Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.719
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Three I know not what: The influence of Greek 
philosophy on the doctrine of Trinity
Author:
Aleksandar S. Santrac1,2
Affiliations:
1School of Religion and 
Theology, University of the 
Southern Caribbean, Trinidad
2Faculty of Theology, North-
West University, South Africa
Correspondence to: 
Aleksandar S. Santrac
Email: 
alex.santrac@gmail.com
Postal address:
PO Box 175, Port of Spain, 
Trinidad
Dates:
Received: 11 Apr. 2013
Accepted: 12 Sept. 2013
Published: 25 Oct. 2013
How to cite this article:
Santrac, A.S., 2013, 
‘Three I know not what: 
The influence of Greek 
philosophy on the doctrine 
of Trinity’, In die Skriflig/
In Luce Verbi 47(1), Art. 
#719, 7 pages. http://dx.doi.
org/10.4102/ids.v47i1.719
Copyright:
© 2013. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work
is licensed under the
Creative Commons
Attribution License.
This article examines the origins of the traditional or orthodox Trinitarian formula. The 
main objective is to clarify to what extent the traditional Christian doctrine of the Trinity 
(Nicene formula) has been influenced by Greek philosophy. Through contemporary 
theological dialogue on this issue, the research focuses on the comparison between the 
traditional formulation of the doctrine of Trinity, influenced by Greek philosophy and the 
biblical revelation of the godhead. The conclusion is that the trinitarian formula might not 
be a dogmatic teaching, but a mystery (a dehellenisation of the concept of Trinity) and that 
the Church fathers and the post-Nicene church used the Greek philosophical-theological 
expressions for Trinity, already present in Scriptures in its doxological and liturgical form, 
primarily for the purpose of contextualisation. 
Introduction
The doctrine of the Trinity is one of the most fundamental doctrines of Christian faith. A number 
of ancient and even contemporary theologians claim that the doctrine originated in Greek 
speculative philosophy and that it does not reflect a biblical view of God. In contrast, the majority 
of Catholic, Orthodox and Protestant or evangelical scholars deny these findings on the basis of 
clear biblical testimony about the Trinity although the term itself is not used in Scripture. It seems 
obvious that the orthodox or traditional church’s trinitarian formula is grounded on at least some 
metaphysical ideas and models derived from Greek thinking. The main objective of this article is 
to explore the extent to which the traditional Christian doctrine of the Trinity (Nicene formula) is 
influenced by Greek philosophy. There are three main possibilities: (1) The traditional doctrine of 
the Trinity has its origin in Greek philosophical thinking; (2) the traditional doctrine of the Trinity 
is greatly influenced by the conceptual framework of Greek philosophy; or (3) the traditional 
doctrine of the Trinity is purely biblical teaching without any conspicuous or significant influence 
from Greek philosophical thinking.
The next section of this article will provide a brief overview of mature Greek philosophy 
(Plato, Aristotle, Neo-Platonism, Gnosticism, etc.) with an attempt to identify the potential 
influences that these philosophical systems may have had on the traditional formulation of the 
triune God. The subsequent section will compare the orthodox formulations of the Trinity and 
the trinitarian formulas found in the Bible. This will be done more as a theological dialogue 
than an exegetical task. Finally, the implications of this research that might contribute to the 
modern development of the understanding of the Trinity, will be drawn out. The possibility of 
developing a contextual theology of the Trinity will be addressed. Although the principles that 
will be examined have wider applications, the developing of an African trinitarian theology 
will also be briefly examined.
Page 1 of 7
Die misterie van die Drie-eenheid: Die invloed van die Griekse filosofie op die leerstelling 
van die Drie-eenheid. Hierdie artikel ondersoek die oorsprong van die tradisionele of 
ortodokse trinitariese leerstuk. Die hoofdoel is om uit te vind tot watter mate die tradisioneel 
Christelike leer oor die Drie-eenheid (Niceense formule) deur die Griekse filosofie beïnvloed is. 
Deur die hedendaagse teologiese debat oor hierdie onderwerp na te gaan, fokus die navorsing 
op ’n vergelyking tussen die tradisionele formulering van die leer van die Drie-eenheid soos 
beïnvloed deur die ortodokse Griekse filosofie en deur die bybelse openbaring van die godheid. 
Die slotsom waartoe gekom word, is dat die trinitariese formule moontlik nie ’n dogmatiese 
leerstuk was nie, maar ’n misterie (’n dehellenisering van die Drie-eenheidsbegrip). Die 
kerkvaders en die post-Niceense kerk het die Griekse filosofies-teologiese uitdrukkings vir 
die Drie-eenheid, wat alreeds in die Skrif in sy doksologiese en liturgiese vorm voorgekom 
het, moontlik slegs vir die doel van kontekstualisering gebruik.
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Read online:

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.719
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Greek philosophy and trinitarian 
dogma 
Plato and the Trinity
It is widely recognised that Platonic philosophy had a 
significant influence on the development of the Christian 
doctrine of God. According to some church fathers, Plato’s 
idea of a Good (the Idea of the Good) has been recognised as 
analogous with the notion of a Christian God. 
Beyond this, the Demiurge or Architect or Creator of the 
universe,1 described in a well-known dialogue Timaeus, has 
been identified (in middle Platonism) as the Mind (Nous) 
or Logos of God. Late Platonic philosophy speaks vaguely 
about a third divine entity, a World Soul or Psyche (Marsh 
1994:55). The relationship between the Form of the Good 
and the Demiurge is not fully explained in Plato’s thought. 
Some scholars do not interpret the passages about the 
Demiurge in Timaeus literally. What is clear, however, is that 
the Demiurge is eventually equated with Logos (in Stoicism) 
and subordinated to the supreme God. This Logos eventually 
becomes equated with the Logos of the Prologue of St. John’s 
Gospel (Dillon 1989:2–3). Arians might have used this 
principle in their attack on the traditional doctrine of Trinity.
Thomas E. Gaston from Oxford University claims in his 
article ‘The influence of Platonism on the Early Apologists’ 
(Gaston 2009) that Justin Martyr borrows Plato’s concept of 
God and that he is not an isolated case. Gaston (2009) notes:
There are clear instances of Platonic influence upon the second century 
Christian writers. Justin’s pupil Tatian uses the same analogies 
to describe the emanation of the Logos and ascribes the role of 
interaction with the world to the Holy Spirit, probably because 
he equates the Spirit with the World-Soul. Athenagoras uses 
the Platonic terms ‘Nous’ and ‘Logos’ to describe the Son, and 
identifies the Logos with the sum of Forms. Both Athenagoras 
and Clement of Alexandria quote Plato’s Letter to demonstrate 
the necessity of three principles. From the end of the second century 
Platonism became engrained in Christian discourse about God. (p. 576, 
[author’s own emphasis])
Therefore, the Christian Trinity or the inner dynamics of the 
relationship between the Father, Son and Holy Spirit have 
been formulated using Plato’s distinction between the Good, 
Nous and Pneuma (World Soul). 
The further development of the Platonic understanding of 
three principles was made by Middle Platonists (ca. 90 BC to 
the 3rd century AD). According to Gaston (2009):
The influence of Middle Platonism upon the development of 
Christianity, particularly on the development of the doctrine of 
God, is undeniable. Despite Paul’s warnings about the ‘wisdom of the 
world’, Christians found natural allies in the monotheistic Platonists. 
1.‘The ’Demiurge’s reasoning, however, is practical, not theoretical. The Demiurge, 
Burnyeat claims, works with given materials and when he creates the cosmos, 
he does not have a free choice, but has to adjust his plans to them. Although we 
know that the Demiurge is supremely benevolent towards his creation, none of us 
could be certain of his practical reasons for framing the cosmos the way he did. 
That is why anyone aiming at disclosing them cannot but come up with “probable” 
answers. Plato’s cosmology is then eikōs in the two senses of the word, for it is 
both “reasonable” and “probable”. But why does Plato call it a muthos? Because, 
Burnyeat argues, the Timaeus cosmology is also a theogony (for the created cosmos 
is for Plato a god), and this shows Plato’s intention to overcome the traditional 
opposition between muthos and logos’ (Partenie 2011:2). 
However, the influence of Platonism had greater impact than the 
early apologists could have realised. Not only did they introduce 
the triadic conception of the God-head but, eventually, the Neo-
Platonists would be instrumental in establishing the coequality 
of the members of the Trinity. (p. 578, [author’s own emphasis])
Neo-Platonism, consequently, has a crucial influence on the 
doctrine of Trinity formulated in the golden age of the church 
fathers. Before the analysis of this Hellenistic inspiration 
used by Christian apologists, let us briefly look at Aristotle’s 
contribution to the development of the Christian doctrine of 
the Godhead. 
Aristotle and the Trinity
Gregory of Nyssa (ca. 335–395), one of the Cappadocian 
fathers, was substantial influenced by Aristotle’s Categories 
in his development of the doctrine of Trinity.2 Aristotle’s 
concept of ousia (substance or essence) was fully adopted, 
though with reinterpretation. Gregory also accepted the 
distinction between primary and secondary substance from 
Aristotle’s Metaphysics3 although he also transcends the 
distinction with his unique formulation of the Trinity (Allen 
1985:96–97).
Basil the Great (329–379 AD), furthermore, borrowed 
Aristotle’s distinction between universal and particular 
categories. Basil’s terminology is totally compatible with 
Aristotle’s. His theory of substance, used later to describe 
the Persons of the Trinity, is explained and elaborated by 
Aristotelian philosophical language (Jacobs 2008:337).
Finally, Aristotle’s Unmovable Mover from Metaphysics has 
also been identified as the Christian God (the Father) in 
distinction from the Demiurge or Creator (Dillon 1989:5).
Therefore, long before Thomas Aquinas, Aristotle had 
exercised considerable influence upon the formulation of the 
Christian concept of the triune God.
Stoicism and the Trinity
Stoicism represents mature Hellenistic philosophy. The 
Stoic concept of Logos became the essential parallel for the 
Christian understanding of the Son of God.
Dynamically speaking, the Stoic Logos is ‘the sum total of the 
spermatic reason-principles which permeate the physical 
world and give it form’ (Dillon 1989:3). Philo of Alexandria 
used this concept and personified it. He described Logos as 
the ‘Son’ of God and Sophia (Wisdom). Philo personified the 
Stoic Logos.4 Though Philo called the Logos both ‘the Son of 
2.The Categories (Lat.Categoriae, Greek Κατηγορίαι Katēgoriai) is a text from 
Aristotle’s Organon that enumerates all the possible kind of things that can be the 
subject or the predicate of a proposition.
3.Metaphysics speaks about being, causation, substance, form, matter and what is 
important here about the nature of God as a prime Mover.
4.‘Philo identifies YHWH as the Platonic One and thus has “‘an emphatic doctrine of 
divine transcendence”‘. God is “‘qualityless”, “unnameable” and “unutterable”‘, and 
thus altogether incomprehensible to the human mind. The perfect transcendence 
of YHWH entails that he cannot relate directly to the world. Following other Middle 
Platonic systems, Philo proposes a hierarchy of intermediaries. Philo cannot deny 
that YHWH is Creator, since the Old Testament (OT) describes him as such, therefore 
he posits two creations. First, YHWH creates the intelligible (immaterial) world (the 
Realm of the Forms), which Philo also identifies as the Logos. Then, through the 
mediation of the Logos, the sensible (material) world is created in the image of the 
intelligible world’ (Gaston 2009:574).
Page 2 of 7

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.719
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 3 of 7
God’ and ‘the second god’, it is not quite clear whether he 
regarded the Logos as a person (Gaston 2009:575). Catholic 
scholars deny any similarity between Philo’s Logos and St. 
John’s Logos. The counter-argument is that John’s Logos is 
conceptually borrowed from the OT (Pr 8), viewing Logos 
as the embodiment of God’s Wisdom (Garrigou-Lagrange 
1952:41).
Nevertheless, it cannot be denied that the Stoic Logos was 
eventually recognised as the Son of God in Christian faith. A 
duality of deities, of course, represented a serious problem 
for Christian apologists. Apologists, under the influence 
of Stoicism, resolved the problem by making a distinction 
between the immanent Word or Thought (logos endiathetos) 
and the expressed Word or Thought (logos prophorikos). The 
Logos or the Son always existed with God the Father as 
logos endiathetos. However, when the Father willed to create 
the world, he expressed his Word (logos endiathetos) which 
became logos prophorikos. The conclusion that follows is: 
‘Though two distinct successive stages of existence are 
here attributed to the Logos, it is the very same Logos who 
subsists in both’ (Marsh 1994:60). This is the response that 
Christian apologists gave when they were confronted with 
the problem of dual divinities.
Neo-Platonism and Trinity
Fourth- and 5th-century theologians of the Christian 
Church (Augustine and Gregory of Nyssa as well as other 
Cappadocians) appropriated the ideas of Plotinus (ca. 204/5–
270) the father of Neo-Platonism, regarding three divine 
hypostaseis. Plotinus’ hierarchy of divinity (the One, Mind and 
Soul) was rejected. However, the Christian doctrine of the 
Trinity still represents a modification of Plotinus’ teachings. 
For Plotinus, everything that exists is in some sense unified. 
The unity of the One, the source of this unity, can be described 
only by negation (apophatic theology or via negativa).5 
Diogenes Allen (1985), in his Philosophy for Understanding 
Theology, clarifies the point that Christianity, however, does 
not believe in the unity of God as a unity of a building, 
organism or a species. The divine unity is a richer one. The 
unity of God does not prevent Christian theology of speaking 
about three persons in the Being of God though the nature 
of the divine unity in plurality is the mystery of his Being. 
Christianity does not believe in radiation or emanation by 
necessity (as Plotinus did), but in the eternal coexistence of 
three Persons of the Godhead (Allen 1985:82–86).
The three divine principles expounded by Neo-Platonism 
also influenced Augustine, representing a good approximation 
to the Augustinian trinity (Stead 1989:72). Nevertheless, 
Christopher Stead (1989:73), in his ‘Augustine’s philosophy 
of being,’ argues that most of the ideas about the One, Mind 
and Soul were foreign to Augustine, who accepted the 
Nicene doctrine of a Trinity of equal Persons. For Augustine, 
God is not beyond being as the One was for Plotinus. It seems 
5.According to apophatic theology or via negative, the Divine Good (God) can be 
described only by negation, speaking only in terms of what may not be said about 
the perfect goodness of God. 
that this church father was under the influence of an older 
tradition of Platonic thought which understood God as Mind 
(1989:73).
Therefore, though the Nicene fathers were heavily 
influenced by Neo-Platonism with its distinction between 
three divine entities, the Christian understanding of Trinity 
is still substantially different from the teachings of Plotinus 
regarding the relationship within the Godhead.
In addition, Jean Luc Marion, the French phenomenologist 
and theologian in his God without being (1995), claims 
that even Thomas Aquinas was influenced by the Neo-
Platonists. Marion tries to transcend the notion of God that 
is married to Greek ontology (Hankey 1999:389, 403–405). If 
Christian theology agrees to take the Greek notion of Being 
(in its general expression), it cannot come to the untainted 
biblical concept of Trinity. Scriptures apparently reveal a 
different understanding of God. In this sense, the modern 
phenomenological movement has become critical towards 
the traditional Neo-Platonic formulation of God. Of course, 
Marion’s critique is really an extension of Heidegger’s critique 
of onto-theology and implicates the entire philosophical 
tradition, not just Neo-Platonism. 
Gnosticism and the Trinity
Finally, the Christian understanding of the Trinity was also 
coloured by its dialogue with the most prevalent heresy of 
the 2nd century Gnosticism. Thomas Marsh, in his volume 
The Triune God: A Biblical, Historical and Theological Study, 
recognises this influence (Marsh 1994):
Though its orthodox critics were concerned with many other 
aspects of Gnostic teaching, the Gnostic portrayal of a non-
incarnate Christ who was a divine emanation or aeon inferior in 
being to the Supreme God was a particular challenge to Christian 
faith which these writers felt obliged to meet and expose. (p. 69)
This debate between the gnostic Christ and the biblical Christ 
was crucial in developing some account of subordinationism.
Speaking about the complex influence of Greek philosophy 
on the Christian notion of the Trinity, Christoph Schwöbel 
(2009) correctly observes:
The ontological clarification was not only necessary to reject 
suspected heresies. It was also an inner necessity if one wanted 
to defend the claim of Christian faith to be the true philosophy. 
On the other hand, the ontological conceptuality provided by the 
various schools of philosophers could not without modification 
express the unity of God in different identities, which we have 
interpreted as a major characteristic of biblical discourse of God. 
(p. 39)
A summary is been provided of the influence of Greek 
philosophy on the church fathers in their development of the 
doctrine of Trinity. Though the metaphysical formulations 
of the fathers served a valuable apologetic purpose, the 
primitive Christian doctrine of the Trinity still might have 
drifted from the original apostolic expression of the doctrine. 
This necessitates a further clarification of the basic differences 
between the traditional church’s trinitarian formula and the 
biblical doctrine of triune God. 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.719
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 4 of 7
The traditional trinitarian formula 
and the biblical Trinity
There was immediate confusion in traditional formulae of 
the Trinity regarding the understanding of the terms persona 
and hypostasis. The Greeks (the Greek fathers) rejected the 
Latin persona, because it led to some forms of Sabellianism 
(the term signifies the mask used in the theatre). However, 
Latin theologians rejected the term hypostasis, because it 
implies substance and led to Arianism. (Arius claimed that 
there are three substances in God of which two are subordinate 
[subordinationism]). The so-called solution came from St. 
Basil who made a distinction between ousia and hypostasis. 
Ousia refers to what is common to all three Persons of the 
Godhead whilst hypostasis signifies what individuates them 
(Garrigou-Lagrange 1952:157).
However, theses definitions of ousia and hypostasis remained 
questionable. Catherine Mowry LaCugna (1986), from the 
University of Notre Dame, observes:
Theologians of East and West still attached significantly different 
meanings to key words such as hypostasis, prosopon, substantia, 
subsistentia, essentia, natura. And the one word which was 
supposed to settle the Christological controversies, homoousios 
(same substance), still had Sabellian overtones to the Greek ear, 
while homoiousios (similar substance) had Arian overtones to the 
Latin ear. (p. 176)
Moreover, Nathan Jacobs recognises this tension and 
objection against the Cappadocian formula. Responding 
to Leftow and Brümmer, who share the intuition that any 
trinitarianism that affirms genuine individuation of the 
hypostases was no different from polytheism with like-
minded gods, he argues that ‘this objection displays a gross 
misunderstanding of Patristic metaphysics, and demonstrates 
how, when playing by the Cappadocians’ rules, there are 
significant differences between polytheism and monotheism’ 
(Jacobs 2008:332).
Regarding the problem of defining persona, Karl Rahner in 
his criticism of the concept, asked: ‘[I]s the concept person 
suitable to express faithfully that which is meant in connection 
with the doctrine of the Trinity’ (Rahner, in Havrilak 
1990:63). Acknowledging the problem is one of linguistic 
context. Rahner admitted that an understanding of ‘person’ 
with reference to the trinitarian God could not follow our 
interpretation of the term used elsewhere. By claiming that 
there are three ‘persons’ in God, ‘we generalise and add up 
something that cannot be added up’ and somehow lose track 
of the one uniting principle of God, the common essence. The 
Orthodox theologian Gregory Havrilak (1990) concludes:
So, the problem is complicated in the Trinitarian sense, in that 
we are compelled to think of ‘persons’ in the Godhead who 
are ‘individuals’ and ‘distinct,’ while simultaneously sharing 
a common life. Hence, the unavoidable dilemma: either we 
accept a Sabellian modalism where the persons are seen as mere 
emanations, or we adopt a form of tritheism as the alternative. 
(p. 63)
Rahner recognised that the Bible does not speak about 
personas. Thus, it might not represent the true difference 
between the Father, Son and Holy Spirit.6 Even Karl Barth 
argued that substantia is a better term than persona. Rahner 
was under the influence of Greek fathers and eastern 
conceptions of the Trinity that is first viewed as a mystery of 
salvation (Havrilak 1990:70). Rahner, though faithful to the 
Greek fathers, still confirmed the primacy of Scripture, even 
if he did it unconsciously. The biblical concept of the Trinity, 
with its emphasis on the unity and mystery of God, seems 
incompatible with the Hellenistic expressions of the doctrine.
Augustine once said:
When you ask ‘Three what?’ human speech labours under a 
great dearth of words. So we say three persons, not in order to 
say that precisely, but in order not to be reduced to silence. (De 
Trinitate, V. 9–10 quoted in Marsh 1994:133)
Upon analysis, the expression persona seems a desperate 
attempt to recognise the distinguished roles within the 
Trinity in the process of salvation rather than an expression 
of the metaphysical realities within divinity. Ontologically 
speaking, there is always the danger that even some 
contemporary ‘social’ theories of the Trinity may demonstrate 
‘a new version of polytheism’ (Tuggy 2013:186).7 
Nevertheless, the trinitarian nature of God is indispensable 
both as a doctrinal expression and in order to maintain an 
orthodox view of salvation. Wolfhart Pannenberg (2007), the 
celebrated theologian of revelation, in his article ‘God of the 
philosophers’, speaks about the necessity of affirming the 
trinitarian nature of divinity:
Theology that is distinctively Christian will attribute creation 
to the Trinitarian God–Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. In Christian 
theology, there is no room for a pre-Trinitarian monotheism of 
the one God. In our time of intense interreligious discussion, 
Christians cannot compromise the truth that the Trinitarian 
conception of God is not simply a Christian addition to 
a monotheism that we otherwise share with others. The 
Christian insistence is that God as such is to be understood as 
a differentiated unity. An undifferentiated unity means unity 
opposed to the many. Unity that is opposed to the many 
presupposes and therefore is conditioned by that opposition. 
Precisely because that is a conditioned unity, it cannot be the 
absolute unity that is before and above the many. Only the triune 
God, as differentiated unity, is absolutely and unconditionally 
the one God. It follows that true monotheism is trinitarian. 
(Pannenberg 2007:33)
This expression of Trinity transcends the Greek philosophical 
influences by refraining from offering definitions of Trinity. 
What is needed, Pannenberg argues, is dehellenisation 
of the Christian concept of trinity. Considerable obstacles, 
nevertheless, must be overcome (Pannenberg 2007):	
Viewed in perspective, however, the program of dehellenizing 
Christian thought was not a lasting movement in modern 
Protestant theology. Aristotle may not have fared well, but the 
Platonic-Augustinian tradition remains strong. (p. 32)
6.‘This unicity of essence implies and includes the unicity of one single consciousness 
and one single person, although of course the unicity of one self-presence in 
consciousness and freedom in the divine Trinity remains determined by that 
mysterious three-ness which we profess about God when we speak haltingly of the 
Trinity of persons in God’ (Rahner, in Havrilak 1990:65).
7.‘A loving community of divine friends’ has been a popular image of Trinity. 
Nevertheless, the theory ends up in believing in a group of gods ‘which is itself 
somewhat self-like’ (Tuggy 2013:186).

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.719
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 5 of 7
Adolf von Harnack (1851–1930), a prominent church 
historian and German theologian, once said:
Rejecting the Old Testament in the second century was a mistake 
that the main body of the church properly rejected; keeping it in 
the sixteenth century was a destiny from which the Reformation 
was not yet able to extricate itself; but to continue keeping the 
Old Testament within Protestantism as a canonical authority 
after the nineteenth century is a consequence of a paralysis of 
religion and the church. (Harnack, in Schwöbel 2009:23)
Dehellenisation of the doctrine of Trinity might be an on-
going project. The narrative aspect of Trinity as the God of 
love and its economic and salvific nature must receive more 
emphasis.8 This seems closer to the biblical worldview. 
Stanley J. Grenz, one of the most notable evangelical 
theologians, affirmed the importance of ontological or 
metaphysical differentiations within divine unity (Grenz 
1994:67). Nevertheless, he also speaks about the economic 
nature of Trinity, namely that all three Persons are involved 
in every area of God’s work and ‘each is dependent on the 
work of others for the fulfilment of one divine program’ 
(Grenz 1994:68). Apparently, the economic nature of Trinity 
points to the salvific nature and program of God and 
ultimately to a fuller understanding of deity, only through 
love as the relational essence of God (Grenz 1994:72). In this 
sense, Grenz joins the rank of theologians who transcend the 
traditional ontological view of Trinity and open some new 
vistas for the dehellenisation of the understanding of a triune 
God. An important aspect of this project is the acceptance of 
trinitarian dogma as mystery.
Stephen T. Davis in his Logic and Nature of God, claims that 
Trinity is not a doctrine, but a mystery (Davis 1983:135, 141). 
Though every doctrine contains an element of mystery, 
the traditional doctrine of Trinity might cease to be a 
Christian doctrine if it is formulated only in its cognitive-
rational understanding of the theological task. The Catholic 
theologian, Richard P. McBrien in his magnum opus Catholicism 
(1994), defends this position:
The Trinity is an absolute mystery in the sense that we do not 
understand it even after it has been revealed. It is a mystery in 
that it is ‘hidden in God [and] cannot be known unless revealed 
by God.’ It is an absolute mystery in that it remains such forever. 
(p. 316)
This principle has been confirmed by Millard Erickson, 
the 
notable 
evangelical 
theologian. 
‘The 
Trinity 
is 
incomprehensible. We cannot fully understand the mystery 
of Trinity,’ claims Erickson (1996:338). Therefore, the dogma 
of the Trinity defies any rational and cognitive grasp of 
the ultimate nature of divine. Does this mean that there is 
no need for philosophy or theological reflection? LaCugna 
(1986) answers as follows:
8.‘The history of love has both eternal and temporal dimensions. In the ordoessèndi, 
God’s inner history as God (God’s self-love in the self-relatedness of “Father, Son, 
Spirit”) is taken to be the same as God’s external history as God (God loving what 
is other than God, in creation, incarnation, sending of the Spirit). In the form of 
Rahner’s axiom, “The ‘economic’ trinity is the ‘immanent’ trinity and vice versa”. 
In the ordocognoscendi, Christian religion arises out of the experience of this 
portion of God’s history. As Christian theology reflects on that experience, it is not 
concerned with predicating attributes (wisdom, or even love) indifferently of “deity 
in general”. Rather, Christian theology asks who this God is, who acts in this history, 
with these people. A narrative account is therefore unavoidable. And so, in the 
ordointerpretandathe trinitarian answer to the “who” of God is: God is love itself’ 
(LaCugna 1986:173).
Theologians need philosophers in the task of self-critical 
assessment of the doctrine: Philosophers can challenge 
theologians to be more exact in our formulations, and more 
consistent in our systematization of history, exegesis, doctrine 
and theology. The cumulative effect of a joint dialogue might 
even be the restoration of a doctrine that for too long has only 
been collecting dust on the shelves of church history. (p. 179)
It must be added that the restoration must seriously consider 
‘biblical philosophy’ and the exegetical task. What is needed 
is a biblical-philosophical re-formulation of the traditional 
formula of the Trinity. The task is worded as follows by 
Schwöbel (2009):
Viewed from this perspective, the formulation of Trinitarian 
doctrine is dependent on the language of God, expressing that 
differentiated unity in the Old as well as in the New Testament. Its 
technical expressions hypostasis, ousia, homousios, koinonia, idion, 
etc. appear as abbreviations of what could already be found in 
the Old and New Testaments in narrative and doxological forms. 
In order to say exactly what they mean, one has to go back to the 
biblical texts and their grammar, their way of relating different 
identities within the unity of agency and being of the one Lord. 
This would mean that the technical expressions of the doctrine of the 
Trinity constantly need to be filled with the content of the biblical 
witnesses because this is their subject-matter. (p. 37, [author’s own 
emphasis])
Therefore, the ‘doing theology in a Trinitarian fashion’ 
always starts, not first and foremost with Athens, but with 
Jerusalem9 though the final formulation of the doctrine 
should be done in the context of dialogue between Athens 
and Jerusalem. The Bible takes precedence over Greek 
philosophy, though methodologically speaking, the language 
of the communication may play a role in the conversation 
with contemporary philosophy in the rational expressions of 
faith.
John Behr, the Orthodox theologian, in his article ‘The Trinity: 
Scripture and the Greek Fathers’, concludes:
Such, then, is how the Greek Fathers, following Scripture, 
maintained that there is but one God, whose Son and Spirit 
are equally God, in a unity of essence and of existence, without 
compromising the uniqueness of the one true God. (Behr 1999:23, 
[author’s own emphasis])
Conclusion: Implications of 
trinitarian dogma for contemporary 
theology and African theology
In summarising this research on the influence of Greek 
philosophy on the Christian doctrine of the Trinity, there 
might be an alternative to Behr’s conclusion. The Greek 
9.‘So what about The Trinity between Athens and Jerusalem? Doing theology in 
a trinitarian fashion will always have to start from Jerusalem, from the biblical 
witnesses which provoked the formulation of the doctrine of the Trinity. The 
doctrine of the Trinity was not invented at Athens. The only doctrine of the Trinity 
that was ever invented at Athens, at least metaphorically, if not geographically, the 
triadic philosophy of Porphyry, was decidedly anti-Christian. However, starting from 
Jerusalem, from the biblical witnesses, trinitarian theology will have to travel to 
Athens because the truth claim involved in the trinitarian claim that God’s history 
with Israel finds its eschatological form in Christ through the Spirit necessitates 
engagement with competing philosophical claims to universality. However, having 
arrived at Athens trinitarian theology will have to touch base with Jerusalem again 
in order to link the conceptsof philosophical reasoning to the contents of biblical 
witness. There is no middle road, no via media, between Athens and Jerusalem. 
Rather, trinitarian theology will have to act as a constant go-between between 
Jerusalem and Athens’ (Schwöbel 2009:41).

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.719
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 6 of 7
fathers, indeed following the biblical mystery of the unity of 
the triune God, still formulated their doctrine of the Trinity 
using the conceptual framework of Greek philosophy. 
Though the doctrine did not originate in Athens, and the 
Church fathers apparently justified their formulas with the 
perspicuous biblical teaching of the triune God, the Greek 
fathers still based their dogmatic method and content on a 
Greek philosophical theoretical framework. This calls for 
an alternative reformulation of the doctrine based on sound 
biblical investigation and fresh contemporary expression.
An attempt will be make to draw some implications of 
this research for the development of a contemporary and 
contextual theology of the Trinity. 
Firstly, according to postmodern evaluation, ‘faith has no 
need of thinking of Being’ (Derrida 1987). Views of God 
derived from revelation should remain distinguished from 
the philosophical concepts of God. This does not mean that 
Christian philosophy or philosophy of religion is superfluous. 
It is a call for a reinvention of the philosophical language 
about the Trinity based primarily on biblical imagery and 
concepts. In the ‘postmodern’ (hopefully wholly biblical, 
but still relevant) expression of the triune God, without the 
philosophical notion of Being, the attention should focus 
more on the hermeneutical key of the redemption found in 
the Bible. This provides the bedrock imagery of the economic 
(salvific) revelation of the Trinity. In the Bible, the triune God 
has been revealed as the triune God of redemption rather 
than in primarily metaphysical and ontological aspects. 
Secondly, the inherited theological trinitarian language or 
the language about God in general (under Greek influence) 
should be complemented by both Old and New Testament 
narrative and doxological language. Obtaining a clearer idea 
about the narratives and praises of God from Scripture 
might aid in coming to a broader and deeper understanding 
of the Trinity. After all, the revelation of God is not only 
propositional, but also based on the encounter with the 
divine person. The liturgical theology might help us better to 
comprehend the dynamical nature of God.
Thirdly, by transcending postmodern expressions of faith 
today which is highly critical of the rational articulated 
structures of faith, we can appreciate the post-postmodern 
emphasis on the adoration of mystery (cf. Santrac 2008). 
Within the biblical framework, this would provide the 
opportunity for a new orthodox expression of faith in the 
Trinity. At the same time, it may help us to experience God 
as mystery and learn to live with the triune God we do not 
fully understand. 
Finally, there is at least one important implication of the 
dehellenised understanding of God as mystery for the 
relevant context of an African theology of the triune God. 
James Kombo, in his article ‘The Trinity in Africa’ (2009), 
recognises that the mysterious nature or essence of the pre-
Christian experience of one God, the Father NTU, provides 
the substratum for the emergence of an alternative African 
Christian notion of the Trinity. He sees the need for the re-
examination of traditional expressions of the doctrine.10 In its 
cultural context, the adoration of God becomes much more 
plausible than full comprehension of the dynamic nature 
of the trinity. John Behr, by quoting Melanchton, becomes 
aware of this important point (Behr 1999): 
Defining the doctrine of the Trinity as a mystery which cannot 
be fathomed by unaided human reason invites a position such as 
Melanchthon’s: ‘We adore the mysteries of the Godhead. That is 
better than to investigate them’. (p. 22)
The Christian heritage confirms this theological and spiritual 
reality. Being less flamboyant, dogmatic, philosophical, 
theological and traditional, we should again go back to the 
Scriptures where we will certainly rediscover the doctrine 
and/or the mystery of the Holy Trinity based on the well-
known proposition of St. Anselm, who in his Augustinian 
spirit proclaims ‘Three I know not what’ (tresnescio quid) (St. 
Anselm, in Marsh 1994:133).
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no financial or personal 
relationship(s) which may have inappropriately influenced 
him in writing this article.
References
Allen, D., 1985, Philosophy for understanding theology, John Knox Press, Atlanta.
Behr, J., 1999, ‘The Trinity: Scripture and the Greek Fathers’, Living Pulpit 8(2), 
22–23.
Davis, S.T., 1983, Logic and nature of God, Eerdmans, Grand Rapids, MI.
Derrida, J., 1987, Psyche: Inventions de l’Autre, Galilee, Paris. PMid:9898766
Dillon, J., 1989, ‘Logos and trinity: Patterns of Platonist influence on early Christianity’, 
in G. Vesey (ed.), The philosophy in Christianity, pp. 1–14, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge. PMid:2913604
Erickson, M.J., 1996, Christian theology, Baker Book House, Grand Rapids, MI.
Garrigou-Lagrange, R., 1952, The trinity and God the creator: A commentary on St. 
Thomas’ Theological Summa, B. Herder Book Co., London.
Gaston, T.E., 2009, ‘The influence of Platonism on the early Apologists’, The Heythrop 
Journal July, 573–580. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2265.2008.00448.x
Grenz, S.J., 1994, Theology for the community of God, Broadman & Holman Publishers, 
Nashville, TN.
Hankey, W.J., 1999,‘Theoria versus poesis: Neoplatonism and Trinitarian difference in 
Aquinas, John Milbank, Jean-Luc Marion and John Zizioulas’, Modern Theology 
15(4), 387–415. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/1468-0025.00105
Havrilak, G., 1990, ‘Karl Rahner and the Greek trinity’, St. Vladimir’s Theological 
Quarterly 1, 61–77. 
10.‘The African pre-Christian experience of God has turned out to be the gate through 
which Yahweh has penetrated Africa. This does not only mean that for the African 
Christians the Trinity must emerge from Nyambe, Nyame, Nyasaye, and so on − 
as various African peoples call God − but also that the Son and the Holy Spirit 
are now constitutive in the identity of those names. In this case, confession of 
one God (monotheism) is not in the ‘common substance-essence’ terms of the 
Greco-Roman heritage, nor in the ‘monotheism as one-ness, non-divisible 
essence’ in Islam and Neo-Platonism, nor as oneness in the sense of ‘absolute 
subject’ in the philosophy of Idealism. Here, oneness of God is confessed in the 
context of the fatherhood as contemplated from the point of view of the Father 
whose NTU is split between the Son and the Holy Spirit. The Father in this case 
is the ‘Great Muntu’ (God) who uniquely shares the Divine NTU with the Son and 
the Holy Spirit. In this mix of things, four things are noteworthy: (1) there emerges 
yet another way of thinking about God, (2) the Christian faith receives alternative 
resources for renewal of the church, (3) assumptions of conventional theological 
thinking are once again re-examined, and (4) Christians have an opportunity to use 
their own cultural identity for God’s glory’ (Kombo 2009, abstract).

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.719
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 7 of 7
Jacobs, N., 2008, ‘On “not three Gods”-again: Can a primary-secondary substance 
reading of ousia and hypostasis avoid tritheism?’, Modern Theology July, 331–358. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0025.2008.00462.x
Kombo, J., 2009, ‘The trinity in Africa,’ Journal of Reformed Theology 3(2), 125–143. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/156973109X448698
Lacugna, C.M., 1986, ‘Philosophers and theologians on the trinity’, Modern 
Theology 
April, 
169–181. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0025.1986.
tb00112.x
Marion, J.L., 1995, God without being, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Marsh, T., 1994, The triune God: A biblical, historical, and theological study, Twenty-
Third Publications, Mystic, CT.
McBrien, R.P., 1994, Catholicism, HarperCollins Publishers, New York. 
Pannenberg, W., 2007, ‘God of the philosophers’, First Things June-July, 31–34. 
Partenie, C., 2011, ‘Plato’s myths’ in E.N. Zalta (ed.), The Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy, Stanford University Press, Redwood City, CA, viewed 02 October 2013, 
from http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/plato-myths/
Santrac, A.S., 2008, ‘Beyond postmodernism: Are we aware of the new world 
view’, viewed 23 April 2012, from http://www.aleksandarsantrac.info/docs/
Unpublished/Beyond%20Postmodernism.pdf
Schwöbel, C., 2009, ‘The trinity between Athens and Jerusalem’, Journal of Reformed 
Theology 3(1), 22–41. http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/156973109X403705
Stead, C., 1989, ‘Augustine’s philosophy of being’, in G. Vesey (ed.), The philosophy in 
Christianity, pp. 71–84, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Tuggy, D., 2013, ‘Hasker’s quests for a viable social theory,’ Faith and Philosophy 30(2), 
171–187. http://dx.doi.org/10.5840/faithphil201330213