Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i2.1778
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Function of space in Daniel 1
Author:
Marius Nel1
Affiliation:
1Faculty of Theology, 
North-West University, 
Potchefstroom Campus, 
South Africa
Correspondence to: 
Marius Nel
Email: 
nel.marius1@gmail.com
Postal address: 
PO Box 12373, Bendor Park 
0713, South Africa
Dates:
Received: 05 Nov. 2013
Accepted: 30 Jan. 2014
Published: 06 June 2014
How to cite this article:
Nel, M., 2014, ‘Function 
of space in Daniel 1’, In die 
Skriflig/In Luce Verbi 48(2), 
Art. #1778, 7 pages. http://
dx.doi.org/10.4102/ids.
v48i2.1778
Copyright:
© 2014. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work
is licensed under the
Creative Commons
Attribution License.
Daniel 1 narrates how Daniel and his friends come from Jerusalem and are appointed as 
officials at the royal court in Babylon. The narrative is governed by the various and significant 
references to space. The Jews’ loyalty towards Jerusalem and its association with the Temple 
and temple cult is challenged by the loyalty required from them at the Babylonian court as 
symbolised by the new names they receive − names associated with the Babylonian gods. The 
strategy they devise to retain their loyalty towards YHWH is decided by their request for a 
specific specific type of food. Their eating special food in contrast to the royal food set apart 
for the candidates, creates a space that relates to the determinative contrast between Jerusalem 
and Shinar. The tale in Daniel 1 is determined by references to space that allowed the Jewish 
readers to understand its meaning.
Introduction
Narratives necessarily happen in a space, and space forms part of the ideological characteristics of 
narratives. A good narrative utilises space in an effective way to enrich the narrative and serve its 
ideological meaning. In this article, reconstruction of ancient space is used to indicate how space 
determines and serves the socio-historic background and ideology of the composition of Daniel 
1. The issue of space is treated in different ways in the narrative and the following dimensions 
can be observed: 
• 
A spatio-religious dimension, with the binary spaces of Judah-Babylon and Jerusalem-Shinar 
playing an ideological role.
• 
A social association of space, with the situation of deportation placed contra the royal court 
with its riches and splendor.
• 
A religio-spatial distancing between Israel’s and Babylon’s religion, and Israel’s God and 
Babylon’s god.
• 
A wisdom dimension, where loyalty towards God results in the gift of political ingenuity to 
explicate dreams, visions and apparitions, prediction of the future by way of astrology, and 
the interpretation of signs and omens as well as political acumen to advise a ruler or to rule. 
Space is utilised by the narrator to demonstrate the power play behind the narrative: between 
Judah as a defeated nation and mighty Babylon, the Jewish king in the prison in Babylon and the 
king ruling over his royal court, Israel’s God (who was seemingly defeated when his country was 
taken and his people removed from it) and Babylon’s god.
Daniel 1 and space
Daniel 1:1−2: Jerusalem and Shinar
The narrative in Daniel 1 relates how Daniel and his three friends, of royal or noble descent, ended 
up at the Babylonian court, because they qualified in terms of the king’s requirements: they were 
Page 1 of 7
Die funksie van ruimte in Daniël 1. Daniël 1 vertel hoe Daniël en sy vriende uit Jerusalem as 
hofamptenare in Babilon aangestel word. Die narratief word beheers deur verskeie belangrike 
verwysings na ruimte. Die Joodse jongmanne se lojaliteit aan Jerusalem en hulle verbintenis 
met die Tempel en tempelkultus, word deur die lojaliteit wat aan die koninklike hof van hulle 
verwag word, getoets. Dit word deur die nuwe name wat aan hulle gegee is, gedemonstreer 
– name wat waarskynlik met Babiloniese gode se name verband hou. Hulle strategie om 
aan JHWH lojaal te bly, berus op hulle versoek om ’n spesifieke soort voedsel te gebruik. 
Afsonderlike voedsel in teenstelling met dié van die koning, skep die ruimte waarbinne die 
bepalende kontras tussen Jerusalem en Sinar gehandhaaf kan word. Die vertelling in Daniël 
1 word bepaal deur verwysings na ruimte, wat die Joodse leser in staat stel om die betekenis 
daarvan te begryp.
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Read online:

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i2.1778
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
without physical defect, of good appearance, versed in every 
branch of wisdom, well-informed, and discerning − thus 
considered suitable for service at the royal court (Dn 1:4). 
Daniel 1 starts and finishes with a spatial-temporal 
orientation and places two significant spaces purposefully 
in contrast to each other: Jerusalem and Babel (Dn 1:1−2). 
In this way the characters in the book are placed against a 
historical background of the exile of Judahites to Babylon 
− even though Jehoiakim was never taken to Babylon.1 The 
narrator creates the impression that Daniel experienced the 
comprehensive reformation initiated by King Josiah during 
the time when Jeremiah proclaimed a message of doom for 
his people (Anderson 1975:15).2 Josiah’s birth coincided with 
the rise of the neo-Babylonian empire when the Chaldeans 
and Medes cooperated to conquer the Assyrian empire and 
destroyed Nineveh. The four friends were supposed to have 
been deported to Babylon at the end of 605 BCE, when their 
kingdom was reduced to a vassal state of Babylon (Burden 
1993:1223). The purpose of the historical placing of the 
narrative is to explain how Jews ended up in Babylon, and 
the temple utensils in the temple of Marduk.
Even though Jerusalem is only mentioned in Daniel 1:1, it 
stands over against Babylon for the rest of the narrative, 
because the narrator links Jerusalem to the Jewish religious 
cult (Dn 1:2 mentions that the vessels belonging to the 
Temple of God are given into the hand of the king of 
Babylon) and Daniel’s decision to refuse the royal food has 
a cultic connotation. Israel viewed Jerusalem, the temple and 
Mount Zion as extensions of YHWH’s god-space, whilst the 
land of Israel was accepted as a holy land that fell directly 
under the rule of YHWH (De Bruyn 2014:9). According to the 
discipline of critical spatiality ‘Jerusalem and the sanctuary 
are not mere physical entities, but indicate a mental, 
sociological, theological space created’ (Venter 2004:619). 
The territory beyond the borders of Israel was demarcated 
as heathen or profane and Babylonia serves as one of the 
important symbols for this world. The space of Babylon is 
to be understood in terms of continuation of the life of Judah 
(Venter 2006:994). ‘The old story world sets the new story 
world in relief. Homeland gives way to alien land’ (Fewell 
1988:34).3 
Jerusalem serves as a symbol of Judah’s religion in the 
perception of the narrator.4 ‘Jerusalem and its sanctuary 
1.Daniel 1:2 is probably corrupt as Charles (1929:6) already acknowledged and as 
shown by the Greek translation. He opines that it read: ‘And Adonai gave Jehoiakim 
into his hand. And he carried a part of the royal seed and of the nobles and a part of 
the utensils of the house of God to the land of Shinar, but the utensils he brought to 
the treasure house of his god.’ A scribe, copying the text, left out the words in italics, 
probably due to homoioteleuton. The words are, however, necessary to understand 
verse 3. Modern translations accept that the subject refers to the temple utensils − 
cf. the Jerusalem Bible version: ‘He took them away to the land of Shinar, and stored 
the sacred vessels in the treasury of his own gods.’
2.Cf. Josephus’ remark in Antiquities X:10.1 that Daniel and his three friends were 
descendants of King Zedekiah.
3.Cognitive linguistics emphasises that words denote or symbolise concepts. The 
concept of ‘space’ forms an integral part of human cognition and, together with 
‘time’, defines one of the most important basic conceptual domains of human 
thinking. Humans use ‘space’ to make sense of the world around them and thus 
space forms an integral part of the way in which they express themselves. All human 
behaviour is located in and constructed of space (De Bruyn 2014:2−3, referring to 
Haspelmath 1997; Zlatev 2007; Low & Lawrence-Zuniga 2003).
4.A symbol plays a specific role, as defined by Wouk (1959:67): ‘If its meaning can be 
neatly exposed like the parts of a machine or the solution of a detective novel, then 
a symbol lacks the poetry by which symbols live.’
play a central role in the theological conceptualisation of 
the Daniel Trägerkreise’ (Venter 2004:620). Priestly circles 
conceived the temple as the holy place of the people of Israel, 
but also the holy centre of all creation (Sweeney 2001:135) 
− a cosmic institution in which temple and world were 
considered ‘congeneric’ (Levenson 1984:286). For this reason, 
YHWH gives the ‘king of Judah’, ‘Jerusalem’ and ‘the vessels 
belonging to the house of God’ (ְכּ ֵלי  ֵביה־    ֱאֹל ֔ ִהים ּו ִמ ְק ָצ ֙ת)5 into the 
hands of the king of Babylon, who puts the vessels into the 
treasury of his own gods (ֵה ֔כיא בּית אֹוצר  ֱאֹל  יו).6 Ancient people 
believed that each deity had an own region or territory in 
which they exerted power and authority.7 In battle, each 
nation summoned their gods to protect them and when they 
lost a battle, it was believed that the gods were not strong 
enough to protect them. These gods and their territory of 
authority were then subjected to the authority of the victor’s 
gods, as Psalm 137 indicates (Hossfeld & Zenger 2008:694). In 
Daniel 1, YHWH’s authority is challenged by an invasion of 
his god-space (De Bruyn 2014:11).
Babylon is denoted as ‘the land of Shinar’ (א ֶדץ־ ִשׁ ְנער) in the 
Masoretic text (translated ‘to Babylonia’ in the Septuagint). 
The reference is to the narrative in Genesis 11, where the 
people of the earth moved eastwards when they found a 
valley in the land of Shinar where they settled and built a city 
and tower. The purpose of the tower, with its top reaching 
heaven, was to ‘make a name for ourselves, so that we do 
not get scattered all over the world’ (Gn 11:4). The enterprise 
ends with YHWH ironically having to come down to see 
the city and tower, and confusing their language so that 
they could not understand each other (Gn 11:8). The people 
were thus scattered all over the world in different language 
groups, and the city is called Babel − from the root bll [to 
confuse], although ‘Babel’ actually means ‘gate of the god’ 
(Wansbrough 1985:29). ‘Shinar’ is an old name for Babylonia 
also found in Genesis 10:10 and 14:1, 9 (Lucas 2002:52). The 
archaic term is used purposefully to call up associations for 
the readers: Shinar is the country connected to Nimrod, a 
mighty hunter in the eyes of YHWH and ‘the first potentate on 
earth’ (Gn 10:8). As the country of Babel, it is associated with 
hubris and evil − themes frequently exploited in apocalyptic 
literature of the inter-testamental period. Zechariah 5:5−11 
5.Koehler and Baumgartner (1958:849) derives miktsat from ketsai − utilised here in 
terms of a part of, or some of (as in Neh 7:69). The verb sounds like qēș, the term for 
‘end’ − an important theological term borrowed from the prophets, starting in Amos 
8:2 and utilised in the apocalyptic eschatology, which is also found in the visions of 
the Book of Daniel (Dn 2, 7−12) to refer to the ‘end time’ (Wagner 1997:1155). The 
emphasis is on Adonai giving Judah and its king into the hand of the king of Babylon. 
The tales (Dn 1−6) demonstrate his sovereignty in different contexts. Compare 
Isaiah 25:9 and 27:6, describing Nebuchadnezzar as the servant of YHWH, whilst 
Isaiah 47:6 emphasises his cruelty towards Israel. Daniel 4:34, 37 describes how the 
king of Babylon bows the knee before YHWH.
6.The words ‘to the house of his god’ look like dittography (a repetition due to a mistake 
made by a later scribe) and the words are left out by most modern translators. The 
words are also left out by the Greek translations. However, if the author’s love of 
repetition is taken into account, the words can rather be seen as an intentional 
and deliberate effort by the narrator to emphasise that the place where the temple 
vessels are taken is in Babylon, in the temple of the god of the place of exile. The 
god refers to Marduk or Bel − the god of the state and chief god of the Babylonian 
pantheon (Helberg 1994:22; Abusch 1995). Bel is an Akkadian word meaning ‘lord’ 
or ‘master’. It is similar on grammatical grounds to Old Semitic Baal. Bel is the name 
of the god responsible for the creation of the world and his partner is Belet, the 
mother goddess. Eventually, Bel was overshadowed by Marduk and in the end the 
two were identified with each other (Van Reeth 1994:41; Kühlewein 1997:247).
7.Compare De Bruyn’s (2014:8) reference to an alternative reading of Deuteronomy 
32:8−9: that the peoples of the earth were given its own territory according to the 
number of the gods.
Page 2 of 7

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i2.1778
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 3 of 7
describes Shinar as a woman sitting in the measuring basket 
called Wickedness, taken to Shinar where she will be housed. 
Babel is a symbol of humankind’s best efforts to establish 
an earthly paradise (Hammer 1976:18). The city was built 
on the banks of the Euphrates, approximately 80 kilometers 
from modern day Bagdad.8 Babel is a symbol of injustice and 
punishment for Jews, as depicted in Jeremiah 40 and Isaiah 
13,9 due to its association with the exile of Judah.10 
The narrator uses the temporal-spatial placing of the narrative 
effectively to indicate where and when the narrative takes 
place, but also to create a creative contrast between two 
spaces in order to explain Daniel and his three friends’ 
loyalty, which forms a major theme in the first chapter. The 
narrative is about a struggle between Nebuchadnezzar and 
all that he stands for, and the four Jews and their loyalty 
towards the God of Israel, described in terms of their choice 
of food. The foreign space of Babylon requires the exilic 
Jews to adapt to new circumstances, whilst at the same time 
prevent becoming absorbed in the customs and religion of 
Babylon (Venter 2006:994): ‘A specific immunity had to be 
maintained without withdrawing from the reality of the new 
circumstances.’ The tales in Daniel (Humphreys 1973):
… present a style of life for the diaspora Jew which affirms most 
strongly that at one and the same time the Jew can remain loyal to 
his heritage and God and yet can live a creative, rewarding, and 
fulfilled life precisely within a foreign setting, and in interaction 
with it. (p. 223)
The viewpoint of the narrator arranges spatial references 
in such a way that a dynamic originates in the first tale and 
becomes even more prominent in the following tales. The 
contest in Daniel 1 is not between Nebuchadnezzar and his 
god on the one side, and Jehoiakim and his God on the other 
side. Two of the characters, Jehoiakim and Nebuchadnezzar’s 
god, fade in the background and die for all practical reasons 
in the tale with Nebuchadnezzar and the narrator’s God 
coming to the fore as the only two characters surviving the 
tale. The narrator’s God is characterised by Jerusalem and all 
it stands for, whilst Nebuchadnezzar is associated with the 
land of Shinar and all the negative associations it carries for 
the narrator’s readers. In this way, the narrator’s perspective 
is enforced on the tale, with the narrator bringing Adonai’s 
power and acts in relation to Nebuchadnezzar’s activities. 
This constructs a world where the Jewish God rules 
sovereignly − where he determines what happens on earth, 
even in hostile territories. Even the acts of foreign rulers 
8.References to Shinar are found in Genesis 10:10, 11:2, 14:1, 9 Joshua 7:21, Isaiah 
11:11, Zechariah 5:11 and Daniel 1:2. Isaiah 14:4, 8 and 22−23 tell how the king of 
Babylon will be punished by God, and verses 13 to 14 have apocalyptic undertones.
9.Isaiah describes the Babylonian army: ‘They come from a distant land, from the 
end of the heavens, the Lord and the weapons of his indignation, to destroy the 
whole earth. Wail, for the day of the Lord is near; as destruction from the Almighty 
it will come!’ (Is 13:5−6). Their occupation of Judah is described in terms of the 
coming of the day of YHWH: ‘[C]ruel, with wrath and fierce anger, to make the earth 
a desolation and to destroy its sinners from it. For the stars of the heavens and their 
constellations will not give their light; the sun will be dark at its rising and the moon 
will not shed its light’ (Is 13:9−10).
10.In the New Testament, the connotation of Babylon with injustice and punishment 
is taken up: ‘The woman was arrayed in purple and scarlet, and bedecked with 
gold and jewels and pearls, holding in her hand a golden cup full of abominations 
and the impurities of her fornication; and on her forehead was written a name of 
mystery: “Babylon the great, mother of harlots and of earth’s abominations.” And 
I saw the woman, drunk with the blood of the saints and the blood of the martyrs 
of Jesus’ (Rv 17:4−6).
are determined by him. The narrator creates this world by 
mentioning Adonai as the determinative factor in one of the 
most decisive events in Israel’s history, the Babylonian exile 
(Fewell 1991:15).
Daniel 1:3−7: Working at the royal 
court
The royal descendants and other nobles exiled from their 
country were given preferential treatment. They were 
deported first, whilst the poor peasants were left behind 
(2 Ki 24:24; 25:12). Potential candidates for the royal court 
were recruited from this group. They had to be royal 
descendants without blemish, handsome, proficient in 
wisdom, knowledgeable and intelligent, and capable of 
serving in the royal palace (Dn 1:3−4).11 Their training is 
described as ‘teaching them the writings and the language 
of the Chaldeans’ (Dn 1:4) − meaningful terms denoting 
introduction to Babylonian religion with its preference 
for magical arts, astrology and sorcery, as confirmed by 
the comparison in verse 20 between the Jewish wise men 
and the Chaldean wise (Mָכּל־ ַה ַחְר ֻט ִמּים  ׇהַא ָשּׁ ִפים  ֲא ֶשׁד  ְבּ ָכ־ ַמ ְלכוּת). 
Chaldean wisdom carried the connotation of magic due to 
its connection with the Chaldeans, referring to tribes from 
Kaldu, but in 10 out of 12 times the term is used, it refers 
to predictors of the future (Davies 1985:38). The Chaldeans 
were the magicians, exorcists and sorcerers that Daniel 2:2 
refers to − the intellectual elite of Babylon (Helberg 1994:23). 
The Chaldean language, referring to the neo-Babylonian 
court language or the Sumerian language with its highly 
complicated cuneiform was the gateway to the omen texts 
and texts containing holy myths and rituals of Babylonian 
religion underlying the political system. In learning the 
language, the Jews are not only exposed to this ideology, 
but they also acknowledge its power. The education of the 
Jewish young men were nothing else than a re-education 
in the Babylonian culture (Burden 1993:1223), with religion 
forming an indispensable part of Babylonian culture. This 
entails a ‘rite of passage’ in Fewell’s (1988:38) terms − a ritual 
designed to facilitate people’s passing from one phase of life 
into another. The first step in this process was to separate 
the persons from their community and seclude them. Then 
they experience a liminal existence in which they were taught 
special knowledge that would enable them to function in the 
new roles they would be assuming. They were encouraged 
to suppress their formed allegiances in elevation of their new 
allegiances. If successful, this process would lead them to 
adopt a new identity and a change of being. In the last stage 
of the passage, they were reintegrated into the new society 
(Fewell 1988:38). As (Venter 2006) explained:
In conflict with their upbringing and religious belief, they were to 
become magicians and enchanters at a foreign court. They were 
to be educated in the Babylonian culture, its specific language 
and its ideology of the esoteric. (p. 993)
Awarding new names to the four friends was an important 
element of the rite of passage. The new names carried 
elements of the names of Babylonian gods. The process of 
11.As in the JPS Tanakh translation (1985; 1999).

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i2.1778
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 4 of 7
name change denotes deculturisation and denationalisation 
(Nomen est omen).12 A new name indicates a new life, and 
the power to change someone’s name implies one’s power 
over that person (cp. Gn 41:45; 2 Ki 23:34; 2 Ki 24:17). The 
theophoric names (Daniel − God is my judge; Hananiah 
− YHWH is gracious; Mishael − who is like God; Azariah 
− YHWH has helped) became names with a relation to 
Babylonian gods, although researchers do not agree to 
what extent (Keil 1975:79; Anderson 1984:37; Ward & Ward 
1995:27).13 Fewell’s suggestion (1991:137) that the names 
presented a perversion of the names of the Babylonian gods, 
Bel, Marduk and Nebo, is provocative and shows how the 
narrator may be sharing a joke with the readers behind the 
back of the Babylonian tyrants, although modern readers 
are left in the dark due to their limited knowledge of the 
Hebrew language and background. The first readers would 
have enjoyed the irony of the situation, carried further in the 
narration of the food. 
The four friends successfully underwent the rite of passage 
and became an integral part of the Babylonian court, although 
they corroborated their original national identity. Their 
dual citizenship formed in the liminal phase was due to the 
specific measures Daniel took with regard to the assignment 
of food to the court candidates (Venter 2006:996).
Daniel 1:8−16: Food and defiling
In the situation of exile in Babylon, it was ‘self-evident’ that the 
Babylonian gods had triumphed, that Yahweh had failed, either 
because of weakness or because of indifference. Either way, the 
evidence suggested that loyalty to Yahweh no longer worked 
or was worth practicing, because other powers could give more 
reliable and immediate payoffs. (Brueggemann 1997:20)
Daniel resolved not to defile himself with the king’s food 
and wine (Dn 1:8). He was not a vegetarian − the word לַאָּג ְתִי 
indicates that he had a cultic problem with the food, related to 
the Mosaic laws regulating clean and unclean foods (Clarke 
1967:692). Strict observance of laws related to food has proven 
through the centuries an effective means to distinguish Jews 
and Muslims from the rest of the world (Porteous 1979:30). 
Food is a symbol of one’s culture, including religion (Fewell 
1988:28).
Readers have an idea of the excellence and richness of royal 
food. That the young men renounced it for the sake of their 
loyalty towards Adonai, was the narrator’s way of convincing 
readers in the 2nd century BCE, during the crisis caused 
by the Syrian king Antiochus IV Epiphanes, to stay faithful 
to YHWH, because the tale assures them that YHWH will 
12.Two modern examples of regime changes leading to ideological changing of 
significant names will suffice: the communists changing important names of cities 
and streets, and the present process in South Africa of name changes challenged 
by parts of minority groups.
13.De Bruyn (2014:12) suggests that Belshazzar means ‘May Bel protect his life’, 
Shadrach means ‘The command of Aku’, Meschach means ‘Who is what Aku is’, 
and Abednego means ‘Servant of Nebo’. De Bruyn then concludes: ‘With their new 
names, Daniel and his friends were cognitively inscribed […] or re-proclaimed as 
vessels of the Babylonian gods. It meant that the four Judeans were no longer the 
property of Yahweh, but the property of the Babylonian gods.’ This is not warranted 
by the grammatical uncertainty as to the meaning of the new Babylonian names 
ascribed to the four Jews.
reward them in the end. 1 Maccabees 1:65−66 relates how 
the circumstances during Antiochus’ persecution of the Jews 
forced them to eat unclean food. The righteous refused and 
they paid the highest price for their faithfulness.
Fewell (1991:18) reminds that the same verb is used to 
describe the giving of new names and the taking of food 
(ַוָי ֶשׂם), indicating that Daniel’s intention was to limit the all-
consuming process of indoctrination and subjection. That the 
chief officer allowed Daniel’s experiment, was due to God 
disposing him to be kind and compassionate towards Daniel 
(Dn 1:9). The experiment succeeded and, without stating it, 
the readers understand that Adonai alone could have done 
this.
The food provided from the king’s table could not harm the 
Judean men, whilst the vegetables and water the friends 
preferred could not guarantee that their appearance would 
be better and they would be fatter (Dn 1:15) after only 10 
days. The implied reader would have understood that it 
was not the substance of the food and wine to which Daniel 
objected, but rather that Daniel expressed his dissent with 
the source of the food: the king and everything he stands for 
(Venter 2006:997−998). The food could not endanger Daniel’s 
purity. What the food stood for, threatened the Jews’ loyalty 
towards their God. Taking this food ‘would be tantamount 
to declaring complete political allegiance’ (Fewell 1988:40). 
Within a cognitive linguistic frameset, eating vegetables was 
a way for Daniel and his friends to set themselves apart as 
vessels through which YHWH could act inside of Marduk’s 
god-space (De Bruyn 2014:12). Despite their new identities as 
symbolised by new names, Daniel and his friends refused to 
act as vessels of the Babylonian gods, but continued to act as 
YHWH’s.
By choosing their own food, the four Jews created a personal 
space that allowed them to hold up their spiritual boundaries 
that kept their identity of purity and holiness intact. This way 
they retained some kind of personal control in a seemingly 
uncontrollable situation (Fewell 1988:40). Daniel’s personal 
space was still controlled by his beliefs of purity and holiness 
when he did not allow the cultural-religious system of the 
physical space at the Babylonian court to invade his inner life 
(Venter 2006:997).
Israel set up rules and regulations for the Temple, sacrifices 
and worship that functioned as indicators of the boundaries 
of their identity, but the diaspora situation deprived them of 
their system of holiness and purity and had to be replaced 
by different measures, such as the study of the Torah and 
regulations determining their eating customs. In this way, 
exilic Jews could reclaim their religious and national identity, 
whilst keeping the delicate balance between opportunity and 
threat in a foreign land (Venter 2006):
In the historical situation in Babylonia with its specific 
sociological structures Daniel and his three associates are 
depicted as the heroes who could hold their own and even 
surpass others in success due to the personal space they created 
around themselves. (p. 1000)14
14.Venter (2006) utilises insights from Soja (1996) to discuss Daniel’s food dilemma in 
terms of Firstspace, Secondspace and Thirdspace.

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i2.1778
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 5 of 7
Daniel 1:17−21: The result of loyalty towards 
God
God made the four Jews intelligent and proficient in all 
writings and wisdom, and gave Daniel understanding of 
visions and dreams of all kinds (Dn 1:17).15 The reason is that 
God rewards his servants’ faithfulness (v. 11 indicates that 
the four friends also stay faithful to YHWH). For the implied 
reader, wisdom has a specific association: of political ingenuity 
to explicate dreams, visions and apparitions, prediction of 
the future by way of astrology, the interpretation of signs 
and omens, the study of animals’ intestines, and political 
acumen to advise a ruler or to rule (Sæbø 1997:420). This is 
in contrast to the wisdom literature presented in the Hebrew 
Bible, where didactic and reflective activities are indicated 
with ‘wisdom’. Daniel’s wisdom is political and mantic as in 
the Joseph and Esther tales (Brueggemann 1997:22).
The Babylonian king found the Jews 10 times better than 
their peers,16 including the established wise men (  ְבּ ׇכל־ ַמ ְלכּותֹו
ָכּל־ ַה ַחְר ֻט ִמּים  ׇהַא ָשּׁ ִפיס  ֲא ֶשׁר; Dn 1:20), after their experiment that 
lasted 10 days (Dn 1:12, 15). The Jews’ reward was that they
ַוַי ַע ְמדּו  ִל ְפ ֵני  ַה ֶמּ ֶלְך [stand before the king], referring to a slave 
standing before his master to do his will and execute his 
wishes (cf. 1 Sm 16:21; 1 Ki 12:6−8; Lk 1:19; Mt 18:10).
The only verb ascribed to God as subject is he gives (Dn 1:2, 9, 
17) − a verb used the 5th most in the Hebrew Bible and that 
indicates the process whereby an object or case is brought in 
movement (Labuschagne 1997:776). In this way the narrator 
demonstrates that Adonai determines history − and Daniel’s 
life as a small part of it. Even when Daniel and his friends 
rebelled against the king’s wishes, because they refused to 
swear loyalty towards another god, they were rewarded by 
the king with a foremost position at his court. The rebels, 
staying faithful to YHWH, became the royal advisors. The 
irony is that they represented YHWH before the king and 
they furthered YHWH’s interests, even though the king paid 
them to serve him with advice. What happened when the 
Babylonian king demanded fidelity from the four Jews? The 
question is answered in Daniel 3.
The tale ends as it starts, with Daniel and his friends placed 
in the royal court of Babylon. They were far from Jerusalem, 
destroyed by the Babylonian king, but at the court they 
represented what Jerusalem stood for: the Israelite temple 
and religious cult.
Daniel 1:21 relates that Daniel served at the court ‘until 
the first year of king Cyrus’, meaning that he survived the 
empire that imprisoned him.17 This verse sounds like an 
ironic snigger from heaven, when the Babylonian king 
trains Daniel to serve before him and Daniel stands in the 
end before the conqueror of the Babylonian empire, Cyrus 
15.With the exception of two terms indicating ‘wisdom’ in verse 4, all the other terms 
used there are repeated in verse 17.
16.‘Ten times’ is translated from ‘ten hands’, indicating that each of the Jews was 
equal to 10 hands, or five men (Wood 1973:46).
17.An analysis of the structure of Daniel 1 shows that the reference to time in Daniel 
1:1 and 1:21 serves as inclusio of the tale.
(Veldkamp 1940:14). Daniel would have been in the service of 
the royal courts of several kings for 60 or 65 years, indicating 
that he would have been an old man by the time Cyrus 
was enthroned. This is not a problem for the narrator who 
wants to explain by the references to the various kings and 
empires that Daniel symbolised Jewish exile − from the time 
of Nebuchadnezzar who besieged Jerusalem and eventually 
burnt the city and its temple to the time of Cyrus. Daniel is 
painted as the figure that oppressed Jews could associate 
with. Daniel survived the empire that imprisoned him and 
shared in the edict of Cyrus announcing salvation for exilic 
Jews. He was a tower of strength and a star of hope for 2nd 
century Jews challenged by Antiochus’ hellenising policies 
(King 1954:32). The Babylonian king trained Daniel to serve 
before his throne. Eventually Daniel served before the throne 
of the victor of the Babylonian king, showing the irony of the 
tale (Bultema 1988:58).18
Space and power
In the discussion of the different aspects of space utilised by 
the narrator, the link to the power play behind the narrative 
was demonstrated: between Judah as a defeated nation and 
the mighty Babylonian nation, the Jewish king being in 
prison in Babylon and the king ruling his royal court and the 
world, and Israel’s God (who was seemingly defeated when 
his country was taken and his people removed from it) and 
Babylon’s god triumphing over the exiles and their gods. 
Power can be analysed in terms of metaphorical extension 
of basic bodily schemata, where humans give meaning 
to the space in which they live, and this meaning can be 
conceptualised in terms of their bodies. The schemata 
consisting of the field of movement, direction of action, levels 
of intensity and causal interaction is indicated by Venter 
(2006:1001–1002), utilising the insights of Johnson (1987:47–
48), as: 
• 
Compulsion, forcing people in a direction.
• 
Blockage, where power is stopped and subjected or 
redirected. 
• 
Counterforce, leading to direct confrontation. 
• 
Diversion, when an opposing power forces diversion. 
• 
Removal of restraint, when restriction to power is 
removed.
• 
Enablement, where people are manipulated due to a lack 
of opposition.
• 
Attraction, consisting of the ability to overpower others 
in one’s own favour. 
These actions contain the root meaning of force and barrier, 
where words like must, can and may play an important role.
Daniel’s refusal to eat the royal food can be interpreted in 
these terms. His body is the container and to eat the king’s 
food would imply taking food into this body that would 
disturb his loyalty towards his religious and national 
identity. Food becomes an external harmful power that 
18.Daniel 1:21 contradicts 10:1, referring to the third year of Cyrus’ reign, indicating 
the Daniel 1 may have functioned at an early stage apart from the rest of the book.

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i2.1778
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 6 of 7
should be prevented from contaminating their bodies. Should 
he partake in the food and wine, Daniel would allow it to 
become part of him, causing his world to come apart (Venter 
2006:1002). Eating his own food becomes a measure against 
external powers entering his body and personal space, and 
he uses protection (see schemata above) to distance himself 
from the threat. Physical food does not threaten Daniel’s 
physical body, but foreign ideology and religion threatens 
his mental body and idea world, and it should be averted at 
all cost. This lead to a direct confrontation where compulsive 
power is met with a counterforce in a display of power. The 
only reason why Daniel succeeds against the overpowering 
force of the foreign court is because his God gives favour and 
compassion to him in the sight of the Babylonian official.
Daniel 1 begins with an invasion of YHWH’s space, but 
ends with a successful invasion of Nebuchadnezzar and/or 
Marduk’s space by the God of Israel. By carrying YHWH’s 
temple objects to the temple of his god, Nebuchadnezzar 
allows YHWH to invade Marduk’s space (De Bruyn 2014:13).
YHWH protects Daniel and his friends within the profane 
world outside his territory. This implies that he will also 
protect his people within the profane world. YHWH’s people 
need not fear the profane world, other nations or their gods 
who challenge YHWH’s reign over the earth. Even the exile 
was caused by YHWH − he delivered his people into the 
hands of Nebuchadnezzar. When Antiochus IV profaned the 
Temple and killed the high priest, Onias III, in 171 BCE, it does 
not imply that the foreign king and his gods overpowered 
YHWH (cf. Dn 9:25−26; 10:25−26; Murphy 2002:158−161).
Conclusion
Daniel 1 serves as an introduction to the Book of Daniel and 
relates how Daniel and his friends were taken from Jerusalem 
and appointed as officials at the royal court in Babel. The 
narrative is determined by the various and significant 
references to space. The Jews’ loyalty towards Jerusalem and 
its association with the Temple and temple cult, is challenged 
by the loyalty required from them at the Babylonian court 
as symbolised by the new names they receive. By refusing 
to eat specific foods set apart for the candidates, they create 
a space that relates to the determinative contrast between 
Jerusalem and Shinar. Reconstruction of ancient space was 
used to indicate how space determines and serves the socio-
historic background and ideology of the composition of 
Daniel 1, with references to a spatio-religious dimension, 
a social association of space, a religio-spatial distancing 
between Israel’s and Babylon’s religion, and Israel’s God and 
Babylon’s god and a wisdom dimension. 
This article showed how space is utilised by the narrator to 
demonstrate the power play behind the narrative: between 
Judah as a defeated nation and mighty Babylon, the Jewish 
king in the prison in Babylon and the king ruling over his 
royal court, and Israel’s God and Babylon’s god.
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no financial or personal 
relationship(s) that may have inappropriately influenced 
him in writing this article.
References
Abusch, T., 1995, ‘Marduk’, in K. van der Toorn, B. Becking & P.W. van der Horst (eds.), 
Dictionary of deities and demons in the Bible, pp. 1014−1025, E.J. Brill, Leiden.
Anderson, R.A., 1975, Unfolding Daniel’s prophecies, Pacific, Mountain View.
Anderson, R.A., 1984, Signs and wonders: A commentary on the Book of Daniel, 
Eerdmans, Grand Rapids. (International Theological Commentary).
Brueggemann, W., 1997, Cadences of home: Preaching among exiles, Westminster 
John Knox Press, Louisville.
Bultema, H., 1988, Commentary on Daniel, Kregel Publications, Grand Rapids.
Burden, J.J., 1993, ‘Daniël’, in W. Vosloo & F. Janse van Rensburg (eds.), Die Bybel in 
praktyk, pp. 1221−1244, CUM, Vereeniging.
Charles, R.H., 1929, A critical and exegetical commentary on the Book of Daniel, 
Clarendon, Oxford.
Clarke, A., 1967, Adam Clarke’s commentary on the Bible, abridged by R. Earle, Baker 
Book House, Grand Rapids.
Davies, P.R., 1985, Daniel: Old Testament Guides, JSOT Press, Sheffield. 
De Bruyn, J.J., 2014, ‘A clash of Gods − Conceptualizing space in Daniel 1’, HTS 
Teologiese Studies / Theological Studies 70(3), Art. #1956, 6 pages. 
Fewell, D.N., 1988, Circle of sovereignty: A story of stories in Daniel 1−6, Almond, 
Sheffield. (JSOT Supplement Series 72).
Fewell, D.N., 1991, Circle of sovereignty: Plotting politics in the Book of Daniel, 
Abingdon, Nashville.
Hammer, R., 1976, The Book of Daniel, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. (The 
Cambridge Bible Commentary).
Haspelmath, M., 1997, From space to time: Temporal adverbials in the world’s 
languages, Lincom Europa, München, Newcastle.
Helberg, J.L., 1994, Die boek Daniël. Skrifuitleg vir Bybelstudent en gemeente, NG 
Kerkuitgewers, Kaapstad.
Hossfeld, F.L. & Zenger, E., 2008, ‘Psalm 137’, in F-L. Lothar, E.A. Zenger & K. Baltzer 
(eds.), Psalmen 101−150, pp. 684−703, Herder, Freiburg. (Herders Theologische 
Kommentar zum Alten Testament).
Humphreys, W.L., 1973, ‘A life-style for diaspora: A study of the tales of Esther 
and David’, Journal of Biblical Literature 92, 211−223. http://dx.doi.
org/10.2307/3262954
Johnson, M., 1987, The body in the mind: The bodily basis of meaning, imagination, 
and reason, University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Keil, C.F., 1975, Biblical commentary on the Book of Daniel, vol. 9, Eerdmans, Grand 
Rapids. (Commentary on the Old Testament in ten volumes).
King, G.F., 1954, Daniel: A detailed explanation of the book, The Midnight Cry, Ilford.
Koehler, L. & Baumgartner, W., 1958, Lexicon in Veteris Testamenti Libros, E.J. Brill, 
Leiden.
Kühlewein, J., 1997, ‘ba’al’, in E. Jenni & C. Westermann (eds.), Theological Lexicon 
of the Old Testament, transl. M.E. Biddle, vol. 1, pp. 247−251, Massachusetts, 
Peabody.
Labuschagne, C.J., 1997, ‘ntn’, in E. Jenni & C. Westermann (eds.), Theological Lexicon 
of the Old Testament, transl. M.E. Biddle, vol. 2, pp. 774−791, Massachusetts, 
Peabody.
Levenson, J.D., 1984, ‘The temple and the world’, Journal of Religion 64, 275−298. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/487131
Low, S.M. & Lawrence-Zuniga, D., 2003, The anthropology of space and place: Locating 
culture, Blackwell, Malden.
Lucas, E.C., 2002, Daniel, Apollos/InterVarsity, Leicester/Downers Grove. (Apollos Old 
Testament Commentary 20).
Murphy, F.J., 2002, Early Judaism: The exile to the time of Jesus, Hendrickson, Peabody.
Porteous, N., 1979, Daniel:Old Testament Library, 2nd rev. edn., SCM, London.
Sæbø, M., 1997, ‘hkm’, in E. Jenni, E. & C. Westermann (eds.), Theological Lexicon 
of the Old Testament, transl. M.E. Biddle, vol. 1, pp. 418−424, Massachusetts, 
Peabody.
Soja, E.W., 1996, Thirdspace: Journeys to Los Angeles and other real-and-imagined 
places, Blackwell, Oxford.
Sweeney, M.A., 2001, ‘The end of eschatology in Daniel? Theological and socio-
political ramifications of the changing contexts of interpretation’, Biblical 
Interpretation 9(2), 123−140. http://dx.doi.org/10.1163/156851501300139273
Van Reeth, A., 1994, Ensiklopedie van die mitologie, transl. J. van Tonder, J. Combrinck 
& D. Müller, Vlaeberg, Cape Town.
Veldkamp, H., 1940, Die knoopen ontbindt: Daniël, T. Wever N.V., Franeker.

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i2.1778
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 7 of 7
Venter, P.M., 2004, ‘Constitualised space in Daniel 9’, Hervormde Teologiese Studies 
60(1−2), 607−624.
Venter, P.M., 2006, ‘A study of space in Daniel 1’, Old Testament Essays 19(3), 993−1004.
Wagner, M., 1997, ‘qēș end’, in E. Jenni & C. Westermann (eds.), Theological Lexicon of 
the Old Testament, transl. M.E. Biddle, vol. 3, pp. 1153−1156, Hendrickson, Peabody.
Wansbrough, H. (ed.), 1985, The New Jerusalem Bible, Darton, Longman & Todd, London.
Ward, J. & Ward, C., 1995, Preaching from the prophets, Abingdon Press, Nashville.
Wood, L., 1973, A commentary on Daniel, Zondervan, Grand Rapids.
Wouk, H., 1959, This is my God: The Jewish way of life, rev. edn., Doubleday, New York.
Zlatev, J., 2007, ‘Spatial semantics’, in D. Geeraets & H. Cuyckens (eds.), The 
Oxford handbook of cognitive linguistics, pp. 318−350, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford.