Original Research
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v70i1.2713
Authors:
Anastasia Apostolides1
Johann-Albrecht Meylahn1
Affiliations:
1Department of Practical 
Theology, Faculty of 
Theology, University of 
Pretoria, South Africa
Note:
This article is based on 
the PhD dissertation ‘Kids 
seeking alternative identity 
and spirituality through the 
live theology glimpsed in 
the Harry Potter series’. This 
dissertation, with Professor 
Johann-Albrecht Meylahn 
as supervisor was submitted 
on 24 April 2014 as part of 
the requirements of the 
PhD degree, Department of 
Practical Theology, Faculty 
of Theology, University of 
Pretoria for examination.
Correspondence to:
Anastasia Apostolides
Email:
soula.tea@gmail.com
Postal address:
111 Bronkhorst Street, 
Groenkloof 0181, 
South Africa
Dates:
Received: 05 May 2014
Accepted: 14 June 2014
Published: 20 Nov. 2014
How to cite this article:
Apostolides, A. & Meylahn, 
J-A., 2014, ‘The lived 
theology of the Harry Potter 
series’, HTS Teologiese 
Studies/Theological Studies 
70(1), Art. #2713, 6 pages. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/
hts.v70i1.2713
The lived theology of the Harry Potter series
This article will argue that the recent turn towards lived theology or religion in practical 
theology can offer a useful hermeneutic to interpret the impact of the Harry Potter series on 
the spiritual formation and identity creation of adolescents. In practical theology there has 
been a turn towards lived theology or religion as lived religion has moved out of institutions 
into social–cultural phenomena as people seek to find meaning and purpose for their lives in 
alternative places to institutionalised religion. 
Introduction
This article aims to show how the Harry Potter series is lived religion or theology and thus by reading 
it, some adolescents may find spiritual meaning (through glimpsing the Gospels through some of 
the characters’ actions) within this and other fantasies – such as Tolkien’s Lord of the rings (1991) and 
Lewis’s Chronicles of Narnia (1980) – that they fail to find within the Church or the Bible. 
The turn to lived-religion in practical theology
In recent years the focus of practical theology has moved from focusing on traditional Church 
practices towards a hermeneutic of lived religion (Ganzevoort 2009; Gräb 2012; Miller-McLemore 
2012b, 2012c, 2012d): ‘The face and structure of religion are changing, and theology, even more 
practical theology, has to respond to those changes’ (Ganzevoort 2009). Hence, practical theology 
has recently moved from being a primarily ministry orientated field, to a field that responds to 
the social–cultural realities in which communities exist and seek to find meaning for their lives 
not only from traditional faith communities but, more recently, also from outside traditional faith 
communities (Ganzevoort 2009; Gräb 2012:80; Miller-McLemore 2012e:111). 
What is lived religion?
Lived theology or religion, according to Miller-McLemore (2012a), is the practice of everyday 
life that has religious or moral implications with or without a person being conscious of it. Many 
decisions made by people, says Miller-McLemore (2012a), have been formed by Gospel values 
(Christian values). In other words, people use within their daily lives (consciously or unconsciously) 
aspects, metaphors or values that have been directly or indirectly shaped by the Gospels and the 
Christian tradition. Miller-McLemore’s (2010e:103) understanding of lived theology extends beyond 
the Church and includes social practices where the divine may also be encountered in everyday 
living and how this may have an influence on theology and how people experience and interpret 
the divine. Gräb (2012:80–81) agrees with Miller-McLemore, and calls for a practical theology of 
lived religion that is not only ‘limited to church theory, pastoral theology or even methodologically-
orientated empirical science (theologia applicata)’, but also includes an attempt to define socio–
cultural ‘phenomena as religious through the employment of cultural-hermeneutic’. Ganzevoort 
(2009) understands lived religion as evaluating the practices of lived religion in the light of the 
sacred texts and the sacred ideas of a particular religion such as Christianity. 
The major question for the hermeneutic of lived religion or theology is the question of normativity, 
transformation and transcendence. Practical theology, according to Miller-McLemore (2012e) and 
Gräb (2012), has a normative, transformative and transcendent role to play within society. 
According to Ganzevoort (2009), the word ‘hermeneutic’ signifies ‘that we want to understand 
lived religion from its own characteristics and in light of its own understandings and intrinsic 
normativity’. Whilst interdisciplinary phenomena may be the starting point, ultimately the point 
of the investigation is ‘religious phenomenon’ (Ganzevoort 2009). ‘Religious phenomena’, argues 
Gräb (2012:81), should be understood through experiences and life-expressions as religious and, 
Page 1 of 6
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Read online:
Copyright: © 2014. The Authors. Licensee: AOSIS OpenJournals. This work is licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution License.

Original Research
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v70i1.2713
therefore, calls for the use of a ‘cultural–hermeneutic’. Gräb 
(2012:81) explains that even though sociocultural expressions 
of religion may not be ‘traditional church theology’, they still 
fulfil people’s religious, sacred or spiritual needs, and need to 
be understood as such. Gräb (2012:87) continues by saying that 
a hermeneutic of religion does ‘not take leave of the church’; 
instead it shows that the Church needs to adjust to the praxis of 
sociocultural religion. However, Gräb (2012:81) warns that not 
all ‘normative determinations’ of cultural-hermeneutics are 
‘religious’. Both Ganzevoort (2009) and Gräb (2012:82) argue 
that this hermeneutic must be based on a particular religion 
with specific religious themes, for example in Christianity, and 
the matters that arise in living out a Christian life. But a person 
may be living a ‘Christian’ life, and not be aware of it due to 
the influence of secularisation. Ganzevoort (2009) continues by 
defining the word ‘lived’ as the ‘actions and meanings operant 
in the way humans live, interact and relate to the divine’. 
In other words, do people live out their lives in a Christlike 
manner on a daily basis? Miller-McLemore (2012e:123) 
points out that it is also very important when researching 
and interpreting the ‘lived’ that the ‘values of the lived’ be 
focused on, and this she explains is not always an easy task: 
‘Practical theology has relevance for everyday faith and life 
or it has little meaning at all’ (Miller-McLemore 2012b:7). This 
means that religion or faith need to be experienced and lived 
out on some level on a daily basis to have actual, practical or 
transformational impact in daily living. In essence, it is about 
putting into practice the ethos that a person values and using 
these values to sometimes overcome daily difficulties, or to 
embrace joys at certain periods in a person’s or a community’s 
life. What is important to Ganzevoort (2009) in the term 
‘religion’ is that focus is placed on the praxis or it could not 
be part of practical theology. Therefore, it is in line with what 
Miller-McLemore says about lived theology having relevance 
in how the living out of religion on a daily basis takes place, no 
matter how small the gesture.
‘Religion’, Ganzevoort (2009) continues to explain, is 
closely related to the sacred, and defines religion as ‘the 
transcending patterns of action and meaning embedded in 
and contributing to the relation with the sacred’. Practical 
theology, insists Ganzevoort (2009), whether studied from 
the phenomenon of a certain subject or theologically reflected 
upon as a phenomenon, always focuses on religion. Miller-
McLemore (2012e:143) explains that religion is studied ‘at the 
point where human suffering evokes or calls for a religious 
response and sometimes at the point where a religious 
response is given and or experienced’. These experiences are 
ones that help a person transform and/or answer an ultimate 
question that may have an effect on how a person values life 
after this experience. Heimbrock (2010:287–288) points out 
that lived religion must be in line with the Gospel message of 
‘salvation, wholeness and brokenness’.
Gräb (2012) calls for an understanding of ‘religion’ that:
[W]ill give practical theology the chance to show – even in 
Church activities – how people beyond the Church can relate in 
and to a Christian–religious view of world and life. (p. 84) 
Hence, religion, or the experience of religion, does not stop in 
the Church, but goes beyond and into the world, and has an 
effect in shaping people’s identity, spirituality and ultimately 
how they choose to express their values on a daily basis. 
The problem of the Church today: 
Loss of relevance
The Church, as Moltmann (1974:7) argues, is in an identity 
and relevance crisis. Is the Church still relevant in a modern 
or postmodern world? More and more people are leaving 
traditional churches and seeking meaning and answers to 
their ultimate questions elsewhere. Particularly the youth 
(adolescents) struggle to find meaning in the ancient texts 
of scripture as the metaphors and language of the Bible is 
foreign to them. 
 
In Western society children do not necessarily grow up with 
Gospel stories anymore and, therefore, these stories do not 
become part of their narrative resources with which they 
construct meaning and purpose for their lives. They are 
living in a different religious or ideological world – very 
often in the world of materialism and consumerism. A world 
where a person’s value is measured by what they own and 
the labels displayed on their clothes. 
In this ‘secularised’ world, organised religion is not relevant. 
The language is foreign to the ordinary language of everyday 
and therefore they have lost faith in organised religion (cf. 
Tracey 2010:67). It is not that youth are not interested in 
religion, they are not particularly interested in traditional 
institutionalised religion, but they have a fascination with 
religion, the uncanny, the unpredictable or the unexplainable. 
Tracey (2010:92) explains that adolescents’ fascination with 
the sacred (something that goes beyond their immediate 
‘realities’) ‘is not primarily anti-religion’, nor an objection 
against the Church, per se, but rather ‘a desperate attempt by 
youth culture to counter advances of the profane and secular 
society’, that they live in. 
A return to religion has taken a turn beyond institutional 
religion and is expressed in popular culture. Beaudoin 
(1998:21) argues that searching for alternative places for 
spirituality, such as the arts, literature and music, seems 
to have become the ‘new’ symbols of society as a way of 
replacing traditional systems such as the Church and the 
clergy, with whom adolescents have become disillusioned. 
Other adolescents know nothing of religion except for what 
exposure they have had from the media, where horrific 
incidents are reported about a particular religion (Tracey 
2010:67). Beaudoin (1998:34) goes on to say that even though 
some adolescents confess not to be religious, they still 
express spirituality by using the material (with glimpses 
of the Gospel such as reading material) they interact with 
within their social context that sometimes inspire them to 
transform and reshape their spiritual identities. Therefore, 
although it may seem that adolescents are no longer exposed 
or influenced by the Gospels, this is not so, as the Gospel 
Page 2 of 6

Original Research
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v70i1.2713
Page 3 of 6
message has shifted from the Bible and the Church to other 
places. In essence, the Gospels have moved from the Bible 
to alternative places that adolescents find accessible. This 
is then not something negative, but it shows that people’s 
spirituality evolves to adapt in accordance with their 
technology, sociocultural world, and level of comfort within 
this world, to answer their ultimate questions. 
The challenge for the Church is to translate the message of the 
Gospels into a language that can be relevant to the challenges 
of today. The fantasy genre seems to be a genre well suited for 
this task as many fantasy authors weave into their narrative 
the Christ discourse in varying degrees, in a language that 
people ‘get’. Examples of authors who have used the Christ 
discourse in their work in the past are Tolkien’s Lord of the 
rings (1991) and Lewis’s The chronicles of Narnia (1980) and, 
more recently, Rowling with her Harry Potter series. 
Fantasy genre as a response to the 
relevance crisis of the Church
For Tolkien, faerie tales were stories about the faerie world, a 
realm where faeries and ‘many things besides elves and fays’ 
exist (Tolkien 1979:16). Sometimes the characters in these 
realms use magic secretly or in the open, and these narratives 
are always about the battle between good and evil. The good 
is usually represented as the alternative sacred story, whilst 
the evil represents one of the dominant discourses (sacred 
story) from the reader’s actual world. The Harry Potter series 
is about a young boy and his friends (who look after one 
another through a strong fellowship with values similar to 
the Christ discourse) who have to destroy a powerful and evil 
wizard that is threatening to destroy the wizarding world.
Fantasy writers create alternative worlds whereby children 
can explore everyday realities from a different or alternative 
perspective. The alternative world or ‘Sub-Creation’ can be, 
as Tolkien (1979) explains, a: 
[S]udden miraculous grace: never to be counted on to recur. It does 
not deny the existence of dyscatastrophe, of sorrow and failure: 
the possibility of these is necessary to the joy of deliverance; it 
denies (in the face of much evidence, if you will) universal final 
defeat and in so far is Evangelium, giving fleeting glimpse of Joy, 
Joy beyond the walls of the world, poignant grief. (p. 68) 
This means that the fantasy world is at its most ‘potent’ where 
the reader may witness ‘Joy’, but this ‘Joy’ can sometimes 
only occur through deep sorrow. This sorrow then allows 
the reader to bring into their world the ‘Joy’ of Evangelium 
(Gospel) from the alternative or ‘Sub-Creation’ world.
Fantasy fiction is often accused of teaching children to 
escape reality (O’Keefe 2004:16). But that is not so, as 
fantasy is, as Tolkien and Lewis both agreed, based on 
reality, otherwise it cannot exist. 
Ganzevoort (2009) explains how no text is ‘without ideas 
or praxis behind it, in it and evoked by it; no idea without 
sources and repercussions in praxis; nor, praxis without 
sources and inherent ideas’. This is true for the Harry Potter 
series as the series did not come out of nowhere. When 
Rowling’s mother died at a young age, Rowling sank into 
deep depression. Rowling had started dabbling with writing 
the Harry Potter series, but continued to write as a way of 
coping with the loss of her mother. Rowling acknowledges 
that either the series would never have been completed, or 
the spiritual quest of love and death that the series became 
so focused on would,not have been the core issue of the 
series, had it not been for the death of her mother (Ray 2010). 
Rowling used the values of the Gospel that she had grown up 
with, and still follows, to work her way through her ultimate 
journey.
On the surface fantasy seems impossible. Tolkien (2008:27) 
shows how these narratives are filled with ‘all manner 
of beasts and birds … beauty that is an enchantment, and 
an ever present peril; both joy and sorrow as sharp as a 
sword’. But at its core, fantasy tries to expose the reader to 
the dominant discourses that we exist in; for example, Lewis 
wanted to wake people up from the ‘evil enchantment’ of 
the corruption of the everydayness of our lives, through the 
fantastic. Rowling wants to awaken the reader to the selfish 
discourse of Western consumerism that saps the consumer of 
their humanity, and then shows them an alternative discourse 
that is about a shared give and take between people and, how 
fellowship is a gift of love.
Zipes (1979:141) explains how fantasy ‘plays upon the 
imagination not to open it up to escape into a never-never 
land but to make a greater contact to reality’. Taylor (2002) 
explains how, when reading The lord of the rings (1991), he 
never escaped reality:
I found myself going along on the journey, dealing like the 
nonheroic, comfort loving hobbits with weariness, fear, 
uncertainty, and agonizing choices. With them I felt terror when 
confronted with undisguised evil and enormous gratefulness for 
unexpected good. (p. 422)
So it is with the Harry Potter series: the reader is confronted 
with choices from the ‘Muggle’ world, the world that non-
magical people live in and ‘Sub-Creation’ (the wizarding 
world) that Rowling creates. The two worlds present the 
reader with two different sacred stories (Jones’s versus 
wizards) echoing the choices of the early Church (Caesar 
versus Christ). Rowling does this by exposing the reader 
not only to their everyday reality (consumerism and/
or materialism), but creates an alternative interpretation, 
another reality where the reader is in a position to choose 
between consumerism or liberation from consumerism and 
fellowship.
Fantasy, whilst entertaining, also helps human development 
through hope: 
While the fantasy is unreal, the good feelings, it gives us about 
ourselves and our future are real, and these real good feelings are 
what we need to sustain us. (Bettelheim 1976:12)
In the last book, The deathly hallows (2007), when Harry ‘dies’ and 
he meets Dumbledore at Kings Cross, Harry asks Dumbledore 

Original Research
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v70i1.2713
Page 4 of 6
if the conversation they are having is real: ‘Is this real? Or has 
this been happening inside my head?’ Dumbledore answers 
him as follows: ‘Of course it is happening inside your head, 
Harry, but why on earth should that mean that it is not real?’ 
(Rowling 2007:579). Even though the reader may go beyond 
the text to experience hope in their imagination, it does not 
mean that it is not real. Fantasy shows the reader that there 
is hope to chaotic events and human beings have the ability 
to put order to chaos by making other choices. By using the 
fantasy genre to offer the reader an alternative interpretation 
to the dominant discourse that the reader confronts on a daily 
basis, the author tries, through the alternative reality that they 
propose, to liberate the reader from the captivity the dominant 
discourse holds over them (crucifies dominant discourse 
of materialism). In Rowling’s case, the reader has to choose 
between being a ‘Muggle’ who tries to live up to and fit in 
to their social context, or to be a wizard who through love 
and grace is liberated from consumerism and thus is reborn 
a new liberated self, free of the desire to please someone or 
something so they can be liked and loved.
Children’s literature, and especially the fantasy genre, deals 
with the questions people ask from childhood. Fantasy 
narratives ask not only the questions we ask in developing 
our identity and spirituality (i.e. who?, why?, what? and 
where?), but these narratives also try to give answers to these 
questions in an enchanting manner. Fantasy narratives have 
the ability to engage the reader’s imagination by producing a 
safe place wherein the reader can try on other identities and 
play out different life scenarios (re-imagining their lives). 
Many fantasies also utilise spiritual experiences, allowing 
the reader to imagine and perhaps even experience moments 
of wonder and awe that go beyond what the text intended. 
In a successful ‘Sub-Creation’, the writer creates something 
‘pure’ and ‘free from greed’ that does not try to delude the 
reader (Tolkien 2008:64). Rather, through the fantastic the 
writer tries to make the reader sensitive to the dominant 
discourse and how it is degrading to human beings, and then 
gives an alternative discourse that may be chosen to the one 
that they exist in (usually a life that includes glimpsing the 
Christ discourse indirectly): ‘Uncorrupted, it does not seek 
delusion, nor bewitchment and domination; it seeks shared 
enrichment, partners in making and delight, not slaves’ 
(Tolkien 2008:64). This pure narrative enables the reader 
to enter through her or his imagination into an alternative 
world where the fantastic exists to achieve ‘Secondary-
Belief’, accepting the created world as real whilst visiting 
this alternative world and the rules that govern it (Tolkien 
2008:64). Consequently, whilst in the ‘Secondary World’, the 
writer should be able to shape the created world in such a 
solid manner that the reader is released from their world 
to temporarily re-imagine themselves as a person who is 
liberated from their dominant discourse, free and willing to 
take up the journey of fellowship. O’Keefe (2004) explains 
how fantasy connects the human, the natural and the 
supernatural: 
[A] totality, a pattern, a network of connection in a fictional 
world that provides the satisfaction. Even when the total world 
presented is a grim one, its fullness is a revelation and a comfort. 
(p. 18)
Tolkien and Lewis were using the story of the Gospel to 
‘baptize the imagination’ (ed. Lewis 1947:21) with the 
discourse of Christ and making the alternative ‘Sub-Creation’ 
a choice between Christ or corruption. Lewis (1960:218) 
explained how fantasy can ‘baptize the imagination’ by 
exposing the reader to a ‘real though unfocused gleam of 
divine truth’. Through ‘baptizing the imagination’, Lewis 
(1947:21) was aiming to make it ‘easier for children to accept 
Christianity when they meet it in later life’. Thus, fantasy 
has the ability to ‘baptize the imagination’, to embrace an 
alternative interpretation of reality, and to live a new life. 
Through glimpsing the ‘source-reality’ in a ‘Sub-Creation’ 
the reader may become more open to the possibilities or 
choices created from an in-front-of-text-reading, allowing the 
reader, as Ricoeur (1981:112) points out, to project his or her 
‘ownmost possibilities’ on this world, freeing the reader to 
imagine themselves acting or living in an alternative manner 
with an alternative identity and spirituality (lived theology). 
As the reader is challenged in their dominant discourse (with 
its specific sacred stories) the reader then looks for alternative 
answers to their ultimate questions. 
Pierce (1993:50) points out that fantasy urges the reader to 
keep asking questions, nagging at their subconscious to 
look for answers. Hence, even though we may not have a 
satisfactory answer right now to a particular question, it 
does not mean we should stop asking that question. Fantasy 
shows the reader that certain questions have many answers, 
unlike the dominant sacred story that gives or allows for only 
one answer. Fantasy also shows the reader that there are 
alternative answers and ways of existing and that the answers 
can change over the course of a lifetime to the same question 
as we evolve as people, taking in different narratives.
The act of creating fantasy is, according to Tolkien (2008), a 
noble act, the highest form of creativity and a tribute to God 
when done successfully: 
Fantasy remains a human right: we make in our derivative mode, 
because we are made: and not only are we made: but made in the 
image and likeness of the Maker. (p. 66)
The Gospels, Tolkien (2008:246) insisted, were fairy-stories: 
‘[T]hey contain marvels, peculiarly artistic, beautiful and 
moving ones: “mythical” in their perfect self-contained 
significance, and yet symbolical and allegorical as well’. For 
Lewis (1944:270), the Gospels are myth, but a ‘myth become 
fact’. Lewis did not demythologise Christ, as in Christ ‘the 
essential meaning of all things down from the “heaven” of 
myth to the “earth” of history, without ceasing to be myth’ 
(Lewis 1944:270). As Christians we must agree to both the 
historical fact of Christ, and at the same time to the imaginative 
myth of Christ, as we do with all myth. For Lewis, fantasy has 
the ability to capture profound experiences, retrieving ‘all 
mistakes, head you off from false paths’ (Lewis 1943:10). This 

Original Research
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v70i1.2713
Page 5 of 6
experience that has the ability to draw the reader into a world 
that ‘wakes you up’ to your dominant tainted surroundings. 
The writer then shows the reader an alternative world that is 
free of this tainted surrounding and enriches the reader with 
a dominant discourse that has glimpses of the divine. 
For Tolkien (2008:246), stories that contain glimpses of the 
‘Truth’ have the ability to go beyond the ‘Secondary World’ 
and into the ‘Primary World’. Fantasy has the ability to 
interact in such a manner with the reader to go beyond the 
text to allow the reader to glimpse the ‘Joy’ of the resurrection. 
In the Gospels, particularly, ‘the greatest artistry has “come 
true”, affecting the reader in their own world’ (Tolkien 
2008:246). This means that the reader may then use what they 
have glimpsed in the ‘Secondary World’ and apply it to their 
lives, directly impacting their identity and, thus, spirituality.
Why is Harry Potter lived religion?
The world or ‘space’ that is created in front of the text, 
between the reader and the Harry Potter series, becomes 
a ‘church’ where adolescents are exposed to glimpses of 
Christ, in a language that they can identify with. This ‘church 
space’ of the imagination challenges adolescents to rethink 
their identities with its glimpses of a Christlike life. Millbank 
(2005:2) explains that in the ‘post Christian phase’, where 
there is a decline in institutionalised religion, fantasy seems 
to have the ability to give glimpses of the Gospel, allowing 
the story of Christ to ‘persist in the echo of the public value’. 
Therefore, the Gospel has moved from the Bible to the 
fantasy genre in a secularised world, and become a religion 
that some people live out. Thus, Christ persists to challenge 
society, not from the Bible, but from within social mediums 
that many people find valuable and feel comfortable with, 
such as the fantasy genre. Fantasy writers such as Tolkien, 
Lewis, and in a contemporary world, Rowling, use glimpses 
of the Gospel in their work to expose and challenge the 
effects of the dominant discourses of their societies that 
they see as fragmenting and hurting people’s identities 
and binding them to material things. These writers use the 
Christ discourse as an exposing and transforming tool to 
show people the effect of the dominant discourses. If, as 
Ganzevoort (2009) argues, practical theology is the study of 
‘lived religion in a hermeneutic mode’ that attends ‘to the 
most fundamental processes of interpreting life through 
endless conversations in which we construct meaning’, then 
this includes conversations with ‘our fellow human beings’ 
and the ‘traditions that model’ our lives. By ‘traditions’ 
Ganzevoort (2009) means the Bible and the Church, ‘with all 
its interpretative power and normative claims’, eventually 
aiming ‘at a more profound and more adequate spiritual life’. 
The Harry Potter series is lived religion or theology, as 
the Christ discourse presented by Rowling may open 
a way for adolescents to live transformed lives that are 
inspired by the implicit story of Christ; sacrificial love 
towards an alternative fellowship. This implicit Christ-
narrative challenges the adolescents to choose between 
seeking identity in materialism or rather in friendship and 
fellowship and sacrificial love. In that sense, the implicit 
Christ-narrative becomes normative for their newly chosen 
identity. Rowling uses the Harry Potter series to offer 
glimpses of the Christ discourse; to be able to interpret 
the lived religion or theology of the Harry Potter series, we 
need to be able to read it together with the Gospels (as a 
normative text). It is then on the basis of the normative text 
of the Gospels that it can be argued that the Harry Potter 
series offers glimpses of the Gospels. Secondly, those 
glimpses of the Christ-narrative can be transformative as 
they offer an alternative to adolescents’ dominant discourse 
of their ‘realities’. This links back to what Miller-McLemore 
(2012a) explains about people forming their values from the 
Gospels (Christian values), and incorporating it within their 
daily lives, even though they may not be aware that these 
are Gospel values that are shaping their lives.
The ‘cultural-hermeneutic’ of the Harry Potter series 
phenomenon is worthy of critical analysis, as the series 
offers an alternative discourse to those of the dominant 
Western discourses that could be having damaging effects 
on people’s identity and spirituality. The alternative sacred 
discourse presented by Rowling may allow the reader to 
experience transformation and the possibility to choose to 
follow the ethos offered by the book which echoes the values 
of the Gospels (Christ discourse). People look for answers to 
the ultimate questions in their sociocultural worlds, and by 
doing so they push the boundaries of where the sacred can be 
experienced. The Harry Potter series is one such sociocultural 
phenomenon. Phenomena such as the Harry Potter series 
sometimes ‘take churches … by surprise’, explains Heimbrock 
(2010:120), as the Church’s interpretation of the Gospels are 
re-interpreted from outside the Church. But this does not 
mean that it is a bad thing; rather, practical theologians need 
to adjust how they practice theology.
Rowling’s wizarding ‘Sub-Creation’, although it gives a 
very similar choice to those of Lewis and Tolkien (the choice 
between Christ and corruption), does not make the Christ 
discourse the only choice (Rowling makes this one of two 
choices). Rather, Rowling gives the reader a gift by telling 
them that there is more to people than what they posses, as 
is so often understood in the Western dominant discourse. 
The Christ discourse places value in fellowship and does 
not require for people to have any possessions to be loved 
by those that they are in fellowship with. What is required 
of them is things that cannot be bought such as love, loyalty 
and honestly; in other words, qualities that do not try to 
delude a fellowship. Harry shows adolescents that by 
caring more about others than himself, the centre of his life 
is not within him or about him (selfish Western consumerist 
sacred discourse), but rather the centre of his life is 
outside of him, in the form of his friends and community 
(Christlike behaviour). Thus, this shows readers that it is 
not material possessions and selfish behaviour that are 
important, but rather the quality of life Harry experiences 
with his friends and wizarding community that help shape 
his identity and spirituality in a life that echoes the Gospel 
values. Therefore, Rowling deconstructs Western reality’s 
materialism and consumerism, rebuilding readers’ reality 
with the alternative ethos of the Gospels. 

Original Research
Original Research
http://www.hts.org.za
doi:10.4102/hts.v70i1.2713
Page 6 of 6
In her Harry Potter series, Rowling addresses the dominant 
discourse of consumerism and materialism that have taken 
religious dimensions through her depiction of the ‘Muggle’ 
world, with the Dursleys as her prime examples of people 
who try to ‘fit in’ with their society through their belongings; 
she then offers an alternative to this way of life with the 
Christ discourse. It is typical of the fantasy genre to challenge 
dominant discourses through a fantastic narrative with an 
alternative spirituality or religion with an appropriate ethos. 
Rowling puts emphasis on people, family and fellowship and 
community as the most treasured occurrence that a person can 
experience in their lives, as opposed to the latest material things. 
Rowling’s pitting of fellowship against consumerism (with all 
its downfalls), opens a space for transformation that may allow 
adolescents to be liberated from the never ending vicious cycle 
created by consumerism and materialism. Consumerism and 
materialism directly causes problems in people’s lives, obliging 
people to ‘fit in’ to their sociocultural world by acquiring what 
the market is telling them they need to have in order to fit in. 
Conclusion
As the Harry Potter series has the Christ discourse threaded 
in its sacred story, it allows the reader glimpses of the values 
of the Gospels from an everyday perspective and that makes 
the series function as lived theology. In other words, some 
of the characters from the wizarding world live out on a 
daily basis, values from the Gospels, no matter how stressful 
a situation may be. These situations are impregnated with 
ethos (normative) and create the possibility of transformation 
and transcendence and, therefore, serve as examples of lived 
theology for the reader, who may then carry these experiences 
into their realities (‘Primary World’). 
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no financial or personal 
relationship(s) that may have inappropriately influenced 
them in writing this article. 
Authors’ contributions
This article is based on the PhD dissertation of A.A. (University 
of Pretoria) with J-A.M. (University of Pretoria) as supervisor.
References
Beaudoin, T., 1998, Virtual faith: The irreverent spiritual quest of generation x, 
Josey-Bass, Chichester.
Bettelheim, B., 1976, The uses of enchantment: The meaning and importance of fairy 
tales, Knopf, New York, NY. 
Ganzevoort, R., 2009, Forks in the road when tracing the sacred: Practical theology 
as hermeneutics of lived religion, viewed 20 May 2013, from http://www.
ruardganzevoort.nl
Gräb, W., 2012, ‘Practical theology as a religious and cultural hermeneutics of Christian 
practice’, International Journal of Practical Theology 16(1), 79–92. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1515/ijpt-2012-0007
Heimbrock, H.G., 2010, ‘Beyond secularization: Experiences of the sacred in 
childhood and adolescence as a challenge for RE development theory’, British 
Journal of Religious Education 26(2), 119–131. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/0141
6200420042000181901
Millbank, J., 2005, ‘Fictioning things: Gift and narrative’, Religion & Literature 37(3), 
1–35, viewed 20 May 2014, from http:/www.jstor.org/stable/40059993
Lewis, C.S., 1943, The pilgrim’s regress: An allegorical apology for Christianity, reason, 
and romanticism, 3rd edn., Geoffrey Bless, London. 
Lewis, C.S., 1944, ‘Myth become fact’, World Dominion 22(Sept–Oct), 269–270.
Lewis, C.S. (ed.), 1947, George Macdonald: An anthology, Macmillan, New York, NY.
Lewis, C.S., 1960, Mere Christianity, Collier Books, New York, NY.
Lewis, C.S., 1962, They asked for a paper: Papers and addresses, Geoffrey Bless, London.
Lewis, C.S., 1980, The chronicles of Narnia, Collins, London.
Miller-McLemore, B.J., 2007, In the midst of chaos: Caring for children as spiritual 
practice, John Wiley & Sons Incorporated, San Francisco, CA. 
Miller-McLemore, B.J., 2012a, Christian theology in practice: Discovering a discipline, 
William B. Eerdmans Publishing Company, Grand Rapids, MI.
Miller-McLemore, B.J., 2012b, ‘Five misunderstandings about practical theology’, 
International Journal of Practical Theology 16(1), 5–26. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1515/ijpt-2012-0002
Miller-McLemore, B.J., 2012c, ‘The contributions of practical theology’, in B.J. Miller-
McLemore (ed.), Wiley: Blackwell Companion to Practical Theology, n.p., Wiley-
Blackwell, Hoboken, NJ.
Miller-McLemore, B.J., 2012d, ‘Theology, religious communities and practice’, in Faith 
and leadership, viewed 12 March 2013, from http://www.faithandleadership.
com/qa/bonnie-j-miller-mclemore
Miller-McLemore, B.J., 2012e, ‘Toward greater understanding of practical theology’, 
International Journal of Practical Theology 16(1), 104–123. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1515/ijpt-2012-0009
Moltmann, J., 1974, The crucified God, SCM Press, London. 
O’Keefe, D., 2004, Readers in wonderland: The liberating worlds of fantasy fiction – 
From Dorothy to Harry Potter, Continuum, New York, NY.
Pierce, T., 1993, ‘Interview’, School Library Journal, 50–51.
Ray, R., 2010, ‘JK Rowling on the Oprah Winfrey Show in Edinburgh’, The Telegraph, 
viewed 
04 
October 
2010, 
from 
http://www.telegraph.co.uk/culture/
tvandradio/8041104/JK-Rowling-on-the-Oprah-Winfrey-Show-in-Edinburgh-ABC-
US-tv-review.html
Ricoeur, P., 1981, Hermeneutics and the human sciences: Essays on language, action 
and interpretation, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Rowling, J.K., 2007, Harry Potter and the deathly hallows, Bloomsbury Publishing, London.
Taylor, D., 2002, ‘In praise of stories’, in L. Ryken (ed.), The Christian imagination, pp. 
407–425, Shaw Books, Colorado Springs, CO. 
Tolkien, J.R.R., 1979, Tree and leaf, Allen & Unwin, London.
Tolkien, J.R.R., 1991, The Lord of the rings, Harper Collins Publishers, London
Tolkien, J.R.R., 2008, ‘Tolkien on fairy-stories: Expanded edition with commentary and 
notes’, in V. Flieger & D.A. Anderson (eds.), Harper Collins Publishers, London.
Tracey, D., 2010, ‘What spirituality means to young adults’, in S. Collins-Mayo & P. 
Dandelion (eds.), Religion and youth, n.p., Ashgate Publishing Company, Burlington.
Zipes, J., 1979, Breaking the magic spell: Radical theories of folk and fairy tales, 
Heinemann Educational Books, London.