Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i1.1715
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Effective Youth Ministry: Embracing a family-orientated 
approach
Author: 
Philippa Strong1
Affiliation:
1Faculty of Theology, 
North-West University, 
Potchefstroom Campus, 
South Africa
Correspondence to: 
Philippa Strong
Email: 
philippa.strong@nwu.ac.za
Postal address: 
Private Bag X6001, 
Potchefstroom 2520, 
South Africa
Dates:
Received: 23 Aug. 2013
Accepted: 12 May 2014
Published: 09 Sept. 2014
How to cite this article:
Strong, P., 2014, ‘Effective 
Youth Ministry: Embracing a 
family-orientated approach’, 
In die Skriflig 48(1), Art. 
#1715, 8 pages. http://
dx.doi.org/10.4102/ids.
v48i1.1715
Copyright:
© 2014. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work
is licensed under the
Creative Commons
Attribution License.
Effektiewe Jeugbediening: Omhelsing van ’n familie-georiënteerde benadering. Hierdie 
artikel ondersteun die Sola Scriptura-benadering van die reformatoriese teologie. Aanvanklik 
fokus die artikel op die huidige krisis in Jeugbediening, naamlik dat Jeugbediening nie effektief 
toegepas word om jongmense tot volwasse Christenskap te lei nie. Dit bespreek een van die 
bydraende faktore tot hierdie krisis: die jeug se isolasie van die volwasse wêreld − spesifiek 
van hulle eie ouers en die groter kerkgemeenskap. Vanuit ’n Sola Scriptura-benadering 
word ’n familie-geörienteerde benadering tot effektiewe Jeugbediening waar dit van ouers 
verwag word om verantwoordelikheid vir hulle kinders se geestelike groei te neem, as 
uitkoms voorgestel. Die kerk behoort dan ouers en families in hierdie proses te ondersteun. 
Verskillende rolspelers in familie-georiënteerde Jeugbediening word geïdentifiseer en ’n paar 
nuwe insigte aangaande hulle verskillende take word voorgestel. 
Introduction
The article is written from a practical theological perspective, using Osmer’s model as research 
guideline (Osmer 2008:4; 2009:7). The Sola Scriptura foundational doctrinal principle of the 
Protestant Reformation, which is held by the reformed theology, was brought into account. 
Sola Scriptura entails the belief that Scripture is the final and only infallible authority for the Christian 
in all matters of faith and practice. Other authorities are fallible and must always be tested by, 
and submit to, Scripture (cf. Patton 2009). From the Sola Scriptura principle, a family-orientated 
Youth Ministry is proposed, where it is expected from the parents to take responsibility for their 
children’s spiritual growth. The church should support parents and families in this process. This 
article identifies the different role players in family-orientated Youth Ministry and aim to propose 
some new perceptions regarding their different roles.
Definition of Youth Ministry
In this article, the term youth supposes a period of transition from the dependence of childhood 
to the independence of adulthood, and the awareness of interdependence as members of 
a community. Youth is thus a more fluid category than a fixed age group. This leads to the 
understanding of ‘Youth Ministry’ in this article as the spiritual ministry of leading young people, 
who find themselves in this transition period from childhood to adulthood (cf. UNESCO 2014), 
from a Christian perspective. Nel (2005:13) describes Youth Ministry in its essence as a discipline 
within practical theology (as in many other parts of the world). It is mainly a ministry where it is 
attempted to cultivate a relationship with God: listening to the one and only unique God in Christ 
and talking to him, calling him Father.
Objectives
The motivation for writing this article is that traditional Youth Ministry is in a crisis as it does 
not succeed in leading the youth to mature spiritual adulthood in the long run (Barna 2000; Nel 
2001:3; DeVries 2004:21, 24; cf. Shafer 2008:6; Smith & Snell 2009:259; Dean 2010:3, 24). This article 
Page 1 of 8
This article embraces the Sola Scriptura approach of the reformed theology. Firstly, the article 
focuses on the crisis in Youth Ministry, namely its inefficiency in leading young people to 
Christian maturity. It addressed one of the contributing factors to the crisis: the isolation of 
youth from the adult world, and particularly from their own parents and the larger church 
community. From the Sola Scriptura principle, a family-orientated approach to effective Youth 
Ministry is proposed where parents are expected to take responsibility for their children’s 
spiritual growth. The church should then support parents and families in this process. 
Different role players in a family-orientated Youth Ministry are identified and some new 
perceptions regarding their different tasks are proposed. 
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Read online:

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i1.1715
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
aims to show how this current crisis of Youth Ministry could be 
addressed. The crisis answers Osmer’s descriptive question: 
‘What is going on?’ Alarmingly, the answer to this question 
is directly opposite to the answer to Osmer’s normative 
question: ‘What ought to be going on?’ (Osmer 2008:4; 
2009:7). Thus, instead of Youth Ministry leading the youth in 
a spiritual relationship closer to God, which would be in line 
with the purpose of the Great Commission of Jesus Christ 
in Matthew 28:16–20, the current crisis in Youth Ministry 
proves the outcome to be the direct opposite, namely that 
young adults are alienated from God. 
The first objective of this article is to find the reason(s) for 
this crisis in Youth Ministry, which will be achieved by 
answering Osmer’s interpretive question: ‘Why is this going 
on?’ The contributing factor to the current crisis in traditional 
Youth Ministry that has been identified and focused on in 
this article (there are quite a few contributing factors) is the 
isolation of teenagers from the adult world − particularly 
from their own parents (cf. Nel 2001:3; DeVries 2004:21, 24; 
Dean 2010:24). 
In the remainder of this article this cause will be addressed and 
a possible solution will be proposed by answering Osmer’s 
pragmatic question: ‘How might we respond?’ This will 
be done by proposing a family-orientated Youth Ministry, 
identifying the different role players and elaborating on their 
specific roles.
Traditional Youth Ministry
Traditional Youth Ministry can be described as Youth 
Ministry being practised as an independent ministry, 
leading to the isolation of the youth from the larger church 
community and their parents (Nel 2001:3, 8; DeVries 2004:21, 
24; cf. Dean 2010:21, 24). Nel (2001:3, 8) stresses this 
characteristic of isolation of traditional Youth Ministry and 
calls it ‘autonomous Youth Ministry’. 
Traditional Youth Ministry has thus little to do with a certain 
tradition, style, programming or personality, but rather 
with the place of the youth in the community of faith 
(DeVries 2004:21). The independence of traditional Youth 
Ministry has lead to the notion that attending a youth 
programme has become a substitute for participation in the 
church (cf. Dunn & Senter III 1997:492–493). 
Currently, traditional Youth Ministry is in a crisis (Senter 
III 2001; Strommen & Hardel 2008:16–17), which entails 
that Youth Ministry today is not effective in leading the 
church youth to mature Christian adulthood (Barna 2000; 
cf. Nel 2001:3; DeVries 2004:21; Shafer 2008:6; Smith & Snell 
2009:259; Dean 2010:3, 24).
All communities, countries and denominations have been 
affected by this traditional Youth Ministry approach − some 
only sooner than others (Nel 2001:3, 8). The current state of 
Youth Ministry in South Africa is thus not unique. 
This ‘traditional approach to Youth Ministry’ resulted 
in a worldwide loss of youths for Christ (Nel 2001:8; cf. 
DeVries 2004:103). In order to effectively pass on faith from 
generation to generation, Strommen and Hardel (2008:19) 
propose that the home and church must be in partnership.
Rethinking Youth Ministry
It is evident from the Bible that God desires every human 
being, including every adolescent and child, to be saved 
and to be in a personal relationship with him (cf. Jn 17:3; cf. 
Dean 2004:xii). In Matthew we find the Great Commission 
where Jesus Christ said:
All authority has been given to me in heaven and on earth […] 
go therefore and make disciples of all nations […] teaching 
them everything that I [Christ] have commanded you. 
(Mt 28:16–20, NIV)
From a Sola Scriptura viewpoint, it is important that Youth 
Ministry should be Christ-centric, as Christ told the disciples 
to teach people everything that he (Christ) told them.1 
Furthermore, it is without a doubt evident from the Bible 
that Youth Ministry has a place and purpose within the Great 
Commission of Jesus Christ.
Proposing a family-orientated 
Youth Ministry
Long before God instituted his church, he created the family. 
Anderson (2007:189) aptly remarks that within the first few 
chapters of Genesis God starts operating from a ‘family 
context’ − and this family operandi continues in the New 
Testament. He concludes that ‘God is family’. Richardson 
(1996:15) remarks that God created the family and that 
the family model he instituted, is the way he wants us to 
understand and define the concept of family. 
Already at the very beginning in the Old Testament God 
instituted marriage when he created Adam and Eve with the 
capacity to reproduce after their own kind. The family unit 
usually consisted of the husband, wife and their children 
(Gn 2:19–24; cf. Richardson 1996:15). 
In the New Testament God actually commands the church 
to be ‘like a family’, saying that the church is part of his 
household (Eph 2:19; cf. 1 Tm 3:15). Jesus calls each to be 
his brother and sister – he makes brothers and sisters of all 
who come to him. All who believe in God and in the work 
of Jesus Christ is called family and are part of the household 
of God (1 Tm 3:15; Heb 2:11). The basic concepts that reveal 
God’s desire for families are an intimate relationship: firstly 
with God and then also with one another (Gn 4:9; Ec 4:10; 
Jn 13:34–35; 15:12; Gl 6:1). In the family context, God always 
needs to come first (Eph 6:2–4; Jn 15:12; Mt 6:33; 10:37–39; 
cf. Strommen & Hardel 2008:17–18). According to the Bible, 
a strong family needs to build and maintain these two key 
relationships: a strong family relationship and a strong 
1.See also Strong’s article titled Christ Alone … Redeeming Youth Ministry (accepted 
for publishing in 2014 by In die Skriflig/In Luce Verbi ) for an in-depth discussion on 
a Christ-centric theological message for effective Youth Ministry.
Page 2 of 8

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i1.1715
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 3 of 8
relationship with God. A strong and life-shaping family 
will be characterised by these two kinds of relationships 
(cf. Mt 10:37–39; Strommen & Hardel 2008:18). 
God commanded parents to teach their children his Word, as 
Nel (2001) wisely indicates:
Parents are primary mediators in the relationship (or covenant) 
between God and families, and as such are key in the roles that 
humans play in the coming of God to children. (p. 12)
This principle of parents being primary mediators in the 
relationship between God and families is boldly proclaimed 
in the Word of God. According to Deuteronomy 11:19 (NIV), 
God commanded parents to teach their children the Word 
of God when he said: ‘Teach them to your children, talking 
about them when you sit at home and when you walk along 
the road, when you lie down and when you get up.’
Ministry was never meant to happen without the context of 
family. Each time a ministry is formed and it is not operating 
from a family framework with the mission to empower and 
enrich family life, it will not be successful as God himself is 
family-‘orientated’ (cf. Anderson 2007:188). God is ministry, 
and his ministry is relational, unitive, creative, redemptive 
and curative − and characterised by love (Stevens 1999:141; 
cf. Olthuis 2012:7). 
No wonder that the lasting results of the youth ministries of 
the past decades were so few and far between − and hence 
also the isolation of youth. As was mentioned earlier in this 
article, DeVries (2004:21) showed the isolation of youth from 
adults, in particular their parents, as one of the main reasons 
why Youth Ministry was virtually without success in the past 
(cf. Dean 2010:24; Strommen & Hardel 2008:19; Nel 2001:3, 8). 
This characteristic of God as a ‘family God’ is of extreme 
importance when we need to find a new orientation for 
Youth Ministry. It is clear that traditional Youth Ministry 
were wrong to separate the youth from the rest of the church 
as well as from the nuclear family. From a Sola Scriptura 
point of view, this article thus proposes a family-orientated 
Youth Ministry. 
A family-orientated Youth Ministry and its 
different role players
Effective Youth Ministry embraces a family-orientated 
approach, which entails that parents are expected to take 
responsibility for their children’s spiritual growth, whilst 
the church supports parents and families in this process 
(cf. DeVries 2004:175; Nel 2001:4–5). The different role players 
of a family-orientated Youth Ministry are parents, youth 
workers, the congregation and the youth. Role players in this 
case can therefore be all the different groups of people who 
have a part in Youth Ministry and making it a team effort. 
Embracing a family-orientated approach addresses the 
problem of the current pattern of isolation in autonomous or 
traditional Youth Ministry (Nel 2001:3; cf. Senter III 2001:xi). 
Nel (2001:4–5) remarks that youths are the responsibility of 
parents, youth leaders, elders, deacons, the congregation as 
well as the responsibility of one another. This responsibility 
is inalienable and not transferable. The different roles each 
of these parties play in effective Youth Ministry will be 
discussed below.
Role of parents in effective Youth Ministry 
First and foremost, it is important to be reminded that the 
responsibility to raise children as mature spiritual adults is 
primarily the responsibility of the child’s parents and not of 
the church, or specifically in this case, the Youth Ministry 
(Eph 6:4; 2 Tm 1:5; 3:15; cf. Nel 2001:12; Barna 2007:25; Schlect 
2007:3). DeVries (2004:10) uses a very familiar African saying 
in order to bring this point across: ‘lt takes a village to raise a 
child.’ The first village for every human being is the family of 
origin. Strommen and Hardel (2008:90) stress the importance 
that parents need to help develop, sustain and pass on a 
Gospel-oriented faith to their children. They continue to 
say that God has placed children initially in the hands of 
their parents (cf. Strommen & Hardel 2008:142). Anderson 
(2007:23) states that parents are God’s covenant partners.
Children are a special gift from God to their parents and 
need to be raised by them as people serving God with all 
their hearts, souls, strength and minds (Ps 127:3–5; Dt 6:5–9; 
cf. Barna 2007:xiii, xviii; Mueller 2007:14; Dunn & Senter III 
1997:496; Nel 2001:12). Children are a gift from God, given 
to us as a sign of God’s favour. Because God values them so 
highly, so must we (Mueller 2007:14). 
One of the classic quotes of James Dobson (n.d.), founder 
and chairman emeritus of Focus on the Family, stresses the 
responsibility of parents to raise their children with godly 
values. He stated (Dobson n.d.; cf. Boteach 2006:177):
Children are not casual guests in our home. They have been 
loaned to us temporarily for the purpose of loving them and 
instilling a foundation of values on which their future lives will 
be built.
Mueller (2007:435) has the same idea that children need 
parents who will help them discover the real meaning of love 
by demonstrating it in their homes − they should be loved 
unconditionally (cf. Boteach 2006:72). 
Boteach (2006:20) says that he believes the most primary role 
of parents is to protect their children, to make sure that they 
are safe: physically, emotionally and spiritually. Children 
should be allowed to be children as long as possible.
Mueller (2007:432) writes that parenting should be 
redemptive. He elaborates on this statement by saying that 
in situations where a child makes a mistake, parents need 
to redeem the situation by turning the mistake into an 
opportunity for the child to be a more Christ-like person. 
In his book, Barna (2007) divides parents in two groups: 
revolutionary parents and typical parents. According to Barna 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i1.1715
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 4 of 8
(2007:xv), revolutionary parents are those who understand 
that their role is to guide their children to understand the 
principles and outcomes that honour God and advance 
his purposes. Success in this regard is measured by the 
transformed lives of children. On the other hand, typical 
parents, according to the research done by The Barna Group, 
are parents who have no plan for the spiritual development 
of their children, do not consider it a priority, have little 
or no training in how to nurture a child’s faith, have no 
related standards or goals that they are seeking to satisfy, 
and experience no accountability for their efforts (The Barna 
Group 2009).
Barna (2007:56) states that his research showed that one of 
the characteristics of revolutionary parents is that they put a 
high premium on the spiritual development of their children. 
Mueller (2007:440) says that parents need to leave a spiritual 
heritage to their children − children need to be taught and 
shown that God occupies centre stage in their parents’ lives 
and home. This will be accomplished through prayers, 
spiritual discussions and family devotions, and by setting a 
godly example as parents (Mueller 2007:440).
The most fascinating fact is that this research showed that 
revolutionary parents see themselves as the primary spiritual 
developers of their children and that the church and school 
should only reinforce the spiritual lessons that were taught 
at home. Revolutionary parents thus have a biblical view 
regarding the spiritual development of their children and 
their responsibility concerning this important matter. Barna’s 
research further showed that one of the fascinating differences 
between revolutionary parents and typical parents are their 
reaction towards their church’s youth leaders. Revolutionary 
parents are interested in the content the youth leaders 
teach their children, how they conduct the experience and 
how they would interact with the parents. If they were not 
satisfied with the standard of the Youth Ministry, they would 
remove their child from the group or release pressure on him 
or her to attend regularly. In contrast, typical parents did not 
care what their children were taught in youth groups, as long 
as they attended (Barna 2007:57).
Revolutionary parents realise the important responsibility 
of raising their children in tandem with God. Strommen and 
Hardel (2008) conclude:
Children and youth tend to adopt the values and beliefs of 
their parents. If the parents embrace the beliefs and values of a 
Gospel-oriented faith, the children will adopt them. (p. 89)
Mueller (2007:422), on the other hand, reminds us that even 
if parents do everything right, there is still no guarantee that 
their children will grow up to be spiritually healthy. Children 
will at a certain point make their own choice regarding God 
(cf. Dean 2004:xiii).
Parents need to realise that they cannot force their children to 
love, honour and obey God. It is the Holy Spirit who convinces 
unbelievers of sin and calls them to faith (Eph 3:17; Jn 6:44). 
Often parents want to bring up their children in a moralising 
way and expect it also from youth leaders (cf. Cole 2012). 
Parents should be constantly alert not to moralise their 
children, as children can easily associate the Gospel with laws 
and regulations instead of a love relationship with Christ. It 
is of utmost importance that parents should trust Holy Spirit 
to let their children grow spiritually, as it is only God who 
can let them grow (1 Cor 3:6–21). Parents’ responsibilities are 
to sow seeds of grace and water it, whilst demonstrating a 
relationship with God from a love and grace perspective. As 
Mueller (2007:423) stated: ’Parents can’t carry their children 
kicking and screaming into the kingdom of God.’ Parents 
need to set a godly example to their children, but ultimately 
they need to rely on God for the spiritual growth of their 
children (cf. Mueller 2007:423; Cole 2012).
Role of youth leaders in effective Youth Ministry
In order to build an effective Youth Ministry it is important to 
define the role of such a ministry’s youth workers.
Youth leaders should demonstrate a personal love 
relationship with Christ 
Youth Ministry needs youth workers who dwell in the 
presence of God and are willing to walk with them on the 
journey, regardless of how often they are prone to personal 
detours, says King (2006:11). 
Youth leaders cannot be atheological about life and ministry 
(cf. Dunn & Senter III 1997:50). They can learn a great deal 
from the way Jesus taught and dealt with people when he 
was on earth. He lived differently. He was teaching a whole 
new world order through the way he lived − his words only 
magnified and confirmed what he lived, and not the other 
way around. Christ did not only talk the talk, he also walked 
the talk (cf. Barna 2006:77). 
Youth 
leaders 
should 
not 
only 
teach 
youth 
the 
Bible − knowledge of the Bible alone will not change their 
lives. It is not enough to give people information and then 
demand change. The lives of youth leaders and parents need 
to be saturated with the love and intimacy they have for 
Christ. This demonstration of intimacy and love with Christ 
will play part in driving the youth right into the arms of the 
Father. Sweney (2011:100) put it beautifully when he said: 
‘Transformed lives transform lives.’ 
Youth leaders should be passionate about the youth and 
dedicated to them
Youth leaders need to be passionate about the youth as 
human beings and not get caught up in the ‘prestige’ of 
youth leaders. They should be dedicated to walk the spiritual 
path with young people together with their parents. Youth 
Ministry should not be seen as a stepping stone towards a 
higher rank in the church. It should rather be valued as a 
very important task − helping parents lead their children in 
the very first steps in Christian life and a relationship with 
God. Youth leaders need to be really interested in the youth, 
valuing their contribution to society, and should be willing 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i1.1715
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 5 of 8
to listen and be a part of their lives (cf. Roebben 2005:27–30). 
Leaders in Youth Ministry should be equipped to observe the 
experiences of the youth, and they particularly need to learn 
to adapt to the modes of expression that young people have 
developed (Roebben 2005:27). As the old saying goes: ‘People 
don’t care unless they know you care.’ 
Youth leaders need to know that they are planters
Every minister wants to see good results in his or her 
ministry − it is the same in Youth Ministry (cf. Cole 2012). 
A youth leader can easily fall into the trap of behaviour 
modification instead of sharing the Gospel with young 
people. This will lead young people to understand the Gospel 
as a set of rules of right and wrong that needs to be outwardly 
performed instead of understanding the Good News as grace, 
having a love relationship with God and knowing that Holy 
Spirit will work sanctification in their hearts (cf. Cole 2012). 
However, in Youth Ministry it should be about planting good 
seeds of grace in the lives of young people and watering 
it, allowing Holy Spirit to produce spiritual fruit. Mark 
Upton, a former youth worker and current pastor at Hope 
Community Church in Charlotte, North Carolina, proposes 
the following wise words as slogan for every youth minister: 
‘If anyone asks you about your ministry, tell them you will 
let them know in ten years’ (cf. Cole 2012).  He adds:  ‘Youth 
pastors need to view themselves as sowers, planting Gospel 
seeds for harvest down the road’ (cf. 1 Cor 3:6-8).
Assisting parents in children’s spiritual development
The results of the ‘Effective Christian Education’ study 
proved that the most influential people in shaping the 
youth’s faith life are by far their parents − not even pastors 
or teachers ranked close to parents in this poll (Strommen & 
Hardel 2008:90). Unfortunately, research shows that a large 
majority of believers rely on the church, rather than their 
family to train their children to become spiritually mature 
(Barna 2006:35). 
Youth leaders and youth workers must become collaborators 
with parents as well as their youth. They must ‘encourage the 
timid, help the weak, be patient with everyone’ (1 Th 5:14; cf. 
Dunn & Senter III 1997:514). Revolutionary parents do not 
see themselves as parents raising their children in a vacuum 
(Barna 2007:58). They realise that in the functioning of the 
body of Christ each member has a different calling and 
that the youth pastor or ministry can be of assistance in the 
discipleship of their children. 
Youth Ministry with the correct values will realise the 
importance of involving and interacting with parents, 
helping them to raise their children to spiritual maturity 
(cf. DeVries 2004:9–10). It is very important to provide 
opportunities for teens and parents to interact, and to gain 
parental involvement in Youth Ministry, according to 
DeVries (2004:17).
It is clear that Youth Ministry can be a helping hand for 
parents in the discipleship process of their children.
Empowering parents to be spiritual leaders of their home
Youth Ministry workers need to understand that, in order to 
be effective in their role, it is important to give the leadership 
and primary responsibility of raising children to spiritual 
maturity back to parents, as God intended it to be. DeVries 
(2004:9–10) argues that the most substantial Youth Ministry 
with the utmost positive results is the ministry that relates to 
young men and women as members of families. Strommen 
and Hardel (2008:269) note that parents play a vital role in 
establishing family relationships as well as how the family 
relates to God.
According to Schlect (2007:3), a part of the problem of the 
flawed concept of Youth Ministry is the fact that the church 
is not expecting enough from parents and their children. 
Only when the church respects, involves and empowers 
parents in the process of guiding children spiritually Youth 
Ministry will be successful in the long run. Instead of taking 
the responsibility off the shoulders of parents to raise 
their children in the ways of God, it is rather the church’s 
responsibility to train and empower parents as spiritual 
leaders in order to be the primary spiritual coaches for their 
children. Barna (2006:35) magnifies this need when he states 
that most Christian parents do not believe they are doing 
a good job at facilitating the spiritual development of their 
children. Strommen and Hardel (2008:142) say that parents 
need to be taught how to connect with their children through 
the sharing of Scripture stories, and also how to pray with 
their children. 
Only when parents feel empowered as spiritual leaders 
they will have the courage to take up their responsibility as 
spiritual leaders of their homes in the same way that they 
take up the responsibility as primary caretakers of their 
children in all other facets of life. Parents need to realise that 
this is the way that God intended it from the very beginning.
Role of the congregation in effective Youth 
Ministry 
The congregation is seen and valued as the larger faith 
family of effective Youth Ministry. The Church is a ‘family 
of families’ (cf. Anderson & Guernsey 1985; Anderson 
2007:176). This concept can only be viewed in a similar way 
the Bible speaks of the body of Christ as a ‘household’ of God 
or the ‘temple’ of God (Eph 2:19; 1 Tm 3:14–15; 1 Jn 3:1; cf. 
Anderson 2007:176). The different parts are connected to one 
another, and together they make up the body of Christ and 
function as it. In the same way, Youth Ministry is an integral 
part of the larger congregation. Nel (2001:4) writes that the 
youth forms an integral part of the congregation as an entity 
and the entity is never completed without Youth Ministry. 
Youth leaders need to remind and motivate the congregation 
that they are important in Youth Ministry to ultimately act as 
the family of God − stretching out their arms to the youth in 
love and healing, and carry them in prayer. The congregation 
should overload the youth in grace and not with a judging 
attitude when they are in the wrong, knowing that they 
are still young Christians. The ideal relationship between 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i1.1715
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 6 of 8
the youth, youth leaders and the congregation will result 
in connecting the identity and work of God with the caring 
work of the church (cf. Purves 2004:xxvii).
Role of the youth in effective Youth Ministry
The youth is responsible for one another in the sense that 
they care for each other and help each other where possible 
(cf. Nel 2001:4–5; Gn 4:9; Ec 4:10). In order to minister 
effectively to the youth, it is very important to understand 
the essence of who they are and how to create a safe haven 
for them. 
What follows is in no way a complete summary, but rather 
an attempt to highlight the most important characteristics of 
who the youth are and what they need.
The youth’s childhood needs to be preserved and protected
Childhood innocence is under assault. Medved and Medved 
(1998) describe it powerfully as follows:
The very idea of parental protectiveness has been overwhelmed 
by relentless pressure from a society that seems determined to 
expose its young to every perversion and peril in an effort to 
‘prepare’ them for a harsh, dangerous future. (p. 3)
Boteach (2006:35) agrees with the above description when 
he indicates that we need to shield our youth from the 
increasingly malign cultural influences that subtly but 
constantly persuade our children to skip childhood (cf. 
Dobson 2012:12).
Medved and Medved (1998:5) remark that Marie Winn wrote in 
her book, Children Without Childhood (1981), that civilisation 
has recently swiftly shifted its attitude regarding nurturing 
the young. She states that instead of struggling to preserve 
children’s innocence, a belief was born that children must be 
exposed to adult experiences early in their lives in order to 
survive in an increasingly complex world. She says that the 
‘age of protection’ has ended and an ‘age of preparation’ has 
set in. As indicted by Medved and Medved (1998) 17 years 
after Winn’s book was written, this preparation model of 
childhood appeared to be an appalling failure. This was 
evident in the increase in youth suicides, crimes conducted 
by children, drug use, sexual activities before the age of 18, 
youth having sexually transmitted diseases and teenage 
pregnancies (Medved & Medved 1998). 
Our children need to be protected − it is a duty we cannot 
shrink from. Children of all ages are crying out to be taken care 
of (Boteach 2006:37). Children need the security of defined 
limits. They may not admit that they want their parents to 
be in charge, but they breathe easier when their parents are 
protecting them and setting the boundaries (Dobson 2012:9).
Dunn and Senter III (1997:509) remark that it is sad that 
parents today want their children to grow up quickly. In 
killing innocence, families, teachers, clerics and neighbours 
are often unwittingly attacking something precious − 
killing something irreplaceable. In the process of destroying 
innocence, they could actually be creating the ominous 
world for which they are trying to prepare their youngsters 
for (Medved & Medved 1998:16). 
 
Parents need to protect children from adult programming 
on the television. Yet, almost four out of every 10 children 
have parents who do not really know what they are watching 
(Dobson 2012:12). Social research conducted by Yankelovich 
Partners Inc., who analysed the television viewing habits of 
Americans, discovered that 42% of children between ages 9 
and 17 have their own cable or satellite television hookups 
in their bedrooms (Dobson 2012:12). Dobson (2012:12) 
correctly asserts regarding these statistics: ‘Considering the 
explicit sex, violence, nudity, and profanity available now, 
especially on cable and satellite television, this is a disturbing 
revelation.’
Boteach (2006:34–35) writes that if we treat our children like 
young adults we are allowing them to miss their childhood 
− a stage that is absolutely essential to provide them with 
a strong foundation for adulthood. Dunn and Senter III 
(1997:512–513) say that many of today’s teenagers are left to 
parent themselves − many of them are either coming from 
broken homes or from homes where both parents are working 
away from home. Children’s innocence can only be protected 
if their parents safeguard it − by raising their children rather 
than forcing them to raise themselves (Boteach 2006:35; cf. 
Medved & Medved 1998:15). Boteach (2006:38) explicitly 
says: ‘In a world where there are no parents, there can be 
no children.’ 
 
Youth leaders need to support parents in embracing their 
role as protectors and guardians in order to ensure that the 
youth of the day grow up to be well-mannered, intellectually 
curious and spiritually secure. 
The youth needs to be taught to embrace their childhood and 
enjoys it, as the teacher in Ecclesiastes (cf. Ec 3:1–8) says: ‘[T]
here is a time for everything.’ Facing this responsibility is the 
first step in fighting the encroachment on the innocence of 
our children (Medved & Medved 1998:15). 
Providing the youth with a safe haven 
The best conditions in which struggling adolescents can 
grow, occur when they feel they are accepted unconditionally 
− they know that they are with someone who is trustworthy 
and real, and experience that they are deeply understood 
(Dunn & Senter III 1997:520). Boteach (2006:38) notes that 
when you provide the youth with a safe haven, they will lack 
self-consciousness, which is a characteristic of childhood.
It is very important for youth leaders (and parents) to 
remember that in order to relate to a teenager, one does 
not need to act like one (Dunn & Senter III 1997:520; cf. 
Boteach 2006:38).
Channelling the youth’s passion
Passion is one of the strongest emotions known to man, and 
it is at its peak during adolescence (Daily 2013). Whatever 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i1.1715
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 7 of 8
adolescents do in life, it is usually done with great passion 
and enthusiasm. Dean (2004:6) states that every stage of the 
life cycle brings certain human characteristics to the fore, and 
identifies passion as one of these qualities in adolescence. It 
is thus of utmost importance to channel the passion of the 
youth in the right direction so that it leads to the glorification 
of God. 
Dean (2004:6) explains that although the frontal brain lobes 
that govern reason and judgement continue to develop into 
adulthood, the emotional centres of the brain are nearly 
mature by adolescence, giving teenagers their propensity for 
leading with their hearts. One could say that the adolescent 
brain is wired for passion. Young people feel it in their 
bones, proclaim it in their hopes and hormones, and act out 
its power. 
Almost everything the youth do, is usually wired with 
passion. Dean (2004:6) correctly observes that to live 
passionately is the mission of the young, the world and, 
perhaps above all, the church (cf. Daily 2013). God desires 
that we will love him with a passionate love, a love that 
consumes our whole heart, soul and mind − our everything. 
It is a love that oozes passion in capital letters. The Bible 
shows that God’s desire is that his children will love him 
zealously (cf. Rm 12:9–13; Pr 23:17). Paul writes to Timothy 
(2 Tm 1:6, NIV): ‘[F]an into flame the gift of God.’
Adolescents do not want to suffer, but they desperately want 
to love something (or someone) worthy of suffering − and to 
be so loved. They yearn for experiences that will channel their 
passions (Dean 2004:xi). Young people, who by definition 
must figure out how to be human, may not realise that their 
quest for ‘a love worth dying for’ is a quest for the Love who 
died for them. It is God’s gift of passion that compels them 
to search for him. For good or for ill, the fire in the youth’s 
loins and the fire in their souls are intimately connected 
(Dean 2004:xiv–xv). By acknowledging the passion of Christ, 
the youth’s passion will give way to faith in Christ and will 
be fuelled by the energy of fierce love for him (Dean 2004:2). 
There is a deep human longing for authentic love − a longing 
present in each of us, but it is acute during adolescence 
(Pascal n.d.; Daily 2013). As Kierkegaard (1985:145) correctly 
observes, the greatest passion of all human beings is to have 
faith (cf. Dean 2004:xiv–xv). This truth is stated in the Bible 
in Colossians 1:16, where it is said that all things were made by 
God and for God: we (all humans, the youth included) were 
created to yearn passionately after God. 
However, passion needs to be channelled properly. Daily 
(2013) reminds us of this importance when he says that 
passion is healthy and a very positive attribute. It is when 
adolescent passion runs unchecked that unnecessary risks 
are taken, which can be harmful to adolescent relationships.
Epilogue
The value of this article is that it identifies and addresses 
one of the contributing factors to the current crisis in Youth 
Ministry, namely the isolation of the youth from the larger 
church community, and particularly from their own parents. 
Youth Ministry as a family-orientated ministry with different 
role players is proposed from a Sola Scriptura point of view. 
It entails different role players to work together as a team, 
making Youth Ministry more effective. The autonomous 
approach of traditional Youth Ministry is thus completely 
rejected. Guidelines regarding the different roles of the role 
players are provided, which aim to provide fresh insights 
regarding their different tasks. Defining a new framework 
for Youth Ministry, in order for it to be more effective, brings 
with it a call for change that will lead the youth to mature 
Christian adulthood. This article aims to aid in defining 
a framework for effective Youth Ministry as it proposes a 
family orientation and teamwork operation instead of an 
autonomous and isolated approach.
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The author declares that she has no financial or personal 
relationship(s) that may have inappropriately influenced her 
in writing this article.
References
Anderson, R.S., 2007, Something old, something new: Marriage and family ministry in 
a postmodern culture, Wipf & Stock, Eugene. 
Anderson, R.S. & Guernsey, D.B., 1985, ‘What kind of family is the church?’, in S.C. 
Barton (ed.), On being family: A social theology of the family, pp. 155–159, 
Eerdmans, Grand Rapids. 
Barna, G., 2000, ‘Teenagers embrace religion but are not excited about Christianity’, in 
Legacy Youth Ministry Resources, viewed 07 June 2012, from http://www.youth-
ministry.info/articles.php5?type=2&cat=20&art_id=38
Barna, G., 2006, Revolution: Worn-out on church? Finding vibrant faith beyond the 
walls of the sanctuary, Christian Art Publishers, Vereeniging. 
Barna, G., 2007, Revolutionary parenting: Want to raise a spiritual champion? What 
the research shows really works, Christian Art Publishers, Beijing.
Boteach, S., 2006, Parenting with fire: Lighting up the family with passion and 
inspiration, New American Library, New York.
Cole, C., 2012, ‘Youth Ministry’s tendency toward legalism’, in The Gospel 
Coalition, viewed 20 February 2014, from http://thegospelcoalition.org/blogs/
tgc/2012/04/16/youth-ministrys-tendency-toward-legalism/
Daily, E., 2013, ‘Passion’, in Heart Centered Counseling, viewed 08 August 2013, from 
http://www.evandaily.com/adoles/passion.html
Dean, K.C., 2004, Practicing passion: Youth and the quest for a passionate church, 
Eerdmans, Grand Rapids.
Dean, K.C., 2010, Almost Christian: What the faith of our teenagers is telling the 
American church, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
DeVries, M., 2004, Family-based Youth Ministry, 2nd edn., InterVarsity Press, Illinois. 
Dobson, J., n.d., ‘Dr. James C. Dobson quotes’, in ThinkExist.com, viewed 08 June 2012, 
from http://thinkexist.com/quotation/children_are_not_casual_guests_in_our_
home-they/260636.html
Dobson, J., 2012, Dobson’s handbook of family advice: Encouragement and practical 
help for your home, Harvest House, Eugene.
Dunn, R.R. & Senter III, M.H., 1997, Reaching a generation for Christ, Moody, Chicago.
Kierkegaard, S., 1985, Fear and trembling, transl. A. Hannay, Penguin, London.
King, M., 2006, Presence-centered Youth Ministry, InterVarsity Press, Illinois.
Medved, M. & Medved, A., 1998, Saving childhood: Protecting our children from the 
national assault on innocence, HarperCollins, New York.
Mueller, W., 2007, Youth culture 101, Zondervan, Grand Rapids.
Nel, M., 2001, ‘The inclusive congregational approach to Youth Ministry’, in M.H. 
Senter III, (ed.), Four views of Youth Ministry and the church, pp. 1–38, Zondervan, 
Grand Rapids.
Nel, M., 2005, ‘Why theology? It is only Youth Ministry’, Journal of Youth and Theology 
4(1), 9–22.
Olthuis, J., 2012, ‘A vision of and for love: Towards a Christian post-postmodern 
worldview’, Koers 77(1), 1–7. http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/koers.v77i1.28
Osmer, R.R., 2008, Practical theology: An introduction, Eerdmans, Michigan.

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i1.1715
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 8 of 8
Osmer, R.R., 2009, ‘Practical theology: A current international perspective. Practical 
Theology in South Africa: Perspectives and paradigms (Key note address)’, Annual 
conference for the Society for Practical Theology, Pretoria, South Africa, January, 
2009.
Pascal, B., n.d., ‘Blaise Pascal Quotes’, in ThinkExist.com, viewed 14 June 2012, from 
http://thinkexist.com/quotation/there_is_a_god_shaped_vacuum_in_the_
heart_of/166425.html
Patton, C.M., 2009, ‘In defense of Sola Scriptura’, in Credo House, viewed 23 April 
2014, from http://www.reclaimingthemind.org/content/Parchmentandpen/In-
Defense-of-Sola-Scriptura.pdf
Purves, A., 2004, Reconstructing pastoral theology, Westminster John Knox Press, London.
Richardson, W., 1996, Reclaiming the urban family: How to mobilize the church as a 
family training centre, Zondervan, Grand Rapids.
Roebben, B., 2005, ‘Light of day − Scaffolding a theology of Youth Ministry’, Journal of 
Youth and Theology 4(1), 23–32.
Schlect, C., 2007, Critique of modern Youth Ministry, 2nd edn., Canon Press, USA.
Senter III, M.H., 2001, ‘Of churches, youth groups, and spiritual readiness: The context 
of the debate’, in M.H. Senter III (ed.), Four views of Youth Ministry and the church, 
pp. ix–xix, Zondervan, Grand Rapids.
Shafer, B., 2008, Unleashing God’s word in Youth Ministry, Zondervan, Grand 
Rapids.
Smith, C. & Snell, P., 2009, Souls in transition: Religious & spiritual lives of emerging 
adults, Oxford University Press, Oxford. http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/acprof:o
so/9780195371796.001.0001
Stevens, R.P., 1999, The other six days: Vocation, work, and ministry in biblical 
perspective, Eerdmans, Cambridge.
Strommen, M.P. & Hardel, R.A., 2008, Passing on the faith: A radical model for youth 
and family ministry, Saint Mary’s Press, Winona.
Sweney, C., 2011, A new kind of BIG: How churches of any size can partner to transform 
communities, Baker, Grand Rapids.
The Barna Group, 2009, Parents accept responsibility for their child’s spiritual 
development but struggle with effectiveness, viewed 26 April 2014, from 
https://www.barna.org/barna-update/article/5-barna-update/120-parents-
accept-responsibility-for-their-childs-spiritual-development-but-struggle-with-
effectiveness
UNESCO, 2014, What do we mean by ‘youth’?, viewed 07 April 2014, from http://
www.unesco.org/new/en/social-and-human-sciences/themes/youth/youth-
definition/