Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.114
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Prophetic preaching in the contemporary context 
of South Africa
Author:
Hennie J.C. Pieterse1
Affiliation:
1Department of Philosophy, 
Practical and Systematic 
Theology, University of 
South Africa, South Africa
Correspondence to: 
Hennie Pieterse
Email: 
pietehjc@absamail.co.za
Postal Address: 
262 Marais Street, Brooklyn 
0181, South Africa
Dates:
Received: 24 July 2013
Accepted: 04 Mar. 2013
Published: 07 June 2013
How to cite this article:
Pieterse, H.J.C., 2013, 
‘Prophetic preaching in the 
contemporary context of 
South Africa’, In Die Skriflig/
In Luce Verbi 47(1), Art. #114, 
6 pages. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.4102/ids.v47i1.114
Copyright:
© 2013. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work
is licensed under the
Creative Commons
Attribution License.
In South Africa we have a great legacy of prophetic preaching with preachers such as Desmond 
Tutu. Since the new dispensation, however, we are confronted today with a new situation of 
injustice and exclusion: the massive poverty amongst about 50% of the population. This article 
discusses the conditions for prophetic preaching in the current context of South Africa, which 
are a clear understanding of the poverty situation and solidarity of the church with the poor, 
a good understanding of prophetic preaching as a specific type of preaching, as well as the 
support of the congregation, the churches and the ecumenical church for prophetic preaching.
Introduction
With excellent preachers like Desmond Tutu, we have a great legacy of prophetic preaching 
against apartheid (cf. Pieterse 2001). The injustice caused by apartheid has been resolved in the 
new dispensation in 1994 with a constitution in which human rights are safeguarded, and a 
democratically elected government has been appointed. A new situation of injustice is confronting 
us today – the unbearable poverty of about 50% of the population, according to prof. Carel van 
Aardt of the Bureau of Market Research at the University of South Africa (Strydom 2009). In this 
article I discuss the contemporary South African context of massive poverty and self-enrichment 
by the elite, which to my mind challenges preachers today to preach prophetically in our context. 
This phenomenon of massive poverty puts the poor in our country in a situation of injustice and 
exclusion from the rest of the South African population (Burger, Louw & Van der Watt 2010:62). 
The practice of preaching this inhuman situation creates a problem for the preacher. Should we 
preach prophetically on the shortcomings of the present social order in such a context (Tisdale 
2010:9)? This problem falls out in three questions: 
• 
What circumstances challenge a preacher to take a prophetic stance in society?
• 
What is prophetic preaching?
• 
Do prophetic preachers need the support of a church community or are they lone rangers?
The book by Tisdale (2010) focuses our attention again on the need for prophetic preaching. The 
South African context differs from the context of the United States. Therefore we must address 
our context with a specific South African approach. As an answer to the research questions 
above, I will investigate the conditions that qualify prophetic preaching in this new context in our 
country. That is also the goal of this article: to find the conditions in which prophetic preaching 
in an unjust and undignified situation would be necessary. First the contemporary South African 
context of poverty against the self-enrichment of the elite will be described, followed by a 
description of prophetic preaching and a discussion of the need for church support for this type 
of preaching.
Suffering of the poor in the contemporary South African 
context
When the new democratic government took office with Nelson Mandela as president, all South 
Africans experienced a feeling of great liberation. Our hopes were high for a new dispensation 
of freedom for everyone, and we were ready to solve the problems of the country and create a 
Page 1 of 6
Profetiese prediking in die huidige konteks van Suid-Afrika. Met predikers soos Desmond 
Tutu het ons ’n goeie erfenis van profetiese prediking in Suid-Afrika. Sedert die nuwe bedeling 
word ons egter met ’n nuwe situasie van ongeregtigheid en uitsluiting gekonfronteer: 
die massiewe armoede van ongeveer 50% van die bevolking. Hierdie artikel bespreek die 
voorwaardes vir profetiese prediking in die huidige konteks van Suid-Afrika: ’n duidelike 
begrip van die armoedesituasie en solidariteit van die kerk met die armes, ’n goeie begrip 
van profetiese prediking as ’n spesifieke soort prediking, asook die ondersteuning van die 
gemeente, die kerk en die ekumeniese kerk vir profetiese prediking. 
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Read online:

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.114
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
dignified and happy life for all. Many poor people thought 
that the government would look after them, but this is not 
what happened. The current (2012) social grants serve 15.6 
million people out of the population of over 45 million. These 
are assigned to the elderly poor who do not have a pension, 
children of poor mothers until they turn 18, orphans, disabled 
people, poor foster parents and poor caregivers of old and 
frail people (Claasen 2012; Laubscher 2012). The expenditure 
in the budget of the state for social grants in 2012 is 11% of 
the total budget; an expenditure that is gradually reaching its 
limits of being affordable. The social grant for a poor family 
of four (total of the separate grants of the family members), 
according the Minister of Finance’s 2012 budget speech, is 
R3940 per month or R47 280 per annum (Laubscher ibid). 
Unfortunately these social grants do not always reach the 
poor. According to the minister of social development, ms 
Bathabile Dlamini in a statement in parliament, R41 million 
disappeared in recent years (August 2009 to December 2011) 
as a result of corruption by officials who work with the 
distribution of social grants (Ferreira 2012). Corruption with 
regard to social grants denies the poor of our country food, 
their most basic need for survival.
The problem is that these social grants hardly provide for 
the most basic needs for survival of the poor. In our context, 
more than 50% of the adult population still earns less than 
R50 000 per annum, according to the research of prof. Carel 
van Aardt of the Bureau of Market Research at the University 
of South Africa, communicated in a press release (Strydom 
2009). South Africans who earn less than R50 000 a year can 
usually not break through the glass ceiling to move up to a 
better income. These people are either unemployed, earn a 
small income in the informal sector or are dependent on 
social grants (Strydom ibid). The poverty line is a cutoff point, 
above which people can maintain a minimum standard of 
living, but below which it is not possible or very difficult 
(Pieterse 2004:30). In our context in 2012, we can deem 
an income of less than R50 000 per annum as beneath the 
poverty line. In the year 2000, about 50% of the population 
of South Africa lived beneath the poverty line. Since then 
there has been an increase in poverty (Burger et al. 2010:66). 
Although the government has involved more people in 
social grants, the gap between rich and poor is increasing 
– the rich elite is getting richer and the poor masses are 
getting poorer. They are excluded from the wellbeing of 
their countrymen and experience injustices against them 
(cf. Burger et al. 2010:62; cf. Van Aarde 2012). Compared to 
the poor who are trapped in poverty and cannot move to a 
higher income, we have those in South Africa who earn top 
incomes (more than R750 000 per annum); a number that has 
grown by 52% around 2008 and 2009. These top earners are 
either government workers, workers in the private sector or 
self-employed, according to prof. Carel van Aardt (Strydom 
ibid). These figures show the serious gap between the poor 
and the rich in this country.
Wepener and Cilliers (2010) listed more factors than just the 
lack of income in their description of poverty. They call it a 
diverse definition in the light of their understanding of social 
capital. Against the feeling of a sense of belonging and the 
formation of trust and identity, poverty could be described as 
exclusion. The poor are denied their identity as human beings 
and members of society. The poor have a lack of useful civic 
skills (Wepener & Cilliers 2010): 
Poverty could indeed be described or defined as: a state of 
affairs where the absence of material resources, lack of space 
to enable the formation of trust and identity, as well as the loss 
of civic skills and collaborative opportunities to further real 
transformation, impact negatively on one another in a seemingly 
unstoppable and escalating spiral. (p. 420)
This situation is even more serious when we compare 
it with the rich elite and the new rich elite (government 
workers and some self-employed people, of which many 
are tenderpreneurs). In the South Africa of today we are still 
confronted with the huge divide between high and low, or no 
income. Buffel (2010) describes it aptly:
… the South African situation is … marked by destitution, 
hunger, homelessness and overcrowding, illiteracy, the HIV and 
AIDS pandemic as well as other ills associated with poverty such 
as crime and violence. These factors paradoxically co-exist with 
affluence. (p. 36)
The unequal distribution of wealth is expressed by the Gini 
coefficient, with 0 representing total equality and 1 total 
inequality (Pieterse 2004:51). In 2000, South Africa scored 
0.59. In 2009, nine years later, we scored 0.67, which shows 
that the income gap between rich and poor is increasing 
(Strydom 2009).
Unemployment is a perennial problem in South Africa. Since 
1994, it has been shifting between 29% and 25% of the 
population who are able to work (Pieterse 2004:38). There 
is a relation between finding a job and the level of primary 
and secondary school education received and opportunities 
available for tertiary education. The problem is that our state 
schools are not functioning well. The ministries for poverty 
and care of the Dutch Reformed Church (NG Kerk) and 
the Uniting Reformed Church organised a conference on 
poverty and education in Bellville on 13 and 14 March 2012. 
There were people from all relevant walks of life in South 
Africa: government ministers, school commissions, labour 
unions, teachers, a commercial institute and a wide variety 
of university professors. The picture that emerged from 
the conference was a bleak one for education at our state 
schools). There is enough money to service our education 
system – R207 billion for 2012. But compared to 40 countries 
of similar economies and development levels, the quality 
of our education for the poor is amongst the bottom 10 out 
of the 40 countries. The quality of South African education 
in the state schools is worse than that of Malawi, Lesotho, 
Mozambique, Namibia, Uganda, Zimbabwe, Kenya and 
Swaziland (Manuel 2012).
Our educational system at the primary school level scores 
low compared with the education systems of the rest of 
the African countries south of the Sahara. From a list of 14 
countries, South Africa lies ninth).  Botswana is first, Kenya 
is second and Mozambique is sixth on the list. South Africa 
is just above Swaziland (Rademeyer 2011). As long as this 
Page 2 of 6

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.114
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 3 of 6
situation continues, poverty will continue. Better education 
is a vital instrument in the fight against poverty. Preachers 
should inform themselves on this issue and sensitise members 
of the congregation in their sermons.
Homelessness is also a perennial problem and squatter camps 
are growing at the edges of towns and cities. In many of these 
squatter camps and in many townships there is no service 
delivery for water, sewerage and electricity. In the last few 
years, protests about poor service delivery in the townships 
have become more and more expressive. After 18 years of 
democracy, a new situation of poverty has developed and 
the service delivery protests by the poor at many places 
in the country are a symptom of this new situation where 
people are still experiencing injustice and social-economic 
exclusion in their lives (Manala 2010).
A qualitative research project 
on the experience of poverty in 
townships with informal housing
At the beginning of 2011, I conducted qualitative structured 
interviews with Black young people waiting in a queue 
at organisations who want to provide training for jobs at 
Mamelodi (Tshwane) and Zamdela (Sasolburg). My field 
workers asked them to voluntarily fill in the answers to the 
questions in the open spaces of the structured interview 
schedule. We started at the back of the queues and stopped 
the data collection when we received 15 respondents’ replies 
at Mamelodi and four at Zamdela, where there was a short 
queue. Fifteen respondents is usually enough in a qualitative 
structured interview research project to get a picture of 
people’s experiences and views, which they express in their 
own words in their written answers (Nieuwenhuis 2007:79). 
Although this research project is about the poor’s experiences 
of poverty, two questions in the structured schedule 
pertain to the issues of the social analysis by Manala (2010). 
The particulars of the respondents participating in the 
survey follow.
Mamelodi (Tshwane) group
There were nine male and six female respondents. The 
majority was unemployed (13) and two were employed. All 
the male respondents were unemployed. The average age 
was 24.8 years.
I report on two questions in the analysis of the responses 
from the Mamelodi respondents.
The experience of being unemployed or receiving a 
meagre income 
The question was phrased as: ‘Your experience of joblessness 
or receiving a meagre income? Please write.’
Eight out of the 15 respondents named bad housing or shelters 
and lack of food as the most severe experiences of their 
situation of poverty. 
Respondent 8 (male, 35 years old, unemployed) wrote: ‘I am 
experiencing difficulties because I am unemployed. It is hard 
for me to get food or to get a better house. Sometimes I sleep 
with an empty stomach … My parents are suffering because 
they do not receive any income … six members of our family 
share one room.’
Respondent 4 (male, 23 years old, unemployed) wrote: ‘It is 
hard to live a jobless life, because everyone needs food and 
shelter to survive. If you don’t work you can become a thief.’ 
Respondent 3 (male, 23 years old, unemployed) wrote: ‘It is 
difficult … receiving [a] meagre income due to the fact that 
I am on foster care [that] does not cover my basic needs to 
survive.’
Poverty also destroys a young man’s dreams: Respondent 7 
(male, 22 years old, unemployed) wrote: ‘Being jobless is a big 
problem, because you can’t have … thing[s] you need, more 
especially food, [a] car or even [the] house of your dreams.’
Respondent 6 (male, 35 years old, unemployed) wrote: 
‘[Joblessness] is discouraging, especially when seeing other 
people earning lots of money but not doing their job properly.’
Protests with regard to service delivery in the townships 
and squatter camps 
The question was phrased as: ‘Why do people protest against 
weak, or no service delivery in the townships and squatter 
camps? Please write.’
Out of the 15 respondents, 13 named promises for better 
service delivery not being kept.
Respondent 2 (male, 29 years old, unemployed) wrote: 
‘Politicians promise poor people proper service delivery when 
they need their votes during elections, but after they get what 
they want they disappear. That causes people to protest.’
Respondent 9 (female, 20 years old, unemployed) wrote: ‘The 
reason [why they protest] is because the political parties in our 
country promise to deliver those services in exchange for 
votes, so they feel unjustified.’
The responsible officials and councillors of the municipality 
do not care.
Respondent 11 (female, 28 years old, employed) wrote: 
‘Because people who are responsible for the service delivery 
in the townships and squatter camps … do not do their jobs; 
they always sit in their offices and push their own agendas 
using the government resources, and they don’t even care 
because they don’t stay in the township or squatter camps; 
they stay in the suburbs.’ 
Respondent 1 (male, 23 years old, unemployed) wrote: 
‘Because they have sent a lot of memorandums to the local 
councillor, but they [do] not receive [a single] response … I 
mean, the local councillor is there because of these people. The 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.114
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 4 of 6
worst part is [that] during the local votes they promise people 
a whole lot more and service delivery, but then again, they 
only care [about] our votes; they don’t really care about us.’
RDP houses are given to people who do not qualify.
Respondent 3 (male, 23 years old, unemployed) wrote: ‘The 
protest is caused by the people who occupy houses while 
they do not qualify for those housing. The administration, 
especially in the squatter camps, is very bad.’
Zamdela (Sasolburg) 
There were two male and two female respondents and all 
four were unemployed. The average age was 24 years. The 
respondents were listed from respondent 16 to respondent 19.
In the analysis of the Zamdela control group, I looked for 
differences and similarities in the responses on the two 
questions compared to the Mamelodi group.
The experience of being jobless or receiving a meagre 
income
All four respondents named bad housing or shelters and lack 
of food as the most severe experiences of their situation of 
poverty.
Respondent 17 (female, 21 years old, unemployed) wrote: 
‘[The] experience of being jobless is that food is too expensive 
and not affordable.’
Respondent 16 (male, 27 years old, unemployed) wrote: ‘Yes, 
I am jobless and … receiving food from my parents.’ 
Protests with regard to service delivery in the townships and 
squatter camps 
Three out of four respondents named promises for better 
service delivery not being kept.
Respondent 17 (female, 21 years old, unemployed) wrote: 
‘People are protesting because they are not satisfied [with] the 
way things are going in our community. The empty promises 
that the municipality and the government are giving to the 
community and the nation.’
Respondent 18 (male, 27 years old, unemployed) wrote: 
‘Because our government likes to make promises to our 
people, but they don’t fulfil it.’
The responsible officials and councillors of the municipality 
do not care.
Respondent 16 (male, 27 years old, unemployed) wrote: ‘In 
our township they don’t care about people; they [only] look 
after themselves.’
The analysis of the two groups’ responses on the two 
questions show that there are generally no differences in 
their experiences and views. As young people living in 
different townships and in informal housing, they experience 
joblessness and poverty in the same way (cf. Pieterse 2012b).
Corruption by officials who are administering the funds 
for services to the poor deepens their experience of misery. 
Nelson Mandela condemns this phenomenon of corruption 
(Mandela 2010):
But history never stops to play tricks even with seasoned 
and world famous freedom fighters. Frequently, erstwhile 
revolutionaries have easily succumbed to greed, and the tendency 
to divert public resources for personal enrichment ultimately 
overwhelmed them. By amassing vast personal wealth, and by 
betraying the noble objectives which made them famous, they 
virtually deserted the masses of the people and joined the former 
oppressors, who enriched themselves by mercilessly robbing the 
poorest of the poor. (p. 406)
Desmond Tutu also takes a strong prophetic stance on this 
issue in his latest book (Tutu 2011):
How utterly despicable and how thoroughly disillusioning that 
there have been officials called ‘civil servants’ who have proved 
to be neither civil nor servants, who have actually robbed the 
most needy through pocketing their social welfare grants. 
The victims have been the elderly, robbed of their desperately 
needed pensions, often the only income in homes where those 
traditionally the breadwinners, are unemployed. Such corrupt 
persons have shown they are devoid of a sense of shame and 
common decency. (p. 202)
In this contemporary context of poverty, the church and 
its preachers face a great challenge. As disciples of Jesus 
we are obliged to side with the poor. In Matthew 25:31–46 
Jesus calls us to identify with the poor as he did and care for 
them. Furthermore, this text teaches us that he is also present 
today in the need of the poor, and in caring for them we care 
for Jesus himself. Therefore, the first condition for prophetic 
preaching in such a situation is solidarity with the poor. One 
has to side with them and experience their life situation 
existentially (Pieterse 2004:85–87).
A description of prophetic preaching
My homiletic theory regards preaching in its very essence 
as situational and topical. It seeks to communicate God’s 
word to people in their particular context. It is impossible to 
ignore the poor in our country and merely preach about faith 
as a private, spiritual affair. Preachers approach the Biblical 
text from their own context (Pieterse 2004:80–82; Immink 
2010:13). A second step is to evaluate societal notions with 
an approach of ideological suspicion on the basis of poor 
people’s understanding of society; beware of the dominance 
of the values of the upper middle class and the rich in a 
society. This includes religious, ecclesiastic and theological 
notions. Then, in the next step, we do exegesis (the design of 
the meaning of the text) for preaching in the context of the 
first hearers of the text whilst we keep our own context in 
mind in our hermeneutical activity. In this confrontational 
dialogue between the reader and the text, the text criticises 
our own understanding and presuppositions of our own 
context and opens up new possibilities of human existence 
in this context. The preacher receives the ‘self’ of the text, 
tantamount to admitting a new ‘self’ into his or her own life 
(Ricoeur 1976:99–105). The process of understanding the 
message of the text for our situation opens up new worlds 
to the preacher and the congregation; honing and refining 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.114
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 5 of 6
their prejudices and biases, putting them in a new light, 
and changing us to see new light and new hope in a context 
of suffering; in short, God’s vision for the contemporary 
situation. The dynamics of the work of the Holy Spirit 
become operative when we read the text and our context in 
prayerful meditation, with open minds and in a deeper space 
of covenantal contact with God in the homiletic process (cf. 
De Wet 2011).
Although we can say that all preaching is prophetic in 
general terms, prophetic preaching in a situation where a 
part of the society or community is experiencing injustice 
and exclusion, is a distinctive type of preaching (cf. Tisdale 
2010:4). It is not the same kind of preaching as on a general 
Sunday according to a lectionary, or the church calendar 
(Advent, Christmas, Lent, etc.), or preaching as teaching, 
or on a special day. Prophetic preaching in a context of 
injustice and exclusion reaches over the borders of a single 
congregation – it has a message for the ecumenical Christian 
church, the broader society and the government. Prophetic 
preaching is contextual. Its approach is from the angle 
of the poor, hence in terms of their need for justice and 
righteousness. Preachers’ hermeneutical orientation should 
be such that they respond to their exegesis interpretatively 
within the crisis of the prevailing situation of poverty. This 
calls for critical, creative thought in order to prophetically 
proclaim God’s words in this new social context:
Profetiese prediking is ’n prediking waarin ’n geroepe getuie 
spreekbuis word van die lewende handelende God; wat optree 
in ’n bepaalde krisisgelaaide konteks met ’n krities-kreatiewe 
woord waardeur verlede en hede, tradisie en krisis evangelies 
herinterpreteer word in terme van ’n nuwe beloftewoord sodat 
dit nuwe verbeeldingryke lewensmoontlikhede en alternatiewe 
bied. By die profetiese inhoud pas ’n profetiese styl en retoriek: 
naamlik die van waagmoed en pastorale bewoënheid en nabyheid 
binne die kring van skeppende gemeenskappe van geloof. 
[Prophetic preaching is preaching in which a summoned witness 
becomes a mouthpiece of a living, acting God; a witness who acts in 
a given crisis-charged context with a critical, creative word in which 
past and present, tradition and crisis are evangelically reinterpreted 
in terms of a new promise so as to offer new, imaginative existential 
possibilities and alternatives. The prophetic content calls for a prophetic 
style and rhetoric; a style of boldness and pastoral compassion and 
closeness within the circle of creative communities of faith.] (Müller 
1996:55, [author’s own translation])
Hermeneutical translation (from one context to another) for 
the purpose of a prophetic sermon is an interpretation of the 
text in such a way that its intention is not lost. Imaginative, 
relevant translation of a text for a sermon means inquiring 
hermeneutically into the intention of the text and then allowing 
it to progress dynamically to a new, liberating message in 
the present-day context in order to open up new existential 
possibilities: the scripturally fixed words of the text become 
a Word event all over again; a speech act with new, relevant 
meaning for the congregation’s situation (Long 2005:22).
Prophetic preaching is preaching based on biblical texts 
revealing God’s vision for justice, peace and equality in our 
world, and preaching that addresses public and social concerns 
(Tisdale 2010:3). It voices God’s passion for others, proclaims 
the promises of God and points the way to new possibilities 
and hope (Tisdale ibid:5). As West (2004) pointed out:
Prophetic witness calls attention to the causes of unjustified 
suffering and unnecessary social misery. It highlights personal 
and institutional evil, including the evil of being indifferent to 
personal and institutional evil. (p. 114)
Some listeners in affluent congregations in South Africa do 
not want to hear sermons on poverty. It could be a result 
of a feeling of guilt as well as the feeling that they do not 
know what do about it. In my research project of a grounded 
theory analysis of sermons on Matthew 25:31–46 in Dutch 
Reformed (NG Kerk) and Uniting Reformed congregations 
in eight provinces, the sermons on poverty are in many 
congregations combined with a great variety of projects by 
congregational members directed to the poor.1 Where this 
happens, the church members participate with enthusiasm.
The liturgy plays a crucial rule of which the sermon is a part. 
In the liturgy, God’s liberating deeds are celebrated through 
commemoration. In the Christian church, the deliverance by 
the Messiah, Jesus Christ, is commemorated in the liturgical 
celebration of Holy Communion. In this way each participant 
in the liturgy of Holy Communion shares in Christ’s salvation 
time and again, and has an expectation of deliverance from 
suffering in the work of Christ through his Spirit. The 
relevance and promises of God’s word in preaching are thus 
kept alive by means of commemoration and expectation (cf. 
Bohren 1974). Desmond Tutu’s prophetic preaching was 
directed by his belief that Jesus has overcome evil on the 
cross (Pieterse 2001:49–50). Perhaps we should revisit the 
prayers and songs in the liturgy during the struggle against 
apartheid (De Gruchy 1986):
What I see in Egoli
are tall buildings
smart cars
well dressed people
a whole scene
that has no place for my wife
no place for my children.
Lord Jesus, where are you? 
Renew your church, Lord,
your people in this land.
Save us from cheap words
and self-deception in your service.
In the power of your Spirit
transform us,
and shape us
by your cross. 
Every preacher should discerned the content of our prophetic 
preaching in contemporary South Africa in the specific 
context of the congregation. General issues that can be 
addressed are corruption by officials administering state 
funds, maladministration of state funds and unskilled 
people in crucial positions in the private sector who cannot 
do the job, but are there because they are ANC cadres due 
to the policies by the government to redeploy people to 
other positions after they are found guilty of corruption or 
maladministration in a previous government position. All 
1.For a typology of these projects, see Pieterse (2012a).

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.114
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 6 of 6
these things deprive the poor from their rights and bereave 
them of hope for a better life. Some of the results are a meagre 
functional education system in state schools and a meagre 
functional medical system in state hospitals and clinics. 
An important issue is the malfunctioning of education in the 
state school system as described above. Preachers should 
inform themselves on this issue and sensitise members of 
the congregation in their sermons. The churches must also 
address the government on a continued basis to do something 
about the situation. Preachers should constantly take note of 
the news every day and follow issues and developments that 
can harm the poor and the citizens of South Africa.   
 
But, there is also good news: we can play a positive role in 
this context of poverty. Preachers can sensitise members of 
the congregation to participate voluntarily in congregational 
projects of charity and empowerment of the poor as 
mentioned above (cf. Pieterse 2012a).
This distinctive type of preaching is a second condition for 
prophetic preaching.
The church and the ecumenical faith 
community must support prophetic 
preaching
The South African Council of Churches, most churches in 
South Africa, and the ecumenical faith community all over 
the world supported Desmond Tutu’s prophetic preaching. 
He was a pastor who lived close to his oppressed people 
and he had no political motivations or ambitions. In our 
contemporary situation, the prophetic preacher also needs 
a prophetic faith community. His or her congregation 
must be sensitised to become a prophetic faith community 
(cf. Corbett & Smith 1980). The South African Council of 
Churches has already made strong statements in the past, 
criticising the government on its handling of the poor. So 
did Tutu, as we have seen. But it is important that the local 
church of a preacher will support him or her in such relevant 
preaching when issues of poverty and the suffering of the 
poor are in the news. Communication by the preacher with 
his or her church members on this issue is very important. In 
any case, a prophetic preacher should persevere and must 
therefore take the long view – a struggle of many years to 
follow (Tisdale 2010:60–61).
The support of the church is a third condition for prophetic 
preaching.
Conclusion
Prophetic preaching should be contextual, building on a 
biblical theology that is directed to the context of all readers 
of the Bible, and informed by social analysis (cf. Pieterse 
2012b). It also needs contacts and support in the ecumenical 
faith community. A prophetic preacher must persevere and 
continue against all odds until the situation is changing for 
the better.
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no financial or personal 
relationship that may have inappropriately influenced him 
in writing this article.
References
Bohren, R., 1974, Predigtlehre, 3rd edn., Kaiser, München.
Buffel, O.A., 2010, ‘Journeying with the poor as they struggle for survival and liberation: 
Pastoral work alongside and together with the poor’, Theologia Viatorum: Journal 
of Theology and Religion in Africa 34(1), 28–48.
Burger, R., Louw, M. & Van der Watt, C., 2010, ‘The challenge of poverty and social 
exclusion in post-apartheid South Africa’, I. Swart, H. Rocher, S. Green & J. Erasmus 
(eds.), Religion and social development in post-apartheid South Africa, pp. 61–73, 
Sun Press, Stellenbosch.
Claasen, C., 2012, ‘Toelaes: ’n Nuwe plan teen geknoei’, Beeld, 18 February, p. 7.
Corbett, J., & Smith, E., 1980, Becoming a prophetic community, John Knox Press, Atlanta.
De Gruchy, J., 1986, Cry justice! Prayers, meditations and readings from South Africa, 
Collins, London.
De Wet, F.W., 2011, Hoe lieflik is die Lig. ‘n Verkenning van die dieptevlak van die 
homiletiese proses, Potchefstroomse Teologiese Publikasies, Potchefstroom.
Ferreira, L., 2012, ’25 000 sake bekyk in bedrog met toelae’, Beeld, 23 April, p. 5.
Immink, F.G., 2010, ‘Een methode van preekvoorbereiding’, in H. Van der Meulen (ed.), Als 
een leerling leren preken [Learning to preach as a learner], pp. 9–20, Boekencentrum, 
Zoetermeer.
Laubscher, J., 2012, ‘Verwyder struikelblokke wat opwaartse mobiliteit strem’, Beeld, 
Sake24, 5 March, p. 17.
Long, T.G., 2005, The witness of preaching, 2nd edn., Westminster John Knox Press, 
Louisville, KY.
Manala, M.J., 2010, ’“A better life for all”: A reality or a pipe-dream? A black theology 
intervention in conditions of poor service delivery in the democratic South Africa’, 
Scriptura 105, 519-531.
Mandela, N., 2010, Conversations with myself, Macmillan, London.
Manuel, T., 2012, ‘Daar ís genoeg geld’, Kerkbode, 20 April, p. 1.
Müller, B.A., 1996, ‘Profetiese prediking op weg na 2000 plus’, in M. Nel (ed.), Prediking: 
Kommunikasie in konteks, pp. 47–78, Makro Boeke, Pretoria.
Nieuwenhuis, J., 2007, ‘Qualitative research designs and data gathering techniques’, in 
K. Marais (ed.), First steps in research, pp. 69–97, Van Schaik Publishers, Pretoria.
Pieterse, H.J.C. (ed.), 2001, Desmond Tutu’s Message: A qualitative analysis, Brill, Leiden/
Boston/Köln.
Pieterse, H.J.C., 2004, Preaching in a context of poverty, University of South Africa Press, 
Pretoria.
Pieterse, H.J.C., 2012a, ‘A grounded theory approach to the analysis of sermons on 
poverty: Congregational projects as social capital’, Verbum et Ecclesia 33(1), 689. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/ve.v33i1.689
Pieterse, H.J.C., 2012b, ‘Social analysis of the poverty situation in South Africa revisited’, 
Theologia Viatorum 36(1), 1–22.
Rademeyer, A., 2011, ‘SA se gr. 6e vaar swak’, Beeld, 5 April, p. 2.
Ricoeur, P., 1976, Interpretation theory: discourse and the surplus of meaning, The 
Texas Christian University Press, Fort Worth, TX.
Strydom, T., 2009, ‘Rykstes word ál meer’, Beeld, Sake24, 13 January, p. 1.
Tisdale, L.T., 2010, Prophetic preaching: A pastoral approach, Westminster John Knox 
Press, Louisville, KY.
Tutu, D., 2011, God is not a Christian: Speaking truth in times of crisis, Rider Books, 
London/Sydney/Auckland/Johannesburg.
Van Aarde, A.G., 2012, ‘The righteousness of God, begging for the poor and Paul’s 
apostolic mission according to his Letter to the Romans’, HTS Teologiese Studies/
Theological Studies 68(1), 1223. http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/hts.v68i1.1223
Wepener, C. & Cilliers, J., 2010, ‘Ritual and the generation of social capital in contexts of 
poverty’, in I. Swart, H. Rocher, S. Green, & J. Erasmus, J. (eds), Religion and social 
development in post-apartheid South Africa, pp. 417–430, Sun Press, Stellenbosch.
West, C., 2004, Democracy matters: Winning the fight against imperialism, Penguin 
Press, New York.