Page 1 of 10
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1868
This article discusses the importance of the moral formation of students who are in training 
for the Christian ministry. Moral formation is defined and its importance is discussed with 
reference to the scholarly debate, both in South Africa and elsewhere. The complex nature 
of moral formation, the individuality of students and the multiplicity of contexts in which 
formation takes place are noted. A model that has God’s grace and human volition at its core 
and discusses the goals, obstacles and means of moral formation, is presented. It extends 
beyond a ‘head, hearts and hands’ approach and discusses the crucial areas of thinking, being, 
relating and doing. It seeks to avoid the extremes of both indoctrination and laissez-faire non-
involvement with ministerial students.
Author:
Louise Kretzschmar1
Affiliation:
1Department of Philosophy, 
Practical and Systematic 
Theology, University of South 
Africa, South Africa
Correspondence to:
Louise Kretzschmar
Email:
kretzl@unisa.ac.za
Postal address:
PO Box 392, Pretoria 0003, 
South Africa
Dates:
Received: 24 June 2014
Accepted: 23 Oct. 2014
Published: 17 Mar. 2015
How to cite this article:
Kretzschmar, L., 2015, ‘The 
education of prospective 
ministers as an invitation 
to life: Moving from moral 
failure to moral excellence 
through a process of moral 
formation’, In die Skriflig 
49(1), Art. #1868, 10 pages. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/
ids.v49i1.1868
Copyright:
© 2015. The Authors. 
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work is 
licensed under the Creative 
Commons Attribution 
License.
The education of prospective ministers as an invitation 
to life: Moving from moral failure to moral excellence 
through a process of moral formation
Read online: 
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Introduction and methodological issues
What image arises in the mind of someone when the words minister, priest or pastor is mentioned? 
The image may be a person who is kind, trustworthy, wise and with stature in the community, 
or it could be an image of someone who is regarded as irrelevant at best or a dangerous predator 
at worst. Such strikingly varied images highlight the challenge of ministerial education and 
formation. How can ministers of character be formed who exhibit integrity and perform the 
many tasks expected of a minister of the Christian church in today’s society?1
All that is relevant to moral formation in ministerial education cannot be covered in a short 
article. Hence, I do not discuss the wider context of ministerial education (Van der Water 
2005; Amanze 2009; Mugambi & Nasimiyu-Wasike 1999) nor enter into a detailed analysis of 
approaches to and models of ministerial training in South Africa (Conradie 1997; Kumalo & 
Richardson 2010; Kretzschmar 2011; Naidoo 2012a; Naidoo 2013). The process and criteria that 
different church traditions or denominations use to accept candidates for ministerial formation, 
and later for ordination, are not discussed here. Nor are the programmes of ministerial training 
used at specific universities or colleges discussed in this short article.
The aim of this discussion is to define moral formation, explain why it is a contested issue, 
defend its importance and outline a model for it. This model is multi-faceted yet practical, 
and encourages further debate, adaptation, application and revision by staff and students 
at universities, theological colleges and Bible schools. Some institutions do offer Christian or 
theological ethics as a subject, but teach ethical theory and issues to the exclusion of moral 
formation. Other institutions place so great an emphasis on subjects like biblical studies and 
1.Even though some churches do not ordain women, many others now do, hence I use inclusive language in this article. 
Die opvoeding van voornemende predikante as ‘n uitnodiging tot die lewe: Beweging vanaf 
morele bankrotskap tot morele uitmuntendheid deur middel van ‘n proses van morele 
vorming. Hierdie artikel bespreek die belangrikheid van morele vorming van studente in 
Christelike bedieningsopleiding. Morele vorming word gedefinieer en die belangrikheid 
daarvan word bespreek met verwysing na die wetenskaplike debat in Suid-Afrika en elders. 
Die komplekse aard van morele vorming, die individualiteit van studente en die veelheid 
van kontekste waarin vorming plaasvind, word genoteer. ‘n Model wat God se genade en 
menslike wilsinspanning as kern het en wat die doelwitte, struikelblokke en middele tot 
morele vorming beskryf, word voorgelê. Dit strek veel verder as ‘n ‘kop-, hart- en hande’-
benadering en bespreek die kritieke areas van denke, wese, verhoudings en handel. Dit streef 
daarna om die uiterstes van indoktrinasie sowel as laissez-faire onbetrokkenheid teenoor 
teologiese studente te vermy.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1868
Page 2 of 10
Original Research
systematic theology that ethics hardly features, despite the 
preponderance of ethical problems in our society. Another 
tendency is that the ethical issues that arise within other 
theological disciplines are not emphasised sufficiently or 
linked to current social affairs. Finally, some institutions may 
fail to integrate ethical thinking with spiritual and moral 
formation in the formal classes, college activities and the 
lives of the staff and students.
What of the methodological approach adopted? Firstly, an 
integrated approach to moral formation is proposed. Both 
ethical theory and moral formation are incorporated in the 
proposed model as cognitive, and other forms of conversion 
(such as relational) ought not to be separated. In ministerial 
education, academic discourse ought to be integrated with 
practical moral formation. Secondly, rather than simply 
repeating earlier academic discussions of the need for 
moral formation,2 ways of addressing them are suggested. 
Marshall (2009:63, 65) notes the role of context, supports an 
integrated approach and states that ‘... formative practices 
must include multiple paths and diverse ways of imagining 
how to support and nurture the qualities and characteristics 
important in religious leadership’. For example, the Bossey 
Institute situated near Geneva uses ‘... Bible study, worship, 
common meals, required periods of residence, abundant 
opportunities for causal interaction ... formal instruction, ... 
[and] the informal exchange with peers’ (Gilligan 1997:39−40). 
Thirdly, in line with Lamoureux’s statement (1999:143) that 
‘through the study of sacred texts, we maintain contact with 
the spiritual tradition, with sources of wisdom and insight 
that culture may obscure’, several references to biblical 
passages that deal with moral example, teaching and failure 
are included, although space does not allow any detailed 
exegesis. Biblical narrative, poetry, psalms and teaching on 
moral matters are accessible to all and they highlight God’s 
interaction with human beings in a variety of socio-cultural 
and historical contexts. Fourthly, the discussion draws on 
several local and international theological sources on ethics 
and moral formation. Empirical studies on theological colleges 
and education, particularly within an African context (e.g. 
Naidoo 2005; 2008; 2011; Oliver 2013) have also been used. 
Reference is further made to studies that combine theological 
and psychological insights (McIntosh & Rima 1997; Hall 1997; 
Van der Ven 1998; Van Niekerk 2009). Finally, I draw on my 
experience of many years of personal contact with students 
and staff at universities and theological colleges.
What is moral formation and why is 
it necessary?
There are several contestations around the subject of this 
article. One relates to the nature and goals of theological 
education and ministerial training as noted above. Yet, 
an extensive volume on theological education in Africa 
(Phiri & Werner 2013) did not include a chapter on moral 
formation.
2.See Kretzschmar (2007; 2004) for a discussion of the academic debate regarding 
moral formation, including the views of Kohlberg, Gilligan, Fowler, Spohn and Van 
Der Ven.
A second contestation is the contemporary questioning of 
all authority figures, exacerbated by accounts of heinous 
crimes against children and women perpetrated by some 
priests and pastors, or other examples of dire moral failure. 
The credibility of the Christian ministry itself is being 
questioned. Hence, the need for a focus on moral formation 
to prepare students for the complex, infinitely rewarding 
and demanding calling of Christian ministry. Because the 
life and work of the minister affects the congregation and is 
constantly in the public eye, moral credibility is crucial.
Thirdly, in a 21st century context of pluralism, secularisation 
and moral relativity, the nature of morality and Christian 
moral norms are questioned. Christians need to critique the 
roots and effects of this moral uncertainty as the absence of 
moral obligation and vision leaves humanity without moral 
purpose and motivation.
Fourthly, the question is: Ought any type of formation to 
be attempted? Some theological teachers are resistant to the 
very idea of a model seeing it as too restrictive, directive, 
authoritarian and dismissive of the personhood of the 
student. Overend (2007:137), however, suggests that a shared 
moral tradition avoids both the extremes of indoctrination 
(‘the submission of the self to a dead authoritarianism’) and 
complete autonomy (‘the emergence of an infinite number 
of personal theologies’). Whilst distortions must be avoided, 
the task of formation cannot be abandoned. This article seeks 
to occupy the space between indoctrination and laissez-faire 
non-involvement.
Fifthly, the current state of the world, our country and the 
church reveals the urgent need for moral formation. In contexts 
where lack of moral understanding, malice, dysfunctional 
relationships, unfair treatment and brutal behaviour abound, 
can theological educators and church leaders simply wring 
their hands? No, they have a moral responsibility to do all 
they can to facilitate the moral formation of the ministerial 
students they send into the church and society.
Finally, what about the professionalism of priests or pastors? 
It is necessary to construct an ethical framework to guide 
reflection on the moral demands of professional ministry, 
especially on sensitive areas like counselling, infidelity, child 
abuse, social conflict and church-state relations. Authors such as 
Trull and Carter (2004:185−214) and Marshall (2009:62, 68−69), 
discuss pastoral ministry and professionalism. Arguably, 
priestly ministry has been a profession for many centuries. 
Like other professions, it requires trustworthiness, integrity, 
confidentiality, sound knowledge, exemplary practice, self-
regulation, community leadership, the proper use of power 
and the avoidance of financial, sexual and other misconduct. 
Christian ministers further need to use their spiritual authority 
to advance the interests of the gospel and their parishioners. 
This article makes it clear that if moral formation is pursued, 
not only will Christian ministers meet, but also exceed the 
moral expectations of other professionals. This is because the 
minister’s vocation is derived first, not from society, but from 
God. The service a minister performs is not only a social service, 

Page 3 of 10
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1868
but also a priestly and prophetic ministry. Thus, ministers are 
expected to ‘internalise’ and live out the Christian tradition, not 
simply proclaim it in words.
In the training of ministers (and in their ongoing growth once 
they are in ministry) it is essential to distinguish between 
genuine and distorted forms of morality. Such distortions 
include hypocrisy, legalism and self-righteous moralism 
(Kretzschmar 2004:87−89). Hypocrisy involves lying to 
oneself (Trull & Carter 2004:63); behind the show there is a 
lack of personal truthfulness. Closely linked to hypocrisy is 
a self-righteous moralism (Lk 18:9−14).3 Moralism is rooted 
in self-effort and has only the appearance of morality. 
Moralists criticise the lack of personal and/or social ethics in 
others, but remain blind to their own lack of moral character 
(Mt 7:1−5). Finally, whilst rules and laws are important in 
the ordering of society, morality cannot be reduced to them. 
Being moral demands more than avoiding the breaking 
of the law; it is a deep adherence to doing what is right in 
obedience to God and in service of others. Trull and Carter 
(2004:57) state ‘... the greatest weakness of legalism is that 
it almost always hinders moral maturity and stimulates 
egotistical pride’.
Because the formation of moral character is often linked 
to sacrifice and hardship, people shy away from the cost 
of the moral journey, realising both instinctively and 
rationally that it is a difficult and dangerous road to take. 
In addition, ministerial students have different family and 
social backgrounds, personalities, abilities, spiritual gifts and 
ministries. However, moral formation is not an optional extra; 
prospective ministers need to take personal responsibility for 
their own formation under the guidance of the Holy Spirit 
within the Christian community.
In this discussion, moral formation is understood to be the 
process of becoming a person of moral character who can 
think through moral issues, make moral decisions and act 
rightly. Also, such a person must grow in righteousness 
or integrity, develop moral credibility, build sound 
relationships and be able to inspire moral formation and 
conduct in those who love God. Such ministers will be able 
to facilitate the growth of moral formation in others so that 
the church becomes a moral community that can do what is 
good and act against evil.
A graphic model of moral formation
Because of the individuality of students and the contexts from 
which they come, a multiplicity of methods needs to be built 
into any approach to moral formation.4 Nevertheless, moral 
formation cannot be achieved without purpose or intention. 
The strategic intentions of the theological institution as a 
3.Unless otherwise stated, I use the New Revised Standard Version for biblical 
quotations.
4.Oliver (2013:6) advocates the use of the R2D2 multifaceted teaching method that 
incorporates Reading, Reflecting, Displaying (using visual and other sensory means) 
and Doing. This creative approach, also suitable to distance learning, provides 
stimulation for students and engages them in creative learning and encourages the 
application of theological learning to their attitudes and behaviour. 
whole and the efforts of the staff members and students need 
to be aligned if such formation is to be achieved (Naidoo 
2005; 2011:135).5 Further, the matter of moral formation 
needs to be fully understood and debated if one wishes to 
evoke the active participation of students. Otherwise they 
may only reluctantly or superficially – acquiescence to what 
is expected.
There are many models of Christian spirituality or moral 
formation that one can draw upon. For example, Catholic 
formation stresses the human, spiritual, intellectual and 
pastoral elements of moral formation (Pastores Dabo Vobis 
1992).6 Another writer, Lamoureux (1999:142), speaks of the 
importance of the ‘conversion of mind and heart, fostering 
integrative 
thinking, 
character 
formation, 
promoting 
authentic discipleship, personal appropriation of faith and 
knowledge, and cultivating a spirituality of the intellectual 
life’. In addition, she (Lamoureux 1999:151) speaks of 
the need for four conversions: the religious (‘a personal 
appropriation of faith’); moral (internalising ‘the norms 
and values of the Christian faith); cognitive (‘appropriating 
knowledge previously learned but not made one’s own’); 
and affective (‘the transformation of the deepest life of 
feeling’). Richardson (2007:147) speaks of a focus on the 
head (knowledge and understanding), heart (values and 
commitment), hands (practical operational skills) and feet 
(action and a way of life). Overend (2007:145) argues for 
the use of a habitus model that facilitates the ‘development 
of the whole person within a community of faith’, avoids 
dogmatic 
application, 
competitive 
individualism 
and 
narrow rationalism, embraces critical theological methods 
and encourages community life.
The models discussed above are drawn on in the 
development of the new model provided in Figure 1, but I 
place more emphasis on relationships and actions. This is in 
line with the five conversions required for the development 
of moral leaders, namely the intellect, emotions, volition or 
will, relationships and action (Kretzschmar 2007:27−36). 
In the model used, the vital internal formative factor of 
volition is placed at the core of the model along with the 
spirit-forming work of God within human beings. The 
model is divided into four quadrants, representing the 
various areas that require integrated attention in moral 
formation, namely knowing, being, relating and doing 
(Kretzschmar 2012:146−167). Radiating from the core circle 
each quadrant includes a discussion on the relevant goals 
of, obstacles to and possible means of moral formation. 
This model is relevant to different modes of education, 
including residential, distance7 and the use of a ‘block’ 
system (White 2006; Naidoo 2012b; Olivier 2013), however 
more self-direction will be expected of students not in 
residential training.
5.Overend (2007:141) notes the focus on formation in theological education in the 
United Kingdom in two reports of the Archbishops’ Council (2001; 2003). 
6.The title is based on Jeremiah 3:15 ‘I will give you shepherds after my own heart.’
7.Graham (2002) argues that Paul practiced a type of ‘distance’ learning in the early 
church.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1868
Page 4 of 10
Original Research
The Core – Spiritual formation: 
God’s grace and human effort 
(volition)
In Christian experience moral and spiritual formation cannot 
be neatly separated. Naidoo (2013:8) argues that, ‘Moral 
formation is an aspect of spiritual formation; spiritual maturity 
results in moral formation and committed discipleship.’ To 
be spiritually formed is to be formed in the image of Christ 
and this process results in the moral formation of individuals 
and groups. Thus, a believer’s deepening relationship to 
God (grace) is the foundation and motivation for their moral 
formation. This, together with the willing obedience and co-
operation of human beings (volition) form the core of the 
model. Moral formation as understood in this article, includes 
intellectual development (knowing), character development 
(being), relational development (relating) and the growing 
ability to do what is right in all spheres of life (acting).
In the New Testament, we see how Peter was shocked to the 
core of his being by his denial of Christ and how his 
subsequent actions were influenced by this kairos moment 
and Christ’s injunction (Mt 26:69−75; Jn 21:15−19). Mary 
Magdalene’s life changed radically as a result of her encounter 
with Christ (Lk 8:1−3l) and she was one of the first to grasp 
and proclaim that Jesus had risen from the dead (Jn 20:1−18). 
Paul’s dramatic ‘Damascus road’ experience (Ac 9:1−30; 
22:6−21) marked the beginning of his joyful and arduous 
ministry to the Gentiles.
In Christian theology, human beings are regarded as 
God-created beings. Human beings are further called to be 
FIGURE 1: Moral formation.
MEANS
OBSTACLES
GOALS
CORE
RELATING
BEING
DOING
God’s grace and
Human volion
KNOWING
Integrated Theological studies; Understand and
internalise ethics and morality; Use of narra	ve and
discussion; Link study, prayer and worship
Pride; Limited knowledge of God; lgnorance;
Separa	on of faith and reason
Rela	onal dysfunc	on; Toxic family background;
Ques	onable cultural values; Aliena	on from
nature
Openness to God; Openness to others; Develop responsibility and
accountability; Be peacemakers; Par	cipate in faith and other
communi	es; Par	cipate in and lead worship; Membership of
a small group; Mentorship, Human solidarity;
Solidarity with nature
Deal with the past; Improved
family rela	onships, interpersonal and
intergroup rela	onships; Just and
compassionate social interac	on; Care for
the environment
Knowing God, self and reality;
Transmission of moral knowledge;
lnternalise moral norms and
values
Moral agency
and ac	on; A
lifestyle of
generosity
jus	ce and
compassion
Avarice; 
Indiﬀerence;   
Inability to    
cooperate;    
Diﬀerent    
social     
backgrounds;     
Fear of     
failure; Lack    
of skills    
Projects in
the College; 
Support of  
fellow  
students;  
Church   
projects;  
Community  
projects;  
Social 
jus	ce 
Moral example;
Pure heart;
Integrity;
Promise
keeping; Self
mastery; Self
sacriﬁce
Wrong
      mo	ves;
         Abuse of
           authority;
           Personal
                dysfunc	on;
       Malice;
             Anger; Lust;
Greed
Training of
desire;
         Growth of
                 moral virtue;
             Emo	onal
                    development;
  
  Listen to truth
 
   tellers; Lec	o
            Divina;
             Spiritual
             retreats;
              Spiritual 
             direc	on;
                  Psychological
      therapy

Page 5 of 10
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1868
redeemed and to become co-workers in God’s Kingdom. 
This is also an invitation to which each human being must 
respond. Without a human response to the grace and 
forgiveness of God made possible by the life, death and 
resurrection of Jesus Christ, no formation can take place. 
Thus, Paul argues that whereas grace cannot be earned by 
human effort or ‘works’, Christian living does need to result 
in ‘good works’ (Rm 5:1−5; 6:12−14; 12:9−21; Eph 2:1−9; 
4:17−32). For Peter, Mary Magdalene and Paul, the call of 
God had to be followed up by God-inspired and motivated, 
yet still free, human action.
This is the reason why human volition, the effort of the will, 
is so vital. If getting out of bed on a cold winter’s morning 
requires an act of the will, how much more important is 
the role of the human will in moral formation? Callahan 
(1991:37−61) has investigated human conscience and free 
will, showing their importance in personal formation and 
moral agency. But sin has distorted every part of human 
nature, including the will. If the will is to be turned away 
from performing acts of evil to doing what is right, it must 
be redeemed and a God-directed conscience formed. Only 
then can human beings develop ears that hear, receive the 
word of God and act on the basis of moral wisdom (Jr 6:10; 
Mt 13:15−17; Lk 6:46−49). In 1 Corinthians 9:24−27, Paul 
states that Christians need to be trained like athletes to live 
the Christian life. The human will needs to be surrendered 
to God’s purposes for it to be developed and properly 
employed by staff and students alike. Ministers, who are 
passive when moral action is required, are as little use in the 
ministry as those who have no self-control and direct their 
will to wrong ends, such as giving way to violent anger that 
increases rather than defuses conflict.
Knowing what is right
The goals of knowing
As noted above, knowing God and being known by God 
is fundamental to right knowing. This enables a change in 
consciousness; a turning towards God in all of life. Openness to 
the Holy Spirit, a willingness to admit errors or ignorance and to 
grow in understanding are vital goals that need to be embraced. 
In the book of 2 Peter, for example, the word knowledge is used 
several times (2 Pt 1:2, 3, 5, 6; 2:20; 3:18); knowledge of God is 
central and knowledge is linked to goodness, self-control and 
the ongoing experience of God’s grace.
Knowing can also be understood as the ability to acquire and 
process information, gain knowledge of a field of study or an 
aspect of life, and develop an artistic, technical or ministerial 
skill. One can also speak of a relational knowing, in which 
one learns to understand people, has sound relationships 
with others or has an intimate, sexual knowledge of another 
person. (Self-knowledge is discussed under ‘being’ below).
In the teaching of ethics or moral theology, the moral norms 
(such as loving God and one’s neighbour) and values 
(like justice, fairness and compassion) of the church are 
transmitted or passed on (Van der Ven 1998:125−179; Van 
Niekerk 2009:111−113). Thereby, students are introduced to 
what is right and good, and how to live rightly. However, 
these values and their implications need to be fully discussed 
and internalised, or made their own, by students.
Also important are the prudence, correct judgement and 
wisdom that are required to make correct moral judgements 
in daily life. In addition, a well-formed conscience, and 
the inner knowledge of moral truth, will enable a student 
minister to discern right motives and behaviour, be self-
directed, be committed to what is good and be able to 
use knowledge, intuition and emotional wisdom to effect 
morally beneficial outcomes (Callahan 1991:171−198; Spohn 
2004:131−133).
Moral knowledge is not only important for the growth of the 
individual, but also to provide information and direction for 
right living in society. In the formal teaching of ethics, moral 
theory, ethical issues,8 decision making and moral formation 
all ought to be covered. Overall, the task is to determine what 
a truly good life is and how people and communities can live 
rightly – an analysis that is sorely needed in South Africa and 
elsewhere.
Obstacles to right knowing
Pride, understood as human arrogance and self-sufficiency, 
is an obstacle to right knowing, because it ignores human 
dependency on God, others and creation. Whilst self-
respect, esteem and fair self assessment are required in the 
formation of personal identity (Ogletree 2005:40−41), pride 
overestimates human moral capacity and impacts negatively 
on relationships.
Another obstacle is ignorance of self, the scriptures, others 
and life in general. A pastor, who lacks understanding of 
the struggles and realities of life in ‘the world’, preaches 
nonsense or lacks discernment, cannot expect to be respected 
by the congregation. Further, a too narrow understanding 
of the gospel that reduces its content and implications, for 
example to either economic liberation or private prayer only, 
will not enable the growth of a full understanding of the link 
between faith and life.
Another important obstacle is a distorted or limited image 
of God. If God is understood by a student minister as, for 
instance, a brutal judge, an unfair and punishing fault-finder, 
a foolish but very generous ‘Father Christmas’, or a distant 
and disinterested Being, he or she will not seek a deeper 
relationship with such a God, nor encourage others to do so.
It is important to challenge, head-on, the assumptions of 
Enlightenment thinkers such as the philosopher Immanuel 
Kant who taught that reason ought to be separated from faith 
(Billy & Orsuto 1996:23; O’Keefe 1995:13). True faith cannot 
be separated from the intellect, since the latter is an essential 
part of the redemption needed by human beings. Hence, the 
8.Ethical issues include sexual and family ethics, feminist or womanist ethics, social, 
political, economic and environmental ethics.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1868
Page 6 of 10
Original Research
emphasis in the Bible on thinking, reflecting, meditating, 
learning and understanding God, ourselves and our world 
(e.g. 1 Ki 3:7−15; Ps 119; Pr 2:1−15; Rm 12:1−2; Col 1:9−14; 
2:1−5).
Theological educators also need to challenge the view 
of many post-modern thinkers that truth is unattainable 
and that spirituality must be separated from religion. 
Certainly, the pursuit of truth is difficult, but if Christ is 
the Truth, as the gospel of John asserts (Jn 1:14−18; 8:31−38; 
14:6; 16:12−15), the truth about life, one’s character and 
relationships is attainable in direct proportion to one’s 
growth into the image of Christ (spiritual formation) and 
the increased wisdom that results from an intentional living 
of the Christian life.
Finally, there may be ‘... a struggle between guarding the free 
inquiry and scientific objectivity revered by scholars, and 
protecting the beliefs and religious traditions valued by local 
churches’ (Naidoo 2011:139). Thus, a way needs to be found 
to help students to remain true to their faith in God, but to 
deepen their understanding of it.
Some means to form right knowing
Students come to their theological studies, especially if they 
are older, with a set of views on morality and faith. These 
need to be evaluated in light of the courses and study material 
offered. Furthermore, discussion of ethical theory, issues and 
decision-making need to be integrated with the study of 
moral formation and the personal views and experiences of 
students. Otherwise there will be no ‘active’ learning or the 
integration of moral theology with day-to-day living.
Acquiring knowledge of what is right by studying ethical 
theory must be supplemented by the use of narrative or 
story. The lives of those we encounter in the Bible, Church 
history and contemporary experience provide a source of 
moral wisdom and teaching (Ellsberg 1997). They reveal the 
complexities of moral action and can encourage ministerial 
students to envision ways of acting morally in the world.
Students also need to be helped by their teachers to integrate 
what they learn in the ethics class with the content of their 
other classes. For example, studies of the Old Testament 
prophets can teach students a great deal about the moral 
failure of individuals and nations and how human beings 
and societies need to align their motives and actions with 
those of their Creator. Similarly, studies in systematic 
theology and practical theology on human nature, sin and 
the church can be linked to studies in ethics. Such studies 
can also be linked to the students’ personal devotions, daily 
experience and the church or college chapel services they 
attend. Study is an important spiritual discipline (Foster 
1978:54−66), but it needs to be combined with private prayer 
and public worship. Ministers are formed in many ways, but 
formal education, a deep study of the Bible and attention to 
the insights of those who lead worship are important means 
of achieving the moral formation of the mind.
Becoming a good person, a person 
of moral character
The goal: Being a good person
Congregations (and theological teachers) have many 
expectations of ministers. These include good preaching, 
effective administration, managing the finances of the 
church, pastoral counselling, mentoring others, being 
spiritually mature and facilitating social ministry beyond the 
walls of the church. It is a mistake to expect any one minister 
to be able to fulfil all these tasks in an exemplary manner. 
Hence, to avoid burnout, priests and pastors need to learn 
to work to their strengths, reduce their weaknesses, delegate 
responsibilities and facilitate the discipleship and ministries 
of others. However, it is legitimate to expect a minister to 
become a moral example that others can follow. The hard 
question students (and theological teachers) need to ask is 
whether they can say with Paul, ‘Be imitators of me, as I am 
of Christ’ (1 Cor 4:16; 11:1).
What moral expectations or goals are outlined in the New 
Testament? Zuck (1998:114−123) identifies the many qualities 
that ought to be present in the life of a disciple. These include 
having a pure heart, a good conscience and a sincere faith. 
Disciples ought to be obedient to God, temperate and able 
to manage their households and the church well (1 Tm 1:5, 
19; 3:9). In Colossians 3:12−17, Paul speaks of compassion, 
kindness, humility, meekness, patience, bearing with one 
another and forgiving one another. Galatians 5:16−26 
contrasts immoral and moral behaviour.
Other examples of moral virtues include being honest, 
trustworthy and transparent; being capable of having 
appropriate and caring relationships with others; being 
dedicated and spiritually mature and exercising power in an 
appropriate manner. Ministers are expected to have integrity 
and to be prudent, that is, able to exercise discernment or 
sound judgement. Carter and Trull (2004:55) state that 
ministers ought to practice ‘promise keeping’ and ‘truth 
telling’, not harming other people, but rather doing what 
is good for them and being just in their actions. Ministers 
are further expected to practise self-sacrifice, that is, a life 
lived in loving and wise service of God and others. None 
of this can be achieved without discipline and self-mastery, 
hence some scholars (Van der Ven 1998:43−79; Van Niekerk 
2009:104−108) argue that a person who does not have self-
control cannot lead or advise others.
Obstacles to becoming a good person
One obstacle to personal moral formation is that of wrong 
motives. When a young man from Latin America, Helder 
Camara, told his father he wanted to become a priest, he 
was told that a priest belongs not to himself, but to God 
and to others (Ellsberg 1997:65−67). Those who enter the 
ministry because they do not know what else to do, see it an 
opportunity to have a comfortable existence, or who wish to 
exercise power over others, ought not to be ordained.

Page 7 of 10
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1868
The church can ill afford ministers who abuse their 
spiritual authority, are weak, incompetent, engage in 
immoral relationships, are drunk, misuse church money, 
fail to teach and disciple their congregations, are uncaring 
and bring the church into disrepute. Hall (1997:241−250) 
discusses personal dysfunctions, such as lack of emotional 
well-being, relationship problems, burnout and personality 
deficits. Jesus highlighted the sins that come from the 
heart or inner being of a person as ‘... evil intentions, 
murder, adultery, fornication, theft, false witness, slander’ 
(Mt 15:19). In Colossians 3:5−8, Paul says: ‘Put to death 
... fornication, impurity, passion, evil desire, and greed 
(which is idolatry) ... But now you must get rid of all 
such things – anger, wrath, malice, slander, and abusive 
language from your mouth.’ However, to get rid of such 
attitudes and actions is not easy, given the capacity of the 
human heart for self-deception.
Catholics speak of the seven ‘deadly’ or capital sins, that 
is, sins that are the source of evil actions (Childress & 
Macquarrie 1986:577).9 Willard (1988:164) describes these 
sins as legitimate desires gone wrong. Vest (2000:70) re-
categorises these sins into eight ‘disruptive thoughts 
or excessive feelings’: gluttony, lust, avarice (greed), 
anger, sadness (depression or dejection), despair (acedia, 
sometimes called sloth, but better translated as restless 
despairing), vainglory and pride. People are motivated 
by what they desire and therefore desire itself needs to be 
trained; turned away from what is damaging and sinful 
towards that which is spiritually healthy and emotionally 
healing (Vest 2000:59).
Some means to facilitate personal moral 
formation
Moral virtues and character develop within relationships and 
actions, for example, the characters and motives of Moses and 
Paul changed radically as a result of their relationship with 
God and what they were required to do. One can only speak 
of moral character when moral virtues (such as honesty and 
courage) have become active inclinations or dispositions 
(Ogletree 2005:37−39) expressed in moral actions. In the next 
two sections the emphasis is on relationships and actions – 
the key means of character formation.
The use of moral vision and imagination as awakened by 
narrative, using biblical stories, stories of other pioneers 
and prophets – and our own stories – are other means of 
achieving moral formation. Hauerwas (1981:9−12, 36−52) 
argues that Christians need to be ‘shaped’ by the Christian 
story and learn to ‘live’ this story in their own contexts.
Though at times difficult and unpleasant, listening to one’s 
critics and to those who are ‘truth-tellers’ is important. If 
what they say is true, their insights will reveal those hidden 
parts that require attention. Other means of overcoming 
obstacles to moral formation include using the lectio divina 
9.See Aquinas Summa Theologiae I−II.84.3−4. 
[divine reading]10 method of reading the Bible, attending 
spiritual retreats and obtaining guidance from a spiritual 
director. Lamoureux (1999:144) points out that ‘a central 
purpose of prayer and contemplation in the spiritual life 
is to see through and beyond the appearance of things, to 
penetrate the surface and to touch that which lies beneath’. 
By practising spiritual disciplines, such as meditation, prayer 
and fasting (Foster 1978:13−53), students open themselves to 
the healing and forming work of God.
The affective (or emotional) development of a person is 
an important part of moral formation, especially the key 
element of trust. The development of trust goes all the way 
back to a person’s childhood; human beings need to be 
touched with warmth and affection, loved, protected and 
nurtured. Otherwise in later life, they find it difficult to love 
or trust others (Van der Ven 1998:283−287; Van Niekerk 
2009:120−124). If they are to be pastors and facilitate 
emotional development in others, student ministers need 
to understand the extent of their own emotional balance 
and maturity, learn to experience the love of God and 
other people, and begin to love others in generous and 
appropriate ways.
Personality profiles (or constructs) refer to personality traits 
that give identity to a person (such as being open, reserved, 
warm, inclined to intellectual analysis, impulsive, organised 
and the like). Self-knowledge is important to help ministerial 
students to identify their strengths (e.g. being an extrovert 
who can work well with others), but also strengthen their 
weak areas (e.g. developing one’s capacity for introversion 
through the spiritual discipline of solitude) (Foster 
1978:84−95). Several psychological models and tests (Hall 
1997) can be employed as students seek to discover who 
they are and how they interact with others. These include the 
Myers Briggs personality typology (Myers & Myers 1995),11 
and the Enneagram (Enneagram Institute 2014). Students 
who come from toxic or dysfunctional family backgrounds, 
as do many South Africans, may require psychological 
therapy with someone who has an understanding of their 
Christian commitment to help them to deal with the past and 
move into a better future.
An integrated and transformative theological education may, 
however, result in some students responding with ‘apathy, 
resistance, or even anger’ (Lamoureux 1999:153). Theological 
teachers ought to respond with sensitivity and wisdom when 
this occurs.
Relating to others in the right way
Relational goals
In order for the church to function as a moral community, it 
needs to consist of people who are on a journey with God, 
10.Lectio Divina includes the four steps of reading, meditation, prayer and 
contemplation.
11.Also available as a free e-book at https://www.cpp.com/pdfs/7270.pdf, viewed 05 
March 2014.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1868
Page 8 of 10
Original Research
themselves and each other. White (2006:308) points out the 
range of relationships initiated and maintained by Paul in the 
early church.
Another goal is to help students deal with the hurts of the 
past and initiate better family relationships. Lamoureux 
(1999:146) suggests a teaching method that enables students 
to engage with the Christian story, link it to their own story 
and appropriate moral teaching in their own lives. A holistic 
theological education both ‘addresses the spiritual hunger of 
students’ and meets its ‘formational and transformational’ 
goals (Lamoureux 1999:152).
The need to heal relationships and develop sound ways of 
interacting with others is also true for the community of the 
church. Otherwise, student ministers will simply re-enact the 
pain, suspicion and anger of their social groups and contexts. 
Relational formation is required at the interpersonal, inter-
group (racial, ethnic, cultural, gender and economic) and 
social levels. Particularly in South Africa, exploitation, 
hardship, conflict, fear and frustration have been experienced 
as a result of separation, discord and profound social 
injustices. If the church is to become a unified, loving, caring, 
truth-speaking, forgiving, reconciling, justice-seeking and 
peace-making body of Christ, a great deal needs to happen to 
make this ‘new community’ a reality.
Finally, human beings were created to be in relationship with 
the whole of creation, but greed, ignorance, bad decisions and 
exploitation have severely damaged this relationship. Being 
morally formed also means that this relationship requires 
dedicated attention.
Obstacles to good relationships
Even though ministerial educators cannot be blamed for 
all the subsequent decisions or faults of a minister, it is 
important for them to help students to identify the obstacles 
that prevent good relationships and ministry. The earlier 
life of a student will have had both a positive and negative 
impact on their formation. McIntosh and Rima (1997) have 
shown how problematic family relationships give rise 
to one or more personality and leadership dysfunctions. 
Childhood and adolescence experiences, especially when 
unacknowledged, form what they call the ‘dark side’ of 
Christian leadership. It is ‘... an over-compensation for 
needs that have not been met in our lives and develops as 
we attempt to repay the existential debts of varying degrees 
that we have taken on’ (McIntosh & Rima 1997:63). Several 
types of leaders are described by the authors – including 
compulsive (perfectionist, workaholic), narcissistic (self-
absorbed and ambitious), paranoid (insecure, fearful and 
suspicious), co-dependent (those who find it difficult 
to say ‘no’ and who seek to cover up problems) and 
passive-aggressive (procrastinators who are stubborn and 
intentionally inefficient) (McIntosh & Rima 1997:85−140). 
Students need to become aware of and admit the effect 
their own backgrounds have had on the shaping of their 
ministerial leadership profiles.
We have seen that students who were ignored, unfairly 
criticised or even abused as children may find it difficult to 
trust others and to form close relationships. This could affect 
their relationships with other students, the staff and the 
institution as a whole.
The cultures, in which students have grown up, will 
influence what they value. For example, some students may 
value justice and moral principles more highly whilst others 
value love and relationships more highly (Kretzschmar 
& Schubert 2009:336). Similarly, the ways students from 
different cultures communicate, understand leadership and 
view planning, punctuality, decision-making and consensus 
may differ widely. If students are made aware of and 
evaluate these differing cultural values, carefully considered 
Christian values, appropriate to specific needs or tasks, can 
be identified and conflict avoided.
In South Africa, a highly emotional and contested issue is the 
relationship people have to the land. This is because of the 
expropriation of land from Africans over many centuries and 
different views regarding the ownership and use of the land. 
In addition, high levels of urbanisation amongst all groups 
have resulted in a degree of alienation from nature, a lack of 
understanding how food security is to be ensured and a lack 
of knowledge of matters environmental.
Some means to encourage the development of 
good relationships
As noted earlier, in 2 Peter 1:5−8 we find an important 
combination of the role of knowledge, character and 
relationships. Beginning with faith, each successive virtue 
nurtures the following one: goodness, knowledge, self-
control, endurance, godliness, mutual (brotherly) affection 
and love.
Furthermore, an attitude of personal honesty and openness 
towards God and others is required if good relationships 
are to be formed. By responding to the needs of people in 
different contexts, students develop a sense of responsibility. 
Accountability is developed by acting in a transparent 
manner and being answerable to others. By acquiring conflict 
resolution skills, students can learn to solve conflicts, be 
peace-makers, and enable people to work together to solve 
community problems, such as crime, unemployment and 
domestic violence.
Moreover, through a process of religious socialisation (Van 
Niekerk 2009:108−111) individuals and groups come to 
accept the moral assumptions and expected behaviour of 
members of the church. ‘... [I]t is through the gathered life 
of the community that people are drawn out of the solitude 
of study and prayer into communion and relatedness’ 
(Lamoureux 1999:144).
As noted earlier, students need to participate in and lead 
worship in the college chapel or their home church so that 
they learn to worship together and devise good liturgies. 

Page 9 of 10
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1868
The use of art (e.g. paintings, craftwork and sculpture), 
music, poetry and drama can evoke an emotional response 
to God and encourage shared experiences. In addition, small 
groups need to be formed to encourage the development 
of mutual support and accountability through Bible study, 
sharing and prayer. The spiritual disciplines of confession 
and guidance (Foster 1978:125−137, 150−162) can also 
facilitate the formation of moral relationships.
Senior students or staff can mentor new students for a period 
of time so that students can learn to cross the race, gender and 
class lines that divide communities in South Africa. Interaction 
with other ministerial students, especially from a different 
context, can prevent the promotion of narrow group interests 
and ideologies and promote a sense of human solidarity with 
others. Students need other people to expose their ‘blind sides’ 
and open their eyes to the experience of others.
Involvement within a college, church or university setting, 
or with groups in civil society that promote environmental 
projects, can expand the students’ awareness of their 
relationship with the physical world in which we live. 
Involvement in projects that, for example, prevent 
pollution, clean up rivers, or care for animals will promote 
a sense of belonging to the earth and responsibility for all 
its creatures.
Doing what is right
What are the goals of right action?
Attention has already been given to what can be done by 
students in the areas of knowing, being and relating. However, 
personal moral agency grows not only through study, but 
also through moral action (Groome 1980; Kretzschmar 
2012:163−167). South African society faces numerous 
problems, such as unemployment, poverty, violence, 
homelessness, substance abuse, exploitation and corruption. 
Students in ministry cannot solve all these problems, but 
they can be conscientised, inspired and assisted to develop 
a moral lifestyle. Generosity, justice and compassion are not 
only personal, but also social moral values.
Obstacles that impede right action
We have seen that avarice, fear, indifference to the needs of 
others and a lack of love prevent people from resisting social 
evils and taking action on behalf of others. Poor relational 
skills and the inability to work together are other obstacles 
that will need to be overcome.
The family and social backgrounds of ministerial students in 
South Africa influence what they value and the nature of their 
action – or lack of action – in the world. The socio-economic 
circumstances of students can both impede or encourage 
their formation. For example, students from prosperous 
families may be generous and seek to work alongside 
those who are poor, or they may ignore the plight of the 
poor. Students from poverty-stricken areas have personal 
experience of the needs of the poor that can motivate them 
to make a difference. Equally, a desire to escape poverty and 
the stress of debt and other financial concerns may impede 
their willingness to address the needs of the poor during and 
after their studies.
A fear of failure can result in students being passive and 
inactive or they may be willing to act on behalf of others, 
but lack the confidence or necessary skills. The practical 
competencies or skills required of ministers cannot be 
discussed here, but are important for their future ministries. 
Confidence and skill develop when students take on tasks, 
receive fair and encouraging feedback, and continue to grow 
through repeated moral action.
Some means that can overcome inaction or 
wrong action
In order to counteract despair, the lack of love and 
indifference, social action and projects, both within the 
college and in local churches or communities, are means 
by which personal moral agency, moral courage, 
commitment and action can be developed. Such projects 
include literacy classes, support for fellow students, 
computer studies, care for pets, farm and wild animals, 
small-scale vegetable farming, HIV prevention and care, 
and involvement with centres that care for women and 
children who have been abused. Also, by working together 
with those business leaders, politicians and civil servants, 
who are dedicated followers of Christ, students can 
promote small business development, a Christian work 
ethic and clean governance.
Finally, the practise of the spiritual disciplines of simplicity 
(avoiding excess and consumerism and being willing to share 
knowledge, resources and skills with others) and service 
(being willing to attend to the needs of others and the created 
world), are extremely important in nurturing moral action 
(Foster 1978:69−83, 110−122).
Conclusion
This article has discussed the nature and importance of moral 
formation. A model has been presented that has, as its core, 
God’s grace and human volition, because moral formation 
cannot be separated from spiritual formation. For Christians, 
moral formation is motivated by ongoing encounter with 
God and the progressive redemption of the human will. Four 
areas of moral formation were discussed, namely intellectual 
development, character formation, moral relationships and 
moral action. Within each of these four areas, several goals, 
obstacles and means or methods of moral formation were 
presented.
The fruits of moral formation are seen in the growth of ethical 
thinking, personal integrity and just and caring relationships 
with others within the college and at home. Moral actions, 
such as acts of kindness and generosity, working for justice 
for oppressed groups, protecting vulnerable animals, visiting 
the old and sick, rescuing orphans and exposing short-sighted 

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1868
Page 10 of 10
Original Research
economic development that destroys the environment upon 
which we all depend, are other examples of moral formation. 
Moving by God’s grace and human volition towards the 
goal of moral excellence along the path of moral formation 
is a multi-faceted and challenging journey, but infinitely 
preferable to moral failure and disgrace.
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The author declares that she has no financial or personal 
relationship(s) that may have inappropriately influenced her 
in writing this article.
References
Amanze, J.N., 2009, ‘Paradigm shift in theological education in southern and central 
Africa and its relevance to ministerial formation’, International Review of Mission 
98(1), 120−131. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/j.1758-6631.2009.00010.x
Archbishops’ Council, 2001, Mind the gap: Integrated continuing ministerial education 
for the Church’s ministers, Church House Publishing, London.
Archbishops’ Council, 2003, Formation for ministry within a learning church (The Hind 
report), Church House Publishing, London.
Billy, D.J. & Orsuto, D.L. (eds.), 1996, Spirituality & morality: Integrating prayer & 
action, Paulist Press, New York.
Callahan, S., 1991, In good conscience: Reason and emotion in moral decision making, 
HarperCollins, New York.
Childress, J.F. & Macquarrie, J. (eds.), 1986, A new dictionary of Christian ethics, SCM, 
London.
Conradie, E.M., 1997, ‘An ABC in theological education?’, Nederduitse Gereformeerde 
Teologiese Tydskrif 38(4), 349−361.
Ellsberg, R., 1997, All saints: Daily reflections on saints, prophets, and witnesses for 
our time, Crossroad, New York.
Enneagram Institute, viewed 05 March 2014, from http://www.enneagraminstitute.
com/store/comersus_listCategoriesAndProducts.asp?idCategory=3
Foster, R., 1978, Celebration of discipline: The path to spiritual growth, Hodder & 
Stoughton, London.
Gilligan, M., 1997, ‘Does what is taught at Bossey equal what is learned?’, Theological 
Education, suppl. ser. 34, 39−46.
Graham, S.L., 2002, ‘Theological education on the web: A case study in formation 
for ministry’, Teaching Theology and Religion 5(4), 227−235. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/1467-9647.00142
Groome, T.H., 1980, Christian religious education: Sharing our story and vision, Harper 
& Row, New York.
Hall, T., 1997, ‘The personal functioning of pastors: A review of empirical research 
with implications for the care of pastors’, Journal of Psychology and Theology 
25, 240−253.
Hauerwas, S., 1981, A community of character: Towards and constructive Christian 
ethic, Notre Dame University, Notre Dame.
Kretzschmar, L., 2004, ‘The importance of moral and spiritual formation in 21st 
century Africa’, in E. Conradie (ed.), African Christian Theologies in transformation, 
pp. 86−110, Stellenbosch, EFSA (Ecumenical Foundation of South Africa).
Kretzschmar, L., 2007, ‘The formation of moral leaders in South Africa: A Christian-
ethical analysis of some essential elements’, Journal of Theology for Southern 
Africa 128, 18−36.
Kretzschmar, L. & Schubert, R.I., 2009, ‘Towards genuine partnerships: A dialogue 
between Western and Tanzanian Christian leaders’, Scriptura 101, 326−340.
Kretzschmar, L., 2011, ‘Can morality be taught? A reflection on teaching Theological 
Ethics at a tertiary level in the Unisa Open and Distance Learning model’, Journal 
of Theology for Southern Africa 141, 61−80.
Kretzschmar, L., 2012, ‘The Christian formation of South African believers for 
engagement with State and society’, in W. Bentley & D.A. Forster (eds.), Between 
capital and cathedral: Essays on Church-State relationships, pp. 131−163, 
Research Institute for Theology and Religion, University of South Africa, Pretoria.
Kumalo, S. & Richardson, N., 2010, ‘Seth Mokitimi and education for ministry: What’s 
in a name?’, Missionalia 38 (2), 259−274.
Lamoureux, P., 1999, ‘An integrated approach to theological education’, Theological 
Education 36(1), 141–156.
Marshall, J., 2009, ‘Formative practices: Intent, structure, and content’, Reflective 
Practice: Formation and Supervision in Ministry 29, 56–73.
McIntosh, G.L. & Rima, S.D., 1997, Overcoming the dark side of leadership: The 
paradox of personal dysfunction, Baker Books, Grand Rapids.
Mugambi, J.N.K. & Nasimiyu-Wasike, A. (eds.), 1999, Moral and ethical issues in 
African Christianity, Acton, Nairobi.
Myers, I.B. & Myers, P.B., 1995, Gifts differing: Understanding personality type, 
Davies-Black Publishing, Mountain View, CA.
Naidoo, M., 2005, ‘An Investigation into spiritual formation programmes at selected 
theological institutions in Kwa-Zulu Natal’, Unpublished DTh in Practical Theology, 
University of Zululand.
Naidoo, M., 2008, ‘The call for spiritual formation in Protestant theological institutions 
in South Africa’, Acta Theologica, suppl. ser. 11, 129−142.
Naidoo, M., 2011, ‘An empirical study on spiritual formation at theological training 
institutions in South Africa’, Religion and Theology 18 (4), 118−146. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1163/157430111X613692
Naidoo, M., 2012a, Between the real and the ideal: ministerial formation in South 
African churches, Unisa, Pretoria.
Naidoo, M., 2012b, ‘Ministerial formation of theological students through distance 
education’, HTS Theological Studies 68, 1−8.
Naidoo, M., 2013, ‘Persistent issues impacting on the training of ministers in the South 
African context’, Scriptura 112 (1), 1−16. http://dx.doi.org/10.7833/112-0-57
O’Keefe, M., 1995, Becoming good, becoming holy: On the relationships of Christian 
ethics and spirituality, Paulist Press, New York.
Ogletree, T.W., 2005, ‘Agents and moral formation’, in W. Schweiker (ed.), The 
Blackwell companion to religious ethics, pp. 36−44, Blackwell Publishing, Oxford.
Oliver, E., 2013, ‘Teaching Open Distance Learning undergraduates in theology to 
become effective change agents’, Verbum et Ecclesia 34 (1), 1−7. http://dx.doi.
org/10.4102/ve.v34i1.845
Overend, P., 2007, ‘Education or formation: The issue of personhood in learning for 
ministry’, Journal of Adult Theological Education 4 (2), 133−148. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1558/jate2007v4i2.133
Pastores Dabo Vobis (1992), viewed 24 June 2014, from http://www.vatican.va/holy_
father/john_paul_ii/apost_exhortations/documents/hf_jp-ii_exh_25031992_
pastores-dabo-vobis_en.html
Phiri, I.A. & Werner, D., 2013, Handbook of Theological Education in Africa, Cluster 
Press, Pietermaritzburg.
Richardson, N., 2007. ‘Ministerial training and theological education in the Methodist 
Church of South Africa: The road ahead’, Missionalia 35(2), 131−152.
Spohn, W., 2004, ‘Conscience and Moral Development’, in C.E. Curran (ed.), 
Conscience, pp. 130−150, Paulist Press, New York.
Trull, J.E. & Carter, J.E., 2004, Ministerial ethics: Moral formation for Church leaders, 
2nd edn., Baker Academic, Grand Rapids.
Van der Ven, J.A., 1998, Formation of the moral self, Eerdmans, Grand Rapids.
Van der Water, D., 2005, ‘Transforming theological education and ministerial 
formation’, International Review of Mission 94 (373), 203−211. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1758-6631.2005.tb00495.x
Van Niekerk, A., 2009, ‘How are good people formed? In conversation with Johannes 
A. Van der Ven’, in L. Kretzschmar, W. Bentley & A. van Niekerk (eds.), What is a 
good life? An introduction to Christian Ethics in 21st century Africa, pp. 101−129, 
AcadSA, Kempton Park.
Vest, N., 2000, Desiring life: Benedict on wisdom and the good life, Cowley, Boston.
White, R., 2006, ‘Promoting spiritual formation in distance education’, Christian 
education Journal 3(2), 303−315.
Willard, D., 1988, The spirit of the disciplines: understanding how God changes lives, 
Hodder & Stoughton, London.
Zuck, R.B., 1998, Teaching as Paul taught, Baker books, Grand Rapids.