www.kardiologiapolska.pl
Kardiologia Polska 2014; 72, 3: 246–253; DOI: 10.5603/KP.a2013.0318	
ISSN 0022–9032
ARTYKUŁ ORYGINALNy / ORIGINAL ARTICLE
Translation and cultural adaptation of a Patient 
Perception of Arrhythmia Questionnaire in Poland
Michał Mirosław Farkowski1, Mariusz Pytkowski1, Dominik Golicki2, Łukasz Szumowski3,  
Kathryn A. Wood4, Hanna Szwed1
12nd Department of Coronary Artery Disease, Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland
2Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, Medical University of Warsaw, Poland
3Arrhythmia Department, Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland
4Duke University School of Nursing, Durham, NC, USA
A b s t r a c t
Background: The Patient Perception of Arrhythmia Questionnaire (PPAQ) is a disease-specific questionnaire designed to 
measure symptoms and health-related quality of life in patients suffering from a group of arrhythmias collectively known as 
supraventricular tachycardias (SVT). There is no valid translation of PPAQ available in Poland, which hinders research in this 
area with Polish arrhythmia patients.
Aim: To conduct initial content validity testing through translation and cultural adaptation of the English language version of 
the PPAQ to the Polish language.
Methods: The whole project was conducted according to the ISPOR Principles of Good Practice for the Translation and 
Cultural Adaptation Process for Patient-Reported Outcomes (PRO) Measures published in 2005.
Results: In 2011, the PPAQ was translated into Polish and cultural adaptation was performed on 20 patients with SVT (12 male, 
age 54.9 ± 17.4). Issues concerning the exact meanings of symptom names and language-dependant gender-related distinctions 
were identified. The former was solved by cooperation with experts in arrhythmia, and the latter by incorporating patients’ 
preferences during cognitive debriefing.
Conclusions: The Polish translation was well accepted by patients during this translation and initial content validity testing. 
Issues arising during the translation process may recur in other translations and be resolved in a similar manner.
Key words: quality of life, questionnaire, translation, supraventricular tachycardia
Kardiol Pol 2014; 72, 3: 246–253
Address for correspondence:  
Michał Mirosław Farkowski, MD, The 2nd Department of Coronary Artery Disease, Institute of Cardiology, ul. Spartańska 1, 02–637 Warszawa, Poland,  
e-mail: mfarkowski@gmail.com 
Received: 21.06.2013	
Accepted: 22.10.2013	
Available as AoP: 07.11.2013
Copyright © Polskie Towarzystwo Kardiologiczne
INTRODUCTION
Supraventricular tachycardia (SVT) is a common name for 
arrhythmias involving the atrium and is composed of atrioven-
tricular nodal reentrant tachycardia (AVNRT), atrioventricular 
reciprocating tachycardia (AVRT), atrial tachycardia (ATACH) 
and inappropriate sinus tachycardia (IST). Generally, atrial flutter 
(AFL) is also considered to be a SVT, but not atrial fibrillation. All 
SVTs have similar clinical symptoms and prognosis, excluding 
Wolff-Parkinson-White syndrome and AFL, and are considered 
a classical target for radiofrequency ablation (RFA) [1–7].
Because of clinical presentation incorporating heart rac-
ing, fatigue, chest pressure and other symptoms, SVT has been 
reported to significantly diminish the health-related quality of 
life (QoL). In these cases, improvement in QoL and symptom 
reduction or elimination are considered key end-points of 
treatment [8–15]. 
During a Medline literature review in 2010 via Pubmed, 
Embase, ProQolid, Trip and Centre for Reviews and Dissemi-
nation databases, only one SVT disease-specific questionnaire 
was identified with published initial psychometric testing: 
the Patient Perception of Arrhythmia Questionnaire (PPAQ). 
This was developed in 2009 and it measures the following 
features of SVT: episode frequency and duration, presence 
and bothersomeness of symptoms, impact on functioning in 

www.kardiologiapolska.pl
Translation and cultural adaptation of a Patient Perception of Arrhythmia Questionnaire in Poland
247
everyday life, and average number of days with restrictions 
on activities [16, 17]. The PPAQ was developed and initially 
tested in the United States. The initial study comprised qualita-
tive interviews with 25 SVT patients followed by instrument 
development testing carried out on 103 adult patients with 
a confirmed diagnosis of SVT, obtained at the time of intra-
cardiac electrophysiological testing and covering: AVNRT, 
AVRT, ATACH, IST, and AFL. For data collection, patient 
symptom reports with both orthodromic and antidromic 
reciprocating tachycardia were combined and included in 
the broader diagnostic category of AVRT. Additionally, data 
from patients with focal and multifocal atrial tachycardia was 
combined in the ATACH group, and AFL data included reports 
from patients with atypical and typical AFL. Patients differed 
significantly in terms of age, sex, years living with arrhythmia 
and maximal heart rate. The questionnaire showed acceptable 
psychometrics and good measurement of patient perceptions 
of arrhythmias, and it was next used to study the change of 
QoL after ablation in patients with a variety of SVT arrhythmias 
in the United States. The PPAQ showed good sensitivity and 
reliability during this initial instrument development phase 
of study. Preliminary construct validation was supported by 
significant differences (p < 0.001) among groups of arrhyth-
mia patients consistent with what we would expect clinically. 
The next study using the PPAQ was conducted in 52 pa-
tients and showed significant improvement in QoL measured 
by PPAQ in terms of reduction of: number and length of SVT 
episodes, number and bothersomeness of episodes, impact of 
SVT on routine, and days missed at work or school. The results 
of PPAQ were concordant with the results of generic measures 
used in the study (selected subscales of Medical Outcomes 
Study questionnaire and Short Form-36 item questionnaire) 
[16, 17]. Preliminary evidence from this second study demon-
strated that the PPAQ has acceptable psychometrics to further 
test it in a study including other types of arrhythmia patients.
Unfortunately the PPAQ was not available in Polish prior 
to this study. 
According to International Society for Pharmacoeconom-
ics and Outcomes Research (ISPOR) and other guidelines, it 
is mandatory to translate QoL questionnaires in a systematic 
manner to retain their content validity, rather than to translate 
word-for-word the exact meaning of each word used [18–20]. 
The aim of the current study was to establish preliminary 
evidence of content validity through translation and cultural 
adaptation of the PPAQ to the Polish language according to 
the ISPOR guidelines on translation and cultural adaptation 
process for patient-reported outcomes (PRO) measures. 
METHODS
This study took place at a tertiary care centre in Poland on 
a group of patients with an established diagnosis of spe-
cific SVT who were symptomatic and scheduled for RFA in 
2011. Patients were eligible if they were at least 18 years of 
age, were able to speak and read Polish, had no concurrent 
medical or psychiatric condition that, in the investigator’s 
opinion, may preclude participation in this study, and had 
no cognitive or other impairment (e.g. visual) that would 
interfere with completing the questionnaire. Eligible patients 
were asked to provide written informed consent before enter-
ing the study. The study protocol was approved by the local 
Institutional Review Board and local Bioethics Committee 
and was in full compliance with the Declaration of Helsinki. 
Our process of translation was conducted following steps 
specified in ISPOR guidelines: preparation, three forward 
translations, reconciliation, back translation, back translation 
review, harmonisation, cognitive debriefing, review of cog-
nitive debriefing results, finalisation, proofreading and final 
report. For a flow-chart and the times of different stages of 
the translation, consult Figure 1.
Preparation. The project team was composed of clini-
cians, independent translators, and Polish language special-
ists and was supervised by an expert experienced in QoL 
studies. The author of the original PPAQ was also involved in 
our initial discussions in the preparation phase of the Polish 
translation process. 
Forward translations. After consultation and discus-
sion with the author of the original PPAQ and our local 
Polish language and electrophysiology experts, the forward 
translation to Polish was performed separately by three in-
dependent expert Polish language translators experienced in 
medical translations.
Figure 1. Stages of the translation process between October 
2010 and July 2011. Time provided in weeks

www.kardiologiapolska.pl
Michał Mirosław Farkowski et al.
248
curately reflected their experiences and were not intrusive or of-
fensive. In the original PPAQ, every other symptom/answer/point 
had a white or a grey background. An issue arose in that seven 
patients (35%, six female) declared that this might influence the 
perception of importance of certain symptoms. Nonetheless, 
all respondents were against any colour changes. None of the 
patients indicated the need for special feminine/masculine word 
forms characteristic of the Polish language. Patients described 
the PPAQ as “simple” and “user-friendly”. A review of cogni-
tive debriefing results was performed by the same experts in 
electrophysiology and the final proofreading was led by a Polish 
philologist to establish initial content validity of the PPAQ in 
Polish. The Polish version of the PPAQ is available as supple-
mentary material to this manuscript (Fig. 2). 
DISCUSSION
The Polish translation of the PPAQ was difficult and time-con-
suming. It could pose the same problems with translations to 
other languages despite its user-friendly construction and high 
accuracy in depicting the relevant symptoms of SVT. The two 
main challenges concerning the project were firstly how to 
accurately translate the meaning of the symptoms specified in 
the PPAQ, and secondly how to deal with feminine/masculine 
articles, nouns and phrases typical of the Polish language but 
absent from English. 
The former issue was addressed by detailed description of 
symptoms, many of which had very similar, yet distinct, mean-
ings. It was resolved by the inclusion of two electrophysiology 
specialists with vast experience in dealing with patients suf-
fering from SVT on the project team who clarified the clinical 
differences and indicated proper translations for those terms. 
The latter issue was more complicated, as guidelines 
do not clearly outline how to deal with those language dis-
crepancies specifically related to the Polish language, and 
the formal/informal ways of addressing strangers in Polish, 
especially women. In the end, the content validity decisions of 
which grammatical form of the symptoms or terms used on the 
questionnaire was best — unisex or separate questionnaires 
Reconciliation, back translation and review. Reconci­
liation was done with the assistance of the same two experts 
in electrophysiology and the questionnaire was translated back 
to English and reviewed by the author of the original PPAQ. 
Harmonisation. Harmonisation was not necessary due to 
our need to carry out only a single language translation process. 
Cognitive debriefing. The cognitive debriefing was con-
ducted by a trained interviewer talking to individual patients 
one-at-a-time in the hospital. All patients completed the Polish 
version of the PPAQ and answered similar questions concern-
ing all domains (Table 1). According to guidelines, there should 
have been 5–8 respondents in the target country who were 
native speakers of the target language and who adequately 
represent the target population [20]. 
RESULTS 
The whole translation process lasted from October 2010 to July 
2011. The cognitive briefing was conducted in a cardiology 
clinic by a trained interviewer on 20 consecutive eligible patients 
(12 male, age 54.9 ± 17.4) after the patients had completed the 
PPAQ. The frequency of SVT episodes varied between respond-
ents from a single episode in six months to a daily basis; lengths of 
episode varied from a couple of seconds to more than an hour. 
Respondents declared from three to 13 distinct symptoms ac-
companying SVT episode covering the whole range of symptoms 
included in PPAQ and defined the bothersomeness of symptoms 
from “not at all” to “extremely”. SVT also affected everyday life 
of our respondents (normal work, sleep, leisure and recreation or 
relationships) differently, again from “not at all” to “extremely”. 
The cognitive interviews ranged in time from 5 min to 20 min. 
Participants were asked to complete the Polish version of the 
PPAQ and answer several questions concerning each domain of 
the PPAQ. To achieve a representative sample, we included five 
patients from each category of arrhythmia, i.e. AVNRT, AVRT, 
ATACH, and AFL. Since IST is an extremely rare condition, we 
were not able to enroll patients with this diagnosis at our centre. 
All patients (20/20) considered the accuracy of terms 
describing the symptoms as excellent and found domains ac-
Table 1. Questions for respondents used in cognitive debriefing (Polish version in parenthesis)
General questions concerning questionnaire 
1.	 Is information contained on this page clear? (Czy informacje zawarte na tej stronie są zrozumiałe?)
2.	 Madam/Sir, do you think the questionnaire should be prepared in two distinct forms for women and men using appropriate linguistic 
forms? (Czy uważa Pani/Pan, że powyższy kwestionariusz powinien być przygotowany w oddzielnych wersjach dla kobiet i mężczyzn  
z zachowaniem odpowiednich form językowych?)
3.	 Madam/Sir, do you think two-colour tables may be misleading or may suggest certain answers? (Czy uważa Pani/Pan, że dwukolorowe 
tabele mogą wprowadzać w błąd lub sugerować wybór niektórych odpowiedzi?)
Questions repeated in every domain 
1.	 Are above-mentioned questions clear? (Czy powyższe pytania są zrozumiałe?) 
2.	 Do you think above-mentioned terms correctly describe your symptoms? (Czy użyte określenia prawidłowo oddają odczuwane dolegliwości?)
3.	 Does the question provoke any negative emotions? (Czy pytanie budzi negatywne emocje?)

www.kardiologiapolska.pl
Translation and cultural adaptation of a Patient Perception of Arrhythmia Questionnaire in Poland
249
 Trzy razy dziennie lub częściej 
 Dwa razy dziennie 
 Codziennie lub prawie codziennie 
 4-5 razy w tygodniu 
 2-3 razy w tygodniu 
 Około 1 raz w tygodniu 
 Około 2 razy w miesiącu 
 Około 1 raz w miesiącu 
 Około 2-4 razy w roku 
 Nigdy 
 Nie dotyczy  
 Kilka sekund 
 Około 1-5 minut 
 Około 5-10 minut 
 Około 11-15 minut 
 Około 20-30 minut 
 Około 30-40 minut  
 Około 45 minut do 1 godziny 
 Dłużej niż 1 godzinę
1. Przeciętnie jak często, w ostatnim miesiącu, 
pojawiał się u Pani/Pana szybki rytm serca? 
(Proszę wybrać tylko jedną odpowiedź)
2. W ciągu ostatniego miesiąca, przeciętnie jak 
długo trwały epizody szybkiego bicia serca? 
(Proszę wybrać tylko jedną odpowiedź)
Figure 2. Polish version of Patient Perception of Arrhythmia Questionnaire
Ankieta pacjenta dotycząca objawów arytmii
Patient Perception of Arrhythmia Questionnaire — wersja polska 
Edycja pierwsza
 
Michał M. Farkowski
II Klinika Choroby Wieńcowej, Instytut Kardiologii w Warszawie
Wersja oryginalna: Wood KA, Stewart AL, Drew BJ, Scheinman MM, Froelicher ES.  
Development and initial psychometric evaluation of the Patient Perspective of Arrhythmia  
Questionnaire. Research in Nursing and Health, 2009; 32 (5): 504–516
W celu uzyskania dalszych informacji na temat tworzenia i wykorzystania  
tego kwestionariusza, proszę skontaktować się z Kathryn Wood, Duke University,  
tel: (919) 684-9621, e-mail: kathryn.wood@duke.edu
Copyright © University of California San Francisco 2007. Wszelkie prawa zastrzeżone.
Æ

www.kardiologiapolska.pl
Michał Mirosław Farkowski et al.
250
Lista objawów 
(a) Czy w ciągu ostatnich 4 tygodni 
uczuciu szybkiego bicia serca 
towarzyszyły niżej wymienione 
objawy?  (Proszę wybrać “tak” lub 
“nie” w każdym wierszu) 
NIE
TAK 
(b) Jeżeli wystąpił ten objaw, to jak bardzo był uciążliwy 
(Proszę wybrać odpowiednie pole w każdym wierszu) 
 
Wcale 
Trochę
Umiar-
kowanie 
Znacząco 
Niezmiernie 
uciążliwy 
Kołatanie serca (regularne) 
       Uczucie nierównego bicia serca 
       Zaburzenia widzenia 
       Uczucie pulsowania w szyi 
       Uczucie pustki w głowie/ zawroty 
głowy 
   
 
     Ból głowy 
       Oddawanie dużej ilości moczu 
       Pocenie się
       Nudności 
   
 
     Osłabienie/ brak energii 
       Utrata apetytu 
       Wyjątkowo szybkie bicie serca 
       Problemy z koncentracją
   
 
     Utrata przytomności 
       Trudności w złapaniu oddechu 
       Uderzenia gorąca/wypieki 
       Ucisk w klatce piersiowej podczas 
przyspieszonego bicia serca 
       Problemy ze snem 
       Inne: 
       Figure 2. Polish version of Patient Perception of Arrhythmia Questionnaire (cont.)
Æ

www.kardiologiapolska.pl
Translation and cultural adaptation of a Patient Perception of Arrhythmia Questionnaire in Poland
251
Poniższe pytania koncentrują się na wpływie szybkiego rytmu serca na wykonywane przez Panią/ 
Pana czynności. Proszę zaznaczyć, jak bardzo była Pani ograniczona/był Pan ograniczony w swoich 
aktywnościach z powodu szybkiego rytmu serca podczas ostatnich 4 tygodni. 
3.
Jak bardzo szybki rytm serca wpływał na poniższe Pani/Pana aktywności w ciągu ostatnich  
4 tygodni? (Proszę wybrać jedno pole w każdym wierszu)  
Wcale
Sporadycznie
Umiarkowanie
Znacznie
Zdecydowanie
Nastrój 
     Możliwość poruszania się
     Sen 
     Pracę (zarówno poza domem jak 
i w domu) 
     Zajęcia rekreacyjne 
     Zadowolenie z życia 
     Życie towarzyskie (spotkania 
ze znajomymi bądź krewnymi, 
wyjścia na kolacje lub do kina) 
     Zdolność prowadzenia
samochodu 
     Relacje z 
małżonkiem/partnerem lub 
chłopakiem/dziewczyną
     Relacje seksualne 
z małżonkiem/partnerem 
 lub chłopakiem/dziewczyną
     4. Ile dni pracy lub zajęć szkolnych opuściła Pani/opuścił Pan z powodu szybkiego rytmu 
serca podczas ostatnich 4 tygodni? Jeśli Pani/Pan aktualnie nie pracuje ani się nie uczy, 
proszę zakreślić "Nie dotyczy” 
Nie dotyczy  
 
 
dni 
5. Przez ile dni była Pani/był Pan zmuszona/zmuszony ograniczać typowe aktywności  
z powodu szybkiego bicia serca w ciągu ostatnich 4 tygodni?  
 
 
dni  
Figure 2. Polish version of Patient Perception of Arrhythmia Questionnaire (cont.)

www.kardiologiapolska.pl
Michał Mirosław Farkowski et al.
252
for women/men — was drawn from patients involved in the 
cognitive debriefing process. All patients indicated there was 
no need for separate versions of questionnaires. 
This is a general issue concerning the translation of all 
questionnaires, not just this questionnaire, into Polish.
At the time of our translation study, the PPAQ was the 
only symptom and QoL questionnaire properly developed 
and validated in a population of patients with SVT [16, 17]. 
In 2012, another arrhythmia-specific symptom and QoL 
questionnaire called ASTA was published [21]. The Polish 
version of the PPAQ was needed as a base questionnaire for 
our future research studies such as our current prospective 
study concerning QoL, utility and willingness to be studied 
of patients undergoing RFA of AVRT and AVNRT. The authors 
are also aware of other ongoing or planned studies in the 
United States of America, the United Kingdom, Colombia 
and Lebanon but have no information on online registration 
or planned dates of publications.
Other examples of Polish versions of QoL questionnaires 
following a similar but less rigid protocol of translation are 
multiple sclerosis questionnaires: the Multiple Sclerosis Im-
pact Scale 29 (MSIS-29), the Multiple Sclerosis International 
Quality of Life Questionnaire (MusiQoL), and the Modified 
Fatigue Impact Scale. 
Limitations of the study
There were no patients diagnosed with inappropriate sinus 
tachycardia enrolled. However, this is an extremely rare ar-
rhythmia condition with a similar presentation to other SVTs, 
hence it does not alter the applicability of the PPAQ in clinical 
practice. Also the international generalisability of the transla-
tion was limited as only a Polish version of the PPAQ was 
prepared. Although sample size may raise concerns about the 
generalisability of the study in a Polish population, the patient 
characteristics indicate that a wide range of patients of both 
sexes with distinct age, number and bothersomeness of symp-
toms and impact on daily routine were involved in the study.
This questionnaire will be very useful in future studies of 
symptoms and QoL in Polish arrhythmia patients, and our pro-
cess of translation can be easily repeated in different countries. 
CONCLUSIONS
Despite limitations, the Polish translation of the PPAQ was 
well accepted by patients due to its user-friendly format and 
accurate representation of the clinical symptoms these patients 
experience. The translation process may pose same problems 
for other languages, but the strategy followed in Poland should 
be capable of being replicated in other countries. 
The PPAQ can be used in adults with standard cases of 
SVT: AVNRT, AVRT, ATACH, IST or AFL regardless of the length 
of the arrhythmia episode. It is reasonable to use the PPAQ in 
other cases of rare narrow-QRS tachycardias; currently, there 
is no published data supporting PPAQ utilisation in irregular ar-
rhythmias (e.g. atrial fibrillation). However, the PPAQ is currently 
being used in studies of atrial fibrillation patient symptoms in the 
United States and the United Kingdom with preliminary good 
content validity and reliability results. Using the same method of 
translation, studies conducted in other languages which docu-
ment content validity of the PPAQ in different arrhythmias (e.g. 
atrial fibrillation) without alteration of the questionnaire would 
be also valid for Polish version of the PPAQ.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank Michal Karlinski for his sta-
tistical support, Anna Krzesniak for her translation assistance, 
and Dorota Wlodarczyk for final proofreading of the Polish 
version of the PPAQ. 
Source of funding: Institute of Cardiology, Warsaw, Poland
Conflict of interest: none declared
References
1.	
Blomstrom-Lundqvist C, Scheinman MM, Aliot EM et al. ACC/AHA/ESC 
guidelines for the management of patients with supraventricular arrhyth-
mias: executive summary. a report of the American College of Cardiol-
ogy/American Heart Association Task Force on practice guidelines and 
the European Society of Cardiology committee for practice guidelines 
(writing committee to develop guidelines for the management of patients 
with supraventricular arrhythmias) developed in collaboration with 
NASPE-Heart Rhythm Society. J Am Coll Cardiol, 2003; 42: 1493–1531.
2.	
Bottoni N, Tomasi C, Donateo P et al. Clinical and electrophysiological 
characteristics in patients with atrioventricular reentrant and atrioven-
tricular nodal reentrant tachycardia. Europace, 2003; 5: 225–229.
3.	
Kesek M, Tollefsen T, Hoglund N et al. U22, a protocol to quantify 
symptoms associated with supraventricular tachycardia. PACE. 2009; 
32 (suppl. 1): S105–S1058.
4.	
Orczykowski M, Walczak F, Derejko P et al. Ventricular fibrillation 
risk factors in over one thousand patients with accessory pathways. Int 
J Cardiol, 2013; 167: 525–530.
5.	
Walfridsson U, Walfridsson H. The impact of supraventricular tachycar-
dias on driving ability in patients referred for radiofrequency catheter 
ablation. PACE, 2005; 28: 191–195.
6.	
Wood K. Mechanisms and clinical manifestations of supraventricular 
tachycardias. Prog Cardiovasc Nurs, 1995; 10: 3–14.
7.	
Wood KA, Drew BJ, Scheinman MM. Frequency of disabling symptoms in 
supraventricular tachycardia. Am J Cardiol, 1997; 79: 145–149.
8.	
Bathina MN, Mickelsen S, Brooks C et al. Radiofrequency catheter abla-
tion versus medical therapy for initial treatment of supraventricular 
tachycardia and its impact on quality of life and healthcare costs. Am 
J Cardiol, 1998; 82: 589–593.
9.	
Bubien RS, Knotts-Dolson SM, Plumb VJ et al. Effect of radiofrequency 
catheter ablation on health-related quality of life and activities of 
daily living in patients with recurrent arrhythmias. Circulation, 1996; 
94: 1585–1591.
10.	
Goldberg AS, Bathina MN, Mickelsen S et al. Long-term outcomes on 
quality-of-life and health care costs in patients with supraventricular 
tachycardia (radiofrequency catheter ablation versus medical therapy). 
Am J Cardiol, 2002; 89: 1120–1123.
11.	
Hlatky MA, Vaughn WK. Quality of life in patients with supraventricular 
arrhythmia. Circulation, 1996; 94: 1491–1493.
12.	
Lau CP, Tai YT, Lee PW. The effects of radiofrequency ablation versus 
medical therapy on the quality-of-life and exercise capacity in patients 
with accessory pathway-mediated supraventricular tachycardia: a treat-
ment comparison study. PACE, 1995; 18: 424–432.
13.	
Lelakowski J, Kuniewicz M, Rydlewska A et al. Quality of life after RF 
ablation of reentrant supraventricular tachycardias and ventricular ectopic 
beats in own observation. Pol Merkur Lek, 2010; 28: 438–443.
14.	
Meissner A, Stifoudi I, Weismuller P et al. Sustained high quality of life in 
a 5-year long term follow-up after successful ablation for supra-ventricular 
tachycardia. Results from a large retrospective patient cohort. Int J Med 
Sci, 2009; 6: 28–36.

www.kardiologiapolska.pl
Translation and cultural adaptation of a Patient Perception of Arrhythmia Questionnaire in Poland
253
Adres do korespondencji: 
lek. Michał Mirosław Farkowski, II Klinika Choroby Wieńcowej, Instytut Kardiologii, ul. Spartańska 1, 02–637 Warszawa, e-mail: mfarkowski@gmail.com 
Praca wpłynęła: 21.06.2013 r.	
Zaakceptowana do druku: 22.10.2013 r.	
Data publikacji AoP: 07.11.2013 r.
Tłumaczenie na język polski i adaptacja kulturowa 
kwestionariusza Patient Perception of Arrhythmia 
Questionnaire
Michał Mirosław Farkowski1, Mariusz Pytkowski1, Dominik Golicki2, Łukasz Szumowski3,  
Kathryn A. Wood4, Hanna Szwed1
1II Klinika Choroby Wieńcowej, Instytut Kardiologii, Warszawa
2Katedra Farmakologii Doświadczalnej i Klinicznej, Warszawski Uniwersytet Medyczny, Warszawa
3Klinika Zaburzeń Rytmu Serca, Instytut Kardiologii, Warszawa
4Duke University School of Nursing, Durham, NC, Stany Zjednoczone
S t r e s z c z e n i e
Wstęp: Kwestionariusz Patient Perception of Arrhythmia Questionnaire (PPAQ) jest specyficznym dla choroby narzędziem 
przeznaczonym do pomiaru jakości życia związanej ze zdrowiem pacjentów cierpiących z powodu arytmii, kolektywnie na-
zywanych częstoskurczami nadkomorowymi. Brak prawidłowo przygotowanego tłumaczenia kwestionariusza PPAQ na język 
polski ogranicza możliwości badań nad jakością życia polskich pacjentów cierpiących na arytmie nadkomorowe.
Cel: Celem badania było przeprowadzenie procesu tłumaczenia i adaptacji kulturowej angielskiej wersji kwestionariusza 
PPAQ na język polski.
Metody: Proces przekładu i wstępne badanie trafności treściowej kwestionariusza przeprowadzono zgodnie z wytycznymi 
ISPOR Principles of Good Practice for the Translation and Cultural Adaptation Process for Patient-Reported Outcomes (PRO) 
Measures opublikowanymi w 2005 r.
Wyniki: W 2011 r. dokonano przekładu kwestionariusza na język polski, a w procesie adaptacji kulturowej wzięło udział 
20 pacjentów (12 mężczyzn, średnia wieku 54,9 ± 17,4 roku). W trakcie procesu zidentyfikowano problemy związane z bli-
skim znaczeniem niektórych nazw objawów arytmii i charakterystycznymi dla języka polskiego zwrotami grzecznościowymi 
zależnymi od płci. Pierwszy problem rozwiązano poprzez współpracę z dwoma ekspertami z zakresu arytmii serca, a drugi 
poprzez zbadanie preferencji pacjentów w trakcie procesu walidacji.
Wnioski: Polska wersja kwestionariusza była powszechnie akceptowana przez pacjentów uczestniczących w procesie walida-
cji. Napotkane problemy mogą powtórzyć się w tłumaczeniach na inne języki i mogą zostać rozwiązane w podobny sposób 
jak w niniejszej pracy. 
Słowa kluczowe: jakość życia, kwestionariusz, tłumaczenie, częstoskurcze nadkomorowe
Kardiol Pol 2014; 72, 3: 246–253
15.	
Walfridsson U, Walfridsson H, Arestedt K et al. Impact of radiofrequency 
ablation on health-related quality of life in patients with paroxysmal 
supraventricular tachycardia compared with a norm population one year 
after treatment. Heart Lung, 2011; 40: 405–411.
16.	
Wood KA, Stewart AL, Drew BJ et al. Patient perception of symptoms 
and quality of life following ablation in patients with supraventricular 
tachycardia. Heart Lung, 2010; 39: 12–20.
17.	
Wood KA, Stewart AL, Drew BJ et al. Development and initial psycho-
metric evaluation of the Patient Perspective of Arrhythmia Questionnaire. 
Res Nurs Health, 2009; 32: 504–516.
18.	
Acquadro C, Conway K, Hareendran A, et al. Literature review of methods 
to translate health-related quality of life questionnaires for use in multi-
national clinical trials. Value Health, 2008; 11: 509–521.
19.	
Rothman M, Burke L, Erickson P et al. Use of existing patient-reported 
outcome (PRO) instruments and their modification: the ISPOR Good 
Research Practices for Evaluating and Documenting Content Validity for 
the Use of Existing Instruments and Their Modification PRO Task Force 
Report. Value Health, 2009; 12: 1075–1083.
20.	
Wild D, Grove A, Martin M, et al. Principles of Good Practice for the 
Translation and Cultural Adaptation Process for Patient-Reported Out-
comes (PRO) Measures: report of the ISPOR Task Force for Translation 
and Cultural Adaptation. Value Health, 2005; 8: 94–104.
21.	
Walfridsson U, Arestedt K, Stromberg A. Development and validation of 
a new Arrhythmia-Specific questionnaire in Tachycardia and Arrhythmia 
(ASTA) with focus on symptom burden. Health Qual Life Outcomes, 
2012; 10: 44.