Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.672
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
‘Fundamentalism’ and ‘fundamentalist’ semantically 
considered: Their lexical origins, early polysemy, and 
pejoration
Author: 
Frederick Hale1
Affiliation:
1School of Ecclesiastical 
Sciences, North-West 
University, South Africa
Correspondence to: 
Frederick Hale 
Email: 
fh243@cam.ac.uk
Postal address: 
No postal address
Dates:
Received: 29 Oct. 2012
Accepted: 29 July 2013
Published: 25 Nov. 2013
How to cite this article:
Hale, F., 2013, 
‘”Fundamentalism” 
and “fundamentalist” 
semantically considered: 
Their lexical origins, early 
polysemy, and pejoration’, 
In die Skriflig/In Luce Verbi 
47(1), Art. #672, 8 pages. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/
ids.v47i1.672
Copyright:
© 2013. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work
is licensed under the
Creative Commons
Attribution License.
The words fundamentalist (as both a noun and an adjective) and fundamentalism were coined 
in 1920 within the Northern Baptist Convention when that and other American Protestant 
denominations were experiencing theological turmoil due to the advance of theological 
modernism. It is argued in the present article that both terms initially had positive meanings 
when used by defenders of orthodoxy. However, within weeks of their birth both were criticised 
by less conservative Christians. Like many other theological terms they underwent semantic 
change – in this case pejoration and lexical extension. Moreover, by 1923 ‘fundamentalist’ 
had been extended into political journalism to refer to strict adherents of one ideology or 
another. The greatest change, however, and one that fixed these neologisms in the public mind 
in both North America and the United Kingdom, came with the widely published ‘Scopes 
monkey trial’ of 1925, when the association of ‘fundamentalists’ and ‘fundamentalism’ with 
anti-intellectualism and obscurantism reached its apogee.
Introduction
During the latter half of the 20th century, the terms fundamentalist and fundamentalism, both of 
which had existed since 1920, became even more polysemous than they had been since that year. 
Their usage to signify various kinds of people and phenomena expanded to hitherto untouched 
extremes. Originally Christian theological nomenclature, they were applied to a seemingly ever-
widening variety of people and ideologies. Basketball coaches who emphasised such basic skills 
as dribbling and passing were dubbed ‘fundamentalists’. Portfolio managers who concentrated 
their analyses on the financial details of individual companies rather than basing their fiduciary 
decisions on macroeconomic market trends were similarly called ‘fundamentalists’. Muslims who 
militantly defended their faith entered political and journalist rhetoric as champions of ‘Islamic 
fundamentalism’. Mormons who continued to practise polygamy despite the abrogation of that 
phenomenon by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints were described as ‘Mormon 
fundamentalists’. Generally terms of opprobrium on the lips or in the pens of people who 
denigrated what they were describing, these two terms had long undergone what semanticists 
call ‘pejoration’. As Lyle Campbell’s (2009) textbook definition succinctly informs us: 
In degeneration (often called pejoration), the sense of a word takes on a less positive, more negative 
evaluation in the minds of the users of the language – an increasingly negative value judgement. (p. 260) 
As will be demonstrated, this happened almost immediately, although many self-styled 
‘fundamentalists’ continued to carry that banner proudly long after its detractors had convinced 
Page 1 of 8
‘Fundamentalisme’ en ‘fundamentalis’ semanties beskou: Leksikale oorsprong, vroeë 
polisemie en verwording. Die terme fundamentalis (as ’n selfstandige sowel as byvoeglike 
naamwoord) en fundamentalisme het binne die Noordelike Baptiste-tradisie ontstaan toe 
hulle en ander Amerikaanse Protestantse denominasies onrus op teologiese gebied beleef het 
as gevolg van die opkoms van teologiese modernisme. Die betoog in hierdie artikel is dat 
albei hierdie terme aanvanklik positiewe betekenis gehad het toe dit deur die beskermers 
van die ortodoksie gebruik is. Albei terme is egter binne weke na hulle ontstaan deur 
minder konserwatiewe Christene gekritiseer. Soos vele ander teologiese terme, het hierdie 
woorde ook semantiese veranderinge ondergaan, in hierdie geval met ongunstige betekenis 
en leksikale uitbreiding. Boonop is die term fundamentalis teen 1923 ook in die politieke 
joernalistiek gebruik om na die rigiede navolging van een of ander ideologie te verwys. Die 
grootste verandering, en een wat hierdie neologismes algemeen in Noord-Amerika sowel 
as in die Verenigde Koninkryk gevestig het, het egter gekom met die wyd gepubliseerde 
‘Scopes monkey trial’ in 1925 toe die assosiasie van fundamentalis en fudamentalisme met anti-
intellektualisme en verkramptheid ’n hoogtepunt bereik het.
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Read online:

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.672
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
much of the American public that it was an odious word, not 
a badge to be worn with pride.
Writing retrospectively in the 1960s, the ground-breaking 
historian of fundamentalism Ernest R. Sandeen (1967a:66, 
1967b:80) observed that the theological defensiveness which 
had given rise to the terms in question ‘quickly gave way to 
the clangor and strife that has turned Fundamentalism into 
a term of reproach’. By his own time, Sandeen noted, few 
people were willing to use what had become the connotatively 
burdened word fundamentalist to identify themselves.
When and why was the term fundamentalism coined, and what 
did it and the cognate neologism fundamentalist originally 
signify? For well over half a century, these and related 
questions have received various and often incompatible 
answers. To cite but one immediately relevant example of an 
attempt to identify the provenance of the former word, in a 
recently published book an eminent South African theologian 
asserted, ‘since 1927 the concept fundamentalism was used 
to describe a form of conservative Protestantism that was 
discernible in Christian circles in the US’ (Vorster 2008:7). 
In fact, both the terms fundamentalist and fundamentalism 
had been current for several years before the indicated date. 
By then they had already undergone noteworthy semantic 
change, drifting from their original meanings and taken on 
unsavoury connotations with remarkable speed. (For an 
incisive introduction to the general concept, see Traugott 
2009:853–860.)
In the present article, steps will be taken towards unravelling 
the tangled usage of these words in their infancy, paying 
especial attention to their origin, disputes over their usage, 
and how they took on opprobrious connotations when they 
underwent early semantic change. This is not – it should be 
underscored at the outset – an argument either for or against 
any of the phenomena, either religious or secular, which the 
terms in question have signified. The terminus ad quem of 
the present analysis is 1925, an important milestone in the 
history of the words fundamentalism and fundamentalist when 
they were very commonly used in widespread journalist 
coverage of the infamous ‘Scopes monkey trial’ as signifiers 
for anti-intellectualism and obscurantism. Our focus is on the 
Northern Baptist Convention, in which these twin neologisms 
were born, and especially on its weekly organ, The Watchman-
Examiner, in which much of their early semantic history is 
lucidly revealed.
The Fundamentals
Forming an etymological and theological bridge to the 20th 
century ‘fundamentalism’ were a series of 90 essays in 12 
paperback volumes published in the United States of America 
(USA) and distributed internationally between 1910 and 1915. 
It was collectively known as The Fundamentals. Intended to 
serve as a bulwark against the incursions of ‘higher criticism’ 
of the Bible which was regarded as having undermined 
orthodoxy, and against theological liberalism generally, these 
volumes were written by dozens of chiefly American and 
British theologians. The Fundamentals are widely believed to 
have been among the most popular semi-scholarly Christian 
literature of their era. Millions of copies were distributed 
internationally and generally free of charge to churches, 
ministers, missionaries, Sunday school superintendents, 
students of divinity and others. Those who did not receive 
free copies could buy individual volumes for the princely 
sum of 15 cents. From the outset, The Fundamentals were a 
transatlantic project with noteworthy Baptist input, although 
theologians representing other denominational traditions 
were also prominent in the list of authors. In the wake of 
these publications, it became very common in American 
Protestant parlance, especially in the religious press, to refer 
to what were generally regarded, at least in theologically 
conservative circles, as ‘fundamental’ beliefs. Of course, 
what was fundamental to one Protestant was not necessarily 
fundamental to another. For example, to some believers’ 
baptism was an essential, non-negotiable tenet, whilst others 
obviously defended paedobaptism. To cite another matter 
on which there was then no consensus: since the late 19th 
century many Protestants in the United Kingdom and North 
America had advocated premillennial eschatology, whilst 
others had rejected it as speculative. Nevertheless, by the 
time of the First World War ‘fundamentals’ was ingrained in 
transatlantic English Protestant usage.
Curtis Lee Laws coins 
‘Fundamentalist’
If any man deserves to be called the ‘father of fundamentalism’, 
not as a movement, but as a word, it is arguably Curtis Lee 
Laws (1868–1946), even though he did not actually coin 
it. Rather, this Baptist minister and editor sired the term 
fundamentalist in 1920 and doggedly promoted its usage as 
a signifier in theological disputes. A native of Virginia, Laws 
received his undergraduate education at Richmond College 
and did his theological studies in the early 1890s at Crozer 
Theological Seminary,  an institution in Upland, Pennsylvania, 
where more than a half-century later. Martin Luther King Jr, 
did likewise. Laws thereupon served churches in Baltimore 
and Brooklyn for two decades before being appointed editor 
of the very widely circulated and influential Baptist weekly 
newspaper The Watchman-Examiner in 1913. He would hold 
that position for 25 years (Bradbury 1946:747–749).
This transplanted Southerner stood squarely on the 
traditional side in the theological disputes which had begun 
to rock the Northern Baptist Convention long before he 
occupied the editorial chair.1 
From his office in New York, Laws used The Watchman-
Examiner to publicise The Fundamentals and the conservative 
position in the intradenominational strife, occasionally 
criticising the more liberal stance of a rival periodical, The 
Baptist, whilst consistently giving favourable coverage to the 
theologically more orthodox Southern Baptist Convention. 
1.Much has been written about the theological disputes in the Northern Baptist 
Convention before 1920. For a succinct summary of events which prompted 
theological conservatives within the denomination to act to defend orthodoxy, see 
McBeth 1987:568−570.
Page 2 of 8

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.672
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 3 of 8
When the doctrinal disputes continued after the First 
World War ended in 1918, Laws and approximately 150 
other Northern Baptist Conventions ministers and laymen 
organised a special conference to take place immediately 
before the 1920 denominational assembly in Buffalo, New 
York. Their reason for holding this extraordinary meeting, 
the arrangers declared, was ‘the havoc which rationalism is 
working in our churches as evidenced by the drift upon the 
part of many of our ministers from the fundamentals of our 
holy faith’. One finds in the list of participants several men 
such as William Bell Riley, Curtis Lee Laws and Amzi Dixon 
who would soon either identify themselves or be identified 
by others as ‘fundamentalists’ (Anon 1920a:652, 1920b). 
Laws reported this event in detail and found it particularly 
heartening 
that 
the 
two 
day-parley 
had 
attracted 
approximately 150 participants. That, he believed, implied 
a renewal of hope for reasserting doctrinal orthodoxy 
which, he repeatedly emphasised, was actually the stance 
of the overwhelming majority of Northern Baptist pastors 
and laymen. In an enthusiastic commentary published in 
The Watchman-Examiner on 01 July 1920, Laws proposed 
that those ‘who cling to the great fundamentals and who 
mean to do battle royal for the fundamentals shall be called 
“Fundamentalists”’. He explicitly included himself amongst 
them and explained that whenever he used this neologism 
‘it will be in compliment and not in disparagement’ (Laws 
1920a:834).
2 A highly consequential term thus saw the light 
of day.
Disputing the neologism
Its birth was not without complications. Almost immediately 
some Baptists rejected ‘fundamentalist’, arguing that it was 
inappropriate nomenclature. Before the end of July, Dr 
Charles Watson of Boston challenged what he perceived 
as the exclusivist, self-righteous tone of Laws’ use of that 
term. In doing so, however, this minister exceeded the 
Watchman-Editor in rhetorical stridency. He and more 
doctrinally inclusive churchmen in the Northern Baptist 
Convention, Watson insisted, consistently affirmed Baptist 
beliefs. He added, though, that they were ‘not enamored of 
the men who assume that they are the only Baptists in sight, 
and who press suspicion and accusation so far that they 
continually break the ninth commandment’. Nothing was 
more fundamental to Christianity than speaking the truth in 
love, Watson suggested, alleging that on that score Laws and 
his cohort had fallen short. Furthermore, Watson, like many 
other Baptists and other Protestants who commented on the 
contemporary theological strife, rejected the notion that the 
faith could be reduced to a few core propositions. ‘Can you 
draw an inclusive circle around three doctrines’, he asked 
rhetorically calling them fundamental, then outside of that 
circle, exempting yourself from the commandments of God, 
sniff suspiciously among Christian teachers and schools, 
misrepresent their teachings, and continue to be a sound 
‘Fundamentalist’? 
2.During the early 1920s Laws was inconsistent in capitalising ‘Fundamentalist’ and 
‘Fundamentalism’ in The Watchman-Examiner.
Watson did not veil his disgust with the ‘holier than thou’ 
attitude he perceived among the conservatives. ‘You 
get dreadfully bored by the man who always calls your 
attention to the hardness of his backbone, and talks and 
acts as if he were all bone’, he lamented. Furthermore, 
by nature people differed somewhat. Watson reminded 
readers that their physical differences were manifestations 
of ‘God’s variety’. By analogy, he reasoned, one should 
also accept the fact that in terms of ‘individual faith, there 
has always been and will always be a similar variety, in 
spite of “Convention”, “Conference”, or “Committee”, or 
“Fiat”’. His denominational fellows, Watson pleaded, should 
acknowledge that (Laws 1920b:925).
In what was undoubtedly one of the first published usages 
of the word fundamentalism, Watson then announced that 
the phenomenon was by no means a novel development. In 
another of his censorious comments, he averred:
already this ‘Fundamentalism’ that we are hearing about is 
not new. It is old and is well into the stage of cant, pretense, 
hypocrisy, and chronic accusation. To thousands of Baptists it 
has been made disagreeable and unchristian simply because 
they know some who are exploiting it are not telling the truth 
about their brethren, else are telling it in unrighteousness. (Laws 
1920b:925) 
Watson urged the dropping of terms which could be divisive. 
Instead, he asked, ‘would it not be better for all of us to remain 
simply Baptists and Christians, and try to adorn these names 
by the spirit that is in us?’ (Laws 1920b:925).
Laws remained unrepentant and continued to advocate 
use of his neologism. He explained in the same issue of The 
Watchman-Examiner in which he published Watson’s critique 
that far from being a stinging term intended to divide and 
accuse, it was actually a consciously positive word intended 
to express the characteristics of the conservatives in a more 
meaningful and inclusive way than other labels he had 
pondered. It was, he insisted, ‘a good, wholesome, descriptive 
word to take the place of several current misnomers.’ Laws 
explained that he had coined ‘Fundamentalists’ specifically 
to avoid antagonising ‘ultra liberals’ by using ‘conservative’ 
and ‘pre-millennialist’ ‘because just to pronounce those 
words in the presence of some of these men makes them 
froth at the mouth.’ His coinage of ‘Fundamentalist’, he 
pleaded, had been done ‘in all innocence and good nature’, 
and he had believed that it would be ‘more acceptable’ and 
‘more illuminating’ than those inflammatory epithets (Laws 
1920b:925).
The words become a movement
At least within the Northern Baptist Convention, the new 
words became an integral and nominal part of a movement 
intended to stave off the advance of modernist theology. The 
initial conference which Laws and his allies had convened in 
Buffalo as a prelude to the denominational assembly became 
an annual affair. Laws gave them favourable publicity in The 
Watchman-Examiner and, undeterred by the criticism levelled 
by men like Watson at the term Fundamentalist, continued 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.672
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 4 of 8
to employ it in an exclusivist sense to signify the men who 
participated in the campaign to bolster orthodoxy and the 
organisations they established within the denomination to 
structure their efforts. Under Laws’ pen, the programme 
to defend orthodoxy remained ‘Fundamentalism’ (Laws 
1921a:1229–1230, 1921b:709–710, 1922b:501).
At the conference held in Indianapolis in June 1922, 
Laws addressed the delegates and summarised the 
movement in terms which echoed what he had long 
stressed in his newspaper. After quoting the editorial in 
which he had proposed ‘Fundamentalist’, he summarised 
‘Fundamentalism’ as:
a protest against that rationalistic interpretation of Christianity 
which seeks to discredit the miracles of the Old Testament, 
sets aside the virgin birth of our Lord as a thing unbelievable, 
laughs at the credulity of those who accept many of the New 
Testament miracles, reduces the resurrection of our Lord to the 
fact that death did not end his existence, and sweeps away the 
promises of his second coming as the idle dream of men under 
the influence of Jewish apocalypticism. (Laws 1922a:745)
He acknowledged that opponents of the movement had 
described its adherents in less flattering and even opprobrius 
terms, among which he listed literalists, dogmatists, separatists, 
medievalists, cranks, and ignoramuses (Laws 1922a:745).
Connotations of intolerance and 
anti-intellectualism
Given the strident nature of theological disputes, it seems 
plausible that in the eyes of modernists the defenders of 
orthodoxy were inherently intolerant and narrow-gauged 
in their doctrinal attitudes. One gets this impression from 
observations made about the fundamentalists’ conferences 
preceding the annual assemblies of the Northern Baptist 
Convention in the early 1920s. Certainly as early as 1922 the 
word fundamentalists was being explicitly associated with 
such a restricted mindset. Nowhere did this come to the 
fore more lucidly than in what might be dubbed the Magna 
Carta of the anti-fundamentalist campaign, Harry Emerson 
Fosdick’s oft-quoted sermon of 21 May 1922, ‘Shall the 
Fundamentalists Win?’ (Fosdick 1922:713−717).
Born in 1878, Fosdick was a well-known Northern Baptist 
minister who taught homiletics at Union Theological 
Seminary in Manhattan and was perhaps the most renowned 
American Protestant preacher during the first half of the 
20th century. From 1919 until 1925 he occupied the pulpit 
at the first Presbyterian Church in New York without, 
however, relinquishing his allegiance to the Northern 
Baptist Convention. Fed up with the bitter strife in his own 
denomination, this unabashed modernist levelled several 
broadsides at ‘the Fundamentalists’ – although without 
mentioning any of them by name – in his notorious homily.
Fosdick (1922) unreservedly laid all of the blame for the 
tensions on the doorstep of the other party whilst exonerating 
his own side as the victims. It was ‘the Fundamentalist 
controversy’, he began – not what historians of American 
Protestantism 
consistently 
call 
‘the 
fundamentalist-
modernist’ one which was threatening to divide the 
churches. Rather than following Laws’ lead and identifying 
fundamentalists as people who sought to preserve 
orthodoxy by doing ‘battle royal’ for the basic doctrines of 
the faith, Fosdick stressed what he perceived as their desire 
to cleanse the churches of unwanted people, that is, ‘to drive 
out of the evangelical churches men and women of liberal 
opinions’. That the fundamentalists were a narrow-minded 
lot was axiomatic: Whilst ‘the best conservatives’ could be 
exemplary in evincing a tolerant spirit, those who carried the 
fundamentalist banner had a program that was ‘essentially 
illiberal and intolerant’ (Fosdick 1922:713).
Moreover, in Fosdick’s portrayal of the fundamentalists, 
they were virtually un-American, or at any rate misfits in 
what he believed was the generally tolerant society of the 
United States. He granted that in this country people were 
at liberty to hold orthodox theological views, but he doubted 
that anyone had a right ‘to deny the Christian name’ to 
those who differed with them on doctrinal matters and 
consequently ‘shut against them the doors of the Christian 
fellowship.’ Precisely that, Fosdick declared, was what the 
fundamentalists were intent on doing, both on American soil 
and abroad. Linking his arguments about the un-American 
character and the intolerance of that group, he lamented, 
‘they have actually endeavored to put on the statute books of 
a whole state binding laws against teaching modern biology’ 
(Fosdick 1922:714).3
Qualified embracing of natural 
science by fundamentalists
Fosdick was neither the first nor the only critic to ascribe this 
anti-intellectual attitude to the new movement. In any case, 
in the American public mind it continued to expand as part of 
the semantic change which the neologisms underwent during 
the first half of the 1920s. As will be seen shortly, within five 
years of the birth of ‘fundamentalist’ and ‘fundamentalism’ 
these terms had gone far beyond theological defensiveness 
and became inextricably associated with hostility to modern 
science. That linkage became a permanent part of the 
understanding of these words outside theological circles, and 
to a great extent it must be attributed to hostile journalistic 
coverage of such events as the infamous ‘Scopes monkey 
trial’ of 1925. What should not be overlooked, however, is 
that during the early 1920s some self-styled ‘fundamentalists’ 
sought to counter the early perception of their movement as 
inherently anti-scientific by arguing that it was compatible 
with modern science.
Exemplifying this argument was Bernard C. Clausen, who in 
1923 contributed to The Watchman-Examiner an article titled 
‘The religion of science’. This scholarly Baptist pastor argued 
that no less than religious people, natural scientists based 
much of their work on postulated assumptions that had not 
been proven and perhaps were incapable of being either 
verified or falsified. ‘Science builds upon faith’, Clausen 
3.Probably meant the state of Kentucky.

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.672
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 5 of 8
(1923) declared in an alignment of the former with religion. 
He granted that there were many ‘selfish, over-confident, 
unworthy scientists’ but also conceded that there were 
also ‘bigoted, hard-hearted religionists too’. Clausen urged 
readers to embrace scientific methods and to ‘deliberately 
proclaim the truth of Christ in the vocabulary which 
[scientists] understand, fearlessly submitting the things we 
believe to the gruelling test of modern life.’ He expressed 
confidence that if they did so: 
some day all of science will take upon its lips the cry of 
[seventeenth-century astronomer Johannes] Kepler, uttered in his 
observatory the night he caught the first glimpse of his expected 
comet, ‘I am thinking God’s thoughts after him.’ (Clausen 
1923:106) 
‘Fundamentalism’ and reactionary 
political rhetoric
In the eyes of at least some modernist Christians, by 1922 
‘fundamentalism’ was not merely a religious phenomenon, 
but one which had become intimately linked with 
‘reactionary’ political rhetoric. An unidentified editor of 
The Christian Century, a pro-modernist weekly magazine 
published in Chicago, expressed this in an editorial published 
in November 1922. This was during the presidency of Warren 
G. Harding, a Republican who had succeeded Woodrow 
Wilson and whose term in the White House included the ‘Red 
Scare’ of 1919–1921, when many citizens of the United States 
feared that ripples of the Bolshevist Revolution might reach 
American shores. ‘Frequently, of late, our Fundamentalist 
leaders have issued voluminous warnings against the spread 
of what they call “infidelity” in the modern pulpit,’ groused 
this editor (Anon. 1922): 
Such warnings are accompanied by terrifying predictions of 
impending anarchy, communism, and all the other nightmarish 
hobgoblins conjured up by the post-war hysteria to frighten us − 
things worn as thin as toy balloons. (p. 1348) 
Fundamentalists were offering their rigid orthodoxy not 
only as the key for saving the integrity of Christianity, 
but also as a nostrum to cure the nation’s ills. That such a 
rhetorical religio-political alliance had emerged did not 
surprise this critic since, in his words, ‘birds of a feather flock 
together’ and ‘both know how to “treat ’em rough”’. The two 
belligerents were equally repugnant in his eyes, because ‘the 
spirit common to both is neither American nor Christian, 
being intolerant and ruthless, and at bottom a fundamental 
scepticism’ (Anon 1922:1348). These acerbic comments were 
a noteworthy contribution to the pejoration of the terms 
in question. However, it should be noted that they do not 
echo what Laws was repeatedly – and with a high degree 
of consistency – emphasising about the theological nature of 
fundamentalism during the early 1920s. There is no evidence 
that he linked that doctrinal restoration movement to a 
political agenda. Nevertheless, from this early date in the 
minds of parts of the American public ‘fundamentalism’ 
included a very conservative ideological component, 
although it did not always come to the surface.
Metaphorical extensions to the 
political sphere
An example from The Times of London in August 1925, 
that is, immediately after the ‘Scopes monkey trial’ which 
will be discussed below, illustrates the point. ‘The spirit of 
fundamentalism is not peculiar to Tennessee’, reported its 
correspondent in Germany:
The chief characteristic of the Tenth German Communist 
Congress, lately held in Berlin, was the attempt to enforce the 
rigid acceptance of Leninism on the German Communists and to 
exorcise all signs of the Demon Evolution. (Anon. 1925b:7) 
Less than a month later The Watchman-Examiner published 
a different usage of ‘fundamentalism’ from another quarter, 
namely its British correspondent, Gwilym O. Griffith. In 
a dispassionate review of the evolving political landscape 
of the United Kingdom since the end of the world war, he 
suggested that the public had to choose between: 
the fundamentalism of the socialist revolutionaries out for the 
destruction of the existing order and the setting up of a labor 
[sic] republic’; ‘the fundamentalism of the Tory extremists, 
proclaiming the divine right of the heredity and industrial 
aristocracy, and developing into some sort of Fascism’, and 
‘the fundamentalism of evolutionary democracies’ (Griffith 
1925a:1204). 
Griffith’s usage of Laws’ word to express political ideologies 
vividly shows one kind of semantic extension.
From theology to ridicule: 
‘Fundamentalism’ and the Scopes 
monkey trial
As indicated above, by 1922 Fosdick could discuss 
fundamentalism in an almost axiomatic way as a movement 
which was hostile not only to theological modernism, but also 
natural science. This attribution was gradually occupying 
centre stage in the drama of the modernist-fundamentalist 
controversy. By the middle of the 1920s many American 
commentators clearly regarded fundamentalism and anti-
intellectualism as two phenomena with a great deal of 
common ground.
A major factor in this linkage was the spirited campaign 
against Darwinism. One can find considerable evidence of it 
at least as early as 1923. One representative example occurred 
in a series of articles which the Congregationalist minister 
Rollin Lynde Hartt, contributed to the monthly magazine The 
World’s Work that year. Bearing such titles as ‘The War in the 
Churches’, his reports of what he termed a ‘three-thousand 
mile journey among the Fundamentalists’ highlighted the 
pre-millennialist eschatology he found amongst many 
of them (Hartt 1923b:469–470). Hartt cited a book titled 
Evolution – A Menace by the ‘Fundamentalist’ Baptist John 
William Porter (whom, however, he did not identify) as 
evidence of the support the new movement was giving to 
the campaign against Darwinism. Hartt (1923a) quoted the 
volume’s dedication to illustrate the spirit he had confronted: 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.672
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 6 of 8
To my beloved and womanly wife, on whose brow is stamped 
the likeness of Him, in whose ‘image’ she was created, and whose 
pure and noble blood is untainted by that of insect, reptile, fowl, 
or beast. (pp. 605−606) 
Hartt (1923a) apparently found it heartening when the 
eminent modernist theologian Shailer Mathews at the 
University of Chicago had assured him, ‘Since we accepted 
evolution, a number of eminent scientists have publicly 
confessed their faith in God.’ Their theological foes, however, 
remained unreconstructed. The intransigent biblical literalism 
of ‘Fundamentalists’, Hartt concluded, made it virtually 
inevitable for them to oppose Darwinism. For them, it had 
become axiomatic to: 
maintain that their ‘fundamentals’ – namely the Virgin Birth, the 
Deity of Christ, a substitutionary Atonement, and the imminent, 
physical return of Christ – presuppose ‘the inerrancy of the 
Scriptures in science and history, as well as in religion’. (Hartt 
1923a:612) 
This conviction, he lamented, had already made an impact 
in the field of tertiary education. ‘Especially vehement is 
the Fundamentalists’ protest against modern science in 
denominational colleges’, Hartt (1923a:605, 606, 612, 614) 
reported. The resulting hostility went hand-in-hand with 
an exclusivist, remonstrative attitude which had already 
become entrenched: ‘Not less firm than their faith in the first 
chapter of Genesis and in the literal, personal, bodily, visible, 
imminent return of Christ to this earth as King,” is their 
conviction that Fundamentalists, and Fundamentalists only, 
are Christians’ (Hartt 1923a:614).
Arguably the event which outdid all others in cementing 
‘fundamentalism’ and ‘fundamentalist’ in the public mind 
was the ‘Scopes monkey trial’ in Dayton, Tennessee, in July 
1925. The copious journalistic coverage given this proceeding, 
perceived and reported by journalists from the USA and 
overseas who lacked theological training but who reported 
its sensationalistic aspects at great length, was inundated 
with the terms under review. From that summer onward, 
the connotations which had burdened them nearly from the 
outset were an integral part of these words, although the 
purely theological meanings never completely disappeared. 
In the minds of much of the Anglophone public on both sides 
of the Atlantic, fundamentalism no longer referred only or 
primarily to uncompromising Protestant theology but to an 
irrational attack on science and an intolerant mind-set which 
fostered obscurantism.
A few examples from journalistic coverage of the trial 
lucidly illustrate the point. Headlines in The New York Times 
the day after it opened included ‘Scopes Jury Chosen with 
Dramatic Speed after Prayer Opens Picturesque Trail; State 
Fights Testimony by Scientists’, ‘Cranks and Freaks Flock to 
Dayton’, ‘Farmers Will Try Teacher’, and ‘Europe Is Amazed 
by the Scopes Case’. Lines in the last-named article typify 
the attitude that dominated that metropolitan newspaper’s 
critical coverage. The English Methodist Frank Ballard was 
quoted as saying that ‘the assumptions of Fundamentalism’ 
reminded him that his extensive dealings with American 
churches a quarter-century earlier had convinced him that 
‘both the science and theology of many of those who posed 
as authorities were half a century behind the times’ (Ballard 
1925:1–2). In an article the following day, one could read that 
in Dayton: 
the 
backwoodsmen 
defended 
Fundamentalism 
against 
Modernism and free-thinking to the point where once the police 
had to come to the rescue of one man by arresting him for 
‘disturbing the peace. (Anon 1925c:1) 
Near the end of the trial, the agnostic defence counsel,  Clarence 
Darrow, put the renowned Presbyterian layman, William 
Jennings Bryan (who was assisting in the prosecution), in the 
dock as a supposed authority on the Bible and questioned 
him mercilessly. The New York Times was apparently pleased 
to report Darrow’s unvarnished answer when asked what 
his purpose was: ‘To show up Fundamentalism, to prevent 
bigots and ignoramuses from controlling the educational 
system of the United States’ (Darrow 1925:1). 
To be sure, in its coverage of the Scopes trial The New York 
Times was amongst the most critical of daily newspapers. 
Even a Southern paper like The Atlanta Constitution could 
uncritically quote the renowned Darwinian and Oxford 
biologist Julian Huxley (1925) during the spectacle in 
Tennessee that ‘Fundamentalism is an attempt to deny the 
right to free thought and truthful education and must not be 
permitted to win in the trail of John T. Scopes.’ He informed 
American readers that:
the attempts of fundamentalists to deny the teaching of science 
is a gross infringement on the right of free thought which until 
recent years we thought the United States stood for, but which 
now we begin to fear it does not. (Huxley 1925:1)
Some American journalists sought to portray the religious 
environment in which the trial took place in a fairly nuanced 
way. To cite but one of many possible examples, Frank R. 
Kent (1925a) of the Baltimore daily The Sun contrasted the 
‘cynical and sophisticated newspaper and magazine writers’ 
who had chosen to treat ‘the whole business as a screaming 
farce’ and the local populace in general. The latter, he (Kent 
1925a) opined:
self-contained and indicate their self-consciousness only by 
a slight eagerness to prove they are a civilized people, living 
decent lives in a decent place and neither the hill billies nor 
yokels which the trial and its atmosphere tends to stamp them, 
and which they are not. (p. 1) 
Kent estimated that about 1700 of the 2000 residents of 
Dayton believed the biblical account of Creation and rejected 
Darwinian evolution, but most of these believers did not voice 
their views as openly as their foes did. ’The fundamentalist is 
reserved in the expression of his views’, Kent generalised. A 
possible explanation for this, he thought, was that ‘the feeling 
of the fundamentalist is deeper and stronger, the sort of thing 
about which men do not argue on street corners and in drug 
stores’ (Kent 1925a:1).
The next day, however, even Kent wrote in a less dispassionate 
vein about the local populace’s religious mentality. He 
understood that not all Christians there were cut from the 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.672
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 7 of 8
same bolt of cloth. In that region, which was ‘saturated with 
religion’, Kent reported that it was a ‘literal fact’ that ‘the 
great bulk’ of the residents adhered to a personal religion 
‘the rigidity of which is hard to exaggerate’. To him their 
intellectually unrefined faith seemed to be essential to 
their happiness and without it their lives would be ‘almost 
intolerable’. He described in particularly deprecating terms 
the Holy Rollers, Pentecostals whose ‘dreadful contortions’ 
and ‘lurid fanaticism’ left no room for natural science. 
Under Kent’s pen the people of Rhea County were hardly a 
rational lot: ‘To talk seriously about convincing them, either 
the reasonably or relatively educated and intelligent church 
members of Dayton or rougher and largely illiterate elements 
in the high hills, on the subject of evolution, is fantastic, futile, 
foolish,’ he judged. ‘Scientific facts that clash with the Bible 
are to them more ammunition for the devil in his war against 
God’ (Kent 1925b:1–2).
Turning to the American religious press, by 1925 the 
vigorously modernist Christian Century was also employing 
‘fundamentalist’ to signify anti-intellectual attitudes, and 
the Scopes trial provided an unparalleled opportunity for its 
editors to use the term derogatorily. ‘Mr. Bryan and the other 
fundamentalists are by no means untrue to the traditions 
of the static mind throughout history’ (Anon 1925d:913), 
sniffed the editors sarcastically midway through the legal 
proceedings. After Scopes was found guilty by a jury that 
had deliberated for less than ten minutes, the same editors 
lampooned fundamentalism as a manifestation of Southern 
regional cultural backwardness. ‘Ideas travel slowly’, they 
remarked, adding that there was much distance between 
Tennessee and ‘the centers of British culture’. They allowed 
that even in Northern states like New York, Illinois, Ohio, and 
Pennsylvania one could find clergymen ’who would champion 
the fundamentalist protest against a reasonable and scientific 
interpretation of the holy scriptures and the Christian faith’ 
(Anon 1925d:913). The Christian Century editors contrasted 
this attitude with what they too optimistically believed was 
the case in the United Kingdom where they mistakenly 
believed ‘the controversy over evolution has been settled for 
at least fifty years’ (Anon 1925a:943). In the wake of the trial, 
the previously mentioned British correspondent Gwilym O. 
Griffith contributed to The Watchman-Examiner his perception 
of the linkage of fundamentalism with anti-intellectualism. 
Like many other observers in the United Kingdom, he found 
the affair both bewildering and disillusioning. Admitting 
that viewing the Scopes trial from afar undoubtedly gave 
him a distorted perception of it, Griffith stated that it seemed 
to be a ‘spectacular phase’ of the fundamentalist-modernist 
controversy. In the United Kingdom, he judged, it had 
received ‘a very bad press in the matter of fundamentalist 
propaganda’ and been particularly ‘damaging to the 
cause of doctrinaire conservatism’. In British free church 
circles, Griffith believed, ‘the Dayton affair has presented 
fundamentalism in a guise calculated least of all to appeal 
to Nonconformist evangelicals,’ because the restrictive 
nature of the law Scopes had violated the cherished ideal 
of educational freedom without ‘the intrusion of the clerical 
dogmatist’. He asked rhetorically whether the trial was a 
step ‘back toward the psychology and philosophy of the 
Inquisition’ (Griffith 1925b:1041).
Curtis Lee Laws’ lament
The father of ‘fundamentalism’, Curtis Lee Laws, looked 
askance at the bastardisation of his lexical child. In the 
columns of his weekly, he took Griffith to task for focussing 
his remarks on the advisability of having an anti-evolution 
statute, not on its infraction which was the issue before the 
court. Beyond that, Laws lamented that the Scopes trial 
had taken place, despite the verdict of guilty. In his view 
Darwinism should not have become a ‘major’ point for 
fundamentalists, because, as he readily acknowledged, 
‘many Christians believe in some form of the development 
theory’. The trial had merely impeded what Laws realised 
were his sustained endeavours to explain to readers ‘in 
the plainest and most unequivocal English the contention 
of the fundamentalists.’ This editor allowed that in a ‘free 
country’ like the United States of America ‘men have a right 
to call themselves fundamentalists if they please,’ regardless 
whether their views conflicted with his own. He continued 
to declare, however, that ‘fundamentalism, pure and simple, 
is merely a defense of what practically all Christians believed 
twenty-five years ago’ (Laws 1925:1071). What Laws failed 
to understand, is that words almost inevitably undergo 
some measure of semantic drift. That means his coining of 
‘fundamentalist’ could not prevent others from using it and 
‘fundamentalism’ as they saw fit.
Conclusion
We 
have 
limited 
our 
analysis 
of 
the 
neologisms 
fundamentalism and fundamentalist almost exclusively to 
the milieu in which they were born in the contentious 
Northern Baptist Convention. It should be emphasised, 
however, that only very briefly was their usage limited to 
that denomination. Certainly by the mid-1920s these terms 
were current in several branches of American Protestantism 
and, to a lesser extent, in British nonconformity. Only rarely, 
it appears, were they used in the Union of South Africa 
during that early period. Outside Baptist circles, Presbyterian 
churches in the USA were one of the other verbal arenas in 
which ‘fundamentalist’ and ‘fundamentalism’ were tossed 
about in ways which reflected their coinage in 1920, but often 
departed from it semantically.
It must also be stressed that the pejoration and lexical 
extensions which these terms underwent in the early 1920s 
did not eradicate their original meaning from the popular 
religious vocabulary. Probably owing especially to the 
World’s Christian Fundamentals Association, which the very 
conservative Northern Baptist pastor William Bell Riley and 
others had founded in 1919, the words retained their original 
meanings in certain Protestant circles during the decades 
between the two world wars until they were gradually 
superseded by evangelical and evangelicalism – terms which 
had existed in English and other European languages for 
centuries and also undergone various semantic changes 
which lie outside the scope of the present article.

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.672
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 8 of 8
This analysis underscores some of the potential pitfalls in 
employing fundamentalist and fundamentalism as terms in 
the history of modern Christianity. Notwithstanding Laws’ 
protestations, virtually from the outset ‘fundamentalist’ 
and ‘fundamentalism’ were polysemous concepts, even 
before they became burdened with heavy connotations of 
anti-intellectualism. To cite but one example of this, many 
self-styled ‘fundamentalists’ were premillennialists, but 
Laws refused to accept that school of eschatology, which 
he understood entailed speculation beyond what he read in 
the Bible. On other issues there were disagreement too. In 
other words, even with regard to theological issues of the 
early 1920s, not all fundamentalists could agree on what the 
fundamentals of the Christian faith were.
From the perspectives of both doctrinal and semantic history, 
the further exploration of the course of ‘fundamentalist’ 
and ‘fundamentalism’ remains a potentially rich field for 
research. How did these words take on additional shades of 
theological meaning when transplanted outside the USA? 
How were they used metaphorically there and abroad as, for 
example, the ideological landscape underwent noteworthy 
changes? How and why was there general abandonment of 
these terms in quarters which had once owned them? How 
have various theologians and historians used them, and 
how has this semantic variety influenced their analyses and 
portrayals of Christian fundamentalism(s)? These and other 
questions await further examination.
References
Anon., 1920a, ‘Announcement for General Conference on Fundamentals’, The 
Watchman-Examiner , 20 May, p. 652.
Anon., 1920b, ‘Baptist fundamentals: Being addresses’, delivered at the Pre-
Convention Conference at Buffalo June 21– 22, The Judson Press, Philadelphia. 
Anon., 1922, ‘Fundamentalism and 100 per centism’, The Christian Century 39(44), 02 
November, p. 1348.
Anon., 1925a, ‘Booming Mediaevalism in Tennessee’, The Christian Century 42(30), 
23 July, p. 943.
Anon., 1925b, ‘Communism in Germany: Oratory and Bravado’, The Times, 03 August, 
p. 7.
Anon., 1925c, ‘Dayton’s police suppress skeptics’,The New York Times, 12 July, p. 1.
Anon., 1925d, ‘Fundamentalist prototypes’, The Christian Century 42(29), 16 July, p. 913.
Ballard, F. 1925, ‘Europe is amazed by the Scopes case’, The New York Times 11 July, 
pp. 1–2.
Bradbury, J.W., 1946, ‘Curtis Lee Laws, D.D, LL.D.’, The Watchman-Examiner 34(29), 
18 July, pp. 747–749. 
Campbell, L., 2009, Historical linguistics: An introduction, 2nd ed., Edinburgh 
University Press, Edinburgh.
Clausen, B.C., 1923, ‘The religion of science’, The Watchman-Examiner 11(4), 25 
January, p. 106.
Darrow, C., 1925, ‘Bryan, made witness in open air court, shakes his fist at Darrow 
amid cheers: Apology ends contempt proceedings’, The New York Times, 21 July, 
p. 1.
Fosdick, H.E., 1922, ‘Shall the fundamentalists win?’, The Christian Century 39(23), 08 
June, p. 713−717.
Griffith, G.O., 1925a, ‘The British letter’, The Watchman-Advocate 13(38), 17 
September, p. 1204. 
Griffith, G.O., 1925b, ‘The Scopes trail from a British point of view’, The Watchman-
Advocate 13(33), 13 August, p. 1041.
Hartt, R.L., 1923a, ‘Down with evolution!’, The World’s Work 44(6), October, pp. 605, 
606, 612, 614. 
Hartt, R.L., 1923b, ‘The war in the churches’, The World’s Work 46(5), September, pp. 
469–470.
Huxley, J., 1925, ‘Fundamentalism must lose fight to aid science’, The Atlanta 
Constitution 12 July, p. 1. 
Kent, F.R., 1925a, ‘Dayton bears its notoriety in seemly way’, The Sun (Baltimore), 10 
July, p. 1.
Kent, F.R., 1925b, ‘Religion holds first place in Dayton minds’, The Sun, 11 July, pp.1–2.
Laws, C.L., 1920a, ‘Convention side lights’, The Watchman-Examiner 8(27), 01 July, 
p. 834.
Laws, C.L., 1920b, ‘Baptists and fundamentalists’, (editorial), The Watchman-Examiner 
8(30), 22 July, p. 925.
Laws, C.L., 1921a, ‘Those conferences on fundamentals’, The Watchman-Examiner 
9(39), 29 September, pp. 1229–1230. 
Laws, C.L., 1921b, ‘What does the Fundamentalist Movement portend?’, The 
Watchman-Examiner 9(23), 09 June, pp.709–710.
Laws, C.L., 1922a, ‘Fundamentalism in the Northern Convention’, The Watchman 
Examiner, 10(24), 15 July, p. 745.
Laws, C.L., 1922b, ‘Pre-Convention Conference on fundamentals’, The Watchman-
Examiner 10(16), 20 April, p. 501.
Laws, C.L., 1925, ‘Editorial notes and comments’, The Watchman-Examiner 13(34) 20 
August, p. 1071.
Mcbeth, H.L., 1987, The Baptist heritage, Broadman Press, Nashville.
Sandeen, E.R., 1967a, ‘Toward a historical interpretation of the origins of 
fundamentalism’, 
Church 
History 
36(1), 
March, 
p. 
66. 
http://dx.doi.
org/10.2307/3162345
Sandeen, E.R., 1967b, ‘Toward a historical interpretation of the origins of fundamentalism’, 
Church History 36(1), March, p. 80. http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/3162345
Traugott, E.C., 2009, s.v. ‘Semantic change’, in K. Allan (ed.), Concise Encyclopedia of 
Semantics, n.p., pp. 853–860, Elsevier, Oxford, Amsterdam. 
Vorster, J.M., 2008, The challenge of contemporary religious fundamentalism, Church 
History Society of Southern Africa, Pretoria.