http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1897
Page 1 of 9
Original Research
Introduction
The Epistle of James generates, from the historical-critical point of view, a slew of challenging 
questions. Who wrote it? Was it James the brother of Jesus, or did someone write in his name? 
Or was the author some lesser known James who was only later mistaken for his more famous 
namesake? Informed scholars promote each possibility (Allison 2013a:113-114).
When was James written? If the brother of Jesus wrote it, it must have appeared before he died, 
which means before the mid-60s. If, however, he did not write it, the book could be very late. 
Some informed voices put it in the 2nd century – even the mid-second century (e.g. Nienhuis 
2007).
What sort of a book is it? The vast majority of Greek manuscripts include the word ‘epistle’ (epistolē) 
in the inscription or subscription. Many, however, doubt the fact that it really is a letter. The book 
lacks a letter’s ending – it just stops; it has no conclusion at all – and it conveys no personal 
messages. Perhaps, then, it is, as some have urged, a bit like the book of Proverbs: a collection of 
general moral exhortation, of eclectic and not always closely related sayings and paragraphs of 
exhortation.
There are also other options: Maybe James is the record of a sermon or a sort of midrash, an 
elaboration and application of certain Old Testament scriptures. It could also be a collection of 
catechetical materials. All of these possibilities and more appear in the critical literature (see 
Allison 2013a:71-76).
Where was James written? Opinion is split between Palestine and the diaspora. There is no further 
agreement regarding the literary relationships between James and other early Christian writings. 
There are striking parallels between James and some of Paul’s letters. Does James know and 
respond to Paul, or do the two writers independently make use of similar traditions instead? 
There are likewise close parallels between James and the 2nd century Shepherd of Hermas. 
Author:
Dale C. Allison1,2
Affiliations:
1Princeton Theological 
Seminary, Princeton, 
United States
2Faculty of Theology, 
North-West University 
Potchefstroom Campus, 
South Africa
Correspondence to:
Dale Allison
Email:
dale.allison@ptsem.edu
Postal address:
26 Library Place, Princeton, 
New Jersey 08540, 
United States
Dates:
Received: 22 Oct. 2014
Accepted: 17 Mar. 2015
Published: 08 May 2015
How to cite this article:
Allison, D.C., 2015, ‘The 
Jewish Setting of the Epistle 
of James’, In die Skriflig 49(1), 
Art. #1897, 9 pages. http://
dx.doi.org/10.4102/ids.
v49i1.1897
Copyright: 
© 2015. The Authors. 
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work is 
licensed under the Creative 
Commons Attribution 
License.
The Jewish Setting of the Epistle of James
Many older commentators understood the Epistle of James to address itself to Jews of the 
diaspora, whether Christian or not. Although few modern scholars have seriously reckoned 
with this possibility, much is to be said for the thesis. It makes sense for example of important 
features of the epistle that otherwise would remain unclear, such as its dearth of explicit 
Christology, its seeming lack of distinctive Christian sentiments, and its thoroughly Jewish 
orientation. The author was a Jewish Christian still hoping for a Christian place within the 
Jewish synagogue; he wished for irenic relations with those who did not confess Jesus to be the 
Messiah. He was thus intentionally quiescent about much for apologetical purposes, a strategy 
with clear parallels in other ancient Christian literature.
Die Joodse agtergrond van die Jakobusbrief. Die Jakobusbrief is deur baie van die ouer 
kommentaarskrywers gesien as ’n selfverklarende geskrif aan die Jode van die diaspora – hetsy 
Christene of nie-Christene. Hoewel van die moderne navorsers heelhartig daarmee saamstem, 
bestaan daar heelwat twyfel oor hierdie siening. Dit maak egter sin ten opsigte van sekere 
belangrike beskrywings van die brief wat andersins onverklaarbaar sou wees soos die gebrek 
aan uitdruklike Christologie, die skynbare gebrek aan kenmerkende Christelike sentimente 
en die grondige Joodse oriëntering daarvan. Die skrywer was ’n Joodse Christen wat steeds 
gehoop het vir erkenning binne die Joodse sinagoge en versoenende verhoudings met diegene 
wat nie vir Jesus as die Messias erken het nie, verlang het. Dus was hy met voorbedagde rade 
baie stil oor baie dinge om apologetiese redes – ’n strategie wat duidelike parallelle met ander 
antieke Christelike literatuur toon.
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1897
Page 2 of 9
Original Research
The question likewise arises here: Does one text know the 
other or do they share so much, because they depend upon 
common traditions or even written sources? Moreover, what 
of the remarkable, extensive correlations between James 
and 1 Peter? Some think that 1 Peter borrows from James; 
some think that James borrows from 1 Peter; some think that 
both borrow from common Christian tradition (see Allison 
2013a:62-70)
Finally, there is the biggest question of all: What was this 
book designed to do and in what historical context? Some 
hold that James is the response of Jesus’ brother to the 
unwelcome effects that some of Paul’s ideas, or perhaps 
even some of his letters, were having. Others – indeed, the 
majority of modern German scholars – maintain that James 
represents in large measure a reaction not to Paul, but to 
later, post-70 (mis)interpretations of Paul and to the ethical 
lapses they encouraged (e.g. Burchard 2000). Yet another 
idea is that our author, sensing the revolutionary tendencies 
that eventuated in the Jewish war, sought an alternative in 
hope and patience that waits upon divine intervention (e.g. 
Martin 1988). Then again, maybe James reacts against Jewish 
Christians associated with the Essenes or maybe he opposes 
some form of Gnosticism. Another possibility could be that 
he counters Marcion, or interprets a primitive collection of 
Catholic Epistles. Beyond all this, there is the thesis, nurtured 
by the influential commentary of Dibelius (1976), that James 
was not written for a particular concrete occasion, as is 
evidenced by the fact that there is no trace of any personal 
relationship between the author and his audience.
What should one conclude?
Perhaps it would be prudent, given the extraordinary 
differences in learned judgement, to refrain from drawing too 
many conclusions regarding James. Some historical mysteries 
simply cannot be solved, because too few clues have come 
down to us. Nonetheless, having spent much of the last two 
decades working on the Epistle, it is my conviction that some 
proposals are more plausible than others. It is therefore the 
purpose of this article to introduce some of those proposals.1
Unexpected silences
I begin with Luther who once claimed (1960:396) that, 
although James ‘names Christ’, he ‘teaches nothing about 
him, but only speaks of general faith in God’. Luther even 
went so far as to assert in one place (1967:424) that ‘some 
Jew wrote’ the letter of James ‘who probably learned about 
Christian people but never encountered any’.
Why would Luther say such things or why would one 
modern scholar dub James as ‘the least Christian book 
in the New Testament’ (Jülicher 1931:209)? Why would 
another affirm ‘that which is specifically Christian [in it] is 
surprisingly thin’ (Bultmann 1955:143), or another assert 
that it leaves ‘the impression of an almost pre-crucifixion 
1.This article serves as introduction to some major conclusions drawn in Allison 
(2013a).
discipleship’ (Sidebottom 1967:14) or another claim that it 
lacks ‘any distinctive Christian message’ (Kümmel 1975:416)? 
Why did one 19th century commentator assert that ‘the style 
and manner [of James] are more that of a Jewish prophet than 
a Christian apostle’ (Clarke 1856:1824)?
The reasons for such remarks, which could be multiplied 
indefinitely, are obvious. Jesus’ crucifixion is neither 
mentioned nor clearly alluded to. Nor is anything said about 
his resurrection or exaltation. Jesus’ deeds are nowhere 
mentioned, and one searches in vain for any remark upon 
his character or status as a moral model – a striking omission 
given the appeals to other moral models, namely Abraham, 
Rahab, Job and Elijah. Adolf Harnack (1958:490) remarked: 
James ‘does not refer to Jesus Christ where one would expect’. 
Further, our book says nothing explicit about baptism, about 
the Lord’s Supper or about the fulfillment of prophecy in 
Jesus Christ. Scholars have, to be sure, found echoes of these 
things in James, and they have likewise attempted to tease 
from the book a developed Christology, drawing inferences 
from what they imagine to be implicit. Yet, the truth remains 
that, as one recent commentator has arrestingly put it, ‘James 
has more to say about Rahab the prostitute than about Jesus!’ 
(Gench 1996:79).
Explaining the silences
What explains the silences, which are so strange given James’ 
canonical context? A few earlier scholars decided that James 
must be a retouched Jewish writing (e.g. Spitta 1896). That 
is, the letter was, as Luther once imagined, written by a Jew. 
Some later Christian, who found it congenial, then lightly 
edited it, adding, above all, the first verse and the name 
‘Jesus Christ’ to 2:1.2
No one, to my knowledge however, defends this position 
today. For, although the thesis of a Jewish original nicely 
explains some facts, it does not explain others. James, after 
all, appears in the Christian canon, and it borrows too heavily 
from traditions we know to have been specifically Christian 
for it to be non-Christian in origin. For instance, the teaching 
on oaths in 5:12, ’But above all, my brothers, do not swear, 
either by heaven or by earth or with any other oath, but let 
your yes be yes and your no be no, that you may not fall 
under condemnation’, clearly reproduces the same tradition 
that lies behind Matthew 5:34-37; a tradition that presumably 
goes back to Jesus and which, in any event, was handed 
down through Christian channels. Moreover, portions of 
chapter 2 have their closest verbal and thematic connections 
in Paul’s epistles (Allison 2013b). There are also, as already 
noted, conspicuous parallels with 1 Peter and the Shepherd 
of Hermas (Allison 2013a:20-23, 67-68). James is a Christian 
document.
How else, then, might one account for what our book fails 
to say? One could posit that the letter is so Christologically 
understated because of its genre or literary type. Should 
2.All references to the Epistle of James will be indicated only by chapters and verses.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1897
Page 3 of 9
Original Research
we really expect much theology from a book of moral 
exhortation with wisdom affinities? The document is an 
assemblage of imperatives – ‘do this, do not do that’. It is not 
theology proper and unless one is dealing with a systematic 
presentation of foundational beliefs, one needs not be 
startled by certain silences. Although Moses is nowhere 
mentioned in the collection known as Proverbs, would it be 
prudent to deduce that all the contributors were ignorant of 
the exodus from Egypt or considered it to be unimportant? 
Was Paul utterly ignorant of, or wholly uninterested in, the 
miracles of Jesus about which he says nothing? In such cases 
surely it was the specific and limited goals of the writers that 
explain the absence of convictions that were probably of 
some importance to them. One is not puzzled that the great 
Pauline themes are absent from Philemon: the occasion of the 
writing accounts for that well enough. Even in the lengthy 
Romans, the most systematic of Paul’s epistles, the apostle 
fails to allude to the Lord’s Supper or to the foundational 
tradition about Jesus’ resurrection known from 1 Corinthians 
15. Maybe then we should not be surprised that James, which 
is a relatively short book of moral exhortation, has little to 
say about the saving events of Jesus’ life and their mediation 
through the sacraments.
Genre, however, fails to clarify why James can mention the 
forgiveness of sins, as he does in 5:15, and yet says nothing 
about Jesus’ atoning death, or elucidates why, when James 
cites models of behavior, he refers to Abraham (2:21-23), 
Rahab (2:25), the prophets (5:10), Job (5:11) and Elijah 
(5:17-18), and not to Jesus. Nor does it help us understand 
why, even if one regards the ‘Jesus Christ’ of 2:1 as original 
(I personally think it is textually quite problematic; Allison 
2013a:382-84), our book names ‘Jesus’ and ‘Christ’ less often 
– at most twice – than any other Christian writing of the 
New Testament period except the diminutive 3 John. Even 
the 25 verses of Philemon, the 13 verses of 2 John, and the 
25 verses of Jude beat the much longer James on this score. 
Where else in early Christianity do we have an epistle whose 
Christological elements are so slight that some have excised 
less than half a dozen words and then declared the result to 
be a non-Christian document? The appeal to genre does not 
compel.
Is there another solution? Maybe, one might suggest, our 
perplexity over James’s content is occasioned only by a failure 
to reckon seriously with the diversity of early Christianity. 
Maybe we should elucidate James’ conspicuous silences by 
urging that our book represents a type of Christianity akin to 
what some have glimpsed behind the Sayings Source Q, the 
hypothetical source of Matthew and Luke, for this document, 
according to the standard reconstructions, says nothing 
about Jesus’ death or resurrection.
Although others might wish to move in this direction, I do 
not. The traditions taken up into Paul’s epistles, traditions 
that developed during the earliest Christian period to 
which we have access, are full of Christological assertions 
and emphases; and in them Jesus’ death, resurrection and 
exaltation are fundamental. I, for one, doubt that we have, 
apart from some very conjectural reconstructions of a few 
very hypothetical communities, really know of any other 
sort of primitive Christianity, that is, one without such 
Christological assertions and emphases or focus upon Jesus’ 
passion and vindication.
More importantly, when one carefully examines the Christian 
parallels to James, time after time one discovers the very 
peculiar fact that he alone lacks Christological elements. For 
instance, James’ first paragraph, 1:2-4, in which our author 
exhorts his readers to count it all joy when they face various 
trials, because the testing of faith produces steadfastness, 
which leads to being complete and lacking in nothing, has 
very close parallels in Romans 5 and 1 Peter 1. Whereas the 
relevant verses in 1 Peter 1 and Romans 5 name Jesus Christ 
and are in other ways explicitly Christian that is not true of 
James (see Allison 2013a:140-141). This odd phenomenon 
recurs as one works through our text, that is, James takes 
up traditions that elsewhere in the New Testament appear 
in Christological dress. Yet, in his gospel the Christology is 
not there. It is as though James deliberately avoids being too 
Christian about things.
Again, then, what can be the explanation? A few have offered 
that James must represent a very primitive or undeveloped 
theology. But was there ever a Christian theology that said 
nothing about Jesus’ death and resurrection or ascension or 
was altogether lacking in the ways our epistle is? Maybe we 
should be asking whether there might be some good rhyme 
or reason for a Christian to be deliberately quiet about some 
important Christian matters.
Additional considerations
In order to set the stage for my case that James is indeed 
consciously quiet about much, that the book is silent by 
design, I begin with a series of observations:
1.	 James does not explicitly address itself to Christians. The 
first line has this: ‘James, a servant of God and of the 
Lord Jesus Christ, To the twelve tribes in the Dispersion: 
Greeting.’ There is nothing here about a church or 
churches. James quite literally addresses itself to ‘the 
twelve tribes in the Dispersion’. Many believe that 
this is a figurative way of speaking about Christianity 
throughout the world.3 I prefer to take the address at 
face value. Cadoux (1944) wrote long ago regarding 
James 1:1:
Christians to-day believe that the Church has inherited the 
privileges of Israel, but if they found a circular letter begin­
ning, ‘My dear fellow Jews’, they would unhesitatingly con­
clude that it was written by a Jew to Jews; nor is there less 
reason for taking the address of this Epistle to mean what it 
says. (p. 11)
Unlike the opening of 1 Peter, the first verse in James 
contains no hint that it should be given figurative sense 
or applied to the churches. Nor does any other part of 
3.For a recent variation of this view see Marcus (2014).

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1897
Page 4 of 9
Original Research
the letter, from which all allegorical interpretation is 
absent, contain such a hint. James 1:1 does not explicitly 
refer to Christians as its addressees. It rather, on its face, 
addresses Jews in the diaspora. Those who understand 
this as a letter addressed to Christians must read into the 
first verse what is not there.
	
A literal reading of 1:1, whilst not common at the present 
exegetical moment, is scarcely idiosyncratic. Many 
competent readers have inferred that our letter was 
not written to Christians, or at not least exclusively to 
Christians, but that it addresses Jews, whether Christian 
or not. This view was particularly popular in the 17th and 
18th centuries, but it is appears as early as the Venerable 
Bede and will also be sponsored in John Kloppenborg’s 
forthcoming commentary in Hermeneia (see Allison 
2013a:116).
2.	 There is no sign of a Gentile audience whereas much 
lines up with a Jewish one. James 2:21 calls Abraham 
‘our father’ without any hint that the expression bears a 
transferred sense so that it includes Gentiles or Gentile 
Christians. The meeting place or gathering of the readers 
is called a ‘synagogue’ (2:2). In 2:19, the readers’ faith 
is embodied, not in a confession about Jesus, but in the 
Shema: ‘You believe that God is one’, – this being a clear 
reference to Deuteronomy 6:4: ‘The Lord our God, the 
Lord is one’. Moreover, the writer calls God ‘the Lord 
Sabaoth’ without explanation (5:4), and all the moral 
exemplars are drawn from Jewish tradition – Abraham, 
Rahab, the prophets, Job and Elijah. There is no mention 
of idolatry, drunkenness or other sins that early Christian 
writers often imagined to be characteristic of Gentiles. 
The Jewish ethos is ubiquitous. In sum, our book seems 
to be addressed to Jews.
3.	 James contains neither Christian salutation nor Christian 
benediction. This is not what we anticipate from an early 
Christian epistle. The odd circumstance would, however, 
be explained if the author did not have only Christian 
readers in mind.
4.	 With the exception of 2:1, which is textually uncertain, 
readers are nowhere explicitly characterised as followers 
of, or believers in Jesus. Put otherwise, if one brackets the 
‘Jesus Christ’ of 2:1, which, on grammatical grounds, has 
often been thought of as secondary, readers, as opposed 
to the author (1:1), are nowhere referred to as being 
followers of, or believers in Jesus.
5.	 As a matter of exegetical history, many have found parts 
of James peculiar if taken to be addressed directly to 
Christians (see Allison 2013a:592, 646-648). This is true 
above all of chapters 4 and 5. Here readers are called 
to submit themselves to God, to cleanse their hands, to 
purify their minds, and to mourn and weep. The reason 
is that they are ‘adulterers’ (4:4) and ‘sinners’ (4:8) – that 
they are friends of the world and enemies of God (4:4). 
They are even guilty of murder (5:6). In calling them to 
account, James appeals to Scripture and Jewish tradition, 
not to the gift of the Holy Spirit or to specifically Christian 
convictions. Furthermore, those denounced in chapter 5 
especially seem past repentance. They have fattened their 
hearts for slaughter, and their flesh will be eaten like fire 
(5:1-5). Many have understandably doubted that these 
are believers in Jesus. Are there, in the first 100 years of 
Christianity, any other texts in which a Christian accuses 
Christians of murder? It is telling that most who think 
of James as addressed exclusively to Christians typically 
hold that, at least in chapters 4 and 5, James, like some 
of the canonical Hebrew prophets, is addressing those 
not present, that is, people who will never hear or read 
his letter (see Dibelius 1976:231, 235). This, however, is 
to concede that our writing does not consistently or in its 
entirety read well as a discourse to Christians.
6.	 Commentators debate the identity of the rich in 2:1-7, 
which reads:
if a man with gold rings and in fine clothing comes into your 
assembly, and a poor man in shabby clothing also comes in, 
and you pay attention to the one who wears the fine clothing 
and say, ‘Have a seat here, please’, while you say to the poor 
man, ‘Stand there’, or, ‘Sit at my feet’, have you not made 
distinctions among yourselves, and become judges with evil 
thoughts? Listen, my beloved brethren. Has not God chosen 
those who are poor in the world to be rich in faith and heirs 
of the kingdom which he has promised to those who love 
him? But you have dishonored the poor man. Is it not the 
rich who oppress you, is it not they who drag you into court? 
Is it not they who blaspheme that honorable name which 
was invoked over you?
	
Who are these rich people? That they are Christians ill 
fits the fact that they blaspheme ‘the good name that was 
called over you’. Maybe, then, ‘synagogue’ should be 
given its natural sense, and perhaps we should think not 
of a Christian service of worship, but rather of a Jewish 
building or gathering, one with both Jewish and Christian 
participants (see Allison 2013a:376-77).
7.	 The chief reason usually given for refusing to see James 
as addressed or partly addressed to non-Christian Jews 
is the claim that several verses presuppose a Christian 
readership. James 1:18 speaks of those ‘brought forth by 
the word of truth that we should be a kind of first fruits 
of his creatures’. Is this not about Christian regeneration? 
James 5:7-8 refers to ‘the parousia of the Lord’. Is this 
not a clear reference to the second coming of Jesus? 
Furthermore, 5:14 speaks about ‘the elders of the ecclesia’. 
Are these not obviously church officers?
A detailed examination of these texts is beyond the current 
article. I can only observe a couple of things. Firstly, not one 
of the verses cited the names Jesus Christ. Therefore, one is 
still left with the question of why everything that we think 
of as being characteristically Christian, remains at best 
implicit.
Secondly, and this is an arresting fact, in each case the history 
of interpretation reveals that the relevant texts can be and 
have been read in more than one way, and in ways that see 
specifically Christian theology recede. The language of 1:18 
has moved many expositors to think not of Christian rebirth 
through the gospel, but instead either of humanity’s creation 
by God’s word or the new creation of Israel through the 
giving of Torah on Sinai (see Allison 2013a:255-256). As for 

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1897
Page 5 of 9
Original Research
the expression, ‘the parousia of the Lord’ – not, and it should 
be emphasised, ‘the parousia of Jesus’ – it is almost certainly 
a Christian formulation. Yet, it is striking that, in the verses 
that immediately precede and in those that immediately 
follow, ‘the Lord’ is God, not Jesus (5:4, 11). As a result some 
exegetes have thought that the Lord is God also in 5:7-8 
(Allison 2013a:699). As for 5:14, ’Is any among you sick? Let 
him call for the elders of the ecclesia’, James mentions neither 
‘deacons’ nor ‘bishops’, and the Septuagint speaks of both 
Jewish ‘ecclesia’ and Jewish ‘elders’ (see Allison 2013a:755-
757). The two words are not in and of themselves, or even 
when put together, Christian (cf. Ps 106:32 – LXX; 2 Esdras 
10:8; Jl 2:16 – LXX).
The strange truth is that, aside from 1:1 and the textually 
dubious 2:1, James, although certainly written by a believer 
in Jesus, explicitly says nothing distinctively Christian. It is 
as though the readers are neither assumed nor required to be 
members of the church themselves. The whole epistle rather 
stays within, or at least could be read within, a Jewish frame 
of reference. One modern scholar has opined that ‘every 
sentence ... could have been written by a proto-rabbi’ (Sigal 
1980:424).
Readers of James often miss this, because, consciously or 
not, they are canonical readers, assuming that James must be 
saying what the New Testament says elsewhere, but he does 
not. He remains resolutely silent in remarkable ways, even 
when we would expect otherwise. 	
Two old proposals
At this point, and as a way forward, I wish to introduce the 
work of two older scholars.
Over a 100 years ago, J.H. Moulton (1907) observed that, after 
the author of James declares himself to be a servant of Jesus 
Christ:
he drops all overt reference to Christian faith, and only names 
the Master in a verse [2:1] where the forced order of the words 
raises an extremely strong presumption of a gloss. (p. 45)
According to Moulton (1907), the explanation for this lack 
of overt reference to Christian ideas is that the letter is 
addressed to Jews:
The ‘Twelve Tribes of the Dispersion’, of course, most naturally 
suggests such a destination. The ‘synagogue’ of ii. 2 will then be 
Jewish, and the rich men who are so sternly denounced will be 
more easily found than if we have to seek them in a Christian 
community of any date prior to the age of Constantine. (p. 46)
Why, then, the absence of specifically Christian doctrine? For 
Moulton (1907), it was part of a missionary strategy. Most 
Jews:
would be deaf to all argument which even named the Crucified, 
and he who would reach them must try another way. Could 
there be a better way than to write as a Jew to Jews, threading 
the pearls of Christ’s own teaching on a string of miscellane­
ous exhortation, all tending to shame them out of a blind un­
belief rooted in party spirit (ἐριθεία)? … Jews who would read 
this Epistle could often without great difficulty be led on to read 
such a book as our First Gospel, in which they would learn with 
surprise that many of the sayings they had accepted as heavenly 
wisdom, when purporting to come from a pious and orthodox 
Jew, were really due to Him whom all orthodox Jews had agreed 
never to hear. (p. 47)
In making this proposal, Moulton (1907) cited a parallel 
from 19th century India. A Christian missionary, he tells us, 
published a tract consisting of nothing but material from the 
Maha-bha-rata, a Hindu scripture – material that the missionary 
found congruent with Christian belief. The purpose was 
to make Hindus more open to the appeal of the Christian 
message:
The Epistle of James was a composition of this class, a Christian’s 
appeal to non-Christians, which veils Christian terms and names 
in order to insinuate Christian truth into prejudiced minds. 
(pp. 49, 50)
This is a provocative reading of James. It is, however, not 
free of problems. For one thing, one doubts that James 
was penned for non-Christian Jews alone. The book does 
nothing to exclude Christian Jews, who would be included 
amongst the addressees in 1:1, and so much of James makes 
sense as practical advice for believers in Jesus that it seems 
unwise to imagine that the letter was intended only for 
outsiders.
Another difficulty for Moulton is his assumption that a 
Christian wishing or purporting to communicate with 
non-Christian Jews could have had only one goal in mind, 
namely to proselytise them. This seems a narrow view. Do 
we really know that early followers of Jesus, in all times and 
places, sought the conversion of Jews to Christian doctrine? 
James, in any event, drops no hint about missionising, and 
one can, without difficulty, imagine situations in which 
stressing similarities rather than differences might have 
been the prudent course (see below). Indeed, is that not what 
one might expect of Christian Jews who wanted, despite 
opposition, to continue attending synagogue?
a.	 H. McNeile (1923) attempted to remedy the deficiencies in 
Moulton’s thesis. McNeile agreed that James’ Christianity 
is intentionally quiet and that our letter addresses itself 
to Jews. Unlike Moulton, he plausibly held that our 
epistle addresses both Jews and Christians. Why then the 
silences? ‘There is little doubt that the writer is himself a 
Christian, but in his desire to reach the widest possible 
public he studiously selects language acceptable to Jew 
and Christian alike’ (McNeile 1923:90). To that public he 
wanted ‘to prove nothing doctrinal, and to “proselytize” 
no one, but to show that the highest standard of ethics 
for Jew and for Christian could be one and the same’ 
(McNeile 1923:95). In building his case, McNeile rightly 
observed how often James is ambiguous, that is, how 
many times a Christian could take something one way, a 
non-Christian Jew another.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1897
Page 6 of 9
Original Research
b.	 Although McNeile’s argument seems more plausible 
than that of Moulton, he added nothing to the latter’s 
comparative material, which consisted solely of a modern 
Christian tract consisting of nothing but material from 
the Maha-bha-rata. That scarcely suffices to ground a thesis 
about an ancient Christian text.
Ancient parallels
It is obvious that writers in all cultures regularly 
accommodate themselves in one way or another to projected 
audiences. Modern textbooks, for instance, are written 
on the level of anticipated students, and children’s books 
avoid long words. Are there, however, any parallels in the 
ancient world to the sort of thing that Moulton and McNeile 
envisaged? That is, are there any examples, closer to James’ 
time and place than Moulton’s illustration, of religious 
individuals who, for this or that reason, found occasion to 
keep their religious convictions, or at least some of them, 
wholly in the background, or in the background for long 
stretches? There were:
1.	 In one place, Origen (Commentary on Jeremiah 20.5), 
tells us that, when in conversation with prejudiced 
pagans, he would hide his Christianity. That is, he 
would propound Christian teaching, but not speak 
of ‘Christ’ or ‘Christians’ unless or until he had his 
listener’s respect and attention in which case he would 
then plainly declare his affiliation and the source of his 
wisdom.
2.	 The Sentences of Sextus is a second century collection of 
451 sayings, mostly ethical injunctions. Although its 
author is unknown, he was clearly Christian; yet, not 
explicitly so. As Jerome observed, although the Sentences 
are Christian, they fail to mention ‘the prophets, the 
patriarchs, the apostles, or Christ’ (Epistle 133.3). So the 
writer attempted to communicate by consciously setting 
aside overt Christian assertions. Why might he have done 
such a thing? The answer is not obvious. Henry Chadwick 
(1959), however, thought that Sextus sought:
to bring the moral wisdom of the Greek sages under the wing 
of the church to whom all truth belongs. With adjustments 
here and there the language of Stoic or Pythagorean wisdom 
could pass in Christian circles. Pythagoras is ours might 
be his motto .... The purpose was probably apologetic .... 
Christianity brings to actuality what is potentially already 
there. The soul is naturally Christian. (pp. 160-161)
This seems the best bet. In any case, here is a Christian 
collection of wise sayings that refrains from making 
explicitly Christian theological assertions.
3.	 The Christian apologist, Lactantius, who lived in the 3rd 
and 4th centuries, mentions God throughout the first 
three books of his Divine Institutes, but nowhere he names 
‘Jesus’ or ‘Christ’. In these very long sections, Christian 
doctrine is off to the side as Lactantius attempts to argue 
with pagans on their own ground, offering criticisms 
of polytheism and secular philosophy that derive from 
generally accepted premises. A similar silence marks 
another one of Lactantius’ books, namely On God’s 
workmanship. In this, Lactantius argues about the human 
body on the basis of reason, not Christian theology. 
The book lacks any distinctively Christian ideas. In two 
different works, then, Lactantius deemed it fitting to 
construct arguments that would speak to people outside 
of the church.
4.	 One finds something very similar in the earlier, 2nd century 
apologies of Athenagoras and Tatian. These fail to name 
Jesus or to speak of ‘Christ’, and they appear to support 
little more than monotheism and moral responsibility. 
They do argue for the expectation of resurrection and 
judgement, but they are uninterested in Jesus as a human 
figure in the corporate life of the Christian community or 
in the deeper resources and expression of early Christian 
piety. The reason is that their projects were focused on 
specific criticism, and they wanted to answer their critics 
in terms those critics could understand and accept. The 
apologists were not being disingenuous, but their task 
was of limited scope. They were Christians, and they 
were defending Christianity, but they deliberately left 
much that is distinctively Christian out of account.
5.	 Even more striking are the extant books of the 2nd 
century bishop, Theophilus of Antioch. Written to a 
pagan friend of the bishop, these books pass over the 
incarnation, fail to refer to the ministry of Jesus, and make 
no allusion to his passion. The canonical gospels are used 
only for their moral teachings. Moreover, Theophilus 
can, incredibly, define ‘Christian’ without naming Jesus 
Christ, and he can defend the idea of resurrection without 
referring to Jesus’ resurrection. Theophilus promotes, 
evidently for apologetical purposes, what has been called 
‘a Christianity without Christ’ (Bentivegna 1975). One 
commentator has remarked that a sympathetic reader 
could have become a convert to Judaism as readily as to 
Christianity (Laeuchli 1962:165-166).
6.	 Pseudo-Phocylides is a collection of sayings presumably 
composed around the turn of the era. The author knew 
the Septuagint, and his work is undeniably Jewish. At the 
same time, ‘it looks as if he did his utmost to conceal the 
Jewish origin of many of his rules of conduct’ (Van der 
Horst 1978:189). Why the concealment? One explanation 
of Van der Horst (1988) is that:
as a Jewish writer, he tried to provide a ‘”pagan” text that 
could be used safely in Jewish schools to satisfy Jewish par­
ents who wanted their children to be trained in the classical 
pagan authors.’ (p. 16)
	
Another suggestion is that he hoped for more than Jewish 
readers. Whatever the truth, here is an illustration from 
the Jewish world of somebody keeping intentionally 
quiet about all sorts of religious beliefs and practices that 
he clearly knew and valued.
7.	 There are two examples of what one might call Christian 
reticence in the New Testament itself. Acts contains 
two speeches in which Christian elements are missing 
until the very end, and even then the language remains 
oblique. Stephen’s speech in Acts 7 lacks all Christology 
until the next to the last verse when it speaks, not of 

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1897
Page 7 of 9
Original Research
the crucifixion of Jesus Christ, but of the killing of ‘the 
righteous one’. Paul’s speech in Athens is similar. It seeks 
to explicate the religiosity of the Athenians and only 
at the end speaks of ‘a man’ whom God has appointed 
and raised from the dead. In both cases, Luke thinks it 
appropriate to present two of his heroes as discoursing 
at length on religious subjects without, at least initially, 
being explicitly Christian. In the case of Acts 17, this is a 
missionary strategy.
The silences of James
It is clear that what Moulton and McNeile envisaged for 
James has parallels in the ancient world. That is, we know 
of religious people, including Christians, who, for various 
reasons, found occasion in their writings to keep a discrete 
silence about some of their most important religious 
convictions. To suggest that the author of James did the same, 
that he decided for some reason not to wear his religious 
heart on his sleeve, is not, then, unthinkable. Why, however, 
might he have done this?
The letter remains cryptic on any reading, but the best 
hypothesis seems to be that James represents Christian 
Jews who did not define themselves over against Judaism. 
The epistle – whether authored by the brother of Jesus or 
by someone in his name – emerged from a Christ-oriented 
group that still attended synagogue and wished to maintain 
irenic relations with Jews who did not share their belief that 
Jesus was the Messiah.
In such a context, James makes sense. The emphasis upon 
convictions rooted in the common religiosity of the wisdom 
literature and the prophets as well as the omission of 
potentially divisive Christian affirmations, would potentially 
make for good will amongst those in the synagogue. It is 
suggestive that a modern theologian (Hogan 1997) has 
written that:
James’ grounding of his moral exhortations in theological rather 
than Christological principles provides a genuine bridge be­
tween Christians and Jews who share a belief in the One God, 
Creator, Lawgiver and Judge. (p. 91)
Although this is a contemporary theological judgement, it 
may harmonise with the original intention of the author of 
James, which was to persuade sympathetic readers that the 
differences between his Christian version of Judaism and 
other forms were not so great. One recalls a line spoken by 
Peter in the Pseudo-Clementine Recognitions: ‘only on this is 
there a difference between us, we who believe in Jesus, and 
those sons of our faith who do not believe’ (Ps.-Clementine 
Recognitions 1.43.2 Syriac).
The letter of James communicates, amongst other things, 
that Jesus’ followers are not apostates from Judaism, but 
rather faithful members of the synagogue who live according 
to the Jewish moral tradition, are faithful to Torah, and 
oppose those who want – as no doubt was rumored of some 
Christians – to divide faith from works (see 2:14-26). This is 
why he draws lines not between Judaism and Christianity, 
but rather between true and false religion.
There is a parallel in a Dead Sea Scroll, the Halakhic Letter, 
4QMMT. This Qumran text differs from other Qumran texts 
in that it addresses outsiders. Collins (1997) suggests that it 
was intended to be read outside the group of the author as 
well as within, and it:
makes no attempt to argue from the experience of the sect or 
from its idiosyncratic theology, since the recipients of the let­
ter could not be expected to accept such arguments. Instead, 
4QMMT is framed in terms that might in principle be persuasive 
to any Jew. It appeals primarily to the Law of Moses. (p. 81)
In other words, the letter, which appears to have been written 
at a time when the Qumran community was still hopeful of 
reconciliation with an institutionalised opposition – probably 
some part of the Jerusalem establishment – speaks in a 
language understandable to all learned Jews, even though its 
purpose is to describe sectarian laws.
Despite the parallel, one must not overlook that James is often 
polemical. The attacks in chapters 4 and 5 are in fact vicious. 
They are not, however, assaults upon the synagogue as such. 
From James’ viewpoint, the synagogue has at least three sorts 
of members. There are Christian Jews (represented by ‘the 
poor’ of 2:1-7), there are rich oppressors (2:1-7; 4:1-5:6), and 
there are those belonging to neither group, whose sympathy 
James seeks to gain or preserve. He wants non-Christian Jews 
in his synagogue to recognise in the opposition to Christians 
the unjust oppression of the poor so fervently condemned 
by the Hebrew prophets. James rails in the hope that others 
will see things as he does. He seeks not to proselytise, but to 
promote tolerance for, and understanding of, his own group 
to gain sympathy for Christians in a context where there is 
perhaps growing antipathy, but not yet formal expulsion 
(see Allison 2011). This is why James’ polemic is not against 
false teaching, but against ‘arrogance ... anger, and the 
criticizing and insulting of others in the community, directly 
or otherwise’ (Chester 1994:29). It is also why the epistle is so 
much concerned with ‘the unity and proper functioning of the 
[religious] community’ (Keith 2003:24). James wants to foster 
in the synagogue peace, gentleness, mercy and impartiality 
(3:16-18), which should leave room for the Christian Jews for 
whom he speaks.
To simplify, James has above all three groups in mind. Firstly, 
there are those who are, in his view, mistreated and suffering; 
they are primarily or exclusively the followers of Jesus. 
Secondly, there are those who mistreat them, presumably 
some group of non-Christian Jews, rich or affiliation with rich 
individuals. Thirdly, there are those who belong to neither of 
those groups, and it is their sympathy James wishes to gain 
or strengthen.
Again there is a formal parallel with the Qumran text, 
4QMMT, for it too envisages three groups. There is the 

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1897
Page 8 of 9
Original Research
group that is defended – members of the Qumran sect; 
then there is the group that is criticised – probably Jewish 
leaders in Jerusalem;and then there is the group of potential 
sympathisers.
Christians within Judaism
The sort of Christianity envisaged here for James is related 
to one of the groups some scholars have detected behind 
John’s Gospel. J. Louis Martyn (1979) famously argued that 
John – above all chapter 9 – attests to the existence of Jews 
who attended synagogue and believed in Jesus, but did not 
proselytise. His case has convinced many, including Raymond 
Brown, for whom the so-called ‘Crypto-Christians’ had ‘little 
taste for polemics against the synagogue’. They rather sought 
to ‘work from within to bring ... offended synagogue leaders 
back to a tolerance toward Christians that had previously 
existed’ (Brown 1979:71-73). Nicodemus may be a symbol 
of such folk: He comes to Jesus by night, obviously so that 
certain people will not know of his sympathies. John 12:42 
also could stand for such people, for here we read that many 
Jewish authorities believed in Jesus, but ‘for fear of the 
Pharisees did not confess it, for fear of being put out of the 
synagogue’.
Even if one does not find Martyn persuasive, we certainly 
have evidence that, at least in later times, some Jews with 
Christian convictions, wishing to stay on friendly terms 
with Jews who did not share their convictions and not 
always flaunt their beliefs about Jesus. Epiphanius (Panarion 
30.9.2-3) reports that a certain Josephus of his acquaintance 
was encouraged by ‘an elderly scholar of the law’, but only 
privately, to confess faith in Jesus Christ. Epiphanius likewise 
purports (Panarion 30.9.4-6) to have known another Jew who 
was learned in the law, loved Christians, spent time in their 
company and believed in the incarnation; Yet, ‘from fear of 
the Jews’, the man remained a non-Christian Jew. Then there 
is the story in the Pseudo-Clementine Recognitions, regarding 
a certain Jewish authority, Gamaliel I, who was ‘secretly’ a 
believer in Jesus and used his prominent position to assist 
Christians (1.65.2; 66.4). Although this is a fiction, it expresses 
someone’s belief that faith in Jesus did not necessarily entail 
evangelistic activity or abandoning Judaism.
In this connection the tale of the martyrdom of James in a 
fragment of the 2nd-century writer, Hegesippus, is most 
intriguing. This has ‘the Jews and the scribes and the 
Pharisees’ asking James to restrain the people who have gone 
astray by belief in Jesus as the Messiah:
Be good enough to make the facts about Jesus clear to all who 
come for Passover. We all accept what you say; we can vouch for 
it, and so can all the people, that you are a righteous man and do 
not show favoritism. So make it clear to the crowd that they must 
not go astray as regards Jesus.
In the event, James publicly confesses Jesus, whereupon 
the scribes and Pharisees realise their mistake (Hegesippus 
according to Eusebius, Ecclesiastical History 2.23.4-18).
This is a remarkable legend. It implies that, before James 
made his public statement shortly before his death, some in 
Jerusalem knew of him and even admired him and yet were 
either unaware of his Christian affiliation or thought his 
beliefs about Jesus innocuous. In other words, until the time 
of his execution, James, according to this tale, successfully 
passed himself off to many as a pious Jew. I suggest we have 
the same memory or at least image of the brother of Jesus that 
we find in the epistle of James.
Conclusion
Recent work on ancient Judaism and Christianity has 
established that the two entities were not as clearly distinct 
as once taken for granted. The Epistle of James, as I read it, 
accords with such work. Our author, although professing to 
be a Christian, does not identify his readers as such. Hence, 
the general address to the 12 tribes: he evidently still hopes 
for an audience with non-Christian Jews. James is thus a sort 
of apology. It addresses Jews, which includes those who 
share the author’s Christian convictions as well as those 
who do not. It also has a two-fold purpose: edification for 
Christian Jews and clarification for non-Christian Jews.
On this view, we can understand why James is so two-faced, 
why it seems so Christian and yet is so resolutely mute on 
peculiarly Christian themes. We can also understand why it 
contains so many passages that could be taken one way by 
a Christian and another by a non-Christian. James reflects a 
Christian group still battling for its place within the Jewish 
community; a group that wishes to remain faithful members 
of the synagogue to be both Jew and Christian. It is telling 
that James Parkes (1961:58), who dedicated so much of his life 
to improving relations between Jews and Christians, found 
James to be ‘in many ways the most attractive of Apostolic 
writings’.
On the reading of James proposed herein, it is clear why the 
book is so Jewish, why it is largely a compilation of traditions, 
and why it is often difficult to trace a logical connection 
between the larger units. James is not an argument, but a 
presentation – a sort of sampler. It is someone’s collection 
of what he wants Jews in the synagogue to know about 
Christians. It is designed to look Jewish and to look 
traditional, because it highlights what Jews and Christians 
have in common.
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no financial or personal 
relationship(s) that may have inappropriately influenced 
him in writing this article.
References
Allison, D.C., 2011, ‘Blessing God and Cursing People: Jas 3:9-10’, Journal of Biblical 
Literature 130, 397-405.
Allison, D.C., 2013a, A Critical and Exegetical Commentary on the Epistle of James, T&T 
Clark, New York/London/New Delhi/Sydney, Bloomsbury. (International Critical 
Commentary).

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1897
Page 9 of 9
Original Research
Allison, D.C., 2013b, ‘Jas 2:14-26: Polemic against Paul, Apology for James’, in 
T. Nicklas, A. Merkt & J. Verheyden (eds.), Ancient and New Perspectives on Paul, 
pp. 123-149, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, Göttingen.
Bentivegna, J., 1975, ‘A Christianity without Christ by Theophilus of Antioch’, in E.A. 
Livingstone (ed.), Studia Patristica, vol. 13, pp. 106-130, Akademie Verlag, Berlin.
Brown, R.E., 1979, The Community of the Beloved Disciple, Paulist Press, New York.
Bultmann, R., 1955, Theology of the New Testament, vol. 2, Charles Scribner’s Sons, 
New York.
Burchard, C., 2000, Der Jakobusbrief, Mohr Siebeck, Tübingen.
Cadoux, A.T., 1944, The Thought of St. James, James Clarke, London.
Chester, A., 1994, ‘The Theology of James’, in A. Chester & R.P. Martin (eds.), The 
Theology of the Letters of James, Peter, and Jude, pp. 1-62, Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge, UK/New York.
Clarke, 1856, The New Testament of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ, vol. 2, G. Lane 
& C.B. Tippett, London.
Chadwick, H., 1959, The Sentences of Sextus, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511470523
Collins, J.J., 1997, ‘The Expectation of the End in the Dead Sea Scrolls’, in C.A. Evans 
& P.W. Flint (eds.), Eschatology, Messianism, and the Dead Sea Scrolls, pp. 74-90, 
Eerdmans, Grand Rapids, MI.
Dibelius, M., 1976, James, ed. H. Greeven, Fortress, Philadelphia.
Gench, F.T., 1996, Hebrews and James, Westminster John Knox, Louisville.
Harnack, A., 1958, Geschichte der altchristlichen Literature bis Eusebius, Teil II: Die 
Chronologie, Band I, 2nd ed., J.C. Hinrichs, Leipzig.
Hogan, M., 1997, ‘The Law in the Epistle of James’, Studien zum Neuen Testament 
22, 79-91.
Jülicher, A., 1931, Einleitung in das Neue Testament, J.C.B. Mohr, Tübingen.
Keith, P., 2003, ‘Les Destinataires de l’Épître de Jacques’, FoiVie 104, 19-27.
Kümmel, W.G., 1975, Introduction to the New Testament, rev. ed., Abingdon, Nashville.
Laeuchli, S., 1962, The Language of Faith: An Introduction to the Semantic Dilemma of 
the Early Church, Abingdon, New York.
Luther, M., 1960, ‘Preface to the Epistles of St. James and St. Jude’, in Luther’s Works, 
vol. 35, ed. J. Pelikan, Fortress, Philadelphia.
Luther, M., 1967, ‘Table Talk’, in Luther’s Works, vol. 54, ed. J. Pelikan, Philadelphia.
McNeile, A.H., 1923, New Testament Teaching in the Light of St. Paul’s, Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge.
Marcus, J., 2014, ‘“The Twelve Tribes in the Diaspora” (James 1.1)’, New Testament 
Studies 60, 433-47. http://dx.doi.org/10.1017/S0028688514000095
Martin, R.P., 1988, James, Waco, TX. (Word Biblical Commentary).
Martyn, J.L., 1979, History and Theology in the Fourth Gospel, rev. ed., Abingdon, 
Nashville.
Moulton, J.H., 1907, ‘Synoptic Studies II. The Epistle of James and the Sayings of 
Jesus’, Expositor 7(4), 45-55.
Nienhuis, D.R., 2007, Not By Paul Alone: The Formation of the Catholic Epistle 
Collection and the Christian Canon, Baylor University Press, Waco, TX.
Parkes, J., 1961, The Conflict of the Church and the Synagogue, World, Cleveland.
Sidebottom, E.M., 1967, James, Jude and 2 Peter, Nelson, London.
Sigal, P., 1980, The Emergence of Contemporary Judaism: The Foundations of Judaism 
from Biblical Origins to the Sixth Century A.D., vol. 1, Pickwick Press, Pittsburgh.
Spitta, F., 1896, Zur Geschichte und Litteratur des Urchristentums, Zweiter Band: Der 
Brief des Jakobus; Studien zum Hirten des Hermas, Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht, 
Göttingen.
Van der Horst, P.W., 1978, ‘Pseudo-Phocylides and the New Testament’, Zeitschrift für 
die Neutestamentliche Wissenschaft 69, 187-202.
Van der Horst, P.W., 1988, ‘Pseudo-Phocylides Revisited’, Journal for the Study of the 
Pseudepigrapha 3, 3-30. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/095182078800000301