Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.581
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Keith Ward’s soft panentheism
Author:
Raymond Potgieter1
Affiliation:
1Faculty of Theology, North-
West University, South Africa
Correspondence to: 
Raymond Potgieter
Email: 
ray@csmdist.com
Postal Address:
PO Box 19491, Noordbrug 
2522, South Africa
Dates:
Received: 13 Aug. 2012
Accepted: 14 Mar. 2013
Published: 04 June 2013
How to cite this article:
Potgieter, R., 2013, ‘Keith 
Ward’s soft panentheism’, 
In die Skriflig/In Luce Verbi 
47(1), Art. #581, 9 pages. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/
ids.v47i1.581
Copyright:
© 2013. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work
is licensed under the
Creative Commons
Attribution License.
This article seeks to assess the general approach to a Christian interpretation of reality as 
popularly applied by Keith Ward. It is suggested that he employs panentheist criteria 
in his attempts to buttress a theological accommodation of both material and spiritual 
interpretations of reality. This assessment will take a general reformational theological 
approach. Suggestions will be included as to why panentheism has made such an impact 
amongst some Christians and why a bipolar approach to God appeals to some in the Christian 
community. Recommendations will then be made to be considered by those who may find 
the lure of Christian generic panentheism in different forms tempting enough to consider its 
interpretation replacing the traditional view of God. 
Introduction
When the curtain closes on Samuel Beckett’s absurdist play, Waiting for Godot (Beckett 1965), 
Vladimir and Estragon are still waiting for Godot to come, despite a warning. Implicit in the play is 
the message that the pursuit of any purpose is meaningless.1 God(ot)2 never turns up, which some 
have interpreted to illustrate a ‘God-hypothesis’ (Piper 2007:15; cf. Dawkins 2008:51). Contrary 
to this interpretation of existential absurdity, was the impact of Schaeffer’s book, The God who is 
there (1970). Schaeffer (1972:18–19) believed that the ‘God who is there’ gives purposeful meaning 
to creation and serves as a platform for meaningful conversation, both amongst academics 
and people in the street. Both of these aforementioned approaches acknowledge humankind’s 
acceptance of the natural order of things. Interpretation is through basic observation as reflected 
in the simplicity and complexity of daily living, and a sense of the present, history and future. 
Humankind generally also reflects a persistent degree of consciousness of the transcendent. 
Identifying the transcendent as God would of course be presumptuous, for someone else may 
define it in more aesthetic terms and another in a deistic or material scientific manner, if at all. 
This introduction serves to set the scene and tone for this paper. The Bible acknowledges that 
there are those who in their hearts deny the existence of God (Ps 14:1; cf. Ps 10:4). At the same 
time it goes to some length to make sure that its readers are aware that the God they meet in its 
pages and in the histories of the Jewish and Christian faithful is not to be confused with any other 
god. Classically, the Westminster Shorter Catechism’s fifth question states: ‘Are there more Gods 
than one?’ with the reply: ‘There is but one only, the living and true God’ (Reymond 1998:130). 
This is a statement assumed by both the Old and New Testaments. Traditionally, the Bible’s basic 
theism is seen to comprise a transcendent and personal deity who is creator and preserver of 
the universe, and who allows for the uniqueness of humankind. The classical model expressing 
God’s activity in the flow of history is sometimes expressed through tracing Christian religious 
ground motifs (Sire 2004), such as God’s activity expressing grace and mercy in the sequence of 
1.For a number of interpretations of this play see Waiting for Godot in Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Waiting_for_
Godot#Christian.
2.The play was originally written in French in which the word for God is Dieu. Some Christians see a play on the word God in Godot as 
being implicit in the play. Beckett on the other hand never committed to any meaning for Godot (Taylor-Batty & Taylor-Batty 2008:21).
Page 1 of 9
Keith Ward se sagte panenteïsme. Die doel van hierdie artikel is om die algemene benadering 
tot ’n Christelike interpretasie van die werklikheid, soos algemeen toegepas deur Keith Ward, 
te evalueer. Dit word voorgestel dat hy panenteïstiese kriteria toepas in sy pogings om 
teologiese akkommodasie van ’n materiële en geestelike interpretasie van die werklikheid te 
steun. Hierdie evaluering volg ’n algemene reformatoriese teologiese perspektief. Voorstelle 
word gemaak om te verduidelik waarom panenteïsme so ’n impak op sommige Christene 
het dat hulle ’n bipolêre benadering tot God verkies. Verder word aanbevelings gemaak vir 
diegene wat ’n Christelike generiese panenteïsme in verskillende vorme aanloklik genoeg 
vind om dit sodoende as ’n alternatiewe interpretasie vir die tradisionele siening van God te 
oorweeg.
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Read online:

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.581
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
creation-fall-redemption. In the 1970s it was fashionable to 
understand religious theism in terms of a sociological theory 
of religion that suggested the secularisation ‘myth’, such as 
propounded by Berger who suggests that humankind in the 
West interprets the world and their lives outside of religious 
interpretations (Berger 1990:108). This theory has since been 
reworked in the light of the persistence of the religious 
phenomenon. More recently, Taylor (2007:19) proposed that 
people reveal a search for fullness and that historically three 
theistic stages identify this ongoing search: 
• 
The period prior to the Enlightenment was a period when 
it was impossible to believe in God (Taylor 2007:539), or 
to at least make sense of the world you needed God in the 
context of the visible, structured church. 
• 
The Enlightenment ushered in a period when humankind 
took central stage to become an alternate option for 
meaning. Formulation of a deistic mechanical universe 
made the emergence of outspoken unbelief a possibility 
(Taylor ibid:9, 114, 716). 
• 
The third stage of intellectual development was a move 
into the impossibility of any metaphysical justification 
outside of material belief at all (Taylor ibid:15–16), and 
yet it remains a struggle to explain an unexplained 
immanence of sanctification and pull in the midst of 
ordinary life (Taylor ibid:548–549). Although this in no 
way guarantees the transcendent (Taylor ibid:543), there 
still is the possibility of belief that lies in the dynamic 
power of language shaping ‘(religious) social realities’ 
(Zavos 2008:27). 
A material interpretation theism, and by implication morality, 
does not satisfy as rival explanations of the structures of 
reality. Religious theism is in fact regarded as a deadly toxin 
(Sullivan 2009:8) to be viewed with suspicion and put behind 
mature persons, because it is unable to deal with matters 
such as having been robbed of a relationship with God or 
the inevitable failure in trying to earn God’s love (Arterburn 
& Felton 2001:3). It is within these categories that there has 
been some evidence of a rethink of classical Christian theism 
so as to meet the challenges of the day. The reworking into 
interpretative categories, such as mentioned above, generally 
seem to lean towards or even fit into a panentheistic structure. 
What I want to show is that even though some theologians 
deny being panentheists, they sometimes fall into the trap 
of what I call a soft panentheism. One such theologian is 
Keith Ward. 
A brief introduction to the modern 
rise of panentheism
The relation to the theism of panentheism is the key to its 
identity. Pantheism equates the universe to God so that 
it and nature serve as two names of one immanent reality. 
Panentheism, on the other hand, is an ‘all-in-God-ism’ in 
which the world and all of reality is in God. While God 
immanently penetrates into creation, he at once transcends 
it ontologically (Cooper 2007:26–27). Some of these subtleties 
will be shown to be evident in Ward’s theology.
A bipolar (transcendent vs. immanent) construct of God’s 
existence and its relation to created reality has a long history. 
Aristotle and Plato’s philosophical thoughts eventually 
developed to allow for philosophical monotheism, but the 
latter’s ‘world-soul’ concept and later Neo-Platonism were 
the seedbed for the development of panentheism (Cooper 
2007:37–38, 62). The world was seen as an emanation of divine 
actualisation implicit in the nature of God maximising deity’s 
cosmological greatness. In addition, ontological dialectical 
polarities (such as infinity vs. finitude, and immanence vs. 
transcendence) are only reconciled when they are unified and 
reconciled in, but not confused with, God (Cooper ibid:63). 
Early Christians saw many points of contact with these ideas 
(Cooper ibid). 
Further exploration of these ideas may be traced to the 
scholastics, but it was Baruch Spinoza (1632–1677) who 
grounded his God philosophically into a structure of bipolar 
attributes of thought and extension. Georg Hegel’s triune 
God was identified with actualisation within historical time 
flow and space (cf. Cooper 2007:61). 
In 1828, Karl Krause coined the term panentheism (Cross & 
Livingstone 1977:1027) with the basic meaning of ‘everything-
in-God’. 
Seventeenth-century 
modernity 
emphasised 
philosophy, science and reason, and presupposed that 
‘all processes can be fully comprehended and controlled’ 
(Bosch 1991:265). According to McGrath (2008:78), the 
term and possibly the idea was introduced into English 
theology in New York during a series of lectures in 1906 by 
William Inge. 
The process philosopher Alfred Whitehead also popularised 
panentheism, but its entrance into theology as process 
theology was through Charles Hartshorne (1897–2000). Some 
Christian theologians saw the worth of exploring the notion 
of a bipolar view of an immanent and transcendent God, 
involved and yet removed from the reality of the world. 
Panentheism was seen to fit God neatly into categories 
of structure and reason. From within these confines, the 
interpretation of immanent theism seems to fit in with a 
rational scientific description of material reality. Its material 
hermeneutic concludes with a present (immanent) and 
removed (transcendent) God. The theism for a god concept 
sought by philosophers was hampered by divine attributes, 
such as that God is at once immanent and transcendent. 
Sanders (1998:141) brings another aspect to the fore for the 
historical development of these thoughts in Christianity. He 
claims the church fathers settled upon an understanding 
of God without taking into consideration the philosophical 
understanding of divine nature. 
Clearly this bipolar structure of deity is reminiscent of the 
idea of an immanent and transcendent God as classically 
understood from the Judaeo-Christian-Islam traditions. 
Despite these similarities, the Christian tradition does not 
easily allow for an unequivocal equation between the two 
theisms. Not only does it not equate with its traditional 
and unique concept of deity, but also brings into question 
the sufficiency of their divine source of revelation: their 
scriptures. 
Page 2 of 9

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.581
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 3 of 9
Panentheism does not manifest itself consistently in Christian 
theology. Clayton (2004:249) cannot identify schools of 
panentheistic thought, but sees ‘family resemblances’. 
Gregersen (2004:23, 34) recognises that there are different 
panentheisms, with some more clearly bipolar, and that 
they qualify as Christian panentheism. He suggests that 
one should clearly state what kind of panentheism is 
being endorsed. To that end, the schema proposed by 
Towne in reviewing the panentheisms expressed by 18 
scientists and theologians, seems useful. He uses six issues 
(Towne 2005:779): ‘the way God acts, how God’s intimate 
relation to the world is to be described, the relation of God 
to spacetime, whether God is dependent upon the world, 
what type of language is used, and the problem of dipolar 
panentheism’. Congruence and variations of these give rise 
to a multiplicity of forms of panentheism. 
Developing a new approach to theism in a religious vacuum 
caused by God’s absence, or degree of absence, also reflects 
in various constructs of theistic models. It was for instance 
Martin Buber (Huston 2007:196) and Teilhard de Chardin 
(n.d.:305–307) who reinstated the possibility of God in 
authentic encounter with creation and, by implication, in 
time and humankind. For some persons involved in science, 
such as Ian Barbour, Paul Davies, Arthur Peacocke, Philip 
Clayton and John Polkinghorne, varying degrees of this 
relationship of God with this world is ‘the most reasonable 
way of combining state-of-the-art science with belief in God’ 
(Cooper 2007:301). It is my contention that Keith Ward’s 
theism is but another expression of these sincere attempts of 
Christians to fit God into material and created reality. 
Panentheism and process theology
Ever since the philosophical formulation of panentheism by 
Whitehead (Griffin & Sherburne 1978) and Hartshorne (2002), 
panentheism has served to make some interpretive sense of 
divine presence and absence. Some Christian leaders, such 
as Ware (2000) and Erickson (2003), are sceptical of any form 
of panentheism, seeing it as opposed to a personal God 
relationally connected to creation and people. 
What made Hartshorne’s contribution significant was the 
importation into theology of a reconception of the classical 
attributes of God to formulate a divinity who undergoes 
change (Hartshorne 1984:1). Latent in process of change 
is the idea that God actually becomes (Hartshorne ibid:9) 
and so changes the nature of meaning of the word ‘God’ 
(Hartshorne ibid:1). Process theology paved the way for a 
variety of forms of theism in its attempt to accommodate 
scientific thinking. Cooper (2007:345) cautions that not all 
that is punted as Christian panentheism deserves the label. 
In fact, he distinguishes historic Christianity from modern 
Christian pluralism on the one hand and traditional theism 
from contemporary panentheism on the other. This dividing 
line, in my opinion, does not allow sufficient latitude for the 
degrees of emphasis that has led to a range of panentheistic 
views, and so it accommodates the soft panentheism of some 
modern day theologians, such as Ward.
At the heart of developing panentheism was the shift in 
emphasis from orthodox Christianity’s view of God’s 
attributes to redefining the attributes of transcendence 
and immanence. Faber (2002:219), for instance, argues 
that the God-language of a Whiteheadian system of belief, 
integrates these contrasting attributes of God. This rationally 
brought deity’s alterity into the realm of creativity through 
distinguishing God’s immanence from transcendence; 
polarity avoiding monotheistic dissolution. 
Hartshorne (2002:328) wrestled with the God of ordinary 
believers conceived by, in his opinion, theoretical theological 
constructs with the tendency to equate God’s power as 
omnipotence. He obviated these tensions from a rational 
platform to redefine the traditional view of God into a 
bipolar composite expressing a panentheistic system of 
beliefs. A second concern was that former contradistinctions 
between science and theology (for example that theology 
[religion] essentially pertains to the immaterial and science 
to the material) would never find common ground for 
meaningful discussion and so be able to communicate with 
one another with space for redefined theism. God potentially 
becomes a legitimate item on the agenda for consideration 
in humankind’s discussion with panentheism and, evident 
from his many publications, Ward joins the discussion. 
Christians engaging panentheism
Cooper (2007:8) usefully lists various forms of Christian 
manifestations of panentheism: 
• 
The Christo-centric panentheism of Teilhard de Chardin 
(cf. Salmon 2012:574).
• 
Tillich’s religious naturalism expressed in existential 
panentheism grounded in being (cf. Nash 1988:253 fn. 3).
• 
Pannenberg’s panentheistic force field (cf. Schwartz 
2012:619).
• 
Panentheistic liberation and ecological theologies.
• 
Panentheism in theological cosmology. 
To this list may be added theologian Moltmann (1985), and 
scientists such as Arthur Peacocke (2004a) and Russel Stannard 
(1989). I could add Thomas Oord’s ‘theocosmocentrism’ 
(2010), the soft panentheism of open theism, Keith Ward’s 
comparative theology and John Polkinghorne’s critical 
realism (2009).
All these approaches, to my mind, resort to some degree of 
polarity of God. It is not the purpose of this paper to pursue 
finer polar distinctions such as dipolar and bipolar. The 
former suggests two poles separated such as God influencing 
creation and it in turn its creator (Bangert 2006:168), whereas 
bipolarity completes God’s being implying interdependence 
between temporal and eternal poles. Marbaniang (2011:133), 
in dealing with Whitehead’s approach, does not make 
this distinction. I use the term bipolar as a generic term to 
include suggestions of the structural definition of God’s 
transcendence and immanence; to for instance accommodate 
a present and future reality into which deity must reasonably 
fit and function, and yet maintain separation from this world 
and evil whilst remaining within it.

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.581
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 4 of 9
Some of the criticism levelled against panentheism is that it is 
not commonly subjected to a rigorous critical theological 
scrutiny. This allows its bipolar structure of a necessary and 
contingent nature of divinity to define a metaphysical structure 
in which God is redefined to allow for some compatibility 
with a material worldview (Potgieter 2002). Redefinitions of 
classical theism, as defined by traditional Christian creeds, 
are basically formulations based upon relational theologies 
and relational ontologies, which networks God into space, 
temporality and causality (Cooper 2007:344–345). This 
reinterpretation is a move away from the view that creator 
God writes humanity’s history as part of his story. Ward 
(2004a:71) claims not to subscribe to panentheism. In my 
view he does not subscribe to a full-blown panentheism, 
but his theological structure demonstrates so many obvious 
similarities to it that I propose that he holds to a soft version 
of panentheism. I contend that Ward’s dynamic theology 
of God is an accommodation of classical transcendence and 
immanence, and reduces to a form of panentheism. The same 
is true, I believe, of scientist-theologian John Polkinghorne, 
though the two must not be equated in their theologies. 
Both Ward and Polkinghorne’s theologies generally seek to 
interpret reality to accommodate a scientific worldview. Their 
panentheistic leanings, in my view, allow them to propose an 
understanding of deity within the confines of a bipolar reality. 
God is not only limited to material reality. God, immanently 
accommodated, maintains credible transcendence. Ward 
lays claim to an open-ended (read ‘process’) structure of 
reality; an incarnational theism immanently encapsulating 
reality expressed in divine cooperation and struggle. I 
propose merely to highlight the generic commonalities with 
panentheism in this paper, in order to establish the premise 
that Ward does rely on a soft form of generic panentheism in 
Christian form to make his theological views credible. 
Christians employing forms of panentheism 
Classical theism is not exclusive property. It came about 
through clarification and formulation of doctrines by 
great theologians such as Augustine, Aquinas, Anselm, 
Scotus, reformers and puritans in the west, and John 
Chrysostom, Basil and the Gregories in the eastern 
traditions. Traditionally, it is generally agreed that God is to 
be maximally regarded as commonly expressed in terms of 
attributes ascribed to deity. God is seen to be present and 
supernaturally immanent and affecting the course of history; 
at once changeless and transcendent and not confused with, 
but separate from created reality. Nevertheless, this view 
has been under scrutiny. For instance, a social trinitarian 
perspective exploring connections between an immanent-
trinitarian view with that of the economic trinity (Webster, 
Tanner & Torrance 2009:45). Eastern Orthodox theology 
with the development of its concept of divinisation (theosis) 
allows for human destiny to be understood as having similar 
undertones with panentheism (Webster et al. ibid:321). A 
form of panentheism (or ‘pan-entheism’) is held to explain 
God’s necessary presence in creation for it to exist at all 
(OrthodoxWiki n.d.). 
Barbour (2010) distinguishes between classical theism and 
efforts to maintain it. For him, process theologians see 
God’s influence as persuasive, not coercive, in the process of 
redemptive transformation in this world, but conclude with 
a weak degree of the awe of deity. Because God is relational, 
and by implication responsible for good and evil, Barbour 
states that there must of necessity be a limit on power, 
while Polkinghorne and Peacocke hold to a voluntary self-
limitation (Barbour ibid:249–250). 
A broad sweep of Keith Ward’s 
theology
Keith Ward aligns himself with other born again Christians, 
but not necessarily with the classical content or traditional 
confessional understanding of the Christian faith. He 
claims, for instance, that the tendency of ‘proof-text’ 
distorts meanings of scripture passages (Ward 2004b:1). 
His writings are noticeably absent of a liberal use of actual 
textual passages and references. He also rejects claims to an 
exclusive substitutionary theory of the atonement which, 
for him, is representative of but one of the many ways in 
which the world is reconciled to God (Ward ibid:2). Though 
certainly not exhaustive, this sample ought to establish that 
Ward is a creative thinker who does not necessarily think of 
himself as limited by traditional Christian theology. To my 
mind, this is a healthy challenge to all thinking Christians: 
that Ward is willing to challenge and rethink the content of 
the Christian faith for the times and commit his thoughts to 
writing for scrutiny and debate. 
I want to make it clear that I am ambivalent to an Ireanean 
regula fidei or ‘rule of faith’. Historically this rule, seemingly 
necessitating what had to be believed, was too inconsistent to 
become a hard and fast formula for the community of faith. 
My opinion is that faith has an element of latent ecumenicity. 
This allows for some degree of a heuristic approach to belief, 
so that different expressions of the same biblical content may 
be held to. Nevertheless, with Reymond (1979:11) I believe 
that the Bible teaches a total theism, worthy of defence, which 
may be proclaimed as a system of truth overarching all of 
life, and not just community. Whilst I do not make any claim 
to an exhaustive view of Ward’s theology, I suggest that the 
following sample will allow for the consideration that Ward 
holds to a panentheistic form of theology. What I propose to 
do is to highlight some of Ward’s approaches to revelation 
and God-experience that, in my opinion, he believes allow 
him to challenge the classical approach to the Christian faith 
and its theism. This brief study will show that Ward’s theism 
includes tendencies to Christian theistic bipolarity, and 
therefore of panentheism.
A view of revelation
Ward’s view of revelation does not seek to prove the 
existence of God. He is a philosopher-theologian; one 
who seeks to authenticate God-experience rather than 
prove deity’s existence. Religion is the place to explore 
humankind’s God-experience. For that reason he focuses on 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.581
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 5 of 9
patterns and stages of religion, from its historical infancy to 
the present (Ward 2008:219). This supposedly came about 
because of the emergence of consciousness giving rise to 
feelings of anxiety, guilt and superiority – implying signs of 
transcendent values and thus authoritative experiences. Page 
(2007:350) holds that this manner of identifying a pattern 
from levels of complexity to arrive at self-consciousness, 
deprecates the involvement of God and is inadequate as a 
description of evolution. The point, however, is that Ward 
does subscribe to God directing evolution in a revelatory 
process towards complexity and consciousness. Page 
(ibid:351) repudiates a deity who creates and deletes. Upon 
reaching a level of consciousness, Ward (ibid:240) accepts 
a crossover into metaphysical transcendence, and reasons 
for a higher consciousness and emergence of forms of 
wisdom, freedom, empathy and universal compassion. By 
its very inclusivity, all religions therefore share in varying 
shades of degrees in the same spiritual reality available to 
all. Each of these religions consequently expresses spiritual-
experience, which some define as revelation and understand 
as a God-experience. For Ward, Christianity’s uniqueness 
is its Christology, in particular the person of Jesus in whom 
revelation comes together (Ward 2004b:9). Revelation 
is immanently centralised in Jesus and not in classical 
propositional theology or creed expressing the teachings 
of the Bible. Jesus is consequently the God-experience of 
Christian revelation. 
New disclosures of God’s love are therefore possible for the 
continued God-experience. God’s love is a basis for Ward’s 
hermeneutic, which allows the church to engage in love as 
dynamic experience. Such unfathomable love encourages 
new disclosures and reveals that there is no unchangeable 
barrier set by God. So it is no surprise to find a quote such 
as: ‘The Bible is a signpost to new exploration of the mind of 
God, not a barrier to all original thought’ (Ward 2004b:16). 
Comparing the above to classical views of revelation, there 
is some commonality, but there are also key elements that do 
not equate to the church’s confessions. The God-experience 
in the reformed tradition, according to Robert Reymond 
(1998:131), is two-fold. It is found in humankind, who bears 
the image of God inclusive of an inherent sensus deitatis [sense 
of deity] allowing for religious experience of creation and 
providence. What makes Christianity unique is that God’s 
providence manifests propositionally in the Scriptures; 
personally in his son, and savingly through the Word and 
Spirit (Reymond ibid:131–132): matters that Ward chooses 
not to pursue. There is a fullness in the Christ of the godhead 
that transcends revelation and its biblical account. God is 
trinity and Jesus is discharging his duty to the father who 
sent him (Center for Reformed Theology and Apologetics 
n.d.:Chapter VIII) for disclosures of love outside of the cross, 
as Ward contends that in Jesus all revelation comes together. 
In my view, Ward does not allow for this fuller traditional 
understanding of revelation. His approach has a weak view 
of the interrelationship of the persons of the godhead as it 
relates to an immanent God-experience. 
God-experience
The view of revelation as continued authentication of God, 
variously expressed as God-experiences, implies that, to 
some extent, God may be known. God’s will and mind may 
be known in new ways to succeeding generations as Judaeo-
Christian-Islamic traditions take their basis of authority from 
persons who have had auditory and visual experiences of 
God (Ward 2008:163). Cooper (2007:325) sounds the warning 
that Christian panentheists hold to a compatibilist view of 
God’s creative actions. They maintain an experience of God’s 
actions as free, enacted in love and as ‘need-satisfying’. 
Ward (2004b:63) pursues this in a continued historical 
compound of revelation, which draws its support from a 
view of a patterned creation guided by wisdom, drawn from 
Colossians and Ephesians and emphasising the polarised 
transcendent cosmic Christ. This wisdom approach to theism 
applies to all religions in various ways. But what are these 
God-experiences humankind, and by implication Christians, 
is directed to? 
Ward (1974:218; 1996:242) is not very specific, but seems to 
take for granted that it will include the widening horizon 
of knowledge to its present day form so that a holistic 
compound of God-experience may be gleaned from material 
science, biology, sociology and so on. A purely biological 
explanation for everything would appear as too exclusive by 
not taking all of humankind’s knowledge and its experiential 
dimensions into account. By virtue of the complexity of this 
compound of immanent God-experience, the same must 
apply should chance be claimed as explaining the origin and 
operation of the universe, which is an inferior option to the 
God-hypothesis (Ward 2008:240). 
Traditional reformed theology holds that God had no need 
to complement himself in creating the universe by virtue that 
God remained the same after this creative act as before. ‘In 
sum, the God of Scripture is self-contained and self-sufficient, 
in no way ontologically correlative to his creation’ (Reymond 
1998:130-131). 
The particular theism of Keith Ward
In my opinion, Ward’s theism, loosely conditioned by 
classical theological traditions, finally develops to express 
a new theism. This is partly due, as shown above, to his 
acceptance of God-experiences as revelatory throughout 
humankind’s history. In addition, Christological uniqueness 
gives Christianity its peculiar dynamic for a historically 
changing identity in engaging the world. And so he guides 
his readers into formulating a present-day polar theism. 
A guide to formulating a credible present-day 
theism
A credible God-thesis
One of the issues Ward wants to address is the establishment 
of the right view of God for the present day: a transcendent 
God, timeless and immutable and creator of and involved 
with all of reality. He does so, on the basis of reason and God-
experience (Ward 1996:242). 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.581
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 6 of 9
Ward addresses temporal creation, subject to contingency 
and change. One way that he does this is by means of his 
polar transitions: from objective value to supreme value, 
from spiritual reality to supreme spiritual reality, and from 
finite self to supreme self (Ward 2008:192, 224–225). Each 
quality exists identifiably and, by implication, relationally 
connects the finite to the infinite. I want to follow the basic 
argument of his use of science, within the system of reality 
and its implied supreme value, to show that what he says 
equally applies to theism implying the basics of a God-thesis.
The common view is that God is all-loving and does not 
want anyone to get hurt because (transcendent) God’s 
sovereign almighty power grants the ability to do anything 
and stretches beyond the imaginable (Ward 2004b:64). 
Clearly this ability to prevent harm is not the immanent 
God-experience of humankind, the Christian faithful or of 
any other religion, and is contradicted by Isaiah 7:4. In fact, 
when this is compared to the scientific method of recording 
the consistency of data to eventually verify the existence of a 
natural law, then the classical God does not seem to fit. 
The wisdom of God, in which Christ dwells, allows people 
to sensorily enjoy art, music and literature, and thereby 
enriching their human experience (Ward 2008:168). These 
same people believe in quantum events, string theory, the 
unobservable and unactualised. Without getting into the 
intricacies about views that the meaning of subjectivity is 
an illusion of consciousness confined to the brain’s neural 
network as opposed to a strong commitment to reason 
buttressed by fallacy-free evidence, the implication is an 
insistence upon a theory that is basically consistent with the 
sensorial experience of humankind (Ward 2008:172–173). 
A God-thesis must be consistent with the workings of the 
universe and the experiences of humankind. 
What Ward says of science objectively, must equally apply 
to his inclusive sensorial concept of God. Wisdom of God 
is immanently contained in scientific knowledge of the 
world and the universe. Nevertheless, it transcends it in 
complementing the comprehensiveness of all available 
knowledge. Because of this relation to deity, material science 
ought to be value-driven. Values such as truth, compassion 
and responsibility become significant and take on greater 
meaning, giving purpose for involvement in issues such as 
the fragility of the eco system, dying of species and care of 
AIDS sufferers. 
If the wisdom of God develops (read ‘process’) historically 
in the unfolding of history in the universe, then science must 
reflect that wisdom in present day form. In other words, 
there is more known about God in the present than there 
was historically. It is upon this basis that Ward establishes a 
sensorial approach to religious truth following the argument 
throughout the system of reality. So much so that it becomes 
a matter of interpretation of humankind to establish the 
identity of deity as opposed to a material identity, hence the 
multiplicity of manifestations of deity of religions. 
An identifiable God-thesis
For Ward, religious truth comprising a system of matter 
and the metaphysical must be related to a greater eternal 
source. This source must, of necessity, be in some form of 
hypostatisation to represent a relation of, for instance, value 
to supreme value (Ward 2008:180). To establish the relation 
between the objectivity of discerning truth, happiness, justice 
and beauty, the process can only be completed in striving 
towards the ideal. Ward (ibid:224–225) acknowledges that 
models of idealistic and theistic views, reasonably but 
not conclusively, suggest a relation between the finite and 
supreme self. This leap into metaphysical objectivity allows 
him to say: ‘But a very natural place to put ideals of beauty, 
truth, and justice is in the mind of a God who is perfect 
beauty, truth and goodness’ (Ward ibid:214). To extrapolate 
from beauty, truth and goodness to absolute beauty, truth 
and goodness is a matter of following the flow of the 
argument. When these ideals are united in a convergence of 
a supreme goal then it is a matter of semantic substitution for 
Ward to replace it with God. The principle is that belief in 
a God premise predisposes belief in the objectivity of value 
and purpose (Ward ibid:189) and allows for the schematic of 
a bipolar model in this model. 
Let me elaborate on the attraction of following this route of 
reasoning. God, for Ward (2010:148; 1994:15), does reveal 
truth as an eternal reference to himself. But this so-called 
‘true knowledge’ in this view of revelation is not one of 
classical unambiguity – quite the contrary. God, for instance, 
cooperates (also read ‘luring’) with humankind within the 
limits of the culture of the day, being changed through a 
process of influence and influencing (Ward 1994:109). A 
mysterious cooperation of faith as process embraces the 
very beginnings of all primal and subsequent religions. 
Interestingly enough is the view of Milbank, which questions 
such a sociological view of religion. Milbank (2001:2–3, 442) 
contends that Christian theology, based on an ontology 
of peace, has a better foundation than any vying cultural 
sociological construct for addressing a totality of reality. By 
its very nature theology seeks to broker an ontological peace 
in contrast to sociological constructs based on an ontology of 
violence. 
A God-thesis with content
Ward states his basic theism as ‘God sets out in creation to 
realise specific purposes. God experiences that realisation’ 
(Ward 2002:216), implying that as part of creation, humankind 
and God are dynamically involved in a historical process 
towards bipolar potential and fulfilment. He suggests the 
concept of ‘supreme moral ideal’ as the coherent loadstone 
of human fulfilment (Ward 2008:206). God who, by virtue 
of the argument developed thus far (Ward ibid:207), is of 
necessity transcendent as the luring, supremely beautiful 
and good creator (Ward ibid:215). Immanent Christ hidden 
in wisdom unfolding and transcendentally residing at God’s 
right hand concludes in Christological panentheism. The 
faithful are lured to the supreme value within the context of 
God’s creation in which immanent God reveals potentialities 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.581
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 7 of 9
and coherence of truth, beauty and goodness. Humankind 
is motivated by the objectivity of such values, which exist in 
the wisdom of God, revealed in the present to reach for the 
greater values.
Within a closed system, the laws of nature are read back 
into the Christian scriptures, which see them as God’s 
servants. Although they do not perfectly express God’s will 
and dominion over humankind, it does reflect the view of 
vulnerability in that change is accounted for. Ward does this 
in the grand classical Christian tradition of transformation. 
Transformation of God lies in Christ. I use the example of 
evil to illustrate. 
Ward (1982:146) holds the opinion that one of the ways to 
explain evil is to realise that it is inevitable in a universe 
where God wills to achieve unobtainable goals. Immediately 
the sense of luring is incorporated into his scheme and so 
a move away from classical theology. God simply cannot 
prevent the evils consequent to randomness and evident 
in creation and humankind. But he does not go as far as to 
condone the idea that God’s being includes the suffering and 
evil in this world so as to be part of the body of God (Ward 
2004a:71). Nevertheless, because God is influenced by the 
evil, suffering and changes in this world, it is my contention 
that this shows that he adopts a softer panentheism than for 
instance that of Peacocke (2004b; 2004c). 
For Ward, the implications are not just for the Christian faith. 
Indeed, regardless of belief in any peculiar identity of deity, 
both theist and nontheist religions postulate some concept 
of supreme spiritual reality. For Christian believers this is 
taken to be reflective of the one personal God of its tradition 
(2008:241).
The attraction for developing a 
Christianised panentheist model 
and a classical response 
Ward commands a great deal of respect as a theologian in 
Britain. His interests are in comparative theology and in the 
relation between science and religious faith and, not least, the 
Christian faith. 
He confirms that he tries to present Christianity cosmically. 
With insights into the purpose and meaning of its physical 
construct revealed by science (Ward 2002:11) and in the 
‘distinctive central core of religious belief that has something 
to contribute to human knowledge and understanding, and 
that it is quite different from scientific knowledge’ (Ward 
2008:4). His view of modern science is that it necessitates that 
theologians review their traditional views of Christian beliefs 
and, by implication, the beliefs of other religions as well. The 
hopeful outcome of these exercises would be some response 
from scientists acknowledging the possibility of the God-
hypothesis and God-experience. 
I have shown how Ward adopted his view of Christianity 
suggestive of his inclusive approach to other religions so as 
to define the place science has within a holistic view of reality. 
A soft bipolar Christology is one of a variety of panentheist 
constructs (Cooper 2007) and proves to be attractive to its 
adherents for various reasons. This attraction is only possible 
because it questions the traditional Christian views of 
revelation and of God’s uniqueness. I will now explore some 
of these. 
God’s vulnerability
The first attraction of a panentheist approach is the fact 
that God is portrayed as being vulnerable. This is a useful 
springboard for a serious approach to science from a 
theological perspective. Essentially, the scientific idea of 
the universe translated into macro and quantum physics 
overturns a static view of creation and instigates a search 
for origin compatible to its premises. The most plausible to 
date is a ‘big bang’ postulate, inclusive of the view that biotic 
life emerged spontaneously because conditions happened 
to favour the life we know. Any credible view of God must 
therefore allow for the serious entertainment of, for instance, 
a classical Newtonian postulate of determinism and the 
unpredictability of indeterminism. Theologians reacted 
variously to this material approach. 
God’s presence in history is in essence Pannenberg’s 
approach. His panentheist platform serves as an invitation 
to scientist and theologian to dialogue and consider the 
implications of God in science. His premise is basically a 
statement of the unity of history as an experience of divine 
reality (Pannenberg 1993:75, 112). In this bipolar manner 
he attempts is to preserve the aseity of God in the midst of 
a dynamic process history. Unity is possible through the 
content of the Christ event, which brings history together 
and anticipates finality (read ‘process’) in the eschaton 
(Pannenberg ibid:25, 48). Scientist-theologian Polkinghorne 
(2001:96) shies away from a determined interpretation of 
revelation and sees God’s operation in this world kenotical. 
The laws of nature are ‘the beautiful equations’ of science 
describing its laws and are seen to reveal the work of God 
(Polkinghorne 2000:38; Weder 2000:189). God does not 
override natural processes but remains vulnerable in a ‘free-
process defense’ love form for this world. Both theologians 
try to bring about a unified theological space, incorporating 
history and its dynamic processes to give credence to the 
experience of visible material reality and invisible deity. 
Ward’s schema follows a similar vulnerable theism. 
A traditional systematic theological approach holds that 
theologising takes place within the Church under the 
Lordship of Christ. This will affirm the ancient truths of the 
Bible correctly understood in each succeeding generation 
so that God will remain truly God, the God of the Bible 
(Reymond 1998:xxxiii). Biblical truth is more than a Hinweis 
[drawing attention to] so that Ward’s theological inclination 
actually formulates itself into a form of panentheism‘.
Ward, Pannenberg and Polkinghorne are persons who 
are respected and valued by the confessing church and 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.581
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 8 of 9
are theologians who unashamedly agree with Reymond 
(1998:16) that ‘[i]t is still biblical to insist that Jesus Christ is 
the incarnate Word of God’. There is some consensus with 
Reymond’s classical take on theology that to make sense of 
this reality, resorting to a theistic explanation is essential. But 
this is also where they separate. 
Ward, Pannenberg and Polkinghorne will read the Bible 
together with the scientific scriptures of the day so as to, in 
their view, more adequately provide a holistic interpretation 
of reality. This is a shift from the classical tradition that relies 
on the revelation inscribed in the Bible to interpret reality. 
The loophole out of this approach to inspired revelation is 
to simply shift the focus to the Christ-event so that theology 
is largely equated to Christo-centric theology. Christ as the 
event in this view is the vulnerable one of history, adequate 
for all other events. Classically, knowledge of God is totally 
dependent on revelation (1 Cor 2:11). This is because, due 
to the fallen nature of humankind, revelation is suppressed 
and perverted and the only safe recourse is to take what the 
Scriptures say about God and what God does (Reymond 
1998:153). 
A platform for ecumenical Christianity
Cooper (2007:345) does not believe that panentheism is 
compatible with traditional Reformed theology, but admits 
that some forms of legitimate ecumenical Christianity may 
be expressed. In my view, it is important not to summarily 
dismiss Christian theologies that do not necessarily equate 
with one’s own. 
To understand the attraction of Ward’s view of ecumenicity, 
one has to grapple with his views of revelation, concepts of 
God and religions other than Christianity. As shown above, 
religion is generally based on the hypothesis of a supreme 
cosmic consciousness. It has the power to lead one into 
experiences that intensifies and gives meaning to life (Ward 
2002:15). People are ‘vehicles of the divine life in the created 
cosmos’ and the purpose of God and man is negotiating the 
pathway toward the kingdom of God as final purpose (Ward 
2004b:34). All humankind, and therefore all religions, are 
involved in this purpose. In this cosmic ecumenicity there is 
firstly, for Ward, a dynamic relationship of humankind with 
God, secondly between God and humankind and finally 
humankind interacting within itself. 
Ward’s ecumenicity emerges naturally from the polar theism 
of his soft panentheism. In this catholic religious view, God 
will do almost anything to persuade humankind to know 
and to love him – an approach with a wide open door for any 
religious persuasion. To avoid the exclusivity of a Judaeo-
Christian-Muslim view of revelation, Ward’s ecumenical 
model is latitudinally broad enough to embrace the most 
primal, traditional and confessional religions. Truth, not 
necessarily biblical, is objective and includes the possibility 
of being accessible to all religions. Such penetration of the 
transcendent upon the basis of objective truth brings about 
humankind’s response to God as knowable in the shared 
event (Ward 2004b:15). Responses may vary relative to the 
religion (Ward 1994:97) and God is an open door in the 
process of history. 
The ecumenical challenge for various religions is to 
acknowledge plural manifestations of the shared God, who 
is at the same time transcendent. Christianity is unique 
in its emphasis upon the trinity (Ward 2004b:16) and the 
incarnation of Jesus Christ (Ward 1994:197). Ward, in my 
opinion, is able to maintain the monotheistic view of the 
Christian God only in so far as it is discussed in the context 
of transcendency. Immanently, God’s revelational plurality 
allows for a variety of manifestations of deity, which could 
converge transcendentally. There is twofold movement in 
this world: from the world to God and from God to the world 
(Ward 2004b:37). 
This soft panentheism, in my view, allows Ward to claim 
some of the same attributes of transcendent God to be evident 
in immanent God. It is therefore an ecumenicity based 
upon a shared religious God-hypothesis. For many, such a 
platform for interfaith discussion would be very attractive 
and even acceptable. It would at least allow for dialogue. But 
it does come with a price. Incorporating Christian religion 
with other religions is of course to risk losing its revelational 
identity for the sake of an event identity. The former relates 
to the classical tradition of the Christian faith and the latter to 
a new type of theism. 
Conclusion
I think that it would be fair to conclude that what emerges 
from this paper is that some truths are more readily 
acceptable within their respective communities of faith. 
Ward commends recognition of truth, justice, goodness and 
beauty as those shared experiences of humankind that may 
lead to formulate value and an eventual God-hypothesis. On 
the other hand, the uniqueness of Christianity also makes for 
exclusion. 
Its Trinitarian theism, nor its exclusion of some unto 
salvation and others not, is not easily assimilated outside of 
its community as it takes the historical and present person of 
Jesus seriously. The generic God-experience is not enough. 
Panentheism in its various forms may adjust traditional 
Christian theism into formulating a credible face meeting 
science, but the Christian perspective does not see justice to be 
fully done. Creator God remains ontologically self-sufficient, 
sovereign, immutably immanent and transcendent, despite 
the insights of a soft panentheism as suggested by Keith 
Ward. The challenge of determinacy and indeterminacy 
remains to be explored. 
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The authors declare that he has no financial or personal 
relationship(s) that may have inappropriately influenced 
him in writing this article.

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i1.581
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 9 of 9
References
Arterburn, S. & Felton, J., 2001, Toxic Faith, Waterbrook Press, Colorado Springs.
Bangert, B.C., 2006, Consenting to God and nature: Toward a theocentric, naturalistic, 
theological ethics, Princeton theological monograph ser. 55, Pickwick Publications, 
Eugene.
Barbour, I.G., 2010, ‘John Polkinghorne on three scientist-theologians’, Theology and 
Science 8(3), 247–264. http://dx.doi.org/10.1080/14746700.2010.492616
Beckett, S., 1965, Waiting for Godot, Faber and Faber, London.
Berger, P.L., 1990, The sacred canopy: Elements of a sociological theory of religion, 
Anchor Books, Random House, New York.
Bosch, D., 1991, Transforming mission, Orbis Books, New York.
Center for Reformed Theology and Apologetics (CRTA) n.d., The Westminster 
Confession of Faith (1646), viewed 27 June 2012, from http://www.reformed.org/
documents/westminster_conf_of_faith.html.
Clayton, P., 2004, ‘Panentheism in metaphysical and scientific perspective’, in P. 
Clayton & A. Peacocke (eds.), In Whom we live and move and have our being: 
Panentheistic reflections on God’s presence in a scientific world, pp. 249–264, 
Eerdmans, Grand Rapids/Cambridge.
Cooper, J.W., 2007, Panentheism: The other God of the philosophers. From Plato to the 
present, Apollos, Nottingham.
Cross, F.L. & Livingstone, E.A. (eds.), 1977, The Oxford Dictionary of the Christian 
Church, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Dawkins, R., 2008, The God delusion, First Mariner Books, New York.
Erickson, M.J., 2003, What does God know and when does he know it? The current 
controversy over divine foreknowledge, Zondervan, Grand Rapids.
Faber, R., 2002, ‘De-ontologizing God: Levinas, Deleuze, and Whitehead’, in C. 
Keller, & A. Daniel (eds.), Process and difference. Between cosmological and 
poststructuralist postmodernisms, pp. 209–234, State University of New York 
Press, Albany.
Gregersen, N.H., 2004, ‘Three varieties of panentheism’, in P. Clayton & A. Peacocke 
(eds.), In whom we live and move and have our being: Panentheistic reflections 
on God’s presence in a scientific world, pp. 19–35, Eerdmans, Grand Rapids/
Cambridge.
Griffin, D.R. & Sherburne, D.W. (eds.), 1978, Alfred North Whitehead’s process and 
reality, rev. edn., The Free Press, New York.
Hartshorne, C., 1984, Omnipotence and other theological mistakes, State University 
of New York Press, Albany.
Hartshorne, C., 2002, ‘“Reconceiving God” from Omnipotence and other theological 
mistakes’, in T.A. Robinson (ed.), God, 2nd edn., pp. 328–339, Hackett Publishing, 
Indianapolis.
Huston, P., 2007, Martin Buber’s journey to presence, Fordham University Press, New 
York. http://dx.doi.org/10.5422/fso/9780823227396.001.0001
Marbaniang, D., 2011, Epistemics of Divine Reality. What knowledge claims of God 
involve, Domenic Marbaniang, POD (Print on demand).
McGrath, A.E., 2008, The open secret: A new vision for natural theology, Blackwell 
Publishing, Oxford. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/9781444301205
Milbank, J., 2001, Theology and social theory: Beyond secular reason, Blackwell 
Publishing, Oxford.
Moltmann, J., 1985, God in creation, SCM Press, London.
Nash, R.H., 1988, Faith and reason: Searching for a rational faith, Zondervan, Grand 
Rapids.
Oord, T.J., 2010, The Nature of love: A theology, Chalice Press, St. Louis.
OrthodoxWiki n.d., Panentheism, viewed 09 June 2012, from http://orthodoxwiki.
org/Panentheism.
Page, R., 2007, ‘Panentheism and pansyntheism: God in relation’, in M.K. Cunningham 
(ed.), God and evolution: A reader, pp. 349–359, Routledge, London/New York.
Pannenberg, W., 1993, Toward a theology of nature: Essays on science and faith, John 
Knox Press, Westminster.
Peacocke, A, 2004a, Evolution: the disguised friend of faith? Selected essays, 
Templeton Press, West Conshohocken.
Peacocke, A., 2004b, ‘Introduction’, in P. Clayton & A. Peacocke (eds.), In whom we 
live and move and have our being: Panentheistic reflections on God’s presence in a 
scientific world, pp. xviii–xxii, Eerdmans, Grand Rapids/Cambridge.
Peacocke, A., 2004c, ‘Articulating God’s presence in and to the world’, in P. Clayton & 
A. Peacocke (eds.), In whom we live and move and have our being: Panentheistic 
reflections on God’s presence in a scientific world, pp. 137–157, Eerdmans, Grand 
Rapids/Cambridge.
Piper, J., 2007, Don’t waste your life, Crossway Books, Wheaton.
Polkinghorne, J., 2000, ‘Some questions and some insights from science’, in J. 
Polkinghorne & M. Welker (eds.), The end of the world and the ends of God: 
Science and theology on eschatology, pp. 29–41, Trinity Press, Harrisburg.
Polkinghorne, J., 2001, ‘Kenotic creation and divine action’, in J. Polkinghorne (ed.), 
The work of love: Creation as kenosis, pp. 90–106, SPCK, London.
Polkinghorne, J., 2009, Theology in the context of science, Yale University Press, New 
Haven / London.
Potgieter, R.M., 2002, ‘Keith Ward and panentheism. An evaluation of Keith Ward’s 
panentheism as a step towards a model for a Christian interpretation of cosmology’, 
PhD Thesis, School of Theology, North-West University, Potchefstroom.
Reymond, R.L., 1979, The justification of knowledge. An introductory study in Christian 
apologetic methodology, Presbyterian and Reformed Publishing, Phillipsburg.
Reymond, R.L., 1998, A new systematic theology of the Christian faith, 2nd edn., 
Thomas Nelson Publishers, Nashville.
Salmon, J.F., 2012, ‘Pierre Teilhard de Chardin’, in J.B. Stump & A.G. Padgett (eds.), 
The Blackwell companion to science and Christianity, pp. 567–577, Blackwell 
Publishing, Chichester. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/9781118241455.ch49
Sanders, J., 1998, The God who risks: A theology of providence, InterVarsity Press, 
Downers Grove.
Schaeffer, F.A., 1970, The God who is there, Hodder and Stoughton, London.
Schaeffer, F.A., 1972, He is there and he is not silent, Tyndale House, Wheaton.
Schwartz, H., 2012, ‘Wolfhart Pannenberg’, in J.B. Stump & A.G. Padgett (eds.), 
The Blackwell companion to science and Christianity, pp. 611–621, Blackwell 
Publishing, Chichester. http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/9781118241455.ch53
Sire, J.W., 2004, Naming the elephant: Worldview as a concept, IVP Academic, 
Downers Grove.
Stannard, R., 1989, Grounds for reasonable belief (Theology and science at the 
frontiers of knowledge), Scottish Academic Press, Edinburgh.
Sullivan, C., 2009, The impossibility of atheism, CrossBooks, Bloomington.
Taylor, C., 2007, A secular age, Harvard University Press, Cambridge, M.A.
Taylor-Batty, M. & Taylor-Batty, J., 2008, Samuel Beckett’s Waiting for Godot, 
Continuum, University of Michigan. 
Teilhard de Chardin, P., n.d., The Future of Man, transl. N. Denny (1964), Image Books, 
Doubleday, New York.
Towne, E.A., 2005, ‘The variety of panentheisms’, Zygon 40(3), 779–786. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1111/j.1467-9744.2005.00704.x
Ward, K., 1974, The concept of God, Basil Blackwell, Oxford.
Ward, K., 1982, Rational theology and the creativity of God, Pilgrim Press, New York.
Ward, K., 1994, Religion and revelation: A theology of revelation in the world’s 
religions, Clarendon Press, Oxford.
Ward, K., 1996, Religion and creation, Clarendon Press, Oxford. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198263937.001.0001
Ward, K., 2002, God, faith & the new millenium. Christian belief in an age of science, 
Oneworld Publications, Oxford.
Ward, K., 2004a, ‘The world as the body of God: A panentheistic metaphor’, in P. 
Clayton & A. Peacocke (eds.), In Whom we live and move and have our being: 
Panentheistic reflections on God’s presence in a scientific world, pp. 62–72, 
Eerdmans, Grand Rapids /Cambridge. PMid:15191543
Ward, K., 2004b, What the Bible really teaches: A challenge for fundamentalists, SPCK, 
London.
Ward, K., 2008, The big questions in science and religion, Templeton Foundation Press, 
West Conshohocken.
Ward, K., 2010, The word of God? The bible after modern scholarship, SPCK, London.
Ware, B.A., 2000, God’s lesser glory: The diminished God of open theism, Crossway 
Books, Bloomington.
Webster, J., Tanner, K. & Torrance, I., 2009, The Oxford handbook of systematic 
theology, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Weder, H., 2000, ‘Hope and creation’, in J. Polkinghorne & M. Welker (eds.), The end of 
the world and the ends of God: Science and theology on eschatology, pp. 184–204, 
Trinity Press, Harrisburg.
Zavos, J., 2008, ‘Dialogues on religion and violence at the parliament of the world’s 
religions’, in N. Green & M. Searle-Chatterjee (eds.), Religion, language, and 
power, pp. 27–41, Routledge, New York.