Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i2.710
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
The first commandment in the Heidelberg Catechism: 
Theological insights of Philipp Melanchthon and 
Zacharias Ursinus
Author:
Ignatius W.C. van Wyk1
Affiliations:
1Reformed Theological 
College, University of 
Pretoria, South Africa
Correspondence to: 
Natie van Wyk
Email: 
aim1@mweb.co.za
Postal address:
PO Box 32186, Waverley 
0135, South Africa
 
Dates:
Received: 15 Mar. 2013
Accepted: 24 June 2013
Published: 04 Nov. 2013
How to cite this article:
Van Wyk, I.W.C., 2013, ‘The 
first commandment in the 
Heidelberg Catechism: 
Theological insights of Philipp 
Melanchthon and Zacharias 
Ursinus’, In die Skriflig/In 
Luce Verbi 47(2), Art. #710, 
9 pages. http://dx.doi.
org/10.4102/ids.v47i2.710
Copyright:
© 2013. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work
is licensed under the
Creative Commons
Attribution License.
This article focuses on the exposition of the first commandment in the Heidelberg Catechism 
(HC). Reconstructions of the original German and Latin texts are presented. Zacharias 
Ursinus, the primary author of the HC, was a student of Philipp Melanchthon in Wittenberg. 
Two important publications of Melanchthon have been revisited in search of the theological 
background and context behind the HC. Ursinus’ expositions of the first commandment in 
his Small and Large Catechisms, as well as some of the insights into his dogmatic lectures are 
explained in an effort to create a better understanding of the exposition of the HC. 
Introduction
My contribution to the celebration of the 450-year existence of the Heidelberg Catechism (HC) 
focuses on the first commandment. In the first section of the article, a reconstruction of the original 
German and Latin texts will be presented for the sake of making it available to readers who might 
not have access to these sources. 
Thereafter, the expositions of the first commandment by Philipp Melanchthon (1497–1560) and 
Zacharias Ursinus (1534–1583) will receive attention, since present-day researchers agree that 
Ursinus was the primary author of the HC1 (cf. Sturm 2000; Bierma 2005; Ehmann 2010; Van Wyk 
2011; Walker 2010; Theiβen 2012; Bierma & Gunnoe 2013). Ursinus initially studied in Wittenberg, 
where Philipp Melanchthon had a huge influence on his formation personally and as a theologian. 
Although Ursinus had not repeated all the thoughts and ideas of his mentor in his exposition, 
he did follow him on the important matters. It is therefore important to acquaint the readership 
(especially those outside the German-Lutheran tradition) with the insights of this important 
Wittenberg reformer. Personally, Ursinus made valuable contributions to the understanding of 
the first commandment prior to, during and after the meetings of the task team that assisted 
him in the writing process. The development of his insights into this commandment makes for 
interesting reading. 
1.Not a single original source on the authorship of the HC has been preserved. The title page and the preface by Elector Frederick III make 
no mention of the author and therefore the question will always remain open (Metz 1985:583; Bierma & Gunnoe 2013:73). There are 
three theories on the authorship of the HC. (1) It is widely accepted in academic circles today that Zacharias Ursinus was the primary 
author of the HC. By observing the many similarities between the HC and his two catechisms, one can hardly reject this thesis (Sturm 
2000). Although his important role cannot be doubted, there is general agreement that he was not solely responsible for writing the 
HC. (2) During the 18th and 19th centuries, the theory of Heinrich Alting (1583–1644) was promoted, namely that Ursinus and Caspar 
Olevianus had been jointly responsible for writing the HC. Present-day scholarship rejects this theory (Sturm 2000). However, in one 
of the most recent articles on the HC, Bierma and Gunnoe (2013:76–77) plead for this theory not to be rejected completely, because 
Olevianus had played a much bigger role than recent scholarship gives him credit for. For instance, similarities between the HC and 
his Vester Grundt (1567) are too obvious to be ignored. Although this exposition of the Creed could not have been used as a draft by 
the task team, the role played by him must have been bigger than anticipated. (3) It is generally accepted that an ‘imperial theological 
commission’ was ultimately responsible for the HC. Ursinus, as a member of this task team, had most probably been responsible for 
the writing of most of the text. One could therefore argue that the HC was a team effort and that Ursinus was the dominant member of 
this team. The argument is based on the words in the preface to the Church Order of 1563, which stated that the HC was a team effort. 
This task team comprised the lecturers of the Faculty of Theology (Ursinus, Emmanuel Tremellius, Pierre Boquin and Wenzel Zuleger), 
the superintendents (Olevianus, Johannes Veluanus, Johannes Willing, Johan Sylvan and Johannes Eisenmenger), church officials and 
other men of faith (Adam Neuser, Petrus Macheropeus, Tilemann Murnius, Johannes Brunner, Michael Diller and Konrad Marius), 
as well as two eminent personalities (Stephan Cirler and Thomas Erastus, Professor of Medicine). The deacon, Wilhelm Klebitz, was 
probably also included (cf. Noltensmeier 2012:25; Mühling 2012:52–55; Bierma & Gunnoe 2013:74). 
Page 1 of 9
Die eerste gebod in die Heidelbergse Kategismus: Teologiese insigte van Phillipp 
Melanchthon en Zacharias Ursinus. Die artikel fokus op die uitleg van die eerste gebod in 
die Heidelbergse Kategismus (HK). Rekonstruksies van die oorspronklike Duitse en Latynse 
tekste word voorgelê. Zacharias Ursinus, die primêre outeur van die HK, was ’n leerling 
van Philipp Melanchthon in Wittenberg. Twee belangrike publikasies van Melanchthon is 
nagevors in die soeke na die teologiese denkwêreld as agtergrond tot die HK. Ursinus se 
uitleg van die eerste gebod in sy Klein en Groot Kategismusse, asook sommige van die insigte 
wat in sy die dogmatieklesings vervat is, word verduidelik in ’n poging om ’n beter begrip 
van die uitleg van die HK teweeg te bring. 
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Read online:

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i2.710
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Within the limits of the space available, using mainly 
footnotes, the expositions of Melanchthon and Ursinus will 
be brought into discussion with contextual questions and 
problems, especially those faced by South Africans who have 
to live in a complex, pluralistic society. 
The text
2
Sunday 34: Question and Answer 94 and 95
The original German version
Ich bin der HERR dein Gott /
Der ich dich auβ Egyptenland /
auβ dem Diensthaus gefüret habe.
Du solst kein ander Götter für mir haben. 
Was erfordert der Herr im ersten Gebot?
Dasz ich bey verlierung meiner seelen heil und seligkeyt
alle abgotterey, zauberey, aberglaubische segen,
anrufung der Heiligen oder anderer Creaturen,
meiden und fliehen sol,
und den einigen waren Gott recht erkennen,
im allein vertrauen,
In aller demut und gedult,
von im allein alles guts gewarten,
un in von ganzem herzen lieben, fürchten un ehren
also dasz ich ehe alle creaturen ubergebe, 
den in dem geringsten wider seinen willen thue. 
Was ist Abgötterey?
An stat des einigen waren Gottes,
der sich in seinem wort hat offenbaret,
oder neben demselbigen etwas anderst dichte oder haben,
darauff der mensch sein vertrauen setzt. 
The Latin version of 1563
Ego sum Dominus, Deus tuus,
Qui eduxi te ex Aegypto, domo servitutis.
Non habebis deos alios in conspectu meo.
Quid postulat Deus in primo praecepto?
Ut, quam mihi chara est salus animae meae, tam studiose 
vite et fugiam omnem idololatriam, magiam, incatationem, 
superstitionem, invocationem  sanctorum, aet caeterarum 
creaturarum; unicum autem et verum Deum recte agnoscá, 
ipsi soli fidá, summa humilitate & patientia me illi subjiciá, ab 
eo solo omnia bona expectem, denique intimo cordis affectu 
ipsum amem reverear, venerer; adeó ut omnibus potius 
creaturis renunciem, quan ut vel minimu contra eius voluntatem 
committá.
Quid est idololatria?
Est loco unius Dei, aut praeter unum illum & verum Deum, qui 
se in verbo suo patefecit, aliud quippiam fingere aut habere, in 
quo spem reponas.
2.The original text of the Heidelberg Catechism, printed three times in Heidelberg in 
1563, is lost. It is therefore impossible to reconstruct an exact version of the original. 
However, there are texts claiming to be copies of the original. Three German texts 
have come into the public domain via modern electronic technology. (1) A text in 
the library of the University of Heidelberg, by Christian Bähr, dating back to 1795. 
A photocopy of this text is available in Heimbucher, Schneider-Harpprecht and 
Siller (2012). (2) A copy of a text that was used by Albrecht Wolters in Bonn, dating 
back to 1864 (cf. Wolters [1846] 2012). (3) The copy of the tercentenary edition 
of the German, Latin and English texts published in 1863 in New York (cf. German 
Reformed Church in the United States of America (GRCUS) 2012). Reconstructions 
of the original Latin texts can be found in GRCUS (1863) and Heimbucher et al. 
(2012). The text in Heimbucher is based on a text that can be found in the Johannes 
a Lasco University in Emden, and is believed to be the oldest text available (cf. 
Ulrichs 2012:67). 
The expositions of Philipp 
Melanchthon 
As stated earlier, Zacharias Ursinus is believed to be the 
primary author of the HC. It is important to remember that 
he studied for seven years in Wittenberg where Philipp 
Melanchthon became his academic and personal mentor. 
Melanchthon’s (indirect) influence on Ursinus went back 
to his catechesis lessons as a schoolboy in Breslau. The local 
minister, Ambrosius Moiban, was a friend and theological 
compatriot of Melanchthon, who had written a short 
catechism in Latin (1533), as well as a comprehensive one 
in German (1535). Already as a catechumen, Ursinus had 
therefore been exposed to the influence of Melanchthon. He 
started his studies in Wittenberg in 1550 as a 15-year-old boy. 
Melanchthon was so impressed by his academic brilliance 
that he took him with to the religious disputation in Worms in 
1557. On central theological questions, such as the doctrines 
of predestination, the free will and Holy Communion, 
Ursinus had remained loyal to his teacher until his death. 
Melanchthon was also the one who had encouraged him 
and made it possible for him to study in Switzerland after 
completing his studies in Wittenberg (cf. Ehmann 2010, 2012; 
Van Wyk 2011:83–90).
Some scholars are of the opinion that the HC is a synthesis 
of Melanchthon’s and Calvin’s theologies – and should 
therefore be named the ‘third theology’ (Sturm 2000:1515). 
This theory is not totally correct, as many other theological 
influences can be identified in the HC.3 However, there 
can be little doubt about the fact that Melanchthon had an 
influence on the other authors of the HC. His influence was 
not limited to Ursinus, since he had a huge influence in the 
Palatinate (cf. Strohm 2013; Gunnoe 2013). It is also possible 
that he influenced other members of the Faculty of Theology 
in Heidelberg, who worked with Ursinus on the task team 
that wrote the Catechism.4 Even though Ursinus (and the task 
team) did not use specific formulations of Melanchthon, he 
shaped their understanding of the commandments. Studying 
Melanchthon’s exposition of the first commandment gives 
one a good idea of the climate of interpretation in which 
Ursinus developed as a student and young academic.
We will be concentrating on two publications of Melanchthon 
in which he made valuable methodological, exegetical and 
hermeneutical remarks on the first commandment. The first 
publication, the 1521 edition of his Loci Communes, is well-
3.The widely used dictum states that the HC is known for its ‘Lutherische Innigkeit, 
melanchthonische Klarheit, zwinglische Einfachheit und calvinisches Feur’ (cf. 
Noltensmeier 2012:24). In his inaugural speech as professor in Dogmatics in 
Heidelberg, Ursinus made the statement that theological training at a university was 
a dubious undertaking. This could only be justified if the honour of God (Calvin), the 
salvation of the people (Luther) and the comfort of the conscience (Melanchthon) 
were to receive due attention (cf. Ehmann 2010:96, 2012:38–39). 
4.During the reign of Otto-Heinrich (1556–1559), the Palatinate became a Protestant 
area. On 16 April 1556, the Confessio Augustana (written by Melanchthon; cf. Jung 
2010:44–48) was adopted as the official confessional document. Self-evidently, 
other works of Melanchthon would also have been held in high esteem. After 
his visit to Heidelberg in 1557, the lecturers of the Faculty of Theology had been 
bound not only by the CA, but also by the Apology of Melanchthon (Strohm 
2013:52). Tilemann Heshusen, dean of the Faculty of Theology during the Eucharist 
controversy (1559–1560), was a pupil of Melanchthon, but rejected the Zwinglian 
perspective. Melanchthon was consulted and his advice on formulating a middle-
position was accepted by Frederick III. In this way, Melanchthon had determined 
the unique course of the Palatinate (cf. Gunnoe 2013:61–63). 
Page 2 of 9

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i2.710
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 3 of 9
known in reformed circles. The second publication, the 1553 
German version of the Loci known as Heubtartikel Christlicher 
Lere, is most probably not well-known in reformed circles 
outside Germany, since it has only recently (2010) become 
available to the public in general. In this publication, one 
will find a far more comprehensive exposition of the first 
commandment than in the older, Latin versions of the Loci. 
Philipp Melanchthon’s 1521 edition of the Loci 
Communes 
Philipp Melanchthon was born in 1497 in Bretten, a small town 
near Heidelberg. He studied in Heidelberg from 1509 to 1512. 
After completing a Master’s degree in Greek in Tübingen, he 
was appointed in 1518 as professor in Greek in Wittenberg. 
He became one of the most influential reformers of the 16th 
century, and was known as the ‘praeceptor Germaniae’ [teacher 
of the German nation] (Jung 2010:7; Selderhuis 2010:9–28). 
Melanchthon was called to Heidelberg twice, but preferred 
to remain in Wittenberg. He did, however, visit Heidelberg 
in 1557, where he influenced the transformation process in 
the Palatinate (cf. Strohm 2013:51). His influence impacted 
the theological thinking of large sections of the reformation, 
as well as those who were responsible for drafting the HC. 
As early as 1521, the young Philipp published the first edition 
of his Loci Communes5 [Fundamental Notions of Theology, or 
Grondbegrippe van die Teologie]. In this publication, he provided 
expositions of the central concepts and notions encountered 
in the Bible, such as God, sin, love and righteousness. He also 
gave attention to the notion law and, within this framework, 
an exposition of the first commandment. 
Melanchthon’s LC also addressed the laws of the Bible, 
including the first commandment, under the heading ‘de 
divinis legibus’ [on the divine laws]. During the first years of 
the reformation, the emphasis fell on the problem of the law 
per se. As Luther’s coworker, he was required to explain why 
it was necessary to distinguish between law and gospel as the 
‘highest art of theology’ (cf. Lohse 1995:284–287). Due to the 
misunderstandings concerning Luther’s theology, he had to 
assist in explaining why the moral law (of the Old Testament) 
had retained its authority over Christians and what the 
prerequisites for obedience to the Ten Commandments were. 
The first important matter addressed by Melanchthon was 
the necessity to differentiate between moral, legal and 
ceremonial laws. Not all legal and ceremonial laws of the 
Old Testament retained validity for the church. In contrast, 
the moral laws have. The Ten Commandments fall under the 
moral laws and form the basis of biblical morality. 
The second important principal of explanation discussed by 
Melanchthon concerns the ‘Christological elucidation of the 
Moral Law’. Hereby is meant that Christ’s understanding of 
the law ought to be explained and that our understanding of 
the law should not bypass Christ. According to Melanchthon, 
5.Loci communes originally meant ‘general (finding) places’ (Gemeinplätze). 
Eventually, the meaning changed to ‘main aspects or fundamental truths’. 
Melanchthon used these words, indicating a textbook for Dogmatics. The title Loci 
communes rerum theologicarum could therefore be translated as ‘The main aspects 
of theology’ (cf. Pöhlmann in Melanchthon [1521] 1997:12; Kuropka 2010:43–45; 
Jung 2010:23–26). 
there cannot be any doubt that Christ wanted the first three 
commandments (and not the first four commandments as 
stated in HC Q & A 93) to be explained from the perspective 
of love for God (Mk 12:30; Dt 6:5). The first commandment 
expects faith, the second glorification of his name, and the 
third tolerance or endurance (tolerantiam/Erduldung) of his 
work in us (Melanchthon [1521] 1997:115 = LC 3,59). To 
trust, praise and tolerate God is summarised in the words: 
‘We should love the Lord with all our heart’ (Melanchthon 
[1521] 1997:117 = LC 3,62). Only those who love God would 
be willing to honour him by obeying his commandments 
(Melanchthon ibid:113 = LC 3,49–50).
The third aspect of Melanchthon’s early contribution to 
the exposition of the first commandment has to do with 
our human ability to obey it. The free will of man cannot 
ensure trust, praise and tolerance (Melanchthon [1521] 
1997:115–117 = LC 3,60–61). According to him, we can only 
obey this commandment when we are moved to do so by 
the Holy Spirit. Natural man is not able to do so on his 
own (Melanchthon ibid:117 = LC 3,64–66). To explain this 
statement, Melanchthon used the argument of the affects. 
The first commandment, according to him (Melanchthon 
1997), has to do with the spiritual affect (affectus),6 which:
non habebis deos alienos, proprie ad affectus referatur, ne quid 
amemus, ne quid formidemus praetor deum, ne nostris opibus, 
virtute, prudential, iustitia aut ulla plane creatura fidamus, sed 
sola dei bonitate. [enables us to love and fear nothing besides 
God, preventing us from putting our trust into our possessions, 
virtues, cleverness, righteousness or trusting one or the other 
creature, but to trust God’s goodness alone.] (p. 113 = LC 3,50) 
This exposition falls back on Martin Luther’s explanation of 
the first commandment in his Sermon von den guten Werken 
of 1520 where he stated: ‘Weil ich allein Gott bin, sollst du auf 
mich alleine deine ganze Zuversicht, Trauen und Glauben setzen 
und auf niemanden anders’ (WA 6,209,26–27). In fact, already 
in 1518, Luther wrote these famous words in his Instructio pro 
confessione peccatorum:
Einen Gott haben heißt, einen solchen haben, von dem du 
zuversichtlich erhoffst, daß du Hilfe erfährst in allem Bösen 
... / ‘Deum habere est talem aliquem habere, a quo confidas te 
adiuvari in omnibus malis ... (WA 1,258,4–5)
Melanchthon, in the footsteps of Luther7 who in the 
footsteps of Jesus, desired to state that obedience to the first 
6.An affect (Affekt, affek, affectus) is a human emotion, passion or vehement. 
Melanchthon distinguishes between two types of affects: (1) the natural (naturales 
affectus) and (2) the spiritual (spirituales affectus). The natural affect is propelled 
by human will, whilst the spiritual affects are given/[gifts from the Holy Spirit] 
by the Holy Spirit. The natural affects are self-love and disparaging of God. The 
spiritual affects, on the other hand, are disparaging of oneself and holding God 
in high esteem. Melanchthon argues that man could only love God when he is 
overpowered by the love of God. The ‘stronger power of God’ has to liberate us 
from our earthly bondages and desires, as well as our egocentricity (cf. Melanchthon 
[1521] 1997:44–45, fn. 83 = LC 1,65). 
7.Luther explains the first commandment in his Small Catechism in the following way: 
‘We should fear, love, and trust in God above all things’ (Concordia 2005:343). In 
the Large Catechism he says: ‘What does it mean to have a god? Or, what is God? 
Answer: A god means that from which we are to expect all good and in which we 
are to take refuge in all distress. So, to have a God is nothing other than trusting and 
believing Him with the heart. I have often said that the confidence and faith of the 
heart alone make both God and an idol. If your faith and trust is right, then your 
god is also true. On the other hand, if your trust is false and wrong, then you do not 
have the true God. For these two belong together, faith and God … Now, I say that 
whatever you set your heart on and put your trust in is truly your god’ (Concordia 
2005:385). Ebeling (1969) and Bayer (1995) can be consulted concerning Luther’s 
understanding of this commandment. 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i2.710
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 4 of 9
commandment centres in the love for God. This love must 
be given to us by the Holy Spirit. We are not capable of 
this love by ourselves and should not even try to do so, as 
Christ (Jn 4:23) has taught us that ‘the true worshippers will 
worship the Father in spirit and truth, for they are the kind 
of worshippers the Father seeks’. Melanchthon accordingly 
appealed that we should be open to the Holy Spirit as this 
affect will guide us in religious practices that would please 
God (Melanchthon [1521] 1997:115 = LC 3,56). 
 
Melanchthon summarised his exposition by underlining that 
obedience to the first commandment is nothing more than 
loving the one, true God (Dt 6:5; Mk 12:30). To love God 
means to wholeheartedly embrace God’s will − the will that 
also dooms and kills (Melanchthon [1521] 1997:119 = LC 
3,69). 
Philipp Melanchthon’s 1553 edition of the 
Heubtartikel Christlicher Lere 
A few introductory remarks need to be made about this 
publication: 
•	 This was the first German version of the Loci and was 
revised by Melanchthon for a last time in 1558.
•	 The book was originally written in German and not in 
Latin. 
•	 This edition of his Loci is a far more comprehensive work 
than the first Latin edition of 1521. In this edition, the 
first commandment received more attention than in the 
earlier editions. 
Points of departure
Before Melanchthon arrives at a detailed explanation of the 
first commandment, he lays down a few theological points of 
departure. He starts with the pronouncement, which many 
people of the 21st century8 may find overstated, namely that 
all people know about a creator, but not all know who the 
one, true God is. According to him, this God is none other 
than the God who had led Israel out of Egypt. This God, the 
creator of everything and the liberator from captivity, is the 
one who will not allow his people to worship another god. 
Not enough is said with this, however, as we look at the 
relevant commandment as Christians. He therefore adds the 
interesting remark that the exodus from Egypt was a miracle 
worked by God and that it was the forerunner to the greatest 
miracle that was to come, namely the resurrection of Christ. 
The God, who must therefore be respected and trusted, is 
the Lord who had been responsible for the miracle of the 
exodus9 and had given the promise of the Messiah to Israel 
and the other nations. In other words, the God of the first 
commandment is, according to Melanchthon, the God of the 
exodus who redeemed us from death through the cross and 
8.The African theologian, John Mbiti (1985:29), has been bold enough to state that 
all Africans know (and believe in) God, the creator. Present-day European (Van den 
Brink & Van der Kooi 2012:48–52) and North American theologians (Plantinga, 
Thompson & Lundberg 2010:77–99), to the contrary, are confronted with the fact 
that most of their countrymen no longer know God as creator. 
9.According to Melanchthon, all the miracles of the Old Testament (the exodus 
included) urge people to look at Christ. He is therefore of the opinion that the 
exordium of the Ten Commandments should be interpreted Christologically 
(Melanchthon [1553] 2010:180 = HL 204–205,15–16). 
the resurrection of Jesus Christ. This God is totally different 
to the idols and therefore in no way to be compared with 
the ‘creator’ of the world religions (Melanchthon [1553] 
2010:179–180 = HL 203–204,20–34). 
The second introductory remark has to do with the affects. 
Here, the author links this notion to sin. Sin means that man 
does not want to love and respect God as he expects of us 
(Dt 6:5). This has to do with the inclination and propensity 
of the flesh. Christ, however, works through his gospel and 
Holy Spirit, and in this way enables sinful man to obey the 
commandment, which in the deepest sense, is nothing else 
than loving God (Melanchthon [1553] 2010:180–181 = HL 
204,30–206,3–4).
The third theological perspective to keep in mind has to do 
with the relationship between law and gospel. Melanchthon 
reminds us that, in line with the second use of the law,10 
hearing it creates fear of God’s wrath and judgement. 
However, by hearing the good news of the gospel, and 
through the work of the Holy Spirit, we learn about the 
forgiveness of sins. In this way, we are drawn from the fear 
of his wrath into the experience of his mercy. Through this 
process, the Holy Spirit works faith, comfort and joy − and 
that is the starting point of obedience to this commandment 
(Melanchthon [1553] 2010:181 = HL 205–206,15–29).
The following words of Melanchthon (2010) could be 
regarded as a summary of his understanding of the first 
commandment thus far: 
Dieses erst und hohist gebott ist das nottigest. Denn engel 
und menschen sind furnemlich geschaffen zu erkantnus des 
wahrhafftigen gottes und das wir yhm gleichformig sein solten, 
yhn recht erkennen, anruffen, preisen und lieben und wissen, 
das ehr wahrhafftig unβ leben, weiβheit, gerechtikeit, narung 
und alle guter gibet, und yhm darumb dankbar und gehorsam 
sein etc. Dweil nu die menschen grausamlich von diesem 
wahrhafftigen gott abweichen, sind erstlich alle menschen 
verdampt. Dises sollen wir betrachten, das wir gottes gerechten 
zorn erkennen, vor yhm erschreken und gnade suchen durch 
glauben und vertauen uff den mittler Ihesum Christum. (p. 183 
= HL 208,20–24)
The good works that come forth from the first 
commandment
Melanchthon had defined six ‘good works’ that could be 
associated with this commandment (cf. Melanchthon [1553] 
2010:181–183 = HL 205,30–208,15):
1.	 This commandment creates correct knowledge of the true 
God − the God who revealed himself in the exodus and in 
Christ and who trains the obedient person to accept this 
correct knowledge of God by faith. Whoever accepts this 
God in faith, will distance himself from all idolatry and 
teachings that are in conflict with the biblical message. 
10.Classical reformation theology operates through two or three uses or functions of 
the law. The first use (primus usus) has to do with the effort to enhance the well-
being of society. The second use (usus elenchticus) has to do with the discovery of 
sin by listening to God’s law. The law is used in a third way (tertius usus legis) when 
it is used as a guideline for Christian living. In an un-Lutheran way, Melanchthon 
promoted the third use of the law. At least indirectly, he had a big influence on the 
composition of the third part of the HC, namely the life of gratitude (cf. Busch 2013; 
Den Hertog 2012, 2013; Theißen 2012). 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i2.710
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 5 of 9
2.	 Obedience to the first commandment leads to the fear of 
God’s wrath, and simultaneously creates fear of the true, 
living God. However, through hearing the gospel we 
discover his love and mercy.
3.	 Obedience to this commandment creates true faith, trust 
and comfort in Christ, and this is the prerequisite for 
knowledge of the true God − the God of Abraham who 
made and kept his promises concerning the Messiah and 
the forgiveness of sin. 
4.	 The fruit of this commandment is love for and joy in God. 
Obedience to this commandment fills us with joy and 
comfort in God’s mercy, and this joy and comfort make it 
possible to love God. 
5.	 This commandment creates hope for believers. Trust 
in the one, true God comforts us with the promise of 
eternal salvation and assistance in difficult times. The 
fruit of hope is patience and joyfulness. The patience that 
Melanchthon speaks about does only have to do with the 
irritations of life, but also with obedience to the will of 
God in times of suffering. 
6.	 The last fruit of the first commandment has to do with 
humility, meekness and submissiveness. Through knowing 
our own weaknesses, we can discover the care and 
protection of the Lord.
Sin against the first commandment
Melanchthon ([1553] 2010:184–186 = HL 208,1–211,27) 
contrasted sin against the first commandment in an order 
of nine grades – from the worst conceivable transgression to 
sins that are not regarded as ‘deadly sins’. 
The most serious transgression (worst grade) of the first 
commandment is to declare that God does not exist or that he 
is an unfair judge, that he does not regard people and that he 
does not bring anything to pass. According to Melanchthon, 
this is typical of Epicurus, Plato and the Stoics.
The second grade concerns putting your trust into another 
god, giving human beings the glory that God alone deserves 
and invoking the dead such as the saints.
The third grade concerns sorcery and witchcraft (Zeuberey). 
The worst form of witchcraft is magic (magica), since this 
form of evil has to do with a partnership with the devil.11 He 
defined sorcery as an act whereby evil-minded people rely on 
the enemies of God to help them harm other people. He also 
defines this as fortune-telling, soothsaying and superstition 
such as trusting certain individuals to heal all kinds of 
diseases through magic (Melanchthon [1553] 2010:184–185 = 
HL 208,20–25).12 
The fourth grade concerns accepting Jewish, Muslim and 
heretic images of God and not embracing the image of God 
revealed by Jesus Christ. The first commandment, according 
11.In this regard, Melanchthon was still bound to the late-Medieval understanding of 
witchcraft (cf. Van Wyk 2004:1205–1209).
12.Interestingly enough, Melanchthon’s understanding of witchcraft, sorcery and 
magic correspond to the African understanding thereof (cf. Van Wyk 2004:1210–
1224). Hopefully, African theologians will discover Melanchthon as someone 
relevant to their questions and problems. 
to Melanchthon, is transgressed through accepting the 
theory of Mani that postulates two divine principles, namely 
a good and an evil one. Mani propagated the idea that both 
a good and an evil ‘god’ exist that competes to control life. 
This conviction is not reconcilable with the biblical teaching 
that God is the all-encompassing reality. According to him, 
it would also be a transgression of this commandment if one 
accepts the teaching of Samosatenus, who believes that Jesus 
is a mere human being. 
The fifth grade concerns living without faith in and love for 
God, and rejecting the idea of repentance.
The sixth grade concerns falling into despair by noticing only 
God’s wrath and failing to see his forgiveness and the hope 
that accompanies it. Sin, therefore, is to constantly fall into 
doubt about God’s grace and forgiveness. 
The seventh grade concerns putting trust into rituals, 
spirituality and religious orders, and in this way deprives 
Christ of his honour. 
The eighth grade concerns developing trust in one’s own 
holiness, cleverness and power. 
The ninth grade concerns turning one’s back impatiently on 
God in times of suffering. 
Melanchthon and the Heidelberg Catechism
The obvious question that should be answered has to do with 
the comparison between Melanchthon and the Catechism 
− what perspectives are shared by the Catechism and 
Melanchthon, what important perspectives of Melanchthon 
have been omitted from the Catechism, and what has the 
Catechism contributed to the 16th century debate that 
Melanchthon still lacked? The intention is not to downplay 
the HC because it says less than Melanchthon. Obviously, 
because of its brevity, the HC excludes some aspects 
that Melanchthon includes. The theory is that by reading 
Melanchthon, one gets an idea of the world of thought of, at 
least, Ursinus. 
Both the HC and Melanchthon concentrate on knowledge 
about the true God of the Bible. Melanchthon, however, is 
more specific by referring to the God of the first commandment 
as the God of the exodus and the resurrection. The God of 
the first commandment worked and is still working miracles. 
He is therefore not only a postulate of practical reason, 
but a living and acting spiritual being. He is not one of the 
two ‘spiritual forces’ that Mani speaks about, but the ‘all-
determining reality’. Knowledge of and obedience to this 
God develops through experiencing the forgiveness, hope 
and joy in Jesus Christ. 
Both the HC and Melanchthon explain that obedience to this 
commandment has to do with loving, fearing and honouring 
God. The value of Melanchthon’s explication of the ‘fear of 
God’ has to do with his reference to the second function of 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i2.710
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 6 of 9
the law. He teaches us that not only does ‘fear’ concern the 
‘respect of God’, but also the fear of his wrath. Not many 
present-day theologians are willing to speak about the wrath 
of God, because they believe that the world only wants to 
hear about his love (cf. Miggelbrink 2002:9–11). In this way, 
the biblical message is being distorted.13 
The HC shares Melanchthon’s view that we should expect 
all good things from this God. Melanchthon added the 
perspective that bad things also came from God. By rejecting 
the idea of a ‘devil’ that competes with God on an equal basis, 
he could reason, along with the HC, that we should humbly 
and patiently love and fear God, but add ‘also in times of 
suffering’. 
The HC shares Melanchthon’s view of the world as a place 
filled with magic, sorcery, witchcraft and ancestor veneration. 
Concerning occultism and magic, Melanchthon mentioned 
‘religious rites’ and not ‘superstitious rites’ as the HC does. 
This formulation could be explained against the background 
of the adiaphora debate in which Melanchthon was caught up 
(cf. Jung 2010:112–113). Melanchthon understood the clinging 
to traditional rituals associated with ancestor veneration as a 
transgression of the first commandment, and thus as sin. 
Although one cannot expect theological arguments on the 
possibilities of obedience to this commandment in the text 
of a catechism, it would be wise to remind students and 
ministers about Melanchthon’s arguments concerning the 
affects. Despair could easily creep in when believers do not 
allow for the work of the Holy Spirit and ‘tolerate’ it that God 
wants to work in us. 
Melanchthon moves considerably closer to modern man with 
his argument that sin, in the deepest sense of the word, is 
‘saying that God does not exist’. The HC, on the other hand, 
sounds much more postmodern by arguing that sin has to do 
with ‘inventing another God’. 
The HC has a more pastoral approach by starting the 
exposition − expressing fear that the disobedient could 
‘endanger their own salvation’ by engaging in magic and 
other superstitious activities. 
The exposition of Zacharias Ursinus 
Quirinus Reuter says (cf. Mühling 2012:56; Gunnoe 2013:65) 
in the preface of the Opera Theologica (vol. 1, 10) of Zacharias 
Ursinus (1612) that he received a commission from Frederick 
III to write two catechisms: ‘Unam quidem maiorem, pro 
studiosis adultioribus, et scholis maioribus, alteram minorem, 
captui populi et puerilis aetatis magis accommodatam in chartam 
conjecit…’ Since the August Lang edition of 1907 these two 
catechisms have been known as Maior and Minor. They 
were revised by the imperial theological commission into 
a new catechism (published on 19 January 1563 − without 
question 80), which would later become known as the HC. 
13.I have made two contributions in this regard (cf. Van Wyk 1996, 2006). 
This ‘new catechism’ (publica Catechesis) combined the two 
wishes of the elector, namely for a catechism that could 
function as norm for preaching and teaching, and a ‘people’s 
catechism’ (Volkscatechismus) by which young and old could 
be educated.14 The third official edition (the fourth, according 
to Metz 1985:583) was taken up in the Church Order of the 
Palatinate of 15 November 1563, and in this way became the 
‘most important document of the state’ (Mühling 2012:56; 
Gunnoe 2013:66–67). The Catechesis Minor (1561, or early 
1562) was written in Latin and the original manuscript 
is available in Ursinus’ preserved private library. This 
catechism was used for the instruction of children and new 
church members. The Catechesis Maior (Summa theologiae), 
also written in Latin in 1562, was used as a textbook for 
senior students in Dogmatics at universities (cf. Bierma & 
Gunnoe 2013:78–79). 
Many formulations of the Minor and Maior were taken up 
pleraque transcripta in publicam Catechesin (Metz 1985:583; 
Sturm 2000:1514). Some of Ursinus’ original formulations 
were rejected by the commission. It is therefore a valuable 
academic exercise to revisit the formulations of the two 
catechisms15 in order to identify important perspectives on 
the first commandment that were not taken up in the HC. 
Small Catechism
16
Question and Answer 80	
Q. What are the commandments of the Decalogue?
A. First: Hear, O Israel. I am the Lord your God, who brought 
you out of the land of Egypt, the house of bondage. You shall 
have no other gods before me. 
Question and Answer 82	
Q. What does the first commandment require?
A. That we detest all idolatry with our whole heart and flee from 
it with the utmost zeal. (HC 94)
Question and Answer 83	
Q. What is idolatry?
A. It is to invent or have anything other than or in the place of 
the one, true God, who has revealed himself to us in his Word, 
on which our hope and trust depend; or anything that we love or 
fear more than him or honour contrary to his command. (HC 95)
14.A catechism attempts to formulate the relevant, essential and existential aspects 
of the gospel to contemporaries. The HC succeeded doing this in an outstanding 
way (Strohm 2012:61).
15.Both these catechisms have many similarities to Calvin’s Catechism, the Catechism 
of Emden and Theodor Beza’s Catechism of Geneva. It is also clear that Ursinus had 
made extensive use of Luther’s Catechisms, Calvin’s Catechism (French 1541, Latin 
1545) and Institutio, and Melanchthon’s Examen Ordinandorum (1552) and Loci, 
and other reformed and Lutheran catechisms, such as Johannes Brenz’ Fragestück 
des Christlichen glaubens für die Jugendt (1535) that had a more Zwinglian 
approach to Holy Communion (cf. Strohm 2012:63). He might even have looked 
into the Catechism of Basel (1531) written by Oecolampadius, the Catechism of 
Zürich (1534) by Leo Jud, as well as Martin Bucer’s Straatsburger Catechism of 
1534 (cf. Lee 2013:41–46). The fact that Ursinus and the Catechis Commission 
made extensive use of all these sources was mentioned by Olevianus in a letter to 
Heinrich Bullinger on 14 April 1563 saying ‘Non unius, sed multorum sunt collatae 
piae cogitationes’ (Metz 1985:583).
16.The translations presented here are taken from Bierma (2005:156–157). The 
original American translation has been kept unchanged, in spite of grammatical 
and stylistic problems.

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i2.710
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 7 of 9
Large Catechism17
Question and Answer 155
Q. What is the first commandment?
A. ‘Hear, O Israel: I am the Lord your God, who brought you out 
of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage. You shall have 
no other gods before me.’
Question and Answer 156
Q. What does God forbid in this commandment?
A. That we neither neglect nor give to another the worship we 
owe him.
Question and Answer 157
Q. What is the worship that he demands we render to him?
A. That we acknowledge him as our God according to his Word, 
firmly believe every word of his, place all our trust in him alone, 
look to him for all good things, love and honor him above all, 
humble ourselves before him, and patiently endure what he 
inflicts upon us.
Question and Answer 158
Q. When Moses speaks to people of Israel, does he also address 
us?
A. No less than he did them. First, because God was not 
producing then for the first time the law summarized in the 
Decalogue, but he was repeating and clarifying for the people 
of Israel not only what he required of them but also that for 
which all rational creatures had been made. Second, inasmuch 
as we have been engrafted into Christ, who is the natural seed of 
Abraham, we are the spiritual children of Abraham and Israel.
Question and Answer 159
Q. Why does God call himself ‘Lord’?
A. To remind us that he has full authority to rule us since he is 
the creator and sustainer of all things.
Question and Answer 160
Q. Why does he call himself our God, who brought Israel out of 
Egypt?
A. First, so that we might remember that this God alone is the 
true God, who revealed himself from the beginning in the church 
by his sure Word and clear divine testimonies. Second, so that 
when we consider that we have been saved and delivered from 
all evil by him, we might realize that we owe him gratitude and 
obedience.
Question and Answer 161
Q. What is an ‘other god’?
A. Anything besides the God revealed in the church in which 
people place any trust, or which they love or fear more than or 
equal to God, or to which they show an honor and reverence for 
the purpose of worshipping God that is outside of or contrary to 
the Word of God.
17.The translations presented here are taken from Bierma (2005:191–193).
Question and Answer 162
Q. Why is ‘before me’ added?
A. So that we flee all idolatry, not only in the sight of others but 
also in our hearts, since all things are exposed in the eyes of God.
Corpus doctrinae christianae 
Ursinus had the responsibility of defending the HC 
theologically. He immediately started using it as his 
academic textbook. His annual lectures in Dogmatics 
comprised nothing other than expanded commentaries 
on the HC. These lectures were collected and published in 
Geneva in 1584 as Doctrinae christianae compendium. In 1587, a 
second edition was published in Cambridge as Explicationes 
catecheticae. In 1591, his successor at the Collegium Sapientiae, 
David Pareus, revised the volume and published it in 
Neustadt as Explicationum catecheticarum […] absolutum opus 
totiusque theologiae purioris quasi novum corpus. In 1612, Reuter 
added the publication to the Opera theologica under the title, 
Corpus doctrinae christianae ecclesiarum a Papatu reformatorum 
continens explications catecheticas. Many revised editions 
followed. It eventually became known to South Africans in 
the Dutch translation as Het schatboek der verklaringen over de 
Heidelbergse Catechismus (Ursinus [1657] 1978; cf. De Wildt 
2013:86–87; the Latin text was not available to the author). 
In this publication, Ursinus made remarks on every phrase of 
the HC’s exposition of the first commandment. I regard the 
comments that follow as noteworthy.
The one, true God, our Lord is the author and sustainer of 
all good things. Because Christians know the ‘good things’ 
better than the Jews, the Lord expects the church to obey 
this commandment better than those outside Christ (Ursinus 
[1657] 1978:253). 
The phrase stating that the Lord brought Israel out of Egypt 
has not got meaning for the Jews only. This phrase is also 
directed to the church. One should understand this phrase 
as a metaphor, as an example of all other good things given 
to us by the Lord on a daily basis. This phrase should 
remind Christians of God who is not only the God of the old 
covenant, but also the God of the new covenant (Ursinus 
[1657] 1978:254). 
To know the only true God, one should start by accepting his 
existence. Doubt about his existence implies disobedience to 
the commandment. The next step is to show willingness to 
learn about him. Part of this learning process is to learn about 
the heresies that exist about the triune God. Self-evidently, 
this means that one should also learn the doctrine dealing 
with the trinity (Ursinus [1657] 1978:255). 
In these lectures, he reiterated his viewpoint that magic has to 
do with the signing of a pact with the devil. He, however, also 
presented us with a new perspective on magic. Magicians, 
according to him, are people who want ‘to do and to know 
things that are not necessary’. Prophets and fortune-tellers 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i2.710
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 8 of 9
are good examples of that. Magicians are also people who 
use words and rituals to manipulate the forces of life to harm 
others. Ursinus also associated magic with superstition, 
which has to do with the association of bad events with 
certain sounds and interpretations of dreams that could be 
totally misleading (Ursinus [1657] 1978:256–257).
The commandment expects faith in the God of the Bible. 
Disbelief would therefore be despising God, unbelief, 
doubting his love and goodness, and falling from faith after a 
certain period of time. Faith is always associated with hope. 
Transgressing this commandment would be falling into 
despair and hopelessness (Ursinus [1657] 1978:257–260). 
By loving God one obeys this commandment. Disobedience 
would be rejecting his love, but also misleading people about 
your love for God (Ursinus [1657] 1978:260).
Ursinus associates obedience to this commandment with the 
‘fear of God’. This ‘fear’ should be like the fear of a child. It 
is expecting good things from God all the time − also during 
bad times (Ursinus [1657] 1978:261–265). 
He ended his exposition with a remark that is amazingly 
relevant to the African situation. Concerning idolatry, he 
remarked that confessing the true God, but relying on 
something or someone else, such as ancestors,18 constitutes 
a transgression of this commandment. To imagine God 
as ‘helper’, but to rely on the deceased on a daily basis is 
not what the commandment expects of us (Ursinus [1657] 
1978:265–267). 
Why all this at this point in time?
Why this commandment of Melanchthon and Ursinus at 
this point in time? As South Africans we live in an extremely 
complicated country. Different cultures, traditions, beliefs, 
influences, ideologies and levels of education and development 
come together at this place. Sometimes we feel part of the 
postmodern world and sometimes we discover that we are 
still captured in the premodern world. All this contributes 
to a sense of uncertainty, disorientation and fear − that often 
spills over into anger, aggression and violence. Should the 
church want to play any meaningful role in this country, we 
would need to deal with the most basic and fundamental 
questions about God, morality and human existence. The first 
commandment is the foundation of all theology (Barth 1986). 
We consistently need to return to this point. Melanchthon 
and Ursinus dealt with this commandment as if they were 
our compatriots. They also were men of their own time − a 
time, however, that has many similarities to the world made 
up of many congregants of the African churches. These two 
theologians of the 16th century can offer a lot to people who 
are confronted by similar questions and challenges as they 
were. The history of theology is important not only to Europe 
and the United States, but also to Africa! 
18.Cf. Bediako (1997) for the importance of ancestor veneration in Africa.
My final remark has to do with a balanced approach to 
spirituality. Obviously Melanchthon and Ursinus had 
an intellectual and rational approach to the Christian 
faith. As children of the Reformation, we gladly follow in 
their footsteps. Hopefully, the younger, predominantly 
African congregations and churches would help the 
predominantly European section of the church to rediscover 
the joy and importance of singing − also of the HC − during 
church services. The HC was sung, for instance, in Basel 
(Switzerland) for many centuries since 1743. Unique of the 
‘Christliche Gesangbuch’ was that they had a separate hymn 
for every commandment (Wennemuth 2012:81). The fact that 
the HC was an addendum to many hymnals shows that the 
reformed tradition was never intended to be an emotionless, 
rational affair. 
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no financial or personal 
relationship(s) that may have inappropriately influenced 
him in writing this article.
References
Barth, K., 1986, ‘Das erste Gebot als theologisches Axiom’, in Theologische Fragen und 
Antworten: Gesammelte Vorträge: 3 Band (1927–1942), 2nd edn., pp. 127–143, 
Theologischer Verlag, Zürich. 
Bayer, O., 1995, ‘”Ich bin der Herr, dein Gott...”: Das erste Gebot in seiner Bedeutung 
für die Grundlegung der Ethik’, in Freiheit als Antwort: Zur theologischen Ethik, pp. 
83–93, Mohr, Tübingen.
Bediako, K., [1995] 1997, ‘Christian religion and the African world-view: Will ancestors 
survive?’, in Christianity in Africa: The Renewal of a Non-Western Religion, pp. 
210–233, Orbis Books, New York. 
Bierma, L. (ed.), 2005, An introduction to the Heidelberg Catechism: Sources, history 
and theology, Baker, Grand Rapids.
Bierma, L. & Gunnoe, C., 2013, ’Auteurschap van de Heidelbergse Catechismus’, in 
A. Huijgen, J. Fesko & A. Siller (eds.), Handboek Heidelbergse Catechismus, pp. 
73–83, Kok, Utrecht. 
Busch, E., 2013, ‘De wet van God volgens de Heidelbergse Catechismus’, in A. Huijgen, 
J. Fesko & A. Siller (eds.), Handboek Heidelbergse Catechismus, pp. 259–267, Kok, 
Utrecht. 
Concordia, 2005, The Lutheran confessions: A reader’s edition of the Book of Concord, 
based on the translation by W. Herrmann, T. Dau & G. Bente, revised, updated 
and annotated by P. McCain, pp. 343, 385, Concordia Publishing House, St Louis.
De Wildt, K., 2013, ‘1567–1620: Commentaren op de Heidelbergse Catechismus’, in 
A. Huijgen, J. Fesko & A. Siller (eds.), Handboek Heidelbergse Catechismus, pp. 
85–95, Kok, Utrecht. 
Den Hertog, G., 2012, ‘“Ein geringer Anfang … mit fester Absicht“: Die Zehn Gebote 
als Regeln’, in M. Heimbucher, C. Schneider-Harpprecht & A. Siller (eds.), Zugänge 
zum Heidelberger Katechismus: Geschichte, Themen, Unterricht., pp. 106–112, 
Neukirchener Theologie, Neukirchen-Vluyn. 
Den Hertog, G., 2013, ‘De Tien Geboden in de Heidelbergse Catechismus’, in A. 
Huijgen, J. Fesko & A. Siller (eds.), Handboek Heidelbergse Catechismus, pp. 293–
302, Kok, Utrecht.
Ebeling, G., 1969, ‘”Was heiβt ein Gott haben oder was ist Gott”: Bemerkungen 
zu Luthers Auslegung des ersten Gebots im Groβen Katechismus’, in Wort und 
Glaube, Band 2, Beiträge zur Fundamentaltheologie und zur Lehre von Gott, pp. 
287–304, Mohr, Tübingen.
Ehmann, J., 2010, ’Zacharias Ursinus und der Heidelberger Katechismus: Ein 
Lebensbild’, Luther 81(2), 90–103.
Ehmann, J., 2012, ‘Von Breslau in die Pfalz − die Wege des Zacharias Ursinus’, in M. 
Heimbucher, C. Schneider-Harpprecht & A. Siller (eds.), Zugänge zum Heidelberger 
Katechismus: Geschichte, Themen, Unterricht, pp. 33–42, Neukirchener Theologie, 
Neukirchen-Vluyn. 
German Reformed Church in the United States of America (GRCUS), [1863] 2012, 
Heidelberg Catechism in German, Latin and English with an Historical Introduction, 
Tercentenary Edition, Charles Scribner, New York. . 
Gunnoe, C., 2013, ‘De Heidelbergse Catechismus in de Theologische context van de 
Palts’, in A. Huijgen, J. Fesko & A. Siller (eds.), Handboek Heidelbergse Catechismus, 
pp. 61–72, Kok, Utrecht. 
Heimbucher, M., Schneider-Harpprecht, C. & Siller, A. 2012, Zugänge zum Heidelberger 
Katechismus: 
Geschichte, 
Themen, 
Unterricht, 
Neukirchener 
Theologie, 
Neukirchen-Vluyn. (Ein Handbuch für die Praxis mit Unterrichtsentwürfen auf 
CD-Rom).

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v47i2.710
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 9 of 9
Jung, M., 2010, Philipp Melanchthon und seine Zeit, Vandenhoeck, Göttingen.
Kuropka, N., 2010, Melanchthon, Mohr (UTB Profile), Tübingen. 
Lee, B., 2013, Catechismi in de gereformeerde traditie: een overzicht’, in A. Huijgen, 
J. Fesko & A. Siller (eds.), Handboek Heidelbergse Catechismus, pp. 37–47, Kok, 
Utrecht. 
Lohse, B., 1995, Luthers Theologie in ihrer historischen Entwicklung und in ihrem 
systematischen Zusammenhang, Vandenhoeck, Göttingen. PMCid:PMC185299
Luther, M., 1883ff., Weimarer Ausgabe, D. Martin Luthers Werke: Kritische 
Gesamtausgabe, 65 volumes, H Böhlau und Nachfolger, Weimar. [=WA]
Mbiti, J., [1969] 1985, African religions and philosophy, 11th edn., Heinemann, 
London. 
Melanchthon, P., [1521] 1997, Loci Communes, Lateinisch – Deutsch. Übersetzt v H. 
Pöhlmann, Hrsg von Lutherischen Kirchenamt der VELKD, 2. Aufl., Gütersloher 
Verlagshaus, Gütersloh. [=LC]
Melanchthon, P., [1553] 2010, Heubtartikel Christlicher Lere,  Melanchthons deutsche 
Fassung seiner Loci Theologici, nach dem Autograph und dem Originaldruck von 
1553 herausgegeben von Ralf Jenett und Johannes Schilling, 2. aktualisierte und 
ergänzte Ausgabe, Evangelische Verlagsanstalt, Leipzig. [=HL]
Metz, W., 1985, ‘Heidelberger Katechismus − Kirchengeschichtlich’, in Theologische 
Realenzyklopädie (TRE), vol. XIV, pp. 582–590, De Gruyter, Berlin.
Miggelbrink, R., 2002, Der zornige Gott: Die Bedeutung einer anstößigen biblischen 
Tradition, WBG, Darmstadt.
Mühling, A., 2012, ‘“Vornehmstes Stück unseres Regimentes“: Die Entstehung des 
Heidelberger Katechismus’, in M. Heimbucher, C. Schneider-Harpprecht & A. Siller 
(eds.), Zugänge zum Heidelberger Katechismus: Geschichte, Themen, Unterricht, 
pp. 51–57, Neukirchener Theologie, Neukirchen-Vluyn.
Noltensmeier, G., 2012, ’Der Heidelberger Katechismus − eine Komposition’, in M. 
Heimbucher, C. Schneider-Harpprecht & A. Siller (eds.), Zugänge zum Heidelberger 
Katechismus: Geschichte, Themen, Unterrich., pp. 24–29, Neukirchener Theologie, 
Neukirchen-Vluyn.
Plantinga, R., Thompson, T. & Lundberg, M., 2010, An introduction to Christian 
theology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
Selderhuis, H.J., 2010, Praeceptor Europae: Philippus Melanchthon over kerk, recht 
en universiteit, Theologische Universiteit Apeldoorn. (Apeldoornse Studies #55).
Strohm, C., 2012, ‘“Was must du wissen…?“ Das Anliegen reformatorischer 
Katechismen’, in M. Heimbucher, C. Schneider-Harpprecht & A. Siller (eds.), 
Zugänge zum Heidelberger Katechismus: Geschichte, Themen, Unterricht, pp. 
58–64, Neukirchener Theologie, Neukirchen-Vluyn.
Strohm, C., 2013, ’Politiek, kerk en universiteit in de ontstaanstijd van de Heidelbergse 
Catechismus’, in A. Huijgen, J. Fesko & A. Siller (eds.), Handboek Heidelbergse 
Catechismus, pp. 49–60, Kok, Utrecht. 
Sturm, E., 2000, ‘Heidelberger Katechismus’, in Religion in Geschichte und Gegenwart 
(RGG), vol. 3, pp. 1514–1515. Mohr, Tübingen. 
Theiβen, G., 2012, Glaubenssätze: Ein kritischer Katechismus, Gütersloher 
Verlagshaus, Gütersloh.
Ulrichs, H-G., 2012, ‘“Akkurat orthodox“, doch von “relative Autorität“’, in M. 
Heimbucher, C. Schneider-Harpprecht & A. Siller (eds.), Zugänge zum Heidelberger 
Katechismus: Geschichte, Themen, Unterricht, pp. 65–76, Neukirchener Theologie, 
Neukirchen-Vluyn. 
Ursinus, Z., [1657] 1978, Het schatboek der verklaringen over de Heidelbergse 
Catechismus, Uit de Latijnse lessen. Deel II, Opgemaakt door David Pareus. 
Vertaalt door Festus Hommius. Hedendaags Nederlands door J. van den Haar, Van 
den Tol, Dordrecht. 
Van den Brink, G. & Van der Kooi, C., 2012, Christelijke dogmatiek, Boekencentrum, 
Zoetermeer. 
Van Wyk, I.W.C., 1996, ‘Die prediking oor die eindoordeel’, HTS 52(2&3), 501–531.
Van Wyk, I.W.C., 2004, ‘African witchcraft in theological perspective’, HTS 60(4), 1201–
1228.
Van Wyk, I.W.C., 2006, ‘The final judgment in African perspectives’, HTS 62(2), 703–
729.
Van Wyk, N., 2011, ‘The Smaller Catechism of Zacharias Ursinus’, ThaciSA 3(2), 83–
109.
Walker, F., 2010, Theological sources of the Heidelberg Catechism, Lexington, KY. 
Wennemuth, H., 2012, ‘Gesungene Lehre – Katechismus in Liedern’, in M. Heimbucher, 
C. Schneider-Harpprecht & A. Siller (eds.), Zugänge zum Heidelberger Katechismus: 
Geschichte, Themen, Unterricht, pp. 77–86, Neukirchener Theologie, Neukirchen-
Vluyn.
Wolters, A., [1846] 2012, Der Heidelberger Katechismus in seiner ursprünglichen 
Gestalt, herausgegeben nebst der Geschichte seines Textes im Jahre 1563 von 
Albrecht Wolters, Adolph Marcus, Bonn.