Cent Eur J Nurs Midw 2015;6(1):209–217 
doi: 10.15452/CEJNM.2015.06.0005 
 
 
 
© 2014 Central European Journal of Nursing and Midwifery 
209
ORIGINAL PAPER                                                                                                               
LIVED EXPERIENCE OF PARENTS OF CHILDREN WITH LIFE-LIMITING AND LIFE-
THREATENING DISEASE 
Radka Bužgová, Andrea Páleníková 
Department of Nursing and Midwifery, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ostrava, Czech Republic 
Received January 9, 2015 
Accepted February 11, 2015 
Abstract 
Aim: The aim of the research was to identify and describe the problems and experiences of family members caring for children 
with life-threatening or life-limiting diseases from diagnosis to the eventual death of the child. Design: A qualitative study using 
grounded theory method. Methods: The sample consisted of eight family members with experience of direct care of children 
with life-limiting or life-threatening disease. For data collection a technique of non-standardized interview was used. Results: 
Based on data analysis, four main categories and subcategories were defined: 1. onset of the disease (diagnosis, prognosis and 
awareness), 2. therapeutical phase (demands of care, the impact of disease and treatment on the family), 3. the acceptance of life 
with disease (feelings and emotions, coming to terms with disease) and 4. dying and death (dignified dying, the period after 
death). Conclusion: Serious disease in a child is a difficult life situation for parents, associated with changes in their personal 
and family life. Carers need psychosocial support, especially in the form of advice, and require the exercise of empathy and open 
communication. 
Key words: palliative care, child, family, dying, support, dignity. 
 
 
Introduction  
Pediatric patients with life-limiting and life-
threatening diseases constitute a very heterogeneous 
group of patients. Life-limiting disease in children is 
defined as a disease which habitually results in 
premature death. Life-threatening disease is a disease 
with high probability of premature death due to the 
severity of the illness, but also the chance of long-term 
survival into adulthood (Craig et al., 2007, p. 2). These 
children may be granted some form of palliative care. 
Palliative care for children is the compact active care 
of a child's body, mind and spirit, and also includes 
providing support to the family of the child. It starts as 
soon as diagnosis is determined and continues 
regardless of whether the child receives or does not 
receive treatment in connection with the disease. As 
with adults, care providers must assess, evaluate and 
mitigate the physical, psychological and social 
suffering of the child (WHO Definition of Palliative 
Care, 2013).  
 
 
Corresponding author: Radka Bužgová, Department of Nursing 
and Midwifery, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ostrava, 
Syllabova 
19, 
Ostrava, 
Czech 
Republic, 
email: 
radka.buzgova@osu.cz 
 
Support for the family should also be granted in the 
period after the death of the child, thus in the period of 
mourning. 
The development of palliative care in pediatrics still 
lags behind the development of palliative care for 
adults. Lack of scientific evidence, outdated concepts 
and distrust of professionals and amateurs in palliative 
care, ethical and legal issues, fragmentation of care, 
limited financial resources, lack of erudition and 
specialists in palliative care, inadequate assessment 
and management of symptoms, blind persistence with 
efforts to cure child patients, and other obstacles, slow 
down this development  and hamper the provision of  
optimal palliative care to children (Davies et al., 2008, 
p. 282; Monterosso, De Graves, 2005, p. 275–276).  
The approximate number of children that could benefit 
from palliative care is estimated at seven million 
annually (Knapp et al., 2011, p. 361). All available 
studies have shown, that the largest number of deaths 
occur during the first year of life. In most cases this is 
due to congenital or chromosomal defects or 
deformity, and, after the first year, diseases of the 
nervous system, circulatory system, or tumors. The 
prevalence of life-limiting illness requiring palliative 
care is 10–16 : 10,000 children in the total number of 

Bužgová R, Páleníková A.                                                                                                                              Cent Eur J Nurs Midw 2015;6(1):209–217 
 
 
 
© 2014 Central European Journal of Nursing and Midwifery 
210
children aged 0–19 years. 30% of these are neoplastic 
diseases and the remaining 70% includes combined 
defects, predominantly neurodegenerative, metabolic 
and genetic (Huijer et al., 2009, p. 10–15). In the 
Czech Republic statistics are only available regarding 
child deaths. In 2012, 2.6 children per 1 000 live births 
died during the first year of life. At the age of 1–19 
years 19.4 children per 100,000 children died between 
these ages from other than external causes (deceased 
2012). 
It is essential that palliative care in children be a 
unified, well-coordinated service that is available to 
families, and that it provide support and information 
in a way that allows them to choose the point of care 
provision, utilization of available social services, and 
place of death (Chambers et al., 2009, p. 7). According 
to the recommended standards for palliative care for 
children in Europe (Craig et al., 2007, p. 4), the team 
of carers must have the ability to recognize the 
individuality of each child and their family and respect 
their values. Part of the team's work is to support the 
wishes and desires of the child and the family, as long 
as the child and caregivers are not exposed to harm.  
The most vulnerable group in pediatric palliative care 
are the parents. Parents, as the legal representatives of 
the child, often bear a heavy responsibility for personal 
and nursing care. Disease raises not only social but 
also ethical issues when the rights of the child, their 
wishes and participation in decision-making are often 
not respected (Huijer et al., 2009, p. 19–20; Chambers 
et al., 2009, p. 7–8). Monterosso and De Graves (2005, 
p. 275–276) states that the parents may experience 
difficulty with unwillingness or inability to switch 
from curative care to palliative care. They are forced 
to make very serious decisions in a situation where 
they have to choose between curative interventions or 
procedures to ensure physical and mental well-being, 
which are mutually exclusive. Hill and Coyne (2012, 
p. 278) found that parents face many battles from the 
moment their child is diagnosed with a life-limiting 
disease.  Therefore, families with a dying child present 
a very special challenge. However, as yet the Czech 
Republic completely lacks a conceptual health policy 
in the area of the care of incurable and terminally ill 
children (Student et al., 2004, p. 101–102). 
Aim  
The aim of the research was to identify and describe 
the problems and experiences of family members 
caring for children with life-threatening or life-
limiting diseases ranging from diagnosis to the 
eventual death of the child. 
 
Methods 
Design 
Due to the sensitivity of the chosen topic, the research 
was conducted by qualitative method using grounded 
theory method. 
Sample 
The research sample consisted of eight family 
members with experience of direct care of children 
with life-limiting or life-threatening diseases. They 
included six parents, one sibling and one grandparent, 
and consisted of seven women and one man aged 
between 32–60 years. Six participants were married, 
one was widowed and another divorced. Five 
respondents had a university degree and three had 
completed 
secondary 
education. 
Further 
characteristics 
of 
research 
participants 
remain 
intentionally unstated in order to preserve their 
anonymity. The sick children consisted of four boys 
and four girls. At the time of the interview four 
children were in care and four children were deceased. 
Of these, three died at home and the fourth in hospital 
in the ICU. The period of care lasted from a few hours 
(about 8 hours) to several years (about 9 years).  Five 
children had at least one sibling. The age of the 
children ranged from one month to 16 years. Two 
children had a cancer, the others had non-cancer 
diagnoses. Statements are identified by the names of 
the respondents, children and siblings, which have 
been changed to preserve their anonymity. 
Data collection 
For data collection the technique of non-standardized 
interview was used. Participants were asked a basic 
question: “What is your experience of the care of your 
seriously ill child?” The researcher asked further 
questions in response to the information volunteered. 
Interviews were conducted in health facilities (n = 3), 
in the working environment of the participants (n = 2), 
and in their home environment (n = 3). Interviews 
were recorded by dictaphone. They ranged from 35 to 
210 minutes in length. 
Data analysis 
Interviews were recorded, carefully listened to and 
subsequently transcribed verbatim. The transcribed 
data were repeatedly analyzed in an attempt to 
understand the significance of individual statements 
and identify the nature of communication. The method 
of text coloring helped to mark key passages of 
conversations that involved research objectives. 
Procedures for break down and conceptualization in 
the frame of open coding allowed statements to assign 
terms that generally summarized what respondents 
expressed by specific words. Many concepts were 

Bužgová R, Páleníková A.                                                                                                                              Cent Eur J Nurs Midw 2015;6(1):209–217 
 
 
 
© 2014 Central European Journal of Nursing and Midwifery 
211
repeated or were almost identical and could thus be 
grouped together as a single concept. In the next step, 
axial coding was performed, in which the individual 
concepts were grouped according to similarities. If in 
some groups it was possible to find an analogous 
context, they were grouped and labeled by the higher 
concept.  Using this procedure has been in the analysis 
of data specified the principal categories and 
subcategories. Categories were organized into an 
analytical relationship as per paradigmatic model. 
This relation is as follows: “A (conditions) leads to B 
(phenomenon), which leads to C (context), which 
leads to D (action or interactions including strategy), 
which then lead to E (consequences)” (Strauss, 1999, 
p. 92). In this particular case it is the following: 
Diseases of  Child (A – condition) leads to certain 
parents´ experience of life-threatening disease (B, 
phenomenon = central category), which leads to a 
certain experience during curative treatment (C), and 
subsequently to action – Adoption of life with the 
disease (D), whose culmination is the result of disease 
– death of the child (E). Direct statements from 
participants are given in italics. 
Results 
Four main categories were defined, based on data 
analysis. Each category and subcategory is shown in 
schema 1.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Schema 1 Overview of created categories and subcategories  
The outset of the disease 
Determination of diagnosis 
In the process of determination of diagnosis there was 
a difference in the description of parents of children 
with cancer and non-cancer disease. Two children 
with cancer were diagnosed relatively early. Susan 
recounted a negative experience: “They called us in 
and he just walked out and gave us the thumbs down. 
Eventually, he added: ʽWell, you should start working 
on a new babyʼ”. A similar experience is also 
mentioned by Radka, whose son was on MRI for knee 
pain: “Afterwards some doctor from orthopedics 
called and said, ʽI just wanted to tell you, that Johnny's 
life is in danger.ʼ Without introducing himself or 
saying anything concrete...”. 
Lived experience with life-limiting disease
The outset of the 
disease
Determination of 
diagnosis
Prognosis and 
awareness
Therapeutic phase
Difficulte care 
The impact of 
disease and 
treatment on the 
family
The phase of point 
break
Acceptance of life 
with the disease
Emotions and 
feelingstions and 
feelings
Reconciliation 
Death and dying
Dignified dying
The period after the 
death

Bužgová R, Páleníková A.                                                                                                                              Cent Eur J Nurs Midw 2015;6(1):209–217 
 
 
 
© 2014 Central European Journal of Nursing and Midwifery 
212
The experience of respondents with determination of 
diagnosis in non-cancer diseases was characterised by 
long waits, unclear information, recurrent life-
threatening states of the child, hospitalization and 
various examinations.  
Prognosis and awareness 
Determining diagnosis goes hand-in-hand with 
prognosis. If a percentual value of survival was 
known, it was truthfully communicated to some 
respondents. Reactions were mixed: “They found out 
that she is suffering from a disease in which the 
muscles gradually atrophy and these children die due 
to suffocation. [She] ... has the most severe form. 
Neurologists told us that it´s 99% certain she will die 
within a year. After hearing this, my wife was 
completely devastated. She nearly collapsed ....”. 
(Peter) The mother of a cancer boy recalled: “After 
surgery they were walking around on tiptoes for three 
days ... . Then the doctor came to us and told us that 
he had bad news ... that it was a malignant 
neuroectodermal tumor – that he would try to treat it 
and if we wanted some percentage, it was about 20%. 
So we said yeah, that's great! We believed that he 
would 
cure 
him”. 
(Susan) 
A 
characteristic 
phenomenon in cancer group respondents was 
confidence in the conduct of doctors and faith in a 
miracle cure. One of the mothers with hindsight 
evaluated her stance regarding the communication of 
diagnosis and repeated prognoses: “We did not 
understand it at all. We were like two people from 
outer space, with blinkers. We were short-sighted, 
because we did not read the signals that the doctors 
were trying to give us. They always said it was 
ʽseriousʼ, that ʽhe could dieʼ. And even though our 
doctor said a week before his death that he had just a 
0.05% chance of being cured, we still said: But you 
will cure him anyway”. (Radka) 
Caring for children with non-cancer diseases with 
uncertain course brought to light problems caused by 
lack of information about diagnosis and prognosis: 
“The information was about nothing. But for me it is 
better to know everything straight.... he will sit, he will 
not sit, he will live, he will die ... “. (Lida) Vera said: 
“Nobody told us to prepare for the worst, that it might 
turn out badly. Absolutely nobody”. For this reason 
they sought information from other sources: “At the 
time I did a lot of studying and reading, looking for 
information, but now we´ve given up on it”. (Simona) 
Other mothers regarded this activity in a very negative 
light. “You can´t imagine how bewildering it is when 
you have to do it all by yourself, when you have to 
search for information in the literature, on the 
Internet. The papers from the doctor won´t tell you 
anything – you can´t understand it, especially as a 
layman”. (Vera) 
Therapeutic phase 
Difficulty care 
With the exception of one case, care was provided by 
close relatives, either at home or in hospital, the 
environment alternating according to the current state 
of health of the child. Although demanding, home care 
was still preferable to carers: “I have always tried to 
stay at home as much as possible. Of course it was 
always a problem for the family. But I just had a 
feeling that if she stays home it will balance the 
medical care and the psychological losses which 
hospitalization causes”. (Simona) With hindsight, 
Vera evaluated the care she managed to provide at 
home as unbelievable: “We were worrying about 
Kristýnka all the time... Actually, till approximately 
21:00 I was busy with the kids, then I started to cook 
for the next day, then I did some laundry, and some 
late shopping in the evening, and around midnight I 
fed Kristýnka again till one o´clock in the morning. 
Then maybe till four o´clock a little bit of sleep and 
then the same over again”. 
Life-threatening disease always carried with it the 
chance of critical conditions developing and there was 
always the ever-present threat of the child's death. 
Thus, parents´ stress levels increased: “If your child 
stops breathing several times a day, and you do not 
know whether, when you put him to bed in the evening 
he will be able to breathe or whether you can afford to 
fall asleep for three hours, it's a really awful 
responsibility ...”. (Vera) Also in imminent threat of 
death was another child: “She stopped breathing at 
home....Mum managed to resuscitate her. She grabbed 
her legs, slapped her back, and she was back. Then 
they told us that it happens to one in a hundred, 
maximum”. (Peter) Unrelievable pain is another 
difficulty of care: “I spent days just carrying her 
around. Kristýnka permanently screamed and the only 
position in which she found some relief was when I 
held her to myself. So I carried her like this some 16 
hours a day, for a year and a half”. (Vera) 
The impact of disease and treatment on the family 
Carers unanimously stated that the disease affected the 
functioning of the whole family. In some cases it had 
an impact on the relationship between the parents of 
the child: “There were a few tense moments when I 
sensed that we would have a row simply because the 
agitation in the family was building up”. (Vera) A 
solid relationship and mutual understanding between 
partners was reported as one of the most important 
factors in helping them cope with the situation: “My 
husband bore all with me. I did not feel so bad, 

Bužgová R, Páleníková A.                                                                                                                              Cent Eur J Nurs Midw 2015;6(1):209–217 
 
 
 
© 2014 Central European Journal of Nursing and Midwifery 
213
because he showed me that he still valued me, that he 
was always there beside me. These are very important 
things”. (Susan)  
The severity of the disease also affected the 
psychological state of the respondents.  Vera stated 
that: “The first years I didn´t know if I shouldn´t just 
drive the car into the first lamp post. The sorrow is so 
awful, nobody can imagine it.” The siblings also found 
themselves in a difficult position: “We older children 
were completely pushed to one side. At that time we 
were supposed to help out and we were regarded not 
as children, but just as so many helping hands”. 
(Helena) Another problem was the prolonged 
separation of a second child from their mother: “You 
could tell that one month had been too long for him. 
When he was told he should go with me to the hospital, 
it was obvious he didn't want to. He didn't just want to 
go for a walk with me any more, he now said he wanted 
me to go home with him?”. (Simona)  
As a consequence of child care there were problems 
caused by commuting to medical facilities, financial 
worries, and the impact it had on work and family life.  
Peter stated that: “It causes such disruption to life. 
Nobody can imagine it.... Everything is complicated, 
commuting, your whole life is turned upside-down.” 
One of the mothers sacrificed her job so she could be 
closer to her sick child: “I´m a little sorry that I left my 
field. I abandoned something that I had studied and 
worked for ....”. (Simona) 
The phase of point break 
In both diagnostic groups the moment came to make 
one of the hardest decisions in life. In the group of 
children with cancer that moment was associated with 
the termination of curative treatment, and parents' 
effort to come to terms with the terminal stage of 
disease. Initially parents were incapable of accepting 
this fact. The mother of a deceased boy said: “The 
doctor asked if we thought that it should continue, that 
we could simply stop it and no longer have to undergo 
even the chemotherapy. We were in shock. He was 
trying to make a suggestion, but I did not understand 
it then”. (Susan) Radka had a similar experience: 
“They had asked us earlier whether we wanted to take 
him home. Approximately 2–3 weeks earlier. But we 
didn´t understand it”. 
The right time for the parents came somewhat later: 
“Only later did we understand that there was no 
longer any need for further suffering, that there was 
no need for additional imaging ....”. (Susan) 
The child´s wishes were also crucial to the parents: 
“The doctor came to Johnny and asked him whether 
he wanted to go home. And Johnny replied: ʽYeah, I 
do.ʼ I asked the doctor what he meant by it, if he was 
sending him home to die. He replied ʽyesʼ. The most 
important thing was what Johnny wanted. Although 
we were terribly afraid, we took him home, please 
him”. (Radka) For carers of non-cancer diseased 
children it is not possible to identify a precise moment 
in time when the final decision was made. In all cases, 
the process took years and the experience exacted a 
considerable psychological toll. 
Acceptance of life with disease 
Emotions and feelings 
Respondents described the course of the child´s 
disease as fluctuating between periods of hope and 
optimism, and moments of disappointment, fear and 
anxiety. 
Another 
method, 
alternative 
therapy, 
additional surgery or other positive proposals from 
physicians led to a surge of euphoria and the hope that 
the child would be cured: “You become fixated on the 
idea that it will help, that if she has withstood so much, 
she can withstand this and everything will definitely 
turn out well. And then again comes a moment when 
everything breaks down”. (Helen) This rollercoaster 
of alternating emotions is also described by Simona: 
“You experience a sort of positive vibration when 
someone tells you that something is good, when the 
only thing you´d heard before is that everything is bad. 
So when an expert tells you that the brain is good, you 
say to yourself, well, everything is not yet lost”. 
During the period of coping with the disease 
respondents repeatedly experienced feelings of guilt 
and remorse over earlier actions. Some mothers even 
sought the origin of the disease in pregnancy. Women 
come to terms with feelings of guilt by themselves: “It 
was necessary to get into that state and abandon the 
idea that I was responsible for it, that it was my fault. 
Still the shadow of doubt remains in me.....”. (Simona) 
Coming to Terms With Death 
Respondents first sought a cure for the disease. Only 
after some time did they learn to accept the incurable 
nature of the disease. Simona stated that: “I really 
believed that I would cure him. Healers, reiki, 
acupuncture, I started to read a lot of spiritual 
literature and studied it... I was convinced that Vojta 
would get better and that I had to be the one to ensure 
it”. Her coming to terms with incurable disease is 
described by Simona as follows: “I take it in the way 
that what is good for him is good for us. And if he 
decides that he wants to leave, then I will respect 
that”.  
Dying and death 
Dignified dying 
Carers of children with cancer who died at home, 
likewise described the need for assistance and 
coordination of care in the home environment in the 

Bužgová R, Páleníková A.                                                                                                                              Cent Eur J Nurs Midw 2015;6(1):209–217 
 
 
 
© 2014 Central European Journal of Nursing and Midwifery 
214
last days and weeks: “We were in contact with a 
doctor all the time, whenever we could call him”. 
(Susan) Radka also remembers cooperation with a 
mobile hospice: “They equipped us. They gave us 
oxygen, medication for urination, sleeping pills, 
patches for pain. They gave us the option that if 
anything happened or if we could not manage, that we 
could come any time”. Cooperation with the mobile 
hospice was not only a great support in this period, but 
in some families, essential in helping them deal with 
the situation: “We called the doctor to do something 
that we couldn´t cope with  any longer. So he arranged 
for the nurses from the mobile hospice to come within 
half an hour. They visited us three times a day. It really 
helped 
us. 
It 
recharged 
us 
physically 
and 
psychologically”. (Radka) Such assistance enabled 
parents to regard their child´s departure as dignified. 
Helen spoke of the poor management of pain in her 
dying younger sister when they were not able to use 
hospice services: “Her condition greatly deteriorated. 
She was completely emaciated, had a bloated belly 
and was in tremendous pain. No one cared how we 
were coping. This waiting for death, it was the most 
difficult...”. 
Participants commented favorably when given the 
opportunity to be with their child during the last 
moments of their life, at home: “We managed to say a 
lot of things. We came to accept that you can´t say 
ʽdon´t die!ʼ but ʽgo the way you want toʼ, that he can 
just leave whenever he wants. Then to have your child 
in your arms...”. (Susan) A similar experience is 
described by Radka: “The last day all three of us slept 
together. I think he was satisfied and happy that he 
was at home. His departure was peaceful. A nurse 
from the hospice just came... She walked into the living 
room and Johnny breathed his last. He waited for her. 
He had loved us so dearly and did not want to leave us 
in that situation alone. He waited for a person who 
knew how to cope with it”. Monika, whose child died 
in the ICU stressed the importance of the degree of 
sensitivity with which the death is communicated and 
of personal contact with the doctor: “I appreciated the 
fact that the doctor came, because originally she was 
just going to give us a call. When she then came to say 
that the boy had died, the only thing I remember is that 
she said that she had made a cross on his forehead at 
least, as we had wanted him to be baptized. I thought 
it was very kind of her”. 
The period after the death 
In the period after the death two common elements 
were important for the carers: the need for physical 
contact with the deceased and the need to preserve 
dignity and piety. In two cases both needs were met, 
while in another two cases they were not. Monika, 
whose child died in hospital, and who did not have the 
opportunity to see him and hold him, said: “I regret so 
much the fact that I could not hold him in my arms. I 
never had the physical contact. Not even at the funeral. 
I did not even think of it. If someone had asked me if I 
wanted to [hold him], I would have done it”. 
This experience was shared by Peter: “I wanted to go 
to pathology, but it was a problem for them and they 
did not want to show me my child...”. Susan describes 
the immediate moments after death at home as 
follows: “We were not in a rush. I knew that I could 
keep him in my arms. We were together. We dressed 
him and washed him, calmly”. Even in the other two 
cases, the first minutes after death were characterized 
by the following words: “no hurry and no rush”. 
Radka describes a state of helplessness immediately 
after the death of her child. However, nurses from the 
mobile hospice provided them with the necessary 
assistance and support: “The nurse arranged 
everything and called everywhere. She bathed him, 
changed his clothes, taped his eyes, tied his little 
mouth. I sat with him and held his hand. He had his 
favorite pillow and toy ....”. 
For the bereaved the quality of the first meeting with 
the medics and undertakers following death was key 
to preserving the dignity of the deceased child: “Above 
all else we required that an autopsy not be carried out. 
My husband took our child and lay him in the coffin. 
The coffin was awful, just for transport. We also 
needed to know that nobody would do anything to him 
anymore, that we did not need to worry. The parents 
need to know that nobody will touch their child 
anymore”. (Susan) 
Failure to comply with even the most basic principles 
of decency and professionalism was experienced by 
one respondent after the death of her sister: “The 
doctor arrived, opened the door and said: ʽWhere is 
it?ʼ He was disgusting, unpleasant. I had an argument 
with him. We told him what time she had died, and he 
said: ʽYou mean to tell me that you left her lying 
around?ʼ I threw him out. Then another doctor 
arrived”. (Helen) 
Some participants, such as Monika, complain of 
inappropriate responses from neighbors after their 
child´s death: “She told me: ʽThank you for another 
little angel in heaven.ʼ As if it was my job to put little 
angels in heaven. That really got to me”. Radka met 
with the following reaction from a neighbor: “Oh 
dear, what a thing to happen to you! Well, you know, 
your grandparents didn´t have the chance to spend 
any time with him, so they called him up to heaven”. 
She experienced another inappropriate response from 
a friend: “Radka, now you'll never be a grandmother 
...”. 

Bužgová R, Páleníková A.                                                                                                                              Cent Eur J Nurs Midw 2015;6(1):209–217 
 
 
 
© 2014 Central European Journal of Nursing and Midwifery 
215
Discussion 
This qualitative research aimed to determine the life 
experiences of carers of children with life-threatening 
or life-limiting disease, which, in some cases resulted 
in the child´s death. From the statements, it is clear the 
onset of incurable disease in a child subjects families 
and the sufferer to a long and distressing ordeal. How 
they come to terms with serious disease, and how they 
cope with the real threat of death, and the reactions 
they have to loss, are completely individual. Receiving 
a serious diagnosis for a child represents a profound 
shock, especially for parents. Acceptance and 
management of disease is particularly difficult when a 
child is born severely ill. Long-term uncertainty exists 
over whether the child will survive, and how they will 
be affected. Breaking the news of serious illness is a 
daunting task for physicians. However, information 
should always be provided as soon as possible (Říčan, 
2006, p. 69) Respondents´ experiences of regarding 
communication of diagnosis were varied. Parents of 
children with non-oncological disease waited long 
months for a final diagnosis. Although they suspected 
that there was something wrong, they nevertheless 
experienced shock and astonishment on actually 
receiving the diagnosis. A common feature of diseases 
with long-term adverse developments is their 
uncertain prognosis. The adaptation of the family 
basically never ends because every deterioration in the 
course of the disease means another new setback for 
the family (Říčan, 2006, p. 74). Parents of children 
with oncological disease were given clear and accurate 
information, including the chances of survival as a 
percentage. Even the faintest hope bolstered parents´ 
faith in a cure and gave them the strength to continue 
fighting the disease.  
A sick child is a very significant factor, which for a 
temporary or prolonged period forms and shapes the 
family system (Fendrychová et al., 2005, p. 33). Life-
threatening disease in their child meant the beginning 
of a process of change for the respondents and their 
families. All experienced a stage of reorganization and 
a new arrangement of personal and family life. All 
efforts from then on focused on caring for a sick 
family member according to the current status of the 
child or the type of ongoing treatment provided both 
at home and in hospital. The illness of a child causes a 
variety of changes in broader social relations 
(Fendrychová et al., 2005, p. 33). Carers in all cases 
tried to be on hand for the child throughout the 
duration of the disease. In some cases they had to deal 
with issues related to absenteeism from work, and 
consequently, the financial situation of the family. 
With each statement an effort was made to establish a 
turning point in the acceptance of the incurability of 
the disease. In tumorous diseases, that moment came 
when doctors proposed the ending of aggressive 
curative treatment and the acceptance of this by 
parents. 
Analysis 
of 
respondents´ 
statements 
confirmed that one of the prerequisites for successful 
management of this situation is that the reason for the 
transition from curative to palliative treatment is made 
clear to the parents and is accepted by them (Lokaj, 
2010, p. 110). With older children, the opinions and 
wishes of the child may contribute to the final 
decision, as was the case with one of the respondents. 
For parents of children with non-oncological disease 
the situation was much harder to manage. Carers 
became acquainted with the disease gradually over 
many months or years. Often unaware of the specific 
diagnosis, they had to cope with acute problems and 
life-threatening conditions. They underwent repeated 
hospitalizations, check-ups, treatments and surgery. 
Statements revealed that, because of the uncertain 
future course of the disease, their thoughts ranged 
from the most optimistic variant to the gradual 
acceptance of progressive incurable disease. Parkes, 
Relf and Couldrick (2007, p. 82) states that the most 
important task is to ensure that from the determination 
of diagnosis, the family receives uninterrupted care 
from at least one professional carer for as long as it is 
needed. Participants in our research did not have 
anyone like this available and care was thus 
fragmented and uncoordinated. From the start, the 
family should have at their disposal a key coordinator 
of care who can ensure continuity of care and 
guarantee that care is provided in accordance with the 
aims and wishes of the family and the child 
(Burkertová, Nováková, Dvořáková, 2005, p. 20; 
Inglin, Hornung, Bergstraesser, 2010, p. 1031-1038). 
All real-life stories of dealing with incurable disease 
and, in some cases, death are accompanied by a 
retroactive reassessment of previous decisions, 
behavior or conduct. Typical is finding fault in others, 
hostility and anger directed towards the whole world, 
but also feelings of guilt. Self-blame often has its roots 
far back in the past (Říčan et al., 2006, p. 69). Close 
relatives of children most often mulled over 
procedures carried out by physicians, painful or 
devastating interventions and the period of pregnancy. 
For every family the period of dying is difficult. All 
the demands of care combine with unclear 
expectations (e.g. when death will occur and what 
precise form it will take), and stem from a lack of 
knowledge, and inexperience (Haškovcová, 2007, p. 
79–80; Kübler-Rossová, 1994, p. 76). All carers 
expressed the need for coordination of palliative care 
at home during the death of a child. Parents frequently 
needed advice on how to deal with food rejection, 
inability to comply with drinking regimes, pain, and 

Bužgová R, Páleníková A.                                                                                                                              Cent Eur J Nurs Midw 2015;6(1):209–217 
 
 
 
© 2014 Central European Journal of Nursing and Midwifery 
216
personal support. Several studies (Contro et al., 2004, 
p. 1248–1252; Heller, Solomon, 2005, p. 335–346; 
Meyer et al., 2002, p. 226–231) have attested that 
regular contact with a health facility and its staff is 
perceived by parents as their main social contact and 
that its termination after the death of the child is 
regarded as a loss (Inglin, Hornung, Bergstraesser, 
2010, p. 1034–1036; Sláma et al., 2011, p. 317–318). 
The bereaved parents should therefore remain in touch 
with health professionals even in the first phase after 
the death of a child. Of central importance in the first 
minutes after the child's death was the need for 
physical contact between the parent and child. Smaller 
children were held in their arms, or they held the hands 
of older children. When the death of a child occurs in 
a medical or other facility parents must be given the 
chance to make physical contact with the deceased 
child. They should be allowed to stay with their child's 
body for as long as they wish. Parents from whom 
children were taken away immediately after birth and 
were not able to hold them in their arms, or at least 
touch them, experience grief far longer. Medical 
personnel should, therefore, not underestimate this 
need nor should they neglect it or try to discourage it, 
as already mentioned by one of the mothers in a 
statement. In fact, it should be actively encouraged as 
the parents themselves may not realize their need for 
it at the time (Kübler-Rossová, 2003, p. 38; Parkes, 
Relf, Couldrick, 2007, p. 118).  
The quality of the first meeting with medics and 
undertakers following the death of a child is one of the 
key factors in preserving the dignity of the deceased. 
Parents put great emphasis on not wishing to have an 
autopsy performed on the deceased child, which they 
considered unnecessary, and, moreover, a type of 
desecration. 
The final leave-taking itself took several forms. Some 
of the bereaved gave their child a favorite toy or 
pillow. One parent took the small body of his child and 
lay him in a coffin. The most important thing for them 
was the assurance that nothing bad would happen to 
their child after he was taken from home. Everyone 
involved in the death of a child should be made aware 
that what happens from the time the child passes away 
until the funeral is extremely important to parents. 
They begin to realize that they can no longer protect 
their child, and thus need verbal assurances that their 
integrity will be respected. 
Conclusion 
Life-threatening and life-limiting illness in a child is 
especially difficult for parents, causing overwhelming 
stress and fear, and bringing severe disruption to 
family life. Children and their families need 
psychosocial support, which consists mainly of 
consultation and requires the exercise of empathy and 
open communication. 
Confronting the death of a child is one of the most 
difficult moments in the life of families, but also in the 
professional life of health professionals. Families 
should receive adequate support. Hospice care was 
provided only to families of children with oncological 
disease. Children with non-oncological diseases 
represent an important group for palliative care 
because their disease has a chronic and unpredictable 
course and the process of adaptation of the family is 
never completely finished. Families repeatedly find 
themselves in a crisis in which they do not have any 
systematic support system. 
Ethical aspects and conflict of interest 
The research complies with recommended ethical 
rules. The participants were informed of the objectives 
of the study and signed an informed consent. During 
the conversation they were not obliged to comment on 
any areas they found uncomfortable or too painful, 
furthermore they could suspend or terminate the 
interview at any point. The anonymity of respondents 
was preserved. 
The authors declare that they are not aware of any 
conflict of interest.  
Author contribution 
Conception and design (RB, AK), data analysis and 
interpretation (RB, AK), manuscript draft (RB), 
critical revision of the manuscript (RB, AK), final 
approval of the manuscript (RB). 
References 
Burketová H, Nováková D, Dvořáková J. Zdravotně sociální 
aspekty paliativní péče u dětí. Kontakt. 2005;7(1–2):17–23. (in 
Czech) 
Contro NA, Larson J, Scofield S, Sourkes B, Cohen HJ. 
Hospital staff and family perspectives regarding quality of 
pediatric palliative care. Pediatrics. 2004;114(5):1248–1252. 
Craig F, Abu-Saad Huijer H, Benini F, Kuttner L, Wood C, 
Feraris PC, Zernikov B. IMPaCCT: standards for paediatric 
palliative care in Europe. European Journal of Palliative Care. 
2007;14(3):109–114. 
Davies B, Sehring S, Patridge JC, Cooper BA, Hughes A, Philp 
JC, Amidi-Nouri A, Kramer RF. Barriers to palliative care for 
children: perceptions of pediatric health care providers. 
Pediatrics. 2008;121(2):282–288. 
Fendrychová J. Péče o kriticky nemocné dítě. Brno: Národní 
centrum ošetřovatelství a nelékařských zdravotnických oborů; 
2005. (in Czech) 
Heller KS, Solomon MZ. Continuity of care and caring: what 
matters to parents of children with life-threatening conditions. 
Journal of Pediatric Nursing. 2005;20(5):335–346. 

Bužgová R, Páleníková A.                                                                                                                              Cent Eur J Nurs Midw 2015;6(1):209–217 
 
 
 
© 2014 Central European Journal of Nursing and Midwifery 
217
Hill K, Coyne I. Palliative care nursing for children in UK and 
Ireland. British Journal of Nursing. 2012;21(5):276–281. 
Huijer HAS, Benini F, Ferraris PC, Craig F, Kuttner L, Wood 
Ch, Zernikow B. Palliative care for infants, children and 
young people – the facts. EAPC: D´Ovidio Onlus; 2010 [cited 
2014 Aug 14].  
Inglin S, Hornung R, Bergstraesser E. Palliative care for 
children and adolescents in Switzerland: a need analysis across 
three diagnostic groups. European Journal of Pediatrics 
2001;170(8):1031–1038. 
Knapp C, Woodworth L, Wright M, Downing J, Drake R, 
Fowler-Kerry S, Hain R, Marston J. Pediatric palliative care 
provision around the World: A systematic review. Pediatric 
Blood & Cancer. 2011;57(3):361–368. 
Kübler-Rossová E. O dětech a smrti. Praha: ERMAT Praha; 
2003. (in Czech) 
Lokaj P. Paliativní péče u dětí s nádorovým onemocněním. 
Paliatívna medicína a liečba bolesti. 2010;3(3):110-112. (in 
Czech) 
Meyer EC, Burns JP, Griffith JL, Truog RD. Parental 
perspectives on end-of-life care in the pediatric intensive care 
unit. Critical care medicine. 2002;30(1):226–231. 
Monterosso L, DeGraves S. Paliativní péče v pediatrii. In: 
O’Connor M, Aranda S, editors. Paliativní péče pro sestry 
všech oborů. Praha: Grada Publishing; 2005. p. 275–284. (in 
Czech) 
Parkes CM, Relf M, Couldrick A. Poradenství pro smrtelně 
nemocné a pozůstalé. Brno: Společnost pro odbornou 
literaturu; 2007. (in Czech) 
Říčan P. Dětská klinická psychologie. 4. vyd. Praha: Grada 
Publishing; 2006. (in Czech)   
Sláma O. Paliativní medicína pro praxi. 2. vyd. Praha: Galén; 
2011. (in Czech) 
Strauss A. Základy kvalitativního výzkumu: Postupy a techniky 
metody zakotvené teorie. Boskovice: Albert; 1999. (in Czech)  
Student JCh, Muhlum A, Student U. Sociální práce v hospici a 
paliativní péče. 1. vyd. Praha: H & H Vyšehradská; 2006. (in 
Czech)   
WHO definition of palliative care. World Health Organization. 
©WHO; 2013 [cited 2014 Feb 24].  
Zemřelí 2012. ÚZIS. Institute of health information and 
statistics of the Czech Republic. [cited 2014 Dec 15]. Available 
from: http://www.uzis.cz/publikace/zemreli-2012