Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i1.1718
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
The role of prophetic action in public theology – the 
implications for addressing corruption in a context of 
sustainable development
Author:
Friedrich W. de Wet1
Affiliation:
1School for Biblical 
Counseling and Church 
Ministry, North-West 
University, Potchefstroom 
Campus, South Africa
Correspondence to: 
Friedrich de Wet
Email: 
fritz.dewet@nwu.ac.za
Postal address: 
PO Box 19120, Noordbrug 
2522, South Africa
Dates:
Received: 26 Aug. 2013
Accepted: 11 Feb. 2014
Published: 14 Aug. 2014
How to cite this article:
De Wet, F.W., 2014, ‘The role 
of prophetic action in public 
theology – the implications 
for addressing corruption 
in a context of sustainable 
development’, In die Skriflig 
48(1), Art. #1718, 8 pages. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/
ids.v48i1.1718
Copyright:
© 2014. The Authors.
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work
is licensed under the
Creative Commons
Attribution License.
After almost two decades of democratic rule in South Africa, patterns of withdrawal and 
uncertainty about the complexities involved in defining the contents, rationality and impact of 
the public role of the church in society seem to be prevalent. As unabated levels of corruption 
and its sustained threat to sustainable development point out, a long-awaited reckoning should 
take place – at least in the circles of South African churches from reformed origin – regarding 
its rich tradition of critical and transformational prophetic involvement in the public space. 
In this article, the author places different models for the public role of the church in the field 
of tension that is generated when the private and public spheres meet each other. The author 
anticipates different configurations that will probably form in this field of tension in the cases 
of respectively the Two Kingdoms Model, the Neo-Calvinist Approach and the Communicative 
Rationality Approach. 
Introduction
The transition from apartheid to a non-racial liberal democracy in South Africa has reshaped 
public life to such an extent that it inevitably requires different theological responses to those 
that were deemed or proven to be appropriate within a totalitarian apartheid context. Whereas 
previously the liberation struggle and criticism against the totalitarian-justifying theological 
design was the core around which the theological debate centred, the focal point has now shifted 
to democratic transformation and, within that, to the enormous challenge of inequality and 
poverty (cf. De Gruchy 2004:47, 54).
The implications of this rapidly changing landscape in a democratic dispensation characterised 
by secularity1 seem to have caught churches’ leadership off guard regarding a new vision for the 
prophetic role in the renewal of society. Once the 1994 elections had put the ANC government 
in power, the churches, as Mayson (2000:59) reminds us, seemed to back off. The prophetic 
vision that was prevalent during the struggle years collapsed. Hopes that religion would play a 
major role in the new dispensation were disappointed. Conferences to determine that role were 
not followed through. The national consultation of churches in South Africa at Rustenburg on 
22–26 February 1999, for example, involved almost all Christian churches. A joint declaration 
was issued about human rights and human responsibilities, poverty, crime and violence, respect 
1.The difference between the terms secularity and secularism should be noted. Secularity is meant to indicate a formal commitment to 
how different claims ought to be assessed, namely by appeal to human reason and common experience rather than by appeal to the 
authority of the church, tradition or political position. In contrast, secularism indicates a substantive outlook that denies the validity of 
religious claims, per se, such as claims about the reality of God (Meyer 2010:2). 
Page 1 of 8
Die rol van profetiese prediking in publieke teologie: Die implikasies vir die hantering 
van korrupsie in ‘n konteks van volhoubare ontwikkeling. Na bykans twee dekades 
van demokratiese regering in Suid-Afrika blyk dit dat patrone van onttrekking en 
onsekerheid oor wat die inhoud, rasionaliteit en impak van die publieke rol van die kerk 
in die samelewing presies behels, steeds voortduur. In ‘n situasie waaruit dit blyk dat daar 
geen werklike teenvoeter is vir die hoë vlakke van korrupsie asook vir die bedreiging wat 
dit vir volhoubare ontwikkeling inhou nie, is dit hoog tyd dat die kerk, ten minste in die 
geval van die Suid-Afrikaanse kerke van reformatoriese oorsprong, diep oor sy profetiese 
rol in die samelewing moet besin. Hierdie kerke kom uit ‘n ryke tradisie van kritiese en 
transformerende betrokkenheid in die publieke sfeer. In hierdie artikel plaas die outeur 
verskillende modelle vir die publieke rol van die kerk in die spanningsveld wat gegenereer 
word wanneer die private en publieke sfere mekaar ontmoet. Die outeur antisipeer 
verskillende konfigurasies wat waarskynlik na vore sal tree in hierdie spanningsveld in die 
gevalle van onderskeidelik die Twee Koninkryke Model, die Neo-Calvinistiese Benadering en die 
Kommunikatiewe Rasionaliteit Benadering. 
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Read online:

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i1.1718
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
for life and education. It is striking how little attention it 
received in the media and from the public when compared 
to the powerful impact of the first Rustenburg consultation 
before the 1994 election (Pieterse 2000:86; cf. Smit 2003:233). 
The previous high regard for the voice of the church was 
now relegated to viewing it as just one voice amongst others. 
Disillusionment with this new relegated role as well as the 
idea that Christians, after years of suffering and struggle, 
had spent their role and were entitled to sit back and let the 
new government transform society for them within the safe 
bounds of the Constitution, made churches turn their eyes 
inward to promote the growth of religious institutions rather 
than the transformation of society (Mayson 2000:59).
After almost two decades of democratic rule in South 
Africa, patterns of withdrawal and uncertainty about the 
complexities involved in defining the contents, rationality 
and impact of the public role of the church in society still 
seem to be prevalent.  
In this article, the problem field will be addressed from the 
vantage point of practical theology as a scientific endeavour 
not only concerned with the inner working of the church, but 
also with the public implications of the Gospel for this world 
in its current form and in its destiny:2
• 
Different epistemological models for coming to grips 
with the complex landscape of the prophetic role of the 
church in the public sphere of democratic societies will be 
investigated in interaction with global trends in Western 
thinking regarding this issue. 
• 
The reasoning behind these epistemological models will, 
from a practical-theological point of view, consistently be 
placed in the tension that arises when the private sphere 
(with its emphasis on actions that freely express the own 
ethos) and the public sphere (with its emphasis on the 
space shared with interest groups that do not necessarily 
share similar views, but can potentially benefit from one’s 
own views and actions) come into interaction with each 
other.3 Hermans (2005) expresses the dynamics of this 
tension-field as follows: 
On the one hand one needs to be truthful to normative 
claims of a religious community and tradition; but on the 
other hand one needs to be involved in an open dialogue 
with persons who do not share the metaphysical ground of 
this claim. How can one sail between Scylla of being strongly 
distinct but publicly irrelevant and Charybdis of being 
relevant but to relinquish its distinct truth claim? (p. 219)
2.See Miller-McLemore (2005:102) for a discussion on a growing trend in practical-
theological thinking to move towards public theology. Factors like concern about 
the silence of mainstream Christianity on key social issues and growing awareness 
of the serious limitations of approaches that merely focus on the skills of individual 
clergy, led practical theologians towards a focus on conceptual strategies for the 
transformation of culture.
3.Baker and Reader (2009:228) envisage a theological space that is both 
interdisciplinary and multilayered, working simultaneously at the intersect of a 
number of key political, cultural and theological realities. In order to express the 
full dynamism and complexity of what is required of practical theology and public 
theology, they identify five sets of binary poles and describes Christian interaction 
as a movement between the public and the private, the global and the local, the 
secular and the sacred, the creative (with risk involved) and the painful (with the 
predicament of being contested involved), the resurrection and the crucifixion. 
In doing so, an attempt is made to resist the simplistic and partial analysis of 
contemporary life that opts for engagement with only one or the opposite side of 
the binary pole.
• 
The way in which the abovementioned tension 
is navigated in the case of each of the different 
epistemological approaches under investigation will 
have a decisive impact on the visualisation of the role of 
prophetic action. Therefore, conclusions will be drawn in 
each case regarding the likely role that will be visualised 
for prophetic action by church leaders. The dynamics of 
corruption in its implications for sustainable development 
as one of the most challenging issues that needs to be 
addressed by all role players in the public arena of the 
current South-African democratic environment will 
consistently be used as example.
Before embarking on this practical-theological exercise, 
the current dynamics of corruption in its implications for 
sustainable development4 in South Africa’s liberal democracy 
are briefly discussed.
The dynamics of corruption and 
sustainable development in South 
Africa’s liberal democracy
Although the concept of liberal democracy5 aims at providing 
justice and equal opportunities for all people in a particular 
society, it is apparent that even this refined form of political 
system cannot guarantee a better life for all. One example of a 
notoriously undemocratic element at work, even in countries 
noted for their free, open, and democratic societies, is the 
prevalence of endemic corruption. The 2012 Corruption 
Perceptions Index of Transparency International6 rates South 
Africa, one of the younger liberal democracies of the world, 
69th out of 176 countries with a score of 43 on a scale of 
1 to 100 (where 0 means a country is perceived to be highly 
corrupt and 100 means it is perceived to be very clean). 
From the Index, it becomes clear that two-thirds of countries 
included in the survey are rated below 50, indicating a 
serious corruption problem on a global scale.
The negative impact of various forms of corruption on the 
current state of the South-African society and its future 
sustainability cannot be denied. Instances of corruption in 
South Africa, like the allocation of public resources for private 
financial gain or the establishment of inferior infrastructure 
due to the so-called ‘tenderpreneurship’ system,7 leave 
millions of poor South-Africans in a very vulnerable 
4.The factor of sustainable development (which consists of managing resource use for 
the benefit of current as well as future generations to such an extent that human 
needs are met without overburdening the environment in the process) is consciously 
brought into the scope of the research field because of its obvious relevance for a 
view on the future of society. One of the distinct features of prophetic action is that 
it is deeply rooted in anticipation of the eschatological renewal of life.
5.The key ideas in the concept of liberal democracy, in addition to equal protection 
before the law, involves: (1) freedom for each person to live in accordance with his 
or her own interpretation of life and (2) the state’s neutrality with respect to all such 
perspectives on life (Volf 2011:124).
6.The report views corruption as a major threat facing humanity, translating into 
human suffering with poor families being extorted for bribes to see doctors or to get 
access to clean drinking water. It leads to failure in the delivery of basic services like 
education or healthcare. It derails the building of essential infrastructure as corrupt 
leaders skim funds (Transparency International n.d.). 
7.‘Tenderpreneurs’ are persons who enrich themselves by gaining contracts in an 
illegal way or as a result of nepotism, political loyalties and pro-struggle credentials. 
Funds that were intended for low-cost housing, job creation and improved service 
delivery are misappropriated with the result that inferior, poorly sustainable 
infrastructure is created (Vorster 2012:136). 
Page 2 of 8

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i1.1718
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 3 of 8
position, deepen economic inequality and seriously threaten 
sustainable development (De Klerk 2013). It can be said 
that a perpetual culture of corruption has taken root in the 
South-African society, a culture that has invaded all spheres 
of life. It does not only have a severe economic impact, but 
also promotes distrust in leadership and fosters a spirit of 
despondency, posing great challenges to whoever wishes to 
address this issue with academic theory-formation, political 
prowess or innovative church leadership.
Vorster (2012:136) discusses the probability that the presence 
of a robust legal culture and uncompromised religions will 
contribute to reduced levels of corruption in a particular 
society.8 It is, however, noticeable in the South-African 
context, as Vorster (2012) points out, that Protestantism, 
especially the influential reformed tradition, played a minor 
role in monitoring the governments of both the pre-1994 and 
the post-1994 dispensations. Protestantism was unable to 
inhibit both the corruption pre-1994 and the contemporary 
levels of this phenomenon. This assessment by Vorster 
(2012) confirms that a long-awaited reckoning should take 
place, at least in the circles of South-African churches from 
reformed origin, regarding its rich tradition of critical and 
transformational involvement in the public space. 
McIlhenny (2009:76) draws a helpful distinction between 
two epistemological approaches in reformed confessional 
communities regarding the role and influence of Christianity 
in the public sphere. In the Two Kingdoms Model, the 
emphasis is on Christians recognising the entanglements of 
sin in culture and their pilgrim state on earth, turning their 
focus away from transformation, living in the hope that 
God will restore heaven and earth, and working faithfully 
and diligently to bring peace to all parts of the world. In the 
Neo-Calvinist Model, the sovereignty of Christ in all areas of 
life is emphasised and Christians are urged to actively engage 
culture with a view on its spiritual transformation. No area of 
life is neutral and all areas need to be redeemed.
In the discussion of the spectrum of possible epistemological 
departure points for defining the role of prophetic action 
in the public square, McIlhenny’s broad distinction in 
discussing epistemologies that work with a dualistic view 
will be utilised (which will be called the dualistic engagement 
perspective), on the one hand, and epistemologies that 
maintain an organic view (which will be called the organic 
transformative perspective), on the other hand. 
The impact of epistemologies 
anchored in a dualistic engagement 
perspective on defining the role 
of prophetic action in the 
private‑public tension 
A dualistic approach (as for instance expressed in the 
so-called Two Kingdoms Model) distinguishes between 
the redemptive sphere of the spiritual kingdom (finding 
8.Vorster’s (2010 or 2012?) discussion takes place in the context of his assessment of 
Treisman’s hypothesis that countries with an effective legal system and legal culture 
and countries with a Protestant tradition will have a lower incidence of corruption 
(see Treisman 2000:399-457). 
institutional expression in the present age only in the church) 
and the non-redemptive sphere of the civil kingdom (that 
encompasses non-ecclesiastical cultural endeavours as they 
are expressed, amongst others, in the work of the state). Social 
life is grounded in God’s work of creation and providence and 
not in his work of redemption. God as creator and sustainer 
of life rules the civil kingdom, but its sphere is limited to 
earthly and temporal matters. This sphere is legitimate but not 
necessarily holy. The spiritual kingdom introduces the sphere 
of redemption in Christ and is focused on the ultimate things 
of Christ’s eschatological kingdom. Whilst in the church, we 
feast on the Word of God’s revelation. In our cultural lives in 
this temporal world, we live by the ‘universally accessible’ 
dictates of natural law9 (VanDrunen 2010:14, 15).
This dualistic view, as it functions in reformed confessional 
communities, draws support from a certain interpretation 
of the views of Calvin regarding the difference between the 
heavenly and earthly spheres. Calvin’s views are interpreted 
as identifying the church with the redemptive kingdom of 
Christ and denouncing the claim that civil government is part 
of this redemptive kingdom (McIlhenny 2009:78; VanDrunen 
2010:4). The Two Kingdoms Model work with an interpretation 
of Calvin’s distinction between earthly things and heavenly 
things. ‘Earthly things’ are those which do not pertain to 
God or his Kingdom, to true justice or to the blessedness of 
future life. These earthly things are related to the present life 
and in a sense confined within its bounds. Spheres like public 
government, household management and liberal arts are 
included in the jurisdiction of the ‘earthly things’. ‘Heavenly 
things’, in contrast, have to do with the pure knowledge of 
God, the nature of true righteousness and the mysteries of the 
Heavenly Kingdom (Calvyn [1559] 1991/1992:2, 2, 13–15).
It must be made clear that the Two Kingdom Model’s 
distinction between the redemptive and civil spheres does not 
imply that the civil sphere is seen as a neutral terrain, devoid 
of guiding presuppositions. Although the task of the state, for 
instance, is to administer justice and not to preach the gospel, 
this justice includes protecting a citizen’s right, according to 
civil law, to preach the gospel. Justice administered by the 
state also does not only include the regulation of individuals 
in society but also, according to the natural law written in 
all human hearts, the protection of harmony in the temporal 
world and fairness in the economic sector in adherence to 
God’s creation order. All callings outside of the church follow 
the goal of living in accordance with God’s created order and 
exercising justice in some way (McIlhenny 2009:79, 80). 
The implications of a dualistic 
engaging perspective for visualising 
the role of prophetic action in the 
private-public tension
Christian engagement with civil society is visualised from 
the perspective that common ground can exist between 
9.Natural law, as presented amongst others in Romans 2:14−15 is seen to be part of 
the created order and inscribed on the hearts of all. These creational laws are seen 
to be distinct from the special revelation of God’s law to his chosen people in as far 
as the former do not save (McIlhenny 2009:77).

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i1.1718
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 4 of 8
Christians and non-Christians in as far as both are conscious of 
the natural laws of God for his created order as it is written in 
their hearts. 
Prophetic action is seen as witnessing pertaining to the issues 
that need to be addressed in enhancing justice and order in 
this temporal life and as prayers for government officials who 
are in need of wisdom in order to establish a peaceful and 
stable society, a society where all communities can serve their 
God without hindrance. A prophetic vision for the future of 
society proceeds from the idea that only Christ can truly renew 
(transform) society when he returns, and it consists of groaning 
that longs for consummation whilst bearing witness to a lost 
and dying world.
Corruption is seen as an evil that seriously threatens the stability 
and sustainability of society. A prophetic appeal is made in the 
context of natural law for civil leaders to act responsibly and 
for the activation of legal processes that promote penultimate 
stability-creating righteousness. These forms of engagement 
are, however, undertaken with the deep sense that only Christ 
will be able to ultimately eradicate all corrupt elements from 
creation upon his return.
Church leaders who proceed from this perspective should be 
aware of the possible one-sidedness into which their mind-set 
and actions can be drawn in a dualistic configuration of the 
private-public tension. The private space (associated with the 
redemptive sphere and eternal value) can become a sanctuary 
against deep contact with a corrupt world (in its association with 
things that have only temporary value), a comfort-zone that 
protects the spiritual community from exposure to the painful 
complexity and depth of suffering that people have to experience 
due to factors like social inequality and marginalisation. When 
engagement with cultural life is seen from a mind-set that 
reasons: ‘the best we can hope for is an ordering that is natural, 
not Christian’, the scope of the Christian contribution to society 
can become limited to formal, minimal and even apathetic 
contact (cf. Smith 2012:123). Criticising VanDrunen’s Natural 
Law and Two Kingdoms theory, Kloosterman (2010) states: 
VanDrunen is correct to warn us of the toxin of triumphalism 
arising from an over-realized eschatology that sees our efforts 
as establishing and ushering in the kingdom of God. There 
is another danger, however, this one equally toxic, namely, 
ingratitude arising from an under-realized eschatology that 
refuses to extend the third use of the law10 beyond personal 
ethics into social-cultural relationships, an ingratitude that 
quarantines the active rule of King Jesus, and a communal 
principled response to it, to the church parking lot. (p. 173)
The impact of epistemologies 
anchored in an organic 
transformative perspective on 
defining the role for prophetic 
action in the private-public tension 
In Koopman’s (2010b:123) approach, Christian participation 
in the public sphere is viewed in an organic sense by making 
10.It is customary in the circles of the Reformation to speak of three uses of the law: A 
civil use for the purpose of restraining sin, a pedagogic use to arise the knowledge of 
sin, and also a didactic (normative) use as the rule for the life of believers according 
to which they express their gratitude by loving God and their neighbours.
use of an integrative trinitarian theological structure. Life 
is not dichotomised into ‘private’ (in the sense that private 
space serves as a retreat for individualising and spiritualising 
tendencies) and ‘public’ (in the sense that public space is seen 
as having only temporal or neutral value) compartments, but 
rather organic unity and transformative power are employed 
in the basic stance (Koopman 2010b): 
Public theology reflects on the love of the triune God for the 
world. This love is expressed in the magnalia Dei, in other words, 
in the acts of creation, sustenance, care, election, and calling of 
God the Father,Mother or Parent; in the acts of reconciliation, 
salvation, and liberation of God the Son; and in the acts of 
renewal, fulfillment, and perfection of God the Spirit. This triune 
work establishes, confirms and actualizes the dignity and worth 
of all humans and of the rest of creation. God’s love for the 
world, which comes to expression in the magnalia Dei, does have 
meaning, significance, and implications for all dimensions and 
terrains of life, from the most private, personal, and intimate to 
the most public, open, social, and cosmic. At its heart, therefore, 
Christian theology is public theology. It reflects on the love of the 
God who is at work in all spheres of life. (p. 123)
The agenda of public theology, according to Koopman 
(2010b:137), is to reflect on the contents, rationality and 
implications of God’s love for the whole world, especially 
for those whose dignity is violated and who suffer exclusion, 
exploitation and expendability. It should also consider a 
creation that is killed by greed and consumerism.
Koopman’s agenda for, and encompassing and deep 
involvement in, the public sphere is also reflected in De 
Gruchy’s (2004) vision for the active role of the church in the 
transformation of the democratic South-African society: 
The task of the church in society is, after all, not to confirm the 
status quo, however good it may be, but to seek its ongoing 
transformation, however difficult. The church must surely prefer 
a democratic society to one that is totalitarian, but its task is not 
primarily to legitimate democracy. Rather, it is to inject into a 
democratic system a vision that pushes democracy beyond its 
present achievements towards a greater expression of what we 
believe is God’s will for the world. (p. 59)
Transformative action in a space where ecclesial and civic 
life is viewed to be representative of one undividable 
reality is, however, not an uncomplicated, tension-free 
matter. Private space (as a space in which the own ethos 
finds free expression) can be pressurised into becoming a 
space with a contra-cultural edge, or into positioning itself 
as an authoritative base for Christianising culture. It can 
also be pressurised into opening itself up to the ethos of 
other interest groups in the public arena in an attempt to 
play a compelling role. Aspects like presuppositions about 
the incommensurability between own values and the values 
of other role-players in the arena of public engagement, 
fears about the own truth claims being rejected and 
concerns about accommodative action possibly leading to 
self‑destruction, make this a complicated field to navigate. 
There are a myriad of possible responses to the tension 
between the own ethos and the interests of other role-players 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i1.1718
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 5 of 8
when the role of Christianity is basically seen to consist of 
an organic, transformative presence in civil society. On the 
right-hand end of the spectrum (the end that reflects the 
views of those who seek to reassert the voice of religion 
in society), voices like the philosopher MacIntrye and 
theologians Hauerwas and Milbank challenge the modern 
notions of common reason and experience and are generally 
suspicious of modern democracy (Meyer 2010:4). Hauerwas, 
for example, rejected the idea of universal ethic or common 
morality grounded in natural law. Nevertheless, he called for 
a kind of Christian activism in this world, that is, peculiar to 
Christianity. He sees the role of the church as a community of 
faith to live out its existence and hence display to the world 
how the peaceful kingdom of God provides an alternative 
to politics built upon violence and falsehood (VanDrunen 
2010:8). On the other end of the spectrum (the end that affirms 
modern secularity), reference can be made to Gustafson’s 
‘accountability theology’ and Niebuhr’s ‘pragmatic theology’ 
that share the attempt to make theology intelligible and at 
least partly credible to the wider culture in the modern world. 
Working with an underlying acceptance of the modern denial 
of metaphysics, both leave the metaphysical claim about the 
reality of God embedded in the background as a critical but 
unsubstantiated assumption (Meyer 2010:13). 
For the purpose of this article (which presents itself as an 
overview of epistemologies that will likely have an influence 
on prophetic action in the landscape of South-African public 
theology), the focus will be on the Neo-Calvinist Approach at 
the one end of the spectrum and the Communicative-Rationality 
Approach at the other end. The first approach functions with 
a more critical stance in the public arena and will to a greater 
extent stress the non-negotiability of Christian ethos. The 
latter functions with a more dialogical stance and will be 
open for the idea of seeking universal contact points between 
Christianity and other views. 
An overview of the Neo-Calvinist Approach
The Neo-Calvinist Approach is usually associated with 
a particular interpretation of the philosophies of Kuyper 
and Dooyeweerd.11 One of the main ideas by Kuyper that 
is incorporated into Neo-Calvinist thinking is the notion 
that every person has a faith commitment and beliefs 
(belief‑dispositions) situated at the core of his or her being. 
All humans are inescapably religious. Not only Christians 
are believers, but people who think that they can remain 
religiously neutral also have belief although it may be, due 
to the effect of sin, a malformed belief. There cannot be such 
thing as absence of belief. There are only two kinds of people: 
On the one hand, there are those who, through divine grace, 
11.It should be noted that the ideas of Kuyper and Dooyeweerd about the church’s 
participation in society have been interpreted quite differently in other contexts. 
Vorster (2010:434, 435), for instance, shows how a particular interpretation of 
Kuyper’s and Dooyeweerd’s distinction between the church as ‘institute’ and as 
‘organism’ led churches of the Afrikaans reformed tradition (in earlier interpretations 
of its Dutch roots) to limit the institutional role of the church to the ministry 
of the Word and Sacraments in the official gathering of believers. The church (at 
institutional level) was seen as a body that does not mingle with politics. Due to the 
emphasis on the institutional character of the church, the role of believers in their 
organic presence in all circles of life (the church as ‘organism’) was not worked out 
fully. It is likely that this interpretation, together with the influence of Methodism, led 
to an initial reluctance in voicing a clear prophetic witness against the policies of the 
apartheid government in the pre-democratic era.
know God and therefore apprehend a fundamental aspect of 
what reality is like as a whole. On the other hand, there are all 
other persons who remain in a state of malformation, do not 
have a capacity for the knowledge of God and lack the ability 
to obtain a conception of the whole. For Kuyper, cultural 
activity reveals the presuppositions of those who submit to 
the Lordship of Jesus Christ over every area of life in contrast 
to those who suppress that reality in unrighteousness 
(Wolterstorff 2001:281, 282; Meyer 2010:568). The implications 
for participation in the public arena are clear: The Christian 
worldview will be seen as the only view that is able to grasp 
the reality of God’s presence in this world and the purpose of 
life in its fullness. The idea of public debate on the common 
ground of a rationality that vies to interpret the world as 
a whole will therefore not be possible. In this respect, the 
Neo‑Calvinist Approach corresponds to what Simpson 
(2002:137) calls the agonistic view (from the Greek agōn), a view 
in which the public space is seen as the site of competitive 
struggle to demonstrate the self-sufficient superiority and 
cohesive totality of virtue attributed to a particular tradition. 
The profile of the Neo-Calvinist Approach’s incorporation 
of the ideas of Kuyper also corresponds with the second 
characteristic of the agonistic view mentioned by Simpson 
(2002:137), namely that a tradition’s moral virtuosity will 
vie for pre-eminence over other communal traditions by 
displaying itself as publicly as possible. In a Neo-Calvinist 
interpretation of Kuyper’s ideas (as it occurs for instance 
in adaptations of Kuyper’s ideas in wider American 
evangelicalism12 and in later developments in South African 
reformed circles13), the Christian’s role in public life is seen as 
participation in a transformative kingdom project undertaken 
by a people fuelled by grace and informed by revelation’s 
claims about how things ought to be (Smith 2012:123). The 
call to Christians will then be to oppose the antithetical 
worldview of modernism and to defend their own sanctuary 
by placing in opposition and publically displaying a life and 
worldview of their own (McIlhenny 2009:81). Christians 
will then not isolate themselves from the public arena 
and will not together with the groaning creation merely 
wait upon redemption. They will rather actively engage 
culture in order to further along its liberation. Interpreting 
the cultural mandate (Gn 1:26–28) from the vantage point 
of a creation-fall-redemption thinking scheme, Wolters 
(2005:63, 71) reasons that redemption in Christ restores and 
renews human beings in their on-going cultural mandate, 
purging them of their sinful perversion of culture and 
redirecting them in ways that are obedient to God and 
beneficial to one another and the whole of creation. All 
cultural labour is seen to be kingdom work in the sense that 
the eschatological kingdom of God is already present in this 
world. Kingdom service done in the name of Christ, striving 
12.See, for instance, Colson and Pearcey (2004) and Belcher (2009).
13.Discussing the impact of the view on the kingdom of God as an already-present, 
but not yet consummated-reality as it was worked out by scholars like Van der 
Walt (1962), Bright (1963) and Ridderbos (1969). Vorster (2010:446) explains how 
it came to be that the official ministry of the church was seen as to function like 
a power station, equipping believers for their work in influencing all spheres of 
society with the light and ethics of the kingdom. This work was seen as a form of 
participation in the coming of the kingdom. See Smit (2003:237) for more sources 
on the manifestation of Kuyper’s influence in the South-African context.

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i1.1718
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 6 of 8
for healing justice and intellectual light in darkness, is seen to 
be work that has eternal value and that will be preserved in 
the new life. All of it lasts; none of it is wasted or lost. There 
are both cultural continuity and transformation in the link 
between this world and the next (Plantinga 2002:137–138). 
An overview of the Communicative Rationality 
Approach
Another model for organic transformative engagement 
between Christianity and the public square, as discussed 
by Simpson (2002:139), envisages participation in a 
communicative civil society.14 Unlike the agonistic view, 
with its characteristic practices of elitist moral display or 
the liberal view that seeks to exclude theological traditions 
from bringing their private moral concerns into the public 
forum, communicative civil society holds that claims to 
practical moral truth must be redeemed critically through 
participatory practices. A communicative civil society 
anticipates overlapping moral insights. This anticipation 
depends on thick moral traditions becoming socially 
embodied and mutually engaging according to rational 
communicative procedures and by means of communicative 
practices. Such a communicative civil society is open to 
the prophetic vocation of congregations, exercised in their 
role as public companions in the public sphere rather than 
heroic individualists, reminding civil society of the fallibilist 
character of every moral consensus within a Christian 
eschatological horizon of the ‘not yet’. 
De Gruchy (2004:59) clearly points out the demands that have 
to be met by the rationality with which a thick moral tradition 
enters the public debate. He reasons that an authentic public 
theology will have to be self-critical and sensitive to other 
perspectives and approaches as well as to the historical 
context in order to function in the market place and public 
square. Yet, this has to be done in a way that does not deny 
its specific Christian content or undermines prophetic clarity 
and responsibility. He argues that there is a fine line between 
a theology that is arrogant and triumphalist in its witness and 
a theology which seeks to bring insight into the debate and, 
when necessary, to speak the truth clearly and unequivocally 
in the most concrete way possible.
As an example of how a mutually enriching exchange 
is visualised for public debate in a pluralistic context, 
reference can be made to Koopman’s application of Stout’s15 
perspectives on the function of language in creative ethical 
thinking. Koopman (2010a) writes: 
14.In the conceptualisation of a communicative civil society, reference is frequently 
made to Habermas`s theories regarding discourse in the public sphere. 
Habermas (1998:360) describes the public sphere as a social space generated by 
communicative action, as a network for communicating information and points of 
view. The streams of communication are, in the process, filtered and processed in 
such a way that they coalesce into topically specific public opinions. 
15.Stout (1990:74−81) alludes to Levi-Strauss’s use of the term bricolage when 
describing moral bricolage as an activity that involves taking apart, reordering, 
weighting, weeding out and filling in available conceptual resources for solving 
problems. Fragments of moral language are rearranged in relation to each other 
and the whole. In the process of bricolage, the sparse language of pidgin (a sparse 
dialect used entirely for communicating with members of another group, a handy 
mode of discourse with strangers) can undergo further development, catch on as a 
language to be learned in infancy and function as subtle medium for deliberation 
and discourse with friends and family. Linguists call such language a creole. A creole 
can become, over time, as rich a moral language as one could want − drawing 
vocabularies from different sources and weaving them together, if all goes well, 
into a tapestry well suited to the needs of a time and place.
We act as bricoleurs who developed a common human rights 
language by borrowing from various religious and secular 
traditions. The pidgin language, i.e. the human rights language, 
which served as the minimum consensus of the plurality of 
South-Africans over the last twelve years, developed into a 
creole language. That means the South-African public human 
rights discourse is enriched by various traditions. Christianity 
helped to make notions like reconciliation and restorative 
justice part of the new public language, or creole. And the 
indigenous African cultures helped to make ubuntu, the notion 
that one person is a person through other persons, the notion 
therefore of communality and solidarity, part of the common 
creole language. (p. 46)
The implications of an organic 
transformative perspective for 
visualising the role of prophetic 
action in the private-public tension
In the case of the Neo-Calvinist Approach, Christian 
engagement with civil society is visualised from the 
perspective that, due to incommensurable differences 
at the deep level of belief dispositions, the core values of 
Christianity will not be negotiable in the public arena. 
Ultimate progress in the public arena can only be made 
when unregenerated thinking is transformed into becoming 
conscious of and bowing before the Lordship of Jesus Christ 
over all areas of life. 
Prophetic action is seen from the perspective of its 
transformative contribution towards society in its present form, 
a renewal of society that can find its true source of liberation, 
righteousness and integrity only in the redemptive presence 
of Jesus Christ. A prophetic vision for the future of society 
proceeds from the idea that the kingdom of God is already 
breaking through into the present society, bearing the first 
fruits of eternal life and in the process energetically preparing 
this world in anticipation of its ultimate consummation.
Corruption will be seen as a manifestation of the corrupt and 
disintegrative forces at work in a society that can only be 
truly renewed when the roots of this problem is addressed by 
ministering the redemptive presence of Jesus Christ. Critical 
prophetic action will not only call for legislative measures 
as this will merely touch the surface of the problem. What 
is needed is change of heart at the deepest level of human 
existence and the creation of a despondency-fighting, living 
hope that will display how life can flourish in a sustained 
form in spaces where the authority of Christ is recognised in 
anticipation of his consummative return. 
Church leaders who proceed from this perspective should 
be aware of the possible dominating position into which 
their mind-set and actions can be drawn in an open and 
dialogical configuration of the private-public tension. When 
engaging public life from a strong sense of conviction, 
church leaders find themselves in the predicament that they 
think that they are right but with no generally accepted 
measure by which their rightness (regarding sinfulness 

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i1.1718
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 7 of 8
and need for redemption in Christ) can be independently 
validated (Bond 2010:69). Entering the public arena with a 
fully‑fledged and comprehensive agenda for transformation 
(as it was comprehensively worked out in the authoritative 
private space) will seriously impede or even close down the 
possibility of making the own belief intelligible by means of 
a rational exchange of ideas (cf. Hermans 2005:222). Church 
leaders should be conscious that they are navigating a field of 
tension in which there is a hairbreadth of difference between 
a coercive imposition of the own agenda and an authentic 
communication of a vision that serves the common good of 
humanity and creation. 
 
In the case of the Communicative Rationality Approach, 
engagement with civil society is visualised from the 
perspective that moral truth must be redeemed critically 
through participation in a rational dialogue with the 
assumption that common ground exists for open flow 
between Christian and non-Christian moral insights and 
indigenous communal experience. 
Prophetic action focuses on bringing richer perspectives to 
points of communality in the public space. Common points 
of reference, like a mutual commitment to a Bill of Human 
Rights in a democratic society, is utilised in developing richer 
perspectives on aspects like restorative justice, reconciliation, 
equality, human dignity and the responsible deployment of 
available resources. An attempt is made to balance respect 
for the wisdom and fundamental value imbedded in other 
cultural and religious traditions with boldness in offering 
unique and ennobling insights believed to be present in the 
Christian tradition.
Corruption is seen as an infliction that can only be countered 
effectively from the communal repository of wisdom and 
deeply rooted indigenous insights regarding the integral 
functioning of civil life. Rather that imposing an artificial 
solution from outside or above, the deeply rooted indigenous 
sources for integral social life should be re-activated and 
ennobled. The deeply rooted culture of ubuntu, for instance, 
can be ennobled to become an organic base for transformation 
once it has been liberated from apartheid effects like 
displacement and entitlement. 
Church leaders who proceed from this perspective should 
be aware of the possibility that the ‘otherness’ of the Gospel 
(as for instance expressed in Jesus’s emphasis on the unique 
righteousness that should be ministered in kingdom activity 
(Mt 5:20, 43–48)) can become subject to dissolution in an open 
and dialogical configuration of the private-public tension 
field. Unless accompanied by robust affirmation of specific 
Christian identity, as Volf (2011:94) reasons, accommodation 
can carry in itself seeds of Christian self-dissolution. In 
shifting the focus of attention to an accommodating mind 
for the ‘otherness’ of other marginalised traditions, the 
departure point in the ‘otherness’ of the Gospel can begin to 
fade into the background. In overreaction against a coercive 
implementation of kingdom proclamation, the prophetic 
word can begin to dissolve into a wager about truth, constantly 
renegotiating the own truth wagers in light of popular beliefs, 
symbols, narratives and myths (Bond 2010:80). 
Conclusion
Negotiating the tension between private and public in 
an attempt to engage faithfully and authentically with 
civic society is no easy task for the contemporary church 
leader. Distortions in this tension can severely impede and 
misalign the prophetic action of the church, whether it is 
by isolating redemptive action into the private sphere and 
limiting public engagement to a formal and superficial level 
in the process, or by departing from a pre-constructed and 
closed vision for a transformative kingdom presence in this 
word and having to deal with unresponsiveness against 
what is deemed to be coercive action in the process or by 
opening up to the ‘otherness’ of this world to such an extent 
that the ‘otherness’ of the own ethos dissolves in an ocean 
of undifferentiated relativity.
To my mind, the true centre of gravity for faithful and 
authentic engagement with civic life in our contemporary 
society does not primarily lie in the systematic soundness of 
our private theological designs for Christianity’s presence in 
this world or in our capacity to make ourselves presentable 
according to what is expected from us by civil society. Our 
true centre of gravity rather lies in the living, pneumatological 
presence of and faith-union with the One to whom all things 
belong and Who is in the process of making all things new. 
Christian identity, as Volf (2011:95) reasons in his account 
of internal difference as a mode of Christian identity and 
engagement in contemporary societies, is not established by 
denying and combating what is outside but by embracing 
and highlighting the centre of what is inside – Jesus Christ 
as the Word who took on flesh and became the Lamb of 
God bearing the sin of the world. In this account, Christian 
identity is not reactive but positive. The centre, not fear of 
others, defines the difference, either of their uncomfortable 
proximity or of their dangerous aggressiveness. 
The prophetic role of Christian communities, their 
engagement to mend the world, to foster human flourishing 
and to serve the common good, is nothing but their identity 
in Christ projecting itself outward in word and deed 
(Volf 2011:96).
By anchoring their identity in the pneumatological presence 
of Christ, Christians will be able to see this world and the 
disintegrative, corruptive forces at work in it through the 
eyes of Christ. They will see the full, unbearable truth about 
the brokenness of this world in the blazing light of God’s 
holy vision for life and his holy will to restore this life to the 
fullness he intended for it in Christ. It is only along this way 
that our vision for the prophetic role of Christianity in civil 
life will not be anchored in our constructs about what the 
presence of God’s kingdom in this world should entail or 
in what is expected from us by the world but in what God 
himself intends for his world.

Original Research
doi:10.4102/ids.v48i1.1718
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
Page 8 of 8
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no financial or personal 
relationship(s) which may have inappropriately influenced 
him in writing this article.
References
Baker, C.R. & Reader, J., 2009, ‘Mapping the new theological space: From blurred 
encounters to thresholds of transformation’, in J. Reader & C.R. Baker (eds.), 
Entering the new theological space: Blurred encounters of faith, politics and 
community, pp. 219–229, Ashgate, Farnham.
Belcher, J., 2009, Deep church, InterVarsity, Downers Grove. 
Bond, L.S., 2010, ‘Preaching and public theology: Reclaiming the church’s ministry’, 
Encounter 71(1), 63–80.
Bright, J., 1963, The kingdom of God, Abingdon, New York. 
Calvyn, J., [1559] 1991/1992, Institusie van die Christelike godsdiens, vert. H.W. 
Simpson, CJBF, Potchefstroom.
Colson, C. & Pearcey, N., 2004, How now shall we live?, Tyndale, Wheaton. 
De Gruchy, J.W., 2004, ‘From political to public theologies: The role of theology in 
public life in South Africa’, in W.F. Storrar & A.R. Morton (eds.), Public Theology 
for the 21ste century: Essays in honour of Duncan B. Forrester, pp. 45–62, T&T 
Clark, London.
De Klerk, B.J., 2013, ‘The relationship between prophetic preaching and performing 
the gift of prophecy in South Africa’, HTS Teologiese Studies/ Theological Studies 
69(1), Art. #1369, 8 pages.
Habermas, J., 1998, Between facts and norms: Contributions to a discourse theory of 
law and democracy, transl. W. Rehg, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Hermans, C.A.M., 2005, ‘A pragmatic practical theology as public theology’, in 
E. Graham & A. Rowlands (eds.), Pathways to the public square: Practical theology 
in an age of pluralism, Proceedings of the International Academy of Practical 
Theology, Manchester, 2003, pp. 219–228, LIT Verlag, Münster.
Kloosterman, N.D., 2010, ‘A response to “The kingdom of God is twofold”: Natural law 
and the two kingdoms in the thought of Herman Bavinck by David VanDrunen’, 
Calvin Theological Journal 45(1), 165–176.
Koopman, N., 2010a, ‘Churches and public policy discourses in South Africa’, Journal 
of Theology for Southern Africa 136(1), 41–56. 
Koopman, N., 2010b, ‘Some contours for public theology in South Africa’, International 
Journal for Practical Theology 14(1), 123–138. http://dx.doi.org/10.1515/
ijpt.2010.9
Mayson, C., 2000, ‘Listening for the prophetic voices: Where have all the prophets 
gone? Prophetic silences and the incapacity of religions to take us forward’, in 
C.W. du Toit (ed.), Violence, truth and prophetic silence: Religion and the quest for 
a South-African common good, pp. 55– 81, UNISA, Pretoria.
McIlhenny, J., 2009, ‘Third-way reformed approach to Christ and culture: Appropriating 
Kuyperian neo-Calvinism and the two kingdoms perspective’, Mid‑America 
Journal of Theology 20(1), 75–94.
Meyer, W.J., 2010, Metaphysics and the future of theology: The voice of theology in 
public life, Pickwick Publications, Eugene, OR.
Miller-McLemore, B.J., 2005, ‘Pastoral theology and public theology’, in E. Graham & 
A. Rowlands (eds.), Pathways to the public square: Practical theology in an age 
of secularism, Proceedings of the International Academy of Practical Theology, 
Manchester, 2003, pp. 95–106, LIT Verlag, Münster.
Pieterse, H.J.C., 2000, ‘Where have all the prophets gone? Prophetic silence and the 
incapacity of religions to take us forward’, in C.W. du Toit (ed.), Violence, truth 
and prophetic silence: Religion and the quest for a South-African common good, 
pp. 82–97, UNISA , Pretoria.
Plantinga, C., 2002, Engaging God’s world: A Christian vision of faith, learning and 
living, Eerdmans, Grand Rapids, MI.
Ridderbos, H., 1969, The coming of the kingdom, Presbyterian and Reformed 
Publishing, Philadelphia. 
Simpson, G.M., 2002, Critical Social Theory: Prophetic reason, civil society and 
Christian imagination, Augsburg Fortress Press, Minneapolis, MN.
Smit, D., 2003, ‘Can we still be reformed? Questions from a South African perspective’, 
in W.M. Alston Jr. & M Welker, (eds.), Reformed theology: Identity and ecumenicity, 
pp. 233–253, Eerdmans, Grand Rapids, MI. 
Smith, J.K.A., 2012, ‘Reforming public theology: Two kingdoms, or two cities?’, Calvin 
Theological Journal 47(1), 122–137.
Stout, J. 1990, Ethics after Babel: The language of morals and their discontent, James 
Clarke & Co, Cambridge. 
Transparency International, n.d., Transparency International Corruption Perceptions 
Index 2012, viewed 23 July 2013, from: http://cpi.transparency.org/cpi2012/
results/#sthash.lupCFgQJ.dpuf 
Treisman, D., 2000, ‘The causes of corruption: A cross-national study’, Journal of Public 
Economics 76(1), 399–457. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0047-2727(99)00092-4
Van der Walt, T., 1962, Die koninkryk van God- naby!, Kok, Kampen. 
VanDrunen, D., 2010, Natural law and the two kingdoms: A study in the development 
of reformed social thought, Eerdmans, Grand Rapids, MI.
Volf, M., 2011, A public faith: How followers of Christ should serve the common good, 
Brazos Press, Grand Rapids, MI.
Vorster, J.M., 2010, ‘’n Ekklesiologiese model vir die bediening van versoening in ’n 
sosio-politieke konteks,’ In die Skriflig 44(2), 429–454.
Vorster, J.M., 2012, ‘Managing corruption in South Africa: The ethical responsibility of 
churches’, Scriptura 109(1), 133–147.
Wolters, A.M., 2005, Creation regained: Biblical basics for a reformational worldview, 
Eerdmans, Grand Rapids, MI.
Wolterstorff, N.P., 2001, ‘What New Haven and Grand Rapids have to say to each 
other’, in Seeking understanding: The Stob Lectures, 1986–1998, Calvin College 
and Calvin Theological Seminary, pp. 251–293, compiled by Calvin College and 
Calvin Theological Seminary, Eerdmans, Grand Rapids, MI.