http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1987
Page 1 of 7
Original Research
Authors:
Peter White1
Cornelius J.P. Niemandt1
Affiliations:
1Department of Science of 
Religion and Missiology, 
Faculty of Theology, 
University of Pretoria, 
South Africa
Correspondence to:
Peter White
Email:
pastor_white@hotmail.com
Postal address:
Private Bag X20, Hatfield 
0028, South Africa
Dates:
Received: 12 May 2015
Accepted: 12 Aug. 2015
Published: 30 Sept. 2015
How to cite this article:
White, P. & Niemandt, C.J.P., 
2015, ‘The missional role 
of the Holy Spirit: Ghanaian 
Pentecostals’ view and 
practice’, In die Skriflig 49(1), 
Art. #1987, 7 pages. http://
dx.doi.org/10.4102/ids.
v49i1.1987
Note:
This article was presented 
at the Southern African 
Missiological Society Annual 
Conference held at North-
West University, Mafikeng 
Campus, Mafikeng, South 
Africa, from 12–14 March 
2014.
Copyright:
© 2015. The Authors. 
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work is 
licensed under the Creative 
Commons Attribution 
License.
Introduction
Roamba (2006:11–15) notes that very little has been written on the role of the Holy Spirit as a 
missionary spirit with regard to West African churches. Though this claim may not be true in 
some West African churches, it is, however, true in the context of the Ghanaian Pentecostal 
churches. A review of some books and academic research on Pentecostalism in Ghana attests 
to this fact. A study of Omenyo’s (2006), Pentecost outside Pentecostalism, and that of Larbi (2001), 
Pentecostalism: The eddies of Ghanaian Christianity, shows that these books are geared towards a 
historical search of the emergence of Pentecostalism in Ghana. Asamoah-Gyadu (2005; 2013a), on 
the other hand, presents an overview of Pentecostalism in Ghana. Just like Omenyo, Abamfo’s 
(1993) study of Pentecostalism in Ghana focuses on the rise of charismatic movements in the 
mainline churches in Ghana. Onyinah’s (2002) doctoral research addresses Akan witchcraft and 
the concept of exorcism in the Pentecostal church. Gbekor (1998) and Amoah’s (2000) research 
throw light on the renewal movement (charismatic movement) in the Evangelical Presbyterian 
Church. Furthermore, Lauterback’s (2008) research on the Ghanaian Pentecostal phenomenon 
explores the social and political implications of the Neo-Pentecostal (or Third Wave) ideas, 
institution and actors in present-day Ghana.
A study of the fore-mentioned literature reveals that though some aspects of Pentecostalism in 
Ghana are discussed, nothing is, however, said about the missional role of the Holy Spirit. This 
article therefore seeks to address this research gap from a Ghanaian Pentecostal’s perspective. It 
would also serve as a foundation for further research since Ghanaian Pentecostal Churches have 
little documented information on the subject under discussion.
For the purpose of this article, Ghanaian Pentecostals are referred to as a group of Christians 
who emphasise salvation in Christ as the basis for one to be filled with the Holy Spirit, and in 
which the ‘Spirit phenomenon’ (including speaking in tongues, prophecies, visions, healing and 
miracles in general) is perceived to be in line with what happened in the Early Church in the 
Acts of the apostles and is accepted as a continuous experience in the contemporary church as 
a sign of the presence of God and an experience of his Spirit (Asamoah-Gyadu 2005:12). What 
defines Pentecostalism is the experience of the Holy Spirit in transformation, radical discipleship 
and manifestations of the acts of power that demonstrate the presence of the kingdom of 
The missional role of the Holy Spirit: Ghanaian 
Pentecostals’ view and practice
This article discusses the missional role of the Holy Spirit from a Ghanaian Pentecostal’s 
perspective. In doing this, trinitarian mission is used as the point of departure and it was 
narrowed down to the missional role of the Holy Spirit. The Ghanaian Pentecostals’ view 
about the baptism and the infilling of the Holy Spirit as well as their practices concerning the 
subject are discussed. The article concludes that there is no way that the church could achieve 
her call without the role of the Holy Spirit, to convict sinners of their sin and also to empower 
the church to proclaim the gospel.
Die missionale werk van die Heilige Gees vanuit die teologie en praktyk van Ghanese 
Pinksterkerke. Hierdie artikel bespreek die missionale werk van die Heilige Gees vanuit die 
teologiese perspektief en praksis van die Pinksterkerke in Ghana. Die artikelvertrekpunt is 
’n trinitariese benadering tot sending, en van daaruit word die rol en plek van die Heilige 
Gees in die sending van God bespreek. Die artikel gee ook aandag aan die siening omtrent 
die doop en die vervulling met die Heilige Gees onder Pinksterkerke in Ghana, asook aan 
kerklike praktyke wat uit hierdie teologiese standpunt spruit. Die artikel argumenteer dat die 
kerk net aan haar missionale roeping getrou kan wees op grond van die Heilige Gees se rol om 
sondaars van sonde en verlossing te oortuig, en die Gees se bemagtiging van gelowiges om die 
evangelie te verkondig deur die verskeidenheid gawes wat die Gees gee.
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1987
Page 2 of 7
Original Research
God amongst his people (Asamoah-Gyadu 2013a:10–11). 
The Holy Spirit is therefore the power of the transition, 
mediation, communication and history which takes place 
firstly in the life of God himself, and then consequently in our 
life and our relationship with Christ Jesus (Flett 2010:239). 
The Holy Spirit is constantly at work in ways that surpass 
human understanding and in places that are least expected 
(World Council of Churches 1992:43). In Ghana one finds 
the classical Pentecostal churches and the Neo-Pentecostal 
churches. The classical Pentecostals are the four mainline 
Pentecostals churches, namely the Christ Apostolic Church 
International; The Apostolic Church, Ghana; The Church 
of Pentecost (CoP); and the Assemblies of God-Ghana. 
The Neo-Pentecostals are the charismatic churches and the 
independent Pentecostal churches popularly known as ‘one 
man churches’. Typologically, both the classical Pentecostal 
churches and the Neo-Pentecostal churches are grouped 
under Pentecostal churches and fall under the umbrella of 
the Ghana Pentecostals and Charismatics Council.
The views presented in this article were informed by a 
literature study of statements and the doctrinal documents of 
Pentecostal churches in Ghana, as well as a broader literature 
study on the issue of the role of the Holy Spirit in mission 
(i.e. ecumenical statements of the Lausanne Movement and 
the World Council of Churches). It was also informed by 
interviews with some Ghanaian Pentecostal leaders and 
observation of how the subject under discussion is being 
treated as far as pentecostalism in Ghana is concerned.
In view of the objectives of the research, the discussion starts 
with the trinitarian mission and then narrows down to the 
missional role of the Holy Spirit. The Ghanaian Pentecostal’s 
view about the baptism and the infilling of the Holy Spirit 
as well as their practices concerning the subject are also 
discussed.
Trinitarian approach to mission
Until the 16th century, when the Jesuits first began to use the 
term mission with reference to the spreading of the gospel 
to people who were not Christians, mission was exclusively 
used in reference to the doctrine of the Trinity. That is the 
sending of the Son by the Father and of the Holy Spirit by 
the Father and the Son (Bosch 1991:1). According to LaCugna 
(1991:228), the doctrine of the Trinity is not only about God 
but also about God’s life with us, and our life with each other. 
It is a life of communion and indwelling, God in us and we 
in God; all of us together. This view implies that mission 
is about God and his historical redemptive initiative on 
behalf of creation (missio Dei). Furthermore, it also refers to 
all the specific and varied ways in which the church crosses 
cultural boundaries to reflect the life of the triune God in the 
world, and through that identity, participates in his mission 
(Tennent 2010:59). In describing the historical redemptive 
work of the triune God, Wright (2006:48–51) proposes a 
missional-biblical hermeneutic. In his view, the whole Bible 
shows us the story of God’s mission through God’s people 
in their engagement with God’s work for the sake of the 
whole of creation. Biblically, the point of departure for the 
trinitarian mission approach was clearly presented by Jesus 
Christ in John 20:21–22 when he said, ‘… as the Father has 
sent me, I am sending you’. And with that he breathed on 
them and said, ‘receive the Holy Spirit’. In the context of 
Jesus’ statement, the Father is the Sender, the Lord of the 
harvest; the incarnated Son is the model embodiment of 
the Father’s mission in the world; and the Holy Spirit is the 
divine empowering presence for the entire mission (Tennent 
2010:75).
Saayman (2010:13) submits that the term missional is meant 
to refer fundamentally to the missio Dei, just as the term 
missionary does. He further argues that in terms of its deepest, 
fundamental understanding, both missional and missionary 
verbalise the phenomenon that we understand as missio Dei 
(Saayman 201015). In fact, without the missio Dei, the mission 
of the church would simply be a grasping at mere straws; 
it would be salvation by works alone. Mission is more than 
mere human activity reliant on emotion, volition and the 
action of finite beings. Mission, rightly, belongs to God; 
and anything other than the missio Dei being the starting 
point and climax of redemptive action is no more than an 
impediment to the proclamation of the true gospel message. 
The missio Dei is not something from which the Christian 
community can depart (Flett 2010:9). The participation of 
the church in the divine mission was expanded during the 
ecumenical discussions of the 20th century (Balia & Kim 
2010:23). The relationship of the divine persons in the Trinity 
to one another is so extensive that it has room for the whole 
world (Moltmann 1993:30). This understanding has therefore 
presented the church as a model of the manifestation of the 
existing relationship in the Trinity (Zizioulas 1995:20). The 
Lausanne Congress on World Evangelization (2010) puts it 
this way:
The mission of God continues to the ends of the earth and to 
the end of the world. The day will come when the kingdoms 
of the world will become the kingdom of our God and of his 
Christ and God will dwell with his redeemed humanity in the 
new creation. Until that day, the Church’s participation in God’s 
mission continues, in joyful urgency, and with fresh and exciting 
opportunities in every generation including our own. (p. 5)
In the concept of missio Dei, the Holy Spirit has a wholly 
unique personhood, not only in the form in which he is 
experienced, but also in his relationship to the Father and 
the Son (Moltmann 1992:12). This relationship was clearly 
noted when Jesus said at Nazareth: ‘The Spirit of the Lord 
is upon me’ (Lk 4:18). A pneumatological mission theology 
was therefore propounded at this point by Jesus Christ (Balia 
& Kim 2010:24), and this was also why the disciples could 
not do anything after the ascension of Jesus Christ until they 
received the power of the Holy Spirit on the day of Pentecost.
The CoP1 (2013) affirms their belief in the triune God in the 
following statement:
1.The Church of Pentecost is one of the four main classical Pentecostal churches in 
Ghana.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1987
Page 3 of 7
Original Research
We believe in the existence of the One True God, Elohim, Maker 
of the whole universe; undefinable, but revealed as Triune God, 
Father, Son and the Holy Spirit – One in nature, essence, and 
attributes, Omnipotent, Omnipresent.
This view of the triune God has also influenced their 
approach to mission (CoP 2013; Larbi 2001:280–281). In fact, 
one could relate this doctrinal position of the CoP to the 
new WCC affirmation (2013) on mission and evangelism. 
It says:
We believe in the Triune God who is the Creator, Redeemer 
and Sustainer of all life. God created the whole oikoumene in 
God’s image and constantly works in the world to affirm and 
safeguard life. We believe in Jesus Christ, the Life of the world, 
and the incarnation of God’s love for the world. Affirming life in 
all its fullness is Jesus Christ’s ultimate concern and mission. We 
believe in God the Holy Spirit, the Life-giver, who sustains and 
empowers life and renews the whole creation. A denial of life is 
a rejection of the God of life. God invites us into the life-giving 
mission of the Triune God and empowers us to bear witness to 
the vision of abundant life for all in the new heaven and earth. 
(p. 51)
This implies that the Ghanaian Pentecostals’ missiological 
understanding of the triune God is not far from that of 
the Ecumenical movement. In addition to the Ghanaian 
Pentecostals’ doctrinal position on the triune God, this view 
also appears in their songs. In their meetings, they also 
sing various songs (cf. Table 1: ‘A song of the Ghanaian 
Pentecostal churches’).
The submission at this point is that no matter the kind of 
mission model one has in mind, that mission model must 
recognise that mission is primarily God’s mission. The 
ultimate goal of the missio Dei is to manifest the glory of 
God on earth, to establish his reign in the hearts of people – 
evidenced by the conversion of souls and resulting in love, 
equality, diversity, mercy, compassion and justice amongst 
God’s creation (Kirk 1999:28).
Missional role of the Holy Spirit
According to the CoP, the Holy Spirit as the mysterious 
third Person of the Trinity through whom God acts, reveals 
his will, empowers individuals, and discloses his personal 
presence in the Old and New Testament (CoP 2013). In many 
pentecostal circles in Ghana, they mostly use the term Holy 
Ghost for the Holy Spirit. Van Aarde (1999:245), in this regard 
argues that the term Ghost – when used for the Holy Spirit – 
is a misleading translation of the Greek word ‘πνεῦμα’ (which 
means spirit), and that there is no word in Greek for Spirit. He 
points out that the closest word is ‘φάντασμα’ which means 
apparition. But this word is never used for the Holy Spirit. 
The Holy Spirit is a Person in the same sense that the Father 
and the Son are Persons. He emphasised that the term Spirit 
relates to the distinct role of his Person, since the Father and 
the Son are also spirit. This argument of Van Aarde is thought 
provoking and will require a further study, which could be 
done in a later Pentecostal’s Pneumatological or exegetical 
research.
From the Pentecostals’ perspective, the role of the Holy Spirit 
has been paramount in the missio Dei process. He has been 
active in the Old Testament, in creation, in redemption, and in 
various other spiritual undertakings. In the New Testament, 
however, his work becomes totally and evidently apparent 
and prominent with regard to world mission (Schweer 
1998:108; Van Aarde 1999:250). This implies that the starting 
place for considering the spiritual dynamics of mission must 
be in recognising the role of the Holy Spirit (Ott, Strauss & 
Tennent 2010:240). Christian mission in this regard could be 
defined as the proclamation of the kingdom of the Father, 
as sharing the life of the Son and bearing the witness of the 
Holy Spirit (Newbigin 1978:31). Newbegin (1978:66) further 
states that mission is the action of the Holy Spirit who in 
his sovereign freedom both convicts the world, and also 
leads the church toward the fullness of the truth which it 
has not yet grasped. The ultimate missional role of the Holy 
Spirit is to make Jesus Christ known to the world and his 
saving power through his death and resurrection. The Holy 
Spirit is seen as the continuing presence of Christ, and his 
agent to fulfil the task of mission. This understanding leads 
to a missiology focusing on sending out and going forth. 
In a personal interview on 20 April 2014, apostle Donkor 
of the Christ Apostolic Church International states that 
pneumatological focus on Christian mission recognises that 
mission is essentially Christologically based and relates to 
the work of the Holy Spirit to salvation through Jesus Christ. 
This is done through the participation of the church in God’s 
ongoing work of liberation and reconciliation through the 
Holy Spirit. It includes discerning and unmasking the 
demons that exploit and enslave people.
In addition to the views discussed, the missional role of 
the Holy Spirit is not limited to the unbelievers, but it is 
also extended to believers in order to fulfil their ministry 
in the church and their mission in the world (CoP 2014a:26; 
Russell 1988:133–134). The Holy Spirit, for example came 
upon the disciples on the day of Pentecost for the purpose of 
equipping them to begin the mission entrusted to them (Acts 
2:1–41). This role of the Holy Spirit in believers therefore 
includes empowering believers for mission and character 
development, which could also be called the ‘life in the Holy 
Spirit’ (Leonard 1989:15). According to the World Council of 
Churches (2013:52, 58) life in the Holy Spirit is the essence 
of mission, the core of why we do what we do, and how we 
live our lives. Spirituality gives the deepest meaning to our 
lives and motivates our actions. Experiencing life in the Spirit 
is to taste life in its fullness; the Holy Spirit meets us and 
TABLE 1: A song of the Ghanaian Pentecostal churches.
Akan language – Twi
Translation
Ye wo nyamebasan Koro
We have a three in one God (triune God).
Ono nkoaanayebesom no (2x)
He is the only One we will worship.
Ye wonyameAgya
We have God the Father.
Ye wonyameOba
We have God the Son.
Ye wonyameSusumkronkron
We have God the Holy Spirit.
Ono nkoaanayebesom no
He is the only One we will worship.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1987
Page 4 of 7
Original Research
challenges us at all levels of life, and brings newness and 
change to the places and times of our personal and collective 
journeys.
In line with this view, Ghanaian Pentecostals preach and 
emphasise that every Spirit filled believer should live 
according to the Word of God and should show good 
conduct (morally and spiritually) in all that they do. 
Many times this emphasis is based on Jesus’ statement, 
‘By their fruit you will recognize them …’ (Mt 7:15–20). 
In the Pentecostals interpretation of the Word, fruit used 
in this context is a figure of speech for their character, the 
product of their life, their actions and their moral conduct. 
Their argument is that it is therefore expected of the spirit 
filled believer to bear the fruit of the Holy Spirit, since the 
Holy Spirit is living in them and also helping them to live a 
‘Christlike’ life (CoP 2014b).
In a nutshell, the activities of the Holy Spirit in the age of 
the church include amongst other things, attracting people 
to Christ, convicting them of truth, regeneration, baptism, 
indwelling, filling, sealing, guaranteeing, spiritual gifts, 
fruit of the Spirit, helping to understand the Scripture, and 
empowering believers. It is noteworthy that Pentecostals 
point to the Scriptures, particularly to Pauline thought, as 
the primary source of authority in matters of faith. For them, 
every time the apostle Paul uses the expression ‘spiritual’ it 
refers to the working of the Holy Spirit (Asamoah-Gyadu 
2013b:11)
The Holy Spirit and the believer: 
Ghanaian Pentecostals’ view and 
practices
In Ghanaian Pentecostal churches’ understanding, after one 
has received Jesus Christ as his or her personal Lord and 
Saviour (become a believer), the second thing the believer 
should seek in order to live a Christ like life and to fulfil their 
ministry, is to be baptised or filled with the Holy Spirit. The 
CoP (2014a) holds that:
All believers in Christ Jesus are entitled to receive, and should 
earnestly seek, the Baptism of the Holy Spirit and fire according 
to the command of our Lord Jesus Christ. This is a normal 
experience of the Early Church. With this experience comes 
power to preach and bestowment of the gifts of the Holy Spirit. 
The believer is filled with the Holy Spirit; there is a physical sign 
of ‘speaking in other tongues’ as the Spirit of God gives utterance. 
This is accompanied by a burning desire and a supernatural 
power to witness to others about God’s salvation power. 
(pp. 19–21; cf. also Asamoah-Gyadu 2013b:14; Larbi 2001:278)
In practice, many Ghanaian Pentecostal churches use the 
following Bible verses and approaches in their teaching on 
the ‘baptism or infilling of the Holy Spirit’. The term ‘baptism 
or infilling of the Holy Spirit’ is used at this point because 
it is noticed that many Pentecostal churches in Ghana do 
use it interchangeably. However, it should be clearly noted 
that through the baptism of the Holy Spirit believers are 
incorporated in the body of Christ. The second thing believers 
should seek, after becoming born again, is the power to walk 
in the newness of life that they have received – this comes 
through the infilling of the Holy Spirit. Although there is 
only one ‘baptism’, there are many infillings.
In Ghanaians’ Pentecostal view, one could be filled with the 
Holy Spirit through a variety of practices.
The desire or thirst for the infilling 
of the Holy Spirit
At the various Holy Spirit services of Pentecostal churches in 
Ghana, leaders of the programme usually encourage those 
who have not received the infilling of the Holy Spirit to have 
the desire or the thirst for the infilling of the Holy Spirit 
(CoP 2014a:33). John 7:37–39 and Matthew 6:5 are many 
times cited in support of this claim. Members are told that 
the ‘thirst’ could mean an earnest desire for something (Mk 
11:24; 1 Cor 14:1). They therefore place emphasis on Jesus’ 
statements in John 7:37–38 and Mark 11:24, as evidence to 
show that one of the means of receiving the infilling of the 
Holy Spirit is by desiring or thirsting for it (CoP 2014a:30).
Pray in faith and ask the Father to 
fill you with the Holy Spirit
The second approach, amongst Pentecostals to enable 
believers to be filled with the Holy Spirit is that members 
are encouraged to pray in faith and ask the Father to fill 
them with the Holy Spirit. In doing this they refer to Jesus’ 
statement on being persistent in prayer, in relation to asking 
the Father to fill believers with the Holy Spirit (Lk 11:9–13). 
The other part of this aspect is the exercising of the faith of 
members, in order to be filled with the Holy Spirit. They often 
stress that it is not enough to pray, one also has to exercise 
one’s faith (Murphy & Murphy 2000:485–486). In a meeting 
at the Revival Life Outreach Church in Kumasi, Ghana, the 
senior pastor, Rev. Paul Owusu Yeboah, told the congregants 
who were seeking to be filled with the Holy Spirit, to support 
their prayer with their faith.
The practice of the laying-on 
of hands
The third approach of Pentecostals to enable believers to 
be filled with the Holy Spirit is the practice of the laying-on 
of hands on those who are yearning for it (CoP 2014a:30). 
Many of Ghanaian Neo-Pentecostals (Revival Life Outreach 
Church, Action Chapel International, and Perez Chapel) 
mostly rely on Hagin’s (1995:5) assertion, which says that 
‘even if a Spirit-filled believer does not have this ministry of 
laying-on of hands, it is all right for him to pray with the 
candidate, because it releases the candidate’s faith’. They 
therefore rely on the following Bible references as examples 
for the practice:
•	 Moses laid his hand upon Joshua – Deuteronomy 34:9.
•	 The apostles Peter and John laid their hands on some 
believers in Samaria – Acts 8:14–17.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1987
Page 5 of 7
Original Research
•	 Ananias laid his hands on Saul – Acts 9:12, 17.
•	 The apostle Paul laid his hand on some believers in 
Ephesus – Acts 19:1–7.
In reference to the Pentecostal’s teachings and practices on 
the infilling of the Holy Spirit, it must be kept in mind that 
although the above-mentioned ways are biblical examples, 
that the Lord can simply fill anyone with the Holy Spirit in 
any setting or circumstance he chooses. God is sovereign and 
can decide to do anything at any time.
Maintaining the infilling of the Holy 
Spirit
The word, maintain, used here is to propound the idea of 
consistency in one’s relationship with the Holy Spirit. Many 
Ghanaian Pentecostal churches, on this matter, state that the 
apostle Paul – in establishing his argument on this view – 
admonished believers to be continuously filled with the 
Holy Spirit (CoP 2014a:30; Eph 5:18); and in 1 Thessalonians 
5:19 Paul said, ‘Quench not the Spirit’. In Paul’s advice to 
Timothy, the Bishop of the Church in Ephesus, the apostle 
said: ‘Wherefore I put thee in remembrance that thou stir 
up the gift of God, which is in thee by the putting on of 
my hands’ (2 Tm 1:6).
2 According to Lin (2002:53–54), the 
admonition of not quenching the Spirit is a command in the 
present tense that indicates that we should always refrain 
from extinguishing the activities of the Holy Spirit. He 
finally submits that, to defuse the danger of quenching the 
Spirit, there are certain things that we must constantly do. 
Lin mentions prayer and a consistent study of the Bible as 
some of the ways to achieve this purpose. In like manner, 
Ghanaian Pentecostals share the same view.
Prayer
Unlike the Christ Apostolic Church – where the constitution 
has a lot to say on the how, where, when and why of prayer – 
the CoP has nothing of that sort – they just pray. Everything 
within the church begins and ends with several minutes of 
prayer. Apart from encouraging people to pray individually, 
they also practice mass or congregational prayer, a type of 
prayer that they believe was practiced by the Early Church 
(Larbi 2001:257). Many Ghanaian Pentecostals see prayer 
as one of the ways one can use to maintain one’s spiritual 
relationship with God (Agyin-Asare 2001:7).
In order to enforce the culture of prayer in their members, 
many of the Pentecostal churches in Ghana have set days 
(such as Wednesdays and Fridays) for prayer meetings; 
some of which are in the morning, and others in the 
afternoon, or evening. These prayer meetings are organised 
in forms such as revival or miracle services, all night prayer 
and deliverance services. They mostly name such prayer 
meetings MpaeboKesee, meaning ‘big prayer’, or Ntentam, 
meaning ‘wrestling in prayer’, an idea taken from the apostle 
Paul (Eph 6:12; Agyin-Asare 2001:16). Other names given to 
2.This view is the position of many Pentecostal churches in Ghana. They usually preach 
and teach their members on the importance of being filled with the Holy Spirit.
these meetings are: ‘Jericho hour’, ‘hour of divine visitation’, 
‘hour of grace’, ‘hour of divine intervention’, ‘hour of 
divine breakthrough’, ‘hour of restoration’, and ‘hour of 
prophetic unction’ (Asamoah-Gyadu 2013a:35–38). Thus, in 
Pentecostal thought, prayer is an activity inspired primarily 
by a certain understanding of the working of the Holy Spirit 
as the believer’s source of empowerment (Asamoah-Gyadu 
2013a:35).
Diligent study of the Scriptures
Pentecostals also encourage their members to develop a daily 
personal Bible study life. They are of the view that Bible 
study is also one of the ways one can become more in tune 
with the Holy Spirit. In a personal interview on 15 July 2013 
with Rev. Ekow Eshun, the General Overseer of the Revival 
Life Outreach Church in Kumasi in Ghana, he said that some 
people always try to brush out certain verses and quotations. 
Their interest is to study things that will satisfy their selfish 
desires. Referring to 2 Timothy 3:14–17, Eshun emphasised 
that every portion of the Bible is of great importance to 
believers. Hampton (2013) argues that whilst believers study 
the Bible for spiritual growth, it reflects in the change in their 
character through the renewing of their mind. This change in 
ones thought and character is through the Holy Spirit.
The strong emphasis the Ghanaian Pentecostal church places 
on belief in the Bible is demonstrated in the songs sung at 
their meetings. One of them is presented as an example below 
(cf. Table 2: ‘Example of a Ghanaian Pentecostal song’).
Sanneh (1983:180) argues that the submission of the Bible to 
the regenerative capacity of African perception is what led 
to the renewal of Christianity through the independent and 
indigenous churches of Africa. Throughout Africa Scripture 
is held in high esteem because of its relevance to the realities 
in many African communities (Jenkins 2006:18, 23).
Missiological implication of 
Ghanaian Pentecostals practices
The Pentecostal experience of the Holy Spirit is an integral 
aspect in the African theology of missions (Roamba 2006:12). 
An important element of Pentecostal spirituality is the 
emphasis on the ‘gift of the Spirit’ which is often expressed 
in their literature as ‘charismatic gifts’ (Asamoah-Gyadu 
2005:7). Pentecostals aim at revivalism and the renewal of the 
world of Christianity. Its emphasis in the modern world is on 
revivalism in the Christian life as a live experience of the Holy 
Spirit that must be renewed time and again. Contemporary 
manifestations of pentecostalism are often classified in terms 
of ‘charismatic renewal’ as a result of their general orientation 
towards the restoration of the gifts of the Holy Spirit. This 
TABLE 2: Example of a Ghanaian Pentecostal song.
Akan language – Twi 
Translation
Nyame anum asem etese Ogya (3x)
God’s Word is like fire (3x).
Ehye Obosan asapasapasapasa
It totally burns the devil.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1987
Page 6 of 7
Original Research
include speaking in tongues, prophesy, healing, visions, and 
revelations to the heart of people (Asamoah-Gyadu 2005:5). 
In their theology, the practice of infilling or baptism of the 
Holy Spirit, which is often followed by speaking in tongues, 
is not the end of one’s spirituality, but a way leading to 
the Holy Spirit endowment for ministry within the church 
and mission to the world (Asamoah-Gyadu 2013b:11; CoP 
2014a:22–24). A position similar to Ghanaian Pentecostal 
churches can be found in the Lausanne Confession (2010) in 
the following words:
The church is called to witness to Christ today by sharing in 
God’s mission of love through the transforming power of the 
Holy Spirit. The Spirit fills the Church with his gifts, which 
must be ‘eagerly desired’ as the indispensable equipment for 
Christian service. The Spirit gives power for mission and for the 
great variety of works of service. Without the gifts, guidance 
and power of the Spirit, our mission is mere human effort. And 
without the fruit of the Spirit, our unattractive lives cannot 
reflect the beauty of the gospel. (p. 10)
The Holy Spirit gives gifts freely and impartially which are to 
be shared for the building up of others and the reconciliation of 
the whole creation (WCC 2013:56). In Ghanaian Pentecostals’ 
understanding, the Holy Spirit can use any of the gifts to 
present the gospel to others as it was in the case of Stephen 
and Philip who started their ministry as deacons but ended 
as evangelists (CoP 2014a:24, 26; Acts 6–8). This implies that 
the gifts of the Holy Spirit are given for a common good and 
place obligations of responsibility and mutual accountability 
on every individual and local community and on the church 
as a whole at every level of its life. In other words, through 
the infilling of the Holy Spirit believers are endowed with 
diverse spiritual gifts that will enable them to be involved in 
the missio Dei. In this regard, Ghanaian Pentecostal churches 
see the teachings and the practices that will help their 
congregation to be filled with the Holy Spirit as an integral 
part of their missional spirituality.
Conclusion
This article discusses the missional role of the Holy Spirit 
from a Ghanaian Pentecostal’s perspective. In doing this, the 
trinitarian mission approach became the point of departure 
and it was narrowed down to the missional role of the Holy 
Spirit. The article argues that the missional role of the Holy 
Spirit is not limited to unbelievers but also to believers. 
It also submits that the missional role of the Holy Spirit to 
unbelievers is to convict them of their sins and the need for 
Jesus Christ as the solution. On the other hand, the role of the 
Holy Spirit with regard to believers includes empowering 
them for ministry and mission as well as personal character 
building. With this view, Ghanaian Pentecostals have 
therefore put in place practices that would help believers 
to be filled with or baptised in the Holy Spirit. This practice 
is not only for personal benefits, but serves as a means to 
experience greater spirituality through the endowment and 
manifestations of spiritual gifts in the lives of believers for 
the purpose of ministry in the church and mission. The role 
of the Holy Spirit is this regard, is integral in every phase 
of the mission of the church. Without the Holy Spirit the 
mission of the church will be a mere human activity, and will 
not yield results that would bring glory to God. Churches 
have to therefore join in with the Holy Spirit to discern what 
the Father is doing in their context and do the same.
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no financial or personal 
relationship(s) that may have inappropriately influenced 
them in writing this article.
Authors’ contributions
Dr Peter White (University of Pretoria) is a postdoctoral 
research fellow of Prof. Nelus Niemandt, Head of the 
Department of Science of Religion and Missiology of the 
Faculty of Theology, University of Pretoria, South Africa. 
He did the field work and the write up for the article, and 
Prof. Niemandt provided the theoretical idea on how to 
integrate the Pentecostal ideas into the broader missiological 
dialogue.
References
Abamfo, O.A., 1993, The rise of charismatic movement in the mainline churches in 
Ghana, Asempa Publishers, Accra.
Agyin-Asare, C., 2001, Power in prayer: Taking your blessing by force, His Printing, 
Hoornaar.
Amoah, G., 2000, ‘Schisms in the Evangelical Church of Ghana’, MPhil thesis, Dept. for 
the Study of Religions, University of Ghana, Accra.
Asamoah-Gyadu, J.K., 2005, African charismatics: Current developments within 
independent indigenous pentecostalism in Ghana, Brill, Leiden.
Asamoah-Gyadu, J.K., 2013a, Contemporary Pentecostal Christianity, Regnum Books 
International, Eugene.
Asamoah-Gyadu, J.K., 2013b, ‘The promise is for you and your children: Pentecostal 
spirituality, mission and discipleship in Africa’, in M. Wonsuk & J.K. Ross (eds.), 
Regnum Edinburgh Centenary Series, vol. 14, p. 11, Regnum Books International, 
Oxford.
Balia, D. & Kim, K. (eds.), 2010, Witnessing to Christ today, vol. 2, Regnum Books 
International, Oxford.
Bosch, J.D., 1991, Transforming mission: Paradigm shifts in theology of mission, Orbis, 
Maryknoll.
Church of Pentecost (CoP), 2013, Ten tenets of the Church of Pentecost, Ghana, viewed 
12 August 2013, from http://www.thecophq.org/pages.php?linkID=4&linkObj=cat
Church of Pentecost (CoP), 2014a, Home cell study guide, Pentecost Press, Dansoman.
Church of Pentecost (CoP), 2014b, Core values, viewed 08 January 2014, from http://
www.thecophq.org/pages.php?linkID=2&linkObj=cat
Flett, J.G., 2010, The witness of God: The Trinity, missio Dei, Karl Barth and the nature 
of Christian community, Kindle edn., Eerdmans, Grand Rapids.
Gbekor, C., 1998, ‘The Bible study and prayer fellowship of the Evangelical Presbyterian 
Church of Ghana’, MPhil thesis, Dept. for the Study of Religions, University of 
Ghana, Accra.
Hagin, K.E., 1995, Seven vital steps to receiving the Holy Spirit, 2nd edn., Faith Library 
Publications, Tulsa.
Hampton, K.J., 2013, The spirit-filled life, viewed 17 August 2013, from http://bible.
org/seriespage/spirit-filled-life-part-2
Jenkins, P., 2006, The new faces of Christianity: Believing the Bible in the Global South, 
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Kirk, J.A., 1999, What is mission? Theological explorations, Darton, Longmann & Todd, 
London.
LaCugna, C.M., 1991, God for us: The Trinity and Christian life, Harper, San Francisco.
Larbi, E.K., 2001, Pentecostalism: The eddies of Ghanaian Christianity, Blessed 
Publications, Accra.
Lausanne Congress on World Evangelization, 2010, Third Lausanne Congress: Cape 
Town Commitment, Cape Town.
Lauterback, K., 2008, ‘The craft of pastorship in Ghana and beyond’, PhD thesis, 
Graduate School of International Development Studies, Roskilde University, 
Roskilde.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1987
Page 7 of 7
Original Research
Leonard, C., 1989, A giant in Ghana: 3000 churches in 50 years – The story of James 
Mckeown and the Church of Pentecost, New Wine Press, Chichester.
Lin, T., 2002, How the Holy Spirit works in believers life today, Biblical Studies Ministries 
International, Bennett Court, Carmel.
Moltmann, J., 1992, Spirit of life: A universal affirmation, Fortress, Minneapolis.
Moltmann, J., 1993, The church in the power of the Spirit: A contribution to messianic 
ecclesiology, transl. M. Kohl, Fortress, Minneapolis.
Murphy, J.O. & Murphy, C.S., 2000, An international minister’s manual, Hundredfold 
Ministries International, Arusha.
Newbigin, L., 1978, The open secret, Eerdmans, Grand Rapids.
Omenyo, C.N., 2006, Pentecost outside pentecostalism, Boekencentrum, 
Zoetermeer.
Onyinah, O., 2002, ‘Akan witchcraft and the concept of exorcism in the Church 
of Pentecost’, PhD thesis, Dept. of Theology, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham.
Ott, C., Strauss, S.J. & Tennent, T.C., 2010, Encountering theology of mission: Biblical 
foundation, historical developments, and contemporary issues, Baker Publishing, 
Grand Rapids.
Roamba, J.B., 2006, ‘A West African missionary church’, in S.M. Burgess (ed.), 
Encyclopaedia of pentecostal and charismatic Christianity, pp. 11–15, Routledge, 
New York.
Russell, S.P., 1988, ‘The pentecostal view’, in D.L. Alexander (ed.), Christian Spirituality: 
Five views of sanctification, pp. 133–134, InterVarsity, Downers Grove.
Saayman, W., 2010, ‘Missionary or missional? A study in terminology’, Missionalia 
38(1), 13, 15.
Sanneh, L.O., 1983, West African Christianity: The religious impact, Orbis, Maryknoll.
Schweer, W.G., 1998, ‘The missionary mandate of God’s nature’, in J.M. Terry, E.C. 
Smith & J. Anderson (eds.), Missiology: An introduction to the foundations, history, 
and strategies of world missions, p. 108, Broadman & Holman, Nashville.
Tennent, T.C., 2010, Invitation to world mission: A trinitarian missiology for the 
twenty-first century, Kregel Publications, Grand Rapids.
Van Aarde, A., 1999, ‘The Spirit of God in the New Testament: Diverse witnesses’, 
HTS Teologiese Studies / Theological Studies 55(1), 245, 250. http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.4102/hts.v55i1.1554
World Council of Churches (WCC), 1992, ‘Ecumenical affirmation: Mission and 
evangelism’, in J.A. Scherer & S.B. Bevans (eds.), New directions in mission and 
evangelization, vol. 2: Theological foundations, p. 43, Orbis, Maryknoll.
World Council of Churches, 2013, Together towards life: Mission and evangelism in 
changing landscapes, Resource book, WCC 10th Assembly, Busan, Geneva.
Wright, C.J.H., 2006, The mission of God, IVP Academic, Downers Grove.
Zizioulas, J.D., 1995, Being as communion: Studies in personhood of the church, St. 
Vladimir’s Seminary Press, Crestwood.