Page 1 of 9
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i3.1880
I dedicate this article to Prof. George Lotter, who has been instrumental in the formation of more 
than 90 postgraduate students in practical theological studies at the North-West University 
(NWU). Under his guidance, a significant amount of empirical research has been conducted. 
This is in line with a movement among scholars, both national and international, towards a 
more empirical approach in Practical Theology. It is therefore indispensable that both lecturers 
and students in Practical Theology should further develop their empirical research capacities. 
In this article, it is argued for a more systematic approach during the coding and data analysis 
phase of qualitative research and the article concludes with a proposed model for coding and 
data analysis in practical theological studies.
Author:
Petria M. Theron1
Affiliation:
1Faculty of Theology, School 
of Biblical Counselling and 
Church Ministry, North-West 
University, Potchefstroom 
Campus, South Africa
Correspondence to:
Petria Theron
Email:
petria.theron@nwu.ac.za
Postal address:
Bali Hoff 07, Pezcod Street, 
Potchefstroom 2531, 
South Africa
Dates:
Received: 10 Sept. 2014
Accepted: 07 Sept. 2015
Published: 13 Nov. 2015
How to cite this article:
Theron, P.M., 2015, ‘Coding 
and data analysis during 
qualitative empirical research 
in Practical Theology’, In die 
Skriflig 49(3), Art. #1880, 
9 pages. http://dx.doi.
org/10.4102/ids.v49i3.1880
Copyright:
© 2015. The Authors. 
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work is 
licensed under the Creative 
Commons Attribution 
License.
Coding and data analysis during qualitative empirical 
research in Practical Theology
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.
Introduction
The broad theme of this edition of In die Skriflig/In Luce Verbi in honour of Prof. George Adrian 
Lotter is ‘Pastoral Theology in SA: Semper reformanda’. The Latin phrase semper reformanda means 
‘always reforming’ and it has become a widely known motto of the reformed tradition (Troxel 
2006). It first appeared in 1674 in a devotional by Van Lodenstein, an important figure in a 
movement known as the Dutch Second Reformation (Horton 2014). The phrase is often used 
and even misused as a motivation or justification for change, for example that churches should 
be more open to move beyond the faith and practice they confess in their doctrinal standards 
and allow innovation. However, Troxel (2006) and Horton (2014) make a strong appeal that one 
should use the phrase according to its true meaning of ‘always being reformed or changed’1 in 
accordance with Scripture and the Lordship of Jesus Christ.2 The doctrine of the church was 
reformed during the Reformation, but in the 21st century the lives and practices of God’s people 
need further reformation. Wolters (1992:1) stresses the point that incessant reformation should 
conform to the Word of God (Rm 12:2) and not, as Horton (2014) warns, to the spirit of the age.
I have come to know George Lotter not only as a person who is willing to change according 
to the Word of God, but also as somebody who is open to change, new ideas and new ways of 
doing things in practising his subject, pastoral studies. However, he does not approach change 
in an uncritical manner, but evaluates it against the truths of God’s Word. To me, he personifies 
somebody who is faithful to the reformational principal of semper reformanda. The choice of the title 
of his article on how secular psychology has taken over the field of traditional biblical counselling 
during the 19th and 20th centuries, and how Jay Adams has done pioneer work to regain the 
ground, is significant, namely The ‘reformation’ of counselling. Lotter (2001:328) demonstrates 
how the motto semper reformanda can be put into practice in academic endeavours, especially 
in pastoral theology and biblical counselling. Although Lotter worked and still works in the 
1.The Oxford’s translation of the Latin phrase semper reformanda is given as ‘always to be reformed’ (Bowker 1999:874).
2.Sola Scriptura and Solus Christus are two of the five well-known reformational principles (Vorster 2010:432).
Kodering en data-analise tydens kwalitatiewe empiriese navorsing in Praktiese 
Teologie. Hierdie artikel word aan prof. George Lotter opgedra. Deur die jare was hy 
instrumenteel in die vorming van meer as 90 nagraadse studente in Praktiese Teologie 
by die Noord-Wes Universiteit (NWU). Baie empiriese navorsing het onder sy leiding 
plaasgevind. Dit is in ooreenstemming met die nasionale en internasionale tendens van 
’n meer empiriese benadering in Praktiese Teologie. Dit is dus van die uiterste belang 
dat Praktiese Teologie-dosente en -studente se vaardighede in empiriese navorsing 
verder ontwikkel moet word. In hierdie artikel word aangetoon dat ’n meer sistematiese 
benadering gevolg moet word tydens die kodering en die data-analisefase van kwalitatiewe 
navorsing. ’n Model vir die kodering en data-analise vir navorsing in Praktiese Teologie 
word ook voorgestel.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i3.1880
Page 2 of 9
Original Research
field of Pastoral Theology, justifying the choice of the theme 
of this edition of In die Skriflig/In Luce Verbi in his honour, I 
choose to write this article in the broader domain of Practical 
Theology as will also become evident in the research results 
later. I therefore deem it necessary to briefly situate Pastoral 
Theology within the broader domain of Practical Theology.
In the time of modernity, Practical Theology was restricted 
to the application of doctrine in pastoral situations, but 
from 1950 onwards, scholars in theology and religion have 
challenged this point of view (Miller-McLemore 2012:1). 
One can speak of a revival of Practical Theology during the 
early 1980s when the need for practical knowledge became 
evident. Researchers like Browning, Poling, Miller, Forrester 
and Dykstra in the United States, Ballard and Pritchard in 
England and Van der Ven from the Netherlands, among 
others, responded by viewing the role of Practical Theology 
anew (Miller-McLemore 2012:2–3). In the process, it became 
clear that it is not easy to define Practical Theology. It is a 
multivalent discipline found in a wide range of spaces 
and places. Miller-McLemore (2012) gives the following 
definition in terms of four distinct enterprises, different 
audiences and different objectives:
Practical Theology is an activity of believers seeking to sustain 
a life of reflective faith in the everyday, a method or way of 
understanding or analysing theology in practice used by 
religious leaders and by teachers and students across the 
theological curriculum, a curricular area in theological education 
focused on ministerial practice and sub-specialities, and an 
academic discipline pursued by a smaller subset of scholars to 
support and sustain these first three enterprises. (p. 5)
Dreyer (2012:511), writing from a South African perspective, 
agrees with Miller-McLemore that Practical Theology can 
no longer be seen as only studying pastoral actions, actions 
related to church life or the training of pastors. An ‘outward’ 
movement is also visible in South Africa as practical 
theologians are increasingly involved in societal, political 
and economic issues. The themes of the past three annual 
meetings of the Society of Practical Theology in South Africa, 
namely Practical Theology and service delivery (2013), Practical 
Theology in Africa and human waste (2014), and The power of 
religion and religions of power within African contexts (2015) 
demonstrate it.
Coming back to the relationship between Pastoral Theology 
and Practical Theology, Miller-McLemore (2012:6) sees the 
former as both person- and pathos-centred with the focus on 
care. In his inaugural address, Lotter (2007:2) also emphasises 
the aspect of care by referring to the biblical foundation of 
Pastoral Theology, namely the metaphors and the parables 
of the pastor and his sheep, where the pastor is intensely 
involved with each one of his sheep (Ps 23; Ezk 34; Jn 10). 
Practical Theology, according to Miller-McLemore (2012:6), 
is more concerned with integrating knowledge within 
theological education and mediating interaction between the 
seminary, the congregation and the wider society. Dreyer 
(2012:513), McClure (2012:269) and De Klerk and De Wet 
(2013:x) offer an alternative way to view the relationship, 
namely that Pastoral Theology is one of the sub-disciplines 
of Practical Theology.
The title of this article indicates that the focus will be 
on empirical research within the discipline of Practical 
Theology. Dingemans (1996:87) refers to the shift that has 
taken place in the last decades of the previous century, 
namely investigating Christian practice instead of merely 
applying biblical data and statements of faith. Five years 
earlier, Pieterse (1991:6) also wrote about this movement 
to emphasise empirical research in Practical Theology. He 
referred to Bastian who strongly argued in 1968 that Practical 
Theology should take theory and praxis into consideration 
and that the actions and activities of the church should be 
analysed empirically. In 1974, states Pieterse (1991:7), Zerfass 
focused on the actions of the church and his cyclic model 
for the theory-praxis-reflection has become well known. 
Practical theologians at the North-West University (NWU) 
have followed this model for many years. Until the 1980s, 
practical theologians worldwide made use of empirical 
insights from the social sciences (Dingemans 1996:87; Dreyer 
2012:512). However, at the beginning of the 1990s, Van 
der Ven sets forth a proposal for an empirical approach to 
Practical Theology so that practical theologians can generate 
their own data by investigating the ecclesiological praxis. 
He refers to empirical theology (Burger 1991:15; Dreyer 
2012:513; Van der Ven 1993:vii). If one looks at the list of 
publications by practical theologians like Pieterse and Dreyer 
from UNISA (University of South Africa), this movement 
towards a more empirical approach to Practical Theology is 
also visible in South Africa (Dreyer 2015; Pieterse 2010, 2011, 
2012, 2013, 2015). However, I wholeheartedly agree with 
Dreyer (2012:513) that lecturers and students should develop 
their empirical research capacities further.
My central theoretical argument in this article is that 
postgraduate practical theological studies and research 
articles may greatly benefit from the use of a more systematic 
approach during the coding and data analysis phase of 
qualitative empirical research. In this article, I first offer 
an overview of recent empirical research done by practical 
theologians and postgraduate students at the NWU. Then 
I focus on coding as an important part of data analysis 
during qualitative empirical research. I also present different 
approaches to data analysis in qualitative research. In 
conclusion, I propose a model for coding and data analysis 
during qualitative empirical research in practical theological 
studies.
Empirical research in Practical 
Theology at North-West University
In this section, I will give an overview of the recent use of 
empirical research by practical theologians at the Faculty of 
Theology at the NWU. I will limit the scope of the research 
to postgraduate studies done between 2010 and 2013 
and articles published in accredited scientific journals by 
lecturers, postdoctoral fellows and associates in the field of 
Practical Theology during the same time. The investigation 

Page 3 of 9
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i3.1880
will provide quantitative data, reporting on how many of the 
researchers made use of empirical methods, and qualitative 
data, analysing the empirical methods the researchers used 
in their research.
Quantitative data
At every graduation ceremony of the NWU, the list of 
students who receive a degree at the particular graduation 
ceremony is printed in a booklet. These booklets are available 
at the office of the manager of the M and D programmes at the 
Faculty of Theology. I have consulted the booklets of 2010 to 
2013 and found that 17 masters and 21 doctoral studies were 
completed in the field of Practical Theology. By looking at the 
content of each of these studies, I noticed that 37 of these 38 
postgraduate studies made use of empirical research. That is 
a percentage of 97.4%.
In order to identify all the practical theological research 
articles published in accredited scientific journals by 
lecturers, postdoctoral fellows and associates of the Faculty 
of Theology, I consulted the reports of the research director 
for the years 2010 until 2013. Surveying these reports, I 
determined that 94 articles were published during these 
years. Of these 94 articles, only 22 made use of empirical 
research. That is a percentage of 23.4%.
Qualitative data
For the purpose of this article, it is important to analyse 
the empirical methods that were implemented in the 
postgraduate studies and articles mentioned above.
The following empirical methods were used in the 37 
postgraduate studies:
•	 In four studies, only quantitative methods were used. 
Three of the researchers developed a questionnaire for 
the purpose of their studies. They distributed it among 
their participants and evaluated the results statistically. 
One researcher used an existing inventory and made 
deductions from the results.
•	 In 25 studies, only qualitative methods were used. 
Most of the researchers developed a questionnaire 
for the purpose of their studies. They distributed it 
among their participants and followed it up with semi-
structured interviews, based on the questionnaire, to 
ensure that they obtained all possible information from 
the participants. The majority of the researchers then 
categorised the data according to emerging themes and 
made deductions from the results. They did not indicate 
how the categories or themes were established. One of 
the researchers used an existing inventory, conducted 
semi-structured interviews based on the inventory and 
made deductions from the data. One researcher made 
use of case studies by analysing sermons and making 
deductions from the results. Another researcher used 
case studies of semi-structured counselling sessions and 
made deductions from it. One researcher used the Delphi 
method of research.
•	 In eight studies, the researchers used a combination of 
quantitative and qualitative methods. They either used 
an existing inventory or developed a questionnaire 
themselves to examine the phenomenon. They interpreted 
the results statistically and then followed the investigation 
up by a questionnaire, and/or a semi-structured 
interview, and/or counselling sessions. Subsequently, 
they made deductions from the data. In one case, the 
researcher repeated the use of the existing inventory to 
investigate the effectiveness of the counselling sessions.
In the 22 research articles, I distinguished the following 
empirical methods:
•	 In two articles, the quantitative method was used and 
deductions were made from the results.
•	 In three articles, the researchers used a mixed method. 
They made use of a questionnaire to obtain quantitative 
data. In order to obtain the qualitative data, they asked 
the participants to give their comments in the form of a 
report. They coded the unstructured data by identifying 
categories without indicating which coding method 
they used to establish the categories. They then used the 
categories to develop a second questionnaire. The results 
of the second questionnaire confirmed the results of the 
first questionnaire and the reports. From the results, they 
made certain deductions.
•	 In two articles, the researchers made use of case studies 
to illustrate the issue under discussion, after which the 
researchers made deductions.
•	 In one article, the researcher used a semi-structured 
questionnaire to compile case studies, from which 
deductions were made.
•	 In two articles, the researchers used auto-ethnography 
and made deductions from the narratives.
•	 In one article, the researcher used an online survey to 
investigate the specific phenomenon. The survey also 
included a narrative section where the participants could 
share further comments. Deductions followed from the 
data.
•	 In one article, the researcher demonstrated the Delphi 
survey method in a practical theological research 
endeavour.
•	 Ten researchers used the following qualitative method 
of research: They developed a questionnaire with open-
ended questions, gave it to a few participants to complete, 
followed it up by an interview to ensure a response to 
all the questions and then analysed the data. Seven of 
the researchers analysed the data by simply identifying 
recurring themes and then making deductions from it. 
In three articles, the researchers used the eight steps of 
Tesch to categorise the data in themes and subthemes. 
They then made their deductions.
Discussion of the results
A high percentage of postgraduate students included 
empirical research as part of their studies, whilst less than 
a quarter of the articles in accredited journals included 
empirical research. Most of the articles in which empirical 

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i3.1880
Page 4 of 9
Original Research
research is reported are articles published by postgraduate 
students and their study leaders, as part of the postgraduate 
studies. The rest of the articles where empirical research are 
included, are by postdoctoral fellows and associates. From 
the results of this investigation, it is clear that the Practical 
Theology lecturers of the NWU do not often embark on 
empirical research in their own research, although they 
expect it from their postgraduate students.
If one considers the empirical methods implemented, it is 
evident that most of the researchers used qualitative methods. 
The method most frequently used entails the following. The 
researchers developed a questionnaire according to the 
theme of the particular study and asked their participants 
to complete it. After the questionnaire, they often had semi-
structured interviews with the participants in order to ensure 
that all possible information was obtained. The researchers 
then made conclusions based on the data. I encountered 
only a few researchers who mentioned that they coded and 
categorised the data according to emerging themes. They 
seldom mentioned the methodology they used during the 
coding process. Only three researchers mentioned in their 
articles that they followed the eight steps of Tesch to categorise 
their data in themes and subthemes. One gets the idea that 
when these researchers do coding, they do it intuitively.
One can wonder about the ‘truth value’ of the qualitative 
research projects. Schurink, Fouché and De Vos (2012:419) 
refer to the traditional criteria for good qualitative research, 
namely internal and external validity, reliability and 
objectivity, but qualitative researchers Lincoln and Guma 
propose that credibility, transferability, dependability and 
conformability are better indicators of good qualitative 
research. Of these four criteria, they consider credibility 
to be the most important one. Credibility refers inter alia 
to the fact that researchers portray accurately what the 
participants conveyed. One way to increase this is by means 
of member checks (2012:420). I am of the opinion that the 
implementation of thorough coding and data analysis will 
significantly contribute to improve the credibility of the 
qualitative empirical research of practical theologians at the 
NWU. This is the focus of the rest of the article.
Coding: An important part of data 
analysis
Smith and Davies (2010:155) argue that coding does not 
constitute the totality of data analysis, but it is a method to 
organise the data so that underlying messages portrayed 
by the data may become clearer to the researcher. Charmaz 
(2006:46) describes coding as the pivotal link between data 
collection and explaining the meaning of the data. A code 
is a descriptive construct designed by the researcher to 
capture the primary content or essence of the data. Coding 
is an interpretive activity and therefore it is possible that two 
researchers will attribute two different codes to the same 
data. The context in which the research is done, the nature of 
the research and the personality and interest of the researcher 
will influence which codes the researcher attributes to the 
data (Engler 2014:257; Saldaña 2013:3–4, 8). During the 
coding process, some codes may appear repeatedly and that 
may be an indication of emerging patterns. These emerging 
patterns or similarity among the codes may give rise to 
categories. Coding is not only labelling, but also linking, 
that is, linking data to an idea. It is a cyclic process. By 
incorporating more cycles into the coding process, richer 
meanings, categories, themes and concepts can be generated 
from the data (Saldaña 2013:5, 8).
Practical aspects of coding
Saldaña (2013:17) gives practical advice for the coding 
process. He says that it is helpful to type the data on the left 
two-thirds of a page and to leave the right margin open for 
notes. Whenever the topic of the data seems to change, the 
researchers can start a new paragraph. In writing down the 
data, researchers need to decide whether they want to give 
a verbatim transcription of the interviews for their specific 
study. It is the opinion of Smith and Davies (2010:149) that 
it is not always necessary and that the essence (gist) of 
the interview is sometimes sufficient. Whilst reading the 
data, states Saldaña (2010:19–20), the researcher can do 
some ‘precoding’ by circling, highlighting or underlining 
significant words or sentences. However, the author urges 
researchers to start the coding process whilst they are 
collecting the data, keeping in mind that the codes may 
change during later cycles. Saldaña (2010:21–22) suggests 
that researchers should keep their research questions and 
aims of their studies in mind. The following questions may 
assist them in their coding decisions:
•	 What are people doing? What are they trying to 
accomplish?
•	 Exactly how are they doing it? What strategies are they 
using?
•	 How do they talk about, characterise and understand 
what is going on?
•	 What assumptions are they making?
•	 What is going on here? What do I, as researcher, learn 
from these notes? What strikes me?
These questions correspond with aspects, mentioned by 
Gibbs (quoted in Smith & Davies 2010:153), that may be coded, 
namely activities or behaviour, events, strategies or tactics, 
present situations, meanings, participation, relationships or 
interactions, conditions or constraints, consequences, settings 
and the researcher’s own reflections.
The number of codes, Saldaña (2013:22–24) states, depends 
on the context, the nature of the data and to what degree of 
fineness the researcher wants to examine the detail. Data 
can be ‘lumped’ together with a single code or can be ‘split’ 
into many smaller parts, each bearing its own code. Both 
methods have advantages and disadvantages. Even though 
splitting is time-consuming, it may produce a more nuanced 
analysis. On the other hand, lumping gets to the essence of 
categorising, although it may produce superficial analysis. 
The number of codes may change during a second cycle of 

Page 5 of 9
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i3.1880
coding. Saldaña (2013:26, 28) advises that the initial coding 
should be done on hard copies, although electronic resources 
are available, as hard copies tend to give a better perspective. 
Coding is usually a solitary act, but he (2013:34–35) advises 
that researchers should share their coding and analysis with 
colleagues or even the participants as a way of validating the 
findings and enriching the analysis.
Writing analytic memos: Concurrently with 
coding
The analytic memos document how the coding process 
is developing and codes may trigger deeper reflection on 
the side of the researcher on the meaning of the data. It 
is important that researchers write down their insights 
(Saldaña 2013:41–42). Analytical memos give researchers the 
opportunity to reflect and comment on the following:
•	 how they personally relate to the participants and the 
phenomenon;
•	 their research questions;
•	 the code choices;
•	 emergent patterns and categories;
•	 problems and ethical dilemmas in the study; and
•	 the future direction for the study.
Writing analytical memos can be seen as the transitional 
phase from coding to the more formal writing of the report 
on the study. The analytical memos can also be coded and 
categorised and may even lead to better codes or categories 
for the data (Saldaña 2013:49–51).
Useful coding methods for Practical Theology
Saldaña (2013:51) mentions that grounded theory, one of the 
approaches in qualitative research, has six coding techniques 
in its coding canon. Researchers normally use these coding 
methods during two coding cycles. During the first cycle, 
the data is split into segments and in vivo coding, process 
coding and initial coding may be used. During the second 
cycle, researchers compare codes, note emerging patterns 
and reorganise the data into categories by using the focused, 
axial and theoretical coding techniques. More detail on each 
of the six coding techniques follow, but it is important to note 
that researchers can use these coding methods also in non-
grounded theory studies (Saldaña 2013:51).
In vivo coding
This method of coding is useful for beginner qualitative 
researchers, as the exact word or phrase of the participant 
serves as a code. In order to distinguish in vivo codes, the 
researchers put them between inverted commas. The 
researchers look for words or phrases that seem to stand 
out, for example nouns with impact, action-orientated verbs, 
evocative word choices, clever phrases or metaphors. In vivo 
coding can be the only coding method used during the first 
cycle of data analysis, but it may be limiting. Sometimes the 
participant says something in the best way and other times 
the researchers do it better. The following phrases serve as 
examples of in vivo codes: ‘freshman year awful’, ‘found stuff 
out’, ‘wasn’t trying so hard’ and ‘friends got closer’ (Saldaña 
2013:91–94).
Process (action) coding
A process code is a word or a phrase that captures action. It 
is done by using gerunds (‘-ing’ words) as part of the code. 
Process coding is useful to identify an on-going action as a 
response to situations, or an action to handle a problem, or 
to reach a goal. As a process code usually conveys movement 
and shows how things have changed over time, it helps the 
researchers to give a dynamic account of events. It conveys 
a trail of the participant’s process, for example: criticising 
rumours; not caring what people think; finding out who your 
real friends are (Saldaña 2013:5, 96–99).
Initial (open) coding
Initial coding refers to the process of breaking the 
qualitative data down into distinct parts and coding these 
by using in vivo coding, process coding, and other coding 
methods. The researchers then examine these parts closely 
and compare them for similarities and differences. During 
this process, the researchers may already become aware 
of emerging categories and code them. It is important 
to remember that these initial codes and categories 
are tentative and may change as the analysis process 
progresses. After initial coding, the researchers need time 
for reflection by means of the writing of analytical memos 
(Saldaña 2013:100–101).
Focused coding
Saldaña (2013:213) explains that after initial coding, the 
researchers embark on focused coding by identifying the 
most frequent or significant codes in order to develop 
the prominent categories (it is linked to axial coding). He 
warns that the researchers should be aware that these 
categories do not always have well-defined boundaries 
and that the codes in a specific category may have different 
degrees of belonging. Rubin and Rubin (quoted by Saldaña 
2013:216) recommend that the researchers organise the 
categories hierarchically in main categories and subcategories 
in order to understand the relationship between them.
Axial coding
The goal of axial coding is the strategic reassembling of data 
that have been split during initial coding. In the process of 
crossing out synonyms and redundant codes, the dominant 
codes will become apparent. The axis of the axial coding 
is a category. During axial coding, categories are related 
to subcategories and the properties and dimensions of a 
category are specified (Saldaña 2013:218). Central categories 
describe the key properties of the phenomenon, causal 
categories capture the circumstances that form the structure 
of the studied phenomenon, strategies describe the actions 
or interactions of people in response to the phenomenon, 
and consequential categories represent the outcomes of 
the actions or interactions. Thus, through axial coding, the 

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i3.1880
Page 6 of 9
Original Research
researchers will be able to answer when, where, why, who, how 
and with what consequences questions (Charmaz 2006:60–61; 
Osmer 2008:52; Saldaña 2013:220). In Figure 1 an example of 
Saldaña (2013:220) serves as explanation.
Theoretical (selective) coding
It is the process to select the theoretical code or core category 
that functions like an umbrella that covers all codes and 
categories. It relates to all categories and subcategories. 
It addresses the how and why questions to explain the 
phenomena. However, this is not necessary for every 
qualitative study (Saldaña 2013:223–224; Schurink et al. 
2012:413). In Figure 2 another example of Saldaña (2013:225) 
sheds light on this aspect of coding.
The 
central 
or 
core 
category 
of 
the 
study 
is 
DISCRIMINATING. Adolescents discriminate when they 
choose their friends. They discriminate through a process of 
accepting and excepting. Adolescents socially discriminate 
in their choice of friendships (Saldaña 2013:225–226).
Approaches to data analysis in qualitative 
research
Poggenpoel (1998:338) mentions five approaches to data 
analysis in qualitative research, namely the constant 
comparative method of Lincoln and Guma, the approach 
of Huberman and Miles, Morse and Field’s approach, the 
method of Marshall and Rossman and Tesch’s approach. 
Creswell’s (2014:196–200) data analysis process will also be 
discussed as a sixth possible approach.
Constant comparative method of Lincoln and 
Guma
This method of processing data consists of four stages and 
Poggenpoel (1998:339–340) explains them as follows.
Comparing units applicable to each category
The researchers identify units of information that can 
stand separately and code these units. If there are units 
that are related because they address the same content, the 
researchers put them together in provisional categories. 
By comparing the units within each category, researchers 
determine the theoretical properties of the category. There 
will be descriptive and explanatory categories.
Integrating categories and their properties
Next, the researchers compare the units in the same category 
with the properties of the category. In this way, the category 
properties become explicit, which is necessary to integrate 
categories.
Delimiting the construction
As the integration of categories progress, the number of 
categories becomes less and the categories become saturated.
Writing the construction
The researchers write the reports and present the results to 
the participants to verify the validity of the results.
Approach of Huberman and Miles
Poggenpoel (1998:340) states that this approach of data 
analysis consists of three processes:
Data reduction
Once the data is available, data summaries, coding, finding 
themes, clustering and writing stories are ways to select and 
condense data.
Data display
The data is then organised to facilitate the thinking about the 
meaning of the data.
Conclusion drawing and verification
Now the researchers make interpretations and draw meaning 
from the data by comparing contrasts, noting patterns and 
themes, clustering, using metaphors, using triangulation, looking 
for negative cases and check the results with the participants.
Morse and Field’s approach
In this approach to data analysis, says Poggenpoel (1998:341–
342), the light falls on four cognitive processes.
Comprehending
Coding is a central process, because it helps the researchers 
to sort the data, but also to understand the underlying 
meanings in the text.
DEFINING ONESELF AS A FRIEND
SOCIALISING
MAINTAINING FRIENDSHIP
SETTING CRITERIA FOR FRIENDSHIPS
LABELLING THE GROUPS
ACCEPTING THROUGH EXCEPTING 
QUALIFYING THE GROUPS
DISPELLING STEREOTYPES OF THE GROUPS
Source: Saldaña, J., 2013, The coding manual for qualitative researchers, 2nd edn., Sage, 
London
FIGURE 1: An example of axial coding.
SOCIAL DISCRIMINATION
DISCRIMINATING
ACCEPTING
EXCEPTING
EXCEPTING STEREOTYPES
ACCEPTING STEREOTYPES
Source: Saldaña, J., 2013, The coding manual for qualitative researchers, 2nd edn., Sage, 
London
FIGURE 2: An example of theoretical coding.

Page 7 of 9
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i3.1880
Synthesising
This involves the analysis of categories by looking for 
commonalities.
Theorising
Theorising is to select and fit alternative models to the data 
in order to construct alternative explanations of the data. 
The process continues until the researchers find the best 
explanation for the data.
Recontextualising
It is the establishment of the emerging theory from the 
particular research so that the theory is applicable to other 
settings and populations.
Approach of Marshall and Rossman
This approach to data analysis has five stages and in each of the 
stages, the researchers reduce the data to manageable parts. 
Each stage also involves interpretations as the researchers 
bring meaning to the data (Poggenpoel 1998:342–343).
Organising the data
The first step is that the researchers should read and reread the 
data in order to familiarise themselves with the content of the 
data. In the process, they can list the data on note cards, do 
minor editing of the data and organise voluminous data.
Generating categories, themes and patterns
The researchers need to identify prominent themes, recurring 
ideas and patterns of belief that link people and settings 
together. These become the categories. This is inductive 
analysis, because the categories emerge from the data.
Testing emergent hypotheses
By looking at the categories from the data and the patterns 
between them, it is possible that hypotheses can arise. It is 
important to test these against the existing data.
Searching for alternative explanations
The researchers should also look for alternative explanations, 
describe it and motivate why it is possible.
Writing the report
This is part of the analytic process, because as the researchers 
choose particular words to summarise and reflect the data, 
they are busy with interpretinge the process by giving shape, 
form and meaning to the data.
Eight steps of Tesch
Tesch (1992:142–145) provides detailed guidelines to develop 
an organising system for unstructured qualitative data:
•	 Get a sense of the whole by reading carefully through all the 
data. This gives the researchers the necessary background 
information. If something comes to mind about the data, 
the researchers should write these ideas down.
•	 The researchers start with one document and whilst going 
through it, ask themselves ‘What is this about?’ The question 
does not refer to the content of the document, but to the 
topic. Write these topics in the margin of the document.
•	 After completing this procedure for several documents, 
the researchers make a list of all the topics, one column 
per data document, placing all the columns on the same 
sheet. They need to compare all the topics and group 
similar topics together. Write these groups in columns, 
perhaps with headings that represent the major topics, 
the unique topics and leftovers.
•	 Abbreviate these topics as codes. With this list of codes, 
the researchers go back to the data and write the codes 
next to the appropriate segments of the text. Be open for 
new categories and codes that may emerge. If any ideas 
about the data come to mind, the researchers should 
write it down in their notes (analytic memos).
•	 Find the most descriptive words for the topics, which 
have begun to turn into categories. Try to reduce the 
categories by grouping together those that relate to each 
other. Try to look for subcategories. A ‘normal’ number 
of categories is between 20 and 50. This is the organising 
system for the data.
•	 Make a final decision on the abbreviation of each category 
and alphabetise the codes to ensure that no duplication 
occurs. The researchers should remember that categories 
have fuzzy boundaries and a segment of data can fit in 
two or three categories.
•	 Put the data belonging to each category together and 
perform a preliminary analysis, looking at all the material 
in one category at a time. The focus is now on the content 
of each category. During this process, keep the research 
question in mind in order to discard irrelevant data.
•	 If necessary, recode the existing data. The organising 
system may help the researchers to give structure to their 
research reports.
Creswell’s approach
Although Creswell (2014:196–200) presents his approach as 
a linear, hierarchical process, he states categorically that the 
six steps are interrelated and do not necessarily follow in the 
order they are given.
Organise and prepare the data for analysis
This refers to the transcribing of the interviews and the 
sorting and arranging of the data if different sources of 
information are used.
Read through all the data
By doing this, the researchers get a general sense of the 
information and possibly its overall meaning. Perhaps the 
researchers want to write down general ideas about the data.
Coding of the data
It is the process of organising the data into chunks of 
information and writing a word that represents a category 
in the margin.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i3.1880
Page 8 of 9
Original Research
Description of the setting or people and categories or 
themes for analysis
During the coding process, the researchers give detailed 
descriptions of the setting or the people involved as well as 
descriptions of the categories or themes for analysis.
Present the results of the analysis
This is often done in a narrative passage to convey the 
findings of the analysis. It may include a chronology of 
events, a detailed discussion of several themes or a discussion 
of interconnecting themes.
Interpretation of the results of the analysis
The aim is to answer the following question: ‘What were the 
lessons learned?’
Proposed model for coding and 
data analysis in practical theological 
studies
After studying the coding techniques as set out by Saldaña 
and some of the existing approaches to data analysis 
mentioned above, I propose the following model for coding 
and data analysis during qualitative empirical research in 
practical theological studies. I trust that students and practical 
theologians can implement it fruitfully in their postgraduate 
studies and research articles. The model consists of five phases:
Phase 1: Preparing the data
The researchers need to decide whether they are going to 
do a verbatim transcription of the data versus just giving 
the essence (gist) of what the participant conveyed in the 
interview. Then the researchers type the data on two-thirds 
of the page, leaving a margin on the right. Whenever a new 
topic starts, the researchers start a new paragraph. During 
this process of preparing the data, the researchers may 
already do some precoding by circling, highlighting or 
underlining significant words or sentences. It is a good idea 
to start early with the process and not wait until all the data 
has been gathered.
Phase 2: Coding
The researchers can code the following: activities and 
behaviour, objectives, events, strategies and tactics, present 
situations, 
meanings, 
participation, 
relationships 
and 
interactions, conditions and constraints, consequences, 
assumptions, settings and the researcher’s own reflections. 
These may come from the analytical memos that the 
researchers write continuously.
During the first cycle of coding, in order to split the data, 
the researchers do initial coding by using in vivo coding (the 
researchers put the exact word or phrase of the participant 
in inverted commas), and process coding (the researchers 
use gerunds to portray action). In the second cycle, the 
researchers reassemble the data by using focused coding to 
develop categories.
Phase 3: Member checking
In order to ensure the quality of the qualitative empirical 
research, the researchers pursue to guarantee the credibility 
of the research. In other words, the researchers want to 
ascertain that they portray accurately what the participants 
conveyed. One way to increase credibility is to make use of 
member checking. After the coding process, the researchers 
can ask the participants to verify the validity of the content of 
their specific data as well as the results of the coding process. 
The researchers need to address issues indicated by the 
participant(s).
Phase 4: Interpreting results
The researchers look at one category at a time and focus on 
the content of each category. In order to interpret the results 
and draw meaning from it, the researchers can compare 
contrasts, note patterns and themes, they can cluster, use 
metaphors and even look for negative cases. I agree with 
Osmer (2008:4) that the researchers draw on theories in the 
literature in an attempt to explain why the patterns in the 
results occurred.
Phase 5: Presenting the data
The data analysis process culminates in the researchers’ 
written reports wherein they discuss the findings of the 
empirical research and give their conclusions.
Conclusion
An investigation into recent research outputs by practical 
theologians at the NWU, in all sub-disciplines of Practical 
Theology, revealed that the qualitative empirical research 
skills of lecturers and postgraduate students need further 
development, especially in the area of coding and data 
analysis. I proposed a model for coding and data analysis in 
practical theological studies.
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The author declares that she has no financial or personal 
relationship(s) that may have inappropriately influenced her 
in writing this article.
References
Bowker, J., 1999, The Oxford dictionary of world religions, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford.
Burger, C., 1991, Praktiese Teologie in Suid-Afrika: ’n ondersoek na die denke oor 
sekere voorvrae van die vak, RGN, Pretoria.
Charmaz, K., 2006, Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through 
qualitative analysis, Sage, Thousand Oaks.
Creswell, J.W., 2014, Research design: Qualitative, quantitative and mixed methods 
approaches, 4th edn., Sage, Thousand Oaks.
De Klerk, B.J. & De Wet, F.W., 2013, Met die oog op God: Voorveronderstellings van 
die reformatoriese invalshoek op Praktiese Teologie, Potchefstroomse Teologiese 
Publikasies, Potchefstroom.
Dingemans, G.D.J., 1996, ‘Practical Theology in the academy: A contemporary 
overview’, The Journal of Religion 76(1), 82–96. http://dx.doi.org/10.1086/489737
Dreyer, J.S., 2012, ‘South Africa’, in B.J. Miller-McLemore (ed.), The Wiley-Blackwell 
companion to Practical Theology, pp. 505–514, Wiley-Blackwell, Malden.
Dreyer, J.S., 2015, Academic biography, viewed 1 August 2015, from http://www.
unisa.ac.za/Default.asp?Cmd=ViewContent&ContentID=22647

Page 9 of 9
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i3.1880
Engler, S., 2014, ‘Grounded theory’, in M. Stausberg & S. Engler (eds.), The Routledge 
handbook of research methods in the study of religion, pp. 256–274, Routledge, 
New York.
Horton, M., 2014, Semper reformanda, viewed 11 April 2014, from http://www.
semperreformanda.com/men-of-god/semper-reformanda-by-michael-horton/
Lotter, G.A., 2001, ‘The “reformation” of counselling’, In die Skriflig 35(2), 319–331.
Lotter, G.A., 2007, ‘Pastorale Teologie: Voëlvlug en (voorlopige) landing’, Inaugurele 
rede, Noordwes-Universiteit, Potchefstroom, 29 Oktober 2004.
McClure, B., 2012, ‘Pastoral care’, in B.J. Miller-McLemore (ed.), The Wiley-Blackwell 
companion to Practical Theology, pp. 269–278, Wiley-Blackwell, Malden.
Miller-McLemore, B.J., 2012, ‘The contributions of practical theology’, in B.J. Miller-
McLemore (ed.), The Wiley-Blackwell companion to Practical Theology, pp. 1–20, 
Wiley-Blackwell, Malden.
Osmer, R.R., 2008, Practical Theology: An introduction, Eerdmans, Grand Rapids.
Pieterse, H.J.C., 1991, ‘Duitsland’, in C. Burger (ed.), Praktiese Teologie in Suid-Afrika: ’n 
ondersoek na die denke oor sekere voorvrae van die vak, pp. 5–12, RGN, Pretoria.
Pieterse, H.J.C., 2010, ‘Grounded theory approach in sermon analysis of sermons on 
poverty and directed at the poor as listeners’, Acta Theologica 30(2), 113–129. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4314/actat.v30i2.67265
Pieterse, H.J.C., 2011, ‘An open coding analytical model of sermons on poverty with 
Matthew 25:31–46 as sermon text’, Acta Theologica 31(1), 95–112. http://dx.doi.
org/10.4314/actat.v31i1.6
Pieterse, H.J.C., 2012, ‘A grounded theory approach to the analysis of sermons on 
poverty: Congregational projects as social capital’, Verbum et Ecclesia 33(1), Art. 
#689, 7 pages. http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/ve.v33i1.689
Pieterse, H.J.C., 2013, ‘An emerging grounded theory for preaching on poverty in 
South Africa with Matthew 25:31–46 as sermon text’, Acta Theologica 33(1), 
175–195. http://dx.doi.org/10.4314/actat.v33i1.9
Pieterse, H.J.C., 2015, Prof HJC Pieterse, viewed 1 August 2015, from http://www.
unisa.ac.za/Default.asp?Cmd=ViewContent&ContentID=95282
Poggenpoel, M., 1998, ‘Data analysis in qualitative research’, in A.S. de Vos, H. Strydom, 
C.B. Fouché, M. Poggenpoel, E. Schurink, & W. Schurink (eds.), Research at grass 
roots: A primer for the caring professions, pp. 334–353, Van Schaik, Pretoria.
Saldaña, J., 2013, The coding manual for qualitative researchers, 2nd edn., Sage, London.
Schurink, W., Fouché, C.B. & De Vos, A.S., 2012, ‘Qualitative data analysis and 
interpretations’, in A.S. de Vos, H. Strydom, C.B. Fouché & C.S.L. Delport (eds.), 
Research at grass roots: For the social sciences and human service professions, 
pp. 397–423, Van Schaik, Pretoria.
Smith, K. & Davies, J, 2010, ‘Qualitative data analysis’, in L. Dahlberg & C. McCaig 
(eds.), Practical researcher and evaluation: A start-to finish guide for practitioners, 
pp. 145–158, Sage, London.
Tesch, R., 1992, Qualitative research: Analysis types and software tools, Falmer, New York.
Troxel, A.C., 2006, Reformanda, viewed 11 April 2014, from http://www.
reformation21.org/counterpoints/post-32.php
Van der Ven, J., 1993, Practical Theology: An empirical approach, Kok Pharos, Kampen.
Vorster, J.M., 2010, ‘An ecclesiological model for the ministry of reconciliation in a 
socio-political context’, In die Skriflig 44(2), 429−454. http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/
ids.v44i2.154
Wolters, A.M., 1992, Die skepping herwin: Bybelse grondslae vir ’n reformatoriese 
lewensbeskouing, PU vir CHO, Potchefstroom.