http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1996
Page 1 of 15
Original Research
Within the social processes of transformation, the connection between oppressive structures, 
radical political change and the reconstruction of the society, the connection between power 
issues and the quest for human dignity and justice, surfaces anew. The abuse of power (threat 
power) puts a lot of pressure on interventions that aim at compassionate reconciliation, rather 
than instant solutions and rational explanations for contradictory events within social processes 
of change and severe forms of suffering.
The quality of the pastoral ministry is often challenged by unexpected events of suffering and 
unexplainable disasters. The latter raises the theodicy question, namely how to deal with the 
connection between the power of God (God Almighty) in the face of the so-called undeserved fate 
that seems to contradict the love of God and that robs human beings from all forms of meaning 
and hope. In the attempt to comfort people, caregivers are challenged by the question ‘why?’ 
within the reality of painful, existential paradoxes. Or should the art of comfort and compassionate 
caring be rendered as in appropriate for our time? Or should it perhaps been phased out as one 
of the ‘zombie categories’ of Christian spirituality?
In his book, Reconstructing practical theology, Reader (2008:1) points out the danger of ‘zombie 
categories’ (Ulrich Beck quoted in Reader), namely the continued employment of concepts that no 
longer do justice to the world we experience, and yet, which are difficult to abandon because of 
tradition and because they are not yet very redundant. Zombie categories are therefore described 
Author:
Daniel J. Louw1
Affiliation:
1Faculty of Theology, 
Stellenbosch University, 
Africa
Correspondence to:
Daniel Louw
Email:
djl@sun.ac.za
Postal address:
Paradyskloof Villas 
14, Paradyskloofweg, 
Stellenbosch 7600, South 
Africa
Dates:
Received: 09 June 2015
Accepted: 12 Aug. 2015
Published: 14 Dec. 2015
How to cite this article:
Louw, D.J., 2015, ‘On 
facing the God-question 
in a pastoral theology 
of compassion: From 
imperialistic omni-categories 
to theopaschitic pathos-
categories’, In die Skriflig 
49(1), Art. #1996, 15 pages. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/
ids.v49i1.1996
Note:
This article’s research is 
based on work previously 
published by the author.
Copyright:
© 2015. The Authors. 
Licensee: AOSIS 
OpenJournals. This work is 
licensed under the Creative 
Commons Attribution 
License.
On facing the God-question in a pastoral theology of 
compassion: From imperialistic omni-categories to 
theopaschitic pathos-categories
Many scholars in the 20th century warned against static, ontological and metaphysical 
schemata of interpretation, stemming from Hellenistic thinking with its impact on God 
images in Christian reflection. Against the background of new spiritual and philosophical 
phenomena like apatheism and anatheism, the question regarding the appropriateness of 
existing categories for God within the framework of pastoral theology surfaces. A paradigm 
shift from omni-categories to pathos-categories is proposed in order to deal with issues 
like human suffering, dignity and justice. In this regard, theopaschitic theology can play a 
decisive role in the reframing of existing static God-images stemming predominantly from the 
Roman-Greco world. The notion of a ‘sustainable God’ is introduced in order to reframe God’s 
compassionate presence (ta splanchna) in terms of a continuum of infinitive interventions 
(infiniscience and the pneumatology of to-be-with).
Die dinamika van die God-vraagstuk in ’n pastorale teologie van medelye en omgee: Vanaf 
imperialistiese omni-kategorieë na teopasgitiese patos-kategorieë. Navorsers het telkemale 
in die twintigste eeu teen die impak van statiese, ontologiese en metafisiese skemas van 
interpretasie gewaarsku. Teïstiese denke is grootliks deur Hellenistiese denkkategorieë bepaal. 
Teen die agtergrond van nuwe filosofiese verskynsels soos apateïsme en anateïsme en die 
invloed daarvan op die verskillende vorms van spiritualiteitsdenke, duik die vraag op na die 
toepaslikheid en relevansie van bestaande, geykte denkkategorië vir die Christelike verstaan 
van God. Die vraagstuk van lyding, menswaardigheid en geregtigheid stel nuwe eise aan ’n 
pastorale teologie wat met kontekstuele lewensvraagstukke erns maak. In die lig hiervan word 
’n paradigmaskuif in teologisering, vanaf omni-kategorieë na patos-kategorieë voorgestel. 
Dit word beredeneer dat ’n teopasgitiese teologie ’n belangrike bydrae kan lewer om statiese 
Godskonsepte, wat grootliks vanuit die Romeinse en Griekse denkwêreld gekom het, in die 
rigting van ’n meer dinamiese Godsverstaan te skuif. Die gedagte van die ‘volhoubaarheid van 
God’ word aan ’n nuwe verstaan van die medelye van God (ta splanchna) verbind. Vandaar 
die voorstel vir ’n paradigmaskuif vanaf almag en alwetendheid na ’n patosvolle, infinitiewe 
omgee-identifikasie (die pneumatologiese volhoubaarheid van daar-wees-vir).
Read online:
Scan this QR 
code with your 
smart phone or 
mobile device 
to read online.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1996
Page 2 of 15
Original Research
as the ‘living dead’, the tried and familiar frameworks of 
interpretation that have served us well for many years and 
continue to haunt our thoughts and analyses, even though 
they are embedded in a world that is passing away before 
our eyes.
What then is meant by the intervention of God in 
compassionate caregiving, and the pastoral challenge to 
reintroduce the God-question in comfort when one faces the 
fact that life is indeed unusual and framed by unpredictable 
happenstances?
The ‘Black swan’ metaphor
As argued in The Black swan (Taleb 2010), life cannot be 
explained in terms of deterministic explanations within a 
cause-and-effect schema of interpretation; ‘things developed 
through contradiction (or opposites) in a way that elevated 
mankind into higher forms of society’ (2010:13). Transferred 
into doing practical theology, the implication is that the 
intervention of God and the understanding of divine 
presence in life events, supersede rational explanation – ‘the 
pathology of thinking that the world in which we live is 
more understandable, more explainable, and therefore more 
predictable than it actually is’ (2010:9).
Within the framework of the research topic, namely the 
God-question in a pastoral theology of compassion, one can 
expect that compassion in itself is in essence not a positivistic 
category of rational explication, but of existential being-
with, within the discrepancies of life. The God-question 
should thus be posed within the fact of paradox as a highly 
‘improbability’ rather than an explanatory cause. God is like 
a kind of ‘Black swan’, not like a purely anthropomorphic 
entity that the Greeks called ‘deus’. God operates in categories 
that point to the improbable. Taleb (2010) states:
Critically the Jewish god did not lend himself to symbolic 
representation. Likewise, what many people commoditize 
and label as ‘unknown’, ‘improbable’, or ‘uncertain’ is not the 
same thing to me; it is not a concrete and precise category of 
knowledge, a nerdified field, but its opposite; it is the lack (and 
limitation) of knowledge. (p. xxix)
Black swan terminology implies to think in terms of 
incompleteness, complification, paradox, improbability and 
unpredictability. ‘Black Swans being unpredictable, we need 
to adjust to their existence (rather than naïvely try to predict 
them)’ (Taleb 2010:xxv); human blindness with respect to 
randomness (2010:xxiii). Meaning and the connection to 
suffering and the unexpected, surface at the interface and 
liminality of the improbable friction between divine presence 
and human surprise. In this respect one should start to render 
compassion and power in terms of Black swan terminology 
as categories of ‘the unusual’ (2010:xxviii).
With reference to methodology, one could assume 
that rather than the methodology of metaphysical and 
hierarchical thinking (top-down) and the methodology of 
phenomenological and experiential, observational thinking 
(bottom-up), Black swan thinking is about zigzag thinking. 
It is circular and spiral due to unpredictability and paradox. 
Thus, this is the reason why empathetic and sympathetic 
understanding in compassion thinking gain from chaotic 
disorder, rather than from logic order – it is the challenge to 
deal with the unknown (Taleb 2012:4).
In her book, Country of my skull, Krog (1998) struggles with 
the meaning question, power issues and the future of South 
Africa after the ‘truth and reconciliation’. It seems as if core 
issues like reconciliation, sharing, fair distribution and 
empathetic acknowledgement of the wrongs of the past in 
the attempt to heal the painful scars of the past, are hampered 
by new power struggles and a lack of compassion – chaos is 
emerging on the horizon of the so-called ‘Rainbow Nation’ 
of Desmond Tutu. Krog poses the burning question of the 
improbable: ‘If the Commission can’t make it work, what 
hope does the country have?’ (1998:276).
Former Archbishop Desmond Tutu (2004) sums up the 
current predicament of South Africa as follows:
We were involved in the struggle because we believed we 
would evolve a new kind of society. A caring compassionate 
society. At the moment many, too many, of our people live in 
gruelling demeaning, dehumanising poverty. We are sitting 
on a powder keg. We really must work like mad to eradicate 
poverty. (p. 33)
Thus, the challenging question for a pastoral theology and 
practical theology that claims to be contextually relevant 
is the following: How should we reflect on the connection, 
even disconnection, between power, and the engagement of 
the pastoral ministry within the plight of suffering human 
beings for meaning and human dignity? What is meant 
by compassion when the caring ministry connects the 
undeserved suffering of human beings, and the chaotic abuse 
of power to the theological notion of the ‘power of God’ and 
the compassion of God’s kenotic love?
Top-down suppression and the 
reframing of God-images
The quest for theological clarity on what is meant by 
compassion in pastoral theology is vibrant within different 
contextual discourses in practical theology. The quest for 
clarity and compassionate understanding surfaces within 
many burning social and political issues. For example the 
gender discourse deals with the suppression of women due to 
the ideology of patriarchalism and male chauvinism. There is 
an urgent need for a hermeneutical deconstruction of power 
issues, framed by a top-down approach of hierarchical and 
patriarchal thinking.
Feminist theology is inter alia about the deconstruction 
of fixed and stigmatised, discriminating categories; it 
criticises the power relations amongst people and the 
hampering factor of male domination (threat power) based 
on theological justification (Bons-Storm 1996:25). Therefore, 
feminist theology as a whole, and feminist pastoral theology 

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1996
Page 3 of 15
Original Research
within it, oscillates between the two poles of critique and 
reconstruction (Moore 2002:12–13). In the book, Feminist 
theology, edited by Susan Frank Parsons, Rosemary Ruther 
(2002:3) reiterates the basic assumption that feminism 
is a critical stance that challenges the patriarchal gender 
paradigm that associates males with human characteristics 
defined as superior and dominant (rational power), and 
females with those defined as inferior and auxiliary 
(intuition, passivity).
With reference to the debate on the God-question in practical, 
life issues, McFague (1987) argues that the motherly and 
compassionate acting qualities of God should be emphasised, 
namely the world as the body of God (1987:69–78).
The important volume on the meaning of doing practical 
theology within different cultural contexts and concrete life 
issues, reiterates the reinterpretation of the God-factor in 
theory formation for practical theology (Miller-McLemore 
2012:2–20). The shift in practical theology is away from 
religious meaning ‘beyond the everyday’ to religious 
meaning ‘in the mundane’ (2012:7). In this regard, the 
reframing of God-images in practical theological reflection 
on life issues becomes imperative. In practical theology, God 
should be portrayed more in terms of compassionate, active 
verbs, than in substantial, powerful nouns.
Old Testament studies assert that the Jewish and Christian 
God is more verb- than noun-like. According to Miller-
McLemore (2012):
Several biblical scholars translate God’s answer to Moses’ 
request for God’s name in Exodus 3; 14, YHWH, as ‘I am who I 
am becoming’ rather than the etymology of YHWH, ‘I am who 
I am’. (p. 8)
The point is, in either case, YHWH is a ‘verbal form’1 and 
indicates the sustainable presence of an ongoing intervention 
and promise of God’s faithful and covenantal being-with, 
rather than a metaphysical entity interpreted in terms of 
immutable categories.
Despite the claim that secularisation makes the God-question 
in processes of urbanisation irrelevant (Cox 1965), it is still 
vibrant in many of the so-called secularised societies. In her 
book, Seelsorge, Doris Nauer (2010:70) puts the question of the 
credibility and reliability of soul care (glaubwürdige Seelsorge) 
a new on the academic agenda of theological education, as 
well as on the calendar of caregiving and the appropriateness 
of communities of faith. A credible, reliable and sustainable 
understanding of pastoral caregiving is possible only with the 
emphasis on quality (2010:105–109) and the understanding 
of the Christian tradition of wisdom with its emphasis on 
compassion, faith and God.
The challenge to reopen the debate on compassionate rather 
than powerful omni-categories is not new. Hall (1993) already 
1.In English, ‘gerunds are words that end with -ing and look like verbs but function as 
nouns. That is, they are nouns (words that name persons, places, ideas, etc.) that 
contain action; they are verbs used as nouns’ (Miller-McLemore 2012:8).
warned against the overemphasis on power categories 
that portray God as an imperialistic father almighty that 
represents more a Caesar-like emperor2 than a compassionate 
being-with.
The ‘Father Almighty’ developed under the influence of an 
affluent society into the romantic sentimentality of Father 
Christmas all-merciful. Instead of a suffering God the 
omnipotent God was proclaimed. One can say that due to 
imperialistic undertones the triumphalism of a theology 
of glory ‘removed the cross from the heart of God’ (Hall 
1993:96). Hall (1993) claims:
God is depicted as one who, unlike us, does not exist under the 
threat of nonbeing in any of its manifestations. Thus, the divine 
power (omnipotence) is not challenged by any lack or weakness; 
the divine knowledge (omniscience) is not circumscribed 
by ignorance, uncertainty, or inherent limitation; the divine 
presence (omnipresence) is not subject to the constraints of 
time and space; and God is not vulnerable to change or prey 
to passions that may be aroused by any existential eventuality 
(immutability). (pp. 96–97)
Our common use of power takes political power as its 
exemplar; power as domination. The perfection or fulfilment 
of power as domination easily becomes manifest as ‘absolute 
power’, ‘the tyrannical enslavement or eradication of 
whatever opposes such power’ (Pasewark 1993:3).
What then are the theological implications for compassionate 
thinking in pastoral caregiving? Is it possible to shift 
the emphasis in practical theological reflection from the 
more traditional omni-categories of imperialistic God-
images to the more compassionate categories of pathos 
thinking in theopaschitic theology? Furthermore, is it 
possible that Christian theological reflection on the power 
of ‘God Almighty’ was more informed by an imperialistic 
interpretation of the power of God (the threat image of 
pantokrator-images) than by the compassionate interpretation 
of a weak, suffering God (theopaschitic images of weak, 
vulnerable power)?
Compassionate thinking and the 
improbability of kenotic love
Compassionate thinking puts a huge burden on human self-
understanding. Davies (2001:xx) formulates this challenge 
as follows: ‘If compassion is knowingly to put oneself at the 
risk for the sake of the other, then self-dispossessive virtue is 
predicated upon a prior state of self-possession’. If translated 
into theological language one should link compassion to the 
ethos of self-sacrifice and the discovery that in Jesus Christ, 
as the ‘compassion of God’ (cf. Lk 1:78), God has already 
preceded us. According to Davies, in compassion being 
is affirmed through the Other in faith and hope: ‘… divine 
self-emptying and self-dispossession for the sake of creation’ 
(ibid:xx).
2.W.N. Pittinger (quoted in Hall 1993:54) argued that the typical picture of divine 
omnipotence is a case of ‘giving to God that which belongs exclusively to Caesar’. 
Even the love of God became a masculine affair supported by patriarchalism.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1996
Page 4 of 15
Original Research
Davies (2001:21) further argues that in compassionate thinking 
the essence of compassion is contracted by the principle of 
self-denying or kenotic love (a dispossessive and decentred 
model of the self). Compassion operates on the basis of self-
emptying for the sake of the other. It contains a rational 
component based on altruistic ethics (the cognitive structure 
of compassion); an emotional component based on an 
attitude of empathy (the affective component of compassion); 
a volitional component based on the intentionality to be 
open for the other or the Other (the conative component of 
compassion); as well as a spiritual component based on the 
encounter with the kenotic love of Christ – the compassion of 
God (the theological and divine or transcendent component 
of compassion). The latter constitutes the meta-physical 
horizon of openness and transcending hope.
Within the Hebrew tradition the scriptural narrative as 
displayed in Exodus 3:14 founds the priority of compassion, 
namely the act of ‘divine presencing which is a boundless 
and unending being-with’ (Davies 2001:20). The notion ‘I am 
who I am’ is one of the most profound statements regarding 
the being and essence of God. The Hebrew tradition refers to 
a fundamental promise and expression of the faithfulness of 
God. In fact, it can be translated and paraphrased that God 
is a unique kind of deity, namely that God will always be 
there where his people are. Exodus 3:14 can thus be viewed 
as the foundation of a spirituality of hope and a theological 
understanding of the spirit of compassion as instigated by the 
compassionate being of God with the suffering predicament 
of his people.
Basic assumption
My basic assumption is that within the theodicy question and 
the human quest for meaning in suffering, theology is often 
a captive of a metaphysical framework of interpretation, 
thus the affinity for static omni-categories. For example in 
the first 400 years after the establishment of Christian texts 
on the Christ-event, cultural and philosophical categories 
were borrowed from Greek philosophy and Hellenistic 
thinking (logos-terminology) in order to explain the reality 
or being of God. Metaphysical categories were often applied 
to explain God’s existence in terms of ontological thinking. 
Categories like the omnipotence, omniscience, immutability 
and impassibility dominated the scenario of dogmatic and 
confessional thinking.3 Largely, this was the reason for the 
very controversial theological debate in the previous century 
regarding the so-called ‘death of God debate’ (Altizer & 
Hamilton 1966).
3.The unarticulated intention was in many church synods to ‘save’ God’s power within 
the framework of a kind of ecclesiastic imperialism and cultural obsession for 
control. The Confession of Faith (Belgic Confession 1959) starts, for example with 
the notion of power as the creation, preservation and government of the universe. 
God as Father ‘watches over us with paternal care, keeping all creatures so under 
his power that not a hair of our head (for they are all numbered), nor a sparrow can 
fall to the ground without the will of our Father …. (‘and not one of them falls apart 
from your Father’s will’). Although ‘will’ is not mentioned in the Greek text (Mt 
10:29; literally: without our Father), the interpreters read ‘will of the Father’ into 
the text. In the background of the religious mind, God determines everything in a 
cause-and-effect manner so that the will of God should at least equal divine power. 
Divine power is then interpreted in terms of cause (first principle) and governance 
(strength) and not in terms of care and compassion (vulnerability). The quest for 
meaning in suffering is then dominated and demarcated by categories of control 
and expansion.
Within the framework of compassionate thinking, what is 
the implication for pastoral theology, very specifically for 
the understanding of the ‘power of God’ in acts of pastoral 
intervention and caregiving, as well as for the hermeneutics 
of a ‘suffering God’ in practical theology?
The theological dilemma in theistic 
thinking: From static categories into 
dynamic thinking
According to Küng (1970), orthodox thinking in dogmatism 
is characterised by the cause-effect categories of deterministic 
thinking and the static categories of theism. The challenge in 
theology is therefore to move from static categories into the 
dynamics of pathos categories.4 This debate is still vivid in 
the reflection on the question regarding the link between the 
God-factor and the quest for action in practical theological 
thinking (fides quaerens actum).
In a keynote address of the meeting of the International 
Academy of Practical Theology (IAPT) in 2015 in Pretoria, the 
systematic theologian J.W. van Huyssteen (2015) proposed a 
‘bottom up approach’ wherein postfoundationalism5 wants 
to brake with static metaphysical thinking in favour of a 
more observational and empirical approach and inductive 
rationale for the action of belief. This approach is supported 
by J. Müller (2011) in his argument for a postfoundational 
approach in theory formation for practical theology.
In foundationalism, ontological categories from philosophy 
were often borrowed to aid theology in its attempt to 
define theological truths. This is the reason why John 
A.T. Robinson, in his controversial publication, Honest 
to God (1963), exposed ‘traditional theism’ (defining of 
God in abstract, static and metaphysical categories) to its 
undergirding static paradigms. His intention was inter alia 
to turn theological reflection away from a metaphysical 
paradigm to the reality of our being human within the 
realm of suffering. Instead of the abuse of God as a deus 
ex machina, Christian spirituality should be directed by the 
powerlessness of a suffering God (Robinson 1963:39). God 
is not like a Grandfather in heaven, a kindly Old Man who 
could be pushed into one corner whilst we get on with the 
business of life (1963:41). ‘God, the unconditional, is to be 
found only in, with and under the conditional relationships 
of this life: for he is their depth and ultimate significance’ 
(1963:60).
4.In Menschwerdung Gottes, Küng (1970:660–631) pays particular attention to this 
question. He sees this as a challenge to dogmatic orthodoxy. The incarnation already 
challenges the concept of an apathetic God. Küng therefore bases his theory of the 
suffering God on the incarnation which involves a dynamic Selbstentäusserung (self-
condescension; self-abandonment) of the Logos. The latter must not be interpreted 
as an apotheosis of the flesh, but as an ensarkosis of the Logos: God is not ‘static’, 
but ‘pathetic’ in the events surrounding the incarnation. Küng views God’s suffering 
because of the fact that the God-Logos, as subject of the incarnation, is also 
intimately involved in the Son’s suffering. We can thus speak of the death and 
suffering of the God-Logos. 
5.Cf. Van Huyssteen (1997). In general, postfoundationalism can be rendered as an 
epistemology denoting a rejection of an assumed or given authority (top-down 
approach) or causative principle. The rationale for the action of belief is embedded 
and determined by contextuality and the constructs of cultural settings. See also 
the connection between postfoundationalism and theoryformation in practical 
theology (Müller 2011).

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1996
Page 5 of 15
Original Research
Robinson’s attempt can be linked to Paul Tillich’s ontology 
of acceptance and his use of existential categories. Tillich 
(1965:44) thus, argues: ‘Nevertheless it is necessary for an 
ontology of courage to include an ontology of anxiety.’ Being 
should be founded by an external factor that functions as the 
ground of being, namely divine Being (divine acceptance): 
‘Despair is an ultimate or “boundary-line” situation. One 
cannot go beyond it’ (1965:59). God is then introduced as the 
metaground of all being and the source of self-affirmation, 
self-acceptance and courage to be (1965:152–183).
The more a culture is forced to think in terms of efficiency, 
the more pressure is placed on existing categories to revisit 
frameworks of interpretation. This was for example the case 
in the surfacing of ‘process theology’.6 Process theology is 
a type of theology that was developed from Alfred North 
Whitehead’s (1861–1947) process philosophy, and most 
notably developed by Charles Hartshorne (1897–2000) and 
John B. Cobb (b. 1925). For both Whitehead and Hartshorne, 
it is an essential attribute of God to affect and be affected by 
temporal processes, contrary to the forms of theism that hold 
God to be in all respects non-temporal (eternal), unchanging 
(immutable), and unaffected by the world (impassible). 
Process theology does not deny that God is in some respects 
eternal (will never die), immutable (in the sense that God is 
unchangingly good), and impassible (in the sense that God’s 
eternal aspect is unaffected by actuality), but it contradicts 
the classical view by insisting that God is in some respects 
temporal, mutable, and passible.
The undergirding assumption surfaces, namely that static 
categories within a fixed metaphysical framework are not 
any more appropriate to meet questions regarding the 
intervention of God within transformative life events. In 
the sixties, Harvey Cox (1965) pointed out that the so-called 
‘death of God’ is not merely an intellectual death, but an 
attempt to probe into static categories in order to deal with 
the dynamics of the ‘secular city’. It is also intuitive and 
aesthetic (Cox 1969:28). According to Cox (1969:28), if we 
really want to ‘experience’ and ‘encounter’ God, we have to 
meet him first in the dance before we can define him in the 
doctrine.
A good example of attempts in the previous century to 
move from static categories into more dynamic categories 
is Eberhard Jüngel’s (1967) systematic reflection in his 
dissertation, Gottes Sein ist im Werden. God’s being is 
interpreted as an event of becoming. It means that God’s 
revelation of himself is not complete. This does not imply 
that God himself is incomplete, but rather that God reveals 
himself as a Für-sich-sein [a Being-unto-himself] who, in his 
grace, is also a Für-uns-sein (a Being-with-and-for-us). In his 
capacity as a Being for us, God discloses himself as being 
involved in the suffering of humankind, and thus he becomes 
6.Process theology and process philosophy are collectively referred to as ‘process 
thought’. Process theology is the philosophical and theological position that God is 
changing, as is the universe. Therefore our knowledge of God must be progressing 
as we learn more about Him, and it can never rest in any absolutes, which is why 
process theologians deny the absolutes of God’s immutability and truth. (cf. http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Process_theology)
a suffering God for suffering human beings in a dynamic 
act of revelation. In these events of God-being-for-us, God’s 
mode of being is still in the process of becoming (incomplete); 
it is a kind of infinitive (continuous happenstance).
The happenstances of life are embedded in sociocultural 
processes and events of transformation and unexpected 
change. The intriguing question for theology is how the 
God-question should meet challenges posed by phenomena 
that seem to make pastoral interventions superfluous and 
ineffective.
From secularisation into apatheism 
and anatheism
Secularisation has been predicted to swamp religious belief. 
In his remarkable book, A history of the modern world, Johnson 
(1985:698) writes that history has an illogical factor: the 
unpredicted. It seems that now that we enter a new century, 
even the term secularisation is in disrepute. New forms of 
spirituality are emerging. Johnson (1985) points out:
While theologians at the universities of Tübingen and 
Utrecht were diminishing the total of Christian belief, strange 
charismatics in the slums of Mexico City and Sao Paulo, of Recife 
and Rio, of Cape Town, Johannesburg, Lagos and Nairobi, were 
adding to it. The first group spoke for thousands; the second for 
scores of millions … (p. 707)
According to Ara Norenzayan, a psychologist at the 
University of British Columbia in Vancouver, Canada, there 
are places where secularisation is making huge inroads: 
western and northern Europe, Canada, Australia, Japan 
and China (quoted in Lawston 2014:31). Norenzayan (2014) 
further states:
Even in the US – a deeply Christian country – the number of 
people expressing ‘no religious affiliation’ has risen from 5 per 
cent in 1972 to 20 per cent today; among people under thirty, that 
number is closer to a third. (p. 31)
Lawston (2014:31–32) refers to Phil Zuckerman, a socialist 
at Pitzer College in Claremont, California, who remarked 
that although it seemed as if religious interests were back 
at the turn of the 21st century, secularisation is also back 
in business. Recent developments in the prosperity cult are 
contributing to precipitous decline in many societies all over 
the globe. Religion is withering across the board. Despite 
pockets of increased fundamentalism and charismatic 
upheavals, religion is no longer a meaningful alternative to 
threats of violence, fraud, and severe poverty.
It was always argued that religion is the moral glue that 
holds society together, and if you get rid of it, everything 
collapses. According to research in sociology, the evidence, 
however, suggests otherwise. It seems that the more 
secular a country or a state, the better it does. More and 
more sociologists are debunking the notion that religion 
is necessary for a healthy society. The argument surfaces 
that secularisation can lead to social improvements. Says 
Zuckerman (quoted in Lawston 2014):

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1996
Page 6 of 15
Original Research
First, if you believe that this is the only world and there is no 
afterlife, that’s going to motivate you to make it as good a place 
as possible. Number two is the emphasis on science, education 
and rational problem solving that seems to come with the secular 
orientation – for example, are we going to pray to end crime in 
our city or are we going to look at the root causes? (p. 35)
With reference to Norenzayan (quoted in Lawston 2014:33), 
there is a new kind of atheism7 that is surfacing in affluent 
societies, namely an irreligiosity that is very apathetic. 
Wealthy people do not really care about issues regarding 
the transcendent realm of life. With apatheism is meant: ‘This 
is not so much doubting or being sceptical, but more about 
not caring.’ Apatheists simply do not think about religion. 
In apatheism you just bypass religion within a nonchalant 
cool attitude of carelessness. Religion and hope flourishes 
in societies where there is a lack of general health care, 
widespread job insecurity and a poor safety net.
It seems that there is indeed a case for arguing that homo 
sapiens is also homo religiosus (Armstrong 1997:3). At 
the same time one cannot ignore the fact that statistics in 
religious countries point in the direction of the gradual 
decline of religious spirituality. On the other hand, there are 
new voices in research on the philosophy of religion. For 
example Richard Kearney in his book, Anatheism: Returning 
to God after God (2011), draws heavily on Paul Ricoeur’s 
model of translation or ‘linguistic hospitality’ and his quest to 
enact and to inhabit the Word or word of the Other or other. 
Spirituality should return to the dimension of the sacred 
in religious texts: the mystical or apothatic that appears in 
religious and wisdom thinking. Burkey (2010 – in his book 
review of Kearney) states:
Out of the depths of the abyss a return and recovery of the sacred 
is possible, a re-birth – not of the God of omnipotence but a God 
of service and a sacramental ‘yes’ to life. Maybe. God-may-be, 
again, anew. That is the eschatological wager of anatheism. 
(p. 162)
The anatheistic option of Kearney should indeed be explored 
by Christian wisdom thinking. It is true that the traditional 
understanding of the sacred as a religious category should 
never ignore the fact that transcendence cannot be reduced 
to merely intramundane categories and the realm of the 
saeculum. As Kearney (2011:152) argues: ‘The sacred is in the 
world, but not of the world.’
Between the abstract metaphysical interpretation of theism 
and the irreligiosity of apatheism and atheism, anatheism 
is seen as an attempt to rediscover the sacred beauty of 
life. Instead of the otherworldly traditional Omni-God, and 
above the rather abstract and well-worn master concept 
of Postmodernism, Kearney reintroduces the interplay 
between the spirituality of hospitality and the dubious 
figure of the Stranger or stranger. For him the metaphor of 
7.In CREDulous atheism, ‘That does not mean incredulous as in unbelieving, but as in 
not being exposed to CREDs, those dramatic displays of faith’ (Lawston 2014:33). 
Religion combined with power has a kind of spellbound effect on people. In fanatic 
manifestations of belief, people are willing to die for their faith. Those beliefs 
become more contagious. When people don’t see extravagant displays of faith, 
then there is some evidence that this leads to decline of religion.
the ‘stranger’ rekindles an awareness of the sacred in the 
sense that the concept embodies something else, something 
more, something other than what the self can contain or 
grasp (Kearney 2011:152). ‘The anatheistic wager concerns 
how we respond to this surplus, this transcendence within 
immanence, this glimmer of the infinite in the finite’ (Burkey 
2010:163).
Simon Critchley (2012:18) refers to the ‘faith of the faithless’. 
This paradox can be connected to the need for new forms 
of self-realisation and the quest for ‘more aesthetic fidelity’ 
(Oscar Wilde quoted in 2012:3). Critchley (2012) says:
At the core of Wild’s remark is the seemingly contradictory idea 
of the faith of the faithless and the belief of unbelievers, a faith 
which does not give up on the idea of truth, but transfigures its 
meaning. (p. 3)
In our search for sacred spaces of truth and spiritual places 
of meaning in our current network culture (Barnard, Cilliers 
& Wepener 2014:1–2) one has to face the dynamics of 
liminality – the position of ‘betwixt and between’. Nothing 
is fixed between apatheism and anatheism, and theology 
has to revisit its own sacred sources with the awareness of 
a bricolage attitude, namely to tinker with fixed beliefs by 
‘cutting and pasting’ from different cultures, religions, 
beliefs and philosophies (2014:120). Even the articulation of 
the meaning of the divine in different cultural settings makes 
the naming of God a liminal issue – ‘always moving, and not 
captured in “freeze-frame”’ (2014:2).
How should we then interpret the God-question; very 
specifically the notion of the power of God (omnipotence) 
within social and cultural changes?
The stumbling block of imperialistic 
omni-categories
Within the history of Christian doctrine, several schemata of 
interpretation (Louw 2000:5–6) in a pastoral hermeneutics 
(Capps 1984) can be identified:
•	 The Hellenistic schema: In this model, God is interpreted 
in terms of a causal and logical principle. As the cause 
of all things and events, God is viewed in terms of 
immutability and apathy. Suffering does not affect God 
at all: God’s immutability and the principle of causality.8
•	 The metaphysical schema: God’s transcendence is 
understood as being remote from historical events. 
Essentially, revelation implies God’s concealment. Behind 
revelation ‘another God’ exists. The otherness of God 
therefore introduces an ontological schism between God 
and our human existence: God’s transcendence – God as 
ultimate Being.
•	 The imperialistic schema: According to the Constantine 
paradigm, God’s kingdom should be understood in terms 
of militant power. God reigns as a Caesar and determines 
every sphere of life. Ever since, it has been a real danger 
8.Inbody (1997:139): ‘The notion of God as the “unmoved mover” is derived from 
Aristotle, at least so far as Western thought is concerned.’

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1996
Page 7 of 15
Original Research
to fashion God in the image of the ‘cultural gods’ – the 
imperial rulers of the Egyptian, Persian and Roman 
empires. The church gave to God the attributes which 
belonged to Caesar (cf. also Inbody 1997:139). The church 
becomes a cultural institution with God as the official 
Head of a powerful establishment: God’s omnipotence – 
God as Pantokrator.9
•	 The patriarchal schema: God acts as a great Patriarch 
and dominates human beings. Therefore God’s actions 
in suffering are regarded in terms of purification or 
edification and retribution. As Patriarch, human beings 
face a very stem God: God as an authoritarian Father.
•	 The hierarchical schema: Life is viewed as an ordered 
system. At stake are position and differentiation. The 
latter is structured in terms of importance, status and 
position along the lines of class differences. In such a 
model, the tension between superiority and inferiority 
determines people’s understanding of God: God as royal 
King, Lord and ruling Judge.
•	 The economic and materialistic schema of wealth, 
achievement, development and affluence: God becomes 
an official and public idol: a God who safeguards 
prosperity. He is then hijacked to serve our selfish 
needs. Belief becomes a religion – it is misused as a good 
investment to bypass tragedy. The kingdom of God 
becomes a stock exchange: God as Director and Manager, 
Provider of wealth and prosperity.
•	 The political and societal schema: Due to the role of 
liberation theology, God becomes a liberating God who 
sides with the oppressed, takes care of the underdog as 
well as those discriminated against. The kingdom of God 
is then interpreted in terms of the exodus theme and our 
human dream for freedom and endeavour for justice by 
means of violent intervention: God, the Liberator and 
‘Freedom Fighter’.
Behind all these schemata lurks the more fundamental and 
primary question concerning the significance and meaning 
of our human endeavour. What is the purpose of life? 
Although we are all facing the dawn of the 21st century, 
one is conscious of a vast and even palpable dissatisfaction 
permeating the status quo – a disenchantment. ‘Perhaps little 
overt theological discourse takes place outside the churches, 
synagogues, mosques and academic religious circles, but 
there is much covert searching after … something. Mystery? 
Transcendence? Meaning?’ (Hall 1993:132).
It becomes clear that the link between God and the misery 
of our being human functions in some way or other as a sort 
of proof  for God’s reliability and faithfulness. A God who 
is viewed in terms of apathy and who does not understand 
suffering creates a ‘non-pastoral’ impression: God does not 
really care. Because of the possible danger of ‘the apathy of 
God’ (immutability) in pastoral ministry particularly, the 
9.Power, even the power of God, is mostly defined as domination and control 
(Pasewark 1993:2). This understanding of power always presents the need to 
defend the notion of God’s omnipotence on philosophical and theological grounds 
and for reasons of religious life.
pastor becomes aware of the fact that suffering radicalises 
the quest for God.10
Inbody (1997:140) captures this problem very aptly when he 
argues that, in our attempt to rethink the meaning of divine 
power, two things can happen. Our God-image can become 
‘too small’ or ‘too big’. If God can only empathise with the 
suffering of the world, but can do nothing about it, God is too 
small. If God is identified with nature, and can do nothing 
more than what positivists mean by natural law, God is too 
small. If God is identified with human capacities, abilities, 
creativity or human ideals, then God is minimalised. On the 
other hand, if God is identified with omnipotent power, as 
the kind of power that, because of definition, can do ‘just 
anything’, God is too big. When a theistic notion of divine 
omnipotence portrays God’s kingdom in terms of an empire, 
he becomes too militant and strong. God is then merely a 
Hellenistic pantokrator.
The Hellenistic and Roman background of many depictions 
of God should be acknowledged (Nyssen 1982:413). It 
is quite understandable that in their search for identity, 
the followers of Christ in the Roman era expressed their 
identities in terms and images that draw on widely shared 
cultural categories. The similarities are evident. However, 
Christians indeed reinterpreted such categories in a different 
and unique way. According to Harland (2009:47), the letters 
of Ignatius of Antioch, which reflect group life in two central 
hubs of early Christianity – Western Asia Minor and Syrian 
Antioch – provide a case in point. In these writings Ignatius 
drew heavily on categories from the culture of Greco-Roman 
cities in order to build up the identity of the Christian 
communities. The same process is evident in imaging. For 
an example see Figure 1 (‘Mosaic with image of Apollo, from 
Greek mythology’).
It should be mentioned here that Byzantium art cannot be 
separated from the historical background when basileia ton 
Rhomaion was transformed to Byzantium and its Greek roots 
(Evans 2004:15). In 1557 the name of the empire was replaced 
with the term Byzantium. Constantinople was seen as the 
place for the restoration of political and religious power 
(2004:5).
What should be reckoned with is that during the Byzantium 
period, many images of Christ represent a wedding of 
the pagan icon genre11 with Roman secular portraiture.12 
Mathews (1998:51) refers to the case of Bishop Gennadios 
of Constantinople (ad 458–457) and a painter, who dared 
to paint the saviour in the likeness of Zeus. The story goes 
10.Cf. C.F. Krause, Leiden Gottes – Leiden des Menschen (1980:7), for his discussion 
on the radicalising effect of the God-suffering theme: ‘Denn mit dem Thema 
“Gott und das Leiden” steht heute nicht nur das Verständnis der menschlichen 
Leidensgeschichte sondem auch – und zwar in theologiegeschichtlich bisher 
ungewöhnlicher Zuspitzung – das Gottesverständnis selbst zur Diskussion.‘
11.Velmans (2007:20) points out the influence of Greek thinking on the idealism 
of the early church fathers; very specifically the impact of Pseudo-Dionysius 
Areopagita (ad 5).
12.Many of the pagan images were Christianised in order to serve a different purpose. 
See for example Zakssaya (2006:50): On a statue of Dionysus was written just 
above the genitals Psalm 28:3 (ad 8–9). 

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1996
Page 8 of 15
Original Research
that he found his hand withered. The bishop healed him 
and instructed that Christ must have shorter, frizzy hair. 
However, in the later development of icons, the Zeus type 
won, because within the framework of the power issues13 
in Byzantium culture, the Zeus depiction was more forceful 
(1998:51).14 The great male gods of antiquity – Asklepios, 
Serapis and even Suchos – ‘all assumed the broad forehead, 
long hair, and full beard that characterized Zeus, the father 
of the gods. Christ should hardly be seen as less powerful 
than they’ (1998:51).15 In this regard, the blessing Christ from 
the monastery of St. Catherine on Mount Sinai should be 
rendered as a perfect example: ‘All the verist tricks of Roman 
portraiture are added to convey the powerful presence of 
Christ’ (1998:51) (cf. Figure 2: ‘The blessing Christ’).
One can understand that iconography in the early Christian 
church cannot be understood without taking the Roman 
cultural background into consideration. Icons portraying the 
Christian understanding of the Divine were interlarded with 
notions of power and empire.16
13.For the further impact of power images in Byzantium icons, see the research of 
Helen Evans (2004:5–16).
14.Early Christian art is permeated with symbolism. See in this regard the very early 
testimony of Eusebius concerning Orpheus as symbol of Christ, even Heracles. All 
act as bearers of the idea of salvation, of the victory of good over evil, of prosperity 
and well-being (Zakssaya 2006:49). 
15.Christian’s claims of historical authenticity for the icons are founded on faith more 
than fact. Icons in Christian traditions should therefore not be interpreted from 
the viewpoint of historical fact, but from the viewpoint of spiritual experiences 
and faithful imaging. Byzantium art was indeed an attempt to portray Christ as 
superhuman, thus the reason for depictions larger than life scale (Mathews 
1998:51–52). 
16.One should bear in mind that iconography in the Christian tradition was greatly 
influenced by the Roman culture of the period ad 200–400. Gombrich (2006) tells: 
The Romans were a matter-of-fact people, and cared less for fancy goods. Yet their 
The theory of the ‘Emporor 
mystique’ in iconography
It is becoming clear that the process of imaging God in early 
Christianity is indeed very complex. We were not there and 
cultural contexts and their impact and influence on imaging 
can be very subtle indeed. When adopting a hermeneutical 
approach to understand the cultural impact on God images, 
one should therefore be very careful how one goes about 
understanding imaging in the Christian faith tradition. One 
theory in the interpretation of early iconography is called the 
theory of the ‘Emperor mystique’ (Mathews 1993).
The ‘Emperor mystique’ approach refers to the theory in 
iconography accepted by art historians, namely that the images 
of Christ in early Christian imagery were derived from images 
of the Roman emperor. Mathews (1993) puts it this way:
Both the shape and the power of the images, according to this 
theory, come from reliance on imagery formerly used to present 
the emperor. It is a ‘mystique’ as far as it involves a reverence 
bordering on cult for everything belonging to the emperor. To 
such historians dropping the word ‘imperial’ into a discussion 
represents an appeal to a kind of ultimate value beyond which 
one never looks. (p. 2)
	
pictorial methods of telling the deeds of the hero proved of great value to the 
religious which came into contact with their far-flung empire (p. 96). Gabriele 
Kopp-Schmidt (2004:68–69) points out in her book, Ikonographie und Iconologie, 
that it was during the 4th century ad that the Christianisation of Roman culture 
occurred. The Romans made use of examples from ancient Rome in their depiction 
of Christ and in their church architecture. Constantine and his family supported 
the ‘new movement’. When Christianity became a state religion at the end of the 
fourth century ad, elements of the Caesar cult were accommodated in the liturgy 
and priesthood. In order to gain power, it was important for the clergy to portray 
Christ in all images as a heavenly ruler and monarch. 
Source: Hagiasophia-christ.jpg. Public domain
The depiction of Christ pantokrator with halo and Hagia Sophia shows a remarkable resemblance.
FIGURE 1: Mosaic with image of Apollo, from Greek mythology.

http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1996
Page 9 of 15
Original Research
It is quite understandable that Constantine’s conversion 
in 312 changed the entire situation. According to Mathews 
(1993:13), the impoverished art of the catacombs and 
cemeteries was inadequate to express the grand claims 
Christians were making for their god. They appropriated 
the grandest imagery they could lay their hands on, namely 
that which developed in the service of imperial propaganda. 
Mathews (1993) confirms:
Finding themselves with an emperor of their own faith, 
Christians boldly appropriated for their own religious purposes 
the entire vocabulary of imperial art, transforming motifs and 
compositions that had been used for imperial propaganda into 
propaganda for Christ. (p. 13)
Inevitably, the future of Christian iconography was 
profoundly modified. One can say that all the vocabulary 
of a triumphal or imperial iconographic language was 
poured into the paradigms and the dictionary, which served 
Christian iconography (1993:13).
One can understand that this Roman cultural heritage 
influenced early Christian iconography and attempts to 
depict the Godhead. When the Bible was translated into 
Greek, the concept of God-pantokrator was used to depict 
an all-powerful God. The Latin omnipotence carried the 
ideology of imperial power into the formulation of the Early 
Church.
Bishop Eusebius of Caesarea in Palestine (c. 260 – c. 340) 
started to formulate for the emperor a Christian theory of 
divine kingship that connected close association between 
the lordship of Christ and the emperor’s governance of the 
Roman Empire. Eusebious called the emperor vicegerent of 
Christ, an apostle for the secular sector: ‘Imperial overtones 
in representations of Christ, then, would harmonize neatly 
with the philosophical theory of the emperor’s divine rule’ 
(Mathews 1993:14).
Even the church was described as the court and throne of 
the heavenly king (cathedral from cathedra = throne) and his 
representative and successor, the bishop, not to be outshone 
by secular pomp, practiced a clerical pomp of his own. The 
‘Emperor mystique’ had an important theatrical dimension. It 
shaped the hierarchy of officials as well. The church designed 
its own elaborate processions, receptions, its ritual chants, 
hymns, sermons, attire and insignia.
It is the contention of Mathews that in essence, despite the 
variabilities of images of Christ in the early centuries, Christ 
does no imitate the emperor’s depiction of power and 
Source: Free image: accessed 08 January 2013, from http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Christ_Pantocrator
The attempt to guard against pagan influences was predominant in the history of Christianity. It even led to theories that there is a close connection between the Isis cult and the development of 
private home altars (Weitzman 1982:5). It was believed that Serapis, with his shrine situated in Alexandria, united in himself the underworld powers of Osiris with the healing powers of Asclepius. 
His head was given the broad brow and copious hair of Jupiter. He wore a wreath of laurel and balanced a grain measure on his head. In AD 400, an association between Serapis and Zeus developed 
(Mathews 1993:184–185). The possible similarity between the depiction of Serapis (a Greco-Egyptian god BC: left panel) and the oldest icon of Christ Pantokrator on a panel (right) from the Saint 
Catherine Monastery near Mount Sinai, was obvious to many. The two different facial expressions on either side may emphasise Christ’s two natures as fully God and fully human. Middle: Mummy 
portraits were sometimes placed on mummies instead of actual mummy musk. The picture of the young man is in tempera, that is colour mixed with egg, circa AD 110 (Permission: National 
Museum Copenhagen. Photo: D.J. Louw). In ancient portraiture general images were often used to depict faces; thus the resemblance with images in early Christianity used to depict the face of 
Christ.
FIGURE 2: The blessing Christ.

Page 10 of 15
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1996
display of ceremony. He presents an anti-imperial image. 
‘From the point of view of the Gospel narrative, then, Christ 
demonstrates the uselessness of imperial parades by doing 
an anti-imperial adventus seated on the least military of all 
beasts, a farmer’s donkey’ (Mathews 1993:45). Although 
this image is true according to the Gospel’s portrayal of the 
authority of Christ, the imperial paradigm often dominated 
the interpretation of the omnipotence of God in the history 
of Christian doctrine. Royal prompt and glory and imperial 
governance often replaced vulnerable humility.
Rather ‘el Saddaj than pantokrator
In theology, God’s omnipotence has often been interpreted 
not in soteriological and sacrificial terms, but in Hellenistic 
terms: pantokrator. The latter is the Greek version of the 
Hebrew phrase ‘el Saddaj (Hieronymus used the Latin version, 
deus omnipotens). It is a fact that God revealed himself several 
times as the Almighty. Genesis 17:1: ‘the Lord appeared to 
him [Abraham] and said, “I am God Almighty”’ (cf. Gn 28:3, 
35:11, 43:14, 49:25; Ex 6:3). However, the etymology of ‘el 
Saddaj is very complex and uncertain.17 From an exegetical 
viewpoint, eight possibilities exist:
•	 Saddaj – the terrific and strong One
•	 the sufficient One
•	 a positive Being that could be linked to an Arab word for 
Lord
•	 Saddaj that could be seen in close connection with a 
Semitic word for breast, the name for a fertile god
•	 derived from a verb that means to throw, cast or pour out
•	 a close link existing between Saddaj and an Accadian 
word for mountain – the One who comes from the high 
place, or from the mountain
•	 a link existing with a Sumerian word for God meaning: 
the one who knows your heart
•	 several scholars suggesting an Ugaritic connection with 
Astarte: somebody from the veld or the floor.
The only conclusion to be derived from the above exposition 
is that the phrase ‘el Saddaj should be traced within the context 
of the various texts. In the meantime, it must be kept in mind 
that it represents the uniqueness and greatness of Yahweh 
who reveals himself in terms of the tribal and familial 
metaphor, as a Father18 and God of the covenant. However, 
it still remains a crucial question whether Hieronymus’ 
translation (omnipotens) and the pantokrator conception that 
so deeply influenced the western thought, was correct.
Van der Zee (1983:79) concludes that omnipotence, as such, 
does not play an important role in Scripture. The concept 
‘almighty God’ is complex. God’s omnipotence, in biblical 
terms, is the unique way in which God is present amongst 
his people. ‘I would rather say: God’s power is different 
(andersmachtig)’ (1983:80, own translation). Suurmond 
17.“Weipert (1976:875) says: ‘Ein Konsens ist bisher nicht zustandegekommen‘.
18.Weipert (1976:882) concludes: ‘Es ist somit warscheinlich, dass einer der 
“Vatergötter” tatsächlich der (‘el) gewesen ist, und P hier, wie öfter, altes Gut 
benutzt und generalisiert hat.‘
(1984:42) remarks that the Christian God must always be 
a strong God. Christians would very seldom think of God 
as vulnerable and weak. However, vulnerability does not 
indicate that God is powerless; its indication that God’s 
power is his love (love = omnipotence), is important. 
Omnipotence then becomes the overwhelming power of 
love and faithfulness that appeals to every human being’s 
responsibility.19
According to Häring (1986:351–372), God is not a Pantokrator; 
neither should he be seen in terms of Aristotle’s potentia. God’s 
power is his redeeming vulnerability and powerlessness; 
omnipotence is God’s loving invitation ‘to a relationship and 
covenant encounter which guarantees real freedom’.20
According to Van de Beek (1984:91–92), behind the concept 
omnipotence lies the motive to see God as the absolute One, 
the Super King with a driving force (despotes). Behind every 
event God functions as the prima causa.21 He is convinced 
that more fundamental than Berkhofs ‘weerloze overmacht’ is 
the overwhelming phenomenon of God’s majestic highness 
and splendid glory.22 God’s dominion and sovereignty exist 
in the interest of humankind; his aim is to conquer the evil 
powers of sin and darkness.23
It can be concluded that omnipotence should not be 
interpreted against the background of the Hellenistic 
pantokrator [strength and violent power]; nor in terms of 
the Roman Caesar (despotes). Omnipotence describes God’s 
unique revelation (his sovereign majesty and splendid 
glory), which portrays him as having overwhelming love 
and steadfast faithfulness. Omnipotence describes a power, 
which is closely connected to God’s covenantal encounter 
and graceful identification with our human misery. 
Omnipotence also corresponds with righteousness and social 
justice. A good example of this connection can be found in 
Deuteronomy 10:17–19:
For the Lord your God is God of gods and Lord of lords, the 
great God, mighty and awesome, who shows no partiality and 
accepts no bribes. He defends the cause of the fatherless and the 
widow, and loves the alien, giving him food and clothing. And 
you are to love those who are alien, for you yourselves were 
aliens in Egypt.
19.Suurmond (1984:45) states: ‘Overwinnende liefde die niet overdondert, maar 
bevrijdend overreedt tot een overgave die bevrijdt!‘‚
20.Häring (1986) concludes: Macht in de oorspronkelijke zin zou dan zijn het 
bindende en waarheidsontsluitende karakter van iedere bestaanservaring. 
‘Macht’ in deze betekenis bemiddelt dan de ervaring van zich met iets te 
kunnen inlaten, uitgedaagd te worden door wat vanzelfsprekend is, opgenomen 
te worden in een ruimte van beaming en van goede verstandhouding met 
de werkelijkheid. Noodzakelijkerwijze zijn dat tegelijk ervaringen van liefde, 
trouw en solidariteit. Ik stel nu: de ervaring van zulk een macht geeft vrijheid’ 
(p. 369).
21.Van de Beek (1984:91–92) concludes that it is very difficult to eliminate the concept 
omnipotence. The Almighty God is, indeed, a biblical concept. The only problem is 
that God’s dominion and sovereignty has been misused by many people. Therefore 
it is difficult to correlate his dominion with the suffering and injustice in history.
22.Van de Beek (1984:90) says: ‘Primair is de gestalte van de majestueuze heerlijkheid, 
waarin God heerst.’
23.Van de Beek (1984:103) states: ‘De christologie is de grote onruststoker in alle 
almachtsgeloof.’

Page 11 of 15
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1996
It is clear that God’s transcendence is closely connected to 
his condescendence. Omnipotence reveals itself in history 
within the context of suffering and our social reality. It 
gives a new dimension to the concept of humanity. God 
shows no partiality (rendered literally, the Hebrew idiom 
means ‘…who does not lift up faces’; Craigie 1976:206), but 
identifies himself with our human misery: ‘He defends the 
cause of the fatherless and the widow.’ God’s impartiality 
indicates judgement and justice as well as compassion 
and love for resident aliens and suffering humans. This 
finding corresponds with Von Rad’s assertion that the 
Deuteronomy texts should be understood in the light of 
the writer’s effort to gain a theoretical understanding of the 
relationship to Yahweh and to prove his trustworthiness. 
This trustworthiness of God is reflected in his loving care that 
safeguards his people.24
Towards the dynamics of pathos-
categories: Theopaschitic theology
What is meant by the ‘power of God’? Inbody’s argument 
points towards a reinterpretation. However, and this is 
the primary theological question at stake, how does such 
a reinterpretation affect our understanding of God’s very 
Being and reality?
It is indeed questionable whether omnipotence should be 
viewed as an essential description and accurate attribute of 
God (telling us something about God’s Being – his Essence), 
or as a metaphor portraying God’s unique faithfulness and 
steadfastness in relation to his covenant people. The basic 
theological argument is that attributes denote God’s active 
deeds in encountering creation and human beings in the 
history of salvation. They do not necessarily describe God’s 
essence as such, remote from any relation or encounter with 
humankind, but his relational revelation to sustain the world 
and his deeds of salvation to save humankind. Berkhof (1979) 
states:
What we may say is that what we call attributes denotes the 
manner in which we meet God as singular-plural, in His 
revelational history … Consequently, we have to say that the 
attributes of God are his being itself as it is facing us. (p. 113)
When an attribute like omnipotence is derived from 
revelation and the covenantal encounter, it can easily 
fall prey to a philosophical and one-sided transcendental 
concept of God. Being aware of this danger, Berkhof tries 
to connect omnipotence with the concept defencelessness (the 
latter does not indicate inability or impotence, but grace that 
can make room for sinful human beings). In his love, God’s 
loving power is vulnerable and prepared to take a risk with 
humankind. Defencelessness25 describes God’s patience and 
long suffering. Berkhof (1979) says:
24.De Groot and Hulst (1950:117) conclude: ‘Heeft Abraham de naam Saddaj 
voordien gekend, van nu aan krijgt deze voor hem een nieuwe inhoud: die van 
“machtige beschermer”.’
25.Berkhof (1979) postulates: ‘By this [defencelessness] we understand that attribute 
by which he leaves room for his ‘opposite’ and accepts and submits himself to the 
freedom, the initiative, and the reaction of that ‘opposite’. It has to do with the 
passive and receptive, the enduring and the suffering in God’ (p. 134).
Defencelessness does not as such exclude an active exercise 
of power; it does exclude a violent and destructive (forcible) 
exercise of power (gewelddadige wijze) which wipes out the power 
of the opposite. (p. 134)
Here the very special way in which God makes his omnipotent 
power felt is at stake: not as a violent force (gewelddadige 
dwang), but as a loving compulsion (liefdevolle drang). This 
defencelessness is demonstrated when Jesus, renouncing all 
earthly power, becomes the victim of the indifference – and 
even hatred of his environment. Defencelessness reaches its 
nadir on the cross where God’s vulnerability is revealed as 
the salvation of the world. God becomes weak (powerless; 
ohnmächtig, as Bonhoeffer puts it). According to Berkhof, 
defencelessness should be qualified. As an adjective, it does 
not denote powerlessness, as such. The Dutch, weerloze 
overmacht, is difficult to translate. Actually, overmacht does 
not mean superiority. Berkhof uses the term overmacht 
to describe God’s overwhelming faithfulness and loving 
steadfastness.26 Instead of ‘defenceless superior power’ 
(English translation), ‘vulnerable faithfulness’ would be a 
better translation of ‘weerloze overmacht’. By using overmacht, 
Berkhof tries to explain that God’s power should be regarded 
as ‘overwhelming grace’, not as destructive and hurtful 
violence.
Berkhof’s viewpoint impels us to ascertain whether the 
term almighty (which occurs only a few times and mostly 
in eschatological context) is understood to denote superior 
power in the sense of strength (God as Warrior) and 
oppressive authority, or overwhelming faithfulness in the 
sense of gracious sovereignty and unique righteousness and 
justice. A power then that conquers death, overcomes God’s 
enemies and triumphs over the destructive powers of evil 
and darkness, hatred and injustice.
Although the terms defencelessness and vulnerability sound 
very strange in connection with the revelation of God, a close 
look at the so-called ‘God theophanies’ sheds new light on 
the whole issue of omnipotence. The theophanies of God as 
Warrior should be read in context; the history of salvation 
is the predominant issue. Primarily, God is revealed as the 
Bearer of the Word. God’s presence is an overwhelming 
fact in Israel’s history and his appearance in human form 
reveals the reality of his presence in such a way as to make 
him vulnerable. According to Fretheim (1984) appearance in 
human form:
… suggests an entering into the more vulnerable life of the 
world where the response can be derision (see Gen 18:12–13) or 
incredulity (Judg 6:13–17). It is to put oneself concretely into the 
hands of the world to do with as it will. It is revealing of the 
ways of God that the Word is enfleshed in bodies of weakness 
within the framework of commonplace everyday affairs and not 
in overwhelming power. (p. 106)
26.Note the Dutch. ‘maar dat God in zijn trouw blijvend handhaaft’; ‘Vooral 
echter in de opstanding van Christus komt de overmachtige aanwezigheid van 
God ten overstaan van zonde en dood naar voren’; ‘Ten slotte is ook de Heilige 
Geest op zijn eigen weerlozen wijze overmachtig bezig’ (Berkhof 1977:146).

Page 12 of 15
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1996
Fretheim’s conclusion (1984:106) is remarkable: ‘For, even in 
those instances where the vestments of God’s appearance are 
threaded with lineaments of power, they clothe in vulnerable 
form. There is no such thing for Israel as a non-incarnate 
God.’
The suffering of God is not foreign to the Old Testament. 
According to Fretheim (1984:139), God’s suffering in the Old 
Testament is threefold. He suffers because of the people’s 
rejection of him as Lord; he suffers with the people who 
are suffering; he suffers for them due to the fact that in the 
sacrifices of the Old Testament ‘God gives of himself to make 
forgiveness possible’. Texts like Jeremiah 4:14 and 13:27, and 
also Hosea 6:4 and 11:8 describe God’s pathos in his struggle 
for the future of his covenant people. God is revealed as One 
who is not vindictive, legalistic, or exacting as to matters of 
judgement. God wants life and not death (Ezk 18:23–24). 
Although God is deeply wounded by the broken relationship 
and is revealed as One who does not remain coolly unaffected 
by the people’s rejection, the process of internalisation 
corresponds with God’s permanent and stable faithfulness. 
‘God’s salvific will does not waver; God’s steadfast love 
endures forever’ (Fretheim 1984:124). God remains gracious, 
merciful, and abounding in steadfast love.
God responds to Israel’s judgement by taking up the cry of 
a mourner, or where suffering without judgement is in view, 
an empathetic presence (Jer 31:20). The most remarkable text 
in this regard is Leviticus 17:11, where the life of the flesh is 
seen to be present in the blood: ‘… and I have given it for you 
upon the altar to make atonement for your souls’. Especially 
striking here is that God has given life in the blood; it is God 
who provides the key element in the sacrifices, namely life. 
Fretheim (1984) comments:
Human beings thus bring not only their repentant arid trusting 
selves to the sacrificial act, but they are bearers of life from God. 
If all things belong to God, then it may be said that God gives of 
Himself to make forgiveness possible. In some sense, God’s life 
is expended for the sake of the life of the people. (p. 139)
The previous exposition makes the following assertion 
possible: several texts suggest the theme of divine humiliation 
(Ps 78:61; 18:35; Is 63:9). This humiliation is connected with the 
eschatological character of the covenantal history. Therefore 
any birth of a new order can come about only through what 
God does and he can accomplish such a creative act only 
by way of a via dolorosa. This assertion corresponds with 
Moltmann’s topic: God’s suffering as a theologia crucis.27
The suffering God and the theology of the cross constitute the 
framework for a new paradigm,28 that is God’s omnipotent 
presence and power interpreted as vulnerable faithfulness 
and overwhelming pathos. Although this sounds new, the 
27.Moltmann (1972:180) postulates: ‘Das Leiden und Sterben Jesu, verstanden als 
Leiden und Sterben des Gottessohnes, aber sind Werke Gottes gegenuber sich 
selbst und darum zugleich Passionen Gottes.‘
28.Inbody (1997:9) states: ‘Although there are differences among trinitarian 
theologians, they all imply that the power of God is to be defined by the cross and 
the resurrection not by the omnipotence of theism.’
roots can be traced back to Martin Luther’s well-known 
thesis (as quoted in McGrath 1985): ‘The man who perceives 
the visible rearward parts of God as seen in suffering and 
the cross, does however deserve to be called a theologian.’29 
For Luther, the cross indeed reveals God – but that revelation 
is the posteriora Dei. The important thing about Luther’s 
assertion is that the cross of Christ, in which God is found to 
be revealed and yet paradoxically hidden in that revelation, 
becomes the sole authentic locus of the human knowledge 
of God. The implication of this thesis is that God’s strength 
(omnipotence) is revealed in apparent weakness, and his 
wisdom in folly.
It is our conviction that this thesis of Luther should be applied 
in the current debate on the significance of God’s presence 
within a secularised world. It should give birth to a new 
paradigm about God’s omnipresence. It is also applicable to 
contemporary theology that is looking for a new theological 
approach to the problem of crime, violence and conflict. A 
theologia crucis can help rid the church of many theological 
misconceptions about God’s omnipotence and presence in 
history. It is McGrath’s (1985) conviction that the theologia 
cruces:
passes judgement upon the church where she has become proud 
and triumphant, or secure and smug, and recalls her to the foot 
of the Cross, there to remind her of the mysterious and hidden 
way in which God is at work in His world. The scene of total 
dereliction, of apparent weakness and folly, at Calvary is the 
theologian’s paradigm for understanding the hidden presence 
and activity of God in His world and in His church. (p. 181)
From omniscience to infiniscience: 
Theology of the intestines
In the effort to identify God with human suffering, 
theopaschitism became the theory or doctrine by which 
theology tries to construe a more passionate approach to our 
understanding of God’s presence within the reality of human 
suffering (injustice, poverty, stigmatisation, discrimination, 
stereotyping, illness, violence, the abuse of power, tsunamis, 
catastrophes).
Those theologians who wanted to reframe paradigms 
regarding God’s praxis have welcomed a theopaschitic 
approach.30 No longer is God seen as static and absolute, 
but dynamic, thereby opening up the future for human 
existence.31 The value of theopaschitic thinking for the 
praxis of God is that it proposes a shift from the substantial 
approach to the relational and encounter paradigm (Berkhof 
1979:32–33). The switch is then from the attempt of orthodoxy 
29.Luther (quoted in McGrath 1985) states ‘Sed qui visibilia et posteriora Dei per 
passiones et crucem conspecta intelligit.’
30.Some of the most important proponents of theopaschitism are the following: 
God’s weakness (Bonnhoeffer 1951); God’s powerlessness (Sölle 1973); God’s 
being as an event of becoming (Gottes Sein ist im Werden; Jüngel 1967); God’s 
forsakenness (Moltmann 1972); God’s defencelessness (Berkhof 1977; Wiersinga 
1972).
31.Although the pathos concept suggests evidence of God’s genuine involvement 
in suffering, there is a danger that the distinction between the passio Dei and 
the passio hominum can easily fall away. God’s sovereignty (transcendence) can 
easily be sacrificed by an overemphasis on God’s enfleshment and identification 
(condescension).

Page 13 of 15
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1996
to uphold ecclesial triumphantilism (Hall 1993:100–101) 
and a theology of glory (theologia gloriae) and omnipotence 
(powerful force),32 to a theologia crucis33 of weakness, suffering 
and passion.
It is my contention that the passio dei is a theological 
exposition of the praxis of hope in caregiving. The passio dei, 
in its connection to the praxis of God, defines ‘practice’ in 
practical theology to compassion (rḥm in close connection 
to the root ḥnn, which means to be gracious). Together with 
oiktirmos and praxis, the passio dei expresses the being quality 
of God as connected to human vulnerability and suffering 
(Esser 1978:598). The verb splanchnizomai is used to make the 
unbounded mercy of God visible.
Ta splanchna reveals God as a Presence, ‘a Companion, “your 
God”’ (Hall 1993:147). In praxis thinking it is not the task 
of the church to demonstrate that God must be, but to bear 
witness to God’s being-there, being-with, and being-for the 
creature. In terms of Hall (1993:155), the test of the church’s 
God-talk at any point in time is its contextual authenticity, its 
praxis-thinking: Does it illuminate God’s being-with-us? We 
can add: Does it portray God’s being-with-us as ta splanchna 
and thus as a source of hope and meaning?
In general, Greek to splanchnon refers to the valuable parts, 
the heart, lung, liver, but also the spleen and the kidneys. 
During the sacrifice, they are removed for the sacrificial meal. 
With reference to human splanchna, it refers to the human 
entrails, especially for the male sexual organs and the womb, 
as the site of the powers of conception and birth. Within 
metaphoric speech, ta splanchna expresses pity, compassion 
and love: ‘The oldest form of the verb is splanchneuō, eat the 
entrails, prophesy from the entrails’ (Esser 1978:599). Within 
the messianic context of Christ’s salvific mission, ta splanchna 
expresses compassion as an indication of God’s divine 
involvement with the human predicament of suffering.34
Splanchnizomai reveals the very character of God within 
the messianic involvement and engagement with human 
suffering. The theology of the entrails reflects God’s being 
quality, and can be called the ontology of God’s attitude 
in suffering. Noteworthy is the fact that within these texts 
ta splanchna is connected to illness and health; dying and 
mourning; loss and grief; violence and injustice; burnout and 
hunger, estrangement and remorse.
32.See in this regard the remark of Hall (1993:108): ‘Powerful people demand 
powerful deities – and get them!’; and ‘Power – and precisely power understood 
in the usual sense – is of the essence of divinity shaped by empire’ (1993:107).
33.‘Greek epistemology could not take account of the surprise needed to recognize 
God on the cross … It did not envision suffering as a source of knowledge’ (Jon 
Sobrino quoted in Hall 1993: note 8, p. 105).
34.It is interesting to note the cases where Christ responded to human suffering with 
the contraction of the entrails, expressing messianic compassion. For example the 
leper with his petition (Mk 1:41); the people like sheep without a shepherd (Mk 
6:34); the sight of the harassed and exhausted crowd (Mt 9:36); two blind men 
who besought him (Mt 20:34); the widow at Nain mourning her only son (Lk 7:13). 
In Luke 15:11–32 the prodigal son, splanchnizomai expresses the strongest feeling 
of a merciful and loving reaction (v. 20). In the parable of the Good Samaritan (Lk 
10:33) splanchnizomai expresses the attitude of complete willingness to use all 
means, time, strength, and life, for saving at the crucial moment (Esser 1978:600).
From a practical point of view, the general and traditional 
theological question is always the cause-effect question, 
namely why God, and whether God is behind these cases. 
From a praxis point of view, the question is not whether 
God is behind these events, but how he is involved. What 
is God’s attitude and intention within these events?; What 
is the mode of God’s being within our human predicament? 
The notion of ta splanchna and infiniscience as a vivid mode 
of splanchnizomai totally reframes our understanding of who 
God is and what is meant by God’s power. Instead of threat, 
power (a Caesar-like display of imperialistic strength35 – 
pantokrator), divine power is now understood as passion and 
compassion (oiktirmos).
By his suffering, God shows that he is weak, vulnerable and 
powerless in this world. Only Christ’s weakness can help 
us to resist suffering in an attitude of protest, resistance and 
surrender (Bonnhoeffer: 1951 Widerstand und Ergebung). The 
theopaschitic approach clearly links God with suffering. The 
cross completes this link and this reveals God as a ‘pathetic’ 
being: he is the ‘suffering God’. Feitsma (1956) calls this 
form of theopaschitism (redefining God’s Being in terms of 
suffering) the most ultimate expression in theology of what 
is meant by God’s compassion.36
Conclusion
Ta splanchna describes the praxis of God’s being not in 
substantial categories, but in terms of passion categories: 
compassion (oiktirmos). Ta splanchna is about a theological 
beautification of life and could theologically be rendered as 
a sustainable involvement in all forms of human misery. It 
describes the aesthetics of a suffering God. In this regard, 
Browning’s reference (1983:13) to David Tracy’s conviction 
that practical theology has primarily to do with the criteria 
or norms for the transformation of human brokenness, is 
addressed. Our human suffering and the quest for meaning 
determines all forms of praxis-thinking. The praxis in praxis-
thinking is the enfleshment of compassion through the 
inhabitational presence of God within human embodiment 
(pneumatological sustainability).
In this regard, the biblical text in Philippians 2:1–2 plays a 
fundamental role in the choice of pastoral care, cura animarum 
as compassionate fellow-suffering and an exhibition of 
kenotic, self-emptying love:
35.Inbody (1997:140) captures this problem very aptly when he argues that, in our 
attempt to rethink the meaning of divine power, two things can happen. Our God-
image can become ‘too small’, or ‘too big’. If God can only empathise with the 
suffering of the world, but can do nothing about it, God is too small. If God is 
identified with nature, and can do nothing more than what positivists mean by 
natural law, God is too small. If God is identified with human capacities, abilities, 
creativity or human ideals, then God is minimalised. On the other hand, if God is 
identified with omnipotent power, as the kind of power that, because of definition, 
can do ‘just anything’, God is too big. When a theistic notion of divine omnipotence 
portrays God’s kingdom in terms of an empire, he becomes too militant and strong. 
God is then merely a Hellenistic pantokrator.
36.Feitsma (1956:42) denotes: ‘Maar als we de noemer aldus onder woorden 
brengen: natural divina passa est, dan moeten toch al die vormen op deze noemer 
gebracht worden.’ Cf also Feitsma’s (1956) observation: Ook in het modern 
theopaschitisme horen we steeds weer dat geluid van Gods eigen lijden. En dat 
niet als een consequentie van communicatio idiomatum in de ene hypostase van 
Hem die God en mens is (wie langs deze weg komt tot het spreken over Gods lijden 
kan zich daarvoor op de Schrift beroepen), maar als typering van Gods diepste 
wezen. (p. 143)

Page 14 of 15
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1996
If then there is any encouragement/consolation (paraklēsis) 
in Christ, any comfort/consolation from love, any sharing/
fellowship in the Spirit (koinōnia Pneumatos), any compassion/
affection and sympathy/mercy (ei tis splanchna kai oiktirmoi), 
fulfil my joy (make complete): be of the same mind (being like-
minded) (phronēte), having the same love, being in full accord 
and of one mind (phronountēs).
Divine compassion is expressed by the God-image of God 
as our Compassionate Companion, Host or Friend for Life. 
The ontological realm of the aesthetics praxis of God is 
described by means of metaphorical speech. In this regard, 
the notion of ‘bowel categories’ describes a practical theology 
of the intestines. The intention and motivation within praxis-
actions is the passio Dei. With reference to Vincent Brümmer, 
one can say the passio Dei expresses the meaning of Christian 
faith and is the concrete praxis hermeneutics of the amicitia 
Dei (Brümmer 2006:299–302): ‘It is only by loving God that 
we can achieve ultimate happiness and complete fulfilment 
in our lives’ (2006:299).
The theological telos [teleology] for ‘fides quaerens spem’ is 
ḥesed and ta splanchna, that is the compassionate humanist 
or humane praxis of the covenantal God as expressed in 
the promissio and fulfilment of the Crucified and Suffering 
Servant: Jesus Christ the Son of God; God Emmanuel, the 
Fellow-Sufferer.
The eschatological convergence point of the passio dei as 
described by splanchna, ḥesed, rḥm, oiktirmos, paschō, is the 
lament of God in the derelictio-cry of the Suffering Servant at 
the cross. This is the reason for Jürgen Moltmann founding 
his theory of a theology of hope in the notion of an eschatologia 
crucis.
With reference to the notion of a functional, practical-
theological ecclesiology, functionality and efficiency should 
be directed by a God-concept that promote a kind of divine 
presence that embrace paradox and the unpredictability 
of randomness, rather than to explain on a rational 
level the unusual events of life. It is in this regard that 
compassionate interventions in caregiving do not describe 
fixed theological principles; they rather point to what one 
can call infinisciences of divine engagements (ongoing modes 
of divine interventions through and by the indwelling Spirit 
of God within the functions of the church as expressions of 
God’s presence in this world). Infiniscience is in essence a 
pneumatological concept and thus should be rendered as 
a category that represents an ongoing intervention that, in 
terms of the promissio of God, safeguards a continuum of 
divine sustainability
The further theological implication of such divine infinisciences 
is that the concept ‘praxis of God’ is demarcated by suffering. 
The challenge in a practical theological reflection on the 
notion ‘the praxis of God’ is how to link the infiniscience of 
God to suffering.
Within an ‘open system’, the focus is not on ‘omniscience’ 
and ‘omnipotence’, rather on infiniscience: the unexpected 
but ongoing events of life as well as the explosion of new 
integrative complex systems of creative change and hoping. 
In such an ‘open system’, the methodological implication 
for practical theology is a circular approach within the 
hermeneutics of a spiral model and zigzag methodology of 
interpretation, rather than the limitations of either a bottom-
up approach (the experiential, phenomenological model) 
or a top-down approach (the theistic, static model). ‘To 
clarify, Platonic is top-down, formulaic, closed-minded self-
serving, and commoditized; a-Platonic is bottom-up, open-
minded, sceptical, and empirical’ (Taleb 2012:182). Pathetic is 
zigzag and spiral due to compassionate networking and the 
paradoxical character of kenotic love and consolatory being-
with.
With reference to the connection between complexity and 
paradigm shifts in theory formation, the following remark 
was made: Within an ‘open system’ the focus is not on the 
‘omniscience’ and ‘omnipotence’ of God, but rather on 
the infiniscience of God. Infiniscience points to the ongoing 
intervention of God and steadfast faithful presence of 
God in all spheres of life. The concept ‘God’ (Yahweh) as 
an active verb (to be) is a kind of unexpected, merciful 
happenstance within the ongoing events of life. Within the 
explosion of new integrative complex systems of creative 
change and hoping, the presence of God surfaces as the 
amazing discovery and promise in the Old Testament: ‘I 
will be your God’ and ‘I am who I am, and I shall be there 
wherever you are’.
Sustainability in its connection to the intervening actions of 
God’s oiktirmos and ḥesed point to infinitive of God’s being 
there within out human vulnerability. The ‘infiniscience of 
God’ thus refers to his compassionate being-with within 
the predicament of our being human. It is an indication of 
faithfulness and a source of vivid hope. The deity in the 
kingdom of Pharaoh is framed by ‘remote stagnation’; the 
deity in Israel is framed by promises of freedom (Exodus-
categories).
In a nutshell
Due to the fact that the name of God refers more to a verb 
in the continuous tense than a fixed substance in the past 
tense, the following theological paradigm shift is proposed: 
from the omniscience of God to the infiniscience of God. The 
infiniscience of God indicates that his power is less about a 
causative threat-power and more about a compassionate 
comfort-empowerment; infiniscience displays sustainable 
and ongoing faithfulness and grace. God is the living God 
within the covenantal inifiniscience: the God of Abraham, 
Isaac, and Jacob. The fact is that the ḥesed and oiktirmos of 
God have implications for both the naming of God in the 
praxis of caregiving, as well as for a Christian anthropology 
and divine interventions within sociocultural processes of 
change. Hesed and oiktirmos define God as a Compassionate 
Companion and Intimate Partner for spiritual wholeness in 
life; they define human beings as agents and beacons of hope 
and wounded healers of life despite the zigzag patterns of 
suffering.

Page 15 of 15
Original Research
http://www.indieskriflig.org.za
doi:10.4102/ids.v49i1.1996
In theory formation for a theology of compassion and hope, 
omni-categories should make place for encounter and 
embracement categories. Rather the notion of the infiniscience 
of God (the noun Jahwēh from the verb haja in Hebrew = 
to be; God as verb and the infinitive tense as indication 
of a continuous being-with and a promise of covenantal 
faithfulness), than the speculative omniscience of God 
(the positivism of all-knowing as a rational, explanatory 
category). The infinitive tense of God’s faithful being-with 
operates like an unprobable factor in life; it represents a kind 
of Black swan event that runs contradictory to any form of 
positivistic prediction and expectation.
In Christian spirituality, the involution of wisdom and the 
involuntariness of hope are connected to the infiniscience 
of God; to the covenantal promise for continuous but 
unexpected sustainability: I will continually be there where 
you are; I will be your God (the sustainability of divine 
faithfulness) even within the disorder of chaotic life events.
Acknowledgements
Competing interests
The author declares that he has no financial or personal 
relationship(s) that may have inappropriately influenced 
him in writing this article.
References
Altizer, J.J. & Hamilton, W., 1966, Radical theology and the death of God, Bobbs-
Merrill, New York.
Armstrong, K., 1997, A history of God from Abraham to the present: The 4000-year 
quest for God, Mandarin, London.
Barnard, M., Cilliers, J. & Wepener, C., 2014, Worship in the network culture: Liturgical 
ritual studies - Field and methods, concepts and metaphors, Peeters, Leuven.
Belgic Confession, 1959, Psalter hymnal: Doctrinal standards and liturgy of the 
Christian Reformed Church, Publication Committee of the Christian Reformed 
Church, Grand Rapids.
Berkhof, H., 1977, Christelijk geloof, Callenbach, Nijkerk.
Berkhof, H., 1979, Christian faith, Eerdmans, Grand Rapids.
Bonnhoeffer, D., 1951, Widerstand und Ergebung, Kaiser Verlag, München.
Bons-Storm, R., 1996, The incredible woman: Listening to women’s silences in pastoral 
care and counseling, Abingdon Press, Nashville.
Browning, D.S., 1983, ‘Pastoral theology in a pluralistic age’, in D.S. Browning (ed.), 
Practical theology, Harper & Row, San Francisco.
Brümmer, V., 2006, Brümmer on meaning and the Christian faith, Ashgate, Aldershot.
Burkey, J., 2010, ‘A review of Richard Kearney’s anatheism: Returning to God after 
God’, Journal of Cultural and Religious Theory 10(3), 160–166.
Capps, D., 1984, Pastoral care and hermeneutics, Fortress, Philadelphia.
Cox, H., 1965, The secular city, SCM, London.
Cox, H., 1969, The feast of fools: A theological essay on festivity and fantasy, Harper 
& Row, New York.
Craigie, P.C., 1976, The book of Deuteronomy, Eerdmans, Grand Rapids.
Critchley, S., 2012, The faith of the faithless: Experiments in political theology, Verso, 
London.
Davies, O., 2001, A theology of compassion: Metaphysics of difference and the renewal 
of tradition, Eerdmans, Grand Rapids.
De Groot, J. & Hulst, A.R., 1950, Macht en wil, Callenbach, Nijkerk.
Esser, H-H., 1978, ‘Splanchna’, in C. Brown (ed.), Dictionary of New Testament 
theology, vol. 2, pp. 599–601, Paternoster Press, Exeter.
Evans, H., 2004, ‘Faith and power 1261–1557’, in H.C. Evans (ed.), Byzantium: Faith 
and power, Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York.
Feitsma, M., 1956, Het theopaschitisme: Een dogma-historische studie over de 
ontwikkeling van het theopaschitisch denken, Kok, Kampen.
Fretheim, T.E., 1984, The suffering of God, Fortress, Philadelphia.
Gombrich, E.H., 2006, The story of art, Phaidon, London.
Hall, D., 1993, Professing the faith, Fortress, Minneapolis.
Häring, H., 1986, ‘Het kwaad als vraag naar Gods macht en machteloosheid’, Tijdschrift 
voor Theologie 26(4), 351–372.
Harland, P.A., 2009, Dynamics of identity in the world of the early Christians, Clark, 
New York.
Inbody, T., 1997, The transforming God: An interpretation of suffering and evil, 
Westminster John Knox, Louisville.
Johnson, P., 1985, A history of the modern world: From 1917 to the 1980s, Jonathan 
Ball, Johannesburg.
Jüngel, E., 1967, Gottes Sein ist im Werden, Mohr (Siebeck), Tübingen.
Kearney, R., 2011, Anatheism: Returning to God after God, Columbia University Press, 
New York.
Kopp-Schmidt, G., 2004, Iconograpahie und Ikonologie: Eine Einführung, Deubner 
Verlag für Kunst, Köln.
Krause, B., 1980, Leiden Gottes – Leiden des Menschen: Eine Untersuchung zur 
kirchlichen Dogmatik Karl Barths, Calwer, Stuttgart. (Calwer theologische 
Monographien 6).
Krog, A., 1998, Country of my skull, Random House, Johannesburg.
Küng, H., 1970, Menschwerdung Gotttes: Eine Einführung in Hegels theologisches 
Denken als Prolegomena zu einer künftigen Christologie – Ökomensiche 
Forschungen, 2 Soteriologische Abteilung, Band 1, Herder, Freiburg im Breisgau.
Lawston, G., 2014, ‘Losing our religion’, New Scientist, 30–35.
Louw, D.J., 2000, Meaning in suffering: A theological reflection on the cross and the 
resurrection for pastoral care and counselling, Peter Lang, Frankfurt am Main.
Mathews, T.F., 1993, The clash of Gods: A reinterpretation of early Christian art, 
Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Mathews, T.F., 1998, Byzantium: From antiquity to the Renaissance, Yale University 
Press, New Haven.
McFague, S., 1987, Models of God, Fortress, Philadelphia.
McGrath, A.E., 1985, Luther’s theology of the cross: Martin Luther’s theological 
breakthrough, Blackwell, Oxford.
Miller-McLemore, B.J., 2012, ‘Introduction: The contributions of practical theology’, in 
B.J. Miller-McLemore (ed.), The Wiley-Blackwell Companion to Practical Theology, 
pp. 1–20, Wiley-Blackwell, Oxford.
Moltmann, J., 1972, Der gekreuzigte Gott, Kaiser, München.
Moore, Z.B., 2002, Introducing feminist perspectives on pastoral theology, Sheffield 
Academic Press, Sheffield.
Müller, J.C., 2011, ‘Postfoundational practical theology for a time of transition’, HTS 
Teologiese Studies/Theological Studies 67(1), 1–5. http://dx.doi.org/10.4102/hts.
v67i1.837
Nauer, D., 2010, Seelsorge: Sorge um die Seele, Kohlhammer, Stuttgart.
Nyssen, W., 1982, ‘Die theologische und liturgische Bedeutung der Ikonen’, in 
K. Weitzman et al., Die Ikonenen, pp. 413–416, Herder Verlag, Freiburg im Breisgau.
Pasewark, K.A., 1993, A theology of power: Being beyond domination, Fortress, 
Minneapolis.
Process Theology, 2015, ‘Process theology’, viewed 20 May 2015, from http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Process_theology.
Reader, J., 2008, Reconstructing practical theology: The impact of globalization, 
Ashgate, Aldershot.
Robinson, J.A.T., 1963, Honest to God, SCM, London.
Ruther, R.R., 2002, ‘The emergence of Christian feminist theology’, in S.F. Parsons 
(ed.), Feminist theology, pp. 3–22, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Sölle, D., 1973, Leiden, Kreuz, Stuttgart.
Suurmond, P.B., 1984, God is machtig – Maar hoe?, 2e dr., Ten Have, Baarn.
Taleb, N.N., 2010, The black swan: The impact of the highly improbable, Penguin 
Books, London.
Taleb, N.N., 2012, Antifragile: Things that gain from disorder, Penguin Books, London.
Tillich, P., 1965, The courage to be, Collins, London.
Tutu, D. 2004, ‘Nelson Mandela annual lecture‘, viewed 20 September 2014, from 
http://nelsonmendela.org/uploads/files/NMF_Lecture_Book_small.pdf.
Van de Beek, A., 1984, Waarom? Over lijden, schuld en God, Callenbach, Nijkerk.
Van der Zee, W.R., 1983, Wie heeft daar woorden voor?, Boekencentrum, 
’s-Gravenhage.
Van Huyssteen, J.W., 1997, Essays in postfoundationalist Theology, Eerdmans, Grand 
Rapids.
Van Huyssteen, J.W., 2015, ‘“Practicing Ubuntu”: God, morality, and persoonhood – A 
bottom-up approach’. Unpublished Keynote Address, International Academy of 
Practical Theology (IAPT), July 20, Pretoria.
Velmans, T., 2007, Byzanz: Kunst und Architektur, Michael Imhof, Petersberg.
Weipert, M., 1976, ‘“addonaj”, Gottesname’, in E. Jenni & C. Westermann (Hrsg.), 
Theologisches Handwörterbuch zum Alten Testament, T. 2, Kaiser, München.
Weitzman, K., 1982, ‘Ursprung und Bedeutung der Ikonen’, in K. Weitzman et al., Die 
Ikonenen, pp. 5–19, Herder Verlag, Freiburg im Breisgau.
Wiersinga, H., 1972, Verzoening als verandering, Bosch & Keuning, Baarn.
Zakssaya, V., 2006, ‘The classical heritage in Byzantine art’, in K. Weitzman, The road 
to Byzantium: Luxury arts of antiquity, pp. 49–57, Fontana (Somerset House), 
London.