89 
  
Martyna Kropiewnicka* 
Grzegorz Ignatowicz** 
Dariusz Ostrowiecki*** 
Marta Czech****
Management of water resources  
in the light of the proposed reform  
of water law in Poland
Zarządzanie zasobami wodnymi  
w świetle proponowanej reformy  
prawa wodnego w Polsce
http://dx.doi.org/10.12775/PYEL.2015.005
Abstract
The article raises the subject of the reform of water law towards the analysis 
of  the fundamental objectives of  the proposed new Act  – Water Law, 
	
*	 Ph.D. Candidate at the  Institute of  Environmental Law and Science of  Public 
Administration, Faculty of Law, University in Białystok.
	
**	 Ph.D. Candidate at the  Institute of  Environmental Law and Science of  Public 
Administration, Faculty of Law, University in Białystok, Windykator Polska LLC, Białystok.
	
***	 Ph.D. Candidate at the  Institute of  Environmental Law and Science of  Public 
Administration, Faculty of Law, University in Białystok.
	
****	 Ph.D. Candidate at the Institute of Civil Law, Faculty of Law, University of Białystok.

Martyna Kropiewnicka, Grzegorz Ignatowicz, Dariusz Ostrowiecki, Marta Czech
90
  
i.e. to organize the competence of bodies of water administration, to separate 
the management of water infrastructure from water management, to determine 
river basin water policy and to simplify funding. Considerations are made by 
comparing the current regulations to those that are going to be implemented 
in the Polish law. The authors indicate problems that exist in the current 
legal system with respect to water law, and try to identify their causes. They 
also try to answer the question whether new legal proposals will actually 
solve these problems.
Keywords: Water Law; management of  water resources; government 
administration bodies; financing water management.
Streszczenie
Artykuł porusza tematykę reformy prawa wodnego pod kątem analizy zasadniczych 
celów projektowanej nowej ustawy – Prawo wodne tj. uporządkowania kompetencji 
organów administracji wodnej, rozdzielenia zarządzania infrastrukturą wodną od 
gospodarowania wodami, a także zlewniowej polityki wodnej oraz uproszczenia 
finansowania. Rozważania dokonywane są poprzez porównanie aktualnie 
obowiązujących przepisów do tych, których wdrożenie do prawa polskiego 
jest planowane. Autorzy wskazują na problemy, jakie mają miejsce w  aktualnie 
obowiązującym porządku prawnym w odniesieniu do prawa wodnego i podejmują 
próbę wskazania ich przyczyn, a także starają się odpowiedzieć na pytanie, czy nowe 
propozycje prawne będą rzeczywiście owe problemy rozwiązywać. 
Słowa kluczowe: Prawo wodne; zarządzanie zasobami wodnymi; organy 
administracji rządowej; finansowanie gospodarki wodnej.
The dynamic process of  development of  environmental law in  Poland, 
largely due to the implementation of the provisions of European Union 
law, influenced the need to reform also water law. The Act on Water Law1 
(hereinafter referred to as AWL) in its original form entered into force 14 years 
ago. Since that time a lot has changed in the scope of water management, 
the reality of its performing, or social and economic conditions of performing 
	
1	 Act of 21 July 2001, Journal of Laws of 2012, item 145, with amendments.

Management of water resources in the light of the proposed reform...
91 
  
water management. This revealed incorrectness and inaccuracy in law, which 
resulted in  numerous practical problems. An expression of  the growing 
dissonance between practice and legislation is the fact of introduction more 
than 50 amendments to AWL. Each subsequent fragmentary change has 
led to a lost of coherence of legislation in the scope of water management 
in Poland. Such worrying facts have contributed to the decision to work 
on a project of a new Act on Water Law, which would be characterized as 
internally coherent and at the same time would clearly determine division 
of  responsibilities between various environmental authorities2. The  main 
goals of the new act are to organize the competence of bodies of water 
administration, to separate the management of water infrastructure from 
water management, to determine river basin water policy and to simplify 
funding3. These issues will be considered herein. 
First of  all, currently valid legal regulations concerning water law 
are worth analyzing. In article 4 item 1 of  the currently binding Act 
on Water Law the Legislator indicates the authorities competent in the 
scope of  water management cases. Among them there are mentioned 
both the government administration bodies (minister in charge of water 
management, the President of the State Board of Water Management – 
as a  central government body supervised by the  minister in  charge 
of water management; director of regional water management board – as 
a government non-complex authority, subject to the President of the State 
Board of Water Management, the voivode), as well as the bodies of local 
government (local government bodies).
Specific authorities of the minister in charge of water management are 
defined by the Regulation of the Prime Minister on 18 November 20114 
on the detailed scope of the Minister of the Environment responsibilities, 
in  accordance with which the  Minister of  the Environment manages 
the  government administration departments of  water management 
and the environment. In accordance with the Act of 4 September 1997 
on  government administration departments5, the  department of  water 
management includes (article 11 item 1):
	
2	 Source: http://www.mos.gov.pl/artykul/7_archiwum/23874_prawo_wodne_projekt_
do_konsultacji.html [12.05.2015]. Project no. UD194.
	
3	 Ibidem.
	
4	 Journal of Laws No 248, item 1493 and No 284, item 1671.
	
5	 Journal of Laws of 2015, item 812 with amendments, consolidated text.

Martyna Kropiewnicka, Grzegorz Ignatowicz, Dariusz Ostrowiecki, Marta Czech
92
  
–  development of protection and rational use of water resources,
–  maintenance of inland surface waters, owned by the State Treasury, 
including technical infrastructure related to these waters, including 
buildings and water equipment,
–  construction, modernization and maintenance of inland waterways,
–  flood protection, including construction, modernization and 
maintenance of water facilities to prevent flooding and coordination 
of projects aimed at flood protection of the state,
–  functioning of  the state hydrological  – meteorological service and 
the state hydrological service, with the exception of matters concerning 
monitoring of groundwater quality.
The President of the State Board of Water Management, as the central 
government authority, has jurisdiction in  matters of  management, 
administration and use of water. He/she is appointed by the Prime Minister 
in an open and competitive recruitment, upon the motion of the minister 
in charge of water management. Requirements concerning formal issues 
related to the duties of the office are determined in the article 89 item 3a 
of the AWL.
According to article 90 of the AWL, the President of the State Board 
of Water Management performs the tasks specified in the Act, in particular:
–  prepares a  water and environmental program for the  country, that 
is referred to in article 113 item 1 point 1,
–  prepares draft plans for management on the river basin areas,
–  prepares: a) preliminary flood risk assessment, flood hazard maps and 
flood risk maps, b) flood risk management plans for river basin areas, 
c) plans to counteract the effects of drought in river basins areas,
–  agrees on the draft of terms of use water in water region,
–  conducts water cadastre for the state area, including the division into 
river basin districts,
–  supervises the activities of the directors of regional water management 
boards and, in particular, controls their actions, approves plans and 
reports on implementation of the plans,
–  programs, plans and supervises the implementation of tasks associated 
with maintaining water or water facilities and investments in water 
management,
–  agrees, in the part relating to water management, on projects of lists 
of  priority programs of  the National Fund for Environmental 

Management of water resources in the light of the proposed reform...
93 
  
Protection and Water Management, that are referred to in article 415 
item 5 point 1 of the Act on Environmental Law6.
Of course, this catalogue is not closed.
The President of the State Board of Water Management performs their 
duties through the State Board of Water Management.
The following of the government administration bodies is the Director 
of  the regional board of  water management. He/she is  appointed by 
the minister in charge of the economy. Their tasks include in particular: 
drawing up the identification of significant anthropogenic influence and 
assessment of their impact on the status of surface water and groundwater, 
in water region; elaborating conditions for the use of the waters of the water 
region; elaborating economic analyzes associated with the  use of  waters 
in the water region; preparing, conducting, verifying and ongoing updating 
of the lists of protected areas established under the provisions of the Act and 
other regulations; preparing the draft flood risk management plans for water 
regions; cooperation in preparing the preliminary flood risk assessment and 
flood risk management plans; elaborating plans to counteract the effects 
of drought in water regions; coordinating activities related to the protection 
against flood and drought in  the water region, in  particular conducting 
the centers of coordination and information on flood protection; agreeing, 
in terms of projects relating to water management in the region, on lists 
of  priority projects submitted by voivodeship funds for environmental 
protection and water management, as referred to  in  article 414 item 
2 point 3 of  the Act on  Environmental Law; expressing opinions 
on draft of voivodeship waste management plans referred to in the Act 
of 14 December 2012 on waste management7, in the scope of protection 
of water resources; giving opinions, in relation to direct threats of damage 
to waters and damage to waters, on the decisions referred to in article 13 
item 3 and article 15 item 1 of the Act of 13 April 2007 on preventing from 
environmental damage and its repair8 (article 92 item 3 of the AWL).
It should be noticed here that the existing division of powers between 
government administration and local government administration in  the 
scope of  water infrastructure is  unclear. This raises the  problems with 
	
6	 Act of 27 April 2001 on Environmental Law, Journal of Laws of 2001, No 62, item 
627 with amendments. 
	
7	 Journal of Laws of 2013, item 21.
	
8	 Journal of Laws No 75, item 493 with amendments.

Martyna Kropiewnicka, Grzegorz Ignatowicz, Dariusz Ostrowiecki, Marta Czech
94
  
the division of tasks and responsibility for their implementation. Ministry 
of  Environment has prepared regulations according to  which water 
management will be performed in a more efficient and transparent way. 
The bill proposes, among others, a change in the legal and organizational 
structure of public administration bodies related to water management. This 
change is aimed at the separation of powers in the field of investment and 
maintenance of State Treasury’s assets related to water management, from 
planning and administrative functions. It was assumed that the minister 
in charge of water management would be the chief organ of government 
administration in the field of water managing. President of the State Board 
of Water Management would act as a central governmental authority for 
water management issues9. As it is indicated in the explanatory statement 
of the bill, such regulations are aimed at increasing the powers of the minister 
in  charge of  water management and his/her control over the  President 
of the State Board of Water Management, and thus, the real impact of the 
Council of Ministers on water management in the country. The minister 
will obtain formal authority to issue binding instructions and guidelines 
in the scope of water management directed to the President of the State 
Board of Water Management. The President would be also obliged to agree 
important decisions in the field of water management with the minister. 
An interesting solution would also be ensuring the impact of governors 
on the shape of the planning documents in the area of water management 
through the competent authorities’ obligation to agree with the governors 
updating water management plans and updating flood hazard maps and 
flood risk maps10.
Separating powers in the field of investment and maintenance of water 
infrastructure from administrative functions and planning functions, 
in practice, proposed by the draft law, will be a significant reduction of the 
bodies and offices from 15 (8 inland waterway offices and 7 regional 
boards of water management) to 6 water management offices (government 
administration) and 2 state legal persons: The Board of Vistula River Basin 
and The Board of Oder River Basin. In each office there will be functioning 
water management division responsible for tasks in the inland waterway 
	
9	 Source: https://www.premier.gov.pl/wydarzenia/decyzje-rzadu/zalozenia-do-
projektu-ustawy-prawo-wodne.html [10.05.2015].
	
10	 Explanatory statement of the bill of Act on Water Law, source: http://www.oigr.pl/
pliki/legislacyjne/29-12-2014-2.pdf, [10.05.2015].

Management of water resources in the light of the proposed reform...
95 
  
sector. One of the numerous tasks carried out by the water offices will be 
issuing water permits, with the exception of permits issued by the starost. 
Furthermore, rivers will be clearly assigned to a specific host (manager). 
Large rivers with national significance, serving as waterways, border 
rivers, will be maintained adequately by the  boards of  the Oder (Odra) 
and Vistula (Wisła) river basins. Other smaller rivers with a regional or 
local importance, will be assigned to marshals of voivodeships, on behalf 
of whom voivodeships boards of drainage and water facilities will deal with 
their maintenance11.
The amendment of Act on Water Law aims to ensure the achievement 
of  the objective determined in  the Water Framework Directive, 
which is  the  implementation of  river basin water management policy. 
The  assumption was the  introduction of  water management policy that 
would meet the  criteria of  “functionality and security and sustainable 
development, economic efficiency, durability of  ecosystems and social 
acceptance”. The aim of the Legislator was forming the legal, organizational, 
financial and technical solutions in such a way, that on one hand would 
be able to  ensure sustainable and balanced development of  the country, 
and on the other hand would take into account the adaptations associated 
with climate change and exhaustible natural resources12. It  should be 
emphasized that the Water Framework Directive shapes the management 
of water resources. It imposes the following stipulations on entities applying 
the Directive: to withdraw from a kind of “self-centered” approach to water 
management and to take other priorities in water management, such as 
efforts intended to control natural phenomena associated with the operation 
of water in the form of technical solutions which give a temporary effect, 
however, in the long term, they can have negative environmental impacts13. 
The previous amendments did not realize de facto the objectives of the Water 
Framework Directive, but rather, they were destroying the proposed EU 
	
11	 Source: http://www.mos.gov.pl/artykul/7_archiwum/23874_prawo_wodne_projekt_
do_konsultacji.html [12.05.2015].
	
12	 Directive 2000/60/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 23 October 
2000, establishing a framework for Community action in the field of water Policy, Official 
Journal of the European Communities L 327/1.
	
13	 J. Rotnicka, Gospodarka wodna w  świetle uwarunkowań Unii Europejskiej, in: Stan 
gospodarki wodnej w  Polsce  – problematyka prawna i  kompetencyjna (na przykładzie Dolnej 
Wisły). Materiały z  Konferencji zorganizowanej przez Parlamentarny Zespół ds. Dróg 
Wodnych i Turystyki Wodnej, 2.06.2011, Kancelaria Senatu RP, 2011, p.22-24.

Martyna Kropiewnicka, Grzegorz Ignatowicz, Dariusz Ostrowiecki, Marta Czech
96
  
model of water management. Moreover, the existing legislative actions have 
rather indicated the lack of consequence and inconsistency in the creation 
of regulations concerning water law14. The new act is intended to overcome 
this chaos.
In the area of planning in water management, the amendment to the Act 
on Water Law in particular clarifies and specifies the regulations with regard 
to the matter of water management plans within the river basins, as well as 
regulates the issues of implementation of water and environmental program 
of  the country. The  result of  changes made by the  Act on  Water Law 
amendment is to be a full implementation of river basin water management 
policy, which is to contribute to the effective and efficient water management 
and which, at the same time, takes into account the preservation of resources 
for future generations. Another objective which manifests itself in the form 
of organizational changes in the administration is to fulfill criteria stipulated 
in the Water Framework Directive15.
Planning as well as implementation of measures in the scope of protection 
of water quality level, as a part of public administration bodies’ activities, 
result directly from the article 99 of the Act on Environmental Law. It states 
that the bodies of administration plan and implement measures to protect 
water quality levels taking into account the hydrographic river basin water 
areas. Whereas, the concept of river basin water area is defined by the article 
9 of the AWL, which indicates that it is an area of land from which all 
surface water runoff is discharged by the system of streams, creeks, rivers 
and canals to the determined point of a water course.
Planning in  water management is  one of  the instruments for 
management of water resources. Water resources management is carried 
out by the division of the state into river basins areas and water regions. 
The  proposed act indicates in  the article 7 item 4 that the  Council 
of Ministers, while establishing a way of recording the course of borders 
of river basin areas, the assignment of groundwater reservoirs and bankfull 
waters – to the appropriate river basin areas, as well as the way of recording 
the course of borders of water regions, will follow the hydrographic division 
of  the country and the  diversity of  hydrological and hydrogeological 
	
14	 Ibidem.
	
15	 Explanatory statement of the bill of Act on Water Law, source: http://www.oigr.pl/
pliki/legislacyjne/29-12-2014-2.pdf, [12.05.2015].

Management of water resources in the light of the proposed reform...
97 
  
conditions in the area of the basin, as well as the location of groundwater 
reservoirs and the way they are used.
In the bill of AWL the issues of planning in water management have 
been placed in section VII. At the beginning the Legislator, as in previous 
versions of the act, indicates that planning in water management is to serve 
programming and coordinating the  activities of  which main objectives 
are: achievement or maintenance of at least good condition of water and 
water-dependent ecosystems, improvement of  water resources condition, 
improvement of  the capacity of  water use, reduction of  the amount 
of entering the water or soil substances and energy that may adversely affect 
the water, improvement of flood protection. Amended act also indicates 
the  achievement of  environmental objectives that are determined in  the 
article 56, 57, 59 and in the article 61 of the proposed act. Environmental 
objectives concern homogeneous parts of  surface waters that have not 
been designated as artificial or heavily modified reservoirs. The Legislator 
indicates that the main objectives for these waters are their improvement 
and restoration in  such a  way as to  achieve their good condition and 
prevent their deterioration. In the article 57 of the new AWL there are 
specified environmental objectives established for artificial and heavily 
modified parts of  surface waters. The  act is  expected to  implement 
protection of these waters, as well as to improve their ecological potential 
and chemical condition, and to prevent deterioration of the ecological and 
chemical condition. Article 59 of the bill of AWL stipulates objectives for 
homogeneous parts of groundwater that are to prevent or reduce pollution, 
prevent deterioration of the condition, protect, take remedial action and 
to ensure balance in the scope of consumption and supply of water in such 
a way as its good condition is achievable . The last environmental objective 
is determined in the article 61 of the bill of AWL. It applies to protected 
areas and indicates achievement standards and goals that arise from specific 
provisions under which the areas have been created.
On the grounds of the bill of AWL, planning documents elaborated 
in the scope of planning in water management are management plans for 
river basin areas, flood risk management plans for the  river basin areas, 
plans to  counteract the  effects of  drought in  the basin areas, plans for 
the maintenance of water, water and environmental program of the country, 
conditions of water use in water regions and conditions of water use in river 
basin water areas.

Martyna Kropiewnicka, Grzegorz Ignatowicz, Dariusz Ostrowiecki, Marta Czech
98
  
Article 280 of  the bill of  AWL stipulates a  catalogue of  planning 
documents which are prepared in  order to  elaborate water management 
plans. In addition, the Legislator indicates that the lists of homogeneous 
parts of surface waters (including bathing water) prepared by the minister 
in charge of health matters should be taken into account while elaborating 
planning documents.. According to the bill of AWL, planning documentation 
referred to in article 280 item 1 points 1-6 are prepared by President of the 
State Board of Water Management.
The amendment to  the  act introduces changes to  the  legal and 
organizational structure of  public administration bodies. Therefore, 
the powers of directors of regional boards of water management functioning 
till now, have been entrusted to  directors of  water management offices 
in particular regions. According to article 280 item 2 of the bill of AWL, 
while preparing planning documentation, the following issues elaborated 
by the directors of regional boards of water management are to be taken 
into account: identification of  significant anthropogenic influence and 
assessment of its impact on the condition of surface water and groundwater, 
lists of  emissions and concentrations of  substances described in  this 
article, identification of influence of changes on groundwater levels, lists 
of  surface waters and groundwater used for public supply intended for 
human consumption, lists of surface waters used for recreational purposes, 
lists of  surface water intended for habitation of  fish, crustaceans and 
molluscs and enabling the  migration of  fish, lists of  waters vulnerable 
to be polluted by nitrogen compounds from agricultural sources, economic 
analysis associated with the use of water. Similarly to the currently binding 
Act on Water Law, the Legislator in the article 281 of the bill of AWL 
indicates the data that should be included in a water management plan for 
a river basin area. This catalogue was, however, extended with the obligation 
to  indicate a  list of  investments that may result in  failure to  achieve 
good condition or deterioration of good condition or potential of waters. 
Failure to achieve good ecological condition and good ecological potential, 
and failure to prevent from ecological deterioration is permissible if it is 
the  result of  new modifications of  physical properties of  these waters, 
or failure to prevent from deterioration of the condition of these waters 
from the very good condition to good condition is the result of new human 
activities, in accordance with the principle of sustainable development and 
the  necessary development of  the society (article 66 of  the new AWL). 
In addition, the bill indicates that the management plan for the river basin 

Management of water resources in the light of the proposed reform...
99 
  
area shall be reviewed and updated every six years. In addition to the data 
referred to in article 281 item 1 of the bill of AWL, the plans should include, 
among others, a summary of any changes or updates from the day of the 
announcement of the previous water management plan for a river basin 
area, assessment of  the progress in  achieving environmental objectives, 
with the presentation of monitored results for the period of the previous 
plan and explanation for any failure to  achieve certain environmental 
objectives. According to  the  assumptions, the  water management plan 
for a  river basin area will be elaborated by the  President of  the State 
Board of Water Management. Furthermore, he/she will review the water 
management plan for the river basin area and prepare its updated version. 
The Council of Ministers, by way of a regulation, will adopt and update 
the water management plan for the river basin area, regarding the need 
to ensure the achievement of environmental objectives and the general 
character of this plan.
Flood risk management plans and plans to  counteract the  effects 
of  drought in  areas of  river basin have been regulated by section IV 
of the bill, articles 170 and 184. It should be indicated that under the new 
Act, draft flood risk management plans for the water regions and for river 
basin areas will be prepared by the directors of water management offices 
and transmitted to the President of the State Board of Water Management. 
The drafts will be transmitted no later than 15 months before the date 
of preparation of flood risk management plans.
Article 182 of  the bill indicates that protection against drought 
is the task of government and local authorities. Protection against drought 
is to be carried out in accordance with the plans to counteract the effects 
of  drought in  river basin areas and plans to  counteract the  effects 
of drought in the water regions. The President of the State Board of Water 
Management will prepare plans to counteract the effects drought in river 
basin areas in agreement with the minister in charge of water management 
and the minister in charge of agriculture. However, draft plans to counteract 
the effects of drought in the water regions will be prepared by the directors 
of water management offices and transmitted to the President of the State 
Board of Water Management no later than 15 months before the date 
of preparing plans to counteract the effects of drought in river basin areas, 
regarding the  need to  ensure effective protection against drought and 
general character of plans. 

Martyna Kropiewnicka, Grzegorz Ignatowicz, Dariusz Ostrowiecki, Marta Czech
100
  
Planning documents in the field of water management plans for the river 
basin areas, flood risk management plans for the river basin areas and plans 
to counteract the effects of drought, according to article 295 of the bill 
of  AWL, will be included in  the concept of  spatial development of  the 
country, regional development strategy, regional spatial development plans, 
urban planning for municipalities and local spatial development plans.
Data catalogue which should be included in a water maintenance plan 
has been specified by the article 286 of the bill. In addition, the Legislator 
suggests that the  draft of  water maintenance plan will be elaborated 
regarding the needs in the field of flood protection, the need to achieve 
environmental objectives and water protection, the conditions for permitting 
failure to  achieve good ecological condition and failure to  prevent from 
ecological deterioration, as well as good ecological potential. Additionally, 
the draft of water maintenance plan will require carrying out a Strategic 
Environmental Assessment. The  draft water maintenance plan will be 
agreed on by the President of the State Board of Water Management and 
the competent voivodeships marshals. The director of water management 
office adopts the water maintenance plan by an act of local law.
The bill of AWL also specifies the assumptions of water and environmental 
program which are aimed at improving and maintaining good water 
condition in a river basin areas. The basic tasks in this field shall be aimed 
at meeting the requirements for measures to enable the implementation 
of  the provisions in  the scope of  water protection, in  particular, these 
are actions which are aimed at meeting existing and future water needs 
in  terms of  supply people with water for consumption, protection 
of  habitats or species, control of  accident hazards involving dangerous 
substances, appropriate use of  sewage sludge, prevention of  pollution 
of water with nitrogen compounds from agricultural sources. Wider range 
of  activities that are aimed at improving and maintaining good water 
condition has been defined in the article 289 of the bill of AWL. Water and 
environmental program is elaborated by the President of the State Board 
of Water Management, in agreement with the minister in charge of water 
management and the minister in charge of the environment. The program 
will be reviewed every six years.
Planning documents in  the field of  water management include also 
conditions of water use in water region and the conditions of water use 
in  river basin water areas. Catalogue of  conditions of  water use, which 
is referred to in the previous sentence, has been specified in articles 291 

Management of water resources in the light of the proposed reform...
101 
  
and 292 of  the bill. The  conditions of  water use in  water regions and 
the conditions of water use in river basin water areas will be determined 
by regulation of  the director of  water management office, in  agreement 
with the President of the State Board of Water Management. During these 
activities, arrangements of  a  water management plan for the  river basin 
areas will be also taken into account arrangements of a water management 
plan for the river basin areas.
What is more, the new AWL is to solve the problem of underfunding 
of water management. At the moment, in the scope of maintenance of water 
infrastructure only the most necessary work is done. This results in a situation 
where implementation of  specific activities occurs only in  a  perspective 
of inevitable disaster, instead of conducting activities that would prevent 
from damage in water infrastructure, which in fact requires less financial 
investment. However, in a situation of permanent lack of funds, decisions 
on spending specified amount of money are somehow delayed until the last 
minute, when the main objective is to prevent serious negative legal and 
financial consequences. Activities in  the scope of  water infrastructure 
involving spending money also occur when it comes to serious negligence. 
It is, in fact, a vicious circle as such negligence results from lack of adequate 
financial resources16.
In order to  change this situation, the  new act introduces a  system 
of  financing water management, which is  to be rational, coherent and 
effective. It is worth taking a close look at how water management funding 
system works today and what is the reason for its malfunction.
On the ground of currently binding Act on the Water Law, economic 
instruments serving for water management are regulated by section VI, part 
5, articles 142-152 of the act. As it is stated in article 142 of the AWL, 
economic instruments serving for water management include:
1)	
fees for the use of inland waterways and water facilities owned by 
the State Treasury, located on the inland surface water;
2)	
fees for the use of the fishing circuit;
3)	
fees for granting a  usufruct of  the land covered by the  waters 
important for the  development of  water resources and flood 
protection, in  particular groundwater and inland surface waters: 
in mountain streams and their sources, the natural watercourses, 
	
16	 Source: http://www.mos.gov.pl/artykul/7_archiwum/23874_prawo_wodne_projekt_
do_konsultacji.html [13.05. 2015 ].

Martyna Kropiewnicka, Grzegorz Ignatowicz, Dariusz Ostrowiecki, Marta Czech
102
  
from the source to the mouth, with an average flow of multi-year 
equal to or greater than 2.0 m3/s cross-section of the estuary, lakes 
and artificial water reservoirs crossed by streams, referred to in point 
B, in border, inland waterways;
4)	
fees for preparing and giving access to data on water cadastre;
5)	
fees relating to the execution of contracts in inland fisheries.
Fees for the  use of  inland waterways and water facilities owned by 
the State Treasury located on the inland surface waters shall be paid for: 
shipping and transportation of people or goods by floating objects; towing 
or wood raft and the use of watergates (article 143 of the AWL). The above-
mentioned charges are the income of the National Fund for Environmental 
Protection and Water Management (article 152 of the AWL).
On the ground of the new act, economic instruments serving for water 
management would also include a fee for use of the land covered by water 
owned by the State Treasury necessary for the conduct of projects related to: 
hydroelectricity, water transport, extraction of stone, gravel, sand and other 
materials, cutting plants from water, infrastructure of transport, industrial, 
municipal or agricultural infrastructure, activities used for recreation, 
tourism, water sports and amateur fishing; service activities, as well as 
telecommunication infrastructure (article 260 of  the AWL). Moreover, 
water management financing would also be possible due to  charges for 
the use of land built up water facilities, as well as the use of water facilities 
or their parts owned by the State Treasury, to which ownership rights would 
be performed by the governors or boards of river basin areas – state legal 
persons and marshals. Under the  provisions of  the new act, they would 
become the property of the State Treasury real estate resources to which 
the provisions of the act on real estate management will not apply, except for 
the provisions of granting the permanent administration (article 261 of the 
AWL). On the basis of the provisions of the new act, boards of river basin 
areas will be able to dispose of real estate not being the property referred 
to in the proposed articles 260 and 261, by their selling, establishing limited 
property rights, renting, leasing, or lending, and the proceeds thereof are 
their income. Proceeds from rent and lease will supply the financing of water 
management.
Dues, fees and proceeds referred to  in  the new article 267 will be 
the income of the boards of river basin areas, with the exception of the fee 
referred to in the article 301 item 5 (fees for preparing and giving access 

Management of water resources in the light of the proposed reform...
103 
  
to data on water cadastre), which will constitute income of the National 
Fund for Environmental Protection and Water Management.
Changes planned in the scope of financing of water management follow 
one main principle, namely that the money that is collected for particular 
use of  water resources should continue to  be spent by the  authorities 
performing water management. This means introducing the principle that 
money out of the water remain in the water. Activity of Boards river basin 
areas and the  voivodeships marshals will be financed with the  fees for 
water consumption, which now constitute the income of the National and 
voivodeships funds for environmental protection and water management. 
On the basis of the provisions of the new act it will also be possible for units 
newly established under this act to acquire income from their own business 
(boards of river basin areas) )17.
The new system of  financing water management is  also supposed 
to contribute to effective and efficient disbursement of funds for activities 
related to adaptation to climate changes18.
Bill of the new Act on Water Law reached the stage of the findings 
of the Committee for European Affairs19. However, we should keep in mind 
the principle discontinuation of work of the legislature, and at the same time 
the recently held parliamentary elections. For this moment, it is difficult 
to  assume whether the  new idea of  water law will continue in  the new 
tenure of the parliament. Undoubtedly, the reform of water law is necessary 
because of  the need to  reorganize the  organizational structure of  water 
administration, as nowadays it is organized in such a way that it does not 
achieve its objectives, mainly due to  the  shifting of  responsibilities for 
specific tasks. What is more, underfunding of water management results 
in lower quality and efficiency of its conduct, which undoubtedly impact 
the condition of environment. As indicated by the Ministry of Environment, 
thinking “in a  sectoral way” (e.g. flood protection, shipping, energy and 
environmental protection) does not allow to fully and timely solve problems 
arising in the area of water management. Comprehensive and holistic look 
can provide constructive strategic documents which will take into account 
	
17	 Explanatory statement of the bill of Act on Water Law, source: http://www.oigr.pl/
pliki/legislacyjne/29-12-2014-2.pdf, [13.05.2015].
	
18	 Ibidem.
	
19	 Source: https://legislacja.rcl.gov.pl/projekt/269140 [13.05.2015].

Martyna Kropiewnicka, Grzegorz Ignatowicz, Dariusz Ostrowiecki, Marta Czech
104
  
the  principles underlined by the  new act and outlined in  this paper20. 
As  the  Ministry of  the Environment has ensured, a  new Act on  Water 
Law shall provide the appropriate tools that will allow the implementation 
of  such demands as functionality, security, sustainable development and 
economic efficiency.
Bibliography 
Rotnicka J., Gospodarka wodna w świetle uwarunkowań Unii Europejskiej, in: Stan 
gospodarki wodnej w Polsce – problematyka prawna i kompetencyjna (na przykładzie 
Dolnej Wisły). Materiały z  Konferencji zorganizowanej przez Parlamentarny 
Zespół ds. Dróg Wodnych i Turystyki Wodnej, 2.06.2011, Kancelaria Senatu 
RP, 2011.
Internet sources
https://legislacja.rcl.gov.pl/projekt/269140;
http://www.mos.gov.pl/artykul/7_archiwum/23874_prawo_wodne_projekt_do_
konsultacji.html;
http://www.oigr.pl/pliki/legislacyjne/29-12-2014-2.pdf;
https://www.premier.gov.pl/wydarzenia/decyzje-rzadu/zalozenia-do-projektu-
ustawy-prawo-wodne.html.
Emails
martyna.kropiewnicka@op.pl
grzegorz.ignatowicz@kancelariecls.pl
d.ostrowiecki@wp.pl
marta.czech@op.pl
	
20	 Source: 
http://www.mos.gov.pl/artykul/7_archiwum/23874_prawo_wodne_projekt_do_konsultacji.
html [10.05.2015].