2015 Guidelines for the Management  
of Hypertension
Part 8
 
 
 
 
 
Recommendations of the Polish Society of Hypertension
Guideline editors: Andrzej Tykarski, Krzysztof Narkiewicz, Zbigniew Gaciong,  
Andrzej Januszewicz, Mieczysław Litwin, Katarzyna Kostka-Jeziorny
Experts: Marcin Adamczak, Ludwina Szczepaniak-Chicheł, Marzena Chrostowska, 
Danuta Czarnecka, Grzegorz Dzida, Krzysztof J. Filipiak, Jerzy Gąsowski,  
Jerzy Głuszek, Stefan Grajek, Tomasz Grodzicki, Kalina Kawecka-Jaszcz,  
Beata Wożakowska-Kapłon, Beata Begier-Krasińska, Jacek Manitius,  
Małgorzata Myśliwiec, Anna Niemirska, Aleksander Prejbisz, Danuta Pupek-Musialik, 
Grażyna Brzezińska-Rajszys, Katarzyna Stolarz-Skrzypek, Agnieszka Szadkowska, 
Tomasz Tomasik, Krystyna Widecka, Andrzej Więcek, Adam Windak, Jacek Wolf, 
Tomasz Zdrojewski, Aleksandra Żurowska
Arterial Hypertens. 2015, vol. 19, no. 4, pages: 153–173
DOI: 10.5603/AH.2015.0020
Polish Society of Hypertension


 2015 Guidelines for the Management of Hypertension, part 8
155
www.nt.viamedica.pl
8. Secondary hypertension
8.1. Introduction
Secondary hypertension is present in 5–10% of 
all hypertensive patients. Appropriate investigations 
followed by therapy directed at the cause of secon­
dary hypertension may lead to elimination of the 
underlying cause, resulting in improved control or 
normalization of BP values with cardiovascular risk 
reduction.
Simple screening evaluation for secondary forms 
of hypertension is indicated in all patients with hy­
pertension, based on history, physical examination, 
and basic laboratory tests.
Clues to the presence of secondary hypertension 
include:
• 
severe BP elevation (including paroxysmal hyper­
tension and hypertensive crisis);
• 
rapidly progressing development of hypertension 
or worsening of BP control;
• 
resistant hypertension;
• 
malignant hypertension;
• 
poor response to antihypertensive drugs;
• 
target organ damage that is disproportionate to 
the duration or severity of hypertension.
Suggestive signs and symptoms and diagnostic 
procedures to investigate specific forms of secondary 
hypertension are summarized in Table XXV.
8.2. Obstructive sleep apnoea
8.2.1. Prevalence
Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) is present in 
a relatively large proportion of hypertensive patients, 
particularly those with resistant hypertension (up to 
85%). Studies indicate that moderate to severe OSA 
that requires appropriate management is present in as 
many as 40–55% of patients with resistant hyperten­
sion. Of note, OSA is also associated with an incre­
ased risk of cardiovascular morbidity and mortality.
Due to frequent coexistence, common pathoge­
netic mechanisms with hypertension, and a limi­
ted effect of specific OSA treatment on BP values, 
some European experts have postulated to consider it 
a concomitant condition and not a secondary form 
of hypertension. However, American guidelines 
(JNC8) list OSA as an important and reversible cau­
se of secondary hypertension.
8.2.2. History, physical examination, and abnor-
malities in routine and additional laboratory tests
The most common symptoms of OSA are habitual 
snoring, episodes of apnoea, and excessive daytime 
somnolescence. Other manifestations of OSA in­
clude the following nocturnal symptoms: nycturia, in­
creased motor activity and sweating during the night, 
awakenings, dyspnoea and/or choking during sleep, 
difficulties with falling asleep, insomnia, palpitations, 
mouth and throat dryness, and symptoms of gastro­
esophageal reflux. In addition to excessive daytime 
somnolescence, other symptoms during the day in­- 
clude morning tiredness, morning headaches, impa­
ired memory and concentration, decreased libido and 
impotence, psychoemotional problems, and an in­
creased rate of traffic and workplace accidents. Most 
studies also indicate that in some hypertensive pa­
tients, daytime symptoms of even severe OSA may 
be modest.
Findings on physical examination mostly include 
obesity, in particular abdominal obesity. The correc­
ted neck circumference above 48 cm (actual neck 
circumference in centimetres plus 4 cm in hyperten­
sives plus 3 cm if habitual snoring, and plus 3 cm 
if nocturnal choking/dyspnoea) is associated with 
a significantly increased risk of OSA.
Major underlying causes may include anatomical 
abnormalities of the upper airways, such as tongue 
hypertrophy, elongation of the soft palate, tonsil hy­
pertrophy, and impaired nasal patency. Less frequent 
abnormalities include an abnormal anatomy of the 
splanchnocranium, for example mandibular hypo­
plasia and/or retraction.
Most commonly, OSA coexists with metabolic 
syndrome and thus abnormal glucose and lipid me­
tabolism is often indicated by basic laboratory tests 
in these patients.
In patients with OSA, ABPM reveals reduced 
a nocturnal BP fall, non-dipping BP pattern, or even 
BP elevation during the night. The presence of OSA 
may also be indicated by increased morning BP va­
lues as detected by HBPM. Holter ECG monitoring 
in patients with OSA shows intermittent periods of 
brady- and tachycardia. Echocardiography may show 
left ventricular hypertrophy (usually of the concen­
tric pattern), left atrial enlargement, mostly diastolic 
dysfunction, and other abnormalities.
8.2.3. Investigations
Investigations for OSA should be considered in 
hypertensive patients with:
• 
clinical symptoms suggesting OSA;
• 
resistant hypertension;
• 
abdominal obesity and metabolic disturbances 
(particularly diabetes);
• 
concomitant coronary artery disease;
• 
a history of stroke/TIA;
• 
non-dipping BP pattern;
• 
nocturnal arrhythmia and/or conduction distur­

arterial hypertension 2015, vol. 19, no. 4
156
www.nt.viamedica.pl
Table XXV. Suggestive symptoms, signs and laboratory test results, and specific investigations for secondary forms of hypertension
Cause of 
hypertension
Symptoms, signs, and routine and additional laboratory test results suggesting a secondary form of hypertension
Investigations
History
Physical examination
Routine tests
Additional tests
First choice 
(screening) tests
Confirmatory tests
Obstructive sleep 
apnoea
Characteristic daytime and nocturnal 
symptoms*
Symptom evaluation using questionna-
ires*
Abdominal obesity
Increased neck circumfe-
rence*
Abnormalities of the 
splanchnocranium
Elevated glucose level, dys-
lipidaemia
Reduced or absent nocturnal BP fall 
in ABPM
Elevated morning BP values in 
HBPM
Arrhythmia and/or conduction  
disturbances in Holter ECG monitoring
Nocturnal study using  
a type IV device*
Nocturnal study using  
a type I–III device*
Parenchymal renal 
disease
History or urinary tract infection or ab-
normal anatomy, haematuria, overuse 
of analgesics, family history of kidney 
disease
Palpable enlarged kidneys 
(in cystic kidney disease)
Presence of protein, ery-
throcytes, or leukocytes in 
urine; reduced GFR
Albuminuria/proteinuria of varying 
severity
Renal ultrasound
Detailed investigations 
for kidney disease
Primary hyperaldo-
steronism
Muscle weakness, family history, particu-
larly of severe hypertension or early onset 
hypokalaemia and cerebrovascular events 
< 40 years of age
Cardiac arrhythmia
Hypokalaemia (spontaneo-
us or diuretic-induced)
Incidentally found adrenal lesion, 
severe target organ damage
Reduced or absent nocturnal BP fall 
in ABPM
Aldosterone-renin 
ratio*
Confirmatory hormonal 
testing*
Adrenal CT/MRI
Adrenal venous sam-
pling
Atherosclerotic RAS
Hypertension of sudden onset or incre-
asing severity, worsening of BP control
Resistant or malignant hypertension
Recurrent flash pulmonary oedema
Vascular bruit in mid-ab-
domen
Rapid worsening of renal 
function (spontaneous 
or during treatment with 
RAAS inhibitors)
Hypokalaemia
Renal ultrasound: kidney length 
difference > 1.5 cm
Small kidney
Doppler renal ultra-
sound
CTA
MRA
Invasive angiography
RAS due to fibro-
muscular dysplasia
Hypertension of early onset (particularly 
in women)
Increasing severity of hypertension, wor-
sening of BP control
Resistant or malignant hypertension
History of fibromuscular dysplasia or arte-
rial dissection in other vascular bed
Vascular bruit in mid-ab-
domen
Rapid worsening of renal 
function (spontaneous 
or during treatment with 
RAAS inhibitors)
Hypokalaemia
Renal ultrasound: kidney length 
difference > 1.5 cm
Small kidney
Doppler renal ultra-
sound
CTA
MRA
Invasive angiography
≠

 2015 Guidelines for the Management of Hypertension, part 8
157
www.nt.viamedica.pl
Table XXV. Suggestive symptoms, signs and laboratory test results, and specific investigations for secondary forms of hypertension (continued)
Cause of 
hypertension
Symptoms, signs, and routine and additional laboratory test results suggesting a secondary form of hypertension
Investigations
History
Physical examinations
Routine tests
Additional tests
First choice 
(screening) tests
Confirmatory tests
Catecholamine-se-
creting tumour
Paroxysmal BP elevations
Headaches, increased sweating, palpita-
tions, pallor
Family history of phaeochromocytoma
Skin lesions typical for neu-
rofibromatosis (café au lait 
spots, neurofibromas)
Hyperglycaemia
Incidentally found adrenal (or some-
times extrad renal) lesion
Plasma free metane-
phrines or urinary frac-
tionated metanephrines
CT or MRI of the abdo-
men and pelvis
123I-MIBG scintigraphy
Screening genetic 
testing for pathogenetic 
mutations
Cushing syndrome
Rapid increase in body weight, polyuria, 
polydipsia, psychological problems
Typical body physique 
(central obesity, moon face, 
buffalo hump), red striae, 
hirsutism, easy bruising
Hyperglycaemia
Incidentally found adrenal lesion
24-hour urinary free 
cortizol excretion
Low-dose (1 mg)  
dexamethasone  
suppression test
Dexamethasone sup-
pression tests
Coarctation of the 
aorta
Intermittent claudication, headaches, 
syncope, epistaxis
Murmur heard in the pre-
cordial or interscapular area
Diminished and delayed 
femoral artery pulse and 
decreased blood pressure 
in the femoral artery com-
pared to simultaneous arm 
measurement
Blood pressure difference 
between the left and right 
arm
Reverse E sign and rib  
notching on chest X-ray 
Abnormalities on echocardiography
Echocardiography
CTA
MRA
Renin-secreting 
tumour
Severe/resistant hypertension, polydipsia, 
polyuria
Cardiac arrhythmia (in se-
vere hypokalaemia)
Hypokalaemia
Incidentally discovered kidney 
lesion
Renin level or plasma 
renin activity and aldo-
sterone level
Kidney CT or MRI 
*details see text 
ABPM, ambulatory blood pressure monitoring; BP, blood pressure; CT, computed tomography; CTA, computed tomography angiography; ECG, electrocardiographic; HBPM, home blood pressure monitoring; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; MIBG, metaiodobenzylguanidine; MRA, magnetic reso-
nance angiography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; RAAS, renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system; RAS, renal artery stenosis.

arterial hypertension 2015, vol. 19, no. 4
158
www.nt.viamedica.pl
Figure 10. Diagnostic algorithm for obstructive sleep apnoea
AASM, American Academy of Sleep Medicine; BP, blood pressure; OSA, obstructive sleep apnoea; TIA, transient ischemic attack. Type I–IV 
devices: explanation see text
bances.
Available questionnaires, such as the Epworth Sle­
epiness Scale and the Berlin Questionnaire, lack spe­
cificity to allow excluding OSA. However, they may 
be helpful in identifying patients at an increased risk 
of OSA and should be included in the basic evalu­
ation of a hypertensive patient.
Investigations for OSA include 4 types of devices 
and systems:
I. 	 Complete polysomnography performed in a sle­
ep laboratory.
II. 	 Portable (unsupervised) polysomnography, re­
cording a minimum of 7 channels, including all 
that are necessary to evaluate the sleep structure 
and the breathing pattern.
III. 	Polygraphy, or a limited recording of at 4 least 
parameters, including respiratory movements of 
the chest and abdomen, air flow through the 
upper airway, and oxygen saturation, without 
evaluation of the sleep structure.
IV. 	Recording of maximum 2 parameters, e.g., noc­
turnal pulse oximetry.
Use of different diagnostic devices and the diagno­
stic algorithm in cases of suspected OSA are summa­
rized in Figure 10.
8.2.4. Diagnostic criteria
For a diagnosis of OSA, the criteria A, B, and D 
or only C and D must be fulfilled.
A.	At least one of the following:
a.	 inadvertent falling asleep, excessive daytime 
somnolescence, ineffective sleep, tiredness, or 
insomnia;
b.	 awakenings with the feeling of breathing ces­
sation, dyspnoea or choking;
c.	 habitual snoring or episodes of apnoea noted 
by the partner of the patient.
B. 	 Polysomnography findings:
a.	 at least 5 disordered breathing events per hour 
of sleep (AHI ≥ 5);
b.	 respiratory muscle activity noted during these 
episodes.
C. 	Polysomnography findings:
a.	 at least 15 disordered breathing events per 
hour of sleep (AHI ≥ 15);
b.	 respiratory muscle activity noted during these 
episodes.
D. 	The above findings are not related to other sleep 
disturbances, diseases (including neurological dise­
ase), or use of medications or other substances.
• 
Classification of the severity of OSA:
• 
Mild OSA (AHI ≥ 5 and £ 15);
• 
Moderate OSA (AHI > 15 and £ 30);
• 
Severe OSA (AHI > 30).
8.2.5. Management of obstructive sleep apnoea
The management of OSA includes the following:
• 
behavioural methods:

 2015 Guidelines for the Management of Hypertension, part 8
159
www.nt.viamedica.pl
—
— body weight reduction (in all patients);
—
— avoidance of a supine position during sleep or 
sleeping in a semi-sitting position (in patients 
with mild or moderate OSA without severe 
obesity);
—
— avoidance of alcohol intake (in all patients);
—
— smoking cessation (in all patients);
—
— avoidance of sedative-hypnotics and narcotic 
analgesics (in all patients);
• 
mandibular advancement splints (simple snoring 
and mild OSA not responsive to behavioural 
treatment);
• 
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) the­
rapy (all patients with AHI > 30; patients with 
AHI > 15 and excessive daytime somnolence 
[Epworth Sleepiness Scale score > 10] or cardio­
vascular disease)
• 
surgery (indications set individually).
Of the above methods, a beneficial effect on the 
reduction of cardiovascular risk and mortality has 
been shown only for the CPAP therapy. Published 
studies also indicate that regular use of CPAP for an 
appropriately long period of time during the night 
may be associated with BP lowering, particularly in 
patients with resistant hypertension.
8.2.6. Treatment of hypertension in patients with 
obstructive sleep apnoea
Limited data are available to develop recommen­
dations regarding antihypertensive therapy in patients 
with OSA. Some evidence suggests benefits of aldoste­
rone antagonists in terms of not only improvement of 
BP control but also reduction of the severity of OSA. 
However, these studies were performed in small gro­
ups of patients and further studies are required. Fur­
ther research is also necessary to determine potential 
benefits of renal denervation in patients with resistant 
hypertension and concomitant OSA.
8.2.7. Care for patients with hypertension and 
concomitant obstructive sleep apnoea
The following issues should be evaluated during 
each visit related to the treatment of hypertension:
• 
in patients with previously undiagnosed OSA:
—
— symptoms suggestive for, and the risk of 
OSA,
—
— indications for investigations to diagnose 
OSA;
• 
in patients with established OSA without previo­
us indications for CPAP therapy:
—
— compliance regarding behavioural therapy 
for OSA,
—
— indications for reassessment of the severity 
of OSA;
• 
in patients with established OSA and indications 
for CPAP therapy:
—
— compliance regarding behavioural therapy 
for OSA,
—
— compliance regarding CPAP therapy, and 
factors associated with noncompliance with 
this therapy,
—
— frequency and duration of CPAP therapy 
during the night (data retrieved from the 
device memory).
8.3. Atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis
8.3.1. Introduction
Hypertension due to renal artery stenosis (RAS), 
also known as renovascular hypertension, is a secon­
dary form of hypertension caused by excessive renin 
production in the ischemic kidney. Significant RAS 
does not only produce hypertension but also impairs 
excretory, endocrine, and homeostatic renal func­
tion and results in ischemic nephropathy. In some 
patients, RAS is a cause of end-stage renal disease 
and the need for renal replacement therapy. Most 
commonly, RAS is of atherosclerotic origin. The se­
cond most common cause of RAS is fibromuscular 
dysplasia, which is dis­cussed in a separate section of 
the present document.
8.3.2. Indications for investigations to diagnose 
atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis
Investigations to diagnose atherosclerotic renal 
artery stenosis should be considered primarily in 
patients with:
• 
hypertension that is:
—
— severe,
—
— resistant,
—
— malignant (accelerated);
• 
episodes of unexplained flash pulmonary oedema 
(Pickering syndrome) and/or unexplained conge­
stive heart failure;
• 
unexplained renal failure (including patients in 
whom renal replacement therapy is initiated);
• 
new-onset azotaemia or worsening of renal func­
tion following administration of a RAAS inhi­
bitor;
• 
hypokalaemia, particularly in patients treated 
with diuretics;
• 
an abdominal bruit;
• 
difference in kidney length > 1.5 cm or a small 
kidney.
Atherosclerotic RAS should also be suspected in 
hypertensive patients with atherosclerosis in other 
vascular beds, including coronary arteries. The rates 
of atherosclerotic RAS correlate with the severity of 
atherosclerosis in other vascular beds.

arterial hypertension 2015, vol. 19, no. 4
160
www.nt.viamedica.pl
8.3.3. Diagnostic methods for renal artery stenosis
8.3.3.1. Doppler renal ultrasonography
Doppler renal ultrasonography is recommended 
as the first-line noninvasive diagnostic test in patients 
with suspected RAS. It allows evaluation of the extra- 
and intrarenal arteries, localization of the stenosis, 
and assessment of its aetiology.
In patients with a suspicion of RAS based on 
Doppler renal ultrasonography and clinical indica­
tions for revascularization, computed tomography 
angiography (CTA), magnetic resonance angio­
graphy (MRA), or invasive renal angiography should 
be performed before the revascularization procedure.
Renal CTA or MRA should be also performed in 
case of normal Doppler renal ultrasonography fin­
dings in patients with a significant clinical suspicion 
of RAS.
Doppler renal ultrasonography allows long-term 
follow-up of patients after correction of RAS and 
evaluation of disease progression in medically tre­
ated patients. Follow-up examinations in revascu­
larized patients should be performed immediately 
after the revascularization procedure and 6-12 mon­
ths afterwards. Follow-up examinations to evaluate 
progression of borderline lesions treated medically 
should be performed annually. In these patient gro­
ups, urgent Doppler renal ultrasound reevaluation 
should be performed in case of acute worsening of 
BP control and/or renal function.
8.3.3.2. Computed tomography angiography
Computed tomography angiography is indicated 
to confirm the diagnosis of RAS (in patients with 
normal or moderately impaired renal function, defi­
ned as eGFR > 30 mL/min).
Normal CTA findings exclude a hemodynamically 
significant stenosis of the main renal artery. Advan­
tages over MRI include better spatial resolution and 
fewer artifacts in patients with renal stents. CTA 
should include urographic phase images in patients 
with a small kidney or a critical RAS.
Disadvantages of CTA include the risk of adverse 
effects related to intravenous administration of an io­
dine contrast agent and the effects of ionizing radia­
tion absorbed by the patients. Another disadvantage 
of CTA is a limited ability to evaluate the significance 
of stenoses in accessory renal arteries and intrarenal 
arterial branches.
8.3.3.3. Magnetic resonance angiography
Magnetic resonance angiography is indicated to 
confirm the diagnosis of RAS. The most effective 
imaging sequence is three-dimensional gradient echo 
(3D GRE) following intravenous administration of 
a contrast agent. Evaluation should include both pri­
mary images and multiplanar reconstructions. Con­
trast-enhanced MRA allows excluding a hemodyna­
mically significant stenosis of the main renal artery.
Magnetic resonance angiography is also useful for 
imaging of kidney transplant vessels. Nephrotoxicity 
of paramagnetic contrast agents in doses used for 
MRI is low and occurs infrequently but a possibility 
of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis in patients with re­
nal dysfunction should be taken into consideration. 
In patient with significant renal dysfunction, MRA 
may be performed without contrast enhancement 
(using techniques such as true fast imaging with stea­
dy state precession [true-FISP], time-of-flight [TOF] 
angiography, and phase contrast [PC] imaging), with 
somewhat lower image quality compared to contra­
st-enhanced images.
Disadvantages of MRA include somewhat lower 
spatial resolution, a tendency to overestimate the 
degree of vessel stenosis, unreliable evaluation of the 
patency of some stents due to artifacts, and poor 
ability to evaluate small arteries (with a diameter 
of < 2 mm), including accessory renal arteries and 
intrarenal arterial branches.
8.3.3.4. Invasive renal angiography
Invasive renal angiography is performed to image 
the renal artery and its branches. It involves intro­
duction of a pigtail catheter to the aorta at the level 
of renal arteries and injecting an iodine contrast 
agent. This method allows very good visualization 
of both the main renal artery and accessory renal 
arteries, and particularly their origin from the aorta. 
Selective renal angiography using catheters with ap­
propriately curved tips is also recommended.
The indication for invasive renal angiography is 
the presence of clinical findings suggesting significant 
RAS, if the diagnosis cannot be definitively esta­
blished based on noninvasive testing only.
Disadvantages of this method include an invasive 
nature of the procedure, exposure to ionizing radia­
tion, and use of a potentially nephrotoxic contrast 
agent.
If the aetiology of the lesion is unclear, conventio­
nal angiography may be supplemented with intra­
vascular ultrasound (IVUS).
In the recent years, it has been suggested to use 
translesional pressure gradient measurements using 
a special guidewire to identify hemodynamically si­
gnificant RAS. The ratio of the mean pressure distal 
to the stenosis to the mean aortic pressure at basal 
conditions below 0.9 was associated with increased 
renin production. This ratio correlates with papave­
rine-induced systolic pressure gradient of more than 

 2015 Guidelines for the Management of Hypertension, part 8
161
www.nt.viamedica.pl
21 mm Hg under the conditions of maximal hype­
raemia. Dopamine-induced pressure gradient above 
20 mm Hg was associated with a favourable response 
to renal artery stenting.
Use of invasive renal angiography is limited to 
imaging before angioplasty and quantitative evalu­
ation of the stenosis. This method may also be consi­
dered in patients with a significant clinical suspicion 
of RAS who undergo other invasive angiographic 
imaging (e.g., coronary angiography).
8.3.3.5. Other investigations
Captopril renal scintigraphy, renal vein catheteri­
zation, measurements of plasma renin activity, and 
the captopril challenge test are not recommended as 
screening tests for the diagnosis of RAS.
8.3.4. Management of atherosclerotic renal artery 
stenosis
Until now, no randomized study showed a signifi­
cant effect of interventional treatment on the course 
of hypertension. The decision to implant a stent into 
a renal artery with an atherosclerotic stenosis should 
be based on multiple additional clinical factors and 
laboratory parameters. The arbitral stenosis threshold 
at 60% is worryingly low and may result in too hasty 
consideration of the intervention. Taking into acco­
unt often erroneous estimation of the stenosis degree 
by angiography, and the effect of additional clini­
cal and nephrological parameters on the decision to 
proceed with the intervention, patient selection and 
stent implantation should be performed in experien­
ced hypertension units.
In a large randomized study published in 2013 
(CORAL), it was found that revascularization in 
patients with atherosclerotic RAS was not associated 
with additional benefits in regard to a reduction 
in the mortality rate due to cardiovascular or renal 
events, cardiovascular event rate reduction, impro­
vement of renal function, and a reduced rate of re­
nal events compared to medically treated patients. 
In both groups, a significant BP — lowering effect 
was seen, obtained by intensification of the drug 
treatment using a combination of ARB + calcium 
antagonist + thiazide diuretic (mean SBP reduction 
throughout the study was 16–17 mm Hg). SBP lo­
wering was more pronounced in the revascularization 
group (between-group difference of 2.3 mm Hg).
Indications for revascularization of atherosclerotic 
RAS are shown in Table XXVI.
8.3.5. Treatment of hypertension in patients with 
atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis
In patients with unilateral RAS, ACEI and cal­
cium antagonists are effective in the treatment of hy­
pertension and may decrease progression of nephro­
pathy. Even in unilateral RAS, treatment with ACEI 
or ARB requires caution and monitoring of renal 
function parameters. A significant decrease in eGFR 
(by ≥ 30%) or an increase in plasma creatinine level 
(by > 0.5 mg/dL) may indicate the need to consider 
revascularization. ACEI and ARB are contraindica­
ted in bilateral RAS and RAS in the single kidney.
Available evidence indicates that thiazide/thiazi­
de-like diuretics, ARB, and beta-blockers are also 
effective in lowering BP to target values in patients 
with RAS.
The CORAL study showed that a combination of 
an ARB, a calcium antagonist, and a thiazide diuretic 
is effective antihypertensive drug therapy in patients 
with atherosclerotic RAS and difficult-to-control hy­
pertension.
All patients with atherosclerotic RAS should be 
treated in accordance with the guidelines on cardio­
vascular disease prevention.
8.3.6. Care for patients with hypertension and 
concomitant atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis
In patients with end-stage renal disease, life expec­
tancy is the shortest among patients with RAS. Ho­
wever, life expectancy is also significantly reduced in 
RAS patients without end-stage renal disease. Two- 
-year mortality in patients with baseline serum creatinine 
concentrations before revascularization below 1.2 mg/dL, 
Table XXVI. Indications for revascularization of atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis (RAS)
Angioplasty may be considered (rather with stent implantation) in symptomatic RAS > 60% secondary to atherosclerosis
If angioplasty is indicated, stenting is recommended to treat ostial RAS of atherosclerotic aetiology
Interventional RAS treatment may be considered in patients with renal dysfunction
Balloon angioplasty with or without stenting may be considered in patients with RAS and recurrent congestive heart failure of undetermined aetio-
logy, or with flash pulmonary oedema with preserved left ventricular ejection fraction
Surgical revascularization may be considered in patients undergoing aortic repair surgery, patient with complex renal artery anatomy, and following 
failure of interventional treatment

arterial hypertension 2015, vol. 19, no. 4
162
www.nt.viamedica.pl
1.2–2.5 mg/dL, and above 2.5 mg/dL was 5%, 11%, 
and 70%, respectively. More than 80% patients die 
due to cardiovascular disease. Thus, patients with 
atherosclerotic RAS should be considered a very high 
cardiovascular risk population.
8.4. Renal artery stenosis due to fibromuscular 
dysplasia
Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) most commonly 
involves renal arteries and leads to the development 
of hypertension. Carotid arteries are the second most 
common location of FMD. FMD may be present in 
virtually all vascular beds, and is often concomitan­
tly present in several areas in the vascular system. In 
a French registry of patients with FMD in the renal 
arteries, the rate of FMD in other vascular beds was 
25% in the carotid arteries, 9% in the lower limb 
arteries, and 31% in other abdominal arteries. The 
arterial wall affected by FMD is prone to dissec­
tion and the development of aneurysms. Dysplastic 
changes located in the carotid and vertebral arteries 
may coexist with cerebral aneurysms. Renal artery 
dissection may have serious clinical consequences, 
leading to an acute development of severe, resistant, 
or malignant hypertension, loss of kidney function, 
and renal infarction. In patients with FMD, dissec­
tion may also involve other arteries, including carotid 
and coronary arteries.
8.4.1. Definition of fibromuscular dysplasia
Fibromuscular dysplasia is an idiopathic, seg­
mental, non-atherosclerotic, and non-inflammatory 
vascular disease that leads to the development of 
stenoses in small- and medium-sized arteries.
8.4.2. Indications for investigations to diagnose 
fibromuscular dysplasia
The indications for investigating a possibility of 
RAS due to FMD in hypertensive patients include:
• 
age below 30 years, particularly in women;
• 
grade 3 hypertension (≥ 180 and/or 110 mm Hg), 
accelerated or malignant hypertension;
• 
resistant hypertension;
• 
small kidney without a previous history of uro­
pathy;
• 
abdominal bruit without evidence of atherosc­
lerosis;
• 
established FMD in at least one other vascular 
bed.
Indications for investigations to diagnose FMD in 
the neck and head arteries and other vascular beds:
• 
investigations for FMD in the craniocervical 
arteries should be considered in patients with 
a history of retinal or cerebral ischemic events, 
intracranial aneurysms, subarachnoid haemor­
rhage, craniocervical arterial dissection, or pul­
satile tinnitus;
• 
in patients with FMD in the renal arteries, inve­
stigations for FMD in the craniocervical arteries 
should be considered if identification of such 
lesions is likely to affect future patient manage­
ment;
• 
in patients with FMD within renal and/or cra­
niocervical arteries, investigations for FMD 
lesions in other vascular beds (which are less 
frequent) should be considered in patients with 
suggestive symptoms or past medical history;
• 
investigations for FMD are also indicated in pa­
tients with spontaneous coronary artery dissec­
tion, particularly with the presence of hyperten­
sion or other suggestive symptoms;
• 
in patients with FMD in the craniocervical arte­
ries, investigations for intracranial aneurysms are 
indicated if identification of such a lesion is likely 
to affect future patient management.
In patients with FMD, it is recommended to 
take family history regarding early development 
of hypertension and the occurrence of intracranial 
dissection, aneurysm or bleeding in first-degree re­
latives. In case of any positive family history, the 
patient may inform his or her relatives about the 
possibility of hereditary FMD.
8.4.3. Investigations for renal artery stenosis due 
to fibromuscular dysplasia
• 
Doppler renal ultrasonography:
—
— is a screening test to detect most cases of 
RAS;
—
— a positive result requires confirmation by 
other diagnostic modality, as does a negative 
result in a patient with a significant clinical 
suspicion of RAS.
• 
Magnetic resonance or computed tomography 
angiography (preferred);
—
— is recommended to confirm FMD in the re­
nal arteries;
—
— is recommended as a screening (first-line) 
test if Doppler renal ultrasonography may be 
expected to be suboptimal (obese patients, 
withholding breath difficult or impossible, 
low echogenicity, little ultrasonographer 
experience);
—
— is recommended as a screening (first-line) test 
if the suspicion of FMD is very strong and/or 
the diagnosis has significant clinical consequ­
ences (very young age, malignant or compli­
cated hypertension, complications in other 
vascular beds, increased creatinine level).

 2015 Guidelines for the Management of Hypertension, part 8
163
www.nt.viamedica.pl
• 
Invasive renal digital subtraction angiography is 
recommended in patients with FMD confirmed 
by CTA or MRA if revascularization is clinically 
indicated:
—
— in patients with a high degree of suspicion of 
RAS due to FMD;
—
— in patients with uncertain diagnosis based on 
non-invasive studies.
8.4.4. Management of renal artery stenosis due to 
fibromuscular dysplasia
• 
In hypertensive patients with RAS due to FMD, 
revascularization is indicated:
—
— in patients with a recent-onset hypertension, as 
the treatment of choice to normalize BP;
—
— in patients in whom drug treatment is unsuccess­
ful (due to drug resistance or intolerance);
—
— in patients with renal failure or renal function 
worsening, particularly after administration of 
an ACEI or ARB;
—
— in patients with a smaller kidney supplied by 
a significantly stenosed artery.
• 
Renal angioplasty is the treatment of choice for 
significant RAS due to FMD. Stenting is not re­
commended, except for periprocedural dissection.
• 
Surgical treatment of significant RAS due to 
FMD should be considered in patients with:
—
— stenosis associated with a complex aneurysm;
—
— recurrent stenosis after two unsuccessful an­
gioplasty procedures;
—
— a lesion involving renal artery bifurcation 
and its branches.
• 
In hypertensive patients with RAS due to FMD 
in whom revascularization is not indicated, ap­
propriate follow-up is recommended, including:
—
— clinical follow-up (monthly BP evaluation until 
target values are obtained, followed by further 
regular follow-up);
—
— biochemical follow-up (yearly measurements of 
creatinine level);
—
— imaging (yearly evaluation of kidney length by 
ultrasonography).
• 
In patients after revascularization for RAS due to 
FMD, recommendations include:
—
— evaluation of BP and eGFR at one month 
after the procedure;
—
— renal imaging at 6 months after the pro­
cedure or earlier in case of BP elevation or 
creatinine level rise.
• 
Patients with FMD should be strongly urged to 
stop smoking. They should be engaged in smo­
king cessation programs using all available agents 
recommended in the respective guidelines.
8.5. Primary hyperaldosteronism
8.5.1. Definition and prevalence
Primary hyperaldosteronism (PHA) is defined as 
a hormonally mediated form of hypertension caused 
by autonomous aldosterone production. Using this 
definition, PHA is diagnosed by showing that aldo­
sterone level is unaffected by factors that affect its 
production in physiological conditions.
Primary hyperaldosteronism is not a pathogeneti­
cally uniform condition, and several forms of PHA 
are distinguished depending on the hormonal profile 
and the management approach:
• 
bilateral adrenal hyperplasia;
• 
adrenal cortex adenoma;
• 
familial hyperaldosteronism type I;
• 
familial hyperaldosteronism type II;
• 
familial hyperaldosteronism type III;
• 
aldosterone-producing adrenal carcinoma;
• 
ectopic aldosterone production (by neoplastic 
tissue).
The prevalence of PHA in hypertensive patients 
depends on BP values. In the general hypertensive 
population, PHA is present in up to 7% of patients 
(depending on the definition of PHA), while the 
prevalence of PHA in patients with resistant hyper­
tension has been estimated at 6–23%.
8.5.2. Clinical presentation
Clinical symptoms of PHA result from excessive 
autonomous aldosterone production. An increased al­
dosterone level results in elevated urinary potassium 
excretion and reduced plasma potassium level, leading 
to hypokalaemia which is the cause of most PHA 
symptoms. Reduced potassium level induces muscle 
cell polarization disturbances, manifesting clinically 
as muscle weakness. Loss of the urine concentrating 
function of the kidney, resulting from hypokalaemic 
nephropathy, may lead to polyuria and polydypsia. In 
some patients, potassium levels may be in the normal 
range, and BP elevation may be modest.
It has been suspected that by inducing hypoka­
laemia and directly affecting cardiomyocytes and 
the cardiac conduction system, increased aldostero­
ne level may contribute to cardiac arrhythmia and 
conduction disturbances. In patients with PHA, 
hypertensive target organ damage is more severe 
compared to patients with essential hypertension. 
ABPM in PHA patients may reveal elevated BP 
during the night with a reduced nocturnal BP fall, 
or even no nocturnal BP fall and BP rise during the 
night. Primary hyperaldosteronism may also coexist 
with OSA, particularly in patients with metabolic 
syndrome.

arterial hypertension 2015, vol. 19, no. 4
164
www.nt.viamedica.pl
Indications for investigations for PHA are summa­
rized in Figure 11.
8.5.3. Screening for primary hyperaldosteronism
The primary screening test for PHA is evaluation 
of the aldosterone-to-renin ratio (ARR). When eva­
luating and interpreting ARR, the following should 
be taken into consideration:
• 
in patients with hypokalaemia, potassium level 
should be brought to normal values by adequ­
ate supplementation, and dietary sodium intake 
should also be controlled (normal sodium diet);
• 
antihypertensive drug therapy should be ap­
propriately modified:
—
— drugs that significantly affect ARR should be 
withdrawn 4 weeks before testing, including 
spironolactone, eplerenone, triamterene, 
amiloride, thiazide/thiazide-like diuretics, 
and loop diuretics,
—
— if ARR is nondiagnostic and hypertension 
may be adequately controlled using drugs 
that do not affect ARR (see below), the fol­
lowing medications should be withdrawn 
2 weeks before testing: beta-blockers, cen­
tral alpha2-agonists (clonidine, methyldopa), 
nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs (false-
-positive ARR), and ACEI, ARB, renin inhi­
bitors, and dihydropyridine calcium antago­
nists (false-negative ARR),
—
— drugs that have the least effect on ARR sho­
uld be used to control hypertension, inc­
luding verapamil, hydralazine, doxazosin, 
prazosin, and terazosin,
—
— in some situations, due to high BP values and 
concomitant conditions, appropriate modi­
fication of antihypertensive drug therapy is 
not possible and may be even associated with 
an increased cardiovascular risk; in these cir­
cumstances, the effect of drug therapy used 
in the patient should be taken into account;
• 
blood sampling for ARR should be performed 
in a sitting position between 9 and 10 AM, with 
the patient remaining upright (sitting, standing, 
walking) for 2-4 hours before blood collection, 
and the collected blood samples should be han­
dled appropriately as agreed with the laboratory;
• 
due to the fact that interpretation of ARR is 
based on values considered abnormal in previous 
research studies and not reference ranges for the 
assays used in the laboratories, ARR should be de­
termined in laboratories in which the assays for al­
dosterone and plasma renin activity or renin level 
were validated against the laboratories that have 
appropriate experience in the diagnosis of PHA;
• 
most commonly, the ARR value suggesting PHA 
is defined as:
—
— above 30 (aldosterone level in ng/dL and 
plasma renin activity in ng/mL/h); or
Figure 11. Diagnostic algorithm for primary hyperaldosteronism
CT, computed tomography; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PHA, primary hyperaldosteronism

 2015 Guidelines for the Management of Hypertension, part 8
165
www.nt.viamedica.pl
—
— above 830 (aldosterone level in pmol/L and 
plasma renin activity in ng/mL/h),
—
— for an elevated ARR to suggest PHA, plasma 
aldosterone level must be at least moderately 
increased (e.g., > 15 ng/dL or > 10 ng/dL),
—
— ARR is also much affected by the lower li­
mit of detection of plasma renin activity by 
a given assay, which may be different for 
different assays and laboratories (plasma re­
nin activity value used for calculating ARR 
should not be lower than 0.2 ng/mL/min),
—
— in the recent years, commercial assays to de­
termine plasma renin level have been intro­
duced; ARR conversion coefficient for renin 
level should be determined separately for 
each assay;
• 
other factors that may affect ARR value inter­
pretation should also be taken into account, 
including age (low-renin essential hypertension 
in the elderly), creatinine level, concomitant 
conditions, difficult blood sampling, and use of 
hormonal drugs (oestrogen-containing prepa­
rations are associated with false-positive ARR 
values).
8.5.4. Confirmatory tests
The diagnosis of PHA is confirmed by establishing 
no effect of factors that normally decrease plasma 
aldosterone level or 24-hour urinary aldosterone ex­
cretion. Biochemical tests used to confirm the dia­
gnosis of PHA include:
• 
oral salt loading test;
• 
saline suppression test;
• 
fludrocortisone suppression test;
• 
captopril suppression test.
When performing these tests, the same principles 
apply as described above for the screening tests (nor­
malization of potassium level, normal sodium diet, 
appropriate modification of antihypertensive drug 
therapy). In Poland, the two tests that are currently 
most commonly used are the saline suppression test 
and the captopril suppression test:
• 
saline suppression test involves intravenous in­
fusion of 2 litres of normal saline (0.9% NaCl) 
during 4 hours in a patient remaining in a semi
-recumbent position. Plasma aldosterone level 
below 5 ng/dL at the end of the test indicates 
a low likelihood of PHA, and the level above 
10 ng/dL indicates very likely PHA. Values in the 
range of 5–10 ng/dL should be interpreted indi­
vidually. Due to a risk of complications such as 
worsening of BP control or exacerbation of he­
art failure, caution is necessary during this test;
• 
captopril suppression test involves measuring plasma 
aldosterone level (along with plasma renin activity 
or renin level) at baseline and 2 hours after ad­
ministration of 25–50 mg of captopril. Normally, 
aldosterone level is reduced in these circumstances 
by more than 30%, and in patients with PHA it 
remains elevated, and plasma renin activity or renin 
level remains unsuppressed. The test is performed 
after assuming an upright position for more than one 
hour. During the test, the patient remains in the sit­
ting position and BP should be evaluated frequently.
In patients with suspected familial PHA type I, 
possible investigations include genetic testing, urina­
ry excretion of 18-oxocortisol and 18-hydroxycorti­
sol, and the dexamethasone suppression test.
8.5.5. Differentiation between various forms of 
primary hyperaldosteronism
After the diagnosis of PHA has been established 
based on clinical symptoms and biochemical test 
findings, it is necessary to assess the nature and lo­
cation of adrenal lesions. Various forms of PHA, in 
particular bilateral adrenal hyperplasia and adrenal 
adenoma, should also be differentiated.
8.5.5.1. Computed tomography
Computed tomography (CT) is currently the 
standard method to evaluate adrenal lesions. Its sen­
sitivity for detecting adrenal tumours exceeds 90%. 
CT allows assessment of the morphology of detected 
adrenal tumours and identification of adrenal hy­
perplasia (anatomic evaluation). Varying reference 
ranges for normal thickness of the adrenals and their 
crura have been reported in the literature: an abnor­
mal finding is segmental thickening of a single crux 
above 5–7 mm or the whole gland above 7–10 mm.
8.5.5.2. Magnetic resonance
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has a similar 
sensitivity for detecting adrenal tumours compared 
to CT (> 90%). Evaluation of the nature of detected 
lesions is based on the application of chemical shift 
for the detection of lipids in adrenal adenomas. MRI 
is a second-line method to evaluate adrenal tumours 
that could not be adequately characterized by CT.
8.5.5.3. Adrenal scintigraphy
Adrenal scintigraphy is of little usefulness in dif­
ferentiating between PHA forms. A new technique 
is positron emission tomography (PET)-CT using 
11C-methomidate. Initial data suggest a potential 
utility of this method for distinguishing between 
various forms of PHA.

arterial hypertension 2015, vol. 19, no. 4
166
www.nt.viamedica.pl
8.5.5.4. Adrenal venous sampling
Adrenal venous sampling (AVS) is the method 
of choice for differentiating between various forms 
of PHA (Figure 11). It should be performed only 
in adequately experienced centres. The success of 
this procedure in such centres, based on the pro­
portion of diagnostically useful results, is more than 
90%. In some patients, the finding of lateralized 
aldosterone secretion by AVS allows the diagnosis 
of adrenal adenoma smaller than 1 cm which is 
not detectable by CT. During AVS, blood samples 
are collected from both adrenal veins and from the 
vena cava inferior below the entry of renal veins, and 
aldosterone and cortisol levels are measured in the 
collected samples. Appropriate blood collection is 
confirmed by a higher cortisol level in the samples 
from the adrenal veins compared to the inferior vena 
cava sample (selectivity index). This should be done 
intraprocedurally, allowing further blood sampling in 
case the previous samples were not drawn from the 
adrenal veins. Interpretation of the aldosterone level 
requires determination of the aldosterone to cortisol 
level ratio in a given sample. Currently, it is general­
ly accepted that lateralized aldosterone secretion is 
indicated by this ratio of at least 4:1. The test may 
be performed during ACTH infusion or without 
administration of ACTH.
Adrenal venous sampling should be performed in 
patients with the diagnosis of PHA in whom adrena­
lectomy is considered, except for patients:
• 
below 35 years of age, with significantly elevated 
aldosterone level, spontaneous hypokalaemia and 
clear CT/MRI findings of a unilateral adenoma 
(with the additional lesion size criterion of > 10 mm 
according to some authors) and a normal contra­
lateral adrenal gland (in some centres, however, 
AVS is performed in all patients regardless of 
their age and imaging study findings);
• 
with an unacceptably high risk associated with 
adrenalectomy (e.g. elderly patients with signifi­
cant comorbidities);
• 
with a suspicion of adrenal carcinoma;
• 
with the diagnosis of familial PHA type I or III;
• 
with 11C-methomidate PET-CT findings indi­
cating a unilateral lesion, if it is not possible to 
perform AVS;
• 
with severe PHA, including high aldosterone le­
vel and hypokalaemia, if CT shows a unilateral 
lesion, familial PHA type I or III has been exc­
luded, and it is not possible to perform AVS.
8.5.6. Management of primary hyperaldosteronism
In documented unilateral PHA due to an aldoste­
rone-producing adenoma or unilateral adrenal hy­
perplasia, the treatment of choice is unilateral lapa­
roscopic adrenalectomy, while patients with bilateral 
adrenal disease (idiopathic adrenal hyperplasia or 
bilateral adenomas) should be treated with aldoste­
rone antagonists. Glucocorticoid-remediable aldoste­
ronism should be treated with low doses of a long-ac­
ting glucocorticosteroid, e.g., dexamethasone.
In patients with bilateral adrenal disease and those 
with unilateral PHA who did not undergo adrena­
lectomy for various reasons, aldosterone antagonists 
are indicated. The initial spironolactone dose should 
be 12.5–25 mg once daily. The lowest effective dose 
should be determined by a gradual dose increase to 
100 mg per day or more. To avoid high spirono­
lactone doses, which may result in adverse effects, 
a thiazide diuretic, amiloride, or triamterene may be 
added. Eplerenone is a newer, selective mineralocor­
ticoid receptor antagonist characterized by a weaker 
antiandrogenic effect and a weaker agonist effect on 
the progesterone receptor, and thus it is associated 
with a lower rate of adverse effects. The strength of its 
mineralocorticoid receptor antagonist effect has been 
estimated at 60% of that of spironolactone. Due to 
a shorter duration of action, this drug should be ad­
ministered more frequently than once daily (initially 
25 mg bid). However, eplerenone has not been licen­
sed to treat PHA in the European Community.
8.6. Catecholamine-producing tumours
8.6.1. Definition
Adrenal catecholamine-producing tumours are 
known as phaeochromocytomas, and the remaining 
extra-adrenal chromaffin cell tumours, which may 
also be hormonally active, are known as paraganglio­
mas. Collectively, these are called phaeochromocyto­
mas-paragangliomas (PPGL).
It has been estimated that 80–85% of chromaffin 
cell tumours are located in the adrenal glands (phaeo­
chromocytomas), and the remaining 15–20% are 
extra-adrenal.
8.6.2. Clinical presentation
Rich and variable clinical symptomatology of 
PPGL is related to the proportion of noradrenaline 
and adrenaline released by the tumour. Paroxysmal 
occurrence of symptoms which may have varying se­
verity and recur with varying frequency is a characte­
ristic feature. The provoking factors include exercise, 
abdominal pressure, large meals, some medications 
(ephedrine, phenylephrine, ACTH, phenothiazines, 
amphetamine, metoclopramide, tricyclic antidepres­
sants, some anaesthesia drugs), stress, and alcohol in­
take. Catecholamine release by the tumour may also 
be induced by glucocorticosteroid administration. 

 2015 Guidelines for the Management of Hypertension, part 8
167
www.nt.viamedica.pl
Phaeochromocytomas may also remain asymptoma­
tic (also with normal BP values).
The most common symptoms, usually paroxysmal 
in nature, include:
• 
paroxysmal BP surges (with typically large BP 
variation) which may last from several minutes 
to several hours;
• 
chronic hypertension;
• 
headache;
• 
excessive sweating;
• 
palpitation;
• 
pallor;
• 
tremor;
• 
anxiety;
• 
orthostatic hypotension.
On physical examination, skin may be pale and 
sweaty and pupils dilated, but most commonly, 
no characteristic PPGL signs are present. Elevated 
glucose level may be found on biochemical testing. 
ABPM may show large BP variation and a decreased 
nocturnal BP fall, or even a non-dipping BP pattern 
and BP elevation during the night.
8.6.3. Investigations for phaeochromocytoma-pa-
raganglioma
The major diagnostic criterion for a hormonally 
active PPGL is the finding of an elevated urinary 
catecholamine metabolite excretion (or, less reliably, 
of catecholamines themselves) or their elevated se­
rum level, with tumour localization by imaging stu­
dies. The final diagnosis is based on histopathologic 
assessment of the resected tumour. The diagnostic 
algorithm is summarized in Figure 12. The diagnosis 
of a hormonally non-functioning PPGL is based on 
imaging and functional studies, and the final dia­
gnosis is again based on histopathologic assessment 
of the tumour.
Plasma free metanephrines and urinary fractio­
nated metanephrines are considered the most useful 
(i.e., most sensitive) biochemical tests. The highest 
Figure 12. Diagnostic algorithm for phaeochromocytoma-paraganglioma
CT, computed tomography; FDG, fluorodeoxyglucose; MIBG, metaiodobenzylguanidine; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; PET, positron emis-
sion tomography; PPGL, phaeochromocytoma-paraganglioma

arterial hypertension 2015, vol. 19, no. 4
168
www.nt.viamedica.pl
sensitivity was reported for plasma free metanephri­
nes (sensitivity 97–99%, specificity 82%). Urinary 
adrenaline and noradrenaline excretion is charac­
terized by lower sensitivity and specificity, and the 
least diagnostic utility was shown for measurements 
of urinary vanillylmandelic acid and dopamine and 
plasma catecholamines. In rare cases, the clonidine 
suppression test may be performed (with determina­
tion of plasma normetanephrine level before and at 
3 hours after clonidine administration).
Anatomical imaging studies in patients with 
PPGL should be performed after excessive cate­
cholamine metabolite levels have been identified in 
plasma or urine (Figure 12). Localization studies for 
PPGL are also performed in PPGL gene mutation 
carriers. Useful imaging methods for PPGL include 
CT and MRI.
8.6.4. Management of phaeochromocytoma- 
-paraganglioma
Paroxysmal BP surges caused by catecholamine
-producing PPGL may be best managed by admi­
nistering phentolamine intravenously, usually at the 
dose of 2–5 mg repeated as needed.
Surgical removal of catecholamine-producing 
PPGL is the treatment of choice.
Appropriate preoperative patient preparation is 
important to reduce BP values, lower the heart 
rate, and control paroxysmal BP surges and other 
symptoms related to the excess of circulating ca­
techolamines. For this purpose, alpha-blockers are 
administered orally for 2–3 weeks, including phe­
noxybenzamine (in increasing doses starting from 
10 mg b.i.d. up to 1 mg/kg/day in 2–3 divided 
doses) or doxazosin (in gradually increasing doses 
starting from 2 mg up to 32 mg/day in 1–2 divi­
ded doses). If alpha-adrenergic receptor blockade is 
unsuccessful at controlling BP, a calcium antagonist 
(nifedipine or amlodipine) may be added as the se­
cond antihypertensive medication. In patients with 
significant tachycardia, addition of a cardioselective 
beta-blocker is desirable but only after alpha-ad­
renergic receptors have been blocked. Catechola­
mines released by PPGL act on both alpha- and 
beta-adrenergic receptors. Administering a beta-
-blocker without previous alpha receptor blockade 
is contraindicated as it may lead to excessive alpha 
receptor activation and a significant BP rise. Drugs 
acting on both alpha- and beta-adrenergic receptors 
(labetalol and carvedilol) should not be used. Cor­
recting hypovolemia by adequate sodium and fluid 
intake is also important during preoperative patient 
preparation to avoid orthostatic hypotension.
8.6.5. Long-term care of patients with  
phaeochromocytoma-paraganglioma
Following surgical removal of PPGL, long-term 
patient follow-up is needed that should include moni­
toring of BP values and plasma or urinary metanephri­
nes. The initial postoperative evaluation to allow early 
identification of a possible tumour recurrence or de­
velopment of hormonally active metastases should be 
undertaken depending on the overall clinical picture 
(genetic predisposition, tumour size, multiple tumo­
urs) after 6–12 months and then repeated annually.
8.6.6. Genetic testing in patients with  
phaeochromocytoma-paraganglioma
Each year, molecular biology advances in regard 
to the diagnosis of PPGL bring discoveries of new 
genes predisposing to this disease. In addition to 
8 genes responsible for the most common heredi­
tary PPGL syndromes (RET, VHL, NF1, SDHA, 
SDHAF2, SDHB, SDHC, SDHD), new predisposing 
genes have also been identified, including MEN1, 
MAX, TMEM127, EGLN1/PHD2, KIF1b, IDH1, 
and HIF2a. The proportion of genetic forms of 
PPGL is currently estimated at 30–40%. In addition, 
a founder SDHD gene mutation has been identified 
in Poland. For this reason, genetic testing for known 
mutations associated with PPGL is recommended in 
all PPGL patients.
8.6.7. Other rarer forms of secondary hypertension
Other rarer forms of secondary hypertension, such 
as renin-secreting tumours, coarctation of the aorta, 
and Cushing syndrome, are summarized in Table XXV.
Piśmiennictwo
1. Adelman R.D., Coppo R., Dillon M.J. The emergency 
management of severe hypertension. Pediatr. Nephrol. 2000; 
14: 422–427.
2. Aggoun Y., Sidi D., Bonnet D. Arterial dysfunction after 
treatment of coarctation of the aorta. Arch. Mal. Coeur Vaiss. 
2001; 94: 785–789.
3. Alberti K.G., Zimmet P., Shaw J. IDF Epidemiology Task 
Force Consensus Group. The metabolic syndrome — a new 
worldwide definition. Lancet 2005; 366: 1059–1062.
4. ALLHAT Officers and Coordinators for the ALLHAT Col­
laborative Research Group. The Antihypertensive and Lipid 
Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial. Major outco­
mes in moderately hypercholesterolemic, hypertensive patients 
randomized to pravastatin vs usual care: The Antihypertensive 
and Lipid-Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack Trial 
(ALLHAT-LLT). JAMA 2002; 288: 2998–3007.
5. Anderson W.P., Kett M.M., Stevenson A.J. i wsp. Renovas­
cular hypertension. Structural changes in renal vasculature. 
Hypertension 2000; 36: 648–652.

 2015 Guidelines for the Management of Hypertension, part 8
169
www.nt.viamedica.pl
6. Antithrombotic Trialists’ (ATT) Collaboration, Baigent C., 
Blackwell L., Collins R. i wsp. Aspirin in the primary and secon­
dary prevention of vascular disease: collaborative meta-analysis 
of individual participant data from randomised trials. Lancet 
2009; 373: 1849–1860.
7. Antoniewicz J., Litwin M., Pędich M. i wsp. Diagnosis and 
treatment of renovascular hypertension in children and adoles­
cents — single center experience with 87 patients. J. Hypertens. 
2007; 25 (supl. 2): S332.
8. Araki N., Umemura M., Miyagi Y. i wsp. Expression, tran­
scription, and possible antagonistic interaction of the human 
Nedd4L gene variant: implications for essential hypertension. 
Hypertension 2008; 51: 773–777.
9. Atanasov A.G., Ignatova I.D., Nashev L.G. i wsp. Impaired 
protein stability of the 11 beta hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
type 2: a novel mechanism of apparent mineralocorticoid excess. 
J. Am. Soc. Nephrol. 2007; 18: 1262–1270.
10. Bakris G.L., Fonseca V., Katholi R.E. i wsp. GEMINI 
Investigators. Metabolic effects of carvedilol vs metoprolol 
in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and hypertension: 
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2004; 292: 2227–2236.
11. Baumgartner H., Bonhoeffer P., De Groot N.M. i wsp. 
Association for European Paediatric Cardiology (AEPC); ESC 
Committee for Practice Guidelines (CPG): ESC Guidelines 
for the management of grown-up congenital heart disease (new 
version 2010). Eur Heart J. 2010; 31: 2915–2957.
12. Beckett N.S., Peters R., Fletcher A.E. i wsp. HYVET Study 
Group. Treatment of hypertension in patients 80 years of age 
or older. N. Engl. J. Med. 2008; 358: 1887–1898.
13. Belch J., MacCuish A., Campbell I. i wsp. Prevention of 
Progression of Arterial Disease and Diabetes Study Group; Dia­
betes Registry Group; Royal College of Physicians Edinburgh. 
The prevention of progression of arterial disease and diabetes 
(POPADAD) trial: factorial randomised placebo controlled trial 
of aspirin and antioxidants in patients with diabetes and asymp­
tomatic peripheral arterial disease. BMJ 2008; 337: a1840.
14. Bhat M.A., Neelakandhan K.S., Unnikrishnan M. i wsp. 
Fate of hypertension after repair of coarctation of the aorta in 
adults. Br. J. Surg. 2001; 88: 536–538.
15. Bilginturan N., Zilel i S., Karacadag S., Pirnar T. Hereditary 
brachydactyly associated with hypertension. Am. J. Med. Genet. 
1973; 10: 253–259.
16. Bloch M.J., Basile J.N. Percutaneous revascularization of 
the renal arteries offers no evidence of clinical benefit in patients 
with atherosclerotic renal artery stenosis — the ASTRAL trial. 
J. Clin. Hypertens. (Greenwich) 2010; 12: 292–294.
17. Blood Pressure Lowering Treatment Trialists’ Collaboration, 
Turnbull F., Neal B., Ninomiya T. i wsp. Effects of different 
regimens to lower blood pressure on major cardiovascular events 
in older and younger adults: metaanalysis of randomised trials. 
BMJ 2008; 336: 1121–1123.
18. Blumenthal J.A., Babyak M.A., Hinderliter A. i wsp. Effects 
of the DASH diet alone and in combination with exercise and 
weight loss on blood pressure and cardiovascular biomarkers 
in men and women with high blood pressure: the ENCORE 
study. Arch. Intern. Med. 2010; 170: 126–135.
19. Borghi C., Ambrosioni E., Novo S., Vinereanu D., Am­
brosio G.; SMILE-4 Working Party. Comparison between 
zofenopril and ramipril in combination with acetylsalicylic acid 
in patients with left ventricular systolic dysfunction after acute 
myocardial infarction: results of a randomized, double-blind, 
parallel-group, multicenter, European study (SMILE-4). Clin. 
Cardiol. 2012; 35: 416–423.
20. Botero-Velez M., Curtis J.J., Warncock D.G. Liddle’s syn­
drome revisited: a disorder of sodium reabsorption in the distal 
tubule. N. Engl. J. Med. 1994; 330: 178–181.
21. Brzezinska-Rajszys G., Quereshi S.A., Ksiazyk J. i wsp. 
Middle aortic syndrome treated with stent implantation. Heart 
1999; 81: 166–170.
22. Buchi K.F., Siegler R.L. Hypertension in the first month of 
life. J. Hypertens. 1986; 4: 525–528.
23. Calhoun D.A., Jones D., Textor S. i wsp. Resistant hyperten­
sion: diagnosis, evaluation, and treatment: a scientific statement 
from the American Heart Association Professional Education 
Committee of the Council for High Blood Pressure Research. 
Hypertension 2008; 51: 1403–1419.
24. Celik T., Iyisoy A., Kursaklioglu H. i wsp. Comparative 
effects of nebivolol and metoprolol on oxidative stress, insulin 
resistance, plasma adiponectin and soluble P-selectin levels in 
hypertensive patients. J. Hypertens. 2006; 24: 591–596.
25. Constantine E., Linakis J. The assessment and management 
of hypertensive emergencies and urgencies in children. Pediatr. 
Emerg. Care 2005; 21: 391–396.
26. Cook N.R., Cutler J.A., Obarzank E. i wsp. Long term 
effects of dietary sodium reduction on cardiovascular disease 
outcomes: observational follow-up of the trials of hypertension 
prevention (TOHP). BMJ 2007; 334: 885–888.
27. Cosin J., Diez J. TORIC Investigators: Torasemide in 
chronic heart failure: results of the TORIC study. Eur. J. Heart 
Failure 2002; 4: 507–513. 
28. Cushman W.C., Evans G.W., Byington R.P. i wsp.; 
ACCORD Study Group. Effects of intensive blood-pressure 
control in type 2 diabetes mellitus. N. Engl. J. Med. 2010; 
362: 1575–1585.
29. Dahlof B., Devereux R.B., Kjeldsen S.E. i wsp.; LIFE Study 
Group: Cardiovascular morbidity and mortality in the Losartan 
Intervention For Endpoint reduction in hypertension study (LIFE): 
a randomised trial against atenolol. Lancet 2002; 359: 995–1003.
30. Dahlöf B., Sever P.S., Poulter N.R. i wsp.; ASCOT Investi­
gators. Prevention of cardiovascular events with an antihyper­
tensive regimen of amlodipine adding perindopril as required 
versus atenolol adding bendroflumethiazide as required, in the 
Anglo-Scandinavian Cardiac Outcomes Trial-Blood Pressure 
Lowering Arm (ASCOT-BPLA): a multicentre randomized 
controlled trial. Lancet 2005; 366: 895–906.
31. Daniels S.R. Repair of coarctation of the aorta and hyper­
tension. Lancet 2001; 358: 89–91.
32. de Divitiis M., Pilla C., Kattenhorn M. i wsp. Ambula­
tory blood pressure, left ventricular mass, and conduit artery 
function late after successful repair of coarctation of the aorta. 
J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 2003; 41: 2259–2265.
33. de Simone G., Daniels S.R., Deveraux R.B. i wsp. Left ven­
tricular mass and body size in normotensive children and adults: 
assessment of allometric relations and impact of overweight. 
J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 1992; 20: 1251–1260.
34. de Simone G., Deveraux R.B., Daniels S.R. i wsp. Effect 
of growth on variability of left ventricular mass: assessment 
of allometric signals in adults and children and their capacity 
to predict cardiovascular risk. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 1995; 25: 
1056–1062.
35. de Swiet M., Fayers P., Shinebourne E.A. Blood pressure 
survey in a population of newborn infants. Br. Med. J. 1976; 
2: 9–11.
36. de Swiet M., Fayers P., Shinebourne E.A. Systolic blood 
pressure in a population of infants in the first year of life: the 
Brompton study. Pediatrics 1980; 65: 1028–1035

arterial hypertension 2015, vol. 19, no. 4
170
www.nt.viamedica.pl
37. Dionne J.M., Abitbol C.L., Flynn J.T. Hypertension in 
infancy: diagnosis, management and outcome. Pediatr. Nephrol. 
2012; 27: 17–32.
38. Dodson P.M., Lip G.Y., Eames S.M. i wsp. Hypertensive 
retinopathy: a review of existing classification systems and 
a suggestion for a simplified grading system. J. Hum. Hypertens. 
1996; 10: 93–98.
39. Doyon A., Kracht D., Bayazit A.K. i wsp. Carotid artery 
intima-media thickness and distensibility in children and 
adolescents: reference values and role of body dimensions. 
Hypertension 2013; 62: 550–556.
40. ESCAPE Trial Group, Wühl E., Trivelli A., Picca S. i wsp. 
Strict blood-pressure control and progression of renal failure in 
children. N. Engl. J. Med. 2009; 361: 1639–1650.
41. Feig D.I., Johnson R.J. The role of uric acid in pediatric 
hypertension. J. Ren. Nutr. 2007; 17: 79–83.
42. Feldman R.D., Zou G.Y., Vandervoort M.K., Wong C.J., 
Nelson S.A., Feagan B.G. A simplified approach to the treat­
ment of uncomplicated hypertension: a cluster randomized, 
controlled trial. Hypertension 2009; 53: 598–999.
43. Fischer D.C., Schreiver C., Heimhalt M. i wsp. Pediatric 
reference values of carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity de­
termined with an oscillometric device. J. Hypertens. 2012; 
30: 2159–2167. 
44. Flynn J.T. Neonatal hypertension: diagnosis and manage­
ment. Pediatr. Nephrol. 2000; 14: 332–341.
45. Flynn J.T., Alderman M.H. Characteristics of children with 
primary hypertension seen at a referral center. Pediatr. Nephrol. 
2005; 20: 961–966.
46. Flynn J.T., Daniels S.R. Pharmacologic treatment of hyper­
tension in children and adolescents. J. Pediatr. 2006; 149: 746.
47. Flynn J.T., Daniels S.R., Hayman L.L. i wsp. American 
Heart Association Atherosclerosis, Hypertension and Obesity 
in Youth Committee of the Council on Cardiovascular Disease 
in the Young: Update: ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in 
children and adolescents: a scientific statement from the Ameri­
can Heart Association. Hypertension 2014; 63: 1116–1135.
48. Flynn J.T., Tullus K. Severe hypertension in children. Pe­
diatr. Nephrol. 2009; 24: 1101–1112.
49. Funder J.W., Carey R.M., Fardella C. i wsp. Case detection, 
diagnosis, and treatment of patients with primary aldostero­
nism: an endocrine society clinical practice guideline. J. Clin. 
Endocrinol. Metab. 2008; 93: 3266–3281.
50. Funder J.W., Carey R.M., Fardella C. i wsp. Case detection, 
diagnosis, and treatment of patients with primary aldostero­
nism: an endocrine society clinical practice guideline. J. Clin. 
Endocrinol. Metab. 2008; 93: 3266–3281.
51. Goldstein D.S., Eisenhower G., Flynn J.A. i wsp. Diagnosis 
and localization of pheochromocytoma. Hypertension 2004; 
43: 907–910.
52. Grupa Robocza Polskiego Towarzystwa Nadciśnienia Tętni­
czego. Wytyczne dotyczące diagnostyki i leczenia chorych z gu­
zem chromochłonnym. Nadciśnienie Tętnicze 2006; 10: 1–19.
53. Grupa Robocza Polskiego Towarzystwa Nadciśnienia 
Tętniczego. Zalecenia dotyczące diagnostyki i leczenia pier­
wotnego hiperaldosteronizmu. Nadciśnienie Tętnicze 2008; 
12: 155–168.
54. Gupta-Malhotra M., Banker A., Shete S. i wsp: Essential 
hypertension vs. secondary hypertension among children. Am. 
J. Hypertens. 2015; 28: 73–80.
55. Hadtstein C., Schaefer F. Hypertension in children with 
chronic kidney disease: pathophysiology and management. 
Pediatr. Nephrol. 2008; 23: 363–371.
56. Haller H., Ito S., Izzo J.L. Jr i wsp.; ROADMAP Trial 
Investigators: Olmesartan for the delay or prevention of mi­
croalbuminuria in type 2 diabetes. N. Engl. J. Med. 2011; 
364: 907–917.
57. Hansson L., Zanchetti A., Carruthers S.G. i wsp. Effect of 
intensive blood pressure lowering and low-dose aspirin in pa­
tients with hypertension: principal results of the Hypertension 
Optimal Treatment (HOT) randomised trial. Lancet 1998; 
351: 1755–1762.
58. Havekes B., Romijn J.A., Eisenhofer G. i wsp. Update on 
pediatric phaeochromocytoma. Pediatr. Nephrol. 2009; 24: 
943–950.
59. http://www.dableducational.org.
60. Jamerson K., Weber M.A., Bakris G.L. i wsp. ACCOM­
PLISH Trial Investigators. Benazepril plus amlodipine or 
hydrochlorothiazide for hypertension in high-risk patients. 
N. Engl. J. Med. 2008; 359: 2417–2428.
61. Jourdan C., Wuhl E., Litwin M. i wsp. Normative values 
of intima-media thickness and distensibility of large arteries in 
healthy adolescents. J Hypertens. 2005; 23: 1707–1715.
62. Kaiser T., Heise T., Nosek L. i wsp. Influence of nebivolol 
and enalapril on metabolic parameters and arterial stiffness in 
hypertensive type 2 diabetic patients. J. Hypertens. 2006; 24: 
1397–1403.
63. Kandzari D.E., Bhatt D.L., Sobotka P.A. i wsp. Cathe­
ter-based renal denervation for resistant hypertension: rationale 
and design of the SYMPLICITY HTN-3 Trial. Clin. Cardiol. 
2012; 35: 528–535.
64. Kent A.L., Kecskes Z., Shadbolt B., Falk M.C. Blood 
pressure in the first year of life in healthy infants born at term. 
Pediatr. Nephrol. 2007; 22: 1743–1749.
65. Kent A.L., Kecskes Z., Shadbolt B., Falk M.C. Norma­
tive blood pressure data in the early neonatal period. Pediatr. 
Nephrol. 2007; 22: 1335–1341.
66. Kent A.L., Meskell S., Falk M.C. Normative blood pressure 
data in non-ventilated premature neonates from 28–36 weeks 
gestation. Pediatr. Nephrol. 2009; 24: 141–146.
67. Khoury P.R., Mitsnefes M., Daniels S.R. i wsp. Age-
specific reference intervals for indexed left ventricular 
mass in children. J. Am. Soc. Echocardiogr. 2009; 22: 
709–714.
68. Kułaga Z., Litwin M., Grajda A. i wsp.; OLAF Study Group. 
Oscillometric blood pressure percentiles for Polish normal 
weight school-aged children and adolescents. J. Hypertens. 
2012; 30: 1942–1954.
69. Kułaga Z., Litwin
 M., Zajączkowska M.M. i wsp. Com­
parison of waist and hip circumferences ranges in children 
and adolescents in Poland 7–18 y of age with cardiovascular 
risk thresholds — initial results of OLAF project (PL0080). 
Standardy Medyczne 2008; 5: 473–485.
70. Lande M.B., Flynn J.T. Treatment of hypertension in chil­
dren and adolescents. Pediatr. Nephrol. 2009; 24: 1939–1949.
71. Lenders J.W., Duh Q.Y., Eisenhofer G. i wsp. Pheochromo­
cytoma and paraganglioma: an endocrine society clinical practi­
ce guideline. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2014; 99: 1915–1942.
72. Lenders J.W., Duh Q.Y., Eisenhofer G. i wsp. Pheochromo­
cytoma and paraganglioma: an endocrine society clinical practice 
guideline. J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 2014; 99: 1915–1942.
73. Li A., Tedde R., Krozowski Z.S. i wsp. Molecular basis for 
hypertension in the “type II” variant of apparent mineralocor­
ticoid excess. Am. J. Hum. Genet. 1998; 63: 370–379.
74. Lindheimer M.D., Taler S.J., Cunningham F.G. Hyperten­
sion in pregnancy. J. Am. Soc. Hypertens. 2008; 2: 484–494.

 2015 Guidelines for the Management of Hypertension, part 8
171
www.nt.viamedica.pl
75. Litwin M. Diagnostyka nadciśnienia tętniczego u dzieci. 
W: Więcek A. Hipertensjologia. Medycyna Praktyczna 2010.
76. Litwin M. Leczenie nadciśnienia tętniczego u młodzieży. 
W: Litwin M., Prejbisz A., Januszewicz A. Nadciśnienie tętnicze 
u młodzieży i młodych dorosłych. Medycyna Praktyczna 2011.
77. Litwin M. Risk factors for renal failure progression in 
children. Pediatr. Nephrol. 2004; 19: 178–186.
78. Litwin M., Grenda R., Sladowska J., Antoniewicz J. Add-on 
therapy with angiotensin II receptor 1 blocker in children with 
chronic kidney disease already treated with angiotensin-convert­
ing enzyme inhibitors. Pediatr. Nephrol. 2006; 21: 1716–1722.
79. Litwin M., Michałkiewicz J., Gackowska L. Primary 
hypertension in children and adolescents is an immuno-met­
abolic disease with hemodynamic consequences. Curr. Hy­
pertens. Rep. 2013; 15: 331–339. 
80. Litwin M., Niemirska A. Intima-media thickness mea­
surements in children with cardiovascular risk factors. Pediatr. 
Nephrol. 2009; 24: 707–719.
81. Litwin M., Niemirska A., Śladowska J. i wsp. Left ventric­
ular hypertrophy and arterial wall thickening in children with 
essential hypertension. Pediatr. Nephrol. 2006; 21: 811–819.
82. Litwin M., Śladowska J., Antoniewicz J. i wsp. Metabolic 
abnormalities, insulin resistance, and metabolic syndrome in 
children with primary hypertension. Am. J. Hypertens. 2007; 
20: 875–882.
83. Litwin M., Sladowska-Kozlowska K. Diagnostyka różnicowa 
nadciśnienia tętniczego u młodzieży. W: Litwin M., Prejbisz A., 
Januszewicz A. Nadciśnienie tętnicze u młodzieży i młodych 
dorosłych. Medycyna Praktyczna 2011.
84. Lurbe E., Cifkova R., Cruikshank J.K. i wsp. Management 
of high blood pressure in children and adolescents: Recommen­
dations of the European Society of Hypertension. J. Hypertens. 
2009; 27: 1719–1742.
85. Mancia G., De Backer G., Dominiczak A. i wsp. Mana­
gement of Arterial Hypertension of the European Society of 
Hypertension/European Society of Cardiology. 2007 Guidelines 
for the Management of Arterial Hypertension: The Task Force 
for the Management of Arterial Hypertension of the European 
Society of Hypertension (ESH) and of the European Society of 
Cardiology (ESC). J. Hypertens. 2007; 25: 1105–1187.
86. Mancia G., Fagard R., Narkiewicz K. i wsp. 2013 ESH/ 
/ESC Guidelines for the management of arterial hypertension. 
J. Hypertens. 2013; 31: 1281–1357.
87. Mancia G., Laurentb S., Agabiti-Rosei E. i wsp. Reap­
praisal of European guidelines on hypertension management: 
a European Society of Hypertension Task Force document. 
J. Hypertens. 2009; 27: 2121–2158.
88. McCambridge T.M., Benjamin H.J., Brenner J.S. i wsp.; 
Council on Sports Medicine and Fitness: Policy Statement. 
Athletic participation by children and adolescents who have 
systemic hypertension. Pediatrics 2010; 125: 1287–1294.
89. Monticone S., Viola A., Rossato D. i wsp. Adrenal vein 
sampling in primary aldosteronism: towards a standardised 
protocol. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2015; 3: 296–303.
90. Monticone S., Viola A., Rossato D. i wsp. Adrenal vein 
sampling in primary aldosteronism: towards a standardised 
protocol. Lancet Diabetes Endocrinol. 2014; 3: 296–303.
91. Nagueh S.F., Appleton C.P., Gillebert T.C. i wsp. Re­
commendations for the evaluation of left ventricular diastolic 
function by echocardiography. J. Am. Soc. Echocardiogr. 2009; 
22: 107–133.
92. National High Blood Pressure Education Program Working 
Group on High Blood pressure in children and adolescents: The 
fourth Report on diagnosis, evaluation and treatment of high 
blood pressure in children and adolescents. Pediatrics 2004; 
114: 555–576.
93. NAVIGATOR Study Group. Effect of valsartan on the 
incidence of diabetes and cardiovascular events. N. Engl. 
J. Med. 2010; 362: 1477–1490.
94. Nwankwo M.A., John M., Lorenz J.C. i wsp. Standard 
protocol for blood pressure measurement in the Newborn. 
Pediatrics 1997; 99: e10.
95. O’Brien E., Mee F., Atkins N., O’Malley K. Short report: 
Accuracy of the Dinamap portable monitor, model 8100 
determined by the British Hypertension Society protocol. 
J. Hypertens. 1993; 11: 761–763.
96. O’Brien E., Mee F., Atkins N., Thomas M. Evaluation of 
three devices for self-measurement of blood pressure according 
to the revised British Hypertension Protocol: the Omron HEM
-705CP, Phillips HP5332, and Nissei DS-175. Blood Press. 
Monit. 1996; 1: 55–61.
97. O’Sullivan J.J., Derrick G., Darnell R. Prevalence of hy­
pertension in children after early repair of coarctation of the 
aorta: a cohort study using casual and 24 hour blood pressure 
measurement. Heart 2002; 88: 163–166.
98. ONTARGET Investigators, Yusuf S., Teo K.K., Pogue J. 
i wsp. Telmisartan, ramipril, or both in patients at high risk 
for vascular events. N. Engl. J. Med. 2008; 358: 1547–1559.
99. Padwal R.J., Hemmelgaru B.R., Khan N.A. i wsp. The 2008 
Canadian Hypertension Education Program recommendations 
for the management of hypertension. Can. J. Cardiol. 2008; 
24: 455–475.
100. Parati G., Lombardi C., Hedner J. i wsp. Position paper on 
the management of patients with obstructive sleep apnea and 
hypertension: joint recommendations by the European Society 
of Hypertension, by the European Respiratory Society and by 
the members of European COST (COoperation in Scientific 
and Technological research) ACTION B26 on obstructive sleep 
apnea. J. Hypertens. 2012; 30: 633–646.
101. Parati G., Stergiou G.S., Asmar R. i wsp. European Society 
of Hypertension guidelines for blood pressure monitoring at 
home: a summary report of the Second International Consensus 
Conference on Home Blood Pressure Monitoring. J. Hypertens. 
2008; 26: 1505–1530.
102. Park M.K., Menard S.W., Yuan C. Comparison of auscul­
tatory and oscillometric blood pressures. Arch. Pediatr. Adolesc. 
Med. 2001; 55: 50–53.
103. Parving H.H., Brenner B.M., McMurray J.J.V. i wsp.; 
for the ALTITUDE Investigators. Cardiorenal end points in 
a trial of aliskiren for type 2 diabetes. N. Engl. J. Med. 2012; 
367: 2204–2213.
104. Patel A.; ADVANCE Collaborative Group, MacMahon S., 
Chalmers J., Neal B. i wsp. Effects of a fixed combination of 
perindopril and indapamide on macrovascular and micro­
vascular outcomes in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus 
(the ADVANCE trial): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet 
2007; 370: 829–840.
105. PATS Collaborating Group. Post-stroke antihypertensive 
treatment study. A preliminary result. Chin. Med. J. (Engl.) 
1995; 108: 710–717.
106. Pęczkowska M., Januszewicz A., Jarząb B. i wsp. Pheo­
chromocytoma in children and adolescents based on Polish 
Pheochromocytoma Registry. Ann. Diag. Paed. Pathol. 2007; 
11: 15–19.
107. Pepine C.J., Handberg E.M., Cooper-DeHoff R.M. i wsp.; 
INVEST Investigators. A calcium antagonist vs a noncalcium 

arterial hypertension 2015, vol. 19, no. 4
172
www.nt.viamedica.pl
antagonist hypertension treatment strategy for patients with 
coronary artery disease. The International Verapamil-Trando­
lapril Study (INVEST): a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 
2003; 290: 2805–2816.
108. Perk J., De Backer G., Gohlke H. i wsp. European Guide­
lines on cardiovascular disease prevention in clinical practice 
(version 2012): The Fifth Joint Task Force of the European 
Society of Cardiology and Other Societies on Cardiovascular 
Disease Prevention in Clinical Practice (constituted by repre­
sentatives of nine societies and by invited experts). Eur. Heart J. 
2012; 33: 1635–1701.
109. Persu A., Giavarini A., Touze E. i wsp. European consensus 
on the diagnosis and management of fibromuscular dysplasia. 
J. Hypertens. 2014; 32: 1367–1378.
110. Peterson A.L., Frommelt P.C., Mussatto K. Presentation 
and echocardiographic markers of neonatal hypertensive car­
diomyopathy. Pediatrics 2006, 118: 782–785.
111. Pływaczewski R., Brzecka A., Bielicki P. i wsp. Zalecenia 
Polskiego Towarzystwa Chorób Płuc dotyczące rozpoznawania 
i leczenia zaburzeń oddychania w czasie snu (ZOCS) u doro­
słych. Pneumonologia i Alergologia Polska 2013; 81: 221–258.
112. Qaseem A., Holty J.E., Owens D.K. i wsp. Management 
of obstructive sleep apnea in adults: a clinical practice guideline 
from the American College of Physicians. Ann. Intern. Med. 
2013; doi: 10.7326/0003-4819-159-7-201310010-00704. 
[Epub ahead of print].
113. Report of the Second Task Force on Blood Pressure Control 
in Children — 1987. Task Force on Blood Pressure Control in 
Children. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, Bethesda, 
Maryland. Pediatrics 1987; 79: 1–25.
114. Reusz S., Cseprekal O., Temmar M. Reference values of 
pulse wave velocity in healthy children and teenagers. Hyper­
tension 2010; 56: 217–224.
115. Ridker P.M., Danielson E., Fonseca F.A. i wsp.; for the 
JUPITER Study Group. Rosuvastatin to prevent vascular events 
in men and women with elevated C-reactive protein. N. Engl. 
J. Med. 2008; 359: 2195–2207.
116. Rossi G.P., Auchus R.J., Brown M. i wsp. An expert 
consensus statement on use of adrenal vein sampling for the 
subtyping of primary aldosteronism. Hypertension 2014; 63: 
151–160.
117. Rozporządzenie Ministra Zdrowia z dnia 29 sierpnia 2009 
r. w sprawie świadczeń gwarantowanych z zakresu podstawowej 
opieki zdrowotnej Dz. U. 2009.139.1139.
118. Schrader J., Luders S., Kulschewski A. i wsp.; MOSES 
Study Group. Morbidity and mortality after stroke, eprosartan 
compared with nitrendipine for secondary prevention: principal 
results of a prospective randomized controlled study (MOSES). 
Stroke 2005; 36: 1218–1226.  
119. Schroff R., Roebuck D.J., Gordon I. i wsp. Angioplasty 
for renovascular hypertension in children: 20 year experience. 
Pediatrics 2006; 118: 268–275.
120. Singh H.P., Hurley R.M., Myers T.F. Neonatal hyper­
tension: incidence and risk factors. Am. J. Hypertens. 1992; 
5: 51–55.
121. Skalina M.E.L., Kliegman R.M., Fanaroff A.A. Epide­
miology and management of severe symptomatic neonatal 
hypertension. Am. J. Perinatol. 1986; 3: 235–239.
122. Sladowska J., Niemirska A., Litwin M., Grenda R. 
Nadciśnienie tętnicze u dzieci. Część 1: Zasady postępowania 
diagnostycznego. Standardy Med. 2005; 2: 1452–1462.
123. Slovut D.P., Olin J.W. Fibromuscular dysplasia. N. Engl. 
J. Med. 2004; 350: 1862–1871.
124. Soejima H., Morimoto T., Saito Y. i wsp. Aspirin for the 
primary prevention of cardiovascular events in patients with 
peripheral artery disease or diabetes mellitus. Analyses from 
the JPAD, POPADAD and AAA trials. Thromb. Haemost. 
2010; 104: 1085–1088.
125. Staessen J.A., Thijis L., Fagard R. i wsp.; Systolic Hy­
pertension in Europe (Syst-Eur) Trial Investigators. Effects of 
immediate versus delayed antihypertensive therapy on outcome 
in the Systolic Hypertension in Europe Trial. J. Hypertens. 
2004; 22: 847–857.
126. Stanowisko grupy ekspertów dotyczące diagnostyki 
obrazowej i wskazań do wykonywania zabiegów przez­
skórnej angioplastyki zwężenia tętnicy nerkowej u chorych 
z NT. Przyjęte przez Polskie Towarzystwo Nadciśnienia 
Tętniczego, Polskie Towarzystwo Nefrologiczne i Polskie 
Towarzystwo Kardiologiczne. Kardiologia Polska 2010; 
68: 860–867.
127. Stanowisko PTNT. Stosowanie produktów o ograniczonej 
zawartości sodu. Nadciśnienie Tętnicze 2007; 11: 84.
128. Stergiou G.S., Christodoulakis G., Giovas P. i wsp. Home 
blood pressure monitoring in children. How many measure­
ments are needed? Am. J. Hypertens. 2008; 21: 633–638.
129. Stewart P. Dexamethasone-suppressible aldosteronism. 
Lancet 2000; 356: 697–698.
130. Symonides B., Jędrusik P., Artyszuk L. i wsp. Different 
diagnostic criteria significantly affect the rates of hypertension 
in 18-year-old high school students. Arch. Med. Sci. 2010; 
6: 689–694.
131. Symplicity HTN-1 Investigators. Catheter-based renal 
sympathetic denervation for resistant hypertension durability 
of blood pressure reduction out to 24 months. Hypertension 
2011; 57: 911–917.
132. Symplicity HTN-2 Investigators, Esler M.D., Krum H., 
Sobotka P.A., Schlaich M.P., Schmieder R.E., Böhm M. Renal 
sympathetic denervation in patients with treatment-resistant 
hypertension (The Symplicity HTN-2 Trial): a randomised 
controlled trial. Lancet 2010; 376: 1903–1909.
133. Telmisartan Randomised AssessmeNt Study in ACE iN­
tolerant subjects with cardiovascular Disease (TRANSCEND) 
Investigators, Yusuf S., Teo K., Anderson C. i wsp. Effects of 
the angiotensin-receptor blocker telmisartan on cardiovascular 
events in high-risk patients intolerant to angiotensin-converting 
enzyme inhibitors: a randomized controlled trial. Lancet 2008; 
372: 1174–1183.
134. Tendera M., Aboyans V., Bartelink M.L. i wsp. ESC 
Guidelines on the diagnosis and treatment of peripheral artery 
diseases: Document covering atherosclerotic disease of extracra­
nial carotid and vertebral, mesenteric, renal, upper and lower 
extremity arteries: the Task Force on the Diagnosis and Treat­
ment of Peripheral Artery Diseases of the European Society of 
Cardiology (ESC). Eur. Heart J. 2011; 32: 2851–2906.
135. Toka O., Maas P.G., Aydin A. i wsp. Childhood hyperten­
sion in autosomal-dominant hypertension with brachydactyly. 
Hypertension 2010; 56: 988–994.
136. Turnbull F., Woodward M., Neal B. i wsp.; Blood Pressure 
Lowering Treatment Trialists’ Collaboration. Do men and wo­
men respond differently to blood pressure-lowering treatment? 
Results of prospectively designed overviews of randomized trials. 
Eur. Heart J. 2008; 29: 2669–2680.
137. Urbina E., Alpert B., Flynn J. i wsp.; American Heart As­
sociation Atherosclerosis, Hypertension, and Obesity in Youth 
Committee. Ambulatory blood pressure monitoring in children 
and adolescents: recommendations for standard assessment: 

 2015 Guidelines for the Management of Hypertension, part 8
173
www.nt.viamedica.pl
a scientific statement from the American Heart Association 
Atherosclerosis, Hypertension and Obesity in Youth Committee 
of the Council on Cardiovascular Disease in the Young and 
the Council for High Blood Pressure Research. Hypertension 
2008; 52: 433–451.
138. Van Bortel L.M., Laurent S., Boutouyrie P. i wsp.; Artery 
Society; European Society of Hypertension Working Group 
on Vascular Structure and Function; European Network for 
Noninvasive Investigation of Large Arteries. Expert consensus 
document on the measurement of aortic stiffness in daily prac­
tice using carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity. J. Hypertens. 
2012; 30: 445–448.
139. Vehaskari V.M. The heritable forms of hypertension. 
Pediatr. Nephrol. 2009; 24: 1929–1937.
140. Verdecchia P., Staessen J.A., Angeli F. i wsp. Usual versus 
tight control of systolic blood pressure in non-diabetic patients 
with hypertension (Cardio-Sis): an open-label randomised trial. 
Lancet 2009; 374: 525–533.
141. Waguespack S.G., Rich T., Grubbs E. i wsp. A current 
review of the etiology, diagnosis and treatment of pediatric 
phaeochromocytoma and paraganglioma. J. Clin. Endocrinol. 
Metab. 2010; 95: 2023–2037.
142. Watkinson M. Hypertension in the newborn baby. Arch. 
Dis. Child. Fetal Neonatal Ed. 2002; 86: F78–F81.
143. Weber M.A., Julius S., Kjeldsen S.E. i wsp. Blood pres­
sure dependent and independent effects of antihypertensive 
treatment on clinical events in the VALUE Trial. Lancet 2004; 
363: 2049–2051.
144. Witkowski A., Januszewicz A., Imiela J. i wsp. Stanowisko 
grupy ekspertów w sprawie zabiegów przezskórnej denerwacji 
nerek w leczeniu nadciśnienia tętniczego w Polsce. Kardiol. Pol. 
2011; 69: 1208–1211.
145. Witkowski A., Prejbisz A., Florczak E. i wsp. Effects of renal 
sympathetic denervation on blood pressure, sleep apnea course, 
and glycemic control in patients with resistant hypertension and 
sleep apnea. Hypertension 2011; 58: 559–565.
146. Wong T.Y., Mitchell P. Hypertensive retinopathy. N. Engl. 
J. Med. 2004; 351: 2310–2317.
147. Wühl E., Witte K., Soergel M., Mehls O., Schaefer F.; 
German Working Group on Pediatric Hypertension: Distribu­
tion of 24-h ambulatory blood pressure in children: normalized 
reference values and role of body dimensions. J. Hypertens. 
2002; 20: 1995−2007.
148. Yusuf S., Diener H.C., Sacco R.L. i wsp. PRoFESS Study 
Group. Telmisartan to prevent recurrent stroke and cardiovas­
cular events. N. Engl. J. Med. 2008; 359: 1225–1237.
149. Yusuf S., Sleight P., Pogue J., Bosch J., Davies R., Dage­
nais G. Effects of an angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitor, 
ramipril, on cardiovascular events in high-risk patients. The 
Heart Outcomes Prevention Evaluation Study Investigators. 
N. Engl. J. Med. 2002; 342: 145–153.
150. Zasady postępowania w nadciśnieniu tętniczym — 2011 
rok. Wytyczne Polskiego Towarzystwa Nadciśnienia Tętniczego. 
Nadciśnienie Tętnicze 2011; 15: 55–82.
151. Zasady postępowania w nadciśnieniu tętniczym. Wytyczne Pol­
skiego Towarzystwa Nadciśnienia Tętniczego oraz Kolegium Lekarzy 
Rodzinnych w Polsce. Nadciśnienie Tętnicze 2008; 12: 317–342.
152. Zimmet P., Alberti K., George M.M. i wsp. The metabolic 
syndrome in children and adolescents — an IDF consensus 
report. Pediatr. Diabetes 2007; 8: 299–306.
153. Zubrow A.B., Hulman S., Kushner H., Falkner B. De­
terminants of blood pressure in infants admitted to neonatal 
intensive care units: a prospective multicenter study. J. Perinatol. 
1999; 15: 470–479.