162
5
2015
The Issue of Applying Professional Values 
in Social Work1
Monika Flídrová
The issue of the values of social work is at present a frequent subject of studies, in which 
values are discussed often in an effort to anchor professional identity.2 This close link 
between values and professional identity follows already from general facts, i.e., that the 
applied values of social work co-participate in forming a stable identity of the profession, 
since through their realization the principles, goals of the profession as well as goals of the 
individual organizations issuing from values are fulfilled. Values affect the choice of methods, 
form relationships especially between worker and client, or also define the profession’s 
mission. Intelligible definition of values therefore contributes to greater transparency of the 
profession for its clients and the broad public, which can as a result imagine the purpose 
and goal of the work more easily.3 “A social worker therefore does not need only knowledge 
and skills why and how to do social work, but also values so that in performing social work 
he can make correct decisions. If value relativism held, social work would be meaningless. 
When everything can be correct and incorrect, good and bad, and it only depends on the 
point of view, points of departure, cultural stereotypes, then there is no point trying to 
change a life situation. Then it is not necessary to help another person to make his life (again) 
better or maintain its high quality.”4
The professional values of social work are therefore defined in the ethical codes of individual 
companies or organizations5 (e.g. in mission statements), but also in many authors.6 
Paradoxically, we are thus finally presented with a broad spectrum of professional values. 
The resulting plurality in defining particular values can be due to many factors, of which let 
us now mention e.g. the issue of defining the concept of value, the undefined boundaries 
of professional ethics and the related as well as lacking clear idea of what values ought 
to be included in social work. We thus enter a vicious cycle leading (1) from the issue of 
professional values (2) to vague professional identity (3) and to insufficient application of 
values in practice. (4) As a result the essence of the profession is not being fulfilled, (5) 
which should lead us to reflection on defining basic professional values. The main intention 
of this study is therefore first of all to point out the uneasy application of values in practice 
by describing some causes or barriers preventing social workers from applying professional 
 
1    This study is an output of the project research of the Grant Agency of the University of South Bohemia 117/2013/H 
– Conception of quality of social work in connection with self-definition of the social worker and his helping profession.
2    Cf. e.g. Monika FLÍDROVÁ – Michal OPATRNÝ, Role hodnot v identitě sociální práce, Sociální práce / Sociálna práca 2/2014, 
pp. 118–126. 
3    Cf. ibid, pp. 123–125; Mirka NEČASOVÁ, Profesní etika, in: Metody a řízení sociální práce, ed. Oldřich MATOUŠEK, Praha: 
Portál, 2013, p. 32. 
4    Monika FLÍDROVÁ – Michal OPATRNÝ, Role hodnot v identitě sociální práce, p. 122.
5    Cf. e.g. © British Association of Social Workers, The Code of Ethics for Social Work (online), at: http://cdn.basw.co.uk/upload/
basw_112315-7.pdf, retrieved December 12th, 2014.
6    Cf. e.g. Sarah BANKS, The social work value base: human rights and social justice in talk and action, in: The Value Base of Social 
Work and Social Care: An Active Learning Handbook, ed. Adam BERNARD – Nigel HORNER, Berkshire: Open University Press, 2008, 
p. 31. From the German speaking world let us mention e.g. Silvia Staub-Bernasconi, who bases the value concept of social work 
on human rights, starting not from values but from universal human needs. Cf. Silvia STAUB-BERNASCONI, Soziale Arbeit als 
Handlungswissenschaft: systemtheoretische Grundlagen und professionelle Praxis – ein Lehrbuch, Bern; Stuttgart; Wien: Haupt, 2007, 
pp. 192–193.

5
2015
163
values in practice. In the study we draw on current discussions on values in the ethics of 
social work, which is also why the causes of uneasy application of values identified below 
by far do not offer the reader a complete list. The goal is rather to contribute to the broad 
discussion dealing with the significance and issue of values in social work.7
1. Knowing professional values
As part of project no. 117/2013/H at the Department of Ethics, Psychology and Charity Work 
at the Faculty of Theology, University of South Bohemia, investigating the “conception of 
quality of social work in connection with self-definition of the social worker and his helping 
profession”, pre-research was realized in 2013by the qualitative method of structured 
interview with open questions, with the goal of mapping social workers’ subjective view of 
social work, its quality and position in society. The research unit was constituted by 25 social 
workers selected based on demographic data according to the selection method,8 who met 
the conditions of education according to Law 108/2006 Sb.9 and had at least two years of 
practice in the field. One of the research questions asked “what values are connected with 
the profession of social worker.”
While the International Federation of Social Workers included values such as dignity, human 
rights and social justice in the International Ethical Code 10 and the Association of Social 
Workers in CR mentioned democracy, human rights and social justice in the Ethical Code 
of the Association of Social Workers of CR (whereby both codes also focus at expertise),11 
the “value” most often cited by social workers (research respondents) was empathy. This 
“value” was mentioned fifteen times (i.e., by 3/5 of the respondent). Other “values” were 
rarely mentioned. Only six workers mentioned expertise. The values humanity, relationship, 
service and altruism appeared five times in the respondents’ enumeration. The principal 
values of ethical codes were hardly mentioned. Though we can generally associate the value 
of dignity with the value of humanity or respect, it did not appear in any respondent’s 
enumeration as such. Only one social worker mentioned human rights, three others at least 
mentioned equality or non-discrimination, i.e., individual principles of human rights. Only 
one respondent cited the value of social justice, which is a primarily acknowledged value 
of social work not only in the codes. On the other hand, social workers often focused on 
“values” describing the character of the worker. According to them a social worker ought to 
be a mature personality, which they associated with trustworthiness; he ought to be open, 
 
 
 
7    S. Banks identifies precisely also insufficient communication among different types of workers and organizations as one of 
the barriers to applying professional values in practice. Cf. Sarah BANKS, The social work value base, p. 32. 
8    Respondents were selected using the method of nonrandom intentional selection (cf. Jan HENDL, Kvalitativní výzkum, Praha: 
Portál, 2005, p. 52) from all regions of the Czech Republic, types of municipality (municipality, town, city) and social services 
(ambulant, residential, terrain, office). The selection considered three aspects: proportion of individual types of facility in state, 
proportion of individual facilities according to the number of inhabitants of the fourteen regions and within them according to the 
size of domicile.
9    Cf. Law no. 108/2006 Sb., on social services, § 110.
10    Cf. © Společnost sociálních pracovníků ČR, Etika sociální práce – principy (on-line), at: http://socialnipracovnici.cz/public/
upload/image/mezinarodni_eticky_kodex.pdf, retrieved December 12th, 2014.
11    Cf. © Společnost sociálních pracovníků ČR, Etický kodex společnosti sociálních pracovníků ČR (on-line), at: http://
socialnipracovnici.cz/public/upload/image/eticky_kodex_sspcr.pdf, retrieved December 12th, 2014.

164
5
2015
helpful to clients or honest, etc. Only two social workers out of 25 mentioned the value of 
solidarity, it was cited as frequently as the values of family and truth.12
The professional values mentioned by the social workers taking part in the research contribute 
to opening the topic of the issue of applying professional values and seeking causes that appear 
to be multifactorial. The evaluation of answers has shown first of all (1) a lack of knowledge of 
values cited in codes or by professional experts, but also (2) construing the concept of value 
rather in the context of personality traits and competences (especially communication skills) 
needed for performing the profession (i.e., a misunderstanding of the concept of value) and 
(3) a significant impact of personal values (e.g. love, truth) on forming the conception of 
the profession. That is why personal values in conflict with professional values can be one 
of the causes of not applying values in practice (see point 4). We can also ask whether the 
attitude of many social workers is not too lax, whether their practice takes sufficient account 
of the mission and organization goals, or whether their acting and procedures are not rather 
motivated by philanthropy, without effort at a professional conception of social work.
2. Ambiguous definition of concept
One of the main causes of the lack of knowledge of the professional values of social work, as 
well as general value pluralism, is unintelligibility of the concept of value. Although values 
are a frequent concept in the humanities, they are not univocally defined in psychology, 
philosophy or sociology.13 As a result many definitions and classifications of values arise, 
leading to a very vague conception of them. That is also why defining the concept of value 
in the context of social work is as yet a primary problem of professional ethics.14 In other 
words, a formulation of the conception of value in the context of social work would make 
it possible to define professional values more univocally, then interiorize them and apply to 
practice.
The ambiguity of the concept is also manifest in the International Ethical Code, which uses 
the concept “principle” instead of “value”. In general these two concepts often occur as 
synonymous in the literature. But in the Code these principles are elaborated into further 
principles. Human rights also have a double position in the Code: First they occur in the 
position of a basic mentioned value and then they “follow” from the value and dignity of all 
people.15 We can therefore ask whether we can regard human rights as a professional value 
of social work. If we incline to defining the concept of value based on its properties, then 
one of the attributes of value, its universality, ranks values above norms and principles.16 
That is why human rights should also be regarded rather as a set of principles, not labelled 
as professional value but deriving from values. To speak of professional values among social 
 
12    More detailed elaboration of the research question see Monika FLÍDROVÁ, Sociální práce jako práce řízená profesními hodnotami 
(diploma thesis), České Budějovice: Faculty of Theology, University of South Bohemia, 2014.
13    Cf. e.g. Panajotis CAKIRPALOGLU, Psychologie hodnot, Olomouc: Votobia, 2004; Ivan BLECHA et al., Filosofický slovník, 
Olomouc: Nakladatelství Olomouc, 1998, p. 171; Pavel KLENER – Miloslav PETRUSEK, Velký sociologický slovník I, Praha: 
Karolinum, 1996, pp. 375–377.
14    Cf. Tomáš MACHULA – Helena MACHULOVÁ, Nedostatečná definice pojmu hodnota jako zásadní problém etiky sociální 
práce, Sociální práce / Sociálna práca 1/2009, pp. 97–104.
15    Cf. © Společnost sociálních pracovníků ČR, Etika sociální práce – principy, art. 4. 
16    Cf. Panajotis CAKIRPALOGLU, Psychologie hodnot, p. 364.

5
2015
165
workers without a consonant pre-understanding of the concept of value appears no longer 
tenable. We can also no longer make do in social work with a definition of value representing 
“what a given society and individual regard as desirable, appropriate and good – what they 
strive for”.17 Although in social work we let ourselves be inspired by or take over some 
information from related fields, we need to define value in the profession ourselves not as 
“a general concept for everything we value or respect”.18 The aim of own definition of the 
concept of value should be first of all the effort to construct own self-conception, identity, 
with the goal of structuring the position of values in the hierarchy of professional principles, 
goals or methods, so that the stability of the profession is reinforced, since it derives also from 
the set firm foundations (mission, values, and others) together with forming a hierarchy 
among them.19
3. Plurality of professional values
But in such procedure we will sooner or later reach the claim that social work can never be 
fully detached from the social environment in which it is realized, because it responds to 
its specific needs. Social work is therefore specific in that in connection with the variety of 
needs, cultures, thought, impact of religion etc. the view of the position of the individual 
professional values in social work partially changes.20 We can therefore not perceive value 
pluralism only negatively. Social work, responding to the pressing social problems of its 
time and milieu, essentially needs to be also partially flexible and varied, since “while overt 
enclosure and circumscription of the profession creates stability (whether by strictly defined 
and observed values), it does not facilitate growth, development and creativity.”21 Banks 
further notes that uniformly defined values would be influenced primarily by Western 
European culture and thought, which does not comprise the entire spectrum of social work 
and need not be objectively most suitable for social work in all its extent.22 But on the other 
hand, overt openness of the profession and lack of circumscription (i.e., also within the 
defined values) lead to its vague identity or even “fragmentation”.23
A partial solution to the conflict between strictly given professional values on the one hand 
and on the other hand professional values defined only within the individual organizations, 
associations, states, depending on the specificities of own culture and politics, may be offered 
precisely by professional ethical codes at the international level. At present the International 
Code binds (only) member organizations to the “…duty to develop and regularly update 
its own ethical norms or ethical guidelines so that they are consistent with the statement”24 
of the International Federation of Social Workers. But the International Ethical Code at 
the same time assumes that professional values mentioned in the Code will be developed 
17    Oldřich MATOUŠEK, Slovník sociální práce, p. 77.
18    Radoslav GOLDMANN – Martina CICHÁ, Etika zdravotní a sociální práce, Olomouc: Univerzita Palackého, 2004, p. 8
19    Cf. Monika FLÍDROVÁ – Michal OPATRNÝ, Role hodnot v identitě sociální práce, p. 125.
20    Cf. Payne in Oldřich MATOUŠEK, Úvod: Cíle a úrovně sociální práce, in: Metody a řízení sociální práce, ed. Oldřich 
MATOUŠEK, Praha: Portál, 2013, p. 12. 
21    Monika FLÍDROVÁ – Michal OPATRNÝ, Role hodnot v identitě sociální práce, p. 125.
22    Cf. Sarah BANKS, The social work value base, p. 32. 
23    Cf. Libor MUSIL, Různorodost pojetí, nejasná nabídka a kontrola výkonu „sociální práce“, Sociální práce / Sociálna práca 
2/2008, pp. 83–84.
24    Cf. © Společnost sociálních pracovníků ČR, Etika sociální práce – principy, art. 5. 

166
5
2015
according to own specificities, but remain in accord with it.25 But in the individual codes 
of member countries, associations and organizations we often lack a link or any reference 
to stipulated international professional values.26 We can ask to what extent the ambiguity of 
values is an important factor or to what extent it is a matter of insufficient involvement and 
lack of communication between social workers at international level.
Nonetheless, this specification of values can enable social workers to understand their 
importance and their interconnection with the profession’s or organization’s mission. That 
is why the process of applying professional values can to a great extent be influenced by 
the strategy of organization management.27 Interpretation of defined values also frequently 
appears abroad as well as in Czech literature (see Introduction). We can find a comprehensive 
elaboration of some values e.g. in the Encyclopaedia of Social Work, in which these values are 
presented rather in their historical context of Western European thought. In defining them 
the authors draw on political science, sociology, philosophy or ethics. But the individual 
values are insufficiently elaborated in the context of practice, principles and goals of 
social work.28 Continuous updating and interpretation of professional values often occurs 
in confrontation with an opposition attitude. Recall e.g. the broad discussion that began 
after the publication of M. Mitlöhner’s article On the Legal and Ethical Problems Connected 
with the Birth of a Gravely Malformed Individual,29 whose different conception of humanity, 
dignity, freedom or meaning of life led in much to opening a debate on values.30
4. Conflict of personal and professional values
Nevertheless, it is a duty of professional ethics to incessantly react, respond, defend or 
update its value conception. But excessive effort to firmly define and apply professional 
values in  social work is opposed by emphasis on conscience and own ethical acting of 
social workers based on personal values.31 That is why even “a code cannot be an exact 
recipe book according to which the social worker would act thoughtlessly  – he would 
thus have no space for own judgment and deliberation and the ethical dimension would 
 
25    Cf. ibid.  
26    Comprehensive comparison of the ethical codes of different countries has already been undertaken by S. Banks (cf. Sarah BANKS, 
Ethics and Values in Social Work, London: Macmillan Press, 1995, pp. 91–102).
27    One way of applying values in an organization is described by P. Vrzáček. In his proposal deriving from the practice of Home 
of the Elderly in Lanškroun he ascribes to organization the power to grasp and control the action of social workers based on 
values: “The organization must have a formulated vision and values that facilitate fulfilling the vision. The organization vision and 
values must be interconnected. Organization values must be defined in internal documentation, which must in various forms 
be accessible to all employees. Employees must know the organization values and must be able to fulfil their work duties in 
accordance with the organization values. Employees who adhere to the organization values in their work must be rewarded for 
that activity. Employees who do not adhere to the organization values must on the other hand be punished. All employees must 
supervise adherence to organization values, especially employees in managerial positions. Solving conflict situations pertains to 
managers.” Petr VRZÁČEK, Vedení ve shodě s organizačními hodnotami, in: Hodnoty v prostředí sociálních a zdravotních služeb, ed. 
Zuzana HAVRDOVÁ, Praha: Fakulta humanitních studií Univerzity Karlovy, 2010, pp. 189–190.
28    Cf. e.g. Alois KŘIŠŤAN, Humanita; Tomáš MACHULA, Solidarita; Tomáš MACHULA, Důstojnost; Eva DRAGOMIRECKÁ, 
Kvalita života, in: Encyklopedie sociální práce, ed. Oldřich MATOUŠEK, Praha: Portál, 2013, pp. 201–206, 223–226. 
29    Cf. Miroslav MITLÖHNER, K právním a etickým problémům spojeným s narozením těžce malformovaného jedince, 
Časopis zdravotnického práva a bioetiky 1/2014, pp. 48–54.
30    The journal Caritas et veritas (1/2015) published by Faculty of Theology, University of South Bohemia, also thematically 
entered this discussion. The issue was entitled Right to Life and the papers in it directly or indirectly referred to Mitlöhner’s text. 
31    Cf. Frederic G. REAMER, Social work values and ethics, New York: Columbia university press, 1999, p. 28.

5
2015
167
necessarily disappear from his acting.”32 Personal values then prevent the social worker 
from approaching the profession mechanically, but enable him to perceive it as a personal 
mission and form relationships with clients based on the principle of genuineness, empathic 
understanding or sincerity. That is why a major part of research involving values in social 
work focuses on the personal values of social workers, because it is generally believed that 
precisely they have primary impact on his relationship to client, intervention methods and 
work procedures. 
But projecting personal values into professional visions can be problematic. Values in general 
are an ideal, a universal notion of what is desirable (see point 2). Although social work does 
not exclude personal value and ethical orientations of worker in solving situations, which 
Reamer33 or Musil34 have dealt with, in fact these primarily affect the practice, stipulating 
basic professional values cannot be based only on own value orientations of social workers 
and their professional conception. The individual types of professional conception according 
to Reamer or Musil are rather a set of characteristics of types of social workers, i.e., what 
“material” is in fact available in social work. But then according to the survey (see point 1) 
the main value of social work should be empathy, which however is no professional ideal; 
it is normally designated only as a suitable communication skill, based on which e.g. the 
relationship between social worker and client is formed.35 But values ought to be closely 
interconnected with the professional vision,36 they are rather related to the meaning and 
mission of social work.
Nonetheless, personal values affect the very choice of the profession of social work. Hartl 
states that everyone who wants to devote himself to the profession ought to have the “basic 
personality traits of a social worker” even before embarking on the educational and work 
process in which the worker is responsible and obliged to act according to professional 
and specific organization values, if they are given by the organization. So whether a social 
worker is motivated by different values, he should first of all be able to reflect these values, 
i.e., be aware how they affect his activity and make use of it in an effort at a change for the 
better.37 
A social worker “must at the same time count with the fact that he will find himself in 
a tension between his personal values and the values of client, employer and in general 
the whole profession of social work. Thus certain value conflicts arise,”38 whose cause 
is a conflict of values in solving a particular problem. He can also get in conflict with 
a type of organization management, especially in those organizations in which emphasis is 
 
32    Mirka NEČASOVÁ, Profesní etika, p. 42. 
33    Reamer identified six models of ethical orientations of social workers that have appeared in the course of social work‘s 
development and are still present today side by side. Cf. Frederic G. REAMER, Social work values and ethics, pp. 17–18.
34    Musil specified four conceptions of social work (administrative, philanthropic, professional, activist) based especially on his 
research with social workers, investigating their value orientations and notions concerning their profession. Cf. Libor MUSIL, 
Různorodost pojetí, nejasná nabídka a kontrola výkonu „sociální práce“; Daniela RŮŽIČKOVÁ – Libor MUSIL, Hledají sociální 
pracovníci kolektivní identitu?, Sociální práce / Sociálna práca 3/2009, pp. 79–92.
35    Cf. Oldřich MATOUŠEK – Pavel HARTL, Nároky sociální práce a syndrom vyhoření, in: Metody a řízení sociální práce, 
ed. Oldřich MATOUŠEK, Praha: Portál, 2013, pp. 51–52.
36    Cf. Petr VRZÁČEK, Vedení ve shodě s organizačními hodnotami, pp. 189–190.
37    Cf. Pavel HARTL, Poradenství, in: Metody a řízení sociální práce, ed. Oldřich MATOUŠEK, Praha: Portál, 2013, p. 111.
38    Monika FLÍDROVÁ – Michal OPATRNÝ, Role hodnot v identitě sociální práce, p. 122.

168
5
2015
placed on clearly defined rules and there is a clearly determined hierarchy together with the 
individual workers’ competences: “Social workers employed in ‘mechanical’ bureaucratic 
organizations have less chance of professional autonomy then their colleagues working in 
smaller independent or private organizations. They also have lesser space for maintaining 
the ethical code as the primary obligation of the profession.”39 But according to the Czech 
code employers ought to create “conditions enabling the social workers employed by them 
to accept and apply obligations implied by the code”.40
Conclusion
The social worker’s ability to act autonomously derives from forming a firm own identity 
based on self-knowledge and identification with the professional identity or organization 
mission. All the above mentioned aspects more or less affect the social workers’ possibilities 
of interiorizing professional values (and together with that the mission of the profession or 
organization) and being guided by them in their practice. The social worker is thus rather 
forced to act intuitively, be guided by his own values which he confuses with professional 
values, or he stylizes himself in the position of an administrative worker. Nonetheless, 
the International Code transfers the responsibility of ethical acting to the workers, who 
undertake to make “ethically grounded decisions”.41 A problem is that in no ethical code 
associations ask why workers do not succeed in observing the stipulated values. That is why 
it would be suitable to newly include not only in the Ethical Code of the Association of 
Social Workers CR some principles of the social worker’s relationship to professional values, 
but also emphasize own reflection. The helper according to Kopřiva should be “prepared at 
all times to perceive and accept his imperfection, weakness and vulnerability, which helping 
makes manifest, and by means of self-reflection and supervision facilitate development to a 
state better than the present one.”42
The Issue of Applying Professional Values in Social Work
Abstract
The article is based on reflecting the research of Grant Agency of the University of South 
Bohemia no. 117/2013/H, part of which was also the topic of professional values. The results 
of the survey research draw attention to the issue of applying professional values in social 
work. This article aims primarily to highlight some of the barriers to value application, mainly 
related to the definition of the concept of values and to the plurality of values in social work. 
It is based on the general notion that in their practice social workers need to follow values 
leading to fulfilling the mission and purpose of social work.
Keywords: social work, value, professional values, applying values
39    Mirka NEČASOVÁ, Profesní etika, p. 43. 
40    © Společnost sociálních pracovníků ČR, Etický kodex společnosti sociálních pracovníků ČR, art. 2.2.2. 
41    © Společnost sociálních pracovníků ČR, Etika sociální práce – principy, art. 5. 
42    Karel KOPŘIVA, Lidský vztah jako součást profese: Psychoterapeutické kapitoly pro sociální, pedagogické a zdravotnické profese, 
Praha: Portál, 1997, p. 91.

5
2015
169
Contact 
Mgr. Bc. Monika Flídrová
Univeritsy of Souht Bohemia, České Budějovice
Faculty of Theology, Department of Ethics, Psychology and Charity Work
Kněžská 8, 370 01 České Budějovice
monikaflidrova@seznam.cz