132
FROM THE GRAND TOUR TO AFRICAN ADVENTURE: 
HAGGARD-INSPIRED LITERARY TOURISM* 
Yvonne Smith
Department of Historical and Heritage Studies, University of Pretoria,
Pretoria, 0002
yvonne.smith@up.ac.za
Van die ‘Grand Tour’ na Afrika-avontuur: Haggard-geïnspireerde literêre 
toerisme
Hierdie artikel ondersoek die invloed van literatuur op toerismeneigings wat tot 
stand gebring is voor die middel-negentiende eeu en hoe hierdie gewoontes hulleself 
in besonder in daaropvolgende reise na Afrika en Suider-Afrika geopenbaar het. 
Literêre toerisme, ’n vorm van kultuurreis gebaseer op skrywers en literêre werke, 
sal in aanmerking geneem word as ’n vanselfsprekende uitdrukking van die 
literatuurtoerisme-verhouding. Met verwysing na verwikkelinge voortspruitend uit 
die Romantiek en Industriële Rewolusie, sal die kulturele proses om Afrika as ’n 
nuwe toerismebestemming te vestig, ondersoek word. Soos in die geval van vele 
ander Europees-gekoloniseerde streke, is die persepsies wat ontwikkel het tydens 
die era van die ‘Grand Tour’ omgeset na Afrika om te kulmineer in uitbeeldings en 
indrukke soos die ‘donker kontinent’, ‘edel barbaar’, ‘jagtersparadys’ en dies meer. 
Groot Zimbabwe, ’n gebied in Suider-Afrika wat vermoedelik as die agtergrond en 
inspirasie vir ’n aantal van H. Rider Haggard se verhale gedien het, sal gebruik word 
om te illustreer hoe hierdie historiese, literêre en toerisme-ontwikkelinge ineengeloop 
het om die indruk van ’n aanloklike toerismebestemming te skep.
Sleutelwoorde: Goties, ‘Grand Tour’, Groot Zimbabwe, H. Rider Haggard, imperiale 
avontuurfiksie, kultuurtoerisme, literêre toerisme, Romantiek, subliem, Suider-Afrika 
This article explores the influence of literature on tourism trends cultivated prior to 
the mid-nineteenth century, and how these habits came to manifest themselves in 
subsequent travel to Africa and Southern Africa in particular. Literary tourism, as a 
form of cultural travel based on writers and literary works, will be considered as a 
S.A. Tydskrif vir Kultuurgeskiedenis 27(2), November 2013
*	
This article is derived from an MA dissertation in Heritage and Cultural Tourism concerning literary 
tourism as a developing genre and its potential within South Africa, which the author completed as a 
postgraduate student in the Department of Historical and Heritage Studies. 

133
patent expression of the literature-tourism relationship. With reference to developments 
stemming from the Romantic Movement and Industrial Revolution, the cultural 
process of establishing Africa as a new tourism destination will be investigated. As 
was the case in many other European-colonised regions, the perceptions that had 
evolved from the era of the Grand Tour were transposed to Africa, culminating in the 
portrayals and impressions of the ‘dark continent’, ‘noble savage’, ‘hunter’s paradise’ 
and the like. Great Zimbabwe, a Southern African site believed to serve as the setting 
and inspiration for a number of H. Rider Haggard’s literary works, will be used to 
illustrate how these historical, literary and tourism developments converged to form 
the impression of an alluring tourism destination.
Keywords: cultural tourism, Gothic, Grand Tour, Great Zimbabwe, H. Rider Haggard, 
imperial adventure fiction, literary tourism, Romanticism, Southern Africa, sublime 
Introduction
Literature and tourism have, for many centuries, shared a mutually stimulating 
relationship. Imaginative literature, travel narratives and tourism promotional literature 
direct the reader-tourist in terms of where to go, how to view places, and, in many 
instances, what to feel during the travel experience. Travel, on the other hand, has 
served as the central feature in many fictional works in the form of the journey. Travel 
opens up new territories for literary presentation, providing the subject matter or 
setting for literature. This then cycles back to presentation through literature, and any 
writer sensitive to their audience and seeking the widest possible appeal would utilise 
a vocabulary, imagery and aesthetics already familiar to and popular amongst readers. 
This runs the risk of reinforcing prevalent cultural stereotypes and preconceptions of 
peoples and places, but, by appealing to such gratifying cultural ideals, can nonetheless 
inspire readers to travel to destinations portrayed in popular literature.
	
 This article will investigate this literature-tourism relationship, particularly the 
influence of literature on tourism trends cultivated prior to the mid-nineteenth century, 
and how these latent habits came to manifest themselves in subsequent travel to Africa 
and Southern Africa. The genre of literary tourism, a practical expression of this 
relationship, will be briefly discussed. As a foundational phenomenon in the historical 
evolution of modern tourism, the Grand Tour will be examined with a particular 
focus on its literary dimensions. The impact of Romanticism on cultural thought, 
literature and the Grand Tour will also be considered. The ensuing transposition of 
these Romantic ideals, literary themes and travel habits to Africa will then be traced. 
Finally, Great Zimbabwe and the popular works by H. Rider Haggard will be used as 

134
a case study to illustrate how these developments lead to tourism of a literary nature 
to Southern Africa.
	
 
The genre of literary tourism
Literary tourism can be defined as a form of cultural tourism that involves travel to 
places and events associated with writers, writers’ works, literary depictions and the 
writing of creative literature.1 Its two basic elements, literature and tourism, are both 
facets of culture. The World Tourism Organisation’s definition of tourism is: “the 
activities of persons during their travel and stay in a place outside their usual place of 
residence, for a continuous period of less than one year, for leisure, business or other 
purposes”.2 Although straightforward, the temporal specificity of this widely accepted 
definition is not historically applicable, since travellers in the past usually ventured 
away from home for several consecutive years, as in the case of Grand Tourists of the 
sixteenth to eighteenth century. Nor does it address tourism’s role within the cultural 
domain. On the one hand, there is the way tourism functions as public culture: “the 
fashions by which governments and interested parties capture national capitals, towns...
ancient temples, monuments, festivals...in order to project the celebrated narratives 
and/or the ordinary vistas of a given people, its places, and its pasts.”3 On the other 
hand, at an individual level, there is the way tourism is encouraged as a socially 
accepted form of deviance from normal routines, posited as a search for authenticity 
apparently absent from our everyday lives.4 This explanation indicates the intertwined 
nature of culture and tourism.
	
 Literature holds a dualistic function in cultural terms as it is both an object 
or product of culture as well as a process of creative activity and development that 
produces such a product.5 The term ‘literature’ here refers to creative or imaginative 
works – short prose narratives, novels, drama and poetry – which, in literary tourism, 
usually instils the desire to see and experience those places associated with the literary 
work or its author. Throughout history, particular works have become esteemed as 
1	
It appears that no formal definition of literary tourism exists as yet, but rather general descriptions that 
mainly relate to literary tourism sites.
2	
G. Richards, The scope and significance of cultural tourism, in G. Richards (ed.), Cultural tourism in 
Europe (Wallingford, 1996), p. 20. 
3	
K. Hollinshead, Tourism as public culture: Horne’s ideological commentary on the legerdemain of 
tourism, International Journal of Tourism Research 1, 1999, p. 267.
4	
D. MacCannel, Staged authenticity: arrangements of social space in tourist settings, American Journal 
of Sociology 79(3), 1973, pp. 589-590; J. Urry, The tourist gaze: Leisure and travel in contemporary 
societies (London, 1990), p. 2.
5	
M. Robinson & H.C. Andersen, Reading between the lines: literature and the creation of touristic 
spaces, in M. Robinson & H.C. Andersen (eds), Literature and tourism: Essays in the reading and 
writing of tourism (London, 2002), p. 12.

135
‘great’ or ‘classic’ pieces of literature, their authors hailed as literary geniuses, and 
can come to be regarded as representative of a country’s national literary canon. But 
in literary tourism, it is not only such critically acclaimed works and authors that 
are pursued and celebrated. Usually, those that prove popular among readers are the 
sources of travel motivation,6 as will be shown with the historically discredited but 
popular genres of Gothic romance and adventure stories. 
	
Literary tourism focuses on various products associated with writers and 
literature. These include places and events centred on books; literary festivals; creative 
writing holidays; literary theme parks; sites connected to the life of a writer; and 
literary landscapes. Each of these products constitute a legitimate line of enquiry in 
literary tourism studies, but in the context of literary tourism to Africa and Southern 
Africa during the nineteenth and early twentieth century, the latter two key features 
are of greater relevance.7
	
As verification and celebration of writers’ lives and literary production, 
biographical sites (houses, birthplaces, haunts, graves, and monuments) are among 
the attractions most commonly associated with the literary tourism industry. Readers 
who “feel the need to go beyond their intellectual exchanges with texts and long for 
some kind of material contact with the author of those texts or the places where these 
originate”8 are attracted to writers’ houses. They offer this kind of physical interaction 
– a tangible connection “between the created and the creator, allowing tourists to 
engage in a variety of emotional experiences and activities.”9
	
Writers’ birthplaces are somewhat curious among tourist attractions as they 
do not really celebrate a writer’s works or career success, that which interested the 
reader in the first place, but rather their time before literary accomplishment, that of 
‘genius in the making’. The narrative of such a site is “necessarily biographical and... 
spatialised, and it tells the story of the childhood origins of literary genius in a specific 
place,”10 Visiting a literary birthplace can provide the literary tourist new insight into 
the life and work of a writer as they get a sense of the domestic and environmental 
stimuli that helped shape him or her.
	
But the places in which writers chose to live as an adult could be far more 
illuminating, as not only can these be regarded as “a reflection or extension of their 
6	
M. Robinson & H.C. Andersen, Reading between the lines (2002), p. 28.
7	
For a more detailed review of contemporary literary tourism products, see Robinson & Andersen (eds), 
Literature and tourism (2002), pp. i-79.
8	
H. Hendrix, Writers’ houses as media of expression and remembrance, in H. Hendrix (ed.), Writers’ 
houses and the making of Memory (London, 2008), p. 1.
9	
M. Robinson & H.C. Andersen, Reading between the lines (2002), p. 15.
10	
N.J. Watson, The literary tourist: Readers and places in romantic and Victorian Britain (Basingstoke, 
2006), p. 58.

136
character,”11 but may also “be read as alternative autobiographies or self-portraits”.12 
Numerous writers have, unsurprisingly, applied a very active hand in the designing, 
building and/or decoration of their homes. As a medium of expression, the house 
enables individuals “to link this particular space to what they consider their inner self, 
their emotions, memories and psychological disposition.”13 Keeping in mind the fact 
that these houses are first mediated by the writers themselves and subsequently the site 
guardians, visiting a writer’s house allows the literary tourist to discern something of 
the former literary inhabitant’s personality and frame of mind. Other writers’ houses 
are designed as parallel expressions to their literary worlds, granting the tourist access 
to “the author’s world of imagination...fixed in matter.”14 
	
 In terms of presentation, writers’ homes have gradually discarded the 
conventional museum approach and its characteristic arrangement of objects in 
formal displays in favour of more realistic, ‘lived-in’ surroundings.15 This may well 
be a strategy to satisfy the literary tourist’s sense of authenticity by generating an 
atmosphere of domesticity and presenting the ‘real’ life of the author beyond the 
solitary process of writing. Ordinary household objects are not only fundamental 
to creating this ‘homely’ setting, but are “conferred with hyper-significance and 
reverence”16 as these are pivotal to the tourist’s connectivity and emotional engagement 
with the author. Pens, desks and typewriters, evidentiary markers of the writing process, 
are naturally particularly significant among these sacralised objects, as is the space 
where the literary works came into being, often the study or library. These writing 
spaces could disclose how they physically and mentally approached the protracted, 
pensive and private activity that ultimately produced the poetry or narrative which 
drew the tourist there. “[T]o the outsider the work and the spaces of that work are 
imbued with mystique.”17
	
 Of course, not all writers go to the same lengths in fashioning their private 
spaces. Aside from their evident documentary worth, such places also have meaning 
for their literature, especially in cases where places known to be familiar to the writer 
can be connected to the description or suggestion of places in his or her literary works.18 
As literary historian Harald Hendrix notes, author’s houses may
11	
M. Robinson & H.C. Andersen, Reading between the lines (2002), p. 16.
12	
H. Hendrix, Writers’ houses as media of expression and remembrance (2008), p. 4.
13	
H. Hendrix, Writers’ houses as media of expression and remembrance (2008), p. 4.
14	
H. Hendrix, Writers’ houses as media of expression and remembrance (2008), p. 3.
15	
M. Robinson & H.C. Andersen, Reading between the lines (2002), p. 17.
16	
M. Robinson & H.C. Andersen, Reading between the lines (2002), p. 17.
17	
M. Robinson & H.C. Andersen, Reading between the lines (2002), p. 16.
18	
H. Hendrix, Writers’ houses as media of expression and remembrance (2008), p. 4.

137
	
... be a source of inspiration in its own right, or a material frame necessary 
for the production of literature... Factual spaces in various ways condition 
the author’s mental map, and thus return, be it directly or metaphorically, on 
the pages of his poetry or narrative.19 
This may well also be true of places that writers visited or frequented during their 
lives, called writers’ haunts. For example, numerous hotels, inns, resorts, pubs and 
restaurants that have played host to famous literary figures, promote themselves 
through this literary association, or are promoted through it in travel guides. But these 
literary haunts may also be described or suggested at in the works of authors that visited 
them, therefore making them of literary significance as well. This was the case with 
Henry Wadsworth Longfellow’s 1862 visit to an inn in Sudbury, Massachusetts, who 
later used it as the backdrop to his book of poems Tales of a Wayside Inn (1863) – the 
establishment was subsequently named Longfellow’s Wayside Inn.
	
The graves of writers range among the first tangible literary attractions 
pursued by reader-tourists. American author Washington Irving, recounting his visit 
to Westminster Abbey in his Sketch-Book of Geoffrey Crayon (1820), identifies the 
intrinsic appeal of literary graves, and in effect all author-related sites. He observes 
that visitors linger longest among the writers’ graves in Poets’ Corner as if they were 
friends or companions because “the intercourse between the author and his fellow-men 
is ever new, active, and immediate.”20 In other words, the literary tourist experiences a 
sensation of personal intimacy with a writer, an intimacy made possible by reading.21 
The connection between the reader and author has thus already been established 
through his or her literature, and what the reader-tourist feels has less to do with the 
author as a person, but more with the person as originator of the literary work/s. The 
emotions they experience at such biographical literary sites therefore largely stem 
from the personal significance of the literary work/s to the tourist; the inspiration, 
insight, meaning and/or pleasure they derived from it. 
	
Literary landscapes, the geographies that serve as or inspire the settings of 
literary works, enable the literary tourist to explore fictional worlds imaginatively 
superimposed on real topographies. The presentation of real places in literature varies 
between near-accurate portrayals, for instance London in many of Charles Dickens’s 
works, and re-invented portrayals, as in William Faulkner’s reinvention of Lafayette 
County, Mississippi. Adapting French historian Pierre Nora’s concept of lieux de 
mémoire (sites or structures that validate the collective memory), cultural heritage 
scholar Stijn Reijnders argues that the places and objects that make up these literary 
19	
H. Hendrix, Writers’ houses as media of expression and remembrance (2008), p. 4.
20	
Quoted in N.J. Watson, The literary tourist (2006), p. 37.
21	
N.J. Watson, The literary tourist (2006), pp. 36-37.

138
landscapes are lieux d’imagination – “physical locations which serve as a symbolic 
anchor for a society’s collective imagination.”22 As places and objects that memorialise 
fictional events, these are not necessarily objectively or historically authentic. This 
is the case with Kronborg Castle in Elsinore, Denmark, associated with the home of 
William Shakespeare’s Hamlet, and Bran Castle in Transylvania, Romania, visited 
by tourists as the home of Bram Stoker’s Dracula (1897). In both cases neither of 
the historical figures that inspired the eponymous fictional characters ever resided in 
these respective edifices.23 Bran Castle, moreover, does resemble Stoker’s description 
of Dracula’s castle in the novel, although he situates it in the north of Transylvania, 
whereas Bran Castle is located several hundred kilometres to the south.24 This indicates 
that such symbolic anchors need not be entirely in accordance with the descriptions 
and geographical placement of settings in a given literary work, as will be illustrated in 
the case of Great Zimbabwe and Haggard’s novels later on. Nonetheless, such places 
have been conferred a second reality through literature by readers who, as tourists, seek 
them out as tangible references to events that reside in their imaginational memory. 
	
 The scholarly study of literary tourism is still relatively new in the academic 
sphere. The historical study of the phenomenon appears to be one of the most 
dominant approaches, but as it is an inherently cross-disciplinary field, even these 
historical studies are approached from various perspectives, such as: anthropology, 
sociology, architecture, geography, and heritage and cultural studies. According to 
literary tourism scholar Nicola Watson, “the epicentre of the desire to make and 
preserve writers’ houses [is located] within the nineteenth century.”25 However, this 
high point in the preservation of writers’ houses as well as the ‘conversion’ of certain 
geographies into literary landscapes can be more specifically located within British and 
European nineteenth century culture, a culture heavily influenced by Romanticism. It 
is therefore not surprising that the majority of studies on the history of literary tourism 
focus, wholly or in part, on phenomena that evolved in these regions between the 
second half of the eighteenth century and the turn of the twentieth century.26 Subject 
22	
S. Reijnders, Stalking the count: Dracula, fandom and tourism, Annals of Tourism Research 38(1), 
2011, p. 234. 
23	
M. Robinson & H.C. Andersen, Introduction, in M. Robinson & H.C. Andersen (eds), Literature and 
tourism (2002), p. xv; A. Muresan & K.A. Smith, Dracula’s Castle in Transylvania: conflicting heritage 
marketing strategies, International Journal of Heritage Studies 4(2), 1998, p. 78. 
24	
S. Reijnders, Stalking the count (2011), p. 232.
25	
N.J. Watson, Introduction, in N.J. Watson (ed.), Literary tourism and Nineteenth-Century culture 
(Basingstoke, 2009), p. 8.
26	
See for example: J. Glendening, The high road: Romantic tourism, Scotland, and literature, 1720-1820 
(Basingstoke, 1997); H. Hendrix (ed.), Writers’ houses and the making of memory (London, 2008); 
S. Matthews, Poetical remains: Poets’ graves, bodies, and books in the Nineteenth Century (Oxford, 
2004); I. Ousby, The Englishman’s England: Taste, travel and the rise of tourism (Cambridge, 1990); 
S. Squire, Wordsworth and Lake district tourism: Romantic reshaping of landscape, The Canadian 

139
to similar cultural and literary influences, America also adopted this tourism mode in 
the early nineteenth century, therefore a number of studies have appeared that highlight 
American literary tourism developments during the 1800s.27 Some developments in 
literary tourism did occur before the mid-eighteenth century, and a few studies have 
focused on those related to specific writers, such as John Milton and Francis Petrarch,28 
and on literary tourism as a component of the Grand Tour.29 However, the scholarly 
study of the history of literary tourism within Africa and Southern Africa appears not 
to have been addressed as yet, and this article will seek to illuminate some aspects of 
the tourism history of this geographical area.
The rise of Romantic literary tourism
Overtly secular modes of tourism were first methodically practiced by European elites 
during the early sixteenth century, a practice that came to be known as the ‘Grand 
Tour’.30 This phenomenon lasted through the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, 
remaining extant in varying forms into the first half of the nineteenth century, and 
has received much scholarly attention.31 Up to the mid-eighteenth century, the Grand 
Tour was practiced as an educational experience, as scholar-courtiers would travel to 
study at universities in Europe, or as a means to gathering information in service of 
“the great project of humanist learning.”32
Geographer 32(3), 1988, pp. 237-47; N.J. Watson, The literary tourist: Readers and places in romantic 
and Victorian Britain (Basingstoke, 2006); N.J. Watson (ed.), Literary tourism and Nineteenth-Century 
culture (2009); P. Westover, Necromanticism: Travelling to meet the dead, 1750-1860 (Basingstoke, 
2012).
27	
D. DeLyser, Ramona memories: fiction, tourist practices, and placing the past in Southern California, 
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 93(4), 2003, pp. 886-908; E.W. Stevens, Helen 
Hunt Jackson’s “Ramona”: social problem novel as tourist guide, California History 77(3), 1998, pp. 
158-167; P. Westover, How America ‘inherited’ literary tourism, in N.J. Watson (ed.), Literary tourism 
and Nineteenth-Century culture (2009), pp. 184-195.
28	
H. Hendrix, From early modern to Romantic literary tourism, in N.J. Watson, (ed.), Literary Tourism 
and Nineteenth-Century Culture (2009), pp. 13-24; A. Santesso, The birth of the birthplace: Bread 
Street and literary tourism before Stratford, ELH 71, 2004, pp. 377-403.
29	
J. Adler, Origins of sightseeing, Annals of tourism research 16, 1989, pp. 7-29; J. Buzard, The beaten 
track: European tourism, literature and the ways to ‘Culture’ (Oxford: 1993); J. Towner, Literature, 
tourism and the Grand Tour, in M. Robinson & H.C. Andersen (eds), Literature and tourism (2002), 
pp. 226-238.
30	
J. Adler, Origins of sightseeing (1989), p. 9.
31	
See for example: J. Black, Italy and the Grand Tour (New Haven, 2003); C. Hibbert, The Grand Tour 
(London, 1987); J. Towner, The Grand Tour: a key phase in the history of tourism, Annals of Tourism 
Research 12, 1985, pp. 297-333.
32	
H. Berghoff & B. Korte, Britain and the making of modern tourism, in H. Berghoff, B. Korte & R. 
Schneider (eds), The making of modern tourism: Cultural history of the British experience, 1600-2000 
(Basingstoke, 2002), pp. 1-20. See also J. Adler, Origins of sightseeing (1989), pp. 11-21.

140
	
 Reading was one of the most important facets of travel preparations.33 Due to the 
prevalence of neo-classicism in cultural taste at this time, the literature which had the 
most dominant bearing upon the Grand Tour were the ancient classics of Greece and 
Rome such as the writings of Caesar, Livy, Virgil, Polybius, Horace and Tacitus – these 
“helped shape their choice of destinations as well as the sentiments expressed when 
viewing people or places.”34 Not only did references to classical literature permeate 
travel accounts, but its influence was also reflected in the Grand Tour’s spatial patterns, 
which remained by and large constant throughout its existence.35 Apart from the cultural 
centres in France and Germany en route, it included the cities of northern Italy, like 
Milan, Turin and Venice, and “Florence, Rome and Naples formed the climax of the 
tour.”36 In fact, Aaron Santesso asserts that the route of the Grand Tour was formed 
partially to accommodate sojourns to destinations with “familiar literary connections.”37 
This classical literary influence never completely vanished throughout the Tour’s 
existence, for travelling scholars, writers and Grand Tourists of the eighteenth and 
nineteenth century eagerly absorbed the topographical settings of Homer’s epic poem 
The Iliad and the journeys from Troy to Ithaca that are borne out in The Odyssey.38
	
 As tourism is a cultural practice, it was, and still is, necessarily influenced by 
more pervasive socio-cultural tendencies and technological developments. In the 
history of literary tourism, perhaps the most influential of these were the Romantic 
Movement as well as the Industrial Revolution, the latter relating not only to 
innovations in transport, but especially advancements in the print and publishing 
industry. Although Romantic propensities in especially art and literature gradually 
increased from the mid-eighteenth century, the beginning of the Romantic era is 
traditionally traced to the 1780s and came to dominate European cultural life during 
the initial half of the nineteenth century.39 A “historically unwieldy and contested 
abstraction,”40 it is regarded as a reaction against the excessive rationalism of the 
Enlightenment. Whereas the latter’s proponents viewed feelings as an interference 
with clear thought, the Romantics emphasised the primacy of the imagination and 
viewed unrestricted, spontaneous emotions as the road to grasping the intricacies of 
human nature.41 Cultural and literary historian John Glendening points out:
33	
J. Adler, Origins of sightseeing (1989), p. 9.
34	
J. Towner, Literature, tourism and the Grand Tour (2002), p. 232.
35	
J. Towner, The Grand Tour (1985), pp. 314-15; J. Towner, Literature, tourism and the Grand Tour 
(2002), p. 232.
36	
J. Towner, The Grand Tour (1985), p. 301.
37	
A. Santesso, The birth of the birthplace (2004), p. 380.
38	
M. Robinson & H.C. Andersen, Reading between the lines (2002), pp. 12-13.
39	
M. Perry, Western civilization: A brief history, 4th Edition (New York, 2001), p. 368; J. Glendening, 
The high road (1997), pp. 6-7.
40	
J. Glendening, The high road (1997), p. 6.
41	
M. Perry, Western civilization (2001), p. 369.

141
	
Although the romantic sensibility asserts itself in opposition to the modern 
world, it is the direct outgrowth of that world: romanticism expresses a binary 
opposition, an epistemology of desire, necessarily produced by the socio-
economic disruptions of modernity as intensified by its need for continual 
expansion and change.42
This continual expansion and change was undoubtedly magnified by the Industrial 
Revolution starting in Britain from the 1760s and influenced culture in various 
ways. Capital accumulation through expanded trade allowed for the growth of an 
industrialised manufacturing sector, enabling individuals of common birth engaging 
in such capitalist enterprises to grow both affluent and influential, thereby creating 
the middle classes or bourgeoisie.43 Book production became highly mechanised, 
facilitating the publication of an immense number of books at relatively little 
expense. The reading public, especially from within the middle classes and female 
readers in particular, grew due to far greater access to and the affordability of texts, 
as well as the advent of circulating libraries.44 This, in turn, aided in the wider and 
faster dissemination of the ideals of Romanticism, whose leading figures included 
such writers as Percy Bysshe Shelley, William Wordsworth, Lord Byron, Victor 
Hugo, Francois Chateaubriand, Johan Wolfgang von Goethe, and Friedrich Schiller. 
Incidentally, each of these writers came to be integrated in the literary tourism domain. 
	
Romantic writing differed fundamentally from the other predominant 
contemporaneous forms of literature – the novel of manners and neoclassical poetry. 
The latter, being more social in its concern, led readers to consider “the exterior actions 
of life,” whereas Romantic writing and its offshoot (or dark twin) Gothic writing were 
more concerned with the individual, often leading readers to contemplate “internal 
mental processes and reactions.”45
	
Similar transformations were brought to bear on the Grand Tour in its tourist 
designation and spacio-temporal patterns. From the 1760s more professional people 
often travelling with their families now made the tour’s circuit rather than landed 
aristocrats, while the average duration of the tour changed from four years to four 
months.46 Locations with sublime and picturesque scenery were now included due 
to the influence of Romanticism, also resulting in a revitalised interest in medieval 
history and related sites.47 Romantic grand tourists were more concerned with “the 
42	
J. Glendening, The high road (1997), p. 7.
43	
M. Perry, Western civilization (2001), p. 355.
44	
F. Botting, Gothic (London, 1996), p. 46.
45	
R. Hume, Gothic versus Romantic: a revaluation of the Gothic novel, PMLA 84(2), 1969, p. 288.
46	
J. Towner, The Grand Tour (1985), p. 316.
47	
J. Towner, The Grand Tour (1985), p. 314.

142
emotional effect of scenes on their own feelings”48 and “[t]he more overwhelming 
and emotionally colored the experience, the more travel could fulfil its new function 
of affording escape from sensory immersion in degraded realities.”49 Tourism and 
Romanticism therefore proved to be naturally compatible. As Glendening argues, 
they reinforce one another in their escapist overtones since “tourism promotes that 
which can be perceived as fundamentally different from the everyday world” and 
Romanticism celebrates “whatever seems to stand in absolute opposition to the 
mundane, disruptive and ultimately unsatisfying tenor of modern society.”50 Previously, 
travel was legitimised as a serious pursuit for information or education, but by the 
closing decades of the eighteenth century it had generally become a private, subjective, 
emotionally charged, recreational form of escape. 
	
 These overall changes in tourist sensibilities naturally led to concurrent changes 
in literary tourists’ practices and sentiments. The 1780s witnessed a surge of interest 
in the graves of writers, especially on the part of British tourists. Various scholars 
point to the popularity of Grey’s poem ‘Elegy written in a country churchyard’ (1751) 
to show the significance and general cultural reception of meditation upon tombs 
by the mid-eighteenth century.51 This particular interest in writers’ graves has been 
conventionally explained as part of the over-all increase in the practice of visiting 
graves and graveyards (also called ’necro-tourism’) during the mid-1700s, and by using 
the argument that literary pilgrimage emulates religious pilgrimage.52 However, Watson 
posits two additional reasons. First, it was the emergence of writers’ biographies “that 
began to connect authorial body and text more intimately,”53 in effect earlier in the 
century, but prototypical by the 1780s. Second, occurring at precisely the same time 
of general anxiety surrounding print-culture, Watson maintains that this anxiety has 
heretofore been largely examined by way of the romantic author’s anxiety over the 
alienation of their mass-audience, but she argues that it also “by contagion, infected 
the romantic reader, who similarly became anxious over the alienation of the author, 
and the promiscuity of the text.”54
	
 Due to the multiplicity and portability of the published book, grave-visiting 
therefore became regarded as a way of achieving a more personal connection with the 
deceased author.55 But the closely packed writers’ graves and memorials in Westminster 
48	
J. Towner, The Grand Tour (1985), p. 314.
49	
J. Adler, Origins of sightseeing (1989), p. 23.
50	
J. Glendening, The high road (1997), p. 7.
51	
I. Ousby, The Englishmen’s England (1990), p. 26; N.J. Watson, The Literary Tourist (2006), p. 35; 
P. Westover, Necromanticism (2012), p. 6.
52	
See for example: I. Ousby, The Englishmen’s England (1990), p. 22-23.
53	
N.J. Watson, The Literary Tourist (2006), p. 33.
54	
N.J. Watson, The Literary Tourist (2006), p. 37-38.
55	
N.J. Watson, The Literary Tourist (2006), p. 38.

143
Abbey’s Poet’s Corner, a site of national significance and longstanding touristic 
popularity, could not adequately provide this new desire for personal, sentimental 
writer-tourist connectivity. A tourism model marked by a growing desire to “locate 
the author within a place or places conceived of as organically connected both to the 
physical person and to the literary corpus”56 therefore emerged. The touristic interest 
in the grave of Thomas Gray in Stoke Poges, Buckinghamshire, towards the end of 
the eighteenth century, even though there was a memorial dedicated to him in Poets’ 
Corner, is evidence of this new tourism model. During the Romantic era there was 
thus a general outward movement in both cultural thought and physical travel to sites 
regarded as more natural and authentic to a writer and his or her work. The latter 
sentiment or perception may also be said to govern the motivations behind the creation 
and visitation of other sites related to authors, such as birthplaces, houses and haunts.
Tourism’s aesthetic transformation: the sublime, picturesque and Gothic
Romanticism, in especially its glorification of unspoiled nature and the medieval 
past, refashioned tourism forever. Simply put, it changed what people perceived 
as beautiful or admirable, thereby altering and enlarging the range of sights people 
pursued through travel.57 This cultural reconstruction of nature and perceptions of 
the past were manifested in different aesthetic approaches, such as the sublime, 
picturesque and Gothic. The sublime was associated with grandeur, magnificence, 
vastness and obscurity.58 Under its auspices, natural wonders or curiosities like 
caves, forests, rushing waters, raging storms and mountainous landscapes were no 
longer merely displeasing or frightening but also impressive,59 supplying “delightful 
versions of terror.”60 The Alpine mountains provide one of the foremost examples 
of this process of cultural (re)construction from a landscape of dread to a sublime 
experience. Literary theorist Fred Botting asserts that mountainous landscapes, 
especially the Alps, “stimulated powerful emotions of terror and wonder in the viewer. 
Their immense scale offered a glimpse of infinity and awful power, intimations of 
a metaphysical force beyond rational knowledge and human comprehension.”61 
Numerous late eighteenth century Grand Tourists opted to incorporate the Alps into 
their itineraries. This included writers who advanced this sublimated image of the 
56	
N.J. Watson, The Literary Tourist (2006), p. 31.
57	
I. Ousby, The Englishmen’s England (1990), p. 99.
58	
F. Botting, Gothic (1996), pp. 3-4.
59	
I. Ousby, The Englishmen’s England (1990), p. 131.
60	
G. Stilz, Heroic travellers – Romantic landscapes, in H. Berghoff, B. Korte & R. Schneider (eds), The 
making of modern tourism (2002), p. 86.
61	
F. Botting, Gothic (1996), pp. 3-4.

144
Alps, like Shelley with his praise poem ‘Mont Blanc’ (1817) and Byron with Childe 
Harold’s pilgrimage (1812). Nineteenth century tourists took these poets’ texts along 
on their travels, some of whom “expressly followed the routes which the poets had 
taken or recited poems on reaching a summit.”62
	
 The picturesque aesthetic, perhaps easier to grasp but more difficult to explain, 
approached nature in a more critical “spirit of painterly appraisal.”63 William Gilpin, 
the great advocate of the picturesque, simply defined it as “that kind of beauty which 
would look well in a picture.”64 It was rather concerned with the subtler effects of 
nature, and focused on such elements in a scene as the interplay of light and shade, 
subtle colour gradations, and harmony between its different elements.65
	
 These aesthetic approaches manifested themselves in tourist practices in the 
form of ‘stations’, a precise spot which affords the viewer with the most picturesque 
or sublime prospect of a landscape. This sightseeing paradigm further gave rise to 
“sentimental landscape tourism”66 through which the narrative and fictional characters 
of a literary work are pursued with a focus on particular sites that make up a literary 
landscape. Emerging near the end of the eighteenth century, Jean Jacques Rousseau’s 
Julie: ou, La Nouvelle Héloise (1761) was likely the first novel to be engaged in 
this manner, as Watson states that it was Rousseau’s writings and his readers “that 
invented this new way of looking at landscape through literature...which delineated 
the shape of sentimental landscape tourism.”67 Set in Switzerland at Lac Léman, the 
narrative of this tragic love story continually re-emphasises specific sites around the 
lake, reinvesting them with emotion and sentiment. Emulating the practices of sublime 
and picturesque landscape tourists, “so too the Rousseau tourist sought out the best 
‘stations’ around the lake so as to get the classic Rousseauistic sentimental experience,” 
and read aloud from the novel passages relevant to particular places.68 Romanticism 
therefore spawned tourism centred primarily on the setting of a novel, the literary 
landscape, with which the tourist engages both imaginatively and emotionally.
	
 The Gothic, a literary genre that emphasises mystery, horror, and the 
supernatural, first emerged in 1764 with Horace Walpole’s novel The Castle of Otranto, 
to become highly popular during the 1790s in Europe, Britain and the USA. The major 
influences on and characteristics of late-eighteenth century Gothic literature were:
62	
H. Berghoff & B, Britain and the making of modern tourism (2002), p. 5.
63	
I. Ousby, The Englishmen’s England (1990), p. 154.
64	
Quoted in I. Ousby, The Englishmen’s England (1990), p. 154.
65	
I. Ousby, The Englishmen’s England (1990), p. 152.
66	
N.J. Watson, The Literary Tourist (2006), p. 132.
67	
N.J. Watson, The Literary Tourist (2006), p. 133.
68	
N.J. Watson, The Literary Tourist (2006), pp. 137, 140.

145
	
The marvellous incidents and chivalric customs of [medieval] romances, the 
descriptions of wild and elemental natural settings, the gloom of the graveyard 
and ruin, the scale and permanence of [Gothic] architecture, the terror and 
wonder of the sublime.69
Castles, cathedrals and monasteries – medieval edifices that were models for 
evocations of sublimity – commonly served as settings for Gothic novels. Literary 
theorist Fred Botting’s assertion that “literary works provided the impulse for the new 
taste”70 [my emphasis] in Gothic architecture, leading to the Gothic Revival, suggests 
that by extension these works also awakened touristic interest in intact and ruined 
original Gothic structures, especially since castles with dungeons became common 
tourist targets.71 Night time visits to ruins, both medieval and classical, also became 
a popular tourist practice, as at Tintern Abbey, Wales, and the Roman Colosseum.72 
This combination of darkness and ruins seems to have held a particular allure, for as 
Botting testifies: “[n]ight gave free reign to imagination’s unnatural and marvellous 
creatures, while ruins testified to a temporality that exceeded rational understanding 
and human finitude.”73 Partial obscurity, for example a site that is partially obscured 
due to nocturnal darkness, inaccessible areas, or too vast to view in its entirety, is 
an important feature of the sublime and Gothic because it allows the “fictionalizing 
imagination to rise to and transcend the material occasion.”74 
Transposed to Africa: quests in literature and the continent
The African continent was also thus partially obscured, as by 1831 there were a few 
remaining uncharted areas on the world map with the largest still in Africa.75 Even as a 
cartographic image, incomplete and obscured by the unknown, the vast ‘dark’ African 
continent appears to have been an ideal subject for the sublime, its ‘blanks’ allowing 
for the cultivation of various myths, fantasies and imaginative conceptions. European 
interest in the African interior gained momentum toward the end of the eighteenth 
century due to a combination of motivating factors: the search for new commodities 
to trade, interest in scientific geography and a fascination with exploration.
69	
F. Botting, Gothic (1996), p. 24.
70	
F. Botting, Gothic (1996), p. 32.
71	
T. Seaton, Thanatourism and its discontents, in T. Jamal & M. Robinson (eds), The Sage handbook of 
tourism studies (London, 2009), p. 532.
72	
G.G. Dekker, The fictions of Romantic Tourism: Radcliffe, Scott and Mary Shelley (Stanford, 2005), 
p. 230; I. Ousby, The Englishman’s England (1990), p. 125.
73	
F. Botting, Gothic (1996), p. 32.
74	
G.G. Dekker, The fictions of Romantic Tourism (1990), p. 50.
75	
P. Brantlinger, Rule of darkness: British literature and Imperialism, 1830-1914 (London, 1988), p.  25.

146
	
 Nineteenth century writing on Africa generally took the form of exploration 
narratives, missionary narratives and adventure fiction. Cultural theorist Patrick 
Brantlinger explains that the books written by the explorers “took the Victorian 
reading public by storm” and cites several examples, particularly David Livingstone’s 
Missionary travels and researches in South Africa (1857), which sold seventy 
thousand copies in its initial months after publication, making him not only wealthy 
but so famous “that he was mobbed by admirers.”76 The aesthetic approaches of the 
picturesque, sublime, and Gothic were by this time wholly familiar to European and 
British culture through imaginative literature and travel writing. These approaches also 
“informed colonial travellers overseas with the perceptions and discursive strategies 
of coping with alien realities. And... play a formative role for the touristic appreciation 
and appropriation of the ’new worlds.’”77
	
 Literary scholar Amber Vogel, in her essay on an ‘African sublime’, makes a 
compelling argument for the transference to and formation of an alternate form of 
the Grand Tour in Africa.78 Her ‘African sublime’ consists of the following common 
elements: “solitude and wilderness, travel and ruin, regret and desire, memory and 
lament...that form rhetorical patterns put to use by African travellers, commentators 
and literary artists presenting Africa to a growing, evolving audience.”79 Drawing 
on such travel narratives as that of Richard Lander, John Speke and Henry Morton 
Stanley, and other documentation on Africa’s exploration, Vogel points out several 
corresponding elements between the Grand Tour and nineteenth century travel in 
Africa. However, only three key points will be briefly noted here. First, the way these 
travel-writers, however different their outlooks and motives, applied the vocabulary 
and aesthetic of the picturesque, sublime and Gothic on the landscapes they traversed.80 
African landscapes were often compared to standards of picturesque beauty (like the 
paintings of Claude Lorraine or Nicholas Poussin); or portrayed through such common 
sublime terminology as vast, dark, solitary, oppressive, majestic and romantic; and 
particular features, like rock outcroppings and forest interiors, were often described 
as resembling ruined Gothic structures. The latter intimates the second important 
parallel – the almost obsessive search after ruins, especially those of lost or extinct 
civilisations. This indicates the extent to which travellers and readers had assimilated 
the conventions of the Grand Tour and Gothic aesthetic, coming to “hunger after...the 
glamour and terror of lost civilisations and their artefacts... [which] memorialized the 
76	
P. Brantlinger, Rule of darkness (1988), p. 180.
77	
G. Stilz, Heroic travellers – Romantic landscapes (2002), p. 85
78	
A. Vogel, African sublime: the dark continent joins the Grand Tour, in M. Robinson & H.C. Andersen 
(eds), Literature and tourism: (2002), pp. 226-38.
79	
A. Vogel, African sublime (2002), p. 281.
80	
A. Vogel, African sublime (2002), pp. 282-89.

147
poignancy of human effort that had come to nothing.”81 Third, the way the records 
of the African Association “serve as a remarkable travel brochure for the would-be 
explorer,” proposing a new location for the Grand Tour and formulating a new motive 
for it.82 These new travel motivations included: economic profit; natural resources; 
indigenes’ spiritual conversion; the discovery of ruins; and, on a more personal level, 
fame, glory and social advancement. The following extract from the records of the 
African Association explicitly posits this transference of the Grand Tour from Europe 
to Africa: 
	
To the British traveller, a desire of changing the usual excursion from Calais 
to Naples, for a tour more extended and important, and of passing from scenes 
with which all are acquainted, to researches in which every object is new, and 
each step is discovery, may recommend the kingdom of Fezzan.83 
The question then is why readers of African travel narratives found them so appealing 
and whether these inspired readers to emulate their traveller-authors and come to 
Africa. These accounts “are almost overburdened by descriptions of the varied and 
awe-inspiring landscapes, the incredible rivers, the rich vegetation, and the many 
strange animals.”84 Added to this are descriptions of the local inhabitants they 
encountered, their dress, appearance, arts and customs – all quite different from that 
of the reader. To the audience first encountering Africa through these texts, it could 
be argued that the sheer ‘otherworldliness’ of the content must have read much like 
fiction. Phillips notes how even geographers and historians have come to reinterpret 
exploration narratives as “quest narratives, in which heroes encounter the unknown 
– adventure” and “illustrate the possibility of reading... geographical narratives as 
adventure narratives.”85 Likewise, the observations of literary commentators on these 
texts could be construed as portrayals of a host of fantastical adventure novels. They 
are described as “nonfictional quest romances in which the hero-authors struggle 
through enchanted, bedevilled lands towards an ostensible goal,”86 and “the heroes 
of their own narratives...every incident appeared as a life-or-death event and genuine 
courage and fortitude took on an operatic bravura.” 87
	
 Such heroism and bravery, such adventure and novelty – along with the 
attendant promises of social advancement, glory, fame and riches to be had – might 
81	
A. Vogel, African sublime (2002), p. 288.
82	
A. Vogel, African sublime (2002), p. 285.
83	
Quoted in A. Vogel, African sublime (2002), p. 286.
84	
D. Hammond & A. Jablow, The Africa that never was (Prospect Heights, 1992), p. 61.
85	
R. Phillips, Mapping men and Empire: A geography of adventure (London, 1997), p. 8.
86	
P. Brantlinger, Rule of darkness (1988), pp. 180-81.
87	
D. Hammond & A. Jablow, The Africa that never was (1992), p. 56.

148
well have seemed very appealing to the potential African traveller, whether as explorer, 
missionary or tourist. Furthermore, African travellers certainly seem to have read the 
works of those who had come before them. For example, George Thompson writes: 
“[A]t daybreak [I] found myself near a place called Pampoen-kraal [Cape Colony], 
being the identical spot where the celebrated Vaillant pitched his tent, and penned his 
romantic descriptions of this part of the colony.”88 Like literary tourists, many travellers 
to Africa brought other travellers’ accounts with them, such as Elizabeth Melville 
who took a number of books with her to Sierra Leone in the 1840s, and specifically 
mentions F. Harrison Rankin’s book The White man’s grave: A visit to Sierra Leone, 
in 1834.89 It appears that a number of African explorers were inspired by the works 
of their predecessors to travel to Africa. René Caillié, for example, was encouraged 
to become a traveller as a youth by Daniel Defoe’s adventure novel Robinson Crusoe 
(1719), and after reading the work of explorer Mungo Park determined that he 
would seek out the city of Timbuktu.90 In a similar vein to the way literary tourists 
seek writers’ biographical sites to form a more personal connection and verify their 
existence and deeds, so too were some explorers subjected to the same treatment. 
When Richard Lander and his brother John set out in 1830 to explore the Niger River, 
part of their mission was the recovery of the relics of Mungo Park who had died at 
Bussa, Nigeria, in 1806. On an earlier expedition “Richard Lander had already found 
traces of lost explorers to be African landmarks as important as anything native to 
the region.”91 David Livingstone also seems to have inspired a particular devotion, 
as Hedley Chilvers notes almost fifty years after his death: “To judge by the number 
of those who have since made the pilgrimage to Chitambo [Northern Rhodesia]...the 
spot where his heart lies buried, the world is not disposed to forget the man.”92
	
 The practices of these African travellers – reading their predecessors’ books, 
travelling to and through the places portrayed in their pages, seeking out physical 
traces of the traveller-author – correspond with the elementary characteristics of literary 
tourist practices and could therefore be regarded as a kind of rudimentary, less focused 
form of literary tourism. There are also distinct similarities between this stage of travel 
in Africa and the Grand Tour, as evidenced by the promotional literature, the pursuit 
of similar attractions, and the application of aesthetic genres conventionalised through 
tourism and creative literature. By the 1870s, Vogel concludes, “the familiar Grand 
Tourist had been wholly transformed into the exotic African explorer: a contemplative, 
88	
G. Thompson, Travel and adventures in Southern Africa I (London, 1827), p. 8.
89	
A. Vogel, African sublime (2002), p. 284.
90	
R. Caillié, Travels through Central Africa to Timbuctoo I (London, 1968 [1830]), p. 5; J.S. Keltie & 
S.C. Gilmour, Adventures of exploration, Book IV, Africa (London, n.d.), p. 51.
91	
A. Vogel, African sublime (2002), p. 290.
92	
H. Chilvers, The Seven Wonders of Southern Africa (Johannesburg, 1929), p. 341.

149
essentially solitary figure set down in a beautiful but alien landscape cluttered with...
artefacts signifying danger, dissolution and darkness.”93
Haggard and the mystery of Great Zimbabwe
Great Zimbabwe, towards the end of the nineteenth century, was such an artefact or 
ruin that embodied the allure of an ancient lost civilisation. The first tangible evidence 
of the existence of the ruins, located in what is today Zimbabwe, was provided in 1871 
by German explorer Carl Mauch. Its architecture was erroneously considered as too 
sophisticated to be the work of any indigenous peoples, and was immediately linked to 
the longstanding, popular myth that this was the Biblical, gold-bearing land of “King 
Solomon’s Ophir, built for the Queen of Sheba, with a Phoenician substratum”.94 
A number of scholars have investigated how H. Rider Haggard contributed to and 
reinforced this myth in the popular imagination that Great Zimbabwe was built by an 
ancient white civilisation through his novels, especially King Solomon’s Mines (1885) 
and She (1886).95 His African adventure novels were of course highly successful: the 
two afore-mentioned novels sold over six hundred and fifty thousand and one million 
copies respectively before his death in 1925; both have been filmed numerous times; 
and King Solomon’s Mines became “standard reading in schools in Britain and in 
English-speaking Africa.”96 After their publication, it came to be believed that Great 
Zimbabwe served both as the setting for She (even though the book’s geography 
indicates an East African setting) and the inspiration for King Solomon’s Mines.97
	
 The areas then known as Mashonaland and Matabeleland were colonised 
between 1890 and 1895 by the British South Africa Company and named Rhodesia.98 
One of a number of Southern African territories colonised during the 1880s and 1890s, 
93	
A. Vogel, African sublime (2002), p. 293.
94	
L. Stiebel, Creating a landscape of Africa: Baines, Haggard and Great Zimbabwe, English in Africa 
28(2), 2001, p.128.
95	
M. Hall, The legend of the lost city; or, the man with the golden balls, Journal of Southern African 
Studies 21(2), 1995, pp. 179-199; L. Stiebel, Creating a landscape of Africa (2001), pp. 123-33; D. 
Tangri, Popular fiction and the Zimbabwe controversy, History in Africa 17, 1990, pp. 293-304.
96	
W. Minter, King Solomon’s mines revisited: Western interests and the burdened history of Southern 
Africa (New York, 1986), p.3.
97	
In terms of real-life inspirations for Haggard’s fictions, the titular character of She, Ayesha or ‘She-
who-must-be-obeyed,’ has also been linked to Queen Modjadji, otherwise known as the Rain Queen. 
The monarch of the baLovedu tribe resident in the South African province of Mpumalanga, she, like 
Ayesha, was believed to be immortal and to possess various supernatural abilities. See M. Cohen, 
Rider Haggard: his life and works (London, 1960), p. 109.
98	
S.J. Ndlovu-Gatsheni, Mapping cultural and colonial encounters, 1880s - 1930s, in B. Raftopoulos & 
A. Mlambo (eds), Becoming Zimbabwe: A history from the pre-colonial period to 2008 (Johannesburg, 
2009), pp. 47,49, 58. 

150
these developments would come to affect both travel and literature, revealing their 
close cultural connection:
	
From the 1880’s through the first decades of the twentieth century more Britons 
than ever before came to Africa...Interest in the new possessions stimulated 
the first wave of African tourism, and many came just to observe and report 
on their observations. The floodgates were raised for a tidal wave of literary 
production...everybody wrote: the “men on the spot”, their wives, the tourists, 
the self-appointed experts, biographers, and novelists.99
Fictional writing on Africa also started gaining momentum from the 1880s, to become 
the dominant form of popular literature about the continent by the end of the century.100 
These fictional works imitated the thrilling narratives of the African explorers and 
tended toward discredited literary genres: Gothic romance and the adventure story.101 
Although discredited and “often marketed as boys’ stories, [the adventure genre] 
attracted readers of both sexes, and (almost) all ages and classes.”102 Brantlinger 
asserts that these fiction writers “produc[ed] quest romances with Gothic overtones 
in which the heroic white penetration of the Dark Continent is the central theme...
[and] H. Rider Haggard’s stories fit this pattern.”103
	
 Haggard is counted among the most significant and influential figures in the 
tradition of British literature on Africa. This is because he assimilated into his writing 
most of the literary themes predominant during the late nineteenth century and the 
“Haggard stamp appeared on almost every one of the hundreds of exotic adventure 
tales that were written after King Solomon’s Mines.”104 Literary historians Dorothy 
Hammond and Alta Jablow, in their investigation of Africa’s depiction through 
primarily British literature from its initial exploration to the 1950s, identify these 
prevailing late nineteenth century themes. As previously mentioned, a common and 
oft-debated theme was the metaphor of Africa as the ‘Dark Continent.’ Reflecting 
not only geographical ignorance, this theme presents Africa as a vast place of danger 
and death, and bespeaks the exotic allure of the continent, harking back to the 
oxymoronic notions, such as ‘horrid beauty’ and ‘delightful terror’, of the sublime. 
Another common but contrasting theme, originating in writings on South Africa 
since the early 1800s, is that of the ‘land in amber’. This Africa is a beautiful, sun-
99	
D. Hammond & A. Jablow, The Africa that never was (1992), p. 76.
100	 D. Hammond & A. Jablow, The Africa that never was (1992), p. 10.
101	 P. Brantlinger, Rule of darkness (1988), p. 189; D. Hammond & A. Jablow, The Africa that never was 
(1992), p. 101.
102	 R. Phillips, Mapping men and Empire (1997), p. 11.
103	 P. Brantlinger, Rule of darkness (1988), p. 189.
104	 D. Hammond & A. Jablow, The Africa that never was (1992), p. 102.

151
drenched, golden land with fertile, open spaces and a temperate climate that preserves 
older and simpler ways of life.105 This image of Africa was a nostalgic fantasy that, 
much like certain aspects of the Romantic sensibility, was “born of a distaste for the 
present ... [and] glorifies the past.”106 An extension of the ‘land in amber’ theme is the 
presentation of Africa as a place of freedom and independence: “the call of Africa is 
the pull toward action and adventure. The envisioned freedom of Africa provides the 
excitement of challenge, the thrill of a brush with danger and even death.”107 Hunting, 
believed to demonstrate character and the virtues of bravery and action, provided ideal 
opportunities for such excitement and danger. The theme of ‘Hunter’s Paradise’ was 
so ubiquitous that Africa and big-game hunting became almost synonymous with 
one another.108 Hunting, as narrative episodes and contextual omnipresence, certainly 
features frequently in Haggard’s works, for his protagonist in King Solomon’s Mines 
and over ten other novels is Allan Quatermain, the great white hunter. 
	
 As in the explorers’ journals, the African environment was still sufficiently 
‘exotic’ to warrant exhaustive descriptions of the fauna, flora and scenic wonders. As 
for the native populace during this period, they were unfortunately either completely 
ignored or egregiously stereotyped as ‘uncivilised savages.’109 Some characters, like 
Haggard’s Zulu warrior Umbopa in King Solomon’s Mines, were cast into the romantic 
ideal of the ’noble savage.’ Determined by European attitudes toward nobility, the 
virtues of the ’noble savage’, courage, intelligence and physical beauty for example, 
were often matched with an aristocratic lineage, like Umbopa who turns out to be the 
rightful king of Kukuanaland. Lastly, the most ubiquitous theme of all is that of travel 
or journeying. Practically all the books on Africa, including She and King Solomon’s 
mines, were either wholly centred upon a journey or include it as an integral part,110 
indicating that through literature Africa also became synonymous with travel. Another 
noteworthy feature of Haggard’s works is “the littering of his African topography 
with ruins,”111 indicating the durable impact of Romanticism’s fascination with lost 
civilisations. 
	
 Many of these themes are admittedly racist, ethnocentric and idealistic. 
However, it could be argued that these themes and images, forming part of a shared 
105	 D. Hammond & A. Jablow, The Africa that never was (1992), pp. 108, 157.
106	 D. Hammond & A. Jablow, The Africa that never was (1992), p. 157; P.D. Curtin, The image of Africa: 
British ideas and action, 1780-1850 (London, 1965), p. 59.
107	 D. Hammond & A. Jablow, The Africa that never was (1992), p. 158
108	 J.C. Gruesser, White on black contemporary literature about Africa (Chicago, 1992), pp. 1, 5; D. 
Hammond & A. Jablow, The Africa that never was (1992), pp. 46-47.
109	 P.D. Curtin, The image of Africa (1965), p. 227; D. Hammond & A. Jablow, The Africa that never was 
(1992), pp. 25-27.
110	 D. Hammond & A. Jablow, The Africa that never was (1992), p. 77.
111	 L. Stiebel, Creating a landscape of Africa (2001), p. 129.

152
cultural background of aesthetic conventions and inculcated through the highly popular 
exploration narratives, produced an image of Africa that was familiar, accepted and 
appealing to readers, and was therefore successfully deployed in imperial adventure 
fiction. It was, so to speak, a tried and tested formula. The literature, furthermore, 
appears to have depicted Southern Africa in particular as an inviting destination – a 
scenic land of sunshine, good weather, ideal for travel, freedom, independence, and 
danger if one were so inclined – that would attract any travel-hungry reader.
	
 Numerous travel accounts from the 1890s onward show that travellers went to 
Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe), often via South Africa, to visit what was likely their two 
most well-known attractions, Victoria Falls and the Zimbabwe Ruins.112 Thomas Cook, 
the reputed originator of the modern packaged tour, ran several tours through Southern 
Africa between the 1890s and the 1920s, one of which included Great Zimbabwe.113 
As early as 1902, twelve years after colonisation, the British South Africa Company 
instructed Richard Hall, an amateur archaeologist, to undertake preservation efforts 
at Great Zimbabwe “in order to make the ruins more attractive to tourists.”114 A local 
guidebook on the ruins had been published by 1914,115 and visitor accommodation 
was available to tourists in the form of a simple hotel from at least 1924.116 
	
 The rhetoric many of these early twentieth century visitors used to describe 
their experience of the ruins was in keeping with the nature of the themes and images 
of nineteenth century adventure fiction with its Gothic overtones. Italian scientist 
Attilio Gatti depicts his experience in the early 1930s thus:
	
To-day the naked ruins expose themselves to our eyes in a grey, monotonous, 
sinister procession...over all a desolate heavy silence broods...the sphinx-like 
mystery with which the ruins preserve the secret of their identity, and the hard, 
cruel aspect they present, affects one strangely.117 
112	 See for example: F.A. Donnithorne, Wonderful Africa: Being the 7,000 miles travel in South and South 
Central Africa (London, 1924); A. Gatti, Hidden Africa (London, 1933); H.L. Tangye, In New South 
Africa: Travels in the Transvaal and Rhodesia (London: 1896).
113	 P. Merrington, A staggered orientalism: the Cape-to-Cairo imaginary, in L. de Kock, L. Bethlehem & 
S. Laden (eds), South Africa in the global imaginary (Pretoria, 2004), p. 79.
114	 H. Kuklick, Contested monuments: the politics of archeology in Southern Africa, in G.W. Stocking 
(ed.), Colonial situations: Essays on the contextualisation of ethnographic knowledge (Madison, 
1991), p. 143.
115	 L. Stiebel, Creating a landscape of Africa (2001), p. 127.
116	 F.A. Donnithorne, Wonderful Africa (1924), p. 166.
117	 A. Gatti, Hidden Africa (1933), p. 109.

153
In spite of archaeological evidence to the contrary, the so-called ‘ancient-exotic theory’ 
of Great Zimbabwe’s origins remained popular, and served as an effective advertising 
tool to the Southern Rhodesian Publicity Bureau118 (Figure 1), which also linked the 
site to Haggard’s works in its promotional literature. He himself found, during his 
visit to Great Zimbabwe in 1914, that “the local guidebook claimed that he used these 
ruins as the setting for ancient Kôr in She.”119 Haggard denied this, admitting only 
to having heard vague rumours regarding the ruins, which did however stimulate his 
imagination in the case of King Solomon’s Mines.120 Haggard’s repudiation evidently 
118	 H. Kuklick, Contested monuments (1991), pp. 149, 156.
119	 L. Stiebel, Creating a landscape of Africa (2001), p. 127.
120	 L. Stiebel, Creating a landscape of Africa (2001), p. 127.
Figure 1: Southern Rhodesia Publicity Bureau poster by A.W. Baylis, 1938.
(From: http://www.christies.com/lotfinder/posters-signage-advertising/aw-baylis-
zimbabwe-the-riddle-of-rhodesia-5491048-details.aspx.)

154
did not stop writers or readers from continuing to make this writer-place connection. 
Hedley Chilvers still makes this connection fifteen years later, stating in reference to 
Great Zimbabwe’s Hill Ruin or Acropolis:
	
Behind the walls of this towering rock-pile lived Rider Haggard’s vivid creation, 
“She-who-must-be-obeyed;” the heroine of the romance which that master of 
fiction wrote in the white heat of an inspiration born of the mystery enveloping 
the Acropolis.121
121	 H. Chilvers, The Seven Wonders of Southern Africa (1929), p. 318
Figure 2: Front cover of a guidebook to Great Zimbabwe.
From: Southern Rhodesia Publicity Bureau, The Great Zimbabwe Ruins 
(Bulawayo, 1930)

155
Earlier in the same book, Chilvers’s caption under a photograph of Haggard at the 
ruins taken in 1914 reads: “Rider Haggard, whose famous novel “She” is based on 
Zimbabwe, and who derived the atmosphere of “King Solomon’s Mines” from other 
relics of a bygone Rhodesia.”122 Another guidebook on the ruins published by the 
Publicity Bureau in 1930 (Figure 2) makes similar statements regarding Haggard and 
his African romances.123 It emphasises the ‘mysterious’ origin of the ruins and describes 
the scenery of Great Zimbabwe in terms such as “savage beauty” and “absolutely ideal 
and romantic that the heart is stirred and the imagination given full rein.”124 Thereby, 
such publications “reinforc[ed] the popular link between Haggard, the ruins and his 
early fiction,”125 as well as sublime conceptions of Africa as a beautiful but wild 
and dangerous place, heightening its tourist attractiveness. Haggard’s audience was 
evidently confident that they could physically visit his African settings, as Hammond 
and Jablow state:
	
Readers were often convinced that what they were reading in King Solomon’s 
Mines was a true story told by a real person, a white hunter named Allan 
Quatermain, and the places he told of could be pointed to on the map of 
Africa.126
With the established connection between Haggard’s African romances and Great 
Zimbabwe, a real, locatable place, the promotion of this link in contemporaneous 
literature, and evidence of tourists visiting the site since the 1890s, it appears likely 
that Haggard’s novels inspired reader-tourists to visit Southern Africa. For, by the 
1960s, the national park around Great Zimbabwe contained almost every kind of 
tourist facility and the ruins received approximately one hundred thousand visitors 
every year.127 That not a single one of these many tourists were drawn by Haggard’s 
works is unlikely, since Haggard-biographer Morton Cohen notes: “For many 
Englishmen, Africa became the Africa of King Solomon’s Mines.”5128 For British 
audiences in particular, linking tracts of land to literary works and converting them 
into the recognised entity of the literary landscape, like ‘Shakespeare’s Stratford’, 
‘Hardy’s Wessex’, ‘Doone-land’ and ‘Brontë Country’, was nothing new by this time. 
Haggard had clearly left a lasting impression on the popular imagination, and to visit 
Southern Africa was to visit Haggard’s Africa.
122	 H. Chilvers, The Seven Wonders of Southern Africa (1929), p. 316.
123	 Southern Rhodesian Publicity Bureau, The Great Zimbabwe Ruins (Bulawayo, 1930), pp. 17, 49.
124	 Southern Rhodesian Publicity Bureau, The Great Zimbabwe Ruins (1930),pp. 10, 14.
125	 L. Stiebel, Creating a landscape of Africa (2001), p. 131.
126	 D. Hammond & A. Jablow, The Africa that never was (1992), p. 10 8.
127	 H. Kuklick, Contested monuments (1991), p. 158.
128	 M. Cohen, Rider Haggard (1960), p. 94.

156
Conclusion
With the rise of the Romantic sensibility permeating cultural thought in Europe 
and Britain from the second half of the eighteenth century, the popular forms of 
literature and the nature of tourism changed, becoming practices of deep emotional 
and imaginative involvement. The untamed natural world and medieval structures 
were culturally reconstructed as beautiful, dangerous and thrilling, translating into 
new sites for the tourist gaze. Romantic aesthetic approaches, especially the sublime 
and Gothic, propagated through imaginative literature and travel narratives, were 
transposed to Africa during the nineteenth century, functioning as familiar cultural 
devices or strategies through which travellers coped with and made sense of this 
unfamiliar and very different new world. These approaches were subsequently 
crystallised in common literary themes and images of Africa, such as the ‘dark 
continent’, ’noble savage’, the ‘land in amber’ and the ubiquitous quest. In this way 
a perception of an Africa both romantic and exotic emerged through the widely read 
nineteenth century quest narratives and romances, among which Haggard’s works are 
counted as highly influential. Great Zimbabwe, in particular, appealed to tourists as a 
site from an ancient, lost culture and a literary landscape linked to two of Haggard’s 
most successful works. It became a popular literary tourist attraction, largely shaped 
by British and European aesthetics through imperial adventure fiction as a site that 
embodied the perceived savage beauty, thrilling danger, and mystique of Africa. In 
turn this perception of Africa in popular consciousness attracted tourists to the greater 
Southern African region and, one might argue, continues to do so.