Responsible AI in Africa—Challenges 
and Opportunities 
Chinasa T. Okolo, Kehinde Aruleba, and George Obaido 
Introduction 
Since its inception , the development and integration of artiﬁcial intel-
ligence have been mostly concentrated within the Global North. This 
concentration of power has direct ties to the colonial history of resource 
extraction from the Global South that deprived nations in this region 
of autonomy and means to industrialise. This disparity has limited the 
ability of artiﬁcial intelligence applications to be effective, meaning that 
these tools are able to operate in a functional manner that doesn’t 
compound existing inequities, within such contexts. Effective AI adop-
tion and implementation of artiﬁcial intelligence are dependent on a 
variety of factors, such as having a local workforce with the required 
training to develop these solutions, sufﬁcient infrastructural capacity to
C. T. Okolo 
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA 
K. Aruleba 
University of Leicester, Leicester, UK 
G. Obaido envelope symbol
University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA 
e-mail: rabeshi.george@gmail.com 
© The Author(s) 2023 
D. O. Eke et al. (eds.), Responsible AI in Africa, Social and Cultural 
Studies of Robots and AI, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-08215-3_3 
35

36
C. T. OKOLO ET AL.
handle the computationally-heavy training of algorithms, representative 
datasets, governmental support and regulation to govern the appro-
priate fair use of these technologies, independent and civil institutions 
and policymakers that safeguard from harmful applications and rein-
force responsibility and accountability. Within the African continent, we 
ﬁnd these factors sorely lacking and a major contributor to the dearth 
of solutions implemented that incorporate artiﬁcial intelligence. In this 
chapter, we present a number of challenges to effective AI adoption and 
implementation in Africa. We examine topics such as digital literacy, infras-
tructure and government support then lead into an analysis of the AI 
startup and research landscape within the continent. The chapter then 
deﬁnes what responsible AI looks like for Africa and provides actionable 
recommendations for improving its progress. 
What Signifies Responsible AI 
The concept of responsible AI has garnered signiﬁcant attention in recent 
years (Boden et al., 2017; Gwagwa et al., 2020; Neri et al.,  2020; 
Arrieta et al. 2020).  According to Boden et al.  (2017), responsible AI 
is the tendency of behaving in a positive, desirable, or socially accept-
able manner. To formulate a central theme for responsible AI, several 
organisations created frameworks for building AI responsibly. These 
organisations formed an organisation termed the Partnership on Arti-
ﬁcial Intelligence (PAI).1 The partnership included organisations such 
as Amazon, Facebook, Google, Microsoft and IBM. PAI documented 
best practices to bring diverse organisations together to build AI systems 
responsibly to beneﬁt the people and society. PAI described responsible 
AI as an approach geared towards ethical, social consequences that must 
be considered towards the development and deployment of AI systems. 
Succinctly, the goals of the partnership on AI are fourfold:
• First, to develop and share best-practice methods and approaches in 
the research, development, testing and ﬁelding of AI technologies;
• Second, to advance public understanding of AI across varied 
constituencies, including on core technologies, potential beneﬁts and 
costs;
1 https://www.partnershiponai.org/ 

RESPONSIBLE AI IN AFRICA—CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
37
• Third, to provide an open and inclusive platform for discussion and 
engagement on the future of AI, and to ensure that key stakeholders 
have the knowledge, resources and overall capacity to participate 
fully in these important conversations; and
• Fourth, to identify and foster aspirational efforts in AI for socially 
benevolent applications. 
AI enables society to automate more tasks and automate to a larger 
extent than before, but it is important to understand who or what is 
responsible for the beneﬁts and harms of using this technology? And, 
if this problem should be tackled pro-actively in the domains of tech-
nology and policy, what does the development of “responsible AI” 
mean? (Coeckelbergh, 2020) To address this question within an African 
context, we describe the different tenets of responsible AI as mentioned 
by Nyabola (2016) and Shearlaw (2016), such as accountability, trans-
parency, explicability, transparency and bias. 
Principles of Responsible AI 
Accountability 
One of the common principles of responsible AI discourse is account-
ability (Arrieta et al., 2020; Raji et al., 2020a; Rakova et al.,  2021). 
According to Raji et al., (2020a), accountability is the state of being 
answerable or responsible towards a system with its underlying behaviour 
and its likely impacts. Their work further emphasised that algorithms 
cannot be held accountable. They are not legal entities; the organisa-
tions using and deploying these algorithms should be held liable through 
governance structures. 
Within the tenets of the law, the notion of responsibility is often 
coupled with liability and punishment for misdeeds, with account-
ability viewed as a review, oversight and enforcement (Kohli, 2018). 
In their work, Doshi-Velez (2017) noted that creating accountable AI 
systems is crucial because accountability is essential for good public 
and private governance. Ensuring accountability in AI systems requires 
guiding actions and providing explanations in line with social values 
and norms. To ensure accountability, Africa needs stringent policies to 
govern AI usage to ensure rights preserving and ethics in its formative

38
C. T. OKOLO ET AL.
design (Gwagwa et al., 2020). While only a few African countries have 
established data protection laws, many remain apathetic about it. 
Transparency 
Transparency 
means 
different 
things 
to 
different 
people, 
a 
term 
poignantly described by Weller [22]. Towards an AI discourse, Hollanek 
(2020) noted that a transparent system would provide information of 
what it is doing and why, and it must be permissible to be audited. 
Current AI algorithms are black boxes. The unboxing of AI algorithms 
has shown to be an engineering challenge, requiring clarity and expla-
nations for end-users and regulators. This level of opacity is seen as 
surreptitious, incorporated by complex data processing, purported as a 
matter of deliberate practice (Hollanek, 2020). 
Within contemporary African settings, the lack of AI transparency is 
visibly apparent (Gwagwa, 2020). One notable example is surveillance 
technology, where many African states are deploying these systems to 
monitor citizens (Mudongo, 2021). Most foreign organisations predom-
inantly run these systems with the sole purpose of achieving political 
agendas or silencing critics. Such lack of transparency infringes user’s 
privacy and leads to data exploitation. According to Hollanek (2020), to 
assess AI transparency, one must recognise that the developer has always 
been a trickster, applying masking techniques to achieve a result. The 
gateway to transparency is to ensure that all aspects of algorithm design, 
politics and morals have to be considered, especially to win trust. 
Explicability 
We used explicability and explainability interchangeably. The concept of 
explainability is viewed as the notion of explanation of steps taken by 
an AI model, in an attempt to ensure transparency, such that the result 
produced must be clearly understood by a human expert (Neri et al., 
2020; Arrieta  et  al.,  2020). For example, in precision medicine, medical 
practitioners require much more information from an AI model about a 
medical diagnosis rather than just some binary predictions. Other notable 
application areas that require explanations include autonomous vehicles, 
security, ﬁnance, among others. 
According to Carman and Rosman (2021), to develop AI models sensi-
tive to African interests and values, it is pertinent to adopt the principle of

RESPONSIBLE AI IN AFRICA—CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
39
explicability relevant in an African research context. The authors echoed 
that for an African adoption, AI systems must be just, fair and intelligible. 
The study further recommended that AI frameworks be designed to be 
applied to an African context for transparency. Regrettably, as a conti-
nent with diverse cultures and values, it is widely understood that African 
interests are not considered during AI designs (Wareham, 2021). 
Bias Evaluation 
AI bias occurs when an algorithm’s output becomes prejudiced due 
to false assumptions based on the data fed into it (Silberg, 2019). 
Silberg argued that the extent to which AI is used for prediction and 
decision-making will always be subject to bias challenges. Roselli et al. 
(2019) argued that AI biases stem from diverse sources, such as the 
chosen algorithm, input attributes and training data used. Several AI 
biases have been seen in diverse applications, such as facial recognition 
systems, autonomous vehicles, health systems, criminal justice systems 
and recruiting systems (Mehrabi et al., 2021; Perkowitz, 2021; Gebru,  
2020; Jo & Gebru, 2020). A typical example of AI bias in the medical 
ﬁeld might be that an algorithm may wrongly recognise doctors as male 
and not female or exclude minorities. In some cases, AI systems may 
falsely misclassify a black person as a criminal element before standing 
trial or even likely to re-offend. Such systems often exclude traditionally 
marginalised groups and result in many diversity issues. 
There has been growing use of AI in many sectors in Africa, espe-
cially in an unequal society, such as South Africa. Most banks use such 
technologies to make loan decisions (Adams et al., 2020). However, the 
metric used for allocating loans through demographics or loan history 
is widely unavailable. Such systems may be used to disadvantage certain 
races or genders. Moosajee (2021) attributes this issue to biased results 
caused by biased data.

40
C. T. OKOLO ET AL.
Challenges to Effective AI Adoption 
and Implementation in Africa 
In this section, we present the challenges towards AI adoption and 
implementation in Africa. 
Digital Literacy 
Digital skills literacy is a signiﬁcant barrier to the adoption and imple-
mentation of artiﬁcial intelligence in Africa. Out of all world regions, 
sub-Saharan Africa has the lowest percentage of citizens equipped with 
digital skills, equalling to about half of the average level of digital skills 
adoption seen globally (Madden & Kanos, 2021). The Future of Work 
in Africa 2021, a report from the World Bank, shows that, on average, 
citizens in Nigeria, Kenya and South Africa possess a higher level of 
digital skills compared to the rest of sub-Saharan Africa (Choi et. al 
2020). Inspired by the Sustainable Development Goals formed by the 
UN, the World Bank has formed the Digital Economy for Africa (DE4A) 
initiative, to digitally enable every African individual, business and govern-
ment by 2030 (World Bank, 2021). Creating building blocks for a 
digital economy within the African continent shows promise in enhancing 
economic growth and alleviating poverty by encouraging entrepreneur-
ship among young adults, increasing farming productivity and yields, and 
balancing the labour workforce by creating pathways for women to access 
more jobs (World Bank, 2019a, b). While some of the statistics presented 
earlier in this section seem dismal, it is important to note the historical 
and structural issues that have led to such outcomes. Historically, the lack 
of investment by African governments into infrastructure necessary for 
supporting digital economies has hampered the growth of digital literacy. 
With the help of international ﬁnance institutions and intergovernmental 
organisations, countries such as Mozambique and Rwanda have actively 
begun to develop action plans towards achieving digital transformation 
(World Bank, 2021). Over the past few years, large technology companies 
have begun to realise the importance of training local workforces in digital 
skills. In May 2021, Microsoft announced a partnership with the Nige-
rian government to signiﬁcantly build their digital economy (Microsoft, 
2021). This collaboration plans to speed Nigeria’s transition to becoming 
a digital economy by making signiﬁcant investments in internet infras-
tructure, equipping 5 million people across the country with digital skills,

RESPONSIBLE AI IN AFRICA—CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
41
developing cloud-based tools to ﬁght corruption and leveraging artiﬁ-
cial intelligence to preserve cultural heritage. With companies such as 
Microsoft, Twitter, IBM, Facebook and Google already having such a 
large presence within the African continent, commitments such as the one 
seen by Microsoft can help subvert the colonial narratives and dynamics 
seen in other industries like agriculture and mining. However, their pres-
ence is not without great scrutiny or concern. Big Tech is not the saviour 
Africa needs to look up to and their presence in Africa is driven primarily 
by proﬁts, monopoly and a rush to grab power more than anything else. 
Infrastructure 
Over the past decade, internet penetration within the African continent 
has risen rapidly from an estimated 10% in 2010 to 28% in 2019 (ITU, 
2021). The sore state of internet penetration across the African conti-
nent can be blamed due to infrastructure issues associated with the lack 
of access to electricity and low investment into internet infrastructure 
such as ﬁbre-optic cables, cell towers and base stations. According to 
the World Bank, 80% of the urban population in sub-Saharan Africa has 
access to electricity compared to 28% in rural sub-Saharan Africa2 . The  
World Bank estimates that reaching the 100 million Africans living in 
remote regions inaccessible to cellular mobile networks will require an 
investment of at least $100 billion3 . While an extremely large number, 
tech companies such as Google, Facebook and Microsoft have lent their 
expertise and vast ﬁnancial resources to improve internet infrastruc-
ture across Africa and the Global South to varying levels of success. 
Alphabet’s (Google’s parent company) Loon, a project developed in 
2011 to bring high-speed internet to remote regions through ﬂeets of 
balloons, operated in regions such as Sri Lanka, Puerto Rico, Mexico, 
Brazil, Chile, Argentina and Kenya (Loon, 2017). While this project was 
disbanded in early 2021, Alphabet has pledged $10 million to support 
companies and organisations focused on internet connectivity, education 
and entrepreneurship within Kenya (Teller, 2021). In partnership with 
Samsung, Ericsson, MediaTek, Opera, Nokia and Qualcomm, Facebook
2 https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/EG.ELC.ACCS.RU.ZS?locations=ZG& 
name_desc=false 
3 https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press-release/2019/10/17/achieving-broadb 
and-access-for-all-in-africa-comes-with-a-100-billion-price-tag 

42
C. T. OKOLO ET AL.
launched Free Basics (also known as Internet.org), an initiative to provide 
free internet services to underdeveloped countries in 20134 . This service 
provides free internet access to websites containing job ads, weather and 
health information and full access to the entire internet for those who 
pay. This two-tiered system has been criticised for harming net neutrality 
and cannibalising the services of local internet cafes, leading to its even-
tual shutdown in India (Prasad, 2018). To this date, 32 African countries 
have participated in this initiative but over the past decade, internet shut-
downs have become a common censure tactic for African governments 
(Killander & Ilori, 2020). The close relationship between Free Basics 
and the telecommunication companies providing these services, many of 
which are fully or partially state-owned, is a troubling issue that should 
be examined more closely. In 2020, Facebook announced “2Africa”, their 
billion dollar project to build an undersea cable that will interconnect 23 
countries in Africa, tripling the continent’s existing network capacity and 
providing support for 4G, 5G and broadband access (Facebook Engi-
neering, 2020). Microsoft Airband, launched in 2017 to bring internet 
connectivity to rural regions, currently has projects in 8 African countries 
(Ghana, Nigeria, Kenya, South Africa, Democratic Republic of Congo, 
Zambia, Tanzania and Rwanda)5 . While Africa continues to be the focus 
point of internet-related initiatives, there is reasonable scrutiny of these 
initiatives and their capabilities to exacerbate existing censorship of citi-
zens by African governments and introduce new methods of surveillance 
to the continent (Shearlaw, 2016). 
Price Barriers 
The Global System for Mobile Communications estimates that 45% of the 
population in sub-Saharan Africa subscribes to mobile services (GSMA, 
2020). Affordability is a large barrier to preventing the adoption of 
both mobile devices and services, which is the primary way users within 
the African continent access the internet. Another factor that impacts 
affordability is the high telecommunications taxation rates in countries 
such as the Democratic Republic of Congo, Mozambique, Sierra Leone 
and Tanzania, which are above the world average (GSMA, 2016). The
4 https://connectivity.fb.com/ 
5 https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/corporate-responsibility/airband 

RESPONSIBLE AI IN AFRICA—CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
43
majority of low- and middle-income countries have failed to meet afford-
ability targets set by the Alliance for Affordable Internet (A4AI) and 
adopted by the UN Broadband Commission for Sustainable Develop-
ment (Policy, 2018). When represented as a percentage of average per 
capita Gross National Income (GNI), the average price of one gigabyte 
of mobile broadband varies between 0.84% in North America and 17.49% 
in Africa (Policy, 2018). With an average cost of $3.30 per gigabyte of 
mobile internet—a price that is higher than anywhere in the world except 
for North America6 —African consumers are being priced out of access to 
the internet and stonewalled from improving their livelihoods through 
digital means. African governments have to be proactive in regulating 
large, multinational telecom companies in setting fair prices for consumers 
and providing the necessary investments in both electrical and internet 
infrastructure to accelerate the adoption of digital skills, which will hope-
fully have a signiﬁcant impact on the state of AI development within the 
continent. 
Lack of Local AI Talent 
While the technology ecosystem within Africa has grown signiﬁcantly, 
there is still a large gap between the pace of software development and 
AI development within the continent. Fortunately, the interest of outside 
entities like Google, Microsoft and IBM has led to the establishment of 
AI research labs on the continent and the local startup ecosystem has also 
begun to grow. Something we ﬁnd extremely promising is the emergence 
of local AI practitioners and research groups that have formed to address 
local problems in agriculture, healthcare, education and more. Initiatives, 
such as Bhala, a smart keyboard that is the ﬁrst mobile application to 
support spell-checking Ndebele, Shona, Swati, Swahili, Xhosa, and Zulu, 
is an example of home-grown technology that meets the needs of local 
populations and ﬁlls a gap overlooked by larger players in this space7 . A  
subsequent section in this chapter (survey of the landscape of AI in the 
continent) provides a deeper look into the current state of artiﬁcial intel-
ligence within the African continent. We analyse over 100 startups and
6 https://www.dw.com/en/why-mobile-internet-is-so-expensive-in-some-african-nat 
ions/a-55483976 
7 https://www.bha.la/about.html 

44
C. T. OKOLO ET AL.
organisations dedicated to providing AI products, services and education 
and note trends that show great promise or bring cause for concern. 
Artiﬁcial intelligence has become nearly ubiquitous in many soci-
eties and many tech companies have begun to recognise the importance 
of democratising the development of artiﬁcially intelligent systems and 
providing equitable access to regions traditionally overlooked in AI 
development. Large tech companies such as Google, Microsoft, IBM, 
Facebook and Amazon have made strides to move into the Global South, 
establishing research labs, development centres, customer support centres, 
or data centres within this region. The openings of these establishments 
may initially appear to be beneﬁcial for local ecosystems, but the talent 
needed to ﬁll these highly specialised roles may not exist locally. This 
presents room for displacement of local workforces by those who have had 
the privilege to access relevant training and mirrors systems of colonialism. 
Fortunately, the past ﬁve years has given rise to grassroots efforts 
focused on training local communities in artiﬁcial intelligence and related 
technologies such as natural language processing (NLP), computer vision 
and machine learning. Black in AI8 , a nonproﬁt organisation founded 
in 2017, has provided hundreds of Black students and professionals the 
opportunity to attend top tier machine learning conferences such as 
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), the 
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), Interna-
tional Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) and much more. Addi-
tionally, the organisation has begun mentorship programmes to guide 
prospective applicants to graduate programmes in computer science, 
support current PhD students in their journeys towards tenure track 
positions in academia and provide resources for entrepreneurs of African 
descent to build successful AI startups. Other prominent initiatives such as 
Data Science Africa9 , Masakhane10 , Ghana NLP11 , AI Saturdays Lagos12 
and Deep Learning Indaba13 have similar missions, contributing greatly 
to the representation of African scholars at AI/ML conference venues,
8 https://blackinai.github.io/#/ 
9 http://www.datascienceafrica.org/ 
10 https://www.masakhane.io/ 
11 https://ghananlp.org/ 
12 https://aisaturdayslagos.github.io/ 
13 https://deeplearningindaba.com/2021/ 

RESPONSIBLE AI IN AFRICA—CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
45
increasing the number of publications focusing on AI and its applications 
to local problems and improving access to AI education. Another step 
to improving AI adoption within the African continent has focused on 
building institutions to formally train students in the concepts needed 
to pursue successful careers within this ﬁeld. The African Institute for 
Mathematical Sciences (AIMS) was launched in 2003 in South Africa to 
teach specialised topics in the mathematical sciences such as applied math-
ematics, bioinformatics, scientiﬁc computing, artiﬁcial intelligence and 
more14 . Since then, AIMS has expanded to Senegal, Ghana, Cameroon, 
Tanzania and Rwanda, graduating nearly 2000 students. To meet the 
demand for artiﬁcial intelligence practitioners within the continent, AIMS 
launched the African Masters in Machine Intelligence (AMMI) with spon-
sorship support from Facebook and Google15 . DeepMind, a subsidiary 
of Google that develops AI systems to advance scientiﬁc discovery, has 
recently funded scholarships for students to pursue Master degrees in 
Computer Science with specialisations in AI, ML and data science at 
Makerere University in Uganda (Mwamai, 2021)16 . We believe that 
industry-academic partnerships between local African institutions are a 
tangible step in bridging the AI-talent gap within the continent and 
will help build sustainable pathways to encourage future growth. While 
governments should be taking on the primary responsibility of funding 
AI education and entrepreneurship, the support of large industry players 
has helped ﬁll this gap. 
Datasets 
Another issue plaguing the effective adoption of artiﬁcial intelligence in 
Africa is the lack of data accessible to African researchers and the rele-
vance of this data to African problems in domains such as agriculture, 
health care and voice/text recognition. Machine learning relies on vast 
amounts of data to train algorithms, and if this data is sparse and unrep-
resentative, the resulting algorithms will be less effective and could cause 
harm to the vulnerable populations. Within Western countries like the
14 https://nexteinstein.org/ 
15 https://aimsammi.org/about-ammi-2/ 
16 http://cs.mak.ac.ug/news/view/18 

46
C. T. OKOLO ET AL.
United States, issues regarding dataset representation of minority popu-
lations like Black people and women have gained prominence over the 
past few years (Buolamwini & Gebru, 2018). However, this conversa-
tion has continued to stay focused on dataset bias in the context of 
Western issues, centring the gaze of these problems on the Global North. 
In regions where the social construct of race is not present, focusing 
solely on the lack of racial representation in datasets limits how people 
address other facets of dataset underrepresentation in the Global South. 
We ﬁnd that expanding issues of dataset bias to factors like ethnicity, tribal 
afﬁliations and other cultural nuances will help datasets becomes truly 
inclusive and relevant to solving African challenges. Open-source plat-
forms like Kaggle17 , openAFRICA18 and Zindi19 have been supportive 
avenues for African researchers and AI practitioners to curate and share 
their datasets, helping to address the lack of datasets within the African 
continent. Initiatives like the Inclusive Images Challenge from Google20 
have aimed to improve representation of imagery from the Global South, 
but haven’t fully represented the vast diversity within the African conti-
nent. This stresses the importance of local communities within the African 
continent being involved in the creation, sharing and use of datasets. 
More notably, we ﬁnd that the formation of grassroots efforts throughout 
the continent has helped make signiﬁcant strides in the types of data 
representing a variety of cultures, languages and regions throughout the 
continent. Collaborations between entities like Zindi and AI for Develop-
ment (AI4D) led to the creation of the AI4D Africa Language Challenge 
in 2020 where over 400 data scientists enrolled to contribute their exper-
tise to build novel datasets21 . The winners of the challenge submitted 
datasets encompassing a variety of African languages like Wolof, Igbo, 
Hausa, Fongbe, Ewe, Kabiye, Kiswahili and Chichewa, many of which 
aren’t present on popular translation services provided by Apple and 
Google. Other initiatives like the Lacuna Fund22 , which was founded to 
provide researchers and scientists in low-income countries resources to
17 https://www.kaggle.com/tags/africa 
18 https://africaopendata.org/dataset 
19 https://zindi.africa/ 
20 https://www.kaggle.com/c/inclusive-images-challenge 
21 https://zindi.africa/competitions/ai4d-african-language-dataset-challenge 
22 https://lacunafund.org/about/ 

RESPONSIBLE AI IN AFRICA—CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
47
produce labelled datasets, have helped improve dataset representation in 
agriculture, health and languages. More notably, the Lacuna Fund stresses 
adherence to practices in ethics and privacy, ensuring that the datasets will 
be owned by their respective creators and openly accessible to the interna-
tional community. We believe that it is imperative for African researchers 
to maintain agency over the data they collect and have input on how 
this data should be shared. Data sharing practices within the African 
context have been understudied, but a recent paper titled “Narratives 
and Counternarratives on Data Sharing in Africa” provided much-needed 
insight on local practitioners involved in these efforts and contributes 
tangible suggestions towards making datasets context-aware and ensuring 
the process of collection and sharing is trustworthy (Abebe et al. 2021). 
While there is still a long way to go in improving the quality and acces-
sibility of datasets representing the African continent, signiﬁcant progress 
has been made thus far. 
Government Support 
Over the past few years, governments have raced to develop legislation 
that will govern the use and implementation of artiﬁcial intelligence for 
personal and commercial use. However, African governments lag heavily 
behind those in North America and the European Union. In the 2019 
Government AI Readiness Index published by Oxford Insights, Africa 
is the worst performing region, with no countries listed in the top 
50 spots and only 12 in the top 100 (Readiness, 2019). The top ﬁve 
countries who are represented in the top 100 (Kenya, Tunisia, Mauri-
tius, South Africa and Ghana) already have signiﬁcantly developed tech 
ecosystems. This brings cause for concern to smaller economies within 
the African continent who have not developed legislation but could still 
be impacted by the effects of artiﬁcial intelligence. While it is unclear 
how many African countries have formally instituted regulation on AI, 
countries like Senegal, Kenya and South Africa have launched regulatory 
frameworks, data protection laws and acts regulating automated decision-
making (Adams, 2021). The Index of Regulation of Artiﬁcial Intelligence 
has monitored the AI policy and regulatory landscape around the world, 
reporting eight African countries (Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Sierra Leone, 
South Africa, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe) as making strides towards 
regulating AI (Goitom, 2019). Additionally, the lack of AI legislation 
proposed by African governments is mainly due to policymakers with

48
C. T. OKOLO ET AL.
scant technology expertise, and insufﬁcient expertise in AI and related 
emerging technologies. As the local AI workforce grows within the 
African continent, it will be important that governments provide opportu-
nities for highly-experienced professionals to contribute to AI legislation 
by serving on technical advisory panels or being placed in government 
positions speciﬁcally developed to leverage their expertise. The develop-
ment of artiﬁcial intelligence in Western countries has been fuelled by 
local startups and a similar model could prove successful in Africa. Larger 
companies like Google, Apple and Amazon have made dozens of acqui-
sitions of AI startups over the past few years, but this model may not be 
efﬁcient for the African context since there is so little AI activity occur-
ring in comparison with the West. Thus, government support for AI 
startups and research hubs is crucial. This will ensure that local inter-
ests and not those of multinational corporations are prioritised when it 
comes to solving issues with AI and that the continent doesn’t expe-
rience an “AI brain drain” seen in other ﬁelds such as medicine and 
engineering. Efforts like the Artiﬁcial Intelligence Hub at the Univer-
sity of Lagos run by Data Science Nigeria, which is the ﬁrst of its kind in 
Nigeria and likely in the continent, provide free AI courses and research 
labs for aspiring AI practitioners (Ndiomewese, 2018). While it is not 
clear how much governmental support this initiative received, it is a good 
model for governments to follow in establishing nationwide AI hubs. 
Again, we stress the importance of AI development being “for Africans by 
Africans” to ensure that colonial cycles of extraction by Western entities 
and historical dependence on foreign aid don’t impede what could be a 
viable pathway towards economic freedom (Chan et al., 2021). 
Survey of the Landscape of AI in the Continent 
The AI startup and research organisational landscape in Africa has rapidly 
increased over the past decade and continues to grow. We collected data 
on 102 African startups and research organisations that are either in oper-
ation, defunct, or with an unknown operating status across 11 African 
countries. Startups and research organisations were included if they oper-
ated within any of the 54 countries on the African continent and if their 
core product or business offering focused on artiﬁcial intelligence and/or 
its respective applications across a variety of domains. As some startups 
had either expired or broken links to their respective websites, we still 
included them but listed their operating status as either Unknown (U) or

RESPONSIBLE AI IN AFRICA—CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
49
No (N). Our search for African companies and organisations working with 
AI was conducted through Google, LinkedIn, Twitter and startup market 
intelligence platforms like Crunchbase, Pitchbook, Venture Capital for 
Africa (VC4A) and Tracxn. We also relied heavily on curated lists from 
sources such as Briter Bridges23 , a business intelligence company focusing 
on markets in the Global South and AI Expo Africa. This list is not 
exhaustive but represents a signiﬁcant number of companies developing 
artiﬁcial intelligence solutions across the African continent. 
Companies and organisations operating on the continent span a wide 
range of industries and domains. From the startups we listed, we found 30 
different industries they operate in. Finance, health care, agriculture and 
research were the largest segments, accounting for nearly 50% of all the 
companies. Within many startups on the continent, the ﬁnancial sector 
has been a priority, and as the shift to AI-powered solutions has begun, 
there is no surprise that this trend has moved towards ﬁnance as well. 
However, despite the goal of many ﬁntech startups on the continent to 
improve ﬁnancial access, they might in fact not be improving the lives 
of people at the bottom of society. We also ﬁnd similar trends in health 
care, where AI has claimed to either match or even exceed the diagnostic 
capabilities of doctors (Liu et al., 2019). However, this claim only holds 
true in the high-resourced environments these technologies are developed 
and tested in, which mostly happen to be in Western societies. As infras-
tructure within the African continent has scaled rapidly, we expect to see 
AI being leveraged further across a variety of domains. While AI being 
applied to ﬁelds such as agriculture, health care and ﬁnance may help 
improve overall access to these vital services, if not developed properly, 
they could indeed exacerbate existing inequities. 
A signiﬁcant number of companies have sprung up as consultancies to 
help larger businesses incorporate AI strategy into their current respec-
tive solutions. These companies were also classiﬁed as “AI” companies 
for the sake of simplicity. Another growing trend we see is the estab-
lishment of research groups and initiatives to train AI researchers on the 
continent and to tackle gaps within AI development that fail to include 
African users. Groups such as Masakhane9 have conducted novel research 
to build datasets and machine translation tools for African languages while
23 https://briterbridges.com/ 

50
C. T. OKOLO ET AL.
other initiatives such as Datascience Nigeria24 have democratised access 
to AI education by hosting bootcamps, summits and online competi-
tions. A small number of AI developers on the continent have begun to 
develop their own libraries to improve AI and data science methods, with 
some like DeepQuest AI25 by brothers Moses and John Olafenwa having 
thousands of users around the world. 
The startups in our analysis operate across a total of 11 African 
countries, with a majority of them based in Nigeria (25%) and South 
Africa (33%). Compared to other regions within the African conti-
nent, Western Africa and Southern Africa have 35 and 33 organisations 
respectively focusing on AI. Most notably, we ﬁnd that countries from 
Francophone Africa (Benin, Burkina-Faso, Cape Verde, Côte D’Ivoire, 
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Republic of Guinea, Madagascar, 
Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal, Togo and Tunisia) are missing from 
the AI ecosystem. While the overall startup and research landscape in AI 
within the African continent are promising, it is essential that AI services 
built on the continent include Africans from a diverse set of backgrounds 
and regions. We ﬁnd that the artiﬁcial intelligence startup ecosystem in 
Africa is relatively young. All of these startups and organisations were 
founded between 2010 and 2020, with 72 (70%) of them founded within 
the past ﬁve years. Additionally, almost 80% of the startups in our analysis 
are early-stage, showing signiﬁcant room for these companies to grow. 
While artiﬁcial intelligence has been around for decades, we presume 
that many of the companies in our analysis that were founded in the 
early 2010s may have adjusted their respective strategies to incorporate 
AI methodologies. 
A majority of the AI solutions developed by startups within the African 
continent cater to businesses that are aiming to improve their respective 
AI offerings or introduce AI into their operational systems. As ﬁnan-
cial technology (also known as ﬁntech) becomes increasingly popular, we 
ﬁnd that a signiﬁcant number of AI startups are developing technology 
to improve banking processes or make ﬁnancing decisions for customers 
based on existing data. Agricultural businesses and healthcare facilities are 
also popular options for AI startups to provide services for these industries 
that are rapidly digitising. Our analysis notes a growing trend of AI being
24 https://www.datasciencenigeria.org/ 
25 https://deepquestai.com/ 

RESPONSIBLE AI IN AFRICA—CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
51
introduced into warehouse operations and for manufacturing capabilities 
which could prove positive in scaling growth in these sectors and having 
a positive economic impact. 
Out of 102 startups, 22 of them (21%) had either all white or majority 
white/non-African founding teams. Many of these companies were based 
in South Africa, which we ﬁnd particularly concerning due to the types 
of technologies such as facial recognition being developed by these star-
tups which would disproportionately affect a major part of the respective 
population. In the United States, research has shown how facial recogni-
tion systems from companies such as Microsoft, IBM, Amazon and others 
are biased against subjects of darker skin tones and those with female 
characteristics (Buolamwini, 2018). These companies have either chosen 
to improve the gender and racial makeup of the datasets used to train 
these systems or abandon facial recognition technology altogether (Heil-
weil, 2020). Surveillance technologies like facial recognition are being 
deployed within large cities throughout the continent and have received 
major backlash from citizens in countries like South Africa and Zimbabwe, 
but continue to stay in use (Chutel, 2018; Hawkins, 2018). This again 
raises concern due to policing systems in countries such as South Africa 
that are signiﬁcantly biased towards Black South Africans who make up a 
considerable portion of the population. 
From the 102 startups we analysed, we found that there is a lack of 
information and transparency on what exactly most startups are doing: 
what methods they are using to build their predictive models, where 
their data is sourced, and how well their models perform. These issues 
have been characterised as fairness, accountability, transparency and ethics 
(FATE) and dozens of startups, mainly in the United States and Europe, 
have formed to address these issues of data and model observability. As 
this ﬁeld continues to widen, it will be important for African startups 
working with AI technologies to construct AI observability platforms of 
their own or work with other local startups in this space. More signiﬁ-
cantly, it is hard to conclusively say if there is a “true” AI element within 
many of the startups we ed. However, this is an issue that is not relegated 
solely to startups within the African continent. In 2019, London venture 
capital ﬁrm MMC studied almost three-thousand “AI startups” across the 
EU, concluding that 40 per cent of these companies do not incorporate 
artiﬁcial intelligence in their products (MMC, 2019). The overuse of the 
phrase “artiﬁcial intelligence” has led to unrealistic exaggerations of tech-
nology and excessive trust on what AI can do. Academic research labs and

52
C. T. OKOLO ET AL.
AI startups have purported to build AI systems that can detect emotions, 
gender, sexuality and even political orientation; however, these tasks are 
nearly impossible for a human to accomplish (Birhane, 2021; Heckman, 
2020; Wojcik & Remy, 2019). This work has led to calls for the EU to ban 
these tools (Asher-Schapiro, 2021) and we hope that policymakers within 
the African continent recognise these harms and actively begin to intro-
duce regulation banning these tools. With the business models of many of 
these types of companies primarily being motivated by maximising proﬁt 
at any cost, the autonomy and well-being of everyday citizens should not 
be disregarded. Current AI technologies are already believed to cause 
harm to marginalised people around the globe, and as AI grows within 
the African continent, there could be repercussions if its development isn’t 
well-governed. 
Emerging Trends and Concerns 
in AI Deployments in Africa 
China is making a push for AI leadership and doubling down on its 
soft power initiatives in Africa as part of China’s Grand Strategy to 
tap emerging markets, shape global governance norms and expand its 
inﬂuence (HDI, 2021; Nantulya, 2018). In his report to the 19th 
Party Congress in October 2017, Chinese President Xi Jinping outlined 
his vision for China becoming a global science and technology leader 
by 2050 (Shepherd & Qiu, 2017). A growing consensus singles out 
China as a major driver and inﬂuencer of authoritarian tech (Feldstein, 
2019a, b). Several experts have claimed that Chinese governments are 
working closely with Chinese companies to export authoritarian tech to 
like-minded governments to promote an alternative governance model 
(Polyakova & Meserole, 2019; Sharma,  2020; Mozur et al., 2019). 
These reports can be validated with the recent increase in the export 
of Chinese tech, which are gross human rights violators to countries 
such as Zimbabwe, Uganda and Ethiopia (Feldstein, 2019a, b). Most 
of the countries in Africa rely on Chinese companies for their digital 
and telecom services. For example, the Ethiopian government uses the 
services and infrastructures of ZTE, a Chinese telecom to monitor its citi-
zens’ communications, Hikvision, the world’s leading surveillance camera 
manufacturer, recently opened an ofﬁce in Johannesburg, CloudWalk 
Technology, a startup based in Guangzhou, recently signed a deal with the

RESPONSIBLE AI IN AFRICA—CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
53
Zimbabwean government (Hawkins, 2018), and Transsion a Shenzhen-
based company that has never sold a handset in its native China, but 
its brands iTel, Tecno and Inﬁnix sell more smartphones than any other 
produces in Africa (Bayes, 2019; Bloomberg, 2018). 
As reported in the AI Global Surveillance (AIGS) Index, Chinese 
companies led by Huawei are leading the supply of AI technologies with 
much focus on surveillance systems around the world (Feldstein, 2019a, 
b). Huawei technology has been linked to more countries in the South 
than any other company. It is aggressively inﬁltrating into the sub-Saharan 
Africa technology market by providing not only equipment and techno-
logical tools but also offering operation, management and support to set 
up these tools. To date, at least 12 African countries are using Huawei 
digital surveillance technology (Olander, 2019; Jili, 2020). An inves-
tigative report in The Wall (2019) highlighted that Huawei employees, 
technicians, provide other services to Uganda and Zambia governments 
that are not disclosed publicly. They helped the Uganda government 
spy on their political opponents by using cell data to track their loca-
tions and intercept their encrypted social media and communications. 
Also, in Zambia, the employees assisted the government in gaining access 
to Facebook pages and phones of bloggers critical of the president so 
they could be tracked and arrested. In Uganda, the government splashed 
$126 million on CCTV from Huawei (Reuters, 2019; Woodhams, 2020). 
The police say the new CCTV system will help reduce violent crime; 
however, the opposition leaders and civil society leaders believe that the 
law enforcement bodies are overburdened and too corrupt to identify 
criminals using footage. They believe the cameras with facial recognition 
technology will target and identify demonstrators in violent clampdowns 
as the election approaches in 2021. 
Facial recognition technology has become increasingly pervasive 
around the world today, with the rising concerns about privacy, poten-
tial abuses, security, bias and freedom (Zeng et al., 2019); this has led to 
cities such as San Francisco ban its usage (Conger, 2019). In 2018, the 
government of Zimbabwe employed a surveillance network developed by 
CloudWalk to provide a mass facial recognition programme. In exchange 
for the technology, Zimbabwe sends images of its citizens, which give 
China an edge in AI technologies compared to other Western countries 
(Mind Matters News, 2020; Techzim,  2018). Beyond the human rights 
concerns, the deal pointed to another angle to the China-Africa tech 
story: the quest for technological advantage. As one local outlet put it:

54
C. T. OKOLO ET AL.
“the Zimbabwe Government is sending our faces to China so China’s AI 
can learn to see black faces”. Existing AI facial recognition technologies 
are principally trained on white and East Asian datasets; the Zimbabwe 
deal offered Cloudwalk valuable data for improving its recognition of 
other ethnicities—thereby strengthening the arsenal of surveillance tools 
available to authoritarian governments (Bayes, 2019). 
Its terms require Harare [the capital of Zimbabwe] to send images 
of its inhabitants—a rich data set, given that Zimbabwe has absorbed 
migration ﬂows from all across sub-Saharan Africa—back to CloudWalk’s 
Chinese ofﬁces, allowing the company to ﬁne-tune its software’s ability to 
recognize dark-skinned faces, which have previously proved tricky for its 
algorithms.—Andersen (2020a, b) 
By expanding into African markets, China’s tech companies are gaining 
access to that sought-after commodity, data. Yes, these companies are 
playing a positive role in connecting African citizens, consumers and 
businesses. Nevertheless, they also have another role in helping Beijing 
promote its model of the internet as a controlled space and as a 
data-driven instrument of social and political control. 
As reported by Tilouine and Kadiri (2018), the Africa Union (AU) 
building headquarters at Addis Ababa gifted to AU by China was serving 
the Chinese government more purpose than initially assumed. In January 
2018, AU ofﬁcials accused China of hacking its headquarters computer 
every night (when no one was in the ofﬁce, but daylight had broken in 
Shanghai) for ﬁve years and downloading conﬁdential data. Beijing had 
funded the building in Ethiopia, and a Chinese state-owned company 
built it. Chinese workers still maintain the building to this day, and 
even its elevator symbols are written in Chinese. This is bothersome. 
That one of the most prominent political organisations in the conti-
nent had been unknowingly sending all of their conﬁdential data directly 
to the Chinese state certainly raises concerns about the implications of 
China’s growing inﬂuence in the technological infrastructure of Africa. 
The overt Chinese presence on the continent in construction, technology 
and business has been attributed to the availability of generous loans with 
affordable interest rates and willing partnership for development (Future 
Africa,2018).

RESPONSIBLE AI IN AFRICA—CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
55
Recommendations for Improving 
Responsible AI Progress in Africa 
According to Feldstein (2019a, b), local governments have the right to 
undertake surveillance systems that are unbiased and rooted in limiting 
their citizens’ freedom and enforcing political repression. For example, 
tracking technologies play a crucial role in preventing terrorism. They 
give the government the ability to monitor threats and act accord-
ingly. Governments can also use face recognition tools in ﬁnding missing 
people and victims of human trafﬁcking. However, technology and power 
struggles have changed the nature of how governments use surveillance 
systems and what they intend to monitor. Generally, the legal stan-
dards required to utilise surveillance systems legitimately are high, and 
governments ﬁnd it challenging to meet them. Countries with weak legal 
enforcement or authoritarian systems “routinely neglect these obligations” 
(Feldstein, 2019a, b). 
Several authors have investigated the implication of racial bias surveil-
lance and facial recognition algorithms (Cavazos et al., 2020; Bacchini & 
Lorusso, 2019; Raji et al., 2020b; Seutloali, 2015). Despite all the iden-
tiﬁed implications and recommendations made by these authors, it is 
important to state that no algorithm improvement is safe from the risk 
of contributing to racial discrimination if the social context in which it 
unfolds mainly consists of racial prejudice. A key recommendation is to 
stop seeing face recognition technologies as tools that do not see race 
and focus on working hard to monitor and get rid of racist from these 
tools. We need software and systems trained on datasets that are equally 
made up of faces representing all races. Until a solution to bias is found, 
algorithms need to be tested regularly for racially biased error rates. 
Awareness is also a key precondition. We cannot hope that any of these 
recommendations are ever achieved unless we become deﬁnitively aware 
that facial recognition technology is doomed to be racially biased—at least 
until racism is permanently erased. Of course, the most effective recipe for 
a racism-free face recognition technology is to struggle for a racism-free 
society. 
It is crucial to align AI initiatives and the data used for training 
AI models to local communities in Africa and the Global South in 
general. Engaging these communities, offering training solutions, under-
standing local issues and their unique needs will help create an avenue for 
developing more inclusive AI technology.

56
C. T. OKOLO ET AL.
Conclusion 
As AI development extends across the world and begins to make signif-
icant progress within Africa, it is imperative that local development of 
AI is encouraged and actively supported by governments, international 
agencies and large tech companies who have already begun to expand 
their global footprint throughout the continent. With current discourse 
and development of artiﬁcial intelligence focused on the West and China, 
there is little work that understands the nuances and sociotechnical impli-
cations of AI development in Africa. Combined with the lack of policy 
regulating the use of AI in many African countries, some of which has 
been problematic, Africa remains ripe for continued exploitation through 
new avenues presented by AI. 
Although it will take considerable effort and expense to grow African 
countries into “AI superpowers”, leveraging existing strengths in the 
software development and AI research communities while investing in 
infrastructure are viable steps towards this goal. AI has strong potential 
to transform livelihoods within Africa, but it is up to the continent to 
diligently focus on ensuring the potential risks and harms of AI don’t 
outweigh the beneﬁts. 
References 
Abebe, R., Aruleba, K., Birhane, A., Kingsley, S., Obaido, G., Remy, S.L. 
and Sadagopan, S., 2021, March. Narratives and counternarratives on data 
sharing in Africa. In Proceedings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, 
Accountability, and Transparency (pp. 329–341). 
Abiodun, F, (2018). ‘Developing Public Sector Leaders for Africa: So China is 
Spying on the African Union? Who is Surprised?’, Future Africa, 30 January. 
Available at: https://futureafrica.net/so-china-is-spying-on-the-african-union-
who-is-surprised/ (Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
Adams, R., Fourie, W., Marivate, V. and Plantinga, P., 2020. Introducing the 
series: can AI and data support a more inclusive and equitable South Africa? 
Human Sciences Research Council. 
Adams, N.-R. (2021) ‘AI law and Afrofuturism—how to regulate AI’s future in 
Africa’, Michalsons, 11 February. Available at: https://www.michalsons.com/ 
blog/ai-law-and-afrofuturism-how-to-regulate-ais-future-in-africa/47558 
(Accessed: 11 June 2021).

RESPONSIBLE AI IN AFRICA—CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
57
Aliya, R. (2019) ‘Europe’s AI start-ups often do not use AI, study ﬁnds’, Finan-
cial Times, 4 March. Available at: https://www.ft.com/content/21b19010-
3e9f-11e9-b896-fe36ec32aece (Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
Alliance for Affordable Internet. (2018a) ‘UN Broadband Commission Adopts 
A4AI “1 for 2” Affordability Target’, News Archives—Alliance for Afford-
able Internet, 23 January. Available at: https://a4ai.org/un-broadband-com 
mission-adopts-a4ai-1-for-2-affordability-target/ (Accessed: 10 June 2021). 
Alliance for Affordable Internet. (2018b). Affordable Internet Access: The cost 
challenge. Available at: https://a4ai.org/affordable-internet-access-the-cost-
challenge/ (Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
Andersen, R. (2020a) ‘Chinese AI Is Creating an Axis of Autocracy’, The 
Atlantic, 1 September. Available at: https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/ 
archive/2020/09/china-ai-surveillance/614197/ (Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
Andersen, R. (2020b). The panopticon is already here. Available at: https:// 
www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2020/09/china-ai-surveillance/614 
197/ (Accessed: 10 June 2021). 
Arrieta, A.B., Díaz-Rodríguez, N., Del Ser, J., Bennetot, A., Tabik, S., Barbado, 
A., García, S., Gil-López, S., Molina, D., Benjamins, R. and Chatila, R., 2020. 
Explainable Artiﬁcial Intelligence (XAI): Concepts, taxonomies, opportunities 
and challenges toward responsible AI. Information Fusion, 58, pp. 82–115. 
Asher-Schapiro, A. (2021) ‘EU urged to ban “discriminatory” AI tools that 
detect gender or sexuality’, Reuters, 16 April. Available at: https://www.reu 
ters.com/article/eu-tech-lgbt/eu-urged-to-ban-discriminatory-ai-tools-that-
detect-gender-or-sexuality-idUSL8N2M86XH (Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
GSM Association. (2016) Connected Society Consumer Barriers to Mobile Internet 
Adoption in Africa. Available at: https://www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelo 
pment/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/Consumer-Barriers-to-mobile-int 
ernet-adoption-in-Africa.pdf (Accessed: 10 June 2021). 
GSM Association. (2020) Sub-Saharan Africa 2020 The Mobile Economy. 
Available at: https://www.gsma.com/mobileeconomy/wp-content/uploads/ 
2020/09/GSMA_MobileEconomy2020_SSA_Eng.pdf (Accessed: 10 June 
2021). 
Bacchini, F. and Lorusso, L. (2019), Race, again: how face recognition tech-
nology reinforces racial discrimination, Journal of Information, Communica-
tion and Ethics in Society, (17)3, pp. 321–335. https://doi.org/10.1108/ 
JICES-05-2018-0050 
Bayes, T., (2019) ‘African networks, smartphones - and surveillance’, Merics, 
18 June. Available at: https://merics.org/en/analysis/african-networks-sma 
rtphones-and-surveillance (Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
Birhane, A., (2021). The Impossibility of Automating Ambiguity. Artiﬁcial Life, 
pp.1–18.

58
C. T. OKOLO ET AL.
Biryabarema, E. (2019) ‘Uganda’s cash-strapped cops spend $126 million on 
CCTV from Huawei’, Reuters, 15 August. Available at: https://www.reuters. 
com/article/us-uganda-crime-idUSKCN1V50RF (Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
Boden, M., Bryson, J., Caldwell, D., Dautenhahn, K., Edwards, L., Kember, 
S., Newman, P., Parry, V., Pegman, G., Rodden, T. and Sorrell, T., 2017. 
Principles of robotics: regulating robots in the real world. Connection Science, 
29(2), pp. 124–129. 
Buolamwini, J. and Gebru, T., (2018), January. Gender shades: Intersectional 
accuracy disparities in commercial gender classiﬁcation. In Conference on 
Fairness, Accountability and Transparency (pp. 77–91). PMLR. 
Buolamwini, J. (2018) Gender Shades. Available at: http://gendershades.org/ 
(Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
Carman, M. and Rosman, B., 2021. Applying a principle of explicability to AI 
research in Africa: should we do it?. Ethics and Information Technology, 23(2), 
pp. 107–117. 
Cavazos, J.G., Phillips, P.J., Castillo, C.D. and O’Toole, A.J., 2020. Accuracy 
comparison across face recognition algorithms: Where are we on measuring 
race bias?. IEEE transactions on biometrics, behavior, and identity science, 3(1), 
pp.101–111. 
Chan, A., Okolo, C.T., Terner, Z. and Wang, A., 2021. The Limits of Global 
Inclusion in AI Development. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.01265. 
Chen, 
L. 
Y. 
(2018) 
‘Are 
you 
a 
robot?’, 
Bloomberg, 
28 
March. 
Avail-
able 
at: 
https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2018-03-28/this-chi 
nese-phone-maker-has-taken-over-africa-for-better-and-worse 
(Accessed: 
11 
June 2021). 
Choi, J., Dutz, M.A. and Usman, Z. eds., 2020. The Future of Work in 
Africa: Harnessing the Potential of Digital Technologies for All. World Bank 
Publications. 
Chutel, 
L. 
(2018) 
‘China 
is 
exporting 
facial 
recognition 
software 
to 
Africa, expanding its vast database’, Quartz Africa, 25 May. Available 
at: https://qz.com/africa/1287675/china-is-exporting-facial-recognition-to-
africa-ensuring-ai-dominance-through-diversity/ (Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
Coeckelbergh, M., 2020. Artiﬁcial intelligence, responsibility attribution, and a 
relational justiﬁcation of explainability. Science and Engineering Ethics, 26(4), 
pp. 2051–2068. 
Conger, K., Richard, F., and Kovaleski, S. (2019) ‘San Francisco bans 
facial 
recognition 
technology’, 
The 
New 
York 
Times, 
14 
May. 
Avail-
able at: https://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/14/us/facial-recognition-ban-
san-francisco.html (Accessed: 08 June 2021). 
Ding, J. (2018) ‘Deciphering China’s AI dream’, Future of Humanity Institute, 
14 March. Available at. https://www.fhi.ox.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/Dec 
iphering_Chinas_AI-Dream.pdf (Accessed 11 June 2021).

RESPONSIBLE AI IN AFRICA—CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
59
Doshi-Velez, F., Kortz, M., Budish, R., Bavitz, C., Gershman, S., O’Brien, D., 
Scott, K., Schieber, S., Waldo, J., Weinberger, D. and Weller, A., 2017. 
Accountability of AI under the law: The role of explanation. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1711.01134. 
Dzoma, G. (2018) ‘Zimbabwe Government Is Sending Our Faces To China 
So China’s Artiﬁcial Intelligence System Can Learn To See Black Faces’, 
Techzim, 8 November. Available at: https://www.techzim.co.zw/2018/11/ 
zimbabwe-government-is-sending-our-faces-to-china-so-chinas-artiﬁcial-intell 
igence-system-can-learn-to-see-black-faces/ (Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
Economy, E.C., 2018. China’s new revolution: The reign of Xi Jinping. Foreign 
Affairs, HeinOnline Journal. pp. 60–61. 
Ehl, D. and Grün, G-C. (2020) ‘Why mobile internet is so expensive in some 
African nations’, DW , 03 November. Available at: https://www.dw.com/ 
en/why-mobile-internet-is-so-expensive-in-some-african-nations/a-55483976 
(Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
Facebook Engineering. (2020) ‘Building Africa, a transformative subsea cable to 
better connect Africa’, Meta Engineering 13 May, Available at: https://engine 
ering.fb.com/2020/05/13/connectivity/2africa/ (Accessed: 10 June 2021). 
Feldstein, S., 2019a. The global expansion of AI surveillance (Vol. 17). Wash-
ington, DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. 
Feldstein, S., 2019b. Can a UN Report Help Rein in Expansive and Abusive 
Digital Surveillance?. World Politics Review. 
Gebru, T., 2020. Race and Gender. The Oxford handbook of ethics of AI, pp. 251– 
269. 
Goitom, H., (2019), ‘Sub-Saharan Africa’, Regulation of Artiﬁcial Intelligence in 
Selected Jurisdictions. pp. 129–131. 
Greitens, S.C., 2020. Dealing with Demand for China’s Global Surveillance 
Exports. Brookings Institution Global China Report. 
Gwagwa, A., Kraemer-Mbula, E., Rizk, N., Rutenberg, I. and De Beer, J., 2020. 
Artiﬁcial intelligence (AI) deployments in Africa: beneﬁts, challenges and 
policy dimensions. The African Journal of Information and Communication, 
26, pp. 1–28. 
Gwagwa, A., 2020. Recommendations on the inclusion of sub-Saharan Africa in 
Global AI Ethics. Research ICT Africa. pp. 1–13. 
Hawkins, A. (2018) ‘Beijing’s Big Brother Tech Needs African Faces’, Foreign 
Policy, 24 July. Available at: https://foreignpolicy.com/2018/07/24/bei 
jings-big-brother-tech-needs-african-faces/ (Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
HDI. (2021) China is Ready to Be come a Technological Superpower. Avail-
able at: https://www.hdi.global/infocenter/insights/2021/china-technolog 
ical-superpower/ (Accessed 11 June 2021).

60
C. T. OKOLO ET AL.
Heckman, C. (2020) ‘AI can now read emotions – should it?’, The Conversa-
tion, 8 January. Available at: https://theconversation.com/ai-can-now-read-
emotions-should-it-128988 (Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
Heilweil, R. (2020) ‘Big tech companies back away from selling facial recog-
nition to police. That’s Progress’, Vox, 10 June. Available at: https://www. 
vox.com/recode/2020/6/10/21287194/amazon-microsoft-ibm-facial-rec 
ognition-moratorium-police (Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
Hollanek, T., 2020. AI transparency: A matter of reconciling design with critique. 
AI & SOCIETY , pp. 1–9. 
Oxford 
Insights. 
(2019). 
‘Government 
Artiﬁcial 
Intelligence 
Readiness 
Index 2019’. Available at: https://www.oxfordinsights.com/ai-readiness2019 
(Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
ITU. (2021) Measuring Digital Development: Facts and Figures 2020. Avail-
able at: https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Pages/facts/default.aspx 
(Accessed: 9 June 2021). 
Jili, B. (2020). Chinese Surveillance Tools in Africa. Available at: https://cld. 
web.ox.ac.uk/ﬁles/ﬁnaljilipdf (Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
Jo, E.S. and Gebru, T., 2020, January. Lessons from archives: Strategies for 
collecting sociocultural data in machine learning. In Proceedings of the 2020 
Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency (pp. 306–316). 
Killander, M. and Ilori, T. (2020) ‘Internet shutdowns in Africa threaten 
democracy 
and 
development’, 
The 
Conversation, 
26 
July. 
Available 
at: 
https://theconversation.com/internet-shutdowns-in-africa-threaten-dem 
ocracy-and-development-142868 (Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
Kohli, N., Barreto, R. and Kroll, J.A., 2018, February. Translation tutorial: a 
shared lexicon for research and practice in human-centered software systems. 
In the 1st Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency. New  
York, NY, USA (Vol. 7). 
Liu, X., Faes, L., Kale, A.U., Wagner, S.K., Fu, D.J., Bruynseels, A., Mahendiran, 
T., Moraes, G., Shamdas, M., Kern, C. and Ledsam, J.R., 2019. A comparison 
of deep learning performance against health-care professionals in detecting 
diseases from medical imaging: a systematic review and meta-analysis. The 
Lancet Digital Health, 1(6), pp.e271–e297. 
Madden P. and Kanos D., (2021) Figures of the week: Digital skills and the 
future of work in Africa. Available at: https://www.brookings.edu/blog/afr 
ica-in-focus/2020/07/22/ﬁgures-of-the-week-digital-skills-and-the-future-
of-work-in-africa/ (Accessed: 9 June 2021). 
Makerere University. (2021) DeepMind Supports Master’s Scholarships to Study 
AI at Makerere University. Available at: https://www.mak.ac.ug/slide/dee 
pmind-supports-master%E2%80%99s-scholarships-study-ai-mak (Accessed: 11 
June 2021).

RESPONSIBLE AI IN AFRICA—CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
61
Mehrabi, N., Morstatter, F., Saxena, N., Lerman, K. and Galstyan, A., 2021. 
A survey on bias and fairness in machine learning. ACM Computing Surveys 
(CSUR), 54(6), pp. 1–35. 
Microsoft. (2021) ‘Microsoft collaborates with the Nigerian government to 
accelerate digital transformation in the country’, Microsoft News Center, 03 
May. Available at: https://news.microsoft.com/en-xm/2021/05/03/micros 
oft-collaborates-with-the-nigerian-government-to-accelerate-digital-transform 
ation-in-the-country/ (Accessed: 9 June 2021). 
MMC. (2019). The State of AI Divergence. Available at: https://mmc.vc/wp-
content/uploads/2019/02/The-State-of-AI-2019-Divergence.pdf (Accessed: 
10 June 2021) 
Moosajee, N. (2021) ‘Fix AI’s racist, sexist bias’, The Mail & Guardian, 14  
March. Available at: https://mg.co.za/article/2019-03-14-ﬁx-ais-racist-sex 
ist-bias/ (Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
Mozur, P., Kessel, J.M., and Chan, M. (2019). ‘Made in China, exported to 
the world: the surveillance state’, The New York Times, 24 April. Avail-
able at: https://www.nytimes.com/2019/04/24/technology/ecuador-survei 
llance-cameras-police-government.html (Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
Mudongo, O., 2021. Africa’s Expansion of AI Surveillance-Regional Gaps and 
Key Trends. Research ICT Africa. pp. 1–6. 
Nantulya, P., 2018. Grand strategy and China’s soft power push in Africa. Africa 
Center for Strategic Studies, pp. 1–3. 
Ndiomewese, I. (2018) ‘This Is Nigeria’s First Ever Artiﬁcial Intelligence Hub’, 
Techpoint Africa, 11 June. Available at: https://techpoint.africa/2018/06/ 
11/nigerias-ﬁrst-ever-artiﬁcial-intelligence-hub/ (Accessed: 11 June 2021). 
Neri, E., Coppola, F., Miele, V., Bibbolino, C. and Grassi, R., 2020. Artiﬁcial 
intelligence: Who is responsible for the diagnosis?. La Radiologia Medica, 
125(6), pp. 517–521. 
Nyabola, N. (2016) ‘Facebook’s Free Basics Is an African Dictator’s Dream’, 
Foreign Policy, 27 October. Available at: https://foreignpolicy.com/2016/ 
10/27/facebooks-plan-to-wire-africa-is-a-dictators-dream-come-true-free-bas 
ics-internet/ (Accessed: 10 June 2021). 
Olander, 
E. 
(2019) 
‘China 
And 
The 
Rise 
Of 
AI 
Surveillance 
Tech-
nology 
In 
Africa’, 
The 
China 
Africa 
Project, 
19 
September. 
Avail-
able at: https://chinaafricaproject.com/analysis/china-and-the-rise-of-ai-sur 
veillance-technology-in-africa/ (Accessed: 10 June 2021). 
Parkinson, J., Bariyo N., and Chin J. (2019) ‘Huawei Technicians Helped African 
governments spy on political opponents’, The Wall Street Journal, 15 August. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/huawei-technicians-helped-afr 
ican-governments-spy-on-political-opponents-11565793017 
(Accessed: 
11 
June 2021).

62
C. T. OKOLO ET AL.
Perkowitz, S., 2021. The Bias in the Machine: Facial Recognition Technology 
and Racial Disparities. MIT Case Studies in Social and Ethical Responsibilities 
of Computing. 
Polyakova, A. and Meserole, C., 2019. Exporting digital authoritarianism: The 
Russian and Chinese models. Policy Brief, Democracy and Disorder Series 
(Washington, DC: Brookings, 2019), pp. 1–22. 
Prasad, R., 2018. Ascendant India, digital India: how net neutrality advocates 
defeated Facebook’s Free Basics. Media, Culture & Society, 40(3), pp. 415– 
431. 
Raji, I.D., Smart, A., White, R.N., Mitchell, M., Gebru, T., Hutchinson, B., 
Smith-Loud, J., Theron, D. and Barnes, P., 2020a, January. Closing the AI 
accountability gap: deﬁning an end-to-end framework for internal algorithmic 
auditing. In Proceedings of the 2020a Conference on Fairness, Accountability, 
and Transparency (pp. 33–44). 
Raji, I.D., Gebru, T., Mitchell, M., Buolamwini, J., Lee, J. and Denton, E., 
2020b, February. Saving face: Investigating the ethical concerns of facial 
recognition auditing. In Proceedings of the AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, 
Ethics, and Society (pp. 145–151). 
Rakova, B., Yang, J., Cramer, H. and Chowdhury, R., 2021. Where responsible 
AI meets reality: Practitioner perspectives on enablers for shifting organiza-
tional practices. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 
5(CSCW1), pp. 1–23. 
Roselli, D., Matthews, J. and Talagala, N., 2019, May. Managing bias in AI. In 
Companion Proceedings of The 2019 World Wide Web Conference (pp. 539– 
544). 
Seutloali, G.M., 2015. Own-race bias in facial recognition amongst black, 
coloured and white participants. PhD diss., University of Cape Town. 
Sharma, I., 2020. China’s Neocolonialism in the Political Economy of AI Surveil-
lance. Cornell International Affairs Review, 13(2), pp. 94–154. https://doi. 
org/10.37513/ciar.v13i2.554 
Shepherd, C. and Qiu, S. 2017. China’s Xi lays out vision for ’new era’ led by 
’still stronger’ Communist Party. Available at: https://www.reuters.com/art 
icle/us-china-congress-idUSKBN1CM35L 
Maeve 
Shearlaw. 
(2016) 
‘Facebook 
lures 
Africa 
with 
free 
internet— 
but 
what 
is 
the 
hidden 
cost?’, 
The 
Guardian, 
01 
August. 
Avail-
able at: https://www.theguardian.com/world/2016/aug/01/facebook-free-
basics-internet-africa-mark-zuckerberg (Accessed: 10 June 2021). 
Silberg, J. and Manyika, J., (2019) Tackling bias in Artiﬁcial Intelligence (and 
in 
Humans. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.mckinsey.com/featured-insights/ 
artiﬁcial-intelligence/tackling-bias-in-artiﬁcial-intelligence-and-in-humans 
(Accessed 11 June 2021).

RESPONSIBLE AI IN AFRICA—CHALLENGES AND OPPORTUNITIES
63
Teller, A. (2021) ‘Loon’s ﬁnal ﬂight’, Medium, 21 January’. Available at: 
https://blog.x.company/loons-ﬁnal-ﬂight-e9d699123a96 (Accessed: 10 June 
2021). 
Tilouine, J. and Kadiri, G. (2018) ‘A Addis-Abeba, le siège de l’Union africaine 
espionné par Pékin’, Le Monde.fr, 26 January. Available at: https://www. 
lemonde.fr/afrique/article/2018/01/26/a-addis-abeba-le-siege-de-l-union-
africaine-espionne-par-les-chinois_5247521_3212.html (Accessed: 11 June 
2021). 
Wareham, C.S., 2021. Artiﬁcial intelligence and African conceptions of person-
hood. Ethics and Information Technology, 23(2), pp. 127–136. 
Wojcik, S. and Remy, E., (2019) ‘The Challenges of Using Machine Learning 
to Identify Gender in Images’, Pew Research Center, 5 September. Available 
at: https://www.pewresearch.org/internet/2019/09/05/the-challenges-of-
using-machine-learning-to-identify-gender-in-images/ 
(Accessed: 
11 
June 
2021). 
Woodhams, S. 2020. China, Africa, and the Private Surveillance Industry. 
Georgetown Journal of International Affairs, 21, pp. 158–165. 
World Bank. (2019a) TICAD Seminar Series: DE4A initiative. Available 
at: https://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/312571561424182864/062519-dig 
ital-economy-from-africa-initiative-Tim-Kelly.pdf (Accessed: 9 June 2021). 
World Bank. (2019b) Achieving Broadband Access for All in Africa Comes with 
a $100 Billion Price Tag. Available at: https://www.worldbank.org/en/ 
news/press-release/2019b/10/17/achieving-broadband-access-for-all-in-afr 
ica-comes-with-a-100-billion-price-tag (Accessed: 9 June 2021). 
World Bank. (2020) Digital Skills for all African Students: What Will it 
Take? 28 Feb. Available at: https://www.worldbank.org/en/news/feature/ 
2020/04/14/digital-skills-for-all-african-students-what-will-it-take (Accessed: 
9 June 2021). 
World Bank. (2021). Digital Economy for Africa Initiative. Available at: 
https://www.worldbank.org/en/programs/all-africa-digital-transformation 
(Accessed: 9 June 2021). 
X, the moonshot factory. (2017) Loon, Expanding Internet Connectivity with 
Stratospheric Balloons. Available at: https://loon.com/ (Accessed: 10 June 
2021). 
Zeiger, H. (2020) ‘China’s Eyes Are Watching Africa Closely.’ Mind Matters 
News 
Available 
at: 
https://mindmatters.ai/2020/11/chinas-eyes-are-wat 
ching-africa-closely/ (Accessed: 09 May 2021). 
Zeng, Y., Lu, E., Sun, Y. and Tian, R., 2019. Responsible facial recognition and 
beyond. arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.12935.

64
C. T. OKOLO ET AL.
Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ 
by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction 
in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original 
author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and 
indicate if changes were made. 
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the 
chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons 
license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds 
the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 
holder.