THE ROUTLEDGE
HANDBOOK OF MEMORY
ACTIVISM
Edited by Yifat Gutman and Jenny Wüstenberg
With Irit Dekel, Kaitlin M. Murphy,
Benjamin Nienass, Joanna Wawrzyniak,
and Kerry Whigham
First published 2023
ISBN: 978-0-367-65039-1 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-003-12755-0 (ebk)
1
DECOMISSIONING
MONUMENTS, MOBILIZING
MATERIALITIES
Ann Rigney
(CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0)
DOI: 10.4324/9781003127550-5
The funder for this chapter is the European Research Council.

1
DECOMISSIONING
MONUMENTS, MOBILIZING
MATERIALITIES
Ann Rigney
For a memory to catch hold in society two things are needed.1 Firstly, a new narrative has to find
expression and, secondly, the power of old narratives to command assent needs to be undermined.
Most discussions of memory activism have understandably concentrated on the first of these
processes: on the ways that “forgotten,” or actively suppressed memories are brought into public
visibility. Many articles in this Handbook accordingly show the creativity of activists in exploring
alternative archives, and in inventing ever new ways to gain recognition for what has been
overlooked. Less attention has been paid to the dismantling of the old. Theoretical reflections on
the emergence of hitherto occluded experiences have by and large assumed that dominant
memories simply disappear as a byproduct of the new ones. Since the old narratives have held
center-stage long enough, the argument goes, why continue to pay attention to them?
However, the intense attention paid to existing monuments in recent years suggests that the
dynamics of old and new are more complicated. The materialized presence of old narratives in
the form of public statues offers a particularly potent site for negotiating the emergence of the
new. With this in mind, the present article calls for reflection, not just on strategies for giving
voice to hitherto occluded actors, but also on best practices for undermining hegemonic
narratives and decommissioning their normative power. The term “decommissioning” is used
here by analogy with weaponry to indicate that collective adhesion to new narratives depends
on the old ones being rendered ineffective, powerless to command attention and respect. While
memory activism primarily takes a positive form (acting “for” a particular memory), it is also
implicitly “against” prevailing narratives which are considered unfit for purpose in a society
with aspirations to greater justice and inclusivity. Although it may not be the ultimate aim, the
decommissioning of the old deserves consideration in its own right.2
This interdependence of the old and the emergent reflects the fact that memories – or more
precisely, acts of remembrance in the present – are in constant dialogue. They are in structural
competition for social uptake and public visibility. Public monuments have proved to be key
flashpoints in this process because their erection and maintenance make hierarchies of values
concrete and tangible. Accordingly, struggles about when to erect and when to demolish them
reflect their importance to public memory, but also, and more fundamentally, their importance
in determining who has the power to define collective identity and control urban space. In
public debates, they are usually discussed in terms of their symbolism, the fact that they evoke
the memory of certain events or actors rather than others. But their power to mobilize
DOI: 10.4324/9781003127550-5
21

emotions is less a matter of symbolism as such, but of material presence. In statues, meaning
ceases to be merely abstract, having become materialized in aesthetically formed objects – many
of which are also very large.
Recent conceptualizations of the “agentic capacity” of material presences allow for a new
understanding of why people can get so worked up about monuments. As Jane Bennett has argued
in her work Vibrant Matter, material presences are “never entirely exhausted by their semiotics”
(2010: 5). As material-symbolic presences monuments are an active part of the “memory habitat”
(Rigney, 2015) in which people live their lives and negotiate collective meanings and allegiances.
They are actants in the assemblage of human and nonhuman agents that work together to produce
public memory at any given moment. Moreover, by identifying what is memorable in the past
and rooting this in particular locations, they are also crucial to creating the “space of appearance”
in which groups acquire visibility in the present or are denied it (Mirzoeff, 2017). It is for this
reason that monuments matter so much, although their role is as yet poorly understood by scholars
and too easily dismissed in the media as a fuss about a load of old stones.
The material, and linked to this aesthetic, presence of monuments interpellates city-dwellers to
acknowledge the importance of a particular historical figure or event. They have been designed to
impose themselves on the spectator, to generate awe and respect by their sheer size, forcing the
viewer to look up, casting shadows over city squares. Often located in central positions in the
cityscape, they even force people to organize their movements around them (the Arc de Triomphe
in Paris offers a case in point as does the monument to Daniel O’Connell in the center of Dublin).
The examples offered so far belong to the monumentalism that since the early nineteenth
century has produced multiple tributes to national heroes in cities across the world. To be sure, the
aesthetic style of monuments and the practices surrounding them have evolved since the nine-
teenth century (see Young, 1993, 2016). Most notable is the gradual shift in the post-World
War II period to more openly interactive and less physically coercive forms and to smaller-scale
and more intimate modes of address – exemplified by Gunter Demnig’s stumbling stones project
that, in conjunction with civil society groups, has led to the placing of thousands of cobblestones
in European cities before the houses of victims of Nazi persecution, all identical in form while
bearing in every case a different name. But here too, as the title “stumbling stones” suggests, it is
the material presence of the memorial stones that triggers memory. These stones too exercise
mnemonic power albeit at a different scale and by triggering a reflexive form of “empathic un-
settlement” (LaCapra, 2001) rather than awestruck subordination to something transcendent.
Reflecting these major changes in commemorative forms, there has also been a gradual shift
in terminology. The term “monument” (usually associated with the celebration of achieve-
ments) has gradually been replaced by “memorial” (usually associated with the mourning of the
dead and the victims of history), a shift of emphasis that is also reflected in changing material
practices and aesthetic forms. This reframing has been accompanied by stringent critiques of
monumentalism as a structurally flawed attempt to fix for eternity a certain view of the past and
turn public memory into a monologic narrative with no room for dissent (Huyssen, 2003;
Hirsch in Altinay et al., 2019: 8). As several chapters here illustrate, ephemeral and performative
interventions in public space are currently being developed as creative alternatives to the
monumental without, however, as the placing of new public memorials suggests, entirely re-
placing people’s desire to give public expression to memory in a more permanent material form.
Even as these new material and performative practices are developing, however, many cities
are still marked by the legacy of monumentalism in the form of monuments to those once
considered heroes. These continue to bear witness to narratives that are now challenged but
that at the time of their erection were often supported, indeed commissioned, by large numbers
of citizens (it should not be forgotten that many major “national” monuments were originally
22
Ann Rigney

made financially possible by crowdsourcing and that, in some cases, they were even expressions
of emancipation – a case in point is offered by the huge tribute to “the Liberator” Daniel
O’Connell erected by acclamation in 1880 as a challenge to English rule in Ireland). If the
“vibrancy” of monuments has been displayed in people’s enthusiasm when they were erected
(though in some regimes this enthusiasm was undeniably imposed by authorities), their mo-
bilizing and affective power is arguably even more strongly reflected in the resentment they
have later provoked. Unwanted monuments – some of which were unwanted from the outset,
others becoming unwanted as frames of remembrance change – exercise a negative power.
They provoke rather than inspire, offend rather than impress, at first in silence and then in
increasingly public forms of dissent. Reflecting the depth of such offense, the Paris Commune
of 1871 took time out of its life-threatening struggle against government forces to express its
anger against the Vendôme Column, which had been erected in 1806 as a tribute to
Napoleonic militarism. Its looming presence in the city caused deep offense since the values it
expressed were contrary to the internationalist spirit of the new revolutionary order. Illustrating
the agentic capacity of the column, the Commune declared it to be “an affirmation of militarism,
a negation of international law, a permanent insult to the vanquished on the part of conquerors,
a perpetual attack on one of the three great principles of the French Republic – fraternity”3
before they decreed its destruction. Its spectacular demolition in May 1871 was celebrated by
the assembled Communards, who performed their newly-won visibility on its ruins, posing for
posterity and future remembrance in the still relatively new medium of photography.
Many other examples can be adduced of monuments that ended up provoking anger and
object-oriented aggression on the part of new regimes or oppositional movements. Suffice it to
mention the swathe of demolitions and relocations of statues to Lenin and Marx that fol-
lowed on the fall of the Soviet Union at the end of the 1980s; the “Rhodes must Fall”
23
Figure 1.1
Communards posing on the ruins of the Vendôme column, 16 May 1871. Photo: Bruno
Braquehais, Commune de Paris, la colonne Vendôme à terre. Courtesy Bibliothèque nationale de
France, Paris
Decomissioning Monuments

movement of 2015, targeting the statue of Cecil Rhodes dominating over the University of
Cape Town (Jethro, 2019); the spectacular dumping into Bristol harbor of the statue to slave
trader Edward Colston in June 2020 during a Black Lives Matter protest; the toppling of a
statue of Spanish conquistador Sebastián de Belalcázar by Indigenous protestors in the
Columbian city of Popayán in September 2020; and the ongoing debates in the United States
about the future of the statues to the Confederacy. Current debates may be unusually intense,
but the mechanisms are not new.
Memory activism and monument destruction have long gone together, from the damnatio
memoriae custom of the ancient Romans, to the iconoclasm of the Reformation, to the practice
of “slighting” the cultural heritage of the losers of the English civil war, to the systematic
destruction of statues of royalty during the French Revolution. Destroying, re-inscribing, or
removing monuments helps clear the decks for something new. More importantly, it helps put
the new on the agenda in a high-profile act of dissensus which is all the more visible because it
uses existing monuments as a launching pad for the emergence of alternatives. Even if some
monuments have become such a familiar part of the landscape as to be almost invisible, they
gain new vibrancy in times of contestation and become a focal point both for advocates of
change and for those who would resist it. Once this happens, the monuments start to command
new forms of attention and to inspire new actions. Ironically, the centralized location of many
monuments has meant that they easily become urban landmarks and assembly points for dis-
senters – including those protesting the monument itself as a toxic legacy and rejecting the
values it expresses. In becoming magnets for demonstrators, monuments help to make tangible
and highly visible the power asymmetries that have shaped the past and continue into the
present. It is for this reason that they can become powerful vehicles for un‐forgetting occluded
histories and for inaugurating a new “space of appearance” in contemporary society that is
visibly played out in their destruction, defacement, removal, or replacement.
Is there then a repertoire of strategies for decommissioning monuments and redirecting the
energies they mobilize? Have centuries of iconoclasm and recent events yielded a list of best
practices? Demolition is clearly the most radical rejection of the past. But while it certainly
succeeds in removing an intolerable or “insulting” presence, it also has a downside. Destruction
risks whitewashing history by removing its traces, and permanently erases a key material witness
to an earlier mnemonic regime and its exclusionary logic. This not only produces a new form of
amnesia about the prehistory of the present; it also destroys a cultural object which, in the
future, might have provided a tangible starting point for facilitating debate about the interplay
between remembering and forgetting in the production of collective identity.
Disrupting the meaning of monuments as they were originally intended offers a more pro-
ductive way forward. Two main strategies can be identified: re-framing and re-signifying. When a
toxic monument is relocated to a museum or to another type of exhibition space and hence
cordoned off from the everyday life of the city, it becomes “reframed” and hence transformed into
a heritage object. As such, it recalls the past instead of affecting the present. It loses the aura it once
had by virtue of its location in the center of city life and becomes instead a “display object”
(Kirshenblatt-Gimblett, 1998) with historical and aesthetic value, but no longer the power to
dictate memory and command respect. The Memento Park outside of Budapest, created in 1993,
offers a case in point: it displays side by side dozens of communist-era statues as aesthetic presences
that have become relics of an outdated memory culture. The very fact that so many statues are
lined up together also underscores their loss of power by making each statue a specimen of a
particular type rather than a singularly vibrant object capable of commanding loyalty. The
downside of relocation to a museum, of course, is that the lessons to be learned from the historical
fact of the monument’s existence will only be visible to museum-goers.
24
Ann Rigney

Re-signifying in situ offers an alternative. This involves modifying the appearance of a
monument so that its original meaning is changed and even over-written by a new perspective.
The least intrusive (and hence arguably least effective) strategy of resignification entails adding
an extra inscription. The statue to Jan Pieterszoon Coen in the Dutch city of Hoorn, for
example, was originally put up at the end of the nineteenth century as a tribute to this
seventeenth-century “hero” of the Dutch colonial enterprise; in 2012 a new plaque was added,
under pressure from civil society groups, that also recognized Coen’s responsibility for the
massacre of civilians on the Banda islands. In bearing witness to colonial violence, the new
plaque has some symbolic value; yet its physical presence is arguably not strong enough to offset
the material presence of the celebratory statue itself. The same could be said of the creative
vandalizing of the huge monument erected in 1931 to Leopold II in the Belgian city of Ostend
which depicted the king towering over his subjects, including a group of naked people from the
Congo. The amputation of the hand of one of these figures by unknown activists in 2004 was
widely interpreted as a way of recalling Leopold’s horrifically violent policies in Africa; but the
power of this mutilation to re-signify the monument nevertheless remains limited given the
sheer size of the latter.
Other “jamming” strategies make a stronger material mark and, for this reason, are more
effective in re-signifying the original and disrupting its power to speak for the public. Examples
include the spray-painting of “Black Lives Matter” across the monument to the Confederacy in
Charleston in 2015 in an explicit and highly visible contestation of the statue’s claim to speak for
society. They also include the colorful repainting of the heroic monument to the Soviet Army in
Sofia in 2011 which transformed the soldiers into figures from popular culture in a spectacular act
of guerilla art that decommissioned Soviet memory while also offering a playful critique of the
ongoing Americanization of Bulgarian society (the same monument was again repainted in 2014
in the Ukrainian colors in condemnation of the Russian occupation of the Crimea).
25
Figure 1.2
Monument to the Soviet Army, Sofia, 18 June 2011. Repainted by anonymous collective.
Photo:
Ignat
Ignev,
CC
BY
3.0
https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0,
via
Wikimedia Commons
Decomissioning Monuments

In such cases, a monument offers a durable canvas for the projection of changing per-
spectives and counter-narratives (at least until such time as the authorities move in and wipe the
monuments clean again). Yet another strategy is to bring alternative monuments into play in
the vicinity of the toxic monument in such a way as to challenge its primacy in the city space. In
the early morning of 15 July 2020, for example, a team led by artist Marc Quinn erected a resin-
and-steel statue of Black protester Jen Reid on the pedestal in Bristol where until a few weeks
earlier the statue of Colston had stood. This piece of guerilla art known as “A Surge of Power
(Jen Reid)” was removed within a day by the city authorities, but as long as it stood, it dra-
matically brought into play both the memory of Colston’s presence and the desire to inaugurate
a new mnemonic regime. As these examples illustrate, combining guerrilla art and pop-up
performance with high-profile monumentality yields highly visible contestation in a form that
can be more responsive to a changing environment and the dynamics of public debate than a
bronze monument erected “for the long haul”.
All of this begs the question of what sort of monuments or memorials, if any, should replace the
ones that have been recently challenged, and how the celebration of achievements can be squared
with mourning of victims. What languages do we have for publicly recollecting the past?
Reflecting the ongoing search for new expressive forms , Kara Walker’s recent Fons Americanus
(Tate Modern, 2019) offered a critical pastiche of monumentalism in the form of an enormous
plaster-cast fountain. This echoed the size and style of the Victoria Memorial outside Buckingham
palace, while depicting various figures and scenes from the “Black Atlantic” slave trade. Its de-
familiarizing appropriation of the very language of the monumental offers a platform for making
visible histories that so many imperial monuments occluded. Although it operates through a
temporary exhibition in an art museum, Walker’s installation is clearly in critical conversation
26
Figure 1.3
Robert E. Lee Monument, Richmond, VA. 1 July 2020. Photograph: Mk17b, CC BY-SA
4.0 https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0, via Wikimedia Commons
Ann Rigney

with more permanent monuments elsewhere. At the same time, it raises the crucial question of the
need to invent alternatives to the monumental (often depicting single “heroes”) in future mne-
monic regimes.
In the meantime, we can conclude that, although there is no single recipe for decom-
missioning monuments, new and highly creative strategies are continuously being invented.
One thing is clear: memory activism is inevitably entangled with the old memory it seeks both
to displace and to disqualify. Gaining recognition for hitherto silenced voices and perspectives
can take the form of entirely new initiatives. But paradoxically, it can actually be facilitated by
the intolerable presence of the old because the latter affords a public platform – and offers a
tangible focus for marking out differences and demanding change in the politics of visibility.
Important as it is, however, there is also a danger attached to expending too much energy on
the decommissioning of existing monuments. If pushed too far, iconoclasm may end up be-
coming an end in itself, distracting attention from the contemporary inequalities that drove the
demand for mnemonic change in the first place, and creating the illusion that to change a statue
is in itself a solution to the problem rather than a part, albeit a key part, of a larger dynamic of
contestation.
Notes
1 Research for this article was financially supported by the European Research Council (ERC) under
grant agreement 788572: Remembering Activism: The Cultural Memory of Protest in Europe.
2 A more extended version of this argument can be found in Rigney (2022).
3 La Commune de Paris, 12 April 1871; Bulletin 22; emphasis and translation AR.
Additional Resources
Bevan, R. (2006) The Destruction of Memory: Architecture at War. London: Reaktion Books.
Huyssen, A. (2003) Present Pasts: Urban Palimpsests and the Politics of Memory. Stanford, CA: Stanford
University Press.
Jethro, D. (2019) Heritage Formation and the Senses in Post-Apartheid South Africa: Aesthetics of Power. London:
Bloomsbury.
Leerssen, J. and Rigney, A. (eds.) (2014) Commemorating Writers in Nineteenth-Century Europe: Nation-
Building and Centenary Fever. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.
Rigney, A. (2022) ‘Toxic Monuments and Mnemonic Regime Change’, Studies on National Movements
9: 7–41.
Young, J. E. (2016) The Stages of Memory: Reflections on Memorial Art, Loss, and the Spaces Between. Amherst,
MA: University of Massachusetts Press.
27
Decomissioning Monuments