Marx, Engels, and Marxisms 
Series Editors 
Marcello Musto, York University, Toronto, ON, Canada 
Terrell Carver, University of Bristol, Bristol, UK

The Marx renaissance is underway on a global scale. Wherever the critique 
of capitalism re-emerges, there is an intellectual and political demand for 
new, critical engagements with Marxism. The peer-reviewed series Marx, 
Engels and Marxisms (edited by Marcello Musto & Terrell Carver, with 
Babak Amini, Francesca Antonini, Paula Rauhala & Kohei Saito as Assis-
tant Editors) publishes monographs, edited volumes, critical editions, 
reprints of old texts, as well as translations of books already published 
in other languages. Our volumes come from a wide range of political 
perspectives, subject matters, academic disciplines and geographical areas, 
producing an eclectic and informative collection that appeals to a diverse 
and international audience. Our main areas of focus include: the oeuvre 
of Marx and Engels, Marxist authors and traditions of the 19th and 20th 
centuries, labour and social movements, Marxist analyses of contemporary 
issues, and reception of Marxism in the world.

Patrizia Dogliani 
A Political History 
of the International 
Union of Socialist 
Youth 1907–1917

Patrizia Dogliani 
Department of History, Cultures, 
and Civilization 
University of Bologna 
Bologna, Italy 
ISSN 2524-7123
ISSN 2524-7131 
(electronic) 
Marx, Engels, and Marxisms 
ISBN 978-3-031-20693-1
ISBN 978-3-031-20694-8 
(eBook) 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-20694-8 
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive license to Springer 
Nature Switzerland AG 2023 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the 
Publisher, whether the whole or part of the material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of 
reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in 
any other physical way, and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic 
adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now known or 
hereafter developed. 
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. 
in this publication does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such 
names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and regulations and therefore free for 
general use. 
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and informa-
tion in this book are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither 
the publisher nor the authors or the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with 
respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or omissions that may have been 
made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional afﬁliations. 
Cover illustration: Man_Half-tube 
This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature 
Switzerland AG 
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland

Titles Published 
1. Terrell Carver & Daniel Blank, A Political History of the Editions 
of Marx and Engels’s "German Ideology” Manuscripts, 2014. 
2. Terrell Carver & Daniel Blank, Marx and Engels’s “German Ideol-
ogy” Manuscripts: Presentation and Analysis of the “Feuerbach 
chapter,” 2014. 
3. Alfonso Maurizio Iacono, The History and Theory of Fetishism, 
2015. 
4. Paresh Chattopadhyay, Marx’s Associated Mode of Production: A 
Critique of Marxism, 2016. 
5. Domenico Losurdo, Class Struggle: A Political and Philosophical 
History, 2016. 
6. Frederick Harry Pitts, Critiquing Capitalism Today: New Ways to 
Read Marx, 2017. 
7. Ranabir Samaddar, Karl Marx and the Postcolonial Age, 2017. 
8. George Comninel, Alienation and Emancipation in the Work of 
Karl Marx, 2018. 
9. Jean-Numa Ducange & Razmig Keucheyan (Eds.), The End of 
the Democratic State: Nicos Poulantzas, a Marxism for the 21st 
Century, 2018. 
10. Robert X. Ware, Marx on Emancipation and Socialist Goals: 
Retrieving Marx for the Future, 2018. 
11. Xavier LaFrance & Charles Post (Eds.), Case Studies in the Origins 
of Capitalism, 2018.
v

vi
TITLES PUBLISHED
12. John Gregson, Marxism, Ethics, and Politics: The Work of Alasdair 
MacIntyre, 2018. 
13. Vladimir Puzone & Luis Felipe Miguel (Eds.), The Brazilian 
Left in the 21st Century: Conﬂict and Conciliation in Peripheral 
Capitalism, 2019. 
14. James Muldoon & Gaard Kets (Eds.), The German Revolution and 
Political Theory, 2019. 
15. Michael Brie, Rediscovering Lenin: Dialectics of Revolution and 
Metaphysics of Domination, 2019. 
16. August H. Nimtz, Marxism versus Liberalism: Comparative Real-
Time Political Analysis, 2019. 
17. Gustavo Moura de Cavalcanti Mello and Mauricio de Souza Saba-
dini (Eds.), Financial Speculation and Fictitious Proﬁts: A Marxist 
Analysis, 2019. 
18. Shaibal Gupta, Marcello Musto & Babak Amini (Eds), Karl 
Marx’s Life, Ideas, and Inﬂuences: A Critical Examination on the 
Bicentenary, 2019. 
19. Igor Shoikhedbrod, Revisiting Marx’s Critique of Liberalism: 
Rethinking Justice, Legality, and Rights, 2019. 
20. Juan Pablo Rodríguez, Resisting Neoliberal Capitalism in Chile: 
The Possibility of Social Critique, 2019. 
21. Kaan Kangal, Friedrich Engels and the Dialectics of Nature, 2020. 
22. Victor Wallis, Socialist Practice: Histories and Theories, 2020. 
23. Alfonso Maurizio Iacono, The Bourgeois and the Savage: A 
Marxian Critique of the Image of the Isolated Individual in Defoe, 
Turgot and Smith, 2020. 
24. Terrell Carver, Engels before Marx, 2020. 
25. Jean-Numa Ducange, Jules Guesde: The Birth of Socialism and 
Marxism in France, 2020. 
26. Antonio Oliva, Ivan Novara & Angel Oliva (Eds.), Marx and 
Contemporary Critical Theory: The Philosophy of Real Abstraction, 
2020. 
27. Francesco Biagi, Henri Lefebvre’s Critical Theory of Space, 2020. 
28. Stefano Petrucciani, The Ideas of Karl Marx: A Critical Introduc-
tion, 2020. 
29. Terrell Carver, The Life and Thought of Friedrich Engels, 30th 
Anniversary Edition, 2020. 
30. Giuseppe Vacca, Alternative Modernities: Antonio Gramsci’s Twen-
tieth Century, 2020.

TITLES PUBLISHED
vii
31. Kevin B. Anderson, Kieran Durkin & Heather Brown (Eds.), 
Raya Dunayevskaya’s Intersectional Marxism: Race, Gender, and 
the Dialectics of Liberation, 2020. 
32. Marco Di Maggio, The Rise and Fall of Communist Parties in 
France and Italy, 2020. 
33. Farhang Rajaee, Presence and the Political, 2021. 
34. Ryuji Sasaki, A New Introduction to Karl Marx: New Materialism, 
Critique of Political Economy, and the Concept of Metabolism, 2021. 
35. Kohei Saito (Ed.), Reexamining Engels’s Legacy in the 21st 
Century, 2021. 
36. Paresh Chattopadhyay, Socialism in Marx’s Capital: Towards a De-
alienated World, 2021. 
37. Marcello Musto, Karl Marx’s Writings on Alienation, 2021. 
38. Michael Brie & Jörn Schütrumpf, Rosa Luxemburg: A Revolu-
tionary Marxist at the Limits of Marxism, 2021. 
39. Stefano Petrucciani, Theodor W. Adorno’s Philosophy, Society, and 
Aesthetics, 2021. 
40. Miguel Vedda, Siegfried Kracauer, or, The Allegories of Improvisa-
tion: Critical Studies, 2021. 
41. Ronaldo Munck, Rethinking Development: Marxist Perspectives, 
2021. 
42. Jean-Numa Ducange & Elisa Marcobelli (Eds.), Selected Writings 
of Jean Jaurès: On Socialism, Paciﬁsm and Marxism, 2021. 
43. Elisa Marcobelli, Internationalism Toward Diplomatic Crisis: The 
Second International and French, German and Italian Socialists, 
2021. 
44. James Steinhoff, Automation and Autonomy: Labour, Capital and 
Machines in the Artiﬁcial Intelligence Industry, 2021. 
45. Juan Dal Maso, Hegemony and Class Struggle: Trotsky, Gramsci and 
Marxism, 2021. 
46. Gianfranco Ragona & Monica Quirico, Frontier Socialism: Self-
organisation and Anti-capitalism, 2021. 
47. Tsuyoshi Yuki, Socialism, Markets and the Critique of Money: The 
Theory of “Labour Notes,” 2021. 
48. Gustavo Moura de Cavalcanti Mello & Henrique Pereira Braga 
(Eds.), Wealth and Poverty in Contemporary Brazilian Capitalism, 
2021. 
49. Paolo Favilli, Historiography and Marxism: Innovations in Mid-
Century Italy, 2021.

viii
TITLES PUBLISHED
50. Levy del Aguila Marchena, Communism, Political Power and 
Personal Freedom in Marx, 2021. 
51. V Geetha, Bhimrao Ramji Ambedkar and the Question of Socialism 
in India, 2021. 
52. Satoshi Matsui, Normative Theories of Liberalism and Socialism: 
Marxist Analysis of Values, 2022. 
53. Kei Ehara (Ed.), Japanese Discourse on the Marxian Theory of 
Finance, 2022. 
54. Achim Szepanski, Financial Capital in the 21st Century, 2022. 
55. Stephen Maher, Corporate Capitalism and the Integral State: 
General Electric and a Century of American Power, 2022. 
56. Rémy Herrera, Confronting Mainstream Economics to Overcome 
Capitalism, 2022. 
57. Peter McMylor, Graeme Kirkpatrick & Simin Fadaee (Eds.), 
Marxism, Religion, and Emancipatory Politics, 2022. 
58. Genevieve Ritchie, Sara Carpenter & Shahrzad Mojab (Eds.), 
Marxism and Migration, 2022. 
59. Fabio Perocco (Ed.), Racism in and for the Welfare State, 2022. 
60. Dong-Min Rieu, A Mathematical Approach to Marxian Value 
Theory: Time, Money, and Labor Productivity, 2022. 
61. Adriana Petra, Intellectuals and Communist Culture: Itineraries, 
Problems and Debates in Post-war Argentina, 2022. 
62. Kolja Lindner, Marx, Marxism and the Question of Eurocentrism, 
2022. 
63. Marcello Mustè, Marxism and Philosophy of Praxis: An Italian 
Perspective from Labriola to Gramsci, 2022. 
64. Lelio Demichelis, Marx, Alienation and Techno-capitalism, 2022. 
65. Terrell Carver, Smail Rapic (Eds.), Friedrich Engels for the 21st 
Century: Perspectives and Problems, 2022. 
66. Alexandros Chrysis, The Marx of Communism: Setting Limits in the 
Realm of Communism, 2022. 
67. Paul Raekstad, Karl Marx’s Realist Critique of Capitalism: 
Freedom, Alienation, and Socialism, 2022. 
68. Marcello Musto, Rethinking Alternatives with Marx, 2022. 
69. José Ricardo Villanueva Lira, Marxism and the Origins of Interna-
tional Relations, 2022. 
70. Bertel Nygaard, Marxism, Labor Movements, and Historiography, 
2022.

TITLES PUBLISHED
ix
71. Marcos Del Roio, Gramsci and the Emancipation of the Subaltern 
Classes, 2022. 
72. Marcelo Badaró, The Working Class from Marx to Our Times, 
2022. 
73. Jean Vigreux, Roger Martelli, & Serge Wolikow, One Hundred 
Years of History of the French Communist Party, 2022. 
74. Vincenzo Mele, City and Modernity in George Simmel and Walter 
Benjamin: Fragments of Metropolis, 2023. 
Titles Forthcoming 
Vesa Oittinen, Marx’s Russian Moment 
Spencer A. Leonard, Marx, the India Question, and the Crisis of 
Cosmopolitanism 
Joe Collins, Applying Marx’s Capital to the 21st century 
Jeong Seongjin, Korean Capitalism in the 21st Century: Marxist Analysis 
and Alternatives 
Marcello Mustè, Marxism and Philosophy of Praxis: An Italian Perspective 
from Labriola to Gramsci 
Shannon Brincat, Dialectical Dialogues in Contemporary World Politics: A 
Meeting of Traditions in Global Comparative Philosophy 
Francesca Antonini, Reassessing Marx’s Eighteenth Brumaire: Dictatorship, 
State, and Revolution 
Thomas Kemple, Marx’s Wager: Das Kapital and Classical Sociology 
Xavier Vigna, A Political History of Factories in France: The Workers’ 
Insubordination of 1968 
Attila Melegh, Anti-Migrant Populism in Eastern Europe and Hungary: 
A Marxist Analysis 
Marie-Cecile Bouju, A Political History of the Publishing Houses of the 
French Communist Party 
Mauro Buccheri, Radical Humanism for the Left: The Quest for Meaning 
in Late Capitalism 
Tamás Krausz, Eszter Bartha (Eds.), Socialist Experiences in Eastern 
Europe: A Hungarian Perspective 
Martin Cortés, Marxism, Time and Politics: On the Autonomy of the 
Political

x
TITLES PUBLISHED
João Antonio de Paula, Huga da Gama Cerqueira, Eduardo da Motta 
e Albuquer & Leonardo de Deus, Marxian Economics for the 21st 
Century: Revaluating Marx’s Critique of Political Economy 
Zhi Li, The Concept of the Individual in the Thought of Karl Marx 
Lelio Demichelis, Marx, Alienation and Techno-capitalism 
Salvatore Prinzi, Representation, Expression, and Institution: The Philos-
ophy of Merleau-Ponty and Castoriadis 
Agon Hamza, Slavoj Žižek and the Reconstruction of Marxism 
Éric Aunoble, French Views on the Russian Revolution 
Alexis Cukier, Democratic Work: Radical Democracy and the Future of 
Labour 
Christoph Henning, Theories of Alienation: From Rousseau to the Present 
Daniel Egan, Capitalism, War, and Revolution: A Marxist Analysis 
Emanuela Conversano, Capital from Afar: Anthropology and Critique of 
Political Economy in the Late Marx 
David Norman Smith, Self-Emancipation: Marx’s Unﬁnished Theory of the 
Working Class 
Tomonaga Tairako, A New Perspective on Marx’s Philosophy and Political 
Economy 
Matthias Bohlender, Anna-Sophie Schönfelder, & Matthias Spekker, 
Truth and Revolution in Marx’s Critique of Society 
Mauricio Vieira Martins, Marx, Spinoza and Darwin: Materialism, 
Subjectivity and Critique of Religion 
Aditya Nigam, Border-Marxisms and Historical Materialism 
Fred Moseley, Marx’s Theory of Value in Chapter 1 of Capital: A Critique 
of Heinrich’s Value-Form Interpretation 
Armando Boito, The State, Politics, and Social Classes: Theory and History 
Anjan Chakrabarti & Anup Dhar, World of the Third and Hegemonic 
Capital: Between Marx and Freud 
Hira Singh, Annihilation of Caste in India: Ambedkar, Ghandi, and Marx 
Salvatore Engel-Di Mauro, An Introduction to Ecosocialism 
Mike Berry, A Theory of Housing Provision under Capitalism 
Maria Chehonadskih, Alexander Bogdanov and Soviet Epistemologies: The 
Transformation of Knowledge After the October Revolution 
Peter Lamb, Harold Laski, the Reluctant Marxist: Socialist Democracy for 
a World in Turmoil 
Raju Das, Marxism and Revisionism Today: Contours of Marxist Theory 
for the 21st Century

TITLES PUBLISHED
xi
Gary Teeple, The Democracy That Never Was: A Critique of Liberal 
Democracy 
Alfonso García Vela & Alberto Bonnet, The Political Thought of John 
Holloway: Struggle, Critique, Emancipation 
Erick Omena, Urban Planning as Class Domination: The Games of Land 
Dispossession

Introduction 
The creation and early life of the International Union of Socialist Youth 
attracted little resonance among historians and had few rare testimonies: 
some reconstructions took place early, particularly in the late 1920s, 
when the international communist and socialist youth unions vied for the 
primogeniture of labor youth movements and the legitimacy of its polit-
ical continuity. Till the 1970s, histories of the Second International forgot 
all the existence of a youth international; works marked by congresses, 
such as those of James Joll, Roland Bauer, Julius Braunthal, Gerhart 
Niemeyer or Patricia Van der Esch, or those devoted to the ideas that 
guided the events of international socialism, such as the works of Georges 
D. H. Cole and Carl Landauer, had yet to delve into topics like the 
women’s and youth movements and their social and political requests. 
Only Van der Esch mentioned the existence of the “parallel” interna-
tional unions associated with the Second International, like the Socialist 
Inter-parliamentary Commission, or the womens’ international organi-
zation, but she too neglected to mention the Youth one. The French 
historian Annie Kriegel was more forthcoming, recalling its existence 
in a few lines, not least because her work expressed the need to treat 
the history of the International “as an element of contemporary social 
history.”1 She understood the history of Union was a chapter in a more
1 A. Kriegel. Les internationales ouvrières (1864–1943). Paris, 1964, 7; and P. Van der 
Esch. La Deuxième Internationale 1889–1923. Paris, 1957. 
xiii

xiv
INTRODUCTION
complex political and social story of the working-class masses in the indus-
trial era. The historical reconstruction of the Youth International was also 
limited by the narrowness of the sources used to write an “ofﬁcial” history 
of the Second International, which essentially consisted of congressional 
reports. It took the expansion of socialist événementielle history through 
Georges Haupt’s enormous survey and retrieval work in the 1960s to 
formulate projects for a study of “parallel and minor” international orga-
nizations. It was in fact Georges Haupt, in a distant 1977, who nudged 
me toward this history as the subject of my Italian university dissertation. 
In that year, Italy was troubled by a complex issue of youth, resulting in 
protests, alternative cultures and violence. The question of young gener-
ations emerged also in the social and political history of the workers’ 
movement. 
The hesitation was attributed to the scarcity of sources and autobio-
graphical narratives. Few accounts from that time were preserved for us, 
such as those of ﬁrst secretaries Henri de Man and Willy Münzenberg; 
they were largely distorted by the ideological and political clash among 
national organizations that occurred with the Great War, in the aftermath 
of the Russian Revolution and at the birth of the Third International. The 
exception was what remained of the correspondence of the second secre-
tary of the Union: the Austrian Robert Danneberg. Part of letters and 
congress preparatory documents went to the archives of the International 
Institute of Social History in Amsterdam, while much of the documenta-
tion from the secretariats operating in Vienna and Zurich was dispersed or 
handed over to the international communist youth movement in Moscow, 
which made instrumental use of it between the two-world-wars period. 
The ﬁrst reconstruction of the Union, and in part the only one, 
dates from 1929 to 1931 and was carried out by three leaders of 
the Communist Youth International: the Austrian Richard Schüller, the 
German Alfred Kurella and Russian Rafael Chitarov. Schüller was particu-
larly concerned with reconstructing the ﬁrst period, the one before the 
intervening partition between socialist and communist youth.2 In the 
late 1920s, the authors were still involved in the clash between the two 
international youth organizations, the socialist and the communist ones, 
and communist interest was to discredit the earlier work of some young
2 Geschichte der Komunistischen Jugendinternationale, 3 vols, Berlin, 1929–1931: R. 
Schüller. Von den Anfangen der proletarischen Jugendbewegung bis zur Gründung der 
KJI. 

INTRODUCTION
xv
socialist leaders—especially those who after the war remained loyal to or 
returned to the socialist “old house.” Even before a history was ﬁnished, a 
historiography had begun to undermine interpretation and the historical 
reconstruction of events. Any young leader in the 1920s was barred from 
these interpretative manipulations.3 The three youth internationals (the 
socialist, the communist and the third one based in Vienna) that sprang 
up in the immediate postwar period sought to legitimize themselves as 
the continuation of the one that was born in Stuttgart in 1907. In the 
second postwar, this ﬁrst imprint remained. Most of the studies on the 
socialist youth came from East German historiography; and for several 
reasons: narrative continuity, easy access to German language sources 
and lack of interest from broader international historiography. To the 
already ﬂawed pre-1945 understanding, other unsubstantiated interpre-
tations were added, for example the GDR historians’ overestimation of 
the inﬂuence on the youth international movement by the Bolsheviks and 
Lenin before 1917.4 
However, it must also be remembered that Stalinism and Nazism 
would soon eliminate, in purges, extermination camps, and through polit-
ical assassinations, the protagonists of the history we are reconstructing 
here: Robert Danneberg, Willi Münzenberg, Gyula Alpari, to mention 
only the most important ones. Or many lesser-known Italians, who 
nonetheless played a key role together with the Swiss in saving the Inter-
national Union from disappearing during the Great War. Several of them 
contributed to the birth of the Communist Youth International, and in 
the 1920s sought protection from fascism in Soviet Union and disap-
peared in the Stalinist purges. Robert Danneberg, a socialist and a Jew, 
died in Auschwitz in 1942. After the repression of the Hungarian revolu-
tion, the life of Guyla Alpari was a constant ﬂight across Europe to escape 
the Stalinists, and then the Nazis, until he was killed in the Sachsenhausen 
concentration camp in 1944. All that does not include the still unsolved 
cause of Münzenberg’s death in a French forest in June 1940.
3 See the historical reconstruction made by three socialist leaders: L. Thaller. Die inter-
nationale sozialistische Jugendbewegung. Wien 1921; K. Korn. Die Arbeiterjugendbewegung. 
2 vols., Berlin, 1923, and K. Heinz. Kampf und Aufstieg, Wien, 1932. 
4 K.H. Jahnke (ed), Geschichte der deutschen Arbeiterjugendbewegung 1904–1945, Berlin 
(GDR) 1973; and A. Reinhardt. Rolle und Funktion des Sekretariats der «Internationalen 
Verbindung sozialistischer Jugendorganisationen» (Entstehung und Tätigkeit 1907–1917 ). 
Ph. Diss., Leipzig, 1965. 

xvi
INTRODUCTION
This book had its ﬁrst Italian version in 1983.5 It was the result 
of long research thanks to a fellowship at the Einaudi Foundation in 
Torin. It retains its original structure, although it is, for reasons of space, 
reduced in the very rich set of notes that almost constituted a second 
text in itself. The decision to rewrite and publish it in English stems 
from two main reasons. First: the lack of an international knowledge on 
this history. Secondly, the different approach and reading we can do of 
that history today.6 If the factual reconstructions of the history of the 
Second International have not progressed very far, the history of inter-
nationalism has made great strides. We can relocate this work in a new 
debate on the characteristics and limits of internationalism and transna-
tionalism. The national movements, the struggles and goals they set: 
anti-militarism, protection of young workers from exploitation, access 
to culture and professional qualiﬁcation for poor youth, economic and 
political networks among youths from different countries are now the 
dominant themes of a history of internationalism that not only exam-
ines organizations. Paraphrasing what was written by Glenda Sluga and 
Patricia Clavin “when historians addressed internationalism, they presume 
its nineteenth-century origins in Marxist-inspired political movements.”7 
They showed that we can study other kinds of internationalism, from 
liberal-inclined internationalisms to a trans-nationalism led by interna-
tional ideas and institutions. I would like to show here that the Marxism 
internationalism of the Second International, 1889–1917, can also be 
seen from the perspective of trans-national networks and struggles. And 
at the same time, the history of the International Union of Socialist Youth
5 P. Dogliani. La “scuola delle reclute”. L’Internazionale giovanile socialista dalla ﬁne 
dell’Ottocento alla Prima guerra mondiale. Torin, 1983. 
6 I refer to some of my previous considerations: Dogliani (ed). Internazionalismo e 
transnazionalismo all’indomani della Grande Guerra. Bologna, 2020, 7–26, Socialisme et 
internationalisme. Histoires du socialisme: Cahiers Jaurès, janvier-mars 2009, n. 191, 11– 
30. A different approach can be seen in few new books crossing internationalism and trans-
nationalism: T.C. Imlay. The Practice of Socialist Internationalism. European Socialists and 
International Politics 1914–1960. Oxford, 1918; N. Delalande. La lutte et l’entraide. L’âge 
des solidarités ouvrières. Paris, 2019; E. Marcobelli. Internationalism towars Diplomatic 
Crisis. The Second International and French, German and Italian Socialists. Published in 
this collection, 2021. 
7 G. Sluga and P. Clavin (eds). Internationalism. A Twentieth-Century History. 
Cambridge, 2017, 3. In this book, see also the chapters: Dogliani. The fate of Socialist 
Internationalism, 38–60, and T. Imlay. Socialist Internationalism after 1914, 191–212. 

INTRODUCTION
xvii
can be framed in the history of generation and relations between youth 
and adults as it has been developed in recent decades. The book is also 
a reﬂection on how and why large masses of European young workers 
were attracted to socialism and Marxism from the end of the nineteenth 
century up to the early twentieth century. 
As I hand the book over to the press, I want to remember some 
maestri who at various times guided and inﬂuenced my early studies on 
the history of international socialism: Gian Mario Bravo, Enzo Collotti, 
Georges Haupt, Madeleine Rebérioux, Herbert Steiner, Claude Willard. 
My remembrance and thanks go to them. I would also like to thank those 
who allowed this book to be published: Francesca Antonini, Jean Numa 
Ducange, Marcello Musto, and the reviser of my English text, Alex Clark. 
A brief notice about the notes: as it has been mentioned they have been 
reduced. An essential choice has been made of bibliographical references, 
quotations and data appearing in the footnotes, while archival references, 
pamphlets and newspaper articles have been largely indicated and are 
quoted here in their original language, as they appeared at the time, to 
better enable their identiﬁcation and retrieval. 
Bologna, September 2022

Praise for A Political History of the 
International Union of Socialist 
Youth 1907–1917 
“Patrizia Dogliani’s new history of the International Union of Socialist 
Youth draws fresh air into the often claustrophobic spaces of the history 
of socialism. She reminds us of the interests and agency of a young gener-
ation—in Europe and the wider world—in a volatile period of political 
experimentation and ambition, war and peace.” 
—Glenda Sluga, Professor of International History and Capitalism, HEC 
European University Institute, Florence, Italy 
“With this new book, Patrizia Dogliani once again demonstrates why she 
is one of the preeminent scholars of modern international and transna-
tional history. Rooted in an impressive array of published and unpublished 
sources in multiple languages, Dogliani’s study of the International Union 
of Socialist Youth provides a novel window on the international socialist 
movement before and during World War I, highlighting the efforts of 
young European militants to deﬁne and instantiate socialism against 
a tumultuous background of depression, war and revolution. It is an 
impressive achievement.” 
—Talbot Charles Imlay, Professor, University of Laval, Quebec, Canada 
“Long recognized as a pioneering historian of youth, Patrizia Dogliani 
offers a rich transnational panorama of socialist youth across Europe. She 
persuasively links the birth of political rebellion and organizing among 
young people to the invention of ‘adolescence’ as a particular economic,
xix

xx
PRAISE FOR A POLITICAL HISTORY OF THE …
social, and cultural stage of modern life. With an impressive command 
of sources in multiple languages, Dogliani provides an essential guide to 
political activism among youth across class, gender, and nationality.” 
—Mary Gibson, Professor of History, City University of New York, USA

Contents 
1 
Proletarian Youth Organizations Before the Stuttgart 
Conference
1 
1.1 
The Condition of Working-Class Youth in Europe 
at the End of the Nineteenth Century
1 
1.2 
Early Bourgeois and Denominational Youth Movements
6 
1.3 
Early Socialist Worker Youth Organizations
15 
1.4 
The Typology of Working-Class Youth Associations
23 
2 
The Birth of the Socialist Youth International
31 
2.1 
Early Proposals for an International Coordination 
of Socialist Youth
31 
3 
The Anti-Militarist Struggle
53 
3.1 
Liebknecht: Militarism “External” and Internal 
to Countries
53 
3.2 
Jaurès and the “Armed Nation”: Anti-Militarism 
and the National Problem
59 
3.3 
Typologies of Anti-Militarist Action
73 
4 
The Organization of Educational Work
85 
4.1 
Socialist Pedagogy
85 
4.2 
Sports Activity and Anti-Alcoholic Struggle
92 
4.3 
The Cultural and Educational Activity of Youth Groups
98 
4.4 
The “Rekrutenschulen” of Social Democracy
111
xxi

xxii
CONTENTS
5 
Unionization and the Economic Struggles of Socialist 
Youth
121 
5.1 
The Issue of Apprenticeship in the Stuttgart Debate
121 
5.2 
Professional Youth Organizations
126 
5.3 
Economic Struggles and the Relationship with Labor 
Organizations
133 
6 
The Function and Activities of the Vienna International 
Secretariat from 1907 to 1914
141 
6.1 
The Administrative and Organizational Activities 
of the Secretariat
141 
6.2 
The Copenhagen Conference and the Birth 
of the French Socialist Federation
151 
6.3 
Contact with Overseas Youth Organizations: America, 
Australia and Argentina
156 
6.4 
The SIUSY in the Face of Conﬂicts Between Youth 
Organizations and Socialist Parties
161 
7 
The Danger of War: International Youth Initiatives 
from 1912 to 1914
171 
7.1 
Worker Youth Organizations Emerging 
from the Breakup of the Habsburg, Tsarist 
and Ottoman Empires
171 
7.2 
New Forms of Anti-Militarism and the Emergence 
of a Youth Left
183 
7.3 
Another “Congrès Manqué”: the Fourth Vienna Youth 
Conference
192 
8 
The Youth International During World War I
197 
8.1 
The Role of Neutral Countries in the Preparation 
of the Berne Conference
197 
8.2 
Living and Working Conditions and the Struggles 
of Youth During the War
204 
8.3 
The Activities of Zurich Secretariat and the Personality 
of Willi Münzenberg
211 
8.4 
Youth Participation in the Zimmerwald Movement, 
the Russian Revolution and the Dissolution 
of the Youth International
218

CONTENTS
xxiii
Conclusions: The End of a History and the Beginning 
of a Historiography
223 
Index
235

Abbreviations 
AJI
Arbeiter-Jugend-Internationale (Berlin) 
Am IISG (aJI)
Amsterdam: Internationaal Instituut voor Sociale Geschiedenis. 
Archives Socialistische-Jugend-Internationale. 
Av
L’Avanguardia (Rome) 
BSI
Bureau socialiste international 
CGL
Confederazione Generale del Lavoro 
CGT
Confédération générale du Travail 
CYI
Communist Youth International Union 
FIGS
Federazione italiana giovanile socialista, Rome: Italian socialist 
youth Federation 
GRS
Karl Liebnecht, Gesammelte Reden und Schriften 
IASJ
Internationale Arbeitsgemeinschaft sozialistischer Jugendorgan-
isation (Vienna) 
JA
Der Jugendliche Arbeiter (Vienna) 
JI
Jugend-Internationale (Zurich -Berlin) 
Mi BIF
Milan: GG. Feltrinelli Foundation’s Library 
MS
Le Mouvement Socialiste, Paris  
NZ
Die Neue Zeit, Berlin 
POB
Parti Ouvrier Belge 
POF
Parti Ouvrier français 
POSR
Parti ouvrier socialiste révolutionnaire 
PSF
Parti socialiste de France 
PSI
Partito socialista italiano 
PSR
Parti socialiste révolutionnaire 
PSS
Parti socialiste suisse 
SFIO
Section française de l’Internationale ouvrière
xxv

xxvi
ABBREVIATIONS
SIUSY
Secretariat of the International Union of Socialist Youth/ Inter-
nationales Sekretariat der sozialistischen Jugendorganisationen 
/Bureau internationale des jeunesses socialistes, Vienna 
SPD
Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands 
SYI
Socialist Youth International Union