Vol.:(0123456789)
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w
1 3
Discover Sustainability
Research
Which competencies should be fostered in education for sustainable 
development at higher education institutions? Findings 
from the evaluation of the study programs at the University of Bern, 
Switzerland
Thomas Hammer1   · Anna Lena Lewis1 
Received: 20 January 2023 / Accepted: 17 March 2023
© The Author(s) 2023 
 
OPEN
Abstract
A relatively broad consolidated consensus has emerged among experts regarding the competencies that should be 
fostered through an education for sustainable development at the higher education level. However, there is little empiri-
cal support to aid in answering the question of which competencies should be promoted from the perspective of stu-
dents and graduates. This was the main purpose for analyzing the corresponding results of the evaluation of the study 
programs in sustainable development at the University of Bern. In a standardized survey, students (N = 124), graduates 
(N = 121), and the supervisors of internships (N = 37) were asked, among other questions, how important they consider 
the fostering of the respective 13 competencies during their studies and for their professional activities. Overall, the 
results confirm the view of experts: the study programs should be designed for a comprehensive empowerment with 
respect of responsible and self-motivated participation in meeting the challenges of sustainable development. Even 
the students are of the opinion that competency-oriented education is important and that not only the acquisition, 
respectively the imparting of knowledge is relevant. Regarding the estimation of the promotion of competencies in the 
study program, the three groups agree that the competencies “Interconnected, foresighted, and thinking approaches 
in system-dynamic contexts” and “Recognizing on one’s own perspective on a situation and problem, empathizing with 
other perspectives, and taking these into account when solving problems” are the most important. For the professional 
field, the competency “Communicating in a comprehensive and target group-oriented manner” is rated most important 
by all three groups. However, it must be noted that there are also differences between the varying perspectives of the 
students, graduates, and internship supervisors. The results indicate opportunities for improvement that can also be 
considered as recommendations in the further development of inter- and transdisciplinary sustainability-oriented study 
programs. Furthermore, lecturers should, especially regarding a multidisciplinary team, coordinate and communize the 
development of competencies across the different educational elements. Students should be well informed regarding 
how the various educational elements, i.e., teaching/learning arrangements and assessments, are intended to contribute 
to the overall development of competency. Finally, in order to ensure that lecturers align respective learning outcomes, 
as well as teaching/learning arrangements and assessments in their educational elements, there will need to be a greater 
focus on competency development across a program of study.
Keywords  Sustainability competencies in higher education · Curricula development · Evaluation of study programs · 
University of Bern/Switzerland
 *  Thomas Hammer, thomas.hammer@unibe.ch; Anna Lena Lewis, anna.lewis@unibe.ch | 1Centre for Development and Environment 
(CDE), University of Bern, Mittelstrasse 43, 3012 Bern, Switzerland.

Vol:.(1234567890)
Research	
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w
1 3
1  Introduction
The greatest challenge at the present period is to conserve the planet’s resources, while also developing welfare for 
all and to effectively maintain a growing population. As the urgency and speed of global change increase, so too does 
societies’ need for knowledge and solutions in order to meet these challenges [1]. Education is to be assigned a key role 
in demanding that it contributes to progress toward a sustainable society [2]. Riess et al.  [3] use the term “Education for 
Sustainable Development” (ESD) to describe the “totality of all actions by which people seek to promote the competen-
cies of learners in such a way as to enable them to shape sustainable development” [3, p. 298]. Through holistic, inter-, 
and transdisciplinary learning methods, ESD should sensitize people and enable them to shape future developments in 
a responsible way and thus render innovative contributions to all economic, social, ecological, and cultural topics—thus 
resulting in a positive contribution to society [4, 5].
Higher education institutions as engines of research and innovation for the cultural, socio-economic, and ecologically 
sustainable development of individuals, communities, and nations are of major importance in regard to this aim [1]. 
Sustainability-oriented study programs render contributions at various levels, that is: They ensure that knowledge on 
the ecological and social consequences of modern societies, as well as in regard to suitable strategies for the purposes 
of dealing with these challenges are translated into courses. Transdisciplinary courses and multi-stakeholder approaches 
introduce students to new forms of thinking, acting, and research. As such, they ensure the education and sensitization 
of future sustainability scientists.
In respect to the discussion on Education for Sustainable Development (ESD), a broad consensus has emerged that 
education in respect of sustainable development should also be designed in a competency-oriented framework at the 
higher education level [6–10]. Competencies should represent the overarching orientation framework for curriculum 
development and all associated pedagogical-didactic requirements in respect of teaching (which includes lecturer train-
ing, as well as the development of teaching modules, including the derivation and the justification of learning outcomes, 
teaching–learning arrangements, and assessments) [11–15]. Likewise, a certain consensus has evolved in respect of the 
fact that competency development should be understood more broadly than the acquisition of knowledge, skills, and 
attitudes (often referred to as “instrumental” ESD). Instead, students should be enabled to deal critically, reflexively, and 
inclusively with various values, concepts, and solution approaches [16–18] and thus contribute responsibly to overcoming 
real-world problems, opportunities, and challenges in their spheres of activity and action (i.e., the so-called “emancipa-
tory” ESD) [19]. According to Wiek et al.  [20, p. 204], competencies consist of “knowledge, skills and attitudes that enable 
successful task performance and problem solving with respect to real-world sustainability problems, challenges and 
opportunities”. Competencies can also be considered as integrated skills, consisting of an interplay of knowledge, skills, 
and attitudes that enable people to assume responsibility and to participate in problem-solving processes in a targeted 
and effective manner at work, in an organization, in civic engagement, and in everyday life [21]. Moreover, according to 
Glasser and Hirsh [22, p. 126], competencies consist of a “constellation of abilities, attitudes, knowledge, understanding, 
skills, and habits of mind that are functionally linked to support both problem-posing and problem-solving and evoke 
purposeful behavior toward particular end goals.”
Ever since the Bologna reform in higher education, specifically in the context of ESD, various competency frameworks 
have been conceptualized across educational levels or specifically developed for the purposes of the higher education 
level. An overview is provided by Rieckmann [23]; Riess et al.  [3]; as well as Wilhelm et al. [15]. In addition, we must also 
include the competency framework of de Haan [24–26] and Bormann and de Haan [27], which has entered the litera-
ture under the terms “Gestaltungskompetenz”, and “shaping competence”, respectively. Furthermore, the competency 
frameworks of Lozano et al. [11]; Rieckmann [28, 29]; Glasser and Hirsh [22]; Cebrián and Junyent [30]; Dlouhá et al. [31]; 
Wals [16, 32]; Wiek et al. [20]; as well as that of Wiek et al. [33]. The latter has been further developed by Brundiers et al. 
[7] by means of a Delphi study and is in our opinion the actual and most appropriate reference framework at this time.
Shephard et al. [34] also identified the differences and contradictions between the various conceptions of competen-
cies. However, in the sense of Rieckmann [23], there is some consensus on what the key sustainability competencies 
are. He includes the following competencies, which are included in certain competency frameworks: systems-thinking 
competency; anticipatory competency; normative competency; strategic competency; collaboration competency; critical 
thinking competency; self-awareness competency; and integrated problem-solving competency—whereby the latter, 
in respect of the interaction with the other competencies, is to be understood as a framework competency that enables 
one to contribute to the mastering of sustainability problems [see also 9].

Vol.:(0123456789)
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w	
Research
1 3
The various competency frameworks have been developed theoretically, for example, in the frame of Delphi surveys 
of researchers and lecturers [7, 28, 29] or in the frame of surveys of professionals [35–37]. However, there are hardly any 
empirical studies on which competencies students and graduates of sustainability-oriented study programs consider 
important. Exceptions include the studies by Brudermann et al.  [38] (in their survey of students at the University of 
Graz/Austria) and Hammer and Pfäffli [39] (in their survey of students at the University of Bern/Switzerland). This paper 
focuses on the perspective of students and graduates of study programs in sustainable development (“novice” or “learner” 
perspective). On the other hand, the perspective of internship supervisors in sustainability-oriented companies or in 
corporate sustainability departments—i.e., professionals from various professional fields who supervise internships—is 
also taken into account ("expert” perspective).
The results of a 2-year evaluation process of the study programs in sustainable development at the University of Bern 
from March 2019 to May 2021 serve as a basis for this study. The aim of the present contribution is to gain insights from 
the results on the assessment of the importance of ESD competencies of students, graduates, and internship supervi-
sors regarding the design of new, as well as the further development of existing sustainability-oriented study programs.
2  Materials and methods
2.1  The study programs in sustainable development at the University of Bern and their theoretical 
foundations
The University of Bern pursues a whole-university approach with respect to the integration of sustainable develop-
ment in teaching, research, services, and operations [40]. In teaching, a process is ongoing, whereby the integration of 
sustainable development into all major study programs is taking place. At the same time, the University of Bern also 
offers special minor programs in respect of sustainable development at the bachelor’s and master’s level, which are 
designed to promote sustainability competencies complementary to the classic disciplinary major programs. A total 
of four minor programs are offered, namely three programs of 15, 30, and 60 ECTS credits at the bachelor’s level (since 
2013) and one master’s program of 30 ECTS credits (since 2015). The latter is designed to be non-consecutive due to the 
fact that certain disciplinary major programs only allow a minor program either at the bachelor’s or only at the master’s 
level, thereby offering students of as many major programs as possible the opportunity to undertake a minor program 
in respect of sustainable development.
From the beginning, the programs were conceptualized against the background of the competency discussions of 
the time. These included the general competency discussion [41], the so-called DeSeCo discussion (i.e., Definition and 
Selection of Competencies) [42–46], the discussion regarding shaping competencies [24–27], and the broader discussion 
on the competencies in respect of an ESD [16, 17, 20, 28, 29, 33, 37, 47–50]. Equally relevant has been the general ESD 
discussion, which addresses matters of aligning learning outcomes with intended competency development, appropri-
ate teaching–learning arrangements, topics, content, assessments, and the role of lecturers [4, 51, 52].
In terms of content and topics, the development of the programs was based on the so-called integrative understand-
ing of sustainability as defined by the United Nations [53–56]. Further, in respect of this definition, the UN have already 
outlined in their report (regarding the World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED) in 1987 [57], which 
was differentiated in the so-called Rio documents in 1992, as well as in the follow-up conferences), that sustainable 
development is a transformation encompassing all areas of society. In respect of this understanding—in addition to the 
general aspects of content (i.e., tackling global challenges as they are concretized, for example, in the Agenda 21 adopted 
in Rio in 1992, or the Sustainable Development Goals)—the procedural aspects are specified (including in regard to the 
participation and empowerment of all actors). In order to meet the challenges of sustainable development, actors at all 
levels of action (individual, local, national, and international) are called upon to act in accordance with the overarching 
long-term goals of sustainable development.
Accordingly, sustainable development is conceived in the study programs as a comprehensive individual and societal 
search. Further, it is a learning and shaping process that affects actors in all fields and at all levels of action. In addition, 
it must also be noted that it consists of a transformation of society, which is referred to by the German Advisory Council 
on Global Change (WBGU) as a “Great transformation” [58]. The teaching, learning arrangements, and assessments are 
geared toward the acquisition of competencies and—in addition to the “classic” formats of lectures, exercises, seminars, 
and individual work—include inter- and transdisciplinary groups; project and research work; case studies; excursions; and 
practical insights. The possibility to complete an internship, which is assessed with 15 ECTS credits, within the framework 

Vol:.(1234567890)
Research	
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w
1 3
of the Bachelor Minor for 60 ECTS credits is particularly worth mentioning (see Sect. 2.3). The lecturers primarily assume 
the role of learning coaches who support the students in their work and reflection processes.
2.2  The competency framework
In the development of the study programs, the abovementioned discussions at the time regarding “shaping competence” 
or “Gestaltungskompetenz” [24–27, 52], as well as the competency framework developed by Wiek et al. [20] were crucial 
(see Sect. 2.1). “Gestaltungskompetenz”, which is mainly discussed in German-speaking countries, means to enable 
learners to acquire the specific capabilities that are required in order to participate in the elaboration and implementa-
tion of solutions regarding the challenges of sustainable development. As such, through this acquisition, they are thus 
able to participate in the shaping of the future in society. According to de Haan [26], this competency consists of 12 
sub-competencies, which are—“namely the ability to:
•	 gather knowledge in a spirit of openness to the world, integrating new perspectives;
•	 think and act in a forward-looking manner;
•	 acquire knowledge and acting in an interdisciplinary manner;
•	 deal with incomplete and overly complex information;
•	 cooperate in decision-making processes;
•	 cope with individual dilemmatic situation of decision-making;
•	 participate in collective decision-making processes;
•	 motivate oneself as well as others to become active;
•	 reflect upon one’s own principles and those of others;
•	 refer to the idea of equity in decision-making and planning actions;
•	 plan and act autonomously; and
•	 show empathy for and solidarity with the disadvantaged.”
In developing their so-called “reference framework for academic program development” and deriving their key com-
petencies in sustainability, Wiek et al. [20] included the relatively generic shaping competency. However, they focused on 
the creation of a framework for the purposes of revising existing programs, as well as in designing new study programs at 
the higher education level. The so-called “sustainability research and problem-solving competence” forms the framework 
competency that enables students to analyze current problem constellations, to create sustainability visions, to elaborate 
desirable future scenarios, as well as to develop and test strategies for the purposes of problem solving. This framework 
competency is composed of the following five competencies: “systems-thinking competency”; “normative competency”; 
“interpersonal competency”; “anticipatory competency”; and “strategic competency”. Brundiers et al. [7] developed this 
competency model further and created a framework with eight competencies: “systems-thinking competency”; “values-
thinking competency”; “futures-thinking competency”; “interpersonal competency”; “intrapersonal competency”; and 
“implementation competency”. These interact to form the so-called “integrated problem-solving competency”.
During the development of the four minor study programs, it became apparent that, due to the specific circumstances 
described above, a competency framework could not simply be adopted as a general framework for the programs and 
that a framework of its own had to be developed. Only when the study programs were concretized in the form of modules, 
training elements, teaching–learning arrangements and performance assessments did a distinct idea of the competen-
cies to be fostered emerge. From this, the study management compiled an orientation framework with 13 competencies 
and, for pragmatic reasons, divided these into the four categories “Specialized and methodological competencies” (in 
German “Fach- und Methodenkompetenzen”); “Personal competencies”; “Social and communicative competencies”; and 
“Action competencies”.
These categories correspond to what de Haan [26] calls “classical” competency categories, such as “subject and 
methodological competence”, “social competence”, and “personal competence”. These categories are similarly used 
by Nölting et al. [59 p. 91], Erpenbeck et al. [41], and Zinn [60]. This “classical” outline was chosen due to the fact that 
it facilitated communication with lecturers from different disciplines who were not familiar with the discussions 
regarding ESD at the higher education level, as well as specific ESD competencies at that time. At the same time, this 
framework allows one to assign aspects of the partly, quite abstract sounding competencies (e.g., systems-thinking 
competency, strategic competency, etc.) to “classical” competency categories, such as specialized, methodological, 

Vol.:(0123456789)
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w	
Research
1 3
and action competencies. The competencies in the four competency categories are detailed as follows (also refer 
to Table 1):
(a)	 Specialized and methodological competencies: With respect to an ESD at the higher education level as a minor pro-
gram complementing a disciplinary major program, it is important that a certain cross-disciplinary sustainability 
knowledge and cross-disciplinary methodological competencies are present or can be developed and created by 
means of research [61]. In this context, interconnected, foresighted, and systemic thinking is quite central [7, 20, 
29, 33, 62]. Equally important are the specific methodological knowledge of inter- and transdisciplinary procedures 
and working methods, as well as the ability to access knowledge from outside the discipline and to contribute to 
inter- and transdisciplinary discourses with one’s own disciplinary knowledge, as well as to work on SD problems 
[63–65].
(b)	 Personal competencies: Sustainable development as a process of social negotiation of sustainable solutions, the 
coordination of the different interests of the various actors, and the resolution of trade-offs requires the ability to 
recognize and reflect on one’s own values and perspective with respect to a sustainable development challenge. 
This is in addition to empathizing with other perspectives, handling the values and perspectives of other actors, as 
well as trade-offs and decision-making dilemmas [66]. In the competency model of Brundiers et al. [7], these aspects 
belong to the values-thinking competency and the interpersonal competency.
(c)	 Social and communicative competencies: In respect of research and practice, sustainable development requires inter-
disciplinary and transdisciplinary cooperation regarding certain problems and thus there is a requirement to work 
in teams and with actors from a wide range of professional fields. Accordingly, it is important to be able to organize 
work and organizational processes in a multidisciplinary team in a targeted and efficient manner. This should be 
conducted in order to involve actors from outside academia appropriately in the research processes, as well as to 
be able to communicate in a comprehensible and target group-oriented manner [67].
(d)	 Action competencies: It is central that students learn to help shape the transformation [4]. This includes the fact that 
students engage with real-world challenges and develop contributions in order to address them [19]. In addition, it 
is required that they are able to contribute their expertise to inter- and transdisciplinary processes [47]. In this regard, 
it is important to stress that the ability to think and work in an inter- and transdisciplinary manner is considered 
fundamental in most inter- and transdisciplinary concepts of an ESD [64, 68].
These competencies should be promoted in all four study programs, but in a level-appropriate manner that cor-
responds to the scope of the study programs with appropriately concretized learning outcomes, teaching–learning 
arrangements, content, and assessments.
Thus far, we have not produced a differentiated analysis regarding the question of how comprehensively the frame-
work with the 13 competencies represents the general sustainability competency frameworks mentioned above. Regard-
ing the framework of Brundiers et al. [7], it can be said that the "Systems-thinking Competency", the "Interpersonal 
Competency", the "Implementation Competency" and the "Integrated Problem-Solving Competency" are relatively well 
represented. Parts of the "Values-thinking Competency", the "Futures-thinking Competency" and the "Strategic-thinking 
Competency" are also included in the competency framework, but overall, they are rather in the background when in 
relation to the other competencies.
2.3  The evaluation of the study programs
For the purposes of the evaluation of the study programs, the faculty responsible for the study programs set up an evalu-
ation commission, which designed the evaluation according to the university guidelines and accompanied it in terms of 
content and methodology. The evaluation process included: a survey of the students; a survey of the graduates; a survey 
of the supervisors in the internship companies; two lecturer workshops; a workshop conducted by the students them-
selves; discussions with the responsible educational partners at other universities (whose students were also admitted 
to the study programs or to parts of them); two reviews by international experts; and a final workshop by the evaluation 
commission (which is also responsible for the final report on the evaluation). The answers to the three surveys (in respect 
of the students, graduates, and internship supervisors) regarding the competencies are included in this analysis, whereby 
reference is also made to the findings of the other studies when putting the results into context. The three surveys are:

Vol:.(1234567890)
Research	
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w
1 3
Table 1   The 13 competencies in four competency categories that provide the framework for the design of the minor study programs in respect of sustainable development (SD) at the 
University of Bern
Category
Competency
Explanation
Specialized and methodological competencies Discipline-independent knowledge of SD (including theories, mod-
els, concepts, understandings, and challenges)
In minor programs, which complement disciplinary major programs 
in fostering ESD competencies, the acquisition of cross-disciplinary 
knowledge (e.g., regarding SD challenges, transformation con-
cepts, and current research questions) is important
Methodological expertise, as well as inter- and transdisciplinary 
approaches and working methods
Appropriate methodological knowledge, especially in regard to spe-
cific inter- and transdisciplinary approaches and working methods, 
is important for the purposes of a cross-disciplinary investigation 
of SD issues
Interconnected, foresighted, and thinking approaches in system-
dynamic contexts
Networking, foresighted, systemic, or system-dynamic thinking is 
regarded as a key competency in the context of ESD competency 
discussions
Accessing knowledge from other disciplines and using disciplinary 
knowledge to contribute to inter- and transdisciplinary dis-
courses in order to address SD challenges
In order to deal with challenges that move beyond the major disci-
pline, it is essential to be able to tap into knowledge from outside 
the discipline and to contribute one’s own disciplinary knowledge 
and skills to interdisciplinary and transdisciplinary discourses in 
order to address SD issues
Personal competencies
Recognizing and reflecting on one’s own perspective on a situation 
and problem, empathizing with other perspectives, and taking 
these into account when solving problems
In the context of individual work, as well as in inter- and transdiscipli-
nary collaboration, it is central to recognize and reflect one’s own 
perspective on a situation and problem and to take other perspec-
tives into account appropriately when solving problems
Handling trade-offs and decision dilemmas
A solution-oriented approach to individual and collective conflicting 
goals (trade-offs) and decision-making dilemmas is a fundamental 
challenge for SD
Handling values, principles, theories, and one’s own competencies 
in a critical and reflexive manner
A reflective and critical approach to individual and societal values, 
societal norms, guiding principles, theories, and one’s own com-
petencies is central to individual and collective solution-oriented 
action for SD
Social and communicative competencies
Designing work and organizational processes in a multidisciplinary 
team in a goal-oriented and efficient manner
In research, professional practice, and social engagement, activities 
for the purposes of sustainable development essentially take place 
in multidisciplinary teams, which requires that work and organi-
zational processes must be able to be designed in a goal-oriented 
and efficient manner
Involving non-academic stakeholders appropriately in the research 
process
In research, as in scientific professional activity, it is important to 
adequately involve relevant stakeholders in scientific activity
Communicating in a comprehensive and target group-oriented 
manner
In research, professional practice, and social engagement, com-
munication that is comprehensible and appropriate with respect 
to the target groups in terms of content and form represents an 
important success factor

Vol.:(0123456789)
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w	
Research
1 3
Table 1   (continued)
Category
Competency
Explanation
Action competencies
Designing, implementing, and reflecting on inter- and transdiscipli-
nary processes on societally relevant topics of SD
In order to fulfil the role of a change agent, it is important to be able 
to design, implement, and reflect on inter- and transdisciplinary 
processes in respect of the relevant sustainable development 
matters
Working on problems from corresponding professional fields scien-
tifically and making contributions to the further development of 
the professional fields
With regard to the integration of sustainable development into the 
professional fields and professional practice, it is central to be able 
to scientifically address issues of sustainable development in the 
professional fields and to contribute to the further development of 
the professional fields
Participating in the collective work and decision-making processes 
that are required in order to transform society toward sustain-
ability
In research, professional practice, and social engagement, it is 
fundamental to appropriately engage in collective work and 
decision-making processes with one’s own sustainability perspec-
tive and thus participate in the transformation of society toward 
sustainability

Vol:.(1234567890)
Research	
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w
1 3
(a)	 Student Survey (November 2019–January 2020): An email was sent to all 441 students enrolled in one of the four 
programs during the fall semester 2019. The electronic questionnaire consisted of 67 mostly closed-ended ques-
tions. A total of 183 responses were received, of which 124 responses could be included in the analysis, representing 
a valid response rate of 28.1%. Further, 76% of the 124 respondents identified themselves as female, 23% as male, 
and one person as other. Moreover, 49 persons studied the bachelor program for 60 ECTS credits, 40 persons in 
respect of the bachelor program for 30 ECTS credits, and 7 in respect of the program for 15 ECTS credits. In addition, 
28 persons studied the master’s program for 30 ECTS credits. At the time of the survey, the students were enrolled 
in 23 different major programs.
(b)	 Graduates survey (January and February 2020): An email was sent to all 337 individuals (out of a total of 353) who 
graduated from a program between 2014 and 2019, and for whom a valid address could be traced. The electronic 
questionnaire consisted of 59 mostly closed-ended questions. A total of 137 responses were received, of which 121 
responses could be included in the analysis, thereby representing a valid response rate of 36%. Just under 74% of the 
121 respondents identified themselves as female, whereas just over 26% identified as male, and no person as other. 
Moreover, 45 persons completed the bachelor program for 60 ECTS credits, 35 persons in respect of the bachelor 
program for 30 ECTS credits, and 15 regarding the program for 15 ECTS credits. Further, 26 persons completed the 
master’s program for 30 ECTS credits. The graduates studied a total of 24 major disciplines.
(c)	 Survey of internship supervisors (January and February 2020): Additionally, by email, 54 (of the total 61) supervisors 
in the companies were contacted who had supervised at least one student internship in their company from 2014 
to 2019 and for whom a valid address could be traced. The electronic questionnaire consisted of 37 mostly closed-
ended questions. A total of 21 responses were received, all of which could be included in the analysis, representing 
a valid response rate of 39%. The internship supervisors were operating in different sectors and could be assigned 
to public administration, to private and public companies, as well as to non-governmental organizations. The intern-
ship supervisors in the companies accompany a student during their 100% 3-month internship (or, correspondingly, 
longer in the case of reduced employment duration) in an operational unit that is concerned with sustainability 
issues. During at least half of the internship, the students work on a scientific problem of sustainable development, 
which is relevant for the company and the professional field. The resulting product is jointly supervised and evalu-
ated by the supervisor in the company and a supervisor at the university. All three questionnaires were pre-tested 
by several people before mailing. The pre-test served to validate the understanding of the questions, the difficulty 
of the questions, the sufficient variation of the answers, the continuity of the flow, the interest towards the whole 
survey and the duration of the survey. Based on the results of the pre-test, the questionnaires were revised.
The questions regarding the importance of the competencies were asked in the same manner to all three surveyed 
groups, as much as possible. The first question could be asked in the same way to all three groups: "How important 
do you consider the promotion of the competencies within the study program?" (see Sect. 3.1).
The question on the assessment of the importance of the competencies for the intended professional activity 
(students’ perspective), for the current professional activity (graduates’ perspective), and for the professional fields 
(internship supervisors’ perspective) was formulated differently in the questionnaire in each case (see Sect. 3.2):
•	 Question to students: "How important do you consider the fostering of competencies for your intended profes-
sional activity?"
•	 Question to graduates: "How important do you consider the fostering of competencies for your current profes-
sional activity?"
•	 Question to internship supervisors: "How important do you consider the fostering of competencies within your 
professional field?"
The third question was addressed only to the graduates: "To what extent do you agree that you have acquired or 
enhanced the competencies during your SD study program?" (see Sect. 3.3).
Below the respective question, the 13 competencies appeared in random order, and for each competency one 
could choose from six answers in an opening matrix, starting with "very unimportant"; "rather unimportant"; "partly/
partly"; "rather important"; "very important"; and ending with "do not know" (in respect of "completely agree", "rather 
agree", "partly/partly", "rather disagree", and "do not agree at all"). In the following presentation of the results, the "do 
not know" answers are omitted and thus only the answers of those who had an opinion are considered. Accordingly, 

Vol.:(0123456789)
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w	
Research
1 3
the number of responses per competency and group surveyed varies from competency to competency (as can be 
seen from the figure texts).
3  Results
Section 3.1 presents the results regarding the importance of fostering competencies in the study programs from the per-
spective of the three groups surveyed, followed in Sect. 3.2 by the results on the importance of the competencies for the 
intended professional activity (students), for the current professional activity (graduates) and for the professional fields 
(internship supervisors). In addition, finally in respect of Sect. 3.3, the results on the graduates’ assessment of the extent 
to which they acquired the competencies during their SD studies. In order to identify similarities and differences in the 
responses of the three groups surveyed, the results are presented comparatively. The results are also sorted according 
to competency category in order to be able to generate statements regarding the assessment of the importance of the 
competencies according to a category.
3.1  Importance of fostering competencies in the study programs from the perspective of students, 
graduates, and internship supervisors
3.1.1  Specialized and methodological competencies
Figure 1 shows that all three groups surveyed considered the four specialized and methodological competencies to be 
"very important" or "rather important" overall, with average values per competency and group between 66 and 100%. 
Fig. 1   Assessment regarding the importance of fostering specialized and methodological competencies from the perspective of students, 
graduates, and internship supervisors, as well as the average of the three estimations in % (students are N = 102/102/105/103 from top to 
bottom; graduates N = 90/87/88/88; and internship supervisors N = 13/11/13/12)

Vol:.(1234567890)
Research	
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w
1 3
Only very few respondents considered one of the competencies as "rather unimportant" (max. 12%) and only some as 
"very unimportant" (max. 1.5%).
Across all three groups, the competency "Interconnected, foresighted, and thinking approaches in system-dynamic 
contexts" was considered by far the most important competency. On average across the three groups surveyed, nearly 
two-thirds of respondents (64%) considered this competency to be "very important”. In contrast, the competency "Dis-
cipline-independent knowledge of sustainable development (including theories, models, concepts, understandings, 
challenges)" was considered "very important" by an average of only one-third (33%) of the three groups. The two other 
competencies in this category, "Methodological expertise, as well as inter- and transdisciplinary approaches and work-
ing methods" and "Accessing knowledge from other disciplines (…)" are in between with shares of 37% and 48% of the 
estimations as "very important".
All four specialized and methodological competencies were rated more important by the internship supervisors than 
by the students and graduates. On average, 61% of the internship supervisors considered specialized and methodologi-
cal competencies to be "very important", whereas only 41% of the students and 36% of the graduates considered them 
to be "very important".
3.1.2  Personal competencies
Figure 2 shows, with respect to all the three groups surveyed, that there is a consideration regarding the three personal 
competencies as a total (such as the specialized and methodological competencies) to be "very important" or "rather 
important", with average values per competency and group of between 72 and 91%. Likewise, only a few respondents 
considered one of the competencies to be "rather unimportant" (max. 9%). Only the competency "Handling trade-offs 
and decision dilemmas" was considered "very unimportant" by individuals, especially by internship supervisors.
Across all three groups, the competency "Recognizing and reflecting on one’s own perspective on a situation and 
problem (…)" was considered the most important competency. On average, across the three groups surveyed, 57% of 
respondents considered this competency to be "very important." In contrast, the competency "Handling trade-offs and 
decision dilemmas" was considered "very important" by an average of just over one-third (34%) of the three groups. The 
competency "Handling values, principles, theories and one’s own competencies in a critical and reflexive manner" is in 
between with a share of 46% as "very important".
Fig. 2   Assessment regarding the importance of fostering personal competencies from the perspective of students, graduates, and 
internship supervisors, as well as the average of the three estimations in % (students are N = 101/103/103 from top to bottom; graduates 
N = 88/88/89; and internship supervisors N = 11/11/12)

Vol.:(0123456789)
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w	
Research
1 3
Two of the three personal competencies were rated as more important by the internship supervisors than by the stu-
dents and graduates, namely the competencies "Recognizing and reflecting on one’s own perspective on a situation and 
problem (…)" and "Handling values, principles, theories, and one’s own competencies in a critical and reflexive manner". 
On average, half of the internship supervisors (50%) considered a personal competency to be "very important"; however 
it must be noted that this is somewhat lower among graduates (45%) and students (42%).
3.1.3  Social and communicative competencies
Figure 3 illustrates that all the three groups surveyed considered the three social and communicative competencies, 
similar to the competencies in the two categories discussed so far, to be "very important" or "rather important" overall, 
with average values per competency and group of between 74 and 93%. Likewise, only a small share of the surveyed 
groups considers one of the competencies to be "rather unimportant" (max. 9%) or "very unimportant" (max. 2%).
Across all three groups, the competency "Communicating in a comprehensive and target group-oriented manner" was 
considered the most important competency with an average share of 52% "very important". In contrast, the competen-
cies "Designing work and organizational processes in a multidisciplinary team in a goal-oriented and efficient manner" 
and "Involving non-academic stakeholders appropriately in the research process" were rated somewhat less as "very 
important" on average across the three groups surveyed, at 37% and 41%, respectively.
In this category, the internship supervisors, with a share of 62% "very important" answers, rate only one of the three 
competencies as more important than the students and the graduates, namely the competency “Communicating in a 
comprehensive and target group-oriented manner”. On average, 45% of the internship supervisors considered the three 
social and communicative competencies to be "very important", whereas 43% of the students and graduates considered 
these competencies to be "very important".
3.1.4  Action competencies
Figure 4 illustrates that, similar to the competencies in the other three competency categories, the three groups surveyed 
also considered the three action competencies to be "very important" or "rather important" overall, with average values 
Fig. 3   Assessment regarding the importance of fostering social and communicative competencies from the perspective of students, gradu-
ates, and internship supervisors, as well as the average of the three estimations in % (students are N = 102/103/102 from top to bottom; 
graduates N = 89/87/87; and internship supervisors N = 11/13/13)

Vol:.(1234567890)
Research	
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w
1 3
per competency and group of between 54 and 100%. As with the other three competency categories, only a small share 
of the groups surveyed considered a competency to be "rather unimportant" or "very unimportant".
Across all three groups surveyed, the competency "Participating in collective work and decision-making processes 
to transform society toward sustainability" was considered the most important competency within this competency 
category with a share of "very important" of 40%, ahead of "Designing, implementing, and reflecting on inter- and 
transdisciplinary processes on societally relevant topics of sustainable development" with 36%.
The competency “Working on problems from corresponding professional fields scientifically and making contributions 
to the further development of the professional fields” was considered "very important" by an average of only 30% of 
the three groups, which is the lowest average across all 13 competencies. Regarding this competency, the three groups 
surveyed also agree the least with respect to its importance. While half of the internship supervisors (50%) rated this 
competency as “very important”, only 24% of the students, and only 17% of the graduates did so. A similarly striking dif-
ference exists only in the estimation of the competency "Discipline-independent knowledge of SD (…)" in the category of 
specialized and methodological competencies. This competency was rated as "very important" by 54% of the internship 
supervisors, compared to only 24% of the students and graduates.
3.1.5  Overall result
Overall, students and graduates rate a competency as "very important" by an average of 40% and 38%, respectively. The 
internship supervisors even consider the promotion of a competency during the study program to be "very important" 
at an average rate of 51%. However, there are differences between the three groups surveyed regarding the estimation 
of the importance of the competencies:
For the students, the competency "Interconnected, foresighted and thinking in system-dynamic contexts" is by far 
the most important competency (61% indicated "very important"), followed by the competencies "Recognizing and 
reflecting on one’s own perspective on a situation and problem (…)" (51%) and "Communicating in a comprehensive 
and target group-oriented manner" (48%). In contrast, only 24% of the students each rate the competency "Design-
ing, implementing, and reflecting on inter- and transdisciplinary processes on societally relevant topics of sustainable 
development" and the competency "Working on problems from corresponding professional fields scientifically (…)" as 
"very important", followed by "Handling trade-offs and decision dilemmas" (35%).
Fig. 4   Assessment regarding the importance of fostering in respect of the action competencies from the perspective of students, graduates, 
and internship supervisors, as well as the average of the three estimations in % (students are N = 104/105/103; graduates N = 87/83/86; and 
internship supervisors N = 11/12/13)

Vol.:(0123456789)
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w	
Research
1 3
The graduates agreed with the students that the two competencies “Interconnected, foresighted and thinking in 
system-dynamic contexts" and "Recognizing and reflecting on one’s own perspective on a situation and problem (…)" 
represent the two most important competencies. Regarding both competencies, 55% of the respondents indicated that 
they were "very important". In the third position among the graduates, with 48% of "very important" answers, follows 
the competency “Involving non-academic stakeholders appropriately in the research process". In addition, followed by 
the competency "Communicating in a comprehensive and target group-oriented manner" with a share of 47%, which 
the students rated as the third most important competency. Most students and graduates, therefore, agree on the most 
important competencies to be promoted in the study program.
Likewise, the graduates agreed with the students that the two competencies "Working on problems from correspond-
ing professional fields scientifically (…)" (only 17% indicated "very important") and "Discipline-independent knowledge of 
SD (…)" (only 22% indicated "very important") belong to the three competencies that are said to be least "very important". 
In third place, among the least "very important" competencies, was the competency "Methodological expertise, as well 
as inter- and transdisciplinary approaches and working methods" with a share of only 28% of "very important" answers.
As for the students and graduates, the two competencies "Interconnected, foresighted and thinking in system-dynamic 
contexts" (77% indicated "very important") and "Recognizing and reflecting on one’s own perspective on a situation and 
problem (…)" (64%) were among the three most important competencies for the internship supervisors. As the third 
competency, 67% of the internship supervisors considered the competency "Accessing knowledge from other disciplines 
(…)" to be very important. In fourth place, with 64% of the "very important" responses, comes the competency "Com-
municating in a comprehensive and target group-oriented manner", which is one of the three competencies with the 
highest "very important" percentages among students, but was in fourth place among the graduates.
In contrast, regarding the competencies that are the least "very important", there was only one correspondence 
between the internship supervisors, the students, and/or the graduates. Similar to the students, the internship supervi-
sors also considered the competency “Handling trade-offs and decision dilemmas” to be less “very important”; whereas, 
only 27% of the internship supervisors indicated it was "very important".
Considering the average in respect of the estimation regarding the importance of the competencies per competency 
category, it can be concluded that the students consider the first three competency categories (specialized and methodo-
logical competencies, personal competencies, as well as social and communicative competencies) to be roughly equally 
important—with an average of 41%, 42%, and 43% of the answers being considered as "very important" (Table 2). In 
contrast, they rated the promotion of competencies in the "action competencies" category as slightly less important, 
with an average of 35% of "very important" responses.
On average, graduates rated the promotion of competencies in the competency categories as slightly less “very impor-
tant”, but agreed with the students that the promotion of personal competencies, as well as social and communicative 
competencies should be considered as more "very important" on average than the competencies in the category of 
action competencies. On average, graduates considered the promotion of an action competency to be "very important" 
at only 28%.
Additionally, in respect of the internship supervisors, the competencies in the category of action competencies are, on 
average, among those that should be least "very important" in the study (on average 44% of "very important" answers). 
In contrast, 61% of internship supervisors thought that the promotion of specialized and methodological competencies 
should be considered as "very important" in the study program.
There are only minor differences in the estimation of the importance of fostering the other competency categories. 
Overall, it cannot be said that one of the three groups surveyed considers a competency category to be significantly 
more "very important" or significantly less "very important".
Table 2   Average 
regarding the assessment 
of the importance of 
the competencies per 
competency category as “very 
important” (in %)
Competency category
Students
Graduates
Internship 
supervisors
Average
Specialized and methodological competencies
41
36
61
46
Personal competencies
42
45
50
46
Social and communicative competencies
43
43
45
44
Action competencies
35
28
44
36
Average
40
38
50
43

Vol:.(1234567890)
Research	
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w
1 3
3.1.6  Preliminary conclusion regarding the estimation of the importance of the fostering of competencies in the study 
program (all three surveyed groups summarized)
Figure 5 shows the average values in % in respect of the estimations of the importance of fostering the individual com-
petencies, as well as the competency categories across all the three surveyed groups. Based on these averages and the 
results to date, the following preliminary conclusion can be drawn:
(a)	 All competencies were considered important, on average, across the three groups, with average scores ranging 
from 69 to 89% (i.e., "very important" and "rather important", respectively). On average across the three groups, a 
maximum of 12% of the respondents considered a competency to be not important (i.e., "rather unimportant" or 
"very unimportant"). None of the 13 competencies was thus rated as not important.
(b)	 Two competencies were considered the most important by all three groups. Accordingly, these also have the high-
est average values in the estimation as “very important”. These are the competencies “Interconnected, foresighted 
and thinking in system-dynamic contexts” (64% “very important”) and “Recognizing and reflecting on one’s own 
perspective on a situation and problem (…)" (57% "very important"). In third place, follows the competency "Com-
municating in a comprehensive and target group-oriented manner" (52% "very important").
(c)	 The competencies "Working on problems from corresponding professional fields scientifically (…)" and "Working 
on problems from corresponding professional fields scientifically (…)" were considered as the least "very important" 
competency, on average, across all three groups, with an average of 30% and 33% "very important" responses, 
respectively. Based on the average values across all three groups, the competency "Handling trade-offs and decision 
dilemmas" (34% "very important") was among the three least "very important" competencies.
(d)	 The average values of the estimations as "very important" per competency category were also higher for the intern-
ship supervisors, in all four categories (see Table 2), than for the students and graduates. On average per competency 
category, internship supervisors rated the competencies within a category as "very important" at 50%, whereas 
these averages were only at 40% for students and 38% for graduates.
(e)	 Based on the average values regarding the estimations of the importance of the competencies of all three surveyed 
groups and per competency category, the three competency categories “specialized and methodological compe-
tencies”, “personal competencies”, and "social and communicative competencies" were considered slightly more 
important than the category with the "action competencies" (i.e., 37% considered as "very important"), with shares 
of 46% and 44% "very important" responses, respectively. However, the overall estimations regarding the importance 
of the various competencies in the competency categories does not allow any statement to be made as to whether 
a competency category is to be regarded as more or less worthy of fostering by one group of respondents or, on 
average, by the three groups surveyed.
3.2  Assessment regarding the importance of the competencies for the intended professional activity 
(students), for the current professional activity (graduates), and for the professional fields (internship 
supervisors)
3.2.1  Specialized and methodological competencies
Figure 6 shows that the estimations regarding the importance of a competency for the intended professional activity 
(students), the current professional activity (graduates), and for the professional fields (internship supervisors) varied 
strongly from competency to competency and per surveyed group. Three of the four competencies were rated as "very 
important" and "rather important" by the majority, but the proportions of "very unimportant", "rather unimportant", and 
"partly/partly" answers were relatively high, especially in comparison to the estimation of the importance of fostering 
the same competencies in the study program (see Fig. 1).
The three interviewed groups agreed that the competency “Interconnected, foresighted and thinking in system-
dynamic contexts” was the most important of the 13 competencies regarding the intended professional activity (stu-
dents), the current professional activity (graduates), and the professional field (internship supervisors). In contrast, the 
competency "Discipline-independent knowledge of SD (…)" was considered as the least important.
The four specialized and methodological competencies were considered, on average, more important by the internship 
supervisors (for the professional field) and by the students (for the intended professional activity) than by the graduates 
for their current professional activity.

Vol.:(0123456789)
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w	
Research
1 3
Fig. 5   Average regarding assessment of the importance of fostering each competency and competency category in the study programs 
(average of the three groups surveyed per competency, as well as the average per competency category)

Vol:.(1234567890)
Research	
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w
1 3
3.2.2  Personal competencies
In contrast to the specialized and methodological competencies, all three personal competencies were considered 
important by all the three groups surveyed (with “very important” and “rather important” responses per competency 
and group surveyed ranging from 67 to 100%, respectively) (see Fig. 7). The proportions of "very unimportant" and 
"rather unimportant" responses were relatively low (between 0 and 13% per competency and group), whereas 
this range extended from 0 to 54% in respect of the estimation regarding the importance of the specialized and 
methodological competencies.
The differences in respect of the estimation regarding the importance of the three competencies per surveyed group 
and competency are relatively low. The first two personal competencies were estimated to be somewhat more impor-
tant than the competency “Handling values, principles, theories, and one’s own competencies in a critical and reflexive 
manner". The internship supervisors estimated the importance of the personal competencies for their professional field 
with 54% of "very important" answers. This was considered as somewhat more important than the students for their 
intended professional activity and the graduates for their current professional activity.
3.2.3  Social and communicative competencies
Figure 8 illustrates that all three social and communicative competencies, similar to the personal competencies, were 
considered as important by the majority (with "very important" and "rather important" responses by competency 
and surveyed group ranging from 50 to 100%). It is noticeable that the proportions of "very unimportant" and "rather 
unimportant" answers vary greatly from competency to competency. For example, the accumulated proportion for the 
Fig. 6   Assessment regarding the importance of specialized and methodological competencies for the intended professional activ-
ity (students), for the current professional activity (graduates), and for the professional fields (internship supervisors) in % (students are 
N = 93/95/97/94; graduates N = 60/57/62/58; and internship supervisors N = 13/13/14/13. In addition, the average of the three estimations is 
equally weighted)

Vol.:(0123456789)
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w	
Research
1 3
competency "Communicating in a comprehensive and target group-oriented manner" per surveyed group was at a 
maximum of 2%, whereas the same proportion for the competency "Involving non-academic stakeholders appropriately 
in the research process" per group was up to 33%. This result could have to do with the formulation of the competency, 
Fig. 7   Assessment regarding the importance of personal competencies for the intended professional activity (students), for the current pro-
fessional activity (graduates), and for the professional fields (internship supervisors) (students are N = 93/95/92; graduates N = 60/57/58; and 
internship supervisors N = 12/13/14. In addition, the average of the three estimations is equally weighted)
Fig. 8   Assessment regarding the importance of social and communicative competencies for the intended professional activity (students), 
for the current professional activity (graduates), and for the professional fields (internship supervisors) (students are N = 95/93/93; graduates 
N = 60/58/58; and internship supervisors N = 13/13/14. In addition, the average of the three estimations is equally weighted)

Vol:.(1234567890)
Research	
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w
1 3
which does not optimally fit the initial question in the questionnaire and required interpretation by the respondents, 
which is why this result must be put into perspective.
If only the proportions of "very important" responses are considered, it is evident that these are very high (between 
73 and 90%) for each group surveyed regarding the estimation of the competency "Communicating in a comprehen-
sive and target group-oriented manner". This competency was considered extremely important by all three groups. The 
internship supervisors tended to estimate the importance of the three social and communicative competencies higher 
than the students and graduates.
3.2.4  Action competencies
Figure 9 shows that the competencies for the intended professional activity (students), for the current professional activity 
(graduates), and for the professional fields (internship supervisors) were considered important by the majority. However, 
the values in this respect varied relatively strongly and were markedly lower than those for the estimation regarding the 
importance of the competencies in the category of personal competencies (see Fig. 7), as well as for two of the three 
competencies in the category of social and communicative competencies (see Fig. 8).
Based on the "very important" proportions of responses, the competency "Participating in collective work and deci-
sion-making processes to transform society toward sustainability" was considered the most important competency. It 
was noticeable that the graduates considered an action competency for their current professional activity to be "very 
important" in only 12% of the answers on average. In contrast, both the students and the internship supervisors estimated 
the three action competencies to be significantly more important. However, these average values were also significantly 
lower than those in the two categories of social and communicative competencies, and personal competencies.
3.2.5  Overall result
On average, 47% of the students estimated the total of 13 competencies as "very important" regarding their intended 
professional activity (see Table 3). Regarding the internship supervisors, an average of 51% of the competencies were 
deemed as "very important" for their professional field. However, only an average of 35% of the graduates consid-
ered the competencies to be "very important" for their current professional activity, which requires an explanation 
Fig. 9   Assessment regarding the importance of the competencies for the intended professional activity (students), for the current profes-
sional activity (graduates), and for the professional fields (internship supervisors) (students are N = 95/95/96; graduates N = 58/56/56; and 
internship supervisors N = 13/12/14. In addition, the average of the three estimations is equally weighted)

Vol.:(0123456789)
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w	
Research
1 3
(see Sect. 4). Nevertheless, there are also major differences between the groups surveyed and from competency to 
competency that must be taken into consideration.
In respect of the students, the two competencies "Communicating in a comprehensive and target group-oriented 
manner" and "Interconnected, foresighted and thinking in system-dynamic contexts" represented, by far, the most 
important competencies regarding their intended professional activity, followed by the competency "Designing work 
and organizational processes in a multidisciplinary team in a goal-oriented and efficient manner". In contrast, only 
18% of the students estimated the competency "Discipline-independent knowledge of SD (…)" to be very important 
for their intended professional activity, followed by the competencies "Working on problems from corresponding 
professional fields scientifically (…)" and "Methodological expertise, as well as inter- and transdisciplinary approaches 
and working methods".
The two competencies rated by the students as the most important regarding their intended professional activ-
ity were also considered by the graduates to be the most important for their current professional activity, namely 
the competencies "Communicating in a comprehensive and target group-oriented manner" and "Interconnected, 
foresighted and thinking in system-dynamic contexts". In third place in respect of graduates, follows the competency 
"Handling trade-offs and decision-making dilemmas" (53%), which for students comes just behind the three most 
important competencies in fourth place.
This strongly concurring perspective of students and graduates also applies to the least "very important" compe-
tencies. In respect of the graduates, the same three competencies were the least "very important" for their current 
professional activity, which were also the least "very important" for their intended professional activity from the 
students’ perspective, i.e., namely in regard to the competencies "Working on problems from corresponding profes-
sional fields scientifically (…)", "Discipline-independent knowledge of SD (…)", and “Methodological expertise, as 
well as inter- and transdisciplinary approaches and working methods”.
As for the students and the graduates, the same competency is the most important for their professional field 
in respect of the internship supervisors, namely the competency “Communicating in a comprehensive and target 
group-oriented manner". Likewise, with very high "very important" shares, two competencies follow, of which one 
competency each was counted among the three most important competencies by the students and the graduates, 
which were namely the competencies of "Designing work and organizational processes in a multidisciplinary team 
in a goal-oriented and efficient manner" and "Handling trade-offs and decision dilemmas".
Even more distinct is the agreement of the estimation regarding the importance of the three least "very important" 
competencies. The internship supervisors estimated the same three competencies (as the students and graduates) as 
the least "very important" for their professional field, namely the competencies "Discipline-independent knowledge 
of SD (…)", "Methodological expertise, as well as inter- and transdisciplinary approaches and working methods", and 
"Working on problems from corresponding professional fields scientifically (…)".
According to the average estimation regarding the importance of the competencies per competency category, 
the three groups surveyed agreed on which competencies per category were considered as more important and 
that which were somewhat less important (see Table 3). The competencies in the social and communication com-
petency category were considered the most important with an average of “very important” percentages of 60% 
(students), 53% (graduates), and 67% (internship supervisors). All three groups considered competencies in the 
personal competencies category to be almost equally "very important." The three groups surveyed also agreed that 
the competencies in the categories of specialized and methodological competencies, as well as action competencies 
were considered as relatively less "very important". The average values per category and surveyed group in these two 
Table 3   Average regarding the assessment of the importance of the competencies with regard to the intended professional activity (stu-
dents), the importance for the current professional activity (graduates) and for the professional field of the internship supervisors (per com-
petency category as "very important" in %)
Competency category
Students
Graduates
Internship supervisors
Average
Specialized and methodological competencies
37
24
38
33
Personal competencies
54
49
62
55
Social and communicative competencies
60
53
67
60
Action competencies
35
12
38
28
Average
47
35
51
44

Vol:.(1234567890)
Research	
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w
1 3
competency categories are only half of the average values in the other two competency categories, with 12–38% 
"very important" shares.
3.2.6  Preliminary conclusion regarding the assessment of the importance of competencies for the intended professional 
activity (students), for the current professional activity (graduates), and for the professional fields (internship 
supervisors)
Figure 10 illustrates what competencies were considered important, on average, across all three groups and how impor-
tant they were considered to be. Based on these average values and the results described thus far, the following pre-
liminary conclusion can be derived:
On average, the majority of the 13 competencies in the three groups were considered important. On average, no more 
than 31% of the three groups considered a competency to be unimportant (please note that "rather unimportant" and 
"very unimportant" are counted together).
(a)	 The competency "Communicating in a comprehensive and target group-oriented manner" was considered the most 
important competency by all three surveyed groups according to the proportions of "very important" responses. 
Similarly, the two competencies "Recognizing and reflecting on one’s own perspective on a situation and problem 
(…)" and "Interconnected, foresighted and thinking in system-dynamic contexts" were also estimated to be of 
above-average importance.
(b)	 The three groups surveyed agree on the three least "very important" competencies, namely "Discipline-independent 
knowledge of SD (…)", "Methodological expertise, as well as inter- and transdisciplinary approaches and working 
methods", and "Working on problems from corresponding professional fields scientifically (…)", although these are 
not considered "unimportant".
(c)	 On average, the internship supervisors considered one competency to be more important than the students and 
graduates. In respect of 8 of the 13 competencies, the "very important" percentages were higher for internship 
supervisors than for students and graduates. This includes all three personal competencies.
(d)	 On average, the internship supervisors considered the competencies in all four competency categories to be more 
"very important" than the students and graduates. On average per competency category, internship supervisors 
estimated the competencies within a category to be "very important" at 51%, whereas this average was only slightly 
lower for students at 47%. It is noticeable that the graduates estimated the competencies per competency category 
as "very important" only to an average of 35%.
(e)	 In contrast, students, graduates, and internship supervisors agreed on which competencies per competency cat-
egory were more “very important” and slightly less so in regard to "very important" overall (see Table 3). All the 
three groups surveyed considered the competencies in the two competency categories "Personal competencies" 
and "Social and communicative competencies" to be more important than the competencies in the competency 
categories of specialized and methodological competencies, as well as action competencies. However, based on an 
overall view of the estimations regarding the importance of the various competencies per competency category, it 
cannot be stated that a competency category is unimportant from the perspective of a surveyed group (see Figs. 6, 
7, 8, 9). Across all three groups, the average cumulative proportions of "very unimportant" and "rather unimportant" 
estimations were only 5–21%, respectively (see Fig. 10).
3.3  Graduates’ estimation of the extent to which they acquired the competencies during their sustainable 
development study program
Figure 11 shows that, depending on the competency, between 31 and 64% of graduates shared the estimation that they 
have acquired or enhanced the respective competency. These percentages refer to the total of those who answered 
"completely agree" or "rather agree" to the above question. The competencies with high scores were distributed across 
all four competency categories, but it is noticeable that three of the four competencies in the specialized and methodo-
logical competencies category are among them. It is also noticeable that the competencies with the lowest values relate 
to the categories of personal, social, communicative, and action competencies.
However, depending on the competency, only a maximum of around one fifth of respondents indicated "completely 
agree" (i.e., 2% to a maximum of 22% of respondents). This means that only around one in five graduates is of the opinion 
that they have acquired or substantially enhanced one of the competencies during the study program.

Vol.:(0123456789)
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w	
Research
1 3
Fig. 10   Average regarding the assessment of the importance of the competencies of all three groups surveyed and the categories in % (students: importance 
for intended professional activity; graduates: importance for current professional activity; and internship supervisors: importance for their professional field)

Vol:.(1234567890)
Research	
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w
1 3
Fig. 11   Assessment of the graduates regarding the acquisition and enhancement of competencies during the SD study program (N = 90–92)

Vol.:(0123456789)
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w	
Research
1 3
A relatively high proportion of graduates indicated "partly/partly" (per competency 21–37%). A relatively large num-
ber of graduates were, therefore, unable to decide whether they had been able to acquire or enhance the respective 
competency during the study program or whether they had not been able to acquire or enhance it.
Finally, a relatively large number of graduates (10–42% per competency) were of the opinion that they have not 
acquired or not enhanced the respective competency at all. More than 30% of the respondents were of the opinion 
that they have not or not at all acquired or enhanced the competencies "Working on problems from corresponding 
professional fields scientifically (…)", "Involving non-academic stakeholders appropriately in the research process", and 
"Communicating in a comprehensive and target group-oriented manner".
If the average values regarding the estimation of the acquisition or enhancement of competencies in a competency 
category are to be considered, it can be noted that the graduates’ estimate is the highest in respect of the fact that they 
have acquired or enhanced the competencies in the category of specialized and methodological competencies. Like-
wise, more than half of the graduates were of the opinion that they have acquired or enhanced the competencies in the 
category of personal competencies. In contrast, with 48% and 44%, respectively, only just under half of the graduates 
were of the opinion that they have acquired or enhanced the competencies in the category of social and communicative 
competencies, as well as in the category of action competencies.
Students, graduates, and internship supervisors were also asked what competencies were missing from the list that 
should be fostered into the study programs. In addition, the internship supervisors were asked what competencies were 
missing that are important within their professional field. A total of 18 suggestions were made. The evaluation revealed 
that the competencies associated with the suggestions were either included in the queried list or were more likely to 
be classified as learning outcomes subordinate to the competencies. The suggestions related to all four competency 
categories and confirmed the list with the 13 competencies, whereby the responses of the internship supervisors showed 
how important they considered the competencies “communicating appropriately and in a target group-oriented man-
ner” and “creative and solution-oriented action” to be for their professional field.
4  Discussion
In accordance with the results detailed in Sect. 3.1, most students, graduates, and internship supervisors agreed that 
all 13 competencies should be fostered in the study programs. In addition, they also agreed that the two competencies 
"Interconnected, foresighted and thinking in system-dynamic contexts" and "Recognizing and reflecting on one’s own 
perspective on a situation and problem" were the most important. The results regarding the perspective of these three 
surveyed groups thus confirmed the findings of the surveyed expert groups, namely that the fostering of "systems-
thinking competency" in conjunction with the promotion of other competencies, such as "interpersonal competency" 
and "intrapersonal competency" should be central [7, 20]. Against the background regarding the categorization of the 13 
competencies into four categories, the students thus also confirmed the perspective that, in addition to the promotion 
of specialized and methodological competencies—which is usually the focus in higher education—the promotion of 
personal, social, communicative, and action competencies was also important. As the 13 competencies, to some extent, 
cover the competency framework relatively well are called "Integrated problem-solving competency" by Brundiers et al. 
[7] (see Sect. 2), the results can also be interpreted to mean that the three groups surveyed largely shared the perspec-
tive of the experts in respect of promoting a holistic competency development in the study programs that goes beyond 
the promotion of specialized knowledge and skills. Further, they also agreed that it should include a comprehensive 
empowerment in order to effectively participate in addressing the societal challenges of sustainable development.
The results in Sect. 3.2 show that the majority of the 13 competencies were also considered important regarding the 
intended professional activity (students), for the current professional activity (graduates), and for the professional fields 
(internship supervisors). When compared to the results in Sect. 3.1, however, the estimations of the importance of the 
competencies differs somewhat. The two competencies that are promoted as the most important in the study program 
["Interconnected, foresighted and thinking in system-dynamic contexts" and "Recognizing and reflecting on one’s own 
perspective on a situation and problem (…)"] are, however, also among the five most important competencies for the 
intended professional activity (students), or current professional activity (graduates), and the professional field (intern-
ship supervisors) from the perspective of the three groups surveyed. However, the competencies "Communicating in a 
comprehensive and target group-oriented manner", "Handling trade-offs and decision-making dilemmas", and “Designing 
work and organizational processes in a multidisciplinary team in a goal-oriented and efficient manner" were considered 
equally important or more important.

Vol:.(1234567890)
Research	
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w
1 3
The three groups surveyed did perceive differences between the importance of a competency in the profession and 
the importance of fostering it in the study programs. This is reflected in the average estimation regarding the importance 
of competencies via the competency category. Indeed, while the three groups surveyed considered the importance of 
promoting competencies per competency category in the study programs to be roughly equally important (see Table 2), 
the average importance of promoting competencies in the two categories of personal, social, and communicative com-
petencies for the profession was considered to be significantly more important than specialized and methodological, as 
well as action competencies (see Table 3). This can be interpreted as an indication that the study programs should not 
simply focus on those competencies that are central to later occupational fields but should also consider, more fundamen-
tally, how the fostering of competencies in the various competency categories should be related in the study programs.
The result regarding the graduates’ estimation of the importance of competencies for their current professional activ-
ity requires explanation. When compared to the students and the internship supervisors, the graduates estimated a 
competency for their current professional activity as rather less important than the students regarding their intended 
professional activity and the internship supervisors in respect of their professional field. A plausible explanation is that 
the graduates had completed their study program no more than 5 years ago when they were surveyed. Moreover, they 
are at the beginning of their professional careers and thus they are not yet able to make much use of various competen-
cies in the initial phase of their careers.
As shown in Sect. 3.3, a maximum of roughly one fifth of the graduates (2–22%, depending on the competency) were 
of the opinion that they have acquired or substantially enhanced a competency during the SD study program. Although 
an average of just under two-fifths (39%) possessed the opinion that they have acquired or substantially enhanced a 
competency, a relatively large proportion (10–42%) of graduates (up to two-fifths) possess the opinion that they have 
not or rather not acquired or enhanced a competency. This cannot be explained by the 12% of graduates who only 
completed the program with 15 ECTS credits. A plausible explanation is constructed of three parts: namely, that firstly, 
even in minor programs at 30 and 60 ECTS credits, competencies cannot in actuality be acquired anew or substantially 
enhanced. Second, too little was communicated to the students during the course of study regarding how the respective 
educational elements, learning outcomes, and the summative and formative assessment would relate to the development 
of competencies that is intended to be developed across the study program. Additionally, third, the learning outcomes, 
the teaching/learning arrangements, and the formative and summative assessment of the various educational elements 
were not always sufficiently aligned with the competency development.
On the latter point, one result from the two workshops with the lecturers was deemed to be significant: the work-
shops revealed that a relatively large proportion of the lecturers were not sufficiently aware of the desired competency 
development across the individual educational elements. This renders it difficult for the lecturers to locate the contribu-
tion of the educational elements for which they are responsible to the overall competency development within a study 
program and to communicate this contribution appropriately to the students. It is also possible that the competency 
development in all training elements did not take place according to the specifications in the curriculum and in the sense 
of the formulated learning outcomes.
These aspects point to limitations in respect of the overall methodological setting of this study. First, the evaluation 
lacked a profound analysis regarding the question whether the different educational elements and their components, 
such as the formulated learning outcomes, the learning/teaching arrangements, as well as the formative and summative 
assessments are well aligned with the competency development. Second, the surveys were ’only’ self-assessments by 
students, graduates, and internship supervisors. The addition of other methods, such as an evaluation of student progress 
assessments throughout the study program or a comparison of an indirect survey of competencies at the beginning of 
the study program with a survey at the end of the study program, may yield different results. Third, the perspective of 
the internship supervisors was based on a relatively small sample size (11–14 valid answers per question), which strongly 
limits the significance of the results in this regard. Fourthly, in respect of the 13 competencies asked, which possess differ-
ent levels of complexity and that some of them are formulated in a relatively abstract manner, this could have influenced 
the answers to the questions. Fifth, the internship supervisors did not have the same education as the students and 
graduates; as such, they may have interpreted various terms included in the formulations of the competencies differently. 
Additionally, sixth, the collection date of the three surveys was just before the outbreak of COVID-19 in Switzerland. It is 
possible that the assessment of the competencies would have been different after the outbreak of COVID-19.
The limitations of the methodological setting described above also contain potential starting points for subsequent 
research. It is desirable to survey the development of competencies across a study program, not only via self-assessments. 
In addition to the already mentioned possibilities of evaluating assessments and testing competencies at the beginning 
and at the end of the study program, a systematic observation of competency development by lecturers could also be a 

Vol.:(0123456789)
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w	
Research
1 3
possible method. Likewise, the question of which mix of teaching/learning formats and what formative and summative 
assessments optimally promote the development of competencies across an entire study program should be addressed 
in greater depth. A further follow-up question is how, in an inter- and transdisciplinary study program in which a multi-
disciplinary and—at the same time—strong disciplinary team of lecturers teach, the competency development of the 
students can be ensured throughout the entire study program.
Overall, however, the present results can nevertheless be interpreted to mean that the perspective contained in the 
frequently discussed competency frameworks, such as those of Wiek et al.  [20]; Rieckmann [23, 29]; UNESCO [9]; and 
Brundiers et al. [7], were conducted, namely, in order to enable students in a competency-oriented and comprehensive 
manner to take responsibility for meeting the challenges of sustainable development. Furthermore, we can see—through 
the contributions developed in this study—that this is shared by students, graduates, and internship supervisors.
The experience with the development of the study programs at the University of Bern revealed that these general 
competency frameworks cannot be directly operationalized. We argue that study program development should consider 
these existing frameworks but also adapt them to meet context-specific conditions. For example, we can see evidence 
of this in the form of learning outcomes for modules and the educational elements they contain, which is due to specific 
conditions (including a multidisciplinary team of lecturers with different ideas). Instead, however, they represent an 
orientation framework that renders it possible to identify areas of focus and any gaps. The competency framework with 
13 competencies that emerged in the context of the development of the study programs at the University of Bern is an 
example of specifying the general competency frameworks [e.g., 7, 20] for study programs.
5  Conclusion
Regarding sustainability-oriented study programs, the following recommendations result from the evaluation of the 
corresponding programs at the University of Bern. In the new development or further development of sustainability-
oriented study programs, it is reasonable to develop a competency framework of one’s own and to establish an explicit 
reference to the broadly discussed competency frameworks. This will enable the identification of any conceptual gaps 
in the competency-based structure of the programs. In this respect, the competency assessment and the operationaliza-
tion of the competencies should be considered already during the development of the study program. In the context 
of this study, we tested the method of scaled self-assessment. However, more innovative instruments of competency 
assessment are needed that go beyond self-assessment. From our perspective, there is a demand for more studies that 
address competency assessment to advance research and progress in this area. The lecturers should already be involved 
in the conception or revision of study programs and the competency structure should be coordinated and communized 
across the modules and the educational elements (e.g., courses, excursions, projects, assessment of learning outcomes) 
contained therein—such that a common understanding of the competency structure across the entire study program 
can emerge in the lecturer team. This should provide a common basis among the lecturers, firstly for the design of the 
various educational elements of the individual lecturers and, secondly, for the purposes of a coherent communication 
to the students regarding the contribution of the individual educational elements, teaching/learning arrangements, and 
assessments in respect of the desired competency development across the individual educational elements.
Acknowledgements  We would like to thank the members of the evaluation committee of the study programs for their support during the 
conceptualization, conducting, and analysis of the research. Special thanks is directed to the two assistants, Jonas Chastonay and Elena Grace 
Siegrist, without whose support the research could not have been carried out. We would also like to thank the Centre for Development and 
Environment (CDE), which allocated additional funds for the evaluation of the study programs. We also thank the reviewers for their important 
citical and constructive feedback.
Author contributions  TH and ALL worked closely together on all elements of this study. This ranged from designing the evaluation of the 
study programs and developing the methods of the research to conducting and evaluating the research, as well as writing this text. They were 
supported in this endeavor by the members of the evaluation commission of the study programs. The study assistants, Jonas Chastonay and 
Elena Grace Siegrist, provided incredibly valuable support, especially in conducting the research, in entering and cleaning the data, and also 
in preparing the figures. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript
Funding  This research received no external funding.
Data availability  The full dataset in an Excel file is available from the corresponding author on request.

Vol:.(1234567890)
Research	
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w
1 3
Code availability  The questionnaires for the three surveys are in German and available from the corresponding author on request.
Declarations 
Ethics approval and consent to participate  All procedures performed in the study involving human participants were in accordance with the 
ethical standards of the institutional and national research requirements. Ethical approval was not required in accordance with the practices 
of the Faculty of Science at the University of Bern. The fully consenting individuals involved in the study provided informed consent for the 
use of the data in this study and for its publication. The data are not traceable to their identity.
Competing interests  The authors declare no competing interests.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adapta-
tion, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, 
provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in 
the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will 
need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
	 1.	 Schneidewind U, Singer-Brodowski M. Vom experimentellen Lernen zum transformativen Experimentieren: Reallabore als Katalysator 
für eine lernende Gesellschaft auf dem Weg zu einer nachhaltigen Gesellschaft. Zeitschrift für Wirtschafts und Unternehmensethik. 
2015;16:10–23. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5771/​1439-​880X-​2015-1-​10.
	 2.	 Lambrechts W, Mulà I, Ceulemans K, Molderez I, Gaeremynck V. The integration of competences for sustainable development in higher 
education: an analysis of bachelor programs in management. J Clean Prod. 2013;48:65–73. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jclep​ro.​2011.​12.​034.
	 3.	 Riess W, Mischo C, Waltner E-M. Ziele einer Bildung für nachhaltige Entwicklung in Schule und Hochschule: Auf dem Weg zu empirisch 
überprüfbaren Kompetenzen. GAIA 2018;27:298–305. https://​doi.​org/​10.​14512/​gaia.​27.3.​10.
	 4.	 Barth M, Michelsen G. Learning for change: an educational contribution to sustainability science. Sustain Sci. 2013;8:103–19. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1007/​s11625-​012-​0181-5.
	 5.	 Barth M, Rieckmann M. State of the Art in research on higher Education for sustainable development. In: Barth M, Michelsen G, Rieckmann 
M, Thomas I, editors. Routledge handbook of higher education sustainable development. London/New York: Earthscan from Routledge; 
2016. p. 100–13.
	 6.	 Barth M. Implementing sustainability in higher education: learning in an age of transformation. London: Routledge; 2015.
	 7.	 Brundiers K, Barth M, Cebrián G, Cohen M, Diaz L, Doucette‑Remington S, Dripps W, Habron G, Harré N, Jarchow M, Losch K, Michel J, 
Mochizuki Y, Rieckmann M, Parnell R, Walker P, Zint M. Key competencies in sustainability in higher education—toward an agreed‑upon 
reference framework. Sustain Sci. 2020. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11625-​020-​00838-2.
	 8.	 Leicht A, Heiss J, Byun WJ, editors. Issues and trends in education for sustainable development. Paris: UNESCO; 2018.
	 9.	 UNESCO. Education for sustainable development goals: learning objectives. Paris: UNESCO; 2017.
	10.	 UNESCO. Berlin declaration on education for sustainable development. UNESCO world conference on education for sustainable develop-
ment: learn for our planet. Act for Sustainability. Paris: UNESCO; 2021. https://​unesd​oc.​unesco.​org/​ark:/​48223/​pf000​03812​28. Accessed 
20 Dec 2022.
	11.	 Lozano R, Merrill MY, Sammalisto K, Ceulemans K, Lozano FJ. Connecting competences and pedagogical approaches for sustainable 
development in higher education: a literature review and framework proposal. Sustainability. 2017;9:1889. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​su910​
1889.
	12.	 Lozano R, Barreiro-Gen M, Lozano FJ, Sammalisto K. Teaching sustainability in european higher education institutions: assessing the 
connections between competences and pedagogical approaches. Sustainability. 2019;11:1602. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​su110​61602.
	13.	 Marope M, Griffin P, Gallagher C. Future competences and the future of curriculum: a global reference for curricula trans-formation. Paris: 
International Bureau of Education (IBE); 2017. http://​www.​ibe.​unesco.​org/​sites/​defau​lt/​files/​resou​rces/​future_​compe​tences_​and_​the_​
future_​of_​curri​culum.​pdf. Accessed 19 Dec 2022.
	14.	 Mochizuki Y, Fadeeva Z. Competences for sustainable development and sustainability: significance and challenges for ESD. Int J Sustain 
High Educ. 2010;11:391–403. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​14676​37101​10776​03.
	15.	 Wilhelm S, Förster R, Zimmermann AB. Implementing competence orientation: towards constructively aligned education for sustainable 
development in university-level teaching-and-learning. Sustainability. 2019;11:1891. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​su110​71891.
	16.	 Wals AEJ. Mirroring, Gestaltswitching and transformative social learning: stepping stones for developing sustainability competence. Int 
J Sustain High Educ. 2010;11:380–90. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​14676​37101​10775​95.
	17.	 Wals AEJ. Learning our way to sustainability. J Educ Sustain Dev. 2011;5:177–86. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​09734​08211​00500​208.
	18.	 Rieckmann M, Schank C. Sozioökonomisch fundierte Bildung für nachhaltige Entwicklung: Kompetenzentwicklung und Werteorien-
tierungen zwischen individueller Verantwortung und struktureller Transformation. SOCIENCE, Journal of Science-Society Interfaces 
2016;1:65–79. https://​openj​ourna​ls.​wu.​ac.​at/​ojs/​index.​php/​socie​nce/​artic​le/​view/​184.
	19.	 Brundiers K, Wiek A, Redman CL. Real-world learning opportunities in sustainability: from classroom into the real world. Int J Sustain High 
Educ. 2010;11:308–24. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​14676​37101​10775​40.

Vol.:(0123456789)
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w	
Research
1 3
	20.	 Wiek A, Withycombe L, Redman CL. Key competencies in sustainability: a reference framework for academic program development. 
Sustain Sci. 2011;6:203–18. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11625-​011-​0132-6.
	21.	 Mulder M, Gulikers J, Biemans H, Wesselink R. The new competence concept in higher education: Error or enrichment? J Eur Ind Train. 
2009;33:755–70. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​03090​59091​09936​16.
	22.	 Glasser H, Hirsh J. Toward the development of robust learning for sustainability core competencies. Sustain J Rec. 2016;9:121–34. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1089/​SUS.​2016.​29054.​hg.
	23.	 Rieckmann M. Learning to transform the world: Key competencies. In: Leicht A, Heiss J, Byun WJ, editors. Education for Sustainable 
Development. Issues and Trends in Education for Sustainable Development. Paris: UNESCO; 2018. p. 39–59. https://​www.​acade​mia.​edu/​
35941​134/​Chapt​er_2_​Learn​ing_​to_​trans​form_​the_​world_​key_​compe​tenci​es_​in_​ESD. Accessed 20 Dec 2022.
	24.	 de Haan G, The BLK. ‘21’ programme in Germany: a ‘Gestaltungskompetenz’-based model for Education for Sustainable Development. 
Environ Educ Res. 2006;12:19–32. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13504​62050​05263​62.
	25.	 de Haan G. Gestaltungskompetenz als Kompetenzkonzept für Bildung für nachhaltige Entwicklung. In: Bormann I, de Haan G, editors. 
Kompetenzen der Bildung für nachhaltige Entwicklung. Operationalisierung, Messung, Rahmenbedingungen, Befunde. Wiesbaden: VS 
Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften; 2008. pp. 23–43. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​531-​90832-8.
	26.	 de Haan G. The development of ESD-related competencies in supportive institutional frameworks. Inter Rev Educ. 2010;56:315–28. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11159-​010-​9157-9.
	27.	 Bormann I, de Haan G, editors. Kompetenzen der Bildung für nachhaltige Entwicklung: Operationalisierung, Messung, Rahmenbedin-
gungen, Befunde. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften; 2008. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​531-​90832-8.
	28.	 Rieckmann M. Schlüsselkompetenzen für eine nachhaltige Entwicklung der Weltgesellschaft: Ergebnisse einer europäisch-lateinameri-
kanischen Delphi-Studie. GAIA 2011;20:48–56. https://​doi.​org/​10.​14512/​gaia.​20.1.​10.
	29.	 Rieckmann M. Future-oriented higher education: Which key competencies should be fostered through university teaching and learning? 
Futures. 2012;44:127–35. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​futur​es.​2011.​09.​005.
	30.	 Cebrián G, Junyent M. Competencies in education for sustainable development: exploring the student teachers’ views. Sustainability. 
2015;7:2768–86. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​su703​2768.
	31.	 Dlouhá J, Heras R, Mulà I, Perez Salgado F, Henderson L. Competences to address SDGs in higher education: a reflection on the equilibrium 
between systemic and personal approaches to achieve transformative action. Sustainability. 2019;11:3664. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​su111​
33664.
	32.	 Wals AEJ. Beyond unreasonable doubt: education and learning for socio-ecological sustainability in the Anthropocene. Wageningen: 
Wageningen University; 2015.
	33.	 Wiek A, Bernstein MJ, Foley RW, Cohen M, Forrest N, Kuzdas C, Kay B, Withcombe KL. Operationalising competencies in higher education 
for sustainable development. In: Barth M, Michelsen G, Rieckmann M, Thomas I, editors. Routledge handbook of higher education for 
sustainable development. London/New York: Earthscan from Routledge; 2016. p. 241–60.
	34.	 Shephard K, Rieckmann M, Barth M. Seeking sustainability competence and capability in the ESD and HESD literature: an international 
philosophical hermeneutic analysis. Environ Educ Res. 2018;25:532–47. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13504​622.​2018.​14909​47.
	35.	 Pérez Salgado F, Abbott D, Wilson G. Dimensions of professional competences for interventions towards sustainability. Sustain Sci. 
2018;13:163–77. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11625-​017-​0439-z.
	36.	 Venn R, Perez P, Vandenbussche V. Competencies of sustainability professionals: an empirical study on key competencies for sustainability. 
Sustainability. 2022;14:4916. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​su140​94916.
	37.	 Willard M, Wiedmeyer C, Warren Flint R, Weedon JS, Woodward R, Feldman I, Edwards M. The Sustainability Professional 2010 Competency 
survey report. A research study conducted by the International Society of Sustainability Professionals. Corvallis/Oregon, USA: International 
Society of Sustainability Professionals; 2011. https://​www.​acade​mia.​edu/​12063​79/​The_​susta​inabi​lity_​profe​ssion​al_​2010_​compe​tency_​
survey_​report. Accessed 20 Dec 2022.
	38.	 Brudermann T, Aschemann R, Füllsack M, Posch A. Education for sustainable development 4.0: lessons learned from the University of 
Graz, Austria. Sustainability. 2019;11;2347. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​su110​82347.
	39.	 Hammer T, Pfäffli J. Kompetenzen einer Bildung für Nachhaltige Entwicklung auf Universitätsstufe: Aus der Sicht von Studierenden der 
Rechts-, Sozial- und Wirtschaftswissenschaften. Bern: Centre for Development and Environment (CDE), University of Bern; 2018. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​7892/​boris.​114678.
	40.	 Trechsel LJ, Zimmermanna AB, Graf D, Herweg K, Lundsgaard-Hansen A, Rufer L, Tribelhorn T, Wastl-Walter D. Mainstreaming education 
for sustainable development at a swiss university: navigating the traps of institutionalization. High Educ Policy. 2018;31:471–90. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1057/​s41307-​018-​0102-z.
	41.	 Erpenbeck J, von Rosenstiel L, Grote S, Sauter W, editors. Handbuch Kompetenzmessung: Erkennen, verstehen und bewerten von Kom-
petenzen in der betrieblichen, pädagogischen und psychologischen Praxis. Stuttgart: Schäffer-Poeschel; 2007 1st ed., 2017 3rd ed.
	42.	 OECD. Defining and Selection of Competences (DeSeCo): Strategy Paper. Paris: OECD; 2002. https://​www.​deseco.​ch/​bfs/​deseco/​en/​index/​
02.​parsys.​34116.​downl​oadLi​st.​87902.​Downl​oadFi​le.​tmp/​oecdd​eseco​strat​egypa​perde​elsae​dceri​cd200​29.​pdf. Accessed 19 Dec 2022.
	43.	 Rychen DS. A Frame of Reference for Defining and Selecting Key Competencies in an International Context. In: Rychen DS, Salganik LH, 
McLaughlin ME, editors: Contributions to the Second DeSeCo Symposium in Geneva. Neuchâtel: Swiss Federal Statistical Office; 2003. p. 
107–16.
	44.	 Rychen DS, Salganik LH, editors. Definition and selection of competencies (DeSeCo): theoretical and conceptual foundations. Kirkland/
Toronto: Hogrefe & Huber Publishers; 2001.
	45.	 Rychen DS, Salganik LH, editors. Key competencies for a successful life and a well-functioning society. Kirkland/Toronto: Hogrefe & Huber 
Publishers; 2003.
	46.	 Salganik LH, Rychen DS, Moser U, Konstant J. Projects on competencies in the OECD context: analysis of theoretical and conceptual 
foundations. Definition and Selection of Competencies (DeSeCo). Neuchâtel: Swiss Federal Stastistical Office; 1999.
	47.	 Barth M, Godemann J, Rieckmann M, Stoltenberg U. Developing key competencies for sustainable development in higher education. Int 
J Sustain High Educ. 2007;8:416–30. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​14676​37071​08235​82.

Vol:.(1234567890)
Research	
Discover Sustainability            (2023) 4:19  
| https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-023-00134-w
1 3
	48.	 Michelsen G. Kompetenzen und Bildung für nachhaltige Entwicklung (BNE). In: Lucker T, Kölsch O, Bearb. Naturschutz und Bildung für 
nachhaltige Entwicklung. Fokus: Lebenslanges Lernen. Bonn—Bad Godesberg: Bundesamt für Naturschutz; 2008. p. 45–57.
	49.	 NCCA. Senior cycle key skills framework. Dublin: National Council for Curriculum and Assessment (NCCA); 2009. https://​ncca.​ie/​media/​
3380/​ks_​frame​work.​pdf. Accessed 19 Dec 2022.
	50.	 UNECE. Learning for the future: competences in education for sustainable development: strategy for education for sustainable develop-
ment. Geneva: United Nations Economic Commission for Europe (UNECE); 2012. https://​www.​unece.​org/​filea​dmin/​DAM/​env/​esd/​ESD_​
Publi​catio​ns/​Compe​tences_​Publi​cation.​pdf. Accessed 20 Dec 2022.
	51.	 Sterling S. The future fit framework: an introductory guide to teaching and learning for sustainability in Higher Education. Heslington/
York, UK: The Higher Education Academy; 2012.
	52.	 Stoltenberg U, Burandt S. Bildung für eine nachhaltige Entwicklung. In: Heinrichs H, Michelsen G, editors. Nachhaltigkeitswissenschaften. 
Berlin: Springer; 2014. p. 567–94. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​642-​25112-2_​17.
	53.	 Christen M. Die Idee der Nachhaltigkeit: Eine werttheoretische Fundierung. Marburg: Metropolis; 2013.
	54.	 Di Giulio A. Die Idee der Nachhaltigkeit im Verständnis der Vereinten Nationen: Anspruch, Bedeutung und Schwierigkeiten. Münster: Lit; 
2004.
	55.	 Grunwald A, Kopfmüller J. Nachhaltigkeit: Eine Einführung. 3rd ed. Frankfurt A.M.: Campus; 2022.
	56.	 Kopfmüller J, Brandl V, Jörissen J, Paetau M, Banse G, Coenen R, Grunwald A. Nachhaltige Entwicklung integrativ betrachtet: Konstitutive 
Elemente, Regeln, Indikatoren. Berlin: edition sigma; 2001.
	57.	 WCED, World commission on environment and development. Our Common Future. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press; 1987.
	58.	 WBGU. World in transition: a social contract for sustainability. Berlin: German Advisory Council on Global Change (WBGU); 2011.
	59.	 Nölting B, Dembski N, Pape J, Schmuck P. Wie bildet man Change Agents aus? Lehr-Lern-Konzepte des berufsbegleitenden Masterstu-
diengangs „Strategisches Nachhaltigkeitsmanagement“ an der Hochschule für nachhaltige Entwicklung Eberswalde. In: Leal Filho W, 
editor. Nachhaltigkeit in der Lehre: Eine Herausforderung für Hochschulen. Berlin: Springer Spektrum; 2018. p. 89–106. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1007/​978-3-​662-​56386-1_6.
	60.	 Zinn S. Nachhaltigkeit durch die partizipative Entwicklung von Kompetenzprofilen implementieren. In: Leal Filho W, editor. Nach-
haltigkeit in der Lehre: Eine Herausforderung für Hochschulen. Berlin: Springer Spektrum; 2018. p. 127–43. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
978-3-​662-​56386-1_8.
	61.	 Lambrechts W, Van Petegem P. The interrelations between competences for sustainable development and research competences. Int J 
Sustain High Educ. 2016;17:776–95. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​IJSHE-​03-​2015-​0060.
	62.	 Straková Z, Cimermanová I. Critical thinking development: a necessary step in higher education transformation towards sustainability. 
Sustainability. 2018;10:3366. https://​doi.​org/​10.​3390/​su101​03366.
	63.	 Defila R, Di Giulio A, editors. Transdisziplinär und transformativ forschen: Eine Methodensammlung. Wiesbaden: Springer VS; vol. 1; 2018, 
vol. 2; 2019. vol. 1. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​658-​21530-9; vol. 2. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​658-​27135-0.
	64.	 Godemann J. Promotion of interdisciplinary competence as a challenge for higher education. J Soc Sci Educ. 2006;5:51–61. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​4119/​jsse-​347.
	65.	 Herweg K, Tribelhorn T, Lewis AL, Providoli I, Trechsel LJ, Steinböck C. Transdisciplinary learning for sustainable development: sharing 
experience in course and curriculum design. Bern: Centre for Development and Environment (CDE), University of Bern; 2021. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​48350/​157343.
	66.	 De Kraker J, Lansu A, van Dam-Mieras R. Competences and competence-based learning for sustainable development. In: de Kraker J, Lansu 
A, van Dam-Mieras MC, editors. Crossing Boundaries: Innovative learning for sustainable development in higher education. Frankfurt 
A.M.: Verlag für Akademische Schriften; 2007. p. 103–14.
	67.	 Godemann J, Michelsen G, editors. Sustainability communication: interdisciplinary perspectives and theoretical foundation. Dordrecht: 
Springer; 2011.
	68.	 Di Giulio A, Defila R. Enabling university educators to equip students with inter- and transdisciplinary competencies. Int J Sustain High 
Educ. 2017;18:630–47. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1108/​IJSHE-​02-​2016-​0030.
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.