Megan MacKenzie, Özlem Sensoy, Genevieve Fuji Johnson, Nathalie Sinclair, 
& Laurel Weldon, Simon Fraser University 
 
 
Abstract 
Despite the visibility of equity, diversity, inclusion, and Indigenization (EDI&I) dis-
courses within large institutions, such as post-secondary institutions, research has 
chronicled only modest advancements on these stated values. Blocks to advance-
ments in EDI&I stem, in part, from the structural nature of racist and sexist dom-
ination, and especially its embeddedness in both formal and informal norms of 
institutions. Based on a close examination of two EDI&I initiatives in university 
contexts, and direct experiences of “pushback” against these initiatives, this article 
conceptualizes institutional gaslighting, whereby universities paradoxically both em-
brace EDI&I discourse, on the one hand, while simultaneously deploying strategies 
that prevent dismantling systemic inequalities, on the other. A conceptualization of 
this dynamic is designed to help others identify and address forms of resistance, 
especially in settings of high stated value, and ultimately advance these values within 
large institutions. 
 
Résumé  
Malgré la visibilité de discours sur l’équité, la diversité, l’inclusion et l’indigénisation 
(EDII) dans de grandes institutions telles que les établissements postsecondaires, la 
recherche n’a relevé que des progrès modestes dans l’instauration de ces valeurs pour-
tant prisées. Les entraves à ces progrès ont pour cause le caractère structurel de la 
How Universities Gaslight EDI&I Initiatives: Mapping 
Institutional Resistance to Structural Change
Megan MacKenzie, Özlem Sensoy, Genevieve Fuji Johnson, Nathalie Sinclair, & Laurel Weldon. (2023). How 
Universities Gaslight EDI&I Initiatives: Mapping Institutional Resistance to Structural Change. International 
Journal of Education Policy & Leadership 19(1). URL: http://journals.sfu.ca/ijepl/index.php/ijepl/article/view/1303 
doi:10.22230/ijepl.2023v19n1a1303
IJEPL 
Volume 19(1) 
2023
IJEPL is a joint publication of the Faculty of Education at Simon Fraser University, the University of 
Delaware, and PDK International. By virtue of their appearance in this open access journal, articles are 
free to use, with proper attribution in educational and other non-commercial settings 90 days after initial 
publication. Copyright for articles published in IJEPL is retained by the authors. More information is available 
on the IJEPL website: http://www.ijepl.org

domination raciste et sexiste et surtout la persistance de cette domination dans les 
normes formelles et informelles des institutions. Cet article, en se fondant sur un 
examen attentif de deux initiatives EDII dans un contexte universitaire ainsi que sur 
un témoignage direct de résistance contre ces initiatives, décrit le détournement cog-
nitif paradoxal par lequel les universités appuient d’une part les discours sur EDII 
tout en employant d’autre part des stratégies qui perpétuent les inégalités systé-
miques. Cet article présente une conceptualisation de cette dynamique aﬁn d’aider 
les personnes impliquées à identiﬁer et appliquer des moyens de résistance, surtout 
dans des contextes reconnus comme étant importants, et, au bout du compte, à pro-
mouvoir EDII au sein de grandes institutions. 
 
Keywords / Mots clés : equity, diversity, inclusion, Indigenization, higher education 
policy / équité, diversité, inclusion, indigénisation, politiques en enseignement supérieur 
 
 
Introduction  
Looking at the formal rhetoric of institutions of higher education, like other large 
institutions, it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd one that does not profess a commitment to equity, 
diversity, inclusion, and Indigenization (EDI&I), expressed in mission statements, 
strategic plans, and other high-level documents. Despite the visibility of the EDI&I 
discourse, research has chronicled, at best, modest advancements on practices related 
to these stated values, including, but not limited to, the following areas of university 
work: hiring practices to advance the successful recruitment of minoritized faculty, 
leadership, and staff (Henry et al., 2017; Kaplanet al., 2018; Sensoy & Diangelo, 
2017); retention practices to support minoritized faculty (Zambrana et al., 2015); 
work to address persistent glass/cement ceilings for minoritized faculty limiting ca-
reer progress and remuneration (Cukier et al., 2021; Johnson & Howsam, 2020; 
Smith, n.d., 2010, 2022; Wijesingha & Robson, 2022); efforts to draw attention to 
and reduce ongoing colonial violence against Indigenous students, staff, faculty, and 
local Nations and Tribal authorities (Brown, 2019); and endeavours that address ev-
eryday occurrences of anti-Indigenous, anti-Black, and anti-Asian racisms (Barber 
et al., 2020; Mirza, 2018), the myriad of barriers facing disabled and neurodivergent 
individuals (Lorenz, 2022; Yerbury & Yerbury, 2021), and the aggression against 
trans and non-binary people (Potter et al., 2020; Siegel, 2019). The literature con-
verges on the conclusion that institutions have not only under-delivered, if not out-
right failed, to live up to their professed EDI&I commitments but have also 
persistently resisted efforts to prioritize structural changes that would advance these 
initiatives. This creates a paradox whereby institutions display a high level of discur-
sive commitment to EDI&I yet underperform on most meaningful EDI&I initiatives 
and actively resist change to the everyday practices of the institution and related ef-
forts to address inequity, combat racism, and enhance diversity. 
As researchers who have committed scholarly and service work to advancing 
EDI&I efforts at the universities where we have worked, we join others who have 
noted persistent forms of resistance to initiatives that could result in meaningful pro-
gress against various forms of oppression, that is, the systemic forms of intersectional 
IJEPL 19(1) 2023 
 
MacKenzie, Sensoy, 
Johnson, Sinclair,  
& Weldon 
 
How Universities 
Gaslight EDI&I 
Initiatives 
2

racism, colonialism, hetero/sexism.1 Instead of attending to evidence-based strategies 
for structural remediation, many universities exhibit a range of resistance strategies 
to counter efforts to enact structural change related to various forms of oppression. 
These common forms of resistance, while widespread, may not be immediately ap-
parent, even to seasoned EDI&I advocates, because they grow out of the standard 
operating procedures, the taken-for-granted everyday institutional practices and pri-
orities of institutions of higher education. 
This article explores these forms of resistance to institutional change, centering 
on resistance to gathering intersectional data related to EDI&I in particular. Scholarly 
EDI&I data gathering is a critical area to examine because the absence of consistent, 
reliable, and long-term data subjected to peer review (as opposed to corporate “di-
versity” audit packages) hinders efforts to identify and analyze problem areas, design 
solutions, and monitor institutional progress. It is critical to institutional transfor-
mation. Further, a lack of such data can enable and legitimize shorter-term initiatives 
focused on personal education and training to the exclusion of structural change. 
Without institutional, structural transformation, the challenges of “baked in” systems 
of oppression remain unaddressed. Structural EDI&I work requires evidence-based 
initiatives for the long-term study and correction of deeply embedded normative 
foundations of institutional practices, policies, and systems. 
Drawing on our experience with resistance to such data gathering, we conceptu-
alize strategies of institutional resistance as institutional gaslighting (Grant, 2021), a 
form of manipulation using strategies such as denial and misdirection to create doubt 
in the targeted individual/advocate and/or to create doubt about, undermine, or side-
line their own perception of events. While our analysis focuses on the everyday insti-
tutional practice of data collection, we use this focus to make broader claims about 
institutional resistance to structural change. We argue that the institutional strategies 
of resistance explored in this article could be useful in understanding resistance to in-
stitutional change in other areas of EDI&I work in higher education and beyond. 
Part 1 of this article argues that institutional transformation must be understood 
as a form of normative change. We then provide a brief overview of common EDI&I 
initiatives that actually serve to reinforce rather than challenge existing norms. We 
then highlight data gathering as critical to transformative projects. In Part 2, we share 
our experiences from two examples of our attempts at large scale intersectional data 
collection to illustrate patterns of resistance. In Part 3, we explicitly name speciﬁc 
manifestations of institutional resistance to this kind of data as a form of institutional 
gaslighting. We explore four forms of institutional gaslighting, including the push-
back, slowdown, shutdown, and blowback. In the ﬁnal section of the article, we 
draw out our conclusions, including how engaging in acts of refusal against institu-
tional gaslighting can contribute to structural change. 
 
Part 1: Institutional transformation as normative change and the 
importance of robust data  
Within universities, there are many obstacles to institutional change, especially 
change necessary for advancing EDI&I. Extant policies and procedures are rigid and 
this adherence to existing norms, values, and practices tends to reinforce extant hier-
IJEPL 19(1) 2023 
 
MacKenzie, Sensoy, 
Johnson, Sinclair,  
& Weldon 
 
How Universities 
Gaslight EDI&I 
Initiatives 
3

archies. The organization and standard operating procedures of most academic in-
stitutions reﬂect the biases of groups that are socially, politically, and economically 
dominant, both at the time of founding and now. Examples of such practices include 
rigid “tenure clocks” that fail to account for family care, mental or physical health 
challenges, or professional pathways that appear to deviate from white, cis-male, 
ableist norms (Banerjee & Pawley, 2013; Beddoes & Pawley, 2014). Policies advanc-
ing “merit-based” reviews typically devalue Indigenous ways of knowing and com-
munity-based research, and discount service and advocacy by and for members of 
marginalized communities (Hanasono et al., 2019; Rideau, 2021). Such policies 
create inhospitable environments for members of many minoritized communities, 
including Black, Brown, Asian, and Indigenous peoples, women, and gender ﬂuid 
or gender non-conforming peoples, thus perpetuating the isolation if not outright 
exclusion of members of these and other marginalized groups (Gutiérrez y Muhs et 
al., 2012; Margolis & Romero, 1998; Williams, 2019). 
Institutional transformation can involve changes to formal policies. Yet, in many 
ways, changing the informal practices, the “secret garden” or “hidden curriculum” 
of institutions, is a much more challenging task (Bjarnegård & Kenny, 2015; Calarco, 
2020; Margolis & Romero, 1998). Even newer institutional systems, including ones 
developed to advance EDI&I, can fail because they are nested within existing prob-
lematic institutional practices (Chappell, 2014; Mackay, 2014). In other words, even 
if academic institutions were to hire only Black and Indigenous women, women of 
colour, non-binary folks, neurodivergent peoples, and folks experiencing multiple 
marginalizations, without deeper change, these new institutional workers would 
continue to operate according to existing norms and systems of governance. It is 
those existing norms and systems that we are most invested in changing. 
The challenge of recreating academic institutions as anti-racist, speciﬁcally, and 
anti-oppressive, broadly, is fundamentally a project of institutional transformation; 
that is, of changing both formal policies and practices and informal institutional 
norms. Studies of normative change suggest several elements are required for success. 
First, problematic norms must be identiﬁed, analyzed, and subjected to discursive 
scrutiny, so that they are no longer invisible. The ways in which norms contribute 
to maintaining power structures and oppressive relational dynamics have to be un-
derstood. Raising awareness of how the informal practice or norm is racist, creates 
harm, and needs to be altered is an important part of motivating change (Legro, 
2000; Raymond et al., 2014; Schmidt, 2008). But merely exposing a norm as harmful 
or problematic will not produce change. Human behaviour is deeply habitual, and 
adopting a new norm is a behavioural challenge. Thus the second element is that an 
alternative practice must be available to replace the problematic practice, and there 
must be a constituency or political agent pushing for and demanding change (Legro, 
2000; Raymond et al., 2014). In the absence of such pressures, extant norms func-
tion as well-traveled pathways and become resilient; decision makers become com-
fortable defaulting to something that feels familiar (Edelman, 1990; Fligstein, 1987; 
Raymond et al., 2014; Risse, 1999; cf. Dobbin et al., 2011). For example, the per-
sistent use of student teaching evaluations to assess quality of instruction—assess-
ments that are often tied to tenure, renewal, and career advancement—demonstrates 
IJEPL 19(1) 2023 
 
MacKenzie, Sensoy, 
Johnson, Sinclair,  
& Weldon 
 
How Universities 
Gaslight EDI&I 
Initiatives 
4

the difﬁculty of replacing a common systemic tool, despite well-established research 
on the biased nature of student evaluations, which often results in particular forms 
of aggression toward minoritized instructors. 
Two common features of institutional ED&I initiatives actually often serve to 
sustain rather than challenge problematic structures. The ﬁrst is an over-reliance on 
individual as opposed to institutional transformation (Applebaum, 2019). Most 
equity work within universities attends to individualized attitude or behaviour 
change, often through training opportunities such as professional development work-
shops on implicit bias, cultural awareness, inclusive teaching, and anti-racism. There 
is good reason, of course, for institutions to address individual action and to encour-
age culture change through continuing education. Addressing problematic interper-
sonal dynamics of racism in the workplace, whether indirect or direct, subtle, or 
overt, and encouraging new practices, such as developing relationships of trust, en-
gaging in meaningful land acknowledgements, and modeling the sharing of pro-
nouns, can be invaluable to creating a more inclusive and welcoming climate. 
However, these approaches have their limitations, especially when interpersonal 
work is focused on present behaviours rather than systemic patterns that are en-
trenched in institutional structures. For example, although many hiring committees 
now require their members to undergo anti-bias training, there often remains a focus 
on bibliometrics, including citation rates and impact factors, despite knowledge of 
how these indicators can be inﬂuenced by racialization and racism. This focus is 
often justiﬁed with reference to the need to uphold “academic standards” and “aca-
demic excellence,” without the recognition that these metrics, in many disciplines, 
are part of a larger pattern that privileges certain kinds of research over others, and 
often devalues research done by racialized and minoritized scholars (White-Lewis, 
2020). In a way, then, anti-bias training—or the façade of anti-bias training—serves 
to uphold existing practices around how academic work is evaluated. 
The second common feature is an overreliance on staff, students, and faculty 
who do the bulk of EDI&I work, in addition to other work responsibilities. Often 
referred to as “shadow” work, this labour typically takes the shape of short-term, in-
adequately resourced initiatives, such as one-off townhall meetings on racism, 
“Courageous Discussions” speaker series, or ad hoc EDI&I advisory committees. If 
they are not tied to any commitments or structural changes, the temporary, often 
hasty, nature of these initiatives ensures that they remain fundamentally disconnected 
from the normative practices of the institution. They become “add-ons” contingent 
on having the time/money/interest/people. When such volunteer work appears to 
produce little change, or even to legitimize merely symbolic action, many engaged 
in these initiatives become demoralized and discouraged, and abandon efforts to 
change the university. This common aspect of EDI&I work thus serves to exhaust 
and alienate individuals with the lived and learned expertise to engage in meaningful 
work toward systematic change. Thus, in addition to presenting a veneer of change, 
initiatives bearing this characteristic uphold the status quo by burning through the 
personnel capable of charting the course toward change. 
In contrast to initiatives that are individualized, short-term, and dependent on 
volunteer labour, there are initiatives vital to advance an institution’s transformation 
IJEPL 19(1) 2023 
 
MacKenzie, Sensoy, 
Johnson, Sinclair,  
& Weldon 
 
How Universities 
Gaslight EDI&I 
Initiatives 
5

agenda. Among the most vital is the collection and analysis of robust intersectional 
and longitudinal data to help reveal systemic patterns. Remedying how institutional 
norms harm marginalized groups requires evidence about how these harms constitute 
patterns over time—work that can beneﬁt from strategies including qualitative, lon-
gitudinal tools of the academy. As Indigenous scholars Walter and Andersen (2013) 
argue, “quantitative data play a powerful role in constituting reality through their un-
derpinning methodologies by virtue of the social, cultural, and racial terry in which 
they are conceived, collected, analysed, and interpreted” (p. 9). Such data can provide 
a powerful form of immanent critique by using the tools of academic inquiry to es-
tablish the lack of neutrality in academic review processes (Marsh et al., 2008; Easterly 
& Ricard, 2011). Close to 20 years ago, the Ontario Human Rights Commission 
(2005) determined that “appropriate data collection is necessary for effectively mon-
itoring discrimination, identifying and removing systemic barriers, ameliorating his-
torical disadvantage and promoting substantive equality” within workplaces (p. 42). 
Establishing whether such patterns exist requires intersectional identity data gathering 
(such as the intersection of gendering and racialization) that is correlated with career-
progress indicators (such as time to promotion and rates of salary increase) and that 
is collected over the course of many years. 
Although necessary for meaningful EDI&I work, there is little consistency 
among organizations in terms of such data collection, analysis, and dissemination 
(Henry, et al., 2017). For example, Frances Henry and colleagues note, with respect 
to the Canadian post-secondary context, that there “is no comprehensive source of 
data or demographic proﬁles of the professoriate and no institutional efforts to gen-
erate knowledge about the everyday lived experiences of racialized and Indigenous 
scholars in the academy” (p. 6). Not only is there little data on the career progress 
patterns and patterns of lived experiences of racialized and Indigenous scholars that 
tracks pay ranges and promotion rates, frequencies and durations of paid and unpaid 
leave, and entry to and attrition from leadership positions, but there is also a dearth 
of anything other than data that “celebrates diversity,” typically in terms of unidi-
mensional, non-intersectional, and depoliticized identities (such as the numbers of 
international graduate students enrolled at an institution). Such information is typi-
cally untethered from practices around awarding scholarships, experiences of men-
torship, incidents of discrimination, and other important contextual factors that have 
different consequences for differently positioned individuals and groups. 
 
Part 2: Two examples of data collection and analysis for institutional 
structural change and institutional resistance 
We offer two case studies of attempts at gathering the kind of data needed to identify, 
scrutinize, and, ultimately, change problematic patterns and structures. Not only do 
these cases illustrate the kind of data collection and analysis necessary for normative 
and institutional change, but they also highlight forms of resistance to this kind of 
data and to this kind of change. 
 
Case 1: Intersectional demographics leadership audit—Canada 
The ﬁrst is an intersectional diversity audit of the leadership pipeline at ﬁve Canadian 
IJEPL 19(1) 2023 
 
MacKenzie, Sensoy, 
Johnson, Sinclair,  
& Weldon 
 
How Universities 
Gaslight EDI&I 
Initiatives 
6

universities (Johnson & Howsam 2020). This study was initially proposed while 
Johnson was a senior advisor to her university’s provost. During the two-year ap-
pointment, she was focused primarily on developing data collection tools that would 
be helpful in identifying racialized and gendered patterns and in addressing discrim-
inatory practices and procedures underlying the more problematic patters. 
Throughout her work toward this end, she was met with various kinds of pushback 
and obstacles from individuals in leadership positions. The feedback on her work 
included concerns around the privacy of employees (even though all of the data pro-
posed to be collected was publicly available), establishing impossible expectations 
(even though the purported goal of the EDI initiative at her university was to address, 
for example, sexism and racism), and the resources necessary to implement her 
studies (even though the university had made expressed commitments to identifying 
and addressing issues related to EDI). Ultimately, the work she developed on tracking 
demographics and career advancement for faculty and staff and for developing 
knowledge about the experiences of racialized faculty and staff within their work 
environment were shelved by her university’s administrative leadership. 
Upon leaving her position, Johnson developed a methodology, similar to that of 
Malinda S. Smith (e.g., 2010, 2022), to analyze publicly available headshots and bi-
ographies of 1,299 administrators, from departmental program chairs to the senior 
executive. This broad scope enabled Johnson to determine if administrators are hit-
ting ceilings, and if these ceilings are at different heights for different people. A per-
centage comparison with Statistics Canada data on professor and lecturer income 
recipients showed that white men and women are overrepresented at senior admin-
istrative ranks, suggesting that, while white men have ready access to all adminis-
trative ranks and white women appear to be making it through to senior 
administrative ranks, racialized women and men do not make it past middle ranks. 
In particular, the study revealed that racialized men are represented among depart-
mental program chairs and directors, departmental chairs and directors, and associ-
ate deans just under their representation in the census data; they are more clearly 
underrepresented within the ranks of deans and senior executives (4.6% and 7.2%, 
respectively). Racialized women appear underrepresented in the ranks of senior ex-
ecutives, deans, and departmental chairs and directors, relative to the census data. 
They appear most clearly underrepresented among senior executives and deans 
(2.4% and 2.3%, respectively). 
In contrast, white women and men were found at every administrative rank, with 
white women appearing to be overrepresented among associate deans (43%) and sen-
ior executives (43%) levels and represented among deans about on par with their rep-
resentation in the census data (34%). They were somewhat underrepresented among 
departmental and departmental program chairs and directors. Generally, white men 
persist in their signiﬁcant overrepresentation in the central and senior leadership of 
universities relative to their representation in the data on professor and lecturer in-
come recipients and in the data on earned doctorate degree holders. These ﬁndings 
indicate that about 90 percent of senior executives and deans are white, which is a 
signiﬁcant contrast with population distribution data reported by Statistics Canada. 
It has long been established that white men dominate the administrative structures 
IJEPL 19(1) 2023 
 
MacKenzie, Sensoy, 
Johnson, Sinclair,  
& Weldon 
 
How Universities 
Gaslight EDI&I 
Initiatives 
7

of Canadian universities (Smith, n.d.). If only in terms of securing positions, white 
women have succeeded in pushing through gender barriers while racialized women 
and men continue to face obstacles in the pipeline to senior administration. 
The patterns revealed by this study are problematic for a range of reasons. As 
stated by the Ontario Human Rights Commission (2005), “numerical data showing 
an under-representation of qualiﬁed racialized persons in management may be ev-
idence of employment systems that have the effect of discriminating and/or of deci-
sion-makers having an overt bias toward promoting White candidates into 
supervisory roles” (p. 32). This kind of data can offer concrete metrics for both plot-
ting institutional starting points for any recruitment and retention initiatives (i.e., 
making visible the systems of the institution that reproduce itself), but also for meas-
uring change over time. Yet, this kind of large-scale data collection is relatively un-
common in the Canadian context and not well integrated into EDI&I institutional 
efforts in either Canada or the United States. 
 
Case 2: “Milkman” style implied racial identity email study—Australia  
The second case study is of bias among faculty members in their responses to emails 
from prospective students. In 2017, Megan MacKenzie and her then colleagues Ben 
Goldsmith and Thomas Wynter set out to replicate a study of bias in higher educa-
tion that had been conducted by Milkman, Akinola, and Chugh in 2015. The 
Milkman study included emails from what seemed to be prospective students sent 
to a range of academics across the United States. These emails were identical, except 
for the name of the prospective students. These names had been vetted and tested 
to ensure they consistently signaled different gender and racial identity. Milkman et 
al. found faculty members—particularly those from higher-paying disciplines and 
private institutions—were most receptive to email inquiries sent by applicants having 
white male names. Building on this work, MacKenzie, Goldsmith and Wynter created 
an email-based audit experiment that included ﬁctional prospective-student emails 
seeking information and a meeting with faculty members. The emails were sent to 
over 7000 faculty members at eight different universities in Australia and differed 
only in the name of the ﬁctional prospective student, which were randomized using 
names that were associated in pre-tests with male/female and white/European, South 
Asian, Australian Aboriginal, Chinese, or Arab identities. 
The study made four empirical contributions. First, it includes a diversity audit, 
which provides descriptive data on gender and racial diversity in faculty members 
across eight of Australia’s top universities, known as the “Group of Eight.” While di-
versity audits rely on a methodology with acknowledged limitations, MacKenzie and 
her colleagues argue that, in the absence of available data collected by institutions 
themselves, such audits produce valuable and reliable data on gender and racial di-
versity in Australian higher education. Second, the audit experiment assesses the 
causal impact of racial and gender indicators on the likelihood of obtaining a meeting 
with a prospective PhD supervisor. The study found that there was a signiﬁcant dif-
ference in both response rates and positive responses to prospective students, de-
pending on the implied racial identity of students’ names. While emails from Thomas 
or Melissa Smith received positive replies in 47–49 percent of cases after 24 hours, 
IJEPL 19(1) 2023 
 
MacKenzie, Sensoy, 
Johnson, Sinclair,  
& Weldon 
 
How Universities 
Gaslight EDI&I 
Initiatives 
8

those from Rahul or Priyanka Kumar received only 34–35 percent positive responses 
over the same period. It was possible to measure both the simple response/nonre-
sponse rate, and the proportion of responses that nevertheless decline a meeting. 
Both measures show similar bias, such that the passive bias of simple non-response 
is compounded by the active bias of negative response, robustly demonstrating the 
existence of bias based on the students’ names. Third, it was found that, unlike ra-
cialization, the perceived gender of a prospective student does not seem to signiﬁ-
cantly impact response rates or content. In short, while the study ﬁnds evidence of 
bias regarding race, it does not ﬁnd evidence of signiﬁcant gender bias. Fourth, in 
exploratory analysis, the project includes an examination of differences in bias among 
academics based on gender, rank, and discipline; the ﬁndings indicate that individ-
uals in institutions with greater diversity on average show less bias, which, we argue, 
can provide insight into potential processes of change. 
In addition to the important ﬁndings, a key part of the story of this research re-
lates to the process and reactions it received. The project required a lengthy ethics 
process. Moreover, after follow-up emails were sent out to faculty explaining the na-
ture of the study, a signiﬁcant number of faculty members raised complaints related 
to the study; over 200 were formal complaints, raising concerns about the methods, 
use of data, and nature of the study. The authors also received several emails from 
agitated faculty members and MacKenzie received several threatening phone calls 
from faculty members warning her that the study would be detrimental to her career 
and prospects for attaining funding in the future. As a result of the high number of 
complaints, the university initiated both an internal and external review of the ethics 
protocols, both of which found the researchers had complied with their ethics guide-
lines. During this time, the study was put on hold, and an announcement was made 
to all of the over 7000 participants indicating that reviews were taking place. 
Ultimately, the university leadership allowed the study to go forward, with the caveat 
that the authors should both remove the data of just over 200 participants who had 
requested their data not be included in the study and show that the removal of such 
data did not jeopardize the study. The authors complied and research is in the pro-
cess of being published. 
These examples illustrate institutional resistance to the forms of EDI&I research 
necessary for institutional transformation. In the ﬁrst, the resistance was prior to data 
collection while, in the second, the resistance was subsequent to data collection. The 
data sought from both examples were scaled at relatively large degrees and intended 
to shift focus from the individuals to the collective, from personal beliefs to institutional 
structures that pattern systemic barriers. Ironically, this work could only be pursued 
through a systematic study of the bodies and attitudes of individuals complicit in these 
systems. The data sought in both projects was not only intersectional, but also aimed 
at demonstrating bias in and providing the basis for transforming institutional pro-
cesses. In the remainder of this article, we theorize the prior and post resistance to this 
form of data collection and analysis in terms of institutional gaslighting.  
 
Part 3: Institutional gaslighting and four speciﬁc forms 
Universities have both embraced EDI&I discourse and paradoxically deployed mul-
IJEPL 19(1) 2023 
 
MacKenzie, Sensoy, 
Johnson, Sinclair,  
& Weldon 
 
How Universities 
Gaslight EDI&I 
Initiatives 
9

tiple strategies of resistance to implementing practices that could dismantle systemic 
inequalities. These paradoxical positions can be better understood through the con-
cept of institutional gaslighting (Ruíz, 2020). Gaslighting2 originally referred to a phe-
nomenon within intimate relationships whereby the gaslighter takes advantage or 
abuses trust. Gaslighting is widely described as a gendered phenomenon in which 
feminized subjects are made to question their positions (their perceptions, views, 
and interpretations of events) by those with more power, typically men. More 
broadly, Petric (2018) deﬁnes gaslighting as a form of manipulation using the 
strategies of denial, misdirection, contradiction, and lying to create doubt in the tar-
geted individual or group making them doubt their own perception, memory, or 
even sanity. 
Black feminist scholars (Berenstain, 2020) use the term structural gaslighting to 
describe the systemic efforts (i.e., group-level actions) launched to sustain existing 
power structures by denying or obscuring the “patterns of harm they produce and 
license” (p. 733). While structural gaslighting refers to broad strategies that maintain 
patriarchal and white supremacist systems, institutional gaslighting may include the 
roles that speciﬁc institutions play in such strategies within a particular institution. 
In academia, institutional gaslighting may include strategies to resist critiques 
of the institution or discredit evidence that undermines the authority or the carefully 
crafted image of the institution. Kennedy-Cuomo (2019) argues that institutions, 
particularly trusted institutions like universities and militaries, use a range of tactics 
to respond to any evidence that undermines their image, including distracting, triv-
ializing, and denying. Focused on institutional responses to sexual violence in par-
ticular, Kennedy-Cuomo (2019) concludes, “when someone expects to trust the 
judgement of an institution, but the institution then betrays justice, survivors are 
gaslighted” (para. 4). 
Studies of the experiences of minoritized faculty and administrators within 
higher education reveal gaslighting behaviours targeting minoritized faculty. For ex-
ample, in a 2019 study, Mohamed and Beagan examine the experiences of racialized 
and Indigenous faculty and describe the impact of subtle, normalized racist practices 
of the institutions. These subtler forms of racism plant seeds of self-doubt among 
racialized and Indigenous faculty who report relying on each other for “sanity checks” 
(p. 339) about their interpretations of daily normalized, verbal, behavioural, and en-
vironmental indignities. Berenstain’s (2020) research on Black and Brown students’ 
experiences illustrates how institutional gaslighting operates and its impacts on mi-
noritized students. Their work shows that Black and Brown doctoral students also 
reported “questioning their sanity” as a result of the ways their experiences were de-
nied or sidelined, even while universities made claims to take diversity seriously. In 
this example, the university does not gaslight racialized students by denying racism 
entirely; rather, an adjacent set of discourse are deployed, ones that acknowledge 
the signiﬁcance of diversity yet construct an understanding and set of policies to ad-
dress diversity and inclusion in ways that completely refute Black and Brown stu-
dents’ actual experiences. Students of Colour are thus gaslit by being made to 
question their own experiences of ongoing racism as racism by institutions that are 
relentlessly declaring their anti-racist commitments (see also Ahmed, 2012, 2016). 
IJEPL 19(1) 2023 
 
MacKenzie, Sensoy, 
Johnson, Sinclair,  
& Weldon 
 
How Universities 
Gaslight EDI&I 
Initiatives 
10

In this landscape, meaningful EDI&I-focused data collection and analysis can 
play a role in resisting such forms of institutional gaslighting by contributing to the 
visibility, voice, and legitimacy of the experiences of marginalized groups. As our two 
examples show, rather than embracing the evidence of such data collection and anal-
ysis activities, the data become the subject of power struggles around their legitimacy. 
In the next section, we describe four speciﬁc ways that institutional gaslighting works to 
frustrate EDI&I initiatives, explaining how these gaslighting phenomena are enabled or em-
bedded in the hidden norms and practices of the academic status quo. 
 
Four speciﬁc forms of institutional gaslighting 
The concept of institutional gaslighting is helpful for understanding the forms of re-
sistance that universities mount against institutional transformation efforts such as 
robust data collection and analysis. Working with this concept and drawing on our 
experiences, we identify four forms of institutional gaslighting we call: the slowdown, 
the pushback, the shutdown, and the blowback. 
 
The slowdown 
The slowdown captures a range of discursive tactics communicating “we can’t do 
that, yet.” We mention slowdown ﬁrst because it can be one of the most common 
and powerful types of institutional resistance. The slowdown can take the shape of 
prolonged public or stakeholder consultation, endless environmental scans of pro-
grams, comprehensive reviews of policies, entrenched barriers to accessing to data, 
and requirements for approval from a large number of individuals and ofﬁces. 
Slowdown is powerful because it can be framed as supportive, reasonable, and ne-
cessitated by principles of peer-review and faculty governance, yet it ultimately serves 
to delay structural changes, often indeﬁnitely. Given the common features of EDI&I 
initiatives outlined above, delay can often mean permanently frustrating a particular 
initiative. Slowdown strategies are powerful because they constitute an effective veto 
of structural change in the form of requests that appear reasonable. 
There were a range of slowdown tactics used by the universities in both the lead-
ership audit and the email study outlined previously. In the case of the leadership 
audit, the slowdown Johnson experienced during her time as EDI advisor took the 
shape of requirements for approval from senior administration on both the faculty 
relations and the human resources sides. With respect to the email study, slowdown 
included a lengthy and complex ethics process, the requirement for an internal and 
external review of the study, and the requirement that some respondent data be re-
moved from the study. The ethics process associated with this project took two years. 
To be clear, having an ethics process is incredibly important; however, in the context 
of this project, there was beyond normal efforts to slow the project down, rather 
than assist its progress by ensuring compliance with all ethics protocols. For example, 
members of the ethics committee continually raised questions about the use of de-
ception and the perceived stress or loss of time that the study might cause for par-
ticipants. MacKenzie, Goldsmith and Wynter had to continually point to university 
policies and guidelines as well as Australia’s national statement on ethical research 
to afﬁrm that the research project did indeed meet all stated requirements. Other re-
IJEPL 19(1) 2023 
 
MacKenzie, Sensoy, 
Johnson, Sinclair,  
& Weldon 
 
How Universities 
Gaslight EDI&I 
Initiatives 
11

searchers might have abandoned the project or taken the ﬁrst rounds of rejection as 
evidence that they needed to substantially revise their methods. Not everyone has 
time, resources, or the endurance to press through slowdown tactics. 
 
The pushback  
Pushback captures tactics that undermine the intellectual, methodological, or ethical 
validity of the research or researchers and can best be captured with the phrase, “you 
are doing it wrong.” Similar to slowdown tactics, pushback may come in the form 
of messages of support that nevertheless raise questions, add requirements, or give 
rise to changes altering the nature of the project. Clearly, pushback and slowdown 
tactics overlap; what distinguishes pushback is the questioning of legitimacy. 
Pushback can convey a message that “diversity is important, but this is not the way 
to do it.” Pushback can come in the form of questioning particular methods or raising 
concerns about the rights of those implicated in research, including their privacy 
and consent. As such, the pushback is frequently a message to the researcher that 
they lack the expertise to conduct their study. Pushback tactics may question the ex-
pertise or motivations of the researchers and point away from EDI&I scholars and 
towards designated EDI&I committees as the legitimate experts in such initiatives 
whose approval is necessary for the research to move forward. 
For the leadership audit, pushback took the shape of requests from senior ad-
ministrators to Johnson to do an employment census as opposed to a leadership 
audit. The former, which is in place at many institutions, captures the diversity of 
the institution’s workforce but does not capture trends in career advancement as the 
latter does. The former provides a description of the diversity of the employee pop-
ulation but does not provide any indicators of equity in terms of progress through 
career ranks. For the email study, there were a number of distinct methods of push-
back, including faculty complaints focused on participant privacy and consent and 
institutional questions about whether the appropriate experts on diversity and in-
clusion at the university had been consulted in the study. 
 
The shutdown 
The shutdown as a tactic of resistance is captured by the phrase “we can’t do that, 
ever.” The shutdown captures forms of institutional pressure put on researchers to 
stop their work immediately. The clear message is that the work is not acceptable, 
appropriate, or permitted. The message is often that it does not adhere to established 
policies, rules, or norms in higher education. Shutdown can take the form of insti-
tutional suggestions or directives to stop, based on decisions that effectively discredit 
the research methodology and/or ﬁndings. While there are overlaps among the var-
ious forms of gaslighting, shutdown tactics are distinct in that they are more deﬁni-
tively aimed at stopping a conversation, halting a project, and distancing and 
delegitimizing research in ways that are silencing. An additional deployment of shut-
down tactics occurs when EDI&I research is used in everyday practices of an aca-
demic unit. For example, in the work of search committees, such as recruitment, or 
in the work of tenure and promotion committees, such as retention, shutdown can 
occur through explicit claims that equity and excellence are mutually exclusive 
IJEPL 19(1) 2023 
 
MacKenzie, Sensoy, 
Johnson, Sinclair,  
& Weldon 
 
How Universities 
Gaslight EDI&I 
Initiatives 
12

values, and that prioritizing equity is to sideline excellence. More generally, it also 
occurs by punishing those who speak out about EDI&I, for example, by imposing 
penalties on a committee member who raises EDI&I issues to highlight microaggres-
sions or manifestations of oppression. 
In the case of the leadership audit, Johnson’s study, which was in its proposal 
stage at the time, was shut down through the silence of “ghosting.” She never heard 
from senior administrators why they would not proceed with the study, but she did 
clearly understand that the study, which has since been published in a peer-reviewed 
journal, was unacceptable in the context of her advisory work for her university. For 
the email study, shutdown came in the form of several rounds of rejections from the 
university research ethics committee and threats from faculty members that the re-
search was illegitimate and could damage the researcher’s careers. The message in 
both these instances was that this research should stop. 
 
The blowback 
Blowback captures forms of harsh social pressure for scholars to abandon their work 
and to stop talking about it. In short, blowback conveys the message, “you need to 
stop doing that and you need to shut up.” Unlike shutdown, which refers to the in-
stitutional obstacles designed to stop research initiatives, blowback refers to the forms 
of peer or public pressures on scholars to stop what they are doing and to “pipe 
down.” Tactics take the form of threats, overt or perceived, that either one ends their 
work or there will be consequences for one’s career. Tactics may also include “cooling 
effects” from colleagues resulting from their disapproval of the work, as well as forms 
of community and peer isolation. The frosting of professional relationships consti-
tutes both shutdown of the work itself—work that is now seen as a barrier to colle-
giality—and blowback because of the isolating impact it has on those doing 
meaningful EDI&I work. Again, gaslighting tactics overlap. What distinguishes blow-
back is that the focus is more on punishing and threatening the individual researcher, 
questioning their legitimacy as a scholar, and limiting the reach of their work. 
Blowback tactics may also involve questioning and attempting to delegitimize 
the professionalism of individuals engaging in EDI&I work. Such tactics are ex-
pressed in accusations of being too “personally” or “emotionally” invested in a re-
search project to lead it effectively. These expressions of blowback are thus based on 
the faulty assumption that research is either personal or rigorous, either equity-
oriented or scientiﬁc. In some cases, scholars doing work related to structural change 
are cast as “troublemakers,” “difﬁcult,” having an “axe to grind,” or seeking only to 
validate their personal experiences through the legitimizing power of the institution. 
Sometimes blowback is expressed in the attitude that EDI&I experts are narrow 
minded and focused solely on issues of racialized and gender-based discrimination 
or moral policing. In all cases, the clear message to those doing this work is that it 
is in their best interest to stop what they are doing and to stop talking about it. 
With respect to the leadership audit, Johnson experienced blowback from 
another advisor on EDI issues in terms of questioning her professionalism and iso-
lating her from senior administrators under whose portfolio the work was taking 
place. Although a major part of her role was to act as an interface between faculty 
IJEPL 19(1) 2023 
 
MacKenzie, Sensoy, 
Johnson, Sinclair,  
& Weldon 
 
How Universities 
Gaslight EDI&I 
Initiatives 
13

members and members of the team working on the university’s EDI initiative, she 
was often accused of leaking too much information to faculty members. Although 
working collaboratively with other social scientists was essential in developing the 
methodology for the audit, while she was an EDI advisor, she was pressured to work 
alone. She was never told directly to limit her communication with faculty members 
about the initiative, but she was made to feel that she would be overstepping profes-
sional boundaries if she did not. 
In the case of the email study, blowback took the form of personal threats made 
to the researchers about the career implications of the work. MacKenzie received the 
following advice from a colleague in her department: “don’t shit where you eat.” The 
clear message was that the work MacKenzie and her colleagues were pursuing would 
be personally detrimental to their careers and should stop immediately. During the 
investigation process, the notiﬁcation sent by the University of Sydney to all 7000 
participants announcing that the study was put on hold also functioned as a form 
of blowback for the researchers. The announcement did not indicate that the project 
had already received ethics approval (which it had) or that the review was not due 
to any evidence of breach of protocol (which there was not), but rather from the 
high number of complaints. Thus, the message implied by omission some level of 
problem, non-compliance, or failure on the part of the researchers that had potential 
reputational damage and emboldened and reinforced peer blowback. 
 
Conclusion: Towards a politics of refusal  
Drawing on our experience as EDI&I researchers and advocates within research uni-
versities, we aimed to illuminate the mechanisms by which EDI&I initiatives, 
adopted by supportive leaders, and even when well-resourced, are frustrated, not 
by exceptional or unusual practices, but by the everyday processes of academic ad-
ministration and faculty governance. These provide a uniquely empowering envi-
ronment for those who feel uncomfortable with or otherwise concerned about EDI 
initiatives. They are a rich resource for those who consciously seek to stymie progress. 
Drawing on two speciﬁc examples of data gathering initiatives, we characterized fa-
miliar forms of institutional resistance to EDI&I initiatives as a form of gaslighting. 
Many feminist scholars have articulated a politics of refusal that may be helpful 
to thinking about the scope and impact of EDI&I work in the context of institutional 
gaslighting. When imagining ways forward, we draw on Bonnie Honig’s (2021) no-
tion of the “arc of refusal,” which she elaborates by re-reading Euripides’ Bacchae. 
Normally read as an attempt by women to challenge patriarchy, who then become 
crazy when they fail (which almost certainly happens in some cases of resistance), 
Honig outlines three acts of refusal that include “leaving the city” (when the Bacchae 
abandon Thebes to protest the labour imposed upon them), “re-tooling their use 
value” (resting, cavorting, breastfeeding animals), and “returning to the city” (as 
transformed women wanting to impose their new ways on Thebes). 
A politics of refusal in our context may involve, for example, leaving the institu-
tion, either metaphorically (going off campus), or, more drastically, resigning, as Sara 
Ahmed (2016) did. It may involve engaging in new practices that do not support 
the patriarchal habits of the kingdom (examples here are numerous, such as collect-
IJEPL 19(1) 2023 
 
MacKenzie, Sensoy, 
Johnson, Sinclair,  
& Weldon 
 
How Universities 
Gaslight EDI&I 
Initiatives 
14

ing data that deans do not want, ﬁnding ways to induce “nice” colleagues to expose 
their biases). Finally, it may also involve returning to the institution to claim new 
spaces. If, like the Bacchae, returning to the city means being expelled and left to 
wander waywardly, Honig (2021) proposes reading the third act of refusal not as a 
failure of the bacchants/researchers, but as a failure of the city/institution. 
Institutional gaslighting is a failure of the institution, and not a failure of the individ-
uals engaged in EDI&I research. Like Black feminist scholar Saidiya Hartman, Honig 
wants to rework the archive through fabulation—the women are not mad or way-
ward, they created new practices, new sororal kinships that exceeded the possibilities 
given by Thebes, given by the institution. 
How does understanding the embedded nature of academic systems in broader 
institutional structures (such as disciplines) help us to see ways not only to under-
stand, but also to overcome such resistance? Again, we point to data gathering, albeit 
a “re-envisioned” form of such an initiative, for possible solutions. Speciﬁcally, build-
ing partnerships with those “outside the city” (or in different cities) may provide the 
political pressure needed to counter attacks on the reputation or to give in to internal 
critics demanding slowdowns. In addition, the data gathering process itself (asking 
questions, generating new insight) may provide a sanity check and prompt change. 
Data collection is one of many tools available for shifting university culture and 
pushing EDI&I initiatives beyond rhetoric. Showing that and where “glass ceilings” 
or “sticky ﬂoors” are (as the Johnson and Howsam, 2020, study does) helps institu-
tions see that the lack of diversity in leadership is not simply a problem of qualiﬁed 
candidates. By so doing, this kind of data can help validate the perspectives of ra-
cialized members of the academy that they are being passed over for leadership po-
sitions in favour of their white counterparts. Doing so also reveals how narratives of 
a lack of qualiﬁed candidates are a form of gaslighting. Similarly, experimental work 
like MacKenzie, Goldsmith, and Wynter reinforce the reality that academic selection 
processes of hiring and mentoring are importantly inﬂuenced by stereotypes of race 
and racism, and are unlikely to be based solely on merit. This kind of evidence un-
dermining institutional claims that it is those who draw attention to race who are 
undermining academic values. In this way, both data gathering projects have the po-
tential to frustrate strategies of institutional gaslighting by revealing the partial and 
distorted perspective that is represented by the supposedly “neutral, meritorious” 
system of academic administration. 
 
Notes 
We recognise that there are other signiﬁcant oppressions not taken up in this discussion 
1.
that require speciﬁc attention. 
The term derives from the 1938 play Gas Light, which was later adapted into a movie, in 
2.
which a husband tries to trick his wife into thinking she is mentally ill so that he can have 
her committed to a mental institution. 
References  
Ahmed, S. (2012). On being included: Racism and diversity in institutional life. Durham, NC: Duke 
University Press. doi:10.2307/j.ctv1131d2g 
Ahmed, S. (2016, May 30). Resignation. Feministkilljoys. URL: https://feministkilljoys.com 
/2016/05/30/resignation/ [July 02, 2022].  
IJEPL 19(1) 2023 
 
MacKenzie, Sensoy, 
Johnson, Sinclair,  
& Weldon 
 
How Universities 
Gaslight EDI&I 
Initiatives 
15

Applebaum, B. (2019). Remediating campus climate: Implicit bias training is not enough. 
Studies in Philosophy and Education, 38, 129–141. doi:10.1007/s11217-018-9644-1 
Banerjee, D., & Pawley, A.L. (2013). Gender and promotion: How do science, technology, 
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) faculty members survive a foggy climate? Journal 
of Women and Minorities in Science and Engineering, 19(4), 329–347. doi:10.1615/JWomen 
MinorScienEng.2013004654 
Barber, P.H., Hayes, T.B., Johnson, T.L., & Marquez-Magana, L. (2020). Systemic racism in 
higher education. Science, 369(6510), 1440–1441. doi:10.1126/SCIENCE.ABD7140 
Beddoes, K., & Pawley, A.L. (2014). ‘Different people have different priorities’: Work-family 
balance, gender, and the discourse of choice. Studies in Higher Education, 39(9), 1573–1585. 
doi:10.1080/03075079.2013.801432 
Berenstain, N. (2020). White feminist gaslighting. Hypatia, 35(4), 733–758. doi:10.1017 
/hyp.2020.31 
Bjarnegård, E., & Kenny, M. (2015). Revealing the “secret garden”: The informal dimensions of 
political recruitment. Politics & Gender, 11(4), 748–753. doi:10.1017/S1743923X15000471 
Brown, L. (2019). Indigenous young people, disadvantage and the violence of settler colonial 
education policy and curriculum. Journal of Sociology, 55(1), 54–71. doi:10.1177 
/1440783318794295 
Calarco, J.M. (2020). A ﬁeld guide to grad school: Uncovering the hidden curriculum. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press. 
Chappell, L. (2014). “New,” “old,” and “nested” institutions and gender justice outcomes: A 
view from the international criminal court. Politics & Gender, 10(4), 572–594. doi:10.1017 
/S1743923X14000427 
Cukier, W., Adamu, P., Wall-Andrews, C., & Elmi, M. (2021). Racialized leaders leading 
Canadian universities. Educational Management Administration & Leadership, 49(4), 565–583. 
doi:10.1177/17411432211001363 
Dobbin, F., Kim, S., & Kalev, A. (2011). You can’t always get what you need: Organizational 
determinants of diversity programs. American Sociological Review, 76(3), 386–411. 
doi:10.1177/0003122411409704 
Easterly, D.M., Ricard, C.S. (2011). Conscious efforts to end unconscious bias: Why women 
leave academic research. Journal of Research Administration, 42(1), 61–76. 
Edelman, L.B. (1990). Legal environments and organizational governance: The expansion of 
due process in the American workplace. American Journal of Sociology, 95(6), 1401–1440. 
doi:10.1086/229459 
Fligstein, N. (1987). The intraorganizational power struggle: Rise of ﬁnance personnel to top 
leadership in large corporations, 1919–1979. American Sociological Review, 52(1), 44–58. 
doi:10.2307/2095391 
Grant, J. (2021). No, I’m not crazy: A Black feminist perspective on gaslighting within doc-
toral socialization. International Journal of Qualitative Studies in Education, 34(10), 
939–947. doi:10.1080/09518398.2021.1930258 
Gutiérrez y Muhs, G., Niemann, Y.F., González, C.G., & Harris, A.P. (Eds.) (2012). Presumed 
incompetent: The intersections of race and class for women in academia. Denver, CO: 
University Press of Colorado. 
Hanasono, L.K., Broido, E.M., Yacobucci, M.M., Root, K.V., Peña, S., & O’Neil, D.A. (2019). 
Secret service: Revealing gender biases in the visibility and value of faculty 
service. Journal of Diversity in Higher Education, 12(1), 85–98. doi:10.1037/dhe0000081 
Henry, F., Dua, E., James, C.E., Kobayashi, A., Li, P., Ramos, H., & Smith, M.S. (2017). The 
equity myth: Racialization and indigeneity at Canadian universities. Vancouver, BC: UBC Press.  
Honig, B. (2021). A feminist theory of refusal. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
Johnson, G.F., & Howsam, R. (2020). Whiteness, power and the politics of demographics 
in the governance of the Canadian academy. Canadian Journal of Political Science, 53(3), 
676–694. doi:10.1017/S0008423920000207 
Kaplan, S.E., Gunn, C.M., Kulukulualani, A.K., Raj, A., Freund, K.M., & Carr, P.L. (2018). 
Challenges in recruiting, retaining and promoting racially and ethnically diverse faculty. 
Journal of the National Medical Association, 110(1), 58–64. doi:10.1016/j.jnma.2017.02.001 
IJEPL 19(1) 2023 
 
MacKenzie, Sensoy, 
Johnson, Sinclair,  
& Weldon 
 
How Universities 
Gaslight EDI&I 
Initiatives 
16

Kennedy-Cuomo, M. (2019, April 5). Institutional gaslighting: Investigations to silence the 
victim and protect the perp. Brown Political Review. URL: https://brownpoliticalreview.org 
/2019/04/institutional-gaslighting-investigations-vane-silence-victim-protect-perp/ 
[February 02, 2022]. 
Legro, J.W. (2000). The transformation of policy ideas. American Journal of Political Science, 
44(3), 419–432. doi:10.2307/2669256 
Lorenz, D.E. (2022). Ableist microaggressions in the academy. In C. Cho & J.K. Corkett (Eds.), 
Global perspectives on microaggressions in higher education: Understanding and combating cov-
ert violence in universities (pp. 125–140). London: Taylor & Francis. doi:10.4324 
/9781003244394 
Mackay, F. (2014). Nested newness, institutional innovation, and the gendered limits of 
change. Politics & Gender, 10(4), 549–571. doi:10.1017/S1743923X14000415 
Margolis, E., & Romero, M. (1998). The department is very male, very white, very old, and 
very conservative: The functioning of the hidden curriculum in graduate sociology de-
partments. Harvard Education Review, 68(1), 1–32. doi:10.17763/haer.68.1.1q382834 
8783j851 
Marsh, H.W., Jayasinghe, U.W., & Bond, N.W. (2008). Improving the peer-review process 
for grant applications: Reliability, validity, bias, and generalizability. American Psychologist, 
63(3), 160–168. doi:10.1037/0003-066X.63.3.160 
Milkman, K.L., Akinola, M., Chugh, D. (2015.) What happens before? A ﬁeld experiment 
exploring how pay and representation differentially shape bias on the pathway into or-
ganizations. Journal of Applied Psychology, 100(6), 1678–712. doi:10.1037/apl0000022 
Mirza, H.S. (2018). Racism in higher education: ‘What then, can be done?’. In J. Arday & 
H.S. Mirza (Eds.) Dismantling race in higher education: Racism, whiteness and decolonising 
the academy (pp. 3–23). London, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. doi:10.1007/978-3-319 
-60261-5_1  
Mohamed, T., & Beagan, B.L. (2019). ‘Strange faces’ in the academy: Experiences of racialized 
and Indigenous faculty in Canadian universities. Race, Ethnicity and Education, 22(3), 
338–354. doi:10.1080/13613324.2018.1511532 
Ontario Human Rights Commission. (2005). Policy and guidelines on racism and racial dis-
crimination. OHRC website. URL: https://www.ohrc.on.ca/en/policy-and-guidelines 
-racism-and-racial-discrimination [March 29, 2022]. 
Petric, Domina. (2018). Gaslighting and the knot theory of mind. Medicine: Medicine, psychol-
ogy, philosophy and theology website. URL: https://medicine436.wordpress.com/2018 
/09/29/gaslighting-and-the-knot-theory-of-mind/ Sepember 29, 2018.  
Potter, S., Moschella, E., Moynihan, M.M., & Smith, D. (2020). Sexual violence among LGBQ 
community students: A comparison with their heterosexual peers. Community College 
Journal of Research and Practice, 44(10–12), 787–803. doi:10.1080/10668926.2019 
.1706668  
Raymond, L., Weldon, S.L., Kelly, D., Arriaga, X.B., & Clark, A.M. (2014). Making change: 
Norm-based strategies for institutional change to address intractable problems. Political 
Research Quarterly, 67(1), 197–211. doi:10.1177/1065912913510786 
Rideau, R. (2021). “We’re just not acknowledged”: An examination of the identity taxation 
of full-time non-tenure-track Women of Color faculty members. Journal of Diversity in 
Higher Education, 14(2), 161–173. doi:10.1037/dhe0000139 
Risse, T. (1999). International norms and domestic change: Arguing and communicative be-
havior in the human rights area.  Politics & Society,  27(4), 529–559. doi:10.1177 
/0032329299027004004 
Ruíz, E. (2020). Cultural gaslighting. Hypatia, 35(4), 687–713. doi:10.1017/hyp.2020.33 
Schmidt, V.A. (2008). Discursive institutionalism. The explanatory power of ideas and dis-
course. Annual Review of Political Science, 11(1), 303–326. doi:10.1146/annurev.polisci 
.11.060606.135342 
Siegel, D.P. (2019). Transgender experiences and transphobia in higher education. Sociology 
Compass, 13(10), e12734. doi:10.1111/soc4.12734 
IJEPL 19(1) 2023 
 
MacKenzie, Sensoy, 
Johnson, Sinclair,  
& Weldon 
 
How Universities 
Gaslight EDI&I 
Initiatives 
17

Sensoy, Ö., & Diangelo, R. (2017). “We are all for diversity, but…”: How faculty hiring com-
mittees reproduce whiteness and practical suggestions for how they can change. Harvard 
Education Review, 87(4), 557–580. doi:10.17763/1943-5045-87.4.557 
Smith, M.S. (n.d.). Diversity gap Canada. URL: https://www.thediversitygapcanada.com 
[March 29, 2022]. 
Smith, M.S. (2010). Gender, whiteness, and “other Others” in the academy. In S. Razack, 
M.S. Smith, & S. Thobani (Eds.), States of race: Critical race feminism for the 21st century 
(pp. 37–58). Toronto, Ontario: Between the Lines. 
Smith, M.S. (2022). Charting Black presence and futures in the Canadian academy. In A. 
Ibrahim, K. Tamari, M. Smith, & K.W. Handel (Eds.), Nuances of blackness in the Canadian 
academy: Teaching, learning and researching while Black (pp. 431–444). Toronto, ON: 
University of Toronto Press. 
Walter, M., & Andersen, C. (2013). Indigenous statistics: A quantitative research methodology. 
London, UK: Taylor & Francis Group. 
White-Lewis, D.K. (2020). The façade of ﬁt in faculty search processes. The Journal of Higher 
Education, 91(6), 833–857. doi:10.1080/00221546.2020.1775058 
Wijesingha, R., & Robson, K. (2022). Glass ceiling or murky waters: The gendered and racial-
ized pathway to full professorship in Canada. Canadian Review of Sociology, 59(1), 23–42. 
doi:10.1111/cars.12365 
Williams, M.T. (2019). Adverse racial climates in academia: Conceptualization, interventions, 
and call to action. New Ideas in Psychology, 55, 58–67. doi:10.1016/j.newideapsych 
.2019.05.002 
Yerbury, J.J., & Yerbury, R.M. (2021). Disabled in academia: To be or not to be, that is the 
question. Trends in Neurosciences, 44(7), 507–509. doi:10.1016/j.tins.2021.04.004 
Zambrana, R.E., Ray, R., Espino, M.M., Castro, C., Douthirt Cohen, B., & Eliason, J. (2015). 
“Don’t leave us behind”: The importance of mentoring for underrepresented minority 
faculty. American Educational Research Journal, 52(1), 40–72. doi:10.3102/000283 
1214563063
IJEPL 19(1) 2023 
 
MacKenzie, Sensoy, 
Johnson, Sinclair,  
& Weldon 
 
How Universities 
Gaslight EDI&I 
Initiatives 
18