TYPE Original Research
PUBLISHED 26 May 2023
DOI 10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
OPEN ACCESS
EDITED BY
Ioannis Kostakis,
Harokopio University, Greece
REVIEWED BY
Muyiwa Oyinlola,
De Montfort University, United Kingdom
Ourania Tremma,
University College Dublin, Ireland
*CORRESPONDENCE
Elke Nijman-Ross
enijman@alueducation.com
†These authors have contributed equally to this
work and share second authorship
RECEIVED 04 October 2022
ACCEPTED 24 April 2023
PUBLISHED 26 May 2023
CITATION
Nijman-Ross E, Umutesi JU, Turay J,
Shamavu D, Atanga WA and Ross DL (2023)
Toward a preliminary research agenda for the
circular economy adoption in Africa.
Front. Sustain. 4:1061563.
doi: 10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
COPYRIGHT
© 2023 Nijman-Ross, Umutesi, Turay, Shamavu,
Atanga and Ross. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,
distribution or reproduction in other forums is
permitted, provided the original author(s) and
the copyright owner(s) are credited and that
the original publication in this journal is cited, in
accordance with accepted academic practice.
No use, distribution or reproduction is
permitted which does not comply with these
terms.
Toward a preliminary research
agenda for the circular economy
adoption in Africa
Elke Nijman-Ross1*, Jessie Umuhire Umutesi1†, Joseph Turay1†,
David Shamavu1†, Winifred Awinpoya Atanga1† and
David Lang Ross2
1Circular Economy Program, School of Wildlife Conservation, African Leadership University, Kigali,
Rwanda, 2Stratera Capital, Kigali, Rwanda
Circular economy (CE) research plays an important role in accelerating the
CE transition globally and is an essential tool to contribute to climate change
adaptation. However, prior CE research is primarily focused on countries in
the Global North, whereas CE research in the Global South has been largely
unexplored, especially in African countries and contexts. Therefore, this study aims
to develop a preliminary research agenda for CE development in African countries
by identifying the current body of knowledge on CE, the existing CE research gaps
and barriers to conducting CE research in African countries. This research applied a
mixed method research design, whereby this study reviewed a total of 275 English
and French articles from Google Scholar through a scoping literature review
and carried out a quantitative and qualitative survey with 38 CE industry experts
working on CE projects in African countries. The ﬁndings suggest that South Africa
is the front-runner in CE research, with the most relevant publications and ongoing
research projects conducted by CE experts. The dominant focus on CE research in
South Africa is an urgent call for scholars to conduct country-speciﬁc research for
additional African countries, especially since a signiﬁcant number of publications
do not distinguish between countries. Based on ﬁndings, this study concludes
that the current body of CE knowledge is primarily focused on one aspect of CE,
circulating materials and products (keep products and materials in use), while there
is consensus from published journal papers that there are meaningful gaps in other
CE principles such as designing out waste and pollution and regenerating natural
systems. Therefore, this paper suggests a list of research topics that can be further
investigated. To the authors’ knowledge, this study is the ﬁrst attempt to establish
a preliminary research agenda for CE across African contexts and countries.
KEYWORDS
circular economy (CE), Africa, bio-economy, Global South, sustainable development goal
12, responsible consumption and production, waste
1. Introduction
With the threat of the global challenges of the unstainable traditional linear economy
focused on “take-make-dispose”, there is an urgent need for an alternative economic model
(Geissdoerfer et al., 2017; Sariatli, 2017; Oduniyi, 2022, p. 2022). A circular economy (CE)
model provides an alternative to the linear economy that seeks to prevent environmental
Frontiers in Sustainability
01
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
degradation,
including
biodiversity
loss,
accelerated
climate
change, waste and pollution (Su et al., 2013; Oduniyi, 2022).
Kirchherr et al. (2017) concluded after analyzing 114 diﬀerent CE
deﬁnitions that Schut et al. (2015) and Geissdoerfer et al. (2017)
identiﬁed that the Ellen MacArthur Foundation formulated the
most prominent and employed deﬁnition. The Ellen MacArthur
Foundation (2013, p. 7) deﬁnes a CE as “an industrial system that
is restorative or regenerative by intention and design. It replaces
the end-of-life concept with restoration, shifts toward the use of
renewable energy, eliminates the use of toxic chemicals, which
impair reuse, and aims for the elimination of waste through the
superior design of materials, products, systems, and within this,
business models”. The CE model targets achieving the sustainability
of production and consumption through the implementation of
closed cycles for restoration and regeneration and the combination
of processes for maintenance, reuse, reparation, remanufacturing,
renovation, and recycling of waste (Parida and Wincent, 2019).
CE research plays an important role in accelerating the global
CE transition and is a tool to contribute to climate change
adaptation (Muchangos, 2021). However, prior CE research is
mainly focused on countries in the Global North, also recognized
as high-income countries, such as Germany, and Japan, which are
known for their immersive inclusion in CE practices and reforms
(Greyson, 2007; Ministry of the Environment and Minister’s
Secretariat, Waste Management and Recycling Department Policy
Planning Division, Oﬃce of Sound Material-Cycle Society, 2014;
Muchangos, 2021). For example, the EU adopted an Action Plan
for the CE (EU, 2020), followed by Germany, which developed a
CE act (Ogunmakinde, 2019), Finland, which established a National
Roadmap for CE (Cairns, 2018), and China adopted the “Circular
Economy Promotion Law” to promote the CE (Greyson, 2007;
UNEP, 2008). Earlier literature reviews concluded that more than
half of the academic studies on CE from 2004 to 2017 are focused
on the Asian region, especially China, and the other remainder
concentrates on European countries (Merli et al., 2018). A similar
conclusion can be drawn from a bibliometric review that evaluated
studies related to sustainability and CE, whereby most of the
authors and cited publications are focused on China, the UK, the
Netherlands, the USA, and Italy (Geissdoerfer et al., 2017). The
dominant focus on the Global North highlights the importance of
studying CE development in the Global South.
In contrast, CE research in the Global South is mainly
unexplored (Muchangos, 2021), even more so in African countries
and contexts (Mhlanga et al., 2022). Despite this, CE practices
and initiatives exist in African countries at diﬀerent levels of
society. A good example is the establishment of the African
Circular Economy Alliance (ACEA), which is an intergovernmental
initiative to promote CE among African nations (ACEA, n.d.).
Another example is the initiative of the Rwandan government,
among others, to host the World Circular Economy Forum
(WCEF) for the ﬁrst time in Africa in 2022 (WCEF, 2022).
At this moment, CE research in Africa is conducted by
diﬀerent organizations, such as a study carried out by the
African Development Bank (AfDB) and African Circular Economy
Alliance (ACEA) about the ﬁve big bets for CE in Africa. This
study highlights ﬁve priorities for the CE for Africa: food waste
conversion, plastic waste recycling, E-waste recycling, recycled
garments, and mass timber (ACEA, 2021). Other research is
conducted on topics such as the impact of E-waste on Public
Health by the University of Port Harcourt in Nigeria (Orisakwe
et al., 2019), the barriers and drivers of applying CE to food
systems in East Africa by individual scholars (Nijman, 2020), and
studies on the framework of Sustainable E-waste management in
Manufacturing and processing industries in Nairobi by Kenyatta
University (Muhani, 2012). Also, reports have been developed on
the CE for Africa by the Ellen MacArthur Foundation on policy
(Ellen MacArthur Foundation, 2021a), plastics (Ellen MacArthur
Foundation, 2021b), and built environment (Ellen MacArthur
Foundation, 2021c), among others.
However, to the authors’ best knowledge, there is no in-depth
analysis previously conducted on the existing CE literature and
research gaps for African countries and contexts at the moment that
this study is conducted. This is a signiﬁcant missed opportunity
since many African and other emerging economies have the
opportunity to leapfrog (Preston and Lehne, 2020) to a CE model
due to comparatively limited norms or infrastructure for linear
economy processes.
Therefore, this study applies a mixed method research design
(triangulation) through a scoping literature review and a survey.
This research carries out a scoping literature review that includes
198 peer-reviewed and 77 non-academic publications to identify
existing CE publications and research gaps. This is followed by a
qualitative and quantitative survey with CE industry experts active
in African countries to identify the existing CE research gaps. This
study is done with the objective of creating a preliminary research
agenda for African countries and contexts. This research can
encourage CE innovation and accelerate CE adoption in African
nations and contexts.
With this research, we aim to identify research gaps with
the objective to develop a preliminary research agenda for CE
development in Africa. In order to do so, this study answers the
following research questions:
- What is the scope of existing literature on CE development in
African countries?
- What
are
the
research
gaps
on
CE
development
in
African countries?
- What are the identiﬁed barriers to conducting CE research in
African countries?
- What are the identiﬁed opportunities for CE research in
African countries?
The contributions of this research are as follows. First of all,
this study creates an in-depth understanding of how research can
contribute to CE adoption in African countries and contexts by
developing a preliminary research agenda. Secondly, it provides
evidence of why research is important for CE adoption. Lastly,
the study supports CE practitioners and scholars by taking, to our
knowledge, a ﬁrst attempt through academic research to create a
preliminary CE research agenda for African countries and contexts
which can be used for future research and innovation.
The rest of the article is organized as follows. After the
introduction, Section 2 provides an overview of the methodology
used during this research. Section 3 presents the research ﬁndings
of the systematic literature and the survey, followed by the
Frontiers in Sustainability
02
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
FIGURE 1
Overview of the methodology that is used to identify the diﬀerent research papers.
discussion and conclusion that highlights the research gaps and the
CE agenda for African contexts and countries in future research to
accelerate CE adoption in African countries.
2. Methodology
This research aims to develop a preliminary research agenda
for CE in African countries. In order to do so, this study applied
a mixed method research design (triangulation), whereby the
authors collected and analyzed data simultaneously from two
diﬀerent resources to make the study more comprehensive. This
study includes a survey with qualitative and quantitative questions
answered by CE industry experts active in African countries with
aim to identify existing research gaps (Section 2.2). Furthermore,
this study conducts a scoping literature review to identify the
existing relevant literature and its gaps (Section 2.1) (Figure 1).
This section explains, for each data source, how data is collected
and analyzed.
2.1. Scoping literature review
2.1.1. Data-collection
To the authors’ best knowledge, no known published scoping
or systematic review reviews are aimed at identifying the existing
literature and its research gaps about the CE for African countries
and contexts. Therefore, in this study, we conducted a scoping
literature review to identify the existing CE literature and its
research gaps, focusing on African countries and contexts. A
scoping review is the precursor of a systematic literature review and
has identiﬁed appropriate methodology to identify gaps where no
research has been conducted (Arksey and O’Malley, 2005). Further,
it has been identiﬁed as an appropriate methodology to identify and
analyze research gaps in the existing literature, which is the purpose
of this study (Munn et al., 2018). Also, scoping reviews are known
to be able to analyze a large ﬁeld of studies and as a stand-alone
review (Macvean et al., 2017), which seems to be appropriate for the
CE due to its holistic scope of applications on diﬀerent levels of the
systems (Kirchherr et al., 2017). For this study, a scoping literature
Frontiers in Sustainability
03
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
review was conducted using the Prisma ﬂow diagram (Fink, 1998),
as illustrated in Figure 1. The literature view was carried out to
gather knowledge about the existing CE literature across contexts
and African countries by identifying, evaluating, and synthesizing
a comprehensive set of credible CE research literature for Africa
published to date.
As part of the scoping literature review, this study developed
an electronic database to map relevant CE literature for African
countries and contexts. The database includes information such as
the research topic, publication title, authors’ names, a link to the
article, research locations of the study, the identiﬁed CE research
and relevant policy gaps highlighted by the authors. In order to
identify the academic literature, this study used Google Scholar
(GS) and targeted keyword searches to identify the most relevant
and credible academic literature. This study used GS since it is
open access database, one of the most popular academic search
engines (Gusenbauer, 2018). GS is likely to be primarily used
and accessible by CE scholars and practitioners in African low-
income countries due to limited ﬁnancial resources for research.
A recent study concludes that the rate of open-access publications
is the highest among low-income countries, especially in Sub-
Saharan Africa. This is most likely due to factors such as the
diﬃculties that scholars face in low-income countries to access
pay-to-view academic publications, which motivates researchers to
make their work freely available (Iyandemye and Thomas, 2019).
This highlights the importance of open access search engines as
GS for low-income and African countries and our study. GS has
been identiﬁed as a commonly used web-based academic search
engine, a source that can ﬁnd three times as many articles free
of charge than other databases such as PubMed (Shariﬀet al.,
2013). Further, most articles identiﬁed through the Web of Science
have also been identiﬁed through GS (Haddaway et al., 2015).
On top of that, diﬀerent studies emphasized that GS has been
underestimated. Recent research has identiﬁed GS as the most
comprehensive academic search engine, with 389 million records
(Gusenbauer, 2018) and a sensitive enough database to be used
alone for systematic reviews (Gehanno et al., 2013). However,
this study did collect data through not only the literature, but
also the survey as a comprehensive data source (Section 2.2). For
GS, this study identiﬁed the most relevant publications written in
English and French on the ﬁrst 5 pages of GS for each keyword
to identify the most relevant studies and narrow the scope of the
literature research.
In the ﬁrst step of the scoping literature review, this study
identiﬁed papers linked to the selected keywords relevant to CE
research in African countries and contexts (Figure 1). Since CE
research is still new for African countries, and it is captured under
diﬀerent terms, this paper did not only focus on the keyword CE but
also other relevant terms. This includes terms scholars/researchers,
or organizations use to capture CE or part of the CE. In order to
select the relevant keywords, this study consulted CE researchers
based in Africa on which keywords could be used for this study and
selected the keywords with the most relevant articles and records
for CE by running the keywords through GS. This study used the
following English keywords: circular economy Africa/Sub-Saharan
Africa, recycling Africa/Sub-Saharan Africa, waste valorization
Africa/Sub-Saharan Africa, e-waste Africa/Sub-Saharan Africa,
green economy Africa/Sub-Saharan Africa, circular practices
Africa/Sub-Saharan
Africa,
bio-economy
Africa/Sub-Saharan
Africa, circular business model Africa/Sub-Saharan Africa and
waste management Africa/Sub-Saharan Africa. Since English is
not the only scientiﬁc language used in academic publications
on this topic, this study also reviewed French academic literature
relevant to CE principles by translating the identiﬁed English
keywords into French. This research used the following French
keywords in combination with Africa and Sub Saharan Africa:
économie circulaire Afrique/Afrique sub-saharienne, recyclage
Afrique/Afrique sub-saharienne, e-déchets Afrique/Afrique sub-
saharienne, sous-produits Afrique/Afrique sub-saharienne, gestion
des déchets Afrique/Afrique sub-saharienne, pratiques circulaires
Afrique/Afrique sub-saharienne, economie verte Afrique/Afrique
sub-saharienne,
business
models
circulaires
Afrique/Afrique
sub-saharienne, valorisation des déchets Afrique/Afrique sub-
saharienne
and
bio-économie
Afrique/sub-saharienne.
Only
articles relevant to the CE and the research objective have been
included in the database, which is explained in the second step of
this section.
In the second step of the scoping literature review, articles
were selected by three criteria (Figure 1). First, this study could
not access 38 articles due to payments or other reasons. Therefore,
these publications could not be included in the database. In order
to overcome this challenge, the authors reached out via email and
Linkedin to the ﬁrst author of the paper to get full access to the
identiﬁed paper so that the paper could still but used for literature
research. The 38 publications that the authors still need access to
despite contacting the authors of the paper have been excluded
from the review (Figure 1). Secondly, publications not relevant
to the research objectives were not included in the database. It
is important to address that only articles relevant to the CE in
African countries are included in the database. For instance, for
keywords such as “waste management Africa” only papers are
included if they incorporate CE principles. In the scoping literature
review, four junior researchers screened the literature on the three
criteria for diﬀerent keywords, followed by a senior researcher that
checked and supervised the screening process of the four junior
researchers. This review included studies with both qualitative and
quantitative methods.
In this paper, we used the three principles formulated by the
Ellen MacArthur Foundation (EMF) since the CE deﬁnition has
been identiﬁed as the most prominent and employed deﬁnition
after the analysis of 114 diﬀerent deﬁnitions by Kirchherr et al.
(2017) and several other studies (Schut et al., 2015; Geissdoerfer
et al., 2017). For these scientiﬁc reasons, this study adopted the CE
concept and principles of the EMF for this study. Furthermore,
for this study, the authors identiﬁed that these CE principles
and concepts ﬁt both technical and biological processes (Ellen
MacArthur Foundation, n.d.). In contrast, other CE principles,
such as the 10-Rs (Reike et al., 2018), might ﬁt better studies with
a diﬀerent scope, such as material and product-focused studies.
The three principles applied to this study include (1) to eliminate
waste and pollution, (2) circulating products and materials, and (3)
regenerative natural systems (Ellen MacArthur Foundation, n.d.).
These principles are applied by scanning the entire article to
identify if the article reﬂects any of the CE principles. If the papers
Frontiers in Sustainability
04
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
reﬂect one or more CE principles, the article is considered relevant
for the CE research for Africa. If articles do not reﬂect one or more
CE principles, the article is not considered relevant. Lastly, since
CE is a holistic concept that requires a system change (Kirchherr
et al., 2017), it can be implemented in inﬁnite. Therefore, the
researchers have narrowed the scope of the preliminary study by
including additional criteria for the literature review. Since this is a
preliminary study with limited resources, the researchers decided
to leave out technical studies related to chemistry, which are, in
most cases, not restricted to geographical areas of Africa (e.g.,
laboratory research and experiments) and could be conducted
elsewhere. Therefore, these studies do not directly contribute
to relevant research gaps for the geographical area of African
countries, and this study recommends that this will be investigated
for future research.
It is essential to address, that this study did not only
include 198 peer-reviewed papers but also 77 non-peer reviewed
publications such as reports, book chapters, books and non-peer-
reviewed papers (e.g., conference, work papers, and pre-prints).
The non-peer-reviewed publications are identiﬁed through the
same keywords, methodology and criteria that are used to select
academic papers. The inclusion of non-peer-reviewed publications
is appropriate since the documentation of the CE concept, and
even more, CE research in African countries and contexts is
still very new, which means that the number of publications
relevant to this study is limited. Therefore, this study wanted to
allow the inclusion of relevant non-peer-reviewed publications.
Also, including peer-reviewed and non-peer-reviewed publications
allows this study to integrate academia and practice to create a
more comprehensive research agenda with preliminary ﬁndings.
Furthermore, a scoping literature review also encourages being
as comprehensive as possible in identifying primary studies and
reviews that are central to the study’s objective (Arksey and
O’Malley, 2005).
In the third step of the scoping literature review, this study
analyzed the diﬀerent papers on the CE and research gaps by
scan reading the full text of each of the publications with a
speciﬁc focus on the abstract, discussion and conclusion. Research
gaps are only included in our analysis if gaps were identiﬁed
and described explicitly in the papers we reviewed. This study
formulates a research gap as an opportunity or recommendation for
further CE research in African countries or contexts. For example,
publications addressed research gaps in the text of the abstract,
results, discussion or conclusion of the paper by using sentences
such as “more research is needed on” or “it is recommended that
further research is conducted on”, “there is a lack of research
on” or other recommendations for future research. Various papers
included general statements of the research gaps for developing
countries; therefore, this study only included CE research gaps
that are speciﬁc to African countries and contexts. The search
gave 756 English and 696 French articles, without the inclusion
of duplicates, which have been reduced for relevance and scope
to 275 total articles, including 200 English articles and 75 French
articles (Figure 1). The articles that are identiﬁed as relevant are
included in a database created in Excel. Given that the objective
of this study is to conduct a scoping review, the scholars primarily
focused on providing an overview of the existing literature and its
research gaps.
2.1.2. Data-analysis
After selecting the relevant articles for each keyword through
the literature review, the total number of articles for the same
keyword was calculated and represented in a bar chart. For
example, for the keyword “circular economy Africa” the total
number of relevant articles has been calculated and represented in
a bar chart (Figure 4).
Secondly, this study calculated the total number of identiﬁed
articles per African country or region that has been identiﬁed
through the literature review on the CE. A map of Africa was
generated to illustrate the number of articles in each country. This
study used Jupyter Notebook with Python software to analyze
the data and to generate the map for Africa due to the simple
visualization and understanding of the developed codes to analyze
the data. After loading the inbuilt map of Africa, it is customized to
represent the data collected from the research.
2.2. Survey
2.2.1. Data-collection
In order to collect comprehensive data from multiple data
sources, this study did not only collect data through the literature
review but also through a survey that includes both qualitative
and quantitative questions. The survey aims to identify existing
research gaps and to build a database of diﬀerent organizations
and researchers that conduct CE research in African countries and
contexts. Therefore, this study developed a survey simultaneously
with the literature review.
The questionnaire has been developed in collaboration between
African Leadership University (ALU), the Circular Economy
Innovation Partnership (CEIP), and the African Circular Economy
Network (ACEN), which is a network of CE industry experts
working on CE in Africa. ALU played an important role in
developing the survey, while CEIP and ACEN played a critical
role in validating and reviewing the survey questions. After the
validation, suggested improvements have been incorporated into
the survey, such as improvements in the settings to ensure all
respondents have access to the online survey. As part of the
validation process, the researchers added additional questions,
such as the research domain of the respondents. Also, the survey
included examples to explain the questions to the respondents to
ensure the answers’ reliability and validity. Also, the examples by
the questions of the survey have been validated.
The survey includes qualitative and quantitative questions that
integrate topics such as the demographics of the respondents,
the current involvement in CE research in Africa, types of
research gaps they have identiﬁed, and the barriers the respondents
have identiﬁed for conducting CE research in Africa. For
the demographics, this study covered questions such as the
respondent’s location, the type of organization they are working
for, the position of the respondent within the organization, and
the research domain. As part of the survey, the respondents are
informed that their inputs will be used for the purpose of this study
and by completing the survey, they consent that data is used for
research. Also, the study complied with the research ethics of the
Circular Economy Research Program at ALU.
Frontiers in Sustainability
05
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
TABLE 1 Sample size of various actor segments across diﬀerent African countries.
Actor segment
South
Africa
Cameroon
Rwanda
Other African
countries
European
countries, incl. UK
Other
Sample
size
Academia
2
1
2
2
6
0
13
Consultant/freelancer
1
0
0
1
3
0
5
Founder/co-founder
1
0
0
1
0
0
2
Retired Minister
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
Waste/CE specialist
0
1
0
1
0
1
3
Executive Secretary
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
Environmental engineer
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
Marketer
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
Associated program oﬃcer
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
Post graduate student
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
Researcher/analyst
3
0
0
2
3
1
9
Sample size per country
9
2
2
9
13
3
38
ALU Circular Economy Program.
The survey aims to collect additional data from CE researchers
and experts conducting CE research or projects in African countries
to make this study more comprehensive (Table 1). For this study,
the researchers made use of a snowballing sample technique to
identify the survey respondents. CE researchers and experts have
been directly invited to the survey by email through the networks
of CEIP, ACEN and ALU, who are directly working with circular
economy experts in Africa. Also, researchers and experts active in
Africa have been invited to complete the survey through Linkedin
(groups) with a special focus on CE in Africa, and the ACEN
newsletter was shared with a community interested in CE in Africa.
The use of social media (Linkedin) and newsletters also allowed
others to share the survey in their networks to increase the number
of respondents.
38 respondents accepted and completed the survey. The
respondents are based in diﬀerent countries, whereby about 24%
of the respondents are located in South Africa (Table 1).
2.2.2. Data-analysis
After collecting the data of 38 diﬀerent CE researchers and
industry experts through a survey (Table 1), this study analyzed
the survey data to identify the indicated CE research gaps, research
barriers and current research countries of the respondents.
In order to analyze the CE research gaps, this study followed
three diﬀerent steps. First, the responses that indicated similar
research gaps are clustered into a group, which is called a category.
After clustering the research gaps into categories, the categories
were given a name. Lastly, after grouping the responses into
diﬀerent categories, a bar chart has been developed to illustrate the
percentage of occurrence per category based on the inputs of the
survey respondents.
Furthermore, an analysis of the CE research barriers has
been conducted with the survey data to understand the current
research barriers to conducting CE research in African countries
and contexts. In order to do so, the total number of respondents
that indicated a challenge (barrier) for CE research was calculated
in numbers and percentages. After that, this study developed a
chart, as illustrated in Figure 6 to demonstrate the percentage of
occurrence of each CE research barrier. Lastly, this study also
analyzed the research focus countries of the diﬀerent respondents
by calculating the total number of respondents that conducted
research for each African country. For each country, the percentage
of the occurrence was calculated and represented in a pie chart
(Figure 3).
3. Results
In this section, this study discusses the ﬁndings of both the
literature review and the survey. The survey has been shared
directly via email through the networks of ALU, ACEN and
CEIP to 94 CE researchers and experts conducting research and
projects in African countries. Furthermore, the researchers and
experts conducting CE research and projects in Africa have been
invited to complete the survey through Linkedin and the ACEN
newsletter. The Linkedin post received 5,786 impressions. The
ACEN newsletter has been shared with a community of 1,324
people interested in ACEN’s work on CE in Africa. The survey has
been accepted and completed by 38 respondents, whereby about
24% of the respondents are located in South Africa (Table 1). The
following paragraphs highlight the survey results in more detail,
followed by the literature review ﬁndings.
3.1. Research countries
From the ﬁndings of the literature review, South Africa has
the highest number of relevant publications for the CE (105
out of 275 publications), followed by Sub-Saharan Africa as a
region (31), Africa as a continent (29), Nigeria (35), Ghana (32),
Kenya (22), Benin (22), Cameroon (14), Senegal (13), Ivory Coast
Frontiers in Sustainability
06
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
FIGURE 2
Overview of the relevant number of publications that have been published for each African country.
TABLE 2 Overview of the number of publications published for each
region, whereby the authors of the identiﬁed publications did not specify
the African countries but only the region.
Region
Number of publications
Sub-Saharan Africa
31
West Africa
6
Africa (the continent)
29
North Africa
2
East Africa
1
Central Africa
1
Total number of publications
70
(13), DRC (10), Ethiopia (10) and Rwanda (7). The other 39
African countries only have a few relevant publications for the
CE, as shown in Figure 2. Burundi, Tunisia, South Sudan, Libya,
Eritrea, Equatorial Guinea, Djibouti, Comoros, Seychelles, and the
African island São Tomé and Princip do not have any relevant
CE publications for Africa (represented as zero value on the map)
(Figure 2). This study identiﬁed 70 publications (25%), whereby the
authors do not specify the African countries in the publications; this
includes Africa as a continent, Sub-Saharan Africa, West Africa,
North Africa, and East Africa. The region Sub-Saharan Africa
(31 publications) and Africa (29 publications) have the highest
number of publications (Table 2). From the survey ﬁndings, it
was discovered that researchers are only active in a few of the 54
African countries in CE research projects. Among the countries
this study surveyed, South Africa has the highest percentage of
published CE research projects, with about 33%. Kenya follows
this with 19%; Malawi with 11%; Zambia with 11%; Rwanda with
11%. The “other” category in the chart comprises countries with 7%
and below. The countries are Algeria, Ghana, Cameroon, Nigeria,
Namibia, Mozambique, and Zimbabwe. Also, this included Africa
as a continent (Figure 3).
3.2. Keywords
As the methodology explains, this study used diﬀerent
keywords to identify relevant publications for the CE. This study
analyzed the number of relevant publications for each keyword
to identify which keywords have the highest number of relevant
publications. From the analysis, it is visible that the keywords
waste management (Sub Saharan) Africa (48 publications), E-
waste (Sub Saharan) Africa (46 publications) and recycling (Sub)
Saharan Africa (38 publications) avails to be keyword widely used.
From English keyword analysis, it is visible that the keywords
E-waste (Sub Saharan) Africa (39 publications), recycling (Sub
Saharan) Africa (34 publications), and waste management (Sub
Saharan) Africa (29 publications) are the keywords mainly used.
The French keyword Gestion des déchets Afrique (sub-saharienne),
also translated as waste management (Sub Saharan) Africa has the
highest number of publications (19) in the French literature, as
illustrated in Figure 4.
3.3. Research gaps
3.3.1. Research gaps identiﬁed in the literature
The ﬁndings of this study have identiﬁed several research
gaps that can be categorized into four main categories, as
illustrated in Figure 5. These categories include: (1) private-
sector driven research (Table 3), (2) policy and governance
(Table 4),
(3)
monitoring
and
evaluation
(Table 5),
(4)
E-
waste
(Table 6),
(5)
food
and
agriculture
(Table 7).
These
ﬁndings
are
discussed
and
represented
in
detail
in
the
text below.
3.3.1.1. Private-sector driven research
It can be observed from the research ﬁndings, as illustrated
in Table 3, that 7 studies suggest the need for CE pilots and
demonstration projects intending to upscale CE innovation. This is
followed by the suggestion of 5 studies to carry industry-academia
Frontiers in Sustainability
07
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
FIGURE 3
Overview of the percentage of countries that are focus countries of ongoing Circular Economy research projects of the survey respondents.
FIGURE 4
Overview of the number of articles for each English and French keyword.
collaborations for CE research and innovations. 6 studies indicated
the need for further research on CE business opportunities in
sectors such as agriculture, human settlements, transport, (rail)
manufacturing, demanufacturing, and E-waste recycling. 6 studies
indicate the need for research on beneﬁts and other (success)
factors for the private sector to be part of the CE transition,
how products and innovations can be designed following a CE
model, feasibility research on renewable energy projects such
as biogas and bio-briquette making. 5 studies highlighted the
importance of feasibility research on renewable energy such
as biogas, briquette making, ethanol and other waste-to-energy
solutions. This is followed by 4 studies that indicated the need for
feasibility studies of CE product design at a (commercial) scale
(Table 3).
3.3.1.2. Policy and governance
Relevant to the category of policies, governance and waste
management, 17 articles address the need for further research
on
waste
management
challenges
for
the
informal
sector,
vulnerable groups, and local/rural communities (Table 4). 9 studies
suggested further research on the drivers and barriers inﬂuencing
recycling behavior, and existing practices among stakeholders and
communities. 8 diﬀerent studies highlighted the importance of
critical analysis of existing policies related to topics that are
Frontiers in Sustainability
08
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
FIGURE 5
Overview of the number of identiﬁed research gaps per category.
connected with CE, such as waste management, recycling, green
economy, and energy. This analysis supports identifying of how CE
can embed in existing and new policies and strategies (Table 4).
3.3.1.3. Monitoring and evaluation
Building on the results of policy and governance, this study
also identiﬁed 4 diﬀerent research gaps relevant to monitoring and
evaluation, as illustrated in Table 5. 21 studies identiﬁed the need
for reliable data on waste management, including the informal
sector and industrial waste management data. 6 studies addressed
the need to monitor and evaluate interventions or projects related
to CE (Table 5).
3.3.1.4. E-waste
Relevant to research ﬁndings related to E-waste, as shown in
Table 6, 9 studies suggested the need for further research on the
health impact of E-waste—an in-depth study on the impact of
E-waste recycling and disposal on the informal sector and local
communities, and the environment. Also, 12 publications suggest
the need for data collection to overcome the lack of data on E-
waste -lack of reliable data on E-waste management, including
the quantiﬁcation. On top of that, 5 studies highlight the need to
identify global and domestic E-waste ﬂows of electronic products
that end up in Africa (Table 6).
3.3.1.5. Food and agriculture
It can be observed from the ﬁndings that 7 diﬀerent research
gaps are identiﬁed that are related to food and agriculture,
as illustrated in Table 7. 14 studies indicated the need for
further research on how diﬀerent types of organic waste and
agricultural by-products can be upcycled. 8 studies emphasize
the need to investigate the impact and performance of organic
inputs (vermicomposting, composting, bio-fertilizers, ﬂy-larvae
composting, bio-char) on agricultural productivity and its beneﬁt
and opportunity compared to conventional farming.
3.3.2. Research gaps identiﬁed through the
surveys with CE industry experts working in Africa
A total of 48% of the respondents indicated a lack of knowledge
on how to reuse/upcycle diﬀerent waste streams for circular
innovation through transforming waste into new products, as
illustrated in Figure 6. Examples include CE innovation research
on the utilization of food residues in new commercial products
as well as the innovation on how to reuse organic waste at the
household level, or how to utilize waste from oﬀ-grid solar systems.
Respondents across diﬀerent African countries have addressed
this research gap. More than 20% of the respondents addressed
that the lack of monitoring and evaluation of CE interventions
is a signiﬁcant research gap since the impact of the CE needs to
be studied and monitored. This may contribute to explanations
for why more than 20% of respondents indicate that there are
no measuring tools available for African countries to measure
CE performance or how assess circularity. Following that, about
7% indicate a lack of data and research, on how to make
informed decisions for policymakers. About 19% addressed a
lack of understanding and research on how to create practical
policies that promote and enforce the CE for the African context.
Furthermore, about 15% stressed that there needs to be a focus
on the role of marginalized groups, but also the inclusion of the
informal sector, or how rural communities can be included in the
CE research. Lastly, about 7% addressed a lack of understanding of
how CE business models can be upscaled in Africa, and there is an
analysis of CE business models (Figure 6).
3.3.3. Research barriers to conducting research
on the CE in Africa
A total of 79% of the survey respondents are currently
conducting research on the CE. Greater than 70% of the
respondents indicated that the lack of funding to conduct CE
research is a barrier to conducting research. In some cases, the
Frontiers in Sustainability
09
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
TABLE 3 Overview of the author’s contribution to each identiﬁed research gap related to the private sector.
Research gap
Frequency
Authors contribution
CE pilot and demonstration projects to upscale CE innovation through
research
7
Njenga et al., 2010; Montcho et al., 2016; Fletcher et al., 2017;
Mugodo et al., 2017; Idowu et al., 2019; Callo-Concha et al.,
2020; Oguntuase, 2020
(Sectoral) CE opportunities and challenges, e.g., agriculture, human
settlements, transport, (rail) manufacturing, demanufacturing and E-waste
recycling at the country level
6
Mäkelä, 2017; Ntsonde and Aggeri, 2017; Charles et al., 2018;
Phuluwa et al., 2020; Schoeman et al., 2021
Feasibility research on renewable energy, such as biogas, briquette making,
ethanol and other waste-to-energy (WTE) solutions
5
Parawira, 2009; Amegah and Agyei-Mensah, 2017; Dlamini
et al., 2018; Tabasso et al., 2020; Chen et al., 2021
Feasibility research of manufacturing CE products at (commercial) scale
4
Semiyaga et al., 2015; Mombo and Bigirwa, 2017; Feleke
et al., 2021; Gatune et al., 2021; Tapsoba et al., 2022
Study how products/innovations can be designed in a CE way
6
Liebenberg, 2007; Charles et al., 2018; Oguge, 2019; Pfukwa
et al., 2019; Oruko et al., 2020; Ghosh and Ghosh, 2022
Determinants (barriers and drivers) and beneﬁts of CE transition for the
private sector
6
Musyoki, 2012; Mativenga et al., 2017; Pathak and
Endayilalu, 2019; Miranosava, 2020; Hassim, 2021; Oyinlola
et al., 2021
Industry - academia collaboration for CE research and innovation projects
5
Fletcher et al., 2017; Bambo and Pouris, 2020; Gatune et al.,
2021; Oguntuase and Adu, 2021; Ghosh and Ghosh, 2022
Feasibility of waste management and sorting waste
4
Nahman and Godfrey, 2010; Kakeu and Christelle, 2018;
Salguero-Puerta et al., 2019; Ddiba, 2020
The development of measuring, assessment tools/documentation of
greening among private sector
2
Mativenga et al., 2017; Andersen et al., 2021
Recycling technologies for the textile and apparel industry
1
Larney and van Aardt, 2009
Lack of research on CE for construction and green building
2
Addy et al., 2021; Mhlanga et al., 2022
respondents even indicated that they had research funds to start
the research, but did not have enough resources to complete the
research. Remarkably, 75% of the respondents indicated noting
challenges with lack of ﬁnance for CE research are representing
organizations based in Africa, as illustrated in Figure 7.
4. Discussion
This study aims to uncover insights to inform the development
of a preliminary research agenda for the circular economy (CE)
adoption in African countries by identifying the current body of
knowledge on CE, the existing CE research gaps and barriers to
conducting CE research in African countries and contexts.
It can be concluded from the literature review and the survey
ﬁndings that South Africa is currently the front-runner in CE
research, with the most relevant published publications (Figure 2)
and ongoing research projects conducted by CE experts (Figure 3).
Furthermore, Kenya has also been identiﬁed by the survey
respondents as an active country in the CE research (Figure 3). The
dominant focus on CE research in South Africa is an urgent call
for scholars to investigate other African countries on the status quo
of CE development and country-speciﬁc potentials for CE. On top
of that, it is important to address that about 26% of the studies
generalize CE ﬁndings for the African continent or particular
African regions without making a distinction between African
countries. Therefore, more country-speciﬁc research is needed to
unlock CE opportunities for diﬀerent countries. In order to do so,
it is necessary to make suﬃcient ﬁnancial resources available for
African institutions to conduct CE research for African countries
and contexts. The survey respondents have identiﬁed the lack of
funding as a signiﬁcant barrier, especially for institutions based in
the continent in conducting CE research (Figure 7). A similar trend
can be observed by AUDA-NEPAD (2019), whereby South Africa,
out of 23 African countries, has allocated the highest amount
of resources to Gross Domestic Expenditure on Research and
Development (GERD). However, the contribution of South Africa,
with 0.7% on the GERD, remains low compared to other western
countries, such as Finland, which spends about 3.28% on the
GERD (AUDA-NEPAD, 2019). Europe spends about 530 million
USD on research per year, while Africa allocates about 25 million
on research and development despite being the fastest-growing
continent (NSF, 2019). The lack of research funds emphasizes the
urgency of making research funds available to accelerate the CE
transition in Africa.It can be derived from the results of this study
that CE research in Africa primarily focuses on waste management,
E-waste, and recycling (132 publications). Therefore, this study
concludes that most of the CE publications in Africa are focused
on the second principle of the CE, which aims to keep materials
in use or also called circulate materials and resources (Ellen
MacArthur Foundation, n.d.). The current body of knowledge is
primarily focused on research topics such as waste management,
E-waste and recycling (Figure 4) with a limited focus on other CE
principles such as opportunities for regenerative natural systems
and designing out waste as a solution in the ﬁrst place (Ellen
MacArthur Foundation, 2013). Therefore, there is an urgent need
Frontiers in Sustainability
10
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
TABLE 4 Overview of the author’s contribution to each identiﬁed research gap related to policy, governance and waste management.
Research gap
Frequency
Authors contribution
Study the current waste management challenges for the informal sector,
vulnerable groups and local/rural communities
17
Njeru, 2006; Gbinlo, 2010; Godfrey et al., 2013; Mondesir
et al., 2013; Nzeadibe, 2013; Sotamenou, 2013; Kinobe, 2015;
Ngambi, 2016; Daouda, 2017; du Toit and Wagner, 2018;
Kakeu and Christelle, 2018; Sotamenou, 2018; Sossou et al.,
2019; Adrien, 2021; Dabire and Gango, 2021; Viljoen et al.,
2021; Volschenk et al., 2021
Study the drivers and barriers that inﬂuence recycling behavior, existing
practices among local stakeholders and communities, and lessons learned
from stakeholder participation in other projects such as environmental
waste management
9
Oelofse and Strydom, 2010; Mtutu and Thondhlana, 2016;
Strydom and Godfrey, 2016; du Toit et al., 2017; Strydom,
2018a,b; Viljoen et al., 2021; Volschenk et al., 2021; Owojori
et al., 2022
Critical analysis of existing policies related topics such as waste
management, recycling, green economy, and energy—and identify how CE
can be best integrated into policies and strategies
8
Nahman and Godfrey, 2010; Borel-Saladin and Turok, 2013;
Nhamo, 2013; Dieng et al., 2018; Desmond and Asamba,
2019; Mutezo and Mulopo, 2021; Rweyendela and Kombe,
2021
Study how the informal sector/communities and their (indigenous)
knowledge can be included in policies, guidelines and frameworks,
especially in waste management, green economy and bio-economy
5
Nzeadibe, 2013; Sentime, 2013; Moyo, 2014; Simatele et al.,
2017; Gatune et al., 2021
Study the impact of air pollution on human health to convince governments
about the urgency to invest in clean energy and asses the (indoor) air quality
for the use FS (fecal sludge) fuel briquettes
2
Semiyaga et al., 2015; Amegah and Agyei-Mensah, 2017
Sustainability-focused research—study how CE can consider sustainability
issues, e.g., SDGs, environmental quality vs. economic growth
2
Gbinlo, 2010; Rosa and Martius, 2021
TABLE 5 Overview of the author’s contribution to each identiﬁed research gap related to monitoring and evaluation of CE.
Research gap
Frequency
Authors contribution
Lack of reliable quantitative data on waste management, informal sector,
industry waste management data, illegally dumped and recycled waste
21
Nahman and Godfrey, 2010; Couth and Trois, 2012a; Feldt
et al., 2014; Kinobe, 2015; Kinobe et al., 2015; Komakech
et al., 2015; Mohee and Simelane, 2015; Scarlat et al., 2015;
Gnassou, 2017; Godfrey et al., 2017; Regassa et al., 2017;
Charis et al., 2019; Critoru et al., 2019; Kabera et al., 2019;
Orhorhoro and Oghoghorie, 2019; Dibba, 2020; Adeleke
et al., 2021; Ezeudu et al., 2020; Schoeman et al., 2021;
Muheirwe et al., 2022; Obsa et al., 2022
Monitoring and evaluation of interventions/projects/initiatives to
understand (project) interventions and their impact on improving (future)
interventions and planning
6
Oduro-Appiah et al., 2013; Kinobe, 2015; Oyekale, 2017;
Kakeu and Christelle, 2018; Mbiadjeu-Lawou, 2019;
Moumbe et al., 2020
Lack of data for policy development/investments of CE and its related CE
topics such as WEEE data, green and bio-economy
4
Klein and Reiher, 2016; Albagoury, 2020; Godfrey et al.,
2021; Oguntuase and Adu, 2021
Monitoring and evaluation for (e) waste management and recycling policies
2
Sebola et al., 2018; Lebbie et al., 2021
to widen the scope of CE research in Africa, which is vital in
advancing to a CE model.
Building on the previous point, the literature review ﬁndings
suggest a drastic need to conduct CE research on the themes such as
private-sector-driven research, policy and governance, monitoring
and evaluation, E-waste, and food and agriculture (Figure 5). One
of the cross-cutting research topics identiﬁed through the survey
and 14% of studies of the literature review is the lack of data
on waste management and E-waste, including the quantiﬁcation
of diﬀerent waste streams to upcycle waste residues hampers CE
research and data-based decision-making. Therefore, this should
be an urgent call for scholars to develop solutions to overcome
the challenges of the data collection for the CE applicable to
African countries and contexts. A similar conclusion is made
in the literature, Oyinlola et al. (2021) investigated the role of
technological innovations in accelerating the transition to circular
plastic value chains in Africa. The study suggested that digital
solutions could be a signiﬁcant aid in collecting and analyzing
data on topics for complexities around waste management and
material ﬂows. On top of that, the need for more data also impacts
local policymakers, monitoring and evaluation of (government)
interventions for CE. For instance, 22% of survey respondents
indicate a need for more monitoring and evaluation on the
impact and beneﬁts of (policy) interventions and how to upscale
successful interventions (Figure 6). This can be explained by the
fact that the survey respondents also indicate a need to develop
CE development measurement tools applicable to African countries
and contexts. Also, developing a CE measurement tool that
applies to Africa and proper monitoring and evaluation through
research can help understand how to create practical policies
Frontiers in Sustainability
11
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
TABLE 6 Overview of the author’s contribution to each identiﬁed research gap related to E-waste.
Research gap
Frequency
Authors contribution
Lack of reliable E-waste data, including quantiﬁcation
12
Nolet, 2012; Akormedi et al., 2013; Bisschop and Walle van
de, 2013; Lawhon, 2013; Schluep et al., 2013; Lepawsky,
2014; Ledwaba and Sosibo, 2017; Adejonwo-Osho, 2019;
Orisakwe et al., 2019; Eﬀebi et al., 2020; Maphosa and
Maphosa, 2020; Ayeleru et al., 2021
Impact of E-waste recycling and disposal on the health of informal workers,
local communities and the environment
9
Caravanos et al., 2011; Muhani, 2012; Feldt et al., 2014;
Amankwah-Amoah, 2016; Srigboh et al., 2016; Asante et al.,
2019; Lebbie et al., 2021; Wachinou et al., 2022
Identify global and domestic E-waste ﬂows of electronics products that end
up in Africa
5
Breivik et al., 2014; Akpan and Olukanni, 2020; Bimir, 2020;
Ondiek and Onyango, 2021; Maes and Preston-Whyte, 2022
Identify existing and the best E-waste practices in Africa
3
Akpan and Olukanni, 2020; Bimir, 2020; Maphosa and
Maphosa, 2020
Investigate the (social-economic) background of E-waste producers and
stakeholders, and ensure their inclusion
2
Oteng-Ababio, 2012; Akpan and Olukanni, 2020
Limited E-waste policy studies for emerging economies
2
Borthakur, 2020; Lebbie et al., 2021
TABLE 7 Overview of the author’s contribution to each identiﬁed research gap related to food and agriculture.
Research gap
Frequency
Authors contribution
Investigate how diﬀerent types of waste and agricultural by-products can be
upcycled, and study the (economic) beneﬁt of the valorization.
14
Courard, 2020; Baﬀes, 2010; Semiyaga et al., 2015; Montcho
et al., 2016; Nzila et al., 2016; Ousseini et al., 2017; Derouiche
and Ben Amor, 2019; Pfukwa et al., 2019; Anagonou et al.,
2020; Ayeleru et al., 2020; Browning et al., 2020; Dibba, 2020;
Munubi and Lamtane, 2021; Sekabira et al., 2021b
Impact of compost, biofertilizers and other techniques on the soil,
productivity, and study its challenges, (cost) beneﬁts, and opportunities
compared to conventional farming and over landﬁll disposal
8
Kaboré et al., 2010; Couth and Trois, 2012b; Longanza et al.,
2015; Semiyaga et al., 2015; Temple and de Bon, 2020; Terfa,
2021; Obsa et al., 2022; Duponnis, n.d.
Adoption—study the factors that inﬂuence the adoption and engagement of
farmers in applying CE practices
4
Musvoto et al., 2014; Smith et al., 2015; Sekabira and
Kantengwa, 2021; Sekabira et al., 2021a
Study the safety of organic waste/human excreta for utilization in compost,
energy or (food) products for human use
3
Parrot et al., 2009; Smith et al., 2015; Pfukwa et al., 2019
Study the status quo on the application of CE practices by farmers and the
speciﬁc farming situation, including the soil fertility
3
Parrot et al., 2009; Musvoto et al., 2014; Boon and Anuga,
2020
The acceptance, safety and optimization of the performance of black soldier
ﬂy by using diﬀerent types of waste streams
3
Semiyaga et al., 2015; Nyakeri et al., 2017; Chia et al., 2019
Investigate the status quo of existing composting practices
2
Parrot et al., 2009; Tshala et al., 2017
to promote and enforce CE, which the survey has emphasized
as a critical research gap. In addressing these research gaps,
both research, policymakers and other stakeholders must take an
inclusive approach, whereby essential stakeholders such as the
informal sector, local communities and marginalized groups should
be included as suggested by the survey. A similar conclusion is
made in the literature; for instance, Nzeadibe (2013) highlighted
the importance of the inclusion of the informal sector in research
and the formulation of policy on sustainable and inclusive solid
waste management.
Lastly, it can be concluded from the ﬁndings that there
is an urgent need for private-sector-driven research on CE in
African countries since this study identiﬁed the highest number of
research gaps on this topic. For example, almost 50% of the survey
respondents (Figure 6) and 14 publications address the urgent
need to identify opportunities for future research and partnerships
on how diﬀerent types of waste, especially organic waste and
agricultural by-products, can be upcycled into new products or
uses. For instance, Semiyaga et al. (2015) highlight the need for
research on simple technologies of converting fecal sludge into
forms of mineral fertilizers with or without nutrient enhancement
for urban-slum areas in Sub-Saharan Africa. Another example that
highlights the importance of private-sector-driven research is a
publication by Munubi and Lamtane (2021) that emphasizes the
need for public-private research partnerships on the potential of
valorizing agricultural by-products in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Also, there is a direct need for private-sector driven CE
research for business opportunities for Africa in sectors such as
agriculture, human settlements, transport, (rail) manufacturing,
demanufacturing, and E-waste recycling. In addition, research
ﬁndings of the literature suggest the direct need to establish
CE demonstration and pilot projects to upscale CE innovation.
Not only CE demonstration and pilot projects are highlighted as
necessary, but also several studies highlighted the importance of
Frontiers in Sustainability
12
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
FIGURE 6
Overview of the percentage of the categories of research gaps of the respondents from the survey (source: ALU CE Program).
FIGURE 7
Overview of the indicated research barriers of the respondents from the survey (source: ALU CE program).
academia-industry projects. For instance, Fletcher et al. (2017)
stressed that West African countries could adopt the Silicon Valley
model to encourage innovation and creativity among universities,
investors and start-ups. Industry-academia collaborations can play
an important role in answering unsolved research questions and
piloting innovations with the private sector, which has also been
identiﬁed as essential solutions by several studies.
4.1. Recommendations for future research
This
study
has
identiﬁed
several
research
gaps
based
on
the
need
to
accelerate
the
CE
transition
in
Africa.
Based
on
this
study,
future
research
can
be
funded
for
the
exploration
of
the
following topics:
Frontiers in Sustainability
13
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
Private sector-driven research to
accelerate the CE transition in Africa
1. Private-sector-driven CE research for business opportunities
in sectors such as agriculture, human settlements, transport,
(rail) manufacturing, demanufacturing, E-waste recycling and
renewable energy (e.g., biogas and bio-briquettes). 8 diﬀerent
publications have indicated this research gap and further
country-speciﬁc research can help to unlock new CE business
opportunities (Table 3).
2. Study drivers, barriers and beneﬁts for the private sector to
transition to a CE in Africa. This research helps understand
what is needed for CE adoption in the private sector and which
incentives can be created to engage the private sector on the CE.
6 diﬀerent studies have addressed this research gap, and about
7% of the respondents of the survey also indicated the need to
understand how to upscale CE business models (Table 3).
3. Study the valorization and upcycling of diﬀerent types of waste
into new products and uses, especially regarding agricultural
by-products. This has been addressed by almost 50% of the
survey respondents (Figure 6), and 14 publications. Most of
the publications especially highlight the potential for the
valorization of agricultural by-products. Since agriculture is a
dominant sector across diﬀerent African nations, there is a high
potential to study how to utilize by-products in new products
and uses for the African context (Table 7).
4. Investigate how products and innovations can be designed in
a CE way, e.g., by improving the recyclability of products and
materials or innovations to prevent plastics from rising that can
be applied in Africa. 6 studies addressed this research gap.
5. Establish CE demonstration and pilot projects to upscale
CE
innovations
in
African
countries.
The
potential
of
demonstration and pilot projects helps to pilot business
solutions with the private sector, which can be combined with
point 6. Seven publications identiﬁed this research gap (Table 3).
6. Establish
industry-academia
collaborations
for
research
and innovation projects, whereby the academia supports
the private sector to solve unanswered questions through
testing, demonstration and pilot projects. This provides
the opportunity to accelerate the CE transition in African
countries hand in hand with the private sector, whereby
research is a spinoﬀfor innovation. 5 publications have
addressed this.
Policy and governance
1. Study the current waste management challenges for the informal
sector, vulnerable groups, and local and rural communities,
followed by how these groups can be included in policies
related to CE, incl. existing policies such as waste management
and recycling. It became clear from the survey and literature
review that informal workers and local communities are not
always considered as important stakeholders. 17 diﬀerent
studies address the need to study challenges that are faced
by the informal sector, vulnerable groups, local and rural
communities (Table 4). Five publications indicate the need for
research on how to include these groups in existing policies
and research (Table 4). This has been further emphasized
by 15% of the respondents, as illustrated in Figure 6. This
address the importance of studying the challenges and the
inclusion of the informal sector, rural communities and
vulnerable groups for CE-related policies in African nations
and contexts.
2. Investigate the drivers and barriers that inﬂuence CE and
recycling behavior and adoption, existing CE practices and
the perception of CE and recycling toward local stakeholders
and communities. Understanding the drivers and barriers that
inﬂuence CE behavior is crucial for adopting CE and for creating
the right (policy) incentives to engage in CE. This research has
been addressed by 9 diﬀerent publications (Table 4).
3. Study how to integrate CE in policies that can be easily
implemented and enforced and create incentives to promote a
CE transition in African countries. It is essential to understand
how CE can be integrated into policies, implemented and
enforced to ensure a successful adaption of the CE adjusted to
the local context. 22% of the survey respondents have addressed
this research gap, as illustrated in Figure 6 and eight diﬀerent
studies (Table 4).
Data- collection and monitoring
1. Building on the previous point, the development and testing
of a measurement and monitoring tool to monitor the impact,
beneﬁts, and interventions of CE applicable to African contexts
have been identiﬁed as an important key for CE. This is essential
to be able to measure and evaluate the CE performance of
the private sector, project and policy interventions for African
countries and contexts. This gap has been identiﬁed by 22% of
the survey respondents, as illustrated in Figure 6.
2. Identify and pilot solutions (e.g., digitalization) to overcome
the lack of reliable quantitative data on (e)-waste management,
incl. informal sector, industry waste management data, illegally
dumped and recycled waste, and CE at large. One of the
studies in this literature review addressed the potential of
digital innovations (DI) as a potential solution to overcome
challenges toward data-collection for the CE for plastics
(Oyinlola et al., 2021), which highly recommends exploring
other CE topics. The lack of data for research and monitoring
has been addressed as a signiﬁcant challenge by 50% of the
survey respondents (Figure 6), 33 publications of which 12
studies especially highlight the need to collect data for E-waste.
This highlights the importance of identifying solutions such
as digitalization to overcome this challenge and unlock new
circular economy opportunities.
E-waste
1. Identify global and domestic E-waste ﬂows (movements) of
electronic products that end up in diﬀerent African countries.
The identiﬁed publications from this study clearly stated that
the E-waste management and recycling situation is problematic
Frontiers in Sustainability
14
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
since African countries are used as a dumping ground for
E-waste. E-waste from high-income countries is (illegally)
exported to African countries, whereby E-waste disposal and
recycling takes place through the informal sector due to
the lack of E-waste legislation and infrastructure in African
countries and the high costs for E-waste recycling in high-
income countries (Amankwah-Amoah, 2016; Srigboh et al.,
2016). It becomes clear that CE thought leaders cannot build a
CE without including African countries and other developing
countries. The CE requires global solutions with the inclusion
of Africa. This calls for further research on the current
international and domestic E-waste ﬂows to identify solutions to
tackle ongoing E-waste challenges in African countries. Also, it
highlights the importance of CE research for African and other
developing countries. This research gap has been identiﬁed by
ﬁve publications (Table 6).
2. Building on the previous point, it is recommended to study
the impact of E-waste recycling and disposal on the health
of informal workers, local communities, and the environment.
E-waste disposal and recycling are taking place through
the informal sector due to a lack of E-waste regulation
and infrastructure. 9 diﬀerent studies indicated the need to
investigate the impact of E-waste recycling on health and the
environment, as illustrated in Table 6.
Food and agriculture
1. Investigate the impact and performance of organic inputs
(vermicomposting,
composting,
bio-fertilizers,
ﬂy-larvae
composting, bio-char) on agricultural productivity and its
beneﬁt and opportunity compared to conventional farming.
Food security is high on the agenda of policy makers and
smallholder farmers in many African nations. In order to
introduce and improve agricultural practices through applying
compost or biofertilizer techniques, it is essential ﬁrst to
understand the impact of these techniques on agricultural
productivity. 8 studies have identiﬁed this research gap
(Table 7).
2. Study the safety of utilizing organic inputs and human excreta.
3 publications highlighted the importance of investigating the
safety and diﬀerent treatments of the utilization of organic
inputs and the use of human excreta as a fertilizer, as illustrated
in Table 7. For instance, it is crucial to study the safety
of applying community-made compost in urban and peri-
urban areas.
3. Investigate the determinants of adopting organic practices,
waste valorization and CE agriculture, and factors aﬀecting the
engagement of farmers applying CE practices. This research
helps to understand how behavior of farmers can be changed
by understanding which determinants play a crucial role in
the adoption of applying CE practices among farmers. 3
publications have addressed this research gap (Table 7).
4. Building on the previous point, it is also necessary to study the
status quo of farmers on applying CE agriculture practices and
the farming situation, including soil fertility. This investigation
will help to accelerate the movement toward circular agriculture
among African farmers. 3 studies addressed this knowledge gap
(Table 7).
Lastly, to our understanding, this study is the ﬁrst attempt to
identify research gaps and develop a preliminary research agenda
for Africa through academic research at the moment this study is
conducted. We encourage other scholars to build on this study and
continue the eﬀorts to take the lead in solving unanswered research
questions to accelerate the CE transition in African countries
and contexts.
4.2. Study limitations
Several limitations should be taken into consideration in this
study. First, this study focuses on 20 keywords for the English and
French literature, with each keyword emphasizing an area of the
CE in Africa to narrow the scope of the literature review. The
limited number of other keywords might hinder the study from
accessing information relevant to the CE in Africa. However, this
study identiﬁed the keywords most relevant for CE in African
countries and contexts. Second, this paper used GS as the search
engine focusing on the ﬁrst ﬁve pages of the database. Such
consideration discouraged exploring other pages of GS that could
contain relevant articles to the study. Third, this study focuses
on African countries with enough data on the CE in Africa.
This approach may have caused bias toward countries early in
the CE development in Africa. However, this study assumes that
in case scholars published articles for speciﬁc African countries,
for instance, “circular economy Kenya”, a high correlation of
these publications would appear under the keyword search of
“circular economy Africa” or “circular economy Sub-Saharan
Africa”. Fourth, the sample size (38 respondents) for this study’s
survey was small, with much attention given to African respondents
as the paper only focuses on Africa’s CE. The sample size of the CE
industry experts in African countries is small since there is a lack
of documentation of CE industry experts across Africa. However,
in order to overcome the challenge, this study made the best use of
available networks, such as the African Circular Economy Network
(ACEN) and other CE initiatives in Africa, such as the Circular
Economy Innovation Partnership (CEIP) (Section 2.2). Finally, this
study builds on previous studies to determine the current “state of
art” for CE in African countries and regions. This research assumes
that collected data from previous research is correct and properly
analyzed. This study used data from two sources, the scoping
literature review and the survey with CE industry experts active in
African countries, to reduce the potential bias.
5. Conclusion
Research plays a vital role in accelerating the global circular
economy (CE) transition and is an essential tool to contribute to
climate change adaptation. However, prior CE research primarily
focuses on countries in the Global North, whereas CE research in
the Global South has been largely unexplored, especially in African
countries and contexts. Therefore, this study aims to uncover
insights to inform the development of a preliminary research
Frontiers in Sustainability
15
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
agenda for CE adoption in African countries by identifying the
current body of knowledge on CE, the existing research gaps
and barriers to conducting CE research in African countries
and contexts.
The ﬁndings of this study can be summarized into three main
conclusions. First, the results suggest that South Africa is the
front-runner in CE research, with the most relevant publications
and ongoing research projects conducted by CE experts. The
dominant focus on CE research in South Africa is an urgent call for
scholars to conduct country-speciﬁc research for additional African
countries, especially since a signiﬁcant part of the publications do
not distinguish between countries and only publishes for Africa at
large or as a region despite Africa’s 54 distinct countries. This is a
crucial missed opportunity for building CE economy knowledge,
expertise and innovation toward the needs and opportunities of
the countries. Secondly, this study concludes that the current
body of CE knowledge is primarily focused on one aspect of CE,
circulating materials and products (keep products and materials in
use), while there is consensus from published journal papers and
the survey that there are meaningful gaps in other CE principles
such as designing out waste and pollution and regenerating
natural systems. Therefore, this study suggests a list of research
topics that can be further investigated, which are included in
the recommendations for future research. The major identiﬁed
research topics are related to private sector-driven research, data
collection and monitoring, policy and governance, E-waste, food
and agriculture.
Lastly, to drive CE research and development agenda
for African countries and contexts, international organizations,
donors, investors, and governments need to make research funds
available, especially for African-based institutions, which has
been identiﬁed as a crucial barrier to CE research. Since many
African countries are still developing their economies, research
can inﬂuence the pathway to CE. Research is crucial in building
CE knowledge, piloting and developing (business) innovations,
and practical solutions applicable to African countries. This study
identiﬁed an urgent need for private-sector-driven research with
the highest number of research gaps found in private-sector-driven
research. Therefore, partnerships, such as academia-industry pilot
projects, are crucial in developing CE solutions and innovations
applicable to African countries and their stakeholders.
Data availability statement
The original contributions presented in the study are included
in the article/supplementary material, further inquiries can be
directed to the corresponding author.
Ethics statement
The studies involving human participants were reviewed
and approved by Circular Economy Research Program at
African
Leadership
University.
The
patients/participants
provided their written informed consent to participate in
this study.
Author contributions
EN-R conceived the work and main concept of the article,
edited the draft and ﬁnal manuscript, and results of the article.
EN-R supervised the work of JU, JT, DS, and WA that build the
database of the literature, analyzed the results of the data base and
the survey, and helped to write the ﬁrst drafts of the manuscript. DR
reviewed the manuscript and supported with the structuring, and
editing support. All authors contributed to the article and approved
the submitted version.
Funding
This research was undertaken as part of the Circular Economy
Program at African Leadership University (ALU). We thank
MAVA Foundation for their support to the program through their
contribution to the ALU Circular Economy Program.
Acknowledgments
We thank all our students from African Leadership University
for their support in conducting this research and the research
associate Doryn Ngesa for their advise. Also, we thank Peter
Desmond of the African Circular Economy Network (ACEN)
and Nathalie Beinish of the CE Innovation and Partnership
(CEIP) their support for reviewing and sharing the survey across
their network.
Conﬂict of interest
DR was employed by Stratera Capital.
The
remaining
authors
declare
that
the
research
was
conducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial
relationships that could be construed as a potential conﬂict
of interest.
Publisher’s note
All claims expressed in this article are solely those of the
authors and do not necessarily represent those of their aﬃliated
organizations, or those of the publisher, the editors and the
reviewers. Any product that may be evaluated in this article, or
claim that may be made by its manufacturer, is not guaranteed or
endorsed by the publisher.
Frontiers in Sustainability
16
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
References
ACEA (2021). Five Big Bets for the Circular Economy in Africa: African Circular
Economy
Alliance.
Available
online
at:
https://www.weforum.org/reports/ﬁve-
big-bets-for-the-circular-economy-in-africa-african-circular-economy-alliance/
(accessed August 10, 2022).
ACEA (n.d.). About ACEA. Acea Africa. Available online at: https://www.aceaafrica.
org/about-acea (Accessed August 5, 2022).
Addy, M., Adinyira, E., Danku, J.C. and Dadzoe, F. (2021). Impediments to the
development of the green building market in sub-Saharan Africa: the case of Ghana.
Smart Sustain. Built Environ. 10, 193–207. doi: 10.1108/SASBE-12-2019-0170
Adejonwo-Osho, O. (2019). E-waste in West Africa: beyond environmental and
health risks. Unilag J. Hum. 3, 17–29.
Adeleke, O., Akinlabi, S., Jen, T. C., and Dunmade, I. (2021). Towards sustainability
in municipal solid waste management in South Africa: a survey of challenges and
prospects. Trans. R. Soc. South Afr. 76, 53–66. doi: 10.1080/0035919X.2020.1858366
Adrien, D. Y. C. (2021). Gestion des dechets dans les établissements scolaires de
l’arrondissement de togba dans la commune d’Abomey-Calavi au Benin (Afrique de
l’Ouest). J. Int. Sci. Tech. l’Eau l’Environ. 6, 23–31.
Akormedi, M., Asampong, E., and Fobil, J. N. (2013). Working conditions and
environmental exposures among electronic waste workers in Ghana. Int. J. Occup.
Environ. Health. 19, 278–286. doi: 10.1179/2049396713Y.0000000034
Akpan, V. E., and Olukanni, D. O. (2020). Hazardous waste management: an
African overview. Recycling 5, 15. doi: 10.3390/recycling5030015
Albagoury, S. H. (2020). Circular economy: a new pathway to sustainability in africa.
J. Afro Asian Stud. 2, 10–30.
Amankwah-Amoah, J. (2016). Global business and emerging economies: towards a
new perspective on the eﬀects of e-waste. Technol. Forecast. Soc. Change. 105, 20–26.
doi: 10.1016/j.techfore.2016.01.026
Amegah, A. K., and Agyei-Mensah, S. (2017). Urban air pollution in Sub-Saharan
Africa: time for action. Environ. Pollut. 220, 738–743. doi: 10.1016/j.envpol.2016.09.042
Anagonou, A., Songmene, V., Godjo, T., and Kouam, J. (2020). Recycling of West
african cashew nut shells waste in asphalt concrete: impact on the physico-mechanical
properties of asphalt concrete. Int. J. Adv. Res. Public. 4, 96–106.
Andersen, M. M., Ogallo, E., and Diniz Faria, L. G. (2021). Green economic change
in Africa – green and circular innovation trends, conditions and dynamics in Kenyan
companies. Innovat. Dev. 12, 231–257. doi: 10.1080/2157930X.2021.1876586
Arksey, H., and O’Malley, L. (2005). Scoping studies: towards a methodological
framework. Int. J. Soc. Res. Methodol. 8, 19–32. doi: 10.1080/1364557032000119616
Asante, K. A., Amoyaw-Osei, Y., and Agusa, T. (2019). E-waste recycling in
Africa: risks and opportunities. Curr. Opin. Green Sustain. Chem. 18, 109–117.
doi: 10.1016/j.cogsc.2019.04.001
AUDA-NEPAD. (2019). Africa Innovation Outlook III. AUDA NEPAD. Available
online
at:
https://au.int/sites/default/ﬁles/documents/38122-docaio_3rd_edition_
ﬁnal_eng_repro.pdf (accessed March 15, 2023).
Ayeleru, O., Okonta, F., and Ntuli, F. (2021). Cost beneﬁt analysis of a municipal
solid waste recycling facility in Soweto, South Africa. Waste Manage. 134, 263–269.
doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2021.08.001
Ayeleru, O. O., Dlova, S., Akinribide, O. J., Ntuli, F., Kupolati, W. K., Marina, P. F.,
et al. (2020). Challenges of plastic waste generation and management in sub-Saharan
Africa: A review. Waste Manag. 110, 24–42. doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2020.04.017
Baﬀes, J. (2010). Marchés des sous-produits du coton : Tendances mondiales
et implications pour les producteurs Africains de coton. Washington, DC: World
Bank Group.
Bambo, T. L., and Pouris, A. (2020). Bibliometric analysis of bioeconomy research
in South Africa. Scientometrics 125, 29–51. doi: 10.1007/s11192-020-03626-y
Bimir,
M.
N.
(2020).
Revisiting
e-waste
management
practices
in
selected
African
countries.
J.
Air
Waste
Manage.
Assoc.
70,
659–669.
doi: 10.1080/10962247.2020.1769769
Bisschop, L., and Walle van de, G. (2013). “Environment victimisation and
conﬂict resolution: a case study in E-waste,” in Emerging Issues in Green Criminology:
Exploring Power, Justice and Hampshire (Critical Criminological Perspectives), eds
D. Westerhuis, R. Walter, and T. Wyatt (Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan),
34–56.
Boon, E. K., and Anuga, S. W. (2020). Circular economy and its relevance for
improving food and nutrition security in sub-Saharan Africa: the case of Ghana. Mater.
Circ. Econ. 2, 5. doi: 10.1007/s42824-020-00005-z
Borel-Saladin, J. M., and Turok, I. N. (2013). The impact of the green economy on
jobs in South Africa: news & views. S. Afr. J. Sci. 109, 1–4. doi: 10.1590/sajs.2013/a0033
Borthakur, A. (2020). Policy approaches on E-waste in the emerging economies: a
review of the existing governance with special reference to India and South Africa. J.
Clean. Prod. 252, 119885. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.119885
Breivik, K., Armitage, J. M., Wania, F., and Jones, K. C. (2014). Tracking the global
generation and exports of e-waste. Do existing estimates add up? Environ. Sci. Technol.
48, 8735–8743. doi: 10.1021/es5021313
Browning, S., Lawrence, T., Joshi, C., and Amaro, R. E. (2020). Analysis of green
pesticide production by valorization of husks from Croton megalocarpus tree nuts.
Environ. Prog. Sustain. Energ. 39, 1–7. doi: 10.1002/ep.13312
Cairns (2018). For a Stronger, Cleaner Economy. Smart Prosperity Institute.
Available online at: https://institute.smartprosperity.ca/library/publications/getting-
circular-economy-primer-canadian-policymaker (accessed July 15, 2022).
Callo-Concha, D., Jaenicke, H., Schmitt, C. B., and Denich, M. (2020). Food and
non-food biomass production, processing and use in sub-Saharan Africa: towards a
regional bioeconomy. Sustainability 12, 2013. doi: 10.3390/su12052013
Caravanos, J., Clark, E., Fuller, R., and Lambertson, C. (2011). Assessing worker
and environmental chemical exposure risks at an e-waste recycling and disposal site in
Accra, Ghana. J. Health Pollut. 1, 16–25. doi: 10.5696/jhp.v1i1.22
Charis, G., Danha, G., Muzenda, E., Patel, B., and Mateescu, C. (2019). “Waste to
energy opportunities in Botswana: a case study review,” in 7th International Renewable
and Sustainable Energy Conference (IRSEC), 1–7.
Charles, R. G., Davies, M. L., Douglas, P., and Hallin, I. L. (2018). Sustainable
solar energy collection and storage for rural Sub-Saharan Africa. Compreh. Guide Solar
Energy Syst. 2018, 81–107. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-811479-7.00005-1
Chen, K. C., Leach, M., Black, M. J., Tesfamichael, M., Kemausuor, F., Littlewood,
P., et al. (2021). BioLPG for clean cooking in Sub-Saharan Africa: present and future
feasibility of technologies, feedstocks, enabling conditions and ﬁnancing. Energies 14,
3916. doi: 10.3390/en14133916
Chia, S. Y., Tanga, C. M., van Loon, J. J., and Dicke, M. (2019). Insects for sustainable
animal feed: inclusive business models involving smallholder farmers. Curr. Opin.
Environ. Sustain. 41, 23–30. doi: 10.1016/j.cosust.2019.09.003
Courard, L. (2020). Construction en terre, ressources secondaires et matériaux
biosourcés: un avenir pour l’Afrique. Proc. R. Acad. Overseas Sci. 1, 103–108.
Couth, R., and Trois, C. (2012a). Sustainable waste management in Africa through
CDM projects. Waste Manage. 32, 2115–2125. doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2012.02.022
Couth,
R.,
and
Trois,
C.
(2012b).
Cost
eﬀective
waste
management
through
composting
in
Africa.
Waste
Manage.
32,
2518–2525.
doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2012.05.042
Critoru, L., Miranda, J. J., Sarraf, M., Doumani, A. F., and Lee, J. J. (2019). Le Coût
de La Dégradation de la Zone Côtière en Afrique de l’Ouest: Bénin, Côte d’Ivoire, Sénégal
et Togo. Washington DC: World Bank Group.
Dabire, J., and Gango, A. (2021). Retour d’expérience : programme de sélection
d’équipements et infrastructures de gestion des déchets adaptés au contexte des villes
secondaires d’Afrique de l’Ouest (Thesis). HAL open science.
Daouda, O. (2017). Gestion des Dechets Solides Menagers Dans le 11e Arrondissement
De Cotonou (Dissertation). Universite d’Abomey Calavi (UAC).
Ddiba, D. (2020). Exploring the circular economy of urban organic waste in
sub-Saharan Africa: opportunities and challenges (Thesis). KTH Royal Institute of
Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.
Derouiche, S., and Ben Amor, M. (2019). Valorisation des déchets ménagers et
assimilés dans la région d’Oued Souf (MA thesis). El Oued: Université of Eloued.
Desmond, P., and Asamba, M. (2019). “Accelerating the transition to a
circular economy in Africa,” in The Circular Economy and the Global South
Sustainable Lifestyles and Green Industrial Development (Pathways to Sustainability),
1st Edn. (Routlegde). Available online at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
332416054_Accelerating_the_transition_to_a_circular_economy_in_Africa (accessed
April 27, 2023).
Dibba, D. (2020). Exploring the Circular Economy of Urban Organic Waste in
Sub-Saharan Africa: Opportunities and Challenges (MA thesis). Royal Institute of
Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.
Dieng, D., Diop, C., Sonko, E. H. M., Gning, J. B., Djitte, M., and Gassama, C. (2018).
Gestion des déchets d’équipements électriques et électroniques (DEEE) au Sénégal?:
acteurs et stratégie d’organisation de la ﬁlière. Int. J. Biol. Chem. Sci. 11, 2393–2407.
doi: 10.4314/ijbcs.v11i5.35
Dlamini, S., Simatele, M. D., and Serge Kubanza, N. (2018). Municipal
solid
waste
management
in
South
Africa:
from
waste
to
energy
recovery
through waste-to-energy technologies in Johannesburg. Local Environ. 24, 249–257.
doi: 10.1080/13549839.2018.1561656
du Toit, J., Wagner, C., and Fletcher, L. (2017). Socio-spatial factors aﬀecting
household recycling in townhouses in Pretoria, South Africa. Sustainability 9, 2033.
doi: 10.3390/su9112033
du Toit, J. L., and Wagner, C. (2018). The eﬀect of a weekly comingled kerbside
collection service on household recycling in a gated community in Pretoria, South
Africa. Sustainability. 10, 1–16. doi: 10.3390/su10041207
Frontiers in Sustainability
17
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
Duponnis, R., and Prin, Y. (n.d.). Valoriser les ressources microbiennes des sols pour
satisfaire les objectifs de développement durable. Québec: Liaison énergie-francophonie.
Eﬀebi, K. R., Niamke, K. H., and Bamba, S. (2020). Évaluation du mode de gestion
des déchets électriques et électroniques dans le village d’Aboboté, district d’Abidjan,
Côte d’Ivoire. Rev. Ivoir. Sci. Technol. 35, 121–137.
Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2013). Towards the Circular Economy. Available
online at: https://ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/towards-the-circular-economy-vol-
1-an-economic-and-business-rationale-for-an (accessed July 15, 2022).
Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2021a). Circular Economy in Africa: Examples and
Opportunities - Policy. Available online at: https://emf.thirdlight.com/link/i6ivujjtl99o-
2v5rxs/@/#id=0 (accessed July 20, 2022).
Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2021b). Circular Economy in Africa: Examples
and Opportunities - Plastic. Available online at: https://emf.thirdlight.com/link/
sxtl5rf1pg7o-uvz8pm/@/#id=0 (accessed July 25, 2022).
Ellen MacArthur Foundation (2021c). Circular Economy in Africa: Examples and
Opportunities - Policy. Available online at: https://emf.thirdlight.com/link/i6ivujjtl99o-
2v5rxs/@/#id=0 (accessed July 30, 2022).
Ellen MacArthur Foundation (n.d.). Circular Economy Introduction. Available
online
at:
https://ellenmacarthurfoundation.org/topics/circular-economy-
introduction/overview (accessed December 19, 2022).
EU (2020). Circular Economy Action Plan. Available online at: https://op.europa.
eu/en/publication-detail/-/publication/45cc30f6-cd57-11ea-adf7-01aa75ed71a1
(accessed July 30, 2022).
Ezeudu, O. B., Agunwamba, J. C., Ugochukwu, U. C., and Ezeudu, T. S.
(2020). Temporal assessment of municipal solid waste management in Nigeria:
prospects for circular economy adoption. Rev. Environ. Health. 36, 327–344.
doi: 10.1515/reveh-2020-0084
Feldt, T., Fobil, J. N., Wittsiepe, J., Wilhelm, M., Till, H., Zoufaly, A.,
et al. (2014). High levels of PAH-metabolites in urine of e-waste recycling
workers
from
Agbogbloshie,
Ghana.
Sci.
Total
Environ.
466–467,
369–376.
doi: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.06.097
Feleke,
S.,
Cole,
S.
M.,
Sekabira,
H.,
Djouaka,
R.,
and
Manyong,
V.
(2021). Circular bioeconomy research for development in sub-Saharan Africa:
innovations,
gaps,
and
actions.
Sustainability
13,
1926.
doi:
10.3390/su130
41926
Fink, A. (1998). Conducting Research Literature Reviews: From the Internet to Paper.
Los Angeles: SAGE Publications.
Fletcher, E., Adeboye, P. T., and Duedu, K. O. (2017). Toward a sustainable
bioeconomy in West Africa: a focus on bioreﬁning. Biofuels Bioprod. Bioreﬁning 11,
775–783. doi: 10.1002/bbb.1793
Gatune, J., Ozor, N., and Oriama, R. (2021). The futures of bioeconomy in Eastern
Africa. J. Futures Stud. 25, 1–14.
Gbinlo, R. (2010). Organisation et ﬁnancement de la gestion des déchets ménagers
dans les villes de l’Afrique Subsaharienne : le cas de la ville de Cotonou au Bénin.
Economies et ﬁnances (Disseration). Université d’Orléans.
Gehanno, J. F., Rollin, L., and Darmoni, S. (2013). Is the coverage of google scholar
enough to be used alone for systematic reviews. BMC Med. Inform. Decis. Mak. 13, 1–5.
doi: 10.1186/1472-6947-13-7
Geissdoerfer, M., Savageta, P., Bocken, N. M. P., and Hultink, E. J. (2017). The
circular economy – a new sustainability paradigm? J. Clean. Prod. 143, 757–768.
doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2016.12.048
Ghosh, S. K., and Ghosh, S. K. (2022). Circular Economy: Recent Trends in Global
Perspective, 1st Edn. Singapore: Springer Nature Singapore.
Gnassou, J. (2017). La crise environnementale : cas des déchets solides et liquides en
Côte d’Ivoire et au Burkina Faso (Dissertation). École Sciences Économiques, Sociales,
de l’Aménagement et du Management, Villeneuve d’Ascq, France.
Godfrey, L., Henry, R., Smout, S., Maserumule, R., Mpofu, A., and Ryan, G. (2021).
“Unlocking the opportunities of a Circular Economy in South Africa,” in Circular
Economy: Recent trends in a Global Perspective, ed S. K. Ghosh (Singapore: Springer
Nature Singapore), 145–180.
Godfrey, L., Muswema, A., Strydom, W., Mamafa, T., and Mapako, M.
(2017). Co-operatives as a development mechanism to support job creation
and sustainable waste management in South Africa. Sustain. Sci. 12, 799–812.
doi: 10.1007/s11625-017-0442-4
Godfrey, L., Scott, D., and Trois, C. (2013). Caught between the global
economy and local bureaucracy: the barriers to good waste management practice
in South Africa. Waste Manage. Res. J. Sustain. Circ. Econ. 31, 295–305.
doi: 10.1177/0734242X12470204
Greyson, J. (2007). An economic instrument for zero waste, economic growth
and sustainability. J. Clean. Prod. 15, 1382–1390. doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2006.
07.019
Gusenbauer, M. (2018). Google Scholar to overshadow them all? Comparing the
sizes of 12 academic search engines and bibliographic databases. Scientometrics 118,
177–214. doi: 10.1007/s11192-018-2958-5
Haddaway, N. R., Collins, A. M., Coughlin, D., and Kirk, S. (2015). The role of
Google Scholar in evidence reviews and its applicability to grey literature searching.
PLoS ONE 10, e0138237. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0138237
Hassim, A. (2021). Green innovation and circular economy in southafrican supply
chain organisations (MA thesis). University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa.
Idowu, I. A., Atherton, W., Hashim, K., Kot, P., Alkhaddar, R., Alo, B. I., et al.
(2019). An analyses of the status of landﬁll classiﬁcation systems in developing
countries: sub Saharan Africa landﬁll experiences. Waste Manage. 87, 761–771.
doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2019.03.011
Iyandemye, J., and Thomas, M. P. (2019). Low income countries have the highest
percentages of open access publication: a systematic computational analysis of the
biomedical literature. PLoS ONE 14, e0220229. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0220229
Kabera, T., Wilson, D. C., and Nishimwe, H. (2019). Benchmarking performance
of solid waste management and recycling systems in East Africa: Comparing Kigali
Rwanda with other major cities. Waste Manage. Res. J. Sustain. Circ. Econ. 37, 58–72.
doi: 10.1177/0734242X18819752
Kaboré, T. W. T., Houot, S., Hien, E., Zombré, P., Hien, V., and Masse, D. (2010).
Eﬀect of the raw materials and mixing ratio of composted wastes on the dynamic
of organic matter stabilization and nitrogen availability in composts of Sub-Saharan
Africa. Bioresour. Technol. 101, 1002–1013. doi: 10.1016/j.biortech.2009.08.101
Kakeu, T. M., and Christelle, R. (2018). Gestion des déchets solides municipauxà
l’épreuve du partenariat public-privé à Bafoussam, Cameroun : une analysedes
inégalités environnementales dans une ville moyenne d’Afrique subsaharienne
(Dissertation). Neuchâtel: University of Lausanne.
Kinobe, J. (2015). Assessment of Urban Solid Waste Logistics Systems: The Case of
Kampala, Uganda (Dissertation). Uppsala: Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences.
Kinobe, J., Gebresenbet, G., Niwagaba, C., and Vinnerås, B. (2015). Reverse logistics
system and recycling potential at a landﬁll: a case study from Kampala City. Waste
Manage. 42, 82–92. doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2015.04.012
Kirchherr, J., Reike, D., and Hekkert, M. (2017). Conceptualizing the circular
economy: an analysis of 114 deﬁnitions. Resources Conserv. Recyc. 127, 221–232.
doi: 10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.09.005
Klein, J., and Reiher, S. (2016). “Sub-Saharan Africa – potentials and barriers for
green(er) economies,” in The Rise of the Green Economies (Climate Neutral Publisher),
175–186.
Available
online
at:
https://www.adelphi.de/de/system/ﬁles/mediathek/
bilder/Towards%20a%20Green%20Economy%20in%20Emerging%20and%20Rapidly
%20Growing%20Countries%20%E2%80%93%20The%20Way%20Forward%20after
%20Rio%2B20.pdf#page=176 (accessed May 5, 2022).
Komakech, A., Sundberg, C., Jönsson, H., and Vinnerås, B. (2015). Life cycle
assessment of biodegradable waste treatment systems for sub-Saharan African cities.
Resources Conserv. Recycl. 99, 100–110. doi: 10.1016/j.resconrec.2015.03.006
Larney, M., and van Aardt, A. (2009). Case study: apparel industry waste
management: a focus on recycling in South Africa. Waste Manage. Res. J. Sustain. Circ.
Econ. 28, 36–43. doi: 10.1177/0734242X09338729
Lawhon, M. (2013). Dumping ground or country-in-transition? Discourses of E-
waste in South Africa. Environ. Plan. C Govern. Policy 31, 700–715. doi: 10.1068/c1254
Lebbie, T. S., Moyebi, O. D., Asante, K. A., Fobil, J., Brune-Drisse, M. N., Suk, W. A.,
et al. (2021). E-waste in Africa: a serious threat to the health of children. Int. J. Environ.
Res. Public Health. 18, 8488. doi: 10.3390/ijerph18168488
Ledwaba, P., and Sosibo, N. (2017). Cathode ray tube recycling in South Africa.
Recycling 2, 4. doi: 10.3390/recycling2010004
Lepawsky, J. (2014). The changing geography of global trade in electronic discards:
time to rethink the e-waste problem. Geogr. J. 181, 147–159. doi: 10.1111/geoj.12077
Liebenberg, C. J. (2007). Waste Recycling in Developing Countries in Africa: Barriers
to Improving Reclamation Rates. Cagliari: CISA.
Longanza, L. B., Kidinda, L. K., Tamina, D., Jacob, A., and Ikatalo, M. T.
(2015). Valorisation agricole des déchets comme alternative à leur gestion dans les
villes d’Afrique subsaharienne : caractérisation des déchets urbains à Lubumbashi et
évaluation de leurs eﬀets sur la croissance des cultures vivrières. Afrique Sci. Revue
Internationale Des Sciences Et Technol. 11, 76–84.
Macvean, M., Shlonsky, A., Mildon, R., and Devine, B. (2017). Parenting
interventions for indigenous child psychosocial functioning: a scoping review. Res. Soc.
Work Pract. 27, 307–334. doi: 10.1177/1049731514565668
Maes, T., and Preston-Whyte, F. (2022). E-waste it wisely: lessons from Africa. SN
Appl. Sci. 4, 72. doi: 10.1007/s42452-022-04962-9
Mäkelä, A. (2017). Circular Economy SWOT Analysis in South-Africa, Botswana and
Namibia (MA thesis). Lahti University of Applied Sciences.
Maphosa, V., and Maphosa, M. (2020). “The state of e-waste management
at Zimbabwe’s Higher Education Institutions,” in 2020 International Conference
on
Artiﬁcial
Intelligence,
Big
Data,
Computing
and
Data
Communication
Systems (IcABCD).
Mativenga, P. T., Sultan, A. A. M., Agwa-Ejon, J., and Mbohwa, C. (2017).
Composites in a circular economy: a study of United Kingdom and South Africa.
Procedia CIRP 61, 691–696. doi: 10.1016/j.procir.2016.11.270
Frontiers in Sustainability
18
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
Mbiadjeu-Lawou, S. P. (2019). Quelle économie circulaire spontanée pour une ville
moyenne camerounaise? : Le cas des déchets solides ménagers de Bangangté (Cameroun)
(Dissertation). Le mans: l’Université du Maine.
Merli, I., Preziosi, M., and Acampora, A. (2018). How do scholars approach
the circular economy? A systematic literature review. J. Clean. Prod. 178, 703–722.
doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.12.112
Mhlanga, J., Haupt, T. C., and Loggia, C. (2022). Shaping circular economy in the
built environment in Africa. A bibliometric analysis. J. Eng. Design Technol. 21, 1–30.
doi: 10.1108/JEDT-03-2022-0175
Ministry of the Environment and Minister’s Secretariat, Waste Management and
Recycling Department Policy Planning Division, Oﬃce of Sound Material-Cycle
Society (2014). History and Current State of Waste Management in Japan. Available
online at: https://www.env.go.jp/en/recycle/smcs/attach/hcswm.pdf (accessed July 25,
2022).
Miranosava, L. (2020). L’esprit d’ esprit d’entreprise dur eprise durable comme l’able
comme l’accès au tr accès au travail des f ail des femmes de la Gambie et duSénégal: une
étude de la culture, du commerce, de l’ ce, de l’environnement et de l’onnement et de
l’émancipation des f émancipation des femmes (Honors senior thesis). Elizabethtown,
PA: Elizabethtown College.
Mohee, R., and Simelane, T. (2015). Future Directions of Municipal Solid Waste
Management in Africa. Africa Institute of South Africa. Available online at: https://
www.jstor.org/stable/j.ctvh8r2sjdoi:10.2307/j.ctvh8r2sj (accessed April 17, 2023).
Mombo, F., and Bigirwa, D. (2017). The role of sub-Saharan Africa countries’
households waste charges on sustainable cities development. Int. J. Waste Resources
7, 1. doi: 10.4172/2252-5211.1000265
Mondesir, J., Babatounde, A., Yehouenou Azehounpazou, E., and Gbedo, V. (2013).
Contribution à la bonne gestion des déchets solides ménagers dans la ville de Kétou
(Dissertation). Calavi: Université d’Abomey-Calavi.
Montcho, M., Babatoundé, S., Aboh, B. A., Bahini, M. J. D., Chrysostome, A. M.
C., and Mensah, G. A. (2016). Disponibilite, valeurs marchande et nutritionnelle des
sous-produits agricoles et agroindustriels utilises dans l’alimentation des ruminants au
benin. Eur. Sci. J. 12, 422. doi: 10.19044/esj.2016.v12n33p422
Moumbe, J. S., Yemmafouo, A., Tsalefac, M., and Fapong, L. J. (2020). Initiatives en
Matière de Gestion des Déchets Solides Municipaux (DSM): Vers l’Emergence d’une
Economie Verte dans la Ville de Dschang, Cameroun. Euro. Scient. J. 16, 123–140.
doi: 10.19044/esj.2020.v16n14p123
Moyo, T. (2014). Green economy/growth policies and their implementation in
the context of the renewable energy sector: the case of Mozambique, South Africa
and Zimbabwe. Int. J. Afr. Renaissance Stud. Multi Inter Transdiscip. 9, 39–60.
doi: 10.1080/18186874.2014.987954
Mtutu, P., and Thondhlana, G. (2016). Encouraging pro-environmental behaviour:
energy use and recycling at Rhodes University, South Africa. Habitat Int. 53, 142–150.
doi: 10.1016/j.habitatint.2015.11.031
Muchangos, L. S. D. (2021). Mapping the circular economy concept and the global
south. Circ. Econ. Sustain. 2, 71–90. doi: 10.1007/s43615-021-00095-0
Mugodo, K., Magama, P. P., and Dhavu, K. (2017). Biogas production potential
from agricultural and agro-processing waste in South Africa. Waste Biomass
Valorization 8, 2383–2392. doi: 10.1007/s12649-017-9923-z
Muhani, D. A. (2012). A Framework for Sustainable E-Waste Management
in Manufacturing and Processing Industries, Industrial Area Nairobi County,
Kenya. Available online at: https://ir-library.ku.ac.ke/bitstream/handle/123456789/
12800/A%20framework%20for%20sustainable%20e-waste%20management%20in
%20manufacturing%20....pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y (accessed July 28, 2022).
Muheirwe,
F.,
Kombe,
W.,
and
Kihila,
J.
M.
(2022).
The
paradox
of
solid
waste
management:
a
regulatory
discourse
from
Sub-Saharan
Africa.
Habitat
Int.
119,
102491.
doi:
10.1016/j.habitatint.2021.1
02491
Munn, Z., Peters, M. D. J., Stern, C., Tufanaru, C., McArthur, A., and Aromataris,
E. (2018). Systematic review or scoping review? Guidance for authors when choosing
between a systematic or scoping review approach. BMC Med. Res. Methodol. 18, 1–7.
doi: 10.1186/s12874-018-0611-x
Munubi, R. A. and Lamtane, A. H. (2021). “Animal waste and agro-by-products:
valuable resources for producing ﬁsh at low costs in sub-saharan countries,” in
Innovation in the Food Sector Through the Valorization of Food and Agro-Food By-
Products, eds N. A. de Barros and I. Gouvinhas (London: InTechOpen), 1–14.
Musvoto, C., Nahman, A., Nortje, C., De Wet, B., Mahumani, B., and Industrial
Research, S. A. (2014). Agriculture and the Green Economy in South Africa. Pretoria:
Council for Scientiﬁc and Industrial Research.
Musyoki, A. (2012). The Emerging Policy for Green Economy and Social Development
in Limpopo, South Africa, UNRISD Occasional Paper. Social Dimensions of Green
Economy and Sustainable Development, No. 8, ISBN 978-92-9085-090-8. Geneva:
United Nations Research Institute for Social Development (UNRISD).
Mutezo,
G.,
and
Mulopo,
J.
(2021).
A
review
of
Africa’s
transition
from
fossil
fuels
to
renewable
energy
using
circular
economy
principles.
Renew.
Sustain.
Energy
Rev.
137,
110609.
doi:
10.1016/j.rser.2020.
110609
Nahman, A., and Godfrey, L. (2010). Economic instruments for solid waste
management in South Africa: opportunities and constraints. Resources Conserv. Recycl.
54, 521–531. doi: 10.1016/j.resconrec.2009.10.009
Ngambi, J. R. (2016). Déchets solides ménagers de la ville de Yaoundé (Cameroun): de
la gestion linéaire vers une économie circulaire (Disseration). Le mans: l’Université du
Maine.
Nhamo, G. (2013). Green economy readiness in South Africa: A focus on the
national sphere of government. Int. J. Afr. Renaissance Stud. Multi Inter Transdiscip.
8, 115–142. doi: 10.1080/18186874.2013.834628
Nijman, E. (2020). Towards Circular Food Production Systems in East Africa.
Nijmegen: Radboud University Nijmegen. Available online at: https://theses.ubn.ru.
nl/bitstream/handle/123456789/9064/Nijman%2C_Elke_1.pdf?sequence=1master~
Thesis (accessed June 5, 2022).
Njenga, M., Romney, D., Karanja, N., Gathuru, K., Kimani, S., Carsan, S., et al.
(2010). “Recycling nutrients from organic wastes in Kenya’s capital city,” in African
Urban Harvest, eds G. Prain, D. Lee-Smith, and N. Karanja (New York, NY: Springer).
Njeru, J. (2006). The urban political ecology of plastic bag waste problem in Nairobi,
Kenya. Geoforum 37, 1046–1058. doi: 10.1016/j.geoforum.2006.03.003
Nolet, M. (2012). La gestion des déchets électroniques en Tanzanie : déﬁs et
perspectives (Dissertation/master’s thesis). Université d’Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada.
NSF (2019). Research and Development: U.S. Trends and International Comparisons.
Available
online
at:
https://www.ncses.nsf.gov/pubs/nsb20225/cross-national-
comparisons-of-r-d-performance (accessed April, 4, 2023).
Ntsonde, J., and Aggeri, F. (2017). Repenser la RSE dans le contexte d’un pays en voie
de développement, le cas de l’économie circulaire au Cameroun (Dissertation/master’s
thesis). Paris.
Nyakeri, E., Ogola, H., Ayieko, M., and Amimo, F. (2017). Valorisation of
organic waste material: growth performance of wild black soldier ﬂy larvae (Hermetia
illucens) reared on diﬀerent organic wastes. J. Insects Food Feed 3, 193–202.
doi: 10.3920/JIFF2017.0004
Nzeadibe, T. C. (2013). Informal waste management in africa: perspectives
and lessons from Nigerian garbage geographies. Geogr. Compass 7, 729–744.
doi: 10.1111/gec3.12072
Nzila, C., Njuguna, D., Dewulf, J., and Spanjers, H. (2016). Enhancing the
environmental proﬁle of an African cotton textile through biowaste recovery and
valorization. Int. Res. J. Eng. Technol. 3, 11–19.
Obsa, O., Tadesse, M., Kim, D. G., Asaye, Z., Yimer, F., Gebrehiwot, M., et al.
(2022). Organic waste generation and its valorization potential through composting
in Shashemene, Southern Ethiopia. Sustainability 14, 3660. doi: 10.3390/su14063660
Oduniyi, O. S. (2022). Factors driving the adoption and use extent of sustainable
land management practices in South Africa. Circ. Econ. Sustain. 2, 589–608.
doi: 10.1007/s43615-021-00119-9
Oduro-Appiah, K., Donkor, T. A., and Ampim-Darko, K. A. (2013). Sustainability
of sanitary landﬁll management in sub-Saharan Africa: the case of Ghana. Int. J. Dev.
Sustain. 2, 1937–1952.
Oelofse, S. H. H., and Strydom, W. F. (2010). “Trigger to recycling in a developing
country: in the absence of command-and-control instruments,” in Waste 2010:
Waste and Resource Management: Putting Strategy into Practice, Stratford-upon-Avon,
Warwickshire, England, 28-29 September 2010, 355–364.
Oguge, N. O. (2019). Circular economy measures: an opportunity for rethinking
plastics waste governance in Kenya. Law Environ. Dev. J. 15, 126–140.
Ogunmakinde, O. E. (2019). A review of circular economy development models in
China, Germany and Japan. Recycling 3, 1–14. doi: 10.3390/recycling4030027
Oguntuase, O. J. (2020). Bioeconomy for sustainable development in Africa –
state of production determinants and future directions. Econ. Region. Stud. 13, 1–14.
doi: 10.2478/ers-2020-0001
Oguntuase, O. J., and Adu, O.B. (2021). “Bioeconomy as climate action: How ready
are african countries?,” in African Handbook of Climate Change Adaptation, eds N.
Oguge, D. Ayal, L. Adeleke, and I. da Silva (Cham: Springer), 2519–2533.
Ondiek, J. O., and Onyango, G. (2021). “Environmental policies in Africa,” in
Routledge Handbook of Public Policy in Africa (Taylor & Francis Group), 623–633.
doi: 10.4324/9781003143840-64
Orhorhoro, E., and Oghoghorie, O. (2019). Review on solid waste generation and
management in sub-Saharan Africa: a case study of Nigeria. J. Appl. Sci. Environ.
Manage. 23, 1729. Available online at: https://www.taylorfrancis.com/chapters/
oa-edit/10.4324/9781003143840-64/environmental-policies-africa-japheth-otieno-
ondiekgedion-Onyango (accessed February 19, 2022).
Orisakwe, O. E., Frazzoli, C., Ilo, C. E., and Oritsemuelebi, B. (2019).
Public
health
burden
of
e-waste
in
Africa.
J.
Health
Pollut.
20,
1–12.
doi: 10.5696/2156-9614-9.22.190610
Oruko, R., Selvarajan, R., Ogola, H., Edokpayi, J., and Odiyo, J. (2020).
Contemporary and future direction of chromium tanning and management in
sub Saharan Africa tanneries. Process Safety Environ. Protect. 133, 369–386.
doi: 10.1016/j.psep.2019.11.013
Frontiers in Sustainability
19
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
Oteng-Ababio, M. (2012). When necessity begets ingenuity: e-waste scavenging as a
livelihood strategy in accra, Ghana. Afr. Stud. Q. 13, 1–21.
Ousseini, M. M., Mahamadou, C., and Mamman, M. (2017). Pratique et utilisation
des sous-produits de légumineuse dans l’alimentation du bétail à la communauté
urbaine de Niamey : Cas de fanes et cosses de niébé (Vigna unguiculata). J. Appl. Biosci.
120 12006–12017. doi: 10.35759/JABs.120.3
Owojori, O. M., Mulaudzi, R., and Edokpayi, J. N. (2022). Student’s knowledge,
attitude, and perception (KAP) to solid waste management: a survey towards a more
circular economy from a rural-based tertiary institution in South Africa. Sustainability
14, 1310. doi: 10.3390/su14031310
Oyekale, A. S. (2017). Determinants of households’ involvement in waste separation
and collection for recycling in South Africa. Environ. Dev. Sustain. 20, 2343–2371.
doi: 10.1007/s10668-017-9993-x
Oyinlola,
M.,
Schröder,
P.,
Whitehead,
T.,
Kolade,
O.,
Wakunuma,
K.,
Shariﬁ, S., et al. (2021). Digital innovations for transitioning to circular plastic
value chains in Africa. Afr. J. Manage. 8, 83–108. doi: 10.1080/23322373.2021.
1999750
Parawira, W. (2009). Biogas technology in sub-Saharan Africa: status, prospects and
constraints. Rev. Environ. Sci. Bio Technol. 8, 187–200. doi: 10.1007/s11157-009-9148-0
Parida, V., and Wincent, J. (2019). Why and how to compete through sustainability:
a review and outline of trends inﬂuencing ﬁrm and network-level transformation. Int.
Entrepreneurship Manage. J. 15, 1–19. doi: 10.1007/s11365-019-00558-9
Parrot, L., Sotamenou, J., and Dia, B. K. (2009). Municipal solid waste management
in Africa: strategies and livelihoods in Yaoundé, Cameroon. Waste Manage. 29,
986–995. doi: 10.1016/j.wasman.2008.05.005
Pathak, R., and Endayilalu, A. (2019). Circular economy: a perspective of Ethiopian
textile sector. Int. J. Creat. Innovat. Res. Stud. 9, 101–109.
Pfukwa, T., Fawole, O., Manley, M., Gouws, P., Opara, U., and Mapiye, C. (2019).
Food preservative capabilities of grape (Vitis vinifera) and clementine mandarin
(Citrus reticulata) by-products extracts in South Africa. Sustainability 11, 1746.
doi: 10.3390/su11061746
Phuluwa, H. S., Daniyan, I., and Mpofu, K. (2020). Sustainable demanufacturing
model for promoting circular economy in the rail industry. Procedia CIRP 90, 25–30.
doi: 10.1016/j.procir.2020.02.117
Preston, F., and Lehne, J. (2020). A Wider Circle? The Circular Economy in
Developing Countries. Available online at: https://www.chathamhouse.org/2017/12/
wider-circle-circular-economy-developing-countries (accessed August 1, 2022).
Regassa, N., Sundaraa, R. D., and Seboka, B. B. (2017). Challenges and opportunities
in municipal solid waste management: the case of Addis Ababa City, Central Ethiopia.
J. Hum. Ecol. 33, 179–190. doi: 10.1080/09709274.2011.11906358
Reike, D., Vermeulen, W. J., and Witjes, S. (2018). The circular economy: new
or refurbished as CE 3.0? — exploring controversies in the conceptualization of the
circular economy through a focus on history and resource value retention options.
Resources Conserv. Recycl. 135, 246–264. doi: 10.1016/j.resconrec.2017.08.027
Rosa, S. F. P., and Martius, C. (2021). Forest-Based Bioeconomy in Sub-Saharan
Africa: Looking at Beneﬁts and Burdens From a Social Sustainability Standpoint. Bogor
Barat: Center for International Forestry Research (CIFOR).
Rweyendela, A. G., and Kombe, G. G. (2021). Institutional inﬂuences on
circular economy: a Tanzanian perspective. Sustain. Prod. Consump. 26, 1062–1073.
doi: 10.1016/j.spc.2021.01.013
Salguero-Puerta, L., Leyva-Díaz, J. C., Cortés-García, F. J., and Moreno, V. M.
(2019). Sustainability indicators concerning waste management for implementation of
the circular economy model on the University of Lome (Togo) Campus. Int. J. Environ.
Res. Public Health. 16, 1–21. doi: 10.3390/ijerph16122234
Sariatli, F. (2017). Linear economy versus circular economy: a comparative and
analyzer study for optimization of economy for sustainability. Visegrad J. Bioecon.
Sustain. Dev. 6, 31–34. doi: 10.1515/vjbsd-2017-0005
Scarlat, N., Motola, V., Dallemand, J., Monforti-Ferrario, F., and Mofor, L.
(2015). Evaluation of energy potential of municipal solid waste from African
urban areas. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 50, 1269–1286. doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2015.
05.067
Schluep, M., Muller, E., Hilty, L. M., Ott, D., Widmer, R., and Böni, H. (2013).
“Insights from a decade of development cooperation in e-waste management,” in
International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies, 223–230.
Schoeman, Y., Oberholster, P., and Somerset, V. (2021). A decision-support
framework for industrial waste management in the iron and steel industry:
a case study in Southern Africa. Case Stud. Chem. Environ. Eng. 3, 100097.
doi: 10.1016/j.cscee.2021.100097
Schut, E., Crielaard, M., and Mesman, M. (2015). Circular Economy in the Dutch
Construction Sector: A Perspective for the Market and Government. Bilthoven: RIVM.
Sebola, M., Mativenga, P., and Pretorius, J. (2018). A benchmark study of waste
tyre recycling in South Africa to European Union Practice. Proc. CIRP 69, 950–955.
doi: 10.1016/j.procir.2017.11.137
Sekabira, H., and Kantengwa, S. (2021). Circular Bioeconomy Practices, Crop
Farming, Household Income, and Work Hours in Africa. Preprint Repository
Name.
Available
online
at:
https://www.researchgate.net/proﬁle/Haruna-
Sekabira/publication/355023463_Circular_Bioeconomy_Practices_Crop_Farming_
Household_Income_and_Work_Hours_in_Africa/links/61584ef761a8f466709bbc26/
Circular-Bioeconomy-Practices-Crop-Farming-Household-Income-and-Work-
Hours-in-Africa.pdf (accessed March 15, 2022).
Sekabira, H., Shiferaw, F., Manyong, V., Späth, L., Krütli, P., Vanlauwe, B., et al.
(2021a). Determinants and Success of Engagement in Circular Bioeconomy Practices
in African Food Systems: A Multivariate Multiple Regression Analysis. Preprint
Repository Name. Available online at: https://www.researchgate.net/proﬁle/Haruna-
Sekabira/publication/355023473_Determinants_and_Success_of_Engagement_
in_Circular_Bioeconomy_Practices_in_African_Food_Systems_A_Multivariate_
Multiple_Regression_Analysis/links/61585072e7bb415a5d4e968e/Determinants-
and-Success-of-Engagement-in-Circular-Bioeconomy-Practices-in-African-Food-
Systems-A-Multivariate-Multiple-Regression-Analysis.pdf (accessed March 20, 2022).
Sekabira, H., Späth, L., Pius Krütli, P., Vanlauwe, B., Wilde, B., and Six, J. (2021b).
Circular Bioeconomy Practices, and their Associations with Household Food Security
in four African City Regions. Preprint Repository Name. Available online at: https://
www.researchgate.net/proﬁle/Haruna-Sekabira/publication/355023286_Circular_
Bioeconomy_Practices_and_their_Associations_with_Household_Food_Security_in_
four_African_City_Regions/links/615851f04a82eb7cb5e4f347/Circular-Bioeconomy-
Practices-and-their-Associations-with-Household-Food-Security-in-four-African-
City-Regions.pdf (accessed March 18, 2022).
Semiyaga, S., Okure, M. A., Niwagaba, C. B., Katukiza, A. Y., and Kansiime,
F. (2015). Decentralized options for faecal sludge management in urban slum
areas of Sub-Saharan Africa: a review of technologies, practices and end-
uses.
Resources
Conserv.
Recycl.
104,
109–119.
doi:
10.1016/j.resconrec.2015.
09.001
Sentime, K. (2013). The impact of legislative framework governing waste
management
and
collection
in
South
Africa.
Afr.
Geogr.
Rev.
33,
81–93.
doi: 10.1080/19376812.2013.847253
Shariﬀ, S. Z., Bejaimal, S. A., Sontrop, J. M., Iansavichus, A. V., Haynes, R. B., Weir,
M. A., et al. (2013). Retrieving clinical evidence: a comparison of PubMed and Google
Scholar for quick clinical searches. J. Med. Internet Res. 15, e164. doi: 10.2196/jmir.
2624
Simatele, D. M., Dlamini, S., and Kubanza, N. S. (2017). From informality to
formality: Perspectives on the challenges of integrating solid waste management into
the urban development and planning policy in Johannesburg, South Africa. Habitat
Int. 63, 122–130. doi: 10.1016/j.habitatint.2017.03.018
Smith, J. U., Fischer, A., Hallett, P. D., Homans, H. Y., Smith, P., Abdul-Salam,
Y., et al. (2015). Sustainable use of organic resources for bioenergy, food and water
provision in rural Sub-Saharan Africa. Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev. 50, 903–917.
doi: 10.1016/j.rser.2015.04.071
Sossou, A. R., Yehouenou Azehoun Pazou, E., and Agbadja, P. R. (2019).
Caractérisation et gestion des déchets solides ménagers dans l’Arrondissement Central
de la Commune de Comè au Bénin (Disseration). Calavi: Université d’Abomey-Calavi.
Sotamenou, J. (2013). “La délégation du service public de gestion des déchets
solides en Afrique: A la recherche d’indicateurs de performance,” in 9th International
conference of territorial intelligence, ENTI, Strasbourg 2010, Nov 2010, Strasbourg,
France, 13p.
Sotamenou, J. (2018). Proposition d’un outil d’évaluation du service publique de
gestion des déchets solides municipaux en Afrique. Environ. Ingénierie Dév. 76, 34–42.
doi: 10.4267/dechets-sciences-techniques.3775
Srigboh,
R.
K.,
Basu,
N.,
Stephens,
J.,
Asampong,
E.,
Perkins,
M.,
Neitzel,
R.
L.,
et
al.
(2016).
Multiple
elemental
exposures
amongst
workers
at
the
Agbogbloshie
electronic
waste
(e-waste)
site
in
Ghana.
Chemosphere
164,
68–74.
doi:
10.1016/j.chemosphere.2016.
08.089
Strydom,
W.
(2018a).
Applying
the
theory
of
planned
behavior
to
recycling behavior in South Africa. Recycling
3, 43. doi: 10.3390/recycling3
030043
Strydom,
W.
(2018b).
Barriers
to
household
waste
recycling:
empirical
evidence
from
South
Africa.
Recycling
3,
41.
doi:
10.3390/recycling30
30041
Strydom, W. F., and Godfrey, L. K. (2016). “Household waste recycling behaviour
in South Africa - has there been progress in the last 5 years?,” in The 23rd WasteCon
Conference and Exhibition, 17-21 October 2016, Emperors Palace, Johannesburg.
Su, B., Heshmatia, A., Geng, Y., and Yu, X. (2013). A review of the circular economy
in China: moving from rhetoric to implementation. J. Clean. Prod. 42, 215–227.
doi: 10.1016/j.jclepro.2012.11.020
Tabasso, S., Grillo, G., Mariatti, F., and Cravotto, G. (2020). “Alternative techniques
and sustainable methods for the valorisation of lignocellulosic biomass,” in Biomass
Burning in Sub-Saharan Africa (Dordrecht: Springer Dordrecht BV), 83–91. Available
online at: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-94-007-0808-2_7 (accessed
May 27, 2022).
Tapsoba, L. D. S., Kiemde, S. M. A., Lamond, B. F., and Lépine, J. (2022). On the
potential of packaging for reducing fruit and vegetable losses in sub-Saharan Africa.
Foods. 11, 952. doi: 10.3390/foods11070952
Temple, L., and de Bon, H. (2020). L’agriculture biologique : controverses
et enjeux globaux de développement en Afrique. Cahiers Agricultures 29, 3.
doi: 10.1051/cagri/2020002
Frontiers in Sustainability
20
frontiersin.org

Nijman-Ross et al.
10.3389/frsus.2023.1061563
Terfa, N. G. (2021). Role of black soldier ﬂy (Hermetiaillucens) larvae frass bio-
fertilizer on vegetable growth and sustainable farming in Sub-Saharan Africa. Rev.
Agricult. Sci. 9, 92–102. doi: 10.7831/ras.9.0_92
Tshala, U. J., Kitabala, M. A., Tunda, M. J. P., Muﬁnd, K. M., Kalenda, M. A., Kapele,
K. G., et al. (2017). Vers une valorisation des déchets ménagers en agriculture (péri)
urbaine à Kolwezi : caractérisation et inﬂuence de la saisonnalité. J. Appl. Biosci. 112,
11072–11079. doi: 10.4314/jab.v112i1.12
UNEP (2008). Circular Economy Promotion Law of the People’s Republic of China.
Available online at: https://leap.unep.org/countries/cn/national-legislation/circular-
economy-promotion-law-peoples-republic-china#:%7E:text=Circular%20Economy
%20Promotion%20Law%20of%20the%20People%27s%20Republic%20of%20China.,-
Country&text$=$This%20Law%20is%20formulated%20for,environment%20and
%20realizing%20sustainable%20development (accessed August 5, 2022).
Viljoen, J. M. M., Schenck, C. J., Volschenk, L., Blaauw, P. F., and Grobler, L. (2021).
Household waste management practices and challenges in a rural remote town in
the hantam municipality in the Northern Cape, South Africa. Sustainability 13, 5903.
doi: 10.3390/su13115903
Volschenk, L., Viljoen, K., and Schenck, C. (2021). Socio-economic factors
aﬀecting household participation in curb-side recycling programmes : evidence
from Drakenstein Municipality, South Africa. Afr. J. Bus. Econ. Res. 16, 143–162.
doi: 10.31920/1750-4562/2021/v16n1a6
Wachinou,
A.
P.,
Kêdoté,
N.
M.,
Padonou,
G.,
Adè,
S.,
Darboux,
J.,
Tohi, M., et al. (2022). Respiratory
disorders related to e-waste exposure
among workers in the informal sector in a sub-Saharan African City: an
exposed
nonexposed
study.
Pulm.
Med.
2022,
1–6.
doi:
10.1155/2022/996
8897
WCEF (2022). WCEF Invites the World to Africa on 6–8 December 2022 to Build
Circular Economy Solutions. Available online at: https://www.wcef2022.com/2022/06/
22/wcef2022-invites-the-world-to-africa-on-6-8-december-2022-to-build-circular-
economy-solutions/ (accessed August 5, 2022).
Frontiers in Sustainability
21
frontiersin.org