RESEARCH
CORRESPONDING AUTHOR:
Chris Alden
Professor of International 
Relations, Director of LSE IDEAS, 
Department of International 
Relations, London School 
of Economics and Political 
Science, UK
j.c.alden@lse.ac.uk
KEYWORDS:
Global South; Russia-Ukraine 
war; United Nations; UN 
reform
TO CITE THIS ARTICLE:
Alden C. The Global South and 
Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine. 
LSE Public Policy Review. 2023; 
3(1): 16, pp. 1–8. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.31389/lseppr.88
The Global South and 
Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine
CHRIS ALDEN
ABSTRACT
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine inspired a unity among Western democracies not seen 
since the first Gulf War. However, Western expectations of global unified condemnation 
and action against Russia were dashed by the response of the Global South. Far from 
endorsing the Western position, over 40 member states consistently abstained or 
voted against resolutions proposed in the United Nations General Assembly that 
sought to condemn Russian actions. In April 2022, in the wake of overwhelming 
evidence of human rights violations, 50 members voted against expelling Russia from 
the Human Rights Council. These included many African, Asian, Middle Eastern and 
Latin American countries who were adamant that, irrespective of who started it and 
how it was conducted, the most important response should be to bring the conflict to 
an immediate end. What is behind the seeming indifference and even hostility in the 
Global South to the Western position on Russia?
This paper will review and assess how Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has been seen 
through the lens of the Global South. It will examine how Global South countries 
viewed the Western response to Russia’s invasion; ensuing debates over non-alignment 
generated by Russia’s invasion amongst Global South countries; and, how the Russia-
Ukraine war has reignited discussion on reform the multilateral system.

2
Alden  
LSE Public Policy Review  
DOI: 10.31389/lseppr.88
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine inspired a unity among Western democracies not seen since the 
first Gulf War. Indeed, it was the expectation that this egregious violation of sovereign territory 
would galvanise the world to a wholesale condemnation of Russian aggression and, with that, 
support for a battery of legal, economic and military measures designed to turn back the tide in 
Ukraine. Led by a revitalised transatlantic alliance, an unprecedented array of sanctions barred 
businesses from commercial activity with Russia, while Western states did whatever they could 
to support Ukraine. Ukrainian refugees found shelter all across Europe, while the governments 
provided significant military resources and training to the Ukrainian troops.
The West’s unity was compounded by the nature of the Russian invasion. Finding Ukraine less 
passive than expected led to a burgeoning catalogue of military failure, with Moscow resorting 
to indiscriminate bombings of civilian targets while permitting (if not encouraging) human 
rights abuses by its forces, all of which sparked outrage in the West and shook the confidence 
of Moscow and its allies. Putin’s inevitable threat of nuclear force raised the stakes even higher.
However, Western expectations of global unified condemnation and action against the Russian 
invasion were dashed by the response of the Global South. No Gulf War-style support was 
forthcoming from this quarter, counter to presumptions in Washington, Brussels and London. 
Far from endorsing the Western position, over 40 member states of the United Nations (UN) 
consistently abstained or voted against resolutions proposed in the UN General Assembly that 
sought to condemn Russian actions.1 In April 2022, in the wake of overwhelming evidence of 
human rights violations, 50 members voted against expelling Russia from the Human Rights 
Council. These included many African, Asian, Middle Eastern and Latin American countries, who 
were adamant that irrespective of who started it and how it was conducted, the most important 
response should be to bring the conflict to an immediate end. Its position was echoed by the 
BRICS grouping, which increasingly presents itself as a challenger to the G7 industrialised countries 
for global leadership. And even those countries which did support condemnation of Moscow’s 
invasion were reluctant to impose sanctions against Russia, making the action toothless.
I  THE GLOBAL SOUTH DEFIANT
What is behind the seeming indifference and even hostility in the Global South to the Western 
position on Russia? The arguments put forward by leaders from Africa, Asia, the Middle East 
and Latin America can be clustered into three categories. The first is exasperation at Western 
hypocrisy towards violations of sovereignty, the second is the neglect and damage done by 
the war to the global development agenda and the third centres on the escalation of Russia’s 
‘special operation’ to the apparent brink of nuclear war with the West.
Concurrently, something that gets little to no airplay in the West is the fact that the Russian 
invasion has ignited a broader debate within the Global South as to what it means to be non-
aligned in the contemporary context. There is widespread recognition that the form of non-
alignment adopted by developing countries during the bipolar Cold War and institutionalised 
through the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) does not resonate with the emerging multipolar 
system. Moreover, despite the protestations of leading emerging powers that they both identify 
as and are representative of the Global South, middle and small states are under no illusions 
as to the impact that power asymmetries with China or India have on global initiatives, not to 
mention on their own national aspirations.
Finally, the crisis in liberal international institutions has set the stage to resume pushing for 
reform of the UN system by China and the Global South. The dysfunctionality of the UN is 
embodied in the fact that there are persistent violations of the UN Charter by the Security 
Council’s Permanent members, despite their role being to preserve international peace and 
stability, and this has undermined faith in the multilateral system. A new round of initiatives 
is underway through multilateral and plurilateral organisations that aim to reform the 
institutions of global governance. Should its declared ambitions be realised, it will produce, a 
more representative, legitimate and effective multilateral system.
This paper will review and assess how Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has been seen through 
the lens of the Global South. It will first examine how Global South countries viewed the 
1	
The vote tally in first UNGA resolution to condemn the invasion was 141 for condemnation to five against, 
with 47 absences or abstentions.

3
Alden  
LSE Public Policy Review  
DOI: 10.31389/lseppr.88
Western response to the Russian invasion in the UN – focusing on the key issues of sovereignty, 
development and nuclear threats. Second, it will look at the debates generated by Russia’s 
invasion within the Global South over non-alignment – a traditional policy approach to great 
power competition. Third, it will investigate how the Russia-Ukraine war has reignited the 
impetus to reform the multilateral system amongst Global South countries and, concurrently, 
how this feeds into the Russian-Chinese declaration of a ‘New Era in International Politics’.
Before embarking, however, on this analysis, it would be important to say a few things about 
the terminology being used in this paper. While once an obscure phrase, ‘Global South’ is a 
term that has become common currency in academic and advocacy circles, especially among 
those arguing for economic and political concerns on an international stage, even to the point 
of being utilised by Western leaders.2 Loosely employed to cover developing countries and 
emerging powers who share the historical experience of Western colonialism and imperialism, 
and a set of shared post-colonial challenges around nation-building and development, Global 
South geography spans Asia, Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean as well as the oceanic 
island states [2]. It no longer exhibits the uniformity in material power (or its absence) that 
was true in the first decades of the Cold War and it continues to be divided along nationalist, 
ideological, sectarian and other indicators of difference. At the same time, these divisions have 
not prevented countries from coming to some common policy positions. For instance, most 
support values such as sovereignty, development rights and international peace, in line with 
the core principles of the UN Charter. Although, much like Western states, such positions are 
not always reflected in the actions of Global South states.
Its greatest significance in international politics is as an organising principle for these countries 
in multilateral settings. In these settings, coalition politics between regionally based groupings 
and like-minded members drives policy formulation and the voting process. The most 
prominent of the Global South coalitions is the G77, established in 1964 (and now with 182 
members), which was the instigator of the UN Conference on Trade and Development. It is one 
of the foundational groupings of the Global South in the UN, and while its fortunes have waxed 
and waned over time, like the NAM, it continues to serve as a collective voice for developing 
countries [3]. In this respect, the platform of the UN – especially the UN General Assembly, the 
Economic and Social Council and the Human Rights Council – is the arena where the Global 
South primarily puts forward its collective position on issues.
The impact of the Russian invasion of Ukraine was felt in the Global South in three distinct ways: 
(i) as a great power challenge to their interests; (ii) in generating a debate on non-alignment 
policy that was traditionally applied to great power competition and (iii) renewing questions 
as to the viability of an international system which is increasingly paralysed by great power 
competition.
II GLOBAL SOUTH REACTIONS TO THE RUSSIA-UKRAINE 
WAR
SOVEREIGNTY AND INTERVENTION
Violations of sovereignty are characteristic of the post-Cold War era, as is patterns of Western 
indifference, as well as committal of, such violations. The long road from Western intervention 
in Iraq in 2003 to Russian intervention in Ukraine in 2022 – which passes through breaches of 
sovereignty in Libya, Syria and Yemen amongst other places – emphasises the disinterest and 
inertia of Western capitals. Moreover, the tepid response of Western governments’ reaction to 
Russia’s invasion and occupation of Crimea and the eastern littoral of Ukraine in 2014 paved 
the way for other states to also prefer inaction. Western states may have eventually imposed 
sanctions after Russia conducted a faux-referendum to affirm popular support for its occupation 
and annexation of the region, but they did so on one hand while propping up Russia’s economy 
on the other. For instance, the EU continued with Nord Stream 2 pipeline construction, pumping 
Russian natural gas into Germany, a policy emblematic of the EU’s unwillingness to sacrifice 
domestic needs to support core principles of international law [4, 5].
2	
Emmanuel Macron speaks frequently about the Global South, for example at the Munich Security Conference 
in 2023 where he said ‘I am struck by how we have lost the trust of the global South’ [1].

4
Alden  
LSE Public Policy Review  
DOI: 10.31389/lseppr.88
In considering Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, South African President Cyril Ramaphosa even 
suggested that the ‘war could have been avoided if NATO had heeded the warnings from 
amongst its own leaders and officials over the years that its eastward expansion would lead 
to greater, not less, instability in the region [6].’ Brazilian President Lula da Silva echoed this 
assessment, stating that ‘Zelensky is as responsible as Putin for the war [1].’ This is a view 
articulated by many governments in the Global South and finds considerable support on social 
media in countries as varied as India, Turkey and Malaysia [7, 8, 9].
Finally, as David Miliband points out, Western protestations of the violation of rule of law 
sound hollow against the catalogue of violations of the same principles by the United States 
(US) in particular. America has continued to fail to ratify the Statue of Rome, a failure which 
eased the way for Russia which withdrew from the treaty in 2016 and China, which refused 
outright to sign up to the treaty China [1]. Western states seem unable to practise what they 
preach.3
DEVELOPMENT AS COLLATERAL DAMAGE
While the war goes on, to the Global South it remains a ‘European war, far away’. The same sorts 
of arguments heard time and again when conflict breaks out in Africa, that the Western public 
would not support intervention in a country so geographically remote from North America and 
Europe, were played out in the Global South.
However, this does not mean that the Global South does not feel the impact of the conflict. First, 
there is the sharp rise in energy and food prices, led by the uncertainty around vital Russian grain 
and fertilizer shipments and second, there is the imposition of economic sanctions on Russia, 
and their consequent restrictions on commercial exchanges with Russian firms [11]. According 
to an IMF report published in March 2022, the energy price spike corresponded with a 30% rise 
in global wheat prices [12]. The negotiation of a deal between Kiev and Moscow, brokered by 
Turkey’s President Recep Tayyip Erdogan, was a welcome step in easing the immediate concerns 
about food security, but it is still subject to periodic review and inflationary pressures remain 
a grave threat to domestic stability in many developing countries. Regarding sanctions on 
Russian firms, the weaponization of the US dollar has enabled the West to impose costs that 
hurt developing economies as well as the Russian economy [13]. It is here that the prospect of 
securing support for sanctions against Russia is inhibited by the Global South’s economic needs 
in the Global South, yet this receives only limited attention amongst Western leaders. As German 
Chancellor Olaf Scholz said in response to African concerns of the sanctions impact, ‘There are 
many stories that are a distraction from Russia’s war in Ukraine – we shouldn’t accept that [11].’
The key point here is that the perspective on the Russian invasion held by the Global South places 
greater focus on its disruptive effect on their economies and the consequent need to restore 
stability, rather than concern with the territorial and human rights violations. The immediacy of 
the painful economic spill over of conflict translated into a position that supported a cessation 
of the war, even if that – as some in the West argued – would play into the hands of Putin.
THREATS OF NUCLEAR WAR
Russia’s unexpected failure to sweep aside the Zelensky government in a few short weeks put 
on display the sub-standard condition of its military. Putin’s willingness to brandish the threat 
of nuclear weapons – not once but many times over the course of the conflict – to coerce 
and divide the transatlantic alliance over the question of support for Ukraine set off alarm 
bells across the world [14]. Coupled to this was the dangerous game that was played with the 
Zaporizhzhia nuclear power facility in eastern Ukraine, where Russian troops had occupied the 
site early on and put Ukrainian plant managers under their control. The proximity of the facility 
to ongoing conflict contributed to fears of a nuclear accident on a scale greater than Chernobyl.
This loosening of norms of conduct on nuclear weapons by one of the UN Security Council’s 
Permanent five (P5) has come at a time when the battery of arms control treaties, that guided 
superpower behaviour for decades, have either run out and are not being renewed [15, 16]. 
During debates in the UN Security Council, representatives from Ghana and Brazil spoke to 
3	
For more on this debate, see Lawson and Zarakol [10].

5
Alden  
LSE Public Policy Review  
DOI: 10.31389/lseppr.88
the fears in the Global South that nuclear disarmament had ‘gone into reverse since 2020 
[15]. Moreover, regimes in North Korea and Iran have demonstrated that with sufficient 
determination and investment, the technical obstacles to becoming a nuclear state can be 
overcome. All of this raises the possibility that a set of regional nuclear arms races in areas like 
Asia and the Middle East could be in the making.
III NON-ALIGNMENT IN AN ERA OF GREAT POWER 
COMPETITION
For the Global South, the Russian invasion of Ukraine and the accompanying Western pressure 
to support countermeasures like sanctions generated debates over non-alignment. This has 
been the traditional policy approach to great power competition since the bipolar Cold War 
era. The conditions of US-led unipolarity, which prevailed from the Cold War’s aftermath until 
2017, began to evolve towards multipolarity with its impact on the distribution of power across 
the international system. However, the rise of US-China competition and its manifestation in 
everything from trade to technology is beginning to bring pressure to bear on the Global South 
to choose a side. Russia’s invasion brings the threat to the liberal international system and 
the abuses of its principles by the P5 under the spotlight. The default policy of non-alignment 
looked out of date in this evolving context.
Alongside the evolution of the international system from bipolar to multipolar is a deliberate re-
positioning of emerging powers away from non alignment over time. While the bipolar conflict 
between the US and the Soviet Union inspired Nehru and others to adopt non-alignment from 
either superpower, the post-Cold War era marked a reconsideration of non-alignment that 
emphasised a search for ‘strategic autonomy’ in foreign policy. For example, China while espousing 
the ‘Five Principles of Peace Co-existence’ derived from the Bandung Conference as pillars of its 
foreign policy continues to maintain a distance from traditional Global South organisations like 
the G77 – the formulation being ‘G77 + China’ – as a signifier of its special leadership status within 
the Global South. India, though long associated with the Nehruvian non-alignment policy and 
formally adhering to the same five principles nonetheless has formally adopted a foreign policy 
of ‘strategic autonomy’ [17, 18]. Indonesia, which leaned towards the US under the Suharto 
regime’s long reign, has effectively rediscovered non-alignment with the advent of democracy 
and even sponsored two major international conferences aimed at reinvigorating the ‘Bandung 
Spirit’ [19]. Brazil too has adopted a policy of ‘strategic autonomy’ as the basis of its foreign policy 
since the end of the Cold War [20]. Even the European Union, undisputedly a key part of the 
Western alliance system and obviously not an emerging power, characterises its foreign policy 
aspirations as one of seeking greater strategic autonomy (presumably from the unnamed US).
This repurposing of non-alignment from its inherently defensive connotations – that is, 
neither signing up as a partner in the Western alliance system nor deliberately supporting an 
alternative to the liberal international system spawned by Western governments, seems to 
be the approach being taken by some countries of the Global South. Seeking to capture this 
evolving phenomenon, former Chilean ambassador, Jorge Heine and Carlos Ominami have 
characterised this new approach as ‘active non-alignment’.
Active Non-Alignment (ANA) calls on Latin American governments to not accept a 
priori the positions of any of the Great Powers in conflict. They must act, instead, in 
defense of their own national interest, without giving in to pressures from hegemonic 
powers. The term ‘active’ refers to a foreign policy in constant search of opportunities 
in a changing world, evaluating each of them on their merits. It recognizes the 
historical roots of the policy of Non-Alignment but adapts it to the 21st century [21].
Active non-alignment in this respect involves taking a policy position that may cut across 
the interests of great powers in the service of Global South countries’ national interests. It 
is transactional in content, not embracing the values-framed ideologies characteristic of the 
Cold War, and aims at the accumulation of greater political space for action, i.e., strategic 
autonomy. And it is suited to a multipolar system where power is distributed more readily 
across the system. For IR theorists, active non-alignment constitutes neo-realism’s ‘balancing’ 
and ‘hedging’ strategies though more rooted in a collective action approach honed through 
participation in international organisations.

6
Alden  
LSE Public Policy Review  
DOI: 10.31389/lseppr.88
IV GEOPOLITICS AND FAST TRACKING THE GLOBAL 
TRANSFORMATION
The unequal distribution of power across international institutions is a longstanding issue for the 
Global South. In the wake of great power abuses of the UN Security Council producing systemic 
instability, countries of the Global South are joining like-minded multilateralists to re-examine how 
this ongoing crisis can inspire a new wave of reform. At the same time, many of these countries 
are also looking beyond the liberal international system for a means of addressing what they see 
as its structural deficiencies and glaring abuses of power which threaten Global South interests.
Permanent members of the UN Security Council continue to be the object of other members 
states’ ire. The violations of sovereignty by Russia have precedents of course amongst the US 
in Iraq, China in the South China Sea and Britain and France in Libya. The recent passage of a 
non-binding resolution requiring permanent members of the Security Council to justify their use 
of the veto by permanent members of the Security Council points again to the resentment and 
concerns across the UN General Assembly as to the power of the P5 [22, 23].
Even more than the P5’s violation of the UN Charter, however, is the more immediate and 
destabilising impact that US-led sanctions campaign is having on the economies of many 
countries in the Global South. What this has demonstrated unequivocally is that US power 
resources have a depth and breadth not fully understood by many in the Global South up till 
this point. Though Washington’s ramping up of financial sanctions against Iran, back in 2014, 
provided a clear case of the reach of US financial power, even that did not have the level of 
international impact of the current round of sanctions against Russia.
All of this has reopened the debate on the pervasive use of the US dollar as the default currency 
in international trade, with Global South countries focusing not only on the cost of conducting 
trade in dollar but also the denomination of loans in dollars. The use of the dollar results in 
loan packages whose value is affected by the strength of the US currency and, consequently, 
contributes to unsustainable debt on their books [24, 25].
Amongst the initiatives operating outside the liberal international institutions against the 
hegemony of the US dollar is the plurilateral BRICS grouping. Led by China, BRICS countries 
are accelerating their own initiative to de-dollarise the global economy. The BRICS’ New 
Development Bank (NDB) is already engaged in a range of initiatives from RMB currency swaps 
to provisions for short term liquidity pressures [26]. The intense interest amongst Global South 
nations in involving themselves in these initiatives can been seen in the uptick in RMB trade in 
a number of Asian, African, Middle Eastern and Latin American economies in recent years. And 
perhaps the most vivid expression of Global South interest is the submission of applications to 
join BRICS by over forty countries in the past few months.
V CONCLUSION: A NEW ERA IN THE MAKING?
During the G7 Summit held in the United Kingdom in June 2021, the Chinese embassy issued 
a telling statement:
The days when global decisions were dictated by a small group of countries are long 
gone. We always believe that countries, big or small, strong or weak, poor or rich, are 
equals, and that world affairs should be handled through consultation by all countries 
[27].
This stinging critique of Western presumptions of global leadership in the service of their 
interests has been galvanised by the West’s response to the Russian invasion of Ukraine. It 
undergirds the renewed to overhaul the liberal international system either from within or 
without. It is this vision of a new world order, a ‘New Era of Global Development’, that coheres 
most closely with the Bandung principles and promises to deliver global equity in governance 
and development and is attracting the countries of the Global South.
At the same time, the perpetual critique of the UN system by the majority of states, however 
valid, does carry with it the seeds of another turn in the system. Should the West see liberal 
internationalism as no longer worth fighting for then the rebirth of a world where Thucydides’ 
realist logic of the rule by the most powerful will surely eclipse those very interests of many 
small and middle states in the Global South.

7
Alden  
LSE Public Policy Review  
DOI: 10.31389/lseppr.88
COMPETING INTERESTS
The author has no competing interests to declare.
AUTHOR AFFILIATIONS
Chris Alden 
Professor of International Relations, Director of LSE IDEAS, Department of International Relations, London 
School of Economics and Political Science, UK
REFERENCES
1.	
Miliband D. The World Beyond Ukraine: the survival of the West and the Demands of the Rest. 
Foreign Policy; 2023 April 18 [cited 2023 June 4]. https://www.foreignaffairs.com/ukraine/world-
beyond-ukraine-russia-west.
2.	
Alden C, Morphet S, Vieira MA. The South in World Politics. London: Routledge; 2010. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.1057/9780230281196
3.	
Satyabraha P. The Group of 77 in a Changing World. UN Chronicle. no date. https://www.un.org/en/
chronicle/article/group-77-changing-world.
4.	
Nix S. Responding to the Russian Invasion of Crimea: Policy Recommendations for US and European 
Leaders. European View. 2014; 13(1): 143–152. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1007/s12290-014-0297-3
5.	
de Maio G. Nord Stream 2: a failed test for EU unity and trans-Atlantic coordination. Brookings 
Institution; 2019 April 22 [cited 2023 June 4]. https://www.brookings.edu/blog/order-from-
chaos/2019/04/22/nord-stream-2-a-failed-test-for-eu-unity-and-trans-atlantic-coordination/.
6.	
Walsh M. US-South Africa ties explode on Russia Arms claims. Asia Times; 2023 May 17 [cited 2023 
June 4]. https://asiatimes.com/2023/05/us-south-africa-ties-explode-on-russia-arms-claim/.
7.	
Garten Ash T, Krastev I, Leonard M. United West, Divided from the Rest: global public opinion one 
year into Russia’s war on Ukraine. European Council on Foreign Relations; 2023 February 22 [cited 
2023 June 4]. https://ecfr.eu/publication/united-west-divided-from-the-rest-global-public-opinion-
one-year-into-russias-war-on-ukraine/.
8.	
Azmi H. Ukraine war: how the battle on social media has become a propaganda tool for Russia and 
Ukraine. South China Morning Post; 2022 March 19 [cited 2023 June 4]. https://www.scmp.com/
week-asia/article/3171049/ukraine-war-battle-malaysias-social-media-propaganda-tool-russia-and.
9.	
Al Jazeera. Why are Indonesians on social media so supportive of Russia. [Posted 2022 March 19; 
Cited 2023 June 4]. https://www.aljazeera.com/news/2022/3/19/why-are-indonesians-on-social-
media-so-supportive-of-russia.
10.	 Lawson G, Zarakol A. Recognizing Injustice: the ‘hypocrisy charge’ and the future of the LIO. 
International Affairs. 2023; 99(1): 201–218. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1093/ia/iiac258
11.	 Mallet V, Bounds A. African Union warms of collateral impact as EU’s Russia sanctions hit food 
supplies. Financial Times. [Posted 2022 May 13; cited 2023 June 4]. https://www.ft.com/content/
e558de33-6064-4b10-a784-eb344cb17915.
12.	 Kammer A, Azour J, Selassie A, Goldfajn I, Yong Rhee C. How the War in Ukraine is reverberating 
Across Regions. IMF Blog; 2022 March 22 [cited 2023 June 4]. https://www.imf.org/en/Blogs/
Articles/2022/03/15/blog-how-war-in-ukraine-is-reverberating-across-worlds-regions-031522.
13.	 Heitzig C, Ordu A, Holtz L. How currency sanctions against Russia could disrupt trade with Africa. 
Brookings Institute; 2022 May 23 [cited 2023 June 4]. https://www.brookings.edu/research/how-
currency-sanctions-on-russia-could-disrupt-trade-with-africa/.
14.	 Vaddi P, Blanchette N, Hinck G. Expired: The Last Nuclear Arms Treaty. Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace; ND. https://carnegieendowment.org/publications/interactive/new-start#.
15.	 United Nations. Risks of nuclear war are higher than at any time since the Cold War, Disarmament 
Affairs chief warns. UN Security Council; 2023. Meeting Coverage SC 15/250. https://press.un.org/
en/2023/sc15250.doc.htm.
16.	 Kariuki J. No other country has raised the prospect of nuclear use, no one is threatening Russia: UK 
statement at the Security Council. Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office; 2023 March 31 [cited 
2023 June 4]. https://www.gov.uk/government/speeches/no-other-country-has-raised-the-prospect-
of-nuclear-use-no-one-is-threatening-russias-sovereignty-uk-statement-at-the-security-council.
17.	 Chaturvedi P. India’s Strategic Autonomy does not mean Unilateralism. The Diplomat; 2022 18 
October [cited 2023 June 4]. https://thediplomat.com/2022/10/indias-strategic-autonomy-does-not-
mean-unilateralism/.
18.	 Weigold A. Nehruivanism in Indian Foreign Policy – embedded in the Modi Doctrine? Future Directions 
International; 2018. policy report. https://apo.org.au/node/133961.
19.	 Anwar DF. Indonesia’s Vision of Order in East Asia Amid US-China Rivalry: continuity or change? Asia 
Policy. 2018; 13(2): 57–63. DOI: East Asia Amid US-China Rivalry: continu

8
Alden  
LSE Public Policy Review  
DOI: 10.31389/lseppr.88
TO CITE THIS ARTICLE:
Alden C. The Global South and 
Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine. 
LSE Public Policy Review. 2023; 
3(1): 16, pp. 1–8. DOI: https://
doi.org/10.31389/lseppr.88
Submitted: 24 May 2023 
Accepted: 04 June 2023 
Published: 08 September 2023
COPYRIGHT:
© 2023 The Author(s). This is an 
open-access article distributed 
under the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution 4.0 
International License (CC-BY 
4.0), which permits unrestricted 
use, distribution, and 
reproduction in any medium, 
provided the original author 
and source are credited. See 
http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
LSE Public Policy Review is a 
peer-reviewed open access 
journal published by LSE Press.
20.	 Vegivani T, Cepaluni G. Brazilian Foreign Policy in Changing Times: the Quest for Autonomy from 
Sarney to Lula. Boston: Lexington Books; 2009.
21.	 Heine J. Non Alignment is Back in the Global South, Albeit in a Different Incarnation. Boston University 
Global Development Policy Centre; 2023. https://www.bu.edu/gdp/2023/02/27/non-alignment-is-
back-in-the-global-south-albeit-in-a-different-incarnation/.
22.	 United Nations. General Assembly holds first ever debate on historic veto resolution, adopts texts on 
infrastructure, national reviews, Council of Europe cooperation 26. General Assembly Seventy Seventh 
Session; 2023. Meeting Coverage GA12500. https://press.un.org/en/2023/ga12500.doc.htm.
23.	 United Nations. Amidst strained multilateral system, states must recommit to United Nations Charter 
obligations, prioritize human rights, Secretary-General tells Security Council. Security Council; 2023 
April 24. Meeting Coverage SC/1526. https://press.un.org/en/2023/sc15263.doc.htm.
24.	 Ranasinghe D, Chatterjee S, Chavez-Dreyfuss G. Russia sanctions hike US dollar borrowing costs in 
global markets. Reuters; 2022 February 28 [cited 2023 June 4]. https://www.reuters.com/business/
finance/russia-sanctions-lift-borrowing-costs-dollars-funding-markets-2022-02-28/.
25.	 Debt Justice. Global South debt payments increase almost 50% in two years. [posted 2017 March 13; 
cited 2023 June 4]. https://debtjustice.org.uk/press-release/global-south-debt-payments-increase-
almost-50-two-years.
26.	 Sullivan J. A BRICS Currency Could Shake the Dollar’s Dominance. Foreign Policy; 2023 April 24 [cited 
2023 June 4]. https://foreignpolicy.com/2023/04/24/brics-currency-end-dollar-dominance-united-
states-russia-china/.
27.	 BBC. G7 Summit: China says small groups do not rule the world. [posted 13 June 2021 ; cited 2023 
June 4]. https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-china-57458822.