Mohamed H. A. 
Hassan is president 
of the Sudanese 
National Academy of 
Sciences in Khartoum 
and past president of 
the World Academy 
of Sciences.
e-mail: hassan@
ictp.it
By Mohamed 
H. A. Hassan
Displaced 
Sudanese 
researchers 
and students 
urgently 
need support 
from the 
global 
scientific 
community.”
Ongoing conflict has displaced students and 
destroyed institutions that were once among 
Africa’s best. Small projects show how a 
brighter future can be built.
O
ne April morning, medical student Asjad 
Yousif Abdalrahman Bushra awoke to the 
sound of bombs exploding in Khartoum. He 
was planning to attend a funeral that day and 
then start preparations for celebrating Eid. 
But war had erupted between the Sudanese army and a 
paramilitary force called the Rapid Support Forces.
As of 22 September, the war had forced more than one 
million people to flee Sudan; at least 4.3 million have 
been displaced within the nation, according to the United 
Nations. Prominent scientists, young researchers and 
students are among them. More than 100 universities have 
been destroyed, looted or extensively damaged. The devas-
tation threatens museums and heritage sites, including the 
University of Khartoum’s main campus, an architectural 
masterpiece that included a laboratory established by 
pharmaceutical magnate Henry Wellcome at the start of 
the twentieth century.
Those who remain in the war zone are unable to continue 
their research and education because most universities and 
scientific institutions have closed, especially in Khartoum.
Displaced Sudanese researchers and students urgently 
need support from the global scientific community.
The Sudanese National Academy of Sciences, of which 
I am president, appealed for help in September (see 
go.nature.com/3qhwceh). I would urge academies of 
science, universities and funding agencies to take note and 
do what they can to host displaced researchers and students.
Bushra’s experience has been emblematic. A battle in 
front of his house rattled the doors and windows. Family 
members encountered armed soldiers on the street. His 
parents would ask him to study to take his mind off what 
was happening, but he found it hard to focus, and the 
University of Khartoum had shut down.
Bushra and 31 other medical students escaped to Atbara, 
a city 300 kilometres northeast of Khartoum. They did 
so thanks to a concerted effort coordinated by a profes-
sor at the university, Elrasheid Ahmed Abdalla, and three 
Sudanese doctors in Dubai, Riad Bayoumi, Amar Khamis 
and Omer Rufaei. Abdalla coordinates the programme 
from Atbara hospital, where he arrived in early May along 
with the first of the students.
The three expatriate doctors raised money to buy essen-
tials, such as bedding, fridges and cooking utensils, for the 
displaced students. The Student Support Centre in Atbara 
provided free group lodgings for them. The administrations 
of the hospitals in Atbara and Ad-Dāmar shared their lecture 
rooms and wards for teaching purposes.
Similar efforts are needed to temporarily relocate 
researchers to other universities that are far from the war 
zones, either in or outside Sudan. Those who have already 
been forced to leave their homes should be provided with 
fellowships to continue their research and studies else-
where. Host universities need adequate resources and 
infrastructure, including a reliable Internet connection, 
so that researchers can connect with their peers, access 
journals and attend conferences.
These partnerships can benefit host institutions, too. 
Abdalla has been organizing lectures and medical rounds 
for almost five months now, and the programme has helped 
final-year Wadi Neel medical students prepare for their 
exams. Lectures are recorded so that students in other 
regions of Sudan or abroad can access them.
It is essential that fellowships and programmes abroad are 
intentionally short-term, lasting perhaps one or two years 
and providing opportunities for scholars to stay connected 
with their home country so that they can help to rebuild 
Sudan’s academic institutions once stability is restored.
Rebuilding will require major international aid, and not 
just because of the immediate effects of the war. The Univer-
sity of Khartoum was ranked among the top ten universities 
in Africa during the late 1970s and 1980s, but the Sudanese 
higher-education system has witnessed a marked decline in 
quality over recent decades, in part because of persistent 
political instability, resource shortages and inadequate 
infrastructure. But it could become great again.
Twinning arrangements between Sudanese and inter-
national institutions will be crucial to re-establish quality 
education and research. For example, Yangzhou University 
in China has hosted nearly 1,000 Sudanese students since it 
paired with the University of Khartoum in 2010. Exchange 
programmes, collaborations, joint conferences and work-
shops could also enrich these twinning arrangements.
Through collaborations and targeted fellowship 
programmes, the international scientific community can 
support and empower talented Sudanese researchers who 
have been displaced, ensuring that their contributions can 
continue to benefit society. The academy is compiling an 
index of Sudanese scholars to share with the Science in 
Exile initiative (scienceinexile.org), which provides a list 
of resources for supporting at-risk, displaced and refugee 
scientists.
Bushra, for one, was reluctant to leave his home, but he 
knew his family valued his education and what he could 
accomplish with it. “I couldn’t fathom how I was going to 
leave my family in a war zone and go somewhere relatively 
safe,” he says. “It still feels selfish, but I tell myself that all 
of this is for them.”
Sudan’s disastrous war — and 
the science it is imperilling
10  |  Nature  |  Vol 623  |  2 November 2023
A personal take on science and society
World view
MOHAMED H. A. HASSAN