International Journal
For Court Administration
ACADEMIC 
ARTICLE
CORRESPONDING 
AUTHOR:
Tareq Al-Billeh
Applied Science Private 
University, Jordan
t_billeh@asu.edu.jo
KEYWORDS:
Administrative Judiciary; 
Litigation at Two Levels; The 
Supreme Administrative 
Court; The Administrative 
Court; The Administrative 
Public Prosecution
TO CITE THIS ARTICLE:
Al-Billeh, Tareq, ‘The 
Situations Related to 
the Functioning of the 
Administrative Judiciary in 
Jordan for the Year 2020: A 
Step Forward’ (2023) 14(3) 
International Journal for 
Court Administration 5. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.36745/
ijca.453
The Situations 
Related to the 
Functioning of the 
Administrative 
Judiciary in Jordan 
for the Year 2020: 
A Step Forward
TAREQ AL-BILLEH 
ABSTRACT
The article analyses the working situations of the administrative 
judiciary in Jordan. In fact, after litigation in the administrative 
judiciary turned to of two levels represented by the Administrative 
Court and the Supreme Administrative Court instead of one level 
which was represented by the Jordanian Supreme Court of Justice 
(formerly), confidence has returned to the administrative judiciary 
through the entertainment of the case by two judicial bodies so that 
one of the guarantees of fair trials is that the case is entertained 
by more than one judicial authority and at more than one level. 
Actually, it is noted through this applied and practical study as well 
as through the tables and figures that there was an increase in the 
number of cases instituted before the administrative judiciary for 
the year 2020 compared to 2019. However, despite litigation has 
become of two levels, the administrative courts of first instance 
are not spread throughout the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan, 
but only in the capital. Therefore, it is necessary to establish first 
instant administrative courts in all governorates of the Kingdom in 
addition to the introduction of administrative courts of appeal in the 
governorates of the Kingdom together with the need to develop a 
standard that defines the jurisdiction of the administrative judicial 
authorities in countries that adopt the distribution of jurisdiction over 
administrative disputes to more than one judicial authority in order 
to determine which ordinary judicial authority that enjoys general 
jurisdiction over some administrative disputes and to determine the 
administrative courts whose jurisdiction is defined by law.

2
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
1. INTRODUCTION
The countries of the world do seek in various ways to implement the principle of 
the rule of law in order to respect the rights and freedoms of individuals. In fact, 
the application of this principle can only be achieved through the submission of all 
persons, rulers and those ruled, to the rule of law under the umbrella of the principle 
of legitimacy.1
Therefore, the role of judicial oversight appears on the work of public administration 
in order to ensure the principle of legitimacy and protect the rights and freedoms 
of individuals. Yet, the effectiveness of this oversight requires the creation of judicial 
bodies to adjudicate administrative disputes in order to achieve the public interest.2
In fact, the establishment of an administrative judicial authority independent of the 
ordinary judiciary takes into account the distinction of litigation procedures that take 
place before the administrative courts from litigation procedures that take place 
before the ordinary courts in terms of the different nature of relations governed by 
administrative law from those governed by private law.3
Actually, the judicial organization in many countries has been established to the effect 
of having two types of judicial oversight over the work of the public administration as 
some countries take the unified judicial system while other countries adopt the dual 
judicial system according to the difference in the political and legal system of each 
country. In fact, by referring to the judicial organization in Jordan, the constitutional 
amendments made in 2011, which were entertained to article 100 of the Constitution, 
did not make any change in the nature of the administrative judiciary except that the 
constitutional legislator had to establish an administrative judiciary into two levels 
instead of one as stipulated in the same constitutional article before its amendment. 
Yet, and by referring to the judicial organization in some countries of the world, such 
as France, for example, then it adopted a dual system through the presence of two 
independent judicial bodies, namely the ordinary judiciary which is concerned with 
the entertainment of ordinary judicial disputes that arise between individuals with 
each other and the administrative judiciary that undertakes the entertainment of 
administrative disputes. In addition, the administrative judiciary has a state council 
as an administrative judicial authority and a consulting body, i.e. judicial duality and 
duality of the state council.4
Therefore, the administrative courts in Jordan derive their legal existence from the 
text of article (100) of the Constitution which explicitly adopted, in terms of judicial 
organization, the dual system as it stated that: “The types of all courts, their levels, 
departments and competencies shall be determined together with the manner 
1	
See A. Shatnawi, Jordanian Administrative Judiciary, Arab Center for Student Services, 
1995 & A. Al-Shakhanbeh, Organization of Administrative Courts in Jordanian Legislation, 
Master’s Thesis, Middle East University, 2016.
2	
See R. Thabeti, Jurisdictions of Administrative Courts in Algeria, Master Thesis, Akli 
Mohand Olhaj University, 2016 & N. Al-Zahra, Specific Jurisdiction between the State Council 
and the Administrative Courts, Master Thesis, Hadj Lakhdar University Batnah, 2012.
3	
See M. Khalailah, Aspects of the Independence of Administrative Litigation Procedures 
from Civil Case Procedures in Jordanian Law. Dirasat: Shari’a and Law Sciences 40(1) 
pp.27–43.
4	
See Article 100 of the Jordanian constitution. 

3
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
on how to manage them by a Private Law provided that this law stipulates the 
establishment of an administrative judiciary on two levels”.5
Hence, and in light of that, the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law No. 27 of 
2014 was issued which is the law currently in force and which article 3 of the same 
provided that: “A judiciary shall be established in the Kingdom to be called (the 
administrative judiciary) to be consisting of: A – the Administrative Court. B- The 
Supreme Administrative Court.” In fact, this means that the administrative judiciary 
in Jordan has become, since the issuance of this law, consisting of two levels (the 
Administrative Court and the Supreme Administrative Court) for which, and according 
to article 4 of the aforementioned law, an administrative court would be established 
in Amman while it is permissible, with the approval of its president, to hold its sessions 
anywhere in the Kingdom. Further, this court is constituted of a president and a 
number of judges being of not less than the second category. In addition, it shall be 
conducted by one or more of tribunals to be formed by its president each constituted 
at least of a president and two members. Yet, if the president of the court is not 
contributing in any of its tribunals, then it shall be presided over by the judge being of 
the highest category or the senior in the same.6
As for the Supreme Administrative Court, it shall be established in accordance with 
article 22 of the aforementioned law in Amman to be consisted of a president and 
a number of judges. Yet, the president of the Supreme Administrative Court shall be 
appointed by the resolution of the Council provided that the resolutions is ratified 
by the Royal Will. Further, and according to article 24 of the Law, the Supreme 
Administrative Court is conducted by one or more tribunals formed by the president 
each constituted of at least a president and four judges. Yet, the president shall refer 
the cases filed to the court to its tribunals and if the president is not participating in 
any of its tribunals, then it shall be presided by the judge of seniority in the category. 
In fact, if one of the Supreme Administrative Court tribunals decided to revoke a legal 
principle established by it or by another tribunal or otherwise it becomes clear to it 
that the case presented to it involves a new or significant legal principle, then the 
Supreme Administrative Court will be held in all its members, except for the absent of 
them for any reason, in order to consider the case and issue the ruling therein at the 
request of its president.7
Thus, article (100) of the Constitution explicitly provided for the establishment of 
administrative courts at the lowest level of litigation, independent from the ordinary 
courts, to entertain administrative disputes to the exclusion of others though the 
aforementioned article did not explicitly state at the nomination of administrative 
courts clearly.8
Therefore, this study aims to identify the mechanism of the work of the Supreme 
Administrative Court, the Administrative Court and the Administrative Public Prosecution 
in Jordan as well as to explain the mechanism of forming the Supreme Administrative 
Court, the Administrative Court and the Administrative Public Prosecution in addition 
to showing the specializations exclusively specified for the Administrative Court and 
5	
See A. Boudiaf, The organic standard and its legal problems in the light of the Civil 
and Administrative Procedures Law. Journal of Political and Law Notebooks 3(5) pp.9–30.
6	
See Article 3 of the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law.
7	
See Articles 22, 24 of the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law.
8	
See Article 100 of the Jordanian constitution.

4
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
the Supreme Administrative Court. Further, it seeks also show annual report for the 
situations of the work of the Supreme Administrative Court, the Administrative Court 
and the Administrative Public Prosecution through the attachment of tables, figures 
and graphs that support this research.
Actually, the importance of the study lies in its subject being the situations of 
administrative judiciary’s work in Jordan for the year 2020 by referring to the annual 
reports of the administrative judiciary situations while linking these reports to the legal 
and judicial aspects. In fact, this study is one of the modern and important issues that 
have a great impact in the practical reality for which the researcher will approach all 
aspects of the subject, whether theoretical or practical, and address the shortage 
in the texts of the Jordanian Constitution as well as the Jordanian administrative 
judiciary law.
As for the research problem, then, by referring to the judicial organization in Jordan, 
the constitutional amendments made in 2011, which were entertained to article 
100 of the Constitution, did not make any change in the nature of the administrative 
judiciary except that the constitutional legislator had to establish an administrative 
judiciary into two levels.
Yet, and since the administrative judiciary is working to ensure that the principle 
of legality is achieved by the oversight of the work of the administrative authority, 
then, and to achieve a balance between the rights and freedoms of individuals, it 
is required to adjudicate in administrative cases which will not happen unless it is 
aware of the requirements of public administration and its working conditions in order 
to be able to adjudicate disputes the administrative disputes through a fair judiciary 
without prejudice to work requirements. Hence, and since it is one of the obligations 
of the independence of the administrative judiciary that the administrative judiciary 
is not undertaken by non-specialists, then there must be an administrative judiciary 
independent of the ordinary (regular) judiciary in all aspects.
Therefore, and through this study, we will try to answer the questions that represent 
the problem of research represented by three main problems: -What is the 
mechanism of the Supreme Administrative Court work? What is the mechanism of 
work of the Administrative Public Prosecution? In fact, several major problems are 
subordinate to these main problems, the most important of which are: What is the 
mechanism of forming the Supreme Administrative Court, the Administrative Court 
and the Administrative Public Prosecution? What are the powers of the Supreme 
Administrative Court, the Administrative Court and the Administrative Public 
Prosecution? What is meant by the independence of the administrative judiciary 
from the ordinary (regular) judiciary? What is the importance of the independence of 
the administrative judiciary from the ordinary (regular) judiciary? Did the Jordanian 
administrative legislation take into account the principle of bringing justice to the 
litigants by establishing administrative courts in all governorates of the Kingdom? Did 
the Jordanian administrative legislator achieve the advantage of specialization for the 
judges of the Administrative Court and the Supreme Administrative Court?
Hence, and in this study, the analytical approach to analysing all the texts of the 
legislation related to the subject of this research will be followed in addition to 
following the practical applied approach by presenting the annual reports of the 
situations of the regular courts, the administrative judiciary and the public prosecutor 
for the year 2020 including the attachment of tables and figures that support the 
theoretical aspect as well as to identify their contents, connotations, and goals in 

5
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
addition to criticizing the legal texts contained in the Jordanian Administrative 
Judicial Law, comment on them, explain the differences between them and the 
jurisprudence, and know the strengths and weaknesses of the various trends and the 
extent of taking them in addition to highlighting the critical side of the researcher as 
the research required the use of several curricula for its divergent nature between the 
texts of legislation, practical applications, opinions and jurisprudence trends.9
2. THE MECHANISM OF ACTION OF THE SUPREME 
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT
The Supreme Administrative Court has independence, that is, independence from 
the executive authority since the administrative judicial authorities are allocated to 
adjudicate administrative disputes that do not mean that they are affiliated with 
the executive authority as a party to the dispute. In fact, adopting this subordination 
means that the orders of the administrative court will not bind the executive authority 
in anything.10
Therefore, the legal question that arises is: What is the mechanism of action of the 
Supreme Administrative Court?
To answer this legal question, we must refer to article (3) of the Jordanian 
Administrative Judicial Law which provided that: “The establishment of a judiciary 
called the administrative judiciary to be formed from the Administrative Court and the 
Supreme Administrative Court”.11
Hence, the judicial jurisdiction regulates two very important issues, i.e., the issue 
of distributing jurisdiction between the ordinary and administrative judiciary and 
the issue of distributing jurisdiction between the same administrative judiciary in 
countries whose competencies are distributed in entertaining administrative disputes 
over more than one administrative authority.12
Therefore, the petitioner must submit his/its claim before competent judicial authority 
in terms of function and venue to entertain his/its case while the judicial authority 
must actually be fulfilled that it is specialized to entertain the dispute presented to it 
and to adjudicate the same or not.13
2.1. FORMING THE SUPREME ADMINISTRATIVE COURT
The Supreme Administrative Court was created under the Jordanian Administrative 
Judicial Law. In fact, and with the creation of that authority, the litigation before the 
9	
See B. Malkawi, The Scientific Origins of Writing Legal Research PhD and Master’s 
Theses, Bar Association Research Judicial Institute Research and Student Research 
Conferences and Seminars, Dar Wael for Publishing and Distribution, 2008.
10	
See A. Boudiaf, Jurisdiction to consider the annulment case between the State 
Council and the Administrative Courts in France, The Arab Organization for Administrative 
Development Conference, 2008; N. Bounas, The Privacy of Administrative Judicial 
Procedures in Algeria, Tunisia, and Egypt, PhD Thesis, Haj Lakhder University, 2015.
11	
See Article 3 of the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law.
12	
See M. Bonaventure, Administrative Justice in Algeria, PhD Theses, University of 
Algiers, 1976.
13	
See A. Abo Omrane, Resolving the problems of conflict of jurisdiction between the 
administrative judiciary and the ordinary judiciary in the Algerian legal system. Journal of 
politics and law Notebooks 5(8) pp.123–134.

6
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
administrative courts became in two levels through the establishment of a court called 
the Supreme Administrative Court which will be based in Amman to be composed of a 
president and a number of judges while the head of the Supreme Administrative Court 
is appointed under a resolution issued by the Council associated with the Royal Will. 
Further, that the president of the Supreme Administrative Court will be of the rank and 
salary of the President of the Court of Cassation and that the judge therein will be of 
the rank and salary of the judge of the Court of Cassation.14
Hence, it is clear to us that the Supreme Administrative Court and the administrative 
courts that were previously referred to are consisting of a president and judges acting 
jointly as the administrative judiciary often depends on legal opinions established as it 
is not the applied judiciary as is the case with the ordinary judiciary for which the reason 
for the difference is due to the role of both the ordinary judge and administrative 
judge. In fact, the legislator, in the field of private law, has discussed almost all 
matters and laid down a large group of rulings regulating various relationships and 
governs many facts that is unlike the administrative judge who may face a dispute 
without a text that is governed by the law which requires establishing a legal opinion 
to resolve the dispute before him. In fact, the administrative law, as being one of the 
branches of public law, its upbringing is attributed to the judiciary and it was for the 
jurisprudence of the French administrative judiciary that the administrative law have 
found its existence and development.15
Actually, the work of the Supreme Administrative Court in 2020 witnessed an increase 
in the number of cases received by it by 12% compared to 2019, where the number 
of cases received by the court during the year reached (334) cases and that the 
percentage of cases filed against ministries reached 25.7% out of the total newly 
received cases. Yet, the details of the tribunals issuing the administrative orders, 
the subject matter of the cases received by the court during the year 2020 were as 
follows:16
14	
See Article 22 of the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law.
15	
See Boudiaf, supra note 10, p. 251.
16	
See <http://www.jc.jo/storage/app/uploads/
public/618/29c/263/61829c2639b78769429488.pdf> [accessed 27 March 2022].

ϴϲ
ϱϳ
ϱϰ
ϯϵ
ϭϵ
ϭϰ
ϭϯ
ϭϭ
ϵ
ϵ
ϴ
ϲ
ϱ
ϰ
Figure 1 The Supreme 
Administrative Court works 
based on the authority 
issuing the administrative 
decision of 2020.16

7
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
In fact, it is noted from Figure 1 that the most appeals presented in 2020 according 
to the authority issuing the administrative order are from ministries, unions, social 
security and universities. Actually, this percentage is logical as it represents the largest 
segment in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan as most of the citizens dealings are with 
the ministries, vocational unions and social security in addition to the administrative 
orders issued by universities, whether they are related to employees or students.
2.1. THE COMPETENCE OF THE SUPREME ADMINISTRATIVE 
COURT
The Jordanian Administrative Judicial Law has determined the competencies of the 
Supreme Administrative Court whereby article (25) of the Jordanian Administrative 
Judicial Law provided that: “The competence of the Supreme Administrative Court 
is to entertain the appeals submitted in all the orders issued by the Administrative 
Court in a final way provided that it considers the appeals submitted to it in terms of 
objective and legal aspects”.17
In fact, the Jordanian Supreme Administrative Court did, in its order No. 53/2020 
issued on 4 April 2020, judge that: “And since the Supreme Administrative Court is 
competent, in accordance with the provisions of article (25) of the Administrative 
Judicial Law, to entertain the appeals that are submitted to it in all final orders issued 
by the Administrative Court to be considered from the objective and legal aspects”.18
Yet, and if a dispute over the jurisdiction occurred in any case between the 
administrative court and another court, whether positive or negative, then the 
reference is appointed to consider that case from a judicial tribunal formed by the 
president of the Court of Cassation as the president and membership of the president 
of the Supreme Administrative Court in addition to two judges from the Court of 
Cassation to be named by the Council and a judge from the Supreme Administrative 
Court to be nominated by its president.19
Actually, it is noted in this regard that the administrative legislator, and in the formation, 
adopted that is proportional to the adequate representation between the Supreme 
Administrative Court on the one hand and the Court of Cassation on the other as they 
are at the top of the ordinary and administrative judiciaries which is in line with the 
idea of duality of judicial that requires the formation of duplication of representation at 
the level of the Special Judicial Authority. In fact, this is in addition to that it adds to the 
dispute court of its refereeing nature. Yet, it must be noted that equal representation 
does not mean the search for balance because this balance is not achieved at all as it 
is under the majority of belonging to a specific judicial party, which is an established 
matter, that the court of dispute is in need to a president to run its affairs, i.e. the 
president of the Court of Cassation. Further, that the equal representation that the 
legislator wished to achieve is not the purpose of strengthening the court’s role in 
preserving the rules of jurisdiction and ensuring its neutrality and objectivity as those 
rules are originally achieved. Moreover, that it is neither possible nor reasonable for the 
dispute court to be directed with their great experience and their broad viewing behind 
their affiliation when adjudicating the cases presented to them. Yet, this is in addition 
to the number of cases has become continuous which increases the burdens on the 
17	
See Article 25 of the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law.
18	
See The Jordanian Supreme Administrative Court, No. 53/2020, 4 March 2020.
19	
See Article 35 of the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law.

8
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
courts to become of the desire to leave the excessive burden that represents a breadth 
for adjudication to the other judiciary instead of having the control over the case.20
Actually, in this regard, the Court of Cassation did, in its order No. 7462/2019, as being 
the court competent in applications for the appointment of the reference, issued on 
January 27, 2020, order to the effect that: “In this regard, we find that the party that 
issued the appealed decision sought to be rescinded is Philadelphia University which 
is a private university but not one of the persons of the public law, and since this is the 
case, then the decisions issued by it are not considered final administrative decisions 
in the sense intended in article (5/7) of the Administrative Judicial Law No. (27) of 2014 
for which the party specialized functionally to consider the case filed by the plaintiff 
and the adjudication is the ordinary judiciary but not the administrative judiciary”.21
Further, the same court ruled in its order No. 5552/2019 issued on October 1, 2019 
to the effect that: “Before discussing the request, we find that the request to appoint 
the reference must be submitted to the Court of Cassation in accordance with the text 
of article (1/35/B) of the Civil Procedures Law and not to its president directly which 
matter has been established by the judicial opinions of the Court of Cassation. Hence, 
and in the present case, we find that this request related to the appointment of the 
reference was submitted to the president of the Court of Cassation but not to the Court 
of Cassation, with which it becomes that this request requires dismissal in form”.22
Actually, it is noted that the inclusion of such a text in the Jordanian Administrative 
Judicial Law indicates with no doubt that the Jordanian administrative legislator 
adopted dual judicial system, despite that the constitutional court did consider, in its 
aforementioned judgment set in this research, that the administrative judiciary is an 
integral part of the ordinary judiciary.
As for the adjudication level, the court adjudicated (311) administrative orders while 
the following table shows the classification of these orders, their number, and the 
reason for rescinding.23
In fact, the rulings issued by the court included the cancellation of (28) administrative 
decisions while the following table shows the classification of these decisions and 
their number as well as the reason for the cancellation.24
Hence, the administrative judicial order does not differ from the judicial judgments 
issued before the ordinary courts as it has the power of the thing that is only judged for 
final orders, i.e., the orders that adjudicate the whole dispute or in part of it, whether 
20	
See Boudiaf, supra note10, p.125.
21	
See Cassation of Rights (Special Court) considered a request to appoint reference No. 
5552/2019 (The Pentagonal Commission) 27 January 2020.
22	
See Cassation of Rights (Special Court) considered a request to appoint reference No. 
7462/2019 (The Pentagonal Commission) 1 October 2019.
23	
See note 16, supra.
24	
Ibid.
DISMISSAL 
IN FORM
DISMISSAL 
IN SUBJECT
RESCINDED
RESCINDED 
AND RETURNED
A CASE 
CONCLUDED
TOTAL
5
244
43
17
2
311
1.6%
78.5%
13.8%
5.5%
0.6%
100%
Table 1 Classification of 
administrative orders 
adjudicated by the Supreme 
Administrative Court.

9
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
this order is a primary or final, Yet, and as for the orders that do not adjudicate the 
subject matter of the dispute, then this power is not established.25
Actually, it is noted from Tables 1 and 2 that the role of the Supreme Administrative 
Court is no longer a (dismissal) court that dismisses the case in form, as the term 
(dismissal court) was (previously) assigned to the Jordanian High Court of Justice. In 
fact, this term was used among the courts, the judiciary and the lawyers due to the 
court’s extreme accuracy practiced in formal matters, such as the matter of powers of 
attorney regarding the outrageous ignorance of the power of attorney or the matter 
of the appeal statements. However, through the statistics shown in the above table, 
it is shown to us that the number of cases entertained by the Administrative Court is 
a matter in relation to an objective reason (cancellation of the administrative decision 
complained of being contrary to the law) or the rescinding of the Administrative Court’s 
order in a part amounting to (20) cases for objective reason and the rescinding of the 
Administrative Court’s order in a specific part while only (8) cases were dismissed for 
a formal reason.
In general, the ratio of adjudication for cases brought to the court amounted to 93.1% 
and that the percentage of adjudication to the total amounted to 91.5%. Yet, and as 
for the current level pending, it amounted to (29) cases only. Moreover, the following 
figure shows the change in the number of the newly received, concluded and pending 
cases before the Supreme Administrative Court in 2020 compared to 2019.26
25	
See C. Debbasch, J. Claude, Administrative litigation, RICCI, Dalloz, 2001.
26	
See note 16, supra.
NUMBER 
OF CASES
THE REASON FOR CANCELLATION
8
A formal reason (related to the issuance of the decision by a non-
competent party, a non-final decision, a confirmatory decision).
13
An objective reason (cancellation of the administrative decision 
complained of being contrary to the law)
7
Rescinding the Administrative Court’s order in a specific part and 
canceling the administration’s decision or rescinding it in its entirety
Total
28
Table 2 The reason 
for cancelling the 
administrative decisions 
adjudicated by the Supreme 
Administrative Court.
Figure 2 Change in the 
number of newly received, 
concluded and pending 
cases before the Supreme 
Administrative Court in 
2020 compared to 2019.

10
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
In fact, by referring to Figure 2, then it is noted that the rate of conclusion to the newly 
received cases of the Supreme Administrative Court in 2020 amounted to 93.1%, 
while the rate of conclusion to the total amounted to 91.5%. Yet, and as for the level 
of the currently pending, then it amounted to (29) cases only compared to 2019 
whereby it is noted that the newly received cases to the Supreme Administrative Court 
in 2020 were greater than the newly received cases to the Supreme Administrative 
Court for the year 2019 which indicates the return of confidence in the administrative 
courts. In fact, although the conclusion rate was higher in 2019 compared to 2020, 
although the number pending of the Supreme Administrative Court, as we indicated, 
was greater in 2020.27
In fact, in order for the judicial orders to be considered valid, then the procedures that 
preceded and being contemporaneous with their issuance must be correct whereby 
the judicial order must pass through several stages, beginning with the stage of 
confidential deliberation before issuing it with all its procedures, until its utterance 
is recited and a copy of it is filed in accordance with the procedures established by 
the applicable law in each country. Further, the competent administrative court must 
pronounce the order in the administrative case in a public session when the order 
is issued either to dismiss the case or to issue an order to cancel the administrative 
decision, whether this cancellation is partial or in its entirety. Yet, and in the event 
that the administrative decision is cancelled, then this will have important and serious 
effects on the cancelled decision as well as the decisions related to it whereby the 
administration must execute the cancellation order, otherwise it will be accountable.28
In addition, the total number of petitions received by the Supreme Administrative 
Court amounted to (19), all of which were concluded. On the other hand, and as for 
the average length of litigation before the court, it amounted to (71) days in (305) 
cases registered and concluded during the year as shown in the following table:29
Hence, it is noted from Table 3 that the Supreme Administrative Court did, during the 
year 2020, conclude (71) cases while the low rate of conclusion is due to the Corona 
pandemic as this pandemic affected the rate of adjudication of cases for which the 
total conclusion rate decreased during the year 2020.30
27	
See note 16, supra.
28	
See A. Al-Ghaweiri, The Administrative Litigation Procedures at the Jordanian High 
Court of Justice A comparative study. Mutah Journal for Research and Studies in Humanities 
and Social Sciences, 6(3) pp.237.
29	
See note 16, supra.
30	
See note 16, supra.
COURT
NUMBER 
OF CASES
THE AVERAGE 
NUMBER OF 
DAYS AT THE 
STAGE THE CASE 
PREPARATION
THE AVERAGE 
NUMBER OF DAYS 
AT THE STAGE OF 
ENTERTAINING 
THE CASE
THE AVERAGE NUMBER 
OF DAYS AT THE STAGE 
OF TYPING, CHECKING 
AND FILING THE 
CONCLUSION
TOTAL
Supreme 
Administrative
305
8
38
25
71
Percentage to 
the total
91%
11.5%
53.6%
34.9%
100%
Table 3 Rate of conclusion 
of cases at the Supreme 
Administrative Court.

11
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
Yet, by going through Figure 3, then this figure shows the rate of newly received, 
concluded and pending cases with the Administrative Court during the years (2017, 
2018, 2019, and 2020) whereby it is noted that the highest rate of the pending, 
concluded and newly received of cases was in 2018 while it was in 2020 that the 
same hit the second place in terms of the conclusion and the third place in terms of 
the newly received.3132
3. THE MECHANISM OF ACTION OF THE 
ADMINISTRATIVE COURT
This court finds its foundation or roots in what was known as the High Court of Justice 
which the constitutional legislator mandated to establish pursuant to article (100) 
of the Jordanian Constitution of 1952. In fact, the Court of Cassation was convened 
as a High Court of Justice under article (10) of the Law for the Formation of Ordinary 
Courts of 1952.33
Yet, the legal question that arises in the context of this study is: What is the mechanism 
of action of the Administrative Court?
To answer this question, it is noted that the Administrative Court has become 
independent, that is, independent from the executive authority since the specialization 
of the administrative judicial authorities in adjudicating administrative disputes does 
not mean that they are subordinate to the executive authority as a party to the dispute 
for which adopting this dependency means that the orders of the Administrative 
Court will not oblige the executive authority in anything.34
In fact, article (3) of the Jordanian Administrative Judicial Law which provided that: 
“The establishment of a judiciary called the administrative judiciary to be formed from 
the Administrative Court and the Supreme Administrative Court”.35
31	
Ibid.
32	
Ibid. 
33	
See N. Ajarmeh, Developments in the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law. Journal 
of Kuwait International Law School 7(2) pp.279–316.
34	
See Boudiaf, supra note 10, p. 236.
35	
See Article 3 of the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law.
Figure 3 Change in the 
number of newly received, 
concluded and pending 
cases at the Supreme 
Administrative Court for 
the years (2017–2020).31

12
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
3.1. FORMATION OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE COURT
Administrative courts were created pursuant to the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary 
Law, and with the introduction of that authority, litigation before the Administrative 
Courts turned to be on two levels for which an administrative court was established in 
Amman while it is permissible, with the approval of its president, to hold its sessions 
anywhere in the Kingdom. Further, this court is constituted of a president and a 
number of judges being of not less than the second category. In addition, it shall be 
conducted by one or more of tribunals to be formed by its president each constituted 
at least of a president and two members. Yet, and if the president of the court is not 
contributing in any of its tribunals, then it shall be presided over by the judge being of 
the highest category or the senior in the same.36
However, the legal question that arises in this study is: Does the Jordanian 
administrative legislator take into account the principle of bringing justice closer to 
the litigants through the establishment of administrative courts in all governorates 
of the Kingdom?
In fact, and in order to answer this question, we must refer to the provisions of the 
Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law. Accordingly, it is noted that it is possible 
to hold sessions of the Administrative Court in any other place in the Hashemite 
Kingdom of Jordan with the approval of the president of the Court. However, we tend 
to believe as others in that the same does not stand to be a substitute for establishing 
administrative courts in the governorates of the Kingdom since the permissibility of 
convening, by a decision of the president, of the court differs from the necessity of 
establishing by providing for the same in the law.37
Yet, and undoubtedly, the administrative legislator did not observe the principle of 
bringing justice closer to the litigants. Actually, the litigant alone bears the burden of 
moving from the farthest region in the Kingdom until he reaches the capital, Amman, 
to file the case resulting in burdens and expenses.38
3.2. JURISDICTION OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE COURT
The Jordanian legislator, and in the Administrative Judiciary Law, specified the 
jurisdiction of the Administrative Court whereby the Administrative Court is exclusively 
competent to hear all appeals related to final administrative decisions, including 
appeals made against the results of the elections of the boards of bodies of chambers 
of industry and commerce, trade unions, associations and clubs registered in the 
Kingdom as well as the electoral appeals that take place according to the laws and 
regulations in force unless there is a provision in another law to the effect of vesting 
this jurisdiction unto another court. Further, the same includes the appeals submitted 
by the concerned parties regarding the final administrative decisions related to the 
appointment to public positions, promotion, transfer, assignment, secondment, 
commissioning, confirmation in service or classification as well as the appeals of public 
officials related to the annulment of final administrative decisions concerned with the 
termination of their services or their suspension from work in addition to the public 
officials’ appeals related to the annulment of final decisions issued against them by 
36	
See Article (4) of the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law.
37	
Ibid.
38	
See Boudiaf, supra note 10, p. 228.

13
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
the disciplinary authorities other than the appeals related to salaries, allowances, 
bonuses, annual increases and pension rights due to public officials, the retirees of 
them or their heirs according to the legislations in force.39
In fact, it is noted that the jurisdiction of the Administrative Court was specified 
exclusively with regard to appeals related to public office. Yet, and although the 
Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law has made good strides in relation to the 
jurisdiction of the Administrative Court, it has not caused the Administrative Court to 
be of the general jurisdiction to entertain all administrative disputes as it is still of a 
limited jurisdiction while the ordinary courts remain the ones with general jurisdiction 
to hear administrative disputes related to administrative contracts which matter 
affects the advantage of having an independent administrative court because the 
ordinary courts apply the Jordanian Civil Law while the Administrative Court applies the 
Administrative Law. In fact, since the disputes are of a single nature (administrative), 
then they must be governed by unified administrative rules and procedures. Yet, this 
is in addition to having the text of the aforementioned article been free from providing 
for disputes related to administrative contracts as the majority of countries that 
adopt the administrative judiciary system include disputes related to administrative 
contracts within the jurisdiction of the administrative judiciary.40
Hence, and in application of this, the Jordanian Administrative Court, and in its order 
No. 434/2021 issued on February 28, 2022, ruled to the effect that: “In this regard, 
our court finds that the Administrative Court is exclusively competent to entertain all 
appeals related to final administrative decisions”.41
However, the legal question that arises in the context of this study is: Has the 
Jordanian administrative legislator achieved the advantage of specialization for the 
judges of the Administrative Court and the Supreme Administrative Court?
Actually, and in order to answer this question, it is noted that the Jordanian 
legislator, in the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law, has specified the cases 
that are exclusively reserved for the administrative judiciary and that every dispute 
falling out of those specific cases exclusively, and even if the nature of the dispute 
is purely administrative, then the competence to entertain these cases falls within 
the competence of the ordinary judicial authorities. In fact, this is what we clearly 
notice in disputes related to administrative contracts as the Jordanian legislator 
did not stipulate that these disputes be included in the cases stipulated exclusively 
for entertainment by the administrative judiciary. Hence, we call on the Jordanian 
legislator, in the earliest amendment to the aforementioned law, to include all disputes 
related to administrative contracts within the jurisdiction of the administrative 
judiciary in order to unify the orders.
Yet, by referring to the text of article (40) of the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law, 
it provided that: “Without prejudice to the provisions of the Administrative Judiciary 
Law, judges of the Administrative Judicial Courts shall be subject to … the legal 
provisions and rules that apply to ordinary judges, including the provisions of the Law 
on the Independence of the Judiciary”.42
39	
See Article 5 of the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law.
40	
See N. Al-Johari, A. Al-Hamadnah, The Administrative Litigation Procedures Manual 
based on Administrative Judiciary Law No. 27 Of 2014, House of Culture for Publishing and 
Distribution, 2016.
41	
See The Jordanian Administrative Court, 434/2021, 28 February 2022.
42	
See Article 40 of the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law.

14
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
It is noticeable also in this regard that this text did not achieve the advantage of 
specialization for the judges of the administrative judiciary courts as the Judicial 
Council is given the right to transfer the administrative judge to the ordinary courts 
and vice versa which leads to the instability of these judges in their work in addition 
to leading to the absence of a specialized administrative judiciary for which the 
ordinary judges apply the rules of the Private Law to the disputes entertained by them 
considering the individuals and administration at an equal level in contrast to the 
specialized administrative judge who believes that administration is not equal in its 
litigation with individuals because the two parties to the dispute are not equal. Further, 
and also regarding the issues of evidence, then they are different in Administrative 
Law than in Civil Law. On the other hand, administrative disputes in the Jordanian 
Administrative Judiciary Law are characterized by a set of provisions that make them 
different from civil litigations including that the administrative legislator imposed 
therein the submission of case petition and representation through a lawyer who has 
been practicing the legal profession for a period of not less than five years or worked 
in a judicial position for a similar period before his practice of law at the level of the 
judiciary of the first category, i.e. at the level of administrative courts, and a fortiori 
at the level of the Supreme Administrative Court being the top of the hierarchy of the 
administrative judiciary in Jordan. In fact, imposing the obligation to be represented 
by a lawyer in administrative disputes is based on strong and reasonable justifications 
in terms of the positive role of the lawyer in the administrative dispute and his 
assistance to the judge in order to reach a fair judgment, especially in the face of 
what distinguishes the administrative law from the advantage of non-legalization on 
the one hand, and the modernity of the administrative law on the other.43
As for the adjudication of cases, then the number of cases received by the 
Administrative Court during the year amounted to (590) cases, i.e., an increase of 7% 
compared to 2019, including (534) cases filed by natural persons, (54) cases filed by 
companies and institutions and (2) cases by government agencies. Yet, the Figure 4 
shows the classification of cases registered with the Administrative Court in terms of 
the claimant.44 45
43	
See A. Boudiaf, The Necessity of a Lawyer in Administrative Disputes: Its Justifications 
and Its Impact on the Right to Litigation. Journal of Fiqh and Law 1(35) pp.37–42.
44	
See note 16, supra.
45	
See note 16, supra.
Figure 4 The works of 
the Administrative Court 
according to the party 
submitting the case.45

15
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
Actually, the process of determining the jurisdiction is based on a specific criterion that 
enables the judicial authorities adjudicating the dispute in question to determine the 
judicial authority that has jurisdiction to adjudicate the subject matter of the dispute.46
In fact, the Administrative Court adjudicated a total of (492) cases where the orders 
issued were as the Table 4 shows:4748
Therefore, we find that the jurisdiction of the administrative courts must be organized 
on a regional geographical basis considering that the rules of local jurisdiction are 
represented in the necessity of spreading administrative courts throughout the 
country in order to bring the judiciary closer to the citizens and to facilitate litigation 
by bringing the administrative courts closer to the place of administrative disputes.49
Accordingly, it can be said that the Jordanian legislator must develop a law of 
judicial independence for the administrative judiciary which has a judicial council 
composed of administrative judges as well as the introduction of a law to organize 
administrative courts stipulating the establishment of a supreme administrative 
court, the establishment of administrative courts of appeal in the governorates of 
the Kingdom and the establishment of first administrative courts all through the 
Kingdom. Yet, article (4/A) of the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law provides for 
the possibility of holding sessions for the Administrative Court in any other place in 
the Kingdom, subject to the approval of the President of the Court, the possibility of 
holding the court in another place in the Kingdom is not considered as a substitute 
for the establishment of courts in the regions. In fact, the permissibility of convening, 
by a decision of the president of the competent court, differs from the necessity of 
establishing and expressly providing for in the law as the movement between the 
judicial and advisory bodies of the administrative judiciary helps in the professional 
and technical training of the members of this judiciary making them better able to 
understand the requirements of the activity of the public administration, reconcile 
these requirements and protect the rights and freedoms of individuals.50
As for the adjudication of judicial orders, then the ratio of adjudication to newly 
received court cases amounted to 83.4%. Yet, the Figure 5 shows the change in the 
46	
See A. La’akoun, The specific jurisdiction of administrative courts in Algeria between 
the legislative text and judicial action. Journal of Law and Human Sciences 11(3) pp.119–
132. 
47	
See note 16, supra.
48	
See note 16, supra.
49	
See S. Seoudi, M. Atailyeh, The Criteria for determining the jurisdiction of administrative 
courts in the Algerian judiciary, Master’s Thesis, University of 8 May 1945, 2013.
50	
See T. Al-Billeh, The Extent to which the Rules of Incompetency, Displacement and 
Disqualification Apply to the Judges of the Administrative Judiciary Courts in Jordan and 
France: A Comparative Study. Dirasat: Shari’a and Law Sciences 47(3) pp. 91–122.
DISMISSAL 
IN FORM
DISMISSAL 
IN SUBJECT
ACCEPTANCE OF THE APPEAL 
AND ANNULMENT OF THE 
ADMINISTRATIVE DECISION
DROPPING
CONSIDERING 
THE CASE CLOSED
TOTAL
141
187
104
53
7
492
29%
38%
21%
11%
1%
100%
Table 4 Classification of 
administrative orders 
adjudicated by the 
Administrative Court.48

16
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
number of newly received, concluded and pending cases before the Administrative 
Court in 2020 compared to 2019.51
Further, the average duration of litigation before the Administrative Court in (289) 
cases that were registered and concluded during the year was (168) days as shown 
in the Table 5:52
4. THE MECHANISM OF ACTION OF THE 
ADMINISTRATIVE PUBLIC PROSECUTION
The representation of the Administrative Public Prosecution for the people of the 
Public Administration does not prevent it from appointing a lawyer to act on its behalf 
before the administrative courts in accordance with the provisions of article (37/B) of 
the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law. Yet, and as for the rights and duties of the 
chief of the Administrative Public Prosecution and his assistants, then they are subject 
to the provisions and rules that apply to the ordinary judiciary including the provisions 
of the Law on the Independence of the Judiciary in accordance with the provisions of 
article (40) of the same law.53
Hence, the legal question that arises in the context of this study is: What is the 
mechanism of work of the Administrative Public Prosecution?
In fact, and in order to answer this question, it should be noted that “an administrative 
public prosecution is established in the administrative judiciary consisting of a 
51	
See note 16, supra.
52	
See note 16, supra.
53	
See Article 40 of the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law.

Ϭ
ϭϬϬ
ϮϬϬ
ϯϬϬ
ϰϬϬ
ϱϬϬ
ϲϬϬ
ϳϬϬ
EĞǁůǇZĞĐĞŝǀĞĚ
ŽŶĐůƵĚĞĚ
ĂƌƌŝĞĚĨŽƌǁĂƌĚ
ǇĞĂƌϮϬϭϵ
ǇĞĂƌϮϬϮϬ
Figure 5 Change in 
the number of newly 
received, concluded and 
pending cases before the 
Administrative Court in 
2020 compared to 2019.
Table 5 The rate of 
adjudication of cases 
before the Administrative 
Court.52
THE COURT
NUMBER 
OF 
CASES
THE AVERAGE 
NUMBER OF DAYS 
AT THE STAGE OF 
PREPARATION OF 
THE CASE
THE AVERAGE 
NUMBER OF DAYS 
AT THE STAGE OF 
ENTERTAINING 
THE CASE
THE AVERAGE NUMBER 
OF DAYS AT THE STAGE 
OF TYPING, CHECKING 
AND FILING THE 
CONCLUSION
TOTAL
Administrative Court
289
99
62%
8
168
Percentage of the total
49%
58.8%
36.8%
4.4
100%

17
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
president and two assistants, none of whom is of a category less than the third. 
Further, that the chief of the administrative public prosecution and his assistants shall 
be appointed by a decision of the Council”. In fact, the chief of the Administrative 
Public Prosecution or whom he authorizes to that effect of his assistants does 
represent the persons of the public administration before the Supreme Administrative 
Court and the Administrative Court in the case and in all its procedures up to the last 
stage of the same. Yet, the Chief of Staff, and based on the request of the Chief of 
the Administrative Public Prosecution, may assign one or more of the military judges 
whose category is not less than Major to act as his assistant in cases in which the 
Armed Forces are a party. However, and at any time, termination of the mandate of 
the aforementioned judge and his replacement by another may be made in the same 
way. In addition, if the parties to the case are persons of the public administration, 
then the case shall be entertained by reviewing by the court after receiving the reply 
suit from the respondent party after which it shall issue its judgment according to the 
rules. Hence, and in application of that, the Jordanian Administrative Court ruled that: 
“The chief of the Administrative Public Prosecution or whoever is authorized by him 
in writing shall represent the public administration persons before the Administrative 
Court in the case up to its last stage pursuant to the provisions of Article (37/A) of the 
Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law”.54
However, there are several other legal questions that may be raised in the future, 
the most important of which are: What is meant by the independence of the 
administrative judiciary from the ordinary (regular) judiciary? What is the importance 
of the independence of the administrative judiciary from the ordinary (regular) 
judiciary?
Hence, and in order to answer these questions, it must be noted that there is an 
urgent need to cancel the text of article (40) of the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary 
Law and to introduce a law of judicial independence for the administrative judiciary so 
that the legal provisions and rules that apply to ordinary judges may not all apply to 
administrative judges due to the different in nature of the ordinary and administrative 
judiciary. In fact, what supports our position in this study is the trend of the Jordanian 
Administrative Judiciary Law itself in article (2) of the definitions which defined the 
law as being: “the law of the independence of the judiciary or any law that substitutes 
it” which text implicitly calls for the need to create a judicial independence law for the 
administrative judiciary.
Therefore, it is necessary to lay the foundations for the dual judiciary system in 
Jordan, given that the distinguishing feature of the dual judicial system is that the 
administrative judiciary is independent from the ordinary judiciary each having its 
own courts of several types and levels headed each by a higher court. In fact, to 
provide for the independence and distinguishing between the administrative judiciary 
party and that of the ordinary judiciary, then it is necessary to achieve the advantage 
of specialization as administrative disputes are of a different nature from that of civil 
and criminal disputes which matter may be met through the presence of specialized 
judges who are independent from the side of the ordinary judiciary and are free from 
the application of the provisions of civil law in order to achieve a balance between 
the public interest and the rights of individuals. In fact, the ordinary judges apply the 
rules of the Private Law deals to the disputes that they entertain while they look at 
54	
See Administrative No. 390/2015, The Pentagonal Commission, 7 February 2016), 
Jordanian Administrative Court.

18
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
individuals and the administration equally but the specialized administrative judge 
believes that the administration is not equal in its litigation with individuals because 
the two parties to the dispute are not equal. Hence, the legal provisions and rules 
that apply to ordinary judges may not all apply to administrative judges because 
the nature of the ordinary (regular) judiciary differs from that of the administrative 
judiciary and given that the administrative judiciary is a judiciary of legitimacy and a 
guardian of the freedom of individuals.55 
Actually, the appeals submitted by the Public Prosecution before the Supreme 
Administrative Court amounted to a total of (55) appeals as shown in the Table 6:56
In fact, the objective criterion is considered a criterion to be relied upon in cases 
where the administration is a party to the dispute. Therefore, no person can be held 
accountable without referring to the actions and activities issued by him through 
which the jurisdiction of administrative courts is determined in order to extend the 
judicial control.57
Further, during the year, the Administrative Public Prosecution pleaded before the 
Administrative Court in (184) cases as shown in the following table:58
In fact, based on Table 7, it is noted from that the Administrative Public Prosecution 
has a major role in representing the people of the Public Administration. Yet, this 
representation does not prevent the Administrative Public Prosecution from appointing 
a lawyer to act on its behalf before the administrative courts as stipulated in article 
(3/E) of the State Case Management Law which states that: The public attorney, with 
the approval of the Council and at the request of any of the state’s departments, 
may authorize, in writing, any of the Jordanian lawyers to conduct the lawsuits of 
that department before the courts or internal arbitral tribunals when that department 
55	
See T. Al-Billeh, Approaches towards the Independency of the Administrative System 
of the Administrative Judiciary from the Administrative System of the Ordinary Judiciary 
(Justice) in Jordan (Applied Study for the Provisions of the Jordanian & French Legislation 
and Judiciary). Dirasat: Shari’a and Law Sciences 47 (1), pp.503–538.
56	
See note 13, supra.
57	
See M. Al-Saghir, The Administrative Contracts, Dar Al-Uloom for Publishing and 
Distribution, 2005.
58	
See note 16, supra.
NUMBER 
OF CASES 
RECEIVED
NUMBER OF CASSATION CASES 
(RULED FOR THE BENEFIT OF 
THE PUBLIC PROSECUTION)
NUMBER OF CASES DISMISSED 
IN SUBJECT (RULED AGAINST 
THE PUBLIC PROSECUTION)
55
9
26
Table 6 Appeals submitted 
by the Public Prosecution 
to the Supreme 
Administrative Court.
THE AGENDA OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE PUBLIC 
PROSECUTION BEFORE THE ADMINISTRATIVE COURT
THE CONCLUDED CASE BASED ON THE MANNER 
OF THE SAME
CARRIED 
FORWARD 
FROM 
2019
NEWLY 
RECEIVED 
CASES 
DURING 
2020
TOTAL 
CARRIED 
FORWARD 
(PENDING)
CONCL­
UDED 
CASES
CURRENT 
PENDING
CANCEL­
LATION 
OF THE 
ADMINI­
STRATIVE 
DECISION
DISMIS­
SAL OF 
THE 
CASE
DROP­
PING 
THE 
CASE
CONSI­DERING 
THE CASE 
TERMINATED 
AND 
IRRELEVANT
96
289
385
249
136
55
156
31
7
Table 7 The agenda of 
the Administrative Public 
Prosecution before the 
Administrative Court.

19
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
shall be committed to pay the attorney fees agreed upon provided that he shall not be 
an attorney in a pending litigation made against the department.59
5. CONCLUSION
The judicial jurisdiction regulates two very important issues, namely the issue of 
the distribution of jurisdiction between the two bodies of the ordinary judiciary and 
the administrative judiciary and the issue of the distribution of jurisdiction among 
the administrative judiciary itself in countries that distribute their competences in 
entertaining administrative disputes to more than one administrative authority.
Therefore, a standard must be set that defines the jurisdiction of the administrative 
judicial authorities in countries that distribute jurisdiction over administrative disputes 
to more than one judicial authority in order to identify the ordinary judicial authorities 
that enjoy general jurisdiction in hearing some administrative disputes and to identify 
the administrative judicial authorities whose jurisdiction is defined by virtue of law in 
addition to comparing the litigation procedures that take place before the ordinary 
courts with the procedures that take place before the administrative courts.
In fact, it would have been more appropriate for the Jordanian constitutional 
legislator to amend the text of article (100) of the Jordanian Constitution by adding 
the phrase establishing (administrative courts of first instance in all governorates of 
the Kingdom, administrative courts of appeal and a supreme administrative court) 
instead of the phrase (administrative judiciary of two levels). Further, we also hope 
that the Jordanian administrative legislator amend the Administrative Judiciary Law 
and stipulate at the creation of administrative courts of first instance in all courts of 
first instance in the Kingdom as well as the creation of three administrative courts of 
appeal in the governorates of Amman, Irbid and Ma’an.
In fact, it is noted that the most appeals filed in 2020 according to the authority 
issuing the administrative decision are the ministries, trade unions, social security and 
universities which percentage is reasonable as it represents the largest segment in the 
Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan as most of the citizens’ dealings are with the ministries, 
trade unions and social security in addition to the administrative decisions issued by 
universities, whether related to employees or students.
Further, that the role of the Supreme Administrative Court is no longer a (dismissal) 
court that dismisses the case in form, so that the term (dismissal court) was 
(previously) common for the Jordanian High Court of Justice used to dominate which 
term was used among the courts, the judiciary and lawyers due to the severity of 
the court’s accuracy in formal matters, e.g. the issue of powers of attorney regarding 
outrageous ignorance in the power of attorney or the issue of the appeal statements. 
However, and through this study, it becomes clear to us that the number of cases 
entertained by the Administrative Court in subject with regard to an objective reason 
(cancellation of the administrative decision complained of as being contrary to the 
law) or the rescinding of the decision of the Administrative Court amounted to (20) 
cases while only (8) cases were dismissed for a formal reason.
Finally, the Jordanian legislator, and in the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law, 
has defined the cases that fall exclusively within the jurisdiction of the administrative 
judiciary while each dispute falling out of the said cases exclusively set, and even if 
59	
See Article 3(e) of the Jordanian State Cases Administration Law.

20
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
being of a mere administrative nature, then the jurisdiction to entertain the same 
would fall within the jurisdiction of ordinary judiciary parties. In fact, we clearly 
notice this in disputes related to administrative contracts as the Jordanian legislator 
did not provide for the inclusion of these disputes in cases stipulated exclusively for 
entertainment by the administrative judiciary.
COMPETING INTERESTS
The author has no competing interests to declare.
AUTHOR AFFILIATIONS
Tareq Al-Billeh 
 orcid.org/0000-0001-7171-6004 
Applied Science Private University, Jordan
REFERENCES
A. Abo Omrane, Resolving the problems of conflict of jurisdiction between the 
administrative judiciary and the ordinary judiciary in the Algerian legal system. 
Journal of Political and Law Notebooks 5(8) pp.123–134.
A. Al-Ghaweiri, The Administrative Litigation Procedures at the Jordanian High Court 
of Justice A comparative study. Mutah Journal for Research and Studies in 
Humanities and Social Sciences, 6(3) pp.237.
A. Al-Shakhanbeh, Organization of Administrative Courts in Jordanian Legislation, 
Master’s Thesis, Middle East University, 2016.
A. Boudiaf, Jurisdiction to consider the annulment case between the State 
Council and the Administrative Courts in France, The Arab Organization for 
Administrative Development Conference, 2008.
A. Boudiaf, The Necessity of a Lawyer in Administrative Disputes: Its Justifications and 
Its Impact on the Right to Litigation. Journal of Fiqh and Law 1(35) pp.37–42.
A. Boudiaf, The organic standard and its legal problems in the light of the Civil and 
Administrative Procedures Law. Journal of Political and Law Notebooks 3(5) 
pp.9–30.
A. La’akoun, The specific jurisdiction of administrative courts in Algeria between the 
legislative text and judicial action. Journal of Law and Human Sciences 11(3) 
pp.119–132.
A. Shatnawi, Jordanian Administrative Judiciary, Arab Center for Student Services, 
1995.
B. Malkawi, The Scientific Origins of Writing Legal Research PhD and Master’s Theses, 
Bar Association Research Judicial Institute Research and Student Research 
Conferences and Seminars, Dar Wael for Publishing and Distribution, 2008.
C. Debbasch, J. Claude, Administrative litigation, RICCI, Dalloz, 2001.
M. Al-Saghir, The Administrative Contracts, Dar Al-Uloom for Publishing and 
Distribution, 2005.
M. Bonaventure, Administrative Justice in Algeria, PhD Theses, University of Algiers, 
1976.
M. Khalailah, Aspects of the Independence of Administrative Litigation Procedures 
from Civil Case Procedures in Jordanian Law. Dirasat: Shari’a and Law Sciences 
40(1) pp.27–43.
N. Ajarmeh, Developments in the Jordanian Administrative Judiciary Law. Journal of 
Kuwait International Law School 7(2) pp.279–316.

21
Al-Billeh 
International Journal 
for Court Administration 
DOI: 10.36745/ijca.453
TO CITE THIS ARTICLE:
Al-Billeh, Tareq, ‘The 
Situations Related to 
the Functioning of the 
Administrative Judiciary in 
Jordan for the Year 2020: 
A Step Forward’ (2023) 
14(3) International Journal 
for Court Administration 
5. DOI: https://doi.
org/10.36745/ijca.453
Published: 11 December 
2023
COPYRIGHT:
© 2023 The Author(s). 
This is an open-access 
article distributed under 
the terms of the Creative 
Commons Attribution 
4.0 International License 
(CC-BY 4.0), which 
permits unrestricted 
use, distribution, and 
reproduction in any 
medium, provided the 
original author and source 
are credited. See http://
creativecommons.org/
licenses/by/4.0/.
International Journal for 
Court Administration is 
a peer-reviewed open 
access journal published by 
International Association 
for Court Administration.
N. Al-Johari, A. Al-Hamadnah, The Administrative Litigation Procedures Manual 
based on Administrative Judiciary Law No. (27) Of (2014), House of Culture for 
Publishing and Distribution, 2016.
N. Al-Zahra, Specific Jurisdiction between the State Council and the Administrative 
Courts, Master Thesis, Hadj Lakhdar University Batnah, 2012.
N. Bounas, The Privacy of Administrative Judicial Procedures in Algeria, Tunisia, and 
Egypt, PhD Thesis, Haj Lakhder University, 2015.
R. Thabeti, Jurisdictions of Administrative Courts in Algeria, Master Thesis, Akli 
Mohand Olhaj University, 2016.
S. Seoudi, M. Atailyeh, The Criteria for determining the jurisdiction of administrative 
courts in the Algerian judiciary, Master’s Thesis, University of May 08, 1945, 
2013.
T. Al-Billeh, The Extent to which the Rules of Incompetency, Displacement and 
Disqualification Apply to the Judges of the Administrative Judiciary Courts in 
Jordan and France: A Comparative Study. Dirasat: Shari’a and Law Sciences 
47(3) pp. 91–122.
T. Al-Billeh, Approaches towards the Independency of the Administrative System of 
the Administrative Judiciary from the Administrative System of the Ordinary 
Judiciary (Justice) in Jordan (Applied Study for the Provisions of the Jordanian 
& French Legislation and Judiciary). Dirasat: Shari’a and Law Sciences 47 (1), 
pp.503–538.