Die Radiologie
vormals Der Radiologe
Review
Radiologie 2023 · 63 (Suppl 2):S21–S26
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00117-023-01189-6
Accepted: 18 July 2023
Published online: 18 September 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
The green and sustainable
radiology department
Jeﬀrey Mariampillai1 · Andrea Rockall2 · Christine Manuellian · Sara Cartwright ·
Samuel Taylor · Michael Deng · Sarah Sheard
1Hammersmith Hospital, London, UK
2Clinical Chair of Radiology, Department of Cancer and Surgery, Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College
London, London, UK
ScanQRcode&readarticleonline
Abstract
As manmade climate change threatens the health of the planet, it is important that we
understand and address the contribution of healthcare to global emissions. Medical
imaging is a signiﬁcant contributor to overall emissions. This article aims to highlight
key issues and examples of sustainable practices, in order to empower radiologists to
make a change within their department.
Keywords
Sustainability· Greening radiology · Scope 3 · Circular economy · Decarbonising
The health sectors of the United States,
Australia,
England,
and Canada emit
a combined 748 million metric tons of
carbon dioxide annually.
If the health
sectors of these countries were a single
independent nation, they would rank
seventh in the world for greenhouse gas
emissions [1]. Together with all healthcare
sectors, radiology departments need to
change their practices to become more
sustainable.
Healthcare is a polluting
activity, and at the same time, climate
change will have a negative impact on
population health, disproportionately af-
fecting vulnerable groups and therefore
increasing health inequality. Our patients
expectustobeenvironmentallyconscious:
92% of UK patients found it important
for their healthcare systems to operate
more sustainably [2]. To eﬀect change,
the radiology sector needs to understand
the sources of emissions from our activi-
ties and their proportional contributions,
so that our mitigations have meaningful
impact. Joining up policy change at gov-
ernmental or organizational levels with
activity at a local level is one of the great-
est challenges to success.
Radiologists
and all imaging staﬀhold the key—via
changes to the way they work in the
department to using their inﬂuence with
the organizations in which they work and
from whom they purchase equipment.
This article highlights some of the main
ways in which radiology services gener-
ate emissions and discusses worthwhile
evidence-based solutions which will al-
low radiologists to oﬀer more sustainable
services in the future.
Scanner contribution
It is not surprising that the workhorses
of the radiology department, MRI and CT
scanners, account for signiﬁcant carbon
emissions: four MRI and three CT scan-
ners alone were attributed to 4% of one
hospital’s total energy consumption [2, 3].
AstudyfromBasel, Switzerland, notedthat
the energy consumption of a CT scanner
averaging 7904 patients a year was com-
parable to the usage of ﬁve four-person
households. An MRI scanner averaging
4141 patients expends the same energy
as 25.8 four-person households. One third
of the total energy consumption of an MRI
scanner is used for constant helium cool-
ingand head coolingduringthesystem oﬀ
state. Two thirds of the overall energy con-
sumptionofaCTscannerisduringitsidling
state, which is highly energy ineﬃcient
[3]. The study authors noted that eﬃcient
patient scheduling and ﬂow through the
scanner rooms would improve the carbon
Die Radiologie · Suppl 2 · 2023 S21

Review
footprint by increasing the eﬃciency of
room use and reducing energy lost whilst
idle, energy that is not contributing to pa-
tient care. Energy-saving methods such
as low-energy idle and system oﬀstates
during nonproductive stages can reduce
consumption by 25–33%. Innovative en-
ergy-conserving designs such as a power-
savemodecyclestheoperationsofthecold
head compressor when the MRI is not sub-
ject to heat loads during active scanning,
providing an additional 22–28% decrease
in energy consumption [4].
Shortening MRI protocols with artiﬁcial
intelligence algorithms such as the NYU
FastMRI Dataset could result in decreased
energyuseinperformingscansandreduce
the need to install and operate additional
scanners by increasing the throughput of
existing MRI scanners [2].
Optimal scheduling of
investigations
Optimizing logistics with better schedul-
ing of appointments is also an area to
focus on. Virtual clinics, consultations via
telephone, and video conferencing have
recently taken oﬀfollowing the pandemic,
resulting in reduction of the carbon emis-
sions related to travelling to hospitals. The
urology department at St. James Hospi-
tal, Dublin, Ireland, estimated a reduction
of 6.07t of carbon by conducting 72%
of 1016 scheduled consultations via tele-
phone in a 3-month period [5]. Imaging
must be completed within the hospital;
however, coordinating imaging appoint-
ments to coincide with outpatient clinics
has practical, environmental, and ﬁnancial
beneﬁts.
Decision support: getting it right
ﬁrst time
In the same way radiologists justify the
exposure of radiation to the patient they
shouldalsojustifyhowtheirpracticeissus-
tainable. A study evaluating the American
College of Radiology (ACR) Appropriate-
ness Criteria, an evidence-based tool to
aid clinicians in making appropriate imag-
ing requests, identiﬁed that 48% of the
listed patient conditions have other simi-
lar “usually appropriate” imaging modality
choices which have diﬀerent energy con-
sumption levels [6]. Some modalities have
signiﬁcantly lower energy consumption
compared to others: ultrasound trumps
MRI, with 1.15kg of carbon dioxide equiv-
alents (CO2e) compared to 19.72kgof CO2e
per abdominal exam [7]. When devising
protocols and guidelines, the energy con-
sumption of each investigation should be
considered and highlighted to the refer-
ring clinicians, particularly with regards to
recommendations for the frequency of in-
terval imaging or suﬃcient lower-energy
modalities for follow-up imaging. More
research is needed in areas where multi-
ple repeat scans are currently favored: as
patients live longer following successful
treatment, research into appropriate fol-
low-up intervals is an important area for
investigation.
Reporting stations and archiving
data
The energy consumption of reporting sta-
tions may seem trivial when compared
with the energy consumption during ac-
quisition of images; however, reporting
stations left on after working hours at.
St Vincent’s Hospital, Dublin, Ireland, ac-
counted for $7253 per year and CO2 emis-
sions equivalent to the annual emissions
of 10 passenger cars [8]. The University
of Maryland Medical Center in the USA
has shown 76.3% energy and cost savings
(83,866.6kWhand $9225.33, respectively)
simply by shutting down workstations [9].
Shutting down the workstations will also
reducetheenergyconsumptionofheating,
ventilation, andairconditioning(HVAC), as
there are fewer reporting stations gener-
ating heat. Most modern computers have
a standby mode where they will eventu-
ally switch oﬀafter a set number of hours
idling. In a hypothetical scenario where
32 reporting stations switched oﬀafter 1 h
ratherthanidlinginstandbyforthedefault
4hpriortoswitchingoﬀ, energyconsump-
tion savings equivalent to 5 households
or 3.8 passenger cars annually were esti-
mated [10]. This is an example of where
although automation can save some en-
ergy consumption, physically turning oﬀ
appliancesafterusageisfarsuperior. There
is a very small peak in the consumption of
energy when turning on workstations, but
this is considered negligible compared to
the overall savings of switching them oﬀ
[11]. The only limiting factor is the time
wasted in restarting computers; software
for intelligent power management is an
important development and implementa-
tion which would help with this aspect of
power usage.
Data storage is often overlooked when
considering the overall environmental im-
pact of radiology. Data storage in gen-
eral accounts for 2% of the worldwide
consumptionof electricityand contributes
nearly the same amount of CO2 emissions
as the airline industry [12]. As the qual-
ity of imaging increases, so does the size
of the data stored. Data from the Na-
tional Integrated Medical Imaging System
(NIMIS), a centralized archiving system for
most hospitals in Ireland, has shown an
increase from 66MB to 160MB for the av-
erage CT study in the past 11 years [13].
A number of CT images saved are recon-
structions of a single image series, which
occupy a considerable amount of space.
Modern picture archiving and communi-
cation system (PACS) software allows for
multiplanar image reconstruction; there-
fore, only thin axial sections need to be
maintained. As data increases at an expo-
nential rate in the digital era, we should
practice “digital temperance” with a shift
in attitude towards restraint in production,
use, and promotion of digital technologies
whenever possible, ensuring the beneﬁts
outweigh the costs and ﬁnancial or envi-
ronmental impact [14].
Thereis UK governmentadviceand leg-
islationonthelengthof storageof primary
care and hospital records [15]; however,
there is very little advice on the longevity
of data storage from imaging that is rising
to exponential levels, with some reaching
the levels of petabytes. It will be an ethical
and contentious debate in the current set-
ting of litigation and defensive medicine
to bring about the appropriate and timely
erasure of unnecessary imaging.
There
needs to be a public debate concerning
long-term data storage. Patients and car-
ers should be part of the decision-making
process for developing guidance in data
use for public good by way of data dona-
tionforresearch, orforagreementsfordata
destruction after a suitable timeframe.
S22
Die Radiologie · Suppl 2 · 2023

Interventional radiology carbon
footprint
The biggest contributors to the carbon
footprint of interventional radiology (IR)
have been investigated by a few groups.
A study looking at the environmental im-
pact of an IR department in New York,
USA, demonstrated that in the average
week it produced 23,500kg of CO2.
It
would take 389 young trees 10 years to
eliminate this amount of carbon. Almost
half, 49%, of total CO2 production was at-
tributed to HVAC; 57% of HVAC energy
consumption occurred outside scheduled
workinghours, whenfewprocedures were
performed. Theproductionanddeliveryof
single-use surgical instruments accounted
for 41% of the total CO2 production [16].
Reducing the use of HVAC outside nor-
mal operating hours by allowing the cli-
mate control system to drift within a wider
range of temperatures and a reduction in
the number of air changes has been sug-
gested [16, 17]. Previously, it was falsely
assumed that lowering or even turning oﬀ
HVAC and then restarting the system to
the required temperature would require
even more energy than leaving it run-
ning. However, the American Society of
Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Condition-
ing Engineers advocate for a reduction in
use during low-use operating room peri-
ods [17].
Plasticsarealargecomponentofsingle-
use surgical instruments in the IR depart-
ment. There is signiﬁcant environmental
harm caused by both the production and
disposal of plastics. “Reduce, reuse, re-
cycle” is often used when thinking about
the sustainable waste management hier-
archy, and this paradigm can also be ap-
pliedwhenconsideringtheuseofplasticin
healthcare. There is scope for reduction in
the amount of plastic we use, especially in
packaging. Several items in prepackaged
surgical kits are unnecessary: 12 out of
40 disposable items in a prepackaged kit
for tonsil surgery were considered unnec-
essary [18]. Wrapping sterile items using
one-step sterile wrap carries no greater
risk of bacterial contamination than dou-
ble-wrap methods [19]. Reusing equip-
ment is diﬃcult given the risk of infection;
however, some items are still considered
single use even after sterilization mainly
due to hypothetical risks with poor evi-
dence, likely driven by the fear of prion
disease. Most plastics used in healthcare
are often incinerated. Less than 5% of
plastic healthcare waste is recycled in the
UK [18]. It has been suggested that 64%
of operating theatre plastics could be re-
cycled [18]. The barriers to medical plastic
recycling include inadequate facilities or
lack of engagement of staﬀ. Plastics that
are involved with medical waste must also
undergo an additional step of steam ster-
ilization before they can be recycled.
Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust
(ICHNT), a conglomerate of ﬁve hospi-
tals with three imaging departments, car-
ried out an 8-week trial of reusable sterile
gownsforuseduringinterventionalproce-
duresinonehospitalIRdepartmentaspart
of a drive to develop sustainable health-
careprocess. Subsequentﬁndingsdemon-
strated satisfaction in over 91% of staﬀ. It
is estimated that introducing this into all
three imaging departments across ICHNT
hospitals would reduce carbon emissions
by an estimated 234,660kg CO2 per year as
well as resulting in an estimated ﬁnancial
saving of 27,131.
Concepts of circular economy and
sustainability in healthcare
The terms circular economy and sus-
tainability are distinct concepts that are
seemingly inherent in all environments.
For the healthcare sector, the two terms
serve a symbiotic relationship, that is to
adopt a more sustainable approach to
achieve a circular healthcare system. The
goal is to shift from the traditional linear
economic model—extraction of raw ma-
terials and manufacturing into consumer
goods which are later disposed of as
waste when the product reaches its end
of life, which is resource intensive and
wasteful—into a circular (closed-loop)
economic model that aims to minimize
resource consumption and waste gen-
eration. Traditionally, economic growth
is attained through the linear model
[20]. To achieve circular healthcare, the
healthcare sector is required to provide
products that are safe and sustainable by
design, while reducing waste generation
and exposure to harmful chemicals in
its practices [21].
Through early com-
munication and engagement with the
supplier on sustainability agenda, the
healthcare sector could increase its power
of inﬂuence on its supply chain to set out
clear and achievable emission reduction
targets. This would minimize the impact
on the environment by reducing green-
house gas emissions, minimize resource
consumption, and ensure eﬀective waste
stream management programs.
Manufacturingandinstallingnewscan-
nersrequiressubstantialenergy. Afteraset
number of years, hardware needs to be
replaced, but up to 95% of CT and MRI
machine components can be used again
[11]. Refurbishment, where most com-
ponents stay in place, is even more sus-
tainable than recycling decommissioned
equipment. Manufacturers are also de-
signing new scanners with upgradability
in mind. Industry has shown commitment
to sustainable practice: the Medical Imag-
ing and Technology Alliance (MITA) has
produced guidance and standards to help
governmentalorganizationsindeveloping
directives and frameworks for the safe use
ofrefurbishedmedicalimagingequipment
[22]. The refurbishment of medical imag-
ing equipment has been an established
practice for the past 20 years, account-
ing for 580 million USD in 2021 [23]. The
circular economy of scanners is critical to
future sustainability.
Capturing scope 3 emissions
Scope 3 category emissions refer to all
greenhouse gas emissions that are inﬂu-
enced by the activities of the organization
but are not owned or controlled by the
organization [24]. Due to the usage of
contractors in the public sector, the size of
scope 3 emissions is understood to be sub-
stantial compared to direct emissions. In
2019, the carbon footprint of the National
Health Service (NHS) in the UK resulted in
a total of 25 megatons of CO2e, of which
62% came from its supply chain [25]. This
has been conﬁrmed at the local level in
a pilot study conducted at ICHNT. The
study aimed to quantify full scope emis-
sionsfordeliveryofthediagnosticimaging
service that is associated with a CT scan-
ner. The results from the study showed
that scope 3 emissions accounted for 69%
of the total emissions, emphasizing how
Die Radiologie · Suppl 2 · 2023 S23

Review
Table 1
Sustainablepracticesthatcanbe
adoptednow
Shutting down imaging equipment when
not in use
Shutting down computers and monitors at
the end of the day
Turning oﬀheating and ventilation when
not in use
Using motion-detector lights out of hours
Changing the habits of waste disposal,
exchanging general waste bins for recycling
bins
Minimizing the use of paper
Attending meetings virtually rather than
crossing sites
Using sustainably sourced cleaning prod-
ucts
Removing single-use utensils and encour-
aging staﬀto bring their own cutlery
much net-zero targets in healthcare rely
on decarbonization of the supply chain
[26].
Optimizing waste management
Inappropriate waste management in ra-
diology departments can contribute to
excessive carbon emissions and rep-
resents a large ﬁnancial, unnecessary
burden which can easily be reduced
through a change in working practices.
Improved waste management within one
of the several separate CT departments at
ICHNT dramatically reduced the amount
of burns waste; estimated at saving just
under 10,000 and 20,513kg of CO2 per
year, this equates to 6.5 ﬂights from
London to Perth [27].
Residual unwanted iodinated contrast
media are often disposed of into the nor-
mal wastewater system or clinical waste
stream [28]. GE Healthcare, supplier of
contrast media, facilitate a collection ser-
vice for excess contrast, introducing circu-
larity into the system by avoiding pollu-
tion and reducing the need for raw iodine
extraction [29]. This also keeps contrast
bottles out of the high-emission clinical
waste streams, allowing for recycling.
Re-educating staﬀon the use of the
correct waste disposal streams within
the imaging department such as gen-
eral waste/clinical waste/burns waste/
recycling waste can be embedded into
training and induction processes, which
willhavethegreatestimpactwithinhigher
waste modalities such as CT (due to the
modality’s high contrast usage) and in-
terventional radiology.
Foregrounding
the wider impact both ﬁnancially and
environmentally can lead to a better
understanding among colleagues of the
eﬀectoftheiractionsandamoresustained
change in behavior.
Clinical waste incineration can make
use of a process which generates electric-
ity (producing 0.347t of negative carbon
per ton of waste) and byproducts can be
recycled or reused. Recycling programs
even exist for old plain-ﬁlm radiographs.
This has the advantage of reducing the
storage burden and may even be ﬁnan-
cially rewarding, as the silver they contain
can be reclaimed.
Embedding waste management prac-
tices is essential for changes to persist
after changes in staﬀ. Changing default
procurement codes to remove nonrecy-
clable stock is one method of embedding
changes.
Nonclinical examples are the
most straightforward, such as removing
polystyrene cups from purchasing and re-
placing with recyclable plastic cups, there-
fore reducing unsustainable waste. Ensur-
ing access to appropriate waste streams,
for example recycling facilities in staﬀand
patient areas, is also important.
Adopting change now
Change begins in the reporting room.
We are all individually responsible for our
own sustainable practices as healthcare
providers. There are simple things we can
do to encourage and promote sustain-
able practice among our own colleagues
(. Table 1).
Auditing energy consumption of imag-
ing departments during nonproductive
hours where equipment is left on may
highlight areas for improvement in en-
ergy eﬃciency.
Heyes et al. produced
a Python script to monitor the network
status of multiple devices and equipment
to determine if they were online dur-
ing nonproductive hours: one CT, two
PET/CT, one angiography suite, 16 PACS
workstations, 20 printers, and six smart
monitors were left on during nonproduc-
tive hours; the realized per-year energy
savings accounted for 72,337kWh, the
energy consumption of 14 four-person
households [30].
Conclusion
Radiologists and radiographers are oper-
ators and consumers of healthcare equip-
ment, and report to senior organizational
management. In all these roles there is an
important opportunity to eﬀect change.
In the department or clinic, we have seen
how careful management of energy con-
sumption, use of disposable items, and
disposal of waste can have a large impact.
The way we deliver our services inﬂuences
thefrequencyand distanceof staﬀand pa-
tient travel. Suppliers and manufacturers
arealreadyinnovating, and environmental
legislation will put them under additional
pressure, but we need to use our purchase
power to further reduce our supply chain
emissions. As customers of manufactur-
ers and suppliers, we can ask questions
about supply chain sustainability in the
form of embodied carbon, circularity of
materials, or energy eﬃciency. There is
some urgency to reducing carbon emis-
sions across healthcare, so it is essential to
share practice with colleagues and other
specialties where there is overlap in ac-
tivity. For issues managed further up the
chain of command, such as hospital es-
tates or energy supply, hearing the same
request or concerns from multiple depart-
ments can increase the pressure to act.
Let’s go!
Corresponding address
Dr. Jeﬀrey Mariampillai
Hammersmith Hospital
Du Cane Road, W12 0HS London, UK
j.mariampillai@nhs.net
Prof. Andrea Rockall
Clinical Chair of Radiology, Department of
Cancer and Surgery, Faculty of Medicine,
Imperial College London
London, UK
a.rockall@imperial.ac.uk
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest. J.Mariampillai,A.Rockall,
C.Manuellian,S.Cartwright,S.Taylor,M.Deng,and
S.Shearddeclarethattheyhavenocompetinginter-
ests.
S24
Die Radiologie · Suppl 2 · 2023

Forthisarticlenostudieswithhumanparticipants
oranimalswereperformedbyanyoftheauthors. All
studiesmentionedwereinaccordancewiththeethical
standardsindicatedineachcase.
Thesupplementcontainingthisarticleisnotspon-
soredbyindustry.
Open Access. ThisarticleislicensedunderaCreative
CommonsAttribution4.0InternationalLicense,which
permitsuse,sharing,adaptation,distributionandre-
productioninanymediumorformat,aslongasyou
giveappropriatecredittotheoriginalauthor(s)and
thesource,providealinktotheCreativeCommonsli-
cence,andindicateifchangesweremade. Theimages
orotherthirdpartymaterialinthisarticleareincluded
inthearticle’sCreativeCommonslicence,unlessin-
dicatedotherwiseinacreditlinetothematerial. If
materialisnotincludedinthearticle’sCreativeCom-
monslicenceandyourintendeduseisnotpermitted
bystatutoryregulationorexceedsthepermitteduse,
you willneedtoobtainpermissiondirectlyfromthe
copyrightholder. Toviewacopyofthislicence,visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Sherman JD, MacNeill A, Thiel C (2019) Reducing
pollution from the health care industry. JAMA
322:1043–1044
2. Schoen J, McGinty GB, Quirk C (2021) Radiology in
our changing climate: a Call to action. J Am Coll
Radiol18:1041–1043
3. HeyeT,KnoerlR,WehrleT,MangoldD,CerminaraA,
Loser M, Plumeyer M, Degen M, Lüthy R, Brod-
beckD,MerkleE(2020)Theenergyconsumptionof
Radiology: Energy-Andcost-savingopportunities
forCTandMRI operation. Radiology295:593–605.
https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.2020192084
4. Woolen SA, Becker AE, Martin AJ, Knoerl R, Lam V,
Folsom J, Eusemann C, Hess CP, Deshpande V
(2023) Ecodesign and operational strategies to
reducethecarbonfootprintofMRI forenergycost
savings. Radiology 307:e230441. https://doi.org/
10.1148/radiol.230441
5. Croghan SM, Rohan P, Considine S, Salloum A,
SmythL,AhmadI,LynchTH,ManeckshaRP(2021)
Time, cost and carbon-eﬃciency: A silver lining
of COVID era virtual urology clinics? Ann R Coll
Surg Engl 103:599–603. https://doi.org/10.1308/
rcsann.2021.0097
6. Alshqaqeeq F, McGuire C, Overcash M, Ali K,
Twomey J (2020) Choosing radiology imaging
modalities to meet patient needs with lower
environmental impact. Resour Conserv Recycl.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.resconrec.2019.104657
7. Martin M, Mohnke A, Lewis GM, Dunnick NR,
Keoleian G, Maturen KE (2018) Environmental im-
pactsofabdominalimaging: apilotinvestigation.
JAmCollRadiol15:1385–1393. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jacr.2018.07.015
8. McCarthy CJ, Gerstenmaier JF, O’Neill AC,
McEvoy SH, Hegarty C, Heﬀernan EJ (2014)
“EcoRadiology”-Pulling the plug on wasted en-
ergy in the radiology department. Acad Radiol
21:1563–1566. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acra.
2014.07.010
9. Prasanna PM, Siegel E, Kunce A (2011) Greening
radiology. J Am Coll Radiol. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.jacr.2011.07.017
10. Hainc N, Brantner P, Zaehringer C, Hohmann J
(2020) “green ﬁngerprint” project: evaluation
Zusammenfassung
Die grüne und nachhaltige Radiologieabteilung
Da der vom Menschen verursachte Klimawandel die Gesundheit des Planeten bedroht,
ist es wichtig, den Anteil des Gesundheitswesens an den globalen Emissionen zu
verstehen und anzugehen. Die medizinische Bildgebung stellt einen wesentlichen
Mitverursacher der gesamten Emissionen dar. Ziel des vorliegenden Beitrags ist es,
die zentralen Themen und Beispiele angewandter Nachhaltigkeit zu präsentieren, um
Radiologen in die Lage zu versetzen, innerhalb ihrer Abteilung etwas zu verändern.
Schlüsselwörter
Nachhaltigkeit · Ökologische Radiologie · Scope-3-Standard · Kreislaufwirtschaft · Dekarbonisie-
rung
of the power consumption of reporting sta-
tions in a radiology department. Acad Radiol
27:1594–1600. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.acra.
2019.11.011
11. Büttner L, Posch H, Auer T, Jonczyk M, Fehren-
bach U, Hamm B, Bauknecht HC, Böning G (2021)
Switching oﬀfor future—Cost estimate and
a simple approach to improving the ecological
footprintofradiologicaldepartments. EurJRadiol.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejro.2020.100320
12. Pearce F (2018) Energy Hogs Can World’s Huge
Data Centers Be Made More Eﬃcient—Yale
E360. Yale Sch For Environ Stud. Online mag-
azine.
https://e360.yale.edu/features/energy-
hogs-can-huge-data-centers-be-made-more-
eﬃcient#:~:text=by%20Matt%20Rota-,Energy
%20Hogs%3A%20Can%20World%27s%20Huge
%20Data%20Centers%20Be%20Made%20More,
and%20dramatically%20improve%20energy
%20eﬃciency
13. Buckley BW, MacMahon PJ (2021) Radiology
and the climate crisis:
Opportunities and
challenges—radiology in training.
Radiology
300:E339–E341
14. Chevance G, Hekler EB, Efoui-Hess M, Godino J,
Golaszewski N, Gualtieri L, Krause A, Marrauld L,
Nebeker C, Perski O, Simons D, Taylor JC,
Bernard P (2020) Digital health at the age of the.
Anthropocene. https://doi.org/10.13135/2384-
8677/2233
15. NHSEngland—TransformationDirectorate(2021)
Records management code of practice 2021.
https://transform.england.nhs.uk/information-
governance/guidance/records-management-
code/records-management-code-of-practice-
2021/.Accessed10Apr2023
16. Chua ALB, Amin R, Zhang J, Thiel CL, Gross JS
(2021)TheenvironmentalimpactofInterventional
radiology: an evaluation of greenhouse gas emis-
sions from an academic Interventional radiology
practice.
J Vasc Interv Radiol 32:907–915.e3.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jvir.2021.03.531
17. Thiel CL, Woods NC, Bilec MM (2018) Strategies
to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from
laparoscopic surgery.
Am J Public Health
108:S158–S164. https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.
2018.304397
18. Rizan C, Mortimer F, Stancliﬀe R, Bhutta MF (2020)
Plastics in healthcare: time for a re-evaluation. J R
SocMed113:49–53
19. Webster J, Radke E, George N, Faoagali J, Harris M
(2005) Barrier properties and cost implications of
a single versus a double wrap for storing sterile
instrument packs 33(6):P348–P352. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.ajic.2004.11.010
20. Bourguignon D (2016) Closing the loop new
circulareconomypackage. https://www.europarl.
europa.eu/RegData/etudes/BRIE/2016/573899/
EPRS_BRI%282016%29573899_EN.pdf. Accessed
25Apr2023(In: EuropeanParliamentaryResearch
Service:EuropeanParliament.)
21. Health care without harm circular healthcare.
In: health care without harm. https://noharm-
europe.org/issues/europe/circular-healthcare.
Accessed25Apr2023
22. National Electrical Manufacturers Associa-
tion (2016) Good refurbishment practices
for medical imaging equipment.
https://
www.nema.org/docs/default-source/standards-
document-library/ditta-grp-implementation-
guide-watermarked.pdf?sfvrsn=a69008ce_2. Ac-
cessed9Apr2023
23. GlobalDiagnosticImagingHI&RTTA (DITTA)(2019)
Goodrefurbishmentpractice. In:globaldiagnostic
imaging, healthcare IT & radiation therapy trade
association (DITTA).
https://www.globalditta.
org/activities/good-refurbishment-practice.html.
Accessed10Apr2023
24. World Resources Institute and LMI (2010) The
greenhouse gas protocol for the U.S. Public sector
interpretingthecorporatestandardforU.S.Public
sector organizations. In: GHG protocol initiative.
https://ghgprotocol.org/sites/default/ﬁles/2022-
12/us-public-sector-protocol_ﬁnal_oct13.pdf.
Accessed25Apr2023
25. TennisonI,RoschnikS,AshbyB,BoydR,HamiltonI,
Oreszczyn T, Owen A, Romanello M, Ruyssevelt P,
Sherman JD, Smith AZP, Steele K, Watts N,
Eckelman MJ (2021) Health care’s response to
climate change: a carbon footprint assessment
of the NHS in england. Lancet Planet Health
5:e84–e92.
https://doi.org/10.1016/S2542-
5196(20)30271-0
26. Deng M (2023) Quantifying the Environmental
Impact of a Computed Tomography (CT) Imaging
Service. In: ECR 2023. EPOS European Society of
Radiology,
27. KommendaN(2019)Howyourﬂightemitsasmuch
CO2 as many people do in a year. https://www.
theguardian.com/environment/ng-interactive/
2019/jul/19/carbon-calculator-how-taking-one-
ﬂight-emits-as-much-as-many-people-do-in-a-
year.Accessed10Apr2023
28. Dekker HM, Stroomberg GJ, Prokop M (2022)
Tacklingtheincreasingcontaminationofthewater
supply by iodinated contrast media. Insights
Imaging 13:30. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13244-
022-01175-x
29. Healthcare GE (2023) Contrast media—Iodine
recycling.
https://www.gehealthcare.co.uk/
Die Radiologie · Suppl 2 · 2023 S25

Review
products/contrast-media-ecr. Accessed 10 Apr
2023
30. HeyeT,MeyerMT,MerkleEM,VosshenrichJ(2023)
Turn it oﬀ! A simple method to save energy and
CO2 emissions in a hospital setting with focus on
radiology by monitoring nonproductive energy-
consuming devices.
Radiology 307:e230162.
https://doi.org/10.1148/radiol.230162
S26
Die Radiologie · Suppl 2 · 2023