Die Pathologie
vormals Der Pathologe
Übersichten
Pathologie 2023 · 44 (Suppl 2):S86–S95
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00292-023-01274-6
Accepted: 17 October 2023
Published online: 4 December 2023
© The Author(s) 2023
Redaktion
W. Roth, Mainz
Regulation (EU) 2017/746 (IVDR):
practical implementation of
annex I in pathology
Andy Kahles1 · Hannah Goldschmid1 · Anna-Lena Volckmar1 · Carolin Ploeger1 ·
Daniel Kazdal1 · Roland Penzel1 · Jan Budczies1 · Christa Flechtenmacher1 ·
Ulrich M. Gassner2 · Monika Brüggemann3 · Michael Vogeser4 · Peter Schirmacher1 ·
Albrecht Stenzinger1
1Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany
2Faculty of Law, University of Augsburg, Augsburg, Germany
32nd Internal Medicine Department, Hematology Lab Kiel, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein (UKSH),
Kiel, Germany
4Institute of Laboratory Medicine, University Hospital, LMU Munich, Munich, Germany
The German version of this article can be
found under https://doi.org/10.1007/s00292-
023-01231-3
ScanQRcode&readarticleonline
Abstract
Background: Regulation (EU) 2017/746 on in vitro diagnostic medical devices (IVDR)
imposes several conditions on pathology departments that develop and use in-house
in vitro diagnostic medical devices (IH-IVDs). However, not all of these conditions need
to be implemented immediately after the IVDR entered into force on 26 May 2022.
Based on an amending regulation of the European Parliament and the Council of the
European Union, the requirements for IH-IVDs will be phased in. Conformity with
the essential safety and performance requirements of annex I must be ensured from
May 2022.
Objectives: With this article, we would like to present the practical implementation of
the currently valid conditions for IH-IVDs at the Institute of Pathology at the University
Hospital of Heidelberg, in order to provide possible assistance to other institutions.
Conclusions: In addition to the intensive work on the requirements for IH-IVDs, several
guidance documents and handouts provide orientation for the implementation
and harmonisation of the requirements for healthcare institutions mentioned in
Article 5 (5). Exchange in academic network structures is also of great importance
for the interpretation and practical implementation of the IVDR. For university and
nonuniversity institutions, ensuring conformity with the IVDR represents a further
challenge in terms of personnel and time, in addition to the essential tasks of patient
care, teaching and research and the further development of methods for optimal and
targeted diagnostics, as well as the maintenance of the constantly evolving quality
management system.
Keywords
Quality Management · Quality Assurance in health care · Regulatory requirements · In-house
manufacturing · Laboratory-developed tests
Introduction
“Regulation(EU)2017/746oftheEuropean
Parliament and of the Council of 5 April
2017oninvitrodiagnosticmedicaldevices
andrepealingDirective98/79/ECandCom-
mission Decision 2010/227/EU (Text with
EEA relevance.)” [15] (short: IVDR) entered
intoforceon26May2017andappliedfrom
26 May 2022. The main objective of the
regulation, which applies throughout the
EU,istoensurethehighestpossiblelevelof
patient health protection combined with
a high level of user safety through harmo-
nized requirements for the manufacture
S86
Die Pathologie · Suppl 2 · 2023

Table 1
Regulation 2017/746 (IVDR)distinguishes between two types of in vitro diagnostic medicaldevices(IVDs)that are IVDR-compliant:CE-
markedIVDs (CE-IVD)from economic operators andin-house IVDs (IH-IVDs)from health institutions
CE-IVDs
IH-IVDs
Manufacturer: economic operators
Placing: European market
Manufacturer: health institutions (e.g., pathology departments)
Placing: within the manufacturing health institution
All requirements of the IVDR must be met, depending on the type and risk
class of the device
Article 5 (5) is to be fulﬁlled, including Annex I
“Notiﬁed bodies” are responsible for conformity assessment with the IVDR:
Currently 10× in the European Union (as of 05/2023 [6])
Without participation of notiﬁed bodies
Monitoring by competent authority
Registration of the devices in the European Database on Medical Devices
(EUDAMED) [5]
No EUDAMED registration
Table 2
Deﬁnitions according to Regulation 2017/746(IVDR)[15](in alphabetical order)
Term
Deﬁnition according to Regulation 2017/746 (IVDR) [15]
Reference
Analytical perfor-
mance
‘analytical performance’ means the ability of a device to correctly detect or measure a particular analyte
Article 2 (40)
Beneﬁt–risk determi-
nation
‘beneﬁt–risk determination’ means the analysis of all assessments of beneﬁt and risk of possible relevance
for the use of the device for the intended purpose, when used in accordance with the intended purpose
given by the manufacturer
Article 2 (17)
Clinical performance
‘clinical performance’ means the ability of a device to yield results that are correlated with a particular clin-
ical condition or a physiological or pathological process or state in accordance with the target population
and intended user
Article 2 (41)
Economic operator
‘economic operator’ means a manufacturer, an authorised representative, an importer or a distributor
Article 2 (28)
Health institution
‘health institution’ means an organisation the primary purpose of which is the care or treatment of pa-
tients or the promotion of public health
Article 2 (29)
Instructions for use
‘instructions for use’ means the information provided by the manufacturer to inform the user of a device’s
intended purpose and proper use and of any precautions to be taken
Article 2 (14)
Intended purpose
‘intended purpose’ means the use for which a device is intended according to the data supplied by the
manufacturer on the label, in the instructions for use or in promotional or sales materials or statementsor
as speciﬁed by the manufacturer in the performance evaluation
Article 2 (12)
Label
‘label’ means the written, printed or graphic information appearing either on the device itself, or on the
packaging of each unit or on the packaging of multiple devices
Article 2 (13)
Manufacturer
‘manufacturer’ means a natural or legal person who manufactures or fully refurbishes a device or has a de-
vice designed, manufactured or fully refurbished, and markets that device under its name or trademark
Article 2 (23)
Performance evalua-
tion
‘performance evaluation’ means an assessment and analysis of data to establish or verify the scientiﬁc
validity, the analytical and, where applicable, the clinical performance of a device
Article 2 (44)
Performance of a de-
vice
‘performance of a device’ means the ability of a device to achieve its intended purpose as claimed by the
manufacturer. It consists of the analytical and, where applicable, the clinical performance supporting that
intended purpose
Article 2 (39)
Risk
‘risk’ means the combination of the probability of occurrence of harm and the severity of that harm
Article 2 (16)
User
‘user’ means any healthcare professional or lay person who uses a device
Article 2 (30)
and use of in vitro diagnostic medical de-
vices (IVD).
This article describes the procedure for
implementing the currently applicable re-
quirements of the IVDR for health insti-
tutions and the “General Safety and Per-
formance Requirements” (IVDR, Annex I)
into the established quality management
(QM) system of the Institute of Pathology
at the University Hospital of Heidelberg
(IPH).
Regulation 2027/746 (IVDR):
implication for pathology
departments
The IVDR distinguishes between two types
of IVDR-compliantinvitro diagnostic med-
ical devices (IVD; . Table 1): CE-marked
IVDs (CE-IVDs) from economic operators
and in-house IVDs (IH-IVDs) from health
institutions (see . Table2for deﬁnitions of
terms). For complex diagnostics in pathol-
ogy, both types of IVDs, also in combina-
tion, are used to ensure optimal patient
care.
Recital 29 of the IVDR describes the
special importance of health institutions
and theIVDs theydevelop themselves. Ac-
cording to this, health institutions—and
thus
pathology
departments—should
continue to have the possibility to man-
ufacture, modify and use devices in-
house, in order to be able to respond to
the speciﬁc needs of the patient target
groups. For this purpose, however, the
IVDR is to prescribe EU-wide harmonized
rules (Recital 28), which are described in
Article 5 (5).
This article sets out several conditions
for health institutions developing and us-
Die Pathologie · Suppl 2 · 2023 S87

Übersichten
Regulaon 2017/746 (IVDR)
CHAPTER II
MAKING AVAILABLE ON THE MARKET AND PUTTING INTO SERVICE OF DEVICES, OBLIGATIONS OF ECONOMIC OPERATORS, 
CE MARKING, FREE MOVEMENT 
Arcle 5: Placing on the market and pung into service
(5)
With the excepon of the relevant general safety and performance requirements set out in Annex I, the requirements of this 
Regulaon shall not apply to devices manufactured and used only within health instuons established in the Union, provided 
that all of the following condions are met: 
(a) 
the devices are not transferred to another legal enty;
(b) and (c) applicable as of 26 May 2024;
(d) 
applicable as of 26 May 2028;
(e) to (i)
applicable as of 26 May 2024;
Member States may require that such health instuons submit to the competent authority any further relevant informaon 
about such devices which have been manufactured and used on their territory. Member States shall retain the right to restrict
the manufacture and use of any speciﬁc type of such devices and shall be permied access to inspect the acvies of the health 
instuons.
This paragraph shall not apply to devices that are manufactured on an industrial scale.
Fig. 1 9 Currently applica-
ble conditions forin-house
in vitro diagnostic medical
devices (IH-IVD)accord-
ing to Regulation 2017/746
(IVDR),Article5(5). Forcon-
ditions (b)–(i),a laterstart
date was decided[16]
Fig. 2 8 Annex I is subdividedinto three chapters.ChapterI addresses the establishmentof risk man-
agement. ChapterII contains the performance recordas a centraltopic.ChapterIIIcontains require-
mentsforthelabellingandinstructionsforuseofIVDs. Thebasisofallchaptersandrequirementsisthe
intendedpurposeandtheassociatedriskclassiﬁcation.TheintendedpurposeoftheIH-IVDinﬂuences
the eﬀort requiredto implement the three centralelements
ing IH-IVDs. If all of the conditions de-
scribed herein are met, any additional re-
quirements of the IVDR do not apply to
IH-IVDs. These conditions for health insti-
tutions are coming into eﬀect gradually,
following an amending regulation in Jan-
uary 2022 ([16]; . Fig. 1).
The requirements summarized below
must already be followed since 26 May
2022:
1. IH-IVDs must comply with the general
safety and performance requirements
(IVDR, Annex I).
2. The manufacture and use must take
place within the EU.
3. IH-IVDs may only be used by the
institution itself and may not be
transferred to another legal entity.
4. Competent authorities shall be pro-
vided with relevant information on the
devices upon request and shall have
access to the health institutions to
verify their activities.
5. IH-IVDs shall not be manufactured on
an industrial scale.
The term “industrial scale” is not deﬁned
in the IVDR. However, the guideline docu-
ment MDCG-2023-1, which was prepared
speciﬁcally for IH-IVDs by the Medical De-
vice Coordination Group (MDCG) and pub-
lished in January 2023, comments on this
[13]. This guideline states that no more
than the estimated number of required
devices should be produced in the man-
ufacturing process.
For the requirements (2)–(5) listed
above, there is therefore no immediate
need for pathology departments to act.
However, pathology departments must
address point (1), the “general safety and
performance requirements”, which are
described in Annex I of the IVDR.
Implementation of annex I in
pathology
Pathology
departments
in
Germany
are
accredited
as
inspection
bodies
by the Deutsche Akkreditierungsstelle
GmbH (DAkkS)—the national accredi-
tation body of the Federal Republic of
Germany—according to standard DIN EN
ISO/IEC 17020. The accreditation focuses
on the expert assessment of the pathol-
ogist and thus the conﬁrmation of the
professional competenceof theinspection
body[7]. Therequirementsofthestandard
EN ISO 15189 must also be considered
[4].
The Institute of Pathology at the
University Hospital Heidelberg (IPH) has
been accredited since 2007. This provides
an established, sound and independently
audited quality management structure
into which the requirements of the IVDR
can be integrated.
Article 5 (5) (c) of
the IVDR requires a quality management
system in accordance with the standard
EN ISO 15189 but does not stipulate
accreditation [8].
S88
Die Pathologie · Suppl 2 · 2023

Fig. 3 9 Formulationofthe
intendedpurpose forin-
house in vitro diagnostic
medical devices (IH-IVD).
Several components (blue)
are includedanddeﬁned
(green)aspartofthedeter-
mination of the intended
purpose. The documenta-
tion is device speciﬁc, e.g.,
in the form of a checklist on
a standardform
Annex I: general safety and
performance requirements
All IVDs, whether commercial CE-IVDs
or IH-IVDs manufactured in-house, must
meet the general safety and performance
requirements (Article 5 (5)).
These re-
quirements are intended to ensure and
demonstrate that the devices are safe for
patients and users, that potential risks
are known and controlled, and that the
devices are ﬁt for their intended purpose.
As a manufacturer and user of IH-IVDs,
pathology departments must ensure and
demonstrate compliance with Annex I.
Annex I is divided into three chapters
(. Fig. 2):
– Chapter I: general requirements (→
focus on risk management)
– Chapter II: requirements regarding
performance, design and manufacture
(→focus on performance evaluation)
– Chapter III: requirements regarding
information supplied with the device
(→focus on labelling and instruction
for use)
The intended purpose forms the basis for
the requirements from Annex I. It thus
determines the eﬀort required for the re-
quirements of Chapters I, II and III and the
amount of the associated documentation.
Intended purpose and risk
classiﬁcation
Deﬁning the intended purpose enhances
patient and user safety by making it less
likely that the device will be used for pur-
poses other than those intended and by
preventingpotentialmisuse. Furthermore,
the “general safety and performance re-
quirements” in Annex I are based on the
intended purpose of the device. The in-
tended purpose, therefore, has a decisive
inﬂuence on the workload for the three
central topics in Annex I (. Fig. 2). “In-
tended purpose means the use for which
a device is intended according to the data
supplied by the manufacturer on the la-
bel, in the instructions for use [...] or as
speciﬁed by the manufacturer in the per-
formance evaluation” (see . Table 2 for
a full deﬁnition).
The intended purpose is decisive for
the classiﬁcation of the device. The IVDR
describes seven rules to classify IVDs, ac-
cording to their intended purpose, into
four classes A, B, C and D with increasing
individual and public risk (Annex VIII). The
more fatal the consequences of a possi-
ble misdiagnosis for the patient (e.g., in
the case of life-threatening diseases) and
the greater the risk to the public (e.g., in
the case of transmissible agents of life-
threatening diseases), the higher the risk
class.
IPH has implemented a new standard
operating procedure (SOP) in the existing
QM documentation to ensure a uniform
and comparable device-speciﬁc formula-
tion of the intended purpose. The SOP de-
scribes how the intended purpose for IH-
IVDs is formulated and how the risk classi-
Die Pathologie · Suppl 2 · 2023 S89

Übersichten
Fig. 4 8 Device-speciﬁc risk management.a Risk management ﬁle:documentation of the risk managementprocess.The
risk management ﬁle represents thetotalityof thedevice-speciﬁcriskdocumentation.b Risk categories:Annex I describes
several safety requirements that anin-housein vitro diagnosticmedical device (IH-IVD)must meet.These requirements are
considereddevice speciﬁc in theriskassessment andthepossible eﬀects(yellow)are analysed
ﬁcationis carried out. Several components
(device name, type of IH-IVD, test material,
function or purpose, indication, patient
group and scope) are deﬁned speciﬁcally
for the device (. Fig. 3). All these com-
ponents are checked against a standard
checklist to deﬁne the intended purpose.
The same form is then used to classify and
document the risk according to Annex VIII
of the IVDR. Guidance document MDCG-
2020-16 of the Medical Devices Coordina-
tion Group [12] also assists with classiﬁ-
cation.
Annex I, Chapter I: general
requirements
Chapter I focuses on device-speciﬁc risk
management for the manufacture and use
of IH-IVDs. IH-IVDs must be ﬁt for purpose
and safe; they must not compromise the
safety of patients, users or third parties.
Any risk associated with their manufacture
and use must be acceptable in relation to
the beneﬁt to the patient and consistent
with a high level of health protection and
safety(IVDR, Annex I (1)). TheIVDR deﬁnes
risk as the combination of the probability
of occurrence of harm and the severity of
that harm (. Table 2).
For the implementation of device-spe-
ciﬁc risk management, a new SOP was cre-
ated for the IPH QM documentation. This
SOP describes creation of a device-spe-
ciﬁc risk management ﬁle (. Fig. 4a). The
riskmanagementﬁlecontainstherequired
riskmanagementplan, theriskassessment
with its subcomponents and a risk man-
agement report.
Risk management plan
A risk management plan must be deﬁned
and documented for each IH-IVD. At IPH,
weuseadevice-speciﬁc form to determine
which “risk categories” are applicable to
the IH-IVD under consideration (. Fig. 4b).
Risks that can be excluded by the intended
purpose and manufacture are not consid-
ered further.
The considered risk cate-
gories are based on the safety require-
ments described in Annex I, Chapter II.
Thus, many of the safety aspects required
byAnnex I canbeconsidered and included
in the risk assessment.
The responsibilities in the risk man-
agement process, the evaluation param-
eters for risk assessment and the criteria
for accepting risks are deﬁned in the de-
vice-speciﬁc risk management SOP. Risk
assessment is performed on the basis of
probability of occurrence [P], detection [D]
and severity [S]. The risk scoring is based
on the risk priority number [RPN]. This is
determined by multiplying the risk assess-
mentvalues(RPN= [P]× [D]× [S], . Fig.5).
The higher the RPN, the higher the un-
derlying risk potential. The resulting RPN
values are used to determine control ac-
tions. The selection of the most appropri-
ate risk reduction solutions shall be made
in accordance with Annex I, Chapter I, 4:
1. the risk is eliminated or reduced as far
as possible;
2. if the risk cannot be eliminated,
appropriate protective measures
are taken, including the establishment
of warning mechanisms (e.g., controls);
3. safety information on residual risks
(e.g., warnings and precautions, con-
traindications) is provided, e.g., in SOPs
or protocols. These are speciﬁcally
discussed in user training (e.g., as part
of initial training).
Risk assessment
The risk assessment is carried out by the
personnel with the greatest expertise in
the manufacture and use of the IH-IVD un-
der consideration (e.g., laboratory person-
nel, scientist, pathologist, bioinformati-
cian). Potential risks are considered for
users (e.g., handling of hazardous sub-
stances), for patients (e.g., false positive/
negativeresults), forpotentialthirdparties
(e.g., exposure to hazardous substances),
for the environment (e.g., disposal) and for
S90
Die Pathologie · Suppl 2 · 2023

Score
1
2
3
unlikely
Risks due to application errors must be excluded or reduced in accordance with Annex I, Chapter 1, Section 5:
occasionally
frequently
Definition
Risks related to use errors
1.
Risk ldentification
2. Risks related to design and manufacture of the device
3. Risks related to infection and microbial contamination
4. Risks related to the interaction with the environment
5. Risks related to radiation
6. Risks related to software
7. Risks related to connection with an energy source
8. Mechanical and thermal risks
9. Other risks
Probability of occurrence
[P]
#
Risk effect
Preventive
action
Risk estimation
Risk evaluation
[P]
[D]
[S]
RPN
uncritical / 
borderline / 
critical
Risk control or, if
necessary benefit-
risk determination
Score
1
2
3
low, no patient hazard
medium, possible patient hazard
high, definite patient hazard
Definition
Severity
[S]
Score
1
2
3
high, will definitely be detected
medium, detection probable
low, detection unlikely
Definition
Detection
[D]
RPN
1–4
uncritical
No further actions necessary
6–9
borderline
Risk reduction in case of patient hazard,
benefit-risk determination
12–27
critical
Risk reduction necessary
Rating
actions
Risk Priority Number
RPN = [P] x [D] x [S]
Yes
n/a
n/a, uncritical
n/a, uncritical
uncritical
1
1
1.1
incomplete
deparaffination
Visual control by 
trained laboratory 
staff (described in
SOP); positive
control on slides
Visual control by 
trained laboratory 
staff (described in
SOP); positive
control on slides
limited probe binding
Determination of
amplification not
valid
Excessive staining
Determination of
 amplification not
valid
extended incubation
time compared to the
instructions for use
1.2
1.3
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
1
1
3
3
3
3
uncritical
n/a, uncritical
Fig. 5 8 Riskassessmentbasedonanexampleinthecategory“useerrors”.Allidentiﬁedrisksareanalysedaccordingly.Thisis
done in tabularform forall risk categories shownin .Fig. 4b
the device itself (e.g., storage conditions,
shelf life; . Fig. 4b).
The risk assessment comprises the fol-
lowing components and is documented
device speciﬁcally and in tabular form
(. Fig. 5):
– Risk identiﬁcation: description of the
risk and its root cause.
– Risk eﬀect: description of the possible
consequence or harm for users, for
patients, for third parties, for the
environment or for the device.
– Preventive actions: description of the
preventive actions to minimize the risk.
– Risk estimation: based on the prob-
ability of occurrence, probability of
detection and severity of harm.
– Risk evaluation: based on the risk
priority number (RPN).
– Risk control/beneﬁt–risk analysis:
if necessary, description of further
measures and control mechanisms
(e.g., user training).
Any risk associated with manufacture and
use must be acceptable in relation to the
Die Pathologie · Suppl 2 · 2023 S91

Übersichten
Fig. 6 8 Deﬁnitionoftheperformancecharacteristicstobedeterminedusingtheexample“MDM2/CEN12—CISH”. Basedon
the intendedpurpose (.Fig. 3), the scope of the validation is deﬁned.It is checkedwhich performancecharacteristics are
applicable.OtherperformancecharacteristicslistedasexamplesinAnnexI,ChapterII,9.1,arenotapplicabletothisexample
beneﬁt to patients and compatible with
a high level of health and safety protection
(Annex I, Chapter I, 1.).
Risk management report
The risk management report shall conﬁrm
that any residual risk associated with the
manufacture and use is controlled, accept-
able and consistent with a high level of
health protection and safety in relation
to the beneﬁt to the patient. Both the
residual risk associated with each hazard
and the overall risk must be considered ac-
ceptable. All riskmanagementdocuments
are available to the user group through
the QM system. In addition, they are in-
formed separately about possible residual
risks (e.g., within the speciﬁc SOP, in the
context of documented training or proto-
colled meetings).
Risk surveillance
Risk management must be a continuous
iterative process that is regularly and sys-
tematicallyupdated(AnnexI,ChapterI,3.).
With the help of the failure analysis, cor-
rectionand improvementprocesses estab-
lishedintheQMsystem(suchasfailureand
action management, regular performance
of internal and external audits and par-
ticipation in round-robin tests), possible
incidents related to IH-IVDs are recorded
and reviewed. Ideally, if no incidents oc-
cur, the risk management ﬁle is reviewed
at least every 2 years to ensure that it is
up-to-date and valid. This review is also
documented in the risk management ﬁle.
Annex I, Chapter II: requirements
regarding performance, design
and manufacture
Chapter II describes requirements for per-
formance, design and manufacture of
IVDs. The safe design and manufacture
of IH-IVDs have already been considered
and assessed in the risk management ﬁle.
According to the IVDR, the performance
of a device is the ability “to achieve its
intended purpose as claimed by the man-
ufacturer” (note: for IH-IVDs→pathology
departments; . Table 2).
Through the
analysis and evaluation of deﬁned per-
formance characteristics,
the scientiﬁc
validity, analytical performance and, if
applicable, clinical performance are de-
termined and veriﬁed before the devices
are used (= performance evaluation;
. Table 2). Examples of the performance
characteristics to be considered are listed
in Chapter II, 9.1. and are determined on
the basis of the device-speciﬁc intended
purpose deﬁned “by the manufacturer”
(see below and . Fig. 3). The intended
purpose thus signiﬁcantly inﬂuences the
scope of the validation and decides which
of the performance characteristics listed
in Chapter II, 9.1., must be demonstrated
and which can be excluded.
A pub-
lication of the IVDR subgroup of the
German
Arbeitsgemeinschaft der Wis-
senschaftlichen Medizinischen Fachge-
sellschaften e.V. (AWMF; Association of
the Scientiﬁc Medical Societies in Ger-
many) provides guidance on the perfor-
mance evaluation of in-house methods
for the detection of infectious pathogens
[14].
Method validation at IPH is based on
guidelinesofthePathology/Neuropathology
Sector Committee, which is responsible
for the interpretation of the accredita-
tion requirements according to DIN EN
ISO/IEC 17020 in the ﬁeld of pathology
[2, 3]:
1. Deﬁnition of the performance char-
acteristics to be determined (example
. Fig. 6):
S92
Die Pathologie · Suppl 2 · 2023

Fig. 7 8 ImplementationoftheAnnexIrequirementsforin-houseinvitrodiagnosticmedicaldevices
(IH-IVD)in the establishedqualitymanagementsystemof the Instituteof Pathology at Heidelberg
University Hospital (IPH)
Based on the intended purpose, the
scope of the validation is determined.
It is checked which performance
characteristics are applicable. The
deﬁned performance characteristics
aredocumented inavalidation-speciﬁc
form.
2. Description of the test procedure:
The results and ﬁndings from the
development and establishment phase
are included in the speciﬁc SOP. The
validation is performed according to
this SOP.
3. Determination of performance charac-
teristics:
Proof that the speciﬁed quality re-
quirements are met in the speciﬁc
case.
The concluding performance evaluation
is made in the device-speciﬁc validation
report. This requires qualiﬁed personnel
to decide whether the quality require-
ments for the method have been met and
whether it can be used for the intended
investigations in accordance with the in-
tended purpose. Ongoing veriﬁcation of
the validated procedure is ensured by ap-
propriate control mechanisms during op-
eration. This ensures that the procedure is
reproducibly stable and robust. The estab-
lished QM system with its correction and
improvement processes described above
also applies here.
Annex I, Chapter III: requirements
regarding information supplied
with the device
Chapter III speciﬁes requirements for the
information supplied with the device.
“Each device shall be accompanied by
the information needed to identify the
device and its manufacturer, and by any
safety and performance information rele-
vant to the user or any other person, as
appropriate” (Annex I, Chapter III, 20.1.).
This is done through labelling and in-
structions for use, for which Chapter III
provides speciﬁcations.
Instructions for
use are deﬁned as follows: “‘instructions
for use’ means the information provided
by the manufacturer to inform the user of
a device’s intended purpose and proper
use and of any precautions to be taken”
(. Table 2).
Inaccordancewiththerequirementsfor
IH-IVDs set out in Article 5 (5), pathology
departments are both manufacturer and
user, as the devices may not be transferred
to another legal entity. Thus, all relevant
information on the manufacture, safety
and performance of the IH-IVD is avail-
able to the user group at all times. Within
the QM system, the intended purpose, risk
assessment and performance evaluation/
validation documents are available to the
user group at all times. In addition, there
are device-/process-speciﬁc SOPs in the
QM documentation. These are either pre-
pared by the user group itself or the users
are trained on them as part of the train-
ing program. These SOPs cover impor-
tant aspects of the safe use of in-house
methods and, like risk management, are
regularly and systematically updated. The
safe use of IH-IVDs in the laboratory, which
is necessary to meet safety requirements,
also includes relevant information on sub-
stancesormixturesclassiﬁedashazardous,
e.g., in the form of safety datasheets and
laboratory safety instructions.
Discussion and conclusion
CommercialCE-IVDsandIH-IVDsarespecif-
ically used in pathology for optimal diag-
nosis and individualized therapy [8]. With
Recital 29 and its concretizationinArticle5
of the IVDR, the legislator recognizes the
beneﬁt and necessity of in-house devel-
oped tests and allows their use for optimal
patient care under certain conditions [8,
17]. As manufacturers and at the same
time users of IH-IVDs, health institutions
like pathology departments must ensure
compliance with Article 5 (5) of the IVDR
and fulﬁl the safety and performance re-
quirementslistedinAnnexI.Then, allother
requirements of the IVDR do not apply to
IH-IVDs.
In January 2023, the Medical Device
Coordination Group (MDCG) document
MDCG-2023-1 was published for health
institutions, providing guidance on some
of the requirements of Article 5 (5) [13].
The MDCG and its tasks are described in
Articles 98 and 99 of the IVDR. According
to Article 99 (c), it has the task of de-
veloping guidelines for an eﬀective and
harmonized implementation of the IVDR,
but these are not legally binding.
Many professional societies and associ-
ations are committed to the practical im-
plementation and content shaping of deﬁ-
nitionalgapsandvaguenessintherequire-
ments, and new networks have formed to
use their academic knowledge and exper-
tise to provide assistance. They provide
support, for example, through guidelines
and templates, as well as through dis-
cussion events, workshops and the ex-
change of experiences.
The IVDR sub-
group of the AWMF provides numerous
templates and supporting documents in
German and English (e.g., on risk man-
agement and performance evaluation) on
Die Pathologie · Suppl 2 · 2023 S93

Übersichten
its website [1]. The recommendations of
the Bundesverband Deutscher Patholo-
gen e.V. (BDP; Federal Association of Ger-
man Pathologists) [9–11], which describe
the implementation of IVDR in pathology
during the implementation phase, are also
helpful.
Such information sources are an im-
portant step for institutions to implement
and harmonize compliance with the re-
quirements of Article 5(5). Academic net-
working structures are also important for
interpretation of the IVDR and its practical
implementation.
In Germany, around 100 institutes for
pathology or neuropathology are accred-
ited according to DIN EN ISO/IEC 17020 [7].
The implementation of the requirements
of the IVDR for IH-IVD thus takes place
within a solid, established and indepen-
dently audited quality management struc-
ture, in which many requirements have
already been implemented (e.g., contin-
uous veriﬁcation of methods by quality
controls, user training or failure manage-
ment). To comply with Annex I of the
IVDR, the Institute of Pathology in Heidel-
berg (IPH) has created several new operat-
ing procedures and integrated them into
the existing DIN EN ISO/IEC 17020-com-
pliant QM documentation (. Fig. 7). In
some cases, existing QM documents were
used, but these had to be adapted to the
requirements of Annex I.
The intensive internal examination of
therequirementsoftheIVDR (e.g., through
gap analysis), the preparation of the QM
documents listed in . Fig. 7 (SOPs and
forms), their implementation in the exist-
ingQMsystem, thenecessarytrainingand,
above all, the device-speciﬁc documenta-
tion provided for in the IVDR through the
expertise of the specialist staﬀare very
resource intensive. For the device-speciﬁc
documentation, the IH-IVD must ﬁrst be
deﬁned and the area of application spec-
iﬁed. Depending on the strategy, this can
be done for an entire process chain, or
modularly for individual links or elements,
and takes the form of a documented in-
tended purpose. Based on this determina-
tion, the device-speciﬁc risk management,
which goes beyond general risk manage-
ment within the scope of accreditation,
performance evaluation and instructions
for use (as SOPs) are established in ac-
cordance with the QM manual. A new
challenge is posed by in-house software
solutions, which now also fall under the
deﬁnition of an IVD according to the IVDR.
For a university institution like IPH, en-
suring compliance with the IVDR—in ad-
dition to the core tasks of patient care,
teaching and research, the further devel-
opment of methods for optimal and tar-
geted personalized diagnostics and main-
tenance of the constantly evolving QM
system—represents an additional major
challenge in terms of personnel and time.
Conclusion for practice
4 Since May 2022, health institutions have
to comply with Annex I of the IVDR for IH-
IVD.
4 Accreditation according to DIN EN ISO/
IEC 17020 is not required, but it provides
a solid basis for compliance with Arti-
cle 5 (5) of the IVDR.
4 Carry out gap analysis→Article 5 (5) vs.
established quality management sys-
tem→implementIVDRrequirements that
are not yet mapped.
4 Existing established quality management
structures can and should be used and ex-
tended if necessary.
4 Guidelines, templates and checklists will
assist in the implementation of the re-
quirements for IH-IVD.
4 With the aim ofharmonizingimplementa-
tion, various academic networks, associa-
tions and professional societies are work-
ing on the development and publication
of supporting guidance documents (e.g.,
AWMF, BDP).
Corresponding address
Dr. rer. nat. Andy Kahles
Institute of Pathology, University Hospital
Heidelberg
Im Neuenheimer Feld 224, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany
andy.kahles@med.uni-heidelberg.de
Prof. Dr. med. Albrecht Stenzinger
Institute of Pathology, University Hospital
Heidelberg
Im Neuenheimer Feld 224, 69120 Heidelberg,
Germany
albrecht.stenzinger@med.uni-heidelberg.de
Funding. Open Access funding enabled and orga-
nized by Projekt DEAL.
Declarations
Conﬂict of interest. A.-L.Volckmar: personalfees
fromAstraZenecaoutsidethesubmittedwork. D.Kaz-
dal: personalfeesfromAstraZeneca,Bristol-Myers
Squibb,Pﬁzer,Lilly,AgilentandTakedaoutsidethe
submittedwork. A.Stenzinger: advisoryboard/
speaker: AGCT,Aignostics,AstraZeneca,Bayer,BMS,
EliLilly,Illumina,Incyte,Janssen,MSD,Novartis,Pﬁzer,
Roche,SeattleGenetics,Takeda,ThermoFisher;grants:
Bayer,BMS,Chugai,Incyte. A.Kahles,H.Goldschmid,
C.Ploeger,R.Penzel,J.Budczies,C.Flechtenmacher,
U.M.Gassner,M.Brüggemann,M.VogeserandP.Schir-
macherdeclarethattheyhavenocompetinginterests.
Forthisarticlenostudieswithhumanparticipants
oranimalswereperformedbyanyoftheauthors. All
studiesmentionedwereinaccordancewiththeethical
standardsindicatedineachcase.
Thesupplementcontainingthisarticleisnotspon-
soredbyindustry.
Open Access. ThisarticleislicensedunderaCreative
CommonsAttribution4.0InternationalLicense,which
permitsuse,sharing,adaptation,distributionandre-
productioninanymediumorformat,aslongasyou
giveappropriatecredittotheoriginalauthor(s)and
thesource,providealinktotheCreativeCommonsli-
cence,andindicateifchangesweremade. Theimages
orotherthirdpartymaterialinthisarticleareincluded
inthearticle’sCreativeCommonslicence,unlessin-
dicatedotherwiseinacreditlinetothematerial. If
materialisnotincludedinthearticle’sCreativeCom-
monslicenceandyourintendeduseisnotpermitted
bystatutoryregulationorexceedsthepermitteduse,
you willneedtoobtainpermissiondirectlyfromthe
copyrightholder. Toviewacopyofthislicence,visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
1. Arbeitsgemeinschaft der Wissenschaftlichen
Medizinischen Fachgesellschaften e.V. (AWMF)
Handreichungen und Muster der Ad hoc Kom-
mission In vitro Diagnostika. https://www.awmf.
org/service/arbeitshilfen-und-formulare#c1797.
Accessed25.05.2023
2. DAkkS (2016) Leitfaden des Sektorkomitees
Pathologie/Neuropathologie für die Validierung
von Untersuchungsverfahren in der Immunhis-
tologie—ID:71SD4028
3. DAkkS (2016) Leitfaden des Sektorkomitees
Pathologie/Neuropathologie für die Validierung
von Untersuchungsverfahren in der Moleku-
larpathologie—ID:71SD4037
4. DakkSMedizinischeDiagnostik—Fachbereich3.5
im Überblick. https://www.dakks.de/de/fb-3.5.
html.Accessed25.05.2023
5. EUDAMED—European database on medical
devices. https://ec.europa.eu/tools/eudamed/#/s
creen/home.Accessed25.05.2023
6. European Commission—Nando (New Approach
Notiﬁed and Designated Organisations) Informa-
tion System. https://ec.europa.eu/growth/tools-
databases/nando/.Accessed25.05.2022
7. Holl-UlrichK,HagelC,KöhlerGetal(2022)Akkred-
itierung in der Pathologie und Neuropathologie.
Pathologie 43:338–345. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s00292-022-01098-w
8. Kahles A, Goldschmid H, Volckmar AL et al (2022)
Structure and content of the EU-IVDR. Pathologie
S94
Die Pathologie · Suppl 2 · 2023

43:351–364.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00292-
022-01077-1
9. Kazmierczak M (2022) Empfehlungen zur
IVDR des Bundesverband Deutscher Patholo-
gen e.V. Einleitung.
https://www.pathologie.
de/?eID=downloadtool&uid=2233.
Accessed
25.05.2023
10. Kazmierczak M (2022) Empfehlungen zur IVDR
des Bundesverband Deutscher Pathologen e.V.
Phase 1 – Inventur durchfuhren. https://www
.pathologie.de/?eID=downloadtool&uid=2234.
Accessed25.05.2023
11. Kazmierczak M (2022) Empfehlungen zur
IVDR des Bundesverband Deutscher Patholo-
gen e.V. Phase 2 – Sicherheits- und Leis-
tungsnachweis.
https://www.pathologie.
de/?eID=downloadtool&uid=2239.
Accessed
25.05.2023
12. Medical Device Coordination Group (2023) MDCG
2020-16 rev.2—Guidance on Classiﬁcation Rules
for in vitro Diagnostic Medical Devices under
Regulation (EU) 2017/746.
https://health.
ec.europa.eu/system/ﬁles/2023-02/md_mdcg_
2020_guidance_classiﬁcation_ivd-md_en.pdf.
Accessed25.05.2023
13. Medical Device Coordination Group (2023) MDCG
2023-1—Guidance on the health institution
exception under Article 5(5) of Regulation
(EU) 2017/745 and Regulation (EU) 2017/746.
https://health.ec.europa.eu/system/ﬁles/2023-
01/mdcg_2023-1_en.pdf.Accessed25.05.2023
14. Rabenau HF, Hofmann J, Hunfeld KP, Reischl U,
Schubert A, Spitzenberger F, IVDR-Subgruppe der
Ad-Hoc-KommissionIVDderArbeitsgemeinschaft
der Wissenschaftlichen Medizinischen Fachge-
sellschaften e.V. (AWMF) (2022) Die neue In-
vitro-Diagnostika-Verordnung (IVDR): Hilfestel-
lung bei der Validierung/Veriﬁzierung von im
diagnostischen Laboratorium eingesetzten bzw.
entwickelten und angewendeten Methoden zum
Nachweis von Infektionserregern. GMS Z Forder
Qual Med Lab 13:Doc1. https://doi.org/10.3205/
lab000044,URN:urn:nbn:de:0183-lab0000443
15. Regulation (EU) 2017/746 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2017 on
in vitro diagnostic medical devices and repealing
Directive 98/79/EC and Commission Decision
2010/227/EU(TextwithEEArelevance).Document
32017R0746, Oﬃcial Journal of the European
Union,L117/P.176,5.5.2017
16. Regulation (EU) 2022/112 of the European
Parliament and of the Council of 25 January
2022 amending Regulation (EU) 2017/746 as
regards transitional provisions for certain in vitro
diagnostic medical devices and the deferred
application of conditions for in-house devices
(TextwithEEArelevance).Document32022R0112,
Oﬃcial Journal of the European Union, L 19/3
28.1.2022
17. Stenzinger A, Weichert W (2020) Einﬂuss der
neuen In-vitro-Diagnostik-Regulation (IVDR) der
Europäischen Union auf die Pathologie. Was ist
wichtig? Pathologe41(Suppl2):129–133. https://
doi.org/10.1007/s00292-020-00867-9
Publisher’s Note. Springer Nature remains neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in published
maps and institutional aﬃliations.
Zusammenfassung
Die Verordnung (EU) 2017/746 (IVDR) in der Praxis: Umsetzung von
Anhang I in der Pathologie. Englische Version
Hintergrund: Die Verordnung (EU) 2017/746 über In-vitro-Diagnostika (IVDR)
stellt mehrere Bedingungen an Pathologische Institute, die hausinterne In-vitro-
Diagnostika (IH-IVD) entwickeln und anwenden. Diese Bedingungen müssen jedoch
nicht alle unmittelbar mit dem Geltungsbeginn der IVDR zum 26.05.2022 umgesetzt
worden sein. Auf der Grundlage einer Änderungsverordnung des Europäischen
Parlaments und des Rates der Europäischen Union werden die Anforderungen an IH-
IVD stufenweise eingeführt. Die Konformität mit den grundlegenden Sicherheits- und
Leistungsanforderungen gemäß Anhang I muss seit Mai 2022 gewährleistet sein.
Ziel der Arbeit: Mit diesem Artikel möchten wir die praktische Umsetzung der aktuell
gültigen Bedingungen für IH-IVD im Pathologischen Institut des Universitätsklinikums
Heidelberg vorstellen und damit mögliche Hilfestellung für andere Einrichtungen
geben.
Schlussfolgerungen: Neben der intensiven Auseinandersetzung mit den Anfor-
derungen an IH-IVD geben mehrere Handreichungen und Hilfestellungen eine
Orientierungshilfe zur Umsetzung und Harmonisierung der in Artikel 5 (5) genannten
Anforderungen an Gesundheitseinrichtungen. Auch der Austausch in akademischen
Netzwerkstrukturen ist für die Interpretation und die praktische Umsetzung der IVDR
von großer Bedeutung. Für universitäre und nicht-universitäre Einrichtungen stellt
die Sicherstellung der IVDR-Konformität – neben den wesentlichen Aufgaben in der
Krankenversorgung, in der Lehre und der Forschung und Weiterentwicklung von
Methoden zur optimalen und zielgerichteten Diagnostik sowie der Aufrechterhaltung
des sich stetig weiterentwickelnden Qualitätsmanagementsystems – eine weitere
personelle und zeitliche Herausforderung dar.
Schlüsselwörter
Qualitätsmanagement · Qualitätssicherung in der Gesundheitsversorgung · Regulatorische
Anforderungen · Eigenherstellung · Laboratory-developed-Test
Die Pathologie · Suppl 2 · 2023 S95