133
7	
ICRC Relations with Bern
	
Part I – Losing the Moral Compass
Nor does the ICRC’s insistence upon its entire separateness from the 
Swiss Federal Government convince sophisticated observers…
Geoffrey Best1
It is clearly not surprising that the ICRC now endorses Dunantist val-
ues as a neutral, independent, impartial, humanitarian actor (NIIHA). 
The organization is the oldest of this type of actor, one that has the 
confidence of many contemporary governments, international orga-
nizations, and even some armed nonstate groups. Some of its Swiss 
traits, and hence organizational culture, may make it less than beloved 
and less easy to deal with, but its status and reputation have remained 
generally high for recent decades. Until the COVID-19 pandemic of 
2020 forced some temporary financial retrenchment, the ICRC found 
donors to fund its annual budget which is now pushing almost US$3 
billion. Then in 2023, in the context of galloping inflation, tighten-
ing monetary policy, and increased military spending, there was a 
severe shortfall in contributions for ICRC planned activities. This is 
discussed later.
Historically, however, the ICRC manifested muddled thinking about 
NIIHA values in its own decision making. The theory was better than 
the practice. With the benefit of historical research, we can now see that 
this was the case continuing into the 1930s even before matters came to a 
head in the 1940s. Even in modern times, some ICRC leaders have been 
more careful about these Dunantist norms, or optics about these norms, 
than others. There was a comparable muddle involving the indepen-
dence of Amnesty International and British governments, with lessons 
that could benefit all RC actors. Naturally enough, the Swiss leaders of 
the ICRC are not the only ones who let nationalism and social biases 
corrupt their commitment to cosmopolitan standards like Dunantist 
principles in humanitarian affairs.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

134	
The Contemporary ICRC
I	
Early ICRC Practice of NIIHA Principles
We have already seen that Dunant, Moynier, and the other founding 
fathers of the ICRC always saw their humanitarian project as private 
and nongovernmental, even if working with national authorities. This 
independence from governments was then immediately violated by 
Moynier, who joined with General Dufour in serving on the Swiss gov-
ernmental delegation at the 1864 diplomatic conference that produced 
the first Geneva Convention for victims of war. It was one thing to 
draft the prospective treaty. That could be done by a fully independent 
Geneva Committee. It was another thing to put oneself under instruc-
tions from Swiss national authorities in Bern by joining the governmen-
tal delegation.
This muddled thinking about independence from, but cooperation 
with, national governing authorities was then repeated by the ICRC for 
a long time. Many ICRC leaders served simultaneously in Swiss public 
positions at federal, cantonal, and city levels. A number of Committee 
members agreed to be Swiss ambassadors or other foreign policy offi-
cials. When the ICRC set up a relief agency to deal with the Balkan war 
of 1913, a Swiss consular official headed that RC agency. Max Huber 
served as legal advisor to the Swiss foreign ministry much of the time that 
he was ICRC president (1928–1944). He accepted to be the Swiss gov-
ernmental representative to the 1932 Disarmament Conference while 
heading the ICRC. Giuseppe Motta, Swiss foreign minister in 1920–
1940, was a member of the ICRC governing board during most of that 
time. After World War II when C.J. Burckhardt and Paul Ruegger were 
Swiss Ambassadors, in France and the United Kingdom respectively, 
they mixed Swiss and ICRC business, discussing the ICRC’s future in 
terms of Swiss national interests.2 ICRC examples of lack of appropriate 
independence from Bern are legion.
When ICRC President Gustave Ador joined the Swiss Federal Council 
in 1917 in order to resolve a crisis there, eventually becoming Swiss pres-
ident in 1919, he took an official leave of absence from the lCRC. But he 
continued to make decisions on behalf of the ICRC, even presiding over 
some ICRC meetings. Clearly, he mixed the roles of ICRC humanitar-
ian neutrality with Swiss political neutrality.3 When C. J. Burckhardt 
became Swiss ambassador in Paris in 1945, Max Huber returned as 
interim ICRC president. As per the source above, however, Burckhardt 
remained involved in ICRC affairs. An official leave of absence was a 
pro-forma status that did not necessarily mean distance from participa-
tion in key ICRC decisions. What was a Swiss political concern and what 
was an ICRC humanitarian concern were not always separated.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ICRC Relations with Bern: Part I	
135
This was true on many levels during the interwar years of 1919–1939 
either because Geneva sought the assistance of Bern, or perhaps more 
often Bern sought to co-opt or advance the role of Geneva.4 But here 
we concentrate attention on the 1930s and 1940s, and then on the 
post-1945 era.
It should be noted that the same intertwining of humanitarian and 
government roles, or worse, was found throughout the RC Movement. 
At one point the head of the Belgian Red Cross was the Belgian defense 
minister. At one point the head of the American Red Cross (ARA) 
was the president of the United States. The top legal counsel for the 
ARC used to be the US Attorney General. It was only in 1986 that the 
International Red Cross Movement forbade a state that had accepted 
the relevant Geneva Convention and the respective National RC Society 
from being represented by one combined delegation to the International 
RC Conference.5 There seems no record, or personal recall now, of how 
many times before then a nation manifested one combined delegation 
to the RC Conference. But there had to be some evident reason, now 
maybe lost to history, for adopting the 1986 wording.
Many, if not most, National RC Societies had become de facto state 
agencies, with minimal independence. Some might be private and inde-
pendent in the economic sense of operating from citizen donations, 
but otherwise they remained quasi-state in nature. Throughout the RC 
world, the principle of independence from governments was observed 
mostly by its breach, even as the idea of independence was written into 
the RC Fundamental Principles.
(There were apparently some occasions on which a National RC 
Society voted differently from its governmental delegation at the RC 
Conference, although no one seems to have records on this point. This 
apparently happened in 1996 on the question of expelling the South 
African governmental delegation from the Conference because of its 
apartheid policies.)
One might guess that a kind of unexamined nationalism impeded care-
ful thought much of the time. No one seemed to want to carefully sort 
out the difference between national citizenship and the NIIHA realm-
meaning cosmopolitan RC principles. Maybe it couldn’t be done to the 
satisfaction of all, or maybe the subject required choices that were too 
difficult – and the preservation of the RC Movement required leaving 
everything unexamined.
There were plenty of egregious examples of National RC Societies 
violating NIIHA norms, not at all limited to the German Red Cross in 
the Nazi era. Other totalitarian states presented the same picture: the 
National RC Society was incorporated into the structure of a state that 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

136	
The Contemporary ICRC
was not known for its humanitarian accomplishments. Totalitarians 
aside, the basic problem remained widespread. In the Serb region of 
Bosnia circa 2002, the head of the Bosnian Serb Red Cross (The Red 
Cross of the Republic of Serbia), an autonomous subunit of the Bosnian 
Red Cross, was Ljiljana Zelen-Karadzic, wife of the now-convicted war 
criminal Radovan Karadzic. She was openly supportive of his discrimi-
natory political campaigns, even as he evaded capture until 2008 to 
stand trial for war crimes, so much so that the ICRC apparently asked 
for her resignation.
In the previous chapter we discussed the ICRC refusal to exercise 
withdrawal of recognition from a recognized National RC Society. The 
Bosnian Serb case comes very close to such a withdrawal, complicated 
by the complex arrangements in Bosnia and Herzegovina, which appar-
ently the ICRC had facilitated. The ICRC, which never had formally 
recognized that particular subunit, asked for her to step down on the 
grounds of driving away supporters – at least if one can believe what was 
reported by multiple media sources.6 (The ICRC declined to clarify that 
history, it being part of the closed archives at the time of writing.)
As for the ICRC over time, from 1863 through the Second World War, 
from Moynier to Huber, they and their colleagues in Geneva seemed to 
often assume that ICRC neutrality and Swiss neutrality, if not the same, 
were almost the same. This error was compounded by a failure to con-
front their social biases that undermined the notion of impartiality. In 
short, lack of proper independence and lack of rigorous self-examination 
about biases sometimes compromised ICRC claims to neutrality and 
impartiality. The narrow sociopolitical background of most ICRC offi-
cials did not help matters. The record on such conflicting values was, if 
anything, worse in much of the rest of the RC Movement.
II	
The 1930s and Mussolini
As noted, the ICRC was started by French-speaking Genevans of 
Protestant persuasion mostly from the upper classes. These male 
Christian conservatives with a social conscience, accompanied by skepti-
cism about things on the political left, kept the enterprise going in pretty 
much the same format from 1863 until the First World War. (The first 
female was co-opted in 1918.) Family links were strong, with a few 
prominent families being well represented.7 Uncles were replaced by 
nephews; relatives by marriage were often co-opted as well. The first 
German speaker was asked to join only in 1923, the first Catholic in 
the same year. So it was only from the 1920s that the governing board 
became national rather than strictly Genevan. What did not change, for 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ICRC Relations with Bern: Part I	
137
the most part, was an unexamined Swiss nationalism and demonstrable 
conservatism. This led to inroads on the practice of humanitarian inde-
pendence, neutrality, and impartiality.
We will skip the Spanish civil war where we still do not have much 
independent research on the ICRC.8 Instead we focus on the Italian inva-
sion of Ethiopia (Abyssinia) in 1935–1936 where we have an extremely 
well-researched source.9
Switzerland was an important trading partner with Mussolini’s Italy. 
In particular, the Swiss-Italian region in the southeast of the country was 
intertwined with Italy not only economically but also culturally. And just as 
Bern might fear an invasion from the Nazis from the north, so it might fear 
Italian irredentist claims in the south. The Swiss foreign minister between 
1920 and 1940 was Giuseppe Motta, from Ticino. He was well known for 
his view of Mussolini as a counter to both the Nazis and the Bolsheviks.10 
He was also on the ICRC governing board. His man in Rome, Georges 
Wagniere, held similar views; he was co-opted onto the Committee in 1936.
President Huber at the helm of the ICRC was close to Motta person-
ally and helped Motta draft the legal approach that allowed Switzerland 
to soften League of Nations economic sanctions on Italy after it invaded 
Ethiopia in 1935. Also, Huber had economic connections to firms heav-
ily invested in Italy, firms which greatly profited from military spending 
in both Italy and Germany.11 Bern, since Switzerland was a member of 
the League, felt obliged to do something given the vote for sanctions in 
the League, but did not want to hurt Italy, or itself, too much. ICRC 
President Huber, legal advisor to the foreign ministry, showed Motta 
how to do what the latter wanted to do as part of Swiss national interests.
Switzerland had never recognized the Soviet Union from 1917, even 
after its consolidation of power by about 1922, and still had no dip-
lomatic relations with Moscow in the 1930s. It was only in 1940 that 
ambassadors were exchanged. Since 1933 Bern had been worried about 
trends in Germany – in addition to the Soviet Union. It followed that 
good relations with Mussolini’s Italy loomed large in Bern’s calculations 
of national interest.
Given the above, in retrospect it is not completely surprising that 
the ICRC followed the lines of Swiss foreign policy toward Italy, tilting 
toward Rome. Geneva was less than neutral and impartial in responding 
to humanitarian needs in the Italian–Ethiopian war of 1935–1936. There 
was indeed a broad RC presence in the conflict, with the ICRC working 
with a number of European RC Societies to provide medical and other 
assistance. Many RC staff in the field upheld NIIHA principles and even 
pressured their headquarters to do more, especially in calling out Italian 
airstrikes on medical facilities, not to mention use of poison gas. The 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

138	
The Contemporary ICRC
ICRC had publicly protested the use of poison gas in World War I; it did 
not do so regarding Italy in Ethiopia.
In various other ways the ICRC favored Italy, as Baudendistel con-
clusively shows. At headquarters in Geneva two views in particular 
prevailed, both reasonably well documented. First there was racism, 
with Huber and others, both in Geneva and Bern, believing that Haile 
Selassie’s Ethiopia should not have been recognized and admitted to 
membership in the League of Nations. There was thus the view that a bit 
of Italian colonialism might not be a bad thing, assisting the Ethiopians 
to make a more orderly future. Then there was the view, already men-
tioned, that the Italian Black Shirts were a useful counterweight to the 
Nazis and the Soviets. Mussolini played to this view after coming to 
power in 1922 until he aligned with Hitler in the later 1930s. For Bern 
and the overlapping ICRC leadership, black was better than brown or 
red. Mussolini’s Black Shirts were preferable to the brown clad Nazi 
storm troopers and to the red flag of the Bolsheviks.
Photograph 7.1  The ICRC clearly tilted in favor of Mussolini’s 
regime in its brutal invasion of Ethiopia in 1935–1936. It did not 
protest when Italy attacked facilities marked with the Red Cross, or 
when Rome resorted to mustard gas to subdue continued Ethiopian 
resistance. The exact year of this photo is not recorded but is either 
1935 or 1936. The ICRC leadership lost its moral compass in the 
1930s and 1940s.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ICRC Relations with Bern: Part I	
139
When the history is closely read, it is undeniable that the ICRC under 
Huber fell far short of a reasonably sound application of NIIHA norms 
regarding Mussolini and his brutal policies in Ethiopia. Part of the prob-
lem was lack of independence from Bern, not because the ICRC was pres-
sured to conform to Swiss policy, but because the ICRC leadership was 
too close to Swiss authorities and voluntarily followed the line of Swiss 
foreign policy. Huber and his colleagues were not inclined to establish 
a rigorously independent humanitarian policy. They were not inclined 
toward a firm humanitarian stand in the face of Mussolini’s policies.
Part of the problem also stemmed from the social conservatism of the 
ICRC and its racist demeaning of Africans, maybe as much under Huber 
as under Moynier earlier. And part of the problem stemmed from how 
both of these factors coalesced into ICRC support for the reigning ver-
sion of Swiss national interests – namely, that one should go slow about 
contesting Italian atrocities in Ethiopia in order to prioritize Swiss larger 
political interests. Huber failed to distinguish a proper NIIHA stance 
from his Swiss identity. What was good for Switzerland was assumed to 
be the right policy for the ICRC as well. Huber might have been a well-
recognized jurist, but he was lacking as a clear-minded humanitarian pol-
icy maker. And he carried the rest of the ICRC governing board with him.
III	
Hitler and the Holocaust
By early fall 1942 the ICRC in Geneva was in possession of reliable 
information from various sources about the Nazi genocide. Nazi geno-
cidal actions had become more systematic after the Wannsee Conference 
of Nazi leaders in early 1942, and then undeniable on a systematic and 
large scale by that summer. A mail poll of Committee members indi-
cated support for a draft public statement about this and other humani-
tarian issues roiling events.
The Swiss government had put Edward de Haller in charge of super-
vising humanitarian organizations, and the ICRC had made him an hon-
orary member of the Assembly. De Haller was related to others in the 
Swiss foreign ministry and politically close to still others. When de Haller 
saw the responses to the mail survey and realized the possibility of an 
ICRC public statement about humanitarian affairs in the Second World 
War, including treatment of detainees, he alerted key figures in Bern. 
One of these was the Swiss president, Philippe Etter, also a member of 
the ICRC governing board. Although Etter was usually not one to take 
part in specific ICRC decisions and activities, he and some others called 
for an in-person meeting of the governing board to discuss the pending 
draft public statement, attended the meeting, and spoke against a public 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

140	
The Contemporary ICRC
statement.12 Clearly he became involved in ICRC meetings to head off 
any public statement that might offend Berlin.
During the years of Nazi rule Swiss authorities, finding themselves 
surrounded by fascist states and well aware of the power of their bru-
tal neighbor to the north, had engaged in policies that tilted toward the 
Nazis – as did Sweden, which was another leading neutral.13 The Swiss 
version of partial appeasement involved cooperation with the Nazis pri-
marily in matters of banking (helping convert gold, much of it stolen, to 
convertible currency, inter alia) and refugees (helping to identify German 
Jewish refugees and turning them back to a dark fate). Much of the coun-
try more broadly speaking, including the Swiss Red Cross, had been rea-
sonably generous in wanting to receive many Jewish refugees, especially 
children, from neighboring states.14 But clearly Swiss official policy rep-
resented a kind of appeasement so as not to provoke Berlin unduly. Other 
small liberal European states such as Belgium and the Netherlands had 
not fared well under the Nazi boot. Was Hitler likely to invade the small 
Alpine state that had made preparations for armed neutrality? Why take 
any chances that Hitler might actually implement invasion plans?
It was true that the Swiss government per se did not officially pressure 
the ICRC to remain silent about the Holocaust and other humanitarian 
subjects. The Swiss Federal Council, which was the collective executive, 
and the Swiss Parliament never adopted any stance regarding the ICRC 
meeting of October 1942. Moreover, a larger perspective showed that 
during the war the ICRC was not always simply in the pocket of Bern, 
because there were numerous differences of opinion between Geneva 
and Bern on this and that subject. While the ICRC had its own activities 
going, and Switzerland was the Protecting Power for several belligerents, 
the two Swiss entities sometimes cooperated and sometimes had stiff 
arguments about who was to do what and who was to pay for what. The 
ICRC manifested some independence during the war, and Swiss officials 
officially respected that independence. But only up to a point.15
In October 1942, the Swiss officials in Bern who were also members 
of the ICRC governing board all argued against a public statement by 
the ICRC regarding a shortlist of humanitarian issues including the fate 
of political detainees. The hidden agenda of appeasement remained offi-
cially hidden, as Bern officials argued for more quiet diplomacy, or sug-
gested that a public statement would make no difference and have no 
impact. In the last analysis the double membership on the ICRC board 
allowed the governmental members to join with other conservatives in 
adopting a position that led to much controversy. The draft public state-
ment was not adopted, but that was not the entire story.
Part of the denouement in 1942 was that in lieu of a public statement, 
the ICRC was supposed to carry out a more vigorous discrete diplomacy 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ICRC Relations with Bern: Part I	
141
toward Berlin in favor of IHL and victims. But this never transpired. 
J. C. Burckhardt and other ICRC conservatives never followed up on 
that agreement. Huber was ill, did not participate in the 1942 meeting, 
and effectively turned ICRC leadership over to Burckhardt. The latter 
was not trusted by the British for being too close to certain German lead-
ers in this era.16 Burckhardt is seen by more than one historian as favor-
ing the German conservatives, but not necessarily the Nazis, as a barrier 
to an expanding communism. And Swiss nationalism was certainly not 
absent in his thinking. (All this would fit with how Huber, and Motta, 
viewed Mussolini as covered above.)
After 1942 the good that was done for Jewish victims of the Nazis by 
the ICRC was done by local ICRC representatives in peripheral areas, 
such as Friedrich Born in Budapest. It was not the ICRC in Geneva that 
authorized the dynamic action in saving many Jews, and the proactive 
ICRC staff members were not recognized and rewarded by the Geneva 
headquarters after the war.17
Photograph 7.2  While the Geneva HQ neither publicly condemned 
Berlin for its atrocities in the 1930s and 1940s, about which the ICRC 
had reliable information by 1942, nor developed a dynamic quiet diplo-
macy in defense of Nazi victims, some individual staff members, such as 
Friedrich Born in Hungary, successfully helped many Jews escape the 
Holocaust. This photo is not dated but was taken in either 1944 or 1945.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

142	
The Contemporary ICRC
IV	
Contested Lessons of History about the 1940s
The reigning version of “lessons learned” about the ICRC and the 
Holocaust stresses the failure to take a public stand in the face of great 
evil: rather than independently standing for humanitarian principle in 
publicly opposing the Nazi genocide and other violations of human 
dignity, and thereby protecting its reputation for the future, the ICRC 
remained silent under personal pressure from high Swiss officials, which 
resonated with the ICRC conservatives of that time.18 In the 1942 
debate several members of the Assembly urged, unsuccessfully at the 
end of the day, a public statement lest the future status of the ICRC be 
negatively affected.
In April 2015, at a meeting on the Shoah cosponsored by the World 
Jewish Congress, ICRC President Peter Maurer gave a talk in which the 
theme of speaking out rather than remaining silent figured prominently. 
He said, in part: 
Over the past seven decades, we have heard innumerable versions of the per-
verse justifications for the horrors of the Shoah…. Tragically, the leaders of the 
International Committee of the Red Cross were part of the by-standers who – 
when confronted with questions about the silence of the institution – defended 
standard responses to extraordinary circumstances…. In institutional terms, the 
ICRC also learned some hard lessons. It had failed to protect civilians and most 
notably the Jews persecuted and murdered by the Nazi regime; it had failed to 
understand the uniqueness of the inhumanity by responding to the outrageous 
with standard procedures; it had looked on helplessly and silently, not really 
trying – certainly not hard enough – to live up to the principle of humanity…. It 
failed as a humanitarian organization because it had lost its moral compass. This 
failure has become an intrinsic part of our institutional history.19
Maurer continued: 
Since then, we have chosen to confront our past and to embrace transparency. 
Our public archives are proof of our acknowledgment of the past and our contin-
ued effort to confront uncomfortable truths. The ICRC has also adopted a new 
policy on confidentiality, explicitly acknowledging that there is a path to condem-
nation of acts of inhumanity. We have chosen not to let ourselves be cornered by 
the binary logic of silence vs. denunciation, which inevitably leads to paralysis.
This speech in its entirety is consistent with contemporary ICRC 
doctrine both about communications20 and about steps to take when 
confronted with violations of IHL or human dignity.21 Maurer, while 
appearing to take a stand in favor of more public diplomacy, actually 
was rejecting a simple dichotomy between silence or denunciation and 
indicating the various steps the ICRC might take short of specific denun-
ciation of a particular authority. His speech, when analyzed carefully, 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ICRC Relations with Bern: Part I	
143
was actually an endorsement for a varied discreet diplomacy that saw 
public denunciation as a rare last resort. Later in this book we show 
that Maurer was almost always in favor of quiet diplomacy rather than 
public criticism, and he explicitly acknowledged this trait in an interview. 
Nevertheless, his carefully chosen words could be understood, and prob-
ably were, as furthering the notion that the ICRC was once again reject-
ing the silence of the Assembly in 1942 in the face of Nazi atrocities.
Almost entirely unnoticed, in 2006 the Assembly adopted a statement 
about the Nazi holocaust.22 This appeared to “come out of the blue,” 
in the sense that nothing in the ICRC’s external environment compelled 
more attention to the history of the 1940s. That doctrinal statement of 
2006 was consistent with ICRC contemporary policy on communication 
and response to violations of human dignity, but it projected a different 
emphasis. One should read the 2006 Assembly statement as saying that 
the primary problem in 1942 was not remaining silent but not having a 
sufficiently dynamic quiet diplomacy, and not pursuing that effort even 
if it had no practical impact. In other words, the ICRC did indeed lose 
its moral compass in the 1940s (and for that matter in the 1930s regard-
ing both Mussolini and the early Hitler), but primarily because it did 
not take a firm and courageous stand by way of high-level if discrete 
overtures to top officials – even if not grounded in IHL, and even if the 
overtures would have no practical impact.
The 2006 statement acknowledging ICRC failure, even if with ref-
erence to the failure in all of Western civilization in the face of the 
Holocaust, reads in part: 
This failure is aggravated by the fact that the ICRC did not do everything in its 
power to put an end to the persecutions and help the victims. The organization 
remained a prisoner of its traditional procedures and of the overly narrow legal 
framework in which it operated. Having abandoned the idea of public condem-
nation – convinced as it was that this would not change the course of events, 
fearing that it would jeopardize the activities it was carrying out for other victims, 
especially prisoners of war, and not wishing to exacerbate Switzerland’s rela-
tions with the belligerent States – the ICRC essentially relied on its delegates to 
make confidential representations to the authorities of the Reich or its satellites. 
However, these delegates had no access to the corridors of power. Only towards 
the end of the war did the ICRC’s leaders make high-level representations to 
certain leaders of the Reich and its satellites.23
The Assembly statement continues: 
Having confined itself to two options – that of the very limited aid operation 
it was carrying out for the victims of Nazi persecution, with derisory results in 
regard to the situation of the victims and no impact on the genocide, and that 
of public condemnation, an ultimate weapon that the ICRC felt it could not 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

144	
The Contemporary ICRC
use, the organization was unable – until the last months of the war – to make 
determined, sustained, high-level diplomatic representations to the leaders of 
the Reich…. Such approaches should have been attempted, even if it could be 
doubted that the desired results would be achieved….
Within the Assembly the view was articulated that the various ICRC 
comments and publications about the Holocaust since the late 1980s did 
not add up to a consistent ICRC position and had not been widely under-
stood correctly. In this view, the ICRC during World War II was cor-
rect for worrying about the effect of a public statement in 1942 on POW 
matters. The Germans were, more or less, adhering to the 1929 GC on 
POWs with the Allies (but not with the Soviets who had never ratified 
that GC), the ICRC was being allowed to act as a neutral intermediary 
on that subject, there were tensions between the Allies and the Nazis 
regarding POW affairs, and it was possible that the Nazis might pull out 
of reciprocal POW arrangements and block various ICRC activities.
Photograph 7.3  ICRC representatives talk to POWs (mainly French) 
at a German POW camp at Rawa-Ruska, on the border between Poland 
and Ukraine, 1942. Fear of collapse of these kinds of prison visits was 
one reason some at the ICRC did not want to press the Nazis very hard 
about treatment of Jews and other detainees who were not POWs and 
not legally protected under the 1929 Geneva Convention. It was in 
1942 that the Nazis escalated plans for the Final Solution.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ICRC Relations with Bern: Part I	
145
In 2006 the Assembly was endorsing the view that the ICRC’s big 
failure in the 1940s was failing to send someone like Burckhardt, with 
good access to high levels of German officialdom, to press the case 
about unacceptable violations of human dignity – even if such matters 
were not then fully covered by IHL. In this view the Nazi policies were 
so grave that the ICRC should have made that high-level effort even 
if Geneva believed the démarche would do no good. The effort itself 
would show that the organization had tried every reasonable option and 
thus had protected its reputation in the future, as well as protecting 
ongoing POW arrangements. The Assembly seemed to imply in 2006: 
If dynamic quiet diplomacy failed, and if there were ongoing humani-
tarian programs, the ICRC would be correct not to publicly denounce 
specific atrocities. The Assembly statement did recognize the role of 
Swiss nationalism in ICRC thinking in 1942 by including the polite 
phrase “not wishing to exacerbate Switzerland’s relations with the bel-
ligerent States….”
In any event the Assembly, with apparently little debate, approved what 
had been drafted by a staff member and what President Kellenberger 
supported. But then apparently it was Kellenberger who decided not to 
publish the statement in the Review or otherwise give it great publicity. It 
was posted on the ICRC website but not featured prominently. Probably 
the ICRC did not want to stir up any new controversies by calling atten-
tion to its past mistakes. This official statement about the ICRC and the 
Holocaust, and for now the last document on the subject, has languished 
in the shadows ever since. Some staff persons did not know it was in the 
public domain.24
Maurer in 2015 was not really disagreeing with the 2006 statement but 
rather was presenting ICRC doctrine on public denunciation of atrocity 
in a way that was tailored to his audience – talking about publicity and 
transparency but closing with an emphasis on other steps besides full 
silence or explicit denunciation. ICRC doctrine as well as practice con-
tinues to emphasize confidential dialogue, with specific public denuncia-
tion of war crimes or gross violations of human rights as an exceptional 
last resort. Even then, specific public denunciation has to be seen as in 
the interest of victims, which in practice it almost never is at the Geneva 
headquarters.
V	
Lessons Applied in Rwanda
Rwanda in spring 1994 is illustrative about what the ICRC really learned 
from 1942, and what ICRC doctrine on communication and response to 
atrocities really means in contemporary times. In the face of atrocities by 
militant Hutus primarily against Tutsi but a few others (and with some 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

146	
The Contemporary ICRC
Tutsi massacres of a smaller number of Hutus), resulting in the esti-
mated deaths of around 800,000 Tutsis, the ICRC stayed in the country 
to do what good it could while making calculated public statements. It 
operated on the edge of danger to its personnel there.
According to Philippe Gaillard, who was head of the ICRC delegation 
in Rwanda at the time of the genocide: 
The Rwandan genocide was so well covered by the media, especially by the west-
ern media, that everyone could follow it on TV, radio or in newspapers every 
day. One could say that it was transmitted live, at least live enough to inform the 
governments and public about what was really happening there…. The ICRC 
contributed to this media coverage and reporting like it maybe never had done 
in its almost 130 years of existence at that time. On 28 April 1994, some three 
weeks after the beginning of the genocide, the ICRC called on the governments 
concerned including all members of the Security Council to take all possible 
measures to put an end to the massacres. The words used – “systematic carnage,” 
“the extermination of a significant portion of the civilian population” – left no room 
for doubt about what was going on.25
So the ICRC was not silent about the Rwanda genocide, but it crafted 
its language so that (just barely) it could stay in the country in order to 
run a hospital that continued to function on the basis of impartiality – 
and was seen as neutral. It made representations to the authorities that 
resulted in children being spared in some orphanages, or Tutsi adults 
saved in this or that jurisdiction. It did what it could in terms of some 
humanitarian good, even as the genocide continued until the victory of 
the invading and Tutsi-dominated Rwandan Patriotic Front.
Of course, the Rwandan genocide was different from 1942. In 1994 
ICRC officials did not have to pay much attention to complicating 
Swiss national interests and whether some high officials in Bern might 
object to an ICRC pending decision. Rwanda had no plans to invade the 
Helvetian Republic.
VI	
The Same Lesson Regarding Russia in Syria
ICRC relations with Russia in recent years demonstrated how the ICRC 
deals with atrocities, in keeping with what happened in Rwanda, and 
with what the Assembly said in its doctrinal statement of 2006. It is all 
of one piece, with the 1940s in the background. Here we are not talking 
about genocide but about major war crimes. But ICRC thinking and 
process remain the same on both matters.
In Syria 2011 to 2021, from the government side, with Russia fight-
ing on the side of the Assad regime from about 2015, there were many 
attacks on medical facilities and use of chlorine bombs, as well as the 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ICRC Relations with Bern: Part I	
147
failure to consistently exercise due diligence in distinguishing between 
civilian and military targets. Human Rights Watch eventually released 
a highly critical report about Russian–Syrian bombing policies.26 The 
ICRC, active on the ground mainly in government-controlled areas, 
protested against inhumane violence in general, but did not call out 
Moscow by name for its role, directly or indirectly, in war crimes as it 
supported the Assad government. In government-controlled areas the 
organization was allowed to deliver some humanitarian relief working 
with the Syrian Arab Red Crescent. It manifested a few cross-border 
operations to rebel held areas. It carried out some routine prison visits 
but not to detainees under interrogation held by the security services. 
(Recall the analysis of the ICRC and the Syrian civil war at the end of 
the last chapter.)
The ICRC had a general strategy underway of engagement with vari-
ous Russian officials for long-term confidence building. Moreover, it, 
was engaged with Russia and its allies with some limited humanitarian 
achievements in Eastern Ukraine from 2014, Libya, Nagorno-Karabagh, 
and probably elsewhere. Geneva had discussions with Foreign Minister 
Lavrov and other high foreign policy officials which the Geneva head-
quarters saw in positive terms. In 2021 the Russian Foreign Ministry 
awarded the F.F. Martens Medal to Peter Maurer representing the 
ICRC for its humanitarian record, whatever that signified. (Winning the 
prize could be seen as success for the ICRC strategy of building confi-
dence and good relations, or as a Russian effort to reward the ICRC for 
keeping silent about, and thus being complicit with, Moscow’s contro-
versial policies.)
In any event ICRC policy was to avoid explicitly denouncing Russia for 
war crimes in Syria especially from Russian air force bombing. The big 
picture about ICRC programs not only in Syria but also about dealing 
with Russia across different situations was controlling, and a good exam-
ple of how the ICRC normally operated, consistent with various doc-
trinal statements, and consistent with arguably the main lesson learned 
from the Holocaust. The main focus was said to be on dynamic quiet 
diplomacy and not explicit public protest, especially if some humanitar-
ian progress was being made somewhere with a particular actor. Public 
denouncement of specific violations of IHL and/or human dignity, and 
active prosecution for war crimes, was almost entirely the domain of 
others. That posture facilitated some pragmatic help for victims – at 
least sometimes. Doctrine allowed for public specific protest as a last 
resort, but it was almost never a favored course of action. This was the 
ICRC general policy followed in the Ukraine war in 2022, discussed in 
the Epilogue.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

148	
The Contemporary ICRC
There seems no evidence that the evolution of ICRC doctrine and 
particular decisions about public protest, or the lack thereof, involved 
Swiss officials in Bern. Rather, ICRC doctrine and policy practice about 
public protest stemmed from ICRC experience and thinking at the top 
in Geneva. Such was not the case, of course, in 1942.
VII	
Further Reflections
After World War II, Huber and Burckhardt wrote a letter to President 
Truman seeking clemency for the German convicted war criminal Ernst 
von Weizsacker, who had been secretary of state, or the top civil servant, 
in the German Foreign Ministry – and later German ambassador to the 
Vatican. This letter, ill-advised for a humanitarian organization, con-
firmed the view that ICRC key leaders saw conservative Germans (and 
Italians), even those complicit in war crimes, as being useful in blocking 
the advance of communism, which they saw as threatening Switzerland 
and the rest of the West. For Burckhardt, the letter to Truman culmi-
nated a sizable effort on behalf of several Nazi war criminals who had been 
friendly to Switzerland or who had helped Burckhardt in his extracurricu-
lar efforts to mediate a peace with Britain during the war. Huber, never 
decisive, went along with what was no doubt a Burckhardt initiative.27
In the fall of 1943, the Nazis had taken over Rome from the collapsed 
Mussolini regime. The Vatican arranged a meeting with Ambassador 
Weizsacker. The relatively new Pope, Pius XII (Pachelli), had decided 
to pursue a belated concern of his predecessor, Pius XI (Ratti), and con-
test the Italian anti-Semitic laws. (The latter had drafted a long statement 
opposed to Nazi policy toward the Jews which was never published.) 
The Pope’s emissary, Cardinal Maglione, asked Weizsacker to intervene 
to protect slightly more than 1,000 Jews detained in a nearby building. 
Weizsacker refused, declining to undermine Hitler’s instructions. A couple 
of days later the Jews were deported to Auschwitz. Only sixteen survived.28
That Huber and Burckhardt would petition Truman on behalf of 
Weizsaker indicated the nature of the views at the top of the ICRC dur-
ing the Nazi years. Such views represented a moral low point in the his-
tory of the ICRC. Deference to Swiss national interests and calculations 
about the dangers of communism loomed large.
VIII	
Universal Humanitarianism and Universal Religion
National RC Societies were not usually paragons of virtue when it came 
to NIIHA values, and the historian John Hutchinson has written about 
how the RC Movement had become nationalized and militarized even 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ICRC Relations with Bern: Part I	
149
before the Second World War.29 But the ICRC, too, has had its own 
controversial eras as well. Just as it is difficult to keep religion from being 
nationalized, so is it difficult to avoid the same fate for a cosmopolitan 
humanitarianism. This was quite evident at ICRC headquarters.
The German Lutheran pastor Dietrich Bonhoeffer famously argued 
that Christianity was supposed to be a universal religion whose tenets 
were not supposed to be nationalized or made secondary to national 
or other secular interests. Christianity, being a universal faith, required 
tough choices for its believers in resisting popular trends.30 He was killed 
by the Nazis for his beliefs. Many, if not most, Christian churches – 
indeed many, if not most, religions – conform to prevailing national sen-
timent about the priority of national interest and national security.
One way to understand ICRC history is to see it as an evolution toward 
a rigorous and professional commitment to NIIHA universal norms, 
trying to improve on its amateurish start complete with fuzzy thinking 
about things such as Swiss nationalism and deference to the Swiss gov-
ernment. The 1930s and 1940s show the details of why that evolution 
had not proceeded very far back then.
Just as Moynier never seemed to have engaged in self-evaluation about 
his support for colonialism and King Leopold’s brutal Congo Free State, 
so Huber and Burckhardt never seemed to have engaged in self-evaluation 
about their humanitarian failures in the 1930s and 1940s – witness the let-
ter to Truman after the war. If there was private agonizing, Huber seems 
to have done more of it than Burckhardt.31 The Assembly statement in 
2006 about the Holocaust wanted to make sure there was reflection about 
1942 and adjacent years, and that the reflection hit on arguably the right 
points. Even so, the 2006 ICRC Assembly statement contained only dip-
lomatic language and soft reference to the role of persons in the Swiss 
government in the defective decisions of the ICRC in 1942.
IX	
Comparison with Amnesty International, London
Here one might usefully bring in a rough analogy from the history of 
Amnesty International (AI). The founder of AI, Peter Benenson, was 
a bit like Henry Dunant: he was a visionary rather than a systematic 
manager, was very good at promoting a cause with much energy, was 
outraged by a certain injustice, was a committed religious believer, and 
became the author of various schemes and visions beyond the one for 
which he is mainly remembered. But that is not the main point here.32
Benenson, a British citizen who was based in London and pushing 
for more attention to political prisoners from 1961, assumed that the 
British government, especially when Labour was in power, shared his 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

150	
The Contemporary ICRC
commitment to human rights and was equally concerned about the fate 
of political prisoners. And so there developed between Benenson rep-
resenting AI and British governments various joint maneuvers in, for 
example, South Africa, Haiti, Southern Rhodesia, and Aden. Some of 
this cooperation was both under the table and of dubious ethics.33
It turned out that, whereas Benenson and AI were interested in detained 
individuals per se, the British government was interested in burnishing its 
image and other aspects of its national interests as it defined them. The joint 
convergence on political prisoners was for different reasons, with different 
objectives. When the bubble of secret dealings eventually burst, Benenson 
had to resign from AI. The organization decided on rejecting any donations 
from governments in the future, a policy position which remains today.
This historical comparison between Amnesty in London and the ICRC 
is not exact, and today the ICRC continues to have close relations with 
the Swiss government both diplomatically and financially. The last four 
ICRC presidents, and now the current one, Mme. Mirjana Spoljaric, 
first had careers as Swiss federal officials (but not all entirely with the 
Foreign Ministry). But the comparison holds on an important point: At 
times both the leaders of the early Amnesty in London and of the early 
ICRC in Geneva assumed that their government was different, more eth-
ical, more genuinely committed to human rights or human dignity than 
other governments, and in the Swiss case more genuinely neutral – and 
worthy of some deference. And so both AI and the ICRC sometimes fell 
into the trap of not guarding their independence enough and not keep-
ing a necessary distance from their national political leaders. A shared 
nationalism, complete with shoddy thinking, was pervasive early on.
X	
Conclusion
There is much more to be said about ICRC relations with Swiss authori-
ties, and the subject is continued in the next chapter.
Notes
	1	 G. Best, War and Law Since 1945 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1994), 
p. 376.
	2	 Gerald Steinacher, Humanitarians at War: The Red Cross in the Shadow of the 
Holocaust (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2017), pp. 104–105. Burckhardt 
at that time had been ICRC president and Ruegger would be in the future.
	3	 Cédric Cotter, (S’)Aider pour survivre. Action humanitaire et neutralité suisse 
pendant la Première Guerre mondiale (Chêne-Bourg: Georg Editeur, 2017), esp. 
pp. 243–248.
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ICRC Relations with Bern: Part I	
151
	 4	 For an English summary of his book in German, see Thomas Bruckner, “The 
ICRC and Switzerland 1919–1939: A ‘Special Relationship’ Examined,” 
Imperial and Global Forum, May 28, 2018, https://imperialglobalexeter 
.com/2018/05/28/the-icrc-and-switzerland-1919-1939-a-special-­
relationship-examined/ (accessed November 16, 2022).
	 5	 Handbook of the International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement (Geneva: 
ICRC-Federation, 1986), 14th ed., p. 527.
	 6	 BBC News, “Karadzic’s Wife Quits Red Cross Post,” December 13, 2002, 
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/europe/2571579.stm (accessed November 17, 
2022); Reuters, “World Briefing/Europe: Bosnia: Karadzic’s Wife Quits 
Red Cross Post,” December 13, 2002, www.nytimes.com/2002/12/13/
world/world-briefing-europe-bosnia-karadzic-s-wife-quits-red-cross-post 
.html (accessed November 17, 2022); Radio Free Europe and Radio 
Liberty, “Balkan Report,” May 31, 2002, www.rferl.org/a/1341067.html 
(accessed November 17, 2022); Reuters, “Timeline: Events Leading to Trial 
of Radovan Karadzic,” www.reuters.com/article/us-warcrimes-karadzic-
trial/timeline-events-leading-to-trial-of-radovan-karadzic-idUSTRE 
59M3I720091023 (accessed November 17, 2022).
	 7	 Diego Fiscalini, “Des elites au service d’une cause humanitaire: le Comité 
International de la Croix-Rouge,” Mémoire de license, University of Geneva, 
Faculty of Letters, Department of History, 1985. Some say this student 
account is not entirely accurate, but no one has produced a better study so far.
	 8	 The standard account on Spain, promoted by the organization, was 
by Marcel Junod, Le Troisième Combattant (Geneva: ICRC, 1947). 
Baudendistel, cited later, suggests that Junod was not a completely reliable 
source concerning both Ethiopia and Spain. The ICRC research historian 
has produced a short account on Spain: Daniel Palmieri, “Une neutralité, 
sous influence?: le CICR, Franco, et les victimes,” Revue Suisse d’Histoire, 
59/3 (2009), pp. 279–297.
	 9	 The definitive source is Rainer Baudendistel, Between Bombs and Good 
Intentions: The Red Cross and the Italo-Ethiopian War, 1935–1936 (New York 
and Oxford: Berghahn Books, 2006).
	10	 See also “Guiseppe Motta,” The Anthology of Swiss Legal Culture, www 
.legalanthology.ch/motta_guiseppe_1871/ (accessed November 17, 2022).
	11	 Yves Sandoz presents a rather positive view of Huber in “Max Huber and the 
Red Cross,” European Journal of International Law, 18/1 (2007), pp. 171–197 
while noting his controversial corporate connections. See also “Le Comité 
International de la Croix-Rouge,” in L’Observatoire de l’Action Humanitaire, no 
date, www.observatoire-humanitaire.org/en/index.php?page=fiche-ong.php& 
part=commentaires&chapitre=311&id=84 (accessed November 17, 2022) 
where one reads the following: “Max Huber was first attacked by the Swiss 
communist press in July 1936, because his firm’s subsidiary in Venetia, the 
SAVA (Società Alluminio Veneto Anonima), was producing aluminum and 
trading with the defense industry in Italy as the fascists invaded Ethiopia. 
From 1929 onwards, Max Huber also directed his father’s metallurgical 
company, Alusuisse & Oerlikon, which manufactured weapons for Nazi 
Germany during World War Two. When conflict broke out in 1939, Max 
Huber decided to donate his salary to the ICRC, but did not resign from his 
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

152	
The Contemporary ICRC
position. Meanwhile, his company’s factory in Singen, Germany, violated the 
Geneva Conventions by using OST (Ostarbeiter) labor provided by deported 
persons and Soviet prisoners of war captured after 1941.”
	12	 Isabelle Voneche Cardia, Neutralité et engagement. Les relations entre le Comité 
international de la Croix-Rouge et le gouvernement suisse pendant la Seconde 
Guerre mondiale (Lausanne: History Society of Swiss Romand, 2012).
	13	 A short and journalistic, but accurate, comparison can be found at: Roger 
Cohen, “The (not so) Neutrals of WWII,” New York Times, January 26, 1997, 
www.nytimes.com/1997/01/26/weekinreview/the-not-so-neutrals-of-world-
war-ii.html (accessed November 17, 2022).
	14	 One independent historian summarized the Swiss overall record toward 
Jewish refugees as “commendable, but not impressive.” Yehuda Bauer, 
The Holocaust in Historical Perspective (Canberra: Australian National 
University Press, 1978), p. 91, https://openresearch-repository.anu.edu.au/
bitstream/1885/114693/2/b12168439.pdf (accessed November 17, 2022). 
See further the extensive, official, and more critical Bergier report on Swiss–
German relations during the Nazi era, published in 2002, “Independent 
Commission of Experts: Switzerland-Second World War (ICE),” www.uek 
.ch/en/index.htm (accessed November 17, 2022).
	15	 David P. Forsythe, The Humanitarians: The International Committee of the Red 
Cross (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005).
	16	 James Crossland, Britain and the International Committee of the Red Cross, 
1939–1945 (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2014).
	17	 It should be stressed that this is not the place for a detailed review of the 
ICRC record in World War II, including the Holocaust. That record has 
been recorded not only by the organization but also by independent scholars 
such as Jean-Claude Favez, The Red Cross and the Holocaust (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1999; the earlier French edition was Une 
Mission Impossible?, Lausanne: Editions Payot, 1988) and Arieh Ben-Tov, 
Facing the Holocaust in Budapest: The International Committee of the Red Cross 
and the Jews in Hungary, 1943–1945 (Boston: Martinus Nijhoff, 1988).
	18	 Favez, The Red Cross and the Holocaust, p. 282, concludes that the ICRC 
should have spoken out about the Nazi genocide.
	19	 ICRC, “Remembering the Shoah: The ICRC and the International 
Community’s Efforts in Responding to Genocide,” April 2015, www.icrc 
.org/en/document/remembering-shoah-icrc-and-international-communitys-
efforts-responding-genocide-and (accessed November 17, 2022).
	20	 ICRC, “The ICRC’s External Communication Doctrine,” May 2, 2016, 
www.icrc.org/en/document/icrc-external-communication-doctrine (accessed 
November 17, 2022).
	21	 ICRC, “Action by the ICRC in the Event of Violations of International Human-
itarian Law or of Other Fundamental Rules Protecting Persons in Situations of 
Violence,” no date, https://library.icrc.org/library/search/notice?noticeNr=20414 
(accessed November 17, 2022); and ICRC, “The ICRC’s Confidential 
Approach: Specific Means Employed by the ICRC to Ensure Respect for the 
Law by State and Non-State Authorities,” no date, https://library.icrc.org/
library/search/notice?noticeNr=37714 (accessed November 17, 2022).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press

ICRC Relations with Bern: Part I	
153
	22	 ICRC, “The Nazi Genocide and Other Persecutions,” October 25, 2007, 
www.icrc.org/en/document/wwii-nazi-genocide-and-other-persecutions 
(accessed November 17, 2022).
	23	 Ibid.
	24	 This doctrinal statement No. 64, posted in 2007, was a slightly different 
version of a 2002 statement by François Bugnion posted in 2002: “Dialogue 
with the Past: the ICRC and the Nazi Death Camps,” ICRC, November 5, 
2002, www.icrc.org/en/doc/resources/documents/misc/6ayg86.htm (accessed 
November 18, 2022). In his post on the ICRC website, Bugnion, who played 
a large role in the fashioning of Doctrine 64, writes: “Even more than the 
absence of public condemnation, it is, in my opinion, the timidity of the con-
fidential representations that weighs most heavily against the ICRC.” For a 
recent exposition of the same theme about dynamic quiet diplomacy, against 
the same historical background, see Daniel Palmieri, “Savoir et se taire: le 
Comité International de la Croix-Rouge et la Shoah,” Revue d’Histoire de la 
Shoah, 2019/1 (No. 210), pp. 117–129. Palmieri is the senior historian at 
the ICRC.
	25	 Philippe Gaillard, “Rwanda 1994: ‘… kill as many people as you want, you 
cannot kill their memory’.” ICRC, March 29, 2004, www.icrc.org/en/doc/
resources/documents/misc/5xfncq.htm (accessed November 18, 2022).
	26	 Human Rights Watch, “Syria/Russia: Strategy Targeted Civilian Infrastruc-
ture,” October 15, 2020, www.hrw.org/news/2020/10/15/syria/russia-strategy-
targeted-civilian-infrastructure# (accessed November 18, 2022).
	27	 Steinacher, Humanitarians at War, pp. 126–136.
	28	 David I. Kertzer, The Pope and Mussolini: The Secret History of Pius XI and the 
Rise of Fascism in Europe (New York: Random House, 2014), pp. 193–195.
	29	 Champions of Charity: War and the Rise of the Red Cross (Boulder: Westview 
Press, 1996).
	30	 From a multitude of sources on the subject, one can start with Bonhoeffer, 
The Costs of Discipleship (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1959), translated 
from the original 1937 publication.
	31	 In Favez, The Red Cross and the Holocaust, the author closes with a thumb-
nail sketch of some leading personalities including Huber and Burckhardt. 
Neither comes off especially well. He shows that neither were careful about 
the difference between humanitarian neutrality and Swiss political neutral-
ity. Even ICRC President Sommaruga, who as we will see was very keen on 
ICRC independence, took exception to what Favez said about Huber, as 
recorded in the final pages of the Favez book. On this matter Favez was right 
and Sommaruga was overly touchy and defensive about ICRC history.
	32	 Tom Buchanan, Amnesty International and Human Rights Activism in Postwar 
Britain, 1945–1977 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2020).
	33	 See also Kirsten Sellars, “Human Rights and the Colonies: Deceit, Deception, 
and Discovery,” The Commonwealth Journal of International Affairs, 93/377, 
2004, www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/0035853042000300197?scrol
l=top&needAccess=true (accessed November 18, 2022).
https://doi.org/10.1017/9781009387002.008 Published online by Cambridge University Press