Taiwo A. Adebiyi
Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering,
University of Houston,
4226 Martin Luther King Boulevard,
Houston, TX, 77204-4003
email: taadebi2@cougarnet.uh.edu
Nafeezat A. Ajenifuja
Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering,
University of Houston,
4226 Martin Luther King Boulevard,
Houston, TX, 77204-4003
email: naajenif@cougarnet.uh.edu
Ruda Zhang1
Assistant Professor
Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering,
University of Houston,
4226 Martin Luther King Boulevard,
Houston, TX, 77204-4003
email: rudaz@central.uh.edu
Digital Twins and Civil
Engineering Phases:
Reorienting Adoption Strategies
Digital twin (DT) technology has received immense attention over the years due to the
promises it presents to various stakeholders in science and engineering. As a result, dif-
ferent thematic areas of DT have been explored. This is no different in specific fields such
as manufacturing, automation, oil and gas, and civil engineering, leading to fragmented
approaches for field-specific applications. The civil engineering industry is further dis-
advantaged in this regard as it relies on external techniques by other engineering fields
for its DT adoption. A rising consequence of these extensions is a concentrated appli-
cation of DT to the operations and maintenance phase. On another spectrum, Building
Information Modeling (BIM) is pervasively utilized in the planning/design phase, and the
transient nature of the construction phase remains a challenge for its DT adoption. In
this paper, we present a phase-based development of DT in the Architecture, Engineering,
and Construction industry. We commence by presenting succinct expositions on DT as
a concept and as a service, and establish a five-level scale system. Furthermore, we
present separately a systematic literature review of the conventional techniques employed
at each civil engineering phase. In this regard, we identified enabling technologies such
as computer vision for extended sensing and the Internet of Things for reliable integration.
Ultimately, we attempt to reveal DT as an important tool across the entire life cycle of
civil engineering projects, and nudge researchers to think more holistically in their quest
for the integration of DT for civil engineering applications.
Keywords: Digital Twins, Civil Engineering, Phases/Life Cycle, Planning/Design, Con-
struction, Operation and Maintenance
1
Introduction
The idea of Digital Twin (DT) has evolved as a leading techno-
logical idea of the fourth industry revolution, with Gartner research
firm predicting the idea as one of the top ten most promising tech-
nology trends over the next ten years [1]. We do not find such
estimation surprising as DT has successfully evolved across sev-
eral industries, especially in manufacturing [2,3], aviation [4,5],
and oil and gas sectors [6,7]. For example, leading technological
firms such as General Electric (GE), Siemens, British Petroleum
(BP), and Airbus, have implemented DTs for optimized production
[8,9].
As already stated by several researchers [10–12], such a
level of DT adoption has not been witnessed in the civil engineer-
ing industry. Different reasons have been highlighted for this slow
pace which include the perceived rigidity of the civil engineer-
ing profession and the complexity of its projects. Recalling that
every civil engineering project must evolve across three distinct
but sequential phases including planning/design, construction, and
operation and maintenance, the direct adoption of DT from other
engineering disciplines will be limiting [12]. Thus, the transient
nature of civil engineering projects and the longevity of their built
structures compels a simplified representation of DT with increas-
ing complexities at consecutive phases. Pregnolato et al. [13] also
highlighted that the slow rate of change of civil engineering assets
makes real-time twinning—a critical part of DT—challenging.
Currently, most civil-engineering-based attempts for DT cre-
ation rely on external techniques by other engineering fields such
as manufacturing and aviation industries, birthing an indirect con-
sequence of a segmented application of DT to the operation and
maintenance phase. Torzoni et al. [14] extended a probabilistic
graphic model already applied to an unmanned aerial vehicle orig-
inally formulated by Kapteyn et al. [15] to develop a predictive DT
1Corresponding Author.
for the health monitoring and management planning of existing
structures. While several works of literature [16–19] exist on the
review of DT as a concept and its values to engineering systems and
operations, such review-based works are practically non-existent in
the civil engineering sector when compared to parallel industries.
In a trend analysis study by Lamb [11], just an estimate of six
percent of published DT-related literature since 2016 is directly
linked to the built environment, with about fifty percent of the lit-
erature connected to the manufacturing sector. Furthermore, only
an extremely few number of publications focused on the general
overview of DT for holistic civil engineering applications, as most
published works are inclined towards DT as an optimized system
for structural health monitoring.
Arup [20] in their review-based report on DT and its signif-
icance for the civil engineering profession established a metric
system for scaling and classification, and also its values through
case studies analysis. Pregnolato et al. [13] reviewed the state-
of-the-art DTs in civil engineering which mostly highlights their
use on already constructed structures, a brief review on BIM and
DT, and a proposed DT workflow process for bridge management.
Despite the title: “DT framework in civil engineering”, Torzoni et
al. [14] in their recent publication merely extended existing mathe-
matical models for SHM. Although Jiang et al. [21] discussed DT
and civil engineering phases, the authors solely reported possible
DT applications across these phases, focusing less on combining
conventional civil engineering techniques and technologies with
recent computational advances for DT creation. It is thus crucial
to consider what DT means to civil engineering at every phase of
its project life cycle, clarifying their distinctiveness and connect-
edness which is the crux of this paper. Importantly, we attempt
to reveal DT as an important system across every civil engineer-
ing phase and nudge researchers to think more holistically in their
quest for the integration of DT for civil engineering applications.
Journal of Computing and
Information Science in Engineering
Copyright © by ASME
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT / 1
arXiv:2403.02426v2  [cs.CE]  7 Aug 2024

We commence this paper with succinct clarifications on DT def-
initions and phase-based conceptual overviews, classification, and
scales in Section 2. We then present a general review of DT and
civil engineering phases in Section 3, setting the tone for the next
three sections. Sections 4, 5, and 6 thoroughly explore each phase
by introducing state-of-the-art tools and techniques that are con-
ventionally applied, reporting demonstrated works, and developing
concepts/frameworks for phase-based DT applications. Through
our review-based methodologies, we generate insights and future
research directions for holistic civil engineering applications, as
we clearly show that all the tools needed for DT realizations are
already available. We then conclude by summarizing the afore-
mentioned expositions in Section 7.
2
DT Conceptual Model Developments, Classification,
and Scale
We build on already existing views to reveal the central concepts
of DT. Through our extensive reviews, we notice the definition of
DT across two spectrums, i.e., in terms of development and in
terms of service or an integration of both. As presented in Ta-
ble 1, we notice that academic-based definitions are more inclined
toward DT developments while industry-based definitions are in-
clined toward DT services (i.e., values created).
Several works
[16,17,19,20,22] have been done to resolve the varying definitions
of DT, and as such, we will not follow suits in this regard but
rather present the mandatory components of DT with emphasis on
their distinguishing features and minimal services, leading to some
classifications.
In the simplest possible form, we view DT as an advancement
to existing technologies for the virtual representation of a physical
system, with the added possibilities of real-time bi-directional data
exchange, feedback, and control, giving way to several applica-
tions. We note that this view is sufficient for our expositions on
DT development for the design and construction phases but lacks
technical adequacy for the operational and maintenance phases of
civil engineering projects.
For this, we adopt Kapteyn et.
al’s
[15] conceptual view of DT and its corresponding physical twin as
two-way tightly coupled dynamical systems evolving through their
respective state spaces. Through this view, probabilistic formula-
tions are enabled: a fundamental part of uncertainty quantification
(UQ) which we strongly note to be a key aspect of DT development
and service.
At the bare minimum, a DT system should have a corresponding
physical twin, bi-directional real-to-virtual connection, real-time
data acquisition and update (feedback), and control i.e., being able
to influence the actions of the physical twin (Figure 1). To quantify
the performance of DT, a reward metric is usually established [15],
which can also be termed service. To re-emphasize the requisite
need for UQ, we need to debunk the perceptions of DT as being in-
distinguishable from its physical twin or as an exact mirror/replica
of the same. As rightly pointed out by Arup [20], DT should be
relevant abstractions of the physical twin. As opposed to the literal
definition of a twin, modeling the entire physical state (if possi-
ble) of an asset will be computationally intractable, and as such
DT will attempt to represent the corresponding digital state with
a high level of complexity but simple enough for computational
efficiencies [15]. Based on this, representative errors that occur
across every component of DT must be accounted for to ensure
reliability, wherein UQ is a critical recipe.
The varying conceptual views of DT have led to different types
of classifications in the body of literature, two of which will be
of importance for this work. First is a hierarchical classification
based on the level of integration given by Kritzinger et al. [19]. It
starts with the Digital Model which is simply a digital represen-
tation of an asset without automated data exchange between the
physical asset and digital object. A further improvement on the
digital model to include an automated one-way data flow is termed
Digital Shadow. Ultimately, a DT ensues when there is an auto-
mated bi-directional data exchange with its corresponding physical
Real Asset
Digital Twin
Data
Feedback
Control
Fig. 1
DT conceptual view. Requisite components include a
virtual representation of a physical asset, real-time bi-directional
data exchange, feedback, and control.
asset.
This classification will particularly become important in
DT’s relation to BIM for civil engineering projects. Another is
the service-based classification reported by Elfarri et al. [23] com-
prising DT, Digital sibling, and Digital threads. Digital Sibling,
also reported by [17] does not necessarily run in real-time but is
used for scenario-based (what-if) analysis for risk assessments, and
Digital Threads utilize overtime DT predictions for designing the
next generation of assets. Having established the fundamental con-
cepts of DT and classifications, we now present a scaling system
to categorize the realizations of DT.
2.1
Scaling Metric for DT. Arup [20] developed a five-level
scale quantifying the present and probable future capabilities of
DT based on four metrics which include Autonomy, Intelligence,
Learning, and Fidelity. These four metrics must be individually
evaluated from level one (1) to level five (5), and their cumulation
results in a 5-level scale for DT as presented in Table 2. Elfarri
et al. [23] reported a DT capability level scale in six (6) tiers—
ranging from 0 to 5, with each tier characterized by their increasing
level of complexities and functionalities, also presented in Table 2.
We combined these scaling systems with our conceptual views of
DT to introduce a corresponding five-level scale system. Precisely,
a level-1 DT only involves digital representations of its respective
asset system; an improvement to level-2 includes real-time monitor-
ing, level-3 further includes predictive capability, level-4 permits
interaction or learning from the twin data and environment, and
level-5 comprises all of the aforementioned with a distinctive ca-
pacity for autonomous control. It should be noted that we consider
the zeroth-level of [23]’s scale to be negligible without loss of
generality.
3
Digital Twin and Civil Engineering Phases
“Construction 4.0” is the corresponding terminology of the
fourth industrial revolution (Industry 4.0) in the Architecture, En-
gineering, and Construction (AEC) industry. Although still in its
infancy, the notion of “Construction 4.0” such as DT can be driven
by several technologies that are currently being applied across the
different civil engineering phases (Fig. 2). In this section, we pro-
vide a succinct review of these technologies and their limitations,
delineating the need for a DT as a forward-thinking approach.
Qi et al. [30] describe construction as a production process,
where the products are buildings. Associated with each product is
a product-life cycle, which represents the conception till retirement
of the product. In translation, the product life cycle of construction
is conventionally categorized into the design phase, construction
phase, operation and maintenance phase, and demolition phase.
The design phase witnessed Building Information Modeling (BIM)
as its major transforming technology and one of the building blocks
2 / ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Transactions of the ASME

Table 1
Academic and industry definitions of DT (Inspired by [20]).
References
Definition
Spectrum
Grieves (Academia)
The digital twin is a set of virtual information constructs that fully de-
scribes a potential or actual physical manufactured product from the micro
(atomic level) to the macro (geometrical level) [24]. In a further expo-
sition, Grieves highlighted DT to consist of a physical product, a virtual
representation, and bi-directional data connections for information ex-
change [25].
Service + Development
IBM (Industry)
A digital twin is a virtual representation of an object or system that spans
its lifecycle, is updated from real-time data, and uses simulation, machine
learning, and reasoning to help decision-making [26].
Service + Development
Rasheed et al. (Academia)
A digital twin is defined as a virtual representation of a physical asset en-
abled through data and simulators for real-time prediction, optimization,
monitoring, controlling, and improved decision-making [17].
Service + Development
AIAA (Academia + Industry)
A DT is a set of virtual information constructs that mimic the structure,
context, and behavior of an individual/unique physical asset, or a group
of physical assets, is dynamically updated with data from its physical twin
throughout its life cycle and informs decisions that realize value. They
advanced the essential elements of DT to comprise a model, asset, and
data/information connectedness between the two [22].
Service + Development
General Electric (Industry)
A digital twin is a living model that drives a business outcome [27]
Service
Siemens (Industry)
A digital twin is a virtual representation of a physical product or process,
used to understand and predict the physical counterpart’s performance
characteristics. [28]
Service
Glaessgen
&
Stargel
(Academia)
DT is an integrated multiphysics, multiscale, probabilistic simulation of
an as-built system that uses the best available physical models, sensor
updates, history, etc., to mirror the life of its corresponding twin [29].
Service + Development
for the new evolution. BIM signified a shift from traditional 2D
computer-aided design (CAD) modeling to 3D parametric mod-
eling with interoperability features (see Section 4) for improved
efficiency. Over the years, BIM has been universally adopted for
the modeling and design of AEC projects. Doumbuoya et al. [31]
analyzed the utilization ratio of BIM in the industry and concluded
that its rate of use is 55% during the design phase, and 52% during
the detail design and tender stage. The authors also reported that
the adoption of 3D modeling has resulted in a productivity gain of
about 15% of drawing production hours. Although BIM is ideally
a life cycle process integration platform [32], a major challenge
in its adoption is its lack of sensitivity to change [31]. While nu-
merous efforts have been employed to improve BIM functionality
across different spheres [33,34], there is a challenge with adopt-
ing it for already existing structures [35], i.e., as-built BIM model.
In later sections, we will introduce the supporting mechanisms to
drive BIM for such purposes and beyond – all geared toward DT
development and application.
The construction phase is very vital as it is the phase in which
the product comes into realization [36]. Just like every other phase,
technological advancements have resulted in the need for automa-
tion to address some fundamental challenges that affect the timely,
cost-effective, and efficient delivery of projects. Some areas of
interest include logistics, scheduling, site monitoring, safety, and
effective collaboration between stakeholders. For this phase, BIM
with extensions is the major technological driver, but several limi-
tations exist with this approach which are discussed in Section 5.2.
Some of the driving technological adoptions later discussed in-
clude sensors and IoT (see Section 5). There is, however, a major
challenge to their integration for various construction management
functions [36], leaving a significant void in achieving the full au-
tomation of this phase.
Structural health monitoring (SHM) is the dominant act of the
operation and maintenance phase.
Traditionally, this phase in-
volved periodic visual inspections by field experts [37]. Currently,
SHM approaches include computer vision and simulation-based
techniques with sensors and IoT as major technological tools.
Mishra et al. [38] discussed cases of poor SHM resulting in dis-
aster, necessitating the integration of sensing technologies such as
wireless sensors, and IoT for improved monitoring processes and
consequent disaster prevention [38]. Sun et al. [39] reviewed smart
sensing technologies employed for SHM, and Ocheing et al [40]
assessed two ground-based radar technologies for a wind turbine.
We once again hint that the realization of DT at this phase is
more feasible and has witnessed greater application in comparison
with the preceding phases. Finally, the demolition phase is rarely
considered and has largely been neglected by researchers when
considering the application of DT [36].
DT applications in several industries across product life cycles
have exposed its potential in the civil engineering phases, with
varying opinions on its method of adoption amongst researchers.
Wagg et al. [18] categorized their DT adoption more broadly into
the design and asset management phase and discussed their pro-
posed DT based on the product life cycle.
Sacks et al. [41]
considered the workflow process of the DT. Others consider its
employment in production, while some do not accede to any of
these perspectives [42]. Nonetheless, the relationship between DT
with product life cycle and processes is commonly agreed upon
[18,30,36]. Ideally, the DT should span the entirety of the prod-
uct life cycle from manufacture to retirement [5,18]. However, the
analysis by Liu et al. [43] showed that most DT papers focus on
a single phase of the asset life cycle, with only 5% addressing
the full life cycle. In this paper, we will be adopting the three
civil engineering phases as the project lifecycles and subsequently
discussing their corresponding digital twin status and applications.
4
Planning and Design: BIM and DT
We commence this section by clarifying that the development
of DT at the planning/design phase can be counter-intuitive due to
Journal of Computing and
Information Science in Engineering
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT / 3

Table 2
Scaling of DT.
Levels
Arup [20]
Elfarri [23]
Current Work
1
A digital model of an asset, which lacks
intelligence, learning, and autonomy
Descriptive CAD models with real-
time data acquisition
Digital representation of an asset
2
Digital model with some capacity for
feedback and control
Models with diagnostic possibili-
ties
Digital representation + real-time mon-
itoring
3
Digital model with capacity for predic-
tive maintenance, analysis, and insights
Models with predictive capabilities
Digital representation + real-time mon-
itoring + prediction
4
A digital model with the capacity to
learn from its asset data and surround-
ing environments
Models with prescriptive (i.e., pro-
viding recommendations) capabili-
ties
Digital representation + real-time mon-
itoring + prediction + interaction
5
Digital models with several capabili-
ties, and fully autonomous.
Models with autonomous capabili-
ties
Digital representation + real-time mon-
itoring + prediction + interaction + au-
tonomous control
Design
Manual drafting
2D CAD
Construction
Operation and
Maintenance
Manual
Visual inspection
3D BIM
Response-based
SHM
BIM
4D BIM
Computer vision
Sensors
IoT
Digital Twin
Demolition
Fig. 2
Civil engineering phases and evolution of enabling
technologies
the absence of a physical twin. Nonetheless, the concept of DT has
promising applications for improved planning and efficient design
of proposed projects within the AEC industry. It should be noted
that while BIM is being applied across the three civil engineering
phases, a practical outlook shows a comparatively heavy applica-
tion in the design phase [31]. Moreover, BIM remains the ideal
way to achieve a virtual representation of a proposed physical twin
at the design phase, as opposed to a combined use of other tech-
nologies for DT development in the later phases. These perceptive
realizations informed our segmented review of BIM and DT as
they relate to the planning and design phase. In this section, we
carefully selected specific applications of BIM that have evolved,
all of which come together to enable the concept of DT using BIM
at the planning and design phase. Importantly, reports on the tech-
niques employed for BIM-based DT at this phase were presented,
inspiring our views on the status quo and the way forward.
4.1
Evolution of BIM. As a stepping stone to introduce the
relationship between BIM and DT in the AEC industry, we begin
by giving an evolutionary overview of BIM. To enable a robust
overview, the evolutionary overview also implicitly reports the ap-
plication of BIM for planning and design purposes at every stage
of development.
4.1.1
Parametric Design. Prior to the development of BIM,
traditional design approaches used CAD tools with pre-defined
shapes for 2D and 3D modeling. For a wider range of applica-
tions and benefits, parametric design has been advanced by var-
ious researchers [44–46] for design optimization. In contrast to
the common-place modeling using pre-defined shapes, parametric
design involves generating shapes from scratch through parametric
input until the desired geometry is attained [47]. Parametric mod-
eling allows for the extraction of multiple information—through a
360-degree visualization—of the model which increases informa-
tion readiness for use in the analysis and optimization of designs.
For example, Giradet et al. [47] adopted a parametric BIM ap-
proach to enhance bridge project design and analysis. Their study
developed a parametric algorithm to produce bridges on the Tekla
Structures modeling platform. The advancements of BIM to in-
clude parametric design opened the doors to all-directional spatial
modeling and BIM’s advanced utilization for sustainable design.
4.1.2
Sustainable Design. Wong et al. [34] divided the use of
BIM for sustainable design into two parts: Integrated Project De-
livery and Design Optimization (Fig. 3). The Integrated Project
Delivery involves the use of BIM to foster easy communication
among all practitioners in the AEC industry.
Design optimiza-
tion on the other hand is in two steps: the creation of models
using inherent BIM software and the export of these models into
BIM-based sustainability analysis tools. As typically done in engi-
neering design, the results obtained from sustainability analysis are
used for sustainable design. Hence, sustainability analysis—which
covers various environmental analytical reports such as energy use,
water use, daylighting, cost implications, etc.,—has become an im-
portant aspect of BIM tools.
Sustainability analysis implies the determination of a building’s
environmental performance using various tools for categorical in-
vestigation including building massing, site orientation, daylight-
ing, and HVAC systems’ maximization [48]. Autodesk Ecotect,
Autodesk Green Building Studio (GBS), Integrated Environmental
Solutions (IES), and Virtual Environment (VE) are the most com-
monly available tools. The application of BIM for sustainability
analysis has increasingly become relevant over the years. This is
due to rising pressures from environmental and social governance.
As such, various countries have instituted the need for sustainabil-
ity certification of major buildings through a credit-based system.
In this regard, BIM can be used to acquire some credits from
regulatory platforms such as the Leadership in Energy and Envi-
ronmental Design (LEED), Building Research Establishment En-
vironmental Assessment Methodology (BREEAM), and Building
Environmental Assessment Method (BEAM), in the United States,
United Kingdom, and China.
In their research study, Wong et
al. [49] reveal the important use of Autodesk Revit to generate sig-
nificant credits for BEAM Plus (an accreditation platform in Hong
Kong). Nguyen et al. [50] noted that BIM contains parameters that
can be automatically acquired for sustainable design processes. A
4 / ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Transactions of the ASME

typical example is Revit’s provision of material schedules that can
be used for rating by LEED, BEAM Plus, BREEAM, and others.
Design
Optimization
Sustainability 
Analysis
Integrated
Project Delivery
Architect
Consultant
Contractor
Owner
BIM Model Creation
BIM-based Analytic Tools 
(Ecotect, GBS, IES, VS)
Sustainable Design
Fig. 3
Sustainable design with BIM
4.1.3
Interoperability and Semantic Models. Interoperability
simply refers to the ability of BIM to export stored data into tools
for further uses [48]. In the early days of BIM, several interoper-
ability challenges necessitated standardization, which was success-
fully achieved by the body tagged Building SMART International
through the development of Industry Foundation Classes (IFC) data
models [51]. IFC quickly became a success with the introduction
of various data schemas such as EXPRESS schema for IFC-SPC
file, XSD for XML file, and an alternative RDF for ifcOWL file
(see [52] for more details). Despite the capabilities offered by IFC
classes through these schemas, several interoperability challenges
persist across different application domains [53]. Boje et al. [54]
also noted that the IFC schemas were particularly created for data
transfers from tool to tool with no allowance for dynamic mod-
ifications. Pauwels et al. [55] highlighted three other challenges
associated with IFC schema which include binding, adaptability,
and extensibility. Binding results from heterogeneous IFC transla-
tions from different authoring tools which lead to geometric distor-
tion; adaptability is due to the not-so-flexible nature of the schemas
for different application domains; and extensibility arises from the
translation challenges experienced by third parties, who are not
familiar with the EXPRESS language [55].
In a bid to ensure dynamical collaborations of BIM models,
the use of web-based semantic technologies such as Web Ontology
Language (OWL) models and Linked Data (LD) were investigated
and subsequently developed [54–58]. For example, IfcOWL was
introduced as alternative support for BIM interoperability using a
web-based semantic model, which Pauwels et al., [58] proposed a
recommendable version for commercial use. OWL and LD have
received positive responses from researchers and industry experts
in the AEC industry as it is well inclined to the pervasive nature of
big data in the Internet of Things (IoT) era. Boje et al. [54] argued
that adopting OWL, LD, and in general semantic web worldview is
a requisite for the continued relevance and improved value creation
of BIM to the AEC industry. It should be noted that the concise
overview of semantic models from OWL and LD perspectives is
intended to familiarize readers with an important aspect of data
transmissibility in DT via BIM and sensors (more details will be
provided in Section 5.2).
4.1.4
Static to Dynamic: BIM and DT. We utilize the five-
level framework proposed by [59] to delineate the evolution of
BIM from its inherent static configuration to an integrated dynamic
powerhouse as an enabler for DT development in the built envi-
ronment. The five levels as shown in Fig. 5 involve the following:
BIM general applicability, BIM plus simulation, BIM plus sensors,
BIM plus artificial intelligence (AI), and DT. A worthy observa-
Parametric Design
Sustainable Design
Interoperability &
Semantic Models
Static to Dynamic
Scan to/vs BIM
BIM & IoTs
BIM Evolution
Fig. 4
Evolution of BIM
tion is that these levels, although not explicitly stated by [59], also
depict the chronological advancement of BIM integration for DT.
Level 1, termed BIM general applicability, involves the advance-
ment of traditional design mechanisms by enabling better visual
representations and information sharing across various building life
cycles. However, the applications at this level only utilized static
information provided by BIM, limiting their use for design integra-
tion and consequently motivating Level 2, termed BIM-supported
simulations. This advances the general use cases from level 1 to
include simulations and provides an analytic overview of build-
ing performances for optimal design insights [59].
We notice
from available literature [51,60–65] that BIM-supported simula-
tions give rise to sustainability analysis as their application revolves
around energy performance evaluation, green building design, day-
lighting analysis, and acoustic simulations as highlighted in Sec-
tion 4.1.2. The bottleneck of these diverse use cases reported for
level 2 is their sole dependence on static information with no re-
gard for potential changes (i.e., in real time) at the later part of the
structures.
Level 3, termed integration of BIM and IoT techniques, became
a gamechanger in enabling real-time monitoring of building perfor-
mances, thanks to technological drivers such as sensors, IoTs, data
analytics query, semantic models, LD, OWL, relational database,
and global/universal unique identifiers [17]. They utilized time-
series data from sensors and contextual data or semantics from
BIM (as detailed in section 5.3 [66]). Level 4, termed BIM and
artificial intelligence (AI) integration, takes level 3 a step further to
facilitate easy decision-making. Deng et al. [59] termed level 5 as a
conceptual framework of an ideal DT in the built environment. The
major takeaway from [59]’s review is the need to enable automated
feedback control beyond level 4 which stops at real-time predictions
but still needs humans in the loops for primitive decision-making.
While the review provided by [59] was termed BIM evolution, we
believe that such characterization is limited in revealing the many
other groundbreaking applications of BIM towards DT develop-
ment. Beyond the dynamical application of BIM, some advances
concerning monitoring, prediction, and control have become a field
of their own. The relevant ones (as shown in Fig. 4) are further
presented as the remaining sub-sections of the evolution of BIM.
4.1.5
Scan-to-BIM and Scan-vs-BIM. Noting that one of the
major edges of BIM is the ability to produce semantically rich
representations of models, efforts have been put in place to produce
Journal of Computing and
Information Science in Engineering
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT / 5

BIM
BIM Supported
Simulations
Level 2
Level 1
BIM integrated with
Sensors
Level 3
Ideal Digital Twins
Concept
Level 5
BIM integrated with AI
Level 4
Fig. 5
Static to dynamic capabilities of BIM (based on [59])
BIM models for not only proposed projects but also completed
projects which are respectively called as-designed BIM models and
as-built BIM models. As-designed BIM model simply refers to the
creation of BIM models from design conditions while the as-built
BIM model (formally called as-built/as-is) refers to the creation
of a BIM model from an existing facility.
The as-built model
involves acquiring geometrical information from the built structure
and their consequent transformation to a high-fidelity model with
semantically rich representations [67].
The creation of as-designed BIM models has become primitive
as various design conditions can be richly represented on BIM soft-
ware utilizing the standardization from IFCs, i.e., interoperability.
On the other hand, the creation of as-built BIM models requires
significant human expertise and requisite technological tools - one
of which is 3D Laser Scanning (also called LADAR meaning laser
detection and ranging). LADAR generates a 3D point cloud of
a visible scene which can then be processed for further uses like
monitoring, geometrical modeling, and in turn developing an as-
built BIM model. The process of creating 3D BIM models from
acquired 3D-point clouds is regarded as “Scan-to-BIM” [68]. For
such a technique, laser scanning has been well adopted in the AEC
field as it is arguably considered to be the best available technology
for capturing 3D information on a project with high accuracy and
speed [68].
Tang et al. [67] rigorously reviewed Scan-to-BIM processes with
a focus on automating the difficult manual processes. From the au-
thors’ review, the creation of an as-built BIM using laser scanners
involves three core steps which include data collection, data pre-
processing, and modeling. The data collection is done by laser
scanning technology which measures distances from sensors and
nearby surfaces to give 3D point clouds. These point clouds which
could be in several millions are then aligned from the scanner’s
local coordinate system to the global coordinate system (a process
known as registration). Filtering can also be carried out in the data
preprocessing stage. The modeling state then involves geometric
modeling, object categorization, and relationship modeling.
One would notice that the process of Scan-to-BIM does not
involve the utilization of prior information from the as-designed
models to develop the as-built model. Tang et al. [66] pointed
out that one of the ways of automating object recognition is using
prior knowledge to reduce the search space of object recognition
algorithms. In a bid to achieve such a level of automation cou-
pled with the rapid development of 3D BIM modeling, Bosche et
al. [68] developed the “Scan-versus-BIM” approach. This involves
the alignment of laser scans of construction sites with as-design 3D
BIM models, that then use comparative analysis based on proxim-
ity metrics to automatically recognize and uniquely identify 3D
model objects.
Unlike Scan-to-BIM which recognizes geomet-
rically similar objects as one object, Scan-versus-BIM uniquely
identifies these objects as separate objects in the 3D BIM model,
hence the edge of the latter over the former [68]. Readers can refer
to Bosche’s review on the four-step process of Scan-versus-BIM
for unique object recognition. The Scan-versus-BIM approach is
however limited by their specific use for objects within proxim-
ity which is usually set at a maximum threshold (𝛿max = 50mm).
This prevents a flexible application of the method. In a later work,
Bosche et al. [69] integrated both Scan-to-BIM and Scan-versus-
BIM approach for construction monitoring using cylindrical MEP
components as a case study.
4.1.6
BIM and IoTs. The integration of BIM and IoT are com-
plementary as the former gives a high-fidelity representation of the
as-designed buildings giving rise to geometrical and semantic in-
formation. IoT takes such developments further by giving a status
report by providing real-time information during the subsequent
life cycles of buildings, especially during construction and opera-
tions [66]. We hint that IoTs significantly advanced the construc-
tion monitoring process. To these foregoing, a detailed overview
of BIM and IoTs including the concept of relational and contex-
tual databases will be presented in Section 5.2 as it relates to BIM
integration and subsequent DT development.
4.2
Techniques for DT Adoption. Based on the various ap-
plications of BIM previously presented, we now establish the con-
ceptual and practical realization of DT using BIM. We particularly
presented a dual review by first noting the remarkable use of BIM
for DT creation and subsequently establishing our inference on the
status quo of BIM and DT for the planning and design phase in
the second part.
4.2.1
BIM-based DT Developments and Applications. Lu et
al. [70] developed and applied a framework hinged on four practi-
cal requirements (intelligence, efficiency, integration, and interop-
erability) to develop and utilize DT for smart asset management.
In their proposed framework, three key layers were presented in-
cluding the smart asset layer, smart asset integration layer, and
smart DT-enabled asset management layer. In these layers, sens-
ing, IoT, as-is BIM models, cloud computing, and computer vision
are important technologies. In a separate work, Lu et al. [71] ex-
tended their framework development to the development of a DT
at the building and city levels by presenting a hierarchical archi-
tecture. The architecture comprised five layers: data acquisition
layer, transmission layer, digital modeling layer, data-model inte-
gration layer, and service layer. DT at city levels was imagined
as a parent umbrella to other sub-DTs from various sub-assets that
make up the city of interest. BIM was particularly employed in the
digital modeling layer in combination with City Information Mod-
eling and supplementary information such as weather and historical
data. The authors demonstrated their architecture by developing a
dynamic DT for the west Cambridge site of the University of Cam-
bridge (see [71] for more details). In the same trend, further works
were carried out for DT-enabled anomaly detection for built asset
monitoring in operation and maintenance (see [72]).
In another spectrum, Pan et al. [8] developed a BIM-data mining
integrated DT framework for advanced project/construction man-
agement. Due to IFC interoperability limitations, extensible tech-
niques such as retrieval of CSV files (called event logs) from IFC
files are adopted for subsequent data mining, otherwise tagged pro-
cess mining. This technique was combined with BIM and IoT in
pairing the virtual and physical models for advanced construction
management. They presented an architecture of the proposed DT
which comprises: sensing technologies for data collection from
the as-built environment, cloud storage for information storage and
a bridge of the physical-cyber system, and high fidelity models
including 4D visualization and process model for modeling, bot-
tleneck detection, and construction progress prediction. Within the
BIM cloud, the point cloud data from the sensor is compared with
the as-planned IFC using a tool named Real-Time and Automated
Monitoring and Control (RAAMAC) to establish discrepancies be-
tween as-planned and as-built models. The data from this tool is
typically in IFC format which is unreadable by data mining algo-
rithms and as such an IFC logger is used to parse required data
6 / ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Transactions of the ASME

from IFC to event logs in CSV format. With such events log in
place, model construction, model implementation, and model eval-
uation were carried out. Pan et al. [8] then presented a case study
of a BIM-based construction project for analysis, prediction, and
optimization.
In a bid to balance the parallel developments of BIM from the
AEC industry and DT from the manufacturing industry, Badenko et
al. [73] present the integration of DT and BIM technologies within
the factories of the future (FoF). FoF uses systems of complex tech-
nological solutions that provide the shortest possible time for the
design and production of quality products. The authors highlighted
three principles as a basis for the integration of BIM and DT tech-
nologies for FoF. The first principle emphasizes flexible production
technologies and infrastructure for dynamic product development.
The second notes the validation of smart models via virtual test-
ing, sensing technologies, and Digital Shadow (DS) principles.
The third implies using three key technologies including BIM, DT,
and System Information Modeling (SIM) for increased economic
benefits. SIM simply involves the transformation of management
systems for products, technologies, and production infrastructure
as objects of management. On these principles are the integration
methods for DT and BIM for FoF. They involve the construction of
a matrix of target indicators and resource constraints of the entire
FoF and an information management system towards the creation of
an accurate and reliable model. The creation of such a model must
be coordinated via the increasing levels of virtual models across
graphical data (BIM), non-graphical data, and documentation, all
geared towards the creation of an Asset Management Model.
4.2.2
BIM-DT for Design Optimization. The aforementioned
applications of BIM-based DT focused more on the construction,
operations, and maintenance phases of AEC projects. While BIM
has successfully been applied in the planning/design phase towards
sustainable design as earlier reported, DT explicit use in the same
regard has been limited in literature. The major setback of BIM-
based DT for planning and design can be linked to the absence of
a real physical twin at this phase, thus making the idea of a DT not
fully realizable. Nonetheless, we crucially report that DT can also
aid in design optimization. For this, the creation of a temporal DT
at the design phase by using similar or historical structures as cor-
responding physical twins is being advanced [21]. The existence
of such DT will enable proper planning and insightful designs
based on the visualized data from the existing DT. For example,
to achieve the optimized design of a bridge, a DT of an existing
bridge with similarities such as location, functional, and aesthetic
requirements can be developed as a starting point for the proposed
bridge structure. Such application of DT will become particularly
important for high-risk projects or conditions as a means to reduce
uncertainty while optimizing cost reductions.
4.3
Remarks on BIM-based DT for Civil Engineering
Phases. The creation of DT at the planning/design phase is rather
conceptual than practical, but, such development has been justified
for its use in design optimization as previously presented. However,
the possibilities offered by BIM—as reported in Section 4.2 pave
the way for DT realizations in subsequent phases of civil engineer-
ing projects. Notable mentions include the semantic richness of
BIM to enable comparative monitoring (see Section 5.4), Scan-to-
BIM and Scan-vs-BIM for robust visualization and thus enabling
DT creation for legacy building (see Section 6.6), dynamic BIM
for real-time monitoring and predictions, among others. To these
foregoing, we introduce three classifications of DT with respect
to their use at different phases of civil engineering projects com-
prising: indirect DT, partial DT, and fully realized DT. The term
indirect DT implies the use of similar or historical structures as
a physical twin to develop a temporal DT of a proposed project
at the design phase. Partial or Prototype DT refers to transient
DT at the construction stage due to a high level of variability in
the physical twin. In this case, BIM, which is often far ahead of
the physical twin, is often used as a digital model representation
in addition to enabling feedback and control to realize DT. Fully
realized DT is apparent at the O&M phase as efforts are dedicated
to realizing the operational conditions of the physical twin in DT
as opposed to both building the physical twin and updating the DT
in the other two phases. Sections 5 and 6 respectively present DT
development at the construction, and O&M phase.
Taking cues from [73], we further present the evolutionary de-
velopments of BIM and their respective relation to DT on a scale
basis. Let us be clear, we do not attempt to present BIM as DT but
rather reveal that a fully-realized DT should perform the function-
alities of a BIM and beyond. While BIM gives full semantics and
3D/4D visualization, DT distinguishing features comprise two-way
coupled connections between the physical twin (existing structures)
and virtual twin, thereby enabling feedback and control as hinted
in the level 5 of static to dynamic evolutions in Section 4.1.4. In
relation to our adopted DT classification on the digital model, dig-
ital shadow, and digital twin, a parallel scale for BIM from level 0
to 3 was introduced by [16] and presented by [73]. In this regard,
BIM-level 0 comprising only 2D CAD drawings does not come
into the DT levels at all. Subsequently, the BIM-level 1 which
consists of 3D models comes as a Digital Model in the DT scale.
A combination of 3D and real-to-virtual connection was termed
BIM-level 2 and Digital Shadow respectively and a combined 3D
model with bi-directional real-to-virtual and virtual-to-real connec-
tion was staged BIM-level 3 and DT.
5
Construction: Sensing, IoT and DT
The technological evolution of DT for construction process op-
timization cannot be made possible without the tremendous devel-
opments in construction monitoring over the years. Although DT
aims to advance the capabilities of construction monitoring pro-
cesses, the fundamental techniques employed in the latter such as
the use of sensing technologies and IoTs are important recipes for
the former realizations. To establish the development and applica-
tion of DT in the construction phase, it is crucial to avail exposi-
tions on these technological drivers. While these technologies are
applied in the subsequent phase, the full commencement of their
application can be initially linked to the construction phase, hence,
we present them in this section. Also, we report, in the later part of
this section, developed or applied techniques that reflect level 3–4
DT capabilities, and as stepping stones to realizing the actuating
capabilities of DT for the construction phase.
5.1
Sensing. Sensing technologies paved the way for real-time
construction monitoring offering diverse advantages for construc-
tion site management such as improved productivity, hazard iden-
tification [74], construction waste management [75], clash detec-
tion, discrepancies detection [76] among others. Rao et al. [77]
already provided a detailed and comprehensive overview of sens-
ing technologies. The three-phased review done by [77] includes
sensing construction environment, real-time monitoring method-
ologies, and case studies of construction site monitoring.
The
sensing part of their review is divided into three aspects including
mapping sensors, positional and communication sensors, and sen-
sor platforms. Following this classification, we summarize notable
sensors in the following paragraphs that are mostly employed in
construction and would be useful for DT development. But first,
we established some basic definitions in Table 3.
For mapping sensors, we highlight three commonly used types
which comprise laser scanners, RGB cameras, and depth cameras.
Laser scanners utilize a laser to generate a visible spectrum for
calculating the emitted pulse Time of Flight (ToF). Laser scan-
ners are however limited by the lack of color information, hence
their combination with digital cameras to obtain colorized 3D point
clouds. Regardless, laser scanner (specifically terrestrial laser scan-
ners or TLS) is often regarded as the best mapping sensor type in
the construction industry due to their high accuracy [77]. RGB
Journal of Computing and
Information Science in Engineering
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT / 7

Table 3
Basic terminologies used in sensing technologies.
Terminologies
Definitions
3D point cloud
a set of data points defined in a 3D coordinates system i.e., by their X, Y, and Z coordinates. A point
cloud delineates a single spatial measurement of an object’s surface, and many points represent the entire
surface of the target object. Color intensities can also be added to a point cloud. They are usually created
by sensing technologies such as 3D laser scanners or photogrammetry software [78,79].
Photogrammetry
This involves extracting information from an object’s measured photographs (mainly establishing the
geometric relationship between image and object at a specific time) [80].
Mapping sensors
involves data capturing (3D point cloud) using sensing technologies that employ physics-based techniques
such as electromagnetic radiation and images combined with geometric estimation (such as Time-of-
Flight), and modeling techniques (such as photogrammetry) to capture the as-is condition of a facility or
construction site [77].
Positional and Com-
munication Sensors
They are used to obtain the geographical locations and motion of the sensors, which are used to georef-
erence the collected 3D data through joint use of measurements from different sensors otherwise called
fusion [81].
Sensor platforms
The means of structural supports provided for sensors. They can be stationary or mobile.
cameras use photogrammetric techniques to process digital im-
ages and thus create 3D point clouds. However, RGB accuracy
depends on several factors such as camera model, camera resolu-
tion, scene illumination, and focal length, among others [82]. As
such, their accuracy is lower than 3D laser scanners. Nonethe-
less, the adopted photogrammetry technique is more flexible and
efficient which helps retain RGB cameras’ competitiveness in the
construction industry. Depth cameras are specific types of cameras
equipped with range sensors such as ToF sensors to illuminate the
whole scene with one pulse of radiation and capture all the re-
flected lights at once. The range data obtained are then converted
to depth data to represent distances which are further augmented
to RGB-D images containing color and depth information for each
pixel. Depth cameras are limited by a small range of accuracy
(3 to 10m) and are such are only suitable for small indoor envi-
ronments. However, their affordability and miniature size make
them useful in mobile devices [77]. The aforementioned sensors
can be used for tracking construction sites, safety management,
indoor localization, 3D point cloud generation, 3D modeling, and
DT development.
Positioning and communication sensors include identification
and tracking devices such as Barcodes and Radio Frequency Iden-
tification (RFID), inertial measurement units (IMU) consisting
of accelerometers, gyroscopes, and magnetometers for 3D mea-
surements, and global navigation satellite systems (GNSS) such
as the commonly adopted United States Global Positioning Sys-
tem (GPS). Other positioning and communication sensors include
short-range communication technologies such as Wi-Fi and in-
frared (IR) sensing, and long-range communication technologies
which comprise Frequency Modulation (FM) and cellular commu-
nications (see [77] for more details). Also, sensor platforms could
be mobile or stationary. Some notable mentions include handheld,
wearable, trolley, and Unmanned Ground Vehicle (UGV), all of
which can be either used separately or combined for specific use
cases [83]. It should be noted that the choice of platforms greatly
influences the applications and performances of the sensors, neces-
sitating a reconnaissance survey of the sites for appropriate sensor
and platform selections.
5.2
Internet of Things (IoT). Numerous research has ad-
vanced the role of IoT in the construction industry for automated
processes.
The same trend can also be seen in review articles
[66,84–87] that not only advanced the revolutionary roles of IoT
for automated construction processes but also reported several case
studies that have utilized IoT for the same. In a trend analysis study
by Ghosh et al. [86], four clusters including structural health moni-
toring, construction safety, optimization and simulation, and image
processing were identified as prominent areas of research that apply
IoT in the construction industry. We will not explore such benefits
as readers can always refer to cited literature but rather show a nar-
rative that reveals the possibilities of DT for construction process
optimization.
The use of IoT in the construction phase is not commonplace
when compared with the O&M phase or even some part of the de-
sign phase. This is mainly due to the complexities associated with
the fast-paced nature of the construction phase. A major complex
scenario is data heterogeneity challenges from sensors and virtual
models (i.e., BIM). More concretely, sensors generate time series
data from continuous sensor readings usually stored in a relational
database [88], while the BIM model generates contextual data in
IFC formats, presenting a challenge of data integration let alone
enabling dynamical updates via the Internet. To these foregoing,
we present important details from the available review by Tang et
al. [66] on BIM and IoT integration evolutionary methods over the
years. But first, it is important to clarify some important termi-
nologies including a self-contained definition of IoT.
• What is IoT? Tang et al. [66] identified that the key con-
cern of IoT is the interconnection of sensing and actuation
devices that enable information sharing via the Internet. In
a similar wave of definitions, Gubbi et al. [89] defined IoT
as an interconnected network of physical objects with sens-
ing, actuating, and communication capabilities that enable a
central framework for data syntheses via seamless access to
domain-specific software and services. While these defini-
tions connote the concept of IoT, the explanation given by
Woodhead et al. [84] is perhaps the simplest and most re-
latable. They implicitly assume that the word “Internet” is
commonplace but elucidate more on the corresponding word
“Thing” that makes up “Internet of Things”. As presented,
a “Thing” is simply any object that has an Internet Protocol
(IP) address and sends data about its state and immediate en-
vironment, and can also receive data linked to actions. They
further presented the emergence of IoT as a means to converge
the developments associated with information technology and
operational technology which opens the way for embedding
compute power in or on “things” such as sensors.
• Industrial IoT (IIoT): This refers to the extended use of IoT
technology in industrial settings through cloud services and
virtualization. This has become an important enabler for real-
time representations and control of complex systems towards
digital constructions [84,90].
• Ubiquitous Computing/Connectivity:
This implies the all-
8 / ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Transactions of the ASME

round integration of computation capabilities into the physical
environment, advancing the perception of the physical envi-
ronment beyond just a visible object or representation of a
model.
This is made possible by placing sensor networks
everywhere to perform an ad hoc arrangement that offers a
higher degree of flexibility for settings and an increased num-
ber of sensor nodes [91].
• Contextual and Relational Database: The former as the name
implies gives context to an entity, person, or thing. In the
AEC industry, the BIM is the main repository for contextual
data which provides information about building geometry, IoT
devices’ configuration, occupancy information, and weather
forecast among others. Precisely, the contextual data from
BIM are stored in a database typically in IFC formats. On
the other spectrum in the construction sites, time series data
which records continuous sensor readings are stored in a rela-
tional database [66]. A relational database stores related data
points and provides fast access to them. They are typically or-
ganized into tables, and each row is a record with a unique ID
(key) and the corresponding columns depict the attributes of
the data. Relational databases are built to understand Struc-
tured Query Language (SQL).
• Database Schema: a collection of metadata that describes the
structures and organization of a relational database including
constraints such as tables, names, fields, data types, and their
respective relationships [92].
5.3
BIM and IoT Devices Integration Methods for Con-
struction Process Monitoring. The integration methods between
BIM contextual data and sensor time-series data (otherwise tagged
relational data) for construction site monitoring is a critical as-
pect of DT development for construction process optimization.
Three out of the five integration methods highlighted by Tang
et al. [66] have demonstrated successful integration of BIM and
IoT [93–95], but not necessarily on a large scale or in real time.
These methods include the combination of BIM tools’ Applica-
tion Programming Interface (API)—such as Revit DB Link—and
relational database—such as Microsoft Access; the transformation
of BIM contextual data into a relational database using new data
schema; and the third is the creation of a new query language.
The remaining two are distinct as they enable the realization of
IoT concepts due to their ability to process heterogeneous data
through a unified framework via the Internet. One of such is the
semantic web approach which processes heterogeneous data—i.e.,
both contextual and time series data—into a homogeneous data
tagged Resource Description Format (RDF). The different data si-
los are then linked across different domains via unique identifica-
tion which are followed by data queries that can be presented in
different forms. However, the conversion of all data types into RDF
takes away some inherent advantages of databases in their origi-
nal forms. In particular, RDF data structure is less effective when
compared with relational database structure, and data duplication
during data conversion to RDF is a probable challenge [66,96]. To
circumvent such setbacks, the fifth and most robust BIM-IoT in-
tegration method evolved which simply merges semantic web and
relational database.
The semantic web plus relational database integration method
retains both contextual and relational databases in their original
format. The contextual data does not only contain building-related
information but also sensor information such as sensor tags and
other semantic representations (but not sensor readings). The pro-
cess involves representing the contextual information in RDF for-
mat using a semantic web approach, retaining sensor time-series
data in the relational database, and mapping contextual information
with the time-series data which can be referenced using Sensor ID
described in RDF as part of the sensor semantics in the contextual
database.
The combination of two technologies necessitates an
integrated query method in which the contextual data are queried
IFC data
Sensors
Contextual data
in RDF format
Relational
Database
Data Mapping
Semantic web
SPARQL
Custom-built
tools, website
Building Context Data
Integration Method
Time-series Data
Fig. 6
Semantic + Relational Database BIM-IoT integration
method (Adapted from [66]).
by SPARQL while the time series are queried using SQL. Since
both data types are mapped, SQL queries can be created using
SPARQL queries on RDF data (see Fig. 6).
Beyond the obvi-
ous advantage associated with retaining data in their original form,
the method is time-saving and memory-efficient. Also, the inte-
grated query method makes use of trusted query languages which
include SPARQL and SQL. As such Tang et al. [66] described this
approach as one of the most promising methods to facilitate IoT
deployment in the construction industry.
5.4
Techniques for DT Adoption. DT in construction has ad-
vanced mere reporting capabilities to enable automated and intelli-
gent semantic platforms. Some current adaptations of the individ-
ual components of the DT for construction process enhancement
are presented in this subsection.
5.4.1
Automated Site Progress Monitoring. Globally, auto-
mated construction progress monitoring consists of data collection,
comparison of as-planned and as-built models (Scan-vs-BIM) for
progress evaluation (see Section 4.1.5), and visualization of re-
sults. As the starting point of this application, the devices used for
data collection (typically sensors) significantly influence the suc-
cess of automated site progress monitoring [97,98]. The progress
evaluation component can be achieved using laser scanning and
photogrammetry to generate point clouds, allowing temporal el-
ements not reflected on the BIM to be captured [99]. The last
element of automated construction monitoring is visualization. Its
driving technological advancement is Augmented reality [98,100].
By Augmented Reality, we refer to an environment where users
can view virtual elements in the real world [98]. The integration
of augmented reality with BIM allows for swift site updating of 4D
BIM models using smartphones. It also permits the superposition
of the as-built models on the as-planned models. However, Alaloul
et al. [98] highlighted the inapplicability of this method for remote
monitoring as a deficiency.
Braun et al. [99] carried out automatic progress monitoring of
a 5-story office building using photogrammetric surveys and 4D
BIM. Point clouds were created from the surveys using semi-
global-matching and subsequently coordinated with the 4D BIM
model.
Pucko et al [101] proposed a continuous construction
progress monitoring method, which is sensitive to change and
constantly updated during the construction process. They utilized
small 3D scanning devices placed in the helmets of workers for
real-time data capturing and recording of partial point clouds. Fur-
thermore, they attempted to provide a holistic progress monitoring
method that caters to both interior and exterior progress monitor-
ing. Interior automated progress monitoring has been identified as
a particularly challenging endeavor for a myriad of reasons such
as disparity in the appearance of objects, lack of texture of some
indoor elements, lighting issues, presence of transparent elements
and sizing of indoor elements, and difficulty in identifying the po-
sition of elements, all of which hinder the extraction of features
by data collection devices [100,102]. Ekanayake et al. [102] con-
ducted a detailed analysis of computer vision-based interior con-
struction progress monitoring. The trend analysis executed by the
Journal of Computing and
Information Science in Engineering
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT / 9

authors corroborates the gap between exterior and interior progress
monitoring in construction. Similarly, Reja et al [103] carried out
an in-depth analysis of current adoptions of automated progress
monitoring technologies in construction, and highlighted the pros
and cons of each technology such as optimal location tracking and
difficulty in indoor monitoring of geospatial devices such as GPS
respectively. The authors identified DT as a potential solution for
addressing some of the challenges.
In general, the major challenges plaguing automated construc-
tion progress monitoring include fragmentation between interior
and exterior progress monitoring, fragmentation of monitoring pro-
cess, lack of integration of input data, occlusions, and cost. Despite
the contributions of researchers to digitalize the monitoring pro-
cess, most methods available still require some manual input in
the completion of the monitoring process. Based on the DT clas-
sification adopted in this paper, the DT in construction progress
monitoring is between levels 2 and 3. Thus, a construction DT
with a complete loop (i.e., level 5) that is capable of prediction,
interactions with the environment, and is highly autonomous or re-
quires limited human inputs will sufficiently tackle the challenges
identified above.
Exterior
Interior
Data collection
Scan vs BIM
Visualization
Automated
progress 
monitoring
Fig. 7
Elements of automated construction progress mon-
itoring and corresponding DT scale. Bold arrows represent a
sequential ordering. Dashed arrows represent a procedural rela-
tionship. Straight lines indicate categorization.
5.4.2
Hazard Identification and Construction Safety. The con-
ceptual use of digitization for hazard identification and construction
safety is prominent among researchers. These techniques although
not explicitly stated have close relationships with the proposed use
of DT for similar purposes. Hou et al. [104] in a review on DT
applications for construction workforce safety reported the existing
approaches such that they fit into the accident causality framework
which includes construction environment safety, behavior safety
in construction, and safety awareness in construction.
The au-
thors identified sensor technologies, virtual construction simulation
(VCS), and visualization technology as the enabling technologies
for construction workforce safety. They further sub-categorized the
use of sensor technology as an applied DT concept for construc-
tion workforce safety into hazard identification, on-site individual
positioning, and workforce behavior monitoring, all of which com-
puter vision was reported as the most popular technological method
for extracting hidden information from complex data. Soltani et
al. [105] utilized several construction site images to estimate the
3D pose of an excavator. Park et al. [106] and Konstantinou et
al.[107] separately utilized computer vision algorithms to identify
and track individuals and objects. Also, Park et al. [108] utilized
motion monitoring to identify the position and hard hats usage by
workers on the construction site. On another spectrum, the use
of VCS and visualization technology (such as BIM) was identified
to help in safety planning, construction activity visualization, and
safety training. For example, some researchers utilized logic-based
mapping of safety rules in BIM for automated hazard identification
and countermeasures [109,110].
A closer observation indicates that the majority of the high-
lighted benefits do not complete the loop for automated feedback
and control which remains an unattained vision of DT for the con-
struction industry in general. However, we acknowledge that the
several demonstrations already reviewed by Hou et al. [104] at-
tempt to go beyond hazard identification by demonstrating safety
awareness and response options available to construction workers.
However, their complete realizations were limited by the lack of
robust methods for complex data gathering and synchronization,
inefficient information processing of complex logical relationships
among objects, hazards, and safety rules, and unclear warning
mechanisms that best align with the cognitive abilities of work-
ers for proper safety behaviors and response. Some recommended
techniques to address these challenges include simultaneous lo-
calization and mapping (SLAM), ontological-based relationship
modeling, and robust warning mechanisms for improved workers’
cognitive safety activities [104]. We also recall the use of robust
BIM-IoT integration methods recommended earlier presented in
section 5.3 to tackle some of the highlighted challenges.
Recently Ye et al. [111] developed a DT-based multi-information
intelligent early warning and safety management platform for tun-
nel construction. The physical twin was equipped with several sen-
sors, a gateway, and Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) transmis-
sion lines to achieve multiple information-gathering and real-time
connections between construction workers and managers during
tunnel construction. The DT was developed on the physical layer
through internet connectivity for real virtual construction simula-
tion, which was further augmented with a service layer for man-
agerial access and control. In addition, a four-level safety early
warning and corresponding emergency response plans were pro-
vided for improved decision-making. The model was tested on a
real-life project in China, to successfully predict the collapse of a
tunnel excavation and the proactive rescue of construction work-
ers. Nonetheless, the developed DT is limited in terms of robust
information processing for safety rules and the inability to avoid
accidents rather than predicting the same [111]. We also believe
that automated safety measures update in the model must be con-
sidered in future research and continued reliance on manual rule
checking and updates could limit broader application of the pro-
posed technique.
5.4.3
Clash
Detection
and
Simulation. In
construction,
clashes may refer to geometric incompatibilities between corre-
sponding design contributions of various AEC stakeholders, which
if left unchecked would result in cost over-run, waste of resources,
and time delays [112,113].
These geometric inconsistencies
mainly occur due to the overlay of plans from multi-disciplines
[114]. Some other attributed causes of clashes comprise design
uncertainties, design complexity, model tolerance, use of 2D mod-
els, incorrect detail, isolated designs by stakeholders, and design
errors [112,115]. To circumvent the consequences of clashes in
construction projects, the concept of clash detection emerged and
it was traditionally conducted by manually comparing the 2D
drawings of all stakeholders to determine areas with collisions
or clashes [116–118]. As a result of the emergence of BIM, the
automation of clash detection has been enabled.
A Federated
Model can be created via BIM, which is an integrated model of
all the multi-disciplinary 3D models. The geometric information
from the federated model can be employed to compute regions
with clashes [117,119].
Researchers have invested efforts into improving the accuracy
of the clash detection process. Some of the methods proposed in-
clude the use of clash detection software for automated detection
in conjunction with the federated BIM model. Helm et al. [118]
10 / ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Transactions of the ASME

classified the algorithms used for building clash detection soft-
ware into 4 categories: collision detection, ray-angle intersection,
industry foundation classes (IFC), and open-source BIM servers.
However, the authors stated that individually, each category lacks
accuracy or speed. Thus, an IFC class detection that combines
all four categories was recommended to balance the tradeoffs be-
tween accuracy and time constraints.
Akponeware et al. [115]
performed a detailed analysis of clash detection strategies, which
revealed that a shared workspace that facilitates the co-creation
of designs by stakeholders is the most effective method for tack-
ling clash detection. This has been realized in common software
such as REVIT (BIM 360 and Collaboration for Revit). They con-
cluded by proposing an open work in progress (OWIP) section of
the common design environment (CDE), which promotes simulta-
neous interdisciplinary works. However, their framework doesn’t
address privacy challenges among the stakeholders.
Beyond the detection of clashes, there is a significant challenge
that exists in the industry as regards the identification and sub-
sequent classification of these collisions [112]. Several works of
literature have attempted to classify clashes based on the sever-
ity of impact (cost over-run, time delay, rework, productivity loss,
etc.) [112,115,116]. Generally, the most commonly adopted clas-
sification is hard and soft clashes [112,115]. Hard clashes exist
where there is an overlap between members while soft clashes
depend on clearance requirements [112,120]. Clash detection soft-
ware and tools identify a large number of clashes. However, some
of the clashes are repeated, irrelevant globally or in terms of pri-
ority, or repeated false positives.
Therefore, there is a need to
filter the clashes detected based on the aforementioned classifica-
tion and relevance to avoid waste of resources [112,117,120]. In a
bid to improve the quality of clash detection, Hu et al [120] com-
pared six different supervised machine learning algorithms which
include: The J-48-based decision tree, random forest, Jrip-based
rule method, binary logistic regression, naive Bayes and Bayesian
network for clash filtering. The Jrip method was found to have
performed the best out of all six methods. From this result, the
authors proposed a clash filtering framework.
In clash management, after the detection, classification, and fil-
tering process, the stakeholders coordinate and communicate to
resolve the identified clashes.
This is the clash correction pro-
cess. The level of automation of the clash correction process is
lower compared with the clash detection process. Hu et al. [117]
state that most research handles clashes independently ignoring the
inter-dependencies and possibility of ripple effect that may occur
from its resolution. Thus, the authors propose an optimized clash
detection sequence, based on the clash network, which factors in
the inter-dependencies. In conclusion, for automated clash detec-
tion, a minimum requirement of a level-2 BIM (earlier introduced
in section 4.3 is required [115] and a holistic DT would address
the fundamental challenge of stakeholder design silos [54].
5.4.4
Optimized Construction Logistics and Scheduling. A
smooth interconnection between material supply, site operations,
and construction personnel is vital for effective decision-making
during the construction process. Efficient technologically infused
logistics management has been scarcely adopted in the civil engi-
neering industry [54,121,122]. This is mainly due to fragmented
individual driving components and the difficulties encountered in
the management and integration of large volumes of logistics data,
which are usually dynamic during construction [36,121,123]. Ex-
amples of these construction logistics data include site space avail-
ability, time and quantities of supply deliveries, and construction
activities demand.
Over the past decade, optimization techniques have been one
of the most employed methods to tackle the problem of construc-
tion management [121,122,124–129].
Said and El-Rayes [121]
presented an automated multi-objective construction logistics opti-
mization system (AMCLOS). AMCLOS is a framework that lever-
ages BIM and optimization models for the seamless integration
of construction data for optimal site decision-making.
Dave et
Detection
Classification
Correction
Filtering
Federated model
+
BIM
Optimization
Machine Learning
Algorithms
Fig. 8
Clash management process and enabling methodol-
ogy
al. [123] focused on the improvement of the construction com-
munication framework management. The authors emphasized the
construction workflow as a key for optimizing construction pro-
cesses, highlighting current construction management systems such
as VisiLean and KanBIM. They concluded that the sufficient solu-
tion to the aforementioned problem is the enhancement of current
management systems with IoT. Li et al. [130] suggested virtual pro-
totyping for the optimization of construction planning schedules
through improved foresight via computer simulations. However,
none of these solutions have been able to sufficiently address the
integration and interoperability challenges of construction data.
DT has been recognized as a potential solution capable of ad-
dressing the construction management challenges [41,54,122]. Al-
though this potential has been recognized, there is limited litera-
ture to this effect, with most of the DT applications in the con-
struction phase being tailored to structural systems integrity [36].
Notably, Greif et al. [122] proposed a decision support system
(DSS) for silos-bulk materials storage space dispatch and replen-
ishment leveraging DT capabilities and optimization techniques.
The authors provide a lightweight digital silo twin which tackles
construction logistics challenges specific to silos. These challenges
include site work interruptions due to depleted fill levels, excessive
and uncoordinated silos movement, and compromised operational
planning due to poor quality of forecasts. Their DSS requires si-
los infused with sensors for data collection and fill monitoring.
The data is subsequently optimized via a cluster-first-route-second
heuristic optimization approach, to devise more efficient silos repo-
sitioning, routing, and replenishment. Sacks et al. [41] presented
a closed-loop construction workflow that utilizes DT information
systems for construction control. Their proposed digital twin con-
struction (DTC) comprises four core components and caters to both
the construction process and product. The first component is the
lean project production systems (LPS), which are employed for
overall project monitoring and feedback loop. The second com-
ponent is BIM: introduced as a core aspect of DT (see Section 4)
but was utilized majorly for information storage. Automated con-
struction monitoring systems (sensors) are the third component of
the proposed DT that provides input data. The final component is
artificial intelligence. The details about its exact role in the DTC
were vague.
The two applications by [122] and [41] are conceptual paradigms
with little—just one existing implementation of the former—or no
practical implementations. Furthermore, there was no indication
in the two papers about the transition of their DTC framework into
a DT for the operation and maintenance phase, corroborating the
perceptive scarcity and the infancy of DT adoption in this sphere
Journal of Computing and
Information Science in Engineering
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT / 11

of construction.
5.5
Remarks on DT Development and Application in the
Construction Phase. Taking cues from the adopted techniques
for DT in construction as summarized, we realize the important
roles of sensing and visualization technologies. In particular, laser
scanning and photogrammetry are significantly used as a part of
sensing methods for data capturing, and one of the many uses of
BIM was visualization. At this point, we identify that for civil
engineering projects, BIM remains central to the implementation
of DT. Unlike the design phase, BIM is utilized in conjunction
with other technological drivers for real-time monitoring, predic-
tion, optimization, and control—all of which constitute the features
of DT—in the construction phase. Notable uses of BIM for this
phase include a comparative platform for automated progress mon-
itoring via the Scan-vs-BIM techniques, visualization technology
for construction workforce safety, federated model development
and collaborative workspace provision for automated clash detec-
tion, and information storage for optimized construction logistics
and scheduling.
We already noted IoT to be an important driver of real-time
monitoring and thus its central role in DT development. However,
a reflective observation from our reviews shows a segmented real-
ization of IoT benefits in the AEC industry – as most use cases are
focused on two aspects of the entire project life-cycle in the AEC
industry. First is sustainable design (energy management) which
happens at the pre-construction stage through the rising success
of BIM with cloud-based IoT services for simulation purposes as
reported in Section 4.1.4. The second is operation and mainte-
nance such as structural health monitoring which typically occurs
post-construction stage. It is not far-fetched to realize that real-
time data capturing through sensors and its immediate integration
with virtual models (such as BIM) via the internet in a highly
dynamic environment like construction sites poses a complex chal-
lenge. Hence the narrow applications of IoTs in the construction
industry. Nonetheless, the advent of semantics, web ontologies,
and linked data are technological pushers of IoT utilization in dy-
namic construction sites. Another important remark from the re-
ported techniques is the rising use of computer vision as part of DT
development for construction processes. In the next section, the
notion of computer vision will be broadly introduced as it serves
as one of the two main methods for structural health monitoring.
We conclude this section by stating that the automation of the
various construction processes currently lacks control and feed-
back.
We notice that manual inputs were significantly required
towards the end of any automated process to drive the next input
actions.
For example, we reported above that the level of au-
tomation in clash correction remains lowest when compared to the
earlier three steps of clash detection, classification, and filtering.
Also, one of the highlighted limitations in construction safety is
manual safety measures update. These expositions show the sta-
tus quo of DT implementation and the need for increased research
focus on driving fully automated processes including control and
feedback in the construction phase.
6
Operations and Maintenance: SHM and DT
We commence this section by delineating the subtle differences
between DT and SHM. Gharehbaghi et al. [37] segmented SHM
into two broad categories termed diagnosis and prognosis. From
several kinds of SHM research conducted over the years, some of
which are later reported, one can infer that major work has been
done on the diagnostic parts [131] (damage detection, localization,
and evaluation) with comparatively low progress on the prognosis
aspect of SHM such as residual life prediction. Nonetheless, the
advent of several miniaturized or sensor-based SHM systems di-
rectly attached to modern structures has paved the way for real-time
monitoring of the structures via model updating and parameter es-
timations, otherwise known as system identification [132]. With
these tools in place, the prognosis aspect of SHM and more features
become attainable including prediction, learning, management, op-
timization, and other context-specific functionalities—all of which
are encompassed in a virtual duplicate of a physical infrastructure
tagged DT [18]. Thus, DT can be viewed as a global system that
can perform complete SHM in real time.
As similarly done for the other phases, we attempt to avail read-
ers of the fundamental concepts of SHM in the O&M phase. It
should be noted that myriads of reviews on SHMs have been done.
As such, we quickly focus on relevant techniques that come to-
gether towards DT development for SHM. Notably, we establish
the evolving methodologies of SHM including physics-based SHM
methods, purely data-driven approaches using either raw data or
extracted features from engineered data, or a combination of both,
alongside techniques such as model update and regularizations to
tackle the inverse problem formulation of SHM. On this premise,
we introduce the requirements of SHM-based DT and existing
mathematical formulations of the same toward the attainment of
a DT for SHM.
6.1
SHM: Overview and Enabling Technologies. SHM can
be technically defined as the process of deploying methods for
damage detection and analysis via the evaluation of the current
mechanical state of the infrastructure, all geared towards condition-
based awareness of infrastructure and its continued optimal perfor-
mance. Traditionally, SHM was implemented on a scheduled basis
via expert visual inspections. This method is very inefficient due
to human limitations and the lack of visibility of some damages,
resulting in the wastage of resources. Therefore, recent techno-
logical advancements have resulted in an automated SHM process.
Generally, SHM can be implemented globally or locally. Global
monitoring involves monitoring damage in the entire system, which
is usually employed for older structures and when certain structural
parts are inaccessible. Local monitoring involves the evaluation of
specific parameters in the structure, which is usually employed for
non-complex and modern constructions [37,43,133–135].
SHM processes can be described in three general steps, i.e., data
acquisition, data processing, and data interpretation. Data acqui-
sition involves observing relevant parameters, often using sensors
(see Section 5.1).
These sensors may be contact, non-contact,
wireless, and give active (actuators) or passive—more commonly
employed—feedback. The data processing phase may be signal
processing techniques such as the Fourier transform, short-time
Fourier transform (STFT), wavelet transforms (WTs), empirical
mode decomposition (EMD), and Hilbert-Huang transform (HHT).
It also involves the normalization of data, filtering, cleansing, trans-
mission, management, and storage [37,134,136,137]. Finally, data
interpretation involves the damage assessment (diagnosis and prog-
nosis). Some commonly employed techniques include support vec-
tor machines, fuzzy logic, deep neural networks, and Bayesian
classifiers [133].
The taxonomy of SHM can be also described in terms of the
techniques employed. The most commonly employed SHM tech-
nique is the vibration-based method, which is dependent on the
parameter to be observed in the structure.
Structures may be
subjected to forced vibration, caused by applied external forces
or ambient excitation.
Ambient excitation is preferred as they
do not require external shakers which may damage the structure
further.
These excitations result in vibrations which allow cer-
tain parameters to be monitored. These parameters can be either
static or dynamic. The dynamic parameters include the natural
frequencies, modal shapes, mode curvature, damping, flexibility,
and stiffness matrices, which are more sensitive to changes than
static parameters such as strain or stress [37,134]. SHM techniques
may also be image-based, particularly the use of computer vision
[133] (see Section 6.2). Another classification is model-based or
signal-based SHM. Model-based SHM involves the observation of
model parameters or errors for damage detection. These models
may be physics-based or data-driven (see section 6.3). For signal-
based SHM, changes in system characteristics such as means, vari-
ances, and spectral information can be evaluated by using sig-
12 / ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Transactions of the ASME

Data
Interpretation
Data
Processing
Data
Acquisition
SHM
Processes
Fig. 9
SHM methodology
nal analysis for feature extraction from measurement data. Dam-
age detection decisions are thus made based on the data analy-
sis via time-domain, frequency-domain, spatial-domain, and time-
frequency domain methods. This is also called feature-based SHM
[37,136–138]. A closely related SHM perspective is that of pattern
recognition. Although discussed independently due to its popular
adoption, it is a data-driven SHM method. These methods rely on
algorithms for the classification and assessment of damage. The
algorithms are dominantly classified into three: supervised learn-
ing for data that contains prior knowledge about various damage
scenarios, unsupervised learning for data that does not contain ex-
amples from the structure; and the last group is the reinforcement
learning algorithms [139].
Mathematically, SHM is generally posed as an inverse problem
[37,138].
Simply put, the inverse problem involves finding the
cause of a problem from the effect of the problem. This involves
using measurements from the structures as inputs of a model to
generate the characteristics of the structure as an output. Inverse
problems are generally ill-posed and sensitive to perturbations. A
forward problem can be written as [138]:
𝑑= 𝑈(𝜃) + 𝛿𝑑
(1)
where 𝜃is the structural parameter, 𝑈is the forward model of
the structure, 𝑑is the measured data and 𝛿𝑑is the error term,
representing errors stemming from different sources such as mea-
surement inaccuracies or model simulation inaccuracies. In this
case, 𝜃, which is sensitive to perturbations, is to be evaluated from
𝑑. However, the instability and ill-posedness of inverse problems
prevent its formulation by simply inverting the forward problem.
Several classes of methods exist for inverse problem formulation
that address the above challenges, one of which is the direct com-
putation of 𝜃from 𝑑:
𝑈†(𝑑) ≈𝜃
(2)
where 𝑈† is an inverse mapping. This class is quite challenging
to execute largely due to its problem dependency.
A generally
applicable method is by constructing the inverse problem as an
optimization problem given by:
𝜃∗= arg min
𝜃
1
2 ||𝑈(𝜃−𝑑)||2
2 + 𝛼𝑅(𝜃).
(3)
The first part of the equation enforces the reconstructed problem fit
the measured data, while the second part 𝑅(𝜃) is the regularization
term. The regularization term provides stability to the constructed
equation by enforcing a unique solution for each set of measure-
ments while also preventing the solution from overfitting the mea-
surement noise. The parameter 𝛼> 0 balances out the two parts.
Gallet et al. [138] provided different views on SHM as an inverse
problem. Notably, they divided SHM techniques as deterministic
or probabilistic. Another is the static or dynamic SHM inverse
problem, where model updating (see Section 6.4) was advanced as
a good approach for handling the latter. Other approaches include
guided wave-based modalities [40], inverse filtering, and Bayesian
approaches. Computer vision inverse problems in SHM were also
presented (see Section 6.2.1). The subsequent subsections further
expatiate the prevalent SHM techniques in civil engineering, their
advantages and challenges, and their relationship with DT.
SHM
Mode of
 computation
Vibration-
 based
Pattern 
recognition
Image-based
Inverse
 Problem
Fig. 10
SHM classification perspectives
6.2
Computer Vision: Image Processing and Deep Learn-
ing Based Approaches. The use of contact-based sensors for
SHM presents several challenges such as technical installation re-
quirements, limited access due to occlusions, electromagnetic in-
terference, and global view restrictions for system identification.
As such, computer vision, which offers non-contact, long-distance,
improved precision, and reduced occlusions, is being employed as
a faster solution for SHM [140–143]. In this subsection, we present
the fundamental concepts of computer vision and their translations
for data-driven SHM methods. We decided to provide these expo-
sitions due to their rising adoptions as online models in the overall
DT system for SHM, as presented in Section 6.4.
6.2.1
Computer Vision for SHM: Motivations and Conceptual
Overview. Computer vision includes the combined use of a vi-
sion system (imaging acquisition devices from cameras to laser
scanners), a computer, and image processing software which is in-
tegrated with specific computational algorithms to automatically
extract useful information from image datasets [37,143]. Ghare-
hbaghi et al. [37] highlighted two major groups of computer vision,
especially in the context of SHM, which include Machine Learning
(ML) or image processing techniques and Deep Learning (DL) ap-
proaches. While ML and DL are similar in their ability to classify
image datasets, their nuances make them preferable in different
contexts. ML techniques involve statistical methods, and feature
selection and engineering with typically small model sizes that are
applied to structured/tabular data. DL techniques involve deeply
connected neural networks with large (overparameterized) model
sizes that are applied to semi- and unstructured data (images, texts).
Noting that training DL models from scratch is expensive, transfer
learning which typically reuses a piece of an already trained model
for related tasks has become an important technique for diverse ap-
plications.
Although ML techniques such as edge detection filters and mor-
phological features have been considerably good in image classi-
fication tasks, the dimensions of fully connected neural networks
(FCNN) needed for the increasingly large number of input vari-
ables from image datasets pose a great challenge. However, the
non-unique nature of images (i.e., approximate representations of
natural objects by different pixel value combinations) offers a ro-
bust advantage for big data processing, inspiring the development
of convolutional neural networks (CNN). CNN compresses a dense
FCNN by sliding a reduced linear kernel over a fully connected
node, followed by pooling (progressively scaled patterns at dif-
ferent resolution levels), and/or flattening for feature processing
(Fig. 11). Capitalizing on the pixel-level representations of im-
Journal of Computing and
Information Science in Engineering
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT / 13

ages, variants of CNNs such as deep CNNs (DCNNs)) have been
developed to go beyond classification tasks. Notable mentions in-
clude object detection via you only look once (YOLO) or single
shot detector (SSD) networks, and segmentation via transposed
convolution such as deconvolutional networks (DeconvNet) and
semantic segmentation model (SegNet).
The idea behind these
advancements can be simplified to a combination of classification
with localization to extract multiple instances from the same class
of objects [144–147].
Convolution
Pooling
Convolution
Pooling
Ouput
Head: Fully Connected
Feedforward network
Flattening
Input Image
Fig. 11
A simplified representation of full convolutional
neural networks
Spencer Jr et al. [148] summarized the recent advanced tech-
niques for computer vision into supervised end-to-end learning in-
cluding CNN and DCNN briefly described above, unsupervised
learning comprising probabilistic structures and CNN unsuper-
vised learning, and optical flow techniques.
Optical flow tech-
niques are predominantly employed in the dynamical monitor-
ing aspect of infrastructural condition assessment, which involves
quantitative measurement to infer the current states of structural
systems [149].
6.2.2
Computer Vision for SHM: Applications. The aforemen-
tioned advances in computer vision have been applied to the di-
agnostic aspect of SHM, with limited extension to the prognosis
aspect of SHM. For ML-based crack detection, which is promi-
nently employed, Salman et al. [150] utilized Gabor filtering to au-
tomatically distinguish cracks in images with a detection precision
of 95%. SpencerJr et al. [148] categorized the use of hand-crafted
filters and ML classifiers as “heuristic feature-extraction methods”
and particularly reviewed four different methods for concrete crack
detection, which comprise edge detection filtering, multiple se-
quential image filtering, median filtering, and depth and 3D infor-
mation. A robust review on crack detection using image processing
techniques can be found in [151]. We note that feature extractions
in ML techniques are integral for SHM, as we cannot apply raw
data—which are often misleading—for damage assessment [152].
However, feature extractions such as hand-crafted features are usu-
ally expensive, sub-optimal, and inextensible to other structures
[153]. These difficulties suggest the use of data in their raw form
for automated damage detection, which is inapplicable via ML. In
this regard, DL methods have been widely adopted due to their
ability to use data in their raw form and learn features automati-
cally.
DL techniques have also been well-adopted for SHM due to the
proliferation of cameras and significantly improved computation
capabilities such as graphical processing units (GPU), and asso-
ciated complexities with big data. Zhang et al. [154] developed
CrackNet, a CNN trained on 1,800 images using two GPU devices
for asphalt crack detection. Worden and Dulieu-Barton [155] com-
bined DL with Bayesian optimization [156,157] to inspect the con-
ditions of a reinforced concrete bridge subjected to an earthquake.
Hoskere et al. [158] utilized FCNN to detect damage and identify
building components to establish damage presence, location, type,
and scene building (SB) information, all geared toward structural
component recognition and damage detection. On another end, op-
tical flow algorithms are used for dynamic monitoring while digital
image correlation (DIC) has been reportedly successful for static
applications.
6.3
Simulation-Based SHM. The inference step of SHM in-
volves the development of a reference for systems monitoring,
which is typically achieved through a physics-based and/or data-
driven approach. Taddei et al. [159] noted that the difference in
these approaches can be established through adopted mechanisms
at the online stage of the monitoring process.
The authors ar-
gued that the offline stage of a data-driven method might include
physics-based synthetic experiments for data acquisition and thus
limit the distinctiveness at that stage. We, however, state that the
body of literature has carefully distinguished the use of data-driven
approaches based on physics-based synthetic experimental data to
be a physics-informed data-driven approach, otherwise tagged as
hybrid-based simulation techniques.
As such, we present three
main computational approaches for SHM, including their concep-
tual overview, applications, and limitations, giving place for DT as
a more efficient tool for SHM.
6.3.1
Physics-based
Simulation
Techniques. Physics-based
simulation techniques are based on physical laws governing the
behavior of the structures of interest, and aiding the extraction
of features from measured sensor data for damage detection and
evolution.
The physical models are presented by differential
equations, which are built and calibrated during the offline
stage of monitoring processes [153,159].
During the online
stage, the model is updated based on newly measured data and
instantaneously recomputed to get the current state of the structure.
In a broad sense, analytical and numerical techniques have been
developed to solve differential equations extended to SHM. While
frequencies and mode shapes are commonly employed as modal
parameters in SHM methods, the former cannot be used to de-
tect local damages since they are global indicators (i.e., scalar),
hence the latter which are local indicators (i.e, vectors with local
information) are often used. The extracted mode shapes are then
compared for both damaged and undamaged stages using damage
indices such as modal assurance criterion (MAC) or coordinate
modal assurance criterion (COMAC) for damage localization and
evaluation. Another notable numerical approach for local damage
identification is the use of finite element (FE) model updating to
construct baseline structural models more accurately before com-
parisons as a basis for reconstruction [160–163]. Precisely, the
stiffness matrix of the FE model is updated so that the frequencies
and mode shapes match the measured ones from the monitoring
system, which are then used to infer the damage location and eval-
uate its severity (i.e., stiffness loss). The FE model updating is
generalized as a constrained optimization problem given by:
min
∥︁∥︁∥︁∥︁∥︁
∑︂
𝑖
𝑤𝑖(𝜆FE,𝑖(𝑥𝑘) −𝜆𝑖)
∥︁∥︁∥︁∥︁∥︁
2
2
such that
𝑥𝑙𝑘≤𝑥𝑘≤𝑥𝑢𝑘(4)
where 𝜆FE,𝑖(𝑥𝑘) is the 𝑖th frequency or mode shape obtained by
FE model using design parameters 𝑥𝑘, 𝜆𝑖is the measured 𝑖th fre-
quency or mode shape, 𝑤𝑖is the weight factor in the range of 0 to 1,
𝑥𝑙𝑘and 𝑥𝑢𝑘are the upper and lower bounds on the 𝑘th design vari-
able, respectively. Since the number of measurements is usually
less than the number of unknown parameters, FE model updating
is ill-conditioned. Additional term and regularization parameters
are adopted to circumvent such bottlenecks [160]. The Tikhonov
regularization is a commonly adopted technique in practical sce-
narios. Section 6.4 will provide more details on model updating
as it relates to the creation of DT for SHM. Other physics-based
SHM techniques as summarized by [153] include but not limited to
modal strain energy [164,165], modal flexibility [166,167], wavelet
transform [168,169], damage locating vector [170], Hilbert-Huang
transform [171].
14 / ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Transactions of the ASME

Despite the success of numerical methods for increasingly com-
plex problems, physics-based techniques are inflexible to dynam-
ically updated models, as changes in the source functions and/or
initial/boundary conditions require a total re-computation of the
model solution, birthing the curse of dimensionality [153]. Zhu
et al. [132] also reported identification uncertainties arising from
uncontrollable and unknown operational input and environmental
variability as associated challenges of the physics-based SHM ap-
proaches. As such, other techniques have been developed from a
purely data-driven perspective or a physics-informed (hybrid) ap-
proach. Also to tackle the effects of measurement noise and model
errors, statistical methods based on Bayesian inference have been
developed, which are particularly useful for DT creation for SHM
as reported in Section 6.4.
6.3.2
Data-driven Simulation Techniques. Data-driven ap-
proaches are primarily based on statistical pattern recognition from
the dataset, eliminating the need for FE model updating and re-
computation during the online phase of SHM. This pattern recog-
nition is however done by a trained classifier, necessitating the use
of ML and DL frameworks. The ML and DL techniques intro-
duced in Section 6.2.1 are mostly applied here but are not limited
to image or video data. Concisely, the data-driven approach com-
prises an offline expensive phase including data acquisition, feature
extraction, and training the classifier, and an online phase that uti-
lizes the trained classifier for SHM [172]. For SHM, the pattern
recognition strategy is often regarded as “anomaly detection” with
a fundamental framework of checking the conformity of newly gen-
erated datasets to the features extracted from the baseline system.
The use of ML for anomaly detection is not a trivial task since they
are based on binarization. In other words, the use of supervised
ML techniques for damage detection will require data from both
the undamaged baseline and the anticipated damaged state of the
structure. This is limited for real-life applications as it is imprac-
tical to generate datasets that reflect all possible damage scenarios
of a structure [152,159].
To circumvent the aforementioned difficulties, One-class classi-
fication (outlier detection or novelty detection) is often employed
in SHM, where labeled data from the undamaged state are used
in the training phase and unlabeled data from both the undamaged
and damaged states are used in the test phase to detect anoma-
lies employing an online novelty score [173,174].
Three well-
known one-class classification strategies include Isolation Forest
[175], Local Outlier Detector [176], and the One-Class Support
Vector Machine (OCSVM), which is commonly adopted for SHM
[152,172,177,178]. The OCSVM is derived from the binary classi-
fication: Support Vector Machine (SVM). Unlike the binary SVM,
the OCSVM does not have second-class data but instead, the deci-
sion boundary (hyperplane) separates the data from the origin, as
a proxy for the second class, which is formulated as a convex op-
timization problem. Long et al. [152] and Schoelkopf et al. [179]
provided reviews on OCSVM. Das et al. [177] used OCSVM as
a signal-processing technique in a wave-based approach for char-
acterizing defect states in composite laminates in an anisotropic
medium. On a different spectrum, compression techniques were
advanced due to the established need for memory-efficient SHM
techniques that can be directly used on the sensors or the gate-
ways [180–183]. Notably, Principal Component Analysis (PCA)
and Autoencoder are used to transform high-dimensional corre-
lated data into low-dimensional correlated data [184]. Moallemi et
al. [183] utilized autoencoders as a data-driven approach to detect
anomalies in a bridge structure.
Data-driven approaches for SHM are greatly limited by the pro-
hibitive cost of offline data acquisition. We once again reempha-
size that it is impractical to have access to datasets that are rep-
resentative of all the possible damage scenarios of a structure for
supervised ML classification. Although we earlier presented one-
class unsupervised ML methods such as OCVSM for SHM, such
methods are only successful for the lower levels of damage di-
agnosis (only detecting damage presence [131,153,159]) let alone
establishing damage prognosis (such as damage severity or life-
cycle estimation). We recall that the limitations of physics-based
approaches—particularly as inverse problems—occur mostly at the
online stage, while that of data-driven, as presented herein, occurs
mostly at the offline stage. It is thus plausible to hybridize these two
approaches as a means for improved SHM, termed hybrid-based
simulation techniques.
6.3.3
Hybrid Simulation Techniques. The concept of regular-
ization for solving inverse problems is also viewed in the data-
driven sense as a guided training process using domain knowledge
[153].
Yuan et al. [153] report that the integration of domain
knowledge for model regularization can either be from a mathe-
matical model governed by PDEs (tagged physics-informed ma-
chine techniques) or from expert human knowledge through tech-
niques like transfer learning and network architecture customiza-
tion. Among the several ways [185] of creating physics-informed
machine learning, a commonly adopted one for SHM is the syn-
thetic creation of data from physics-based models for training ML
classifiers.
In addition to sufficient data creation, the use of a
physics-based model aids the interpretability of ML tools and per-
mits further analysis beyond damage detection such as establishing
damage location and severity.
The use of physics-based simulations in the data-driven ap-
proach is however limited by the computational burden in solv-
ing parameterized PDEs for many values of parameters. For im-
proved efficiency, the concepts of surrogate modeling [186,187]
and adaptive sampling [188,189] were introduced. However, both
approaches are still limited by the curse of dimensionality and are
mostly applied to static data. Another limitation is model errors
from the approximate representations given by those techniques
[159,190]. Parametric model order reduction (pMOR) and defini-
tion of bounds (uncertainty quantification) have been adopted to
address the curse of dimensionality and model errors, respectively.
A commonly adopted pMOR technique is the Reduced-Basis (RB)
method [191,192]: a projection-based method with the central idea
of using a linear combination of suitable basis functions derived
from a high-fidelity problem to reconstruct a solution for a new
parameter [172]. The RB method is based on the reformulation
of several problems in the following form: for a given value of 𝜇,
find 𝑢(𝜇) ∈𝑋such that
𝐹(𝑢(𝜇); 𝜇) = 0
(5)
where 𝑋is a function space, 𝜇∈R𝑝is a vector of parameters
representing materials properties, time, geometric properties, etc.,
and 𝐹is a mapping defined over 𝑋× R𝑝. Provided some initial
values 𝑢(𝜇𝑖) for the function, 𝑢(𝜇) can be nicely predicted for a
generic value 𝜇[193]. For example, we can predict displacements
based on some parametric evolution such as geometry or time
(typically called snapshots), where we identify the dominant basis
functions for approximation. Through this, repetitive use of the
underlying model becomes feasible enabling applications for real-
time control and optimization and in turn diagnostic and prognostic
SHM [193]. However, the RB method consists of a potentially
expensive offline stage to generate the reduced basis Φ𝑟(a low-
rank truncation of the data) and an online stage typically based on
Galerkin projection given by:
𝑢(𝜇) = Φ𝑟𝑎(𝜇)
(6)
where 𝑎(𝜇) are to be determined from the dynamics on the Φ𝑟sub-
space. Another approach to pMOR is to use a reduced subspace
Φ𝑟(𝜇) that adapts with the parameters, typically via interpola-
tion [194]. Compared with using a global basis, this approach can
achieve the same accuracy with a much smaller reduced model,
which is very attractive for online DT applications.
Bigoni et al. [172] employed a data-driven approach through
physics-based data generations (making their approach hybrid)
obtained from solving parametric PDEs using pMOR based on
Journal of Computing and
Information Science in Engineering
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT / 15

Galerkin projection, and the reconstruction of time signals us-
ing the Weeks method (a numerical inverse Laplace transform).
OCSVM was then used as the classifier using newly synthesized
data obtained from the solution of the parametric PDEs for un-
seen input parameters. Their proposed approach was successful
for damage detection and localization with reported extension to
2D and 3D DT frameworks.
Uncertainty quantification has been implied in the reported ap-
plications of SHM. At this point, we briefly introduce Bayesian
methods which have been commonly adopted for mitigating model
errors’ impact on damage detection and localization.
Bayesian
methods are probabilistic methods that use prior information from
experiments or experience to give the posterior probability of un-
certainties in damage identification and localization.
Bayesian
methods intrinsically regularize models using the associated proba-
bility distributions. Their successful application is however hinged
on the accuracy of the prior information [160]. To generate accu-
rate prior with limited data availability, sparse Bayesian learning
[195–197] has been developed for constructing parameterized prior
based on sparse data [160]. For a given structure response 𝑅, the
posterior probability of parameter 𝜃is given by Bayes rule:
𝑝(𝜃|𝑅) = 𝑝(𝑅|𝜃)𝑝(𝜃)
𝑝(𝑅)
(7)
where 𝑝(𝑅|𝜃) is the probability of 𝑅given 𝜃, 𝑝(𝜃) is the prior
probability of 𝜃, 𝑝(𝑅) is a normalizing constant, and 𝑝(𝜃|𝑅) is the
posterior probability distribution of 𝜃given 𝑅. Bayesian methods
are particularly useful for the development of DT for SHM and
further details will be provided in Section 6.4.
Another promising approach is the use of ANN to solve dif-
ferential equations. ANN are utilized to learn complex non-linear
mappings to swiftly handle slight variations in models. With the
advent of GPUs and TensorFlow (DL framework with embedded
automatic differentiation), research in this area has considerably
increased for solving nonlinear PDE (see [198]). Yuan et al. [153]
demonstrated the promise of this approach to solve both forward
and inverse problems for beam vibration modeling and displace-
ment reconstruction respectively. For the forward problem, authors
sequentially employed the collocation method in segmented short-
time windows across two training phases successively without and
with the loss function.
The ANN-solving mechanism was then
extended to the inverse problem involving displacement field re-
construction from a sparse array of data.
This section has introduced the three-phase techniques com-
monly adopted for SHM. It is the authors’ opinion that such ex-
positions set the tone to introduce the conceptual advancements of
SHM using DT both from implementation and applicability per-
spectives presented in the subsequent sections.
6.4
SHM + DT: Model Update and Uncertainty Quantifi-
cation. We emphasize that the creation of DT for SHM purposes
is made possible by the rising success in model updating, data
augmentation [7], and uncertainty quantification [199].
In the
proposed DT framework developed by Ritto et al. [185], a DT
goes beyond a computational model of underlying physical struc-
tures but accounts for uncertainties, calibrated with data measured
from the physical twin, evolving with time to reflect the current
states of the asset and life-cycle estimation.
In a bid to distin-
guish between a validated model and DT, Wagg et al. [18] em-
phasized time-evolution and extended use of DT as characteristic
features of DT, noting model updates and uncertainty quantifi-
cation as key functionalities. In fact, the authors interchangeably
used model updating and uncertainty quantification, further reveal-
ing their inherent connection. Although several techniques such as
regression and Bayesian methods have been established for uncer-
tainty quantification, their applications in DT are complicated by
increasing complexities from multiphysics or multiscale modeling
arising in several system-level predictions.
Approaches such as
data-augmented modeling or surrogate modeling were highlighted
Real Asset
Data
Control
Calibration /
Model Update
Models
Services:
Diagnosis &
Prognosis
Uncertainty
Quantification
Uncertainty
Quantification
Digital Twin
Feedback
Fig. 12
DT for structural health monitoring. Requisite com-
ponents include a real asset, virtual representation with compu-
tational models calibrated for the physical asset, real-time bi-
directional data exchange, feedback, and control for prognostic
and diagnostic services. Uncertainty quantification is essential in
the DT components.
to circumvent the challenges of uncertainty quantification for DT.
The authors still advocated the need for more efficient methods for
estimating uncertainty propagation in DT.
In a later work by Zhu et al. [132], a model updating strategy
was developed to alleviate the computational burdens associated
with the earlier introduced strategies. They proposed the use of
an intermediate model to eliminate the need for continuous model
updating which might be unnecessary for unaltered systems. The
three-level strategy comprises an intermediate model which can be
any surrogate with identifiable parameters from SHM data, diver-
gence analysis for conditioning model update based on the quanti-
fied level of system changes, and a model update using Bayesian
methods to propagate the uncertainty between the measured data,
intermediate model, and the system model.
The authors’ novel
contribution is embedded in the divergence analysis step which is
also in two parts: the first is to check if measured changes are
due to environmental conditions or system changes, and the sec-
ond step proceeds if the first check is attributed to system changes
such that this change is compared to an established threshold to
necessitate the model update. The authors demonstrated their pro-
posed strategy for a vibration-based system identification method.
For this, a modal model was employed as the intermediate model,
where modal analysis was conducted to get the posterior distribu-
tion of the parameter 𝜔of the modal model given the measured
data 𝐷𝑖, denoted by 𝑝(𝜔|𝐷𝑖). A divergence analysis is then con-
ducted such that a discrepancy 𝑑𝑖between the intermediate model
and reference model is quantified and compared with the tolerance
discrepancy 𝑑tol as a determinant for model update or not. The
model update itself utilized a Bayesian framework to account for
the identification uncertainty of the model parameters given by:
𝑝(𝜃|𝐷𝑖) = 𝑝(𝜃)
∫𝑝(𝜔|𝜃)
𝑝(𝜔) 𝑝(𝜔|𝐷𝑖)𝑑𝜔
(8)
where 𝜃is the system parameters which are updated by the posterior
distribution given above. At this point, we follow suit with other
researchers and emphasize that uncertainty quantification remains
an important link for the creation of DT and it must be accounted
for from the calibration to the prediction and optimization of a
DT as shown in Fig. 12. The next section further highlights the
stronghold of uncertainty quantification for DT creation.
16 / ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Transactions of the ASME

6.5
Existing Mathematical Abstractions for DT.
6.5.1
Probabilistic Graphical Model. A well-received mathe-
matical abstraction of DT proposed by Kapteyn et al. [15] involves
six representative quantities: physical state (𝑠∈S), observational
data (𝑜∈O), control inputs (𝑢∈U), digital state (𝑑∈D), quan-
tities of interest (𝑞∈Q), and reward (𝑟∈R). A crucial selling
point of their mathematical abstraction is its utilization for develop-
ing mathematical models for DT that are currently being applied to
structural systems for quantification and validation. One of such is
the probabilistic graphical model (PGM) for DT which encodes the
interaction and evolution of the six representative quantities of the
asset-twin system. The encoding captures the data-decisions-flow
(ranging from sensing, assimilation, inference, and action). Statis-
tically, the model is built upon a dynamic Bayesian network with
the inclusion of decision nodes, which are time-discrete random
variables representing each quantity.
The probabilistic construct of the model can be linked to the
nodal representation of discrete-time quantities as random vari-
ables; for example, the digital state 𝐷𝑡at time 𝑡is defined as a
random variable distributed as 𝑝(𝐷𝑡). The graphical framework
enables a principled approach for calibration, data assimilation,
and feedback control loop of the DT leading to important features
like prediction, planning, and uncertainty quantification. The con-
ditional independence structure of the graph permits the factoriza-
tion of joint distributions of the model variables. In particular, the
factorization serves two purposes which include revealing the inter-
actions to be minimally included in the DT computational models
and providing a basis for efficiently derived Bayesian inference
algorithms combined with modeled interactions for specific DT
actions. An example factorization given by [15] is shown below:
𝑝
(︂
(𝐷𝑡, 𝑄𝑡, 𝑅𝑡)𝑡𝑐
𝑡=0
|︁|︁(𝑜𝑡, 𝑢𝑡)𝑡𝑐
𝑡=0
)︂
=
𝑡𝑐
∏︂
𝑡=0
[︂
𝜙update
𝑡
𝜙QoI
𝑡
𝜙evaluation
𝑡
]︂
(9)
where the factors are defined as
𝜙update
𝑡
= 𝑝(𝐷𝑡|𝐷𝑡−1,𝑈𝑡−1 = 𝑢𝑡−1, 𝑂𝑡= 𝑜𝑡),
𝜙QoI
𝑡
= 𝑝(𝑄𝑡|𝐷𝑡),
𝜙evaluation
𝑡
= 𝑝(𝑅𝑡|𝐷𝑡,𝑈𝑡= 𝑢𝑡, 𝑂𝑡= 𝑜𝑡).
In Section 6.6, we report an application of the PGM for SHM of
civil engineering structures by Torzonni et al. [14].
6.5.2
Digital Mirrors and Virtualization. Before the develop-
ment of the probabilistic graphic framework presented above, Wor-
den et al.[200] made an attempt to provide a mathematical frame-
work for DT (or digital mirrors). To present their mathematical
framework, the authors reserved the use of the term digital twins
for digital mirrors in the concept of context-dependent virtualiza-
tion. They argued that existing “DTs” are context-dependent and as
such it is not always the case to fully model a physical system, and
that most models reflect specific features or parts of a bigger scope
in a system. In addition, the literary definition of the mirror as an
object that faithfully reflects a mirror-facing object (i.e., context-
dependent) flows with their argument. This paper will however
not separate the rhetoric of mirror from twin but rather present
their mathematical underpinnings for DT modeling and applica-
tions. The term “digital twin” will be adopted throughout the rest
of this paper for the sake of generalizations.
Similar to the PGM’s representative quantities, the authors at-
tempted to define the physical object of the system 𝑆, environ-
ment 𝐸, context 𝐶, schedule 𝑊𝐶, and associated schedule’s test
𝑇𝐶
𝑊to present the mathematical abstraction of digital twin (mir-
ror). The physical system 𝑆will be represented with a state vector
s(𝑡) = {𝑠1(𝑡), · · · , 𝑠𝑁𝑆(𝑡)} across 𝑁𝑆time-specific measurements
to characterize its states, and the environment 𝐸which is viewed as
an influence on 𝑆is represented by an environmental state vector
e(𝑡) = {𝑒1(𝑡), · · · , 𝑒𝑁𝐸(𝑡)}. The desired system aspect (context
𝐶) is a set of environmental state variables 𝐶= {𝑒𝐶
𝑖
∈𝐸, 𝑠𝐶
𝑗∈
s : 𝑖, 𝑗}, where 𝑒𝐶
𝑖
represents environmental context and 𝑠𝐶
𝑗rep-
resents response or predictive context. The schedule 𝑊𝐶is a time
series set given by {e𝐶
𝑊(𝑡𝑖) : 𝑖= 1, · · · , 𝑁𝑖, 𝑡𝑖∈[0,𝑇]}, where
{𝑡𝑖} could be continuous or discrete. The response r𝐶
𝑊(𝑡) to 𝑊𝐶
is thus represented as the measurement sequence from structural
test results that are based on schedule inputs, which is represented
by the functional
r𝐶
𝑊(𝑡) = 𝑆[e𝐶
𝑊(𝑡) ≡𝑊𝐶].
(10)
The associated test schedule can be defined as 𝑇𝐶
𝑊= {e𝐶
𝑊, r𝐶
𝑊},
with data captured for both training 𝐷train and testing 𝐷test.
A model 𝑀𝐶is defined to predict the behavior of the physical
object 𝑆for any schedule specific to the context 𝐶. As such, they
deduced a simulation for a context 𝐶under a schedule 𝑊𝐶as
m𝐶
𝑊(𝑡) = 𝑀𝐶[𝑒𝐶
𝑊(𝑡) ≡𝑊𝐶].
(11)
A metric 𝑑𝐶(x, y) is then defined to study the model fidelity on a
given context 𝐶.
Having established the above terminologies, for a model 𝑀𝐶𝜖in
a given context 𝐶to be an 𝜖-mirror, it must satisfy the equivalence:
𝑑𝐶(m𝐶(𝑡), r𝐶(𝑡)) ≤𝜖
for all 𝐷test.
(12)
This model 𝑀𝐶𝜖is fit for purpose if and only if it is an 𝜖-mirror
for 𝐶and 𝜖≤𝜖𝑟, where 𝜖𝑟is a critical threshold based on context
or engineering requirements.
Worden et al. [200] further augmented their proposed physics-
based framework with a data-driven approach—a hybrid approach
such as a machine learning model trained on 𝐷train to give a new
model 𝑀ℎ𝐶(𝐷train)—as a means to meeting model updates re-
quirements. In this case, the probabilistic nature of most machine
learning models thus necessitated the need to assess model accu-
racy and as such to quantify uncertainty.
6.6
Field Specific Adoption: SHM + DT. Following con-
ceptual overviews on SHM and DT development, we now report
applications of DT for SHM across two categories. As presented
below, the aforementioned techniques are integrated as enabling
technologies for the development of DT for SHM.
6.6.1
Predictive Diagnostic SHM. We notice that most exist-
ing developments of DT for SHM purposes were aimed at realizing
the real-time condition assessment of structures, and predictions of
damage presence, type, and locations. We classify such an appli-
cation of DT as predictive diagnostic SHM; some of which are
reviewed below.
Febrianto et al [201] developed a digital twin using a statis-
tical finite element model (StatFEM) for autonomous continuous
monitoring and assessment of the structure. The authors employed
hybrid simulation techniques for prediction. Fiber Bragg grating
sensors were utilized for the continuous monitoring of a railway
bridge. The measured data was the strain distribution of the bridge,
which was previously collected from the point of construction to
two years post-construction and validated with a deterministic FE
model by other researchers. Their proposed framework accounted
for uncertainties in sensor readings, applied loading, FE model
misspecification errors, and train weight by making the FE com-
ponent a random variable represented by a Gaussian process. The
prior density of the FE component was obtained by solving a tra-
ditional probabilistic forward problem, and the posterior densities
Journal of Computing and
Information Science in Engineering
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT / 17

were inferred via the Bayes rule. The results revealed reasonable
accuracy between measured and predicted data post-calibration of
the DT, even in regions with missing sensor data.
Angjeliu et al [12] proposed a DT for the structural integrity
assessment of a historic masonry Cathedral in Milan.
The au-
thors adopted a non-linear finite element model, based on data
from photogrammetric geometric measurements, extensive in situ
survey, and archive data. In addition, due to the historical nature
of the building, there was no available structural model, thus the
researchers employed a mixed modeling technique consisting of
parametric modeling and computer-aided engineering (CAE) for
the as-built model, which was then discretized to produce the FE
model for DT development.
Accelerometers were employed as
sensors and placed on the nave of the cathedral (the target loca-
tion), for data acquisition and model updates. Their proposed DT
helped in understanding the force distribution and interdependen-
cies between structural members, which was successfully utilized
for damage detection and prediction within certain parts of the
structure. In a similar trend of DT development for legacy build-
ings, Pregnolato et al [13] proposed a DT that was utilized for the
predictive maintenance of the Clifton suspension bridge in Bristol,
United Kingdom. In this case, three types of sensors including
temperature sensors, displacement transducers, and strain gauges
were utilized for data acquisition for model development and ac-
quisition, and with the global aim of estimating the coefficient of
friction of the tower saddles. The 3D FE model was developed in
MIDAS Gen, which was calibrated with the previously developed
models. The data interface was in two layers: a software layer,
where model updating occurs, and the application layer which in-
terprets the inputs and provides outputs. We highlight that these
particular applications of DT for SHM utilize existing technologies
previously introduced in other sections such as parametric BIM and
sensing, thus suggesting their synchronizations for context-specific
applications.
In tandem with our adopted concept on SHM-based DT, Ritto
et al. [185] developed a DT for dynamical systems. The authors
emphasized the computational model, uncertainty quantification,
and model calibration as the core of their DT. A prismatic bar
with similar structural behavior was adopted as a theoretical phys-
ical asset.
Their computational model was constructed using a
6-degree-of-freedom lumped parameter description and the uncer-
tainty quantification component was accounted for by modeling
parameters as uniform random variables. The authors trained and
tested various data classifiers for appropriate model selection. Fi-
nally, they performed a series of analyses on their DT by varying
parameters in their data sets, expressing several causal and resultant
relationships between their DT components and data parameters.
Their DT model was tested for damage detection and prediction
but excluded model discrepancy and prognostic SHM.
6.6.2
Predictive Diagnostic + Prognostic SHM. For complete
SHM processes, some researchers have developed DT for prognos-
tic evaluations. By prognosis evaluation, we imply a time evolution
study of a physical twin through its DT. This goes beyond damage
prediction based on anticipated events but also includes under-
standing damage evolution such as crack propagation. With such
possibilities, DT features such as planning, automated preventive
maintenance, and efficient model updates can be realized [202].
The models reviewed in Section 6.5 are applied to particu-
larly enhance SHM capabilities for both diagnosis and prognosis.
Specifically, the PGM developed by [15] was applied by [14] to
develop a DT framework for civil engineering structures. Torzoni
et al. [14] presented three key steps for predictive digital twins us-
ing physics-based models and machine learning. First is the use
of the PGM framework for predictive DT. For this, the observed
data are assimilated using DL models as an initial estimate of the
digital state. The structural health parameters that comprise the
digital state are updated using sequential Bayesian inference based
on health-dependent control policy to capture the structural health
evolution. The second step is a simulation-based strategy to gener-
ate training datasets for the DL models i.e., numerical simulations
of physics-based models were utilized to generate the datasets. For
civil structures, the detection of damage patterns characterized by
a small evolution rate remains the focus, prompting the use of
stiffness as the ideal parameter. Reduced order modeling (ROM)
based on proper orthogonal decomposition (POD) and Galerkin
projection were employed to simplify the problem and save com-
putational costs during the synthetic data generation. The third step
comprises the assimilation of the populated datasets using two DL
models. For every new observational data acquired, a classification
task is performed to identify damage detection/localization. For ev-
ery identified damage, the observational data are further processed
with regression models to quantify the amount of damage at each
damageable region. The developed methodologies were applied for
two numerical experiments which comprised a simulated L-shaped
cantilever beam and railway bridge. The results showed promising
prospects for the application of DT for SHM under varying oper-
ational conditions, with low uncertainties. Also the framework as
presented by [15] propels planning by suggesting suitable control
inputs for future occurrences.
Although not in civil engineering, Karve et al. [203] extended
the diagnosis and prognosis aspect of SHM to include intelligent
mission planning for unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) to ascertain
safe and reliable mechanical systems with maintenance-free oper-
ation. For mission planning optimization, the authors utilized load
profile optimization to minimize the damage growth without com-
promising the level of work done. They specifically employed a
hybrid strategy where the initial missions aim to minimize the final
damage value, and later missions minimize the probability of ex-
ceeding critical crack size. With all these in place, damage-tolerant
mission planning under uncertainty using DT was achieved.
6.7
Remarks on DT and SHM. We introduced the necessary
arsenals to develop DT for SHM purposes. These include the fun-
damental processes of data acquisition through sensing technolo-
gies, data processing such as feature extraction via ML methods,
and data interpretation from extracted features or raw data using
computer vision and DL methods. Furthermore, the conventional
SHM techniques that have been reportedly successful for diagnos-
tic purposes were extended to include DT as a basis for enabling
feedback and control, and ultimately achieving real-time SHM that
spans both diagnostic and prognostic evaluations.
As a starting point for our remarks, we remind readers that SHM
is one of the possible applications of the DT of a corresponding
structural system. Thus, DT should not be viewed as a tool for
SHM but rather as a system with SHM capabilities.
For most
existing DT-based SHM, the current capability level stops at real-
time damage detection and prediction for better decision-making
in terms of early warnings or precise maintenance. However, an
ideal DT-based SHM should not only include damage detection,
localization, and level of severity, but also provide information on
damage propagation, life cycle estimation, preventive maintenance,
and mission planning. From our review, we notice limited devel-
opments of DT to achieve such possibilities which we categorized
as predictive diagnostic + prognostic SHM. Taking a closer look
at this category, we notice that mission planning can be linked to
the aviation industry such as the work done by Karve et al. [203]
and Kapteyn et al. [15]. This can be correspondingly achieved for
civil structures in terms of automated predictive maintenance that
will identify remedial actions for anticipated damage based on time
evolution studies. In fact, this is requisite for achieving a level-5
DT.
For DT development, two techniques have proved important.
First is the inevitable need for uncertainty quantification. Kapteyn
et al. [15] in their mathematical abstractions and correspond-
ing PGM framework emphasized uncertainty quantification for all
six parameters.
Ritto et al. [185] added a layer of uncertainty
quantification in the computational model of a DT, and Karve et
al. [203] mandated uncertainty quantification for diagnostic, prog-
nostic SHM, and also load-profile optimization for mission plan-
18 / ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Transactions of the ASME

ning. We agree with the body of literature in this regard and par-
ticularly state that predictive SHM at every level can be viewed as a
probabilistic SHM. As already established, the model update goes
hand in hand with uncertainty quantification but not necessarily
uncertainty quantification. As the name implies, model updating
is a must for an accurate depiction of the digital states of the cor-
responding physical states of an asset. While sequential Bayesian
inference is commonly employed, the need for continuous model
updates can be computationally expensive due to the repetitive need
for evaluations [132]. Also, the unique nature of civil engineering
systems with very slow structural alteration and false anomalies
from ambient excitations questions the need for all-time model up-
dates. As proposed by Zhu et al. [132], pre-model update checks
could be developed to ascertain the appropriate time for model
updates. Pan et al. [8] also demonstrated such an approach for a
BIM-data mining integrated DT. We thus suggest more research
on the most efficient approach for model updates for the DT devel-
opment of structural systems. For both uncertainty quantification
and model updates, randomization of parameters for probabilistic
evaluations is critical.
7
Concluding Remarks
The unconsolidated adoption of DT across several fields threat-
ens its perception as a technological buzzword, which could easily
perpetuate the civil engineering field if one looks at DT’s level
of development for its projects. Through the literature surveyed,
we showed DT to be an advancement to existing technologies that
make use of the great possibilities that currently exist in compu-
tational science and engineering. Notably, we showed DT to be
an enabler for mission planning optimization in the aviation in-
dustry and as a platform for realizing the factory of the future in
the manufacturing industry. Although we conceded to the slow
adoption of DT in the civil engineering field, we equally presented
several motivating examples of at least level-3 DTs developments
for SHM.
Specific to this work, we view DT as a viable solution to
the unique challenges at the separate phases of civil engineering
projects. This is in tandem with the fundamental concept of DT as
a continuous technology across the entire life cycle of projects or
products. We started by emphasizing that a complete DT which we
termed level-5 DT should be capable of digital representation, real-
time monitoring, prediction, interaction, and autonomous control.
Beyond a service-based notion of DT, we noted the fundamental
components of DT from a developmental angle. In this regard, we
strongly stated that the distinguishing feature of a DT comprises: a
physical asset, digital asset, real-time bidirectional data exchange,
feedback, and control.
However, most attempts to develop DT
exclude the controlling or actuating capabilities of DT.
The majority of our review focused on the phase-based devel-
opment of DT to advocate for a holistic adoption of the same in
the AEC industry. This should not be confused with a proposition
for a singular DT for the entire civil engineering phases. For this
reason, we presented DT as a context-based representation of a
real asset to avail accurate and computationally tractable models.
Furthermore, we adopted self-sufficient narrations of the conven-
tional techniques at each phase as a basis for DT development and
applications. We equally provided remarks specific to each phase
to provide insights on the forward-thinking approach for DT devel-
opment and adoption for civil engineering projects. For example
at the planning/design phase, we highlighted the realization of in-
direct DT using similar or historic structures for a more informed
design of high-risk projects. In the construction phase, we showed
the role of BIM, sensing, and IoT in developing highly sensitive DT
that are dynamic enough to capture the transient nature of projects
at this phase. We then showed the promise of DT for robust SHM
built on several technological and mathematical concepts—such
as model update and computer vision— to make prognostic SHM
commonplace in civil engineering. Another important insight in-
cludes the synchronization of the dominant technologies across the
different phases, one which was apparent in the reviews presented
on BIM, sensing, and computer vision.
Although not detailed in this work, other important technologies
such as cloud computing and cyber-physical systems are important
in the framework of DT development. Aside from a technological
view of DT, there exists an important cultural view. For this, the
place of data privacy is highly contentious and the role of DT for
the civil engineering workforce must be equally explored. If con-
sciously adopted, DT will become a competitive tool for sustain-
able and resilient civil engineering practice amidst the mounting
environmental and social challenges in the AEC profession.
Acknowledgment
The authors thank the University of Houston Division of Re-
search for providing startup fund (Award No. 000186084) to sup-
port this research.
References
[1] Tao, F. and Zhang, M., 2017, “Digital twin shop-floor: a new shop-floor
paradigm towards smart manufacturing,” IEEE access, 5, pp. 20418–20427.
[2] Liu, Q., Liu, B., Wang, G., and Zhang, C., 2019, “A comparative study on
digital twin models,” AIP Conference Proceedings, Vol. 2073, AIP Publishing,
Paper No. 1.
[3] Qi, Q. and Tao, F., 2018, “Digital Twin and Big Data Towards Smart Man-
ufacturing and Industry 4.0: 360 Degree Comparison,” IEEE Access, 6, pp.
3585–3593.
[4] Guo, F., Zou, F., Liu, J., and Wang, Z., 2018, “Working mode in aircraft
manufacturing based on digital coordination model,” The international journal
of advanced manufacturing technology, 98, pp. 1547–1571.
[5] Tuegel, E. J., Ingraffea, A. R., Eason, T. G., and Spottswood, S. M., 2011,
“Reengineering aircraft structural life prediction using a digital twin,” Interna-
tional Journal of Aerospace Engineering, 2011(1), p. 154798.
[6] Cameron, D. B., Waaler, A., and Komulainen, T. M., 2018, “Oil and Gas digital
twins after twenty years. How can they be made sustainable, maintainable and
useful?” Proceedings of The 59th Conference on Simulation and Modelling
(SIMS 59), Linköping University Electronic Press, pp. 15–24.
[7] Zhang, R., Wingo, P., Duran, R., Rose, K., Bauer, J., and Ghanem, R., 2020,
“Environmental Economics and Uncertainty: Review and a Machine Learning
Outlook,” Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Environmental Science, Oxford
University Press.
[8] Pan, Y. and Zhang, L., 2021, “A BIM-data mining integrated digital twin
framework for advanced project management,” Automation in Construction,
124, p. 103564.
[9] Tao, F., Zhang, H., Liu, A., and Nee, A. Y. C., 2019, “Digital Twin in Indus-
try: State-of-the-Art,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 15(4), pp.
2405–2415.
[10] Enzer, M., Bolton, A., Boulton, C., Byles, D., Cook, A., Dobbs, L., El Hajj,
P. A., Keaney, E., Kemp, A., Makri, C., and Mistry, S., 2019, “Roadmap
for delivering the information management framework for the built environ-
ment,” Centre for Digital Built Britain, https://www.cdbb.cam.ac.uk/DFTG/
DFTGRoadmap
[11] Lamb, K., 2019, “Principle-based digital twins: a scoping review,” Centre for
Digital Built Britain.
[12] Angjeliu, G., Coronelli, D., and Cardani, G., 2020, “Development of the sim-
ulation model for Digital Twin applications in historical masonry buildings:
The integration between numerical and experimental reality,” Computers and
Structures, 238, p. 106282.
[13] Pregnolato, M., Gunner, S., Voyagaki, E., De Risi, R., Carhart, N., Gavriel,
G., Tully, P., Tryfonas, T., Macdonald, J., and Taylor, C., 2022, “Towards
Civil Engineering 4.0: Concept, workflow and application of Digital Twins for
existing infrastructure,” Automation in Construction, 141, p. 104421.
[14] Torzoni, M., Tezzele, M., Mariani, S., Manzoni, A., and Willcox, K. E., 2024,
“A digital twin framework for civil engineering structures,” Computer Methods
in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 418, p. 116584.
[15] Kapteyn, M. G., Pretorius, J. V., and Willcox, K. E., 2021, “A probabilis-
tic graphical model foundation for enabling predictive digital twins at scale,”
Nature Computational Science, 1(5), pp. 337–347.
[16] Jones, D., Snider, C., Nassehi, A., Yon, J., and Hicks, B., 2020, “Charac-
terising the Digital Twin: A systematic literature review,” CIRP journal of
manufacturing science and technology, 29, pp. 36–52.
[17] Rasheed, A., San, O., and Kvamsdal, T., 2020, “Digital twin: Values, chal-
lenges and enablers from a modeling perspective,” Ieee Access, 8, pp. 21980–
22012.
[18] Wagg, D., Worden, K., Barthorpe, R., and Gardner, P., 2020, “Digital twins:
state-of-the-art and future directions for modeling and simulation in engineer-
ing dynamics applications,” ASCE-ASME Journal of Risk and Uncertainty in
Engineering Systems, Part B: Mechanical Engineering, 6(3), p. 030901.
[19] Kritzinger, W., Karner, M., Traar, G., Henjes, J., and Sihn, W., 2018, “Digital
Twin in manufacturing: A categorical literature review and classification,” Ifac-
PapersOnline, 51(11), pp. 1016–1022, 16th IFAC Symposium on Information
Control Problems in Manufacturing INCOM 2018.
Journal of Computing and
Information Science in Engineering
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT / 19

[20] Arup, 2019, “Digital Twin: Towards a Meaningful Framework,” https:
//www.arup.com/insights/digital-twin-towards-a-meaningful-framework/, Ac-
cessed: 2024-02-9.
[21] Jiang, F., Ma, L., Broyd, T., and Chen, K., 2021, “Digital twin and its imple-
mentations in the civil engineering sector,” Automation in Construction, 130,
p. 103838.
[22] of Aeronautics, A. I. and (AIAA), A., 2024, “Digital Twin: Definition and
Value—An AIAA and AIA Position Paper,” https://www.aia-aerospace.org/
publications/digital-twin-definition-value-an-aiaa-and-aia-position-paper/,
Accessed: 2024-02-9.
[23] Elfarri, E. M., Rasheed, A., and San, O., 2023, “Artificial Intelligence-Driven
Digital Twin of a Modern House Demonstrated in Virtual Reality,” IEEE Ac-
cess, 11, pp. 35035–35058.
[24] Grieves, M. and Vickers, J., 2017, Digital Twin: Mitigating Unpredictable,
Undesirable Emergent Behavior in Complex Systems, Springer International
Publishing, Cham, pp. 85–113.
[25] Grieves,
M.,
2014,
“Digital Twin: Manufacturing Excellence Through
Virtual
Factory
Replication,”
Dassault
Systèmes,
White
Paper,
https://www.3ds.com/fileadmin/PRODUCTS-SERVICES/DELMIA/PDF/
Whitepaper/DELMIA-APRISO-Digital-Twin-Whitepaper.pdf
[26] IBM,
2024,
“What
is
a
Digital
Twin?”
https://www.ibm.com/topics/
what-is-a-digital-twin?mhsrc=ibmsearch_a&mhq=what%20is%20digital%
20twin, Accessed: 2024-02-9.
[27] Electric, G., 2024, “Minds + Machines: Meet a Digital Twin,” https://www.
youtube.com/watch?v=2dCz3oL2rTw, Accessed: 2024-02-9.
[28] Siemens, 2024, “Digital Twin Technology,” https://www.sw.siemens.com/
en-US/technology/digital-twin/, Accessed: 2024-02-9.
[29] Glaessgen, E. and Stargel, D., 2012, The digital twin paradigm for future NASA
and US Air Force vehicles, American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics
(AIAA, p. 1818.
[30] Qi, Q., Tao, F., Hu, T., Anwer, N., Liu, A., Wei, Y., Wang, L., and Nee, A.,
2021, “Enabling technologies and tools for digital twin,” Journal of Manufac-
turing Systems, 58, pp. 3–21, Digital Twin towards Smart Manufacturing and
Industry 4.0.
[31] Doumbouya, L., Gao, G., and Guan, C., 2016, “Adoption of the Building
Information Modeling (BIM) for construction project effectiveness: The review
of BIM benefits,” American Journal of Civil Engineering and Architecture,
4(3), pp. 74–79.
[32] Arayici, Y., Khosrowshahi, F., Ponting, A., and Mihindu, S., 2009, “Towards
implementation of building information modelling in the construction indus-
try,” Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Construction in the
21st Century (CITC-V), Depositing User : Arayici, Y Themes : Built and
Human Environment.
[33] Häkkinen, T., Kuittinen, M., Ruuska, A., and Jung, N., 2015, “Reducing em-
bodied carbon during the design process of buildings,” Journal of Building
Engineering, 4, pp. 1–13.
[34] Wong, K.-d. and Fan, Q., 2013, “Building information modelling (BIM) for
sustainable building design,” Facilities, 31(3/4), pp. 138–157.
[35] Khajavi, S. H., Motlagh, N. H., Jaribion, A., Werner, L. C., and Holmström, J.,
2019, “Digital Twin: Vision, Benefits, Boundaries, and Creation for Buildings,”
IEEE Access, 7, pp. 147406–147419.
[36] Opoku, D.-G. J., Perera, S., Osei-Kyei, R., and Rashidi, M., 2021, “Digital
twin application in the construction industry: A literature review,” Journal of
Building Engineering, 40, p. 102726.
[37] Gharehbaghi, V. R., Noroozinejad Farsangi, E., Noori, M., Yang, T. Y., Li, S.,
Nguyen, A., Málaga-Chuquitaype, C., Gardoni, P., and Mirjalili, S., 2022, “A
Critical Review on Structural Health Monitoring: Definitions, Methods, and
Perspectives,” Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering, 29(4), pp.
2209–2235.
[38] Mishra, M., Lourenço, P. B., and Ramana, G., 2022, “Structural health moni-
toring of civil engineering structures by using the internet of things: A review,”
Journal of Building Engineering, 48, p. 103954.
[39] Sun, M., Staszewski, W., and Swamy, R., 2010, “Smart sensing technologies
for structural health monitoring of civil engineering structures,” Advances in
civil engineering, (1), p. 724962.
[40] Ochieng, F. X., Hancock, C. M., Roberts, G. W., and Le Kernec, J., 2018,
“A review of ground-based radar as a noncontact sensor for structural health
monitoring of in-field wind turbines blades,” Wind Energy, 21(12), pp. 1435–
1449.
[41] Sacks, R., Brilakis, I., Pikas, E., Xie, H. S., and Girolami, M., 2020, “Con-
struction with digital twin information systems,” Data-Centric Engineering, 1,
p. e14.
[42] Negri, E., Fumagalli, L., and Macchi, M., 2017, “A review of the roles of digital
twin in CPS-based production systems,” Procedia manufacturing, 11, pp. 939–
948, 27th International Conference on Flexible Automation and Intelligent
Manufacturing, FAIM2017, 27-30 June 2017, Modena, Italy.
[43] Liu, M., Fang, S., Dong, H., and Xu, C., 2021, “Review of digital twin about
concepts, technologies, and industrial applications,” Journal of Manufacturing
Systems, 58, pp. 346–361, Digital Twin towards Smart Manufacturing and
Industry 4.0.
[44] Katz, C., 2008, “Parametric description of bridge structures,” International
Association for Bridge and Structural Engineering, Tech. Rep. 18, IABSE
Symposium Report.
[45] Venugopal, M., Eastman, C., Sacks, R., and Teizer, J., 2011, Improving the
Robustness of Model Exchanges Using Product Modeling "Concepts" for IFC
Schema, ASCE, pp. 611–618.
[46] Halfawy, M. R. and Froese, T., 2002, “Modeling and implementation of smart
AEC objects: an IFC perspective,” Proceedings of the CIB w78 Conference:
Distributing Knowledge in Building, Aarhus School of Architecture, 12–14
June (2002), Aarhus School of Architecture, Denmark, pp. 1–8, International
Council for Research and Innovation in Building and Construction, https://itc.
scix.net/pdfs/w78-2002-60.content.pdf
[47] Girardet, A. and Boton, C., 2021, “A parametric BIM approach to foster bridge
project design and analysis,” Automation in Construction, 126, p. 103679.
[48] Azhar, S. and Brown, J., 2009, “BIM for sustainability analyses,” International
Journal of Construction Education and Research, 5(4), pp. 276–292.
[49] Wong, J. K.-W. and Kuan, K.-L., 2014, “Implementing ‘BEAM Plus’ for BIM-
based sustainability analysis,” Automation in construction, 44, pp. 163–175.
[50] Nguyen, T., Shehab, T., and Gao, Z., 2010, “Evaluating Sustainability of Ar-
chitectural Designs Using Building Information Modeling,” The Open Con-
struction and Building Technology Journal, 4(1).
[51] Lee, Y.-C., Eastman, C. M., Solihin, W., and See, R., 2016, “Modularized
rule-based validation of a BIM model pertaining to model views,” Automation
in Construction, 63, pp. 1–11.
[52] Pauwels,
2015,
“IFC2RDFtools, presentation in the CIBW078 Work-
shop
on
Accelerating
BIM
Research
(Last
Accessed
September
2023),”
CIBW078
Workshop,
https://www.slideshare.net/pipauwel1/
20151023ifc2rdftoolingslideshare
[53] Lee, Y.-C., Eastman, C. M., and Lee, J.-K., 2015, “Validations for ensuring the
interoperability of data exchange of a building information model,” Automation
in Construction, 58, pp. 176–195.
[54] Boje, C., Guerriero, A., Kubicki, S., and Rezgui, Y., 2020, “Towards a seman-
tic Construction Digital Twin: Directions for future research,” Automation in
Construction, 114, p. 103179.
[55] Pauwels, P., Zhang, S., and Lee, Y.-C., 2017, “Semantic web technologies
in AEC industry: A literature overview,” Automation in construction, 73, pp.
145–165.
[56] Le, T. and Jeong, H. D., 2016, “Interlinking life-cycle data spaces to support
decision making in highway asset management,” Automation in Construction,
64, pp. 54–64.
[57] Venugopal, M., Eastman, C. M., and Teizer, J., 2015, “An ontology-based anal-
ysis of the industry foundation class schema for building information model
exchanges,” Advanced Engineering Informatics, 29(4), pp. 940–957, Collec-
tive Intelligence Modeling, Analysis, and Synthesis for Innovative Engineering
Decision Making Special Issue of the 1st International Conference on Civil
and Building Engineering Informatics.
[58] Pauwels, P. and Terkaj, W., 2016, “EXPRESS to OWL for construction indus-
try: Towards a recommendable and usable ifcOWL ontology,” Automation in
construction, 63, pp. 100–133.
[59] Deng, M., Menassa, C. C., and Kamat, V. R., 2021, “From BIM to digital twins:
A systematic review of the evolution of intelligent building representations in
the AEC-FM industry.” Journal of Information Technology in Construction,
26, pp. 58–83.
[60] Zhang, C., Zayed, T., Hĳazi, W., and Alkass, S., 2016, “Quantitative assess-
ment of building constructability using BIM and 4D simulation,” Open journal
of civil engineering, 6(03), p. 442.
[61] Tagliabue, L. C., Maltese, S., Re Cecconi, F., Ciribini, A. L. C., and De An-
gelis, E., 2018, “BIM-based interoperable workflow for energy improvement
of school buildings over the life cycle,” Proceedings of the 35th International
Symposium on Automation and Robotics in Construction (ISARC 2018), Berlin,
Germany, pp. 20–25.
[62] Shahzad, S., Calautit, J. K., Hughes, B. R., Satish, B., and Rĳal, H. B., 2019,
“Patterns of thermal preference and Visual Thermal Landscaping model in the
workplace,” Applied Energy, 255, p. 113674.
[63] Ma, G., Liu, Y., and Shang, S., 2019, “A building information model (BIM)
and artificial neural network (ANN) based system for personal thermal comfort
evaluation and energy efficient design of interior space,” Sustainability, 11(18),
p. 4972.
[64] Cheng, J. C. and Das, M., 2014, “A BIM-based web service framework for
green building energy simulation and code checking,” Journal of Information
Technology in Construction (ITcon), 19(8), pp. 150–168.
[65] Wu, C. and Clayton, M., 2013, “BIM-based acoustic simulation Framework,”
30th CIB W78 International Conference, pp. 99–108.
[66] Tang, S., Shelden, D. R., Eastman, C. M., Pishdad-Bozorgi, P., and Gao, X.,
2019, “A review of building information modeling (BIM) and the internet of
things (IoT) devices integration: Present status and future trends,” Automation
in Construction, 101, pp. 127–139.
[67] Tang, P., Huber, D., Akinci, B., Lipman, R., and Lytle, A., 2010, “Automatic
reconstruction of as-built building information models from laser-scanned point
clouds: A review of related techniques,” Automation in Construction, 19(7),
pp. 829–843.
[68] Bosché, F., Guillemet, A., Turkan, Y., Haas, C. T., and Haas, R., 2014, “Track-
ing the Built Status of MEP Works: Assessing the Value of a Scan-vs-BIM
System,” Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering, 28(4), p. 05014004.
[69] Bosché, F., Ahmed, M., Turkan, Y., Haas, C. T., and Haas, R., 2015, “The
value of integrating Scan-to-BIM and Scan-vs-BIM techniques for construction
monitoring using laser scanning and BIM: The case of cylindrical MEP com-
ponents,” Automation in Construction, 49, pp. 201–213, 30th ISARC Special
Issue.
[70] Lu, Q., Xie, X., Heaton, J., Parlikad, A. K., and Schooling, J., 2020, “From
BIM Towards Digital Twin: Strategy and Future Development for Smart As-
set Management,” Service Oriented, Holonic and Multi-agent Manufacturing
Systems for Industry of the Future, T. Borangiu, D. Trentesaux, P. Leitão,
20 / ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Transactions of the ASME

A. Giret Boggino, and V. Botti, eds., Springer International Publishing, Cham,
pp. 392–404.
[71] Lu, Q., Parlikad, A. K., Woodall, P., Don Ranasinghe, G., Xie, X., Liang, Z.,
Konstantinou, E., Heaton, J., and Schooling, J., 2020, “Developing a Digital
Twin at Building and City Levels: Case Study of West Cambridge Campus,”
Journal of Management in Engineering, 36(3), p. 05020004.
[72] Lu, Q., Xie, X., Parlikad, A. K., and Schooling, J. M., 2020, “Digital twin-
enabled anomaly detection for built asset monitoring in operation and mainte-
nance,” Automation in Construction, 118, p. 103277.
[73] Badenko, V., Bolshakov, N., Tishchenko, E., Fedotov, A., Celani, A., and
Yadykin, V., 2021, “Integration of digital twin and BIM technologies within
factories of the future,” Magazine of Civil Engineering, (1 (101)), p. 10114.
[74] Zhao, Z., Shen, L., Yang, C., Wu, W., Zhang, M., and Huang, G. Q., 2021, “IoT
and digital twin enabled smart tracking for safety management,” Computers and
Operations Research, 128, p. 105183.
[75] Sartipi, F., 2020, “Influence of 5G and IoT in construction and demolition waste
recycling–conceptual smart city design,” Journal of Construction Materials,
1(4), pp. 1–9.
[76] Ahmed, F., Phillips, M., Phillips, S., and Kim, K.-Y., 2020, “Comparative study
of seamless asset location and tracking technologies,” Procedia Manufacturing,
51, pp. 1138–1145, 30th International Conference on Flexible Automation and
Intelligent Manufacturing (FAIM2021).
[77] Rao, A. S., Radanovic, M., Liu, Y., Hu, S., Fang, Y., Khoshelham, K.,
Palaniswami, M., and Ngo, T., 2022, “Real-time monitoring of construction
sites: Sensors, methods, and applications,” Automation in Construction, 136,
p. 104099.
[78] El-Omari, S. and Moselhi, O., 2011, “Integrating automated data acquisition
technologies for progress reporting of construction projects,” Automation in
construction, 20(6), pp. 699–705, Selected papers from the 26th ISARC 2009.
[79] Gigabyte, 2024, “Point Cloud,” accessed February 28, 2024, https://www.
gigabyte.com/Glossary/point-cloud
[80] Mikhail, E. M., Bethel, J. S., and McGlone, J. C., 2001, Introduction to modern
photogrammetry, John Wiley and Sons.
[81] Elhashash, M., Albanwan, H., and Qin, R., 2022, “A review of mobile mapping
systems: From sensors to applications,” Sensors, 22(11), p. 4262.
[82] Dai, F., Rashidi, A., Brilakis, I., and Vela, P., 2013, “Comparison of image-
based and time-of-flight-based technologies for three-dimensional reconstruc-
tion of infrastructure,” Journal of construction engineering and management,
139(1), pp. 69–79.
[83] Leon, C. P., Jingdao, C., Jisoo, P., and Yong, K. C., 2021, “Multisensor-driven
real-time crane monitoring system for blind lift operations: Lessons learned
from a case study,” Automation in Construction, 124, p. 103552.
[84] Woodhead, R., Stephenson, P., and Morrey, D., 2018, “Digital construction:
From point solutions to IoT ecosystem,” Automation in Construction, 93, pp.
35–46.
[85] Khurshid, K., Danish, A., Salim, M. U., Bayram, M., Ozbakkaloglu, T., and
Mosaberpanah, M. A., 2023, “An in-depth survey demystifying the Internet of
Things (IoT) in the construction industry: Unfolding new dimensions,” Sus-
tainability, 15(2), p. 1275.
[86] Ghosh, A., Edwards, D. J., and Hosseini, M. R., 2021, “Patterns and trends
in Internet of Things (IoT) research: future applications in the construction
industry,” Engineering, Construction and Architectural Management, 28(2),
pp. 457–481.
[87] Oke, A. E. and Arowoiya, V. A., 2021, “Evaluation of internet of things (IoT)
application areas for sustainable construction,” Smart and Sustainable Built
Environment, 10(3), pp. 387–402.
[88] Kazmi, A. H., O’grady, M. J., Delaney, D. T., Ruzzelli, A. G., and O’hare, G.
M. P., 2014, “A Review of Wireless-Sensor-Network-Enabled Building Energy
Management Systems,” ACM Trans. Sen. Netw., 10(4).
[89] Gubbi, J., Buyya, R., Marusic, S., and Palaniswami, M., 2013, “Internet of
Things (IoT): A vision, architectural elements, and future directions,” Future
generation computer systems, 29(7), pp. 1645–1660, Including Special sec-
tions: Cyber-enabled Distributed Computing for Ubiquitous Cloud and Net-
work Services and Cloud Computing and Scientific Applications — Big Data,
Scalable Analytics, and Beyond.
[90] Oracle,
2023,
“What
is
a
Relational
Database
(RDBMS),”
https://www.oracle.com/database/what-is-a-relational-database/#:~:
text=Arelationaldatabaseisa,ofrepresentingdataintables.
[91] Skibniewski, M. J. and Jang, W.-S., 2006, “Ubiquitous computing: object
tracking and monitoring in construction processes utilizing ZigBee networks,”
Proceedings of the 23rd International Symposium on Automation and Robotics
in Construction (ISARC), Citeseer, pp. 287–292.
[92] IBM,
“What
is
a
database
schema?”
https://www.ibm.com/topics/
database-schema
[93] Zhang, Y. and Bai, L., 2015, “Rapid structural condition assessment using radio
frequency identification (RFID) based wireless strain sensor,” Automation in
Construction, 54, pp. 1–11.
[94] Solihin, W., Eastman, C., Lee, Y.-C., and Yang, D.-H., 2017, “A simplified
relational database schema for transformation of BIM data into a query-efficient
and spatially enabled database,” Automation in Construction, 84, pp. 367–383.
[95] Mazairac, W. and Beetz, J., 2013, “BIMQL – An open query language for
building information models,” Advanced Engineering Informatics, 27(4), pp.
444–456.
[96] Hu, S., Corry, E., Curry, E., Turner, W. J., and O’Donnell, J., 2016, “Building
performance optimisation: A hybrid architecture for the integration of contex-
tual information and time-series data,” Automation in Construction, 70, pp.
51–61.
[97] Golparvar-Fard, M., Peña-Mora, F., and Savarese, S., 2009, “D4AR–a 4-
dimensional augmented reality model for automating construction progress
monitoring data collection, processing and communication,” Journal of infor-
mation technology in construction, 14(13), pp. 129–153.
[98] Alaloul, W. S., Qureshi, A. H., Musarat, M. A., and Saad, S., 2021, “Evolution
of close-range detection and data acquisition technologies towards automation
in construction progress monitoring,” Journal of Building Engineering, 43, p.
102877.
[99] Braun, A., Tuttas, S., Borrmann, A., and Stilla, U., 2015, “A concept for auto-
mated construction progress monitoring using bim-based geometric constraints
and photogrammetric point clouds.” J. Inf. Technol. Constr., 20(5), pp. 68–79.
[100] Kopsida, M., Brilakis, I., and Vela, P. A., 2015, “A review of automated
construction progress monitoring and inspection methods,” Proceedings of the
32nd CIB W78 Conference 2015, pp. 421–431.
[101] Pučko, Z., Šuman, N., and Rebolj, D., 2018, “Automated continuous con-
struction progress monitoring using multiple workplace real time 3D scans,”
Advanced Engineering Informatics, 38, pp. 27–40.
[102] Ekanayake, B., Wong, J. K.-W., Fini, A. A. F., and Smith, P., 2021, “Computer
vision-based interior construction progress monitoring: A literature review and
future research directions,” Automation in Construction, 127, p. 103705.
[103] Reja, V., Pradeep, M., and Varghese, K., 2022, “A Systematic Classification
and Evaluation of Automated Progress Monitoring Technologies in Construc-
tion,” ISARC. Proceedings of the International Symposium on Automation and
Robotics in Construction, Vol. 39, IAARC Publications, pp. 120–127.
[104] Hou, L., Wu, S., Zhang, G., Tan, Y., and Wang, X., 2020, “Literature review of
digital twins applications in construction workforce safety,” Applied Sciences,
11(1), p. 339.
[105] Soltani, M. M., Zhu, Z., and Hammad, A., 2018, “Framework for location
data fusion and pose estimation of excavators using stereo vision,” Journal of
Computing in Civil Engineering, 32(6), p. 04018045.
[106] Park, M.-W. and Brilakis, I., 2016, “Continuous localization of construction
workers via integration of detection and tracking,” Automation in Construction,
72, pp. 129–142.
[107] Konstantinou, E. and Brilakis, I., 2018, “Matching construction workers across
views for automated 3D vision tracking on-site,” Journal of Construction En-
gineering and Management, 144(7), p. 04018061.
[108] Park, M.-W., Elsafty, N., and Zhu, Z., 2015, “Hardhat-wearing detection for
enhancing on-site safety of construction workers,” Journal of Construction
Engineering and Management, 141(9), p. 04015024.
[109] Zhang, S., Teizer, J., Lee, J.-K., Eastman, C. M., and Venugopal, M., 2013,
“Building Information Modeling (BIM) and Safety: Automatic Safety Checking
of Construction Models and Schedules,” Automation in Construction, 29, pp.
183–195.
[110] Getuli, V., Ventura, S. M., Capone, P., and Ciribini, A. L., 2017, “BIM-based
Code Checking for Construction Health and Safety,” Procedia Engineering,
196, pp. 454–461, Creative Construction Conference 2017, CCC 2017, 19-22
June 2017, Primosten, Croatia.
[111] Ye, Z., Ye, Y., Zhang, C., Zhang, Z., Li, W., Wang, X., Wang, L., and Wang,
L., 2023, “A digital twin approach for tunnel construction safety early warning
and management,” Computers in Industry, 144, p. 103783.
[112] Racha, C., Mian, A. H., Ahmad, M. A., Hashim, I. S., Huda, D., Sergio,
R.-T., Mohamad, K., Khalid, K. N., and Nashwan, D., 2021, “Cost-benefit
analysis of BIM-enabled design clash detection and resolution,” Construction
Management and Economics, 39(1), pp. 55–72.
[113] Seo, J.-H., Lee, B.-R., Kim, J.-H., and Kim, J.-J., 2012, “Collaborative process
to facilitate BIM-based clash detection tasks for enhancing constructability,”
Journal of the Korea Institute of Building Construction, 12(3), pp. 299–314.
[114] Rokooei, S., 2015, “Building information modeling in project management: ne-
cessities, challenges and outcomes,” Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences,
210, pp. 87–95, Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Leadership,
Technology, Innovation and Business Management (ICLTIBM-2014).
[115] Akponeware, A. O. and Adamu, Z. A., 2017, “Clash detection or clash avoid-
ance? An investigation into coordination problems in 3D BIM,” Buildings,
7(3), p. 75.
[116] Hartmann, T., 2010, “Detecting design conflicts using building information
models: a comparative lab experiment,” Proceedings of the CIB W78.
[117] Hu, Y., Castro-Lacouture, D., Eastman, C. M., and Navathe, S. B., 2020,
“Automatic clash correction sequence optimization using a clash dependency
network,” Automation in Construction, 115, p. 103205.
[118] van den Helm, P., Böhms, M., and van Berlo, L., 2010, “IFC-based clash
detection for the open-source BIMserver,” Computing in civil and building en-
gineering, proceedings of the international conference. Nottingham University
Press, Nottingham, UK, Vol. 181.
[119] Gholizadeh, P., Esmaeili, B., and Goodrum, P., 2018, “Diffusion of build-
ing information modeling functions in the construction industry,” Journal of
Management in Engineering, 34(2), p. 04017060.
[120] Hu, Y. and Castro-Lacouture, D., 2019, “Clash Relevance Prediction Based
on Machine Learning,” Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering, 33(2), p.
04018060.
[121] Said, H. and El-Rayes, K., 2014, “Automated multi-objective construction
logistics optimization system,” Automation in Construction, 43, pp. 110–122.
[122] Greif, T., Stein, N., and Flath, C. M., 2020, “Peeking into the void: Digital
twins for construction site logistics,” Computers in Industry, 121, p. 103264.
[123] Dave, B., Kubler, S., Främling, K., and Koskela, L., 2016, “Opportunities for
enhanced lean construction management using Internet of Things standards,”
Automation in Construction, 61, pp. 86–97.
Journal of Computing and
Information Science in Engineering
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT / 21

[124] Dede, T., Kripka, M., Togan, V., Yepes, V., and Rao, R. V., 2019, “Usage
of optimization techniques in civil engineering during the last two decades,”
Current Trends in Civil and Structural Engineering, 2(1), pp. 1–17.
[125] Zhang, H. and Li, H., 2010, “Multi-objective particle swarm optimization
for construction time-cost tradeoff problems,” Construction Management and
Economics, 28(1), pp. 75–88.
[126] Afshar, A., Ziaraty, A. K., Kaveh, A., and Sharifi, F., 2009, “Nondominated
archiving multicolony ant algorithm in time–cost trade-off optimization,” Jour-
nal of Construction Engineering and Management, 135(7), pp. 668–674.
[127] Zhang, Y. and Ng, S. T., 2012, “An ant colony system based decision support
system for construction time-cost optimization,” Journal of Civil Engineering
and Management, 18(4), pp. 580–589.
[128] Aminbakhsh, S. and Sonmez, R., 2016, “Discrete particle swarm optimiza-
tion method for the large-scale discrete time–cost trade-off problem,” Expert
Systems with Applications, 51, pp. 177–185.
[129] Koo, C., Hong, T., and Kim, S., 2015, “An integrated multi-objective optimiza-
tion model for solving the construction time-cost trade-off problem,” Journal
of Civil Engineering and Management, 21(3), pp. 323–333.
[130] Li, H., Chan, N., Huang, T., Guo, H., Lu, W., and Skitmore, M., 2009,
“Optimizing construction planning schedules by virtual prototyping enabled
resource analysis,” Automation in Construction, 18(7), pp. 912–918.
[131] Rytter, A., 1993, “Vibrational based inspection of civil engineering structures,”
Ph.D. thesis, University of Aalborg, Denmark, Ph.D.-Thesis defended publicly
at the University of Aalborg, April 20, 1993 PDF for print: 206 pp.
[132] Zhu, Y.-C., Wagg, D., Cross, E., and Barthorpe, R., 2020, “Real-time digital
twin updating strategy based on structural health monitoring systems,” Model
Validation and Uncertainty Quantification, Volume 3: Proceedings of the 38th
IMAC, A Conference and Exposition on Structural Dynamics 2020, Z. Mao,
ed., Springer International Publishing, Cham, pp. 55–64.
[133] Alonso, L., Barbarán, J., Chen, J., Díaz, M., Llopis, L., and Rubio, B., 2018,
“Middleware and communication technologies for structural health monitoring
of critical infrastructures: A survey,” Computer Standards and Interfaces, 56,
pp. 83–100.
[134] AlHamaydeh, M. and Aswad, N. G., 2022, “Structural Health Monitoring
Techniques and Technologies for Large-Scale Structures: Challenges, Limita-
tions, and Recommendations,” Practice Periodical on Structural Design and
Construction, 27(3), p. 03122004.
[135] Chen, H.-P., 2018, Structural health monitoring of large civil engineering
structures, John Wiley and Sons.
[136] Farrar, C. R. and Worden, K., 2007, “An introduction to structural health
monitoring,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical,
Physical and Engineering Sciences, 365(1851), pp. 303–315.
[137] Goyal, D. and Pabla, B., 2016, “The vibration monitoring methods and signal
processing techniques for structural health monitoring: a review,” Archives of
Computational Methods in Engineering, 23(4), pp. 585–594.
[138] Gallet, A., Rigby, S., Tallman, T., Kong, X., Hajirasouliha, I., Liew, A., Liu,
D., Chen, L., Hauptmann, A., and Smyl, D., 2022, “Structural engineering
from an inverse problems perspective,” Proceedings of the Royal Society A,
478(2257), p. 20210526.
[139] Flah, M., Nunez, I., Ben Chaabene, W., and Nehdi, M. L., 2021, “Machine
learning algorithms in civil structural health monitoring: A systematic review,”
Archives of computational methods in engineering, 28(4), pp. 2621–2643.
[140] Jahanshahi, M. R., Masri, S. F., and Sukhatme, G. S., 2011, “Multi-image
stitching and scene reconstruction for evaluating defect evolution in structures,”
Structural Health Monitoring, 10(6), pp. 643–657.
[141] Lee, J.-H., Ho, H.-N., Shinozuka, M., and Lee, J.-J., 2012, “An advanced
vision-based system for real-time displacement measurement of high-rise build-
ings,” Smart Materials and Structures, 21(12), p. 125019.
[142] Koch, C., Paal, S. G., Rashidi, A., Zhu, Z., König, M., and Brilakis, I.,
2014, “Achievements and challenges in machine vision-based inspection of
large concrete structures,” Advances in Structural Engineering, 17(3), pp. 303–
318.
[143] Ye, X.-W., Dong, C.-Z., and Liu, T., 2016, “A review of machine vision-
based structural health monitoring: Methodologies and applications,” Journal
of Sensors, 2016(1), p. 7103039.
[144] Girshick, R., Donahue, J., Darrell, T., and Malik, J., 2014, “Rich feature hier-
archies for accurate object detection and semantic segmentation,” Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pp. 580–587.
[145] Redmon, J., Divvala, S., Girshick, R., and Farhadi, A., 2016, “You only look
once: Unified, real-time object detection,” Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 779–788.
[146] De Brabandere, B., Neven, D., and Van Gool, L., 2017, “Semantic instance
segmentation with a discriminative loss function,” .
[147] Perazzi, F., Khoreva, A., Benenson, R., Schiele, B., and Sorkine-Hornung,
A., 2017, “Learning Video Object Segmentation from Static Images,” 2017
IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
3491–3500, doi: 10.1109/CVPR.2017.372.
[148] Spencer Jr, B. F., Hoskere, V., and Narazaki, Y., 2019, “Advances in Computer
Vision-Based Civil Infrastructure Inspection and Monitoring,” Engineering,
5(2), pp. 199–222.
[149] Horn, B. K. and Schunck, B. G., 1981, “Determining optical flow,” Artificial
Intelligence, 17(1), pp. 185–203.
[150] Salman, M., Mathavan, S., Kamal, K., and Rahman, M., 2013, “Pavement
crack detection using the Gabor filter,” 16th international IEEE conference
on intelligent transportation systems (ITSC 2013), IEEE, pp. 2039–2044,
doi: 10.1109/ITSC.2013.6728529.
[151] Mohan, A. and Poobal, S., 2018, “Crack detection using image processing: A
critical review and analysis,” alexandria engineering journal, 57(2), pp. 787–
798.
[152] Long, J. and Buyukozturk, O., 2014, “Automated structural damage detection
using one-class machine learning,” Dynamics of Civil Structures, Volume 4:
Proceedings of the 32nd IMAC, A Conference and Exposition on Structural
Dynamics, 2014, F. N. Catbas, ed., Springer International Publishing, Cham,
pp. 117–128.
[153] Yuan, F.-G., Zargar, S. A., Chen, Q., and Wang, S., 2020, “Machine learning
for structural health monitoring: challenges and opportunities,” Sensors and
smart structures technologies for civil, mechanical, and aerospace systems
2020, 11379, p. 1137903.
[154] Zhang, A., Wang, K. C., Li, B., Yang, E., Dai, X., Peng, Y., Fei, Y., Liu, Y.,
Li, J. Q., and Chen, C., 2017, “Automated pixel-level pavement crack detection
on 3D asphalt surfaces using a deep-learning network,” Computer-Aided Civil
and Infrastructure Engineering, 32(10), pp. 805–819.
[155] Worden, K. and Dulieu-Barton, J. M., 2004, “An overview of intelligent fault
detection in systems and structures,” Structural Health Monitoring, 3(1), pp.
85–98.
[156] Do, B. and Zhang, R., 2023, “Multi-fidelity Bayesian Optimization in Engi-
neering Design,” arXiv, 2311.13050
[157] Do, B. and Zhang, R., 2024, “Epsilon-Greedy Thompson Sampling to Bayesian
Optimization,” arXiv.
[158] Hoskere, V., Narazaki, Y., Hoang, T. A., and Spencer Jr, B. F., 2018, “Towards
automated post-earthquake inspections with deep learning-based condition-
aware models,” .
[159] Taddei, T., Penn, J. D., Yano, M., and Patera, A. T., 2018, “Simulation-Based
Classification; a Model-Order-Reduction Approach for Structural Health Moni-
toring,” Archives of Computational Methods in Engineering, 25(1), pp. 23–45.
[160] Yang, Y., Zhang, Y., and Tan, X., 2021, “Review on vibration-based structural
health monitoring techniques and technical codes,” Symmetry, 13(11), p. 1998.
[161] Friswell, M. and Mottershead, J. E., 1995, Finite element model updating in
structural dynamics, Vol. 38, Springer Science and Business Media.
[162] Sanayei, M., Khaloo, A., Gul, M., and Catbas, F. N., 2015, “Automated finite
element model updating of a scale bridge model using measured static and
modal test data,” Engineering Structures, 102, pp. 66–79.
[163] Suzuki, A., Kurata, M., Li, X., and Shimmoto, S., 2017, “Residual struc-
tural capacity evaluation of steel moment-resisting frames with dynamic-strain-
based model updating method,” Earthquake engineering and Structural Dynam-
ics, 46(11), pp. 1791–1810.
[164] Kim, J.-T., Ryu, Y.-S., Cho, H.-M., and Stubbs, N., 2003, “Damage identifi-
cation in beam-type structures: frequency-based method vs mode-shape-based
method,” Engineering structures, 25(1), pp. 57–67.
[165] Shi, Z. Y., Law, S. S., and Zhang, L. M., 2000, “Structural damage detection
from modal strain energy change,” Journal of engineering mechanics, 126(12),
pp. 1216–1223.
[166] Pandey, A. and Biswas, M., 1994, “Damage detection in structures using
changes in flexibility,” Journal of sound and vibration, 169(1), pp. 3–17.
[167] Jaishi, B. and Ren, W.-X., 2006, “Damage detection by finite element model
updating using modal flexibility residual,” Journal of sound and vibration,
290(1-2), pp. 369–387.
[168] Staszewski, W. J., Worden, K., and Tomlinson, G. R., 1997, “Time–frequency
analysis in gearbox fault detection using the Wigner–Ville distribution and
pattern recognition,” Mechanical systems and signal processing, 11(5), pp.
673–692.
[169] Ovanesova, A. and Suarez, L. E., 2004, “Applications of wavelet transforms
to damage detection in frame structures,” Engineering structures, 26(1), pp.
39–49.
[170] Bernal, D., 2002, “Load vectors for damage localization,” Journal of Engineer-
ing Mechanics, 128(1), pp. 7–14.
[171] Yang, J. N., Lei, Y., Lin, S., and Huang, N., 2004, “Hilbert-Huang based
approach for structural damage detection,” Journal of engineering mechanics,
130(1), pp. 85–95.
[172] Bigoni, C. and Hesthaven, J. S., 2020, “Simulation-based Anomaly Detection
and Damage Localization: An application to Structural Health Monitoring,”
Computer Methods in Applied Mechanics and Engineering, 363, p. 112896.
[173] Pimentel, M. A., Clifton, D. A., Clifton, L., and Tarassenko, L., 2014, “A
review of novelty detection,” Signal processing, 99, pp. 215–249.
[174] Goldstein, M. and Uchida, S., 2016, “A comparative evaluation of unsupervised
anomaly detection algorithms for multivariate data,” PloS one, 11(4), pp. 1–31.
[175] Liu, F. T., Ting, K. M., and Zhou, Z.-H., 2008, “Isolation forest,” 2008
eighth ieee international conference on data mining, IEEE, pp. 413–422,
doi: 10.1109/ICDM.2008.17.
[176] Breunig, M. M., Kriegel, H.-P., Ng, R. T., and Sander, J., 2000, “LOF: iden-
tifying density-based local outliers,” Proceedings of the 2000 ACM SIGMOD
international conference on Management of data, pp. 93–104.
[177] Das, S., Srivastava, A. N., and Chattopadhyay, A., 2007, “Classification of
damage signatures in composite plates using one-class SVMs,” 2007 IEEE
Aerospace Conference, IEEE, pp. 1–19.
[178] Anaissi, A., Khoa, N. L. D., Mustapha, S., Alamdari, M. M., Braytee, A.,
Wang, Y., and Chen, F., 2017, “Adaptive one-class support vector machine for
damage detection in structural health monitoring,” Pacific-Asia Conference on
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, Springer, pp. 42–57.
[179] Schölkopf, B., Platt, J. C., Shawe-Taylor, J., Smola, A. J., and Williamson,
R. C., 2001, “Estimating the support of a high-dimensional distribution,” Neu-
ral computation, 13(7), pp. 1443–1471.
22 / ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Transactions of the ASME

[180] Thaprasop, P., Zhou, K., Steinheimer, J., and Herold, C., 2021, “Unsupervised
outlier detection in heavy-ion collisions,” Physica Scripta, 96(6), p. 064003.
[181] Siddiqui, F., Sargent, P., and Montague, G., 2020, “The use of PCA and signal
processing techniques for processing time-based construction settlement data
of road embankments,” Advanced Engineering Informatics, 46, p. 101181.
[182] Zonzini, F., Girolami, A., De Marchi, L., Marzani, A., and Brunelli, D., 2020,
“Cluster-based vibration analysis of structures with GSP,” IEEE Transactions
on Industrial Electronics, 68(4), pp. 3465–3474.
[183] Moallemi, A., Burrello, A., Brunelli, D., and Benini, L., 2021, “Model-based
vs. data-driven approaches for anomaly detection in structural health monitor-
ing: A case study,” 2021 IEEE International Instrumentation and Measurement
Technology Conference (I2MTC), IEEE, pp. 1–6.
[184] Cui, Z., Li, F., and Zhang, W., 2019, “Bat algorithm with principal component
analysis,” International Journal of Machine Learning and Cybernetics, 10, pp.
603–622.
[185] Ritto, T. and Rochinha, F., 2021, “Digital twin, physics-based model, and ma-
chine learning applied to damage detection in structures,” Mechanical Systems
and Signal Processing, 155, p. 107614.
[186] Razavi, S., Tolson, B. A., and Burn, D. H., 2012, “Review of surrogate mod-
eling in water resources,” Water Resources Research, 48(7).
[187] Chua, P. C., Moon, S. K., Ng, Y. T., and Ng, H. Y., 2021, “A Surrogate Model
to Predict Production Performance in Digital Twin-Based Smart Manufactur-
ing,” Journal of Computing and Information Science in Engineering, 22(3), p.
031007.
[188] Basudhar, A. and Missoum, S., 2008, “Adaptive explicit decision functions for
probabilistic design and optimization using support vector machines,” Com-
puters and Structures, 86(19-20), pp. 1904–1917.
[189] Basudhar, A., Missoum, S., and Sanchez, A. H., 2008, “Limit state function
identification using support vector machines for discontinuous responses and
disjoint failure domains,” Probabilistic Engineering Mechanics, 23(1), pp. 1–
11.
[190] Yadav, A. and Zhang, R., 2024, “Stochastic Subspace via Probabilistic Principal
Component Analysis,” arXiv.
[191] Hesthaven, J. S., Rozza, G., and Stamm, B., 2016, Certified reduced basis
methods for parametrized partial differential equations, Vol. 590, Springer.
[192] Quarteroni, A., Manzoni, A., and Negri, F., 2015, Reduced basis methods for
partial differential equations: an introduction, Vol. 92, Springer.
[193] Maday, Y. and Rønquist, E. M., 2002, “A reduced-basis element method,”
Journal of scientific computing, 17, pp. 447–459.
[194] Zhang, R., Mak, S., and Dunson, D., 2022, “Gaussian Process Subspace Pre-
diction for Model Reduction,” SIAM Journal on Scientific Computing, 44(3),
pp. A1428–A1449.
[195] Tipping, M. E., 2001, “Sparse Bayesian learning and the relevance vector
machine,” Journal of machine learning research, 1(Jun), pp. 211–244.
[196] Wipf, D. P. and Rao, B. D., 2004, “Sparse Bayesian learning for basis selec-
tion,” IEEE Transactions on Signal processing, 52(8), pp. 2153–2164.
[197] Zhang, Z. and Rao, B. D., 2011, “Sparse signal recovery with temporally
correlated source vectors using sparse Bayesian learning,” IEEE Journal of
Selected Topics in Signal Processing, 5(5), pp. 912–926.
[198] Raissi, M., Perdikaris, P., and Karniadakis, G. E., 2019, “Physics-informed
neural networks: A deep learning framework for solving forward and inverse
problems involving nonlinear partial differential equations,” Journal of Com-
putational physics, 378, pp. 686–707.
[199] Zhang, R. and Ghanem, R., 2021, “Normal-Bundle Bootstrap,” SIAM Journal
on Mathematics of Data Science, 3(2), pp. 573–592.
[200] Worden, K., Cross, E., Barthorpe, R., Wagg, D., and Gardner, P., 2020, “On
digital twins, mirrors, and virtualizations: Frameworks for model verification
and validation,” ASCE-ASME Journal of Risk and Uncertainty in Engineering
Systems, Part B: Mechanical Engineering, 6(3), p. 030902.
[201] Febrianto, E., Butler, L., Girolami, M., and Cirak, F., 2022, “Digital twinning
of self-sensing structures using the statistical finite element method,” Data-
Centric Engineering, 3, p. e31.
[202] Bordegoni, M. and Ferrise, F., 2023, “Exploring the Intersection of Metaverse,
Digital Twins, and Artificial Intelligence in Training and Maintenance,” Journal
of Computing and Information Science in Engineering, 23(6), p. 060806.
[203] Karve, P. M., Guo, Y., Kapusuzoglu, B., Mahadevan, S., and Haile, M. A.,
2020, “Digital twin approach for damage-tolerant mission planning under un-
certainty,” Engineering Fracture Mechanics, 225, p. 106766.
Journal of Computing and
Information Science in Engineering
ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT / 23

List of Figures
1
DT conceptual view. Requisite components include a virtual representation of a physical asset, real-time bi-directional
data exchange, feedback, and control. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2
2
Civil engineering phases and evolution of enabling technologies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Sustainable design with BIM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
4
Evolution of BIM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
5
Static to dynamic capabilities of BIM (based on [59])
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
6
Semantic + Relational Database BIM-IoT integration method (Adapted from [66]). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
7
Elements of automated construction progress monitoring and corresponding DT scale. Bold arrows represent a sequential
ordering. Dashed arrows represent a procedural relationship. Straight lines indicate categorization. . . . . . . . . . . .
10
8
Clash management process and enabling methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
9
SHM methodology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
10
SHM classification perspectives
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
11
A simplified representation of full convolutional neural networks
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
14
12
DT for structural health monitoring. Requisite components include a real asset, virtual representation with computational
models calibrated for the physical asset, real-time bi-directional data exchange, feedback, and control for prognostic and
diagnostic services. Uncertainty quantification is essential in the DT components. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
List of Tables
1
Academic and industry definitions of DT (Inspired by [20]). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
2
Scaling of DT.
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
3
Basic terminologies used in sensing technologies. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
8
24 / ACCEPTED MANUSCRIPT
Transactions of the ASME