‘Russian aggression in Ukraine in 2022 provided an unwelcome reminder to many 
that war has not disappeared as a tool of statecraft, although most in Ukraine 
needed no reminding of that fact given that they first experienced Russian invasion 
in 2014. The ability of Ukraine to withstand the Russian attack, to inflict heavy 
casualties and later to liberate significant parts of their country caught many by 
surprise (not least the Russians). This book examines in detail the character and 
conduct of the war to date and offers important insight into the nature of modern 
war across all warfighting domains. The author explains how Ukraine has managed 
to break away from the limitations of old Soviet military culture to develop and 
sustain resilient fighting power. This is an important book for anyone who wishes 
to understand the current war in Ukraine. It will also be very useful to anyone 
interested in the evolution of war today and into the future, the central point about 
resilience has relevance far beyond Ukraine.’
Ian Speller, Maynooth University, Ireland
‘Although it might be too early to talk about lessons learned from the war in Ukraine, 
this book nonetheless gives us both a framework and content for understanding 
why Russia failed in its full-​scale invasion of Ukraine. These are two countries that 
share the same Soviet doctrinal past. Still, Ukraine has managed to take advantage 
of relevant conceptual lessons from the Soviet doctrine, Western best practices, 
and consequent NATO standardisation of the military for the requirements of 
modern warfare. Ukraine has learned and adapted. The book is structured in a 
manner to encourage learning. It is a must-​read for academics, civilian and military 
practitioners who want to improve their understanding of both the war in Ukraine 
and warfare in general and the need for building resilience into one’s society and 
military as a part of that. This is simply an outstanding and timely book that I highly 
recommend.’
Karl Erik Haug, Head of the Department of Modern History and Society, 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Norway
‘This book is both a timely and an important assessment of why Russia has failed 
to coerce and control Ukraine after its initial aggression in 2014 and subsequent 
large-​scale invasion in February 2022. Fedorchak compares the Russian and 
Ukrainian military systems and approaches to warfare. She also explains how 
robust resilience has evolved to become an inherent characteristic of the Ukrainian 
state, military and society. The framework and concept of resilient fighting power 
is a key aspect of her analysis. Fedorchak’s comprehensive book is an excellent 
early evaluation with many lessons to ponder for NATO and in fact all states 
neighbouring Russia.’
Col. (Ret’d) Per Erik Solli, Senior Defence Analyst, Norwegian Institute 
of International Affairs (NUPI), Norway
 
 

‘The Russian war against the Ukraine has been going on for 8 years and has 
gone through several phases. The last being the high-​kinetic war since February 
2022. The Ukrainian resistance to the Russian invasion has filled the world with 
admiration as well as brought strong material and vocal support. We have seen the 
use of new technology on a massive scale, but have at the same time witnessed an 
almost World War I fighting in Donbas. This book by Dr Fedorchak is an analysis 
of the experiences from this war. She lands in many interesting conclusions, several 
of them actually point in the direction of a return to concepts from the Cold War. It 
is for instance seen the return of mass armies combined with what has been called 
“fifth generation warfare”. This illustrates the need for a broad as well as deep 
understanding of warfare. The book also highlights the need for morale and civilian 
resilience, the importance of ingenuity, military use of civilian resources and 
international support. The conclusion by Dr Fedorchak is an important contribution 
to the state of the art of warfare. It shows that war does not follow singlefile theory 
or general expectations. Instead, it calls for more comprehensive studies of the 
Russia-​Ukraine war, to be used in future conflicts.’
Fredrik Eriksson, Assistant Professor Military History, 
Swedish Defence University, Sweden
 

THE RUSSIA-​UKRAINE WAR
This book provides a systematic analysis of the Russian-​Ukraine war, using the 
concept of resilient fighting power to assess the operational performance of both 
sides during the first year of the full-​scale invasion.
The Russian war in Ukraine began in 2014 and continued for eight years, before 
the full-​scale invasion of 24 February 2022. It is not a new war, but the intensity of 
the warfighting revived many discussions about the conduct of inter-​state warfare, 
which has not been seen in Europe for decades. This book does not aim to offer 
an exhaustive operational analysis of the war, but rather provides a preliminary 
systematic analysis across various domains of warfare using the concept of fighting 
power to assess the operational performance of both sides. First, the book discusses 
the conceptual component and the post-​Cold War adaptations of the Soviet 
strategic tradition by both the Ukrainian and the Russian Armed Forces. Following 
that, it gives an evaluation of the various aspects of warfighting in the land, air, 
maritime and cyber domains. Then, the book examines the role of international 
allied assistance, sanctions and weapons delivery in strengthening the resilience 
of the Ukrainian Armed Forces. The book concludes with some comments on the 
role of inter-​state warfare in the current strategic environment and future warfare.
This book will be of much interest to students of military and strategic studies, 
defence studies, foreign policy, Russian studies and international relations.
Viktoriya Fedorchak is a lecturer in War Studies at the Swedish Defence 
University. She is the author of British Air Power (2018) and Understanding 
Contemporary Air Power (2020).
 
 

For more information about this series, please visit: www.routle​dge.com/​Routle​dge-​Advan​ces-​in-​ 
Defe​nce-​Stud​ies/​book-​ser​ies/​RAIDS
Routledge Advances in Defence Studies
Routledge Advances in Defence Studies is a multi-​disciplinary series examining 
innovations, disruptions, counter-​culture histories, and unconventional approaches 
to understanding contemporary forms, challenges, logics, frameworks, and 
technologies of national defence. This is the first series explicitly dedicated to 
examining the impact of radical change on national security and the construction 
of theoretical and imagined disruptions to existing structures, practices, and 
behaviours in the defence community of practice. The purpose of this series is to 
establish a first-​class intellectual home for conceptually challenging and empirically 
authoritative studies that offer insight, clarity, and sustained focus.
Series editors: Timothy Clack, University of Oxford, UK, and Oliver Lewis 
Rebellion Defence and University of Southern California, USA
Advisory Board: Tarak Barkawi London School of Economics, UK; Richard 
Barrons Global Strategy Forum, UK; Kari Bingen-​Tytler Center for Strategic and 
International Studies, USA; Ori Brafman University of California, Berkeley, USA; 
Tom Copinger-​Symes British Army, UK; Karen Gibsen Purdue University, USA; 
David Gioe West Point, USA; Robert Johnson Oxford University, UK; Mara Karlin 
John Hopkins University, USA; Tony King Warwick University, UK; Benedict Kite, 
British Army, UK; Andrew Sharpe Centre for Historical and Conflict Research, 
UK; Suzanne Raine Cambridge University, UK.
The Russia-​Ukraine War
Towards Resilient Fighting Power
Viktoriya Fedorchak
 
 

THE RUSSIA-​UKRAINE 
WAR
Towards Resilient Fighting Power
Viktoriya Fedorchak
 
 

Designed cover image: © Getty images 
First published 2024
by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2024 Viktoriya Fedorchak
The right of Viktoriya Fedorchak to be identified as author of this work has been 
asserted in accordance with sections 77 and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and 
Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or reproduced or utilised 
in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or 
hereafter invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any information 
storage or retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, 
and are used only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-​in-​Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 978-​1-​032-​39841-​9 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-​1-​032-​39843-​3 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-​1-​003-​35164-​1 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/​9781003351641
Typeset in Times New Roman
by Newgen Publishing UK
 
 

Who we are and where we are going to…
For Ukraine, the land of free people…
For Ukrainian people, with deep roots in Ukrainian soil…
For Ukrainian land, liberated and blooming…
For Ukrainian skies, free and peaceful…
 
 

 

CONTENTS
Acknowledgements
xi
Disclaimer
xii
List of abbreviations
xiii
Introduction
1
	1	 Analytical framework
4
	2	 The conceptual component: Soviet strategic thinking and 
military doctrine in the post-​Cold War reforms
23
	3	 Historical context
44
	4	 Combatants
61
	5	 The land domain
81
	6	 The air domain
100
	7	 The maritime domain
120
	8	 Information and cyber aspects of the war
138
	9	 The resilience of the Ukrainian people
159
 
 

x  Contents
	10	 International military assistance
174
	11	 Final considerations: Modern warfare and resilient 
fighting power
195
Conclusion
215
Bibliography
218
Index
236
 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This was not an easy book to write. Hence, the assistance of people who were there 
for me in various ways is of great importance. I am grateful to my Air Operations 
Division at the Swedish Defense University, who welcomed me to their community 
a year ago. I am exceptionally grateful to Per Hård af Segerstad for the soft landing 
and welcoming working environment; Rikard Niva for the numerous conversations 
that kept my spirits high; Emil Walter for introducing me to the Swedish air 
power; and Daniel Smith for understanding and the important work he does for 
the Ukrainian military. Special thanks to the civilian and military leadership of the 
university for the warm welcome and supporting me throughout this year.
I am grateful to my editors and publishing team for making this project happen 
despite the restrained time frames and challenging circumstances. I would like to 
thank the reviewers of my initial book proposal for redirecting my energy in the 
right direction.
Most of all, I am grateful to my mother, Fedorchak Olga Semenivna, who was 
with me every step of the way.
Dr Viktoriya Fedorchak
 
 

DISCLAIMER
Views expressed in this monograph are the author’s alone, and do not represent the 
official positions of the Swedish Defence University and the Swedish government.
 
 

ABBREVIATIONS
ADP
Army Doctrinal Publication Operations
AEW
Airborne Early Warning
AI
Artificial Intelligence
AJP
Allied Joint Doctrine (Allied Joint Operations)
AOR
Area of Responsibility
APC
Armoured Personnel Carriers
ASW
Anti-​Submarine Warfare
ATACMS
Army Tactical Missile System
ATO
Anti-​Terrorist Operation
ATV
All-​Terrain Vehicles
AWACS
Airborne Warning & Control System
A2AD
Anti-​Access and Area Denial Capabilities
BDA
Battle Damage Assessment
BTG
Battalion Tactical Group
C2
Command and Control
C3I
Command and control, Communications and Intelligence
C4ISR
Command, Control, Communications, Computers (C4) Intelligence, 
Surveillance and Reconnaissance (ISR)
CAR
Conflict Armament Research
CAS
Close Air Support
CGS
Chief of General Staff
CINC
Commander in Chief
COIN
Counterinsurgency
EEZ
Exclusive Economic Zone
EPF
European Peace Facility
FSB
Russian Federal Security Service
 
 

xiv  List of abbreviations
GRU
Chief Intelligence Office (abbreviation used both in Ukraine and 
Russia)
HARM
High-​Speed Anti-​Radiation Missiles
HIMARS
High Mobility Artillery Rocket Systems
HUMINT
Human Intelligence
IDCC
International Donor Coordination Centre
IFV
Infantry Fighting Vehicles
IFU
International Fund for Ukraine
ISR
Intelligence, Surveillance and Reconnaissance
ISTAR
Intelligence, Surveillance, Target Acquisition and Reconnaissance
ISW
Institute of the Study of War
JCC
Joint Coordination Centre
JFO
Joint Force Operation
MDI
Multidomain Integration
MANPADS
Man-​Portable Air-​Defense Systems
MMCM
Maritime Mine Counter Measures
MOD
Ministry of Defence (UK)
MP
Member of Parliament (UK)
NAFO
North Atlantic Fellas Organization
NATO
North Atlantic Treaty Organisation
NCO
Non-​Commissioned Officer
NEC
Network Enabling Capability
NFZ
No-​Fly Zones
NGO
Non-​Governmental Organisation
NGW
New Generation of Warfare
NLAW
Next generation Light Anti-​tank Weapon
NSA
NATO Standardized Agency
NSDC
National Security and Defence Council (of Ukraine)
OSINT
Open-​Source Intelligence
PGM
Precision-​Guided Munition
PMC
Private Military Company
POW
Prisoners Of War
PSO
Peace Support Operations
RAAM
Remote Anti-​Armor Mine
RAF
Royal Air Force
RPV
Remotely Piloted Vehicle
SAR
Search and Rescue
SBU
Ukrainian law enforcement
SOF
Special Operations Forces
SSSCIP
State Service of Special Communications and Information 
Protection of Ukraine
TDF
Territorial Defence Forces
TOW
Tube-​Launched, Optically-​Tracked, Wire-​Guided
UAF
Ukrainian Armed Forces
 

List of abbreviations  xv
UAV
Unmanned Air Vehicle
UDCG
Ukraine Defence Contact Group
UkrAF
Ukrainian Air Force
UCAV
Unmanned Combat Air Vehicle
USAF
United States Air Force
USV
Unmanned Sea Vehicles
UUV
Unmanned Undersea Vehicles
VDV
Russian Airborne Forces
WMD
Weapons of Mass Destruction
 
newgenprepdf

 

DOI: 10.4324/9781003351641-1
INTRODUCTION
Russia’s illegal war in Ukraine has lasted for more than nine years. In the perception 
of the global audience, the events of the annexation of Crimea, followed by the 
more kinetic war of 2014–​2015, are remembered the most. The Minsk Agreements 
froze the conflict for wider international audiences, with the common perception of 
a ceasefire to be agreed on and implemented. However, the reality was ‘less fire than 
ceasefire,’ and the warfighting continued in the East for eight years, culminating 
in the full-​scale Russian invasion of Ukraine on 24 February 2022. Living through 
historical events has a distinctive effect on societies and how these events are 
perceived. Systematic understanding of historical events requires both taking into 
account perspectives and assessments during those events (or relatively so) and 
analysis of the future scholars that have the advantage of distancing themselves 
more from the events, people and the entire preceding eras.
This book is intended to serve several purposes. It explains differences in the 
construction of the fighting power of the two sides, paying attention to various units, 
force cohesion, different technologies and different developments across domains. 
The book shows various factors in sustaining the resilience of the fighting power 
in this war, illustrating the ability of the Ukrainian Armed Forces (UAF) to survive 
the first year of the full-​scale invasion and intense warfighting and to recover for 
the summer 2023 counteroffensive. This book is aimed as a contribution to further 
exploration of this war in its entirety and the phenomena of Ukrainian fighting 
power and strategic culture in general. The time frame of the main research is 
one year since the full-​scale invasion in 2022. Although the book explores the 
fighting power of the two countries, the primary argument is that the UAF managed 
to develop and sustain resilient fighting power in support of various operational 
objectives and prepare for regaining military momentum in the battlespace in the 
summer of 2023 as this book was being finalised.
 
 

2  Introduction
The primary analytical tools used in this book are ambitious, since they combine 
the traditional military concept of fighting power with the more abstract concept, 
and in this case attribute, of resilience. In this regard, the framework of resilient 
fighting power allows exploring the sustainment, recovery and reestablishment of 
the Ukrainian fighting power during this one year of the full-​scale invasion in its 
further preparation for the summer 2023 counteroffensive. Hence, the focus is very 
much on the fluidity of recovering the ability to effectively fight once more on the 
next even more kinetic stage of the war. The concept of resilient fighting power is 
then further explored through the main themes of modern warfare: the trinity of 
political will, people and technology, total/​comprehensive defence, mass approach 
in structuring armed forces, and interservice and cross-​domain integration. The 
aspects of asymmetry, force multiplication, precision and mass barraging are 
inherently part of various discussions and explorations of these domains.
This book is structured to encourage consistent learning about fighting power. 
Chapter 1 explains the analytical tools used within this book. First, the three 
components of fighting power –​ conceptual, physical and moral –​ are explained 
using various military doctrines and formal documents. Then, the concept of resilient 
fighting power is discussed in detail. The main post-​Cold War developments in 
warfare are provided as a wider context for distilling the key themes of modern 
warfare, which are later on traced across further chapters.
Chapter 2 is devoted to the conceptual component of the fighting power –​ military 
doctrines and the thought process behind the structuring of the armed forces and 
preparing the personnel for the warfighting. The common Soviet past is explained, 
illustrating the different extents of Soviet tradition and doctrine present in the 
military thinking in the two countries. The place of military doctrine in the post-​
Cold War military reorganisation is discussed here.
Chapter 3 provides the historical context of the war, paying attention to the 
warfighting experiences of the opposing sides during the first eight years of the 
war. The chronology of the events is followed through different experiences and 
learning points of the UAF and the Russians. This time frame is also explored for the 
reinforcements of the two militaries for further full-​scale Russian aggression against 
Ukraine. The question of the Russian militarisation of Crimea is addressed here.
Chapter 4 focuses on the people aspect of the physical component of the fighting 
power, illustrating the numerous groups of combatants fighting for both sides. 
While both sides were characterised by different groups with varied training and 
experience, the cohesion of troops differed primarily due to different leadership 
approaches in Ukraine and Russia and the extent to which Ukraine had moved 
away from the Soviet military culture, while the Russian military remained largely 
Soviet in organisational culture and performance.
The next four chapters focus on the four domains of warfare: land, air, 
maritime and cyber (plus information warfare), respectively. Although space 
capabilities played an enabling role for various capabilities on both sides, their 
extent could not be traced to devote an entire chapter to  the space domain. The 
 

Introduction  3
three chapters on the traditional physical domains of warfare are structured as 
follows: the main developments in the domain are followed by the primary points 
for consideration. Hence, Chapter 5 focuses on the land domain, the complexity 
of the warfighting in spring, consolidation of the frontlines, the Ukrainian summer 
2022 counteroffensives, the specifics of different approaches to artillery between 
two countries, and the consolidation of forces for the next stage of the war.
Chapter 6 explores the air war over Ukraine, illustrating the place of Ukrainian 
aviation in defending Ukrainian skies during various stages of 2022. The questions 
of degrading Russian mass and technological advantages in the air fleet with the 
employment of Ukrainian layered air defences and dispersal and establishment 
of mutual air denial on the frontlines are discussed here. Russia’s long-​range 
ballistic missile attack campaign against the Ukrainian civilian infrastructure is 
also addressed here.
Chapter 7 illustrates the more scarce events in the maritime domain, focusing on 
the key highlights in the extent that ground-​based defences effectively undermined 
the Russian control of the sea in the studied time frame. The sinking of the Moskva 
and the use of USVs are discussed in terms of asymmetry in undermining the 
firepower of a more numerically superior enemy.
Chapter 8 is divided into two parts. The first part addresses Russian 
disinformation and propaganda, and warfighting in the information environment. 
The second part is devoted to the cyber domain of warfare, illustrating the shifts in 
Russian cyberattacks.
Chapter 9 is devoted to the resilience of the Ukrainian people. This chapter 
illustrates the importance of a national strong rear to support the normal functioning 
of society and various aspects of warfighting. The resilience of the Ukrainian 
society is discussed together with various sources of innovation and crowdfunding 
initiatives of the Ukrainian civil society and individuals.
Chapter 10 outlines the importance of international partners in providing 
military assistance to Ukraine and its role in strengthening Ukrainian capabilities. 
The chapter starts with a discussion of the No-​Fly Zone over Ukraine which 
did not happen. Then, military assistance by various stakeholders is analysed in 
terms of correspondence to various developments and consequent demands in the 
battlespace.
The final chapter (Chapter 11) provides a wider discussion of the main themes 
of modern warfare identified in the first chapter. Furthermore, factors contributing 
to the development of the resilient fighting power in this war are considered, taking 
into account differences between the two sides across the three components of the 
fighting power.
 

DOI: 10.4324/9781003351641-2
1
ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK
This chapter explains the main analytical tools of the book and the main trends and 
themes in modern warfare, which will be further discussed in their specifics across 
domains and experiences of the war. The analytical framework for this book is 
rather distinctive. It is ambitious to combine two concepts: the traditional military 
concept of fighting power (including the three traditional components) with a more 
abstract and interdisciplinary concept of resilience. Accordingly, the combined 
concept of resilient fighting power shifts the focus on the ability of the military 
(owner of the fighting power) to bounce back and recover to the point of continuing 
fighting, gaining military advantage and progressing in the battlespace to achieve 
posed objectives. Since the war is not over and the focus is on the one-​year time 
frame, this combined conceptual framework allows focusing on the continuous 
process of reviving the fighting power at different stages of this year, exploring 
factors contributing to strengthening its resilience.
The concept of fighting power
Traditionally, fighting power consists of three interconnected components: 
conceptual, physical and moral. The concept emphasises the importance of 
balancing the three components to achieve greater military effectiveness in the 
battlespace. From an analytical perspective, this concept provides an opportunity 
for systematic analysis of developments in the battlespace and the cause–​effect 
relationship between them. It is worth noting that the description of components 
given below is a collective reflection combining various takes on the concept in 
different doctrines. Hence, some elements of each component might be outlined in 
one doctrine, while omitted in others. Similarly, some doctrines include education 
as a conceptual component, while others as a physical one. From the analytical 
 
 
 

Analytical framework  5
and practical perspectives, these discrepancies are of little importance because the 
essence of the components and fighting power in its entirety remains the same. 
British Allied Joint Publication-​3.2: Allied Joint Doctrine for Land Operations is 
used to reflect the most recent formal reflection of the concept.1
I. Conceptual component. This refers to ‘the thought process regarding how 
to fight contemporary wars, taking into account new challenges, national specifics, 
and scarce resources.’2 This component includes the knowledge and practical 
improvements derived from previous operational experiences, distilled best practice, 
experimentation and innovation linked to the modern threats and characteristic 
features and demands of the operating environment. It should encourage analytical 
and critical evaluation of new situations on both the operational and tactical levels.3 
While it provides a common ground for understanding the context of the operation, 
it also serves as a common basis for innovation, creativity and adaptability to the 
specifics of the operating environment.4 This component can be considered as a 
bridge between past experiences in warfare revised for the requirements of today’s 
practices to improve the outcomes and distil best practice for the future. Like any 
thought process, in order to be relevant and timely, the conceptual component 
should always be in transition, revised and adjusted to the arising features of a 
distinctive operating environment, as well as the overall strategic environment.5 
There are various takes on which elements constitute the conceptual component. 
As a result, different editions and various service and environmental doctrines tend 
to emphasise different elements and that emphasis is often conditioned by various 
factors of organisational culture and dominance of one approach over another at 
a given time. According to earlier doctrines, the conceptual component consists 
of the principles of war, doctrine, conceptual innovation, and understanding of 
context and conflict.6 In more recent army doctrine, a more holistic approach 
has been taken, identifying doctrine and adaptation as the main elements of the 
conceptual component.7 In essence, the wider elements, such as the principles of 
war, understanding of context and conflict are envisaged to be already part of the 
text of the doctrines –​ that is, doctrinal concepts just as those in the taught courses 
in military education. Hence, the essence of the conceptual component does not 
diverge significantly in different doctrines.
The principles of war are lessons on warfighting acquired from factors of 
warfare. They are universal for any domain of warfare and illustrate the enduring 
nature of warfare despite its changing character due to technological advancement. 
On the other hand, military doctrine includes ‘fundamental principles by which 
military forces guide their actions in support of objectives.’8 Unlike the principles 
of war, doctrines tend to be more specific for a given domain of warfare (e.g., 
environmental doctrines), perceptions of contemporary threats and the technologies 
available for managing those threats. Hence, doctrines are often conditioned by 
national strategic traditions, the organisational culture of the armed forces and their 
technological advancement. Traditionally, doctrines aim to teach how to think rather 
than what to think and should provide common ground for further innovation.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

6  Analytical framework
Conceptual innovation or adaptation is an inevitable part of the conceptual 
component and the thought process in general because the operating environment 
is never inert. Adversaries and enemies learn and adjust their tactics and consequent 
behaviour in the battlespace. Adaptation of planning and innovation in actions 
in response to those changes improve military effectiveness in the battlespace 
and often save soldiers’ lives. From an organisational perspective, conceptual 
innovation is also a driving force for organisational renovation and adaptation to 
the new requirements of the time –​ that is, national political and external strategic 
environments. One more element that different doctrines move between conceptual 
and physical components is military education. In recent editions of doctrine, it is 
attributed to the conceptual component. Military education is ‘aimed at improving 
individuals’ knowledge and skills to strengthen their adaptability, improvisation, 
and critical and innovative thinking.’9 Military education provides the common 
ground embodied in doctrines and best practices allowing for further critical 
thinking on innovation and adaptability. Moreover, the common tradition in the 
conceptual component allows for improvement of interoperability between allied 
nations across services and domains of warfare.
II. Physical component. This refers to the more tangible physical means of 
fighting. It includes five main elements: personnel, equipment, training, readiness 
and sustainment (maintenance).10 In other words, armed forces must have the right 
number of people with the right skills and mindset, sufficient equipment to do the 
task, and continuous supply of provision, spare parts and servicing for the operating 
platforms and equipment in order ‘to achieve the necessary level of readiness and 
consequent enduring quality of performance in the battlespace.’11 Personnel is a 
key element in the physical component because warfare remains a human activity. 
Motivated, skilled and trained people fighting across domains are the ones who 
make operational art happen. When they lack the skills and motivation to fight, 
even the availability of the most advanced technologies will not compensate for 
the shortfalls of poor personnel and poor morale. Hence, investment in developing 
the most up-​to-​date and advanced skill set for the requirements of modern warfare 
is paramount for effective operational performance. In this regard, striking a 
balance between numbers of personnel, their readiness and adaptability to the 
unpredictability of warfare is particularly important.
Equipment is another element of the physical component and factors of military 
success. Although equipment is a tangible variable that can easily be quantified 
and, at first glance, considered sufficient based on mere numbers, the real practical 
value of equipment depends on situational requirements. In other words, armed 
forces require functional, effective and well-​maintained equipment corresponding 
to the necessities of fighting a specific enemy or adversary within a given operating 
environment. Moreover, equipment that does not match the requirements of the 
operating environment would make little or no contribution to the establishment of 
combat power and the achievement of posed military objectives. Furthermore, like 
any other element of the physical component, sufficient quantity of equipment based 
 
 
 
 

Analytical framework  7
on the demands of the operating environment is of utmost importance. It is also worth 
mentioning that the effect of firepower or fulfilment of any other operational role can 
depend on the combination of equipment and platforms across domains. For instance, 
a smaller quantity of aerial capabilities can be overcome by more profound presence 
of ground-​based defence for the country that counters invasion. On the other hand, 
the long-​term effectiveness of this symbiosis would depend on the intensity of enemy 
attacks and the further strengthening of ground-​based air defences (GBAD). Hence, 
when equipment is discussed, more attention should be paid to evaluating the specific 
demands of the operating environment.
While military education shapes the mind, military training combines all three 
components of fighting power and applies them to practice. Training is essential 
not only for improving one’s ability to operate complex equipment in various 
operating scenarios but to drill it to the point when it becomes instinctive, while 
the mind can consider adaptation when the unpredictable circumstances of the 
operating environment demand it. Moreover, training is essential for establishing 
and improving jointness across services and interoperability across allied nations. 
A common approach to training and similarity of equipment allow strengthening 
of Allied interoperability and, as the case of the Ukrainian Armed Forces has 
shown, was a prerequisite for equipment transfer and consequent employment in 
the battlespace.
In addressing readiness, AJP-​3.2 discusses this element in a systematic and 
well-​rounded manner:
The physical component of fighting power must be sufficiently responsive to the 
operating environment to achieve their mission. Troop-​contributing nations are 
responsible for providing trained, equipped and certified forces at appropriate 
readiness to meet the minimum military requirements. Readiness includes 
all components of fighting power: the physical readiness of the force; their 
conceptual readiness; and a strong moral component, ready in time to complete 
their operational task.12
Readiness cannot be taken for granted. It might be unrealistic to be prepared for all 
possible case-​scenarios, but the characteristic features of the strategic environment 
and the adversary or enemy that the country faces tend to suggest some of the more 
likely scenarios. A balanced approach to the structuring, training and positioning 
of armed forces tends to provide more opportunities for flexible responses and 
adjustments to the demands of the operating environment.
One of the less glossy elements of the physical component, but not less 
significant, is sustainment, which is the systematic support of military activities 
from maintenance of equipment, logistics, medical services, provision of necessary 
supplies and services to the personnel to financing and continued budgetary 
commitments. No matter how advanced and capable technologies and well-​trained 
personnel might be, logistics and the stability of supply chains remain crucial in 
 
 

8  Analytical framework
supporting combat power in a given operation. As history and contemporaneity 
illustrate, hopes for a blitzkrieg do not transfer into the reality of sustaining the 
momentum without well thought-​out and continuous logistics. Wars of attrition 
tend to kill the momentum of surprise and intensity that invading forces count 
upon,  not to forget that fighting in home territory often favours the defender.
III. Moral component. This is about the human aspect of warfighting and the 
ability to motivate armed forces to fight and perform in the battlespace appropriately. 
It includes morale, leadership, ethical foundations and ethos. Morale is the 
individual or group commitment, conviction and discipline to fulfil an assigned task 
at a particular time. This is an essential element, because high morale can overcome 
shortfalls in other aspects of warfighting. High morale rests upon a strong fighting 
spirit, shared identity (moral cohesion), discipline, pride, comradeship, confidence, 
trust in one’s weapons and equipment and spiritual foundation (belief in the cause).13 
War remains a bloody and violent activity, and psychological pressure, fear and 
doubts are an inevitable part of warfighting. Numbers of people and equipment are 
important, but high morale can often be the main difference between those who stay 
in the battlespace and fight until the end, and those who flee because their spiritual 
foundation –​ the cause of war –​ is illegitimate and there is no moral cohesion but 
only fear and survival instinct. Hence, the side that defends their homeland against 
invaders tends to stand strong with high morale, because they are defending their 
land, families and identity against invaders.
Army doctrine defines leadership as ‘a combination of character, knowledge, 
and action that inspires others to succeed.’14 Warfare brings people into basic 
relationships, where trust and reliance on a comrade in arms are often conditioned 
by common experiences of fighting war and discipline. A strong leader who takes 
responsibility for his/​her men and women and is not afraid to act, who leads by 
example instead of hiding behind subordinates’ backs, inspires people to follow. As 
important as discipline and chain of command are, exemplary leadership makes a 
huge difference for people on the ground and across the entire chain of command. 
Sustaining leadership across all ranks and organisational structures is essential for 
effective force employment, because leaders are responsible for taking care of their 
subordinates and inspiring them to go the extra mile or survive in the most severe 
circumstances.
Ethical, moral and legal foundations and ethos should be at the heart of 
military operations and performance in the battlespace. Although warfare is messy, 
bloody and violent, there are still certain rules in warfare and an internationally 
recognised legal framework to limit use of force: one that distinguishes between 
combatants and non-​combatants in the conflict. The entire moral component 
depends on the forces’ belief in the ethical and moral causes of war and the manner 
of its conduct. In this regard, ethos is the
collection of values and beliefs that guides the application of force and conduct of 
operations –​ and helps ensure the legitimacy of those operations and campaign. 
 
 
 

Analytical framework  9
This includes belief in the justness of the cause and the ability to maintain the 
support of nations.15
Just as a strong ethos can help overcome the horrendous reality of war, lack of 
moral and ethical grounds for using violence can undermine forces’ will to fight or 
subdue to fear, thus increasing the likelihood of desertion.
A strong moral component is essential for cohesion of the fighting force. Lack 
of common beliefs, motives and comradeship combined with poor discipline and 
absence of interoperability and jointness between various units can also result in 
reviving internal disputes between units during warfare, which undermines their 
military relevance and does the job for the opposing side. Similarly, if the invading 
side is motivated by looting, then the likelihood of internal fighting for the looted 
goods is very high, if not guaranteed. Consequently, ‘if military actions contradict 
or are perceived as contradicting these foundations, the legitimacy of the campaign 
might be undermined, jeopardising the overall achievement of the political 
objectives posed.’16 This consideration equally applies to legitimate campaigns and 
those that use fake excuses for revisionist expansionist invasions.
In its turn, fighting power is assessed by combat effectiveness:
the ability of a unit or formation, or equipment to perform assigned missions or 
functions. Note: this should consider leadership, personnel strength, the state or 
repair of the equipment, logistics, training and morale and may be expressed as 
a percentage.17
The aforementioned description of the three components thus illustrates that while 
the physical components can be easily evaluated quantitatively, the conceptual 
and moral components are more qualitative and require a qualitative approach 
to analysis. Assessment of the three components of fighting power also involves 
collective performance, which refers to a high degree of unity, trust and proficiency 
achieved by units or headquarters that have trained or operated together. Partners 
and contractor units can be effectively integrated into the force through training, 
optimising collective performance.18
This concept of fighting power was chosen as the primary analytical framework 
for this research for a few reasons. First, it provides the needed flexibility in 
addressing various aspects of the preparation and consequent performance of 
armed forces of the two countries in a theoretically sequential order. The conceptual 
component allows investigation of the thought process behind military education 
and the consequent building of the strategy and operational performance of the 
belligerents. The physical component allows assessment of the capabilities of both 
countries in a systematic and detailed manner, taking into consideration modern 
trends in military equipment and personnel training. The relevance of the moral 
component cannot be overestimated in this war, because it provides a tool to 
explore the heroic war of the Ukrainian people under the most disadvantageous 
 
 
 
 
 

10  Analytical framework
conditions of full-​scale invasion and the decreasing will to fight among the Russian 
combatants, their poor morale and consequent performance in battlespace.
The wider concept of resilience and resilient fighting power
Resilience is a widely used term in various disciplines and practices. The term 
generally refers to ‘an ability to withstand and quickly recover from a difficult 
situation. This comes hand-​in-​hand with the idea of “bouncing back”, returning to 
“normal”, and picking up where we left off before whatever difficulty or challenge 
we experienced.’19
In psychology, it is defined as ‘the process and outcome of successfully 
adapting to challenging life experiences, especially through mental, emotional, 
and behavioural flexibility and adjustment to external and internal demands.’20 In 
other disciplines, it can refer to the political, societal or economic withstanding of 
various challenges. In environmental studies, ecological resilience is often used 
as a synonym for ecological robustness, referring to ‘the ability of a system to 
continue functioning amid and recover from a disturbance.’21
Even in the security and strategic studies and military fields, there are varied 
approaches to its definition and application area. In military psychology, ‘military 
resilience can be defined as the capacity to overcome the negative effects of setbacks 
and associated stress on military performance and combat effectiveness.’22 From 
the perspective of national security, resilience is approached as a system of tools 
‘to understand our vulnerabilities, pre-​empt challenges before they arise, ensure 
we are prepared for them, and mitigate the impacts. Then, when events occur, 
we should be ready to withstand and recover.’23 In the context of fighting power 
and its doctrine reflection, resilience is referred to as one of the aspects of either 
flexibility or agility, depending on which doctrine is discussed.24 Hence, British 
Army doctrine defines it as ‘the degree to which people and their equipment remain 
effective under arduous conditions or in the face of hostile action.’25
As these definitions illustrate, different aspects are emphasised, and there are 
numerous contexts in which an individual, system or organisation recovers from 
the disadvantageous effect of a disruption. While the military doctrine stresses 
the degree of effectiveness of the physical component, most of the definitions and 
approaches to resilience are related to the process of recovery and regaining the 
preliminary condition. The application of the term ‘resilience’ to the fighting power 
per se is aimed to explore the continuity of the fighting power in this war, that 
is, to explore which of the two fighting sides demonstrated resilience in fighting 
power, how it was achieved and how it was sustained at various stages of this one 
year of the full-​scale invasion within the nine years of the actual war. This term 
allows the focus to be on various fluid elements of the fighting power that were 
changing during this year of the war and contributed to the strengthening of the 
resilience of the fighting power and to Ukrainian national resilience in support 
of the UAF. One might assume that the ‘flexibility’ principle of war would have 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Analytical framework  11
provided even more opportunities for analysis but it would have shifted attention 
to too many attributes/​composing elements within flexibility, such as versatility, 
responsiveness, resilience and adaptability of the whole force.26
Using the concept of resilience as a process allows for an examination of the 
constant sustainment, recovery, and rebuilding of Ukrainian military capabilities 
in achieving various objectives at different stages of this year of war. The focal 
point is the return to effective fighting because resilient fighting power becomes 
the prerequisite to various operational achievements in the war. Hence, the focus 
is very much on the fluidity of bouncing back to the ability to fight again and even 
more effectively. In other words, the point for recovery is the effective employment 
of the fighting power, just as it is stated in the military doctrine, but the focus is on 
the process and continuity of the transformation of the fighting power in this war.
The concept of resilience also allows a look into the context of the establishment 
of the fighting powers of the two countries prior to the full-​scale invasion and 
the factors defining the state of affairs. As an umbrella term, it also allows an 
exploration of the significance of a strong rear –​ national and international –​ support 
in sustaining the physical and moral components of the fighting power. In essence, 
this book illustrates various aspects and contributing factors to establishing and 
sustaining effective fighting power in this war. The following themes of modern 
warfare provide additional layers for exploration of this topic.
Key trends/​themes in modern warfare
This section explores different trends and themes that can be traced in a variety 
of discussions on modern warfare. Some trends and themes are traced in domain 
chapters and culminate in the discussions in the last chapter. Other aspects are 
aimed at determining the place of the current war within the thinking on modern 
warfare in the post-​Cold War era.
It became evident in the first few years after the collapse of the Soviet Union that 
the peace dividend did not pay off. More wars and conflicts were to characterise the 
post-​Cold War world, and due to the wider experiences with the counterinsurgency 
(COIN) operations, the focus on Western military experience and practice shifted 
to out-​of-​area operations and wars of choice. The immediate implications of this 
were shorter military involvements, more intensive but shortened kinetic stages of 
the wars and wider opportunities for the national governments of the Alliance or 
partner nations to decide the time at which to shift from the more kinetic to a more 
humanitarian side of the operations or when to pull their troops and assets out of 
the conflict. This reality of fast achievements and intensive but short-​term kinetic 
stages was reflected in the military industry operating on the contractual basis of 
peacetime realities, which would often be illustrated in stockpiles of some arsenals 
running low due to involvement in high-​intensity tasks.27
Cutting-​edge technologies inevitably resulted in an increased tempo of warfare, 
with various implications on the significance of tactical-​level decision-​making 
 
 
 
 

12  Analytical framework
and impact of these decisions on the conduct of operations. Greater attention to 
war as one of the flashy news topics significantly increased at this time, adding 
new challenges in conducting operations under greater public and international 
scrutiny.28 While discussions surrounded the significance of one military power 
and domain of warfare over another on various occasions, COIN and Russian 
invasions in Georgia and Ukraine in 2014 illustrated the importance of the ground 
element combined with other domains. Nevertheless, the increased speed and 
tempo of warfare and new technologies dictated the need for greater multidomain 
integration (MDI) following the system-​of-​systems approach and interoperability 
on national and international levels.
While the peace dividend of the 1990s and the use of COIN in the following two 
decades revealed scepticism regarding the likelihood of inter-​state warfare, even 
in principle, the shift in the strategic environment towards the revival of the peer 
and near-​peer conventional inter-​state conflict raised some traditional questions 
regarding the mass approach to structuring one’s national armed forces and 
generated discussions of asymmetry between a more technologically advanced or 
mass-​focused adversary. In this regard, the focus began shifting to the importance 
of the littoral manoeuvre and amphibious warfare in the Indo-​Pacific Area of 
Responsibility (AOR). Despite this relatively new shift and focus on inter-​state 
warfare, the land-​centric war witnessed in Ukraine since the full-​scale invasion was 
not the most anticipated type of inter-​state war nor was it discussed in international 
expert circles before 24 February 2022. Hence, this war illustrated many shifts in 
the modern understanding of inter-​state warfare and warfare in general. While new 
operational experiences might refute some expectations about modern and future 
warfare, there are enduring trends that prevail.
In his book, published in early 2022, Mick Ryan identified trends in seven 
segments of conflict in the twenty-​first century that he considered were likely to 
trigger the most significant changes in the character of war in the future29:
1	 The factor of time is appreciated in a new manner. The spread of more cutting-​
edge technologies, the increased speed of planning, demands for fast decision-​
making AI-​enabled technologies across the entire spectrum of capabilities, 
and the spillovers of competition into the information space require military 
organisations and institutions to employ time more effectively to improve 
decision-​making.
2	 The battle of signatures. Since each item of military equipment possesses a 
distinctive signature within the visual, aural or electromagnetic spectrum, and 
distinctive patterns of operations also characterise military organisations, future 
warfare should emphasise minimising one’s own military signatures using 
recorded signatures to deceive the adversary and taking advantage of identifying 
adversary’s signatures across different domains of warfare.
3	 New forms of mass refer to balancing military equipment, taking advantage 
of both cutting-​edge technologies and less expensive means to establish the 
 
 
 

Analytical framework  13
required mass. The focus is on combining manned and unmanned capabilities 
to achieve a force multiplication effect: ‘large and expensive systems may well 
still be needed, but they must be procured in fewer numbers and balanced with 
large numbers of small networked, and inexpensive systems.’30
4	 More integrated thinking and action mean that future military organisations 
should be able to operate simultaneously across all domains.
5	 The trend of human–​machine integration stresses the use of AI and autonomous 
technologies not only as a means across the full spectrum of development of the 
modern and competitive fighting power but also as a way of making them ‘full 
partners with human beings in the conduct of military missions.’31
6	 There is a gradual shift towards competition for influence, meaning the ability to 
sustain support for one’s actions at home and internationally. It is also a matter 
of being able to sustain it over time.
7	 Greater sovereign resilience refers to ensuring that national logistics and supply 
chains are sustainable and protected from the adversary’s control and disruption 
attempts.
While Mick Ryan focused on the future United States–​China competition in 
his book, many of his identified trends can be traced in the full-​scale segment of 
the Russia–​Ukraine war within the year studied in this book. Some of the themes 
discussed in this book align with Mick Ryan’s main trends, while a few additional 
themes are identified. Many of the trends/​themes are entwined or are conditioned 
by the same factor of causality.
People, technologies and political will
This triangle is one of the most traditional reflections of various elements of warfare 
and the consequent components of its success. Very seldom can the gains in one 
segment completely compensate for the shortfalls in two others. Hence, a balance in 
the presence of all three elements is required. Looking at the history of warfare and 
the contemporary advancement of cutting-​edge technologies, it might be tempting 
to say that warfare has become more technology-​centred and dependent. However, 
technologies in essence became more sophisticated and overarching across more than 
one domain of operation and consequent effect rather than becoming the core element 
in warfare. In other words, Colin Gray’s argument of the enduring nature of war versus 
its changing character remains valid today just as it was when wars were fought with 
less sophisticated weapons than today. Technologies develop together with human 
civilisation, and their sophistication requires more time and effort in their production 
and maintenance and the training of skilled personnel. However, most technologies 
remain in people’s hands no matter the distance or extent of control. Warfare is still a 
human activity. The war in Ukraine illustrated this in more than one way.
People are the ones who execute the act of war with the technological means 
they are given for the objectives posed by their political and, by extension, military 
 
 
 
 

14  Analytical framework
leadership. As they are central to the process of warfighting, people are the face 
of war, they either make it more humane or dehumanise it depending on their 
behaviour in the battlespace. They are the final users of the weapons that are 
available in warfare. People are the ones who often compensate for technological 
shortfalls and malfunctioning, they adapt to the constantly changing circumstances 
of the operating environment and the unpredictability of the fog of war. Despite 
multiple discussions of moving people out of the loop and limiting their 
participation in warfare, the war in Ukraine showed the continuation of full-​scale 
cross-​domain warfare with people remaining in the centre of it, while provision of 
cutting-​edge technologies allowed even more of the human spirit to manifest along 
with the will to fight to defend their homeland. The symbiosis of the cutting-​edge 
technologies and people who were taught to fight with what they had –​ outdated 
Soviet technologies –​ illustrated not only that advanced technologies require more 
training and time for training but also that motivation to fight for the survival of 
one’s nation can result in less time-​consuming and targeted learning of how to use 
those technologies. One example discussed later is the acquisition of Ukrainian 
artillery brigade training for the use of Polish Krab artillery pieces and their 
consequent use in the battlespace.
Political will, environment and leadership are crucial to enable the effectiveness 
of the other two elements. Supportive political will and leadership can stimulate 
further successful developments in the battlespace, while the wrong objectives 
and micromanagement can impede progress of the armed forces even if they were 
initially characterised by numerical and technological advantages. Although the 
term ‘mission command’ is primarily applicable to military command and control, 
the idea of decentralised execution can be extended to the civil and political 
spheres, which in their turn would affect civil–​military relations during various 
stages of war. Further chapters will show various manifestations of the mission 
command and comprehensive approach in this war. Inevitably, political will, 
leadership and national environment are linked to public opinion and support, 
illustrated in patriotic public and media campaigns supporting the UAF and the 
fight against invaders and the Russian propaganda to preserve support for their 
aggressive war in Ukraine. Hence, media or information warfare of narratives was 
one of the segments of this war, which showed both the extent of the power of 
narratives in the information sphere and varying degrees of its impact closer to the 
ground and Eastern Europe.
The theme of total/​comprehensive defence
The concept of total defence dates back to the experience of World War II, which 
showed that warfighting could not be contained only within the military sphere; 
its devastating effects influenced civilian lives in many ways. In essence, total war 
means that the entire society is engaged in various roles to support the warfighting 
and to sustain the country and its military through the war. This also means that 
 
 

Analytical framework  15
previously peacetime arrangements and business conduct must be adjusted to 
the wartime requirements. As an extension of the total war, total defence means 
mobilising civilian and military assets to support the national defence.32
The conventional thinking on the topic of total defence was developed during 
the Cold War, which, in essence, continued to have the imprint of the threat of total 
war. Accordingly, the two primary pillars of total defence were civilian and military 
ones. However, in the post-​Cold War environment, the changes in the perceptions 
of threats, the peace dividend and the consequent perceived unlikelihood of total 
warfare resulted in reshaping the concept into a comprehensive defence. NATO 
defined comprehensive defence as ‘an official Government strategy, which 
encompasses a whole-​of-​society approach to protecting the nation against potential 
threats.’33 In this regard, the change from the total defence is in refocusing on the 
whole-​of-​society and the-​whole-​of government approaches. In the Allied context, 
total and comprehensive defence is related to the collective defence, as national 
resilience contributes to the Allied collective defence. After the Russian annexation 
of Crimea in 2014, at the NATO Warsaw summit in 2016, Allied nations agreed on 
enhancing national resilience with the aim of achieving seven baseline requirements 
for civil preparedness:
	• ‘assured continuity of government and critical government services;
	• resilient energy supplies;
	• ability to deal effectively with uncontrolled movement of people;
	• resilient food and water resources;
	• ability to deal with mass casualties;
	• resilient civil communications systems;
	• resilient civil transportation systems.’34
The Allied context illustrates the enduring connection between national societal 
resilience and continued functionality of the society and country in general and the 
ability to project power and use military force in warfighting. Whether the military 
engagement is in out-​of-​area operations or in homeland defence, preparedness, 
resilience and adaptability of the society serve as wider support and pillars of the 
national defence.
Either version of the concept is essential under the condition of protracted 
warfare, in which the primary focus is on continuous sustaining of the national 
society and providing support to the fighting force through different stages of 
intensification of the warfighting and varied degrees of threats to the civilian 
population, infrastructure and normal functioning of the society across different 
spheres. Various segments of cross-​agency or intersociety collaboration can be 
preliminarily defined and put distinctive contingency planning in place. However, 
industries tend to be one of the crucial elements of reorientation from peace to 
wartime. War places significant pressure on restricting various productions, with 
some requiring more time and resources than high-​intensity warfare realities allow. 
 
 
 
 

16  Analytical framework
Hence, it is often crucial to have industry reorientation planning in place during 
peacetime to achieve effective functionality during war.35
The theme of mass and structuring of the Armed Forces
This theme is not new, and as one of the distilled principles of warfare, has been 
present in most of the classical strategic thinking from Sun Tzu to Clausewitz, with 
further reflections in the modern doctrines. In traditional strategic thinking, the 
principle of mass can be referred to as ‘the concentration of people and capabilities 
at a given place and time.’36 Neither Sun Tzu nor Clausewitz were convinced that 
numeric superiority could guarantee victory with mass as only one of the influential 
factors, and Sun Tzu was more in favour of manoeuvre and flexibility in force 
employment.
The principle of mass has been reconsidered in the post-​Cold War Western 
doctrines and approaches to structuring national armed forces. The initial focus on 
total numeric superiority shifted towards attaining artificial mass through layering 
and massing effects by using cutting-​edge technologies for force multiplication.37 
In the Allied context, the mass is to be attained through the Allied joint integration:
The UK maintains highly credible air power but cannot provide the full breadth 
of air power capabilities and enablers to generate, coordinate and sustain the 
mass required to conduct high-​intensity operations alone. For that reason, we 
must always be innovative in our development and application of air power, and 
the way we integrate it across all operational domains and with our international 
allies and partners.38
This example of doctrine illustrates the significant change in the perception and 
consequent development and employment of mass in the last three decades. While 
the Cold War illustrated greater focus on the numeric superiority between peer 
adversaries across domains, platforms and technological specifications, the post-​
Cold War environment was characterised by a reduction in the numbers of the 
armed forces and a belief in the peace dividend. Hence, the concept of the mass 
approach shifted from pure numeric superiority to a focus on a few more capable 
and higher-​quality assets. Therefore, cutting-​edge technologies with precision, 
long-​range and system-​of-​system potential allowed the achievement of force 
multiplication or what can be called artificial mass. In this regard, the emphasis 
was on improvements of the command and control (C2), lethality, achievement 
of information and technological superiority.39 This change has had an immediate 
effect on structuring armed forces worldwide, focusing on reducing the numbers, 
and procuring fewer but more technologically advanced and multirole platforms 
within the traditional cycles of modernisation and changes of the platforms and 
equipment.40 This also meant that the costs of cutting-​edge technologies would be 
constantly increasing questioning the cost-​efficiency of various projects.41
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Analytical framework  17
With the revival of peer and near-​peer conflicts, the question of mass shifted 
to discussing how warfighting would unravel among countries with different 
approaches to the mass. In other words, further conceptualisation aimed at 
exploring how the side with advanced technologies would face an adversary with 
more numeric capabilities but a relatively lower technological edge. For instance, 
David Alman and Heather Venable argued that the United States Air Force (USAF) 
gained an advantage through cutting-​edge technologies combined with surprise 
and rapid results in the earliest stages of the conflict. However, once an adversary 
reinforces its capabilities with the additional technological edge of relatively 
similar technological characteristics, this would result in a war of attrition, which 
inevitably requires more of the traditional mass to sustain more prolonged inter-​
state wars.42
As a result of the revival of peer conflict discussions, the question of 
reconceptualization of mass in the context of the U.S. offset strategies became 
paramount. Lt. Gen. (Ret.) David Deptula and Maj. (Ret.) Heather Penney 
discussed the importance of quality, quantity, diversity, adaptation and speed 
when decisions on force design to match the requirements of the modern strategic 
environment are made. Quality refers to the cutting-​edge technologies inherent to 
the Western tradition of structuring its military; however, with the increasing tempo 
of adversaries building up their technological side of the capabilities, inter-​state 
peer or near-​peer conflict symmetry is more likely to be symmetrical.
Regarding the numeric segment of force design, the primary challenges include:
1) effectively covering range and geography with tempo and mass; 2) presenting 
the adversary with sufficient system complexity to complicate their targeting and 
operational strategy; and 3) withstanding attrition in contested environments to 
remain operationally resilient and effective. A symmetric competition of attrition 
is no longer the only objective of this attribute. Instead, defense leaders must 
understand how to best leverage quantity in its force design to offset adversary 
strategies.43
Another attribute of effective force design is the diversity of one’s equipment. 
Different types of equipment strengthen resilience because if one type is unavailable, 
a different type can be used. Hence, diversification can create additional challenges for 
an adversary’s targeting. The attribute of adaptation combines the abilities to deploy 
new capabilities, modify existing weapons and seek new force structural adjustments 
to the requirements of the battlespace. The speed attribute is also extended to a full 
cycle from capability development to its adjustments in the battlespace:
Speed is the pace at which the United States can develop new capabilities, 
produce and field them in operationally significant quantities, and then adapt 
them to battlespace exigencies. It might also be considered the rate of change. 
This attribute is crucial to disrupting adversary awareness, understanding, 
 
 
 

18  Analytical framework
decision, and action. This pace must exceed an adversary’s ability to adapt. It is 
also key to maintaining operational relevancy.44
Inevitably, time becomes an overarching factor interconnected with the 
effectiveness of force structuring and the consequent employment of fighting 
power. According to the two authors, artificial mass and force multiplication 
through cutting-​edge technologies and multirole features of various platforms 
require more time to develop. While previously, they could provide a decade of 
asymmetric advantage, nowadays the strategic environment and adversaries’ 
capabilities building illustrate the need to focus on ‘rapid adaptation,’ meaning the 
ability ‘to field a force that can present unexpected force mixes with unanticipated 
operational architectures at speed.’45
Therefore, structuring of the armed forces with mass in mind should be 
approached as a system. Attention should be paid to a full cycle of timely 
capabilities, development, employment and adjustments or restructuring to the 
requirements of the battlespace taking into account the wider context of the civilian 
and military industrial segments in improving adaptability and readiness of the 
available equipment and its sustainment. Critical mass in modern warfare can be 
defined as the ability to rapidly produce and/​or have sufficient numbers of military 
capabilities to deploy, modify, sustain and integrate into the force structure of a 
given operating environment according to the operational requirements. Thus, the 
scale would largely depend on the adversary and the type of conflict or war at 
stake. The capabilities also have to be addressed in their wider context of military–​
industrial readiness for the wartime production cycles: ‘The mass approach, more 
than any other, requires self-​sufficiency in manufacturing the required mass for 
the instances of protracted warfare, and the lack of connection between the mass 
approach and achievement of posed objectives.’46
Cross-​domain integration, interoperability and combined arms 
approach
The question of interservice integration has been an important theme in discussions 
of warfare since the gradual additions of new domains to warfare, starting with land-​
centric views that were gradually shaped by maritime and aerial physical domains, 
and then by cyber and space domains. Any modern military doctrine, strategy or 
policy paper discusses the necessity of strengthening interservice collaboration 
and integration to avoid duplication of effort and conflicting orders, improve 
effectiveness of budgetary spending and prevent blue-​on-​blue fire in operations. 
Interconnectedness and interservice collaboration allow for more effective use of 
intelligence across services and levels of warfare and more effective employment of 
cutting-​edge technologies. In its turn, interservice collaboration and cross-​domain 
integration are aimed to facilitate and improve interoperability among different 
allied nations in the multinational cross-​domain operating environment.
 
 
 
 
 

Analytical framework  19
In the first few decades of the post-​Cold War reforms, greater attention was 
paid to interservice collaboration and integration. At that time, the term of jointery 
or jointness became prevalent in Western national doctrines. Jointery or jointness 
(American spelling) was traditionally defined as ‘a series of initiatives across 
defence to coordinate the activities of the three services more closely, pooling 
their expertise and maximizing their punch, while at the same time eliminating 
duplication and waste.’47
Except for its more positive aspects of reducing duplication and improving 
interservice operability, this phenomenon caused concerns regarding the 
independent status of the single services. As some national experiences illustrated, 
jointery can be counterproductive when some  single services are merged and 
substituted by a single joint one. Another concern of this phenomenon is that the 
entire national system will evolve around a single service, making others redundant 
or developed only for the supportive purposes of that single service. In order to 
be effective, jointness requires a balance between single services’ autonomy and 
contribution to the joint objectives and planning. Accordingly:
the successful implementation of jointness requires effective single-​service 
thinking and resultant performance with jointness in mind rather than 
implementing jointness with little consideration of single-​service requirements 
and the nature of each domain. There are two ways of thinking about and 
implementing jointness. In the first, a joined plan can be developed and then 
distributed between the three services. This joined-​up approach may not reflect 
an in-​depth understanding of each domain. The second approach is to look into 
each environment, shape single-​service responses within each domain, and 
incorporate them into a joint strategy.48
Another consideration in terms of jointery and its effectiveness refers to how it is 
implemented across the services. The traditional top-down rigid approach might 
result in setbacks, while the bottom-up solutions are likely to have greater effect 
across various levels. From the structural perspective, jointery often results in the 
introduction of joint C2 structures. The UK Joint Operations Doctrine defines a joint 
force as ‘a force composed of significant elements of two or more Services operating 
under a single commander authorised to exercise operational command and control.’49
Overall, the process of interservice integration and jointery can be manifested 
in various ways. It can be an ad hoc improvement of inter-​agency collaboration 
and reduction of duplication. It can include merging some functions of the single 
services into joint entities. It can also result in establishment of permanent joint 
structures with the full incorporation of training, military education and structuring 
of the Armed Forces. Finally, it can be manifested in the establishment of joint 
frameworks for the improvement of operational performance.
The concept of MDI can be viewed as a natural progression from the previous 
interservice integration and jointery. The focus is even more on the interconnectedness 
 
 
 
 

20  Analytical framework
of various domains of warfare and the crucial necessity of cohesion across various 
segments in achieving layered, cross-​domain effects. The foreword to the Joint 
Concept Note 1/​20 Multidomain Integration explains MDI as follows:
This multidomain integration (MDI) will change the way we operate and war 
fight, and the way we develop capability. Effective integration of the domains 
will achieve a multidomain effect that adds up to far more than simply the sum 
of the parts. This integrated force must also be fused across government and 
interoperable with principal allies.50
In this regard, following the vision of the Integrated Operating Concept,51 
the aim of this exploratory concept is to facilitate modernisation of warfighting 
‘moving beyond “joint” to an era when modern manoeuvre in any domain will be 
enabled by effects from all domains. This integrated force must also be integrated 
nationally and with our key allies and partners.’52
Intensification of modern warfare due to numerous factors, spreading of cutting-​
edge technologies and rapid data sharing in the information space to mention but 
a few inevitably requires layered effects from different domains of warfare. The 
effects of different weapons originating in different domains cannot be completely 
separated from their effects on other domains. The battlespace is integrated by its 
very essence, and the side that can better integrate its assets, reduce duplication and 
achieve effective deconfliction can obtain more productive layered effects across 
different domains and levels of warfare and, hence, attain a military advantage. 
This aspect is of even greater significance under conditions in which there are 
significant gaps across military equipment in various domains. The layered 
approach of combining arms in one domain or across domains can compensate for 
immediate gaps in other domains.
The concept of combined arms is not new in warfare and has undergone various 
transformation stages. In a traditional sense, combined arms refers to simultaneously 
combining different capabilities in order to achieve posed objectives. From one 
perspective, it can be perceived as focusing on manoeuvre and an indirect approach 
rather than mass, thus aiming to undermine the enemy’s cohesion through the 
advantages of tempo and precision targeting. From another perspective, it can be 
approached as a merging of effects:
fire and maneuver, direct and indirect approaches across domains, orthodox and 
unorthodox ways and means. Combined arms reduce the decision space of the 
adversary. The more effects a force brings to bear in time and space, the more 
likely the enemy system is to collapse.’53
Overall, these analytical framework and themes are further used across later 
chapters in order to illustrate resilient fighting power in this war and the primary 
factors defining the success of this resilience.
 
 
 
 
 

Analytical framework  21
Notes
	 1	 Allied Joint Publication AJP-​3.2: Allied Joint Doctrine for Land Operations 
(Brussels: NSO, 2022).
	 2	 Viktoriya Fedorchak, Understanding Contemporary Air Power (London: Routledge, 
2020), 6–​7.
	 3	 AJP-​3.2, 19.
	 4	 Ibid.
	 5	 Viktoriya Fedorchak, British Air Power: The Doctrinal Path to Jointery (London: 
Bloomsbury Academic, 2019), 25.
	 6	 UK Air and Space Doctrine (Joint Doctrine Publication 0-​30), 2 edn. (Shrivenham: DCDC, 
December 2017).
	 7	 AJP-​3.2, 20.
	 8	 Ibid., 19.
	 9	 Fedorchak, Understanding Contemporary, 7.
	10	 AJP-​3.2, 20.
	11	 Fedorchak, Understanding Contemporary, 7.
	12	 AJP-​3.2, 21.
	13	 Ibid., 19.
	14	 JDP 0-​30 (2017), 3–​10.
	15	 AJP-​3.2, 19.
	16	 Fedorchak, Understanding Contemporary, 7.
	17	 AJP-​3.2, 18.
	18	 Ibid.
	19	 Cabinet Office, The National Resilience Strategy 2021, 12.
	20	 American Psychological Association. Available online: www.apa.org/​top​ics/​res​ilie​nce
	21	 Encyclopedia Britannica. Available online: www.bri​tann​ica.com/​scie​nce/​eco​logi​cal-​res​
ilie​nce
	22	 Bradley Nindl et al. ‘Perspectives on Resilience for Military Readiness and 
Preparedness: Report of an International Military Physiology Roundtable,’ Journal of 
Science and Medicine in Sport, 21 (2018): 1116–​1124.
	23	 Cabinet Office, The National Resilience Strategy, 12.
	24	 In the Army doctrine, it is flexibility; in the RAF doctrine, it is agility.
	25	 Army Doctrine Publication AC 71940: Land Operations (London: MOD, 2017), 1A-​3.
	26	 Ibid.
	27	 Christina Goulter, ‘British Experience,’ in Precision and Purpose: Airpower in the 
Libyan Civil War, ed. K. Mueller (Santa Monica: RAND, 2015), 168.
	28	 Tony Harcup and Deirdre O’Neill ‘What Is News? Galtung and Ruge Revisited,’ 
Journalism Studies, 2, no. 2 (2001): 278–​279; T. Harcup and D.O’Neill, ‘What Is news? 
News Values Revisited (Again),’ Journalism Studies, 18, no. 12 (2017): 1470–​1488.
	29	 Mick Ryan, War Transformed (Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 2022), 82–​84.
	30	 Ibid., 97.
	31	 Ibid., 84.
	32	 Ieva Berzina, ‘From “Total” to “Comprehensive” National Defence: The Development 
of the Concept in Europe,’ Journal on Baltic Security 6, no. 2 (2020): 1–​9.
	33	 NATO SOF HQ, Comprehensive Defence Handbook, Vol. I (2020), 15. Available 
online:www.nshq.nato.int/​Libr​ary/​Downl​oadF​ile/​e8a86​ab2-​cbf4-​900e-​3fcc-​c3daa​
451c​067
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

22  Analytical framework
	34	 W. Roepke and H. Thankey. ‘Resilience: The First Line of Defence,’ (accessed 22 March 
2023). Available online:
www.nato.int/​docu/​rev​iew/​artic​les/​2019/​02/​27/​res​ilie​nce-​the-​first-​line-​of-​defe​nce/​
index.html
	35	 Viktoriya Fedorchak, ‘The Mass Approach in the Air War Over Ukraine: Towards 
Identifying a Critical Mass,’ Handlingar Och Tidskrift, no. 1 (2023): 119–​120.
	36	 Ibid., 111.
	37	 David Alman and Heather Venable, ‘Bending The Principle Of Mass: Why That 
Approach No Longer Works For Airpower,’ War on the Rocks (accessed 3 March 2023). 
Available online: https://​waront​hero​cks.com/​2020/​09/​bend​ing-​the-​princi​ple-​of-​mass​
why-​that-​appro​ach-​no-​lon​ger-​works-​for-​airpo​wer/​
	38	 Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-​30: UK Air Power, 3 edn. (Shrivenham: DCDC, 
December 2022), iii.
	39	 Alman and Venable, Bending the Principle of Mass.
	40	 Fedorchak, Understanding Contemporary, 147–​149.
	41	 Fedorchak, ‘The Mass Approach,’ 112.
	42	 Alman and Venable, ‘Bending the Principle of Mass.’
	43	 David Deptula and Heather Penney, Building An Agile Force: The Imperative for Speed 
and Adaptation in the U.S. Aerospace Industrial Base (Arlington: The Mitchell Institute 
for Aerospace Studies, 2021).
	44	 Ibid.,19.
	45	 Ibid., 21.
	46	 Fedorchak, ‘The Mass Approach,’ 119.
	47	 The Strategic Defence Review (1998), Cm 3999, Introduction, para 4.
	48	 Fedorchak, Understanding Contemporary, 17.
	49	 Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP 01): UK Joint Operations Doctrine (Shrivenham: DCDC, 
2014), 123.
	50	 Joint Concept Note 1/​20 Multi-​Domain Integration (Shrivenham: DCDC, 2020), iii.
	51	 Integrated Operating Concept (Shrivenham: DCDC, 2021), 10.
	52	 Ibid., v.
	53	 Benjamin Jensen and Matthew Strohmeyer, ‘The Changing Character of Combined 
Arms,’ War on the Rocks (Accessed 5 February 2023). Available online: https://​waront​
hero​cks.com/​2022/​05/​the-​chang​ing-​charac​ter-​of-​combi​ned-​arms/​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

DOI: 10.4324/9781003351641-3
2
THE CONCEPTUAL COMPONENT
Soviet strategic thinking and military doctrine in 
the post-​Cold War reforms
This chapter has three objectives. First, to identify Soviet strategic thinking and 
the predominant trends in the development of military doctrine as a context for 
understanding the common Soviet military background of Russia and Ukraine. 
Second, to show the post-​Cold War conceptualisation of the role of the military in 
the two countries, their restructuring in the post-​Soviet recovery and the place of 
doctrine in these reforms. Third, the national defence and warfighting approaches of 
the two countries before February 2022 are explored through their recent doctrines 
and strategy documents. This chapter is structured as follows: first, Soviet strategic 
thinking and doctrine are discussed in the time frame from the inter-​war period 
until the collapse of the Soviet Union, followed by a discussion of post-​Soviet 
doctrines and their role in reorganising the armed forces in Ukraine and Russia 
and the extent to which the two countries either moved away from or followed the 
Soviet traditions.
Soviet strategic thinking and military doctrine
In order to understand the influence of Soviet military thinking on modern events, 
it is essential to look into the origins of that thinking, its main principles, the extent 
of its embedding in official documents and its transfer into practice both in times of 
peace and war. Hence, it is worth beginning with the origins of Soviet thinking on 
how to fight wars and its reflection in the military doctrines throughout the history 
of the Soviet Union.
After the victory of the Red Army over the Imperial Army in the Civil War, the 
newly established state and its armed forces needed a direction for its structure, 
development and formalisation. On one side of the spectrum, there were veterans 
of the Civil War, such as Mikhail Frunze and Mikhail Tuckhachevskii, who aimed 
 
 
 

24  The conceptual component
to tear down any old bourgeois structures in the Armed Forces and establish 
everything in a new ‘Red Army style,’ taking the experiences of the Civil War 
and glorified successes of the Red Army as a model to follow. They wanted to 
develop a new doctrine for the new Army. On the other side, the Commissar of War 
at the time, Lev Trotsky, questioned in his 1921 article the very utility of having 
any doctrine for the Red Army or any unified doctrine. He was also sceptical of 
learning from the past, believing that past events and exact historical situations 
could not be repeated.1
Besides the debate on the utility of doctrine and the path of transformation for 
the Red Army in the inter-​war period, there was also a debate on the relevance 
of offensive or defensive strategy and objectives for the armed forces in a future 
war. Trotsky had a moderate view on the subject, supporting a balance between 
offensive and defensive actions. In the inter-​war period, the Soviet Union went 
through substantial societal transformation from the Tsarist rule to the rule of the 
proletariat, which required merging contested classes of peasants and workers. 
Both classes were needed to make the Soviet apparatus work, and any suggestions 
for indoctrinated offensive revolution during demobilisation could undermine any 
motivation for building communism2 and public support for the newly established 
communist rule. Further conceptualisation of the balanced approach to offensive 
and defensive actions was reflected in the work of A. A. Svechin, a former officer of 
the Imperial Army and a military theorist of the time. He focused on the importance 
of the economic strength of the rear for both offensive and defensive actions. 
Furthermore, he distinguished between structural differences and the consequent 
necessity of readiness and economic support for a war of destruction and a war of 
attrition. The former was to be conducted through rapid operations using reserves 
created during peacetime, while the latter was to include prolonged waves of attack 
using the capacities of the industrial rear. Consequently, the first case required 
substantial military expenses, while the second had a strong economic base to 
sustain a war of attrition long term.3
One of the features of the Soviet regime and its history is that political leadership 
had full control of decision-​making with an immediate effect on ‘disagreeable’ 
individuals. The volatile moods of the Soviet leadership and the inter-​party struggle 
would often result in the military and other professional leaders being deported or 
losing their lives in prison or by execution. Trotsky lost his influence due to the 
party struggle; Svechin lost his due to the too realistic and critical assessment of 
a war of destruction, while his opponents used more exaggerated estimations that 
supported the Soviet political leadership and fit well with five-​year plans. Struggles 
within different schools of thought at the General Staff Academy and the demise 
of Svechin’s authority through various rounds of criticism in the 1920s and early 
1930s gave rise to the idea of being offensive as the primary way of conducting war 
and how the Red Army had to be structured.4
Despite the shift from balancing offensive and defensive conduct of war to a 
major offensive one, Svechin’s contribution to the continuity of Soviet military 
 
 
 
 
 

The conceptual component  25
thinking of the time was the idea of a transitional stepping-​stone of war between 
strategy and tactics –​ operational art for the Soviet context. Further, theorists like 
N. E. Varfolomeev and Vladimir Triandafilov under the leadership and intellectual 
influence of Tuckachevsky continued the conceptualisation of a new doctrine for 
the Soviet Armed Forces, which would come into history as the doctrine of ‘deep 
operation.’5
The core of the overarching doctrine of the Soviet military in the decades to 
come and in the post-​Soviet times consisted of the following ideas. First, the trends 
in the military affairs of the time suggested that gaining victory over the enemy in 
a single decisive battle or a single blow was unlikely. Instead, success was to be 
achieved by a series of sequential operations that would be more damaging to the 
enemy than the Soviet side. Second, the success of the offensive action depended 
on rapid assault that would not give the adversary a chance to organise a retreat and 
regroup their armed forces. Hence, the rapid speed of penetration into the depth 
of the enemy’s battlefield was to provide the same stunning, disorganising and 
paralysing effect on enemy troops that the principle of surprise could provide at a 
given time.6
This theory was then further formalised in the first official Red Army doctrine 
Provisional Field Regulations 1929 (PU-​29), Temporary Instructions on the 
Organisation of Deep Battle (PU-​33) and Provisional Field Regulations for the 
Red Army (PU-​1936). In conceptual succession, Tuckachevsky’s ideas were 
further developed by Gregorii Issersson in his work on operational art. He argued 
that the challenge of Soviet operational art was to defeat the enemy through each 
part of its defences in depth. He emphasised the threat of dissipation of force as it 
was advancing into the enemy’s defence. Moreover, he argued that campaigns of 
the time consisted of many successive operations that pierced the enemy’s thick 
defence deep into the battlefield.7 These successive operations included temporal 
and spatial integration of air, land and maritime efforts. This thinking was further 
formalised by Triandafillov in The Nature of the Operations in Modern Armies 
published in 1937 .8
Like many intellectuals during various eras in Soviet history, especially in 
Stalin’s time, the forefathers of the theory of deep battle were not immune to the 
change in political will in the Soviet Union, and they soon were labelled as traitors 
and purged like their predecessors. The direct implication of their fall from grace 
was that their thinking and concepts were abandoned in the formal documents. 
However, as often happens with any suppressed ideas, they tend to arise in practice 
since they were part of the organisational culture and teaching curriculum for a 
certain period. The experience of World War II showed that the deep operation 
concept and the offensive were to stay in Soviet practice and consequent thinking 
for decades to come.
In the aftermath of the two World Wars, conceptual changes in the Soviet Union 
were still driven by political leadership with varying degrees of acknowledgement 
and learning from the past experiences, technological developments, previous 
 
 
 
 
 

26  The conceptual component
strategic thinking of Clausewitz and the German doctrine of blitzkrieg, the external 
international environment of the Cold War and internal trends within the Soviet Union. 
From the doctrine development perspective, post-​War Stalin rule (1945–​1953) was 
characterised by the development of doctrine to fight the last war. Hence, the focus 
was on the protracted warfare of World War II, with support of the ground troops with 
firepower from all other domains. Of course, surprise was at the heart of a successful 
start. Unlike traditional Western doctrine that tends to evaluate the achievements 
and shortfalls of various actions, Stalin’s doctrines would only glorify the successes, 
without critically evaluating the costs of achievements and failures during 1941–​1942. 
The victory was achieved through slowly moving fronts with frontal breakthroughs 
occurring ‘by deliberating massing forces on a main axis of attack.’9
Khrushchev’s era (1954–​1964) was characterised by the greater conceptualisation 
of nuclear weapons. The nuclear strike gained the function of surprise followed by 
conventional means to achieve posed objectives. The focus had shifted from the 
dominance of the ground troops and tactical aviation to the nuclear tool but mainly 
as a preliminary means to destroy the enemy’s forces followed by assault of the 
ground forces in the form of tanks and mechanised units. Thus, the principle of the 
offensive and surprise prevailed with the addition of a pre-​emptive nuclear strike. 
In Brezhnev’s era (1964–​1982), there was further discussion of nuclear warfare 
with the potential for exchanging nuclear strikes, with the renewal of large-​scale 
conventional operations in a full-​scale war. This shift was conditioned by the 
strengthening of conservative narratives and KGB participation in the decision-​
making of Brezhnev’s Politburo and the external factor of the American shift in 
nuclear policy from massive retaliation to flexible response.10
The revival of serious thought on strategic defence took place during 
Gorbachev’s era (1983–​1989) with the realisation that pre-​emptive conventional 
strikes could, in fact, result in nuclear escalation that, in reality, the Soviet Union 
could not withstand. The new doctrine of 1985 emphasised the defensive phase 
to be followed by a strong counteroffensive. While the regular force was given a 
defensive role, the counteroffensive was reliant on mobilisation of reserves and 
their follow-​up movement:
Once forces from the strategic reserve moved forward, they would exploit the 
success achieved by the early front counterstrikes. Without fire superiority, the 
surprise, manoeuvre, and decisiveness of the counterstrike were impossible. 
Enemy deep fire systems and reconnaissance had to be destroyed, mostly by air, 
so that the manoeuvre forces had freedom of action.11
Although this doctrine illustrated a somewhat balanced approach to defensive and 
offensive approaches, Soviet military thinking of the time as reflected in various 
publications showed a mismatch with a rather political doctrine. Offensive and 
deep operation thinking were deeply embedded in the Soviet military mind and 
were there to stay in the post-​Cold War era.
 
 
 
 

The conceptual component  27
One of the elements of the Russian approach to surprise was deception 
(‘maskirovka’). Colonel David Glantz in his work on Russian deception 
during World War II argued that the Soviet approach to surprise addressed nine 
areas: concealing one’s intentions, hiding plans, masking combat preparations, 
employing new technologies and ways of combat, careful choice of the timing and 
direction of the attack, surprise employment of all available forces especially those 
with more kinetic firepower (air, artillery and armoured forces), rapid manoeuvre 
and decisive action to pre-​empt enemy responses, the use of fake constructions 
and communications and taking full advantage of the situational characteristics, 
such as terrain, weather and seasonal indicators.12 In essence, Glantz argued that 
elements of deception could be applied to five out of these nine points of surprise. 
In the context of the Cold War, these elements were incorporated into every 
aspect of Soviet foreign policy and the military, with constant concealment of 
actual capabilities and their functionality. For the Soviet political leadership, the 
perception of their Western counterparts was one of the major centres of gravity 
to reach, and various means of deception with its multiple tools allowed them 
to reach it.13 Deception was to be used at the preliminary stage and during the 
entire duration of the conflict. It was then to be combined with the divide and 
rule principle: ‘Disinformation, in this context, might have allowed the Soviet 
leadership to exploit divisions within an opposing coalition whose members 
lacked consensus on goals and methods.’14
The origins of the Soviet classical military thinking illustrate a few trends in 
the overall Soviet environment of military thinking and doctrine development. 
First, the connectedness between political and military leadership was far from the 
traditional Western cooperation between policy objectives and using military means 
to fulfil those objectives. The political regime of authoritarian or dictatorial rule, 
depending on which segment of the Soviet era is discussed, restrained the extent 
of innovative, critical and even unorthodox thinking among the military and many 
other professionals in the Soviet Union. The experience with the development of 
the deep operation illustrated the enduring struggle within the party and among the 
General staff and officers for the supremacy of their ideas and approval from the 
political leadership. While the former required accepting a theory and its formal 
reflection in doctrine, the latter meant the simple necessity of survival in an 
authoritarian regime with leadership that could purge anyone at any time. While 
during the inter-​war period, a greater extent of military science and evidence-​based 
thinking on the conduct of war could be observed followed by the development and 
spreading of various theories, numerous purges during Stalin’s rule established a 
tendency towards laying low and not taking initiative, since initiatives often would 
punish initiators, as was the experience of Trotsky and Tukhachevskii. In general, 
this trend of conformity before the ruling elite can be extended to the modern times 
of Putin’s regime, the nominal utility of doctrines, their rudimental reflection in the 
actual reforming of the Russian Armed Forces and the constant fear of the military 
leadership falling out of grace.
 
 
 
 

28  The conceptual component
In this context, the second observation is disconnection between what is 
written in formal doctrine and what is trained and performed on the ground. This 
discrepancy might have seemed minimal during the inter-​war and World War II 
periods, and the practical necessities of war would dictate relevant adjustments. 
However, this dichotomy of what is on the paper and what exists in reality has 
been haunting Soviet and post-​Soviet Armed Forces until today, with the current 
war illustrating how wide the gap between formal papers, propaganda and real 
capabilities, trained skills and adaptability is.
Third, innovative thinking requires some freedom, support from leadership or 
at least a lack of punishment for unconventional approaches to solving a problem. 
Although there was a relatively susceptible environment for this innovative thinking 
in the inter-​war period, the reality of the Stalin regime showed the limitations on 
innovative and critical thinking in the Soviet Union with a clear message of the 
driving forces for any military thoughts and ideas –​ political leadership is always 
right even if it is not. In a way, this early military thinking and doctrine development 
experience became formative for the entire Soviet tradition in the decades to come.
Fourth, all these factors in combination created an environment susceptible 
to greater conformity in the conceptual component of the offensive tradition of 
deep operation, which in its essence, continued throughout the entire existence 
of the Soviet Union and in many post-​Soviet countries. Conformity and the fear 
of challenging the thoughts of political leadership stimulated a single concept of 
the offensive to dominate strategic thinking, doctrines and consequent practice in 
the decades to come. An important feature of dogmatisation and indoctrination 
of the Soviet ideas on the offensive was that although the formal documents could 
switch from offensive to nuclear and then to balanced offensive and defensive 
actions, these changes had little impact on the actual transformation of the Soviet 
Armed Forces or the stimulation of any type of critical thinking and, hence, 
flexibility and adaptability in the battlespace.
Finally, although Soviet theorists made extensive contributions to the 
development of the concept of operational art and emphasised the significance of 
flexibility in manoeuvre and its adjustments to the requirements of a given situation, 
the rigid command and control inherent in Soviet Armed Forces would undermine 
the very essence of the flexibility and agility that could be taken advantage of 
in achieving operational art. As the Soviet actions in the Winter War illustrated, 
the offensive approach and operational art had various shortfalls. First, the mass 
approach of the offensive required the need for further coordination of action and 
amassing of the effect of the attack; the obvious shortfall of aiming for attack alone 
is the need to sustain the effect and further progress the offensive. Second, if not 
as a major strategy, defensive action should at least be trained and prepared for in 
case various stages or segments of war require it, especially when a deep battle 
transforms into a war of attrition. Swift action does not guarantee an immediate 
victory. Focusing on surprise as a means of taking operational advantage over the 
enemy can achieve only so much, but it cannot guarantee anything after the first 
 

The conceptual component  29
stage of war and mobilisation of forces by the defending side. In the case of the 
Finish Winter War, the Soviets had the benefits of operational surprise in terms of 
timing, weight and location of their attack.15 Still the issue is always what happens 
after the initial advantage of the surprise when the intended paralysing effect wears 
off and the offensive has to be sustained over a prolonged time.
Ukrainian military doctrine and post-​Cold War reorganisation
In Ukraine’s post-​Cold War military reforms, doctrine had a slightly different 
use than in the Western practice during the same period. In the Western tradition, 
military doctrines refer to the set of principles for how the military conducts their 
operations to achieve stated objectives. Doctrine is authoritative but requires 
judgement in its application. There are different types of doctrines across levels 
of warfare, services, operational environments and types of operations. Doctrines 
are revised when various political, strategic and operational environmental 
changes occur. Often doctrines in their respective hierarchy are driven by the 
national strategy and objectives of the country’s foreign policy. Although doctrines 
are authoritative, they normally are not equal to the normative act and are not 
law-​binding documents. On the contrary, in Ukrainian post-​Cold War practice, 
documents titled ‘military doctrines’ are part of the normative acts, which are the 
main source of law in Ukraine.
The legal mechanism of doctrine establishment and enactment refers to two 
main entities: the President of Ukraine and the National Security and Defence 
Council of Ukraine (NSDC), which is a co-​coordinating body (state agency) to 
the President of Ukraine in the sphere of national security and defence. Activities 
of the NSDC are regulated by Article 107 of the Constitution of Ukraine.16 The 
President of Ukraine chairs the NSDC, and its decisions are ‘put into effect 
by decrees of the President of Ukraine’ (Art. 107, para 7). New decrees of the 
President can abolish the previous ones, thereby changing the approach and 
direction of the defence policy and the ways to achieve the objectives reflected 
in military doctrine. Hence, it is important to emphasise that Ukrainian military 
doctrines are styled and read as legal documents that establish both the direction 
and the means of achieving stated objectives in the defence and security spheres, 
with the Ministry of Defence responsible for enacting these principles and 
reporting on their progress. In essence, the documents of military doctrine on a 
strategic level are a formal estimation of the country’s national strategy, defence 
and security policy, containing some elements of the Western-​style military 
doctrines. Due to its prescriptive legal status, the documents outline the direction 
in some detail, but are not as detailed as, for instance, British Defence Reviews, 
which also identify the direction for the national Armed Forces to follow with 
an assessment of capabilities within an estimated budget. There were also 
documents on national strategy. Normally, the two documents would detail and 
complement each other.
 
 
 
 

30  The conceptual component
Considering the formal specifics of documents called military doctrine in 
Ukraine, it is essential to emphasise some observations on the doctrine’s purpose, 
use and consequent content. First, due to the entwined nature of the NSDC and 
the post of the President of Ukraine, military doctrines have often embodied a 
President’s approach to national defence, security, Ukrainian foreign policy and 
Ukraine’s place in regard to NATO, the European Union (EU) and Russia. Second, 
since the country had to readjust its military posture from being a part of the Soviet 
Union to a newly established independent state with its own military budget, 
armed forces and consequent defence policy, various doctrines have addressed 
military reorganisation, usually indicating the extent of numerical reduction in 
the armed forces and shrinking military budgets rather than a conceptualisation 
of defence and warfighting. Finally, most of the doctrines did not focus much on 
actual warfighting or defence per se, but rather on the justification of inconsistency 
between the military budgets, force reduction, a move from conscription to a 
volunteer professional army and ageing of the capabilities. While some of the 
doctrines that are further discussed tried to introduce systematic military reforms 
to follow the Western model, others would scrap the achievements of the previous 
ones, making the situation even worse. Thus, it can be argued that the reforms that 
the military doctrines of Ukraine contained and promulgated were far from linear, 
with various setbacks and multiple inconsistencies. Furthermore, most doctrines 
were reactive, while only the last one in 2021 showed a proactive stance and 
introduced the concept of Comprehensive Defence into Ukrainian national defence 
and warfighting.
Leonid Polyakov defined three stages in the development of the Ukrainian 
Armed Forces (UAF) in the post-​Cold War era: non-​alignment between NATO 
and Russia (1991–​2000), reforms and NATO ambitions (2001–​2009) and from 
non-​alignment to Russian aggression (2010–​2016).17 As the author of this book, 
I would add the final period of NATO orientation and professionalisation of the 
UAF (2014–​2022 onwards) during the eight years of low-​intensity war and full-​
scale invasion in February 2022.
Ukraine’s first post-​Cold War military doctrine was published in 1993. It 
established the policy of Ukraine’s non-​alignment between NATO and Russia, 
the defensive nature of Ukrainian foreign policy and Ukraine’s views on nuclear 
weapons. This document addressed the general terms of the defensive approach, 
military–​political aspects, the causes of military insecurity and Ukraine’s attitude 
towards war, military–​technical and military–​economic aspects.18 In the light 
of the enduring fear of Russian aggression in Ukraine since the first days of 
independence, the non-​alignment and defensive nature did cause some debate in 
the Parliament, with the focal point of discussing the nuclear status of Ukraine. 
The adopted doctrine proclaimed that Ukraine had no intention of employing 
nuclear weapons, but ‘it will not reduce its nuclear armament, unless others, too, 
take “adequate steps” and unless Ukraine receives security guarantees from other 
nuclear powers and world community.’19 As history has shown, these preconditions 
 
 
 
 

The conceptual component  31
to disarmament were fulfilled, and Ukraine gave away its nuclear arsenal, signing 
the Budapest Memorandum on 5 December 1994.
The non-​alignment period of 1991–​2000 depicted in the doctrine was 
characterised by the process of denuclearisation of the country and reorganisation 
of its Armed Forces. Further details of both were indicated in ‘the state programme 
of Armed Forces Construction and development by 2005’ (January 1997), which 
focused on the elimination of strategic nuclear weapons by 2002 and a reduction 
in the Armed Forces to 310,000 by 2000; as of 1991, Ukraine had the largest 
Armed Force in Europe with 800,000 personnel.20 Although further normative acts 
followed, in reality the Armed Forces had to manage their reduction within the 
constantly shrinking military budgets on their own. As a result, the main structural 
reform was the numerical reduction of conventional strength to 400,000 personnel 
in 2001. In terms of equipment, it had an ageing Soviet-​era arsenal with little to no 
modernisation.21
Rather limited reforms to the Armed Forces in the first decade of independence 
dictated the necessity of a more comprehensive approach. In 2000, ‘the State 
Programme for Reforming and the Development of the Armed Forces of Ukraine 
by 2005’ was adopted. It demonstrated the usual trends of significant budgetary 
cuts, closure of military bases and merging of the Air Force and the Air Defence. 
The time was characterised by substantial malnutrition of the Armed Forces:
Estimates at that time suggested that, in accordance with standard requirements, 
the armed forces had decreased to 300,000 military personnel, while over 3,000 
tanks and over 500 aircraft required a much bigger budget to maintain their 
readiness. However, the Ukrainian state budget of that time (2000–​4) regularly 
allocated only 10–​20 per cent of the required amount—​about $500 million–​
$700 million. It was barely enough to feed the conscripts and to pay a low salary 
to military officers.22
This grave situation substantially undermined not just readiness but also the 
very existence of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, with their primary training and 
operational skills gained in peacekeeping operations and international military 
operations. In order to reorganise the military, in 2001, President Leonid Kuchma 
adopted the concept of transformation of the Ukrainian Armed Forces into a 
volunteer/​professional force of 240,000 militaries by 2015. However, in 2002, the 
number was adjusted to 180,000.
The end of the non-​alignment era is associated with President Viktor 
Yushchenko and changes brought to Ukraine by the Orange Revolution. The 
obvious reorientation towards the EU and NATO was embodied in the new 
doctrine of 2005. Reforms were aimed to reorganise the military according to the 
NATO standards: development of NATO-​style command and control structures; 
finalising the merging of the air force with the air defence, thereby making three 
single services instead of four; establishment of a Joint Operations Command; 
 
 
 
 

32  The conceptual component
and movement towards volunteer professional armed forces. Furthermore, a more 
Western model of military training, education and personnel organisation were to 
be introduced. The target number for the Armed Forces was 140,000. Collaboration 
within international programmes and contingent intensified in this period. 
Although the implementation of this initiative faced numerous setbacks, such as 
the economic crisis and the Russian invasion of Georgia, the direction for reforms 
remained clear –​ the professionalisation of military to the NATO standard.23
The linear progression of the reforms was scrapped by the new President –​ pro-​
Russian Viktor Yanukovych. Hence, he made a U-​turn in the direction of Russia 
and scrapped all previous reforms. The military doctrine published during his 
presidency eliminated the NATO direction of the Ukrainian military and prioritised 
a ‘constructive partnership’ with Russia. Moreover, he extended the contested 
stationing of the Russian Black Sea fleet in Crimea from 2017 to 2042 and labelled 
the threat of regional aggression as unlikely. In essence, under Yanukovych’s 
presidency, besides the obvious reduction of the armed forces to 130,000 personnel, 
the overall readiness was further reduced not only by closure of various military 
bases and support facilities but also by further deepening of corruption24 and 
redirection of scarce military funds to non-​military procurements and activities. 
Yanukovych followed the Russian example of that time and established numerous 
anti-​riot police units and security services to protect his regime, which numbered 
three times more than the regular Ukrainian Armed Forces. Hence, everything was 
done systematically so that the Ukrainian military was in the poorest condition 
possible for the Russian invasion in 2014.
The next doctrine was published in 2015 under the presidency of Petro 
Poroshenko. It once again abandoned the policy of non-​alignment and reinstated 
the NATO and EU direction of Ukraine’s foreign policy and military reforms. 
Russia was identified as the primary adversary and threat to Ukraine’s security, with 
its full-​scale invasion as the main scenario for which to prepare. The operational 
experiences in Crimea and Donbas were reflected in NSDC’s Concept of Ukraine’s 
Security and Defence Sector Development (2016), which prioritised the need for 
intelligence capabilities, professionalisation of the military, ways of developing and 
sustaining military reserves and strengthening of the territorial reserve. In practical 
terms, these reforms increased the military to 250,000, with the intensification 
of their combat training and logistics support and the establishment of the Joint 
Operations HQ and the Special Operations Command.25
These four post-​Cold War military doctrines do not particularly illustrate the 
traditional thought process on how to fight wars or the detailed conduct of a 
country’s national defence based on an assessment of the strategic environment. 
Instead, the military doctrines served as a means to formalise the country’s foreign 
policy direction and its impact on defence, security and military reforms. While the 
overall trend was most certainly a reduction in the military in the post-​Cold War 
reorganisation due to a lack of funding and the obvious need for professionalisation 
in the military, there was also the obvious tendency of pro-​Russian governments to 
 
 
 
 

The conceptual component  33
weaken the Ukrainian military, so that they would not pose such a great threat to 
further Russian aggression.
‘The Military Security Strategy of Ukraine’ (25 March 2021) was developed 
under the Presidency of Volodymyr Zelenskyy by the secretary of the NSDC Oleksiy 
Danilov. Unlike any other document on military doctrine or national strategy in 
Ukraine’s entire post-​Cold War history, this one introduced a clear concept of 
how Ukraine’s military security should be approached and how defence should 
be conducted in the case of a full-​scale invasion. Although this was a strategic 
level document, it was more military and practice-​oriented than the previous socio-​
political doctrines and national strategies. The concept of comprehensive defence 
(Vseokhoplyuyucha oborona) included the following measures:
-​	 Preventive actions and persistent resistance to the aggressor on land, at sea 
and in the airspace of Ukraine, countermeasures in cyberspace and against 
imposing one’s will in the information space;
-​	 Using the entire potential of the state and society (military, political, 
economic, international-​legal (diplomatic), spiritual, cultural, etc.) to repel 
aggression;
-​	 Employment of all forms and methods of armed struggle against the aggressor, 
in particular asymmetric and other actions in defence of Ukraine in compliance 
with the principles and norms of international law.26
Comprehensive defence was to be built on three pillars: deterrence, resilience 
and cooperation. Deterrence envisaged the readiness of all civilian and military 
potential of Ukraine to counter various military threats and inflict political, military 
and economic losses upon an adversary, forcing it to abandon escalation and 
stop aggression. The second pillar is resilience, which entails the ability of the 
governmental authorities, the Armed Forces, the national economy, infrastructure 
and society to recover and adapt to the changes in the security environment in 
repelling an aggressor and providing support for further effective activity of the 
territorial defence of Ukraine, resistance movement and the conduct of various 
types of operations, and renewal of the infrastructure and communication to 
strengthen people’s livelihood. The third pillar is cooperation, which entails 
coordination of actions within the country during the preparation of armed defence 
against armed aggression, reconstruction activities in the post-​hostilities period 
and the actions taken by the EU, NATO, international organisations and individual 
states to support Ukraine.27
The overall narrative of this strategy (which substituted military doctrine and 
other related normative acts of the previous president) is about systematic defence 
of the country from aggression using all available means within the country and 
abroad, with a clear identification of Russia as the main aggressor. Unlike any 
other strategic doctrine or strategy previously discussed, The Military Security 
Strategy of Ukraine suggested actual preparation for defending the country in the 
 
 
 

34  The conceptual component
case of future escalation as well as preparedness and improvement of resilience. 
Hence, the defence rested upon strengthening the resilience of all civil and military 
entities in the country and the preparedness of the armed forces, territorial defence 
and other fighting units for rapid deployment against the invading forces of 
Russia. In this regard, three waves of action were envisaged. In the first wave of 
repulsing and deterring armed aggression, to prevent the enemy’s advancement 
deep into Ukrainian territory and restrain further escalation of the conflict, the 
Ukrainian Armed Forces were to conduct various special operations, including 
on the adversary’s territory. In the second wave, the military reserve was to be 
utilised to strengthen the defence, followed by further mobilisation in the country. 
An important element of the second wave was the deployment of the resistance 
movement in the event of temporary occupation of certain territories of Ukraine. 
In the third wave, additional military units, established through the mobilisation 
of reserves, were to be employed in further repulsing and deterring the armed 
aggression against Ukraine. In this wave, the end of aggression was envisioned 
with the assistance of the international community. Cessation was to be on 
favourable terms for Ukraine. Not a separate wave, but a recovery stage of post-​
conflict settlement identified both activities and goals: ‘post-​conflict settlement, 
demobilization, restoration of control of compliance within the regime of the state 
border of Ukraine and reintegration of temporarily occupied territories during the 
reconstruction period after the end of hostilities.’28
To achieve these objectives and the improvement of the national joint military 
capabilities, reforms in the Armed Forces were to be speeded up. Once again, 
NATO principles and standards of professional military were chosen for these 
endeavours. The main focus was on
achieving and maintaining capabilities of Armed Forces of Ukraine and other 
components of the defence forces in terms of strategic mobility, conducting 
asymmetric, network-​centric, multi-​sphere and indirect actions that will 
eliminate the numerical and technological superiority of the adversary on land, 
in the air, at sea, in information space and cyberspace.29
Overall, the strategy illustrates a more realistic and practical suggestion on how 
Ukraine can defend itself under the conditions of a full-​scale Russian invasion. 
While the comprehensive approach in general follows the post-​Cold War tradition 
of various countries that were likely to face a more numeric adversary, the specifics 
of the response and waves of defence were built on distinctive features of the 
Ukrainian terrain and its history of warfighting. Historically, the Ukrainian people 
have always had to fight greater conventional standing armies both in the Imperial 
and pre-​Soviet times. Hence, various characteristics of partisan warfare are inherent 
to Ukrainian warfighting, and military traditions date back long before the very 
inception of the Soviet Union. Diversion and dispersion of force and efforts provide 
an excellent opportunity to undermine the enduring hope of Russians for blitzkrieg 
 
 
 

The conceptual component  35
and overarching benefits of a surprise attack. Furthermore, the covert operations in 
the territory of Russia identify and consequently target the core centres of gravity 
for any attacking force: its logistics and supply chain.
Finally, this strategy has a systematic approach to defending one’s country 
using a full spectrum of capabilities, the modern professional military concepts 
of network-​centric, multidomain and joint warfare, and the wider concept of 
comprehensive defence. This feature of the strategy formally illustrated the 
processes of strengthening interservice cohesion in the battlespace and reforms to 
strengthen this integrity initiated after the beginning of the Russian war in 2014. 
Moreover, this element of the strategy also illustrated a more systematic learning 
from the professional military practice of the NATO countries.
Russian military doctrine and post-​Cold War reorganisation
Like any former Soviet country, Russia had to readjust its Armed Forces and 
military complex to the new realities. While the peace dividend might not have 
been as profoundly sound in the newly established state, internal struggles and the 
necessity of uniting a country that had never been homogenous in any way required 
a clear message on foreign policy and the place of Russia and its military in the 
post-​Cold War world. Accordingly, military doctrines were used to deliver more 
of a socio-​political stance30 of the government and its vision of foreign policy and 
the place of the military in it. The role of military doctrine in the Russian military 
context was identified in one of its doctrine editions, stating that the Russian 
military doctrine
represents a system of officially adopted by the State views on preparations for 
armed defense and on the armed defense of the Russian Federation. The Military 
Doctrine contains the main provisions of the military policy and of military-​
economic support for defense of the State based on the analysis of military risks 
and military threats facing the Russian Federation and the interests of its allies.31
While in Ukraine, the development of doctrine was a roller coaster with non-​
alignment, in the case of Russia, it was a steady decline in the perception of the West 
and NATO from the rhetoric of modest points of cooperation with Western countries 
to deterioration into threats, perceptions and manifestations of antagonism between 
Russia and the West. The transitional period of some uncertainty and associated 
opportunities in the 1990s soon returned to the Soviet rhetoric and methods; no 
matter what glossy images and buzzwords were used in doctrines, the practice 
remained Soviet and KGB in its essence.
As the Soviet section of this chapter showed, in the last decade of its existence, the 
Soviet Union was moving towards adopting defensive doctrine and reorganisation 
of its military accordingly. Since the process was not finalised and the collapse of 
the Union resulted in broken logistics chains and the division of various units of the 
 
 
 
 

36  The conceptual component
Soviet military between different newly established independent states, there was 
a vital need for reforms. From one perspective, the question was finding a balance 
between nuclear and conventional military tools. From another perspective, there 
was the traditional post-​Cold War military debate on how the Armed Forces 
would be structured: whether to follow a technological or a mass approach.32 In 
the case of Russia, two camps of the debate were presented by General Vladimir 
Slipchenko, who lobbied in favour of cutting-​edge and precision technologies over 
the land component, and Makhmut Gareev, who was sceptical of ballistic missiles 
and was more focused on the principles of defensive sufficiency in structuring 
the Russian Armed Forces: ‘priority in outfitting troops and naval forces is given 
to highly effective weapons and equipment capable, according to their quality, of 
substantially reducing the quantity of arms needed to maintain the combat might 
of the Armed Forces.’33
The first post-​Cold War Russian doctrine of 1993 was an interim document to 
formalise the existing state of affairs and prevent the pendulum from swinging 
too far. The emphasis was that Russia would continue to preserve both nuclear 
and conventional weapons in its arsenal and that the main threats to Russia at the 
time would be the strengthening of military presence in the neighbouring countries 
and military alliances, regional conflicts in the neighbourhood, the proliferation 
of weapons of mass destruction (WMD) and terrorism. A trend towards greater 
mobility, technological advancement and professionalisation of the Russian Armed 
Forces was formalised in this document.
While the doctrine of 1993 could have been viewed as moderate and open-​
minded considering the Soviet past and the Cold War, rolling back to Soviet 
antagonism can already be associated with the draft of the 1999 doctrine published 
in military magazines for its professional discussion. The draft indicated the threats 
of ‘monopolarism’ to Russia and the potential for its change using military means. 
In various discussions, then-​Prime Minister Putin emphasised the necessity of 
strengthening the national military and the consequent Russian grasp over the 
Caucasus. The draft doctrine and speeches of the time served the obvious deterrent 
role of preventing any interference by the United States and NATO in the Caucasus 
(meaning the ongoing Russian war in Chechnya) in the way NATO got involved 
in Yugoslavia.34 The actual doctrine that was published in 2000 took a slightly 
more modest form than its draft indicated. However, from the nuclear perspective, 
it moved from the use of nuclear weapons in the case of existential threat, as was 
stated in the National Security Concept of 1997, to their use in the case of full-​scale 
aggression against Russia with conventional weapons or a WMD attack.35
From the conventional perspective, the main external threats included any 
territorial claims against Russia or interference in its internal affairs; preventing 
Russia from its participation in resolving international security problems in the 
multipolar world; armed conflicts or military build-​ups on the Russian border or 
borders of its allies; and expansion of military unions. In essence, this doctrine 
continued the traditional Soviet rhetoric of preserving Russian spheres of influence 
 
 
 
 
 

The conceptual component  37
and the ‘entitlement’ of Putin’s government to ‘resolve’ international conflicts as 
it considered fit. The detailed and more aggressive nuclear stance suggested the 
traditional ‘or else’ argument that always existed in Soviet and Russian foreign 
policy and strategic thinking. However, the doctrine was labelled to be defensive 
in its nature, with the traditional Soviet military offensive twist. More attention 
should be paid to this doctrine than to any other that followed because it is the 
starting point of the Putin era in Russia and its embodiment of Putin’s approach 
to the military and what could be called Putin’s doctrine, which dominated Russia 
for the next 22 years: subversion of the principles of international law; territorial 
grab; nuclear blackmailing; and KGB methods of conducting business internally 
and internationally.
The next doctrines that followed only further crystallised Russian antagonism 
towards the West, vis-​à-​vis NATO. The 2010 edition explicitly emphasised the 
threat of NATO expansion instead of using the generic term for military alliances 
used in the previous edition. The 2014 edition of the doctrine continued the same 
anti-​NATO narrative, distinguishing between military threats and risks, with varying 
degrees of escalation and responses. This doctrine also mentioned Russian interests 
in the Arctic and its space capabilities. The fear on the part of Putin’s regime that 
it could lose power through the internal changes was evident in its equalling of 
any internal threats to the ruling regime with threats to the state. Furthermore, 
this doctrine emphasised the multitude of means to achieve stated objectives, 
including information, political, economic and other tools besides military force.36 
In addition, this doctrine mentioned for the first time private military organisations 
and mercenary units that flourished in the Russian wars. As no coincidence, 
Gerasimov dismissed the reforms of professionalisation of the Russian Armed 
Forces initiated by Serdyukov when Russian military shortfalls became evident 
in Georgia. In 2014, the federal-​level national guard was established to protect 
the integrity and endurance of the Putin regime by withdrawing 400,000 members 
of the professional military force from the Armed Forces and moving them to the 
National Guard.
The overall discourse of the doctrine could be considered as a continuation 
of the mass fire offensives with a greater emphasis on improving intelligence, 
surveillance and reconnaissance (ISR) capabilities and the precision of their strike 
capabilities. The previous vulnerabilities of the Chechen War37 and Georgia38 were 
partially addressed by emphasising the necessity of integration among various 
districts of the Army and across services. One of the weak points in Russian defence 
was a surprise attack of the Western adversary enabled by speed and technological 
superiority of the Western capabilities. Integrated defences were to respond rapidly 
and punish the attacker already during the first stage of the conflict by preliminarily 
disrupting and deflecting their advancing efforts. Furthermore, ‘these defenses are 
designed to operate in coordination with Russia’s other capabilities to ultimately 
target and degrade an adversary’s critical infrastructure and ability to sustain 
combat.’39
 
 
 
 

38  The conceptual component
This doctrine also broadened the concept of deterrence, previously primarily 
applied to the nuclear context. The new term of strategic deterrence included the 
usual nuclear weapons, conventional weapons and non-​military tools of the concept 
of New Generation of Warfare (NGW). According to NGW, the preliminary 
stages before the start of military confrontation would involve psychological 
and information suppression of an adversary’s morale and will to fight through 
various anticipatory actions. Hence, the asymmetric and non-​kinetic elements of 
this concept.40 Although the essence of the NGW is not explained in the official 
doctrine of 2014, its further conceptualisation and presentation were done by 
Chief of the General Staff General Valery Gerasimov and the Russian military in 
a number of speeches and lectures given at the military college and in the pages of 
professional journals. This use of non-​military means at the preliminary stage of 
warfare became known in the academic and professional literature as Gerasimov’s 
doctrine or hybrid warfare. However, in one of his speeches, Gerasimov called the 
Russian approach to defence by a more traditional term, that of active defence:
A defensive strategy emphasises maneuver defense, and counterattack. It 
is a defensive offense that envisions persistent engagement of an opponent 
throughout the he theatre of military action, to include critical infrastructure in 
their homeland, executing strategic operations that affect an adversary’s ability or 
will to sustain the struggle. Consequently, Russian military strategy is comprised 
of operational concepts that represent defensive and offensive constructs without 
clear distinction. Active defense devalues strategic ground offensives, privileging 
the aerospace domain, maneuver defense, and forms of noncontact warfare.41
Some other features of the active defence strategy included pre-​emptive actions in 
neutralising potential threats to national security. Although the pre-​emptive measures 
could vary from non-​kinetic to kinetic ones, they were still to take advantage of 
surprise, decisiveness and continuity in inflicting unacceptable damage upon the 
enemy and hence gain strategic initiative. Interestingly, the usual kinetic and 
intense warfighting tactical level of engagement was foreseen at a distance, clearly 
referring to varying artillery ranges on both sides. The battlefield was perceived 
as fragmented without fixed battle lines. Land forces manoeuvre defence was 
prioritised over ground offensives to undermine and degrade opponent’s strength 
and preserve one’s own force. Interestingly, Russia’s own territories could be given 
away to gain stronger positional defence and counteroffensive effort. Furthermore, 
the purpose of all actions in the active defence was not territory gain but making 
the political cost of attack too high. Hence, adversary’s main centres of gravity and 
consequent targets for the long-​range strikes were to be both military and economic 
elements:
The overall Russian objective is to prevent an opponent from achieving a decisive 
outcome, forcing them into a conflict with high levels of attrition. The vision is 
 
 
 

The conceptual component  39
to inflict damage to military and economic infrastructure such that opponents 
will seek war termination on acceptable terms, and become preoccupied by the 
ensuing internal instability.42
Overall, various elements of Russian military thinking in the NGW and 
active defence generally labelled as the Gerasimov doctrine, or hybrid warfare, 
substantially influenced academic and professional discussions on modern warfare 
for almost a decade. While some considered these ideas and various aspects of 
its manifestation in Russian actions in Ukraine in 2014 ultra-​innovative, more 
realistic strategic thinkers and scholars were sceptical about the new buzzword and 
conceptual hype:
Gerasimov was trying to do was allude to the traditional Russian concept of 
non-​linear warfare—​which refers to the use of both regular and irregular forces 
along with psychological, economic, and diplomatic means—​and the traditional 
concept of deep operation, which is based on a systematic and national effort 
combining diplomatic, social, and military elements. In fact, in his infamous 
speech, he cited Isserson and Svechin, although both in reference to general 
propositions like military combat readiness and preparing for future conflicts.43
Although there was no formal military doctrine before the pre-​invasion, a new 
national security and strategy document was issued on 2 July 2021. The overall 
narrative of the document has largely been analysed by different scholars, 
with various points of emphasis. First, the overall focus of the strategy was the 
independent self-​centred actorness of Russia in the global world in which the 
previous cooperation with friendly states, which was substituted by interactionalism 
and antagonism with the United States and Europe, was less sound than in the 
2015 edition.44 However, in the 2015 edition, the reach of Russian influence had an 
extraterrestrial scope, while in 2021, the agenda extended to spreading its presence 
and influence further into the Arctic and extending it to ‘unclaimed’ Antarctica. 
Besides extending hands to unclaimed continents, this strategy emphasised Russian 
culture and its identity and, by extension, protection of the Russian people.45 In 
essence, the doctrine provided ideological, ethnocultural grounds for the further 
blurring of the principles of international law and employment of lawfare in support 
of the Russian expansionist wars.
Comparison of the two approaches to doctrines
As the post-​Cold War use of doctrine shows, in both countries, strategic doctrines 
were closely linked to the political decision-​making and had remained closely 
integrated into the normative frameworks of both countries. Although this tendency 
can be perceived as a mere national tradition or modus operandi, it immediately 
affects the use and functionality of military doctrines. First, the doctrine reflected 
 
 
 
 
 
 

40  The conceptual component
the views of the ruling political elites, resulting in a roller coaster in the case of 
Ukraine and the strengthening of anti-​Western sentiment in the case of Russia 
under Putin’s rule. Second, despite being rather vague at the strategic level, 
military doctrine as a normative act can be equated to an order and an obligation for 
all other national entities related to security. In essence, despite its vagueness and 
general nature, it was aimed at providing an exact framework for the Armed Forces 
to operate and means to monitor that performance against the allocated budgets.
Third, while the pre-​2021 Ukrainian doctrines had a rather generic socio-​political 
nature that discussed Ukrainian foreign policy in its link to defence and security, 
the 2021 strategy that was a substitute for this doctrine specifically addressed how 
warfighting and defence against Russian aggression would be conducted. Compared 
to the Western practice, this document illustrates more features of a national 
strategy or a military doctrine at a strategic level because it soberly evaluates the 
existing strategic environment from the military and security perspectives and 
provides an exact approach to defence and a strategy of warfighting. In contrast, 
Russian military doctrines were used to express the extent of animosity towards 
Western countries and NATO, but despite the changing rhetoric, they did not 
introduce many new ways to counter threats other than nuclear blackmailing and 
a mass offensive. Even what many began to call Gerasimov’s doctrine was more 
developed in his speeches and lectures delivered to cadets and officers than in what 
was written in Russian military doctrine and strategy per se.
Fourth, if military doctrine is too closely linked to the socio-​political environment 
and becomes more of a political tool in foreign policy, its utility for the military 
becomes limited. While general strategic-​level doctrines tend to provide enough 
room for flexible and decentralised execution, often in the post-​Soviet countries, 
a lack of clear instructions on the methods and quality standards can result in 
adherence to only the numeric reflection of the reforms and objectives posed in 
respective doctrines.
Fifth, the last pre-​full-​scale invasion doctrines of the two countries captured 
important strategic thinking of the countries, showing very different trends. In both 
cases, the combination of history, national ethos and geopolitical endurance of the 
terrain would dictate how warfighting was to take place. While Russian geopolitical 
location over a vast territory has always encouraged land-​centric mass offensive 
thinking on warfighting, Ukraine has always had to defend itself from the Russian 
imperial ambitions by taking advantage of what Ukrainian terrain provided. The 
Ukrainian tradition of warfighting has historically been a combination of diversified 
semi-​autonomous units and partisan warfare taking advantage of mountainous 
areas in western Ukraine, woods and swamps in the northern part and various 
hills, rivers and floodplains across the country. The three waves described in the 
Ukrainian strategy of 2021 illustrate the employment of asymmetry at its best. 
While Russia was likely to follow its traditional mass offensive surprise attack, 
it also continued to bring its enduring vulnerabilities in sustaining the effect and 
advancement over a prolonged time, with the consequent logistical challenges and 
 

The conceptual component  41
greater dependence on the rear. Diversion activities in the Russian rear combined 
with frontline manoeuvre of the Ukrainian regular forces and partisan warfare on 
temporarily occupied territories would, in sum, provide a crumbling effect on the 
integrity and very functionality of the invading force, which in fact was seen in 
2022 and is discussed in the following chapters of this book.
Finally, although strategic-​level documents illustrated more formalised and up-​
to-​date thinking in Ukraine and the endurance of previous Soviet traditions in Russia, 
another trend needs to be emphasised in the context of doctrine and consequent 
military practice. Since there were no systematic reforms in professionalisation at all 
levels of the military, various Soviet paper-​style practices would endure. However, 
innovative thinking and the persistence of leadership from people like General 
Valery Zaluzhny would be fighting this practice to introduce more modern and 
professional mechanisms. More time will be needed after the war for the institutions 
to completely adjust. This context is essential to emphasise because the absence of 
systematic reforms from top down resulted in the development of practice-​oriented 
innovations and activities from a bottom-​up, grassroots approach. Various know-​
how and training, especially of special operations units like the Azov regiment, 
would be developed based on the practical experiences personally gained in 2014–​
2015 by the future leaders of the new regiments and units. They would build their 
training and tactical preparation based on that experience of what worked and what 
did not. Hence, in the war of 2022, innovations to warfighting and the improvement 
of fighting power of the Ukrainian warriors were coming from both directions –​ from 
above and from the grassroots of the tactical necessities of warfighting. Immediate 
necessities of war dictate mission command in more than one sphere of execution. 
In the case of Russian military, strict hierarchy and subordination did not allow 
much room for manoeuvre in any field and most certainly did not encourage mission 
command, critical thinking nor innovation, especially in the first months of the 
full-​scale invasion. Hence, as later chapters will illustrate, many of the Russian 
innovations were, in essence, learnt from the warfighting itself and were adaptations 
to Ukrainian tactics during military engagements.
Notes
	 1	 Sally W. Stoecker, ‘The Historical Roots of the Current Debates on Soviet Military 
Doctrine and Defense,’ The Journal of Soviet Military Studies, 3, no. 3 (1990): 364–​365.
	 2	 Ibid., 366.
	 3	 Ibid., 369–​370.
	 4	 Derek Leebaer, Soviet Military Thinking (London: Routledge, 1982).
	 5	 James Schneider, ‘Military Theory: V.K. Triandafillov, Military Theorist,’ The Journal 
of Soviet Military Studies, 1 (1988): 285–​306.
	 6	 David Glantz, Soviet Military Operational Art: In Pursuit of Deep Battle 
(London: Routledge, 1991).
	 7	 Richard Simpkin, Deep Battle: The Brainchild of Marshal Tukhachevskii 
(London: Brassey’s Defence Publishers, 1987).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

42  The conceptual component
	 8	 V.K. Triandafillov, The Nature of the Operations of Modern Armies, ed. by Jacob 
W. Kipp (London: Routledge, 1994).
	 9	 Edward Felker, OZ Revisited: Russian Doctrinal Reform in Light of Their Analysis 
of Desert Storm (Maxwell: School of Advanced Airpower Studies Air University, 
1995), 10.
	10	 Ibid., 12
	11	 Ibid., 14.
	12	 David Glantz, Soviet Military Deception in the Second World War (London: 
Routledge, 1989).
	13	 Stephen Cimbala, ‘The Cold War and Soviet Military Strategy,’ The Journal of Slavic 
Military Studies, 10, no. 3 (1997): 26.
	14	 Ibid.
	15	 Major Gregory Bozek, The Soviet-​Finnish War of 1939–​1940: Getting the Doctrine 
Right (Fort Leavenworth: School of Advanced Military Studies, United States Army 
Command and General Staff College, 1993). Available online: www.ibib​lio.org/​hyper​
war/​UN/​USSR/​Sov_​F​inn-​1939_​D​octr​ine/​index.html
	16	 Constitution of Ukraine. Available online: www.presid​ent.gov.ua/​docume​nts/​const​
itut​ion
	17	 Leonid Polyakov, ‘Ukraine,’ in The Handbook of European Defence Policies and Armed 
Forces, eds. H. Meijer and M. Wyss (Oxford: OUP, 2018), 179–​194.
	18	 Charles Dick, ‘The Military Doctrine of Ukraine,’ The Journal of Slavic Military Studies, 
7, no. 3 (1994): 507–​511.
	19	 Ibid., 509.
	20	 Polyakov, ‘Ukraine,’ 180–​182.
	21	 Ibid.
	22	 Ibid., 183.
	23	 Ibid., 185
	24	 Ibid., 186.
	25	 Ibid., 193.
	26	 ‘On the Military Security Strategy of Ukraine,’ Decree of the President of Ukraine, No. 
121/​2021. Available online: www.presid​ent.gov.ua/​docume​nts/​1212​021-​37661
	27	 Ibid.
	28	 Ibid.
	29	 Ibid.
	30	 Carlo Caro, ‘The Truth about the Evolution of Russian Military Doctrine,’ The National 
Interest, 1 July 2022. Available online: https://​natio​nali​nter​est.org/​blog/​buzz/​truth-​
about-​evolut​ion-​russ​ian-​milit​ary-​doctr​ine-​203​327
	31	 The Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation 2014, translation. Available 
online: https://​theat​rum-​belli.com/​the-​milit​ary-​doctr​ine-​of-​the-​russ​ian-​fed​erat​ion/​
	32	 Makhmut. A. Gareev, ‘On Military Doctrine and Military Reform in Russia,’ The 
Journal of Soviet Military Studies, 5, no. 4 (1992): 548.
	33	 Caro, ‘The Truth.’
	34	 Stephen Blank, ‘Russia’s New Draft Military Doctrine: Context, Content and 
Conclusion,’ 14–​18 March 2000. Available online: https://​ciaot​est.cc.colum​bia.edu/​isa/​
bls03/​
	35	 Nikolai Sokov, ‘Russia’s 2000 Military Doctrine, The Nuclear Threat Initiative,’ 30 
September 2000. Available online: www.nti.org/​analy​sis/​artic​les/​russ​ias-​2000-​milit​ary-​
doctr​ine/​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The conceptual component  43
	36	 Andrew S. Bowen, ‘Russian Armed Forces: Military Doctrine and Strategy,’ 
Congressional Research Service (CRS), 20 August 2020. Available online: https://​sgp.
fas.org/​crs/​row/​IF11​625.pdf
	37	 De Haas, Marcel. ‘Russian Air Power over Chechnya: Lessons Learned Applied.’ The 
Officer Magazine 15, no. 6 (2003): 14–​18; De Haas, Marcel, The Use of Russian Airpower 
in the Second Chechen War. Shrivenham: Conflict Studies Research Centre, 2003.
	38	 Igor Sutyagin, ‘Russian Air Power,’ in Routledge Handbook of Air Power, ed. J. Olsen 
(London: Routledge, 2018), 318.
	39	 Bowen, Russian Armed Forces, 2.
	40	 Ibid.
	41	 Michael Kofman et al., ‘Russian Military Strategy: Core Tenets and Operational 
Concepts,’ CNA report, August 2021. Available online: www.cna.org/​arch​ive/​CNA_​Fi​
les/​pdf/​russ​ian-​milit​ary-​strat​egy-​core-​ten​ets-​and-​oper​atio​nal-​conce​pts.pdf
	42	 Ibid., ii.
	43	 Caro, ‘The Truth.’
	44	 Julian Cooper, ‘Russia’s Updated National Security Strategy,’ 19 July 2021. Available 
online: www.ndc.nato.int/​resea​rch/​resea​rch.php?icode=​704
	45	 Elizabeth Buchanan, ‘Russia’s 2021 National Security Strategy: Cool Change Forecasted 
for the Polar Regions,’ RUSI, 14 July 2021. Available online: https://​rusi.org/​expl​ore-​
our-​resea​rch/​publi​cati​ons/​com​ment​ary/​russ​ias-​2021-​natio​nal-​secur​ity-​strat​egy-​cool-​
cha​nge-​for​ecas​ted-​polar-​regi​ons
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

DOI: 10.4324/9781003351641-4
3
HISTORICAL CONTEXT
This chapter explains the context of Russian aggression against Ukraine during 
the 2014–​2022 time frame. Overall, the period of 2014–​2022 can conditionally 
be divided into three stages. The period of 2014–​2015 was the first stage of 
invasion –​ the annexation of Crimea and the orchestration of the ‘separatist’ war 
in Donbas. The 2016–​January 2022 period can be identified as the interim stage 
of the frozen conflict, or the stage of reinforcement and build-​up for the full-​scale 
invasion. Accordingly, the third stage would be from the full-​scale invasion until 
today. In this chapter, each stage is explained through a brief chronology of events 
followed by a discussion of the military experiences of both Ukrainian and Russian 
combatants. Thus, the chapter provides insights into the extent that the military 
engagements of 2014–​2015 shaped the interim transformation years of 2016–​2022 
before the full-​scale invasion in 2022. Equal attention is paid to the Russian and 
Ukrainian parties to the conflict.
Chronology of events 2014–​2015
President Viktor Yanukovych’s pro-​Russian regime culminated in his refusal to sign 
the Association Agreement with the EU in November 2013. This action resulted in 
pro-​European and pro-​Western protests and consequent calls for his resignation. 
The regime’s response was similar to the Russian tradition –​ the use of violence 
against peaceful protesters in Kyiv in February 2014, with more than a hundred 
dead and many injured. The killing of the ‘Heavenly Hundred,’ as it went down in 
Ukrainian history, and the atrocities on the streets of the capital turned even the most 
apolitical people against Yanukovych’s regime. Losing control over the country, he 
fled to Russia on 22 February 2014 as the Ukrainian Parliament unanimously voted 
to remove him from power and establish an interim government. By extension, the 
 
 
 

Historical context  45
lack of a pro-​Russian government in Kyiv meant a loss of Russian influence and 
the ability to lobby for its interests in Ukraine, at least in the vertical hierarchy of 
power. The immediate response was the triggering of plans for the annexation of 
Crimea. Few scholars are convinced that no contingency planning took place over 
the years and that the annexation of Crimea was planned overnight.1 The excuses 
were also not new –​ protection of the interests of the ethnic Russians because the 
interim government in Kyiv abandoned the Russian language as one of the official 
languages in Ukraine on 23 February 2014; and calling Ukrainian protests and the 
change in government an illegitimate coup.
On 27 February 2014, the infamous ‘little green men’ (various units of 
Russian Airborne Forces [VDV], Special Forces and Spetsnaz) began to appear 
in key positions in Crimea, putting pressure on the local authorities by seizing 
the parliamentary building in Simferopol and other main governmental buildings 
across the peninsula with a consequent change in the local government to the pro-​
Russian one led by Sergey Aksyonov. This government announced its separatist 
sentiments against Kyiv and proclaimed that the status of Crimea was to be decided 
by a local referendum scheduled for 25 May 2014. On 28 February, the day after 
this announcement, more Russian units took control of the key infrastructure 
and blocked Ukrainian military bases, while seizing command and control of air 
defences to facilitate the safe spread of Russian troops across the peninsula.2
Taking further advantage of the surprise and hesitant response of the interim 
government in Kyiv, the Crimean Parliament under Aksyonov shifted the date of 
the referendum to 16 March with the consequent staged vote results of 97% in 
favour of seceding Ukraine and joining Russia (the vote and result were widely 
contested internationally). The annexation was then formally finalised on 18 
March, when the Russian Parliament adopted the decree. This distortion of the 
normative process was in parallel with further strengthening of the military control 
of the peninsula: more green men of various organisations arrived on 5 March. 
A Russian cruiser blocked the Black Sea exit on 6 March. The fall of the Ukrainian 
naval base in Novofedorivka opened Russian access to Crimea through Kerch on 
12 March. From a military perspective, Russia strengthened their control over the 
peninsula during 18–​24 March, leaving no option for Ukraine but to prepare for the 
withdrawal of its troops from the peninsula. Although preparations were already 
underway on 19 March, the announcement was made on 24 March. Once annexed, 
the transformation of Crimea from a mere concentration of Russian military 
presence in the Black Sea to its full militarisation and de facto Russian military 
base began.3
Further military build-​up continued on the Ukraine–​Russia border in April 2014, 
with approximately 40,000 troops. While in Crimea, green men without insignia 
were used to secure Russian interests, in eastern Ukraine, pro-​Russian separatists 
were used as proxies for the same purpose. They seized government buildings in 
two districts and proclaimed the independence of the Luhansk and Donetsk regions 
from Ukraine.
 
 
 
 

46  Historical context
In response to these actions, the National Security and Defense Council 
of Ukraine (NSDC) announced on 13 April the beginning of an anti-​terrorist 
operation (ATO) against illegitimate activities of Russia-​sponsored separatists 
and regular Russian troops assisting them. The decision came the day after pro-​
Russian separatists led by Igor Girkin (former FSB) captured Sloviansk and 
later Kramatorsk. Strelkov/​Girkin and his accomplice became known as ‘The 
Executioners of Slovyansk’ for killing Ukrainians by firing squad.4 The ATO 
involved both Ukrainian law enforcement (SBU) and the Armed Forces. In April–​
July, Ukrainian forces suppressed separatists and regained much of the previously 
occupied territories.
At the early stage of the Russia-​sponsored separatist movement, the aim of 
Russian regular troops seemed to be to ‘conduct a train-​and-​equip programme to 
provide capabilities to the local separatists.’5 However, the suppression of pro-​
Russian separatists by Ukrainian forces led to the crossing of the border by Russian 
troops under the pretext of ‘humanitarian convoys’ and their reinforcement of 
the separatists by artillery shelling and direct engagement in warfighting against 
Ukrainian forces. The employment of conventional Russian forces further resulted 
in the siege of Ilovaisk and the consequent massacre when Russians did not honour 
the green corridor arrangement and killed hundreds of Ukrainian soldiers and 
volunteers retreating from the captured town on 29 August 2014. The captured 
territories, fallen cities, increased direct involvement of Russian troops in Ukrainian 
territory and the constant threat of full-​scale invasion forced Ukraine to sign the 
first ceasefire accord of Minsk I on 5 September 2014. The symbolic nature of 
the ceasefire was already demonstrated on 28 September when the second battle 
for Donetsk airport began, continuing until January 2015, with Ukrainian forces 
losing the airport to Russian-​sponsored separatists with multiple losses on the 
Ukrainian side. The Ukrainian servicemen defending Donetsk airport during May 
2014–​January 2015 became known as the Cyborgs for repelling intense assault by 
Russian artillery, infantry and armour fire in the siege that lasted 242 days, with 
101 soldiers killed, 440 wounded and nine missing.6 The Cyborgs were volunteers.
Soon after, the Minsk II Ceasefire Agreement was signed on 12 February 2015. 
As Lawrence Freedman accurately described the situation, it was ‘more of less 
fire than a ceasefire’7: ‘From 2014 through today [before the 2022 invasion], more 
than 14,000 people have been killed, tens of thousands wounded and more than a 
million displaced.’8
The Russian side in this period
Academic and professional experts on warfare were divided over whether Russian 
actions in Crimea and south-​eastern Ukraine were ‘hybrid,’ and hence the new form 
of modern warfare, or were instead the employment of the various already available 
tools of limited war. Despite the disagreement on the conceptual framework and 
its implementation in two distinctive operating environments in Crimea and 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Historical context  47
Donbas, various features of the Russian performance can be identified for further 
understanding of the war in general. The Russians used different approaches in 
Crimea and Donbas. In Crimea, a surgical approach was adopted. The omnigenous 
special operations units had the full advantage of military basing on the peninsula, 
full intelligence on Ukrainian military bases in the area, many years of infiltration 
into Ukrainian society, authority structures and even the Orthodox Church of the 
Russian Patriarchate that has traditionally been the core of the FSB intelligence 
gathering in the territory of Ukraine. Hence, the surgical approach was most likely 
based on two considerations. First, it made the annexation look more like self-​
identification of the local people; pure coercion would have looked very different 
on the news footage. Furthermore, the surgical approach was necessitated by the 
objective of getting rapid control over the peninsula to change its affiliation before 
Ukrainian leadership and the military would respond.
Besides the presence of the green men, another factor that contributed to Russia’s 
success was that many high-​ranking officers were deployed to convince their 
Ukrainian counterparts to act more consensually or to defect. Moreover, it should 
not be forgotten that there were always Russians and pro-​Russian sympathisers 
in all organisations and spheres of life in Ukraine, and their facilitation of 
Russian achievements should not be underestimated, especially if it refers to the 
military, government or law enforcement institutions.9 All these favourable factors 
stimulated rapid and timely deployment of Russian troops across the peninsula, 
bringing it under full control within a few weeks.
Although at first glance, the advantage of surprise and sustaining momentum 
of the deployment of the first green men from the Russian base in Crimea to 
Crimea’s annexation and the withdrawal of Ukrainian troops looked smooth and 
instantaneous, in reality, it was facilitated by various pro-​Russian governments 
and Russophile elements that weakened Ukrainian military and authorities in their 
ability to defend the country since it gained its independence in 1991. In the three 
decades of its independence, each move of Ukraine to strengthen its military would 
face fifth-​column resistance and the scaremongering of deteriorating Ukraine–​
Russia relations. It can thus be concluded that Russia’s long-​term presence 
significantly conditioned Russia’s success on the Crimean peninsula, its contingent 
planning for Crimea’s annexation and its long-​term infiltration into key decision-​
making structures in Ukraine.
Crimea illustrated the spearheaded cross-​unit success of green men in gaining 
control over an –​ if not small, then semi-​detached –​ area with Russia controlling 
the Black Sea coastline; however, the case of Donbas showed a different approach 
and the immediate limitations of surgical Special Ops units. Donbas is of a 
very different terrain than Crimea in that it is open and flat mainland and not a 
peninsula. Although firepower from other domains, especially from the sea, could 
have compensated for the lack of numbers of troops on the ground, in the case of 
more mainland territory, a greater presence on the ground was required to secure 
its control and subordination. The surgical units could take over buildings used 
 
 

48  Historical context
by the local authorities, but expectations for obedient transition to Russian rule 
faced various obstacles, especially with pro-​Ukrainian opposition strengthening 
across the country after the annexation of Crimea. The best example of the SBU 
confronting separatists took place on 12 April in Slovyansk. In this case, Russian-​
grown, hired, previously infiltrated and then backed separatists acted as a useful 
proxy for power projection and was also meant to reduce the employment of 
‘professional’ Russian forces to a bare minimum. It was also a case of surprise not 
having the same effect if applied twice.
Mixing previously Russia-​groomed and sponsored separatists with imported 
Russian mercenaries under the rule and training of the Russian ‘professional’ 
Special Operations Forces (SOFs) showed mixed results. First, giving former 
criminals weapons and basic military training does not make them good fighters or 
soldiers. The best example to support this point was the shooting down of Malaysia 
Airlines Flight MH17 by Russia-​sponsored separatists on 17 July 2014.10 Eight 
years later the Hague District Court found Russians Igor Girkin, Sergey Dubinskiy 
and Ukrainian Leonid Kharchenko responsible for the case. At the time, Girkin was 
defence minister, hence in charge of the separatists of the self-​proclaimed Moscow-​
backed Donetsk People’s Republic.11
Second, training given by mercenaries like the Russian Arseniy Pavlov, known 
under his nickname of ‘Motorola,’ was of questionable quality and was missing 
any moral-​ethical component. He gained his military experience during the Second 
Chechen War, then came to Crimea in 2014 and took part in stirring the pro-​
Russian uprising in Kharkiv in 2014. With Girkin, he was among the ‘Executors of 
Slovyansk’ and was then appointed a ‘people’s mayor’ of Donetsk. This was also 
an example of how a Russian mercenary was ‘governing’ one of the temporarily 
occupied territories in Ukraine. He was also involved in the Ilovaisk massacre.12 
Third, although proxies provided the needed mass to project power with relatively 
limited involvement, it was costly in other ways. Its effectiveness was questionable 
due to the successful progression of the Ukrainian counteroffensive in May–​July 
2014, and the number of Russians killed in combat (‘cargo-​200’ in Russian code) 
at that time still remains unknown. Consequently, regular Russian troops’ direct 
involvement was required to repel the Ukrainian counteroffensive. Fourth, the 
mixed nature of the Russian separatist and SOF contingent allowed for more agile 
units of tactical battle groups versus the Ukrainian force formation of battalions.13
Overall, Donbas was not Crimea. It was not semi-​detached and could not be so 
easily controlled. The use of SOF of various kinds and proxies could not guarantee 
the same extent of control and accuracy of execution as was achieved in Crimea. 
Moreover, the Ukrainian counteroffensive in spring–​summer 2014 demonstrated 
that the use of proxies and SOF had limited effectiveness in the advancement of 
the Russian invasion. The successful regaining of Ukrainian territories from the 
separatists and Russian SOFs showed shortfalls of the separatist proxy forces. 
As a result, to suppress the Ukrainian counteroffensive the involvement of more 
conventional Russian forces was required. Hence, the further invasion of the regular 
 
 
 
 
 

Historical context  49
troops under the ‘humanitarian support’ excuse and more intense employment of 
artillery took place from late August 2014 onwards. Poor professionalism and 
performance meant the proxies proved ineffective in the actual warfighting and 
in the achievement of their tactical objectives. However, they could be useful for 
sustaining the frozen status of the conflict long term. This inconsistency between 
expectations and their actual performance can also help explain Putin’s giving a 
cold shoulder to the separatists’ hopes of gaining immediate independence and 
joining Russia, as Crimea did. The status of frozen conflict provided a multitude of 
opportunities for manipulation both inside Russia and internationally.
The Ukrainian side
Despite the immediate paralysing effect of surprise, the interim government of 
Oleksandr Turchynov made various decisions to conduct a proportionate military 
response to the Russian aggression. On 1 March, the military were put on full 
alert and initiated partial mobilisation. The Ukrainian military were ordered to 
hold their bases in Crimea without firing shots. This approach was to prevent 
further escalation and triggering Russian full-​scale use of force. The repetition of 
Transnistria, Chechnya and Georgia scenarios was to be avoided. This approach 
also allowed some time for mobilisation and reorganisation of the Ukrainian 
military. On the other hand, Ukraine lost 12,000 defected troops, more than 50 
vessels and a variety of equipment, not to mention the actual infrastructure of the 
military bases in Crimea.14 For the Ukrainian Air Force, the annexation resulted 
in the immediate loss of 126 aircraft to the Russians, of which only 92 were later 
returned with Russia keeping the rest.15
Despite the loss of Crimea, Ukraine managed to mobilise, train and equip 
forces and increase its preliminary 130,000 military to 200,000 within two months. 
Approximately one-​third was then used in the ATO to suppress separatism in 
Donbas. From the first days of the ATO, it had a mixed nature. As an anti-​terrorist 
operation, it was not entirely a military operation and combined both civilian and 
military units. The very narrative of the ‘non-​military’ character of warfighting 
played along with the Russian narrative of under-​threshold conflict conduct and 
lawfare. The ATO also illustrated a trend that will be later emphasised in the 
military strategy of Ukraine 2021 and the reality of warfighting in 2022. This trend 
was the presence of multiple units of varying backgrounds and origins fighting for 
Ukrainian sovereignty and liberation from the Russian occupation. Accordingly, 
the early days of the ATO saw the expedited formation of volunteer battalions 
(Dobrobats) coming from various backgrounds, often from the participants in 
Maidan 2013. Soon these battalions were subordinate either to the Ministry of 
Internal Affairs (Special Tasks Patrol Police) or the Ministry of Defence (territorial 
defence battalions), with very few active under no authority or affiliation.
The obvious limitation of the Ukrainian ATO response was vagueness in its 
status in the civil–​military divide, which resulted in conflicting claims of authority 
 
 
 
 

50  Historical context
over various units. Although the legal authority of the military side of the ATO was 
under the Security Service of Antiterrorist Centre, various agencies often attempted 
to take control over these troops.16 Furthermore, at the initial stages of ATO, the 
Ukrainian military and volunteers lacked basic equipment, sufficient professional 
training (often they had to learn best practice in the fight, paying for them with 
their own blood and lives), basic logistics, effective command and control (C2) 
and secure communication. The often ad hoc nature of the response frequently 
suggested using what was available at a given time without a second thought about 
the security of communication. In addition, there had always been the presence of 
traitors and pro-​Russian elements giving away the positioning of Ukrainian forces.
The grave situation of centralised equipment and supply provision to all 
fighting units on the Ukrainian side resulted in another phenomenon which will 
reappear in the next stage of the war in 2022 –​ volunteer movement in support 
of the military needs on the frontline. This movement had a crowdfunding nature 
and provided financial, logistical and equipment support to various volunteer and 
military battalions at the frontline in 2014–​2015. It was truly a grassroots initiative 
of people who personally knew volunteer fighters in distinctive battalions and 
their needs in different locations. These were not abstract people but ordinary 
members of the Ukrainian society taking arms to defend their country, and the 
public supported them with what they had.17 Although the scale was not the same 
as in 2022, diverse know-​how and techniques were acquired at this time with their 
further improvement and full effect in 2022–​2023.
Materiel-​wise, Ukraine certainly had the remaining Soviet equipment, which 
had not yet been chopped into pieces under the arrangements of the post-​Cold 
War disarmament of Ukraine.18 It had also preserved its military manufacturing 
capacities; however, time was needed to reorient production to meet the war 
demands. Nevertheless, between 2014 and 2016, Ukroboronprom, a consortium 
of Ukrainian manufacturers of weapons and military equipment, provided different 
Ukrainian security structures with the following renovated weapons and military 
equipment: 4,704 units, of which 899 were weapon ordnance; 2,564 armoured 
vehicles, special vehicles and engines; 356 aircraft, engines and aggregates; 6 
pieces of naval equipment; 902 communication, AA cover and radio warfare. In 
addition, 8,012 units were produced and modernised, of which 1,412 were weapon 
ordnance; 160 armoured vehicles, special vehicles and engines; 56 aircraft, engines 
and aggregates; 3,956 missiles and ammunition; and 2,454 communication AA 
cover and radio warfare.19
Some thoughts come to mind in evaluating the Ukrainian response of 2014–​
2015. The very idea of total or comprehensive defence is inherent in Ukrainian 
thinking about and their practice of defence, and can be traced back to the two World 
Wars, if not earlier. The primary assets of Ukraine have always been its people and 
the land. At this stage of the war, these assets were people who volunteered to join 
fighting battalions, volunteers who provided soldiers and volunteer fighters with 
various supplies, ordinary citizens who donated and crowdfunded activities of the 
 
 
 
 
 

Historical context  51
national fighting battalions, foreign aid and the military industry that tried to assist 
with modernisation and repair of the much-​needed equipment. Although the scale 
was not the same as in 2022, the knowledge of various initiatives and ways of 
providing support and supplies remained. Furthermore, many volunteer fighters 
remained on active duty during the entire eight years of war, which resulted in 
gaining substantial operational skills and relevant knowledge of the opponent and 
the operating environment.
The first two years of the war evidenced the shortfalls in neglecting the military 
for three decades. A lack of common professional training up to modern standards, 
systematic joint exercises for interservice and across-​unit integration posed 
challenges across various levels of warfare. However, while the issues with the 
command and control and communications would undermine cooperation on an 
operational level, tactical-​level solutions would often be developed out of necessity 
rather than specific training or following of a certain doctrine.
Another feature of the beginning of the war was the establishment of a 
different path to warfighting. The experience of 2014 introduced two paths to 
warfighting in Ukraine: conventional military service (conscription, mobilisation) 
and volunteering for different national battalions. Although later all volunteering 
battalions would be under governmental authority and would follow the appropriate 
chain of command, the tradition of volunteer battalions banding together from the 
same city or region or university continued when groups volunteered and joined 
territorial defence battalions or SOF battalions like the Azov regiment affiliated 
with the National Guard of Ukraine. These two distinctive paths would also result 
in the differentiation of roles and consequent performance during the full-​scale 
invasion of 2022. Although the military that remained serving during all eight years 
of war would gain more systematic training and operational experience, the new 
recruits (conscription and mobilised) in the conventional path would gain more 
traditional and basic training on warfighting if they did not have any military or 
operational experience beforehand. In contrast, those who joined SOF battalions 
like Azov would be trained in special operations, focusing on survivability task 
accomplishment instead of more formalised drills.
Reinforcement period of 2016–​2022: ‘less fire than a ceasefire’
Shelling of Ukrainian positions in the east continued until the full-​scale invasion 
in 2022. On top of that, in 2016 and 2017, massive cyberattacks were launched 
against the Ukrainian infrastructure, such as the National Bank of Ukraine and the 
electricity grid. On 25 November 2018, the Russian FSB’s coastal guard fired shots 
against Ukrainian Naval ships aiming to transit from the Black Sea via the Sea 
of Azov to the Ukrainian port of Mariupol. Members of the Ukrainian crew were 
injured, and three vessels were seized by the Russians.20 Service personnel were 
detained and sent to Moscow and released in a prisoner exchange only at the end 
of 2019. Vessels were also returned the same year. In reality, Russia was flexing 
 
 
 

52  Historical context
its muscles in controlling the Sea of Azov and, by extension, the Back Sea and 
denying access in the maritime domain. Unsurprisingly, the release of crew and 
vessels occurred after US vessels visited the Black Sea earlier in 2019.21
In 2018 and 2019, the shortfalls of Poroshenko’s approach to doing business 
as usual and ignoring the continued losses of Ukrainian lives in Donbas were 
beginning to show. The array of scandals associated with the military industry 
and weapons procurement, and even more widespread corruption and nepotism 
in the rigid Soviet-​style decision-​making at the top resulted in a changing of the 
country’s leadership, with Volodymyr Zelenskyy becoming the new President in 
2019. Zelenskyy tried to move away from the frozen conflict status, especially 
when Ukrainian soldiers continued dying under the constant Russian shelling. He 
hoped to achieve peace in Donbas. Accordingly, Zelenskyy supported the contested 
Steinmeier Formula22 calling for elections in the separatist territories in accordance 
with Ukrainian elections. However, many in Ukraine viewed such a statement as a 
factual capitulation and appeasing of the aggressor.23
Despite the 2020 pandemic, Donbas did not become any calmer, and in 2020 
alone, 50 Ukrainian service personnel were killed and 339 wounded at the frontlines 
against Donetsk and Luhansk separatists.24 Further escalation and the likelihood of 
invasion were already evident in 2021, with the Russian use of the usual excuse 
of military exercises to cover its military build-​up near the Ukrainian border. In 
March–​April, 100,000 troops were brought into the area. According to Russian 
official sources, ‘exercises’ involved 300,000 military personnel.25 While various 
political back-​and-​forth statements regarding their withdrawal took place in the 
next few months, their complete presence was renewed in November. Russia also 
made a diplomatic row about the passing of the British Royal Navy destroyer HMS 
Defender that on 23 June 2021 ‘briefly sailed through territorial waters off the coast 
of the disputed territory of Crimea’26 on its route from the Ukrainian port of Odesa 
to Georgia. In December, President Biden warned Putin not to invade Ukraine, 
preparations for which were already evident. Putin demanded that Ukrainian 
NATO membership be banned and that NATO capabilities be withdrawn from 
various areas in Eastern Europe.27
On 21 November 2021, an article published in the Military Times contained an 
interview with the head of the Ukrainian National Defence Intelligence Agency, 
Brigadier General Kyrylo Budanov. In this interview, he warned that Russia was 
using its Zapad 21 exercises in actual preparation for a full-​scale invasion. He 
argued that it would be of a larger scale and come from the three directions –​ 
the south (Crimea), the east (Donbas) and north (from Belarus), involving aerial 
strikes, artillery and ground forces: ‘increasing troop levels and weapons systems 
in occupied Crimea and staging systems like Iskandar short-​range ballistic missile 
systems and other weapons elsewhere near the border.’28 He considered that the 
timing of the attack could be the end of January or the beginning of February 2022. 
He was also convinced that unfavourable weather conditions would be unlikely to 
stop the invasion or the Ukrainian response.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Historical context  53
Further discussions and diplomatic attempts took place in January 2022, with 
the United States being the first country to order families of diplomatic staff to leave 
Ukraine. The order was issued on 23 January. Having received a formal response 
from NATO and not getting what he wanted, Putin proceeded with the already 
planned ‘military exercises.’ This resulted in the stationing of 30,000 Russian 
troops on the northern Ukrainian border. In mid-​February, return fire to separatists 
shelling in the east was recorded, which Putin then presented as an escalation from 
the Ukrainian side. Intensification of Russian shelling in the east continued until 
the actual full-​scale invasion on 24 February 2022. At night on 24 February at 
4 am (the preferred bombing time of Hitler), Putin began a full-​scale invasion 
of Ukraine by combining bombing raids on its key cities, military facilities and 
infrastructure with movement of the ground forces and armoured convoys across 
the border from three directions: north (from Belarus), south (from Crimea) and 
east (reinforcing their sponsored separatists and previously established units in 
Luhansk and Donetsk) targeting the eastern frontline. The first barrage included 
approximately 100 missiles from both land and sea. They included short-​ and 
medium-​range missiles, cruise and surface-​to-​air missiles.
Russian build-​up and militarisation of Crimea during this period
After the annexation, Russia began rapid militarisation of the peninsula into an 
actual military base. The obvious limitations of the semi-​detached nature of the area 
and its cessation from Ukraine raised immediate issues with logistics –​ provision of 
electricity and water supplies were coming from the mainland Ukraine. In these eight 
years of war, Russia showed that its priority in Crimea was military build-​up and 
not providing a high-​quality life for its Russian-​speaking population in Crimea that 
it so eagerly claimed to defend. While many Crimean citizens were given Russian 
passports with registered living addresses in far eastern Russia, the main effort was 
placed on strengthening its military presence and means for power projection in 
the Black Sea region and Europe with closer basing of various platforms delivering 
long-​range missiles. Since it is hard to assess the actual capabilities of an enemy 
only based on open-​source information, there are varying numbers on the extent 
of militarisation. According to Lieutenant-​General Serhii Naiev, the Commander 
of the Joint Forces of the Armed Forces of Ukraine, in late February 2021, there 
were around 33,000 together with naval and air components on rotation. The actual 
ground forces were estimated as 11,500 military personnel.29 Besides strengthening 
the military infrastructure of the existing military bases and former Soviet 
infrastructure on the peninsula, more equipment was sent to Crimea, with some 
900 combat armoured vehicles, 195 tanks, around 283 artillery and multiple-​launch 
rocket systems, 50 helicopters and 100 aircraft of varied purposes.30
As part of the militarisation of Crimea, Russia modernised and strengthened 
its Black Sea fleet, prioritising it among other fleets. The cruiser Moskva and two 
Krivak-​class frigates were reinforced with three modern Admiral Gregorovich-​class 
 
 
 
 

54  Historical context
(or Krivak V-​class) frigates. Six new submarines joined the Soviet Kilo-​class 
submarines. Smaller artillery vessels like Buyan-​M corvettes were doubled. 
Regarding landing ships, the fleet included three Alligator-​class and four Ropucha-​
class landing ships. Not surprisingly, Russia used its March–​April 2021 ‘exercises’ 
to relocate more craft from the Baltic fleet to the Black Sea fleet. Accordingly, 
the three landing ships Minsk, Kaliningrad and Korolev and the corvette Boikiy 
crossed through the Danish strait on 21 April 2021.31 There were also four ships for 
intelligence gathering, including the most modern Ivan Khurs, which was finished 
only in 2018 and was the most advanced ship of this type in the entire fleet.32 The 
fleet’s HQ was in Sevastopol, with parts stationed in Rostov.
Ukrainian transformation during this period
Although this period of the war was characterised by certain reservations about the 
conflict in its frozen state allowing the Russians to regroup and strengthen their 
capabilities in preparation for a full-​scale invasion, certain transformations and 
strengthening of the UAF also took place. The establishment of the ATO and its 
civil–​military nature corresponded to the necessity of the ad hoc situation of the 
time and could provide rapid response to the posed challenges without aggravating 
the existing complex situation with Russia. However, by focusing on the terrorist 
action of separatists, little attention was given to the actual Russian involvement. 
This approach was counterproductive, since it practically acknowledged the Russian 
advantage in the grey zone or under-​threshold conflict and accepted the vagueness 
of the Russian actions in the east. Besides the reluctance of the Ukrainian politicians 
to announce an actual war with Russia, there was international pressure from the 
European leaders led by the German Chancellor Angela Merkel, who wished to 
preserve the existing status quo in order to avoid disruptions in the building of the 
Nord Stream II gas pipeline to transport cheap Russian gas.
President Poroshenko announced the end of the ATO in May 2018. Although 
traditionally the end of an operation would mean achieving some specific objectives 
or at least the establishment of a ceasefire, this was not the case for the war in 
Donbas. Instead, a Joint Force Operation (JFO) substituted ATO. This change had 
various practical and legal implications. First, control over the operation was no 
longer civil–​military but only military, which would allow a reduction in the existing 
inter-​agency frictions and post-​Soviet bureaucratic practice that multiplied the 
more agencies were involved. Second, the legal status of the war in Donbas shifted 
from the ‘non-​governmental-​controlled areas,’ officially described and accepted 
by Ukrainian and European authorities, to ‘temporarily occupied territories in 
the Donetsk and Luhansk regions by Russian occupation administration.’33 The 
normative act further clarifies the acts of Russian aggression, stating as follows:
The Russian Federation is carrying out armed aggression against Ukraine 
and the temporarily occupied parts of its territory with the help of the Armed 
 
 
 
 
 

Historical context  55
Forces of the Russian Federation… [occupied territory is defined] as an area 
of ground within the boundaries of which units of the Armed Forces of the 
Russian Federation, illegal armed formations established under the auspices of, 
subordinate to, managed, controlled and funded by the Russian Federation and 
the occupying administration of the Russian Federation have set up authority 
and exercise their power.34
This refocusing from terrorists/​separatists to the Russian aggression was 
essential, since it in fact called a spade a spade in both warfighting and legal terms, 
meaning that, despite the ongoing warfighting and dubious status of any territories 
illegally taken by Russia and its sponsored and infiltrated separatists, Ukraine was 
taking and continue taking actions in returning those territories to its legitimate 
control. Hence, this shift reinstated the legal status of Donbas as an integral part 
of Ukraine and officially named Russia an aggressor and occupier of Ukrainian 
territories. In the long run, this would also mean that any appeasement of Russia-​
sponsored separatists and attempts to take these territories away from Ukraine 
would not be accepted by the Ukrainian government. From a military perspective, 
this shift provided better clarity of objectives and returned control to the military 
in organising and conducting the operation, which had little to do with antiterrorist 
tasks but were in fact combat engagements.35
This interim stage of war also illustrated various reforms and transformations 
in the Ukrainian military. In 2017, ‘The State Program for the Development of 
the Armed Forces of Ukraine until 2020’ identified the necessity of reforming the 
Ukrainian military according to NATO standards to defend national sovereignty 
and fulfil necessary prerequisites for joining NATO.36 These objectives were to be 
achieved through modernisation and automation of management and accounting 
procedures, unification and modernisation of weapons and equipment, the creation 
of necessary reserves and systematic supplies, professionalisation of personnel, 
employment of international military-​technical assistance, enhancement of the 
regulatory framework, a move to capability-​based defence planning according to 
NATO standards for codification of weapons and property, training and readiness 
evaluation based on the NATO benchmarks.37 The document then further detailed 
each step.
From the organisational perspective, these reforms allowed the separation of 
the Commander in Chief (CINC) and Chief of General Staff (CGS) posts. The 
primary responsibility of the CINC was to improve combat readiness and military 
capabilities of the Armed Forces, the National Guard and the State Border Guard 
Service. The CGS reported to the CINC. He was responsible for determining 
military capabilities and the required resources, operational planning and 
modernisation arrangement, military training and the allocation and distribution 
of equipment.38 In addition, the post of Minister of Defence was to be separated 
from the military following the standards of civil–​military distribution of power in 
liberal democracies and one of the criteria for NATO accession.
 
 
 
 
 
 

56  Historical context
Specific emphasis was placed on reforming the reserves. In 2020, three types 
of reserves were to be developed: operational, mobilisation and civilian reserves. 
The first was aimed at immediate support to the frontline units. These would be 
people with existing military experience who could be immediately deployed. The 
second category would be assigned to distinctive military units and would require 
additional training for the specific requirements of their units. The third category 
of civilian volunteers was to be used for defence and national security purposes.
In terms of capabilities and procurement plans, the emphasis was placed on the 
ground forces, with various modernisations of the artillery. Regarding anti-​tank 
capabilities, between 2014 and early 2022 Ukraine received Javelin missiles as 
part of the US assistance in equipment and weapons transfer worth $2.7 billion. 
The Ukrainian industry also produced Stugna-​P and Korsar missile systems, and 
Ukraine designed and manufactured Vilkha Multiple Launch Rocket System 
(MLRS). For accurate targeting, drones were to be used for forward observation and 
fire coordination. Accordingly, deals were made to procure Bayraktar TB2 drones 
from Turkey. Regarding air power, priority was given to upgrading air defence 
systems, such as S-​300, 9K330 Tor, 2K12Kub and S-​125 Neva. Attention was also 
given to improving sustainment of the combat capabilities. Thus, modernisation of 
command and control, communications and intelligence (C3I) of the air defence 
networks and basic modernisation of combat air fleet of MiG-​29, Su-​27, SU-​25 
and Su-​24 took place. Regarding the navy, it adopted ‘the Mosquito doctrine’ in 
2018, which entailed the procurement of small, agile attack patrol boats aimed for 
hit-​and-​run activities.39
Issues and scandals
Despite the chosen NATO direction of reforms and their systematic intentions, there 
were various bumps on the road to professionalisation and appropriate equipping 
of the Ukrainian military for the upcoming war. First, on paper, the leadership of 
the Ministry of Defence was to be appointed from among the civilian politicians or 
those retired from the military with a cool down of five years. However, in 2018, 
during Poroshenko’s presidency, the General of the Army Stepan Poltorak retired 
from the military but remained in charge of the Ministry of Defence as a civilian, 
without any cool down time.40 He was the Minister of Defence from 14 October 
2014 until 29 August 2019, when newly elected President Zelenskyy asked for his 
resignation. The next Minister of Defence was Andrii Zahorodniuk, a civilian with 
no military background (29 August 2019 to 4 March 2020), followed by Lieutenant 
General Andriy Taran (4 March 2020 to 3 November 2021), who served in the Army 
until 2016. Finally, the Minister of Defence Oleksii Reznikov was appointed on 3 
November 2021. He had some Air Force service experience in the 1980s.41 Recently, 
Reznikov was dismissed in September 2023, succeeded by Rustem Umerov.
During these interim years, other damaging occurrences of questionable 
origin were ammunition depot explosions. For instance, four explosions in 
 
 
 
 
 

Historical context  57
the warehouse destroyed heavy artillery ammunition at the 6th  arsenal in 
the Chernihiv region in October 2018. As a result, the strategic arsenal of 
120mm mortar shells, 122mm howitzer shells, 125mm tank shells and 122mm 
Grad rockets were affected with other ammunitions left untouched. An act of 
sabotage was one of the official hypotheses. The loss was estimated at hundreds 
of millions of US dollars. Worse than that, these ammunitions could not be 
produced in Ukraine. Other similar incidents had previously occurred at the 
arsenals of Kalynivka and Balaklia.42
The culmination of the period was the chain of scandals related to former 
President Poroshenko and various allegations of weapons smuggling and the 
making of money on the war, not excluding the fact that the son of his business 
partner was ‘selling smuggled Russian components to Ukrainian defence factories 
at wildly inflated prices.’43 Such a scale of corruption had direct negative 
implications for the availability of the actual military materiel for the UAF in the 
upcoming intensified stage of the war. This level of systematic corruption indicated 
not only wide gaps between the formal path to a NATO professional military and 
the reality of its implementation but also the necessity of a different leadership 
across agencies for effective reforms, the new conceptualisation of defence and its 
consequent implementation. Not without setbacks, such a team of modern leaders 
and innovative decision-​makers came into power with new President Zelenskyy. 
Although more than one reshuffle was needed, Ukraine had the right people in the 
right places to withstand the upcoming new stage in the war. Chapter 4 discusses 
the people as one of the parts of the physical component.
Notes
	 1	 Roger McDermott, ‘Brothers Disunited: Russia’s Use of Military Power in Ukraine,’ in 
The Return of the Cold War ed. by J. L. Black and Michael Johns (London: Routledge, 
2016), 81.
	 2	 Ibid., 82.
	 3	 Andrii Klymenko, The Militarization of Crimea under Russian Occupation (Washington, 
DC: Atlantic Council, 2015).
	 4	 Christopher Miller, ‘The Executioners of Slovyansk,’ Radio Free Europe, July 23, 2020 
(accessed 22 December 2022). Available online: www.rferl.org/​a/​the-​execu​tion​ers-​of-​
slovya​nsk/​30743​132.html
	 5	 McDermott, ‘Brothers Disunited,’ 86.
	 6	 Mark Raczkiewycz, ‘Ukraine Honors “Cyborg” Troops Who Withstood Russia’s 242-​
day Siege of Donetsk Airport,’ The Ukrainian Weekly, 22 January, 2021. Available 
online: www.ukrwee​kly.com/​uwwp/​ukra​ine-​hon​ors-​cyb​org-​tro​ops-​who-​withst​ood-​russ​
ias-​242-​day-​siege-​of-​done​tsk-​airp​ort/​
	 7	 Lawrence Freedman, Ukraine and the Art of Strategy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2019), 124.
	 8	 Becky Sullivan, ‘Russia’s at War with Ukraine. Here’s How We Got Here,’ NPR, 24 
February 2022 (accessed 5 April 2022). Available online: www.npr.org/​2022/​02/​12/​108​
0205​477/​hist​ory-​ukra​ine-​rus​sia
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

58  Historical context
	 9	 BBC, ‘Ukraine: Fugitive Putin Ally Medvedchuk arrested –​ Security Service,’ 13 April 
2022 (accessed May 6, 2022). Available online: www.bbc.com/​news/​world-​eur​ope-​
61089​039
	10	 Kyiv Post, ‘From the Archives: SBU Intercepts Phone Conversations of Separatists 
Admitting Downing a Civilian Plane,’ 18 July, 2014 (accessed 14 June 2022). Available 
online:  www.kyivp​ost.com/​ukra​ine-​polit​ics/​sepa​rati​sts-​admit-​down​ing-​a-​civil​ian-​
plane-​in-​tap​ped-​conve​rsat​ion-​full-​tra​nscr​ipt-​356​545.html
	11	 Euronews, ‘Three Men Given Life Sentences for Shooting Down Flight MH17 over 
Ukraine in 2014’ (accessed 14 June 2022). Available online: www.euron​ews.com/​my-​
eur​ope/​2022/​11/​17/​three-​men-​given-​life-​senten​ces-​for-​shoot​ing-​down-​fli​ght-​mh17-​
over-​ukra​ine-​in-​2014
	12	 Kyiv Post, ‘Update: Russian Arseniy Pavlov, a.k.a. ‘Motorola,’ Killed in Donetsk Blast; 
Kremlin Separatists Blame Kyiv,’ 16 October 2016 (accessed 14 June 2022). Available 
online: www.kyivp​ost.com/​ukra​ine-​polit​ics/​russ​ian-​mercen​ary-​arse​niy-​pav​lov-​war-​cri​
mes-​susp​ect-​known-​motor​ola-​rep​orte​dly-​kil​led.html
	13	 McDermott, ‘Brothers Disunited,’ 83.
	14	 Leonid Polyakov, ‘Ukraine,’ in The Handbook of European Defence Policies and Armed 
Forces, eds. H. Meijer and M. Wyss (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018), 188.
	15	 Illia Ponomarenko, ‘Ukraine’s Air Force Rebuilds Amid War,’ Kyiv Post, March 15, 
2019 (accessed 14 June 2022). Available online: www.kyivp​ost.com/​ukra​ine-​polit​ics/​
ukrai​nes-​air-​force-​rebui​lds-​amid-​war.html
	16	 Polyakov, ‘Ukraine,’ 191.
	17	 Bohdan Ben, ‘How Ukraine’s Largest Volunteer Movement Changes Rules of the Game, 
Unites East & West,’ Euromaidan Press, 10 February 2022 (accessed 14 June 2022). 
Available online: https://​euro​maid​anpr​ess.com/​2022/​02/​10/​how-​ukrai​nes-​larg​est-​volunt​
eer-​movem​ent-​chan​ges-​rules-​of-​the-​game-​uni​tes-​east-​west/​
	18	 Oleksiy Trygub, ‘Air Force of the Ukrainian state: the first ten years of formation’ Army 
Inform, November 24, 2021. https://​arm​yinf​orm.com.ua/​2021/​11/​24/​pov​itry​ani-​syly-​
ukray​insk​oyi-​derzh​avy-​per​shi-​des​yat-​rokiv-​stano​vlen​nya/​
	19	 Ukrainian Defence review, no. 3 (July–​September 2016), 11. Available online: https://​
issuu.com/​ukrai​nian​_​def​ense​_​rev​iew/​docs/​udr-​03-​2016​_​scr​een
	20	 US Embassy in Ukraine, ‘Press Releases: Russia’s Dangerous Escalation in the Kerch 
Strait,’ 26 November 2018 (accessed 14 June 2022). Available online: https://​ua.usemba​
ssy.gov/​press-​relea​ses-​russ​ias-​danger​ous-​esc​alat​ion-​in-​the-​kerch-​str​ait/​
	21	 US Embassy in Ukraine, ‘USS Donald Cook arrives in Odesa, Ukraine,’ 25 February 
2019 (accessed 14 August 2022). Available online: https://​ua.usemba​ssy.gov/​uss-​don​
ald-​cook-​arri​ves-​in-​odesa-​ukra​ine/​
	22	 Christopher Miller, ‘Explainer: What Is The Steinmeier Formula –​ And Did Zelenskiy 
Just Capitulate To Moscow?’ Radio Free Europe, 2 October 2019 (accessed 5 November 
2022). Available online:
www.rferl.org/​a/​what-​is-​the-​ste​inme​ier-​form​ula-​and-​did-​zelens​kiy-​just-​cap​itul​ate-​to-​
mos​cow-​/​30195​593.html
	23	 Illia Ponomarenko, ‘Ukraine Could Have Prevailed in Donbas, But Now Is Doomed 
to Unjust Peace,’ Kyiv Post, 7 October 2019 (accessed 14 June 2022). Available 
online: 
www.kyivp​ost.com/​arti​cle/​opin​ion/​op-​ed/​illia-​pono​mare​nko-​ukra​ine-​could-​
have-​prevai​led-​in-​don​bas-​but-​now-​were-​doo​med-​to-​unj​ust-​peace-​with-​rus​sia.html
	24	 Promote Ukraine, ‘Fifty Ukrainian Soldiers Killed in Donbas in 2020,’ 21 January 2021 
(accessed 14 June 2022). Available online: www.pro​mote​ukra​ine.org/​fifty-​ukrain​ian-​
soldi​ers-​kil​led-​in-​don​bas-​in-​2020/​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Historical context  59
	25	 Roger McDermott, ‘Russia’s Armed Forces Test Combat Readiness Close to Ukraine’s 
Border -​ Jamestown,’ Eurasia Daily Monitor 18, no. 76 (2021) (accessed 7 November 
2022). Available online: https://​jamest​own.org/​prog​ram/​russ​ias-​armed-​for​ces-​test-​com​
bat-​readin​ess-​close-​to-​ukrai​nes-​bor​der/​
	26	 Dan Sabbagh, ‘Royal Navy Ship off Crimea Sparks Diplomatic Row between Russia and 
UK,’ The Guardian, 23 June 2021 (accessed 7 November 2022). Available online: www.
theg​uard​ian.com/​world/​2021/​jun/​23/​russ​ian-​ship-​fired-​warn​ing-​shots-​at-​royal-​navy-​
destro​yer-​hms-​defen​der-​mos​cow-​says
	27	 Charles Maynes, ‘4 Things Russia Wants Right Now,’ NPR, 24 January 2022 (accessed 
7 November 2022). Available online: www.npr.org/​2022/​01/​12/​107​2413​634/​rus​sia-​
nato-​ukra​ine
	28	 Howard Altman, ‘Russia Preparing to Attack Ukraine by Late January: Ukraine Defense 
Intelligence Agency Chief,’ Military Times, 21 November 2021 (accessed 14 June 
2022). Available online: www.milita​ryti​mes.com/​flas​hpoi​nts/​2021/​11/​20/​rus​sia-​prepar​
ing-​to-​att​ack-​ukra​ine-​by-​late-​janu​ary-​ukra​ine-​defe​nse-​intel​lige​nce-​age​ncy-​chief/​
	29	 Radio Freedom, ‘The Commander of the Joint Forces spoke about the Number of 
Russian Troops in Crimea,’ 25 February 2021 (accessed 7 November 2022). Available 
online: www.radio​svob​oda.org/​a/​news-​krym-​naev/​31121​394.html
	30	 Consulate General of Ukraine in Edmonton, ‘The 7th Anniversary of the Beginning 
of the Russian Armed Aggression against Ukraine,’ 20 February 2021 (accessed 7 
November 2022). Available online: https://​edmon​ton.mfa.gov.ua/​en/​news/​7th-​anni​vers​
ary-​beginn​ing-​russ​ian-​armed-​agg​ress​ion-​agai​nst-​ukra​ine
	31	 McDermott, ‘Russia’s Armed Forces.’
	32	 Gustav Gressel, ‘Waves of ambition: Russia’s military build-​up in Crimea and the Black 
Sea’ European Council on Foreign Relations, 21 September 2021 (accessed 7 November 
2022). Available online: https://​ecfr.eu/​publ​icat​ion/​waves-​of-​ambit​ion-​russ​ias-​milit​ary-​
build-​up-​in-​cri​mea-​and-​the-​black-​sea/​
	33	 Adam Coffey, ‘Ukraine Declares “Anti-​Terrorist Operation in the Donbas” Officially 
Over: What Does That Mean?’ RUSI, 16 May 2018 (accessed 7 November 2022). 
Available online: https://​rusi.org/​expl​ore-​our-​resea​rch/​publi​cati​ons/​com​ment​ary/​ukra​
ine-​decla​res-​anti-​terror​ist-​operat​ion-​don​bas-​off​icia​lly-​over-​what-​does-​mean
	34	 Alya Shandra, ‘Ukraine’s Draft Law on Reintegrating Donbas Finally Says It’s under 
Russian Occupation,’ Euromaidan Press, English translation. 13 July 2017 (accessed 
7 November 2022). Available online: https://​euro​maid​anpr​ess.com/​2017/​07/​13/​ukra​ine-​
prese​nts-​draft-​bill-​on-​reinte​grat​ing-​don​bas/​
Original version in Ukrainian: https://​hromad​ske.ua/​posts/​deoku​pats​iia-​za-​turc​hyno​
vym-​tekst-​zak​onu
	35	 Coffey, ‘Ukraine Declares.’
	36	 Ministry of Defence of Ukraine, ‘The State Program for the Development of the Armed 
Forces of Ukraine until 2020,’ 31 July 2017 (accessed 7 November 2022). Available 
online: 
www.mil.gov.ua/​cont​ent/​oboro​n_​pl​ans/​2017-​07-​31_​N​atio​nal-​prog​ram-​2020​_​
en.pdf
	37	 Ibid., 1.
	38	 Arda Mevlutoglu, ‘Ukraine’s Military Transformation between 2014 and 2022,’ Politics 
Today, 7 April 2022 (accessed 7 November 2022). Available online: https://​politi​csto​
day.org/​ukra​ine-​milit​ary-​tra​nsfo​rmat​ion/​
	39	 Ibid.
	40	 Illia Ponomarenko, ‘Defense Minister Poltorak Quits Military Service, but Remains in 
Charge as Civilian,’ Kyiv Post, 13 October 2018 (accessed 7 November 2022). Available 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

60  Historical context
online: 
www.kyivp​ost.com/​ukra​ine-​polit​ics/​defe​nse-​minis​ter-​polto​rak-​quits-​milit​ary-​
serv​ice-​to-​forma​lly-​com​ply-​with-​nato-​ben​chma​rks.html
	41	 Ministry of Defence of Ukraine, Oleksii Reznikov (accessed 7 November 2022). 
Available online: www.mil.gov.ua/​en/​minis​try-​of-​defe​nce-​lea​der/​olek​sii-​rezni​kov.html
	42	 Unian, ‘Ukraine Loses Heavy Artillery Ammunition in Recent Ammo Depot Explosion 
in Chernihiv Region,’ 9 October 2018 (accessed 21 November 2022). Available 
online: www.unian.info/​soci​ety/​10292​025-​ukra​ine-​loses-​heavy-​artill​ery-​amm​unit​ion-​
in-​rec​ent-​ammo-​depot-​explos​ion-​in-​cherni​hiv-​reg​ion.html
	43	 Leonid Bershidsky, ‘This Graft Scandal May Be Too Much Even for Ukraine,’ 
Bloomberg, 27 February 2019 (accessed 7 November 2022). Available online: www.
bloomb​erg.com/​opin​ion/​artic​les/​2019-​02-​27/​ukra​ine-​milit​ary-​proc​urem​ent-​scan​dal-​sha​
kes-​presi​dent​ial-​race#xj4y7v​zkg
 
 
 
 

DOI: 10.4324/9781003351641-5
4
COMBATANTS
As the nature of war endures and only its character changes, people remain the 
core of warfighting. Human physical and mental readiness, motivation to fight and 
endure the limitations and hardships of war, skill sets and experience can make 
a difference between success or failure in the battlespace and whether a nation 
survives aggressor’s attempts at its annihilation. This chapter explores the main 
combatants on both sides, the diversity of units with different backgrounds, their 
overall military and operational experiences, and the consequent training of the 
combatants and its correspondence to the challenges and requirements of this stage 
of war. The chapter also addresses the morale of the two fighting sides and what 
motivated each side to engage in warfighting.
The Ukrainian Armed Forces
In one of the few interviews that Gen. Zaluzhnyi gave in the last year, he commented 
that for the Ukrainian military the war started in 2014, and the next eight years of 
warfighting were used in order to find solutions how to fight a numerically and 
to varied extent technologically more superior enemy. In this regard, there was 
only one solution, which entailed training the relevant skills, combined with the 
reshuffling of the military equipment and air defences across various parts of the 
country. While most of the troops were engaged first in ATO and then in Joint 
Operation, the smaller number of the UAF were working on restoring the combat 
capabilities in the points of permanent deployment. These arrangements had to be 
made across the entire country with a few rounds of changes. In order to make this 
work unnoticed for the wider public, such activities had to be conducted secretly 
often at night.1
 
 
 
 

62  Combatants
These preparations also required significant training of the military personnel 
across domains. Various exercises and training in support of better mobility and 
agility of fighting power across domains took place over these eight years of the 
war. Although the Soviet times were long gone, the remnants of the Soviet tradition 
were still evident in the UAF. Accordingly, reforming of the Ukrainian military 
from the Soviet practice and organisational culture towards modern fighting power 
had to be done. Hence, the UAF was going through transformation in two parallel 
processes: developing the relevant skills for fighting the numerically superior enemy 
and revamping the force from Soviet-​style practices and attitudes to a modern 
force with Ukrainian traditional strategic culture and international standards at its 
heart. Practical skills were developed during national and international training and 
exercises.
The main focus of various training courses and exercises was on fighting Russia 
as the primary enemy in the Ukrainian terrain. The emphasis was placed on the 
modern characteristics of urban warfare, taking advantage of the dispersion or 
concentration of SOF when and where it was needed substituting the Soviet-​style 
rigid hierarchy. Although the primary focus was on training ground forces in land-​
centric warfare scenarios, the training and exercises were not limited to the ground 
forces. Various exchanges took place and courses were taught for other services. 
For instance, Scandinavian countries provided courses on strategy and air warfare 
for the Ukrainian Air Force (UkrAF) personnel and Scandinavian air specialists 
visited Ukraine with various initiatives.2
One of the most systematic and structured international training and support 
efforts for the UAF was the British effort within Operation Orbital 2015–​2022, 
which provided exercises and training for 22,000 Ukrainian personnel. After the 
full-​scale invasion, it was substituted by Operation Interflex –​ a UK-​led operation 
of multinational personnel preparing training for the UAF in the territory of the 
United Kingdom. One of the biggest air-​centric exercises conducted between the 
UkrAF and the USAF was in October 2018 at Starokostiantyniv Air Base called 
‘Clear Sky 2018’ that aimed for training interoperability with neighbouring air 
forces according to NATO standards. Accordingly, trained components included 
‘tactical airlift, aeromedical evacuation, pararescue, cyber defence, air sovereignty 
and air-​to-​ground joint fire integration.’3 On the UkrAF side, the exercise involved 
30 aircraft and 350 military personnel. The main effort was by UkrAF and UAF, 
but also involved seven other allied nations: Belgium, Denmark, Estonia, Great 
Britain, the Netherlands, Poland and Romania.4 In the maritime domain, regular 
training took place through the entire eight years of war, usually involving 
Romania, Bulgaria, Turkey, Ukraine and Georgia as regional partners. One of these 
trainings occurred between 10 and 14 March 2021, conducting a post-​visit series 
of passing exercises.5 As the interim period of war illustrated, the UAF focused on 
systematically strengthening the fighting power in order to deter the likely Russian 
full-​scale invasion. Besides the discussed reforms, this was also evident in the 
increase in the armed forces and widening of the potential of the skilled reserve, 
 
 
 
 
 

Combatants  63
territorial defence, which became in actuality a separate branch in the Ukrainian 
military.
Various regional initiatives for territorial defence originated from the experiences 
of 2014–​2015 and had varying degrees of finalisation and training in 2018. The 
current organisational features and subordination of the Territorial Defence Forces 
(TDF) were formally finalised with the law coming into force on 1 January 2022. TDF 
was mentioned in strategy 2021, and President Zelenskyy signed the corresponding 
law on national resistance on 29 July 2021.6 There were also some territorial self-​
defence units subordinate to the administrative and self-​government authorities 
in administrative districts. However, the TDF is subordinate to the Minister of 
Defence. The former commander of the TDF, General Ihor Tantsura, was in direct 
subordination to the CINC of the UAF. The force was to consist of 25 brigades 
following the traditional 24 oblasts administrative division of the country, with the 
addition of the 112th  Territorial Defence Brigade for Kyiv. The initial idea was that 
TDF would include former military and people with military experience and then 
would train civilian volunteers for various tasks.7 However, with the beginning of 
the full-​scale invasion, anyone willing in the age range between 18 and 60 could 
join. TDF were subordinate to the Ministry of Defence and sooner or later were to 
reinforce Ukrainian troops where it was required across the country and frontline. 
Some of the identified issues would be varying degrees of available equipment, 
weapons and different training across regional TDF units.
Although the phenomenon of Ukrainian volunteer battalions raised multiple 
discussions about governmental/​civilian control of the use of force in the war, and 
during the interim period, various battalions were dismantled, volunteer battalions 
indeed saved Ukraine in 2014 and became the core of the warfighting in 2022. In 
this regard, some battalions continued recruiting and training soldiers during the 
interim period of 2016–​2022. The preliminary operational experience of fighting the 
enemy in the east had given them first-​hand knowledge of how the enemy behaved 
in the battlespace and what to expect from them. Unlike the general best practice 
in the inter-​war preparation of soldiers in the military, when training is aimed 
at various scenarios and different types of adversaries, the volunteer battalions 
(although already subordinate to the Ukrainian authorities) were preparing their 
soldiers to fight an exact enemy –​ the enemy they faced in 2014–​2015 in Eastern 
Ukraine. This type of training and preparation had a few benefits. First, it provided 
an exact focus on the modus operandi of the enemy. Second, volunteer battalions 
and ATO veterans involved in training provided practical, tactical level training 
and sharing of know-​how for specific terrain characteristic of Eastern Ukraine. 
In essence, these smaller battalions that had the military experience of 2014, 
knowledge of the area and SOF features and training would become the core of 
Ukrainian partisan, surgical units operating both in the frontline and at the enemy’s 
rear and as partisans/​saboteurs in the semi-​occupied territories.
Smaller units tend to gain strengths of the distinctive background of their 
members, and these features become evident sooner and hence can be improved 
 
 
 

64  Combatants
and utilised earlier. As a result, each battalion gains its specific features and 
specialisation in the war, which cannot necessarily be expected from another unit. 
Although such diversification can be challenging for the more unified standing 
armies’ engagement of the last century, in the battlespace of this war, smaller units 
combined with territorial defence units provided excellent means for dispersion, 
infiltration into the enemy’s rear and encircling the enemy as was done on multiple 
occasions during the Kherson and Kharkiv offensives.
Azov regiment
One of the most famous volunteer battalions formed in 2014 that still operates 
today is the Azov Battalion. It was created on 5 May 2014 in the city of Berdyansk 
as a battalion of the special police patrol service of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. 
By order of the Minister of Internal Affairs of Ukraine, the ‘Azov’ battalion was 
reorganised on 17 September 2014 and expanded into the ‘Azov’ special purpose 
militia regiment of the Ministry of Internal Affairs. On 11 November 2014, the 
battalion was transferred under the jurisdiction of the National Guard of Ukraine 
and was reformed per the standards of readiness and task requirements of their 
brigades. It is a special operations squad within the 3057th military unit of the 
National Guard of Ukraine.8 They actively participated in warfighting in 2014 
in Mariupol, Illovaisk and in the liberation of five cities in Eastern Ukraine in 
February 2015. From 2016 to 2022, the battalion performed various combat tasks 
of anti-​amphibious defence on the coast of the Sea of Azov. They bravely defended 
the Azovstal plant in besieged Mariupol from February to May 2022. When the 
plant fell, all defenders were taken into Russian captivity. In the biggest prisoners 
of war (POW) exchange on 21 September 2022, many Azov members and their 
leadership were released.
The activity of the Azov battalion illustrates not only the military achievements 
of the SOF in Ukraine within the scope of the entire eight years of war, but also 
the bottom-​up initiatives of sharing and improving military education across the 
ranks and developing instructors to transfer knowledge to the next generations of 
recruiters and, consequently, soldiers. In 2015, after two years of ATO and frontline 
fighting, the leader of the Azov, Andriy Biletskyi, gathered Georgian instructors 
of the regiment and tasked them to develop the first officer course. Following its 
completion, the initiative of opening a Sargent school was taken forward, aiming to 
educate and organise a sergeant corps first at the regiment, with further opportunities 
of extending it to other regiments and the entire armed forces. The military 
sergeant school established in 2016 was named after the prominent Ukrainian 
military commander of the Ukrainian National Army, Yevhen Konovalets.9 The 
task for sergeant education was twofold: develop instructors for passing knowledge 
onwards and develop squad leaders. The core of the three-​month course is to 
combine the practical experience and specifics of the war in Ukraine with Western 
standards of military education. Furthermore, the emphasis was placed on agility 
 
 
 
 

Combatants  65
and developing critical and unconventional thinking essential for gaining an 
advantage over the enemy in the asymmetric battlespace.10 The curriculum took 
advantage of diversified members of the regiment and instructors with knowledge 
of both Soviet and Allied operations. In essence, the school partially fulfilled the 
basic role of non-​commissioned officer (NCO) training and education that the UAF 
needs across all services:
At the time of the invasion, Ukraine did not have a fully developed professional 
non-​commissioned officer (NCO) corps, which it had been seeking to develop 
along NATO standards before the war. The UAF continued to face issues with 
retention, professional development, and funding. As described previously, the 
high proportion of trained veterans, many with combat experience, mitigated to 
some degree the need for an established NCO corps to train and command new 
recruits.11
The Azov regiment’s recruitment, training and military education activities became 
evident during the war of 2022. SOF squad Kraken, a separate intelligence-​
gathering, subversive unit of the Ukrainian Ministry of Defence, was founded by 
former Azov members in Kharkiv when the full-​scale invasion started. It is led 
by Konstantin Nemichev, and it gathered many people from the Kharkiv region.12 
They took an active part in the Kupiansk offensive operation in September 2022 –​ 
the liberation of the eastern parts of the Kharkiv oblast including the deliberation 
to cross the Oskil River, creating a bridgehead for further advancement of the 
Ukrainian troops.13 In the interview, Konstantin Nemichev reflected on the 
formation of the squad. They began mobilising and training people six months 
before the invasion when Russians started accumulating their troops on the 
Ukrainian borders. People would often be trained on the weekends. Civilian 
recruits would be given basic training in tactics and survival skills. In the first hours 
of the invasion, the squad mobilised 800 people and started placing them along 
the district road around the city of Kharkiv. On the second day, there were already 
1,200 people. Many people were willing to defend Kharkiv. The immediate inflow 
of the willing was divided into two groups: those that would fight and volunteers 
assisting various aspects of logistics.14
The Ukrainian Foreign Legion
One of the distinctive phenomena of the war was the presence of foreign fighters 
from the very beginning of the Russian invasion in 2014 and the full-​scale invasion 
in 2022. While in 2014, the status of foreign fighters on the Ukrainian side caused 
multiple legal questions of belligerents’ status, rights and protections, in the years 
that followed, legal and administrative improvements took place. Accordingly, 
from 2016 onwards, foreign fighters in the UAF could sign a contract with the 
Armed Forces15 that provided them with the status of legal, temporary residents 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

66  Combatants
of Ukraine within the duration of the contract.16 Hence, they did not need to apply 
for additional documents for a residence permit from the migration authority. In 
contrast, volunteers for various humanitarian organisations still had to apply for 
a residence permit with the relevant document to prove the place of residence 
registration in Ukraine.17 Although the experience with foreign fighters and 
improving their formalisation and legalisation in Ukraine was ongoing during the 
eight years of war, the International Legion of Territorial Defence of Ukraine was 
announced after the Russian full-​scale invasion. On 27 February 2022, President 
Zelenskyy appealed to foreign citizens to join the fight against Russian aggression 
in Ukraine.
The process was well-​organised and conducted through the military attachés 
in Ukrainian embassies abroad. The focus was placed on foreign citizens with 
relevant military experience, although many people without such experience also 
volunteered. Within a week after the announcement, 20,000 people volunteered 
to join the legion from 52 foreign countries.18 However, the experience of the first 
cohort in the fight illustrated that many people were not prepared to face Russian 
atrocities, constant artillery shelling and trench warfare. Even military veterans 
from NATO countries faced the challenge of fighting with very different equipment 
and more sporadic supply capacities than they experienced in NATO operations.19 
This experience emphasised the greater necessity for the enrolment of people 
with military experience and military veterans, who would not only have relevant 
experience and skills but also could adapt to the distinctive requirements of 
warfighting in Ukraine. Another obvious challenge in joining people from varying 
backgrounds and countries is their motivations and intentions. If preliminary 
screening and interviews did not detect dubious intentions among some extremist 
elements joining the legion, then commanders of the battalions would often weed 
them out.
Despite various challenges, the Foreign Legion provided an opportunity for 
people worldwide to unite under the common aim –​ to fight Russian aggression and 
stand for the common values of freedom and humanity. Many combatants were from 
countries that Russia had previously invaded and annexed territories. Battalions 
from Georgia, Chechnya, Belarus and even Russia are of particular interest since 
they were numerous enough to form their own units based on their territorial and 
ethnic belonging. Some of them started as separate volunteer international units 
as early as 2014 and then became an integral part of the UAF, while others were 
established as part of the international legion in 2022.
The Georgian Legion
The Georgian Legion is not only one of the most prominent foreign battalions 
in Ukraine, it is also the oldest one. It was formed in April 2014 by Mamuka 
Mamulashvili. With his father of military background, he fought against Russians 
in the Abkhasian war when he was 14, having spent three months in Russian 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Combatants  67
captivity. Following his father’s military career path, he then gained military 
experience in the wars of the 1990s. Just as Ukrainians fought on the side of 
Georgians in the 1990s and 2008, Mamuka and his men responded to the Ukrainian 
plea for help against Russia in 2014; one of the Georgian legionnaires explained 
that the independence of Ukraine meant the independence of Georgia.20 In April 
2014, they were involved in training activities, with further direct engagement in 
warfighting in Luhansk.21 Throughout the entire eight years of war, most foreign 
fighters coming to Ukrainian aid went through the training and accommodation 
of the Georgian Legion. In the first few years, the status of foreign fighters was 
ambiguous; however, the 2016 law facilitated more highly skilled professional 
military people to join the unit, which became the largest foreign unit in the UAF. 
The legion includes military professionals from 32 countries, with the majority 
from Georgia, the United States and the United Kingdom. In an interview on 10 
July 2022, Mamuka shared that the legion included around 1,000 people. Just as 
for many in the UAF, for the legion, the war started eight years prior. The legion 
was substantially involved in training new incoming foreign volunteers because 
its members had the relevant experience in training new waves of recruits and 
had an organisation structure fit for the purpose. In terms of specific tasks within 
the full-​scale stage of the war, they focused on taking down Russian command 
centres and logistics. Although the legion consisted of a thousand soldiers, they 
avoided concentration of force and dispersed across the frontline. This was 
because Russians were targeting them specifically22 and due to the nature of 
their tasks.
Chechen foreign battalion
Another foreign battalion that already came to aid Ukraine in 2014 was also made 
up of people who knew the Russian way of war –​ Chechens who fought for the 
independence of Ichkeria from Russia on the side of General Dudayev. Most of 
them were European Chechens who fled the second Chechen war and settled in 
Europe. They were led by Isa Munaev, who then lived in Norway. He gathered 
fellow Chechen men and women and came to Ukraine to form an international 
battalion named after Dzhokhar Dudayev to oppose Russian aggression in Ukraine. 
In this regard, the battalion opposed Russians and pro-​Russian Chechens of 
Kadyrov, also known as Kadyrovtsy, who were used among Russian troops and 
separatists in 2014–​2015 and then in 2022. Just as did Georgians, members of 
the Dudayev battalion knew Russian methods of fighting, repressing and targeting 
civilians in the occupied territories.23 They knew their enemy and could share 
relevant information and skills with their Ukrainian counterparts. Their numbers 
increased in the eight years of war, especially after the full-​scale invasion, reaching 
five battalions.24 Given their previous operational experience of urban warfare in 
the two Chechen wars, they were often involved in area-​clearing operations after 
the UAF retook previously occupied territories.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

68  Combatants
Kastus Kalinouski regiment
This volunteer battalion joined Ukraine in the fight in 2022. It consisted primarily 
of Belorussian dissidents of the 2020–​2021 protests against Lukashenko’s 
dictatorial regime and Russia’s influence in Belarus. Until May 2022, it was a 
single Belarus battalion, but then more people joined, and it turned into a regiment 
consisting of two battalions, ‘Volat’ and ‘Litvin’ (named after the call sign of their 
deceased commander and Belarusian volunteer, respectively). The main mission of 
the regiment is ‘Liberation of Belarus through the liberation of Ukraine.’25 These 
volunteers were actively involved in the liberation of Irpin and the Ukrainian 
counteroffensive in the battles of Sievierodonetsk and Lysychansk.
The war in Ukraine demonstrated a truly international effort in fighting Putin’s 
regime and war, and it even has a Russian ethnic legion fighting on the Ukrainian 
side. Freedom of Russia Legion was formed by the former Russian military, 
prisoners of war and volunteers defecting from the Russian Army in March 2022. 
Then some Belarusians also joined the legion. The legion became popular, with 
5,000 applications at one point.26 However, this legion’s selection process is very 
thorough and strict since the Russian authorities specifically targeted it. Insider 
information that members of this unit provided was useful in the allocation of the 
Russian forces at the beginning of the war. Except for the actual warfighting, this 
unit was also conducting an effective information campaign among the younger 
Russian population and spreading accurate information about the war in Ukraine. 
Furthermore, their Telegram channel provided information for Russian soldiers on 
how to defect and surrender to the UAF.
The Russian Armed Forces
Much has been written in the professional military and academic literature on the 
transformation of the Russian Armed Forces and its modernisation in the last 10–​
14 years. Following various estimates across the entire 2022 stage of war, many 
analysts expected more from the Russian Armed Forces in Ukraine. More is meant 
not so much in terms of scale or application of mass but in more modern and joint 
performance of at least the conventional armed forces across various domains. 
A higher extent of professionalisation, integration and modernisation was expected 
based on decades of committed reforms and Russia’s successful performance in 
limited wars.
While in Ukraine, leadership changes with different allegiances to Russia 
undermined the post-​Cold War continuity of military reforms, in the case of Russia, 
internal skirmishes between civilian and military elites undermined continuity. The 
post-​Georgia reforms were led by civilian defence minister Anatoliy Serdyukov 
(2007–​2012), who, with full political backing, introduced hard-​line reforms per 
modern warfare requirements. He focused on small and flexible brigades versus 
heavy divisions, and on the requirements of modernising Russian practice and 
 
 
 
 
 

Combatants  69
training for operational needs, such as interservice integration and jointery, improved 
mobility and rapid reaction. Partial professionalisation was emphasised, while the 
officers’ corps was significantly reduced. The rationale was that not all recruits were 
committed to a professional military career. Conscription was reduced from two 
years to one year in 2008, hoping to move towards contracted soldiers of the size of 
425,000 by 2017. Released funds were to be used to improve the technological side 
and R&D and to acquire 70% of modern equipment by 2020. The C2 structures 
were also reformed with greater autonomy of the services. Six military districts 
were substituted by four, and the Soviet four-​tier system was substituted with 
a more Western-​style three-​echelon chain of command. A step towards modern 
Command, Control, Communications, Computers (C4) Intelligence, Surveillance 
and Reconnaissance (ISR) (C4ISR) was also made just as was an increase in more 
frequent and sizable exercises and training.27 Despite this initiative, the process 
stumbled due to organisational resistance, uneven distribution of resources and 
structural corruption. In 2012, targeted numbers were 200,000 recruits short.
This period of modernisation was ended and partially reversed by the new 
defence minister appointed in 2012, Sergei Shoigu. He continued his predecessor’s 
trend towards more numerical and complex integrated exercises and the recruitment 
of a professional force. However, the experience of war in Ukraine and the fact that 
Ukrainians put up a fight suggested that limited war might not be so limited and 
might be more prolonged. In 2014–​2015, a U-​turn in Russian reforms was observed, 
with the revival of ideas of various systems of reserves and mass mobilisation. 
Thus, the experience of Ukraine 2014–​2015 illustrated the necessity of critical 
mass for further advancement and fighting a large-​scale war. Accordingly, the 
Western military pointed out the shift in Russian military exercises from the more 
agile units aimed at limited wars to full-​scale exercises picking 300,000 soldiers in 
2018. According to Johan Norberg,
what is important is what they are doing. They have a lot of personnel. They 
have a lot of materiel, even if much of it is old and from the Soviet period. But 
the exercises build capability, that is, units that can carry out assigned missions 
on combat operations.28
Besides the intimidation purpose, large-​scale military exercises and training 
were also aimed at providing Russian soldiers with the relevant skills and practice. 
In terms of operational experience, Russians were involved in many wars in the last 
three post-​Cold War decades. They had mixed outcomes from these experiences. 
The invasions in Chechnya and Georgia illustrated the immediate flaws in their 
performance –​ deficiencies in urban warfare, the lack of precision in air warfare 
and very poor air–​land integration. In contrast, they used more SOF and artillery-​
backed forces in the east of Ukraine. They showed the utility of their air force 
against anti-​Assad insurgents and civilian infrastructure in Syria, once again under 
the conditions of backing the Assad regime, hence limited war with no significant 
 
 
 

70  Combatants
opponent across domains. Russians had the operational experience of fighting 
against conventional and unconventional opponents but still on a very small scale 
in Georgia, Syria and in Ukraine during 2014–​2015. However, none of these wars 
provided experience with protracted engagement and the sustainment of Russian 
presence and fighting across domains. In Georgia, the engagement was very short, 
while in Syria, they supported the Assad regime, using SOF and air capabilities in the 
complete obliteration of Aleppo and Idlib. In Ukraine 2014–​2015, Crimea provided 
another argument in favour of SOF. Still, already in Donbas, the limitations of 
smaller, less integrated and joint units proved insufficient for further advancement 
and sustainment of protracted warfare against a more numeric opponent than the 
Russians had ever faced in their post-​Cold War military endeavours.
The need to amass the military personnel and materiel became evident in the first 
few months of the 2022 invasion. Depending on the sources, half of the 150,000 
troops gathered on the Ukrainian borders were used in the first attack. Four to five 
months later, in June–​July 2022, the need for a constant supply of manpower to 
the Russian Army was to be fulfilled by announcing recruitment for the volunteer 
battalions across 85 Russian administrative units. Each battalion was to consist of 
400 men in the age range from 18 to 60. They were to be given 30 days of training 
before the deployment to Ukraine. Recruits were taken with or without previous 
military experience. The main incentive was the promise of $3,000 per month to 
each soldier. According to the Institute of the Study of War (ISW), although 85 
battalions could provide 34,000 volunteers, their salary would result in a monthly 
cost of $102 million. Hence, this force was to be more expensive but more poorly 
trained than the usual Russian conscripts.29 Later, many of these volunteers and 
regular soldiers complained of either being paid less or not being paid at all.30
One of the ethnic units with a distinctive regional belonging –​ Kadyrov’s 
Chechens –​ was used in various Russian wars and already in Ukraine in 2014. 
Their image of scary and ruthless Putin’s loyal assassins was often used to 
suppress any disobedience in Russia. However, it proved more challenging for 
them to fight the UAF than to terrorise civilian population. The best evidence of 
this dismantling of the myth of invincible Kadyrov Chechens was their losses in 
Irpin, Bucha and Vorzel. However, the very utility of Kadyrovites and other ethnic 
minorities recruited for regional volunteer battalions had to do both with adding to 
the numeric manpower and with the construction of the image of a unified Russia 
standing against Ukraine. This ethnic diversity combined with the recruitment of 
‘volunteer’ foreign fighters from European and African countries among other 
things was aimed at building the image of international support for the Russian 
aggression and its excuses. Once again, various means were used to strengthen 
propaganda and lawfare employment to justify the Russian aggression.
With further losses during Ukrainian counteroffensives in Kharkiv and 
Kherson, Putin announced ‘partial’ mobilisation of 300,000 men. In the Soviet 
tradition of executing an order to the fullest, mobilisation focused on taking hold 
of men of different ages, with or without military experience. Mobilisation was 
 
 
 

Combatants  71
also geographically uneven, just as the focus was previously placed on mobilising 
the ethnic minority groups from the central and far eastern regions of Russia. 
Essentially, this was a continuation of Russian colonialist rule over other ethnic 
groups. This mobilisation illustrated the return to the traditional mass with poor skills 
and performance. First, the quantity of materiel and availability had significantly 
deteriorated, especially regarding supplies for the infantry –​ the images of rusty 
World War II rifles went viral. Second, supplies for the newly mobilised basic 
kits were no longer available. Instead, they were given the list of basic first-​aid 
supplies –​ from clothes, protection gear and food supplies –​ to be bought by their 
families.31 Third, the newly mobilised were promised two weeks of basic training, 
which was even less than the volunteer battalions gathered during the summer. As 
it has been in the Soviet Union and continues in Russia, the reality is very different 
from the formal commitments, hence, many newly mobilised (known as ‘mobics’) 
were sent to Ukraine within a few days of their mobilisation. Besides the men in 
Russia, Putin also forcibly mobilised men from the occupied territories to serve 
on the Russian side.32 The reality of the autumnal mobilisation contributed to both 
immediate losses and the high level of Russians surrender to the UAF.
Russian private military companies (PMCs) and mercenaries
The experience of the Arab Spring and the supremacy of irregular warfare brought 
the attention of the Russian leadership and military to the utility of irregular, light, 
manoeuvrable forces in modern warfare. This resulted in two trends: reforms of 
the Russian SOFs with a completely new look and organisational characteristics 
in 201333 and the establishment and flourishing of PMCs. The attempts to employ 
irregular actors in non-​linear conflicts were illustrated in Ukraine, making the war 
a real-​time polygon (training ground) for employing PMCs on their own and in 
integration with separatist units and more conventional forces. Their activities 
varied from diversion and sabotage missions and frontal attacks to different 
elements of urban warfare to intelligence gathering and psychological operations 
to training recruits and youth.34
Gained experience in Ukraine was then used in Russian support of the Assad 
regime in Syria. One of the first PMCs formed was the Slavonic Corps, members 
of which, after its defeat in Syria, joined the main PMC of the Wagner Group, 
sponsored and controlled by a Russian oligarch, Yevgenyi Prigozhin, also known 
as Putin’s chef. In the next few years, the group gained more operational experience 
and modernised its structure for the requirements of irregular and limited warfare, 
while preserving some army characteristics. According to Sergei Sukhankin, a 
Jamestown Foundation analyst, the years in Syria demonstrated various operational 
qualities of the Wagner Group, such as:
First, it showed it could be successfully employed in military-​related tasks 
(assuming a relatively weak opposing force). Second, it could be used jointly 
 
 
 
 
 
 

72  Combatants
or in conjunction with regular formations (the Special Operations Forces and 
the Aerospace Forces) for intelligence gathering and reconnaissance. Third, this 
force could be used to protect objects/​critical infrastructure. Fourth, another 
useful area of application for Wagner has been training local military personnel.35
Wagner’s defeat in Deir ez-​Zor Province in February 2018, when they faced 
the superior force of US marines and Kurds, showed the traditional Soviet/​
Russian shortfalls, such as weakness against a technologically more superior force, 
limitations in air–​land integration, and integration with the regular forces of the 
Assad regime.36 In addition, their conventional Army background undermined their 
effectiveness in more complex terrains, especially since they were always on the 
invading side and could seldom have the full advantage of the terrain. Nevertheless, 
they gave Russia the advantage of plausible deniability in various operations when 
they were used in Ukraine, Syria, Libya and sub-​Saharan Africa.37
The Wagners were involved in almost all aspects of the invasion and territory 
capture in 2022. Like most Russian troops, they suffered more losses as the war 
progressed. Despite their concentration in Bakhmut, one of the most contested and 
bloodiest spots in the eastern frontline, their offensive there was supressed by the 
UAF as of the end of November 2022. On 8 August 2022, they also lost their base 
in Propasna in a High Mobility Artillery Rocket Systems (HIMARS) strike when 
the photo of their location was accidentally posted on the Telegram channel.38 
Although many of Wagner’s mercenaries were called from their foreign locations 
in Africa, their numbers were significantly reduced during the first six months of 
war, resulting in recruitment from not the most conventional recruitment pool. 
In September, Prigozhin’s video aimed to recruit Russian prisoners and foreign 
nationals (Tajiks, Belarusians and Armenians) to join the fight in Ukraine went 
viral. They intended to recruit 1,500 felons in exchange for freedom after spending 
the designated two years warfighting in Ukraine. While many refused, prisoners 
with the most gruesome crimes were specifically targeted. As in any environment, 
organised crime has its own rules, and Wagner’s plea to recruit prisoners to kill 
civilians in Ukraine caused criticism among organised crime leaders. In a video 
address on 12 July 2022, one of the Russian criminal authorities, ‘Thief in Law’ 
Grisha Moskovsky, called upon Russian prisoners not to accept Wagner’s offer to 
fight in Ukraine, since men who consider themselves as decent would never use 
weapons to kill women, children and the elderly.39
Comparison of the Ukrainian and Russian combatants and the 
battlefield requirements
An important dividing factor in the Ukrainian and Russian military organisations 
and their consequent practices was the change in military leadership style in 
Ukraine and its further separation from the rigid Soviet practice. According to Gen. 
Zaluznyi, the main focus of the transformation was on learning how to listen to one’s 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Combatants  73
subordinates and to treat them like human beings.40 Such a cohesive culture was 
to be built on respect, inclusion and cooperation instead of fear and bullying like 
in the Soviet and, by extension, the Russian Army. Gen. Zaluznyi also mentioned 
exemplary leadership-​inspired changes that visionary individuals made in the 
UAF before the beginning of the war and through its eight years. The exemplary 
leader who shaped the current military decision-​makers in Ukraine, including 
General Zaluznyi, was Colonel General Hennadiy Petrovych Vorobyov, who was 
commander of the ground forces of Ukraine from 2009 to 2014 and significantly 
influenced the modernisation of the Ukrainian Army. Recalling his acquaintance 
with Colonel General Vorobyov, Lieutenant General (Ret.) Mark Hertling, former 
Commander of US Army Europe, wrote:
Henadii was closely tracking the combat activity of his soldiers and units 
serving in the Balkans as part of KFOR and in eastern Afghanistan as part of 
the Polish Brigade. He outlined an innovative plan to improve his junior officer 
corps and complained about the low quality of his senior officers. In a one-​on-​
one discussion over beer, he confessed that his senior officers were his biggest 
problem, and he needed to find a way to replace the corrupt generals who were 
“Russian-​trained” and too close to Ukraine’s older politicians. Again, he asked 
if I could help him get more young colonels into the exchange program at the 
U.S. Army War College in Pennsylvania.41
General Zaluznyi emphasised that at the beginning of the war, 50–​60-​year-​old 
senior officers tried to push the old Soviet methods in drilling 30-​year-​old or 
younger soldiers, but it immediately became evident that the Soviet approach to 
leadership and archaic procedures would not work in the modern Ukrainian Army 
since young Ukrainian soldiers were not Soviets. This transformation is far from 
complete, and the UAF has many Soviet relics to eliminate from its organisational 
practice. However, various attempts at modernisation and the reduction of red tape 
stimulated mission command and greater cohesion of various Ukrainian ground 
forces. Colonel General Vorobyov has also redirected the future leadership of the 
UAF towards learning and gaining more experience from Western military practice, 
which has been and remains the future, while the Soviet military tradition is of the 
past, which the Russians demonstrated in this war.
Another distinctive feature of the UAF is that it was more susceptible to 
adopting decentralised performance in the battlespace. A few reasons conditioned 
the fast adoption of mission command in the UAF. The bottom-up initiatives 
that existed in Ukraine from the recent experiences in Maidan and eight years of 
warfighting dictated the necessity of mission command. While the terminology of 
the practice might not have been well-​known to all, the essence of decentralised 
execution when an order is given or the task is posed dates back to the times of 
the Zaporizka Sich, when Ukrainian units operated in a very decentralised manner 
when fighting against the Russian Empire. Hence, Ukraine’s rebellious history was 
 
 
 

74  Combatants
very much characterised by the decentralisation of execution –​ mission command. 
Furthermore, the essence of resistance and sabotage is in the core principles of 
partisan warfare, two of which are dispersion and decentralisation. They become 
especially essential when fighting a numerically superior enemy.
On the contrary, the Russians continued with a rigid hierarchy and strictly 
centralised control conditioned by the fear of losing control over the military and 
the lack of relevant operational skills to facilitate such training and consequent 
performance on the battlefield. Furthermore, overwhelming corruption in the 
military was based on a strong rigid hierarchy and the elimination of unconventional 
thinking to discourage questioning authority and further mutiny. Thus, thinking 
outside the box was very alien for both the Russian military leadership and the 
conscripts. Even their SOF and PMCs would still follow the Soviet army tradition 
in terms of command and control.
From the perspective of traditional state-​on-​state warfare, different types of 
units from various services or volunteers could have been very difficult to manage 
under the rigid command and control system characteristic of the Soviet tradition. 
But in the case of Ukraine, such personnel structure and diversification of units 
from the UAF, international legion and TDF provided greater flexibility and agility 
of the units on the ground under the conditions of implementing mission command. 
Of course, the key to achieving successful performance is the knowledge of the 
unit’s specifics and expertise. As various aspects of training and deployment of the 
SOF and light units illustrated, they all know their specific tactical and operational 
tasks, such as distinctive responsibilities in clearing areas around cities and the 
environment of urban warfare. The key to the successful integration of diverse 
conventional troops and the SOF and to achieving deconfliction and avoiding 
duplication of effort was effective communication, clear-​cut distribution of tasks 
according to specialisation and availability of the tactical ISR.
One of the inherent challenges of units coming from different paths of life and 
diverse backgrounds is bringing them to a common ground for relevant fighting 
skills. Although the addition of the TDF and International Legion to the traditional 
three branches of the UAF provided more opportunities to bring more units up to 
speed on the war necessities; regional preparation and training would often vary 
due to the remoteness from the frontline and disparity in provision of equipment at 
the earlier stages of invasion.
The Russian side had numerous challenges in integrating diverse multi-​ethnic 
groups. This division and lack of integration of the combatants on the Russian side 
had various implications for their battle readiness and consequent performance. 
First, just as there has been a strict and rigid hierarchy and a tradition of bullying 
in the Russian Armed Forces, there was inequality and differences between various 
structures, ethnic groups and PMCs. When the first occupation of the territories 
began and a greater movement of Russian troops extended across Ukrainian 
land, mass looting started with different Russian soldiers fighting for the looted 
goods and even starting their own skirmishes. The longer the war continued, 
 

Combatants  75
the more conflicts between different ethnic groups escalated, with instances of 
internal fights, defection and killing of commanders by newly mobilised Russians. 
Furthermore, the old Soviet methods of using firing squads to follow the frontline 
soldiers (recruited prisoners) were reported to have been revived by Wagner PMC 
in various areas.42
The Ukrainian military and combatants’ inherent advantage was the knowledge 
of the enemy they were fighting and the unique specifics of the terrain. Although 
it might be argued that the Russians knew the maps of Ukraine from Soviet times, 
they did not live in that terrain. Even saboteurs and those directing Russian fire 
could not compensate for the advantage of the terrain. While the Eastern and 
Crimean frontlines before the full-​scale invasion can be considered as well-​known 
by the Russians, the more secluded areas of their advancement showed the utility 
of traditional ambushing by the UAF and the advantage of precision artillery or 
drone strikes used by the UAF against them. The main difference between 2014 
and 2022 was that in 2014, there were fewer people among the civilian population 
with at least some military training and operational experience, while in 2022, in 
addition to the serving military, there were many trained and experienced ATO 
veterans among Ukrainian civilians who could easily join volunteer TDF or the 
regular reserves without the necessity of extensive training:
The high level of experience and training among recruits meant they were able 
to operate artillery, tank, and support systems that traditionally require more 
time for reservists or volunteers to master. These units have been crucial in 
supporting regular UAF units and enabling them to spearhead operations and 
counteroffensives.43
This was an invaluable operational experience of fighting Russians under severe 
circumstances, without supplies or equipment. This experience was paid in blood, 
but it helped Ukraine to withstand the first months of the 2022 invasion.
Regarding the operational experience of the Russian combatants, it was greatly 
uneven and was not based on the experience of preparing for the fight against 
a distinctive enemy nor having the prolonged and active experience of fighting 
this enemy. The units that were involved in 2014–​2015 were not engaged on the 
same scale as in 2022. Using Russia-​sponsored separatists resulted in a lack of the 
actual warfighting experience that the Ukrainian soldiers gained through rotation. 
Furthermore, Russia’s constant shelling of the Ukrainian side on the Eastern front 
cannot exactly be called a multifaceted operational experience to prepare their 
soldiers for a full-​scale fight against experienced Ukrainian soldiers. Russian SOF 
and PMCs gained experience in sabotage, diversion and urban warfare, but PMCs 
like Wagner operated in very different countries in the Middle East and Africa, with 
varying degrees of resistance to their actions from the opposing sides. Although 
Crimea and the war in Donbas 2014–​2015 were a training ground for them, their 
further evolution and operational experience in the Middle East and Africa did not 
 
 
 

76  Combatants
prepare them for the full-​scale war in Ukraine against various SOF and volunteer 
battalions on the Ukrainian side. Finally, the quality of conscripts had significantly 
fallen, since the first waves had a year of training while further waves had even 
less than that. It is important to emphasise that the poor fighting skills of the 
young conscripts were a result of many factors conditioned by Putin’s regime. The 
experiments with the military reforms resulted not in professionalisation but rather 
in a reduction of the length of training, with doubtful improvement in its quality. 
Since most conscripts would often be from the poorer and more deprived parts of 
Russia, warfighting was not an intention and objective for conscripts, and receiving 
a salary for doing as little as possible was more important for them than obtaining 
relevant skills.
In terms of motivation, Ukrainian people are driven by a simple objective –​ 
the survival of the Ukrainian nation and its independence from Russia. For many 
others fighting on the Ukrainian side, it is a war to defeat Russia so that the 
pro-​Russian elements that gained power in their home countries would lose the 
Kremlin’s support, and these nations would then get to choose their own path of 
development. For still others, this is a war for true democratic values and to show 
comradeship to fellow soldiers with whom they fought in other wars of the last 
three decades. This war shows the continuity and strength of Ukrainians’ high 
morale and conviction in fighting for national sovereignty, territorial integrity 
and liberal values. By contrast, Russian atrocities committed on Ukrainian soil 
were similar to what the Russians did in Syria, Chechnya and Georgia. Despite 
observing these war crimes, Ukrainian soldiers still managed to preserve their high 
morale, fighting spirit and their cohesion by dancing for TikTok videos to cheer up 
civilians, treating sick animals and helping each other with pieces of food. This 
human spirit endures in the acts of courage in defending your comrades, such as 
taking fire or falling on a grenade to save your unit. It is evident in giving away 
your own body armour to protect evacuating civilians or in encircling civilians, to 
protect them from direct fire. The motivation of doing what is right along with the 
fact that there is no alternative but to win this war for the next generation to live 
in peace stimulates people to do seemingly impossible things. From the first day 
of the war, Ukrainian soldiers and society became committed to the motto: ‘We 
will break through!’
On the other hand, when combatants are motivated only by looting and 
carnage, have no discipline or morale and can be commanded only with fear, 
their endurance will be tested and will soon collapse. In addition, if troops are 
dropped on the frontline, according to their ethnicity, to prevent ‘superior’ groups 
from coming to harm, then once again, the morale and survivability of such units 
will remain questionable at best. There is also the factor of comradeship, such 
that no matter where one’s fighting brother is from, he is your closest person 
in the world because if you fight for the right cause and you need to survive 
together, and if one of you dies, you honour the memories of the time you have 
spent fighting together. Battle comradeship is one of the most primaeval features 
 

Combatants  77
of the warrior ethos that remains until today, although it has been refined to 
the soldier culture of today. But when troops are motivated only by looting and 
another combatant on the same side is seen as a competitor and not as a comrade; 
or when a wounded soldier, instead of being saved, is finished off; and even dead 
bodies of fellow combatants are not collected or are collected and then cremated 
so that they will be considered missing and the Russian government would not 
have to pay compensation to their families, then their morale will be poor. When 
their commanders defect, leaving their entire units to their own devices, it says a 
lot about the prevailing morale of the leadership. These different levels of morale 
and motivation to fight describe very well the differences between the UAF and 
the Russian combatants.
The core of the military profession is readiness for warfighting and the ability 
to sustain the warfighting for as long as a given war requires until the posed 
objective is achieved. While limited wars and distinctive fixed-​time overseas 
deployment have their own rules of development, conduct and ending, full-​scale 
inter-​state warfare is not so easily controlled nor easy to finish until the actual 
military victory and defeat of the enemy are achieved. Warfighting is not about 
perceptions of what and how war might or should look, nor about views or varying 
perceptions of what victory should be. In the total war of survival, the core of 
the military profession becomes very existential and clear –​ to fight to defend the 
homeland (civilian population and land) from devastation. In essence, such wars 
make military practitioners, politicians, academics and ordinary people realise that 
national defence and security require a strong military capable of fighting under 
severe circumstances, because there are no guarantees that one’s enemy will abide 
by the same rules or indeed any rules of war.
Notes
	1	 Dmytro Komarov, ‘Special Project: Year. Off Screen,’ Interview with General Zaluznyi, 
12 May 2023. Available online www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​TadX​xP_​2​6V8&t=​132s
	2	 Viktoriya Fedorchak, ‘The Mass Approach in the Air War Over Ukraine: Towards 
Identifying a Critical Mass,’ Handlingar Och Tidskrift, no. 1 (2023): 110–​125.
	3	 Jennifer Piggott, ‘A Closer Look at Clear Sky 2018 –​ A Committed Relationship 
Between the U.S. and Ukraine,’ USAFE, 19 October 2018 (accessed 17 March 2023). 
Available online: www.usafe.af.mil/​News/​Arti​cle-​Disp​lay/​Arti​cle/​1667​802/​a-​clo​ser-​
look-​at-​clear-​sky-​2018-​a-​commit​ted-​relat​ions​hip-​betw​een-​the-​us-​and-​ukr/​
	4	 Simone Marcato, ‘Exercise Clear Sky 2018 –​ Starokostiantyniv, Ukraine,’ Milavia, 12 
January 2019 (accessed 17 March 2023). Available online: www.mila​via.net/​speci​als/​
clear-​sky-​2018-​starok​osti​anty​niv/​
	5	 NATO MARCOM, ‘NATO Forces Train with the Ukrainian Navy,’ 17 March 2017 
(accessed 17 March 2023). Available online: https://​mc.nato.int/​media-​cen​tre/​news/​
2021/​nato-​for​ces-​train-​with-​the-​ukrain​ian-​navy
	6	 Ukrainska Pravda, ‘The Law on National Resistance Came into Force,’ 1 January 2022 
(accessed 17 March 2023). Available online: www.pra​vda.com.ua/​news/​2022/​01/​1/​
7319​212/​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

78  Combatants
	 7	 Magdalena Kowalska-​Sendek and Robert Sendek, ‘Lesson Right from the Front,’ Polska 
Zbrojna, 15 July 2022 (accessed 17 March 2023). Available online: www.pol​ska-​zbro​
jna.pl/​home/​arti​cles​how/​37680?t=​Les​son-​Right-​from-​the-​Front
	 8	 Azov, ‘About Azov’ (accessed 17 March 2023). Available online: https://​azov.org.ua/​
pro-​nas/​
	 9	 Ibid.
	10	 Mykhailo Lyuksikov, ‘Interview with the Head of the Military School of Commanders 
named after Colonel Yevhen Konovalts,’ Militarnyi, 26 January 2018 (accessed 6 June 
2023). Available online: https://​mil.in.ua/​uk/​artic​les/​int​erv-​yu-​z-​nach​alny​kom-​vij​skov​
oyi-​shk​oly-​kom​andy​riv-​imeni-​pol​kovn​yka-​yevg​ena-​kono​valt​sya-​dru​gom-​kir​tom/​
	11	 Andrew S. Bowen, ‘Ukrainian Military Performance and Outlook,’ Congressional 
Research Service (CRS), 5 June 2023. Available online: https://​crs​repo​rts.congr​ess.gov/​
prod​uct/​pdf/​IF/​IF12​150
	12	 Militarnyi, ‘Special unit “KRAKEN” Carried Out Special Operations in Bilogorivka,’ 
16 July 2022. Available online: https://​mil.in.ua/​uk/​news/​spe​tspi​droz​dil-​kra​ken-​pro​viv-​
spet​sope​rats​iyi-​v-​bilog​oriv​tsi/​
	13	 Kraken Unit, ‘Kupiansk Offensive Operation,’ 6 November 2022. Available online: www.
yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​jVvg​nHxJ​oSY
	14	 ATN, ‘There Is No Margin for Error: The Special Unit Kraken Is at Work,’ 30 September 
2022. Available online: https://​atn.ua/​khar​kiv/​bez-​prava-​na-​pomy​lku-​pratsi​uie-​spe​tspi​
droz​dil-​kra​ken-​381​110/​
	15	 Decree of the President of Ukraine # 248 of June 10, 2016 ‘About Approval of the 
Regulations on Passing of Military Service in the Armed Forces of Ukraine Foreigners 
and Stateless Persons.’ Available online: https://​cis-​legi​slat​ion.com/​docum​ent.
fwx?rgn=​86889
	16	 State Migration Service of Ukraine, ‘Information for Foreigners Who Participate in the 
Anti-​Terrorist Operation.’ Available online: https://​dmsu.gov.ua/​en-​home/​servi​ces/​info​
rmat​ion-​for-​for​eign​ers-​who-​part​icip​ate-​in-​the-​anti-​terror​ist-​operat​ion.html
	17	 Ibid.
	18	 Lisa Abend, ‘Meet the Foreign Volunteers Risking Their Lives to Defend Ukraine—​and 
Europe,’ Time, 7 March 2022. Available online: https://​time.com/​6155​670/​fore​ign-​fight​
ers-​ukra​ine-​eur​ope/​
	19	 Ukraine Media Center, ‘Ukraine Foreign Legion: Fight for Freedom. Ukraine in Flames 
#177,’ 3 September 2022. Available online: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​02lg​21Yf​Qdo
	20	 Maryan Kushnir and Levko Stack, ‘Legionnaires: What Georgians Are Fighting for 
Near Debaltsevo,’ Radio freedom, 6 June 2016. Available online: www.radio​svob​oda.
org/​a/​27782​088.html
	21	 Sevgil Musaeva and Yevhen Buderatskyi, ‘Mamuka Mamulashvili, Commander of the 
Georgian Legion: Ukraine Is the Only Country to Take On the Challenge of the Barbaric 
Terrorist State that Is Russia,’ 10 July 2022. Available online: www.pra​vda.com.ua/​eng/​
artic​les/​2022/​07/​10/​7357​256/​
	22	 Ibid.
	23	 Lyudmila Vannek, ‘Dudayev’s Battalion Arose in Donbas in Opposition to Kadirovites –​ 
Lyoma Chabaev,’ Radio Freedom, 8 October 2014. Available online: www.radio​svob​
oda.org/​a/​26627​819.html
	24	 Militarnyi, ‘Five Chechen Battalions Are Fighting on the Side of Ukraine,’ 22 September 
2022. Available online: https://​mil.in.ua/​uk/​news/​na-​botsi-​ukray​iny-​voy​uye-​p-​yat-​chec​
hens​kyh-​bat​aljo​niv/​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Combatants  79
	25	 The Kastus Kalinoŭski Regiment, About. Available online: https://​kal​inou​ski.org/​en/​
about/​
	26	 Aleksandra Klitina, ‘Over 5,000 Applications to Join “Freedom of Russia” Legion –​ 
Fighter Caesar,’ Kyiv Post, October 14, 2022. Available online: www.kyivp​ost.com/​russ​
ias-​war/​over-​5000-​appli​cati​ons-​to-​join-​free​dom-​of-​rus​sia-​leg​ion-​figh​ter-​cae​sar.html
	27	 Katarzyna Zysk, ‘Russia,’ in The Handbook of European Defence Policies and Armed 
Forces, ed. H. Meijer and M. Wyss (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018), 96–​97.
	28	 Swedish Defence Research Agency (FOI), ‘Russia Trains for War,’ 4 February 2019. 
Available online: www.foi.se/​en/​foi/​news-​and-​pressr​oom/​news/​2019-​02-​04-​rus​sia-​tra​
ins-​for-​war.html
	29	 ISW, ‘Russian Volunteer Units and Battalions,’ 16 July 2022. Available online: www.
under​stan​ding​war.org/​backg​roun​der/​russ​ian-​volunt​eer-​units-​and-​bat​tali​ons
	30	 Nick Mordowanec, ‘Putin Facing Revolt after Soldiers Aren’t Paid,’ Newsweek, 3 
November 2022. Available online: www.newsw​eek.com/​vladi​mir-​putin-​fac​ing-​rev​olt-​
after-​russ​ian-​soldi​ers-​are-​not-​paid-​ukra​ine-​war-​1756​734
	31	 Pjotr Sauer, ‘ “The Army Has Nothing”: New Russian Conscripts Bemoan Lack of 
Supplies,’ The Guardian, 20 October 2022. Available online: www.theg​uard​ian.com/​
world/​2022/​oct/​20/​the-​army-​has-​noth​ing-​new-​russ​ian-​con​scri​pts-​bem​oan-​lack-​of-​
suppl​ies
	32	 Maxim Vikhrov, ‘Terror and Silence. How the Russians Force the Ukrainians of Donbas 
to Fight against their Own Country,’ The Ukrainian Week, 13 May 2022. Available 
online: https://​tyzh​den.ua/​ter​ror-​and-​sile​nce-​how-​the-​russi​ans-​force-​the-​ukr​aini​ans-​of-​
don​bas-​to-​fight-​agai​nst-​their-​own-​coun​try/​
	33	 Tor Bukkvoll, ‘Military Innovation under Authoritarian Government –​ the Case of Russian 
Special Operations Forces,’ Journal of Strategic Studies, 38, no 5 (2005): 602–​625.
	34	 Sergey Sukhankin, ‘Unleashing the PMCs and Irregulars in Ukraine: Crimea and 
Donbas,’ The Jamestown Foundation, 3 September 2019. Available online: https://​
jamest​own.org/​prog​ram/​unl​eash​ing-​the-​pmcs-​and-​irr​egul​ars-​in-​ukra​ine-​cri​mea-​and-​
don​bas/​
	35	 Sergey Sukhankin, ‘Russian PMCs in the Syrian Civil War: From Slavonic Corps to 
Wagner Group and Beyond,’ The Jamestown Foundation, 18 December 2019. Available 
online: https://​jamest​own.org/​prog​ram/​russ​ian-​pmcs-​in-​the-​syr​ian-​civil-​war-​from-​slavo​
nic-​corps-​to-​wag​ner-​group-​and-​bey​ond/​
	36	 Ibid.
	37	 Catrina Doxsee and Jared Thompson, ‘Massacres, Executions, and Falsified 
Graves: The Wagner Group’s Mounting Humanitarian Cost in Mali,’ CSIS, 2022. 
Available online: www.csis.org/​analy​sis/​massac​res-​exe​cuti​ons-​and-​falsif​ied-​gra​ves-​
wag​ner-​gro​ups-​mount​ing-​human​itar​ian-​cost-​mali
	38	 Militarnyi, ‘Wagner PMC Base Attacked in Popasna,’ 14 August 2022. Available 
online: https://​mil.in.ua/​en/​news/​wag​ner-​pmc-​base-​attac​ked-​in-​popa​sna/​
	39	 ‘Grisha Moskovskiy Addressed the Prisoners,’ 12 July 2022. Available online: www.
yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​T8Vq​4fi-​vUk
	40	 Komarov, ‘Special Project.’
	41	 Mark Hertling, ‘I Commanded U.S. Army Europe. Here’s What I Saw in the Russian 
and Ukrainian Armies,’ The Bulwark, 11 April 2022. Available online: www.the​bulw​
ark.com/​i-​comman​ded-​u-​s-​army-​eur​ope-​heres-​what-​i-​saw-​in-​the-​russ​ian-​and-​ukrain​
ian-​arm​ies/​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

80  Combatants
	42	 Anastasia Smirnova, ‘Wagnerites Shot Dozens of Prisoners Recruited for the War,’ 
Novyvny Online, 1 November 2022. Available online: https://​nov​yny.onl​ine.ua/​vagn​eriv​
tsi-​rozst​rily​ali-​desya​tki-​zaver​bova​nih-​na-​viynu-​vyaz​niv_​n850​351/​
	43	 Bowen, ‘Ukrainian Military.’
 
 
 

DOI: 10.4324/9781003351641-6
5
THE LAND DOMAIN
This chapter addresses the land domain of the war. It focuses on different stages 
of the war, including Russian territorial gains in the first days of the invasion 
followed by the establishment of a relatively more static frontline in the spring, 
Russian withdrawal from the north while losing the Battle for Kyiv and the siege 
of Mariupol followed by its refocus on Donbas. Next, the land aspects of Ukrainian 
counteroffensives are discussed, followed by Russia’s winter intensification in 
different locations and the consequent regrouping of forces for the next stage of war 
in spring-​summer 2023. Various aspects of fighting power are discussed throughout 
the chapter, with some points for further consideration provided at the end.
The initial stage
Aiming for the advantage of surprise, Russia attacked Ukraine from the north, 
east and south, with wide-​ranging objectives, such as capturing the capital and 
seizing major cities across these directions to occupy as much of the territory as 
possible within a short time. Within a few days, these objectives were revealed to 
be too broad for the Russian military to achieve. The inability to destroy expected 
military targets of C2 and recruit Ukrainian military leadership in the first few days 
as was done in the Crimean scenario was one of the many Russian miscalculations. 
Similarly, political leadership did not leave Ukraine but remained to defend and 
fight for it.
The Russian attempt to take Kyiv was illustrated in the long columns of armed 
machinery, some reaching 65 km and moving towards the capital. The major 
vulnerability was Hostomel airport, one of Kyiv’s gateways. The Russians tried 
to seize it by using helicopter transportation of special operations of VDV into the 
area. By seizing the airport, the Russians could use it to land larger cargo transport 
 
 
 

82  The land domain
aircraft to deliver more troops and weapons into the area. However, in the first 
wave of attack, helicopters were taken down by man-​portable air-​defence systems 
(MANPADS), while in the second wave after landing, the Russian VDV was greeted 
with Ukrainian artillery fire. Russian ground advancement from the Gomel direction 
towards Kyiv was still rapid despite the use of the same roads and the concentration 
of Russian forces in the same areas due to poor orientation in the area. This was 
also due to a lack of sufficient Ukrainian troops. For instance, the UAF troops in the 
Chernihiv area left various Ukrainian units behind Russian lines.1
At that time, the primary asset to defend Kyiv was the 72nd mechanised 
brigade and two artillery brigades. However, the UAF used most of its SOF and 
special units on the Gostomel direction. The UAF managed to organise people 
from military training facilities (cadets and military teachers) into temporary 
battalions and utilise artillery systems normally used for training in those facilities. 
Furthermore, reserves from the territorial defence units were employed. Even with 
these efforts, the force ratio on the Gomel direction was 12:1 in favour of Russia. 
Such force disparity resulted in various instances of territorial defence taking all-​
around defensive positions.2
The defence of Kyiv illustrated various innovative tactics of the UAF that 
allowed them to achieve the desired outcome with the scarce resources available. 
The speed of movement of the Ukrainian soldiers was often improved by using All-​
Terrain-​Vehicles (ATV), which also allowed access to the more complex terrains of 
forest areas. Russian columns were eliminated by hitting the first and the last vehicle 
in the column. Then the rest of the column was destroyed by artillery or drones. 
This approach often allowed the seizure of vehicles that were not damaged.3 The 
advancement of Russian troops was also slowed by the use of hydraulic systems in 
the area –​ by damaging dams and bridges, the river Irpin flooded the area making 
it unsuitable for further movement of the Russian troops.
For security reasons, Russian troops were not told where they were going and 
what they were doing until 24 hours before the invasion, and their high hope for 
instantaneous gains and low expectations of heavy fighting resulted in a significant 
lack of supplies needed for three days. Poor logistics of supply and communication 
soon resulted in Russians getting supplies from the locals, including using locals’ 
phones for calling home. This provided an opportunity for the UAF –​ by detecting 
the concentration of signals in the forests –​ to coordinate artillery fire accordingly.4 
After 36 days of the full-​scale invasion, Russian troops withdrew from the north 
and focused their efforts on Donbas and southern areas.
According to Mick Ryan, various Russian miscalculations played into 
Ukrainian hands at the early stage of the invasion. In close combat, the Russians 
aimed at ‘conducting sweeping manoeuvres that coordinated airborne and 
airdrop operations with ground offensive operations.’5 However, their air–​land 
integration and combined arms tactics were very poor, partially because domains 
and directions from the command perspective were separate wars fought under 
different commands.6
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The land domain  83
Regarding Russian advancement in other areas, little progress was made in 
Donbas to further advance against the Ukrainian defences, but the UAF had to 
be engaged in this theatre and could not be redeployed elsewhere. The primary 
success Russians achieved was in capturing Melitopol and Kherson with minimum 
resistance, and they managed to encircle Mariupol. Regarding Kharkiv, a very hasty 
move of the Russian SOF on light vehicles into the city resulted in their troops 
taking heavy casualties. The expectation that Kharkiv would be taken easily was 
erroneous, and the occupiers were soon encircled. According to a Ukrainian soldier 
taking part in the defence of Kharkiv, Russians barricaded in the local school were 
asked to surrender, but they claimed that Ukrainian soldiers would be surrendering 
to the larger Russian troops that were to enter the city. This Russian unit was soon 
eliminated. The primary explanation for this Russian failure is the disparity in 
preparedness and the lack of integration between Russian SOF groups and their 
consequent conventional supporting troops. Since then, Russia has continued its 
attempts to break into the city using artillery shelling.7
The siege of Mariupol
The port city of Mariupol has been strategically relevant to Russia since it opened 
the ground path to connect with Crimea. It also was the remaining part of the 
previously Russian-​occupied Donetsk district. Its significance and very close 
location to Russia and Russian-​occupied territories allowed Russia to advance 
towards the city from four ground directions and eventually encircle and besiege 
the city. The case showed the same approach applied in Grozny, which included 
massive, continuous, combined fire originating in various domains and assault 
groups terminating defensive positions.8 In the beginning, the Russians experienced 
losses due to poor integration of armour and infantry, but this was soon fixed. The 
defence of the city also illustrated a significant issue among the Ukrainian forces –​ 
the division of unit boundaries among the army, navy and territorial defence units of 
the UAF.9 Since Russians could identify those boundaries, they isolated Ukrainian 
defences into smaller pockets and attrited them.
One of the most significant acts of valour was the defence of the Azovstal plant 
by the Azov regiment and Ukrainian marines and other units that dug into the 
facility for three months. Surrounded and having gathered wounded soldiers from 
other pockets of defence, this was the last stand of the besieged Mariupol. The 
primary advantage of the facility was its old Soviet design, which meant that as a 
strategic object, it was built to last, with numerous bunkers and a complex system 
of tunnels leading to various areas outside the plant. But like any siege, the issue 
was food and medical supplies, especially since many wounded were gathered in 
the plant.
In addition, as they were deep behind Russian lines, any support or breakthrough 
on the ground from the UAF would take a long time and would require significant 
achievements across the newly established frontline. This also meant that the air 
 
 
 
 
 

84  The land domain
space over the city was under Russian control. Any attempts to provide supplies 
and troop evacuation would have had a very low success rate. This does not mean 
that resupply missions were not conducted. According to Brigadier General Kyrylo 
Budanov, the head of the Defence Intelligence of Ukraine, seven missions were 
conducted, with 16 Mi-​8 helicopters involved. During two missions, two helicopters 
were shot, and a third helicopter was destroyed coming to the rescue. Overall, the 
flights provided the besieged with weapons, ammunition, food and medicine and an 
additional 72 soldiers of the Azov regiment while evacuating most of the severely 
wounded from the plant. The flights were eventually stopped because information 
about them became public, and the Russians strengthened their air defences,10 
focusing more on the helicopters flying low at night. Eventually, Azov defenders 
were ordered to surrender and were taken into Russian captivity. Only some of 
them were returned during the major prison exchanges on 21 September 2022. 
Besides the symbolism of the Ukrainian heroic defiance, the resistance of Azov 
soldiers also distracted Russian forces from redeployment into other areas and kept 
air defences around the city instead of refocusing them closer to the frontline.
Artillery
The role of artillery is hard to overestimate; it was crucial in providing desired 
fire to support the ground forces in preserving frontline positions, degrading 
Russian logistics and facilitating further advancement of the UAF in the 
counteroffensives. According to the RUSI report, at the beginning of the invasion, 
the disparity in the numeric estimates of the artillery between Russia and Ukraine 
was insignificant: 2,433 barrel artillery systems compared to 1,176 and 3,547 
MLRS versus 1,680.11 The primary challenge for the UAF was the reduction in 
ammunition, which would only be enough for six weeks of intense warfighting. 
The reduction in ammunition available to the UAF was conditioned by Russian 
sabotage activities a few years before the invasion by exploding primarily storage 
facilities with the 152 mm shells used in most of the Soviet artillery.
The primary difference between Russian and Ukrainian use of artillery was that 
the Russians employed the traditional Soviet mass approach, which covered larger 
areas compared to the more sporadic surgical strikes conducted by the UAF. In 
this regard, the Russian mass approach and fire superiority were conditioned on 
the greater availability of artillery systems and ammunition, especially at the early 
stage of war. The UAF had to be smart in using their available resources, primarily 
due to their scarcity, especially during the first few months of the full-​scale invasion 
while international military assistance was yet to arrive.
The Russian refocus on Donbas beginning in mid-​April allowed it to concentrate 
forces and assets in a smaller area. Despite the high morale of the Ukrainian 
soldiers, the fight for Donbas revealed signs of fatigue due to diminishing amounts 
of equipment and ammunition, the losses of brothers in arms and issues in 
organising rotation since these were the early months of war. It was later revealed 
 
 
 
 

The land domain  85
that April was a turning point in the war. Russians were also demoralised and some 
of their better trained and experienced soldiers were already gone. This stage of 
war reinforced the importance of artillery in the land-​centric war –​ despite the 
Russian numeric superiority in available artillery, their advantages and actual unit 
survival depended on precision on the tactical level using all available resources. 
Russia and Ukraine also had to mutually adapt to each other’s tactics. For 
instance, it became evident that the Russians could not conduct counter-​artillery 
fire from the targeted battery but instead from another one that was not under 
fire. The Russians proved heavier and hence slower for quick repositioning and 
would often displace only under fire. Having fire dominance allowed for this static 
approach that caused relatively little harm to the Russian forces until the UAF 
gained more sophisticated long-​range artillery. Then static and less agile Russian 
batteries became easy targets. During the Donbas offensive, Russian artillery was 
firing on average 20,000 rounds per day and on some days, 32,000 rounds, while 
the UAF seldom went over 6,000.12
The scarcity of resources and vital necessities often encourage the most practical 
innovations both in times of peace and war. In the case of the UAF, scarcity of 
ammunition meant a greater need for improvement in precision and systemisation 
of fire from different domains. The solution for Ukrainian artillery was the Android 
app named Kropyva which was developed by volunteers in the Army SOS. It gives 
users an opportunity to mark enemy positions using a tablet: ‘The software then 
transmits the indication to nearby artillery pieces while allowing the coordination 
of their fire, resulting in synchronised fire against the same target from several 
separate positions.’13
In addition to improved precision, this app also significantly reduced the 
vulnerability of Ukrainian artillery to counterfire since it reduced the time needed 
for different activities. The deployment time of the howitzer battery was reduced to 
3 minutes, the engagement with an unplanned target to 1 minute and the opening of 
counter-​battery fire to 30 seconds.14 Hence, the systematic improvement of artillery 
performance was conditioned on the use of this app and on drone coordination of 
fire in tactical ISR missions, which allowed greater flexibility in engaging various 
pre-​planned and time-​sensitive targets of opportunity.
One of the prominent employments of Ukrainian artillery in spring 2022 was 
the use of artillery against the Russian attempt to encircle Ukrainian troops by 
crossing the Siverodonetsk River near the village of Bilohorlivka in May.15 The 
Russians established pontoon bridges to allow their troops and vehicles to cross 
the bridge. However, heavy Ukrainian artillery destroyed the enemy forces in the 
process. This was achieved by close collaboration between Ukrainian intelligence 
and engineering units that assessed the potential places for the Russian crossing 
with further drone surveillance verification of the actual Russian movement and 
activities. Thus, artillery units were well informed when and where to strike –​ they 
engaged Russian targets when their movement slowed down on the two banks of 
the river. The fleeing remnants of the troops were destroyed by Ukrainian aviation.
 
 
 
 
 

86  The land domain
Despite Ukrainian innovations and the gradual supply of the UAF with Western 
artillery systems in May 2022, the ratio of artillery had shifted towards even greater 
Russian numeric superiority by the end of spring and early summer. According to 
a statement by General Valery Zaluzhny on 28 June 2022,
the most intense hostilities are ongoing in the north of Luhansk and Kharkiv 
oblasts. In this area in the past 24 hours alone, Russia carried out 270 artillery 
raids, using 45,000 rounds of ammunition, and launched 2 missile strikes and 
32 airstrikes.16
Furthermore, the intensity of the Russian concentration of artillery was different 
across the frontline, which resulted in some areas being more defended, while 
others were more vulnerable to constant shelling.
Despite obvious numerical superiority in the number of artillery and ammunition, 
the inherent weakness in Russian fighting was blindly following Soviet doctrines 
and traditions of fighting a war. This was evident in the matter of logistics and 
sustainment of the troops on the frontline. First, although the character of the war 
in Ukraine required decentralisation and the ability to act in various directions, the 
location of Russian reserves and support elements were still within a 50 km range of 
the frontline. This approach was changed only after two months,17 again illustrating 
the rigid Soviet hierarchy in decision-​making within the Russian military. Second, 
a lack of planning for attrition warfare is often illustrated in poor supply routes and 
too deeply moving into the territory of the defending country. Although Russia 
managed to supply fuel, munitions and living necessities via trains in the occupied 
territories, these were reachable targets for artillery with the right precision and 
range, just as were Russian ammunition storage facilities established in ordinary 
houses in the occupied territories. Thanks to the Ukrainian partners, it was only a 
matter of time before the UAF used such artillery systems on the battlefield.
The main game changer in the battlefield at the time was the introduction of the 
American HIMARS in early summer. The UAF quickly acquired the necessary 
skills to operate the system. HIMARS provided even greater precision and, most 
importantly, further reach, depending on the ammunition type provided. Hence, 
the UAF targeted Russian logistics infrastructure deep behind their lines, such as 
artillery supply depots in the east. Soon after the introduction of HIMARS, there 
was a reduction in Russian ammunition expenditures from 12,000–​15,000 rounds 
per day to 6,000 rounds per day.18 However, the supply of HIMARS came with 
restrictions on their use –​ they were not provided with 200-​mile Army Tactical 
Missile System (ATACMS) and they were not to be used against Russian territory.19 
The importance of HIMARS was in having the firepower to defend Ukrainian 
territory, hold the frontline and have fire support for counteroffensives. In the weeks 
before the launch of Ukrainian counteroffensives, HIMARS and other Western 
weapons were used to degrade Russian supplies and logistics –​ ammunition depots, 
C2 locations, bridges and railway connections.
 
 
 
 
 

The land domain  87
The counteroffensives
Although the Russian offensive in Donbas resulted in additional territorial gains in 
the Luhansk district (Svitlodarsk, Lyman and Sviatohirsk) in early July, advancement 
was very slow and costly both in terms of lives and materiel. According to the 
estimations of the Ukrainian Ministry of Defence, from the time of the invasion 
until 21 August 2022, Russia lost 45,200 servicemen in Ukraine, 1,912 tanks, 4,224 
armoured combat vehicles, 1,028 artillery, 266 MLRS, 234 military jets and 197 
helicopters and other assets.20 In essence, the summer months can be considered 
a stage of regrouping the UAF for counteroffensives. The summer months were 
effectively used to degrade the Russian rear and supply chains with the extended 
reach that the HIMARS provided. Due to heavy losses, Russia brought more of its 
newly mobilised mass of soldiers onto the battlefield, often with little to no training. 
The UAF developed some ways to rotate its soldiers, allowing them to recover 
from months of uninterrupted fighting and constant shelling. Another distinctive 
feature of the Russian frontline observed by the UAF was the paradoxical lack 
of the same sufficient force concentration and mass build-​up across the entire 
extended frontline. In other words, when some areas became more problematic for 
the Russians to hold, more troops were moved from another area, weakening that 
position.21
Many scholars will study the Ukrainian counteroffensives in Kharkiv and 
Kherson for decades to come as a modern illustration of the principle of deception, 
the continuity of the Soviet ‘maskirovka’ doctrine in Ukrainian military thinking 
and the employment of the operational art in the modern information age of almost 
a transparent battlefield that presumably almost dispelled the fog of war.22 The 
research by the Washington Post involving 35 interviews of personnel from the 
UAF revealed that one of the axes of a counteroffensive was initially to be a decoy, 
with Kharkiv distracting attention from the Kherson offensive. However, Colonel 
General Oleksandr Syrsky suggested using Kherson as a partial distraction while 
conducting the Kharkiv counteroffensive. The idea was daring and unexpected 
since Izyum was not only significantly fortified (24 battalion tactical groups 
[BTGs] or approximately 18,000 troops with weapons and ammunitions), but also 
more Russian troops were across the border in Belgorod.23 According to Syrsky,
the enemy … thought that, because so many forces had been built up in Izyum 
and more were stationed over the Russian border in the Belgorod region, ‘you’d 
have to be crazy to move and try to strike right in the middle and split the two’… 
but the thought was there.24
The highlight of the late summer months were the discussions of the role 
of HIMARS in further degrading Russian forces, their demoralisation and high 
losses. There were also open public and media discussions of when the UAF 
would finally regain the Kherson region and soldiers would enjoy the taste of the 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

88  The land domain
famous Kherson watermelons. From the military perspective, these discussions 
might have been counterproductive since they highlighted the next objective of 
the UAF. However, such a move was part of the deception strategy of distracting 
attention from another direction of action, meaning the Kharkiv region. In addition 
to the public domain discussions, a few weeks before the counteroffensive, a 
game of bridges was taking place in the Kherson region, with Ukrainian artillery 
destroying rail and highway bridges in Kherson, reducing logistics traffic by 
70% across the Dnipro River, leaving Russian soldiers without a sufficient 
food and water supply a few days before the UAF breaking through the first 
lines of Russian defence on 29 August 2022. The distractions and formal focus 
on Kherson resulted in the relocation of half of the Russian troops, especially 
more experienced ones, at the end of July and the beginning of August, from 
the northeast of the Kharkiv region and the Izyum stronghold to the Kherson 
region.25 Further primary advancement of the UAF on the Kherson direction 
in late August–​early September only encouraged the Russians to preserve their 
focus and efforts on the southern direction.
The Kharkiv counteroffensive was the best illustration of a combination of 
surprise, speed, rapid adaptation and spearheading of action in breaking through 
the enemy’s frontline by joining two simultaneous advances: one towards 
Kupyansk pointing north and the second towards Izyum pointing south, which in 
essence divided the Russian troops into two, allowing further encirclement in both 
directions. The primary enabler of success was the speed of the UAF movement. 
As Syrsky stated, ‘Everything depended on the first day—​how far we could break 
through.’26 It was instantaneous movement; as of 9 September 2022, the UAF had 
captured 2,500 square kilometres in Kharkiv Oblast,27 and the counteroffensive had 
started only three days prior on 6 September.
Part of the Kharkiv counteroffensive was a rear raid conducted by the 80th 
separate amphibious assault brigade that moved together with the 25th  and 
92nd brigades. According to the brigade commander, Colonel Ihor Skybiuk, the 
brigade acted in the direction of the main assault after the first echelon units broke 
through the enemy’s defence. The primary objective was to get the city of Izyum 
under control, with a secondary objective of joining with other units to encircle 
the Izyum concentration of Russian forces. Russian troops that were engaged 
with the Ukrainian first attack echelon and artillery did not expect simultaneous 
infiltration of the UAF units into their rear position and speedy action towards their 
encirclement. The very movement of the unit was gradual, consisting of smaller 
engagements with the enemy and the employment of ambushes all the way to 
Izyum. Russians were retreating to the Oskil River crossing that was under the 
control of the Ukrainian artillery. So, they were destroyed there.28
One of the distinctive features of the operation was that Russians were running 
in a hurry, leaving behind their vehicles, ammunition supplies and even sleeping 
bags. As a result, the UAF gained much materiel during this raid: more than a 
hundred tanks, infantry fighting vehicles (IFVs), armoured personnel carriers 
 
 
 
 
 

The land domain  89
(APC) and various self-​propelled and towed howitzers.29 Therefore, there was 
some distraction of the technical sections of the unit towards the trophy equipment. 
In order to avoid this distraction during the second stage, a special unit responsible 
for handling trophy equipment was formed. According to Col. Skybiuk, Russians 
primarily depicted quantitative superiority rather than qualitative superiority, and 
even the most trained and elite Russian Fourth Tank Division did not show any 
significant achievements. Nevertheless, there was constant tactical learning about 
the performance of different Russian divisions and the development of ways to 
counter their advantages.30
Unlike the Kharkiv case, the Kherson counteroffensive followed its own 
dynamic and was much slower in its path and territorial progress. After weakening 
Russian supply and logistics support in the area, gradual and systematic grinding 
through Russian forces was taking place. The most important factor was preventing 
Russian resupply and reinforcement from the other bank of the Dnipro River, 
which was achieved by damaging the bridge over the river. The breakthrough 
started with mass fire against the Russian position, aiming to degrade their artillery, 
and once its numeric superiority was overcome, more freedom of action on the 
ground. The UAF movement was slower than in Kharkiv for a few reasons. First, 
as was previously mentioned, Russia moved more of their units from Kharkiv to 
the Kherson area, which meant a greater concentration of force. Second, according 
to Oleksii Reznikov, Ukrainian Minister of Defence, the rainy autumn weather 
slowed vehicle advancement because the terrain would easily turn to mud. Third, 
according to Brigadier General Oleksandr Tarnavskyi, the commander of the 
operational and strategic group of troops known as ‘Tavria,’ the Russians had 
mined 900 thousand hectares of liberated territories in the Kherson and Mykolaiv 
regions.31 Finally, each metre of liberated Ukrainian land came at a high price 
of the blood and sweat of the UAF. While Russia does not value the lives of its 
soldiers, Ukraine does, so liberating territory at any cost could end up costing even 
more. Eventually, the Russians were substantially degraded and cut off from their 
support on the opposite bank of the river, and they announced their withdrawal to 
the southern bank. Kherson and the entire northern bank of the river were liberated 
on a very symbolic date of 11 November 2022.
The two successful counteroffensives had great significance for the course of 
the war. They not only boosted the morale of the military and civilian Ukrainian 
population but also showed that the UAF can push back and achieve significant 
victories in addition to pushing enemies from Kyiv and the northeast. Kherson 
was also the only new regional capital that Russians managed to occupy during the 
invasion, so it had significant political symbolism. From the military geography 
perspective, control of Kherson and the northern bank secured control over one 
of the gateways to western Ukraine. Furthermore, closer advancement of the UAF 
in the direction of Crimea provides more opportunities for reaching new Russian 
positions on the other bank of the Dnipro River and Crimea itself. However, since 
the UAF did not gain control of the other river bank, Russian artillery could still 
 
 
 
 

90  The land domain
target the city of Kherson and Ukrainian positions from across the river, which 
continued into 2023.32
After the two counteroffensives and the formal announcement by Russia of 
mobilisation on 21 September 2022, and with the consequent immediate drop of 
newly mobilised troops on the frontline, the Russians strengthened their focus on 
the area where they were the most well-​established, namely Donbas, with continued 
fighting across the entire frontline. As the next chapter on air war illustrates, Russia 
compensated for its ground losses with aerial and long-​range bombing of the entire 
territory of Ukraine, with a specific focus on targeting civilian infrastructure. 
Besides its demoralising effect and the exhaustion of the Ukrainian ammunition 
stockpile, the offensive was also aimed at keeping Ukrainian leadership and rear 
support busy, distracting from the next stage of the war at hand –​ regrouping and 
consolidation for further actions. Hence, the period after the two counteroffensives, 
especially during the winter months of December 2022 and January 2023, can be 
characterised for both sides as gathering strength for the next stage of the war. 
Russia tried to buy time by publicly manipulating announcements about peace 
negotiations and a potential truce. In the meantime, missile attacks on Ukrainian 
cities continued from both Russian and Belarussian airspaces, with Belarusian 
aviation becoming more active in January 2023 when it began conducting ‘military 
exercises’ with the Russians.33
As for the Ukrainian preparations for the next stage of war, General Zaluznyi 
summarised the situation and requirements for the UAF in his interview with the 
Economist on 3 December 2022. Overall, he concluded that the Russians were 
regrouping their forces and gathering assets for their next attacks and potentially 
even trying to retake Kyiv, most likely by attacking from the territory of Belarus. 
He emphasised that the Russians were trying to buy time to mobilise more troops 
and gather material for the next strike, while preventing the UAF from regrouping 
for further advancement. Accordingly, the Russians intensified their assaults across 
the entire frontline with varying degrees of concentration of fire, primarily to keep 
the UAF busy and exhaust them before the next stage of war that would potentially 
occur in February–​March 2023.
Therefore, General Zaluznyi identified three strategic objectives for the UAF. 
First, the primary objective was to hold the lines and positions and preserve 
liberated territories under Ukrainian control. It is 10–​15 times more difficult to 
liberate territory than to hold it. Second, in the next stage of the war, any further 
engagements with the Russians or the conduct of the liberation operation would 
require substantial assets –​ thus, the objective was to build a critical mass; that 
is, accumulate resources sufficient for the liberation operation and a return to the 
borders that existed on 23 February 2022. From the materiel perspective, this 
would require more of international military assistance focused on the heavier 
equipment needed for land warfare. From the personnel perspective, the critical 
mass would have to be built by increasing the number of reserves with high levels 
of training. Finally, it would be crucial to strengthen Ukrainian air defences with 
 
 
 

The land domain  91
more advanced capabilities to once again build up the required critical mass to 
overcome the 0.76 coefficient of efficacy and take down the more sophisticated 
Russian long-​range ballistic missiles.
In discussing further options for the liberation of Crimea, General Zaluznyi 
stated that the key to its liberation is seizing 84 km of territory to Melitopol, which 
would allow firing control over the ground connection to Crimea. In order to 
conduct further liberation operations, which would most certainly have to be on a 
large scale, the UAF would need 300 tanks, 600–​700 APCs and 500 howitzers.34
Bakhmut holds
The battle of Bakhmut is one of the bloodiest in this war. It was characterized by 
the intensification of the Russian attempts to take the city of Bakhmut in Eastern 
Ukraine and saw mass casualties and attrition warfare in its worst manifestations. 
Intensification of Russian assaults began in August and was reinforced in November 
with the Russian troops withdrawn from Kherson. From then on, the place became 
known as the hottest spot of the frontline with Wagner PMC trying its tactics of 
using waves of prisoners and recruits. The intensity of warfighting and never-​
ending mass waves of expendable Russian troops and the concentration of various 
firepower assets on this segment of the frontline made the place one of the biggest 
meat grinders of the war.
In the interview, Col Gen Syrsky explained the significance of Bakhmut for both 
sides. From the Russian perspective, the city was of importance to facilitate their 
further advancement in the direction of Kramatorsk and Siversk in their further 
plans of fully occupying Donbas. From the Ukrainian perspective, the location 
was important because it was a focal point of the Ukrainian defence and holding 
of the frontline. Geographically being the traditional fortress standing on the hill, 
surrounded by rivers, it allowed inherent advantages in holding the ground. Another 
advantage was the tall buildings which facilitated defence in the urban warfare 
environment and undermined usual Russian advancement on the more plane-​land 
areas of Eastern Ukraine. Finally, ‘Bakhmut constitutes a part of Konstiantynivka-​
Kramatorsk agglomeration, the retention of which will prevent the enemy from 
hitting our forces in the flank or rear on the Lysychansk and Donetsk fronts.’35
Due to the intensity of warfighting and constant closeness of engagement, this 
battle showed numerous occasions of mutual learning and constant adjustment 
of fighting tactics. As a grinder of Russian ground forces, the constant necessity 
of firepower and ammunition became crucial to the survival of the UAF in the 
area. While the Ukrainian skills in urban warfare and reinforcements provided 
advantages in holding the city for nine months of the battle, the Russians learned and 
adapted their tactics accordingly. According to Col. Gen. Syrsky, Russians began 
to establish ‘Storm’ assault units to restore lost positions. They also showed better 
integration of their firepower with artillery and tank units in attacking Ukrainian 
positions, unmanned air vehicles (UAVs) for sweeping the area with subsequent 
 
 
 
 

92  The land domain
follow-​up engagement of Russian assault units. In early spring 2023, in order to 
undermine Ukrainian advantage in the urban environment, Russians adopted the 
tactic of ‘scorched earth’ with prolonged artillery barrages of the chosen target 
followed by a small group of ten people storming the target.36
Points for consideration
The manpower aspect of the war illustrated multiple points for discussion 
in identifying relevant characteristics for preparing the right personnel. The 
importance and disparity of training, skills and force cohesion between the two 
sides have been discussed in earlier chapters. From the perspective of the land-​
centric war, the presence of firepower originating from various domains can act as 
force multiplication and facilitate territorial advancement, but the absence of the 
critical mass and sufficient concentration of force across the frontline and occupied 
territories significantly undermines long-​term control of that territory. Russian 
employment of its traditional mass approach to the use of force and its advantage 
due to its numeric superiority in terms of its forces proved futile for several reasons.
One of the evident deficiencies in Russian performance was the inconsistency 
between the numeric representation of its armed forces on paper its skills and 
readiness. Total numbers on paper do not necessarily transfer into actual fighting 
power, and various partial attempts at modernisation focused on achieving rapid 
success with heavy equipment and much lighter BTGs lacked sufficient infantry for 
their effective performance on the roads, open spaces and urban environments.37 As 
was previously outlined, the Russian approach to structuring its ground forces was 
based on more traditional perceptions of manoeuvre warfare and, hence, focused on 
having more artillery and tanks, while force generation in the last ten years proved 
to be a significant issue.38 This was illustrated in the insufficient number of forces 
recruited for the contracted/​professional service even before the 2014 invasion. The 
actual lack of force was demonstrated in the insufficient staffing of the BTGs, which in 
the course of reforms, significantly reduced the manpower and consequent readiness 
of BTGs by cutting infantry to the minimum. According to Kofman and Lee:
As a tiered-​readiness force, Russian ground formations (including the airborne 
and naval infantry) were staffed somewhere between 70 to 90 percent. 
Consequently, a 3,500 sized brigade might only have 2,500 men at peacetime. 
When accounting for 30 percent conscripts likely to be in the unit, this meant that 
no more than 1,700 would be considered deployable. If actual readiness levels 
were being padded, or there were insufficient numbers of contract servicemen 
to fill out two battalion tactical groups, then the real number of forces available 
was even further reduced.39
Hence, force employment had been driven by force design and determined the 
numerous flaws that followed. The first days of invasion illustrated a significant 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The land domain  93
number of materiel but insufficient personnel to effectively employ it. For example, 
long convoys were particularly vulnerable at the beginning of the invasion because 
they did not have sufficient infantry and off-​road coverage.40
Regarding the Russian numeric or mass approach, it quickly became evident that 
personnel and materiel mass were soon significantly degraded in the war. During 
the spring–​summer, the numeric superiority of artillery compensated for the high 
losses of the Russian military, but the military burned through a significant amount 
of ammunition, while HIMARS and howitzers helped to eliminate ammunition 
storages. By losing significant mass in terms of people and artillery, the lack of 
an uninterrupted supply of ammunition weakened the Russian ability to control a 
large frontline in Kharkiv and to have sufficient artillery to control Kherson.41 The 
effectiveness of numeric superiority largely depends on how the numbers are being 
structured and employed, both in terms of personnel and materiel.
With respect to troops’ cohesion and skills, all traditional Russian exercises 
showcased a more static numeric presence instead of sophisticated modern skills, 
adaptability, force cohesion or the conduct of near-​real warfighting exercises. 
Even deployed units with some operational experience did not have much 
cohesion within larger formations since they originated from various regions 
and were too diversified, with some inherent ethnic rivalry among them. As 
their numbers degraded through spring–​summer, integration of newly mobilised 
personnel without much training and reconstituting of forces during the heavy 
fighting was very poor.42 Despite Russian attempts to modernise its military, the 
hierarchy and leadership style remained very rigid and hostile to critical thinking 
and alternative opinions. The Stalin tradition of treating generals prevailed in 
Putin’s Russia and was well illustrated in the constant changes in commanders 
in the war in Ukraine. Due to the consequences of taking responsibility for 
innovations, Russia, especially its Army, often took a long time to adapt their 
counteractions to the Ukrainian tactics. The rigidity of command and control 
and the punitive leadership style significantly undermined the use of mission 
command and tactical-​level initiative, and with significant losses among Russian 
senior-​ and medium-​level leadership, their skills and roles in sustaining the ranks 
was lost.43
Another issue in the Russian case is the disparity among different troops and 
their consequent status in the Russian forces. This time the incoherence was 
between ordinary soldiers and the newly mobilised soldiers and the Wagner PMC, 
Kadyrov’s Chechens that would use prisoners or the newly mobilised as cannon 
fodder in the first wave of their assaults. Besides the obvious lack of survivability 
of these troops, the spread of this news through various channels in Russia also 
undermined the mobilisation numbers, and many in the recent waves immediately 
surrendered to the UAF. The Ukrainian surrender hotline for Russian soldiers (‘I 
want to live’) witnessed mass surrenders in spring 2023 (the pick of 3,000 per each 
month of March and April), with increasing fear among Russians of the upcoming 
spring\summer Ukrainian counteroffensive.44
 
 
 
 
 
 

94  The land domain
From the perspective of modern warfare and the discussion of numeric standing 
armies versus smaller and more well-​trained and agile forces, the example of the 
Russian experience illustrates that the readiness for diverse warfighting scenarios 
requires a more balanced and multifaceted approach to building a critical mass of 
skilled Army that has both modern skills and the numeric weight to withstand the 
preliminary engagement and continue effective performance. The level of training 
and tasks might differ, but cohesion and across-​unit integration must be in place 
for it to function.
In contrast, the UAF illustrated the supremacy of the principle of economy of 
force and dispersion as the primary counteraction to the Russian mass approach. At 
the beginning of the invasion, Ukraine did not have equivalent numbers of people 
to those that the Russians were dropping on them. However, the required numbers 
were soon built through the previously prepared reserves and the involvement of 
cadets from the military education facilities, such as during the battle for Kyiv. 
Dispersion and delayed battles along with the advantage of the terrain allowed 
Ukraine to stop the enemy’s advancement into Ukrainian territory and to begin 
to gradually push Russians out of the occupied territories. The role of the human 
factor in this context is immense. Unlike the Russians, Ukrainian cohesion 
and the consequent integration of the troops was much higher. There are a few 
reasons for this. First, many survival, self-​organisation and integration skills were 
developed during the two Ukrainian revolutions. People in their 30s spent their 
entire lives in the transition of Ukraine through different stages of turmoil and 
now new stages of the war. Many people who went through the Revolution of 
Dignity were the same ones to fight in ATO in various places and roles over the 
eight years, and these very people were then in various roles on the frontline. In 
this regard, cohesion was conditioned not only by the commonality of patriotic 
beliefs and Ukrainian fighting spirit but also by the shared experiences of fighting 
this war for eight years, comradeship built through those years and training of the 
military skills. Furthermore, ATO veterans and more experienced men in their 50s 
who went through other wars could be found in different units –​ regular military, 
defence reserves and volunteers. Of course, this does not mean that cohesion across 
all units and consequent waves of mobilisation was at the same level; this most 
certainly varied, especially in the latest intakes. However, the core of the UAF 
that withstood the most difficult time in spring 2022, when ammunitions were at 
their lowest –​ were people united by their experiences of the Ukrainian life and 
warfighting during the previous decade.
From the perspective of materiel, several observations can be made. As in any 
domain of warfare, the Russians once again used numeric superiority, this time 
in equipment with varying levels of technological sophistication. Their firing 
superiority significantly increased throughout the spring, primarily due to more 
equipment being brought to the relatively consolidated frontline and the depletion 
of the UAF ammunition in Russian sabotages of Ukrainian arsenals during the eight 
years of war. While Russia could adopt more area bombing, the UAF had to choose 
 

The land domain  95
targets more carefully and focus on precision strikes and unconventional tactics 
to undermine the Russian advantage. Gen. Zaluznyi summarised the significant 
difference in targeting: ‘they act as horde, while we had to count each projectile.’45 
As always happens, human capital had to compensate for the limitations of 
the technologies and their scarcity. Hence, Ukrainian soldiers innovated with 
MANPADS to engage Russian convoys in a way that allowed some intact equipment 
to be taken from the enemy. The vital necessity to survive with scarce resources 
dictated numerous tactical innovations, while Russian overreliance on numeric 
superiority in personnel and firepower led to their indiscriminate use of force and 
mass in the employment of fire instead of precision. According to US Army Gen 
(Ret.) Petraeus, Ukraine managed to take full advantage from combining various 
assets in achieving combined effects:
By combined arms operations, I’m referring to the use of tanks together with 
infantry to keep the enemy infantry and their anti-​tank guided missiles off the 
tanks, with artillery and mortars suppressing the enemy, and with engineers 
and explosive ordnance disposal to reduce obstacles and defuse mines, with 
air defence right up with the tanks to keep the enemy’s air off of them. [With] 
their close air support, supported now by the MiG [fighter jets] provided by 
Poland and other NATO nations, logistics right up behind them with additional 
ammunition, food, fuel, water, medical support, and supplies, [and] good 
command-​and-​control on the Ukrainian side, electronic warfare to degrade the 
communications of the Russians.46
In immediate and short-​term necessity cases, people’s skills tend to compensate 
for the limitations or scarcity of resources, and protracted warfare and land-​centric 
warfare dictate the need to introduce new equipment with characteristics that could 
change the parity or undermine the enemy’s numeric advantage. International 
partner supplies of different howitzers and HIMARS to Ukraine demonstrated 
how more precise and mobile artillery can make a difference in the balance of 
fire power and facilitate further progress in the war. This case illustrates the 
significance of cutting-​edge technologies on the modern battlefield, but it comes 
with a reservation. In the ongoing discussion of numeric superiority versus fewer 
numbers of cutting-​edge technology, the focus is on building a sufficient critical 
mass in terms of systems with more numeric and cost-​effective arsenals that can 
provide desired firepower at a needed scale of inter-​state warfare. The objectives 
posed by General Zaluznyi along with further pleas from Ukraine for international 
military assistance demonstrated that while one can defend the country with the 
given means by building upon advantages from other sources, such as knowledge 
of the terrain and dispersal, in order to have a game-​changing or break-​through 
effect, advanced capabilities need to be accumulated and built up to create the 
critical mass required for the inter-​state warfare of today and tomorrow. The shape 
of that critical mass might vary from domain to domain, but it should be enough for 
 
 
 

96  The land domain
the given scale, and the most obvious scale can be the territory of the country that 
is building its defence capabilities.
Another significant feature of the land warfare that became evident in Ukraine 
is that terrain is significantly more urban than it was in World War II and, therefore, 
gaining territory in swift large-​scale manoeuvres of heavy ground forces was 
more contested since large cities were on the way and required very different 
force formation and skills of urban warfare. According to Michael Kofman, the 
Russians did not have an urban warfare doctrine, nor systematic training for urban 
warfare across its military –​ a very small number would be specifically trained for 
this type of warfare. Even the Russian VDV would not be fit for the purpose of 
being airdropped into cities to conduct urban warfare; they were still too heavily 
equipped for such purposes. Urban areas are far from friendly for heavy equipment 
like tanks, and ambushes by the UAF equipped with Next generation Light Anti-​
tank Weapons (NLAWS) would destroy Russian tanks, not to mention lighter 
vehicles. Furthermore, the heavily shelled buildings provided new positions for 
UAF infantry and snipers to target Russian forces.47
Urban warfare requires relevant professional training and knowledge of the 
urban area. In the case of Ukraine, some of its SOF units were trained in urban 
warfare because elements of the foreign legion had this type of training and 
incorporated it into the training programmes conducted during prior eight years 
of the war. This does not mean that this type of training was systematic across 
the entire Ukrainian military. However, there was another experience related to 
urban warfare –​ the experiences of two revolutions in the capital’s urban areas. 
Basic skills such as barricading, blocking roads and finding relevant overview 
positions were learned from practical, tactical experiences. Another enabling 
factor was John Spencer’s sharing of his manual on urban warfare with the 
UAF that, due to the modern information age, reached the Ukrainian soldiers 
on the ground and contributed to their knowledge of relevant tactics on the 
battlefield.
Despite the new technologies and availability of long-​range weapons, land-​
centric warfare remains people-​centric at its core. In one of the interviews, Gen. 
Zaluznyi explained the reason for the Ukrainian survival and endurance through 
the nine years of war –​ ordinary Ukrainian people. In this context, discussing the 
matter of different ways of warfighting between Ukrainians and Russians, he stated 
that it is about perception and value of human life. The Russian political and military 
leadership are more accepting of casualties among their military, which was evident 
in the use of cannon-​fodder tactics and high rates of blue-​on-​blue fire among the 
Russian forces. The Ukrainian leadership, in contrast, has been consciously more 
virtuous, focusing on defending the people and reducing casualties among the UAF 
as much as possible. From the perspective of total defence, as Zaluznyi said, ‘the war 
starts with professional military and ends with teachers and engineers’48 meaning 
that it consumes the professional military first, while it eventually requires civilian 
reserves to step up into the warfighting. While the exact numbers of the Ukrainian 
 
 
 

The land domain  97
losses are not made public and only some general numeric comparisons with more 
significant Russian losses were made, this land-​centric and human-​centric war 
showed significant demand for constant mobilisations and systematic training of 
the reserves during the ongoing warfighting. Hence, one year into the full-​scale 
invasion and nine years into the war –​ there were more engineers and teachers 
in the UAF, while additional reserves were being trained abroad and in Ukraine 
in order to build up sufficient skilled and equipped manpower for the Ukrainian 
summer counteroffensive.
Notes
	 1	 Mykhaylo Zabrodskyi, et al., Preliminary Lessons in Conventional Warfighting from 
Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine: February–​July 2022 (London: Routledge, 2022), 27.
	 2	 Ibid., 28.
	 3	 United 24, ‘Why Did Russia FAIL? Inside the Battle for Kyiv,’ 12 January 2023. 
Available online: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​U-​W1GuXP​hFw&t=​1s
	 4	 John Spencer, ‘The 2022 Battle of Kyiv_​John Spencer_​Chair of Urban Warfare Studies 
at the Modern War Institute,’ Lecture, 1 April 2023. Available online: www.yout​ube.
com/​watch?v=​5eWG​H_​7m​rg8
	 5	 Mick Ryan, ‘How Ukraine Is Winning in the Adaptation Battle Against Russia,’ 
Engelsberg Ideas, 24 August 2022. Available online: https://​enge​lsbe​rgid​eas.com/​ess​
ays/​how-​ukra​ine-​is-​winn​ing-​in-​the-​ada​ptat​ion-​bat​tle-​agai​nst-​rus​sia/​
	 6	 Ibid.
	 7	 Zabrodskyi, et al., Preliminary Lessons, 28.
	 8	 Ibid., 34.
	 9	 Ibid.
	10	 Howard Altman, ‘Inside Ukraine’s Daring Helicopter Missions Into Russian-​Occupied 
Mariupol,’ The Drive, 15 May 2022. Available online: www.thedr​ive.com/​the-​war-​
zone/​exclus​ive-​deta​ils-​of-​ukrai​nes-​dar​ing-​hel​icop​ter-​missi​ons-​into-​russ​ian-​occup​ied-​
mariu​pol
	11	 Zabrodskyi, et al., Preliminary Lessons, 16
	12	 Ibid., 36–​39.
	13	 Tom Cooper, ‘Kropyva: Ukrainian Artillery Application,’ 10 June 2022. Available 
online: https://​med​ium.com/​@x_​TomC​oope​r_​x/​krop​yva-​ukrain​ian-​artill​ery-​appl​icat​ion- 
​e5c61​61b6​c0a
	14	 Ibid.
	15	 ISW, ‘Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, May 10.’ Available online: www.under​
stan​ding​war.org/​backg​roun​der/​russ​ian-​offens​ive-​campa​ign-​ass​essm​ent-​may-​10
	16	 The Kyiv Independent, Kharkiv https://​twit​ter.com/​Kyiv​Inde​pend​ent/​sta​tus/​1541​7536​
5185​6900​096
	17	 Zabrodskyi, et al., Preliminary Lessons, 42–​43.
	18	 Ryan, ‘How Ukraine.’
	19	 Sanya Mansoor, ‘Why U.S. HIMARS Rockets Are Becoming Increasingly Decisive for 
Ukraine,’ Time, 5 January 2023. Available online: https://​time.com/​6244​479/​him​ars-​
rock​ets-​ukra​ine-​rus​sia/​
	20	 Ukrainian MOD, Twitter post, 21 Aug 2022, 10:19 AM. https://​twit​ter.com/​Defen​ceU/​
sta​tus/​1561​2666​1404​1022​465
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

98  The land domain
	21	 Chuck Pfarrer, ‘Opinion: A Game of Bridges –​ The Battle to Retake Kherson,’ Kyiv Post, 
30 August 2022. Available online: www.kyivp​ost.com/​opin​ion/​1495
	22	 Huw Dylan, David V. Gioe and Joe Littell, ‘The Kherson Ruse: Ukraine and the Art of 
Military Deception,’ Modern War Institute, 10 December 2022, Available online: https://​
mwi.usma.edu/​the-​kher​son-​ruse-​ukra​ine-​and-​the-​art-​of-​milit​ary-​decept​ion/​
	23	 Isabelle Khurshudyan, et al., ‘Inside the Ukrainian Counteroffensive that Shocked 
Putin and Reshaped the War,’ The Washington Post, 29 December 2022. Available 
online: www.was​hing​tonp​ost.com/​world/​2022/​12/​29/​ukra​ine-​offens​ive-​khar​kiv-​kher​son- 
​done​tsk/​
	24	 Ibid.
	25	 Ibid.
	26	 Ibid.
	27	 ISW, ‘Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment,’ 9 September. Available online: www.
iswr​esea​rch.org/​2022/​09/​russ​ian-​offens​ive-​campa​ign-​assess​ment​_​10.html
	28	 Apostrophe TV, ‘The Unique Story of the Counteroffensive of the UAF in the Kharkiv 
region,’ 1 December 2022. Available online: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​5mkh​
1O3W​BvE
	29	 Militarnyi, ‘Ukrainian Military Captured a Significant Quantity of Enemy Equipment in 
Kharkiv Region,’ 9 September 2022. Available online: https://​mil.in.ua/​en/​news/​ukrain​
ian-​milit​ary-​captu​red-​a-​sign​ific​ant-​quant​ity-​of-​enemy-​equipm​ent-​in-​khar​kiv-​reg​ion/​
	30	 Ibid.
	31	 CensorNet, ‘The Russians Mined Almost 900,000 Hectares of the De-​occupied 
Territories of Kherson Region and Mykolaiv Region, –​ the Commander of the “Tavria” 
Group Tarnavskyi,’ 23 January 2023. Available online: https://​cen​sor.net/​ua/​news/​
3395​075/​rosiyany_​zaminuvaly_​mayije_​900_​tysyach_​ga_​deokupovanyh_​terytoriyi_​
hersonschyny_​ta_​myko​layi​vsch​yny_​koma​nduv​ach
	32	 Tetiana Bezruk, ‘Artillery Heralds Kherson’s New Year,’ Center for European Policy 
Analysis, 10 January 2023. Available online: https://​cepa.org/​arti​cle/​artill​ery-​hera​lds-​
khers​ons-​new-​year/​
	33	 Iryna Balachuk, ‘Military Exercises in Belarus Extended Again, to Last at Least until 
End of January,’ Ukrainska Pravda, 20 January 2023. Available online: www.pra​vda.
com.ua/​eng/​news/​2023/​01/​20/​7385​739/​
	34	 The Economist, ‘An interview with General Valery Zaluzhny, Head of Ukraine’s Armed 
Forces,’ 15 December 2022. Available online: www.econom​ist.com/​zaluz​hny-​tra​nscr​ipt
	35	 Valentyna Romanenko, ‘Commander of Ukrainian Ground Forces Names Main Reasons 
for Holding Bakhmut,’ Ukrainska Pravda, 25 April 2023. Available online: www.pra​
vda.com.ua/​eng/​news/​2023/​04/​25/​7399​371/​
	36	 Interfax Ukraine, ‘By Holding Bakhmut, We Do Not Give the Enemy the Opportunity 
to Increase the Front –​ Syrsky,’ 25 April 2023. Available online: https://​inter​fax.com.ua/​
news/​interv​iew/​906​054.html
	37	 John Spencer, host, ‘Russia, Ukraine, and Urban Warfare,’ Urban Warfare (podcast), 19 
August 2022, (accessed 24 June 2023) https://​mwi.usma.edu/​rus​sia-​ukra​ine-​and-​urban-​
warf​are/​
	38	 Ibid.
	39	 Michael Kofman and Rob Lee, ‘Not Built for Purpose: The Russian Military’s Ill-​fated 
Force Design,’ War on the Rocks, 2 June 2022. Available online: https://​waront​hero​cks.
com/​2022/​06/​not-​built-​for-​purp​ose-​the-​russ​ian-​milita​rys-​ill-​fated-​force-​des​ign/​
	40	 Spencer, ‘Russia, Ukraine, and Urban Warfare.’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The land domain  99
	41	 Michael Kofman and Rob Lee, ‘How the Battle for the Donbas Shaped Ukraine’s 
Success,’ Foreign Policy research Institute, 23 December 2022. Available online: www.
fpri.org/​arti​cle/​2022/​12/​how-​the-​bat​tle-​for-​the-​don​bas-​sha​ped-​ukrai​nes-​succ​ess/​
	42	 Michael G. Anderson, ‘A People Problem: Learning from Russia’s Failing Efforts to 
Reconstitute Its Depleted Units in Ukraine,’ Modern War Institute, 26 January 2023. 
Available online: https://​mwi.usma.edu/​a-​peo​ple-​prob​lem-​learn​ing-​from-​russ​ias-​fail​
ing-​effo​rts-​to-​recon​stit​ute-​its-​deple​ted-​units-​in-​ukra​ine/​
	43	 Ibid.
	44	 Taras Levchenko, ‘ “There Were Appeals from the Entire Units”: How Do the Russian 
Soldiers Surrender?’ Radio Freedom, 10 May 2023. Available online: www.radio​svob​
oda.org/​a/​yal-​viyskv​irf-​zdayut​sya-​u-​polon/​32405​035.html
	45	 Komarov, Special project.
	46	 Vazha Tavberidze, ‘Ukraine War A Clear-​Cut Case Of ‘Right Versus Wrong,’ Says 
Petraeus,’ Radio Free Europe, 18 April 2023. Available online: www.rferl.org/​a/​petra​
eus-​interv​iew-​ukra​ine-​rus​sia-​putin/​32369​104.html
	47	 Spencer, ‘Russia, Ukraine, and Urban Warfare.’
	48	 Komarov, Special project.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

DOI: 10.4324/9781003351641-7
6
THE AIR DOMAIN
This chapter is devoted to exploring air power and the aerial domain of the war in 
Ukraine. It addresses why air superiority was not gained and how a parity of mutual 
air denial was established instead. It explains the initial chronology of the events, 
various ways of employing air power and the limitations of the Russian long-​range 
missile attack campaign. It illustrates how the Ukrainian layered approach to air 
defence and the employment of dispersal denied the military advantage of Russian 
numerical and technological superiority in the aerial domain. It also shows the 
importance of interservice and cross-​domain integration in achieving the desired 
effects. Furthermore, attention is paid to the skills and training of the Ukrainian 
pilots compared to that of the Russians, illustrating the extent that adaptability and 
dispersal were acquired by the UkrAF during the first eight years of war.
Stages of the air war
Four distinctive stages in the Russian air war over Ukraine can be defined during 
the first year of the full-​scale invasion. The first stage, February–​March 2022 
was characterised by the preliminary engagement of air forces gradually being 
substituted by the establishment of air defences and anti-​access and area denial 
capabilities (A2AD) in their respective controlled areas. The initial targeting 
focused on military objectives. One of the tactical adjustments was changing 
from day to night-​time flights. The second stage of March–​August 2022 can 
be considered as an interim period, with testing of various Russian tactics and 
approaches in targeting and Ukrainian responses. During this period, targeting 
switched to bigger targets, including in civilian areas, intensification of bombing 
in June, focusing on storage facilities, railway infrastructure and refineries 
etc. The third period August–​November 2022, corresponded to the Ukrainian 
 
 
 

The air domain  101
counteroffensives and demonstrated Russian air and land assets being on the 
defensive.1 On the other hand, the Russian long-​range ballistic missile attack 
campaign continued throughout the year, intensifying punitive attacks on civilian 
areas and infrastructure on the occasions of Ukrainian victories on the ground, or 
when important foreign decisions and visits took place or on symbolic dates. The 
fourth stage of December 2022–​March 2023 was characterised by the continuity of 
the previous combination of the long-​range ballistic missile barraging with various 
extents of intensification, using bombers from the Russian and Belarusian air space 
to attack targets in Ukraine. Various Russian attempts within this recent period also 
saw Russian employment of gliding bombs, the inclusion of UAVs to support their 
critical mass in barraging campaigns and ISR tasks.
The employment of the aerial assets in the full-​scale invasion was paramount 
for the surprise and paralysing effect and degrading of the Ukrainian air defences 
and air forces at their most vulnerable –​ when they were on the ground. The attacks 
included heavy cruise and ballistic missile barrages combined with the employment 
of bombers Su-​34 and fighters Su-​30 and Su-​35, facilitated by electronic jamming of 
air defences. The main focus of the attacks were Ukrainian air defences, air bases and 
airfields, fixed radar and surface-​to-​air missile (SAM) sites, and ammunition storage 
facilities. Russian targeting lists were detailed due to the preliminary intel gathered 
from the multiple classified and human intelligence (HUMINT) sources, resulting in 
heavy fire; but allies informed the UAF about the actual attack and thus succeeded in 
preserving various aerial capabilities intact. Mobile air defence and personnel were 
moved from their preliminary positions known to the Russians, which meant that 
when Russian missiles reached those places, they were hitting empty locations. In 
addition, the rather obvious targeting of aircraft while it was the most vulnerable on 
the ground did not provide the desired effect of destroying the UkrAF since most of 
the fleet was either airborne or retracted to the peripheral airfields.
The intensity of the fire in the first days was significant, with between 200 and 
140 sorties for fighters and bombers flying deep into Ukrainian territory. With some 
of the air defences moved and others jammed and supressed by means of electronic 
warfare, the UkrAF, using Mig-​29 and Su-​27 fighters, had to engage in the 
immediate defence of the country’s air space in the first few days of the invasion. 
The evident tactical technological superiority of the Russian SU-​30 and Su-​35 in 
terms of radar and missile performance required the Ukrainian pilots to innovate 
with aggressive tactics and low flights taking advantage of the air littoral under 
the conditions of being significantly outnumbered. Accordingly, in the first few 
days of the invasion, many brave pilots of the UkrAF downed Russian fighters and 
bombers, often paying for the achievement with their own lives, such as the famous 
Ukrainian flying ace Col. Oleksandr Oksanchenko, who was often considered to be 
the legendary ‘Ghost of Kyiv.’ He died on 28 February 2022 when his Su-​27 was 
shot down over Kyiv.2 When the Ukrainian ground-​based air defences (GBAD) 
restored their functionality, the issue of deconfliction arose, which was resolved by 
allocating different operational areas.
 
 
 

102  The air domain
Antonov/​Hostomel international cargo airport was a focal point in Russian 
invasion plans, located 30 km northwest of Kyiv. It was to be used as forward 
operating base for further Russian deployment into the area and advancement 
towards Kyiv. Control over other airports like Kyiv International Airport (Zhuliany) 
and Boryspil were also potentially considered for this purpose.3 The Hostomel\
Antonov airfield was significant for the Russian airlift of troops and heavy cargo 
not only because of its immediate closeness to the capital, but also because of 
its distinctive infrastructure. The airfield was built for heavy transport use of the 
biggest transport aircraft in the world –​ An-​225 Mriya, which meant very wide and 
well-​strengthened airstrips. In capturing the area, Russians used primarily their 
Mi-​8 transport helicopters to drop their paratroopers, and Mi-​24 and Ka-​52 combat 
helicopters supported by fighter jets to gain control of the airport. In the first 
instances a few hundreds of Ukrainian defenders had to fight against numerically 
superior enemy. Nevertheless, they managed to take down some of the Russian 
helicopters with MANPADS. Later on, Ukrainian paratroopers were deployed into 
the area. Although Russians eventually managed to get hold of the location, the 
infrastructure was degraded so that it could no longer be used for the intended 
heavy airlift purposes. Three Ukrainian airborne paratroopers commanded by 
a young paratrooper with a call sign ‘Zeus’ that were in the encirclement of the 
Russians in the area, successfully coordinated Ukrainian artillery and aviation fire 
on the Russian positions until their full withdrawal from Northern Ukraine.4
From the air power perspective, this battle was significant in many ways. 
Its crucial role in preventing further encirclement and advancement on Kyiv is 
unquestionable. It also illustrated the vulnerability of the Russian aerial assets 
in Ukraine to MANPADS. While Russians placed significant focus on their 
paratroopers and Army aviation, which they showcased in all of their wars, this 
battle illustrated that they were the most vulnerable. In the further months of war, 
in the count of destroyed Russian assets, transport and attack helicopters were the 
most numerous. From the perspective of forward operating bases, or logistical hub, 
the inability to control Antonov airport also illustrated that Crimea 2014 and Kyiv 
2022 were very different operational environments.
What has been witnessed in the progressing months of war illustrates cross-​
domain and inter-​unit efforts in achieving air denial to Russian attempts to 
establish air superiority in Ukrainian airspace. First, the inability to destroy 
mobile air defences like S-​300 and Buk systems with their further deployment 
in the needed areas of operation was a huge disadvantage for the Russian Air and 
Space Forces (Vozdushno-​kosmicheskiye sily VKS). Second, Russians did not 
manage to destroy UkrAF on the ground, and even their technological superiority 
did not destroy Ukrainian military aviation, not to mention that Ukrainian pilots 
proved more innovative and sophisticated in aerial manoeuvres. Third, since the 
medium altitudes from which Russians operated in their campaigns in Syria were 
limited due to the SAM systems, the Russian pilots moved to the lower altitudes 
and operated in air littoral which, in essence, was unknown to them. Just as 
 
 
 

The air domain  103
Ukrainian ground troops had the advantage of the terrain in land warfare, so did 
the UkrAF have the advantage of knowing the air littoral to outmanoeuvre the 
Russians. Furthermore, low altitudes became even more dangerous for the Russian 
fixed-​ and rotary-​wing aircraft due to the availability of Stinger and Starstreak 
MANPADS. There were reports of anti-​tank missiles being used against Russian 
helicopters flying low. Hence, UAF illustrated that ‘defense in vertical depth is 
most effective when the defender exploits the interactions between the blue skies 
and the air littoral.’5 Besides fixed-​wing aircraft luring Russian counterparts into 
the air littoral, Bayraktar drones targeting approaching Russian convoys also were 
chased by the fighters and were lured to the lower altitudes. This worked until 
Russia deployed air defences, such as S-​400 and Buk, to cover the battlefield. 
Mutual air denial over the battlefield occurred.6 Furthermore, the effectiveness of 
Ukrainian air denial made Russian pilots of fixed-​ and rotary-​wing aircraft afraid to 
enter Ukrainian airspace, which meant that they either operated at high altitudes or 
conducted strikes from the Russian airspace. These changes can also be perceived 
as operational adaptation, learning from one’s enemy, and engagement, which once 
again required the defending side to develop additional innovations.
In essence, denying the Russians control of the air over Ukraine confirmed one 
of the air power dictums of Colin Gray, which is that ‘control of the air is either 
essential or highly desirable but differs qualitatively from control on the ground,’7 
suggesting that it ‘does not imply the immediate surrender of an adversary in the 
same way as control of the ground.’8 Fluidity and changeability of both control 
of the air and air denial provide opportunities for changing the parity if new 
opportunities arise. A few factors conditioned the Ukrainian air denial. It required 
integration and deconfliction of various assets across domains in their support of 
air denial and employment of air power in the frontline. Dispersion of the aerial 
assets across the country; avoidance of concentration of force; and a high level 
of adaptability of pilots to taking off, landing, flying and enduring technological 
challenges under severe circumstances of field air bases or airfields contributed 
to employment of air denial. Combined effects from conventional aircraft, cheap 
drones and ground-​based firepower established effective countermeasures against 
various targets in the air across various altitudes. International military assistance 
provided logistical support and spare parts supplies allowing Ukrainian engineers 
and Ukroboronprom to restore various aircraft and fix air defence systems and 
radars. Devoted ground troops were motivated as much as Ukrainian pilots to take 
Russian aviation off Ukrainian skies with all available means.
Effects, posed objectives, targeting and precision
When a mass approach is adopted for structuring and employing force, it might be 
tempting to assume that ‘more’ might mean more effective and that quantity would 
compensate for other deficiencies. As the air war illustrated, although critical mass 
is needed to sustain both air offensive and defensive, as with any military force, it 
 
 
 
 
 
 

104  The air domain
is about how the capabilities are being used –​ multiple hit targets or a huge number 
of dropped bombs do not equal the achievement of posed military objectives and 
desired strategic effects.
When the air raids against Ukrainian military infrastructure in the first few days 
proved far less successful than what was expected and Ukrainian GBAD were 
recovered, the VKS had to adjust the flights of their Su-​25, Su-​30 and Su-​34 to fly at 
low altitudes during the first two weeks of the full-​scale invasion. Low altitude and 
often flying in singles instead of in a significant formation resulted in rapid losses 
of aircraft from the MANPADs, at one point reaching eight hits within a week. 
Besides the danger, the low-​altitude flying meant very little time for acquiring, 
manoeuvring and dropping weapons on the given target, not to mention lack of 
up-​to-​date maps and the challenges of attacking well-​dug-​in Ukrainian forces that 
used the same equipment as Russian troops. Hence, the Russians were flying sorties 
against preassigned targets rather than taking advantage of time-​sensitive targets or 
targets of opportunity. Furthermore, daytime low-​altitude flights were considered 
too dangerous by more experienced Russian pilots.9
The primary Russian adaptation during the early spring 2022 was shifting 
sorties from the day to the night-​time. The primary advantage for Russians was that 
Ukrainian soldiers on the ground lacked thermal imagers or night-​vision devices 
to shoot at Russian aircraft at lower altitudes. However, with more national and 
international crowdfunding aimed at this distinctive equipment, more night-​vision 
goggles were provided for the ground troops in Ukraine. Hence, the mutual addition 
of tactics continued, but it took time to get this equipment. So, the Russians took 
advantage of the night-​time for most of the spring 2022. From the targeting point 
of view, night sorties were not characterised by greater precision, which resulted 
in switching from the Ukrainian military objects that required more accurate 
intelligence and planning to the usual Russian indiscriminate bombing of besieged 
cities. While in Syria, the Russians had used TU-​22M Backfire medium bombers 
to conduct ‘carpet bombing’ of Aleppo from medium altitudes,10 in Ukraine, they 
bombed them from lower altitudes. It is no coincidence that the ruins of Aleppo 
look the same as the ruins of Mariupol. Choosing big targets of populated cities 
like Kharkiv, Summy, Chernihiv and Mariupol provided symbolic achievements 
for the VKS to report to the Kremlin at the time when Ukraine was winning the 
Battle of Kyiv.
Russian withdrawal from Northern Ukraine and relative stabilisation of the 
frontline impacted the employment of aerial assets in the months before the Kharkiv 
and Kherson counteroffensives. Russians could regroup and consolidate their air 
force. Besides continued fighter attacks, Russians began using Orlan drones to 
identify and jam Ukrainian SAMs. As a result, the Ukrainian SAM systems of 
Buk and Osa had to be moved away from the frontline to reduce their losses. This 
allowed the VKS to use medium and low altitudes close to the frontline. However, 
due to the high losses of SU-​34 in the night raids, they were often used against fixed 
targets from a distance of 18–​15 km and medium altitude.11 With the beginning of 
 
 
 
 

The air domain  105
the Ukrainian counteroffensives in Kharkiv and Kherson, like the ground troops, 
the VKS also went onto the defensive. The availability of AGM-​88 HARM 
missiles supplied to Ukraine by Western partners allowed Ukraine to exhaust and 
suppress Russian GBAD, which allowed Ukrainian Su-​25 and Su-​24 to conduct 
standoff rocket attacks and bomb Russian positions on the frontline. Besides 
GBAD suppression, another factor disadvantaging the VKS was the scarcity of 
tanker support, which was traditionally focused on supplying the bomber fleet. 
As a result, combat air patrols (CAPs) would have to be shorter and sorties more 
frequent in order to cover designated areas of the frontline during the daytime. On 
the other hand, the Russians started using long-​range R-​37M from Mig-​31BMs at 
high altitudes, which provided them with the reach at a safer distance outside the 
Ukrainian defences12 but reduced the precision and target recognition, especially 
on the constantly changing frontline of the Ukrainian counteroffensive.
As the damage done to the aircraft increased at the lower and medium altitudes, 
it was mainly used against fixed targets and following given coordinates. While 
in modern warfare, targeting indeed depends on the intelligence gathered and the 
significance of the target to the overall objective, the Russian cherry-​picking of 
targets could potentially have had a surprise effect. However, the lack of continuity 
of sporadic attacks without follow-​up raids to clear the areas or conduct effective 
battle damage assessment (BDA) undermined the very utility of the initial strikes. 
Accordingly,
the very choice of targets at different stages was questionable and inconsistent 
with potential operational and strategic objectives or effects. Also, many time-​
sensitive targets and targets of opportunity were ignored. From one perspective, 
it could have looked like taking advantage of mass by concentrating it where it 
was needed at a given time. In reality, the extent of that necessity was doubtful. 
However, with the gradual establishment of the frontline, the focus shifted 
towards covering the frontline and nearby territory.13
Besides the symbolism and obvious necessity of showing progress in the aerial 
part of the campaign, this experience with targeting and mass use of ammunition 
showed another inherent Soviet deficiency of the VKS –​ even mass is exhaustible. 
Although much has been written about Russian aerial capabilities and their lack of 
involvement in Ukraine to the fullest capacity, the missing point is that, from an 
air cover perspective, the Russian aerial fleet is overstretched between covering 
national air space, making occasional moves into European national airspace and 
fighting the war in Ukraine. Furthermore, the ammunition stockpiles are also 
exhaustible and irreplaceable at the desired speed and rate, especially considering 
that various Russian missile manufacturing facilities have been sabotaged. Russia 
is dependent on the Western supply of spare parts, microchips and components for 
its various Russian-​manufactured weapons, supply which was heavily restricted 
by sanctions.14 Conflict Armament Research (CAR) investigates and physically 
 
 
 
 

106  The air domain
documents weapons and communication equipment used by Russia in the war 
against Ukraine. They identified 144 non-​Russian manufacturers of more than 650 
unique component models used in Russian military equipment in Ukraine.15 The use 
of identical components across different military systems makes Russia dependent 
on them for sustaining mass capabilities production across different platforms. For 
instance, Russian 3M14 Kalibr, 9M544 Smerch, Kh-​59 Ovod and Kh-​101 missiles 
use the same satellite navigation signal receivers. Similarly, the same parts were 
used in on-​board computers for Kh-​101 missiles and Ka-​52 helicopters.16
The UkrAF did not have the advantage of the same number of aerial capabilities 
and munition. Therefore, targets had to be well scrutinised before confirming and 
engaging. Furthermore, the scarcity of fixed-​wing aircraft due to their first weeks 
of active engagement, and the necessity of repairs and spare parts, placed various 
firepower tasks on to ground artillery, UAVs and rotary-​wing aircraft. Hence, the 
time was spent using the delivered spare parts for fixing Ukrainian fixed-​wing 
aircraft.
Ukrainian Army Aviation and Close Air Support (CAS)
The primary source of CAS for the UAF would traditionally be Army Aviation, 
subordinate to the ground forces of Ukraine. Before the beginning of war in 2014, 
Ukrainian helicopter pilots were involved in various peacekeeping operations 
worldwide. Starting with 2014, the focus was on strengthening the materiel of the 
branch. The branch was involved in various activities of ATO. By mid-​October 
2014 helicopters had flown 8,000 sorties with a total flying time of 8,000 hours. In 
the interim years of the war, army aviation was involved in mobility tasks, combat 
missions against enemy forces at Donetsk airport and airlift to then-​surrounded 
Kramatorsk airfield. After the full-​scale invasion, army aviation flew missions to 
Azovstal in besieged Mariupol. They also played their part in the liberation of 
Snake Island, performing airlift, attack and rescue tasks.17
Fire support for the ground forces cannot be overestimated in inter-​state warfare. 
Often not only the advancement but the very survival of the troops on the ground 
is dependent on the timeliness of the available air cover. In the case of the UAF, 
ground forces would often gain support from various sources of firepower: artillery, 
mortars, drones and different types of aircraft. The diversity of fire cover was 
conditioned by the scarcity of aerial assets in providing CAS across the extended 
frontline and the necessity of repairs and sustainment of the aerial capabilities 
before their engagement in the counteroffensives. Nevertheless, UkrAF and Army 
aviation were often called in to provide cover during spring and summer, with 
active involvement in CAS sorties supporting the offensives. The phenomenon of 
fire support provided by UAVs and remotely piloted vehicles (RPVs) in support of 
the tactical needs of the ground forces became of particular importance. However, 
the Ukrainian Army aviation is known to be the primary frontline support for the 
troops on the ground; as their motto says: ‘we are where we are needed.’
 
 
 
 
 

The air domain  107
In the case of Russian air power and CAS missions, Su-​25 were conducting 
more of a barrage effect support, while the Su-​34 fleet potentially was more 
capable of multirole standoff tasks against constantly moving Ukrainian troops. 
However, during the Ukrainian counteroffensive, while the UkrAF was flying CAS 
missions, the same could not be said about the VKS. Several reasons can explain 
the lack of Russian air power in CAS. First, greater functionality and employment 
of Su-​34 and Su-​25 since the beginning of the invasion resulted in reducing the 
fleet and wearing out of the materiel and personnel. Second, in order to reduce 
fleet losses in CAS missions, the VKS began using Su-​35 and Mig-​31 high-​altitude 
interceptors to target Ukrainian aircraft during their CAS missions in the frontlines, 
taking advantage of safe distances and preventing them from receiving return fire.18
Russian long-​range missile attack campaign
Another manifestation of the Russian mass approach to the employment of air 
power was the ongoing heavy barrage of Ukrainian territory with cruise and ballistic 
missiles from day one of the invasion: ‘Russia launched more than 1,100 missiles 
at Ukrainian targets over the first 21 days of the war and a total of 2,125 missiles 
over the first 68 days of the war.’19 In the first few months of the war, Russian 
attacks focused on military infrastructure, logistics supply, fuel storage facilities, 
bridges and civilian targets. Besides the existing intel on the static infrastructure, 
military objects and logistics chains, there was data collected from HUMINT. 
The UAF used shoot-​and-​scoot tactics for various mobile air defences and mobile 
units, which significantly undermined the effectiveness of the bombardment. 
Consequently, the focus of targeting shifted to fuel supply chains, storage facilities 
and railway infrastructure, together with seemingly casual retaliatory missiles 
hitting civilian targets like shopping malls and railway stations in the middle of the 
cities, such as the Kramatorsk railway station attack on 8 April 2022 and the city 
centre shopping mall attack in Kremenchuk on 27 June 2022.
Autumn illustrated yet another change in the Russian bombing campaign –​ the 
Russian retreat in Kharkiv and Kherson resulted in a change in leadership over the 
Ukrainian campaign. On 9 October 2022, General Sergey Surovikin was appointed 
as the new commander of the Russian forces in Ukraine. He was known as ‘General 
Armageddon,’ the orchestrator of the indiscriminate Russian bombing of Syrian 
cities. As the saying goes, an old dog cannot be taught new tricks. The next day, 
a massive bombing of the entire territory of Ukraine took place, targeting civilian 
infrastructure and especially the electricity grid. On that day alone, 84 missiles and 
24 loitering munitions (also publicly known as Shahed ‘kamikaze drones’) were 
launched.20 In order to cause greater damage and casualties, the timing was chosen 
as early morning on Monday when people would be going to work and preparing 
to travel for their daily chores. From that day on, the bombing intensified, and 
the regular bombing of entire country continued, further targeting the electricity 
grid aimed at forcing the Ukrainian people into submission through deprivation of 
 
 
 
 
 

108  The air domain
electricity, heating and water supplies. After the Ukrainians regained Kherson on 11 
November 2022,21 bombardment intensified with a particularly severe attack on 15 
November (around 100 missiles) and 23 November (70 missiles launched), resulting 
in severe blackouts due to disruptions of electricity production, transportation and 
distribution of electricity. Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant, Europe’s largest, had 
no external electricity supply and operated on diesel generators.
Despite the intensification of the Russian bombardment, the Ukrainian air 
defences were regrouped and readjusted to the variety of the attacks, with consequent 
improvement of the interception rates from 20–​30% in March–​April 2022 to 50–​
60% in June22 and 70–​80% in November. According to Commander-​in-​Chief of the 
Armed Forces of Ukraine, Gen. Valery Zaluzhny, the effectiveness of the Russian 
ballistic missile attacks was equivalent to the coefficient of 0.76, meaning that 
out of 100 launched missiles, 24 would get through.23 The improved interception 
rate was significantly conditioned by the greater availability of air defence systems 
and ammunition provided by international partners. The Norwegian Advanced 
Surface-​to-​Air Missile System (NASAMS) was highly praised.
Overall, there are a few observations to be made about the Russian bombing 
campaign. First, indiscriminate use of mass without linking it to carefully chosen 
targeting lists with clear strategic effects would mainly empty stockpiles. Second, 
shifts between targeting priorities was an adjustment to the course of the war. 
However, it did not make the strikes more effective, especially with improving 
Ukrainian air defences. Third, targeting the civilian infrastructure most certainly 
had two intentions. From the military perspective, the dispersion of the attacks 
across the entire country was aimed at exhausting Ukrainian air defences and 
redirecting valuable ammunition for interception purposes –​ highly technological 
ammunitions that could be used against Russian aerial capabilities or at the 
frontline. From the psy-​ops perspective, Russians assumed that they would gain 
success where the Nazis had failed before –​ reducing the people’s morale to 
fight by indiscriminately bombing cities and civilian infrastructure. This war has 
shown that indiscriminate bombing of civilians only makes Ukrainians angrier and 
strengthens their will to fight.
On air defences
Military necessity gives birth to various innovations and unconventional solutions. 
The Ukrainian system of air defence is such a case. According to the spokesperson 
of the UkrAF, Yuriy Ignat, the Ukrainian air defence system was distinctive since 
it utilised assets from various sources and domains. It initially employed Soviet 
air defence systems combined with attack aircraft and MANPADS. People with 
MANPADS were then spread across the country and various observation posts were 
established.24 Hence, different means provided varying range and more diversified 
cover of the key objects from the Russian missile and loitering munition attacks. 
However, the necessity for more advanced Western air defences arose because of 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The air domain  109
the diversity and intensification of the Russian long-​range ballistic missile attacks 
since 10 October 2022. For instance, one of the challenges was shooting down 
Iskander missiles since they were flying very low and Kindzhal missiles travelling 
at high speed. Hence, more technologically sophisticated Western technologies 
like NASAMs, IRIS-​T and Patriot systems were required to counter this faster 
and more sophisticated side of the Russian ballistic missile capabilities used in 
attacking Ukraine.
One of the obvious challenges of Ukrainian air defences was the complexity 
of integrating different capabilities with varying technological characteristics 
and logistics requirements into a single functional system, avoiding conflicts, 
fratricide and duplication of effort. Indeed, the UkrAF managed to get the most 
out of different air defence systems provided by international partners. The issues 
of deconfliction and integration of technologically different air defence equipment 
into a single system of national air defence was achieved by utilising diverse means 
ranging from attributing separate areas of responsibilities to different assets and 
combining a balanced approach in centralisation and mission command. Different 
air defence systems would also have dissimilar ranges and varying utility across 
the country and against specific threats. Hence, combining various assets allowed 
to cover some gaps and improve the success rate of the air defences.
One of the widely discussed themes in this segment of air war was the 
correlation between the numerical side and costs. The war of attrition with Russian 
long-​range missile barrages and Ukrainian utilisation of the more sophisticated 
Western air defences would inevitably come to the question of who would have 
the most missiles to last the longest, along with the cost of the more sophisticated 
technologies that require more time for repairs and manufacturing in the quantities 
that the war demanded.25 However, due to sanctions and disruption of supply 
chains, Russia could no longer manufacture its ballistic missiles at the same rate 
or quality as before. In the case of Ukraine, the solution to this challenge was 
combining cheaper air defences options against threats like Shahed kamikaze 
drones. For instance, if they were launched during the daytime, then large-​calibre 
machine guns or other small arms could be effectively used to shoot them down.26 
The primary necessity with the Shahed drones was to have radars with suitable 
characteristics to identify their trajectory, while various cost-​effective means were 
used to shoot them down. Hence, more sophisticated Western air defences like the 
Patriot system were crucial against more advanced Russian ballistic missiles like 
Kinzhal.
Drone warfare
Drones became the central part of the war in Ukraine. Fewer numbers of manned 
aircraft and their necessity for repairs after the first engagements and mutual air 
denial inevitably resulted in the gap in aerial capabilities across various roles of 
air power. Previous purchase of Turkish TB-​2 Bayraktar drones, customisation of 
 
 
 
 

110  The air domain
the commercial drones and new production of Ukrainian innovations of drones 
suggested new trends in modern warfare and the place of UAVs, RPVs and loitering 
munitions in inter-​state warfare.
From the very beginning of the full-​scale invasion, Bayraktar drones were used 
for ISR and precision strikes on Russian convoys and C2 locations and places of 
force concentration since Russian air defences were focused on the cover of the 
frontline. Often, they were used as decoys to lure Russian aircraft to lower altitudes. 
However, having realised this vulnerability, Russians also focused on the cover of 
their logistics chains. As a result, Ukrainian TB-​2 became used in more complex 
attacks under more favourable conditions, like in the case of Snake Island and air 
and naval combined drone attacks on the Russian Black Sea fleet in Sevastopol. The 
Russian equivalent to TB-​2 was the Orion drone. Strictly military ISR UAVs like the 
Ukrainian SKIF and Russian Orlan-​10 were relevant for each side since they could 
fly at medium altitudes and could provide substantial imagery for rapid fires.27 Russia 
was frequently using Il-​20M for gathering signal intelligence, on the tactical level. 
At the same time, Russian UAV ‘Granat’ of various modifications and Orlan-​10 were 
aimed at collecting ISR for SOF and troops on the ground. Regarding the tactical 
ISR purposes of the Ukrainian SOF, the United Kingdom and Norway purchased for 
Ukraine Norwegian-​produced micro-​drones Black Hornet, which is the smallest ISR 
system in the world and is often used by the SOF for immediate tactical intelligence.
Another distinctive feature of the war is the increased use of commercial drones 
for numerous military purposes. First of all, simple and cheap drones were used 
for the tactical level ISR purposes of monitoring the movement of the Russian 
troops, spotting artillery pieces, inspecting buildings and documenting Russian 
war crimes on the ground28 and even for dropping small munitions. Customisation 
of commercial drones and assembling of small drones started from the very 
beginning of the invasion. Various engineering faculties, like the Igor Sikorsky 
Kyiv Polytechnic Institute, started modifying and making small drones for custom 
requests of specific units of the UAF.29 Often when the scale of these grassroots 
initiatives was expanding, Ukrainians living abroad would crowdfund purchases of 
materials or general drones for further customisation in Ukraine.
In one of his social media posts Gen. Zaluznyy wrote: ‘In wars of such intensity 
and scale, technology plays an important role. Aerial reconnaissance increases 
the situational awareness of commanders on the battlefield.’30 In that post, he 
specifically referred to the work of a widely known division of aerial reconnaissance 
in the UAF, known as ‘Birds of Madyar’ led by Robert Brovdi. The activity of his 
unit illustrated the fullest potential of the UAV in monitoring the frontline and 
delivering attacks on Russian positions across the frontline. At one point, their unit 
was based in the Bakhmut area.
This unit employed various civilian drones, such as the widely used DJI Mavic. 
They also used crowdfunding to purchase drones for night-​time use. Furthermore, 
with the Ukrainian objective of crowdfunding the Army of Drones, and intensification 
of the warfighting, the demand for civilian and military drones did not subside. 
 
 
 
 
 

The air domain  111
Therefore, it could have been more cost-​effective and timely to have the capacity to 
alter drones according to one’s needs. While spare parts could have been a challenge, 
Robert Brovdi found an innovative solution: he bought 3D printers and used them to 
print the required elements for the civilian drones to carry munitions. These drones 
would then deliver munitions to bomb the Russian trenches.
Another development in the aerial drone side of the war was the improvement 
of previous test projects and the development of new drone technologies by the 
Ukrainian military industry. For instance, in 2021, Ukrainian Infozakhist Research 
and Production Center was already testing its Airborne Warning & Control System 
(AWACS) Gekata based on PD-​2 drones, a system that is capable of reconnoitring 
targets within 450 km reach and could detect ground and air signals in real time.31 
Since the invasion, these drones and systems were widely used for UAF purposes. 
For instance, the Back and Alive Foundation purchased 20 drones and 10 ground 
stations for them.32 Another response to the demands of ISR and fire coordination 
was Ukrspecsystems’ development of reconnaissance and fire coordination drone, 
Shark for deep penetration of temporarily occupied territories. Punisher attack 
drones were used for a short range of 45 km to fly reconnaissance, attack and 
transport missions in support of the tactical needs of SOF.33
One of the most significant developments in Ukrainian military drone 
manufacturing became the long-​distance strike drones. This topic received much 
attention and was characterised by some speculations. While various military 
developments during the war were classified and found well-​protected, there were 
also trends in the development and testing of pilot projects prior to the beginning of 
the invasion. One such project was the long-​range attack drone Falcon-​300, which 
could operate at an altitude of 12 km and, depending on the engine, could have a 
flight range from 1,000 to 3,300 km.34 Design bureau Luch also produces Skif or 
Stugna man-​portable anti-​tank guided missile systems and missiles for Ukrainian 
MLRS Vilkha. It was equipped with another Ukraine-​manufactured equipment –​ an 
optical aiming station ‘OPSN’ produced by Izyum Instrument-​Making Plant. This 
example illustrates a few very important features of the Ukrainian military aviation 
industry. First of all, as the cradle of manufacturing for the Soviet military, Ukraine 
preserved its military industry on a smaller scale but still effective and functional 
despite the three tumultuous post-​Cold War decades. Second, the knowledge 
base and skills for developing innovative projects and production were still there. 
Third, during war, the necessity for the final product within a short time frame 
dictated a reduction in red tape and any other restrictions that would often prevent 
various projects from going forward. Finally, this means that Ukraine’s new drones 
and long-​range striking capabilities are the result of many years of work. The 
achievements of these efforts became vital during the full-​scale invasion.
Despite the apparent advantages of the drones, the enemy forces identified and 
took advantage of their vulnerabilities. The early use of drones and their success 
was gradually overruled by strengthening Russian electronic warfare assets (such 
as the Shipovnik-​Aero) at the established frontlines and the concentration of 
 
 
 
 
 

112  The air domain
effort in Donbas. This resulted in significant disruption of navigation and directed 
artillery against Ukrainian aerial assets. Despite the stated advantages of the UAVs, 
their survivability was not very high. Some 90% of the UAVs used by the UAF 
in the first stages of war were destroyed, with the durability of quadcopters being 
three flights, while that for fixed-​wing UAVs was around six flights. The number of 
flights could be improved: ‘skilled crews who properly pre-​programmed the flight 
path of their UAVs to approach targets shielded by terrain and other features could 
extend the life of their platforms.’35 However, the short lifespan of drones primarily 
demonstrated the need for their continued supply and the necessity of them being 
cheap, produced on continuous basis, have a simple delivery, deployment and use.36
Regarding Ukrainian electronic warfare (EW) assets, from the first days 
of invasion, mobile EW and electronic intelligence units were spread across 
the country to detect, identify and localise threats through their distinctive 
radiated electromagnetic energy. The gathered formation is then sent to the field 
commanders. The UAF operates varied anti-​UAS systems: complexes include 
“Bukovel-​AD” (UA), “Nota” (UA), “Enclave” (UA), “Mandat” and R-​330KV1M 
(UA), “Polonaise” (UA), VAMPIRE (USA), Blighter Surveillance Systems A422 
(UK); portable anti-​drone systems (anti-​drone guns) include Antidron KVSG-​6 
(UA), RG-​7 (UA. Soon to enter service), EDM4S Sky wipers (LT), Nightfighter 
(UK) and Drone Defender (USA). Furthermore, Ukrainian engineers developed 
small ‘trench’ EW devices for the frontline.37
One of the initiatives reflecting the demands of the battlefield was the idea of 
developing high-​speed kamikaze quadcopters to be used against tanks, penetrate 
enemy dugouts, catch relatively slow Shahed loitering munitions, and detonate 
them in the air. The primary challenge of the project was not the manufacturing 
technical side, but finding highly skilled drone pilots. The quadcopter pilot school 
aimed to develop pilots with relevant skills in using quadcopters to their full 
potential against various targets and in many tasks. The focus was also placed on 
the role of drones in urban warfare, specifically in using small, light quadcopters to 
check buildings for the presence of enemy forces or explosives. In January–​March, 
the centre aimed to prepare 100 pilots and 100 copters to support the UAF.38
Personnel, training and skills of Ukrainian military aviation
The air war over Ukraine illustrated that the time of heroic air battles, dog fights and 
human potential in aerial war is far from being over. The examples of the heroism 
of Ukrainian pilots fighting for the freedom of Ukrainian skies while outnumbered 
by Russian aircraft will become part of the history of modern warfare. One such 
example was the pilot of the 40th tactical aviation brigade, Oleksandr Brinjala, 
who, with his wingman, fought against 12 Russian, more-​modern attack aircraft. 
This resulted in taking down three Russian aircraft at the cost of his life.
The spokesperson of the UkrAF, Yuriy Ignat, was convinced that despite the 
technological advantages on the Russian side, Ukraine could redress the balance and 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The air domain  113
achieve positive outcomes in close combat primarily thanks to the highly trained skills, 
professionalism and motivation of the Ukrainian pilots.39 Despite their numerical 
and technological advantages, the Russians failed to gain air superiority and became 
afraid of entering Ukrainian airspace because of the skilled and highly trained 
Ukrainian aviation, among other reasons. The UkrAF proved itself combat-​ready 
already in 2014, but the next interim years of war were used effectively in preparing 
the service for the inevitable fighting of the known enemy. Accordingly, Ukrainian 
aviators focused on training to adjust to various potential scenarios. During the 
flights, they trained aviation to exit from under attack, to operate from the operational 
(dispersed) airfields, to dogfight in air battles, to learn how to shoot down cruise 
missiles by training on the Soviet Tu-​143 Reys (unmanned reconnaissance aircraft); 
how to drop bombs; to restore aircraft damaged in the battle in the quickest way; and 
how to conduct search-​and-​rescue missions for downed pilots.40 Furthermore, pilots 
were trained to land and take off from almost any relatively suitable surface. One of 
the training processes included ‘touch and go’ landing on temporary airstrips, usually 
highways, which in essence meant that once the chassis touched the ground, the pilot 
had to move to the take-​off phase immediately.
These skills were essential for the survival of Ukrainian military aviation in 
the first days of the full-​scale invasion. According to the Commander of UkrAF, 
Lieutenant General Mykola Oleschuk:
Thanks to these skills, the enemy did not manage to destroy our aviation at the 
base airfields. Instead, the Ukrainian pilots came out from under the attacks and 
immediately began to destroy the enemy in the air… On the first day, Ukrainian 
Su-​27 pilots destroyed two state-​of-​the-​art Russian Su-​30SM in dogfights. On 
the critical route near Gostomel, Su-​24M bombers, Su-​24MR scouts, and Su-​
25 attack aircraft regularly launched powerful rocket-​bomb attacks against the 
Russian landing force, which was trying to hold the strategic bridgehead.41
In the interview, Commander of the 831st Tactical Aviation Brigade of the 
UkrAF, Colonel Oleksandr Mostoviy commented on the events of the first hours of 
the full-​scale invasion and taking aircraft out of the airfield in complete darkness:
There was a warning that the runway might be damaged. That is, there was 
no certainty that the takeoff would be successfully completed. Turned on the 
headlight, took off, the strip was partially damaged, and after that, one by one, 
all the planes took off.42
Regarding the Anti-​Aircraft Defense Missile Artillery Forces within the UkrAF, 
they have gained combat mission operational experience since 2014, primarily 
focusing on the East of Ukraine, with occasional shooting down of Russian 
reconnaissance UAVs. Their skills were further honed during annual exercises 
at the Yahorlyk training ground, focusing on anti-​aircraft combat, manoeuvring, 
 
 
 
 
 

114  The air domain
autonomous performance, joined actions with aviation and repelling a massive air 
attack as part of a group. In the battlespace of the full-​scale invasion, these skills 
were further tested with ‘the constant necessity of changing positions, entailing 
the need for rapid deployment, withdrawal, the establishment of communication 
and logistics, choosing positions so that enemy pilots did not even guess where the 
missiles would fly at them from…’43
One segment of the UkrAF that suffered the most during the first few days of 
the full-​scale invasion were the radio engineering units, since, due to the nature of 
their work, the radio stations were less mobile. According to Lt. Gen. Oleschuk:
A functioning radar is the No. 1 target for anti-​radar missiles. It is like a person 
with a flashlight in the dark. If you turn it off, you become invisible. But without 
them, our defense forces and aviation cannot fully function. Every locator 
knows this well. And despite everything, these brave warriors tried to conduct 
reconnaissance of the airspace continuously.44
They were targeted by Russian elite SOF and airborne troops, and missiles were 
sent against them, but despite being injured and losing their brothers in arms, they 
continued to provide critical information about the airspace. Radio-​engineering 
units located closer to the Russian border, also had to be engaged in the ground 
fighting to defend their positions. Furthermore, after the initial numbers of the 
Russian aerial assault were reduced, Russians adapted and began using gained 
knowledge of the terrain flying along the riverbed, hiding behind the terrains and 
hills, and widening the use of electronic warfare. However, in its turn, the UkrAF 
adapted its air defences by placing radars in the most favourable locations, creating 
mobile fire groups, and employing some tactical tricks which allowed to detect 
Russian aircraft, missiles and loitering munitions.45
Regarding the formal military education of the Ukrainian pilots, during the 
eight years of war, the focus in training was placed on improving flying skills and 
upgrading pilots’ qualifications to pilot of the 3rd class in the Kharkiv National 
University of the UkrAF named after Ivan Kozhedub. Graduates of this university 
would join their respective brigades already with 200 hours of flying time, a few 
months later they would be put on combat duty of the National Air Defences. Both 
air force and army aviation pilots would participate in various annual exercises 
locally (including strategic command and staff exercises) and with international 
partners. During these exercises, one frequently practised tactical technique was 
getting out or escaping a missile attack on an airfield.46
Russian pilots training and experience
Regarding the Russian operational experience and training, various gaps were 
revealed in their performance in Ukraine. From the beginning, their sorties illustrated 
great self-​confidence and assumption that no obstacles would be faced. The effective 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The air domain  115
opposition of the UkrAF from the first days in the Battle of Kyiv shocked Russian 
pilots. Even greater shock was the inconsistency between their pre-​planned and 
indoctrinated flight patterns compared to the more sophisticated manoeuvrability 
and skills of Ukrainian aviation. Even the further stages of mutual learning and 
adaptations illustrated that the VKS was adapting slower, and technological and 
numerical superiority did not provide the desired advantage in the air.
Although the high expectations of the VKS were heralded across the world, 
emphasising their operational experience in Syria, Crimea and Georgia, the sporadic 
attempts at air–​land integration were not at that scale and the missions flown by the 
VKS were not of the same complexity, depth and in a such contested environment 
as in Ukraine in 2022. Accordingly, their primary tasks in those operations were 
primarily air-​to-​ground with limited engagement with aerial assets of the defending 
sides or strong air defences.
From the perspective of training, the VKS demonstrated a reduction in flying 
hours, with the annual 100–​120 flight hours for a fighter pilot, 120–​140 for 
military-​transport pilots, 100 hours for long-​range and army aviation pilots.47 
This is below the NATO standard of around 200 hours. The quality of the training 
remains unknown. Although various exercises of the VKS focused on the usual 
training of low and high-​altitude flying, night-​time and bad weather conditions, 
their primary limitation and consequent disadvantage in the actual warfighting 
was the lack of integration with larger formations. Furthermore, although Russians 
employed precision-​guided munitions (PGMs) in Syria, that did not necessarily 
reflect changes in their training.48
Furthermore, the quality of flying would also differ between generations of 
pilots: Soviet old-​school ones would normally have far more flying hours and 
experience. On the other hand, their involvement in the war in Ukraine illustrated 
that they did not have much better adaptability but showed the indoctrinated 
Soviet style of flying according to directives rather than taking advantage of 
the opportunities arising. Furthermore, going by the book made Russian flying 
predictable for the Ukrainian pilots, since they knew that book very well and could 
take advantage of that knowledge.
Another important aspect to consider is that the experience accumulated by the 
Russian pilots in the previous wars has significantly declined with their losses of 
pilots in the downed aircraft in Ukraine. Although Russians focused on educating, 
training new pilots and retraining the pilots from civilian aviation, they did not 
have the same experience of fighting complex sorties and manoeuvres in the 
Ukrainian air littoral as Ukrainian pilots. For that very reason, they are hiding in 
the safety of their airspace. Skills-​wise, Russian pilots are no match to Ukrainian 
ones, illustrated in tactics, employment of dispersal and taking full advantage of air 
littoral, and integration with the ground forces and GBAD. The primary advantage 
of the Russians was technological superiority. That is why the primary theme of 
this year of the full-​scale invasion was the necessity of providing the UkrAF with 
Western combat aircraft. Combined with the skills of Ukrainian pilots, they would 
 
 
 

116  The air domain
have already changed the course of war. Ukrainian pilots and the UAF have proven 
their skills more than once. They have learnt and adapted and made the most of the 
available technologies.49
Points for consideration
The air domain of the war in Ukraine illustrated some enduring features that 
extended across domains, together with more distinctive and applicable ones 
specifically for the air. These observations and characteristics of this war provide 
a fruitful field for exploring what constitutes modern, effective and resilient air 
power and which tools enable greater readiness and effective performance in the 
modern battlespace.
First, doctrine, training and exercises are aimed not only at teaching how to fly a 
certain number of hours but how to gain relevant skills per modern standards. The 
VKS illustrated the hazard of indoctrination of the rigid flying practice for decades, 
without training the full spectrum of skills required for innovative thinking and 
adaptability under the conditions of diverse fighting environments. On the other 
hand, UkrAF used Soviet doctrine as a toolkit to unravel the enemy’s behaviour 
and prepare relevant skills and manoeuvres to outmatch the enemy’s technological 
and numerical advantage. Furthermore, the conceptual component can provide so 
much, but it cannot be a substitution for the practice of flying different missions 
in all weather and joint exercises. The UkrAF combined the best of both worlds –​ 
knowledge of the enemy’s Soviet school of doctrine and training and having access 
to the Western military education and joint exercises, taking full advantage of the 
eight years of war in developing multi-​faceted skill set and the inherent Ukrainian 
will to learn practical skills and learn fast. Hence, this case shows not only that the 
preparation of the pilots requires systematic approach across doctrine, training and 
exercises, but also a suitable organisation and strategic culture for the innovative 
and adaptable skills to be developed and practised in the battlespace. Historically, 
the Ukrainian side had been  known to be innovative and adaptable, while the 
Russian side did not manage to break away from the Soviet past and practice.
Second, in discussing mass and cutting-​edge technology dichotomy, the air war 
over Ukraine illustrated that numerical superiority does not guarantee victory or 
even air superiority. Once again, purely numeric and mass approach to structuring 
the VKS revealed more shortfalls than provided anticipated overwhelming 
superiority. Although large numbers of available aircraft would suggest mass 
supremacy, not having the experience of complex multi-​aircraft operations, and 
consequent simultaneous and for that matter continuous use of multiple aerial 
assets in a single area of operation inevitably revealed logistical shortfalls, such 
as lack of sufficient air-​to-​air refuelling, repairing and wearing out of those assets, 
further complicated by blue-​on-​blue fire.
Furthermore, the complexity of war in Ukraine and the use of the full vertical 
depth and the necessity of various missions to be flown in support of the ground 
 
 
 

The air domain  117
troops, illustrated that despite the total mass numbers of the overall fleet, the primary 
functionality and demand was for multi-​role aircraft for multiple purposes. In its 
turn, it placed greater pressure on the scarcer cutting-​edge side of the Russian aerial 
fleet, not only in terms of more frequent use and wearing out of the materiel but also 
the gradual increase of the losses of the more frequently used assets. Personnel-​
wise, despite the number of available aircraft for flying, soon the primary scarcity 
of the VKS became skilled pilots. This scarcity became conditioned by the high 
losses of downed aircraft in Ukraine and the lack of sufficient planning for teaching 
and training pilots for wartime requirements.
From the perspective of long-​range ballistic missiles, the mass approach 
was also beginning to prove counterproductive. Although Russia could sustain 
continual ballistic missile attack campaigns almost throughout the entire war and 
damage a lot of Ukrainian civilian infrastructure and obliterate cities, as in Syria, 
the stockpiles even of the Russian mass-​structured arsenals proved to be far from 
non-​exhaustible without the availability of Western microchips and spare parts 
used in manufacturing and putting navigation on their ballistic missiles. As a result, 
Russia had to get cheap Iranian drones to sustain its mass attacks, as well as buying 
more missiles from the other ‘allies’ it still had left.
Regarding air denial, the UkrAF in fact utilised assets from multiple domains 
in projecting power into aerial one posing challenges to the enemy across different 
altitudes. This illustrated even greater cross-​domain dependency and hence the 
necessity of cross-​domain deconfliction and integration of the military assets. 
Finally, by extension from the previous points, there should also be a balance in the 
preparation of pilots for both manned and unmanned aerial assets. While UkrAF 
had a program for the preparation of the pilots for manned aircraft, additional effort 
and initiatives were launched already during the full-​scale invasion to prepare 
drone pilots for anti-​tank warfare. One of the current Western debates is whether to 
provide all services with UAVs and RPVs and to what extent, which of course will 
increase demand for RPV-​piloting skills and their training.
Notes
	 1	 Fedorchak Viktoriya, ‘Air War over Ukraine,’ Power Point Presentation, Swedish 
Defence University, Stockholm, 15 May 2023.
	 2	 Mikhail Zhorohov, Air War in Ukraine, February–​May 2022 (Chernihiv: AirHub, 
2022), 22.
	 3	 UAF, ‘Amazing Video! How Ukrainian Aviation Works,’ 30 July 2022. Available 
online: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​gsMM​nXjh​lUc
	 4	 TSN, ‘Details of the Fight at the Airport in Gostomel –​ Details from “Zeus”,’ 22 August 
2022. Available online: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​iHqD​bnz4​VTo
	 5	 Maximillian K. Bremer and Kelly A. Grieco, ‘Air Denial: The Dangerous Illusion of 
Decisive Air Superiority,’ Atlantic Council, 30 August 2022. Available online: www.
atla​ntic​coun​cil.org/​cont​ent-​ser​ies/​airpo​wer-​after-​ukra​ine/​air-​den​ial-​the-​danger​ous-​illus​
ion-​of-​decis​ive-​air-​supe​rior​ity/​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

118  The air domain
	 6	 Ibid.
	 7	 Colin Gray, Air Power for Strategic Effect (Maxwell: Air University Press, 2012), 278.
	 8	 Viktoriya Fedorchak, Understanding Contemporary Air Power (London: Routledge), 40.
	 9	 David Roza, ‘Why the Skies over Ukraine Have Proven So Deadly for Russian Pilots,’ 
Task & Purpose, 17 March 2022. Available online: https://​tas​kand​purp​ose.com/​news/​
russ​ian-​aircr​aft-​shoot-​down-​ukra​ine/​
	10	 William Courtney, ‘Russia Destroyed Grozny and Aleppo—​Is Kyiv Next?’ The 
RandBlog, March 28, 2022. Available online: www.rand.org/​blog/​2022/​03/​rus​sia-​destro​
yed-​gro​zny-​and-​ale​ppo-​is-​kyiv-​next.html
	11	 Justin Bronk, Nick Reynolds and Jack Watling, The Russian Air War and Ukrainian 
Requirements for Air Defence (London: RUSI, 2022), 18.
	12	 Ibid.
	13	 Viktoriya Fedorchak, ‘The Mass Approach in the Air War over Ukraine: Towards 
identifying a critical mass,’ Handlingar Och Tidskrift, no. 1 (2023): 119–​120.
	14	 Viktoriya Fedorchak, ‘Out of Carrots: Why Should New Systematic Sanctions against 
Russia Be implemented?’ Trønderdebatt, 19 February 2022. Available online: www.
tronde​rdeb​att.no/​
	15	 Conflict Armament Research. ‘Component Commonalities in Advanced Russian 
Weapon Systems: Ukraine Field Dispatch,’ September 2022. Available online: https://​
storym​aps.arc​gis.com/​stor​ies/​239f7​56e2​e6b4​9a5b​ec78​f5c5​248b​f3d
	16	 Ibid.
	17	 Aviatsiya Halychyny, ‘How Does Army Aviation Work?’ 3 March 2023. Available 
online: www.avi​atsi​yaha​lych​yny.com/​pl/​blog/​iak-​pratsi​uie-​armij​ska-​aviats​iia/​
	18	 Bronk, Reynolds and Watling, The Russian Air War, 20.
	19	 Seth G. Jones, ‘Russia’s Ill-​Fated Invasion of Ukraine: Lessons in Modern Warfare,’ 
CSIS, 1 June 2022. Available online: www.csis.org/​analy​sis/​russ​ias-​ill-​fated-​invas​ion-​
ukra​ine-​less​ons-​mod​ern-​warf​are
	20	 Igor Kossov, ‘What’s behind Russia’s Unusually Big Missile Attack on Ukraine?’ The 
Kyiv Independent, 11 October 2022. Available online: https://​kyiv​inde​pend​ent.com/​
natio​nal/​whats-​beh​ind-​rus​sia-​unusua​lly-​big-​miss​ile-​att​ack-​on-​Ukra​ine
	21	 The President of Ukraine, ‘Today Is a Historic Day, We Are Regaining Kherson,’ 11 
November 2022. Available online: www.presid​ent.gov.ua/​en/​news/​sogo​dni-​isto​rich​nij-​
den-​mi-​pove​rtay​emo-​her​son-​zve​rnen​nya-​pre-​79101
	22	 Bronk, The Russian Air War, 29.
	23	 The Economist, ‘An Interview with General Valery Zaluzhny, Head of Ukraine’s Armed 
Forces,’ 15 December 2022. Available online: www.econom​ist.com/​zaluz​hny-​tra​nscr​ipt
	24	 Ulyana Bezpalko, ‘Yuriy Ignat: We Actually Created a Unique Air Defense System that 
Does Not Exist in the World,’ RBS UA, 9 September 2022. Available online: www.rbc.
ua/​ukr/​news/​yuriy-​ignat-​fakt​iche​ski-​sozd​ali-​uni​kaln​uyu-​166​2665​350.html
	25	 Iain Boyd, ‘A Game of Numbers: How Air Defense Systems Work and Why Ukraine Is 
Eager for More Protection,’ The Conversation, 18 October 2022. Available online: https://​
thec​onve​rsat​ion.com/​a-​game-​of-​numb​ers-​how-​air-​defe​nse-​syst​ems-​work-​and-​why-​
ukra​ine-​is-​eager-​for-​more-​pro​tect​ion-​192​487
	26	 Defence Express, ‘Air Force Named Which Air Defense Means Are Effective Against 
Shahed UAVs,’ 12 December 2022. Available online: https://​en.defe​nce-​ua.com/​news/​
air_​force_​named_​which_​air_​defense_​means_​are_​ef​fect​ive_​agai​nst_​shah​ed_​u​avs-​
5126.html
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The air domain  119
	27	 Mykhaylo Zabrodskyi, et al., Preliminary Lessons in Conventional Warfighting from 
Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine: February–​July 2022 (London: RUSI, 2022), 37.
	28	 Bremer and Grieco, ‘Air Denial.’
	29	 Alina Matviychuk, ‘E-​cigarettes Are Disassembled to Make Combat Drones for the 
Armed Forces: How KPI Students Help Destroy the Occupiers,’ Vikna, 31 July 2022. 
Available online: https://​vikna.tv/​isto​rii/​rozpov​idi/​rozibr​aly-​elek​troc​zyga​rku-​shhob-​
zrob​yty-​dron-​dlya-​zsu-​istor​iya-​studen​tiv-​kpi-​yaki-​dopo​maga​yut-​nyshh​yty-​okupan​tiv/​
	30	 CinC AF of Ukraine, ‘Magyar’s “Birds”,’ Facebook, 22 February 2023, www.faceb​ook.
com/​watch/​?v=​11843​7771​5615​803
	31	 Inder Singh Bisht, ‘Ukrainian Firm Flight Tests Drone-​Based AWACS,’ The Defence 
Post, 31 December 2021. Available online: www.the​defe​nsep​ost.com/​2021/​12/​31/​ukra​
ine-​drone-​based-​awacs/​
	32	 Oleg Danylov, ‘20 PD-​2 UAVs: Come Back Alive Foundation Buys UAVs for $8.5 
Million,’ Mezha, 24 June 2022. Available online: https://​mezha.media/​en/​2022/​06/​24/​
20-​pd-​2-​uavs-​come-​back-​alive-​fou​ndat​ion-​buys-​uavs-​for-​8-​5-​mill​ion/​
	33	 Root Nation, ‘How Punisher Drones Assist the Armed Forces of Ukraine,’ 14 June 2022. 
Available online: https://​root-​nat​ion.com/​en/​artic​les-​en/​weap​ons-​en/​en-​punis​her-​dro​
nes-​armed-​for​ces-​of-​ukra​ine/​
	34	 Militarnyi, ‘UAV Falcon-​300,’ 6 November 2020. Available online: https://​mil.in.ua/​uk/​
artic​les/​bpla-​sokil-​300/​
	35	 Zabrodskyi, et al., Preliminary Lessons, 37.
	36	 Fedorchak, ‘The Mass Approach,’ 117.
	37	 Nightfighter.
	38	 Oleksandr Zahorodnyi, ‘A Quadrocopter for the Destruction of “Shahed” Drones: in 
Ukraine, They Began to Create a Unique Drone,’ TSN, 25 December 2022. Available 
online:  https://​tsn.ua/​exclus​ive/​kvadr​okop​ter-​dlya-​znis​chen​nya-​shahi​div-​v-​ukray​
ini-​poch​ali-​stvo​ryuv​ati-​unikal​niy-​bezp​ilot​nik-​2230​489.html?fbc​lid=​IwAR0g46_​
CGKjjAaacOPfygQkGQBLF16WM​hKYw​7fey​SAt5​H6i5​kAqT​biZz​lmI
	39	 Army Inform, ‘Why Do Our Pilots Fight Better than Russian Pilots –​ Interview with 
Yuriy Ignat,’ 22 August 2022. Available online: https://​arm​yinf​orm.com.ua/​2022/​08/​22/​
chomu-​nashi-​lotch​yky-​voyu​yut-​kras​hhe-​za-​rosijs​kyh/​
	40	 Army Inform, ‘The Air Force Has Withstood and Is Effectively Destroying the 
Occupiers: Interview with Lt Gen Mykola Oleschuk,’ 25 February 2023. Available 
online: https://​arm​yinf​orm.com.ua/​2023/​02/​25/​365-​dniv-​bytvy-​za-​ukr​ayin​ske-​nebo/​
	41	 Ibid.
	42	 UAF, ‘Amazing Video!’
	43	 Armyinform, ‘The Air Force.’
	44	 Ibid.
	45	 Ibid.
	46	 Army Inform, ‘Why Do Our Pilots Fight Better.’
	47	 Rafael Franco, ‘Russian Air Force’s Performance in Ukraine: Air Operations: The Fall 
of a Myth,’ JAPCC Journal, 35 (2023): 50.
	48	 Ibid.
	49	 Jamie Dettmer, ‘Ukraine’s Needs-​must Approach Won’t Cut It with F-​16 Training,’ 
Politico, August 21, 2023. Available online: www.polit​ico.eu/​arti​cle/​ukra​ine-​f16-​figh​
ter-​jet-​aircr​aft-​train​ing-​zelens​kyy-​war/​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

DOI: 10.4324/9781003351641-8
7
THE MARITIME DOMAIN
Unlike the aerial and land domains covered in the previous two chapters, events 
in the maritime environment were more sporadic due to various factors, starting 
with the primary disparity between the Ukrainian and Russian Navies and the 
consequent destruction of the Ukrainian naval assets in the early stage of the war. 
Nevertheless, this chapter addresses the maritime domain, focusing on capabilities 
and the employment of naval assets in the war, identifying various gaps in the 
available resources and warfighting requirements, and the implications of these 
experiences for sea power.
Unlike the two previous domains, events occurring in the maritime domain 
are less covered in the public sphere. This is partially conditioned by a certain 
sea-​blindness, in a more abstract use of the phrase. Since the outreach for these 
events and their consequences might be more difficult to register, in contrast to 
those in the air and land domains, the sea clashes and their implications tend to 
be less well covered in the newsfeeds or discussed in detail within the evaluation 
of developments in this war. Accurate situational awareness in the sea requires 
military-​grade equipment and capabilities across various domains. While it can be 
attained by the fighting sides and NATO, it is far more difficult to obtain accurate 
and cross-​verified information on the events in the sea domain compared with 
those on land and in the air. Nevertheless, this chapter looks at the most significant 
events in the maritime segment of the war and various trends within it.
The context
As with any national military service, historical and cultural contexts are essential in 
understanding the rationale for various decisions in procuring specific capabilities 
and their place in the overall intention and strategy of fighting a war with a distinctive 
 
 
 

The maritime domain  121
opponent. The Russian Navy was no exception, and it is important to consider 
the Cold War design legacies that defined the Russian approach to their naval 
capabilities and their employment. Although Stalin had great hopes for the huge 
Soviet Navy to counter British and American mass and technological advantages, 
the experience of World War II reduced these hopes to a more modest approach 
of focusing on asymmetric capabilities in countering NATO’s advantages in the 
domain. Hence, the focus was placed on building small vessels, naval aviation 
and submarines, while the primary strength of the Russian war machine was in a 
strategic nuclear deterrent and massive ground forces. Various organisational and 
cultural changes are often driven by visionary individuals, which for the Russian 
Navy, was Admiral Sergey Gorshkov, who focused on revamping the fleet for 
blue water operations and developing what he called a ‘balanced fleet.’1 This 
meant refocusing on cutting-​edge technology, carrier killer missiles, a much more 
extensive and capable submarine fleet and heavier naval aviation. He highlighted 
the strategic role of the Soviet Navy as protecting the strategic missile submarine 
fleet, which inevitably brought the service out from under the shadow of the land-​
centric thinking of warfare and the role of various domain-​specific capabilities and 
services.
This historical context and the design legacy decisions of the 1970s and 1980s 
impacted the modern Russian fleet and its distinctive approach to warfighting. 
While the Western approach to navies focused on protecting their aircraft carriers as 
the means of destroying adversaries’ fleets through massive air attacks, the Soviet 
fleet focused on the supreme concept of firepower and gaining the advantage in 
long-​rage fire exchanges. The primary implication of this focus was reflected in the 
design decision to place more long-​range missile systems on the decks, using all 
possible space for the heavier equipment in support of firepower while reducing the 
convenience of maintenance and access for personnel. The combination of heavier 
weaponry, ammunition loads and jet fuel on the decks also meant that such ships 
were much more explosive in and of themselves due to the threat that ammunition 
would ignite.2 The next stage in Russian naval development was its decline during 
the 1990s due to the collapse of the Soviet Union and the breakup of the service 
structures, maintenance services and military industry. During Putin’s time, the 
Navy was revamped with an additional focus on placing more of the long-​range 
Kalibr cruise missiles on Russian ships, which became known as the Kalibrization 
of the Russian fleet.3 This feature will become particularly palpable with regard to 
the Ukrainian infrastructure during Russian long-​range cruise missile strikes.
Preparation
Since the annexation of Crimea, the Russian Black Sea fleet has doubled in 
size. Before the full-​scale invasion, the Russian Black Sea fleet consisted of 6 
submarines (Kilo class), 6 surface combatants (the flagship cruiser Moskva and 
5 frigates), 36 patrol and coastal combatants, 10 vessels devoted to mine warfare 
 
 
 
 
 

122  The maritime domain
and 10 amphibious assault ships and landing crafts. Using the pretext of exercises 
in 2021, the fleet was further strengthened by six amphibious ships from the Baltic 
Sea and Northern Fleets, including their personnel and equipment.4
Among the national armed forces, Ukrainian maritime capabilities were the least 
prepared for country's defence. At the start of the full-​scale invasion, the Ukrainian 
Navy had one frigate, twelve patrol and coastal craft (including one corvette), 
one mine warfare vessel, one amphibious landing ship, one amphibious landing 
craft and eight logistics and support vessels.5 After the Ukrainian frigate Hetman 
Sahaydachniy (U130) was stationed for maintenance in the port of Mykolaiv, it 
was then scuttled in early March 2022 so that the Russians could not take it.
Russian numerical and technological superiority was greatly felt in this domain, 
primarily because Russia prioritised naval assets in its modernisation campaign long 
before the invasion. This modernisation was influenced by the power projections 
its naval capabilities allowed in various regions, most importantly in controlling 
the Black Sea area and sustaining Russian claims in the Arctic region.6 In contrast, 
after 2014, Ukraine had to start almost from scratch because the Ukrainian Navy 
lost 75% of its personnel and 70% of its ships and critical infrastructure after 
the annexation of Crimea.7 Thus, for the first eight years of the war, the naval 
capabilities had to be restructured, modernised and increased in numbers. While 
some effort was made during this time, the systematic approach identifying a 
clear naval force design and its capabilities for the Ukrainian Navy 2035 was 
developed only in 2019 and contained in the Strategy of the Naval forces.8 The 
strategy identified the main capabilities and three stages of their acquisition and the 
expansion of the area of control and influence. The first stage (2018–​2025) was to 
focus on maintaining maritime domain awareness in the coastal area (40 nautical 
miles [NM]) by developing ISR capabilities. Second, sea denial assets, such as 
mine-​barrier installation, electronic warfare and employment of coastal defence 
capabilities to protect the littoral, were to be acquired. The third priority in this 
stage was to establish sea control by ‘build-​up of ranger, convoy and patrol boat 
capabilities to ensure navigation in the littoral zone and in the estuaries, establish 
an effective system of port infrastructure protection through development of 
counter mining, counter sabotage, search and rescue capabilities.’9 The next stage 
(2025–​2030) was to build on the developed capabilities and extend sea control 
to Ukraine’s exclusive economic zone (EEZ) to the area of 200 NM in the Black 
Sea and the Sea of Azov. An increase in long-​range precision antiship systems 
was to be emphasised. The last stage in 2030–​2035 was to develop a sufficient 
contribution of the Ukrainian Navy to the blue water missions undertaken by allies 
in Europe, NATO and the UN.10
This strategy did not see its full implementation due to factors beyond the full-​
scale invasion, but some modernisation and strengthening of the Ukrainian naval 
capabilities did take place. First, to strengthen the ISR on the surface, Ukraine 
purchased the multifunctional radar complex ‘Mineral-​U.’ This system allowed the 
detection of active and passive modes and the identification of surface targets at 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The maritime domain  123
the 500–​600 km range. It was supposed to work with the coastal mobile antiship 
missile complex Neptune, designed by the bureau ‘Luch.’ The Neptune’s range is 
280 km with a sea-​skimming feature,11 meaning that the missile is flying at a very 
low altitude, decreasing the chance of radar detection by its target in the sea. The 
first battalion of Neptunes was to be deployed in April 2022. Although the full-​scale 
invasion speeded up the transfer of these systems, their full readiness required more 
time and a more significant number of missiles for these complexes. The issue with 
this capability was soon resolved when Ukraine was provided with the Harpoon 
antiship missile system with a similar use to that of the Ukrainian Neptunes. The 
Neptune system became famous for sinking the Russian cruiser Moskva on 13 
April 2022. Other aspects of improving coastal defence included strengthening 
coastal artillery, mine-​blocking activities and radio-​electronic warfare.
Objectives and actions
Russian objectives in the land and aerial domains were very straightforward, with 
the land domain more dependent on the physical characteristics of the terrain, while 
in the case of the aerial domain, more flexibility and freedom for manoeuvring were 
allowed by the vertical depth. In the case of the maritime domain, geographical 
specifics played a significant role similar to the more fixed characteristics of 
the land domain. During the eight years of war, the Russians had become more 
accustomed to using the Sea of Azov as their internal lake, suppressing the freedom 
of Ukrainian naval traffic and access to its ports. Russia’s first objective was to gain 
command of the Sea of Azov to blockade the Ukrainian ports in this sea, such as the 
ports of Berdiansk and Mariupol. This was to facilitate naval support of the Russian 
movement on the ground and the building of the Crimean bridge to establish a land 
connection between Russia and Crimea. This support was conducted as firepower, 
amphibious landing and supply reinforcement. The significance of the city of 
Mariupol was twofold –​ it was a seaport in the Sea of Azov and a focal point in 
gaining land access to Crimea.
Russian fixation on a land path to Crimea was conditioned by the unchanged 
importance of the Sevastopol base for control of the Northern Black Sea and its 
inherent vulnerability to interruptions in supply. Logistics were dictated by the 
distinctive geography of the Crimean Peninsula, which was open on all three sides 
for sea assault and linked by a narrow strip to Ukraine. If Russia had not taken two-​
thirds of the Ukrainian fleet in 2014, the Russian positions in the Black Sea and 
their control of Crimea would have been much more contested.
The next natural objective was to gain control of the Black Sea and suppress 
Ukrainian naval assets in the ports. The far-​reaching objective was to cut Ukraine 
off from coastline access by controlling various ports and conducting amphibious 
landings to enable further progress by the ground troops. Russia would factually 
blockade Ukraine, denying it additional maritime routes to support its economy, 
and providing additional tools in its hunger tactics to pressure Ukraine and the 
 
 
 

124  The maritime domain
international community. The achievement of the enabling role of maritime 
power –​ command of the sea –​ provided Russia with opportunities to project power 
in support of its ground campaign. The role of the Black Sea fleet was primarily to 
blockade the Ukrainian coastline and conduct a long-​range attack campaign deep 
into the country’s territory using Kalibr cruise missiles.
In Russian planning for the invasion, amphibious forces had their role. Two 
amphibious task groups were created to be used in landing along with the ground 
advancement of the Russian troops in the southern direction towards Kherson, 
Mykolaiv and Odesa. They were to be employed after the initial invasion but 
before the ground troops arrived in the area. Their tasks included seizing main 
intersections and chokepoints to facilitate further movement of the ground troops 
in the Mykolaiv area.12
Although Russia obviously had complete numerical superiority in the maritime 
domain and soon was able to achieve most of its objectives in that domain, the 
immediate limitation that would prove significant in the further development of the 
war was that Turkey, on 28 February 2022, exercised its right under the Montreux 
Convention to close the Dardanelles and Bosporus Strait to the entry of combatant 
ships during the conflict. This meant Russia could not reinforce its Black Sea fleet 
from its bigger fleets in the Baltics and High North. Since Ukraine did not have 
naval assets equivalent to the Russian Black Sea fleet, naval specialists indicated 
that the primary means of counter action would be ground-​based coastal sea denial 
fires, mine warfare and the use of small craft.13 However, as the war progressed, 
Ukraine’s unconventional approach to tactics and the employment of innovative 
equipment illustrated new ways of degrading the enemy’s maritime assets –​using 
unmanned sea vehicles (USVs) combined with other assets.
From the first days of the invasion, the Russian fleet suppressed Ukrainian 
vessels in the ports and quickly began blockading the country by closing the Kerch 
Strait connecting the Sea of Azov to the Black Sea. Blockading Ukrainian ports 
in the Black Sea and closing transportation routes to the Sea of Azov meant the 
complete denial of any chance of transportation and resupply of the Ukrainian 
troops in the east via the sea.14 Although the argument of the convenience and 
speed of the sea route in providing supplies for various port cities like Berdiansk 
and Mariupol could be considered sound in peacetime, the route into the Sea of 
Azov was dangerous even before the invasion due to Russian de facto control of 
the strait and the sea. Even if the Russian fleet was engaged elsewhere, this still 
would have made any vessel trying to get through an easy target for the coastal 
artillery from both sides of the strait: Crimea and Russia. Hence, the optimal land 
route for allied supplies and equipment was to go from Poland to the frontline.
With control over the Sea of Azov, the Russians prepared to launch their 
amphibious landing in Mariupol. To avoid any potential resistance, the landing 
was conducted approximately 48 km from Mariupol, closer to Crimea and within 
reach of various sources of firepower if the need arose. Soon they were engaged 
in fighting in Mariupol. Although the employment of amphibious assaults was 
 
 
 
 

The maritime domain  125
also expected in the port city of Berdyansk, the city was occupied by Russian 
ground forces, and only then were amphibious vessels stationed in its port. The 
vulnerabilities of amphibious ships became evident when the UAF sank the 
Saratov as the ship was offloading at the pier in late March 2022. The lack of 
helicopter support for the amphibious landing, which is common in Western 
Navies, made Russian amphibious pier-​side supply of the ground forces vulnerable 
to light antitank weapons, Tochka-​U, drone strikes or even the 9M113 Konkurs 
antitank missiles if they were in the right hands. Despite these vulnerabilities and 
the exercise of greater caution by the Russians, amphibious reinforcement on the 
coastline continued.15
Traditionally, amphibious operations require the element of surprise and, ideally, 
some fire coverage from the aerial domain when the landing takes place. Thus, it 
had a greater chance of success earlier in a war when land defences were not at full 
strength. One of the much-​discussed topics of the sea war in Ukraine is the lack of 
a Russian amphibious landing in Odesa. As previously stated, Odesa was one of 
the objectives to provide support for ground troops. The closest Russians came to 
landing in Odesa was on 15 March 2022, although there had been some indications 
of preparations to facilitate an amphibious landing. In the pre-​landing phase, the 
Russian Naval and Air Force conducted missile strikes around Odesa, with 90 
missiles used to weaken ground-​based resistance to the landing. The indications 
of landing operations included landmine sweepers leading the way, followed by 
amphibious ships and the formation of the supporting ships were reported. Ukraine 
was making ground preparations for the defence, including fighting readiness of 
tanks and artillery located on the coast against potential landing. On that occasion, 
landing did not occur and was categorised by some analysts as an ‘amphibious 
demonstration,’ which is a show of force.16 Although in peacetime, a show of force 
can act as intimidation or a deterrent, in wartime, it looks more like hesitation. 
It indicates the significant vulnerability of amphibious assaults to ground-​based 
fire, especially when there is no close air support (CAS). In this instance, air 
bombardment served as air interdiction or sweeping of the area before the insertion 
of the amphibious task group, which without CAS in the event of landing would 
still be vulnerable to the Ukrainian ground defences.
One of the most prominent occurrences of spring was the sinking of the Russian 
flagship cruiser Moskva. Ukrainian Neptune antiship missiles hit the ship and 
it sank on 14 April 2022 while it was being towed to a port. The sinking of the 
Moskva raised numerous discussions in professional military circles about how 
this was possible, the factors that enabled the ship to be sunk and the actual state of 
the Russian fleet. While there were various theories of how this was accomplished, 
the official version is that two Neptune missiles launched by Ukraine sank the ship. 
Two anti-​cruise missiles hit the ship on 13 April 2022, resulting in its sinking on 
14 April 2022 due to continued fire and flooding while under tow.17 The primary 
discussion did not focus as much on the fact that the Neptunes managed to hit 
their chosen target, but rather on additional factors after the attacks that might 
 
 
 
 

126  The maritime domain
have contributed to the eventual sinking of the ship. Two of the widely discussed 
issues were the reasons the air defences and the ship’s radar did not alert the crew 
of the incoming missiles and the ineffective handling of the damage caused by the 
two missiles. According to Chris Carlson, this was due to several factors. Some 
of these factors were the outdated technological characteristics of the Slava class 
design cruisers, partial automation of consoles, overreliance on manual servicing 
of various capabilities, including air defences and a lack of sufficient training for 
the military personnel and safety protocols.18 As with materiel in other domains 
of warfare, one of the arguments is that the Russians focused on the amount of 
equipment, in this case, equipment located on the ship’s deck, rather than investing 
in the human capital to support all of it. Carlson further elaborated on the personnel 
issues of the Russian navy. Instead of employing an entirely professional military, 
Russia used conscripts to man its vessels. The overall length of conscription for all 
its armed forces was reduced to one year in 2021. Previously, conscription varied 
between the services and was two years for the Army and three years for the Navy.19 
Although the exact details of the sinking of the cruiser will require an end to the 
war and an examination of the ship to confirm the factors, the same trend in the 
Russian approach to fighting power is as evident in the maritime domain as it is in 
the ground and in the air –​ economy on personnel skills and training following the 
Soviet assumption that no one is irreplaceable and the numbers of poorly trained 
reserves and conscripts can cover the gaps. However, each domain of warfare has 
illustrated that technological and even basic sophistication and improvements 
require sufficient skills and training of the personnel and servicing crews. These 
skills are the ones that need time to build up and be maintained, and they are often 
missing in the conscripts.
Although this event did not have a game-​changing impact on the course of 
the war, it would have resulted in the loss of a communication infrastructure and 
anti-​ship and air missiles it could have provided for the Russian fleet. This event, 
of course, had symbolic importance, especially during the tough April fighting. 
It showed that the Russian Black Sea fleet is far from being invulnerable and 
would need to approach the Ukrainian coastline at a different distance. The reach 
of the Neptune missiles is approximately 300 km. This also illustrated that any 
amphibious ambitions could be very costly over the Black Sea coastline controlled 
by Ukraine.20
Early summer also brought the wider use of TB2 Bayraktar drones near Snake 
Island. The most important discovery was that Russian Tor and Pantsir air defence 
systems could not fend them off, and Bayraktar drones managed to take down 
enemy assault boats and air defences: ‘Their biggest coup was hitting a landing 
craft just as it attempted to disembark a Tor missile system. The sunken landing 
craft blocked access to the island until it could be salvaged.’21 Harpoon missiles 
provided by Denmark further strengthened Ukrainian defences. Their impact 
was already felt in June when on 17 June, two of them were used to eliminate 
the support vessel Vasiliy Bekh. Tor systems strapped to its deck did not help its 
 
 
 
 
 

The maritime domain  127
survivability. Harpoons were also successfully used against Russian-​controlled gas 
platforms employed by Russia for surveillance purposes. The use of these combined 
capabilities against the Russians based on Snake Island and the targeting of their 
resupply soon resulted in the Russians leaving the island on 30 June 2022. Their 
further movements were more cautious in August, with assault activities limited 
to submarines launching long-​range cruise missiles against Ukrainian territory, 
while the Admiral Grigorovich-​class frigates were kept at a further distance from 
the Ukrainian coastline.22 Additional concerns about Ukrainian anti-​ship missiles 
and long-​range attacks caused by further Ukrainian counteroffensives in Kherson, 
which were evident in long-​range attacks on the Russian fleet’s HQ and its main 
naval aviation airfield, resulted in Russian kilo-​class submarines being moved from 
the Sevastopol base in Crimea to Novorossiysk port in Krasnodar Krai, southern 
Russia.
Unmanned sea vessels (USVs)
On 29 October 2022, the Russian sense of invulnerability and supremacy at sea 
was also damaged by the Ukrainian assault on Sevastopol Naval Base that targeted 
ships, including the new flagship frigate General Makarov and a minesweeper, 
using maritime drones or USVs and UAVs. These drones were equipped with 
explosives that used semi-​swarm tactics in attacking enemy ships. Although the 
damage to the ships did not result in their sinking as in the case of the cruiser 
Moskva and the Saratov, it had important implications for the standing of the 
Russian Black Sea fleet in the region. First, it was once again shown that the 
fleet was not invincible, even in its own harbour of the Sevastopol Naval Base. 
Second, USVs and potentially UAVs managed to get through the naval and aerial 
defences of the well-​established Russian military base. Third, it challenged Russian 
dominance in the Northern Black Sea, and this supported Ukrainian progress on 
the ground during the counteroffensives and showed that Crimea was far from as 
secure as Russia wanted to believe. Fourth, the Russian Navy’s sense of superiority 
and security, and their morale were significantly damaged. This was further 
illustrated in their relocation behind the safety of the Crimean Peninsula and their 
involvement in long-​range cruise missile attacks at even greater lengths from the 
Ukrainian coastline. Hence, ‘a country with no operational navy has overwhelmed 
a superior enemy at its home base.’23
From a materiel perspective, this attack illustrates the overarching theme of this 
war in various domains –​ the effective use of Ukrainian innovative asymmetric 
solutions that undermine Russian numeric and technological superiority. Flagships, 
frigates and mine sweepers are far more expensive and time-​consuming to produce. 
At the same time, the Ukrainian USVs, despite their relevant modern technological 
edge, can still be put together in rather undemanding and multifunctional facilities 
at significantly lower cost and with a shorter time required than manufacturing a 
cruiser. From the perspective of functions and innovative technologies, many navies 
 
 
 
 

128  The maritime domain
worldwide were developing USVs for purposes other than kamikaze missions, 
including surveillance, countermining activities and defence purposes.24 Since 
Ukraine no longer had a multifaceted fleet, the direct necessities of war dictated 
innovations and the use of new technologies. In essence, this attack also showed 
the utility of drone swarms in the maritime domain of warfare. It was certainly 
a starting point (although not the first time USVs were used in such a role), but 
as the extent of damage illustrated, greater numbers or more explosives to inflict 
critical damage would be required to achieve a successful result. Alternatively, a 
combination of UAVs and USVs could provide the desired effect.
The Sevastopol attack illustrated some relevant considerations for modern 
warfare. The attack demonstrated the combination of unmanned assets from 
various domains in achieving the desired effect of reaching the target. The 
significance of the attacks is not just in employing drones from another domain. 
In 2017, Houthi rebels used drone boats against a Saudi frigate operating off the 
Yemeni coast.25 USVs are much cheaper than their targets, providing the full 
advantage from asymmetry. They carry more explosives than mines or torpedoes. 
The primary importance of the current employment of USVs is that the defences 
focus on countering UAVs. Hence, the focus is on a different domain.26 The 
employment of both UAVs and USVs in the attacks illustrates the relevance of 
distracting attention with the use of UAVs, while the USVs provide the desired 
kinetic effect or vice versa. Placing this discussion into the multidomain warfare 
context, each unmanned platform has its characteristics and the advantages and 
disadvantages of the domain from which it originates. While domain-​specific 
solutions might be viable, drone threats from other domains can overcome 
even integrated defence systems focused on a single type of unmanned threat 
originating in a single domain. Thus, with the current focus on UAVs, USVs can 
pose a more significant threat to naval fleets and coastline targets. For instance, 
after the success of the Sevastopol attack, USVs were effectively used to attack 
Russian oil at the Sheskharis oil terminal in Novorossiysk in mid-​November 
2022.27 Besides the strategic importance of the fuel storage facilities, the message 
was very clear –​ this naval base was within reach of Ukrainian firepower. It is 
worth remembering that Novorossiysk is the naval base where Russian Black Sea 
fleet submarines are often hidden as their safest harbour in the entire Black Sea 
and the Sea of Azov.
While physical restraints are less problematic for the UAVs, they could be more 
effective in creating barriers to the free movement of the USVs. Accordingly, after 
the Ukrainian attacks, Russia strengthened its defences of both Sevastopol and 
Novorossiysk Naval Bases with layers of floating booms. However, unlike ships, 
oil infrastructure is more difficult to protect.28 Another important consideration in 
the defences against drones originating in different domains is their detection:
Current best practices for detecting and countering UAVs emphasize defence 
in depth using different types of sensors attuned to different signatures, given 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The maritime domain  129
range differences and detection trade-​offs. Although nonaerial drones may give 
similar types of signatures, the details will be different. For example, acoustic 
detectors may pick up the unique sound of a UAV engine or whirring rotors, but 
the engine of a ground or surface vehicle may sound quite different. Plus, how do 
detection measures hold up when groups of drones attack from multiple angles 
across multiple domains at once? Only once the drone is detected can defenders 
respond.29
In terms of countermeasures, various tools from jamming to physical barriers 
might be useful, but their effectiveness would largely depend on the sophistication 
and technological characteristics of the nonaerial drones, especially in the case of 
unmanned undersea vehicles (UUVs).30 Hence, in this new segment of naval and 
multidomain warfare, adaptations and countermeasures will develop hand in hand 
with the situational characteristics of the two sides fighting. Another important 
aspect of this discussion would be establishing the critical mass required to conduct 
a systematic assault on a military base to achieve damage beyond immediate repair. 
While swarm tactics across various domains could provide the desired kinetic 
effect, the issue would be how to preserve a more numeric assault undetected. 
Aerial assets provide greater reach and access to the desired targets but might be 
more detectible in the mass swarm, while USVs would have certain limitations 
of the physical barriers and some naval bases and strategic targets would be more 
vulnerable to their strikes than others, partially due to their maritime geography 
and access.
Russian blockading of seaports and hunger tactics
One of the distinctive features of the sea segment was the enabling contribution 
of the blockading of the ports to the employment of other tactics and the 
leveraging of influence for the war. Most of the Ukrainian Black Sea ports were 
used for loading huge quantities of grain and shipments of grain to various 
countries worldwide. Ukraine is one of the world’s major producers of wheat, 
and it contributed almost 40% of the World Food Program’s wheat supplies.31 
The blockade of shipments from the Ukrainian ports, including grain, allowed 
the Kremlin additional leverage in placing pressure on the Western countries 
and the global community by blackmailing them with food shortages due to the 
blockade. Although hunger tactics are not new in Russian practice, the blockade 
enabled it on a new scale. Russia aimed to use this leverage to reduce sanctions 
imposed on it and its oligarchs. On 24 July 2022, the UN and Turkey brokered 
a deal and the ‘Black Sea Grain Initiative’ was achieved, allowing ships with 
Ukrainian grain free passage, while another part of the deal allowed the export 
of Russian food and fertilisers.32 The next day, Russians bombed Odesa with 
Kaliber cruise missiles, hitting port infrastructure.33 Despite the constant dangers 
of the Russian strikes, grain routes continued until October when Russians 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

130  The maritime domain
suspended the grain deal after the attacks on Sevastopol naval base. Despite this, 
grain convoys continued to leave the port of Odesa and deliver food worldwide. 
Since the deal was brokered, 17.8 million tonnes were delivered to countries in 
need. According to the UN,
the critical food supplies, mostly from farms in Ukraine heavily disrupted by 
the continued fighting in the wake of Russia’s full-​scale invasion last year, have 
reached 43 countries since August –​ more than 40 per cent of them low and middle-​
income nations, the initiative’s Joint Coordination Centre (JCC) said in a Note to 
Correspondents on Wednesday. In December, exports through Ukraine’s Black 
Sea ports rose to 3.7 million metric tonnes, up from 2.6 million in November, and 
in just the last two weeks, nearly 1.2 million metric tonnes have left port.34
From the fighting power perspective, this case demonstrates the strategic 
implications of the availability of firepower and hardware in the maritime domain 
to block civilian traffic on the maritime routes. This caused economic damage 
to Ukraine and provided certain leverage for the Russians to project power over 
the global community. Although Russia did not achieve its proposed objective of 
lifting sanctions, the case still illustrated the significance of a relatively numerical 
naval fleet with firepower in blockading traffic in the maritime domain.
On mines
Another technological relic of the past resurfacing in this war was the old Soviet 
sea mines. While their use in the maritime domain has been considered as another 
illustration of asymmetric response to the numeric advantage of an enemy, they 
were also used as a means of denial of freedom of movement by restricting 
traffic for civilian vessels in the Russian attempt to hijack the export of grain 
from Ukraine and project Russian control over wider areas of the Black Sea 
region. As a result, the spreading of the loose sea mines that have been detected 
in various parts of the Black Sea, including Turkish, Romanian and Bulgarian 
national waters, has raised various questions regarding the borders of the war 
and its immediate implications on the region and sea traffic through the strait of 
Bosporus and Dardanelles. Since the invasion, Turkey, Romania, Bulgaria and 
Ukraine have destroyed around 40 sea mines in the western Black Sea area.35 
However, strictly from the sea warfare perspective, ‘old-​fashioned sea mines are 
still effective enough to slow or deter amphibious assault, complicate logistics, 
and curtail maritime trade.’36 While traditionally the threat of sea mines was 
often handled by mine sweeper vessels, in the case of Ukraine, its divers and 
relevant naval personnel were trained on how to handle the threat of the sea 
mines by employing uncrewed drones. The Royal Navy’s Diving and Threat 
Explosion group and the US Navy’s 6th Fleet personnel taught a six-​week course 
to Ukrainian personnel on how to operate drones for searching the seabed for 
 
 
 
 
 

The maritime domain  131
mines and unexploded ordnance. The United Kingdom provided six drones, so 
Ukraine could learn to use them and then employ them in clearing the Ukrainian 
coastline of mines upon their return home.37 Previously, Ukrainian divers would 
have had to conduct searches of the seabed area around the Odesa coastline in 
person, jeopardising their lives each time.38 The drone initiative and training was 
one of the British contributions in countering Russian threats to the safety of the 
grain exports from Ukraine and employing Russian hunger tactics to achieve 
concessions on the sanctions imposed on it. Addressing the matter, the then UK 
Defence Secretary Ben Wallace stated:
Russia’s cynical attempts to hold the world’s food supply to ransom must not be 
allowed to succeed. This vital equipment and training will help Ukraine make 
their waters safe, helping to smooth the flow of grain to the rest of the world and 
supporting the Armed Forces of Ukraine as they look to defend their coastline 
and ports.39
On the future of the Ukrainian naval fleet
Despite the actual lack of big ships in the Ukrainian naval fleet, making of the 
future Ukrainian Navy continued even during the war. On 16 October 2020, an 
agreement for cooperation in the field of security and defence was signed between 
Ukraine and Turkey:
The memorandum enshrines the desire of Ukraine and Turkey to develop their 
defence-​industrial programs and strengthen defense capabilities, as well as to 
establish mutually beneficial long-​term cooperation based on mutual respect 
and consideration of each other’s interests. The document outlines the intentions 
of the parties to launch and implement joint projects for the construction of 
warships, UAVs and all types of turbine engines.40
The outcome of this agreement was a Ukrainian order for two corvettes to be built 
by Turkey’s RMK Marine Shipyard, with the construction of the first one beginning 
in 2021. It was to be finished and fully equipped in 2023 for further tests to follow. 
This plan was made before the war started. However, despite the situation, on 2 
October 2022, the first Ada-​class anti-​submarine corvette, Hetman Ivan Mazepa, 
was launched in Istanbul.41 It was intended to become the flagship of the newly 
restored Ukrainian Navy.
Another addition to the Ukrainian Navy came from one of its closest allies –​ 
the UK. As part of the British defence review in 2021, ‘Defence in Competitive 
Age,’ the United Kingdom was to retire the Sandown-​ and Hunt-​class vessels and 
refocus on unscrewed minehunters within its £184 million Maritime Mine Counter 
Measures (MMCM) programme. As a result, two Sandown-​class mine hunters 
were gifted to Ukraine. The extent of UK–​Ukraine collaboration established in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

132  The maritime domain
2021 regarding the maritime domain was to the extent of acquiring more vessels 
and building naval bases:
in addition, eight missile boats will be built according to the requirements of 
the Ukrainian Navy, the first two of which will be built directly in the United 
Kingdom, and the other will be built already in Ukraine. The assistance of the 
United Kingdom in the construction of naval bases on the Azov and the Black 
Sea is also planned.42
The two ships were renamed the Chernihiv and the Cherkasy and sailed under the 
Ukrainian flag for the first time in January 2023, being based in Rosyth, Scotland, 
for further modifications.43
One of the equipment additions to the Ukrainian capabilities related to 
the maritime domain was the Royal Navy providing Ukraine with Sea King 
helicopters. This initiative and the training of ten Ukrainian pilots to operate them 
was announced on 26 November 2022, with the first helicopters sighted in Ukraine 
in January 2023. Despite their varied use in the Royal Navy, the exact technical 
specifications of the three helicopters were not specified:
in Royal Navy service, the Sea King performed shipborne anti-​submarine 
warfare (ASW), search and rescue (SAR), airborne early warning (AEW), and 
utility transport. Variants also served in a SAR role with the Royal Air Force. 
The precise version, or versions, supplied to Ukraine have not been revealed.44
In any case, these are additional airborne capabilities for employment in the 
Ukrainian coastal area.
Points for consideration
Overall, the maritime domain of the Russia–​Ukraine war illustrated a less intense 
and decisive impact of the events on the overall course of war, but it provided a lot 
of points for discussion in terms of modern warfare and construction of fighting/​
sea power in this domain. Some trends remain transferable from other domains of 
warfare already discussed, while others have more domain-​specific characteristics. 
First, as in two other traditional physical domains of warfare, Russian numeric 
superiority was challenged by asymmetric solutions originating from various 
domains. Although from the first days of the invasion, Russia could claim that it 
gained control of the Sea of Azov and the Black Sea by capturing the rest of the 
Ukrainian vessels and blockading various ports; this control was soon challenged 
by land-​based antiship cruise missiles and even long-​range artillery against closer 
targets in the near-​coastal areas. This asymmetry feature illustrates that cutting-​
edge and precise firepower originating from another domain can significantly 
undermine more costly and capable equipment in the maritime domain. In this 
 
 
 
 
 

The maritime domain  133
regard, the sinking of the Moskva made the development and manufacturing of 
Neptunes justified, cost-​effective and timely and confirmed the vital necessity of 
ground-​based defences against threats originating in other domains. Hence, to 
some extent, capabilities from other domains can compensate for the shortfalls 
in a domain with fewer available materiel, which in this case was the maritime 
domain.
Nevertheless, control of the sea requires control on the surface, under and above 
the sea. While coastal defences damaged Russian naval capabilities, they did not 
fully deny the Russian fleet control of the sea. Domain-​specific capabilities exist 
for a reason –​ they provide greater freedom of action and power projection in their 
respective domain. Firepower and power projection from other domains can to a 
certain extent compensate and provide an asymmetric response, but they cannot 
fully compensate for the lack of an actual naval fleet and its greater distance in 
power projection. The loss of the Ukrainian naval fleet, due to treason and defection 
to the Russian navy during the annexation of Crimea, was felt during the full-​
scale invasion. All modern technologies require substantial time for development, 
but this is even more true for naval capabilities on a large scale, like cruisers and 
corvettes.
The sinking of the Moskva exemplified the enduring challenge in the Russian 
military machine and significant lessons for the construction of viable fighting 
power in the future –​ materiel needs to be designed with survivability in mind and 
not just firepower. Personnel require sufficient training and skill development. The 
enduring issue for the Russian military is its lack of investment in people in terms 
of skill development and time devoted to their training. While in land warfare, less-​
trained personnel can be used for secondary tasks, limiting interaction with high-​
tech equipment, in more technology-​centric domains, such as maritime and aerial 
domains, lack of training and skills become evident quickly and have devastating 
results.
As in other domains, the maritime domain observes a combination of old 
and new assets in power projection and the denial of freedom of action. From 
one perspective, sea mines are as usable and effective today as they were during 
World War II; although the scale and numbers might vary, they still deny access to 
amphibious landing, restrain sea traffic and threaten military ships. This matter also 
poses the legal question of the boundaries of war in the sea when mines travel to 
the national waters of other countries, causing damage to civilian vessels owned by 
third parties. From another perspective, the introduction of wider employment of 
USVs in combination with UAVs and on their own illustrates further development 
of military technology and tactics in which the combination of assets from various 
domains can overcome the limitations of assets within a single domain. Moreover, 
from the perspective of innovation and adaptation, the focus of the current defences 
on the threats primarily from UAVs provides more opportunities for the effective 
use of USVs and/​or UUVs taking advantage of the blind spots in the Russian 
defence of its fleet, naval bases and supporting infrastructure.
 

134  The maritime domain
Another reflection of the old and new dichotomy is the question of legacy 
materiel and new trends in the changing character of war. The Soviet legacy of the 
Russian fleet design reflects far more than just the idea of continuity and supremacy 
of the firepower projected from the maritime domain, which in essence can be 
argued as confirmation of the primary utility of naval assets as no more than naval 
artillery in support of the Russian land advancement and the long-​range cruise 
missile terror campaign against the entire territory of Ukraine. The main question 
is not so much about the reason the Soviet fleet was designed around the concept 
of offensive firepower but more about if it is still fit for purpose and, of course, the 
question: What is the purpose? There most certainly was no sea battle like in the 
old days (this does not mean that we will not witness this in the future but probably 
not in the Russia–​Ukraine war) and combined firepower was primarily used against 
the land targets, which made the Russian Black Sea Fleet serve as naval artillery 
and a means to resupply the ground forces. The question is whether the Russian 
Soviet legacy of fleet design and its approach to structuring and manning its fleet 
are suitable for the new reality of combined UAV, USV and UUV attacks. While 
Russia has been quoted to have gained operational experience with its use of long-​
range cruise missile attacks in Syria and then further application in Ukraine, a few 
enabling factors facilitated it. In Syria, Russian actions were unrestrained due to 
the attacks on anti-​Assad and civilian populations. In the case of Ukraine, besides 
the threat of drones from different domains, the Russian fleet remained relatively 
safe, since Ukrainian aviation was not enough to be pulled away from the support 
of Ukrainian needs in the land and air domains. If Ukrainian military aviation had 
not been weakened and almost extinct after three decades of Russian interference 
in Ukrainian internal affairs, the Russian Black Sea Fleet would not have favoured 
the extent of control of the sea that it did, not to mention if two-​thirds of the 
Ukrainian naval fleet had not defected to Russia in 2014. Context remains a key to 
understanding the given case.
The lack of amphibious landings also raised some relevant discussions about 
this maritime activity. The historical evidence45 confirmed that opposed amphibious 
landing was a very dangerous endeavour, especially if the landing force is not 
protected by firepower before and during the landing. Furthermore, surprise 
was hard to achieve considering the obvious strategic areas to capture, meaning 
seaports and chokepoints, which, in turn, were strengthened by the UAF with heavy 
artillery, tanks and ground forces. From the perspective of amphibious landing in 
modern and future warfare, this case illustrates the importance of relevant skills 
and a more flexible concept of amphibious landing suitable for modern realities 
and the situational specifics of a distinctive enemy.
Notes
	 1	 Norman Polmar, Thomas Brooks and George Fedoroff, Admiral Gorshkov: The Man 
Who Challenged the U.S. Navy (Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 2019).
 
 
 
 

The maritime domain  135
	 2	 Perun, ‘The Naval War in Ukraine –​ The Moskva, Missiles & Lessons,’ 23 October 
2023. Available online: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​YrgC​Psoc​k6w
	 3	 Joshua Menks and Michael B. Petersen, ‘The “Kalibrization” of the Russian Fleet,’ 
Proceedings of US Naval Institute 148, no. 5 (2022). Available online: www.usni.org/​
magazi​nes/​proc​eedi​ngs/​2022/​may/​kalibr​izat​ion-​russ​ian-​fleet
	 4	 Bill Combes, ‘The War at Sea Russia’s War in Ukraine,’ Series No. 6, International 
Center for Defence and Security, June 2022. Available online: https://​icds.ee/​wp-​cont​
ent/​uplo​ads/​dlm_​uplo​ads/​2022/​06/​ICDS_​B​rief​_​Rus​sia%C2%B4s_​War_​in_​Ukrain​e_​
No​6_​Bi​ll_​C​ombe​s_​Ju​ne_​2​022.pdf
	 5	 Ibid.
	 6	 Colin Wall and Njord Wegge, ‘The Russian Arctic Threat: Consequences of the Ukraine 
War,’ CSIS, January 2023. Available online: www.csis.org/​analy​sis/​russ​ian-​arc​tic-​thr​
eat-​conse​quen​ces-​ukra​ine-​war
	 7	 Naval Forces of Ukraine, ‘Strategy of the Naval Forces of the Armed Forces of Ukraine 
2035,’ 11 January 2019. Available online: https://​navy.mil.gov.ua/​en/​str​ateg​iya-​vijsk​
ovo-​mors​kyh-​syl-​zbroj​nyh-​syl-​ukray​iny-​2035/​
	 8	 Ibid.
	 9	 Ibid.
	10	 Ibid.
	11	 Military Today, ‘Neptune: Anti-​Ship Cruise Missile.’ Available online: www.milit​ary-​
today.com/​missi​les/​nep​tun.htm
	12	 Ibid.
	13	 Benjamin Armstrong, ‘The Russo-​Ukrainian War at Sea: Retrospect and Prospect,’ War 
on the Rocks, 21 April 2022 (accessed 25 June 2023). Available online: https://​waront​
hero​cks.com/​2022/​04/​the-​russo-​ukrain​ian-​war-​at-​sea-​ret​rosp​ect-​and-​prosp​ect/​
	14	 Ibid.
	15	 Ibid.
	16	 Tayfun Ozberk, ‘Russia’s Amphibious Operation Dilemma,’ Naval News, 20 March 
2022 (accessed 23 June 2023). Available online: www.navaln​ews.com/​naval-​news/​
2022/​03/​russ​ias-​amp​hibi​ous-​operat​ion-​dile​mma/​
	17	 Christopher Carlson, ‘The Sinking of Moskva,’ Power Point Slides, Historicon 2022, 
Admiralty Trilogy Seminar.
	18	 Peter Robbins, ‘Admiralty Trilogy Chat –​ Product Updates and Moskva Sinking Seminar,’ 
20 August 2022. Available onine: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​uHTG​6NB8​b3o
	19	 Iryna Balachuk, ‘Russia Wants to Bring Back 2 Years of Military Service,’ Ukrainska 
Pravda, 3 November 2022. Available online: www.pra​vda.com.ua/​eng/​news/​2022/​11/​3/​
7374​778/​
	20	 Todd Prince, ‘ “Moscow” at the Bottom: What Conclusions Did Military Analysts Draw 
After the Sinking of the Flagship of the Black Sea Fleet of Russia,’ Radio Freedom, 20 
April 2022. Available online:www.radio​svob​oda.org/​a/​mos​kva-​zaton​ula-​rak​ety-​nep​tun-​
viyna/​31811​563.html
	21	 H. I. Sutton, ‘Ukraine Is Turning the Tide Against Russian Navy in Black Sea,’ Naval 
News, 6 July 2022. Available online: www.navaln​ews.com/​naval-​news/​2022/​07/​how-​
ukra​ine-​is-​turn​ing-​the-​tide-​agai​nst-​russ​ian-​navy-​in-​black-​sea/​
	22	 Ibid.
	23	 Quoted in Ben Hall and John Rathbone, ‘Military Briefing: Ukraine Raid Heralds 
New Era of Naval Drone Warfare,’ Financial Times, 2 November 2022. Available 
online: www.ft.com/​cont​ent/​41cee​444-​d783-​4e99-​b882-​29c75​e9dd​5a3
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

136  The maritime domain
	24	 H. I. Sutton, ‘Why Ukraine’s Remarkable Attack on Sevastopol Will Go Down in 
History,’ Naval News, 17 November 2022. Available online: www.navaln​ews.com/​
naval-​news/​2022/​11/​why-​ukrai​nes-​rem​arka​ble-​att​ack-​on-​sev​asto​pol-​will-​go-​down-​in-​
hist​ory/​
	25	 Tyler Rogoway, ‘Explosion Rocks Saudi Frigate Operating off Yemeni Coast,’ The 
Drive, 30 October 2017. Available online: www.thedr​ive.com/​the-​war-​zone/​7234/​
explos​ion-​rocks-​saudi-​frig​ate-​operat​ing-​off-​yem​eni-​coast
	26	 Zachary Kallenborn, ‘It’s a Bird, It’s a Plane, It’s … Time to Plan for Drones in Other 
Domains,’ Modern War Institute, 1 May 2023. Available online: https://​mwi.usma.edu/​
its-​a-​bird-​its-​a-​plane-​its-​time-​to-​plan-​plan-​for-​dro​nes-​in-​other-​doma​ins/​
	27	 H. I. Sutton, ‘Ukraine’s Maritime Drone Strikes Again: Reports Indicate Attack on 
Novorossiysk,’ Naval News, 18 November 2022. Available online: www.navaln​ews.
com/​naval-​news/​2022/​11/​ukra​ine-​marit​ime-​drone-​stri​kes-​again-​repo​rts-​indic​ate-​att​
ack-​on-​novor​ossi​ysk/​
	28	 H. I. Sutton, ‘Summary of Increased Russian Defenses at Sevastopol and Novorossiysk,’ 
Covert Shores, 20 November 2022. Available online: www.hisut​ton.com/​Russ​ian-​Navy-​
Defen​ses-​Sev​asto​pol-​Novor​ossi​ysk.html
	29	 Kallenborn, ‘It’s a Bird.’
	30	 Ibid.
	31	 Mark A. Green, ‘Forty Percent of the World Food Program’s Wheat Supplies Come from 
Ukraine,’ Stubborn Things, 2 June 2022. Available online: www.wilso​ncen​ter.org/​blog-​
post/​forty-​perc​ent-​world-​food-​progr​ams-​wheat-​suppl​ies-​come-​ukra​ine
	32	 UN, ‘Beacon on the Black Sea.’ Available online: www.un.org/​en/​black-​sea-​grain-​ini​
tiat​ive
	33	 Rob Picheta, ‘Outrage as Russian Missiles Strike Odesa Port One Day After Grain 
Export Deal Agreed,’ CNN, 24 July 2022. Available online: https://​edit​ion.cnn.com/​
2022/​07/​23/​eur​ope/​rus​sia-​ukra​ine-​odesa-​str​ike-​grain-​expo​rts-​intl/​index.html
	34	 UN News, ‘UN Aims to Boost Aid to Frontline Areas of Ukraine; Black Sea Grain 
Exports Near 18 Million Tonnes,’ 18 January 2023. Available online: https://​news.
un.org/​en/​story/​2023/​01/​1132​607
	35	 GCaptain, ‘Bulgaria Defuses Drifting Sea Mines Along Black Sea Coast,’ GCaptain, 
24 January 2023. Available online: https://​gcapt​ain.com/​bulga​ria-​defu​ses-​drift​
ing-​sea-​mines-​along-​black-​sea-​coast/​
	36	 Brent Sadler, ‘Applying Lessons of the Naval War in Ukraine for a Potential War with 
China,’ The Heritage Foundation, 5 June 2023. Available online: www.herit​age.org/​asia/​
rep​ort/​apply​ing-​less​ons-​the-​naval-​war-​ukra​ine-​potent​ial-​war-​china
	37	 Royal Navy, ‘Royal Navy Divers Train Ukrainians to Hunt for Mines with Underwater 
Drones,’ 26 August 2022. Available online: www.royaln​avy.mod.uk/​news-​and-​lat​est-​
activ​ity/​news/​2022/​aug​ust/​26/​20220​826-​royal-​navy-​div​ers-​train-​ukr​aini​ans-​to-​hunt-​
for-​mines-​with-​und​erwa​ter-​dro​nes
	38	 Naval Forces of Ukraine, ‘What Are Military Divers Looking for in Port Waters?’ 6 
November 2022. Available online: https://​navy.mil.gov.ua/​en/​shho-​shuka​yut-​vijsk​ovi-​
vodol​azy-​v-​akva​tori​yah-​por​tiv/​
	39	 UK MoD, ‘UK Donating Undersea Minehunter Drones to Help Ukraine Clear Coastline,’ 
27 August 2022. Available online: www.gov.uk/​gov​ernm​ent/​news/​uk-​donat​ing-​under​
sea-​min​ehun​ter-​dro​nes-​to-​help-​ukra​ine-​clear-​coastl​ine
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The maritime domain  137
	40	 President of Ukraine, ‘Ukraine and Turkey Have a Common Vision of Cooperation in 
the Field of Security and Defense –​ President,’ 16 October 2020. Available online: www.
presid​ent.gov.ua/​en/​news/​ukray​ina-​j-​ture​chch​ina-​mayut-​spi​lnu-​toc​hku-​zoru-​shodo-​spi​
vpr-​64669
	41	 Tayfun Ozberk, ‘Turkish Shipyard Launches Ukraine’s 1st MILGEM Corvette,’ Naval 
News, 3 October 2022 (accessed 23 June 2023). Available online: www.navaln​ews.com/​
naval-​news/​2022/​10/​turk​ish-​shipy​ard-​launc​hes-​het​man-​ivan-​maz​epa/​
	42	 George Allison, ‘Two Ukrainian Warships Train Together Off Scottish Coast,’ UK 
Defence Journal, 22 January 2022. Available online: https://​ukdef​ence​jour​nal.org.uk/​
two-​ukrain​ian-​warsh​ips-​train-​toget​her-​off-​scott​ish-​coast/​
	43	 Ibid.
	44	 Stetson Payne, ‘Ukraine Situation Report: Donated Sea King Helicopter Makes Debut Near 
Black Sea,’ The Drive, 21 January 2023. Available online. www.thedr​ive.com/​the-​war-​
zone/​ukra​ine-​situat​ion-​rep​ort-​dona​ted-​sea-​king-​hel​icop​ter-​makes-​debut-​near-​black-​sea
	45	 Ian Speller and Chris Tuck, Amphibious Assault: Strategy and Tactics from Gallipoli to 
Iraq (London: Amber Books, 2021).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

DOI: 10.4324/9781003351641-9
8
INFORMATION AND CYBER ASPECTS 
OF THE WAR
This chapter is devoted to the non-​physical domain of warfare, paying attention to the 
information warfare and cyber domain segments of the war. Accordingly, the first part 
of the chapter looks into the Ukrainian and Russian approaches to the information 
aspect of the war, various conditions and tools that enabled different achievements 
within this segment of war. Attention is also paid to the international community and 
the widespread phenomenon of North Atlantic Fellas Organization (NAFO). Strictly 
from the military perspective of the changing character of war and greater openness 
of the battlespace, the question of open-​source intelligence (OSINT) is addressed. 
Finally, the cyber domain of the war is explored, followed by a discussion of various 
points for consideration within the information and cyber segments of the war.
Information segment of the war
The principles of information warfare, deception and disinformation are not new to 
warfare. However, the means have changed, and the extent of informatisation and 
digitisation of human life has also changed. Inevitably, information technologies 
affected certain aspects of conducting warfare and the impact of warfare on 
societies. The CNN effect, the mediagenic effect of air power, the dichotomy of 
immediate remoteness and closeness of the conflict affect how one perceives and 
experiences warfare in the modern information age. However, this war brought 
new experiences in the interaction between the battlespace and information space.
The use of information space and media platforms for disinformation, 
propaganda and military purposes is also not new. The research on fake news and 
the Russian propaganda in support of its favoured candidates in various Western 
elections extensively covers the topic.1 The phenomenon of using social media 
platforms, such as Twitter (now ‘X’), Facebook and others, for sharing information 
 
 
 
 

Information and cyber aspects of the war  139
on the events on the ground during various uprisings and conflicts has already 
gained attention in the academic research.2 However, in the case of this war, 
information space became an integral front of the war, in which different narratives 
and claims had to be refuted, if not in real time, then immediately after in order not 
to allow the enemy the advantage on this segment of war.
Before discussing the approaches of the two sides to the information front of the 
war, it is essential to establish a few distinctive features of the information space in 
the context of this war. First, conventional means of communication like smartphones 
managed to dissolve the fog of war to a greater extent than in previous wars. Soldiers 
at the frontline could take videos of the events and provide evidence to prove or 
refute different claims. The videos of trench warfare, use of artillery, CAS conducted 
by the Army Aviation and evidence of the enemy’s dead bodies soon flooded the 
social media platforms, with only one difference –​ the extent of censorship of the 
content characteristic of a certain social media platform. Second, available data 
posed a security risk and could be used to identify a person’s location and coordinate 
fire. Thus, behaviour in the information space had to be adjusted in order to prevent 
such instances. Third, it might seem that both sides can manipulate visual and audio 
data from the battlespace. However, the practice of further verification illustrated that 
the authentic videos do not require time for adjustment and are streamed much faster 
than are altered, fake videos. The high tempo of the war and the constant movement 
of the frontline favoured the spreading of authentic videos rather than fake ones, 
especially since the fake ones would have several flaws and would quickly be taken 
apart by the audience more skilled in information technologies.
Fourth, Russian soldiers’ use of ordinary mobile phones to call home provided a 
lot of data for the Ukrainian intelligence to use in achieving kinetic and information 
objectives of the war. Sharing the recordings of the Russian soldiers talking to their 
families provided a new layer and means of fighting the war on the information 
front. Historically, such data could primarily be obtained from the letters collected 
after the end of war. It was important to gain the upper hand on the information 
front for several reasons. The global outreach provided opportunities to engage 
audiences from different countries and gain their support. It became another means 
of boosting the morale of the Ukrainian people and their partners, while degrading 
the enemy’s morale. It provided opportunities to address the enemy’s audience 
through platforms that were not fully controlled by Russian censorship. It allowed 
people from across the world to contribute to the fight against Russian aggression 
through the means available to them in their everyday lives. The best example 
would be the NAFO social media movement and its place in the information war to 
suppress the Russian disinformation campaign.
The Ukrainian approach
Like many things in war, the Ukrainian approach to fighting on the information 
front evolved and crystallised with various systematic practices as the actual war 
 
 
 

140  Information and cyber aspects of the war
progressed and as a response to the behaviour and changing tactics of the enemy. In 
general, the Ukrainian approach can be characterised as systematic and multifaceted, 
taking advantage of every available opportunity and platform involving different 
actors to create and sustain resilience in the information space. This discussion 
focuses on the following actors/​fighters on the information front: ordinary people, 
political figures, the UAF (both as institutions and individual soldiers) and 
organised international movements.
From the perspective of the ordinary people of Ukraine, from the first days 
of the full-​scale invasion, information space became the means of sharing data 
regarding Russian movement on the ground, identifying which areas were hit 
by shelling, various crowdfunding initiatives and supporting each other across 
regions. In the beginning, mistakes were made, such as sharing open-​source data 
on the details of hit targets. However, soon ordinary people, educated by each 
other or negative experiences, understood what data could be shared online and 
what should remain undisclosed. Human intelligence (HUMINT) on suspicious 
behaviour in various areas of the rear prevented different sabotage attempts and 
fire coordination. The principle of reporting suspicious behaviour in the rear in real 
time also evidenced significant progress in threat identification and detention. After 
this initial learning experience with fire coordination through social media, another 
milestone in public information activity and transformation of the Ukrainian public 
from ordinary users to information front fighters was the promulgation of visual 
evidence of Russian atrocities in Bucha and Irpin via online platforms. The trigger 
for change was the immediate attempts of the Russian propaganda machine to 
distort the reality of these atrocities and to manipulate the existing evidence to their 
own advantage. The outrage with this disinformation triggered a more proactive 
involvement of ordinary people in spreading accurate information via various 
information platforms. This proactive approach was further strengthened by the 
questions from the Western public and media who would often be confused about 
whom to trust and which evidence to believe. Soon any Russian attempt to spread 
false allegations would be refuted by multiple pieces of evidence and rapid sharing 
of accurate data from ordinary Ukrainian people, especially those who could not 
be on the frontline.
As the experience with media usage illustrates, different countries and conflicts 
have been characterised by the employment of various platforms in each case. In 
Ukraine, the public would use Facebook and YouTube to share personal news, but 
Twitter and Telegram gained prominence in the information front of war. Twitter 
proved effective in reaching both local and international audiences and degrading 
Russian bot accounts, while Telegram allowed more detailed footage from the 
frontline to be shared due to its lower censorship restrictions. The most complex 
to use was YouTube due to its stricter content regulations. UkrTwi or Ukrainian 
Twitter became a phenomenon of its own –​ people would share their feelings and 
support each other, as well as post fundraising for the immediate tactical needs 
of various units, evidence of purchase and use and sharing of different types 
 

Information and cyber aspects of the war  141
of information. Of course, at various focal points of the war, great uncertainty 
required official sources to sustain the balance in the information space, which 
the formal accounts of the UAF and Ukrainian political leadership would often 
provide.
One of the most prominent figures in the information battlespace was President 
Zelenskyy himself. He was always present in the information space, reaching 
various segments of the audience with different tools. For the national audience, 
he recorded short daily video reports of the situation and his activities, paralleled 
with written data spread on his other media channels. From the perspective of the 
international audience, he conducted an unprecedented information campaign to 
raise awareness and support for Ukraine worldwide. This included online speeches 
to national governments and parliaments, international organisations, various field-​
specific fora and conferences worldwide. As the situation stabilised and he could 
leave the country, he conducted in-​person visits to strategic partners of Ukraine, 
strengthening ties and support of partner nations for Ukraine. He also applied 
a very holistic and pragmatic approach to the information front of the war –​ he 
invited leaders of foreign governments not only to visit Ukraine to experience 
the environment of the war but also to witness the evidence of Russian atrocities 
for themselves. Hence, foreign leaders visiting the country would be brought to 
Bucha and Irpin to see for themselves what was done to the Ukrainian people. 
Overall, Mick Ryan laconically concluded that Ukraine rapidly adapted to the 
information age requirements and employed ‘a highly effective international 
influence campaign’ led by President Zelenskyy starting with his famous phrase 
‘I need ammunition, not a ride.’3 This campaign not only allowed Ukraine to have 
the upper hand in refuting Russian disinformation but also provided Ukraine with 
‘significant levels of military, humanitarian, economic and intelligence support.’4 
But President Zelenskyy didn’t just appeal to Western audiences; he also managed 
to address the Russian population. Various pro-​Ukrainian hacker groups facilitated 
broadcasting his speeches on Russian and Crimean TV, disrupting the normal news 
broadcasts.
As in many spheres of Ukrainian life, various initiatives combine grassroots and 
top-​down approaches that often have the same objective but employ means and 
advantages related to their respective actors and their situations. The military’s role 
in the information front of war is no exception. From an individual and grassroots 
perspective, Ukrainian soldiers started from the very beginning to record and share 
two types of videos. The first type would be videos from the frontline showing 
their lifestyle and achievements. Of course, the content of these videos would be 
unclassified and approved by immediate leadership for public release. The second 
type would be more entertaining videos of soldiers dancing, singing or performing 
various tricks. These videos would often be distributed via various platforms, 
but their short nature made them particularly suitable for the TikTok and Twitter 
platforms, which encouraged many people to start using TikTok in the first place. 
For instance, one paramedic to let his relatives know he was alive posts a picture 
 
 
 

142  Information and cyber aspects of the war
with a coffee cup each day, wishing everyone ‘good morning, have a nice day, 
we are one more day closer to victory.’5 Both types of videos would boost the 
morale of people on the frontline and the rear, both nationally and internationally. 
As the war progressed, videos also became the means to show various shortfalls 
of resources distributed across the frontline, which attracted attention to different 
areas of concern. In February 2023, videos from Bakhmut were the most frequent 
because too many manipulations and attempts to discredit the UAF and their efforts 
in holding the area were attempted by Russian propagandists. For example, the 
air reconnaissance group commander with the call sign ‘Madyar,’ Robert Brovdi, 
was going online with daily updates on the situation in Bakhmut and Soledar. He 
was changing location within the Bakhmut area each time he recorded videos and 
uploaded them into the Internet to provide a timely update on the situation in the 
area. Such regular video updates had to follow strict rules of non-​disclosure of 
sensitive information. Also, repeated appearances of the same officer would add 
to the source’s credibility and increase its consequent value for informing the 
audience and boosting morale. This type of video was often aimed at the local 
population or Ukraine-​speaking audience.
From the institutional perspective, the Ukrainian leadership also initiated a 
more formal format of video interviews and video projects to access fundraising, 
international support and to boost morale. Some of these initiatives would be 
interviews with commanders discussing their distinctive units or past battles 
in more detail as participants in the fighting, like the story of the Ukrainian 
counteroffensive in Kharkiv told by Colonel Ihor Skybiuk, the brigade commander 
of the 80th separate amphibious assault brigade.6 Other initiatives would focus on 
distinctive capabilities and their employment in different battles. For example, one 
of the initiatives of President Zelenskyy, United 24, the official fundraising platform 
for Ukraine, would often have various projects and fundraising led by distinctive 
global figures. For instance, Star Wars actor Mark Hamill was an ambassador 
for fundraising of the RQ-​35 Heidrun reconnaissance drones. Canadian actress 
Katheryn Winnick became a fundraiser ambassador for the building restoration 
project on this platform as of 1 March 2023. Another project would focus on 
artillery and would provide detailed examples of the role of artillery in various 
battles.7
NAFO phenomenon
Another distinctive phenomenon in the information space is that of the NAFO, 
which operates under the hashtag #NAFO on Twitter. It is
an organic online group of pro-​Ukraine supporters that have gained the attention 
of policymakers and global leaders for their creative use of digital media to take 
on key sources of Russian disinformation and raise support for the war effort 
in Ukraine.8
 
 
 
 
 
 

Information and cyber aspects of the war  143
One of the co-​founders is Matt Moores. Like many movements and phenomena 
in the modern information space, this one started with a random occurrence and 
became a trend and a worldwide phenomenon. It started as a fundraiser. According 
to Matt Moores, the activity of a group of people started by using memes with the 
cartoon Shiba Inu dog images as a way to caricature various elements of Russian 
propaganda, and people began paying money to get their own Shiba avatar to 
support the cause. The fundraiser gathered $300,000. The initiative of targeting 
Russian bots and propaganda elements started with mocking the Twitter posts of the 
Russian Ambassador to international organisations in Vienna, Mikhail Ulyanov.9 
Unlike the formal refutations of various claims, the NAFO community employed 
more mainstream information space behaviour, which became extremely difficult 
to counter for the Russian propagandists; NAFO fellas were mocking and ridiculing 
pro-​Russian authors of the tweets and their content. The immediate confirmation 
of the effectiveness of this approach was Ulyanov’s engagement with the mocking 
tweets and his growing infuriation and then his gradual taking of breaks from the 
social media platforms. This was a learning point for the community, which shifted 
its activity towards identifying, tracing and reporting Russian propaganda accounts 
across various social media platforms. The Ukrainian officials also favourably 
greeted the initiative, with some officials gaining their own Shiba Inu avatars on 
their Twitter profiles. This phenomenon illustrated a few important aspects of 
warfare in the information age. The battlespace has most certainly shifted into the 
information space, taking the form of fake news and propaganda elements. While 
the governmental means of countering such threats would be partial and costly, the 
solution found itself in the information space and in the online behaviour of ordinary 
users. Ordinary people can get involved in resisting propaganda and disinformation 
without needing any additional skills or specific military or cybersecurity training. 
By identifying the disinformation accounts and Russian bots and reporting them 
to the admins of the social media platforms, they achieve a well-​felt effect on 
countering propaganda in the information space. It does not mean that these efforts 
are the only means, but combined with other formal and grassroots initiatives, 
they contribute to systematic dealing with the threat. Mockery is very difficult to 
confront because it does not use a rational argument or negative emotions like 
anger; instead, it uses humour. Any attempts to counter this mockery with more 
propaganda, fake evidence or rational arguments simply drain more effort and 
resources from the propaganda channels.
Another observation of this phenomenon is that warfare is no longer a localised 
matter, and different effects in the information space can be achieved from 
anywhere. Hence, anyone can get involved in the movement. The NAFO example 
illustrated that grassroots initiatives might start by focusing on a certain activity, but 
the opportunities the information space and online engagement provide allow rapid 
evolution of these initiatives into more formalised, global and effective entities. 
This initiative also shows further blurring between the traditional civil and military 
divides and the effects that activities of non-​military individuals might have on 
 
 

144  Information and cyber aspects of the war
war-​related matters, especially when audiences from the countries not involved in 
the war are getting more involved in resisting propaganda and disinformation of 
the aggressor.
Russian propaganda
The Russian propaganda machine is not a new phenomenon in international 
relations. It has been used to distort reality for decades both inside Russia and 
globally. Regarding the war in Ukraine, Russia followed some of its traditions of 
manipulation with information, people’s perceptions and the promotion of pro-​
Russian views and narratives. It followed the same pattern as it did in 2014 and 
constructed its own casus belli. In the 2014 invasion and annexation of Crimea, 
Russia distorted the principles of international law and created the narrative of 
Russian protection of the Russian-​speaking population. The next eight years of war 
were used to strengthen the narratives.10 A February 2023 report by the Atlantic 
Council on the narrative warfare of Russia provided an analysis of the 350 fact 
checks of pro-​Kremlin disinformation during the eight interim years of 2014–​
2021. They collected more than 10,000 articles of false and misleading narratives 
published by 14 pro-​Russian outlets in 70 days when propaganda intensified (16 
December 2021–​24 February 2022) before the full-​scale invasion. The main pro-​
Russian narratives included:
•	 Russia is seeking peace (2,201 articles);
•	 Russia has a moral obligation to do something about security in the region 
(2,086 articles);
•	 Ukraine is aggressive (1,888 articles);
•	 the West is creating tensions in the region (1,729 articles); and
•	 Ukraine is a puppet of the West (182 articles).11
One of the distinctive features of the Russian approach to propaganda and 
the construction of narratives is taking an event out of context and substituting 
the original context with the Russia-​favourable one. This approach is often more 
successful in the long run, when it is layered with new fake evidence or ‘bogus 
eyewitnesses.’ A distinction can be made between Russian propaganda for the 
foreign audience and their home audience. Articles written for the international 
audience tend to be embedded in national specifics and manipulation of the 
existing political power struggles in the countries. For instance, many pro-​Russian 
fake news outlets find support, and some far-​right and left-​wing elements in liberal 
democracies across the world spread their content. Also, some national media 
outlets tend to employ and host pro-​Russian individuals. One of the academic 
research projects on Russian propaganda targeting the US population discovered a 
positive correlation between the Russian media outlet Sputnik and some American 
media outlets.12 Accordingly, narratives related to the war tend to be tweaked to 
 
 
 
 
 

Information and cyber aspects of the war  145
the concerns of these groups and manipulate them to support a pro-​Russian stance 
that is closer to their views. In contrast, in targeting their population, Russian 
propaganda has used the symbiosis of famous propagandists and TV figures 
appearing on national television and online platforms. In this regard, narratives of 
Russian imperial supremacy over former Soviet countries, especially over Ukraine, 
were used to boost Russian support for the war and strengthen Russian hatred of 
Ukrainians based on the old myths embedded in Russian imperial, totalitarian, 
expansionist history:13
For audiences within Russia, changes in legislation and the regulatory 
environment effectively criminalized media independence and public dissent 
against the war, while the Kremlin and its media proxies embraced jingoistic 
messaging that could be reduced to symbols like the letter Z. The Kremlin also 
weaponized fact-​checking tropes, exploiting increasingly popular Telegram 
channels such as War on Fakes to amplify disinformation via media outlets and 
diplomatic social media accounts.14
While it was much easier for Russia to continue disinformation among its 
population after the decades of the Soviet rule of propaganda and obedience, the 
full-​scale invasion illustrated the need for a different approach due to the high 
tempo of events and increased presence of the Ukrainian counter-​propaganda 
efforts. According to Andy Carvin,
changing people’s minds and positions is much harder than simply sowing 
doubt or fear. It’s one of the reasons why Kremlin information operations 
focus so much on essentially generating chaos, causing contagion, causing a 
loss of morale, or just getting people simply confused about what’s true and 
what’s not.15
From the first days of the full-​scale invasion, Russians intensified their disinformation 
campaigns, starting with a poorly made deep-​fake video of President Zelenskyy 
appealing to the Ukrainian nation to surrender. In the first weeks of the invasion, 35 
new Russian disinformation narratives occurred per day. Their primary objective 
shifted to undermine the credibility of Ukraine and its Armed Forces in the 
international arena and make international audiences doubt Ukrainian evidence of 
Russian atrocities in Ukraine. Some of the Russian activities included using fake 
accounts and bots, altering imagery to create deepfakes, forging documents (to 
discredit Ukrainian officials and international military support for Ukraine) and 
creating and posting fake news videos on behalf of reputable news agencies like 
the BBC.16
Customisation of the Russian disinformation campaign since the full-​scale 
invasion became evident in using different national cultural and historical narratives 
to undermine the credibility of Ukraine. For instance, in the case of Poland, 
 
 
 
 
 

146  Information and cyber aspects of the war
pro-​Russian hackers took control over social media accounts. They used them to 
spread forged documents claiming that Ukrainian officials have anti-​Polish views. 
Another predominant narrative was in painting Ukrainian refugees as a burden 
on the Polish economy, exploiting the generosity of the Polish people. Another 
attempt was aimed at appealing to the historical context of territorial belonging. 
Accordingly, in September 2022, forged ballot papers allegedly produced by the 
Polish Electoral Commission appeared that aimed to conduct a referendum for 
the western Ukrainian city of Lviv to join Poland. Another attempt speculating 
on the same subject was conducted in November 2022, using a Telegram channel 
spreading a questionnaire allegedly prepared by the Polish embassy asking 
Ukrainians whether they wanted to live under the Polish ‘protectorate.’17 Such 
rudimental attempts illustrate poor Russian understanding of the mentality of 
the two nations and the primary objective of fighting off Russian invasion once 
and for all. This also shows that they did not realise the extent of modern digital 
literacy of people and the additional means of data cross-​verification available in 
the modern information age. France was targeted with a focus on their military 
support and false claims that the French Caesar howitzer gifted to Ukraine ended 
up in the Russians’ hands. The extreme case of the pro-​Russian propaganda was the 
Georgian government repeating Russian narratives.
From a global perspective, while a greater pushback from most Western 
audiences to the Russian disinformation campaign took place, its message might 
have resonated better with some of the local audiences of the Global South. 
Russia’s focus on Africa in terms of economic and military interests within its 
‘Return to Africa’ policy was only strengthened by its disinformation campaign. 
Russia continued using its channels RT and Sputnik, if they were not banned, and 
diplomatic media channels as an alternative if they were banned. Furthermore, on 
4 March 2022, pro-​Russian accounts launched a social media campaign in Africa 
supporting Putin and his invasion of Ukraine. The distinctive hashtag resulted in 
over 300,000 mentions by around 106,000 user accounts.18 In Latin America, to 
overcome the loss of restricted propaganda TV channels RT and Sputnik, Russia 
used its diplomatic media channel and YouTube channels to spread its messages.19
Regarding narratives, Russia focused on employing the anti-​Western and anti-​
imperialist attitudes present in various countries of the Global South,
portraying itself as a ‘victim of NATO’ and as an alternative to the imperialist 
West … Russia also manipulates the narrative of the alleged racism of Ukrainians 
and Westerners. For example, it exploits tensions over more favorable treatment 
for Ukrainian refugees compared to those coming from Africa, the Middle East, 
or Latin America.20
These narratives are well entwined with Russian promises to establish mutually 
beneficial relations in the diplomacy and trade spheres, which are attractive for 
various developing countries. From the Russian perspective, it is essential to 
 
 
 
 
 

Information and cyber aspects of the war  147
provide some evidence that it is not entirely isolated from the world and that it still 
has friends.21
Despite the scale and sophistication of the Russian propaganda and 
disinformation campaign, various factors contribute to it being less effective and 
successful compared to the pre-​war and interim eight years of the war period. 
First, Russians’ experience significant resistance and resilience from audiences 
worldwide to their disinformation campaign. The full-​scale invasion, bloodshed, 
territorial occupation and the constant shelling of civilian areas made the war 
the main topic of the news for a year. It became more difficult for Russians to 
hide what was happening on the ground, since many independent journalist 
investigations and live reporting were widely spread.
Third, despite the immediate outreach of information technologies and the 
instantaneous digital spreading of news, the high tempo of the war and constantly 
evolving frontline were counterproductive for the Russian disinformation campaign. 
Russians tend to use specific events, layering them with lies and invented contexts. 
As stated by Emily Harding, a senior fellow and deputy director of the International 
Security Program:
So, like, for –​ a lot of their election propaganda, for example, you could see 
them find a kernel of truth and then do the whole, you know, just-​asking-​
questions thing that they can then insert into certain discussion forums or some, 
like, fringe journalism outlets. But then they create enough buzz around it that 
it moves very slowly into mainstream, and mainstream feels like they have to 
report on it because people are talking about it in these other forums.22
For such schemes to fully effect, layering and ‘the backstory’ require time to be 
settled in the audience’s perception. For the fake evidence to be credible, they 
need time to be created with details and good editing skills. However, what was 
observed with Russian disinformation videos and forged documents was that many 
of them were prepared in a hurry, of poor quality, and could easily be torn down by 
ordinary users identifying distinctive features of the location or posting the original 
videos used for the fake ones. Meanwhile, on the Ukrainian side, it is easier to 
share original and immediately taken videos from the frontline to refute Russian 
disinformation since Ukrainians are sharing what is happening on the frontline.
Another challenge for Russian disinformation is the volume of information 
generated by people covering the war and sharing information from the frontline. 
While previously Russian bots would have had the upper hand in spreading 
disinformation, now there are too many sources. As Ukraine adopted a multifaceted 
and systematic approach to fighting the information war, Russians shifted their focus 
to the Telegram platform23 due to less strict content restrictions. There, they would 
create accounts pretending to be Ukrainians and would spread their disinformation. 
On the one hand, official information can be verified through different official 
sources available on such platforms, such as official websites and web accounts on 
 
 
 
 

148  Information and cyber aspects of the war
Facebook, Twitter and other platforms. On the other hand, Russians have greater 
outreach with Telegram channels; as of June 2022, 700 million active users were 
on Telegram. For comparison purposes, it is worth mentioning that Twitter has only 
around 368 million monthly active users,24 while Facebook’s outreach is almost 
2.96 billion monthly active users (but it has more restrictive rules for content 
upload and sharing).25
Open-​source intelligence (OSINT)
In discussing the information front of the war, Emily Harding identified another 
important feature of the war and the information space: ‘the West is experiencing 
its first real open-​source war.’26 Another phrase used to describe the war was ‘the 
first digital war’; this means the digital space has been more dynamically used 
in this war than in any previous one. In essence, OSINT in this war refers to the 
multitude of data relevant to the military that could be obtained from non-​classified, 
accessible, public –​ and hence open –​ sources of information. The multitude of 
technological means and their sophistication varied in the data availability and 
access to it, but it was not classified. The more high-​end spectrum of data on 
the OSINT was collected from satellites. For instance, Google Maps traffic data 
showed coordinates of the movement of the Russian troops near the Ukrainian 
border. Similarly, NASA satellite imagery from space-​based synthetic aperture 
radar sensors allowed to monitor Russian preparation and restocking efforts.27
The behaviour of the Russian soldiers on social media exposing sensitive 
information which the UAF could then use falls on the less technologically complex 
side of the spectrum. For instance, Russian soldiers would frequently upload 
their pictures, tag their fellow unit members and geolocations on their Telegram 
and VK (VKontakte –​ the Russian equivalent of Facebook) profiles. In turn, this 
information would allow the UAF to trace Russian movement and coordinate 
fire. These pictures were also used to identify specific units’ locations where the 
Russian soldiers committed atrocities, like in Bucha and Irpin. This was one of the 
examples proving the maxim of modern life and warfare –​ it is almost impossible to 
hide from the cameras and leave no trace in the information space. Similarly, when 
Russians made and uploaded to TikTok videos of their travelling on the convoy 
trucks, it allowed to identify the route, the exact equipment, the brigade and its 
formation. In addition, since the majority of Ukrainian citizens have smartphones, 
they possess sensors that act as a force multiplier for the UAF, widening the area 
of cover.28 OSINT was also used for reporting BDA, confirmation of attacks on air 
bases and other strategic targets.29
The implications of the OSINT for intelligence proved significant in this war, 
changing not only the situational awareness per se, but also the means of data 
collection, processing and employment. General Sir Jim Hockenhull, Commander 
of UK Strategic Command, identified and systematically discussed these 
implications.30 First, OSINT reinforces anticipatory intelligence, meaning that 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Information and cyber aspects of the war  149
additional intelligence strengthens the understanding of the adversary’s posture 
and deployment. Besides the obvious utility for the military, it provides relevant 
insights into the given situation for the wider audience to interpret. Second, this war 
had an impact on public confidence. The audiences in Ukraine and the West were 
constantly in the loop of the events and cross-​verification of data through OSINT. 
Hence, the perception of the war, its conduct and the inconsistency between formal 
Russian claims and reality became evident to audiences worldwide.
Third, OSINT was essential in undermining the Russian disinformation campaign 
and false flag narratives. The Russian disinformation campaign was losing on more 
grounds because truthful footage and accurate coverage of the events were widely 
spread across the world through multiple media outlets and social media. Fourth,
open source has proved to be a force multiplier, and we’ve been able to move 
to an approach which militaries around the world have sought to do for some 
time. Through open source every platform and every service person is able to 
act as a sensor. Citizen involvement has meant that practically every citizen and 
every phone has become a sensor. There are some challenges around the ethical 
and moral position of this, but in the context of a war of national survival the 
Ukrainian public are incredibly committed to playing their part and providing 
the advantage to their decision makers.31
Fifth, crowdsourcing and employment of standardised chatbots to report the 
location of the Russian troops by Ukrainian civilians also provided a variety of 
perspectives and viewpoints on the information. This is important since it gave 
more perspectives on the events and allowed for additional insights. Finally, 
OSINT managed to a greater degree to lift the fog of war. It can be compared to 
the jigsaw puzzle of collecting information pieces to see the full picture. Instead of 
being the lid of the puzzle box, OSINT provides endless versions of the pieces of 
the puzzle, and an infinite number of pictures can be put together with those pieces. 
Furthermore,
it also introduces a challenge in terms of discretion around the information, and 
we must filter with a view to being able to refine. This is where the combination 
of open-​source intelligence and secret sources of intelligence becomes 
invaluable in being able to see whether we can define greater understanding as 
a consequence.32
These implications identified at the highest professional military level make 
OSINT an integral element for the war in Ukraine and future warfare in general. 
However, it also demonstrated the previously identified challenge of the information 
age –​ the availability of an overwhelming amount of data and the necessity for 
timely processing. The war provided various experiences with this matter. For 
instance, on one occasion, the UAF identified and coordinated fire on the Chechen 
 
 
 

150  Information and cyber aspects of the war
unit 40 minutes after they uploaded videos to TikTok; on other occasions, the 
image had to be widely circulated for one to three days to be geolocated. Another 
significant implication is the accumulation of footage. According to Mathew Ford, 
the video footage produced from wars is significantly increasing. For instance, 
such footage was up to 40 years of running time during the Syrian war, while in the 
first 80 days of the full-​scale invasion of Ukraine, some 10 years of running time 
had already been produced.33
Some of the challenges related to OSINT became evident across various stages 
of this studied year of the war. After the first few weeks, Ukrainian people learned 
that they should not post pictures and discuss the extent of damage in various areas 
after the Russian bombing. While some learned naturally, others were shunned 
by peer pressure in the information space. However, with various technologies 
becoming available in Ukraine and increasing hype for flashy images and videos, 
normative actions had to be taken to prevent spreading of some information in 
the media. The most prominent of the examples was the posting of photos and 
videos of the work of Ukrainian air defences (including US Patriot systems) in 
Kyiv during Russian ballistic and drone attacks. This information resulted in the 
sequential Russian strike on that location and partial damage to the Patriot system.34 
People who posted information were identified and given official warnings with 
clear normative implications of such actions being identified. Video recordings 
with their apologies (but not showing their actual faces) were then used to clarify 
that filming work of air defences has damaging effects on national defence. It goes 
without saying that those who coordinate Russian fire inside Ukraine are prosecuted 
according to the criminal code of Ukraine.
Another case is related to the hype and elevated agitation in the Western and 
local media regarding the timing, direction and details of the Ukrainian spring 2023 
counteroffensive. Journalists, academics and think-​tank analysts tried their best 
to discover the details, to the point that the Ukrainian president had to say that 
the counteroffensive is not a movie. In early June 2023, the Ukrainian Ministry 
of Defence posted a video encouraging everyone to remain silent and not post 
or share any information related to the plans and actions of the UAF. The 24/​7 
media attention to the war and the constant demand for information have created 
obstacles in the operating environment of this war.
The cyber aspect
The cyber domain has become an inseparable domain of modern warfare, and the 
war in Ukraine is no exception. However, like with various aspects of this war, 
analysts’ predictions were only partially fulfilled. Although the grand-​scale cyber 
war and complete cyber dominance of one side over another was not achieved, the 
cyber aspect illustrated various trends to consider in national security and defence.
Russian cyberattacks on Ukraine did not start on 24 February 2022 but when 
the war started in 2014. For years, Ukraine served as a testing ground for various 
 
 
 
 

Information and cyber aspects of the war  151
Russian GRU cyber unit hacks. In March 2014, a distributed denial-​of-​service 
(DDoS) attack targeted Ukrainian computer networks and communication systems, 
aiming to distract attention from the occupation of Crimea. Two months later, pro-​
Russian hackers tried to manipulate votes in Ukrainian presidential elections, and 
removal of malware delayed the vote count. More attacks occurred in the years to 
come, but the most significant and internationally well-​known was the June 2017 
NotPetya malware which disrupted the work of various governmental, financial, 
communication and transport services and businesses. This attack also disrupted 
the work of the Chornobyl nuclear power plant and spread globally, affecting 65 
countries and around 50,000 systems, resulting in an overall loss of $10 billion.35
Various attacks continued up to the full-​scale invasion, with a greater 
intensification in January–​February 2022. The primary targets of the attacks were 
Ukrainian governmental websites, communication services and the banking system. 
On 23 February, the FoxBlade wiper malware attacks focused on the financial, 
IT and aviation sectors. On 24 February 2022, in the facilitation of the invasion, 
Russia launched a major cyberattack against Viasat, a satellite communication 
network, used by the UAF for C2, communication and intelligence. This attack 
also disrupted communication across Europe. Since the full-​scale invasion, 
cyberattacks have become a part of the war with various distinctive features in 
changes of tactics and targeting.
According to the State Service of Special Communications and Information 
Protection of Ukraine (SSSCIP), although Russian cyberattacks can be traced 
in various spheres, they have continued since February 2022 to prioritise 
governmental, civil and energy infrastructure, media and communication. A shift 
in targeting from the military and governmental entities to the civilian population 
and infrastructure was observed as in other domains of warfare. The recent annual 
report on cyber incidents provided more detailed information on the intensification 
of cyberattacks in 2022. Compared to 2021, 2.8 times more cyber incidents were 
recorded in 2022: malicious codes increased by 18.3 and phishing attempts by 2.2 
times; moreover, an increase of 26% in critical events originating from Russian IP 
addresses took place.36 Some of the more detailed statistics are as follows:
-​	 58 bil of processed events (received by the means of monitoring, analysis and 
transferring of telemetry information about cyber incidents and cyberattacks);
-​	 181 mln of suspicious information security events (during primary analysis);
-​	 179,000 of critical IS events (potential cyber incidents identified after 
suspicious IS events filtering and secondary analysis completion);
-​	 415 registered cyber incidents (critical IS events identified and processed 
directly by security analysts).37
At first glance, it may seem that the increase in Russian cyber activity 
demonstrated their readiness for various scenarios of event development, at least 
in this domain. However, trends in this domain illustrate some similarities with 
 
 
 
 

152  Information and cyber aspects of the war
the traditional domains of warfare. Although NotPetya, FoxBlade and Viasat cases 
showed more sophisticated and complex cyberattacks on their targets and a greater 
scale of impact, experts have characterised the additional attacks during this year of 
full-​scale invasion as more intense and less complex or ‘fast, dirty and relentless.’38 
Accordingly, the Russian GRU military intelligence agency shifted their tactics 
from phishing attacks that were previously aimed at obtaining one’s credentials 
or planting backdoors on an institution’s working computers, they refocused on 
targeting devices providing immediate access, such as firewalls, routers and email 
servers. This change in tactics provided Russians with the following advantages:
It’s allowed the Russian military hackers to have far faster, more immediate 
effects, sometimes penetrating a target network, spreading their access to other 
machines on the network, and deploying data-​destroying wiper malware just 
weeks later, compared to months in earlier operations.39
According to Viktor Zhora, a senior official of SSSCIP, the tempo and intensity 
of Russian cyberattacks had indeed increased, and there is division in tactics 
and targeting between the Russian GRU and the FSB. While GRU refocused on 
edge devices, the FSB still used phishing emails as their usual method. However, 
repeated wiping of the same organisation in a rapid sequence was rare.40 Although 
the tempo of attacks has increased and intensity became evident, the complexity of 
these attacks and, to some extent, their scale were reduced.
Another feature of the Russian cyber war in Ukraine is that it is not limited to 
Ukrainian cyberspace. On various occasions, foreign governments in support of 
Ukraine were also targeted. For instance, on 11 April 2022, three German wind-​
energy companies were targeted, shutting thousands of turbines. This was not the 
first time wind-​energy companies had been attacked. On 31 March, Nordex, a 
wind turbine maker, had to shut down its IT system due to an attack, responsibility 
for which was claimed by ‘Russia-​based ransomware group Conti which was 
sympathetic to Russia and meant to disrupt the European efforts of less reliance on 
Russian oil and gas.’41 Another example was that in the week commencing 2 May 
2022, Russian hackers attacked Czech Railways, some regional airports, the Czech 
civil service server and state resources in Estonia, Moldova and Romania. After the 
Estonian government decided to remove six Soviet military monuments in Narva 
on 16 August, Russian hackers launched a cyberattack on 18 August that was the 
most extensive attack in the country since 2007.42
Overall, Russian cyberattacks can be characterised as follows. As in other 
domains, Russian integration of cyber and conventional physical domains of 
warfare is far from multifaceted efficiency and the necessity of war. Although it 
can be argued that the increased tempo of the war in general and its reflection in 
the cyber domain illustrate that the Russian GRU cyber unit can keep up with the 
increasing demands, the simplification of methods for attacks, their limited scale 
(compared to the Viasat) and increased number of mistakes which undermined 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Information and cyber aspects of the war  153
various attacks suggest burning out of the personnel and/​or a lack of new skilled 
recruits in support of the more established personnel of the Russian GRU.43 While 
the exact situation with the Russian hackers remains unknown, the pure logic 
of over-​committed activity remains undeniable. In this regard, while intensified 
attacks in Ukrainian cyberspace require constant attention and efforts, Russian 
retaliatory actions against EU and NATO members most certainly distracted them 
from the Ukrainian area of their cyberattacks.
Furthermore, despite the intensity and diversity of cyberattacks, they are far 
from being the decisive or the primary domain of war in Ukraine. Although cyber 
aspects contribute to the overall warfighting of the Russians, like many other 
Russian agencies, cyber units can achieve some of the tasks they are given, but 
their inter-​agency integration and layering of effects are limited. This is partially 
because no planning for the prolonged war was in place and, thus, no thoughts were 
placed into the need for, let’s say, cyber and ground forces advancement. Even 
one year after the full-​scale invasion, cyberattacks were often used as a decoy to 
distract attention from various activities in other domains or geographical parts of 
the country rather than as integrated, well-​planned actions to layer effects using 
tools from various domains.
Regarding the Ukrainian counteractions to the Russian cyberattack, Ukraine 
was assisted by both governmental and private stakeholders. The extent the US 
government collaborates with Ukraine in this sphere remains unknown. However, 
assistance from companies like Google and Microsoft was invaluable. One of the 
pre-​emptive measures taken by the Ukrainian government before the full-​scale 
invasion was changing its data protection laws, allowing more data to be moved 
into the cloud:
Before this change, Ukrainian public-​sector digital infrastructure was run on 
servers within Ukraine –​ leaving the physical servers vulnerable to destruction 
by Russian missile attacks. Three days after Russian forces began their invasion 
of Ukraine, Amazon had delivered Snowball devices to Ukraine; these hardened 
devices were used to securely transfer Ukrainian government data to the cloud. 
According to Microsoft, within 10 weeks of the beginning of the war, many of 
the government’s most important digital operations and assets had been moved 
to the cloud –​ and out of the war zone.44
The increasing civil–​military collaboration in the cyber domain was also illustrated 
in the fast tackling of the FoxBlade since the Microsoft Threat Intelligence Centre 
wrote a code to stop the attack. The code was then shared with the Ukrainian 
authorities to eliminate the threat. Civil–​military collaboration also expanded. 
Microsoft contacted Ann Neuberger, US deputy national adviser for cyber and 
emerging technology, and was advised to share the code with European governments 
to prevent it from spreading in the region.45 This development is of great significance, 
as it provides another example of incorporating the private/​commercial sector into 
 
 
 
 

154  Information and cyber aspects of the war
the war, yet in a different domain. Strictly from the perspective of the cyber domain, 
cybersecurity has been demanding closer collaboration between commercial and 
governmental entities because to be effectively treated various threats operating in 
the grey zones would require expertise and tools available from both parties.
Another significant development of the war regarding the grey area of the cyber 
domain that will have long-​term implications for the domain and future warfare 
in general refers to the legal categorisation of some Russian cyberattacks as war 
crimes. The primary argument is that Russian cyberattacks are conducted in 
conjunction with physical attacks on civilian infrastructure, resulting in civilian 
deaths. According to Ukraine’s chief digital transformation officer, Victor Zhora:
When we observe the situation in cyberspace we notice some coordination 
between kinetic strikes and cyberattacks, and since the majority of kinetic attacks 
are organized against civilians –​ being a direct act of war crime –​ supportive 
actions in cyber can be considered as war crimes. We are discussing completely 
new terms and ideas on how to classify these attacks, which happened during 
the war, which have never happened before.46
One of the most prominent examples is Russia’s simultaneous cyber and physical 
attacks (shelling of the thermal power plant) on the DTEK company, Ukraine’s 
largest private energy investor. The case is being presented to the International 
Criminal Court in the Hague. Although the Geneva Convention does not include 
such attacks, much has changed since 1949, and the war in Ukraine may result 
in many changes to previously established norms since the character of war has 
evolved.
Points for consideration
Traditionally, the fastest way to lose war was to lose it at home. Different warring 
sides have used this principle in conflicts across the entire history of warfare. 
However, in the war in Ukraine, this principle was at an entirely different scale 
and the tempo of information warfare significantly increased. From the conceptual 
perspective, the element of information warfare is already embedded in the military 
doctrines across domains and levels of warfare. However, the current war illustrates 
different considerations. It shows the necessity of preparing manuals on the correct 
military and individual behaviour in the information space during peace and war 
times. Although military personnel know about restrictions on what is allowed and 
what is not, the greater integration of the information space into the battlefield 
and the presence of smartphones as a network of sensors requires more detailed 
tactical-​level manuals addressing this type of challenge.
Since the line between civilian and military personnel is becoming more 
blurred, especially in the sphere of the information space, more attention should be 
paid to strengthening the resilience of the civilian population and their behaviour 
 
 
 

Information and cyber aspects of the war  155
online under the conditions of warfare or severe crises. The Ukrainian population 
learned during the war what information can be shared, when and how it can be 
shared and its potential use by the adversary. From the perspective of strengthening 
national resilience against various activities in the information age and the relative 
dissolving of the fog of war over the battlefield, it is essential to prepare the 
population for the new requirements of operating under the conditions of warfare. 
Another consideration in this context refers to the pre-​emptive measures in 
countering disinformation. The resilience of the population and its strengthening 
of information support for the military on the battlefield would largely depend on 
their ability to distinguish truthful information from fake information. Systematic 
courses in information security aimed at identifying truth from fake could contribute 
to strengthening the information front of war. In the case of Ukraine, a lot of effort 
was placed into pulling resources and people into the information segment of the 
war to prevent the wider spread of Russian disinformation. The learning point for 
liberal democracies is to invest in pre-​emptive means of strengthening national 
resilience before any potential crises or conflicts. The general public is more 
exposed to the events of war, especially of this type, than ever before, and these 
features of the information segment of war are likely to continue in the future, and 
hence should be addressed sooner than later.
In terms of the physical component of the information space, while some 
capabilities might be more expensive to acquire and use in warfare, the case of 
Ukraine illustrates that relatively cheap but functional technologies can provide 
a significant difference. Stable communication and updated smartphones helped 
communicate between various units, coordinate fire and conduct battle damage 
assessments, and provide means for information warfare in the format of videos 
from the trenches and frontlines. Although smartphones could pose a threat in the 
frontline, they provide additional advantages and greater engagement with relatives 
and the wider public in the information space if used in the right locations. As the 
Russian experience with using the smartphones of the local population illustrated, 
a lack of basic knowledge and training in utilising smartphones can endanger 
survival of the unit.
Information warfare is most certainly no longer just a governmental effort. 
The war has illustrated that successful opposition to the disinformation campaign 
requires a systematic approach, engaging various national agencies, the local public 
and international stakeholders along with finding ways to address the population 
of the enemy. The Ukrainian approach to information warfare illustrates how its 
multifaceted nature undermined Russian propaganda and disinformation across 
various platforms and agendas.
From the morale perspective, the information space became the source of 
mutual support between Ukrainian soldiers on the frontline and their relatives and 
wider community in the rear, both nationally and internationally. The opportunity 
of communicating with soldiers on the battlefield or within a certain distance 
(when it was allowed and possible) strengthened morale on both sides –​ civil and 
 

156  Information and cyber aspects of the war
military. The civilian population knew why they were enduring limitations in terms 
of the disrupted infrastructure and deteriorated living conditions, while the soldiers 
on the battlefield knew the purpose for which they were fighting. In past wars, 
this connection was more remote and detached, but the information space of this 
war connected many people in an unprecedented way. This does not mean that 
communication in real time was constant or that there was always communication 
with the soldiers on the frontline; but when they could be online, there was an 
opportunity to reconnect with relatives and the strangers following them on social 
media, not only in Ukraine but worldwide.
Regarding the cyber domain, it most certainly did not illustrate the substitution 
of conventional means of warfare with cyber warfare. The extent of the Russian 
integration of cyberattacks with the physical attacks in other domains was not fully 
implemented, demonstrating the issues in Russian cross-​domain integration and 
the lack of preparation for the war of attrition across domains. Unlike the physical 
domains of warfare, Russian cyberattacks provide sufficient resources to adjust to 
the requirements of the war. However, constant distractions to target governmental 
and private entities outside Ukraine showed that the Russian GRU and the FSB 
had to compromise the sophistication and scale of the attacks to more simplistic 
and frequent ones. In placing the discussion of the mass approach into the cyber 
domain, it is worth mentioning that attrition warfare necessities illustrated the need 
for that critical mass to sustain the intensity of the war.
Since the boundaries between civil and military, between private and 
governmental spaces and activities, were significantly blurred by the effects of 
cyberattacks and espionage, it is unsurprising that civil–​military collaboration in 
counter-​cyber warfare actions has moved to a new stage. In this regard, the cyber 
domain is probably on the frontline of the increasing role of the private sector in 
modern wars. The format and extent of civil–​military engagement remain hard to 
predict but would largely depend on the role to be played by the cyber domain and 
information warfare in future wars.
Notes
	 1	 Erik Brattberg and Tim Maurer, Russian Election Interference (Washington, 
DC: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, 2018); Duchess Harris and  Marcia 
Lusted, Russian Hacking in American Elections (Edina: Abdo Publishing, 2018); Pippa 
Norris,  Sarah Cameron and  Thomas Wynter, Electoral Integrity in America: Securing 
Democracy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018).
	 2	 John Mair and  Richard Keeble, Mirage in the Desert?: Reporting the Arab Spring 
(London: Abramis Academic Publishing: 2011); Alex Nunns and  Nadia Idle, Tweets 
from Tahrir Egypt’s Revolution as It Unfolded, in the Words of the People Who Made It 
(New York: Bloomsbury, 2011).
	 3	 Mick Ryan, ‘How Ukraine Is Winning in the Adaptation Battle Against Russia,’ 
Engelsberg Ideas, 24 August 2022. Available online: https://​enge​lsbe​rgid​eas.com/​ess​
ays/​how-​ukra​ine-​is-​winn​ing-​in-​the-​ada​ptat​ion-​bat​tle-​agai​nst-​rus​sia/​
 
 
 
 
 

Information and cyber aspects of the war  157
	 4	 Ibid.
	 5	 Neprogory, Twitter post, 24 June 2023, 5:14 AM, https://​twit​ter.com/​Neprog​ory/​sta​tus/​
1672​4429​3376​3624​962
	 6	 Apostrophe TV, ‘The Unique Story of the Counteroffensive of the UAF in the Kharkiv 
Region,’ 1 December 2022. Available online: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​5mkh​
1O3W​BvE
	 7	 United 24, ‘Why Can Russian Artillery not Prevail Against Ukrainian Forces?’ Fight 
For Freedom Ep2, 27 July 2022. Available online: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​s5BI​
bmms​NF0
	 8	 Kathleen McInnis, Seth Jones and Emily Harding, ‘NAFO and Winning the Information 
War: Lessons Learned from Ukraine,’ CSIS, 22 October 2022. Available online: www.
csis.org/​analy​sis/​nafo-​and-​winn​ing-​info​rmat​ion-​war-​less​ons-​lear​ned-​ukra​ine
	 9	 Ibid.
	10	 Nika Aleksejeva and Andy Carvin, Narrative Warfare: How the Kremlin and Russian 
News Outlets Justified a War of Aggression against Ukraine (Washington, DC: Atlantic 
Council, 2023).
	11	 Ibid., 1.
	12	 Douglas Wilbur, ‘Propaganda or Not: Examining the Claims of Extensive Russian 
Information Operations Within the United States,’ Journal of Information Warfare 20 
(2021): 146–​156.
	13	 Jade McGlynn, Memory Makers: The Politics of the Past in Putin’s Russia 
(London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2023).
	14	 Roman Osadchuk and Andy Carvin, Undermining Ukraine How the Kremlin Employs 
Information Operations to Erode Global Confidence in Ukraine (Washington, 
DC: Atlantic Council, 2023), 1.
	15	 Quoted in Vera Bergengruen, ‘Inside the Kremlin’s Year of Ukraine Propaganda,’ Time, 
22 February 2023. Available online: https://​time.com/​6257​372/​rus​sia-​ukra​ine-​war-​dis​
info​rmat​ion/​
	16	 Osadchuk and Carvin, Undermining Ukraine.
	17	 Ibid., 22.
	18	 Ibid., 30.
	19	 Ibid.
	20	 Olga Tokariuk, ‘A Year of Lies: Russia’s Information War Against Ukraine,’ CEPA, 21 
February 2023. Available online: https://​cepa.org/​arti​cle/​a-​year-​of-​lies-​russ​ias-​info​rmat​
ion-​war-​agai​nst-​ukra​ine/​
	21	 Ibid.
	22	 McInnis, Jones, and Harding, ‘NAFO and Winning.’
	23	 NISOS, ‘Russian’s RT Leads a Global “Information Militia” on Social Media to Bypass 
Censorship on Ukraine-​Related Disinformation –​ An Investigative Report,’ October 
2022. Available online: www.nisos.com/​blog/​rus​sia-​today-​info-​mili​tia-​rep​ort/​
	24	 Statista, ‘Number of Twitter Users Worldwide from 2019 to 2024.’ Available 
online: www.stati​sta.com/​sta​tist​ics/​303​681/​twit​ter-​users-​worldw​ide/​
	25	 Statista, ‘Number of Monthly Active Facebook Users Worldwide as of First Quarter 
2023.’ Available online: www.stati​sta.com/​sta​tist​ics/​264​810/​num​ber-​of-​mont​hly-​act​ive-​
faceb​ook-​users-​worldw​ide/​
	26	 McInnis, Jones, and Harding, ‘NAFO and Winning.’
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

158  Information and cyber aspects of the war
	27	 Magdalene Karalis, ‘Open-​Source intelligence in Ukraine: Asset or Liability?’ Chatham 
House, 16 December 2022. Available online: www.chath​amho​use.org/​2022/​12/​open-​sou​
rce-​intel​lige​nce-​ukra​ine-​asset-​or-​liabil​ity?gclid=​Cj0KCQiA6faf​BhC1​ARIs​AIJj​L8nj​fh0Q​
64tB​Ved-​yYg6Rx​fMN-​hmPU_​0GBKHRb7bP​daEK​Yvpa​JEC9​mAaA​mzyE​ALw_​wcB
	28	 Ibid.
	29	 Robin Kemp, ‘OSINT’s Influence on the Russian Air Campaign in Ukraine and the 
Implications for Future Western Deployments,’ Atlantic Council, 30 August 2022. 
Available online: www.atla​ntic​coun​cil.org/​cont​ent-​ser​ies/​airpo​wer-​after-​ukra​ine/​osi​nts-​
influe​nce-​on-​the-​russ​ian-​air-​campa​ign-​in-​ukra​ine-​and-​the-​impli​cati​ons-​for-​fut​ure-​west​
ern-​depl​oyme​nts/​
	30	 General Hockenhull, ‘How Open-​Source Intelligence Has Shaped the Russia-​Ukraine 
War,’ Speech delivered RUSI, London, 7 November 2022. Available online: www.gov.uk/​
gov​ernm​ent/​speec​hes/​how-​open-​sou​rce-​intel​lige​nce-​has-​sha​ped-​the-​rus​sia-​ukra​ine-​war
	31	 Ibid.
	32	 Ibid.
	33	 The Economist, ‘Open-​Source Intelligence Is Piercing the Fog of War in Ukraine,’ 13 
January 2023. Available online: www.econom​ist.com/​inte​ract​ive/​intern​atio​nal/​2023/​01/​
13/​open-​sou​rce-​intel​lige​nce-​is-​pierc​ing-​the-​fog-​of-​war-​in-​ukra​ine
	34	 Yaroslava Denkovych, ‘In Kyiv, Nine More People Were Exposed for Publishing Videos 
of Air Defense Operations,’ TSN, 31 May 2023. Available online: https://​kyiv.tsn.ua/​
u-​kiy​evi-​vikr​ili-​sche-​dev-​yatoh-​lyu​dey-​yaki-​publ​ikuv​ali-​video-​rob​oti-​ppo-​foto-​2340​
379.html
	35	 Jakub Przetacznik and Simona Tarpova, Russia’s War on Ukraine: Timeline of Cyber-​
Attacks (Brussels: European Parliament, 2022), 3–​4.
	36	 State Service of Special Communications and Information Protection of Ukraine, 
Report: The Number of Recorded Cyber Incidents Almost Tripled in 2022, 16 February 
2023. Available online: https://​cip.gov.ua/​en/​news/​u-​2022-​roci-​kilk​ist-​zarey​estr​ovan​
ikh-​kibe​rinc​iden​tiv-​viro​sla-​mai​zhe-​vtri​chi-​zvit
	37	 Ibid.
	38	 Andy Greenberg, ‘Russia’s New Cyberwarfare in Ukraine Is Fast, Dirty, and Relentless,’ 
WIRED, 10 November 2022. Available online: www.wired.com/​story/​rus​sia-​ukra​ine-​
cyber​atta​cks-​mandi​ant/​
	39	 Ibid.
	40	 Ibid.
	41	 Vinchin, ‘Cyberattacks Hit European Wind Energy Companies, Three Fall Victims to 
the Hacks,’ 5 May 2022. Available online: www.vinc​hin.com/​en/​news/​cyber​atta​cks-​hit-​
europ​ean-​wind-​ene​rgy-​compan​ies-​three-​fall-​vict​ims-​to-​the-​hacks.html
	42	 State Service of Special Communication and Information Protection of Ukraine, ‘Cyber, 
Artillery, Propaganda: Comprehensive Analysis of Russian Warfare Dimensions,’ 2022, 
18. Available online: https://​nsarch​ive.gwu.edu/​sites/​defa​ult/​files/​docume​nts/​rr9​q9n-​
glu5j/​2023-​01-​17-​Ukra​ine-​ESCU-​Cyber-​Artil​ler-​Pro​paga​nda-​Compre​hens​ive-​Analy​
sis-​of-​Russ​ian-​Warf​are-​Dim​ensi​ons-​ESCU.pdf
	43	 Greenberg, ‘Russia’s New Cyberwarfare.’
	44	 Ibid.
	45	 Ibid.
	46	 Shannon Van Sant, ‘Kyiv Argues Russian Cyberattacks Could Be War Crimes,’ Politico, 
9 January 2023. Available online: www.polit​ico.eu/​arti​cle/​vic​tor-​zhora-​ukra​ine-​rus​sia-​
cybe​ratt​ack-​inf​rast​ruct​ure-​war-​crime/​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

DOI: 10.4324/9781003351641-10
9
THE RESILIENCE OF THE 
UKRAINIAN PEOPLE
The Russian war against the Ukrainian nation has had a direct impact on the 
lives of ordinary people in Ukraine, resulting in displacement, injuries, killing, 
kidnapping of Ukrainian children, destruction of homes and families, and distortion 
of normal lives. Despite the Russian attempts, the Ukrainian people have illustrated 
incredible resilience and creativity in facing and coping with the most complex 
challenges posed to civilians in this war. This chapter focuses on the case of 
Ukrainian resilience which lies at the heart of the Ukrainian approach to the total/​
comprehensive defence, illustrated through different examples of the resilience 
of the Ukrainian people and various initiatives in support of the military on the 
battlefield. The chapter finishes with a discussion of the factors that enabled the 
Ukrainian total defence and the resilience of the Ukrainian nation.
Ukrainian approach to resilience
The legal framework to regulate the Ukrainian approach to resilience was adopted 
in September 2021 –​ ‘Concept for ensuring the national system of resilience.’1 
This document outlined key definitions and the approach to achieving national 
resilience under hybrid threats and crises. Resilience was defined as ‘the ability of 
the state and society to effectively resist threats of any origin and nature, to adapt 
to changes in the security environment, to maintain stable functioning, to recover 
to the desired balance after crisis situations quickly.’2 The primary focus was on 
inter-​agency (agencies included state authorities, local self-​government bodies, 
enterprises, institutions, organisations and civil society institutes) and collaboration 
aimed at sustaining the functionality of the society across various spheres. The 
main elements of resilience included effective functioning of the governmental 
bodies; security of the critical infrastructure, specifically the supply of water, food, 
 
 
 
 
 

160  The resilience of the Ukrainian people
energy and heating; resilient functioning of the transport systems, cyber security 
and communication services; securing of law and order; support for the healthcare 
system in enduring greater pressure under the increased workload and restrained 
resources; effective functioning of the civil protection services; effective responses 
to the uncontrolled mass movement of people; social resistance, especially to the 
information warfare and propaganda; and financial and economic stability achieved 
through sustainment of the main business processes.3
This framework and consequent policy were established only in autumn 2021, 
and would be tested during the full-​scale invasion. Despite the initial confusion 
and some of the members of Parliament (MPs) fleeing the country prior to the 
invasion in early February, those that stayed continued uninterrupted the work of 
this important legislative and diplomatic body. Inspired by the resilience of the 
president, the constitutional majority of 300 MPs continued to conduct plenary 
sessions in person, even when Russians were 20 km from the capital and the 
bombardment of the city and blackouts continued through autumn 2022.4 The 
work of the Parliament also became more productive and effective. For instance, 
regarding the plenary time for the laws adopted in the first reading, half of all 
bills were passed in less than 41 seconds, and 90% of bills were passed in less 
than 2 minutes. Prior to this, only international agreements and ratifications were 
considered in such a turbo-​mode.5 Other governmental institutions, like law 
enforcement, social welfare and the tax office, continued working as well.
Regarding transport infrastructure, Russia caused severe damage and disrupted 
normal transportation flows through the air and naval routes. Due to the war 
and destruction of the civilian airports, civilian aviation could not operate in 
the Ukrainian air space, while transportation via Ukrainian ports proved to be 
complicated due to the Russian blockade of the ports, which affected the 70% of 
Ukrainian exports that were transported by sea. Oleksandr Kubrakov, the Ukrainian 
minister of infrastructure, reported in May 2022 that 7 airports, 144,000 km of 
roads, 1,242 bridges and almost 6,300 km of railways had been destroyed, which 
corresponded to 30% of the entire transport infrastructure of the country and was 
estimated to be worth €92.6 billion.6 Due to this damage, the bulk of transportation 
for people, equipment and goods heavily fell on ground transportation.
While huge vehicles could deliver so much through the block-​posted roads 
across the country, the Ukrainian Railways became the symbol of resilience in 
the transport sector. In terms of passenger transportation, railways were the fastest 
way to evacuate people from the more dangerous areas into safer parts of the 
country and abroad. According to the official statement of Ukrainian Railways in 
2022, the railways transported 1.4 million passengers into the EU countries, which 
was the biggest figure in the previous ten years. On top of that, 600,000 people 
were transported as evacuees to the EU. The total of its performance for 2022 
was ‘16.9 million passengers transported in long-​distance connections, another 
4 million passengers were evacuated.’7 According to the end-​of-​year estimates, 
despite everything, Ukrainian Railways still transported 150,582,000 tonnes of 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The resilience of the Ukrainian people  161
cargo in 2022, 52.1% less than in 2021. While all cargo transportation was reduced, 
one type of cargo reduced the least: grain. In 2022, Ukrainian Railways transported 
28,871,300 tonnes of grain, which is only 14.2% less than in 2021.8
Another example of Ukrainian resilience is the endurance of Ukrainian farmers 
in continuing their work despite the full-​scale invasion. The impact of the war 
on agriculture has been devastating. The Russian bombing campaign against 
Ukrainian civilian infrastructure also targeted various segments of agriculture, 
including farms and fields. While some farming fields will have to be cleared from 
the remnants of the explosions, other agricultural areas must be cleared because 
Russia mined them during their retreat. According to Oleksandr Dvoretskyi, the 
head of demining in the Kherson region, in this region alone, 300,000 hectares 
have to be demined to be again usable for agriculture purposes.9 This was before 
the destruction of the Nova Kakhovka dam on 6 June 2023, resulting in the flooding 
of the Kherson region and ecocide on an unprecedented scale.10
From the first days of the invasion, the immediate effect was disruption of 
the normal agricultural cycles and industrial supply chains for various types of 
agriculture. This meant not only that various territories were occupied and could not 
be used for sawing but also that those areas that could be used had to be sawn under 
the dangerous conditions of the threats of constant Russian bombing campaigns and 
the stealing of farm equipment from Ukrainian farmers. Nevertheless, Ukrainian 
farmers sawed, fertilised and harvested crops despite falling bombs, poor weather 
conditions and other disruptions. They found solutions and arrangements to 
disseminate storage and facilitate delivery to where it was possible for small-​
scale farming. While people can compensate for various limitations of the existing 
circumstances even in terms of overcoming dangerous situations or the initial 
scarcity of some resources, such as fertilisers, pesticides and even tractor fuel, 
they cannot easily overcome such issues as heavily mined territories or lack of 
transportation flow for the harvested or stored grain, which might become stale and 
unusable. Further financial assistance to Ukrainian farmers was provided within 
United States Agency for International Development (USAID), the Agriculture 
Resilience Initiative (AGRI)–​Ukraine; $100 million was aimed at supporting 
uninterrupted production of agricultural products, focusing on the provision 
of financial support as well as supplies of fuel, fertilisers, pesticides, personal 
protective equipment (PPE), seeds and other types of equipment. To support the 
harvest of 2022, this assistance was provided to 23% of the registered farmers, 
which is an estimated 12,800 Ukrainian farmers.11 The initiative also addressed 
enduring challenges, such as widening the capabilities of Ukrainian entrepreneurs 
in drying, temporary storage and processing different agricultural products.12 This 
was particularly important since damp weather and the urgency of harvesting crops 
when possible resulted in corn containing 30% moisture, which was not ideal for 
harvesting and required drying.
The best illustration of the resilience of Ukrainian farmers is the harvest of 
2022. According to the Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food of Ukraine, as of 26 
 
 
 
 
 
 

162  The resilience of the Ukrainian people
January 2023, Ukraine had threshed 52.6 million tonnes of grain from 11.1 million 
hectares (96%). In this regard, wheat, barley, peas, soybeans, rapeseed and sugar 
beets were harvested from 100% of the areas. Other agricultural crops were almost 
completely harvested –​ corn (90%), buckwheat (98%), millet (99%) and sunflower 
seeds (99%).13 Furthermore, although the area for sowing the main spring crops 
for the 2023 harvest in Ukrainian-​controlled territory decreased by 206.5 thousand 
hectares to an estimated 5,700 thousand hectares compared to 2022, the Odesa 
region had already started sowing, and more than 16 thousand hectares were sowed 
in March 2023.14
Although the destruction of different meat, dairy and poultry farms significantly 
reduced the livestock, those farms that remained kept going despite the dangers. 
The owner of the 2,000-cow dairy and crop farm commented on the resilience of 
his employees in the situation:
The creamery, the processing factory, they never skipped one day in picking up 
the milk. They never skipped a day in paying. We gave them some milk for free 
and they processed it for free and they gave these products to refugees and to the 
army. And a lot of people, a lot of farmers did similar things.15
In the modern digital-​ and electricity-​dependent age, electricity shortages and 
blackouts challenge the logistics of societal survivability and individual resilience. 
Russian attacks on the Ukrainian electricity grid and civilian infrastructure were 
aimed at destroying normal life, depriving the Ukrainian people of the means to 
prepare food, get water and obtain heat during the coldest times of the year. However, 
the Ukrainian experience during this time illustrates the reverse of the Russian 
desired objectives. It again illustrated the successful integration of grassroots 
and more centralised top-down initiatives. When blackouts became an ordinary 
occurrence, regional administrations developed schedules for power cuts in order 
to economise electricity available for distinctive regions. This often depended on 
the extent of the Russian bombing, the speed of recovery of the electricity grid by 
the local services, restoration of electricity supply to the newly de-​occupied areas 
and industry consumption. Furthermore, alternative, independent power generators 
and other electrical equipment soon satisfied the immediate demand for electricity. 
The supply of these devices was provided through different channels. Foreign 
governmental aid for big power generators was sent from all over the world, while 
some were purchased by the Ukrainian government, individual businesses and 
ordinary people for personal use at home.
While large businesses had to reorient their activities according to the availability 
of the big power generators, small businesses did not give up. For instance, various 
artesian coffee shops continued to work during power shortages using electricity 
generators, allowing people to charge their devices or get additional assistance. 
In essence, doing business as usual was another manifestation of the Ukrainian 
defiance against all odds. Many people learned to adjust their activities to the times 
 
 
 
 

The resilience of the Ukrainian people  163
when electricity was available and use personal power banks, or publicly available 
support points. The Points of Invincibility/​Unbreakability became essential support 
for the people in those severe times. They also became crucial pillars in sustaining 
total defence during prolonged public service disruptions. Accordingly, in the 
event of prolonged emergency power outages, points of invincibility were meant to 
provide electricity, Internet, water, heating and rest areas for people free of charge 
on a 24/​7 basis.16 The initiative was announced at the end of November 2022, 
with 4,000 points already prepared at that time and more to become available. 
For convenience search of their locations, a dedicated website with an interactive 
map including a description of the services and places available was launched.17 
In addition to the governmental points, some businesses would provide the basic 
services free of charge, while others would require payment. Such participating 
businesses in each city would also be listed on the same website. This initiative 
was implemented very fast. The primary distinction between various points was 
the relatively different availability of additional services, like medical support or 
childcare, which varied between regions and depended on the funds available in 
each regional administration.
One of the prominent examples of Ukrainian resilience is its ability to sustain 
and restore the power grid damaged by Russian attacks. According to US data, 
before the beginning of direct targeting of the electricity grid in November 2022, 
only 5% of the grid was damaged, but after the attacks were focused specifically 
on the grid, 30% was damaged.18 As a result, in order to restore various segments 
of the grid, Ukrainian repair teams were working around the clock and even under 
further rounds of Russian bombing. The electricity team has been on full alert with 
a 24/​7 working schedule since midnight on 24 February 2022. Four hours before 
the invasion, a test disconnection of Ukraine from the Russian power grid was 
conducted to check its compliance with requirements of the European Network 
of Transmission System Operators for Electricity. It was to last for three days. 
According to Mariia Tsaturian of Ukrenergo, during the first days of the invasion, 
electrical engineers had to conduct synchronisation of the national system with the 
European one, and a project that would normally require 1.5 years was finished 
within 3 weeks.19 Despite Russian targeting of the same places after their repair, 
Ukrenergo teams continued working and fixing damage. In autumn, they also 
had to work on fixing connections between the newly de-​occupied territories of 
Kherson and the rest of the national power grid.
Volunteering movement
In the early chapters, Maidan and the roots of the Ukrainian volunteering movement 
were discussed. The full-​scale invasion illustrated that the volunteering movement 
became more consolidated and spread to more spheres, products and services 
provision, than before. As a result, it became a strong pillar in strengthening total 
national defence and the link between the rear and frontline at the crucial tactical 
 
 
 
 
 
 

164  The resilience of the Ukrainian people
level. The multitude of initiatives and volunteering frameworks would require 
a book of its own; thus, only some of the most prominent examples with their 
distinctive specialisations are discussed here. Army SOS is known for purchasing 
military equipment to meet the demands of different units in the UAF. It also 
developed the ‘Kropyva’ tablet software used for artillery targeting. A similar 
military direction of equipment development and provision was adopted by 
‘Aerorozvidka,’ which focused on developing and employing network-​centric and 
robotic military capabilities in the Ukrainian defence. This team developed their 
own R18 drone –​ a vertical take-​off and landing octoper with eight lifting screws 
that can carry a payload of a few kilograms.
The Hospitallers medical battalion was created in 2014 by medical volunteer Yana 
Zinkevych, and it continued its work into the full-​scale war. The primary purpose 
of this volunteering paramedic initiative was to provide first aid to the wounded on 
the battlefield, evacuation to the closest hospital, help with rehabilitation processes 
and transfer the deceased to their burial sites across Ukraine. In addition to actual 
involvement in medical support on the frontline, the unit has also conducted 
numerous training programmes to teach different volunteers and military personnel 
how to save lives. It has conducted various fundraising activities to purchase 
medical and transportation equipment supporting different units. One of the most 
important and lifesaving means constantly in need on the frontline remains a good 
medical turnstile and practical knowledge of its correct use.20 The unit’s cause was 
further supported by abroad fundraising initiatives, such as Hospitallers Ukraine 
Aid from the UK, which focused on fundraising to provide fully equipped and 
medically supplied ambulances to Ukraine.21
An example of how the volunteer initiative 2014 developed into a fund that 
systematically addresses needs on the frontline is the ‘Come Back Alive’ foundation. 
It is the first charity organisation in Ukraine licenced to buy and import military 
and dual-​purpose goods. Among its purchases are Bayraktar TB2 drones and 
supporting equipment, thermal imaging optics, quadcopters, cars and intelligence 
systems. It also facilitates various training programmes for demining activities, 
drone operators, artillerymen, snipers and pre-​medical aid on the battlefield. It 
provides more niche training for the needs of the SOF. Since 2014, it has raised 
over UAH 6.6 billion ($175 million).22 One of their projects ‘Long Arms of 
Territorial Defence’ was aimed at strengthening the Territorial defence units with 
‘reconnaissance and strike complexes with a unified system of providing means 
of reconnaissance, fire damage, communication, mobility and specialized training 
by the instructors of the Foundation.’23 The total sum of UAH 333 million was 
divided on a regional basis following the way TDF was formed. Another project 
was to establish a cyber centre in one of the units. Another project was fundraising 
in support of the tactical needs of the 10th Naval Aviation Brigade.24
Another large-​scale foundation that was established later than 2014 is the Prytula 
Foundation, which became prominent in its ability to purchase satellite access when 
$16 million gathered for drones was not required because the Turkish manufacturer 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The resilience of the Ukrainian people  165
Baykar gifted Ukraine three Bayraktar drones. Besides various military projects, 
this foundation also launched projects to help the civilian population affected by 
Russian aggression. This included aid to medical institutions, urgent humanitarian 
aid to people living close to the frontline or to recently de-​occupied territories, 
provision of heating and connection equipment, and the NEST temporary housing 
initiative.25
These few examples of volunteering go hand-​in-​hand with another important 
phenomenon of the war –​ crowdfunding. According to Chatham House research, 
despite the ongoing war, 72% of Ukrainians were donating money to support the 
UAF: ‘on the day of an Iranian drone attack on the centre of Kyiv in October 2022, 
people donated more than £5.6 million to buy kamikaze drones for the Ukrainian 
army.’26 From the Ukrainian perspective, there is nothing new in supporting 
different military units with equipment and personally purchased items. While 
it may seem that the experience dates back to the beginning of the war when 
the UAF were under-​resourced during the pro-​Russian regime of Yanukovych, 
the experience dates back to both revolutions (the Orange Revolution and the 
Revolution of Dignity) when people would send support to those standing on the 
main square. Various initiatives and practices were crystallised in the examples 
mentioned in this section. Crowdfunding was indeed one of the Ukrainian 
adaptations to the requirements of the war.27 From one perspective, it provided 
additional means to support the UAF that were customised to the needs of the 
tactical levels of specific units. Often customised orders could be sent sooner 
than any centralised requests, not to mention that centralised purchases could 
then prioritise more strategic and operational objectives. Once again, the two 
approaches –​ grassroots and top-down –​ complemented each other, which was 
especially significant under the conditions of the high tempo of war on dynamic 
frontlines.
From another perspective, namely the societal one, people had an opportunity 
to directly support the UAF in their fight against Russian aggression. This was an 
important factor in strengthening the connection between the rear and the frontline 
and, hence, boosting mutual morale. The civilian population that could not fight felt 
more engaged and motivated because they could at least help the UAF financially. 
Soldiers on the frontline felt the support of not only the Ukrainian government and 
the chain of command but also the Ukrainian nation and society in general, which 
reduced the feeling of alienation and blurred the idea of a greater divide between 
the relatively peaceful rear and the warfighting on the frontline. These initiatives 
widened support for the UAF from that of Ukraine and the region to the global 
scale since ordinary people worldwide could donate money in support of the UAF. 
This meant that the very concept of the rear and social support in the total defence 
had significantly transcended any limitations of the conceptual frameworks and 
illustrated not only the global support for the UAF in this war but also that the 
Ukrainian war for its independence and integrity resonated with the core humane 
values across the world. It indeed became a global war.
 
 
 
 

166  The resilience of the Ukrainian people
Besides the big crowdfunding projects, there have been smaller individual 
initiatives by people known and trusted by various groups in society. These ties 
are based on knowing people personally or through trusted sources. One of the 
examples is Yana Suporovska,28 a talented journalist, public activist and founder 
of the Cultural Tribunal podcast. This project is about prominent Ukrainian names 
in culture, art and science and the world-​class collections that for centuries were 
appropriated by the Russian Empire.29 In addition to being active in the cultural and 
information segments of the Ukrainian struggle against Russian aggression, she is 
an active participant in the UkrTwi community. In terms of crowdfunding, she would 
often post smaller crowdfunding initiatives for various units’ very specific tactical 
needs. The importance of these projects was that they would provide needed means 
in terms of funding, purchasing and delivering the exact items within the shortest 
time. The effectiveness of such initiatives is based on trust, posting evidence of 
the purchases and their deliveries, and further confirmation from the people on the 
ground. This is also conditioned by the directive feature of the Ukrainian society of 
preserving the social aspects of data verification, meaning that under the conditions 
of the post-​Cold War transitional stage of instability, one of the sources for cross-​
verification of data would be HUMINT or to know people who were involved in 
one event or another. For the same reasons, people tend to trust individuals more 
than institutions. In the context of this war, it would often mean confirmation of the 
information by people on the ground. Hence, greater transparency of even civilian 
or civil–​military collaboration has been observed in this war.
Another example of precise, customised crowdfunding is conducted by the 
well-​known commander of the air reconnaissance group ‘Birds of Madyar,’ Robert 
Brovdi (call sign ‘Madyar’). In March 2023, he announced crowdfunding for Mavic 
thermal drones to boost the night-​time activities of various units of the UAF. The 
most surprising part of this effort was not the request or purpose or who initiated 
the call but the fact that instead of the needed UAH 10 million, UAH 15 million 
were crowdfunded within five hours after the call for funding was announced on 
social media platforms.30 Such examples illustrate the core of Ukrainian strength in 
this war –​ unity and standing together despite differences.
Besides the big projects or well-​known initiatives, some ordinary people were 
often hidden by the shadows of the grand scale of the war but they made a huge 
difference for Ukrainian warriors on the frontline. From the first days, ordinary 
people gathered supplies and manufactured Molotov cocktails, women and children 
knitted camouflage nets for the ground forces and SOF, and restaurant owners 
opened their doors to feed people. There were grandmothers in their eighties 
baking bread in half-​destroyed stoves to feed UAF warriors on their way to the 
frontline. Children were playing instruments or chess on the streets of Ukrainian 
cities to crowdfund for the UAF; some were giving away their personal savings 
to help the UAF in defending their homeland. Other people were eager to deliver 
anything or anyone to and from the frontline. On one occasion, I came across 
social media exchanges between the soldiers on the frontline asking someone from 
 
 
 
 

The resilience of the Ukrainian people  167
the surrounding area to pick up a puppy because it could not be taken with the 
relocating unit and would starve to death or be killed by Russians if they came into 
the area. People would help each other like never before.
Sources of Ukrainian resilience and total defence
The aforementioned examples and segments of Ukrainian resilience and approaches 
to total defence are the result of characteristic features of Ukrainian society, the 
historical context and various experiences of the last few decades. From the historical 
perspective, because of a long history of occupation and domination, Ukraine has 
a long tradition of resistance, independence and sovereignty movements. Hence, 
from the political perspective of organising the country, a rigid hierarchy would 
never work. It would mainly result in diversification of local practice in the regions 
beyond what centralised directives envisaged. Inconsistency between people’s 
will and centralised attempts to suppress it was manifested in the two revolutions 
in Ukraine. Since the driving force of change was coming from the people and 
ground initiatives, it gave rise to a strong civil society that started from simple 
assistance provided to people from one’s region during the Orange Revolution and 
the Revolution of Dignity and developed into a strong rear consisting of volunteers, 
businesses, NGOs and ordinary people supporting the UAF during the full-​scale 
invasion. In essence, through these tumultuous years of revolutions and constant 
transition, various civil society initiatives developed from ordinary ideas into 
large-​scale projects providing systematic support to various segments of the UAF 
and parts of Ukrainian society.
The proactive nature and effectiveness of Ukrainian civil society was driven by 
necessity –​ the necessity of living in a transitional period, helping revolutionaries 
on Maidan and helping the military on the frontline. Although societal trends 
varied during the first eight years of war, one year of full-​scale invasion illustrated 
that know-​how developed in the last ten years had improved the readiness of the 
civil society to financially, physically and morally support the UAF. The argument 
that the strong front depends on the strong rear became sound during this year of 
the war like never before.
Another important factor in the adaptability and flexibility of Ukrainian society 
across spheres was the combination of advanced digital services and know-​how 
with traditional and close-​to-​the-​ground practices. Ukraine combined the benefits 
of digitisation of various spheres of life with preserving some more traditional 
ways of providing services for the categories of society that preferred to use more 
traditional tools. For instance, although most of the banking system would function 
on mobile and Internet banking, the importance of cash transactions was not ruled 
out as much as it has been in many Western countries over the last decade. Hence, 
under the crisis conditions, more people would have cash for transactions at the 
local outdoor markets, which proved to be an important adaptability during the 
blackouts. When supermarkets could not be open due to the lack of electricity 
 
 

168  The resilience of the Ukrainian people
before power generators were available, people could purchase almost anything at 
the outdoor markets. Of course, from the perspective of adaptability and alternative 
sources of product supply, more urbanised areas were more vulnerable to the 
disruptions of supply chains, while the less urbanised areas closer to the sources of 
the food supply would feel the shortages differently.
Another factor in sustaining Ukrainian resilience and self-​sufficiency is that 
Ukraine is an agrarian country. Most food and clothes products were or could 
be produced in the country. Despite the war and Russian targeting of fields, crop 
storage facilities and delivery routes, Ukraine supported itself with food necessities 
and exported grain abroad. Furthermore, although the country’s industrial potential 
declined in the post-​Cold War decades, the remaining industries could reorient to 
product and service provision in support of both the front and rear. One example is 
the most famous Ukrainian brand of military tactical clothes and equipment M-​Tac, 
which is worn by the Ukrainian political and military leadership and is supplied to 
military and civilians for tactical-​level needs.31 Other large light-​industry factories 
are reoriented to the governmental orders for different needs of the UAF.
One of the important factors in the survivability of various sectors of the national 
industry was the ease of mobility of various factories. In other words, when the 
full-​scale invasion started, many factories with movable equipment migrated to the 
safer parts of the country –​ primarily central and western Ukraine. The availability 
of big facilities into which the factories could move was not a problem, since many 
big factory buildings remained unused after the decline of industrial production 
in the post-​Cold War decades. Thus, the capacity to house these factories was 
there. In turn, these factories brought jobs into the areas. Furthermore, many small 
and medium-​sized enterprises reoriented towards societal needs in participating 
in various governmental programmes and producing time-​specific products 
and providing relevant services based on the changed demand and priorities in 
consumer behaviour. In this regard, people plan purchases more in advance and 
focus on Ukrainian brands and those that provide additional support to the UAF.32
From the governance perspective, one of the factors stimulating Ukrainian 
resilience and effective decision-​making across regions is the previous reforms 
aimed at decentralisation and reinforcement of regional and municipal governance. 
The direct result of these reforms was that regions and municipalities would have 
greater freedom in decision-​making and could focus on the regional development 
according to the local specifics and requirements. This set of reforms was 
conditioned by Ukrainian orientation towards EU membership and was initiated 
after 2014. Besides various refurbishing and reconstruction projects run since 
2014, ‘decentralisation reforms had a positive effect on the administrative, 
human resource and fiscal capacities of municipalities, as well as on service 
quality.’33 Regarding the challenges posed by the full-​scale invasion, following the 
overarching direction outlined by Kyiv, these reforms allowed local authorities to 
craft their response packages and activities based on the available local resources 
and infrastructure. For instance, the governor of the Truskavets’ health resort was 
 
 
 
 

The resilience of the Ukrainian people  169
working around the clock to facilitate incoming, internally displaced persons 
arriving from the temporarily occupied and heavily bombed areas. Different cities 
would face varied challenges since some would be on the main train routes and 
would take in more people.
In terms of resilience to air attacks, a few aspects need to be considered. On 
the plus side, the Soviet system of bomb shelters in the old buildings was very 
important for saving lives and providing people with much-​needed shelter. From 
the perspective of the air raid sirens, the infrastructure for spreading the alerts was in 
place but various locations required repairs, which were undertaken fairly quickly 
across the country. As with many other activities, duplication of notifications and 
air raid alerts were conducted also digitally via smartphone apps, indicating the 
beginning of the air raid siren, the extent of the danger and the consequent end 
of the siren. Hence, the data were collected and transmitted symmetrically. Often 
attacks were coming from Crimea and the Black Sea in the direction of Kyiv, and 
people would be given the approximate time of the incoming attacks. One of the 
challenges with the bomb shelters was that in the new buildings, people would use 
basements for this purpose, which, in essence, meant that these were not designated 
bunker-​type bomb shelters. Still, this was better than nothing. In contrast, some 
Soviet-​era bunkers in the old school and municipal buildings, especially in the 
regions, were not immediately suitable and would often require repairs. These 
challenges would be prioritised, and during this first year of the full-​scale invasion, 
many bomb shelters were repaired using local and central funding opportunities.
From the perspective of resilience, presence of the relevant infrastructure and 
the use of alternative places like the Kyiv underground for bomb shelter proved 
to be lifesaving and allowed focusing on other immediate challenges, especially 
during the first months of the war. However, for the infrastructure to be used to its 
fullest potential, it needs to be checked and fixed regularly so that it is ready when 
it is most needed. The argument that a certain threat might not be feasible proved 
wrong. The refurbishment of many bomb shelters made them functional again, but 
the capacity issue remained pressing, with many people using basements or car 
parks as shelters. Many people staying in their houses would protect themselves 
following the rule of two walls. Even in the case of bomb shelters, the Ukrainian 
volunteering spirit and creativity went hand in hand, with various solutions coming 
from local people. For instance, in the spring 2022, local volunteers in Odesa began 
clearing old 20-​meter-​deep catacombs to transform them into bomb shelter.34
On innovations
When discussing one of the Ukrainian adaptations in the war, Air Marshal Johnny 
Stringer (Royal Air Force), stated that Ukraine achieved ‘focused innovation,’ 
combining various platforms from small, medium and big technologies to create 
app-​based ISR and C2.35 The phrase ‘focused innovation’ can be extended to 
characterise the Ukrainian approach to resilience. On the basis of talent and hard 
 
 
 
 

170  The resilience of the Ukrainian people
work, many Ukrainians achieved a lot in foreign countries where they would find 
more favourable conditions for their development –​ Ukrainian artists, inventors, 
businessmen and public activists can be found across different countries throughout 
the nation’s history. During the Soviet era, many achievements of the Ukrainian 
people were appropriated by the state, which called them ‘Soviet.’ Some examples 
of this appropriation of Ukrainian artists are the famous film director Oleksandr 
Dovzhenko, and the avant-​garde artists Kazymyr Malevych and Oleksandra Ekster.36
During the eight years of war, various innovations have been created across 
different spheres of Ukrainian life: from volunteering mechanisms, high-​quality 
textile products, IT services to drone test projects and innovations in the military 
sphere. While the protracted war stimulated some innovations and allowed them to 
gradually develop, the full-​scale invasion and the severe threat to the very survival 
of the Ukrainian nation refocused people and their skills on the single purpose of 
fighting and resisting the enemy in all domains and fronts of war. This vital necessity 
draws people’s innovation in a single direction –​ to the rear to sustain the front and 
to the front to fight. Regarding the supportive environment for various initiatives 
and innovative suggestions, previously existing red tape and corruptive, restrictive 
layers were lifted (at least to a greater extent), allowing people to implement their 
ideas in life. Furthermore, the pressing necessity dictated immediate solutions 
without the usual doubts. People were just doing what they could, whether it be 
the Cultural Tribunal recovering Ukrainian cultural heritage from centuries of 
Russian thefts, or new drones developed for the UAF, or a Ukrainian boy inventing 
a demining drone to clear his land from the Russian explosive footprints, or various 
apps in support of both civil and military needs. Ukrainian foreign minister Dmytro 
Kuleba summarised the case of Ukraine as follows: ‘Historically, Ukraine was 
unfairly under-​appreciated, and I regret it took  bloodshed and a devastating war 
for the world to realise how cool we are.’37
One of the crucial factors for the relevance of the innovations and their 
consequent implementation is that the vast majority of them are driven by tactical-​
level needs and are resolved by the grassroots, ground-​level people who manage 
to create things under conditions of limited resources, disrupted supply chains, and 
a lack of electricity and sleep. From the military perspective, this was a crucial 
targeted innovation, because it addressed essential challenges faced by Ukrainian 
warriors in their day-​to-​day activities. People would remember how to do trench 
candles and how to improve them. This war illustrated the importance of being 
practice-​oriented in problem-​solving and innovation. The Ukrainian principle of 
‘get the most with what we have’ prevailed in every aspect of life in times of war.
Notes
	 1	 Decree of the President of Ukraine, No. 479/​2021. ‘On the Decision of the National 
Security and Defense Council of Ukraine dated 20 August 2021, “On the Introduction of 
the National System of Resilience.” ’ www.presid​ent.gov.ua/​docume​nts/​4792​021-​40181
 
 
 
 
 

The resilience of the Ukrainian people  171
	 2	 Ibid.
	 3	 Ibid.
	 4	 Sarah Whitmore, ‘Ukraine’s Parliament: One Year at War,’ Hansard Society, 23 
February 2023. Available online: www.han​sard​soci​ety.org.uk/​blog/​ukrai​nes-​par​liam​
ent-​one-​year-​at-​war
	 5	 Volodymyr Skrypets and Oleksandr Zaslavskyi, ‘Work Monitoring of the Supreme 
Council of Ukraine: IX Convocation, Session 7 (Half a year of war),’ Laboratories 
of Legislative Initiatives, 2022, 43. Available online: https://​parlam​ent.org.ua/​wp-​cont​
ent/​uplo​ads/​2022/​12/​Monit​orin​g_​7-​9-​1.pdf?utm​_​sou​rce=​https://​www.han​sard​soci​ety.
org.uk
	 6	 Monika Kiss, Russia’s War on Ukraine: Implications for Transport (Brussels: European 
Parliament, 2022), 4.
	 7	 Ukrzaliznytsia, ‘In 2022, Ukrzaliznytsia Transported a Record Number of Passengers in 
Connection with the EU.’ Available online: www.uz.gov.ua/​press​_​cen​ter/​up_​to​_​dat​e_​to​
pic/​592​766/​
	 8	 Mykola Kopylov, ‘In 2022, the Railways of Ukraine Transported More Than 150 
Million Tons of Cargo,’ Rail.insider, 5 January 2023. Available online: www.rail​insi​der.
com.ua/​zali​znyc​zya-​ukray​iny-​u-​2022-​roczi-​pereve​zla-​ponad-​150-​mln-​t-​vantaz​hiv/​?fbc​
lid=​IwA​R2kw​gE4D​RTAV​_​woM​bBOR​PNJB​3Gh-​VK3​qxMS​l9Lf​PB8O​h8HH​ULGQ​
ZeuJ​ies
	 9	 New York Times, ‘In Fields Sown with Bombs, Ukraine’s Farmers Risk Deadly Harvest,’ 
11 March 2023. Available online: www.nyti​mes.com/​2023/​03/​11/​world/​eur​ope/​ukra​ine-​
farms-​mines.html
	10	 Tim Schauenberg, ‘Ukraine: Destroyed Kakhovka Dam Amounts to “ecocide”,’ 
Deutsche Welle, 6 June 2023. Available online: www.dw.com/​en/​ukra​ine-​destro​yed-​
kakho​vka-​dam-​amou​nts-​to-​ecoc​ide/​a-​65849​713
	11	 USAID, ‘Agriculture Resilience Initiative–​Ukraine (AGRI–​Ukraine).’ Available 
online: www.usaid.gov/​ukra​ine/​agri​cult​ure-​res​ilie​nce-​ini​tiat​ive-​agri-​ukra​ine
	12	 Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food of Ukraine, ‘ “AGRI-​Ukraine” Initiative: The US 
Will Support Ukrainian Farmers with $100 Million,’ 22 July 2022. Available online: https://​
mina​gro.gov.ua/​news/​ini​ciat​iva-​agri-​ukray​ina-​ssha-​pidt​rima​yut-​ukra​yins​kih-​ferme​
riv-​na-​100-​mln
	13	 Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food of Ukraine, ‘25.2 Million Tons of Corn Were 
Threshed in Ukraine,’ 27 January 2023. Available online: https://​mina​gro.gov.ua/​news/​
v-​ukray​ini-​namo​loch​eno-​252-​mln-​tonn-​kukuru​dzi
	14	 Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food of Ukraine, ‘More Than 16,000 Hectares of 
Grain and Leguminous Crops Have Already Been Sown in Ukraine,’ 10 March 2023. 
Available online: https://​mina​gro.gov.ua/​news/​v-​ukray​ini-​vzhe-​posiy​ano-​ponad-​16-​tis-​
ga-​zerno​vih-​ta-​zerno​bobo​vih-​kul​tur
	15	 Morning AgClips, ‘Dairy Brings Resilience for Ukraine Farmer,’ 21 February 2023. 
Available online: www.mor​ning​agcl​ips.com/​dairy-​bri​ngs-​res​ilie​nce-​for-​ukra​ine-​far​mer/​
	16	 Points of Invincibility, https://​nez​lamn​ist.gov.ua/​
	17	 EuroMaidan Press, ‘4000 “Points of Invincibility” Will Provide Electricity, Internet, 
Heat and Water for Ukrainians in Case of Long Power Outages.’ Available online: https://​
euro​maid​anpr​ess.com/​2022/​11/​23/​4000-​unbr​eaka​ble-​poi​nts-​will-​prov​ide-​elec​tric​ity-​
inter​net-​heat-​and-​water-​for-​ukr​aini​ans-​in-​case-​of-​long-​power-​outa​ges/​
	18	 U.S. Embassy & Consulates in Italy, ‘Working to Keep Electricity On in Ukraine.’ 
Available online: https://​it.usemba​ssy.gov/​work​ing-​to-​keep-​elec​tric​ity-​on-​in-​ukra​ine/​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

172  The resilience of the Ukrainian people
	19	 Nils Adler, ‘ “Heroes to All of Us”: Ukraine’s Energy Repair Crews,’ AlJazeera, 23 
February 2023. Available online: www.aljaze​era.com/​featu​res/​2023/​2/​23/​her​oes-​to-​all-​
of-​us-​ukrai​nes-​ene​rgy-​rep​air-​crews
	20	 Hospitallers, For the Sake of Every Life. Available online: www.hospi​tall​ers.life/​
about-​us
	21	 Help Hospitallers, www.hospi​tall​ers.org.uk/​
	22	 Come Back Alive, ‘About the Foundation.’ Available online: https://​savel​ife.in.ua/​en/​
about-​fou​ndat​ion-​en/​
	23	 Come Back Alive, ‘Long Arms of TDF.’ Available online: https://​savel​ife.in.ua/​tro-​333/​
#tro​333-​desc​ript​ion
	24	 Come Back Alive, ‘10 Million for Gentlemen from Crimea,’ 15 December 2022. Available 
online: https://​savel​ife.in.ua/​proje​cts/​milit​ary/​10-​milyo​niv-​dlya-​paniv-​iz-​krymu/​
	25	 Prytula Foundation, ‘Humanitarian Help to Civilians.’ Available online: https://​prytul​
afou​ndat​ion.org/​human​itar​ian-​help
	26	 Orysia Lutsevych, ‘How Ukraine’s Invention and Resilience Confounds Russia,’ 
Chatham House, 3 February 2023. Available online: www.chath​amho​use.org/​publi​cati​
ons/​the-​world-​today/​2023-​02/​how-​ukrai​nes-​invent​ion-​and-​res​ilie​nce-​confou​nds-​rus​sia
	27	 Mick Ryan, ‘How Ukraine Is Winning in the Adaptation Battle against Russia,’ 
Engelsberg Ideas, 24 August 2022. Available online: https://​enge​lsbe​rgid​eas.com/​ess​
ays/​how-​ukra​ine-​is-​winn​ing-​in-​the-​ada​ptat​ion-​bat​tle-​agai​nst-​rus​sia/​
	28	 Yana Suporovska, https://​twit​ter.com/​Yan​aSup​orov​ska
	29	 The Ukrainians, ‘We Invite You to the Cultural Tribunal Trailer of the new podcast 
The Ukrainians,’ 5 September 2022. Available online: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​f9Jj​
nYGy​t2M
	30	 Zakarpattya, ‘Over 15 Million Hryvnias Were Collected in 5 Hours of the Collection 
for “Night” Drones, Announced by the Transcarpathian Robert Brovdi “Magyar”.’ 
Available 
online: 
https://​zaka​rpat​tya.net.ua/​News/​226​178-​Za-​5-​hodyn-​zboru-​na-​
nic​hni-​drony-​oholo​shen​oho-​zakar​patt​sem-​Rober​tom-​Bro​vdi-​Madia​rom-​nadiis​
hlo-​ponad-​15-​mln-​hrn-​VIDEO
	31	 Lyubov Petrushko, ‘Born of War. Ukrainian M-​TAC Military Clothing Was Liked 
by Zelenskyi and Zaluzhnyi. How a Small Brand Grew into a Big Business.’ Forbes 
Ukraine. Available online: https://​for​bes.ua/​comp​any/​naro​dzhe​niy-​viyn​oyu-​ukr​ains​kiy-​
viysko​viy-​odyag-​m-​tac-​polyub​ili-​zelens​kiy-​ta-​zaluzh​niy-​yak-​neveli​kiy-​brend-​pere​ris-​
u-​veli​kiy-​biz​nes-​16012​023-​11058
	32	 Gradus Research, ‘Brand Power, Support for Ukrainian Goods and Even Greater 
Rationalization of Demand –​ How the War Changed the Consumer Behavior of 
Ukrainians in 2022.’ 2023. Available online: https://​gra​dus.app/​docume​nts/​328/​Gradu​s_​
Re​sear​ch_​-​_​Consu​mer_​Tren​ds_​2​023_​ENG_​snw6​9z9.pdf
	33	 OECD, Rebuilding Ukraine by Reinforcing Regional and Municipal Governance, 
OECD Multi-​level Governance Studies (Paris: OECD Publishing, 2022), 17.
	34	 Jenny Cai and Benay Ozdemir, ‘Volunteers Transform Ukraine’s Odesa Catacombs into 
Liveable Bomb Shelter to Protect Civilians from Russian Attacks.’ ABC.NET, 19 May 
2022. Available online: www.abc.net.au/​news/​2022-​05-​20/​vol​unte​ers-​turn-​odesa-​catac​
omb-​into-​bomb-​shel​ter/​101078​204
	35	 Johnny Stringer, ‘The Ukrainian Conflict: Implications for NATO and RAF Air and 
Space Power,’ Speech delivered at RUSI, London, 3 November 2022. Available 
online: https://​rusi.org/​eve​nts/​memb​ers-​eve​nts/​lord-​trench​ard-​memor​ial-​lect​ure
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

The resilience of the Ukrainian people  173
	36	 Svitlana Tsurkan, ‘Non-​Russian Avant-​Garde, or How Russia Appropriates Ukrainian 
Culture,’ Euromaidan Press, 5 January 2023. Available online: https://​euro​maid​anpr​ess.
com/​2023/​01/​05/​non-​russ​ian-​avant-​garde-​a-​guide-​to-​russ​ias-​art​wash​ing-​and-​cultu​ral-​
approp​riat​ion/​
	37	 James Landale, ‘Ukraine Will Remember Who Backed Us –​ Foreign Minister,’ BBC 
News, 17 March 2023. Available online: www.bbc.com/​news/​world-​eur​ope-​64976​079
 
 
 

DOI: 10.4324/9781003351641-11
10
INTERNATIONAL MILITARY 
ASSISTANCE
One of the distinctive features of this year of the full-​scale invasion was an 
increased support of Ukraine by various international partners. This support has 
varied depending on Ukrainian needs and available assets as well as the political 
environment in the partner countries towards aiding Ukraine and the types of 
assistance possible at a given time. This chapter explores the importance of foreign 
military assistance to Ukraine to reinforce the capabilities of the UAF. In essence, 
the chapter looks at the significance of wider supply chains, supply chain continuity 
and the uninterrupted nature of supply chains to sustain modern full-​scale inter-​
state warfare. The role of industrial capacities in support of the demands of high-​
intensity warfare is also discussed.
The various Russian sabotages before the full-​scale invasion resulted in the 
preliminary degrading of Ukrainian stockpiles, and it was only a matter of time 
before the question of scarcity and lack of ammunition for the existing materiel 
was raised, which was illustrated by the challenges across domains. Sooner or later, 
more ammunition and equipment would be crucial for Ukraine to sustain its defence 
over a longer time and for the very survivability of the troops and holding of the 
lines. As further developments across the year showed, each stage of Ukrainian 
counteractions and counteroffensives was characterised by gathering all available 
and delivered assets to strengthen the firepower of the UAF and limit the extent 
of casualties through the use of precision weapons and ammunitions in as cost-​
effective a manner as possible since even with the foreign military aid, the issue of 
scarce resources overshadowed Ukrainian decision-​making each step of the way.
While Chapter 9 illustrated the resilience of the Ukrainian people and their 
support in sustaining the fighting power with their available skills and activities 
within the country, the foreign military assistance provided another layer in 
sustainment of the Ukrainian capabilities with more specific and targeted military 
 
 

International military assistance  175
equipment, training and financial support crafted to Ukrainian needs on a larger 
scale and according to the demands of a particular stage of the war. In essence, 
the physical component of Ukrainian fighting power was strengthened by 
Western military equipment of various characteristics and different requirements 
for training. While some types of equipment required more training than others, 
partner nations showed an eagerness to develop and provide training courses on 
the shortest notice, matched only by Ukrainians’ eagerness to learn relevant skills 
to defend their country. While some initiatives required more preparations from 
the partner nations, others were immediately established as demand increased and 
the situational characteristics deteriorated. One of the most prominent examples 
was the provision of power generators to Ukraine during Russian targeting of the 
electricity grid in autumn–​winter 2022.
From the systematic perspective of logistics and supply chains, the case of Ukraine 
once again illustrates a symbiosis of different levels in satisfying the constantly 
increasing requirements of inter-​state warfare. Some tactical-​level demands in the 
form of basic and specialised equipment and commercial UAVs could be satisfied 
by Ukrainian civil society through crowdfunding and other initiatives, but on the 
macro level (strategic and operational), other assistance was essential. While some 
equipment could be developed and produced by the Ukrainian military industry, 
a significant number of military technologies was provided by Western partners, 
with the scale gradually expanding as the war progressed and demanded more 
equipment and greater firepower aimed not only for defence and degrading enemy 
forces but also for more kinetic counteroffensive activities.
The case of a no-​fly zone (NFZ) over Ukraine that never was
Before discussing the extent of Western military assistance to Ukraine, it is 
essential to examine the idea that dominated the discussion of the war in the spring 
2022, which was the debate on the potential of Western full or partial closing of 
the skies over Ukraine. This issue is discussed here, since it is primarily a decision 
and capabilities commitment of the Western countries, which can be categorised 
as an option of support that never occurred. Hence, it needs to be explained before 
discussing the variety and increasing intensification of international military 
assistance to Ukraine.
The concept of NFZ can be described as
a physical area of a nation that is patrolled using airpower of another sovereign 
state or coalition. The legitimacy of such patrols of sovereign territory is derived 
from the fact that the no-​fly zones are typically implemented within the context 
of international PSO coalitions, as was the case in Iraq and Bosnia.1
As a result of the post-​Cold War operational experiences, three types of NFZs 
have been identified based on the distinctive purposes for their establishment. 
 
 
 

176  International military assistance
Air cover NFZs are aimed at providing aerial support for the troops in hostile 
situations. Air deterrent NFZs are aimed at preventing invasion and aggression 
between two countries. Air occupation NFZs are an alternative to troops on 
the ground.2 While NFZs originated in the conventional warfare of the First 
Gulf War, they are primarily used in peace-​support frameworks or segments of 
counterinsurgencies. There are a few complexities with this type of missions. 
While from the contributing countries perspective, these missions might seem 
like a more feasible means of addressing a problem at hand, the elimination of a 
ground footprint still requires significant aerial assets, logistics and commitment, 
the extent of which would depend on the type of the NFZ, situational features of 
a given conflict and the scale of the aerial coverage. As a result, the effectiveness 
of the mission would depend on the density of aerial coverage, the extent of 
hostile activities and counteractions, and the distinctive rules of engagements 
conditioned by unique situational characteristics of an operation. Furthermore, 
despite the immediate flexibility that aerial assets can provide policymakers, there 
is a greater necessity for coordinating actions with the troops on the ground, which 
becomes even more complex when those troops are from other nations and operate 
within different national military systems.3 In essence, establishing an NFZ means 
achieving a certain degree of control of the air by denying the enemy its use. This 
is accomplished not only by the mere presence of aircraft in the air but also by 
their actual kinetic employment in destroying any aerial or ground-​based violation 
of the NFZ status. It is thus a combat mission with all of the accompanying legal 
and political consequences.
Some of the above points become even more prominent in the context of the 
discussion of the NFZ in Ukraine, with some new arguments arising. The primary 
consideration is that the Ukrainian case did not fit into any of the aforementioned 
types of NFZs. This would not be air cover for the troops on the ground since no 
allied troops would be on the ground, and any Western air cover or close air support 
to the Ukrainian troops in warfighting would mean active direct involvement in 
the warfighting. It could not be an air deterrent NFZ because the warfighting was 
already taking place, with the full-​scale Russian invasion and during the previous 
eight years of war. The very preventative nature of this type of NFZ was absent 
from the start. Finally, the air occupation type was highly unlikely due to its 
employment in Libya and the consequent backfiring of this decision from the long-​
term political perspective.4
Another consideration on the subject of an NFZ is its cost. Even though it is a 
seemingly favourable alternative to the traditional troops on the ground, an NFZ is 
far from cheap. For instance:
The USA’s simultaneous involvement in two NFZs over Iraq cost $12 billion, not 
to mention the uncalculated cost of the rapid ageing of aircraft and overworking 
of the USAF personnel. This figure is not surprising, considering that in the first 
five years of Southern Watch, 86,000 sorties were flown. On each rotation, an 
 
 
 
 

International military assistance  177
average operation was supported by 5,000 US personnel; however, in crisis that 
number was as high as 15,000.5
In Ukraine, even if there could be a shorter timespan for establishing an NFZ, it 
would not mean that cost would be lessened considering the employment of more 
expensive cutting-​edge technologies in Western military and the need for more 
advanced logistical support in some cases. Of course, another aspect to consider 
is the scale. As compared to Iraq, the territory of Ukraine is 1.4 times bigger and 
would require an even greater commitment of aerial assets and consequent logistics.
Probably the most crucial argument against the NFZ over Ukraine was 
conditioned by the very nature of the mission –​ it would be a combat mission 
entailing the potential of actual warfighting, at least over the covered territory. Even 
within the relatively limited framework of the NFZs, taking part in warfighting 
‘would bring Russia into direct conflict with NATO forces.’6 In early March 
2022, Jens Stoltenberg, NATO’s Secretary General, summarised the situation as 
follows: ‘We understand the desperation but we also believe that if we did that 
(establishing a no-​fly zone) we would end up with something that could lead to a 
full-​fledged war in Europe, involving much more countries.’7
The other discussions regarding partial NFZs over Western Ukraine were 
primarily based on political considerations of the Western countries rather than the 
military thinking of their sufficiency and effectiveness. Hence, there was very little 
surprise that NFZs in any shape or form were ruled out.
The overall international military assistance to Ukraine
The question of international military assistance to Ukraine became evident from 
the beginning of the full-​scale invasion. Various institutions had to change their 
policies in order to provide needed assistance, while some countries required shifts 
in their political environments to adjust assistance packages to Ukrainian needs. 
Since NATO was not going to get directly involved in the war and possessed no 
capabilities of its own, NATO member states had to make their assistance on a 
bilateral basis. However, there was a need for coordination of international support. 
Accordingly, the United Kingdom (UK), Poland and the United States led the 
coordination of international military assistance.
The United Kingdom arranged and hosted two donor conferences in February 
and March 2022, involving 35 countries from the European Union (EU) and 
NATO. In April 2022, the International Donor Coordination Centre (IDCC) was 
established in the US European Command Headquarters in Stuttgart, to provide 
military assistance in the most organised and effective way. This initiative was 
then supported by creating the Ukraine Defence Contact Group (UDCG) on 26 
April 2022, which took place on the Ramstein Airbase and became known as the 
Ramstein format. Its aim is to discuss the partner commitments and their review 
according to the evolving military needs of the UAF in further intensification of 
 
 
 
 
 

178  International military assistance
war and changing situational characteristics in the battlespace. It also became a 
platform for discussions of various matters at the top level. The ninth meeting 
of the UDCG took place on 14 February 2023, with 50 participating countries. 
Within this framework, countries jointly committed to provide Ukraine with 
military assistance worth £40 billion.8 The International Fund for Ukraine (IFU) 
was another initiative to coordinate buying and transporting military equipment 
from third countries or enterprises to Ukraine. It was established in April 2022 
under UK leadership.9
The war also triggered a shift in the Common Foreign and Security Policy 
(CFSP) and its relatively new tool of the European Peace Facility (EPF). It was 
founded on 22 March 2021 as a substitution for other instruments in this field, 
meaning the Athena Mechanism and the African Peace Facility. In essence, the 
EPF is ‘an off-​budget instrument aimed at enhancing the EU’s ability to prevent 
conflicts, build peace, strengthen international security.’10 Its initial financial 
ceiling for 2021–​2027 was €5.692 billion.
On 27 February 2022, the EU High Representative for Foreign Affairs and 
Security Policy, Josep Borrell, announced that the EPF framework was to be used 
to satisfy two emergency assistance needs of Ukraine ‘to finance the supply of 
lethal material to the Ukrainian army, as well as urgently needed fuel, protective 
equipment and emergency medical supplies.’11 This was a significant decision not 
only because this tool was employed for the provision of the military equipment 
and logistics assistance to a country fighting the war against aggression but also 
because ‘a “taboo has fallen”, and that this will be the first time in history that 
the EU will be providing lethal equipment to a third country.’12 Militarily neutral 
countries of the EU could opt out from provision of the lethal weapons. The scale 
of assistance within this framework in six sequential tranches was around €3.6 
billion. Since 60% of the EFP budget was devoted to helping Ukrainian needs in 
the war, the ceiling of the fund had to be increased by two more billion.13
As previously mentioned, besides common centralised and institutionalised 
frameworks, individual nation members or non-​members of the EU and NATO 
conducted their contributions on a bilateral basis. It is crucial to look into assistance 
from some individual countries to understand the scale of Western military support 
to Ukraine. It will not be possible to include the details of all the countries in 
this chapter, but some aspects and examples should be identified for a better 
understanding of the wider foreign military assistance and supply chains.
American military assistance to Ukraine has a long history. During the initial 
eight years of the war, primarily non-​lethal weapons were provided, with a 
gradual shift towards lethal weapons during the Trump administration. Hence, 
some equipment was made available before the full-​scale invasion. From 2014 
until 27 February 2023, the United States committed about $34 billion in security 
assistance for Ukraine to defend itself. Of this sum, the commitment of the Biden 
administration since the start of the full-​scale invasion was estimated at more than 
$31.7 billion.14 Since 2018, Ukraine has procured less-​advanced weapons, such 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

International military assistance  179
as Javelin anti-​armour missiles and Mark VI patrol boats, along with various non-​
lethal equipment like helmets and body armour. Since 2022, the United States 
has provided more advanced defensive equipment and increased the quantity 
of previously sent types of military supplies and equipment. Some of the most 
prominent advanced weapons provided since 2022 include ground-​based air 
defences such as HIMARS, NASAMS and Patriot; M1 Abrams and T-​72B tanks 
and Bradley infantry fighting vehicles; APCs; Stinger anti-​aircraft systems; Javelin 
and other anti-​armour systems; Phoenix Ghost and Switchblade Tactical UAS and 
artillery; mortar systems; Remote Anti-​Armor Mine (RAAM) Systems; Tube-​
Launched, Optically Tracked, Wire-​Guided (TOW) missiles, high-​speed anti-​
radiation missiles (HARMs), and laser-​guided rocket systems; grenade launchers 
and small arms; communications, radar and intelligence equipment; and training 
and maintenance services.15
In addition to the direct assistance, the Unites States has also authorised delivery 
of equipment to Ukraine that originated in the United States but was in the arsenals 
of the 14 NATO and partner countries. The United States has also facilitated allies 
to supply Ukraine with air defence systems from their national inventories, and it 
announced ‘$682 million in Foreign Military Financing to incentivise and backfill 
donations of military equipment to Ukraine by its allies and partners.’16
The United Kingdom was the second biggest contributor to Ukraine in military 
assistance after the US. Preliminary help started a few months prior to the invasion 
in December 2021. As of February 2023, the United Kingdom had provided military 
assistance worth £2.3 billion within a year, of which £250 million was given to the 
IFU. The current British government of Rishi Sunak has committed to match the 
same sum for 2023–​2024. Besides the non-​lethal assistance, such as body armour, 
helmets, night vision devices, medical supplies and winter clothes, the country 
also provided a significant number of lethal weapons, including NLAW anti-​tank 
missiles, Starstreak air defence systems, AFVs, M270 MLRS and anti-​structure 
ammunitions among many other pieces of equipment. As was previously mentioned, 
the United Kingdom was one of the few countries that provided Ukraine with aerial 
assets in the form of Sea King helicopters.17 With the intensification of the war in 
autumn and winter, some more sophisticated technologies were sent to Ukraine; 
among them were Advanced Medium-​Range Air-​to-​Air Missile (AMRAAM) to 
be used in NASAMS. The characteristic feature of these missiles is that they are 
capable of shooting down cruise missiles. Following preparations for the Ukrainian 
spring offensive and widening the discussion among partner nations regarding 
the provision to Ukraine of a significant number of tanks and various armoured 
vehicles, the United Kingdom committed to provide 14 Challenger II tanks with 
additional ammunitions for various platforms. The United Kingdom was the first 
country to provide Ukraine with long-​range missiles –​ Storm Shadow –​ which 
were in use by the UAF already in spring 2023.
As one of the key countries coordinating international support for Ukraine, 
the United Kingdom facilitated transportation from the NATO and third-​country 
 
 
 
 

180  International military assistance
partners. The Royal Air Force C-​17 Globemaster transport aircraft from the Air 
Mobility Force delivered thousands of tonnes of military assistance to Ukraine 
from various allied and international donors throughout 2022. In the case of NATO 
and EU Member States, deliveries were conducted within the ATARES programme, 
which is aimed at mutual support through the exchange of national air transport 
services.18
Poland is the country that is beyond praise in its constant support of Ukraine’s 
requirements at each stage of the war. It has hosted millions of Ukrainian refugees 
and became the primary logistical hub for the military assistance being sent to 
Ukraine from around the world through various routes and means of delivery, 
transferring it to Ukraine and spreading it in accordance with the needs of the UAF. 
Poland was already supplying Ukraine with lethal weapons at the end of January 
2022; through the year of the full-​scale invasion, it was one of the main suppliers 
of heavy weaponry to Ukraine, ranging from Polish AHS Krab howitzer artillery, 
IFVs and T-​72 tanks to grenades, ammunition, mortars, anti-​aircraft missiles 
and reconnaissance drones.19 With German permission, it resupplied German-​
manufactured Leopard II tanks to Ukraine and successfully received permission 
to redeploy five Cold War MiG-​29 fighter aircraft from German inventory.20 Since 
Poland has given away a lot of its military equipment, the United Kingdom and the 
United States were discussing frameworks to backfill some of these capabilities.
The geostrategic location of Poland made its role in Ukrainian logistics even 
greater since it allowed an equipment repair workshop to open in an undisclosed 
location in Poland. The state-​owned Polish Armaments Group conducts repairs of 
Polish-​manufactured Krab howitzers that were damaged in Ukraine.21 The Polish 
engineers’ remote realtime technical support of these howitzers used by Ukrainian 
artillerymen on the frontline received much praise. During the visit of President 
Zelenskyy to Poland on 5 April 2023, the partnership between the two countries 
was further tightened with Ukraine procuring Polish weapons, such as Rosomak 
APCs, Rak self-​propelled gun mortars and ammunition for the Piorun air defence 
systems. Furthermore, the two heads of state discussed various opportunities 
for establishing joint commercial enterprises in manufacturing of weapons and 
ammunition.22
Together with the US, Turkey was one of the few countries to sell Ukraine lethal 
weapons before the Russian full-​scale invasion. The primary items for procurement 
were Bayraktar drones manufactured in Turkey. However, the arrangement and 
its continuation through the year was primarily advertised as a deal between the 
manufacturer Baykar Technology and Ukraine. Since then, various sources have 
discussed the extent of Turkish assistance to Ukraine,23 but the two countries have 
officially acknowledged few details.
Germany has been in the middle of the debates regarding provision of Ukraine 
with various types of weapons at each stage of the full-​scale war. Despite the 
complex debates on providing Ukraine with weapons and blocking the provision 
of German-​produced weapons to Ukraine by other countries, such as Estonia, as 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

International military assistance  181
well as blocking artillery or anti-​drone rifles and anti-​sniper systems via NATO 
procurement means, and despite the debates regarding provision of Leopard 2 tanks 
and recently MiG-​29, and despite all its shortcomings, Germany provided support 
to Ukraine across various segments.24 The total sum of German military assistance 
to Ukraine as of February 2023 was €2.36 billion.25 Due to various funding 
schemes, different capabilities either facilitated Ukraine to buy directly from the 
German manufacturer or were provided from the German military arsenals, and 
some of these funds were devoted to Germany’s increased contribution to EPF.26 
The situation significantly changed one year later. Germany stepped in with even 
more significant military assistance to Ukraine of €2.7 billion pledged in May 
2023, focusing on heavy weaponry like tanks and air defences.
French military support to Ukraine was present across all rounds of the Western 
supplies from howitzers in spring–​summer, air defences during autumn and tanks 
and armoured vehicles in winter. Spain provided Hawk air defence systems, 
artillery ammunitions and winter uniforms. Following the allied decision to send 
tanks, Spain joined the initiative with Leopard II tanks they had in storage. Italy 
agreed to send Ukraine lethal weaponry, including Stingers, mortars and anti-​tank 
weaponry. Further packages included heavier weapons and air defences. From the 
earlier stages of the war, Portugal provided both non-​lethal and lethal weapons and 
offered to contribute to the European training courses. The majority of equipment 
sent by Portugal remains classified.27 Romania provided both lethal and non-​lethal 
weapons and allowed military equipment and other supplies to transition across its 
territory. Bulgaria provided logistical support; it agreed to supply some pieces of 
its Soviet-​era equipment only in December 2022 in exchange for NATO assistance 
in modernising its capabilities.28
The Netherlands already began providing Ukraine with military assistance a 
week prior to the Russian invasion. As of December 2022, the total sum of the 
assistance through 2022 was €987 million.29 As in many other cases, it evolved 
from the more basic ammunition to the more complex equipment, including 
howitzers, air defences (including Patriot systems), combat vehicles, different 
sensors, bridges, individual weapons and ammunition. Furthermore, they provided 
different transport vehicles, minehunter vessels and a variety of equipment for 
demining as well as logistics equipment.30 The country also cooperates with the 
United States to sponsor refurbishing of Czech T-​72 tanks.
Ukraine’s neighbouring Eastern European countries also provided constant 
support. From the first days of the invasion, the Czech Republic committed to 
deliver pistols, assault rifles, machine guns, sniper rifles and one million cartridges 
as well as Czech Dana howitzers and RM-​70 Vampir MLRS. In spring 2022, it 
became the first country to provide Ukraine with Soviet-​era tanks T-​72 and combat 
helicopters.31 It also collaborates with NATO allies to modernise Soviet tanks in 
its inventory. As a signatory of the Tallinn Pledge on 19 January 2023, the Czech 
Republic committed to further supporting Ukraine by boosting its mass production 
of ammunitions and maintaining the already deployed equipment.32 Slovakia 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

182  International military assistance
followed the same path of immediate assistance in February 2022, focusing on 
120 artillery ammunitions and fuel, later followed by S-​300 air defences, mortars 
and Zuzana self-​propelled gun-​howitzers. Slovakia was also repairing various 
Ukrainian and Russian vehicles used by the UAF. On 19 March 2023, Slovakia 
announced it would deliver its 13 MiG-​29 aircraft to Ukraine. It was the second 
NATO country to pledge fixed-​wing aircraft delivery.33 The first four were already 
delivered on 23 March 2023.
The Baltic countries were among the European countries that were well aware 
of what the Russian threat was really like. Hence, their support of Ukraine was 
incredible despite their smaller military budgets and available capabilities. Latvia 
already began delivering Stingers, individual equipment and dry food supplies to 
Ukraine in January–​February 2022, followed by more supplies of these items with 
UAVs, helicopters and M109 howitzers. In May 2022, Lithuania was among the 
top 15 Ukrainian donors with immediate deliveries of Stingers, anti-​tank weapons, 
UAVs and radars, followed by heavier ground forces transportation requirements, 
such as M113 armoured personnel carriers, military trucks and all-​terrain mine 
clearance vehicles. The recent commitments include Mi-​8 helicopters. Estonia 
already began providing Ukraine with smaller portions of firearms in 2020, 
starting with 2,400 Makarov semi-​automatic pistols, then with weapons with more 
firepower when there was a renewal of Russian military build-​up in 2021. In January 
2022, Estonia sent Javelins after receiving US approval, while it took longer for 
Germany and Finland to approve licences for more Javelins and howitzers, which 
nevertheless were sent later. The latest package focused on armoured vehicles and 
air defences. The overall package of military assistance from Estonia was around 
€340 million.34
Another group of significant contributors of military assistance to Ukraine were 
the Nordic countries. The revival of the Russian threat resulted in a shift in regional 
security and Sweden’s and Finland’s NATO applications and a greater focus on 
military, financial and humanitarian support of Ukraine’s fight for its independence 
and integrity. Norway changed its principle of not supplying weapons to war zones. 
During this year, it delivered M72 light anti-​tank weapons (LAW), M109 howitzers 
and armoured vehicles. Norway also took part in various bilateral and trilateral 
initiatives, such as investments with Denmark and Germany in the production of 
howitzers in Slovakia. With the UK, it collaborates on provision of MLRS and 
Black Hornet micro-​drones for the needs of special operation forces.35
Despite having a long tradition of military non-​alignment, Sweden has a 
prominent military industry producing various equipment from Gripen fighter 
aircraft to land warfare Archer artillery systems. Regarding its military assistance 
to Ukraine, it was announced on 27 February 2022 that it was committing to supply 
field ratios, helmets, body armour and anti-​tank weapons along with €47 million 
of financial help to Ukraine. Further tranches included anti-​ship missile systems, 
air defences, small arms and protective equipment. The content of some packages 
of military assistance has not been disclosed. In the recent (January 2023) and 
 
 
 
 

International military assistance  183
the largest tranche so far, worth SEK 4.3 billion, Sweden included CV-​90 IFVs, 
anti-​tank missiles and the Archer artillery systems.36 Finland also announced 
immediate assistance to Ukraine, which very soon evolved from defensive to 
lethal weapons supply, with nine tranches as of December 2022, although very few 
details have been shared due to security reasons. Denmark contributed 600 million 
through different initiatives starting with non-​lethal weapons and ending with the 
recent promise of providing 19 Caesar artillery systems. With Germany and the 
Netherlands, Denmark established a Leopard 1A5 initiative to supply Ukraine 
with 100 Leopard 1 tanks, additional spare parts and ammunition.37 Furthermore, 
Nordic countries are also in the heart of the fighter jet coalition that agreed to 
train Ukrainian pilots and engineers to employ fourth-​generation fighter aircraft 
like the F-​16 and Jas 39 Gripen. The nine countries –​ the UK, the Netherlands, 
Poland, Denmark, Sweden, Belgium, Portugal, France and the US –​ also agreed 
to join the coalition.38 Discussions held with some coalition members focused 
on sending F-​16s to Ukraine, while other members committed primarily to pilot 
training programmes.
Countries from other regions also supplied Ukraine with military assistance. 
Australia provided AUD 475 million in various protected armoured vehicles and 
demining equipment. One of the most unique types of equipment was provision 
of cardboard drones –​ the ‘Corvo Precision Payload Delivery System’ drones –​ 
manufactured by the private Australian company SYPAQ Systems.39 New Zealand 
sent packages of non-​lethal weapons. Canadian military support for Ukraine also 
transitioned from non-​lethal to lethal weapons, initially focusing on individual 
weapons and ammunitions, then heavier ones like howitzers, heavy armoured 
vehicles; it recently announced purchases of NASAMS from the United States to 
be sent to Ukraine. The estimated sum of Canadian military support since February 
2022 has been estimated at $1 billion.40 Japan sent various types of non-​lethal support 
equipment and humanitarian aid. As of early spring 2023, it remains restricted in its 
freedom to send lethal weapons due to Japan’s prohibitive legislation the revision 
of which was to be discussed in spring 2023.41 Japan also promised to increase its 
initial support for Ukraine from more than $1 billion to $5.6 billion in financial 
aid.42 Taiwan was assisting Ukraine with hundreds of tonnes of humanitarian aid, 
financial support and $56 million in assistance for rebuilding the country. The 
country also suggested various training opportunities for Ukrainian personnel.43
Overall, Western military assistance to Ukraine illustrates many initiatives on 
various levels from institutional, bilateral, group and project-​based activities. In 
addition to constant dialogue within the Ramstein format, various countries have re-​
emphasised their commitments to support Ukraine each step of the way. One of the 
recent initiatives was the Tallinn Pledge –​ a joint statement of the defence ministers 
of Estonia, the UK, Poland, Latvia, Lithuania and representatives of Denmark, 
the Czech Republic, the Netherlands and Slovakia –​ which was announced on 
19 January 2023. The purpose of the statement was ‘to reaffirm our continued 
determination and resolve to supporting Ukraine in their heroic resistance against 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

184  International military assistance
the illegal and unprovoked Russian aggression.’44 It then proceeded with detailed 
individual commitments of the participating parties. This statement was made the 
day before the next Ramstein meeting on 20 January 2023.
Training courses
Besides materiel provision, Western partners also assisted the UAF with various 
personnel training programmes. The United Kingdom has conducted training 
initiatives in Ukraine since 2015. Earlier that year, operation Orbital was launched. 
It aimed at non-​lethal training and capacity building. The initial focus was on 
non-​combat military personnel providing basic training in medical, logistics and 
intelligence capacity development. As various gaps were identified, the operation 
was extended to 100 military personnel focusing on ‘additional medical, infantry 
and survival skills training, countering improvised explosive devices; training for 
defensive operations in an urban environment; operational planning; engineering; 
countering attacks from snipers, armoured vehicles and mortars.’45 The primary 
approach of the operation was to ‘train the trainers’ in order for the Ukrainian 
personnel to spread their skills across the relevant branches and units. Starting 
in 2015 up until the full-​scale invasion, the United Kingdom had trained 22,000 
Ukrainian personnel within this operation and the Maritime Training Initiative.46
Just like the UK, Canada also conducted training and capacity-​building activities 
in Ukraine since 2015 under the umbrella term of Operation Unifier, aimed at 
training
36,000 Ukrainian military and security personnel in battlefield tactics and 
advanced military skills. As the mission progressed, much of the direct training 
undertaken by CAF members transitioned to members of the Armed Forces of 
Ukraine, with Canadians acting as advisors and mentors as well as assisting in 
the development of courses.47
Operation Orbital provided a functional framework for establishing a training 
programme crafted for the new requirements of the full-​scale war. As a result, 
the United Kingdom launched a long-​term training programme under Operation 
Interflex, aimed at training at least 10,000 Ukrainian soldiers every 120 days. 
Unlike its predecessor, this operation has been taking place in the UK, while 
some other medical and engineering training initiatives are held in Ukraine.48 
This training received further support from various international partners. The 
Netherlands was one of the first to offer personnel to participate in the training. 
Canada agreed to send its people to the United Kingdom to strengthen the joint 
effort as it had extended the duration of its Operation Unifier until March 2025. 
The Nordic countries also agreed to contribute: Sweden (120 instructors), Finland 
(20), Denmark (130) and Norway, though they did not specify the exact number. 
Denmark has experience collaborating with the United Kingdom and Canada since 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

International military assistance  185
it was part of the previous operation Orbital and Unifier. Lithuania, New Zealand 
and Australia also sent their personnel. The next stage of expanding this programme 
is to include training of Ukrainian pilots.49
Another initiative within this framework was the establishment of training 
programmes within the EU frameworks. Accordingly, the European Union Military 
Assistance Mission Ukraine (EUMAM) was launched on 15 November 2022. The 
programme is set to run for two years and already involves 24 EU Member States, 
and it should initially train 15,000 Ukrainian personnel. This framework is aimed 
to complement existing training arrangements within British, Canadian and other 
bilateral initiatives.50
Besides this systematic training programme, various equipment exploitation 
and maintenance courses have been given to Ukrainian military personnel in 
partner countries. For instance, the United States trained the Ukrainian military 
to use the Patriot air defence systems.51 The United States had previously trained 
3,100 Ukrainian military personnel to use and maintain other types of equipment, 
such as HIMARS, howitzers and armoured vehicles. The recent American initiative 
of training Ukrainian forces in combined arms training in Germany is aimed at 
sharpening relevant skills for the counteroffensive.52
In addition to participating in Operation Interflex, Sweden expanded collaboration 
with the Ukrainian military across a few more points. In April–​May 2023, Sweden 
launched the largest defence exercise in the last 25 years –​ Aurora 23: ‘an exercise 
in which all service branches and other armed forces will participate, and which 
will reinforce the collected capability to counter an armed attack on Sweden.’53 The 
exercise involved 26,000 personnel from various partner countries, including Ukraine.
The Swedish Defence University conducted another collaboration initiative 
through a range of bilateral visits and meetings of the university military and civilian 
leadership with Ukrainian counterparts from the National Defence University of 
Ukraine and Ukrainian Ministry of Defence. During the April visit of the Ukrainian 
delegation, some of the discussed topics included
a Strategic Leadership Programme exclusively for leaders in Ukraine, with the 
support of NATO’s Defence Education Enhancement Programme (DEEP). The 
project is run by the Swedish Defence University’s Centre for Societal Security 
(CTSS) which has offered this leadership programme since 2021 as part of 
Sweden’s involvement in NATO’s Partnership for Peace (PfP).54
The visit also touched upon the Swedish officers training programme’s curriculum 
and various bilateral cooperation opportunities.
As part of Norway’s commitment to participate in Nordic training initiatives 
for the UAF, the country began training 100 Ukrainian personnel at Vaernes on 24 
April 2023. The four-​week course was aimed at training skills in military medicine, 
sharpshooting and team leadership. This was the first course of its kind in Norway. 
The Norwegian Home Guard supervised it.55
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

186  International military assistance
Points for consideration
The wider international military assistance to Ukraine confirmed some of the 
significant observations about inter-​state warfare, and to a certain degree, adjusted 
some other views on modern and future warfare. Despite the tendency for limited 
wars of choice, full-​scale inter-​state warfare requires continuous and increasing 
support both in terms of skilled personnel and the supply of materiel of various 
characteristics depending on the tasks at hand in the battlespace. The Ukrainian 
requirements in firepower across domains were identified early in the last year 
of the full-​scale war, with different stages of intensification and the necessity for 
varying capabilities. While some immediate needs could be satisfied by domestic 
supply chains and logistics in the rear, the wider international community served 
as a support hub of the UAF in terms of the provision of cutting-​edge technologies 
to strengthen Ukrainian fighting power in defending the country. The scale of the 
war and partner military not only identified the necessity of long-​term sustainment 
of fighting power in a protracted war or war of attrition but also illustrated various 
challenges in the current strategic environment and military readiness across 
various stages of its achievement.
Time and timeliness
The primary consideration evident in this war is the matter of time and timeliness 
of decision-​making, delivery and employment of various equipment across the 
battlespace. The matter of time in warfare is probably even more essential today than 
ever due to the high tempo of war and the speed of information transfer worldwide. 
Robert Leonhard identified four time-​related factors for defining and limiting 
political and military power: duration, frequency, sequence and opportunity.56 
Mick Ryan explained that in the post-​Cold War era, Western countries aimed for 
conflicts of more limited duration. This ‘desire for shorter wars is driven by the 
level of interests involved as well as the need to sustain political and public support 
for military actions.’57 In the case of Ukraine, this Western tendency had a few 
manifestations in terms of military assistance to Ukraine. While some countries 
provided immediate military assistance to Ukraine in the spring 2022 or even 
earlier, various Western countries initially found it difficult to gain and sustain 
political and public support for the provision of military assistance or the gradual 
shift from sending non-​lethal weapons to lethal and then heavier lethal weapons to 
Ukraine.
Although eventually political and public support for military assistance to 
Ukraine was achieved in various Western countries, challenges in timely decision-​
making and delivery of weapons remained. Since each round of partners’ discussions 
of the military assistance was stimulated by the deteriorating situation in Ukraine 
and the vital Ukrainian needs for survival at a given time, the decision-​making was 
reactive rather than proactive. In its turn, this approach had direct implications on 
 
 
 
 
 

International military assistance  187
the timelines of formal processing of decisions, the establishment of time frames 
of commitments and the actual delivery of equipment. This tendency was evident 
in national debates over air defences, Leopard tanks and fighter aircraft. From the 
foreign partners’ perspective, this is a natural mode of action in assisting within 
the peacetime framework and procedures. However, from the perspective of full-​
scale inter-​state warfare, the question is posed differently –​ long-​term planning, 
building up of capabilities and earlier availability of resources to arrange kinetic 
aspects of counteroffensives and the regaining of Russia-​occupied territory require 
a pro-​active approach in supply contribution to enable a further gaining of military 
advantage and its full employment in the battlespace.
The important shift in the dynamics of the war is that there is a big difference 
between having the capabilities to contain one’s enemy within a given frontline 
and having accumulated needed capabilities to advance and take back territory. 
In other words, while the first nine–​ten months of this intensive segment of war 
were characterised by the responsiveness of international partners in providing 
the UAF with the means to survive and defend the country within the established 
frontlines, the winter preparation for the Ukrainian counteroffensive illustrated a 
gradually changing mindset –​ a move towards gathering strengths for the shifting 
of the relatively established military balance in Ukrainian favour. On 20 April 
2023, Oleksiy Danilov, secretary of the National Security and Defense Council 
of Ukraine, commented on this topic, stating: ‘The next necessary stage in our 
relations with allies and partners is the transition from ensuring the military 
balance on the battlefield to the level of achieving Ukraine’s military superiority 
over Muscovy’s occupation army.’58
The intensification of the war, its move towards the war of attrition and wider 
Russian targeting of the civilian population across Ukraine affected the partners’ 
mindset and perception of the war. Initially, it was a matter of underestimating 
the UAF and considering how long the country would last. Then it was about 
developing systematic provisions of lethal weapons across various demanded time 
frames. In the recent stage in preparation for the counteroffensive or, as Danilov 
said, gaining Ukrainian military superiority or military advantage, the focus is on 
reshaping the existing Ukrainian fighting power towards the heavier and more 
technologically advanced side of the spectrum and also improving the logistics of 
these technologies with various maintenance and payload supply arrangements. 
However, time and timeliness were crucial factors in providing military assistance 
across various stages of the intensification of war –​ whether that was artillery and 
tanks for counteroffensives, air defences or aerial capabilities.
Mass
In the case of the war in Ukraine, the question of mass and building up critical mass 
became essential in achieving both military balance and military advantage on the 
battlefield. The warfighting experience in Ukraine is called for good reasons the 
 
 
 

188  International military assistance
war between Russian capabilities as characterised by the structuring of the mass 
approach against Western NATO military equipment used by the UAF. Indeed, 
employing more cutting-​edge technologies provided by the Western partners 
allowed degrading Russian numeric superiority across various segments of the 
battlespace and domains. This, in essence, confirmed the effectiveness of the more 
advanced technologies in full-​scale inter-​state warfare.
However, there are some reservations and limitations to such a simplistic 
conclusion. First, the scale of the war with relatively open terrains requires a 
certain concentration of forces to hold the line, which entails the need for wider 
coverage and employment of cutting-​edge technologies. Although they can provide 
the effect of force multiplication, their impact would largely depend on spreading 
of the frontline and the intensity of the warfighting. For instance, some advanced 
technologies would not be prepared for non-​stop use under the conditions of 
constant warfighting. Others would be very few and scarce to be committed to more 
mundane tasks. Thus, any distinctive equipment must be available in sufficient 
numbers and/​or combined with an ordinary mass of less sophisticated technologies 
to reach full functionality and maximum effect.
Second, while many Western technologies proved invaluable in different stages 
of the war, the Soviet weapons and older Western equipment proved to be essential 
in the survival of the UAF, especially in spring 2022, and the consequent conduct of 
the war. From the mass approach perspective, this experience demonstrates that the 
critical mass, meaning the sufficient number of capabilities aimed to achieve the 
desired effect, was built by combining relative numerical availability of the older 
equipment with the cutting-​edge technologies. While some equipment could not be 
as precise or long-​range as desired, it could still be used in dangerous places where 
more valuable assets could not be committed. This mixture of more advanced and 
older Soviet-​era military technologies provided by the partners helped to come 
closer to the establishment of the critical mass needed not only to defend territories 
and hold the lines but also for the counteroffensives and regaining Russian-​occupied 
territories. However, this realisation of the building up of relative numeric mass for 
immediate and further actions and the high consumption of ammunition required 
time and a lot of partner negotiations to develop common decisions and more 
systematic solutions.
Third, another aspect of the mass in the war and partner military assistance 
that was revealed refers to logistics. The intensity of constant employment of 
new and old equipment raised the question of increased necessity of ammunition. 
While the immediate challenge of having different calibre used in Soviet and 
NATO equipment was obvious, there were issues with providing sufficient 
numbers of ammunition across both modern and old segments. In the case of the 
old technologies’ ammunition, the solution and challenge were to gather Soviet-​
era ammunition from the countries worldwide, which, of course, required time 
for negotiations, gathering and meeting transportation requirements. In the case of 
ammunition for Western equipment, the challenge at first was to commit partner 
 

International military assistance  189
nations to provide ammunition from their stocks, but then the issue became the 
need for production of new ammunition when stock supplies drained. While 
technically, production of new munitions for cutting-​edge technologies should not 
be an issue, the current demand for military equipment and munitions illustrated 
numerous challenges. While using the same calibre ammunition across different 
equipment and platforms corresponds to standardisation and interoperability of the 
allied forces, from the industrial perspective, it creates large-​scale demand that 
requires immediate provision. The core of the problem is that most of the military 
industries worldwide were tuned to produce equipment and ammunition for the 
demands of peacetime, following scheduled national procurement plans. The war 
in Ukraine significantly boosted demand. On the one hand, demand increased for 
advanced technologies in support of Ukraine. On the other hand, allied countries 
required procurement of more materiel for their own national defence, especially 
if these technologies were already tested in the ongoing war. In essence, a certain 
bottleneck effect in production occurred, requiring the rewiring of the military-​
industrial production for wartime demands. Adjustments to this reality began 
taking place across NATO countries producing this military equipment.
Nevertheless, industries require time to adjust, while the war continues and 
demands military equipment and ammunition, if not yesterday, then today. This 
realisation was reflected in the partners refocusing on shortening the logistical 
path by stimulating the refurbishing of the Soviet-​era equipment in the Eastern 
European NATO members and establishing manufacturing of the ammunition there. 
In addition to the obvious increase of capacities in satisfying increased demand, 
these solutions also reduce transportation costs and make the arrangements more 
cost-​effective from both immediate and long-​term perspectives. However, time and 
timeliness remain merciless factors in this war.
On 20 March 2023, in response to this vital demand, one of the common 
European initiatives established during the Swedish Presidency of the Council of 
the EU was launched, a three-​track approach to delivery and joint procurement of 
ammunition to Ukraine. Its aim is to ‘speed up the delivery and joint procurement 
aiming at one million rounds of artillery ammunition for Ukraine.’59 This 12-​
month framework resulted from the informal meeting of ministers of defence in 
Stockholm a month prior, where the decision was made to devote two billion to 
boost ammunition production and consequent delivery to Ukraine.60
Interoperability of military equipment and relevant skills
One of the widely discussed challenges of foreign military assistance was the issue 
of the multitude of different equipment produced by various manufacturers, raising 
a few questions in terms of their interoperability with each other and consequent 
integration into Ukrainian defences. Besides the equipment’s actual characteristics 
and functionality, improving the UAF skills in their employment and maintenance 
became paramount. Various solutions were identified to meet these challenges.
 
 
 
 

190  International military assistance
The problem of interoperability or using the same single platform across the 
entire domain and/​or battlespace is a luxury that Ukraine did not have. While 
the idea of a network of networks and communication between various assets 
across domains is one of the solutions that modern cutting-​edge technologies can 
provide, the most important thing for Ukraine was to have firepower where it 
was needed and to secure deconfliction capabilities from various domains. The 
Ukrainian solution was the tactical fire coordination centers that could coordinate 
fire from artillery, RPVs to helicopters and fighter aircraft. For various air defences, 
different types were in different areas and can be perceived as functioning as 
their distinctive bubbles. From the perspective of people who are to use different 
equipment with more sophisticated features, they need to acquire skills primarily 
for this type of technology. On the other hand, regarding the MANPADS of 
different manufacturers, after some training with instructors on some equipment, 
they would adjust their skills to use different versions manufactured by other 
Western partners.
As previously mentioned, training with various types of equipment, like 
artillery and air defences, was often conducted within a short course provided in 
the countries that were sending that type of equipment. Usually, empirical training 
courses require more time, but the Ukrainian military showed fast learning capacity 
and acquiring relevant skills within the shortest time frames. Partner nations often 
praised the UAF soldiers for their motivation, eagerness to learn and ability to 
grasp relevant information and improve desired skills faster than the usual military 
personnel.61 The Ukrainian military were not just talented, considering their diverse 
backgrounds or motivated, considering the pressing requirements of returning to 
war; there was also the enduring factor of the culture-​specific transitional nature of 
life in Ukraine. This factor entails that people often need to have varied skills quite 
different from their initial degree or first career. It was also common for people to 
change to other careers and quickly acquire new skill sets. In terms of training, this 
often meant that the initial skill set brought by the Ukrainian soldiers was already 
multifaceted.
Another question related to the diversity of military equipment refers to 
maintenance and repairs. In the initial stages of the war with the provision of 
smaller arms, such issues were secondary in various discussions and commitments, 
but with the provision of wider and heavier military assistance, more attention 
was paid to establishment of maintenance facilities in various neighbouring 
countries, which was particularly emphasised in the Tallinn Pledge. Countries 
also took responsibility for providing repairs and spare parts for equipment they 
previously sent. From the military perspective, the availability of such hubs in 
the safe areas of other countries can provide the desired logistical support for the 
more complex technologies, but this will also take time, which once again poses 
additional challenges in sustainment of the critical mass and fighting power at a 
given stage. On the other hand, the Soviet-​time equipment requires spare parts for 
more substantial repairs.
 
 

International military assistance  191
Although the diversification of equipment poses multiple challenges in its 
sustainment and employment, this diversity can also be viewed as an advantage 
since some equipment can be fixed at home or even in the nearby maintenance hubs 
not far from the frontline by Ukrainian soldiers themselves, while other equipment 
needs to be repaired in the national rear or in the wider maintenance locations 
abroad, such as the Polish Crab artillery repair workshop. From the perspective of 
vulnerabilities of the logistical chains, even if some locations are targeted, others 
will perform as required. The same is true with the multitude of assets; while some 
might be damaged and require longer repair times, others can be made available 
immediately. The functionality of these substitutions largely depends on the wider 
availability of military equipment, the extent of freedom in its circulation across 
the battlespace, and the path to the rear and repair facilities and back. Furthermore, 
in the crucial locations of grinding Russian troops (likeBakhmut) availability and 
resupply of equipment and ammunitions is vital to the very preservation of the lives 
of the UAF and their ability to hold the territory and to continue opposing waves 
of Russian assaults.
To an extent, it can be argued that people remain the glue sticking together the 
different systems and military assets. The ability of the Ukrainian military to find 
solutions even to the most complex situations, combined with various elements of 
Western training, resulted in remarkable adaptability from the human part of the 
nation’s fighting power and its consequent resilience. Technologies can be adjusted 
to the desired specifications, but they cannot overcome their physical capabilities; 
on the contrary, people can adjust to the most difficult situations and come up with 
the most innovative solutions –​ or ‘smart innovation.’
Notes
	 1	 Alexander Benard, ‘Lessons from Iraq and Bosnia on the Theory and Practice of No-​Fly 
Zones,’ Journal of Strategic Studies 27, no. 3 (2004): 455.
	 2	 Ibid., 455–​456.
	 3	 Viktoriya Fedorchak, Understanding Contemporary Air Power (London: Routledge), 
111–​113.
	 4	 Karl Mueller, Precision and Purpose: Airpower in the Libyan Civil War (Santa 
Monica: RAND, 2015).
	 5	 Ibid., 113.
	 6	 Claire Mills, Military Assistance to Ukraine since the Russian Invasion (London: House 
of Commons Library, 2023) (accessed 15 June 2023), 4.
	 7	 Quoted in Louisa Brooke-​Holland and Patrick Butchard, No-​Fly Zones and Ukraine 
(London: House of Commons Library, 2022), 12–​13.
	 8	 UK MoD, ‘NATO Defence Ministers to Discuss Accelerated Support to Ukraine Ahead 
of Anniversary of Russia’s Full-​Scale Invasion,’ 14 February 2023 (accessed 15 June 
2023). Available online: www.gov.uk/​gov​ernm​ent/​news/​nato-​defe​nce-​minist​ers-​to-​disc​
uss-​acce​lera​ted-​supp​ort-​to-​ukra​ine-​ahead-​of-​anni​vers​ary-​of-​russ​ias-​full-​scale-​invas​ion
	 9	 Mills, Military Assistance.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

192  International military assistance
	10	 European Council, ‘European Peace Facility’ (accessed 13 June 2023). Available 
online: www.consil​ium.eur​opa.eu/​en/​polic​ies/​europ​ean-​peace-​facil​ity/​
	11	 The Diplomatic Service of the European Union, ‘Further Measures to Respond to the 
Russian Invasion of Ukraine: Press Statement by High Representative/​Vice-​President 
Josep Borrell’ (accessed 13 June 2023). Available online: www.eeas.eur​opa.eu/​eeas/​furt​
her-​measu​res-​resp​ond-​russ​ian-​invas​ion-​ukra​ine-​press-​statem​ent-​high-​repres​enta​tive​
vice​_​en
	12	 Mills, Military Assistance, 54.
	13	 Ibid., 55.
	14	 Christina Arabia, Andrew S. Bowen and Cory Welt, ‘U.S. Security Assistance to Ukraine,’ 
Congressional Research Service (CRS), 15 June 2023, 1. Available online: https://​crs​
repo​rts.congr​ess.gov/​prod​uct/​pdf/​IF/​IF12​040
	15	 Ibid., 2.
	16	 Mills, Military Assistance, 54.
	17	 Ibid., 12–​13.
	18	 RAF, ‘RAF Transport Aircraft Flies Canadian Military Assistance Supplies to Europe 
for Ukraine’ (accessed 4 June 2023). Available online: www.raf.mod.uk/​news/​artic​les/​
raf-​transp​ort-​aircr​aft-​flies-​canad​ian-​milit​ary-​ass​ista​nce-​suppl​ies-​to-​eur​ope-​for-​ukra​ine/​
	19	 Mills, Military Assistance, 44.
	20	 DW, ‘Germany Approves Polish Request to Send Ukraine 5 MiG jets’ (accessed 15 June 
2023). Available online: www.dw.com/​en/​germ​any-​appro​ves-​pol​ish-​requ​est-​to-​send-​
ukra​ine-​5-​mig-​jets/​a-​65301​536
	21	 Carolina Jeznach and Joe Parkinson, ‘The Covert Polish Repair Shop Patching Up 
Ukrainian Arms,’ The Wall Street Journal, 28 January 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). 
Available online: www.wsj.com/​artic​les/​the-​cov​ert-​pol​ish-​rep​air-​shop-​patch​ing-​up-​
ukrain​ian-​arms-​1167​4920​742
	22	 Ukrainian World Congress, ‘Zelensky’s Visit To Poland –​ Key Takeaways,’ (accessed 15 
June 2023). Available online: www.ukr​aini​anwo​rldc​ongr​ess.org/​zelens​kys-​visit-​to-​pol​
and-​key-​takeaw​ays/​
	23	 Oryx, ‘The Stalwart Ally: Türkiye’s Arms Deliveries to Ukraine’ (accessed 15 June 
2023). Available online: www.oryxsp​ioen​kop.com/​2022/​11/​the-​stalw​art-​ally-​turki​yes-​
arms.html
	24	 Mills, Military Assistance.
	25	 Christoph Trebesch et al., The Ukraine Support Tracker: Which Countries Help Ukraine 
and How? (Kiel: Kiel Institute for the World Economy, 2023), 20.
	26	 The Federal Government, ‘Military Support for Ukraine,’ (accessed 15 June 2023). 
Available online: www.bund​esre​gier​ung.de/​breg-​en/​news/​milit​ary-​supp​ort-​ukra​ine-​
2054​992
	27	 Mills, Military Assistance, 46.
	28	 Ibid., 29.
	29	 Ibid., 42.
	30	 Kajsa Ollongren, Twitter post, 14 April 2023, 3:10 PM, https://​twit​ter.com/​Defe​nsie​
Min/​sta​tus/​1646​8636​1106​9972​484/​photo/​1
	31	 Mills, Military Assistance, 30.
	32	 UK MoD, ‘Joint Statement –​ The Tallinn Pledge’ (accessed 15 June 2023). Available 
online: www.gov.uk/​gov​ernm​ent/​news/​joint-​statem​ent-​the-​tall​inn-​ple​dge
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

International military assistance  193
	33	 The Defence Post, ‘Slovakia to Donate 13 MiG-​29 Fighter Jets to Ukraine,’ 19 March 
2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: www.the​defe​nsep​ost.com/​2023/​03/​19/​
slova​kia-​mig29-​figh​ter-​jets-​ukra​ine/​
	34	 Mills, Military Assistance, 33.
	35	 Ibid., 43.
	36	 Ibid., 49–​50.
	37	 Netherlands MoD, ‘Netherlands to Purchase Leopard 1 Tanks for Ukraine’ (accessed 
15 June 2023). Available online: https://​engl​ish.defen​sie.nl/​lat​est/​news/​2023/​02/​07/​neth​
erla​nds-​to-​purch​ase-​leop​ard-​1-​tanks-​for-​ukra​ine
	38	 Martin Fornusek, ‘Official: Fighter Jet Coalition Helping Ukraine Now Includes 9 
Countries,’ The Kyiv Independent, 2 June 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available 
online: 
https://​kyiv​inde​pend​ent.com/​presi​dent​ial-​off​ice-​figh​ter-​jet-​coalit​ion-​not-​limi​
ted-​to-​f-​16s/​
	39	 Christopher McFadden, ‘Ukraine Is Using Cardboard Drones To Do Battle with Russia 
Now,’ Interesting Engineering, 27 March 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available 
online: https://​int​eres​ting​engi​neer​ing.com/​inn​ovat​ion/​austra​lia-​ukra​ine-​cardbo​ard-​
dro​nes
	40	 Government of Canada, ‘Canadian Donations and Military Support to Ukraine’ 
(accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: www.can​ada.ca/​en/​dep​artm​ent-​natio​nal-​defe​
nce/​campai​gns/​canad​ian-​milit​ary-​supp​ort-​to-​ukra​ine.html
	41	 Mills, Military Assistance, 51–​52.
	42	 Theara Coleman, ‘Japan Pledges an Additional $5.5 Billion in Humanitarian Aid to 
Ukraine,’ 21 February 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: https://​thew​
eek.com/​russo-​ukrain​ian-​war/​1021​188/​japan-​pled​ges-​to-​send-​add​itio​nal-​55-​bill​ion-​in-​
human​itar​ian-​aid-​to
	43	 Kira Rudik, ‘Taiwan Supports Ukraine and Studies Country’s Response to Russian 
Invasion,’ Atlantic Council, 15 March 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available 
online: 
www.atla​ntic​coun​cil.org/​blogs/​ukrai​neal​ert/​tai​wan-​suppo​rts-​ukra​ine-​and-​stud​
ies-​count​rys-​respo​nse-​to-​russ​ian-​invas​ion/​
	44	 UK MoD, ‘Joint Statement –​ The Tallinn Pledge.’
	45	 Claire Mills, Military Assistance to Ukraine 2014–​2021 (London: House of Commons 
Library, 2022) (accessed 15 June 2023), 3.
	46	 Ibid., 5.
	47	 Government of Canada, ‘Operation Unifier’ (accessed 15 June 2023). Available 
online: 
www.can​ada.ca/​en/​dep​artm​ent-​natio​nal-​defe​nce/​servi​ces/​ope​rati​ons/​milit​ary-​
ope​rati​ons/​curr​ent-​ope​rati​ons/​operat​ion-​unif​ier.html
	48	 Mills, Military Assistance, 22.
	49	 Ibid., 23–​24.
	50	 EEAS, ‘European Union Military Assistance Mission Ukraine’ (accessed 15 June 2023). 
Available online: www.eeas.eur​opa.eu/​sites/​defa​ult/​files/​docume​nts/​2023-​EUMAM​
Ukra​ine.pdf
	51	 Todd Lopez, ‘Ukrainian Troops Headed to U.S. for Patriot Missile Training,’ US DoD, 
10 January 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: www.defe​nse.gov/​News/​
News-​Stor​ies/​Arti​cle/​Arti​cle/​3264​235/​ukrain​ian-​tro​ops-​hea​ded-​to-​us-​for-​patr​iot-​miss​
ile-​train​ing/​
	52	 The Associated Press, ‘Expanded U.S. Training for Ukraine Forces Begins in Germany’ 
(accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: www.npr.org/​2023/​01/​16/​114​9372​572/​expan​
ded-​us-​train​ing-​for-​ukra​ine-​for​ces-​beg​ins-​in-​germ​any
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

194  International military assistance
	53	 Swedish Armed Forces, ‘Defence Exercise Aurora 23’ (accessed 15 June 2023). 
Available online: www.for​svar​smak​ten.se/​en/​act​ivit​ies/​exerci​ses/​aur​ora-​23/​
	54	 Swedish Defence University, ‘Ukrainian Delegation Visits Swedish Defence University,’ 
14 April 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: www.fhs.se/​en/​swed​ish-​defe​
nce-​uni​vers​ity/​news/​2023-​04-​14-​ukrain​ian-​del​egat​ion-​vis​its-​swed​ish-​defe​nce-​uni​vers​
ity.html
	55	 Norwegian Armed Forces, Twitter post, 24 April 2023, 3:58 PM,
https://​twit​ter.com/​Forsv​aret​_​no/​sta​tus/​1650​4993​6703​4408​966
	56	 Quoted in Mick Ryan, War Transformed (Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 2022), 85.
	57	 Ibid.
	58	 Oleksiy Danilov, Twitter post on 20 April 2023, 2:48 PM, https://​twit​ter.com/​Ole​ksiy​
Dani​lov/​sta​tus/​1649​0321​9120​7260​160
	59	 Swedish Presidency of the Council of the European Union, ‘Delivery and Joint 
Procurement of Ammunition for Ukraine,’ 20 March 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). 
Available online: https://​swed​ish-​pre​side​ncy.consil​ium.eur​opa.eu/​en/​news/​deliv​ery-​
and-​joint-​proc​urem​ent-​of-​amm​unit​ion-​for-​ukra​ine/​
	60	 Alice Tidey, ‘EU Defence Ministers Mull €2 Billion Plan to Boost Ammunition 
Deliveries to Ukraine,’ EuroNews, 8 March 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available 
online: www.euron​ews.com/​my-​eur​ope/​2023/​03/​08/​eu-​defe​nce-​minist​ers-​disc​uss-​joint-​
proc​urem​ent-​for-​amm​unit​ion-​to-​replen​ish-​deple​ted-​sto​cks
	61	 Australian Government, ‘Chief of Army Praises Ukrainian Recruits,’ 18 November 
2022 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: www.defe​nce.gov.au/​news-​eve​nts/​
news/​2022-​11-​18/​chief-​army-​prai​ses-​ukrain​ian-​recru​its
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

DOI: 10.4324/9781003351641-12
11
FINAL CONSIDERATIONS
Modern warfare and resilient fighting power
Previous chapters have looked at various aspects of the war: its context, combatants, 
doctrines, different experiences across domains, the role of the wider national 
society and the assistance of international partners in supporting the UAF. This 
chapter combines various considerations on this war within the framework of the 
themes and concept of the resilient fighter power. Distilled lessons are important 
for learning purposes of the military and political entities. In addition, some lessons 
‘learned’ six months after the full-​scale invasion will differ from lessons identified 
after a year or what might be stated in years to come. Accordingly, this chapter 
does not claim to be the most exhaustive or detailed list of lessons learned. Instead, 
it highlights the points for consideration and consequent discussion within the 
previously identified themes in modern warfare. It pulls together the experiences of 
the war to understand the factors that contributed to the resilience of the Ukrainian 
fighting power against Russian aggression. This also illustrates the shortfalls of the 
Russian fighting power in the context of this war and large-​scale inter-​state warfare 
in general.
Land-​centric warfare, asymmetry and innovation
This war showed the revival of high-​intensity land-​centric warfare in times of 
cutting-​edge technologies, nuclear weapons, UAVs and AI. Despite technological 
developments, the core of land warfare remains defined by the characteristics of 
the terrain and the advantage it provides to the defending side in using asymmetry 
against a numerically superior enemy. The primary source of asymmetric 
advantage was the Ukrainian people, adaptable and innovative according to the 
war requirements.
 
 
 

196  Final considerations
Nothing makes people innovate as much as the necessity to survive and the 
consequent demands of war. In the case of the UAF, various innovations were 
conditioned by the necessity of tactics and Ukraine’s very cohesive civil society. 
However, such developments do not occur overnight. Many of them were 
crystallised during the first eight years of the war, with full-​scale invasion pushing 
them forward for their systematic employment. The urgent need for solutions also 
reduced any other setbacks and limitations. Ukrainian ‘smart innovation’ showed 
once again that new, cheaper civilian and military technologies supported with 
customised software could become more functional. Traditionally, the sources of 
innovation that could be used in the military sphere often originated in the private 
sector. In the war in Ukraine, a new source, which corresponds to the modern trend 
of grassroots initiatives, originated in civil society and volunteers. This tendency 
is conditioned by reducing the gap in the civil–​military divide and the greater 
tradition of the involvement of Ukrainian civilians in supporting the military on the 
tactical level over the nine years of war.
Another interesting consideration in boosting the Ukrainian innovations evident 
in the war is the conceptual component and diversity of warfighting elements with 
diverse types of training. While the traditional military single-​service doctrine 
is aimed to achieve unified performance, the variety of units involved on the 
Ukrainian side received different training with different doctrines or concepts as 
part of the learning process. The immediate necessities of war dictated that practical 
skills be trained with some conceptual basis while taking advantage of individuals’ 
background knowledge and previous skills. This illustrates that tactical-​level 
experiences and adjustments to the enemy behaviour determined solutions 
and tactical innovations. Various examples in the training courses developed in 
Ukraine showcase the significant role of sharing the accumulated knowledge and 
experience of NCOs or the equivalent. However, this knowledge and experience 
must be systematically incorporated into the training system for wider outreach. 
There is still a need in many fields to establish modern officer development and 
training courses.
In the case of the Russian troops, unification was conducted through the 
traditions of the Soviet doctrines with a consequent inconsistency between the 
available technologies and manpower to sustain and employ those technologies 
to their fullest potential. From the perspective of adaptability and innovations, 
more experienced military personnel and conscripts were characterised by rigid 
decision-​making, but for slightly different reasons. Conscripts were provided with 
basic training, if any, with limited understanding of the tasks and the reality of 
warfare. In contrast, more experienced military personnel faced the challenges of 
a rigid Soviet-​style chain of command and the time required for decision-​making. 
The later stages of 2022 showed Russian tactical adaptations in terms of the use 
of artillery, CAS and the Wagner PMC tactic of using cannon fodder in waves 
in Bakhmut, which shifted towards scorched-​earth tactics. This choice of tactics 
was, to a greater extent, conditioned by the lack of sufficient Russian experience 
 

Final considerations  197
and training in urban warfare. One year on, the Russians began learning from the 
Ukrainian innovations replicating them according to their available resources. 
However, from the perspective of civil society support, a very different dynamic 
was observed in the case of Russia, in which most of its specialists left the country 
out of fear of being mobilised. The brain-​drain and significant citizens’ migration 
from Russia also intensified when Putin’s regime came to power, because it would 
not allow for smaller businesses and grassroots initiatives to flourish under his 
regime of strengthening central control.1 Hence, a source of innovation originating 
from civil society was absent in Russia.
There is nothing new in what, in fact, enables adaptability and innovation –​ 
besides the actual creative thinking aspect of the process, there should also be 
a susceptible environment encouraging or at least not prohibiting creativity and 
innovative thinking. The necessity of survival dictates innovative thinking, which 
can be encouraged by organisational culture but is ultimately conditioned by 
an individual’s skills and adaptability and the nature of the enemy faced on the 
battlefield.
From the perspective of organisational change, much has been discussed on the 
significance of investing in people as an important part of capabilities building. 
This was evident in various reorganisation initiatives introduced during the first 
eight years of the war and foreign partners’ training courses provided to the UAF. 
Although various systematic plans for military reform and professionalisation of 
the UAF were finalised and had already been announced in 2019 with the adoption 
of various NATO standards and practices, the actual organisational transformation 
and modernisation was primarily personality-​driven. Understanding of the need to 
use Western practice and standards to correspond to the requirements of modern 
warfighting originated within the innovative progressive leaders such as Col. Gen. 
Vorobyov, who taught and shaped different leading officers of the UAF, including 
the current Commander-​in-​Chief General Valery Zaluzhny. This does not mean that 
the entire Ukrainian Army was transformed, but the top-down initiative was met 
with the eagerness of younger generation soldiers who had been fighting for eight 
years to adopt more effective ways of warfighting instead of following the outdated 
Soviet methods of a rigid chain of command. As Zaluzhnyi once commented, 
Soviet army methods would not work with the young, modern 30-​year-​old officers 
in the UAF.
The Ukrainian personality and progressive youth-​driven approach to 
transformation and reorganisation towards Western standards of professional Armed 
Forces were in striking contrast with the Russian attempts at numeric reforms of 
their military, which provided results only on the paper of the senior leadership’s 
reports. While corruption is often blamed for the failures of the Russian military 
reform, it is also a matter of rigid thinking from the top to the middle-​level officers, 
the traditions of the hazing (dedovschina) system and many other relics of the 
past. Innovation and reforms are not possible without critical thinking and open-​
mindedness to innovations.
 
 

198  Final considerations
The learning point for any innovation is that it requires a few factors for its 
fruition: an encouraging environment, personal leadership initiatives and support from 
the innovative groups from within the service. While all three factors might be present 
at a given time, the availability of at least two can compensate for the lack of the third 
one. However, all three were missing in the case of the Russian Armed Forces.
Jointness or interservice integration: how to proceed and not to 
proceed
Interservice or interdomain integration is not a new phenomenon and has gone 
through various stages of reconceptualisation in various debates on modern warfare. 
In the case of this war, much attention was devoted to how the rigid Russian 
top-down approach to jointness and employment of air power and sea power as 
artillery extensions of the ground forces undermined their effectiveness in the 
war.2 Achievement of the desired joint effect depends on a fragile balance between 
interservice integration on different levels of warfare and the distinctive strategic 
role and functionality of single services in different strategic settings. Supremacy 
of single services or complete elimination of distinctive services is a lesson already. 
Although land-​centric warfare revived various discussions on the utility of distinctive 
services and capabilities, the most significant takeaway is the extent of jointness and 
interservice integration observed in the UAF and its approach to its implementation.
Although not all services were present in the war to the same extent in their own 
domains, primarily due to the varied assets available at the beginning of the full-​
scale invasion and the immediate losses in the first few weeks, the existing units 
from different services were integrated into the overall warfighting mechanism of 
the war. Just as in many other activities, the distinctive feature of the Ukrainian 
military practice was that it combined initiatives from both the grassroots tactical 
level and the top-down approach. Although changes to military institutions tend to 
be more complex due to many bureaucratic processes, and the Ukrainian military 
still have many spheres to clean up from the Soviet practice; interservice and cross-​
domain integration allowed to coordinate fires originating from different domains 
hitting Russian units in trenches, their logistics and ammunition storage facilities 
across the frontline and deep in their rear.
To a greater extent, tactical-​level jointness was conditioned not by the idea of a 
tactical manifestation of the previously established policy of jointness and cross-​
domain integration outlined in the national strategy document. The vital need drove 
effectiveness. The scarcity of resources and capabilities across domains, including 
the maritime and aerial assets, required a more effective use of the available means 
in conjunction with the land component. Ultimately, cross-​domain effects were 
observed by using ground-​based air defences against Russian aviation, Ukrainian 
aviation in CAS and air interdiction missions, helicopters and drones in various 
ISR and kinetic roles, coastal defences against the Russian fleet, marines in urban 
warfare and demining activities in the Black Sea. The best description of the 
 
 
 

Final considerations  199
Ukrainian strategic culture and fighting spirit evident in this war is the analogy of 
a beehive –​ once someone attacks its home, the hive does not require distinctive 
plans of action, only a direction to attack the enemy and defend the home until 
the end. This analogy illustrates Ukrainian strategic culture’s inherent feature –​ 
decentralisation as a precondition for the joint actions and achievement of joint 
effects across domains. In this regard, a dual approach to command and control was 
essential in adjusting the complexity of a long frontline and the distinctive, unique 
challenges for different segments of it.
Mission command should not be viewed as a panacea for all situations and types 
of war, but in the earlier stages of the full-​scale invasion, its employment provided a 
significant advantage for the UAF. Under the conditions of the wide spreading of the 
Russian troops without a yet well-​established frontline, mission command allowed 
Ukraine flexibility in responding to the enemy actions in the best Ukrainian traditions 
of partisan warfare. Under those conditions of uncertainty on the ground, Russian 
troops suffered from confusion, a disrupted chain of command and a lack of military 
experience in this type of war. Although there are many current discussions about 
the reconceptualisation of mission command, it remains a viable skill in sustaining 
agility and freedom of action on the ground. Its learning requires more training 
and exercises characterised by close-​to-​war settings. The rigid Russian command 
structure would also never allow for flexibility and initiative decision-​making.
Placing this discussion once again into the joint or interservice context, the 
provision of objectives or direction was sufficient for the UAF to approach the 
task at hand with what was available and could provide desired effect within 
the closest time frame and with minimum use of ammunition, which is always 
crucial in high-​intensity warfare. In essence, Ukrainian interservice and cross-​unit 
integration and collaboration was another innovation and adaptation of the UAF 
since it was a tactical-​level solution to the problem of scarce resources and the 
necessity of achieving layered effects using capabilities across different domains.3 
Although different analysts might be tempted to emphasise the significance of one 
service or another or outline the decisive role of one type of military power over 
another, in reality, the war has been conducted using all of the available services 
and their assets towards a single goal –​ defending Ukraine and repelling the enemy 
from the Ukrainian territories. It could be assumed that the war would have looked 
very differently if more numeric and technologically advanced aerial and naval 
capabilities were in the Ukrainian inventory, there had been greater and more 
prolonged control of the air and there had been more aerial assets to make the work 
of the ground forces easier and reduce pressure on the artillery and infantry, but it 
was not attainable after the post-​Cold War disarmament of the UAF.
Mass, cutting-​edge technologies and force multiplication
The land-​centric nature of this large-​scale inter-​state war once again raised the 
question of the importance of sufficient critical mass in modern warfare. Unlike 
 
 
 

200  Final considerations
the conflicts of the last three decades, this war was primarily characterised by the 
invading side having both mass and technological advantages, at least from the 
onset of the war. It soon shifted towards Ukraine utilising Western technologies 
against the Russian mass approach using Soviet and relatively modern military 
equipment. Hence, the dichotomy of mass and modern cutting-​edge technologies 
could be traced in this war in a more traditional sense to achieving artificial mass by 
employing cutting-​edge technologies. However, the high tempo, scale and Russian 
ignorance of their own casualties and losses suggested that although new, more 
advanced Western technologies across domains illustrated the much-​desired force 
multiplication to the traditional characteristics of precision, improved targeting, 
electronic warfare capabilities and ISR capacities, their numeric availability and 
logistics should be present in sufficient numbers to cover the long frontline and the 
vast territory of Ukraine. The discussion in Chapter 10 on international military 
assistance illustrated that there is a difference between layering defences across 
domains in support of achieving desired mass and joint effects and accumulation 
of capabilities for more enduring effects of the counteroffensives and holding those 
de-​occupied territories.
Following Deptula and Penney’s emphasis on the more numerical force due 
to the three challenges, the following can be identified in the context of Ukraine. 
The most evident in Ukraine is the first challenge of effectively covering given 
territory with both tempo and mass. The need for a more balanced mass –​ critical 
mass –​ in Ukraine was conditioned by the long frontline, the constant intensity of 
Russian assets across various segments of that frontline and the continuous assaults 
on the entire territory of the country within the long-​range bombing campaign 
using Russian aerial and naval capabilities. It became evident that while holding 
the frontlines could be achieved with some assets of artificial mass and by taking 
advantage of the terrain, defending civilian infrastructure from the long-​range 
bombing required significant numbers of ground defences and ammunition in order 
to protect most of the country. One year on, not all missiles can be shot down. 
However, according to UkrAF commander Mykola Oleshchuk, Patriot air defences 
proved able to shoot down Russian Kinzhal missiles.4
Looking at the matter from the Western conceptualisation and the employment 
of mass in the last three decades, it seems clear that out-​of-​area operations, while 
posing their own logistical challenges in sustaining firepower and its enduring 
effect, are a very different experience to defending your country from invasion. 
From this point of view, the task is to defend the country on the frontline and over 
the entire territory instead of being concentrated across the focal point in gradually 
achieving various objectives in a given overseas operation. This entails that the 
sufficient numbers of various capabilities should be spread across a rather large 
battlespace.
The second challenge with structuring the armed forces and consequent 
capabilities is posing a challenge to an adversary with ‘sufficient system complexity 
to complicate their targeting and operational strategy.’5 The idea of the system can 
 
 
 

Final considerations  201
be discussed as the overall system of Ukrainian defence and the UAF in general. 
In the case of Ukraine, from the first days of war, the advantage taken from the 
mobility of various defences is the principle of dispersal. In the later stages, once 
the UAF had adjusted to the warfighting, various tactical and operational level 
adaptations were aimed to achieve this objective of system complexity. Although in 
the context of Western cutting-​edge technology, system complexity can be viewed 
in terms of networks of more sophisticated capabilities, in the case of Ukraine, this 
meant achieving system complexity through the combination of various military 
technologies across different segments of the frontline. In the aerial domain, it 
was layering the system of defences across different altitudes by employing both 
ground and air capabilities. The system complexity was achieved through diverse 
characteristics of different technologies with consequent layering effects. The 
system complexity principle was also evident in the supply chain and logistics, 
with different solutions creating opportunities for the uninterrupted provision of 
supply and maintenance services in the closer and wider rear.
The third challenge of ‘withstanding attrition in contested environments’ is an 
significant aspect of the war in Ukraine. During this year of the war, the UAF took 
full advantage of Western technologies in precision fires even under the scarcity 
of these technologies and relevant ammunitions. This was achieved by targeting 
fuel supply chains or force concentration and taking advantage of the bottlenecks 
and other favourable terrains. While the Russians would be losing more men and 
equipment during the war, the significant aspect for the UAF was the question 
of reinforcement and rotation of the more experienced serving officers. While 
most had very few recovery days within this year of war, the strengthening of 
the personnel side of the fighting power was attributed to the diversification of 
Ukrainian combatants and paths to the warfighting. This diversification allowed 
for facilitating different stages of mobilisation and training across the year as 
well as speeding up reinforcements across various segments of the frontlines. 
However, this also posed an issue of the varied levels of training and preparation of 
different units within the territorial defence in different regions before their actual 
deployment to the frontline.
In the case of Bakhmut and the grinding of Russian cannon fodder in the form of 
recruited prisoners, the newly mobilised and Wagner mercenaries, withstanding the 
attrition by Ukrainian forces was primarily dependent on the constant availability 
of the firearms and ammunition, since the waves of assaults were continuous and 
were aimed at achieving a breakthrough by constant sacrifices of massed waves. 
Such a contested environment illustrates the immediate existential significance of 
the numbers of available ammunition, with the focus primarily on numbers and 
their ability to operate round the clock rather than the characteristics of precision 
per se, since the problem was not in hitting the target, but to be able to destroy 
continuous waves of numerous targets approaching.
Inevitably, the factor of time is at the heart of this discussion. Effective 
technologies must be available not only in more numbers, but also supplied 
 

202  Final considerations
sufficiently and continuously. This feature of continuity is essential in the high 
tempo of a more prolonged attrition land-​centric war. In this regard, besides the 
traditional technical specifications of the technologies, their effectiveness becomes 
evaluated in terms of the timeliness of their availability in combination with skilled 
and trained personnel. The war experience illustrated that, to have greater flexibility 
and adaptability in the battlespace, the critical mass should be at the heart of force 
design with relevant interconnectedness between peace and war times. This would 
require a contingency plan for the industrial adjustments for the war requirements, 
but these plans should already be in place during peacetime.6
The follow-​up aspect within this segment of discussion refers to the ways of 
building the critical mass. As was illustrated on various occasions across domains 
and the supply and military assistance chapters, achieving sufficient numbers in 
cutting-​edge technologies and consequent artificial mass or force multiplication 
requires time and the significant restructuring of ammo productions of the military 
industries. However, in the case of Ukraine, the opportunity to build critical mass 
consisted of several initiatives. Western technologies provided by the international 
partners were used with Soviet-​era equipment from the Ukrainian inventory and the 
trophy equipment captured from Russian troops. Another segment in strengthening 
the required critical mass was, of course, the Ukrainian military industry. Once it 
was cleared of pro-​Russian elements, it produced required technologies based on 
prior test projects and new initiatives. In recent months, the focus has also been 
placed on strengthening joint enterprise initiatives in the production of military 
equipment between Ukraine and Poland and between Ukraine and the Czech 
Republic. While all of these channels for strengthening critical mass to match high-​
intensity warfare illustrate systematic solutions, they all require significant time, 
and many of them were gaining tempo only one year after the beginning of the 
full-​scale invasion.
This war illustrated another source for providing force multiplication and 
firepower per the immediate tactical demands of the war. This refers to the use 
of cheap, unmanned platforms across various tasks. While military-​grade drones 
proved essential in the first months of this year of war, cheap civilian drones with 
Ukrainian modifications became the highlight of force multiplication under the 
high tempo of the war. The example of commercial drones for military purposes 
showed cheaper options in establishing and sustaining critical mass using military 
and civilian initiatives in their funding, delivery and repairs are needed.7
Another important factor in using drones to satisfy some aspects of critical mass 
and force multiplication is that due to their cheapness, their uninterrupted supply is 
attainable. However, the ability to have a continuous flow of cheap drones should 
not be taken for granted because it also depends on such factors as the extent of the 
public ability to crowdfund constant funding requests and even continuity of drone 
manufacturing by commercial entities. Furthermore, countries manufacturing 
cheap drones might reconsider their policies regarding selling them to war zones 
or even third parties on the market. Hence, an important contribution to sustaining 
 
 
 

Final considerations  203
this part of the capabilities was establishing local repair services to reduce costs 
spent on purchasing new drones and as a means of significantly improving the 
resilience of such devices and the timeliness of their availability.8
While, to a certain extent, technologies can provide force multiplication, 
there is always a human side of the critical mass that requires more significant 
efforts and time to prepare and develop the required skills. The human segment 
and time became entwined in this war. While technologies can provide artificial 
mass at a given time and some desired effects, the lack of critical mass in terms 
of technologies and firepower is often compensated by the people fighting across 
domains, often costing the blood and lives of the best.
People
While the primary challenges with technologies were, first, their immediate 
availability, second, their accumulation and, third, the logistics of their continuous 
supply and sustainment under the conditions of high-​intensity war, the question 
of people was related to the crucial elements of establishing and building up 
sufficient capabilities in conjunction with the available technologies and often 
as compensation for the lack of required equipment. The experiences of the two 
fighting sides were very different. In the case of Russia, although there were 
exaggerated expectations of its numerical superiority and the military reforms in 
the previous two decades under Putin’s regime, they illustrated significant flaws in 
having a capable people component. Their mass approach to structuring their armed 
forces focused on the advantages of more advanced technologies, with insufficient 
personnel to sufficiently service this equipment or employ it to the fullest potential 
in the battlespace.9 The focus on conscription and partial modernisation of the 
Russian Army were futile since they were conducted in Soviet pro-​forma style. 
Modernisation attempts did not commit to the actual skills development, nor did 
they encourage innovations. Hence, Russian numerical superiority was not found 
in the skilled personnel in support of the available, relatively modern equipment; as 
always, Russia had a higher headcount without any sufficient connection with the 
skills required for the equipment they had.
In the case of Ukraine, the prior eight years of war focused on fighting a single, 
well-​known enemy and the support of the Foreign Legion soldiers who fought 
Russia in other wars of the post-​Cold War era significantly prepared the people’s 
side of the Ukrainian capabilities and the physical component of the fighting power. 
While the immediate hits were taken by the more experienced and trained military 
personnel and better-​trained sections of the territorial defence units, various waves 
of mobilisation prepared more personnel to sustain the fighting power across the 
battlespace through the year. The national experience of warfighting in the first eight 
years combined with some international training courses allowed the strengthening 
of the skill set of the UAF. Furthermore, like on various other occasions, the 
diversification of paths and training frameworks provided additional advantages, 
 
 
 
 

204  Final considerations
with SOF having greater flexibility in focusing on developing specifically required 
skills for the given operating environment while training recently mobilised aiming 
for formalised solutions. Unlike the Russian headcount approach to building critical 
mass, the UAF as a general rule had a greater focus on strengthening the skill set of 
the personnel utilising both national and international training opportunities. The 
availability of reserves and various training initiatives for the civilian population 
within the concept of total/​comprehensive defence stimulated the development of 
the relevant skills within a shorter time, allowing for greater adaptability, especially 
in the first days of the full-​scale invasion.
In this context, the important means of force multiplication for the UAF was 
the inherent Ukrainian adaptability, creativity in problem-​solving and innovative 
thinking. Various immediate tactical solutions multiplied giving advantages 
across the battlespace. This was conditioned by a greater degree of living in 
transitional times for the last three decades and the consequent strengthening of 
Ukrainian psychological capabilities and adaptability. Shannon Houck makes a 
good case for the psychological capabilities in support of resilience, exploring the 
development of resilience in Ukrainian society.10 The rationale can be extended to 
a wider context of living in uncertainty and its impact on preparing people to adapt 
or perish in a storm of events. While in the initial stage, uncertainty and inability 
to accept the given reality have a paralysing effect on an individual, the constant 
presence of uncertainty results in an adjustment to it and greater adaptability 
and unconventional thinking, which became evident in various experiences of 
the UAF:
‘Similar to how we adapt to the stress of a physical workout by increasing 
the strength of our muscle fibers, building mitochondria, or producing more 
red blood cells, our brains adapt to the stress of uncertainty, by adjusting our 
stress response, establishing and reinforcing memory connections, and being 
better equipped to handle that formerly uncertain situation.’ With exposure to 
uncertainty comes more psychological preparedness, not necessarily for specific 
incidents, but for the discomfort that unanticipated incidents may bring.11
One of the aspects or sub-​themes of the mass approach and the structuring of the 
armed forces is the question of casualties and military/​political attitude to casualties 
in war and the likelihood of the decision resulting in mass casualties among 
the military personnel. Russia has a long tradition of accepting casualties, with 
individual life seemingly becoming even cheaper in Putin’s Russia. Soviet losses 
in the war in Afghanistan were enough to undermine the stability of the Soviet 
power, resulting in its withdrawal. However, Russian losses in Ukraine are much 
larger than in the ten years in Afghanistan, which to a greater degree illustrated the 
reduced value of life in Putin’s Russia.12 This observation is then strengthened by 
the traditional Russian tactics of using their personnel as cannon fodder –​ the lower 
the ranks, the more likely they are to be utilised in waves of attacks. The same was 
 
 
 
 

Final considerations  205
illustrated in the Wagner tactic of sending recruited prisoners in waves at gunpoint 
in Bakhmut.
The number of Ukrainian fallen and of injured soldiers remains classified for the 
good reason of preventing a decline in high morale, although people in Ukrainian 
cities see how many soldiers are dying, and funerals have become an integral part 
of Ukrainian life just as have constant air raid sirens. Ukrainian soldiers know 
whom they are losing and the cost of ‘Bakhmut Holds’. Ukrainians have a strong 
morale and fighting spirit because after this year of war, they also live and fight 
for their fallen comrades. The fighting ethos dates back to the old warrior code 
of honour, for this is the patriotic war for the liberation of the homeland and the 
survival of the Ukrainian nation.13
For the UAF, it is not a war of choice because there is no choice but to fight. 
Since at various stages of this year of the war, military equipment or ammunition 
was scarce, or various segments of the frontline had a greater intensification of 
the enemy assaults or employment of different tactics, holding certain territory 
came at a higher cost in human lives. Hence, the UAF leadership has a very 
realistic understanding of the cost of a mile in this war. This also refers to the 
counteroffensives. Despite the losses, the UAF illustrated high adaptability and 
speed in restructuring various tactical-​level units under the conditions of attrition 
war. The agility of Ukrainian tactical units and the inherent tradition of mission 
command allowed faster and more effective unit readjustment under the conditions 
of losses compared to the Russian inability to make tactical-​level reorganisation 
decisions without the involvement of orders from officers in decision-​making.
Civil–​military relations and total/​comprehensive defence
Despite the clear-​cut division between civil and military matters and the distinction 
between different sources in support of strengthening the fighting power, this total 
war illustrated the gradual merging of civil and military assets in support of the 
UAF. This merging was illustrated in various segments. First, from the perspective 
of Ukrainian society, the total character of the war, the nation’s survival and the 
preservation of the country’s territorial integrity resulted in the war being at the 
heart of people’s lives in Ukraine. This manifested in various contributions by 
ordinary people and businesses to sustain the armed forces, including crowdfunding, 
individual assistance and volunteering activities to the initiatives in repairs and 
innovations in support of the physical component of the fighting power. From the 
perspective of resilience, the toughness and flexibility of the Ukrainian society 
contributed in many ways as a supportive means of reinforcing the resilience of the 
military fighting power, addressing both moral and physical components.
In terms of the concept of total/​comprehensive defence and its application in 
Ukraine, although various initiatives to improve the readiness of the country for 
the next stage of war were taking place in 2021 following the national strategy 
document, many adjustments were conditioned by both experience and ad hoc 
 
 
 

206  Final considerations
solutions. Some activities in societal readiness for the war were determined by the 
first eight years of the war. However, the scale and intensity of disrupting Ukrainian 
normal life and statehood were lower than post-​February 2022. Accordingly, the 
experiences of volunteering, crowdfunding and various grassroots initiatives were 
crystalised based on lessons learned from the previous years of war. Many other 
responses were evolving ad hoc in accordance with the situation –​ the previous 
examples of the civilian population preparing Molotov cocktails and establishing 
drone harbours and repair hubs come to mind. Once again, the adaptability 
and innovative thinking of Ukrainian society were conditioned by the high 
psychological resilience of the people living in times of uncertainty and transition 
for a few decades, combined with cognitive readiness and determination to fight a 
patriotic war for the survival of their nation and territorial integrity:
Preparing individuals and populations for invasion requires cognitive readiness. 
Determination. Motivation to get in and stay in the fight. Psychologically 
resilient individuals feel a sense of connection and belonging to their social 
circles and community environment. They trust their local forces and civilian 
services. They are knowledgeable about enemy influence attempts. They believe 
in their country’s narratives and purpose and feel a sense of national identity and 
pride.14
The sustainment of this resilience was also based on the clear-​cut common objectives 
of the war for both the military and society –​ territorial integrity of the country 
and survival of the Ukrainian nation –​ to live as free people. The goal resonated 
with local and foreign people on so many levels that it gave them the strength to 
withstand the most complex challenges, from the making of ‘Bandera smoothies’ 
(Molotov cocktails) to enduring blackouts and constant Russian bombardment.
From the perspective of learning lessons in total/​comprehensive defence and 
strengthening civil–​military relations, nations adopting this concept would ideally 
not face the same existential threat as Ukraine did during the Russian aggression; 
the preparation of a society for total defence requires clarity of objectives, and 
realistic training and consequent realisation of what war is about, and that it 
requires defence of the homeland. Ukraine once again illustrated how important it 
is to allow grassroots initiatives to flourish in support of both political and military 
objectives. It suggests focusing on improving better civil–​military understanding of 
modern warfare and the roles of the respective participants in total/​comprehensive 
defence with various opportunities for innovation and tactical-​level contributions 
by the civil society.
Towards resilient fighting power
Although a full operational analysis of the war and its full-​scale segment will have 
to wait until the war is over, the experience of the studied year of this war provides 
 
 
 

Final considerations  207
insights into relevant factors shaping resilient fighting power in modern inter-​state 
warfare. These various characteristics are derived from the experiences of the war 
within the themes previously discussed in this chapter. From the perspective of the 
conceptual component of the fighting power and the thought process behind the 
warfighting, it can be argued that although both Armed Forces shared the same 
Soviet doctrinal past, their post-​Cold War adjustment and development of the 
conceptual component and respective reforming of the Armed Forces went very 
differently. Despite the shortfalls in conducting systematic military reforms in 
Ukraine due to the political ups and downs with various pro-​Russian governments 
in power, Ukraine managed to take advantage of relevant conceptual lessons from 
the Soviet doctrine, Western best practice and consequent NATO standardisation 
of the military for the requirements of the modern warfare. In contrast, despite 
announcing various new doctrinal concepts like a hybrid or new age of warfare, 
the core of the Russian conceptual component and strategic thinking remain Soviet 
in their essence and practice. The experiment with SOF–​air integration in Syria 
was focused only on a fraction of the Russian Armed Forces and, hence, did not 
represent the actual state of their thinking and warfighting, especially on the inter-​
state level of the Ukrainian scale. From the perspective of adaptation and innovative 
thinking on warfighting, Ukraine illustrated thinking outside the Soviet conceptual 
box, adopting some aspects of the Western doctrines and best practice derived from 
the eight years of experience fighting war in Ukraine. Although the Western-​style 
doctrines were not systematically adopted and did not serve the same purpose as in 
the allied countries, the Western conceptual component was gradually incorporated 
into Ukrainian military culture and thinking through the NATO standardisation 
processes, training and exercises and individual initiatives. This was facilitated 
mainly by individual initiatives of the progressive military officers and the gradual 
modernisation of the Ukrainian organisational culture, which reduced the red tape 
and the Soviet bureaucratic footprint, hence reviving the long-​term pre-​Soviet 
strategic culture of bottom-up integration and mission command.
In contrast, Russian (read Soviet) organisational culture, its rigid top-down joint, 
centralised command and control and the superficial nature of its modernisation 
trends resulted in the conceptual component and military thinking bouncing within 
the same box, not often realising the extent of their predictability in warfighting 
for someone who knew that box from the inside yet went beyond it. It can even be 
assumed that many so-​called innovative Russian doctrines were often written for 
Western audiences rather than for the Russian armed forces as a serious means of 
reforming their thinking and improving readiness.
From the perspective of resilient fighting power, although the Russians illustrated 
various adjustments of their tactics across domains in response to the Ukrainian 
tactical developments and various modernisations, initially this required the 
involvement of high-​rank officers and significant losses of Kadyrov Chechens and 
Wagner PMC cannon fodder. Nevertheless, Russian performance across domains 
remained focused on mass fire with little attention to precision or discrimination 
 

208  Final considerations
in targeting. The usual feature of the Russian wars –​ targeting civilians –​ remained 
evident in this war. For the conceptual component to contribute to resilience, it has 
to be present in military education and training, and then be further altered as the 
situational characteristics require. Ukraine managed to do so by taking advantage of 
the tactical solutions to the issues of interservice integration, fire coordination and 
combined arms in strengthening layered effects. As much as military organisations 
aim to formalise and unify their personnel, this war has shown that the most 
innovative and adaptable side can achieve resilience and endurance even in the 
midst of such a high-​intensity inter-​state war.
Physical component: people and equipment
This war has illustrated that people remain the driving force to achieve posed 
objectives. They have the relevant skills to operate the equipment directly or 
remotely. They compensate for various technological limitations or limited 
availability. The force that is the most adaptable and innovative is the force that 
can bounce back to operational readiness sooner and achieve the desired effect 
through various means in a more productive manner. The UAF is an example of 
a modern, flexible, highly trained force with unique operational experience that 
is capable of employing varied types of equipment in fighting the enemy across 
domains. Psychological capabilities and readiness conditioned by long decades of 
transition and uncertainty stimulated creativity and innovative thinking focused 
on distinctive tactical-​level objectives. The learning point is that warfighting does 
not take place in ideal circumstances, and the force that is the most resilient in 
the worst-​case scenarios can achieve the highest level of combat readiness and 
sustain it over time. Various discussions of the war in Ukraine have illustrated the 
necessity of strengthening the combat readiness and agility of the military during 
peacetime with close-​to-​real war military exercises that are focused on developing 
exact survival and fighting skills across domains.
The Russians illustrated the endurance of their Soviet heritage with significant 
negligence in investing in regular personnel. The fear of military coups against 
Putin’s clique resulted in investments in SOF and mercenary groups like Wagner 
PMC. While the use of mercenaries and proxy forces is not new, they are not 
a sufficient alternative to a strong national military. Hence, the majority of the 
Russian military personnel were poorly or insufficiently trained and their numbers 
were not enough to achieve the required objectives. Despite the constant focus on 
the mass approach to structuring their armed forces, Russians illustrated that they 
did not have sufficient numbers to sustain that mass both in terms of army soldiers 
and human assets in the information space. The widely known Russian exercises 
involving various services and significant numbers were often aimed at giving a 
show of force, and a numerical one, instead of providing opportunities for effective 
cross-​service integration and improving the military skills of personnel and the 
effective use of equipment.
 
 

Final considerations  209
For military personnel to be resilient, they should not be afraid to take the 
initiative and find their solutions. The versatile skill set of the Ukrainian military, 
with their diverse backgrounds, allowed them to contribute to various tactical 
solutions. The UAF also proved to be fast learners. This can be explained by many 
factors, including the imminent presence of war requirements, but it is also because 
most of the Ukrainian soldiers would have higher education and a profession in 
their civilian life in one field or another. Newly mobilised Russian conscripts or 
even experienced officers did not match the skill set the Ukrainian people already 
had before joining the UAF. The focus on giving children higher education 
has traditionally been part of Ukrainian culture. It aimed at providing the next 
generation with a wider overview of life and developing critical and independent 
thinking. It is not accidental that students and youth stood their ground in the two 
Ukrainian revolutions. In the current context, it also contributed to the survivability 
of the nation. European statistics showed the following:
In Ukraine 97.5% of women and 97.1% of men aged 20–​24 years had completed 
at least an upper secondary level of education in 2021. This was an improvement 
on the situation in 2011, when the levels were 95.7% and 94.2% respectively 
… the proportion of 30–​34-​year-​olds in 2021 who had completed a tertiary 
level of education –​ Ukraine had the highest overall proportion of tertiary 
qualification holders among ENP-​East countries, with 2021 figures of 51.4% of 
men and 64.8% of women, in total 58.0%. In comparison, in the EU 41.0% of 
young people aged 30–​34 years had completed tertiary education in 2021; this 
corresponded to 46.1% among women and 36.0% among men.15
From the perspective of sustainment of the qualified skills of the military personnel 
prior to and during the war, the focal points remain the reserves and various waves 
of mobilisation. The extent of their effectiveness and contribution to the fighting 
power largely depended not only on the individual experiences and mobilised or 
volunteer route to warfighting but also on the type of training they were given and 
the extent of the warfighting skills acquired.
Materiel
Regarding the materiel segment of the physical component, the discussions 
across themes and chapters on different domains illustrated that the operational 
advantage in high-​intensity inter-​state warfare is achieved not by the traditional 
Soviet approach to massing both soldiers and equipment but in attaining a balance 
between effective employment of the combined arms with the use of more 
advanced technologies and the built-​up mass of the Soviet-​era technologies. In this 
case, Ukraine achieved desired objectives with what was available and provided at 
the given time; however, more kinetic and wider-​scale advancement required the 
accumulation of versatile assets to project power and achieve layered combined 
 
 
 

210  Final considerations
effects across domains. At various stages, a decrease in available equipment and 
ammunition was compensated with human creativity, yet the price of time was 
the lives of the UAF. From the perspective of resilience of fighting power and 
revival of its military effectiveness, military equipment needs to be available at 
a given time and in constant resupply with sufficient ammunition, especially for 
this type of war. Logistics and sustainment have always been crucial factors in 
warfighting. In the case of Ukraine, equipment diversification allowed for various 
sources of supplies and support, ranging from national, civil and military initiatives 
to international military assistance from the partner nations and their societies.
From the perspective of sufficiency and effectiveness of the military equipment 
under high-​intensity inter-​state warfare, at least partial national self-​sufficiency is 
required to satisfy the immediate needs of warfighting. The discussion after the 
one-​year high-​intensity segment of the war in Ukraine is focused on returning 
to the traditional approach to military arsenals, fully stocking them and keeping 
ammunition and equipment in repaired and functional condition. Although there 
is nothing new in this way of thinking in terms of sustainment and readiness of 
the fighting power for various types of threats and conflicts, under the prolonged 
thinking of the peace dividend and a lack of direct threats, the focus was on other 
matters while stocking arsenals for various threats and scenarios was considered 
a relic of the past. The war in Ukraine illustrated the endurance of the principle 
‘si vis pacem, para bellum’ (if you want peace, prepare for war). In the context 
of the high-​intensity warfare, the crucial triangle of equipment availability, its 
endurance and a constant flow of ammunition illustrated that it was crucial to 
survival and achieving military advantage. While many Ukrainian arsenals with 
Soviet-​era ammunition were destroyed by various sabotages during the first eight 
years of war, the sustainment of the Ukrainian military equipment was partially 
satisfied through a range of initiatives –​ manufacturing capacities of the Ukrainian 
UkrOboronprom, the assistance of the partner nations in bringing in Soviet-​era 
supplies and recent initiatives for joint ventures and manufacturing of ammunitions 
in the neighbouring countries.
From a wider perspective of the supply of Western equipment and its sustainment 
in Ukraine, it showed that the wider international community strengthened and 
sustained the physical component of the Ukrainian fighting power. However, the 
primary challenges of Western military industry and the consequent challenges for 
the future of strengthening fighting power across the alliance are that decades of out-​
of-​area operations and wars of choice resulted in the military industry functioning 
under peacetimes, meaning individual contracts between manufacturers and 
distinctive nations. During the short period of relative peace, such arrangements 
allow the scheduling and planning of various procurement programmes, but under 
the conditions of total war, they pose vulnerability in themselves, especially if there 
is little diversification in terms of platforms, ammunition and equipment. While 
the interoperability of ammunition is essential for the systematic functionality 
 

Final considerations  211
in joint cooperation and unification of the logistics and sustainment, building 
up critical mass for the national and allied defences requires time and increased 
production capacities, which many global manufacturers in the military industry 
are working on. Despite the new advanced technologies with the AI component and 
system of systems marvels; manufacturing capacities, speed, logistics, endurance 
and sustainment remain significant in assessing the effectiveness of the military 
equipment. Just as at any other time in the last two millennia of warfare, weapons 
baptised in the fire of war are the ones to prove themselves and are likely to be 
procured for the next war. Furthermore, the equipment’s resilience, besides its 
systematic sustainment, largely depends on the adaptability and knowledge of the 
personnel that utilises it and flexibility in finding solutions to fix it.
In the case of Russian military equipment, although their stocks were 
not sabotaged prior to the invasion, their use of indiscriminate bombing and 
artillery shelling and the overall approach to warfighting illustrated that even 
their stockpiles are exhaustible and not prepared for a protracted attrition war 
on such a scale. The Russian war machine was also significantly damaged by 
international sanctions, limiting access to foreign technologies like microchips in 
ammunition manufacturing. Although Russia still managed to sustain its equipment 
manufacturing and the production of various ammunitions, the restraints were 
conditioned by the speed of manufacturing, which was significantly crippled by 
numerous sabotage activities against Russian military apparatus throughout the 
entire year of the full-​scale invasion with greater intensification in spring 2023. 
Disruption of the functionality of the military industry, its delivery capacity and 
overreliance on the cheap railway system for the equipment delivery to Ukraine 
illustrated significant shortfalls in the Russian ability to sustain its physical 
component of the fighting power. The Russian choice of cheaper Iranian Shahed 
‘kamikaze drones’ (loitering munitions) was a good illustration of the need for 
fast restocking of their capacities in order to sustain continuous, indiscriminate 
bombing campaigns. From the perspective of technological parity, in preparation 
for the Ukrainian counteroffensive by combining various sources to fully stock 
military equipment and ammunition, Ukraine was beginning to gain the upper 
hand in firepower, precision, range and establishment of the critical mass compared 
to the Russian military apparatus. In essence, the resilience of equipment and a 
build-​up of a critical mass is about the smart use of weapons because they are 
never inexhaustible. The UAF started with scarcity and coped with it through 
various stages of this year, while Russia started with numerical superiority and its 
mass employment without consideration of the sustainment and endurance of the 
firepower and fighting power in general and was left with scarcity and insufficient 
supply compared to their demands. Inter-​state war is not a sprint, it is a marathon, 
and the physical component of the fighting power needs to be sustained to endure, 
instead of hoping for immediate results without any contingency planning for other 
potential developments in the war.
 

212  Final considerations
The moral component
In commenting on the war in Ukraine, US Army General (Ret.) David Petraeus 
said that ‘about as clear a right-​versus-​wrong as we’ve seen in our lifetime.’16 This 
recognition of clear-​cut right and wrong is directly related to the moral component 
of the fighting power and resilience of the UAF compared to the enemy.
The simple source of the high morale and what kept the Ukrainian people going 
was that this is a patriotic war for their homeland’s independence and territorial 
integrity. For the UAF and all the people fighting on the Ukrainian side, it is a war 
for liberal values, freedom and human lives. As President Zelenskyy said in his 
speech to Canadian students, ‘we are fighting for our future, our freedom, our land 
and the opportunity to build a new Ukraine.’17
It is based on human values, comradeship and a strong fighting spirit that not 
only brought people from around the world but also helped to sustain the high 
morale and survival of the UAF in the most difficult situations. Although some 
professionals avoid discussing the warrior ethos, in this war it was indeed the 
warrior ethos that was established through interpersonal ties and the facing of 
hardships together.
The behaviour of the combatants on the Russian side included looting, raping, 
killing of civilians, a lack of discrimination between combatants and non-​
combatants, the long-​range bombing of Ukrainian cities and the kidnapping of 
Ukrainian children. These actions violated the law of armed conflict.18 Russian 
combatants that had more fighting experience and high rank often avoided 
combat until they were forced to do so. The newly mobilised were unprepared, 
while Wagner PMC used recruited prisoners as an additional source of cannon 
fodder. Such a mass of a fighting force could not be characterised by the high 
morale or traditional fighting spirit. The instances of Russians leaving their 
wounded and not helping them were recorded many times. Lack of a legitimate 
cause of war cannot provide one’s combatants with a strong will to fight; 
even fear tactics have their limitations. As the preparations for the Ukrainian 
summer 2023 offensive illustrated, more and more Russian combatants were 
surrendering right away in order not to die in Eastern Ukraine. The side with no 
motivation to fight, but with fear, is vulnerable, especially in a more prolonged 
war. The problem is that, in the Russian tradition, they often have to fight at 
gunpoint. However, the Wagner experience illustrated that if there were enough 
recruited prisoners to turn around and overpower their commander, they could 
survive by surrendering to the UAF. It indeed had led some to posit that human 
life had become cheap in Russia.19
The moral resilience of the fighting personnel comes from within. It can be 
strengthened through training and military service and belonging to distinctive 
units, but the core of it lies in a far more existential belonging to humankind 
fighting for the right cause –​ human life, freedom, your homeland, families, friends 
and humane virtues.
 
 
 
 
 
 

Final considerations  213
Finally, the extent of the collective performance of the two sides of the war must 
be stressed. The case of the UAF illustrated not only the significant integration 
across services and units but also cohesion across units with different backgrounds 
and paths to warfighting. In this regard, cohesion was conditioned by the tactical-​
level demands, the polishing of previously gained skills and the strengthening of 
newly acquired ones during this intensive year of war. Furthermore, even when 
units had to be reorganised due to losses and other reasons, this was done according 
to the immediate situational requirements.
In contrast, the Russian collective performance from the first days of the war 
was undermined by a lack of cohesion due to the diversification of units and 
their consequent ethnocultural, regional and status conflicts. This significantly 
undermined inter-​unit cooperation on the ground, and on various occasions resulted 
in internal fights between various factions and engaging with other groups in the 
first waves of warfighting. This lack of integration often resulted in fratricide and/​
or duplication of effort.
Notes
	 1	 Irina Plaks, ‘Want to Hurt Putin? Back a Brain Drain from Russia,’ Atlantic Council, 24 
March 2022. Available online: www.atla​ntic​coun​cil.org/​blogs/​new-​atla​ntic​ist/​want-​to-​
hurt-​putin-​back-​a-​brain-​drain-​from-​rus​sia/​
	 2	 Mykhaylo Zabrodskyi, et al., Preliminary Lessons in Conventional Warfighting from 
Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine: February–​July 2022 (London: RUSI, 2022).
	 3	 Viktoriya Fedorchak, ‘The Mass Approach in the Air War Over Ukraine: Towards 
Identifying a Critical Mass,’ Handlingar Och Tidskrift, no. 1 (2023): 110–​125.
	 4	 Roman Petrenko, ‘Ukraine’s Air Force Announces Downing of Kinzhal Missile Using 
Patriot Air-​Defence System,’ Ukrainska Pravda, 6 May 2023 (accessed 3 June 2023). 
Available online: www.pra​vda.com.ua/​eng/​news/​2023/​05/​6/​7400​941/​
	 5	 David Deptula and Heather Penney, Building an Agile Force: The Imperative for Speed 
and Adaptation in the U.S. Aerospace Industrial Base (Arlington: The Mitchell Institute 
for Aerospace Studies, 2021), 19.
	 6	 Fedorchak, ‘The Mass Approach,’ 122–​123.
	 7	 Ibid., 117.
	 8	 Focus UA, ‘ “CPR for Drones”: How Volunteers Restore Downed UAVs for the 
Ukrainian Armed Forces,’ December 2022, https://​focus.ua/​uk/​digi​tal/​543​222-​rean​imac​
iya-​dlya-​dro​nov-​kak-​volont​ery-​vosst​anav​liva​yut-​sbi​tye-​bpla-​dlya-​vsu-​video
	 9	 Aleksandr Golts, ‘Russia’s Military Failures in Ukraine: Causes and Consequences,’ 
SCEEUS, 2 March 2023 (accessed 18 June 2023). Available online: https://​sce​eus.se/​en/​
publi​cati​ons/​russ​ias-​milit​ary-​failu​res-​in-​ukra​ine-​cau​ses-​and-​conse​quen​ces/​
	10	 Shannon Houck, ‘Psychological Capabilities for Resilience,’ War on the Rocks, 27 
December 2022 (accessed 18 June 2023). Available online: https://​waront​hero​cks.com/​
2022/​12/​psycho​logi​cal-​capab​ilit​ies-​for-​res​ilie​nce/​
	11	 Ibid.
	12	 Dmytro Komarov, ‘Special Project: Year. Off Screen’ Interview with General Zaluznyi, 
12 May 2023. Available online: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​TadX​xP_​2​6V8&t=​132s
	13	 Anthony King, The Combat Soldier (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013).
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

214  Final considerations
	14	 Houck, ‘Psychological Capabilities.’
	15	 Eurostat, ‘European Neighbourhood Policy –​ East –​ Education Statistics,’ (accessed 
18 June 2023). Available online: https://​ec.eur​opa.eu/​euros​tat/​sta​tist​ics-​explai​ned/​
index.php?title=​Eur​opea​n_​Ne​ighb​ourh​ood_​Poli​cy_​-​_​Ea​st_​-​_​educa​tion​_​sta​tist​
ics#Educational_​atta​inme​nt_​a​mong​_​peo​ple_​aged​_​20-​24_​ye​ars
	16	 Vazha Tavberidze, ‘Ukraine War a Clear-​Cut Case of “Right Versus Wrong,” Says 
Petraeus,’ Radio Free Europe, 18 April 2023 (accessed 18 June 2023). Available 
online: www.rferl.org/​a/​petra​eus-​interv​iew-​ukra​ine-​rus​sia-​putin/​32369​104.html
	17	 Speech by President Volodymyr Zelenskyy to the student community of major Canadian 
universities, 22 June 2022. Available online: www.presid​ent.gov.ua/​en/​news/​mi-​byemo​
sya-​za-​svoye-​majbut​nye-​svoyu-​svob​odu-​svoyu-​zem​lyu-​i-​75989
	18	 Human Rights Watch, ‘Ukraine: Apparent War Crimes in Russia-​Controlled Areas,’ 
3 April 2022. Available online: www.hrw.org/​news/​2022/​04/​03/​ukra​ine-​appar​ent-​
war-​cri​mes-​rus​sia-​con​trol​led-​areas; The UN Human Rights Office, ‘UN Commission 
Concludes That War Crimes Have Been Committed in Ukraine, Expresses Concern 
About Suffering of Civilians,’ OHCHR, 23 September 2023. Available online: www.
ohchr.org/​en/​press-​relea​ses/​2022/​10/​un-​com​miss​ion-​conclu​des-​war-​cri​mes-​have-​been-​
commit​ted-​ukra​ine-​expres​ses; The UN Human Rights Office, ‘Report of the Independent 
International Commission of Inquiry on Ukraine,’ OHCHR report, 15 March 2023. 
Available online: www.ohchr.org/​sites/​defa​ult/​files/​docume​nts/​hrbod​ies/​hrcoun​cil/​coi​
ukra​ine/​A_​H​RC_​5​2_​62​_​AUV​_​EN.pdf
	19	 Slavoj Žižek, ‘Death or Glory in Russia,’ Project Syndicate, 1 February 2023. Available 
online: www.proj​ect-​syndic​ate.org/​com​ment​ary/​russ​ian-​ortho​dox-​chris​tian​ity-​and-​the-​
roots-​of-​ideo​logi​cal-​madn​ess-​by-​sla​voj-​zizek-​2023-​02?barr​ier=​acces​spay​log
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

DOI: 10.4324/9781003351641-13
CONCLUSION
The war was continuing as this book was being finalised (summer 2023). The 
UAF was in the middle of the counteroffensives, while Prigozhin’s one-​day coup 
illustrated significant flaws in Putin’s regime in Russia. While more Russian 
soldiers surrendered to the UAF in the spring 2023, the price of each liberated mile 
of Ukrainian land is still very high. However, the Ukrainian nation and all those 
fighting and supporting Ukraine demonstrated remarkable resilience and strong 
fighting spirit.
This book has illustrated that the resilience of Ukrainian fighting power during 
this one year of full-​scale invasion was determined by multiple factors. Unlike 
in 2014, when the UAF was starved of resources and investment, the issue with 
training and availability of basic supplies, in 2022, the war was going on for eight 
years. These eight years strengthened the Ukrainian military and provided them 
with the relevant operational experiences and time to prepare for the inevitable 
full-​scale Russian invasion. It was inevitable since bully-​states and dictatorships 
understand only strength. The entire nine years, and this last year more specifically, 
showed that the primary assets in the resilience of the fighting power remain to be 
people. These are people who are fighting on the frontline, volunteers to crowdfund 
and support the tactical needs of the units, and the wider public that donates funds 
and items in support of the UAF. These are also people who train and provide 
military assistance to the UAF; the Ukrainian military and political leadership that 
inspired various reforms and changes in the Armed Forces.
Having the right people in the right places also requires enduring motivation and 
sustaining morale and fighting spirit. For the UAF, and those fighting and supporting 
them in many ways, this is a clear-​cut division between right and wrong. The UAF is 
fighting for the survival of the Ukrainian nation and the liberation of the Ukrainian 
territory from the aggressor. This is the war of liberation, for human values and 
 
 

216  Conclusion
freedom. These values kept people going through this year, sustaining high morale 
on the frontline and rear. The dynamic between the frontline and rear is very much 
like a smile –​ it is contagious. So, when the UAF shared their achievements and 
even funny videos on media platforms, the wider society would rejoice with them. 
Similarly, when the rear withstood various Russian attacks and kept going and 
supporting the UAF, this would only strengthen morale on the frontline.
The technological side of the Ukrainian resilient fighting power illustrated 
that diversity provides a significant advantage in countering numerically superior 
enemy. The critical mass developed by the UAF took full advantage of the numerical 
side of the available and more dated Soviet equipment and more advanced Western 
cutting-​edge technologies in building layered defences across domains. In this 
regard, the necessity of war required tactical solutions and rapid decisions, which 
incorporated many assets in support of the UAF objectives across the frontline. 
Once again, precision proved to be more cost-​effective and useful in achieving 
specific objectives than the mass barraging and carpet bombing inherent in the 
Russian military tradition.
Although more advanced technologies illustrated the greater significance of 
precision, taking advantage of unmanned assets across domains, it also showed 
that in high-​intensity warfare, a continuous flow of ammunition is crucial for the 
sustainment of the fighting power and its actual survival in various segments of 
the frontline. Timely availability of technologies and ammunition is essential for 
effective adaptation in the battlespace. On the contrary, their absence or a delay 
in one domain puts additional pressure on another, and even greater pressure on 
the people fighting across those domains. The UAF survived and consolidated its 
capabilities because it had motivated people with multiple skills and talents. Future 
reports and books will reveal how many lives the freedom of Ukraine cost. The 
sacrifices of the fallen are likely to live long in the memory of Ukrainians. Many 
make reference to the ‘golden generation’ that have died on the frontlines.1
The combination of the human will, innovative thinking and war necessities 
resulted in many adjustments and developments that made the Ukrainian fighting 
power resilient in this war. The adjustment during the first eight years was that 
most of the training and exercises were focused on actual warfighting against 
a well-​known enemy. Hence, much of the UAF training across services was 
conducted in close-​to-​war settings or approached as operational rehearsals, which 
only tuned relevant skills for adaptation in the first few days and weeks of the 
full-​scale invasion. The experience of the 2014–​2015 warfighting also showed the 
necessity of a more empirical education within the NCO framework, with various 
incentives fruition during 2022. The urgency of war stimulated Ukrainian warriors 
to acquire relevant skills in warfighting and in operating Western equipment within 
the shortest time, finding the most effective employment in Ukrainian settings.
On the contrary, Russians were fighting a war of invasion and aggression. 
Propaganda and a focus on the numerical structuring of the armed forces and 
firepower, and the indiscriminate barraging of civilian areas, can get the aggressor 
 
 

Conclusion  217
only so far. The Russian traditions of using fear and firing squads in warfighting 
had not evolved much since World War II, nor had its organisational culture of rigid 
hierarchy and complete centralisation, killing any initiative and unconventional 
thinking. The armies of mercenaries, recruited prisoners and Kadyrovites also did 
not provide sufficient mass or skills to sustain the fighting power over a prolonged 
period of time in a war on the Ukrainian scale. The lesson already learned in 
warfare is that the side that does not evolve and adapt to the operating environment 
or the wider strategic environment is doomed to lose; it is only a question of time.
From a broader perspective, this war illustrated that peace cannot be taken for 
granted and that the absence of war today does not mean it cannot happen tomorrow. 
This does not mean living in fear, but instead, the reality requires preparing for 
warfighting during peacetime, considering the trends in the strategic environment. 
Already, the Ukrainian experience with resilient fighting power and total defence is 
being discussed and  influences the conceptualisation and organisation of national 
security and militaries across the world. The important aspect is ensuring these 
lessons are not to be neglected and forgotten when this war is over and when 
another era of peace arrives in international relations. The price of ignoring the 
existence and likelihood of war in the foreseeable future might be too high to pay.
Note
	1	 Pjotr Sauer, ‘Ukraine Mourns “Our Golden Generation” Killed on Frontlines,’ The 
Guardian, 19 June 2022. Available online: www.theg​uard​ian.com/​world/​2022/​jun/​19/​
ukra​ine-​mou​rns-​our-​gol​den-​gen​erat​ion-​kil​led-​on-​fro​ntli​nes
 
 
 

BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abend, Lisa. ‘Meet the Foreign Volunteers Risking Their Lives to Defend Ukraine—​and 
Europe.’ Time, 7 March 2022 (accessed 3 June 2023). Available online: https://​time.com/​
6155​670/​fore​ign-​fight​ers-​ukra​ine-​eur​ope/​
Adler, Nils. ‘Heroes to All of Us’: Ukraine’s Energy Repair Crews.’ AlJazeera, 23 February 
2023 (accessed 3 June 2023). Available online: www.aljaze​era.com/​featu​res/​2023/​2/​23/​
her​oes-​to-​all-​of-​us-​ukrai​nes-​ene​rgy-​rep​air-​crews
Aleksejeva, Nika and Carvin, Andy. Narrative Warfare: How the Kremlin and Russian 
News Outlets Justified a War of Aggression against Ukraine. Washington, DC: Atlantic 
Council, 2023.
Allied Joint Publication AJP-​3.2. Allied Joint Doctrine for Land Operations. 
Brussels: NSO, 2022.
Allison, George. ‘Two Ukrainian Warships Train Together off Scottish Coast.’ UK Defence 
Journal, 22 January 2022 (accessed 3 June 2023). Available online: https://​ukdef​ence​
jour​nal.org.uk/​two-​ukrain​ian-​warsh​ips-​train-​toget​her-​off-​scott​ish-​coast/​
Alman, David and Venable, Heather, ‘Bending the Principle of Mass: Why That Approach 
No Longer Works for Airpower.’ War on the Rocks (accessed 3 March 2023). Available 
online: 
https://​waront​hero​cks.com/​2020/​09/​bend​ing-​the-​princi​ple-​of-​mass​why-​that-​
appro​ach-​no-​lon​ger-​works-​for-​airpo​wer/​
Altman, Howard. ‘Inside Ukraine’s Daring Helicopter Missions into Russian-​Occupied 
Mariupol.’ The Drive, 15 May 2022 (accessed 14 June 2022). Available online: www.
thedr​ive.com/​the-​war-​zone/​exclus​ive-​deta​ils-​of-​ukrai​nes-​dar​ing-​hel​icop​ter-​missi​ons-​
into-​russ​ian-​occup​ied-​mariu​pol
Altman, Howard. ‘Russia Preparing to Attack Ukraine by Late January: Ukraine Defense 
Intelligence Agency Chief.’ Military Times, 21 November 2021 (accessed 14 June 2022). 
Available online: www.milita​ryti​mes.com/​flas​hpoi​nts/​2021/​11/​20/​rus​sia-​prepar​ing-​to-​
att​ack-​ukra​ine-​by-​late-​janu​ary-​ukra​ine-​defe​nse-​intel​lige​nce-​age​ncy-​chief/​
Anderson, Michael. ‘A People Problem: Learning from Russia’s Failing Efforts to 
Reconstitute Its Depleted Units in Ukraine.’ Modern War Institute, 26 January 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Bibliography  219
Available online: https://​mwi.usma.edu/​a-​peo​ple-​prob​lem-​learn​ing-​from-​russ​ias-​fail​
ing-​effo​rts-​to-​recon​stit​ute-​its-​deple​ted-​units-​in-​ukra​ine/​
Apostrophe TV. ‘The Unique Story of the Counteroffensive of the UAF in the Kharkiv Region.’ 
1 December 2022. Available online: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​5mkh​1O3W​BvE
Arabia, Christina, Bowen, Andrew S. and Welt, Cory. ‘U.S. Security Assistance to Ukraine.’ 
Congressional Research Service (CRS), 15 June 2023. Available online: https://​crs​repo​
rts.congr​ess.gov/​prod​uct/​pdf/​IF/​IF12​040
Armstrong, Benjamin. ‘The Russo-​Ukrainian War at Sea: Retrospect and Prospect.’ War on 
the Rocks, 21 April 2022 (accessed 25 June 2023). Available online: https://​waront​hero​
cks.com/​2022/​04/​the-​russo-​ukrain​ian-​war-​at-​sea-​ret​rosp​ect-​and-​prosp​ect/​
Army Doctrine Publication AC 71940. Land Operations. London: MOD, 2017.
Army Inform. ‘The Air Force Has Withstood and Is Effectively Destroying the 
Occupiers: Interview with Lt Gen Mykola Oleschuk.’ 25 February 2023 (accessed 25 
June 2023). Available online: https://​arm​yinf​orm.com.ua/​2023/​02/​25/​365-​dniv-​bytvy-​
za-​ukr​ayin​ske-​nebo/​
Army Inform. ‘Why Do Our Pilots Fight Better than Russian Pilots –​ Interview with Yuriy 
Ignat.’ 22 August 2022 (accessed 25 June 2023). Available online: https://​arm​yinf​orm.
com.ua/​2022/​08/​22/​chomu-​nashi-​lotch​yky-​voyu​yut-​kras​hhe-​za-​rosijs​kyh/​
ATN. ‘There Is No Margin for Error: The Special Unit KRAKEN Is at Work.’ 30 September 
2022 (accessed 25 June 2023). Available online: https://​atn.ua/​khar​kiv/​bez-​prava-​na-​
pomy​lku-​pratsi​uie-​spe​tspi​droz​dil-​kra​ken-​381​110/​
Australian Government. ‘Chief of Army Praises Ukrainian Recruits.’ 18 November 2022 
(accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: www.defe​nce.gov.au/​news-​eve​nts/​news/​
2022-​11-​18/​chief-​army-​prai​ses-​ukrain​ian-​recru​its
Aviatsiya Halychyny, ‘How Does Army Aviation Work?’ 3 March 2023 (accessed 25 June 
2023). Available online: www.avi​atsi​yaha​lych​yny.com/​pl/​blog/​iak-​pratsi​uie-​armij​ska-​
aviats​iia/​
Azov. ‘About Azov’ (accessed 17 March 2023). Available online: https://​azov.org.ua/​
pro-​nas/​
Balachuk, Iryna. ‘Military Exercises in Belarus Extended Again, to Last at Least Until End 
of January.’ Ukrainska Pravda, 20 January 2023. Available online: www.pra​vda.com.ua/​
eng/​news/​2023/​01/​20/​7385​739/​
Balachuk, Iryna. ‘Russia Wants to Bring Back 2 Years of Military Service.’ Ukrainska 
Pravda, 3 November 2022 (accessed 17 March 2023). Available online: www.pra​vda.
com.ua/​eng/​news/​2022/​11/​3/​7374​778/​
BBC. ‘Ukraine: Fugitive Putin Ally Medvedchuk Arrested –​ Security Service.’ 13 April 2022 
(accessed May 6, 2022). Available online: www.bbc.com/​news/​world-​eur​ope-​61089​039
Ben, Bohdan. ‘How Ukraine’s Largest Volunteer Movement Changes Rules of the Game, 
Unites East & West.’ Euromaidan Press, 10 February 2022 (accessed 14 June 2022). 
Available online: https://​euro​maid​anpr​ess.com/​2022/​02/​10/​how-​ukrai​nes-​larg​est-​volunt​
eer-​movem​ent-​chan​ges-​rules-​of-​the-​game-​uni​tes-​east-​west/​
Benard, A. ‘Lessons from Iraq and Bosnia on the Theory and Practice of No-​Fly Zones.’ 
Journal of Strategic Studies 27, no. 3 (2004): 454–​478.
Bergengruen, Vera. ‘Inside the Kremlin’s Year of Ukraine Propaganda.’ Time, 22 February 
2023. Available online: https://​time.com/​6257​372/​rus​sia-​ukra​ine-​war-​dis​info​rmat​ion/​
Bershidsky, Leonid.‘This Graft Scandal May Be Too Much Even for Ukraine.’ Bloomberg, 
27 February 2019 (accessed 7 November 2022). Available online: www.bloomb​erg.com/​
opin​ion/​artic​les/​2019-​02-​27/​ukra​ine-​milit​ary-​proc​urem​ent-​scan​dal-​sha​kes-​presi​dent​ial-​
race#xj4y7v​zkg
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

220  Bibliography
Berzina, Ieva. ‘From “Total” to “Comprehensive” National Defence: The Development of 
the Concept in Europe.’ Journal on Baltic Security 6, no. 2 (2020): 1–​9.
Bezpalko, Ulyana. ‘Yuriy Ignat: We Actually Created a Unique Air Defense System that 
Does Not Exist in the World.’ RBS UA, 9 September 2022 (accessed 14 June 2023). 
Available online: www.rbc.ua/​ukr/​news/​yuriy-​ignat-​fakt​iche​ski-​sozd​ali-​uni​kaln​uyu-​166​
2665​350.html
Bezruk, Tetiana. ‘Artillery Heralds Kherson’s New Year.’ Center for European Policy 
Analysis, 10 January 2023 (accessed 14 June 2023). Available online: https://​cepa.org/​
arti​cle/​artill​ery-​hera​lds-​khers​ons-​new-​year/​
Bisht, Inder Singh. ‘Ukrainian Firm Flight Tests Drone-​Based AWACS.’ The Defence Post, 
31 December 2021 (accessed 14 June 2023). Available online: www.the​defe​nsep​ost.
com/​2021/​12/​31/​ukra​ine-​drone-​based-​awacs/​
Blank, Stephen. ‘Russia’s New Draft Military Doctrine: Context, Content and Conclusion.’ 
14–​18 March 2000. Available online: https://​ciaot​est.cc.colum​bia.edu/​isa/​bls03/​
Bowen, Andrew S. ‘The Russian Armed Forces: Military Doctrine and Strategy.’ 
Congressional Research Service (CRS). 20 August 2020 (accessed 14 June 2023). 
Available online: https://​sgp.fas.org/​crs/​row/​IF11​625.pdf
Bowen, Andrew S. ‘Ukrainian Military Performance and Outlook.’ Congressional Research 
Service (CRS), 5 June 2023 (accessed 14 June 2023). Available online: https://​crs​repo​rts.
congr​ess.gov/​prod​uct/​pdf/​IF/​IF12​150
Boyd, Iain.‘A Game of Numbers: How Air Defense Systems Work and Why Ukraine Is 
Eager for More Protection.’ The Conversation, 18 October 2022 (accessed 13 January 
2023). Available online: https://​thec​onve​rsat​ion.com/​a-​game-​of-​numb​ers-​how-​air-​defe​
nse-​syst​ems-​work-​and-​why-​ukra​ine-​is-​eager-​for-​more-​pro​tect​ion-​192​487
Bozek, Gregory. The Soviet-​Finnish War of 1939–​1940, Getting the Doctrine Right. Fort 
Leavenworth: School of Advanced Military Studies, United States Army Command and 
General Staff College, 1993. Available online: www.ibib​lio.org/​hyper​war/​UN/​USSR/​
Sov_​F​inn-​1939_​D​octr​ine/​index.html
Brattberg, Erik and Maurer, Tim. Russian Election Interference. Washington, DC: Carnegie 
Endowment for International Peace, 2018.
Bremer, Maximillian and Grieco, Kelly. ‘Air Denial: The Dangerous Illusion of Decisive 
Air Superiority.’ Atlantic Council, 30 August 2022 (accessed 5 May 2023). Available 
online: 
www.atla​ntic​coun​cil.org/​cont​ent-​ser​ies/​airpo​wer-​after-​ukra​ine/​air-​den​ial-​the-​
danger​ous-​illus​ion-​of-​decis​ive-​air-​supe​rior​ity/​
Bronk, Justin, Rynolds, Nick and Watling, Jack. The Russian Air War and Ukrainian 
Requirements for Air Defence. London: RUSI, 2022.
Brooke-​Holland, Louisa and Butchard, Patrick. No-​Fly Zones and Ukraine. London: House 
of Commons Library, 2022.
Buchanan Elizabeth. ‘Russia’s 2021 National Security Strategy: Cool Change Forecasted for 
the Polar Regions.’ RUSI, 14 July 2021 (accessed 13 June 2023). Available online: https://​
rusi.org/​expl​ore-​our-​resea​rch/​publi​cati​ons/​com​ment​ary/​russ​ias-​2021-​natio​nal-​secur​ity-​
strat​egy-​cool-​cha​nge-​for​ecas​ted-​polar-​regi​ons
Bukkvoll, Tor. ‘Military Innovation under Authoritarian Government –​ the Case of Russian 
Special Operations Forces.’ Journal of Strategic Studies 38, no. 5 (2005): 602–​625.
Cabinet Office. ‘The National Resilience Strategy 2021.’ Available online: https://​ass​ets.pub​
lish​ing.serv​ice.gov.uk/​gov​ernm​ent/​uplo​ads/​sys​tem/​uplo​ads/​atta​chme​nt_​d​ata/​file/​1001​
404/​Resil​ienc​e_​St​rate​gy_​-​_​Ca​ll_​f​or_​E​vide​nce.pdf
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Bibliography  221
Cai, Jenny and Ozdemir, Benay. ‘Volunteers Transform Ukraine’s Odesa Catacombs into 
Liveable Bomb Shelter to Protect Civilians from Russian Attacks.’ ABC NET, 19 May 
2022 (accessed 14 June 2023). Available online: www.abc.net.au/​news/​2022-​05-​20/​vol​
unte​ers-​turn-​odesa-​catac​omb-​into-​bomb-​shel​ter/​101078​204
Carlson, Christopher. ‘The Sinking of Moskva,’ Power Point Slides. Historicon 2022, 
Admiralty Trilogy Seminar.
Caro, Carlo. ‘The Truth about the Evolution of Russian Military Doctrine.’ The National 
Interest, 1 July 2022 (accessed 22 February 2023). Available online: https://​natio​nali​nter​
est.org/​blog/​buzz/​truth-​about-​evolut​ion-​russ​ian-​milit​ary-​doctr​ine-​203​327
Carolina, Jeznach and Parkinson, Joe. ‘The Covert Polish Repair Shop Patching Up 
Ukrainian Arms.’ The Wall Street Journal, 28 January 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). 
Available 
online: 
www.wsj.com/​artic​les/​the-​cov​ert-​pol​ish-​rep​air-​shop-​patch​ing-​up-​
ukrain​ian-​arms-​1167​4920​742
CensorNet. ‘The Russians Mined Almost 900,000 Hectares of the De-​Occupied Territories 
of Kherson Region and Mykolaiv Region, –​ the Commander of the “Tavria” Group 
Tarnavskyi.’ 23 January 2023 (accessed 22 February 2023). Available online: https://​cen​sor.
net/​ua/​news/​3395​075/​rosiyany_​zaminuvaly_​mayije_​900_​tysyach_​ga_​deokupovanyh_​
terytoriyi_​hersonschyny_​ta_​myko​layi​vsch​yny_​koma​nduv​ach
Cimbala, Stephen. ‘The Cold War and Soviet Military Strategy.’ The Journal of Slavic 
Military Studies 10, no. 3 (1997): 25–​55.
CinC AF of Ukraine. ‘Magyar’s “Birds.” ’ Facebook, 22 February 2023. www.faceb​ook.
com/​watch/​?v=​11843​7771​5615​803
Coffey, Adam. ‘Ukraine Declares “Anti-​Terrorist Operation in the Donbas” Officially 
Over: What Does That Mean?’ RUSI, 16 May 2018 (accessed 7 November 2022). 
Available online: https://​rusi.org/​expl​ore-​our-​resea​rch/​publi​cati​ons/​com​ment​ary/​ukra​
ine-​decla​res-​anti-​terror​ist-​operat​ion-​don​bas-​off​icia​lly-​over-​what-​does-​mean
Coleman, Theara. ‘Japan Pledges an Additional $5.5 Billion in Humanitarian Aid to Ukraine.’ 
JapanTimes, 21 February 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: https://​thew​
eek.com/​russo-​ukrain​ian-​war/​1021​188/​japan-​pled​ges-​to-​send-​add​itio​nal-​55-​bill​ion-​in-​
human​itar​ian-​aid-​to
Colin, Wall and Wegge, Njord. ‘The Russian Arctic Threat: Consequences of the Ukraine 
War.’ CSIS, January 2023. Available online: www.csis.org/​analy​sis/​russ​ian-​arc​tic-​thr​eat-​
conse​quen​ces-​ukra​ine-​war
Combes, Bill. ‘The War at Sea Russia’s War in Ukraine,’ Series No. 6, International Center 
for Defence and Security, June 2022.
Conflict Armament Research. ‘Component Commonalities in Advanced Russian Weapon 
Systems: Ukraine Field Dispatch.’ September 2022 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available 
online: https://​storym​aps.arc​gis.com/​stor​ies/​239f7​56e2​e6b4​9a5b​ec78​f5c5​248b​f3d
Consulate General of Ukraine in Edmonton. ‘The 7th Anniversary of the Beginning of the 
Russian Armed Aggression against Ukraine.’ 20 February 2021 (accessed 7 November 
2022). Available online: https://​edmon​ton.mfa.gov.ua/​en/​news/​7th-​anni​vers​ary-​beginn​
ing-​russ​ian-​armed-​agg​ress​ion-​agai​nst-​ukra​ine
Cooper, Julian. ‘Russia’s Updated National Security Strategy.’ 19 July 2021. Available 
online: www.ndc.nato.int/​resea​rch/​resea​rch.php?icode=​704
Cooper, Tom ‘Kropyva: Ukrainian Artillery Application.’ 10 June 2022. Available 
online: 
https://​med​ium.com/​@x_​TomC​oope​r_​x/​krop​yva-​ukrain​ian-​artill​ery-​appl​icat​
ion-​e5c61​61b6​c0aC​ourt​ney, William. ‘Russia Destroyed Grozny and Aleppo—​Is 
Kyiv Next?’ The RandBlog, March 28, 2022 (accessed 7 November 2022). Available 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

222  Bibliography
online: www.rand.org/​blog/​2022/​03/​rus​sia-​destro​yed-​gro​zny-​and-​ale​ppo-​is-​kyiv-​next.
html
Danylov, Oleg. ‘20 PD-​2 UAVs: Come Back Alive Foundation Buys UAVs for $8.5 
Million.’ Mezha, 24 June 2022 (accessed 10 November 2022). Available online: https://​
mezha.media/​en/​2022/​06/​24/​20-​pd-​2-​uavs-​come-​back-​alive-​fou​ndat​ion-​buys-​uavs-​for-​
8-​5-​mill​ion/​
Decree of the President of Ukraine No. 248 of June 10, 2016. ‘About Approval of the 
Regulations on Passing of Military Service in the Armed Forces of Ukraine Foreigners 
and 
Stateless 
Persons.’ Available 
online: 
https://​cis-​legi​slat​ion.com/​docum​ent.
fwx?rgn=​86889
Decree of the President of Ukraine No. 479/​2021. ‘On the Decision of the National Security 
and Defense Council of Ukraine Dated August 20, 2021. “On the Introduction of the 
National System of Resilience”.’ Available online: www.presid​ent.gov.ua/​docume​nts/​
4792​021-​40181
Defence Express. ‘Air Force Named Which Air Defense Means Are Effective against Shahed 
UAVs.’ 12 December 2022. Available online: https://​en.defe​nce-​ua.com/​news/​air_​force_​
named_​which_​air_​defense_​means_​are_​ef​fect​ive_​agai​nst_​shah​ed_​u​avs-​5126.html
De Haas, Marcel. ‘Russian Air Power over Chechnya: Lessons Learned Applied.’ The 
Officer Magazine 15, no. 6 (2003): 14–​18.
De Haas, Marcel. The Use of Russian Airpower in the Second Chechen War. 
Shrivenham: Conflict Studies Research Centre, 2003.
Deptula, David and Penney, Heather. Building an Agile Force: The Imperative for Speed and 
Adaptation in the U.S. Aerospace Industrial Base, The Mitchell Institute for Aerospace 
Studies. Arlington: The Mitchell Institute for Aerospace Studies, 2021.
Dick, Charles.‘The Military Doctrine of Ukraine.’ The Journal of Slavic Military Studies 7, 
no. 3 (1994): 507–​511.
Doxsee, Catrina and Thompson, Jared. ‘Massacres, Executions, and Falsified Graves: The 
Wagner Group’s Mounting Humanitarian Cost in Mali.’ CSIS, 2022 (accessed 13 June 
2023). Available online: www.csis.org/​analy​sis/​massac​res-​exe​cuti​ons-​and-​falsif​ied-​gra​
ves-​wag​ner-​gro​ups-​mount​ing-​human​itar​ian-​cost-​mali
DW. ‘Germany Approves Polish Request to Send Ukraine 5 MiG Jets.’ 13 March 2023 
(accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: www.dw.com/​en/​germ​any-​appro​ves-​pol​ish-​
requ​est-​to-​send-​ukra​ine-​5-​mig-​jets/​a-​65301​536
Dylan, Huw, Gioe David and Littell Joe. ‘The Kherson Ruse: Ukraine and the Art of Military 
Deception.’ Modern War Institute, 10 December 2022. Available online: https://​mwi.
usma.edu/​the-​kher​son-​ruse-​ukra​ine-​and-​the-​art-​of-​milit​ary-​decept​ion/​
Economist. ‘An Interview with General Valery Zaluzhny, Head of Ukraine’s Armed Forces.’ 
15 December 2022. www.econom​ist.com/​zaluz​hny-​tra​nscr​ipt
Economist. ‘Open-​Source Intelligence Is Piercing the Fog of War in Ukraine.’ 13 January 
2023. 
www.econom​ist.com/​inte​ract​ive/​intern​atio​nal/​2023/​01/​13/​open-​sou​rce-​intel​lige​
nce-​is-​pierc​ing-​the-​fog-​of-​war-​in-​ukra​ine
EEAS. ‘European Union Military Assistance Mission Ukraine’ (accessed 15 June 2023). 
Available 
online: 
www.eeas.eur​opa.eu/​sites/​defa​ult/​files/​docume​nts/​2023-​EUMAM​
Ukra​ine.pdf
EuroMaidan Press. ‘4000 “Points of Invincibility” will Provide Electricity, Internet, Heat 
and Water for Ukrainians in Case of Long Power Outages.’ 23 November 2022 (accessed 
14 June 2023). Available online: https://​euro​maid​anpr​ess.com/​2022/​11/​23/​4000-​unbr​
eaka​ble-​poi​nts-​will-​prov​ide-​elec​tric​ity-​inter​net-​heat-​and-​water-​for-​ukr​aini​ans-​in-​case-​
of-​long-​power-​outa​ges/​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Bibliography  223
Euronews. ‘Three Men Given Life Sentences for Shooting Down Flight MH17 over Ukraine 
in 2014.’ 17 November 2022 (accessed 14 June 2022). Available online: www.euron​
ews.com/​my-​eur​ope/​2022/​11/​17/​three-​men-​given-​life-​senten​ces-​for-​shoot​ing-​down-​fli​
ght-​mh17-​over-​ukra​ine-​in-​2014
European Council. ‘European Peace Facility’ (accessed 13 June 2023). Available 
online: www.consil​ium.eur​opa.eu/​en/​polic​ies/​europ​ean-​peace-​facil​ity/​
Eurostat. ‘European Neighbourhood Policy –​ East –​ Education Statistics,’ (accessed 
18 June 2023). Available online: https://​ec.eur​opa.eu/​euros​tat/​sta​tist​ics-​explai​ned/​
index.php?title=​Eur​opea​n_​Ne​ighb​ourh​ood_​Poli​cy_​-​_​Ea​st_​-​_​educa​tion​_​sta​tist​
ics#Educational_​atta​inme​nt_​a​mong​_​peo​ple_​aged​_​20-​24_​ye​ars
Fedorchak, Viktoriya. ‘Air War over Ukraine,’ Power Point Presentation. Stockholm: Swedish 
Defence University, 15 May 2023.
Fedorchak, Viktoriya. British Air Power: The Doctrinal Path to Jointery. London: Bloomsbury 
Academic, 2019.
Fedorchak, Viktoriya. ‘Out of Carrots: Why Should New Systematic Sanctions against 
Russia be Implemented?’ Trønderdebatt, 19 February 2022. Available online: www.
tronde​rdeb​att.no/​
Fedorchak, Viktoriya. ‘The Mass Approach in the Air War over Ukraine: Towards Identifying 
a Critical Mass.’ Handlingar Och Tidskrift no. 1 (2023): 119–​120.
Fedorchak, Viktoriya. Understanding Contemporary Air Power. London: Routledge, 2020.
Felker, Edward. OZ Revisited: Russian Doctrinal Reform in Light of Their Analysis of 
Desert Storm. Maxwell: School of Advanced Airpower Studies Air University, 1995.
Focus UA. ‘ “CPR for Drones”: How Volunteers Restore Downed UAVs for the Ukrainian 
Armed Forces.’ December 2022. https://​focus.ua/​uk/​digi​tal/​543​222-​rean​imac​iya-​dlya-​
dro​nov-​kak-​volont​ery-​vosst​anav​liva​yut-​sbi​tye-​bpla-​dlya-​vsu-​video
Fornusek, Martin. ‘Official: Fighter Jet Coalition Helping Ukraine Now Includes 9 Countries.’ 
The Kyiv Independent, 2 June 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: https://​
kyiv​inde​pend​ent.com/​presi​dent​ial-​off​ice-​figh​ter-​jet-​coalit​ion-​not-​limi​ted-​to-​f-​16s/​
Franco, Rafael. ‘Russian Air Force’s Performance in Ukraine: Air Operations: The Fall of a 
Myth.’ JAPCC Journal 35 (2023), 47–​52.
Freedman, Lawrence. Ukraine and the Art of Strategy. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2019.
Gareev, Makhmut A. ‘On Military Doctrine and Military Reform in Russia.’ The Journal of 
Soviet Military Studies 5, no. 4 (1992): 539–​551.
GCaptain. ‘Bulgaria Defuses Drifting Sea Mines Along Black Sea Coast,’ GCaptain, 24 January 
2023. https://​gcapt​ain.com/​bulga​ria-​defu​ses-​drift​ing-​sea-​mines-​along-​black-​sea-​coast/​
Glantz, David. Soviet Military Deception in the Second World War. London: Routledge, 1989.
Glantz, David. Soviet Military Operational Art: In Pursuit of Deep Battle. 
London: Routledge, 1991.
Golts, Aleksandr. ‘Russia’s Military Failures in Ukraine: Causes and Consequences.’ 
SCEEUS, 2 March 2023 (accessed 18 June 2023). Available online: https://​sce​eus.se/​en/​
publi​cati​ons/​russ​ias-​milit​ary-​failu​res-​in-​ukra​ine-​cau​ses-​and-​conse​quen​ces/​
Goulter, Christina. ‘British Experience.’ In Precision and Purpose: Airpower in the Libyan 
Civil War, edited by  K. Mueller. Santa Monica: RAND, 2015.
Goulter, Christina. ‘The Royal Naval Air Service: A Very Modern Service.’ In Air Power 
History: Turning Points from Kitty Hawk to Kosovo, edited by S. Cox and P. Gray. 
London: Frank Cass, 2002, 51–​66.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

224  Bibliography
Government of Canada. ‘Operation Unifier.’ www.can​ada.ca/​en/​dep​artm​ent-​natio​nal-​defe​
nce/​servi​ces/​ope​rati​ons/​milit​ary-​ope​rati​ons/​curr​ent-​ope​rati​ons/​operat​ion-​unif​ier.html
Gradus Research. ‘Brand Power, Support for Ukrainian Goods and Even Greater 
Rationalization of Demand —​ How the War Changed the Consumer Behavior of 
Ukrainians in 2022.’ 2023 (accessed 18 June 2023). Available online: https://​gra​dus.app/​
docume​nts/​328/​Gradu​s_​Re​sear​ch_​-​_​Consu​mer_​Tren​ds_​2​023_​ENG_​snw6​9z9.pdf
Gray, Colin. Air Power for Strategic Effect. Maxwell: Air University Press, 2012.
Green, Mark A. ‘Forty Percent of the World Food Program’s Wheat Supplies Come from 
Ukraine.’ Stubborn Things, 2 June 2022. Available online: www.wilso​ncen​ter.org/​blog-​
post/​forty-​perc​ent-​world-​food-​progr​ams-​wheat-​suppl​ies-​come-​ukra​ine
Greenberg, Andy. ‘Russia’s New Cyberwarfare in Ukraine Is Fast, Dirty, and Relentless.’ 
WIRED, 10 November 2022 (accessed 18 June 2023). Available online: www.wired.
com/​story/​rus​sia-​ukra​ine-​cyber​atta​cks-​mandi​ant/​
‘Grisha Moskovskiy Addressed the Prisoners.’ 12 July 2022. Available online: www.yout​
ube.com/​watch?v=​T8Vq​4fi-​vUk
Gustav Gressel, ‘Waves of ambition: Russia’s military build-​up in Crimea and the Black 
Sea’ European Council on Foreign Relations, 21 September 2021 (accessed 7 November 
2022). Available online: https://​ecfr.eu/​publ​icat​ion/​waves-​of-​ambit​ion-​russ​ias-​milit​ary-​
build-​up-​in-​cri​mea-​and-​the-​black-​sea/​
Hall, Ben and Rathbone, John. ‘Military Briefing: Ukraine Raid Heralds New Era of Naval 
Drone Warfare.’ Financial Times, 2 November 2022 (accessed 7 November 2022). 
Available online: www.ft.com/​cont​ent/​41cee​444-​d783-​4e99-​b882-​29c75​e9dd​5a3
Harcup, Tony and O’Neill, Deirdre. ‘What Is News? Galtung and Ruge Revisited.’ 
Journalism Studies 2, no. 2 (2001): 261–​280.
Harcup, Tony and O’Neill, Deirdre. ‘What Is News? News Values Revisited (again).’ 
Journalism Studies 18, no. 12 (2017): 1470–​1488.
Harris, Duchess and Lusted, Marcia. Russian Hacking in American Elections. Edina: Abdo 
Publishing, 2018.
Hertling, Mark. ‘I Commanded U.S. Army Europe. Here’s What I Saw in the Russian and 
Ukrainian Armies.’ The Bulwark, 11 April 2022 (accessed 7 November 2022). Available 
online: www.the​bulw​ark.com/​i-​comman​ded-​u-​s-​army-​eur​ope-​heres-​what-​i-​saw-​in-​the-​
russ​ian-​and-​ukrain​ian-​arm​ies/​
Hockenhull, Jim. ‘How Open-​Source Intelligence Has Shaped the Russia-​Ukraine War’ 
Speech delivered RUSI, London, 7 November 2022.
Houck, Shannon. ‘Psychological Capabilities for Resilience.’ War on the Rocks, 27 
December 2022 (accessed 18 June 2023). Available online: https://​waront​hero​cks.com/​
2022/​12/​psycho​logi​cal-​capab​ilit​ies-​for-​res​ilie​nce/​
Integrated Operating Concept. Shrivenham: DCDC, 2021. Available online: https://​ass​ets.
pub​lish​ing.serv​ice.gov.uk/​media/​612f9​1b28​fa8f​5032​8e2c​8f5/​Integr​ated​_​Ope​rati​ng_​C​
once​pt_​2​025.pdf
Interfax Ukraine. ‘By Holding Bakhmut, We Do Not Give the Enemy the Opportunity 
to Increase the Front –​ Syrsky.’ 25 April 2023 (accessed 4 June 2023). Available 
online: https://​inter​fax.com.ua/​news/​interv​iew/​906​054.html
Isserson, Georgii. The Evolution of Operational Art. Trans by Bruce W. Menning. Fort 
Levenworth: US Army Combined Arms Center, 2013.
ISW. ‘Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment, 10 May’ www.under​stan​ding​war.org/​
backg​roun​der/​russ​ian-​offens​ive-​campa​ign-​ass​essm​ent-​may-​10
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Bibliography  225
ISW. ‘Russian Offensive Campaign Assessment,’ 9 September, www.iswr​esea​rch.org/​2022/​
09/​russ​ian-​offens​ive-​campa​ign-​assess​ment​_​10.html
ISW. ‘Russian Volunteer Units and Battalions.’ 16 July 2022. www.under​stan​ding​war.org/​
backg​roun​der/​russ​ian-​volunt​eer-​units-​and-​bat​tali​ons
Jensen, Benjamin and Strohmeyer, Matthew. ‘The Changing Character of Combined Arms.’ 
War on the Rocks (accessed 5 February 2023) (accessed 18 June 2023). Available 
online: https://​waront​hero​cks.com/​2022/​05/​the-​chang​ing-​charac​ter-​of-​combi​ned-​arms/​
Joint Concept Note 1/​20. Multi-​Domain Integration. Shrivenham: DCDC, 2020.
Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP 01). UK Joint Operations Doctrine. Shrivenham: DCDC, 2014.
Joint Doctrine Publication (JDP) 0-​30. UK Air Power. 3 edn. Shrivenham: DCDC, 2022.
Jones, Seth. ‘Russia’s Ill-​Fated Invasion of Ukraine: Lessons in Modern Warfare.’ CSIS, 
1 June 2022. Available online: www.csis.org/​analy​sis/​russ​ias-​ill-​fated-​invas​ion-​ukra​ine-​
less​ons-​mod​ern-​warf​are
Kallenborn, Zachary. ‘It’s a Bird, It’s a Plane, It’s … Time to Plan for Drones in Other Domains.’ 
Modern War Institute, 1 May 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: https://​mwi.
usma.edu/​its-​a-​bird-​its-​a-​plane-​its-​time-​to-​plan-​plan-​for-​dro​nes-​in-​other-​doma​ins/​
Karalis, Magdalene. ‘Open-​Source Intelligence in Ukraine: Asset or Liability?’ Chatham 
House, 16 December 2022 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: www.chath​
amho​use.org/​2022/​12/​open-​sou​rce-​intel​lige​nce-​ukra​ine-​asset-​or-​liabil​ity?gclid=​
Cj0KCQiA6faf​BhC1​ARIs​AIJj​L8nj​fh0Q​64tB​Ved-​yYg6Rx​fMN-​hmPU_​0GBKHRb7bP​
daEK​Yvpa​JEC9​mAaA​mzyE​ALw_​wcB
Kemp, Robin. ‘OSINT’s Influence on the Russian Air Campaign in Ukraine and the 
Implications for Future Western Deployments.’ Atlantic Council, 30 August 2022 
(accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: www.atla​ntic​coun​cil.org/​cont​ent-​ser​ies/​airpo​
wer-​after-​ukra​ine/​osi​nts-​influe​nce-​on-​the-​russ​ian-​air-​campa​ign-​in-​ukra​ine-​and-​the-​
impli​cati​ons-​for-​fut​ure-​west​ern-​depl​oyme​nts/​
Khurshudyan, Isabelle et al. ‘Inside the Ukrainian Counteroffensive that Shocked Putin and 
Reshaped the War.’ The Washington Post, 29 December 2022 (accessed 17 March 2023). 
Available online: www.was​hing​tonp​ost.com/​world/​2022/​12/​29/​ukra​ine-​offens​ive-​khar​
kiv-​kher​son-​done​tsk/​
King, Anthony. The Combat Soldier. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013.
Kiss, Monika. Russia’s War on Ukraine: Implications for Transport. Brussels: European 
Parliament, 2022.
Klitina, Aleksandra. ‘Over 5,000 Applications to Join “Freedom of Russia” Legion –​ Fighter 
Caesar.’ Kyiv Post, October 14 2022 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: www.
kyivp​ost.com/​russ​ias-​war/​over-​5000-​appli​cati​ons-​to-​join-​free​dom-​of-​rus​sia-​leg​ion-​figh​
ter-​cae​sar.html
Klymenko, Andrii. The Militarization of Crimea under Russian Occupation. Washington, 
DC: Atlantic Council, 2015.
Kofman, Michael et al., ‘Russian Military Strategy: Core Tenets and Operational Concepts,’ 
CNA Report, August 2021. Available online: www.cna.org/​arch​ive/​CNA_​Fi​les/​pdf/​russ​
ian-​milit​ary-​strat​egy-​core-​ten​ets-​and-​oper​atio​nal-​conce​pts.pdf
Kofman, Michael and Lee, Rob. ‘How the Battle for the Donbas Shaped Ukraine’s Success.’ 
Foreign Policy Research Institute, 23 December 2022 (accessed 15 May 2023). Available 
online: 
www.fpri.org/​arti​cle/​2022/​12/​how-​the-​bat​tle-​for-​the-​don​bas-​sha​ped-​ukrai​nes-​
succ​ess/​
Kofman, Michael and Lee, Rob. ‘Not Built for Purpose: The Russian Military’s Ill-​Fated 
Force Design.’ War on the Rocks, 2 June 2022 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

226  Bibliography
online: https://​waront​hero​cks.com/​2022/​06/​not-​built-​for-​purp​ose-​the-​russ​ian-​milita​rys-​
ill-​fated-​force-​des​ign/​
Komarov, Dmytro.‘Special Project: Year. Off Screen.’ Interview with General Zaluznyi, 12 
May 2023. Available online www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​TadX​xP_​2​6V8&t=​132s
Kopylov, Mykola. ‘In 2022, the Railways of Ukraine Transported More than 150 Million 
Tons of Cargo.’ Rail Insider, 5 January 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available 
online: 
www.rail​insi​der.com.ua/​zali​znyc​zya-​ukray​iny-​u-​2022-​roczi-​pereve​zla-​ponad-​
150-​mln-​t-​vantaz​hiv/​?fbc​lid=​IwA​R2kw​gE4D​RTAV​_​woM​bBOR​PNJB​3Gh-​VK3​qxMS​
l9Lf​PB8O​h8HH​ULGQ​ZeuJ​ies
Kossov, Igor. ‘What’s behind Russia’s Unusually Big Missile Attack on Ukraine?’ The 
Kyiv Independent, 11 October 2022 (accessed 15 May 2023). Available online: https://​
kyiv​inde​pend​ent.com/​natio​nal/​whats-​beh​ind-​rus​sia-​unusua​lly-​big-​miss​ile-​att​ack-​on-​
Ukra​ine
Kowalska-​Sendek, Magdalena and Sendek, Robert. ‘Lesson Right from the Front.’ Polska 
Zbrojna, 15 July 2022 (accessed 17 March 2023). Available online: www.pol​ska-​zbro​
jna.pl/​home/​arti​cles​how/​37680?t=​Les​son-​Right-​from-​the-​Front
Kraken Unit. ‘Kupiansk Offensive Operation.’ 6 November 2022. Available online: www.
yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​jVvg​nHxJ​oSY
Kushnir, Maryan, and Stack, Levko. ‘Legionnaires: What Georgians Are Fighting for Near 
Debaltsevo.’ Radio Freedom, 6 June 2016. Available online: www.radio​svob​oda.org/​a/​
27782​088.html
Kyiv Post. ‘From the Archives: SBU Intercepts Phone Conversations of Separatists 
Admitting Downing a Civilian Plane.’ 18 July, 2014 (accessed 14 June 2022). Available 
online: www.kyivp​ost.com/​ukra​ine-​polit​ics/​sepa​rati​sts-​admit-​down​ing-​a-​civil​ian-​plane-​
in-​tap​ped-​conve​rsat​ion-​full-​tra​nscr​ipt-​356​545.html
Kyiv Post. ‘Update: Russian Arseniy Pavlov, a.k.a. ‘Motorola,’ Killed in Donetsk Blast; 
Kremlin Separatists Blame Kyiv.’ 16 October 2016 (accessed 14 June 2022). Available 
online: www.kyivp​ost.com/​ukra​ine-​polit​ics/​russ​ian-​mercen​ary-​arse​niy-​pav​lov-​war-​cri​
mes-​susp​ect-​known-​motor​ola-​rep​orte​dly-​kil​led.html
Landale, James. ‘Ukraine Will Remember Who Backed Us –​ Foreign Minister.’ BBC News, 
17 March 2023 (accessed 14 June 2022). Available online: www.bbc.com/​news/​world-​
eur​ope-​64976​079
Leebaer, Derek. Soviet Military Thinking. London: Routledge, 1982.
Levchenko, Taras. ‘ “There Were Appeals from the Entire Units”: How Do the Russian 
Soldiers Surrender?’ Radio Freedom, 10 May 2023. Available online: www.radio​svob​
oda.org/​a/​yal-​viyskv​irf-​zdayut​sya-​u-​polon/​32405​035.html
Lopez, Todd. ‘Ukrainian Troops Headed to U.S. for Patriot Missile Training.’ US DoD, 
10 January 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: www.defe​nse.gov/​News/​
News-​Stor​ies/​Arti​cle/​Arti​cle/​3264​235/​ukrain​ian-​tro​ops-​hea​ded-​to-​us-​for-​patr​iot-​miss​
ile-​train​ing/​
Lutsevych, Orysia. ‘How Ukraine’s Invention and Resilience Confounds Russia.’ Chatham 
House, 3 February 2023 (accessed 6 June 2023). Available online: www.chath​amho​
use.org/​publi​cati​ons/​the-​world-​today/​2023-​02/​how-​ukrai​nes-​invent​ion-​and-​res​ilie​nce-​
confou​nds-​rus​sia
Lyuksikov, Mykhailo. ‘Interview with the Head of the Military School of Commanders 
Named after Colonel Yevhen Konovalts.’ Militarnyi, 26 January 2018 (accessed 6 June 
2023). Available online: https://​mil.in.ua/​uk/​artic​les/​int​erv-​yu-​z-​nach​alny​kom-​vij​skov​
oyi-​shk​oly-​kom​andy​riv-​imeni-​pol​kovn​yka-​yevg​ena-​kono​valt​sya-​dru​gom-​kir​tom/​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Bibliography  227
Mair, John and Keeble, Richard. Mirage in the Desert?: Reporting the Arab Spring. 
London: Abramis Academic Publishing: 2011.
Mansoor, Sanya. ‘Why U.S. HIMARS Rockets Are Becoming Increasingly Decisive for 
Ukraine.’ Time, 5 January 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: https://​time.
com/​6244​479/​him​ars-​rock​ets-​ukra​ine-​rus​sia/​
Marcato, Simone. ‘Exercise Clear Sky 2018 –​ Starokostiantyniv, Ukraine.’ Milavia, 12 
January 2019 (accessed 17 March 2023). Available online: www.mila​via.net/​speci​als/​
clear-​sky-​2018-​starok​osti​anty​niv/​
Matviychuk, Alina. ‘E-​Cigarettes Are Disassembled to Make Combat Drones for the Armed 
Forces: How KPI Students Help Destroy the Occupiers.’ Vikna, 31 July 2022 (accessed 
17 March 2023). Available online: https://​vikna.tv/​isto​rii/​rozpov​idi/​rozibr​aly-​elek​troc​
zyga​rku-​shhob-​zrob​yty-​dron-​dlya-​zsu-​istor​iya-​studen​tiv-​kpi-​yaki-​dopo​maga​yut-​nyshh​
yty-​okupan​tiv/​
Maynes, Charles. ‘4 Things Russia Wants Right Now.’ NPR, 24 January 2022 (accessed 7 
November 2022). Available online: www.npr.org/​2022/​01/​12/​107​2413​634/​rus​sia-​nato-​
ukra​ine
McDermott, Roger. ‘Brothers Disunited: Russia’s Use of Military Power in Ukraine.’ In The 
Return of the Cold War, edited by J. L. Black and M. Johns. London: Routledge, 2016.
McDermott, Roger. ‘Russia’s Armed Forces Test Combat Readiness Close to Ukraine’s 
Border –​ Jamestown.’ Eurasia Daily Monitor 18, no. 76 (2021) (accessed 7 November 
2022). Available online: https://​jamest​own.org/​prog​ram/​russ​ias-​armed-​for​ces-​test-​com​
bat-​readin​ess-​close-​to-​ukrai​nes-​bor​der/​
McFadden, Christopher. ‘Ukraine Is Using Cardboard Drones To Do Battle with Russia 
Now.’ Interesting Engineering, 27 March 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available 
online: 
https://​int​eres​ting​engi​neer​ing.com/​inn​ovat​ion/​austra​lia-​ukra​ine-​cardbo​ard-​
dro​nes
McGlynn, Jade. Memory Makers: The Politics of the Past in Putin’s Russia. 
London: Bloomsbury Academic, 2023.
McInnis, Kathleen, Jones, Seth and Harding, Emily. ‘NAFO and Winning the Information 
War: Lessons Learned from Ukraine.’ CSIS, 22 October 2022. Available online: www.
csis.org/​analy​sis/​nafo-​and-​winn​ing-​info​rmat​ion-​war-​less​ons-​lear​ned-​ukra​ine
Menks, Joshua and Petersen, Michael. ‘The “Kalibrization” of the Russian Fleet.’ 
Proceedings of US Naval Institute 148, no. 5 (2022). Available online: www.usni.org/​
magazi​nes/​proc​eedi​ngs/​2022/​may/​kalibr​izat​ion-​russ​ian-​fleet
Mevlutoglu, Arda. ‘Ukraine’s Military Transformation between 2014 and 2022.’ Politics 
Today, 7 April 2022 (accessed 7 November 2022). Available online: https://​politi​csto​day.
org/​ukra​ine-​milit​ary-​tra​nsfo​rmat​ion/​
Militarnyi, ‘Five Chechen Battalions Are Fighting on the Side of Ukraine.’ 22 September 
2022. Available online: https://​mil.in.ua/​uk/​news/​na-​botsi-​ukray​iny-​voy​uye-​p-​yat-​chec​
hens​kyh-​bat​aljo​niv/​
Militarnyi, ‘Special unit “Kraken” Carried Out Special Operations in Bilogorivka.’ 16 July 
2022. Available online: https://​mil.in.ua/​uk/​news/​spe​tspi​droz​dil-​kra​ken-​pro​viv-​spet​sope​
rats​iyi-​v-​bilog​oriv​tsi/​
Militarnyi. ‘UAV Falcon-​300.’ 6 November 2020. Available online: https://​mil.in.ua/​uk/​artic​
les/​bpla-​sokil-​300/​
Militarnyi. ‘Ukrainian Military Captured a Significant Quantity of Enemy Equipment in 
Kharkiv Region.’ 9 September 2022. Available online: https://​mil.in.ua/​en/​news/​ukrain​
ian-​milit​ary-​captu​red-​a-​sign​ific​ant-​quant​ity-​of-​enemy-​equipm​ent-​in-​khar​kiv-​reg​ion/​
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

228  Bibliography
Militarnyi, ‘Wagner PMC Base Attacked in Popasna.’ 14 August 2022. Available 
online: https://​mil.in.ua/​en/​news/​wag​ner-​pmc-​base-​attac​ked-​in-​popa​sna/​
Military Today. ‘Neptune: Anti-​Ship Cruise Missile.’ Available online: www.milit​ary-​today.
com/​missi​les/​nep​tun.html
Miller, Christopher. ‘Explainer: What Is the Steinmeier Formula –​ and Did Zelenskiy Just 
Capitulate to Moscow?’ Radio Free Europe, 2 October 2019 (accessed 5 November 
2022). Available online: www.rferl.org/​a/​what-​is-​the-​ste​inme​ier-​form​ula-​and-​did-​zelens​
kiy-​just-​cap​itul​ate-​to-​mos​cow-​/​30195​593.html
Miller, Christopher. ‘The Executioners of Slovyansk.’ Radio Free Europe, July 23, 2020 
(accessed 22 December 2022). Available online: www.rferl.org/​a/​the-​execu​tion​ers-​of-​
slovya​nsk/​30743​132.html
Mills, Claire. Military Assistance to Ukraine 2014–​2021. London: House of Commons 
Library, 2022.
Mills, Claire. Military Assistance to Ukraine Since the Russian Invasion. London: House of 
Commons Library, 2023.
Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food of Ukraine. “AGRI-​Ukraine” Initiative: The US Will 
Support Ukrainian Farmers with $100 Million, 22 July 2022. Available online: https://​
mina​gro.gov.ua/​news/​ini​ciat​iva-​agri-​ukray​ina-​ssha-​pidt​rima​yut-​ukra​yins​kih-​ferme​
riv-​na-​100-​mln
Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food of Ukraine. 25.2 Million Tons of Corn Were Threshed 
in Ukraine, 27 January 2023. Available online: https://​mina​gro.gov.ua/​news/​v-​ukray​ini-​
namo​loch​eno-​252-​mln-​tonn-​kukuru​dzi
Ministry of Agrarian Policy and Food of Ukraine. ‘More than 16,000 hectares of Grain and 
Leguminous Crops Have Already Been Sown in Ukraine.’ 10 March 2023. Available 
online: 
https://​mina​gro.gov.ua/​news/​v-​ukray​ini-​vzhe-​posiy​ano-​ponad-​16-​tis-​ga-​zerno​
vih-​ta-​zerno​bobo​vih-​kul​tur
Ministry of Defence of Ukraine. Oleksii Reznikov. (accessed 7 November 2022). Available 
online: www.mil.gov.ua/​en/​minis​try-​of-​defe​nce-​lea​der/​olek​sii-​rezni​kov.html
Ministry of Defence of Ukraine. ‘The State Program for the Development of the Armed 
Forces of Ukraine until 2020.’ 31 July 2017 (accessed 7 November 2022). Available 
online: 
www.mil.gov.ua/​cont​ent/​oboro​n_​pl​ans/​2017-​07-​31_​N​atio​nal-​prog​ram-​2020​_​
en.pdf
Mordowanec, Nick. ‘Putin Facing Revolt after Soldiers Aren’t Paid.’ Newsweek, 3 November 
2022 (accessed 27 November 2022). Available online: www.newsw​eek.com/​vladi​mir-​
putin-​fac​ing-​rev​olt-​after-​russ​ian-​soldi​ers-​are-​not-​paid-​ukra​ine-​war-​1756​734
Morning AgClips. ‘Dairy Brings Resilience for Ukraine Farmer.’ 21 February 2023. 
Available online: www.mor​ning​agcl​ips.com/​dairy-​bri​ngs-​res​ilie​nce-​for-​ukra​ine-​far​mer/​
Musaeva, Sevgil and Buderatskyi, Yevhen. ‘Mamuka Mamulashvili, Commander of the 
Georgian Legion: Ukraine Is the Only Country to Take On the Challenge of the Barbaric 
Terrorist State that Is Russia.’ Ukrainska Pravda, 10 July 2022. Available online: www.
pra​vda.com.ua/​eng/​artic​les/​2022/​07/​10/​7357​256/​
NATO MARCOM. ‘NATO Forces Train with the Ukrainian Navy.’ 17 March 2017 (accessed 
17 March 2023). Available online: https://​mc.nato.int/​media-​cen​tre/​news/​2021/​nato-​for​
ces-​train-​with-​the-​ukrain​ian-​navy
NATO SOF HQ. Comprehensive Defence Handbook, Vol. I (2020). Available online: www.
nshq.nato.int/​Libr​ary/​Downl​oadF​ile/​e8a86​ab2-​cbf4-​900e-​3fcc-​c3daa​451c​067
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Bibliography  229
Naval Forces of Ukraine. ‘Strategy of the Naval Forces of the Armed Forces of Ukraine 
2035.’ 11 January 2019 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: https://​navy.mil.gov.
ua/​en/​str​ateg​iya-​vijsk​ovo-​mors​kyh-​syl-​zbroj​nyh-​syl-​ukray​iny-​2035/​
Naval Forces of Ukraine. ‘What Are Military Divers Looking for in Port Waters?’ 6 
November 2022 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: https://​navy.mil.gov.ua/​en/​
shho-​shuka​yut-​vijsk​ovi-​vodol​azy-​v-​akva​tori​yah-​por​tiv/​
Neprogory. Twitter post. 24 June 2023, 5:14 AM. https://​twit​ter.com/​Neprog​ory/​sta​tus/​1672​
4429​3376​3624​962
Netherlands MoD. ‘Netherlands to Purchase Leopard 1 Tanks for Ukraine.’ 7 February 2023 
(accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: https://​engl​ish.defen​sie.nl/​lat​est/​news/​2023/​
02/​07/​neth​erla​nds-​to-​purch​ase-​leop​ard-​1-​tanks-​for-​ukra​ine
Nindl, Bradley et al. ‘Perspectives on Resilience for Military Readiness and 
Preparedness: Report of an International Military Physiology Roundtable.’ Journal of 
Science and Medicine in Sport 21 (2018): 1116–​1124.
NISOS. ‘Russian’s RT Leads a Global “Information Militia” on Social Media to Bypass 
Censorship on Ukraine-​Related Disinformation –​ An Investigative Report,’ October 
2022. Available online: www.nisos.com/​blog/​rus​sia-​today-​info-​mili​tia-​rep​ort/​
Norris, Pippa, Cameron, Sarah and  Wynter, Thomas. Electoral Integrity in America: Securing 
Democracy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018.
Nunns,  Alex and Idle, Nadia. Tweets from Tahrir Egypt’s Revolution as It Unfolded, in the 
Words of the People Who Made It. New York: Bloomsbury, 2011.
OECD. Rebuilding Ukraine by Reinforcing Regional and Municipal Governance, OECD 
Multi-​level Governance Studies. Paris: OECD Publishing, 2022.
‘On the Military Security Strategy of Ukraine.’ Decree of the President of Ukraine. no. 121/​
2021. Available online: www.presid​ent.gov.ua/​docume​nts/​1212​021-​37661
Oryx. ‘The Stalwart Ally: Türkiye’s Arms Deliveries to Ukraine.’ 21 November 2022 
(accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: www.oryxsp​ioen​kop.com/​2022/​11/​the-​stalw​
art-​ally-​turki​yes-​arms.html
Osadchuk, Roman and Carvin, Andy. Undermining Ukraine How the Kremlin Employs 
Information Operations to Erode Global Confidence in Ukraine. Washington, 
DC: Atlantic Council, 2023.
Ozberk, Tayfun. ‘Russia’s Amphibious Operation Dilemma.’ Naval News, 20 March 2022 
(accessed 23 June 2023). Available online: www.navaln​ews.com/​naval-​news/​2022/​03/​
russ​ias-​amp​hibi​ous-​operat​ion-​dile​mma/​
Ozberk, Tayfun. ‘Turkish Shipyard Launches Ukraine’s 1st MILGEM Corvette.’ Naval 
News, 3 October 2022 (accessed 23 June 2023).l.
Payne, Stetson. ‘Ukraine Situation Report: Donated Sea King Helicopter Makes Debut 
Near Black Sea.’ The Drive, 21 January 2023 (accessed 23 June 2023). Available online. 
www.thedr​ive.com/​the-​war-​zone/​ukra​ine-​situat​ion-​rep​ort-​dona​ted-​sea-​king-​hel​icop​
ter-​makes-​debut-​near-​black-​sea
Perun. ‘The Naval War in Ukraine –​ The Moskva, Missiles & Lessons.’ 23 October 2023. 
Available online: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​YrgC​Psoc​k6w
Petrenko, Roman. ‘Ukraine’s Air Force Announces Downing of Kinzhal Missile Using 
Patriot Air-​Defence System.’ Ukrainska Pravda, 6 May 2023 (accessed 3 June 2023). 
Available online: www.pra​vda.com.ua/​eng/​news/​2023/​05/​6/​7400​941/​
Petrushko, Lyubov.‘Born of War. Ukrainian M-​TAC Military Clothing Was Liked by 
Zelenskyi and Zaluzhnyi. How a Small Brand Grew into a Big Business.’ Forbes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

230  Bibliography
Ukraine, 16 January 2023 (accessed 23 June 2023). Available online: https://​for​bes.ua/​
comp​any/​naro​dzhe​niy-​viyn​oyu-​ukr​ains​kiy-​viysko​viy-​odyag-​m-​tac-​polyub​ili-​zelens​kiy-​
ta-​zaluzh​niy-​yak-​neveli​kiy-​brend-​pere​ris-​u-​veli​kiy-​biz​nes-​16012​023-​11058
Pfarrer, Chuck. ‘Opinion: A Game of Bridges –​ The Battle to Retake Kherson.’ Kyiv Post, 
30 August 2022 (accessed 17 March 2023). Available online: www.kyivp​ost.com/​opin​
ion/​1495
Picheta, Rob. ‘Outrage as Russian Missiles Strike Odesa Port One Day After Grain Export 
Deal Agreed.’ CNN, 24 July 2022 (accessed 3 June 2023). Available online: https://​
edit​ion.cnn.com/​2022/​07/​23/​eur​ope/​rus​sia-​ukra​ine-​odesa-​str​ike-​grain-​expo​rts-​intl/​
index.html
Piggott, Jennifer. ‘A Closer Look at Clear Sky 2018 –​ A Committed Relationship between 
the U.S. and Ukraine.’ USAFE, 19 October 2018 (accessed 17 March 2023). Available 
online: www.usafe.af.mil/​News/​Arti​cle-​Disp​lay/​Arti​cle/​1667​802/​a-​clo​ser-​look-​at-​clear-​
sky-​2018-​a-​commit​ted-​relat​ions​hip-​betw​een-​the-​us-​and-​ukr/​
Polmar, Norman, Brooks, Thomas and Fedoroff, George. Admiral Gorshkov: The Man Who 
Challenged the U.S. Navy. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 2019.
Polyakov, Leonid. ‘Ukraine.’ In The Handbook of European Defence Policies and Armed 
Forces, edited by H. Meijer and M. Wyss. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018. 
179–​194.
Ponomarenko, Illia. ‘Defense Minister Poltorak Quits Military Service, But Remains in 
Charge as Civilian.’ Kyiv Post, 13 October 2018 (accessed 7 November 2022). Available 
online: 
www.kyivp​ost.com/​ukra​ine-​polit​ics/​defe​nse-​minis​ter-​polto​rak-​quits-​milit​ary-​
serv​ice-​to-​forma​lly-​com​ply-​with-​nato-​ben​chma​rks.html
Ponomarenko, Illia. ‘Ukraine’s Air Force Rebuilds Amid War.’ Kyiv Post, March 15, 2019 
(accessed 14 June 2022). Available online: www.kyivp​ost.com/​ukra​ine-​polit​ics/​ukrai​
nes-​air-​force-​rebui​lds-​amid-​war.html
Ponomarenko, Illia. ‘Ukraine Could Have Prevailed in Donbas, But Now Is Doomed to 
Unjust Peace.’ Kyiv Post, 7 October 2019 (accessed 14 June 2022). Available online: www.
kyivp​ost.com/​arti​cle/​opin​ion/​op-​ed/​illia-​pono​mare​nko-​ukra​ine-​could-​have-​prevai​led-​
in-​don​bas-​but-​now-​were-​doo​med-​to-​unj​ust-​peace-​with-​rus​sia.html
President of Ukraine. ‘Today Is a Historic Day, We Are Regaining Kherson.’ 11 November 
2022. Available online: www.presid​ent.gov.ua/​en/​news/​sogo​dni-​isto​rich​nij-​den-​mi-​pove​
rtay​emo-​her​son-​zve​rnen​nya-​pre-​79101
President of Ukraine. ‘Ukraine and Turkey Have a Common Vision of Cooperation in the 
Field of Security and Defense –​ President.’ 16 October 2020. Available online: www.
presid​ent.gov.ua/​en/​news/​ukray​ina-​j-​ture​chch​ina-​mayut-​spi​lnu-​toc​hku-​zoru-​shodo-​spi​
vpr-​64669
Prince, Todd. ‘ “Moscow” at the Bottom: What Conclusions Did Military Analysts Draw 
after the Sinking of the Flagship of the Black Sea Fleet of Russia.’ Radio Freedom, 20 
April 2022. Available online: www.radio​svob​oda.org/​a/​mos​kva-​zaton​ula-​rak​ety-​nep​tun-​
viyna/​31811​563.html
Promote Ukraine. ‘Fifty Ukrainian Soldiers Killed in Donbas in 2020.’ 21 January 2021 
(accessed 14 June 2022). Available online: www.pro​mote​ukra​ine.org/​fifty-​ukrain​ian-​
soldi​ers-​kil​led-​in-​don​bas-​in-​2020/​
Przetacznik, Jakub and Tarpova, Simona. Russia’s War on Ukraine: Timeline of Cyber-​
Attacks. Brussels: European Parliament, 2022.
Raczkiewycz, Mark. ‘Ukraine Honors “Cyborg” Troops Who Withstood Russia’s 242-​Day 
Siege of Donetsk Airport.’ The Ukrainian Weekly, 22 January, 2021.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Bibliography  231
Radio Freedom. ‘The Commander of the Joint Forces Spoke about the Number of 
Russian Troops in Crimea.’ 25 February 2021 (accessed 7 November 2022). Available 
online: www.radio​svob​oda.org/​a/​news-​krym-​naev/​31121​394.html
Robbins Peter. ‘Admiralty Trilogy Chat –​ Product Updates and Moskva Sinking Seminar.’ 
20 August 2022. Available online: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​uHTG​6NB8​b3o
Roepke, Wolf-​Diether and Thankey, Hasit ‘Resilience: The First Line of Defence,’ (accessed 
22 March 2023). Available online: www.nato.int/​docu/​rev​iew/​artic​les/​2019/​02/​27/​res​ilie​
nce-​the-​first-​line-​of-​defe​nce/​index.html
Rogoway, Tyler. ‘Explosion Rocks Saudi Frigate Operating off Yemeni Coast.’ The Drive, 
30 October 2017 (accessed 25 April 2023). Available online: www.thedr​ive.com/​the-​
war-​zone/​7234/​explos​ion-​rocks-​saudi-​frig​ate-​operat​ing-​off-​yem​eni-​coast
Romanenko, Valentyna. ‘Commander of Ukrainian Ground Forces Names Main Reasons 
for Holding Bakhmut.’ Ukrainska Pravda, 25 April 2023 (accessed 25 April 2023). 
Available online: www.pra​vda.com.ua/​eng/​news/​2023/​04/​25/​7399​371/​
Royal Navy, ‘Royal Navy Divers Train Ukrainians to Hunt for Mines with Underwater 
Drones.’ 26 August 2022 (accessed 19 April 2023). Available online: www.royaln​avy.
mod.uk/​news-​and-​lat​est-​activ​ity/​news/​2022/​aug​ust/​26/​20220​826-​royal-​navy-​div​ers-​
train-​ukr​aini​ans-​to-​hunt-​for-​mines-​with-​und​erwa​ter-​dro​nes
Roza, David. ‘Why the Skies over Ukraine Have Proven So Deadly for Russian Pilots.’ Task 
& Purpose, 17 March 2022. Available online: https://​tas​kand​purp​ose.com/​news/​russ​ian-​
aircr​aft-​shoot-​down-​ukra​ine/​
Rudik, Kira. ‘Taiwan Supports Ukraine and Studies Country’s Response to Russian Invasion.’ 
Atlantic Council, 15 March 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: www.atla​
ntic​coun​cil.org/​blogs/​ukrai​neal​ert/​tai​wan-​suppo​rts-​ukra​ine-​and-​stud​ies-​count​rys-​respo​
nse-​to-​russ​ian-​invas​ion/​
Ryan, Mick. ‘How Ukraine Is Winning in the Adaptation Battle Against Russia.’ Engelsberg 
Ideas, 24 August 2022. Available online: https://​enge​lsbe​rgid​eas.com/​ess​ays/​how-​ukra​
ine-​is-​winn​ing-​in-​the-​ada​ptat​ion-​bat​tle-​agai​nst-​rus​sia/​
Ryan, Mick. War Transformed. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 2022.
Sabbagh, Dan. ‘Royal Navy Ship off Crimea Sparks Diplomatic Row between Russia and 
UK.’ The Guardian, 23 June 2021 (accessed 7 November 2022). Available online: www.
theg​uard​ian.com/​world/​2021/​jun/​23/​russ​ian-​ship-​fired-​warn​ing-​shots-​at-​royal-​navy-​
destro​yer-​hms-​defen​der-​mos​cow-​says
Sadler, Brent. ‘Applying Lessons of the Naval War in Ukraine for a Potential War with 
China.’ The Heritage Foundation, 5 June 2023. Available online: www.herit​age.org/​asia/​
rep​ort/​apply​ing-​less​ons-​the-​naval-​war-​ukra​ine-​potent​ial-​war-​china
Sauer, Pjotr.‘“The Army Has Nothing”: New Russian Conscripts Bemoan Lack of Supplies.’ 
The Guardian, 20 October 2022 (accessed 7 November 2022). Available online: www.
theg​uard​ian.com/​world/​2022/​oct/​20/​the-​army-​has-​noth​ing-​new-​russ​ian-​con​scri​pts-​bem​
oan-​lack-​of-​suppl​ies
Schneider, James. ‘Military Theory: V.K. Triandafillov, Military Theorist.’ The Journal of 
Soviet Military Studies 1 (1988): 285–​306.
Shandra, Alya. ‘Ukraine’s Draft Law on Reintegrating Donbas Finally Says It’s under 
Russian Occupation.’ Euromaidan Press, 13 July 2017 (accessed 7 November 2022). 
Available online: https://​euro​maid​anpr​ess.com/​2017/​07/​13/​ukra​ine-​prese​nts-​draft-​bill-​
on-​reinte​grat​ing-​don​bas/​
Simpkin, Richard. Deep Battle: The Brainchild of Marshal Tukhachevskii. London: Brassey’s 
Defence Publishers, 1987.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

232  Bibliography
Skrypets, Volodymyr and Zaslavskyi, Oleksandr. ‘Work Monitoring of the Supreme Council 
of Ukraine: IX Convocation, Session 7 (half a year of war).’ Laboratories of Legislative 
Initiatives, 2022. Available online: https://​parlam​ent.org.ua/​wp-​cont​ent/​uplo​ads/​2022/​
12/​Monit​orin​g_​7-​9-​1.pdf?utm​_​sou​rce=​https://​www.han​sard​soci​ety.org.uk
Smirnova, Anastasia. ‘Wagnerites Shot Dozens of Prisoners Recruited for the War.’ Novyny 
Online, 1 November 2022 (accessed 7 November 2022). Available online: https://​nov​yny.
onl​ine.ua/​vagn​eriv​tsi-​rozst​rily​ali-​desya​tki-​zaver​bova​nih-​na-​viynu-​vyaz​niv_​n850​351/​
Sokov, Nikolai. ‘Russia’s 2000 Military Doctrine, The Nuclear Threat Initiative.’ 30 
September 2000, Available online: www.nti.org/​analy​sis/​artic​les/​russ​ias-​2000-​milit​ary-​
doctr​ine/​
Speller, Ian and Tuck, Chris. Amphibious Assault: Strategy and Tactics from Gallipoli to 
Iraq. London: Amber Books, 2021.
Spencer, John. ‘The 2022 Battle of Kyiv_​John Spencer_​Chair of Urban Warfare Studies at 
the Modern War Institute.’ Lecture, 1 April 2023. Available online: www.yout​ube.com/​
watch?v=​5eWG​H_​7m​rg8
Spencer, John, host. ‘Russia, Ukraine, and Urban Warfare.’ Urban Warfare (podcast), 19 
August 2022 (accessed 24 June 2023) https://​mwi.usma.edu/​rus​sia-​ukra​ine-​and-​urban-​
warf​are/​
State Migration Service of Ukraine. ‘Information for Foreigners Who Participate in the Anti-​
Terrorist Operation’ Available online: https://​dmsu.gov.ua/​en-​home/​servi​ces/​info​rmat​
ion-​for-​for​eign​ers-​who-​part​icip​ate-​in-​the-​anti-​terror​ist-​operat​ion.html
State Service of Special Communication and Information Protection of Ukraine. ‘Cyber, 
Artillery, Propaganda: Comprehensive Analysis of Russian Warfare Dimensions.’ 2022 
(accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: https://​nsarch​ive.gwu.edu/​sites/​defa​ult/​
files/​docume​nts/​rr9​q9n-​glu5j/​2023-​01-​17-​Ukra​ine-​ESCU-​Cyber-​Artil​ler-​Pro​paga​nda-​
Compre​hens​ive-​Analy​sis-​of-​Russ​ian-​Warf​are-​Dim​ensi​ons-​ESCU.pdf
State Service of Special Communications and Information Protection of Ukraine. ‘The 
Number of Recorded Cyber Incidents Almost Tripled in 2022.’ 16 February 2023 
(accessed 15 May 2023). Available online: https://​cip.gov.ua/​en/​news/​u-​2022-​roci-​kilk​
ist-​zarey​estr​ovan​ikh-​kibe​rinc​iden​tiv-​viro​sla-​mai​zhe-​vtri​chi-​zvit
Stoecker, Sally. ‘The Historical Roots of the Current Debates on Soviet Military Doctrine 
and Defense.’ The Journal of Soviet Military Studies 3, no. 3 (1990): 363–​389.
Stringer, Johnny. ‘The Ukrainian Conflict: Implications for NATO and RAF Air and Space 
Power.’ Speech delivered RUSI, London, 3 November 2022.
Sukhankin, Sergey. ‘Russian PMCs in the Syrian Civil War: From Slavonic Corps to Wagner 
Group and Beyond.’ The Jamestown Foundation, 18 December 2019 (accessed 15 June 
2023). Available online: https://​jamest​own.org/​prog​ram/​russ​ian-​pmcs-​in-​the-​syr​ian-​
civil-​war-​from-​slavo​nic-​corps-​to-​wag​ner-​group-​and-​bey​ond/​
Sukhankin, Sergey. ‘Unleashing the PMCs and Irregulars in Ukraine: Crimea and Donbas.’ 
The Jamestown Foundation, 3 September 2019 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available 
online: https://​jamest​own.org/​prog​ram/​unl​eash​ing-​the-​pmcs-​and-​irr​egul​ars-​in-​ukra​ine-​
cri​mea-​and-​don​bas/​
Sullivan, Becky. ‘Russia’s at War with Ukraine. Here’s How We Got Here.’ NPR, 24 
February 2022 (accessed 5 April 2022). Available online: www.npr.org/​2022/​02/​12/​108​
0205​477/​hist​ory-​ukra​ine-​rus​sia
Sutton, H. I. ‘Summary of Increased Russian Defenses at Sevastopol and Novorossiysk.’ 
Covert Shores, 20 November 2022 (accessed 25 April 2023). Available online: www.
hisut​ton.com/​Russ​ian-​Navy-​Defen​ses-​Sev​asto​pol-​Novor​ossi​ysk.html
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Bibliography  233
Sutton, H. I. ‘Ukraine’s Maritime Drone Strikes Again: Reports Indicate Attack on 
Novorossiysk.’ Naval News, 18 November 2022 (accessed 25 April 2023). Available 
online: www.navaln​ews.com/​naval-​news/​2022/​11/​ukra​ine-​marit​ime-​drone-​stri​kes-​again-​ 
repo​rts-​indic​ate-​att​ack-​on-​novor​ossi​ysk/​
Sutton, H. I. ‘Ukraine Is Turning the Tide against Russian Navy in Black Sea.’ Naval News, 
6 July 2022 (accessed 5 April 2023). Available online: www.navaln​ews.com/​naval-​news/​
2022/​07/​how-​ukra​ine-​is-​turn​ing-​the-​tide-​agai​nst-​russ​ian-​navy-​in-​black-​sea/​
Sutton, H. I. ‘Why Ukraine’s Remarkable Attack on Sevastopol Will Go down in History.’ 
Naval News, 17 November 2022 (accessed 15 April 2023). Available online: www.
navaln​ews.com/​naval-​news/​2022/​11/​why-​ukrai​nes-​rem​arka​ble-​att​ack-​on-​sev​asto​pol-​
will-​go-​down-​in-​hist​ory/​
Sutyagin, Igor. ‘Russian Air Power.’ In Routledge Handbook of Air Power, edited by J. 
Olsen. London: Routledge, 2018.
Swedish Armed Forces. ‘Defence Exercise Aurora 23’ (accessed 15 June 2023). Available 
online: www.for​svar​smak​ten.se/​en/​act​ivit​ies/​exerci​ses/​aur​ora-​23/​
Swedish Defence University. ‘Ukrainian Delegation Visits Swedish Defence University.’ 
14 April 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: www.fhs.se/​en/​swed​ish-​defe​
nce-​uni​vers​ity/​news/​2023-​04-​14-​ukrain​ian-​del​egat​ion-​vis​its-​swed​ish-​defe​nce-​uni​vers​
ity.html
Swedish Defence Research Agency (FOI). ‘Russia Trains for war.’ 4 February 2019. 
Available online: www.foi.se/​en/​foi/​news-​and-​pressr​oom/​news/​2019-​02-​04-​rus​sia-​tra​
ins-​for-​war.html
Swedish Presidency of the Council of the European Union. ‘Delivery and Joint Procurement 
of Ammunition for Ukraine.’ 20 March 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available 
online: https://​swed​ish-​pre​side​ncy.consil​ium.eur​opa.eu/​en/​news/​deliv​ery-​and-​joint-​proc​
urem​ent-​of-​amm​unit​ion-​for-​ukra​ine/​Tav​beri​dze, Vazha. ‘Ukraine War A Clear-​Cut Case 
of ‘Right Versus Wrong,’ Says Petraeus.’ Radio Free Europe, 18 April 2023. Available 
online: www.rferl.org/​a/​petra​eus-​interv​iew-​ukra​ine-​rus​sia-​putin/​32369​104.html
The Defence Post. ‘Slovakia to Donate 13 MiG-​29 Fighter Jets to Ukraine.’ 19 March 2023 
(accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: www.the​defe​nsep​ost.com/​2023/​03/​19/​slova​
kia-​mig29-​figh​ter-​jets-​ukra​ine/​
The Diplomatic Service of the European Union. ‘Further Measures to Respond to the 
Russian Invasion of Ukraine: Press Statement by High Representative/​Vice-​President 
Josep Borrell’ (accessed 13 June 2023). Available online: www.eeas.eur​opa.eu/​eeas/​
furt​her-​measu​res-​resp​ond-​russ​ian-​invas​ion-​ukra​ine-​press-​statem​ent-​high-​repres​enta​tive​
vice​_​en
The Federal Government. ‘Military Support for Ukraine’ (accessed 15 June 2023). Available 
online: www.bund​esre​gier​ung.de/​breg-​en/​news/​milit​ary-​supp​ort-​ukra​ine-​2054​992
The Military Doctrine of the Russian Federation 2014. Translation. Available online: https://​
theat​rum-​belli.com/​the-​milit​ary-​doctr​ine-​of-​the-​russ​ian-​fed​erat​ion/​
The New York Times. ‘In Fields Sown with Bombs, Ukraine’s Farmers Risk Deadly Harvest.’ 
11 March 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: www.nyti​mes.com/​2023/​03/​
11/​world/​eur​ope/​ukra​ine-​farms-​mines.html
The Ukrainians. ‘We Invite You to the Cultural Tribunal Trailer of the New Podcast The 
Ukrainians.’ 5 September 2022. Available online: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​f9Jj​
nYGy​t2M
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

234  Bibliography
Tidey, Alice. ‘EU Defence Ministers Mull €2 Billion Plan to Boost Ammunition Deliveries 
to Ukraine.’ EuroNews, 8 March 2023 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: www.
euron​ews.com/​my-​eur​ope/​2023/​03/​08/​eu-​defe​nce-​minist​ers-​disc​uss-​joint-​proc​urem​ent-​
for-​amm​unit​ion-​to-​replen​ish-​deple​ted-​sto​cks
Tokariuk, Olga. ‘A Year of Lies: Russia’s Information War Against Ukraine.’ CEPA, 21 
February 2023. Available online: https://​cepa.org/​arti​cle/​a-​year-​of-​lies-​russ​ias-​info​rmat​
ion-​war-​agai​nst-​ukra​ine/​
Trebesch, Christoph et al. The Ukraine Support Tracker: Which Countries Help Ukraine and 
How? Kiel: Kiel Institute for the World Economy, 2023.
Tropin, Zakhar. ‘ECHR Ruling Confirms Russian Invasion of Ukraine Began in 2014.’ 
Atlantic Council, 13 February 2023 (accessed 6 June 2023). Available online www.
atla​ntic​coun​cil.org/​blogs/​ukrai​neal​ert/​echr-​rul​ing-​confi​rms-​russ​ian-​invas​ion-​of-​ukra​
ine-​began-​in-​2014/​
TSN. ‘Details of the Fight at the Airport in Gostomel –​ Details from “Zeus.”’ 22 August 
2022. Available online: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​iHqD​bnz4​VTo
UAF. ‘Amazing Video! How Ukrainian Aviation Works.’ 30 July 2022. Available 
online: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​gsMM​nXjh​lUc
UK Air and Space Doctrine. Joint Doctrine Publication 0-​30. 2 edn. Shrivenham: DCDC, 
December 2017.
UK MoD. ‘Joint Statement –​ The Tallinn Pledge’ (accessed 15 June 2023). Available 
online: www.gov.uk/​gov​ernm​ent/​news/​joint-​statem​ent-​the-​tall​inn-​ple​dge
UK MoD. ‘NATO Defence Ministers to Discuss Accelerated Support to Ukraine Ahead 
of Anniversary of Russia’s Full-​Scale Invasion.’ 14 February 2023 (accessed 15 June 
2023). Available online: www.gov.uk/​gov​ernm​ent/​news/​nato-​defe​nce-​minist​ers-​to-​disc​
uss-​acce​lera​ted-​supp​ort-​to-​ukra​ine-​ahead-​of-​anni​vers​ary-​of-​russ​ias-​full-​scale-​invas​ion
UK MoD. ‘UK Donating Undersea Minehunter Drones to Help Ukraine Clear Coastline.’ 27 
August 2022 (accessed 30 June 2023). Available online: www.gov.uk/​gov​ernm​ent/​news/​
uk-​donat​ing-​under​sea-​min​ehun​ter-​dro​nes-​to-​help-​ukra​ine-​clear-​coastl​ine
Ukraine Media Center. ‘Ukraine Foreign Legion: Fight for Freedom. Ukraine in Flames 
#177.’ 3 September 2022. Available online: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​02lg​21Yf​Qdo
Ukrainian Defence Review. no. 3 (July–​September 2016), 11. Available online: https://​issuu.
com/​ukrai​nian​_​def​ense​_​rev​iew/​docs/​udr-​03-​2016​_​scr​een
Ukrainian MOD. Twitter Post. 21 Aug 2022, 10:19 AM. https://​twit​ter.com/​Defen​ceU/​sta​
tus/​1561​2666​1404​1022​465
Ukrainian World Congress. ‘Zelensky’s Visit to Poland –​ Key Takeaways.’ (accessed 15 
June 2023). Available online: www.ukr​aini​anwo​rldc​ongr​ess.org/​zelens​kys-​visit-​to-​pol​
and-​key-​takeaw​ays/​
Ukrainska Pravda. ‘The Law on National Resistance Came into Force.’ 1 January 2022 
(accessed 17 March 2023). Available online: www.pra​vda.com.ua/​news/​2022/​01/​1/​
7319​212/​
Ukrzaliznytsia. ‘In 2022, Ukrzaliznytsia Transported a Record Number of Passengers in 
Connection with the EU.’ Available online: www.uz.gov.ua/​press​_​cen​ter/​up_​to​_​dat​e_​to​
pic/​592​766/​
UN. ‘Beacon on the Black Sea’ www.un.org/​en/​black-​sea-​grain-​ini​tiat​ive
Unian. ‘Ukraine Loses Heavy Artillery Ammunition in Recent Ammo Depot Explosion 
in Chernihiv Region.’ 9 October 2018 (accessed 21 November 2022). Available 
online: 
www.unian.info/​soci​ety/​10292​025-​ukra​ine-​loses-​heavy-​artill​ery-​amm​unit​ion-​
in-​rec​ent-​ammo-​depot-​explos​ion-​in-​cherni​hiv-​reg​ion.html
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Bibliography  235
United 24. ‘Why Can Russian Artillery Not Prevail against Ukrainian Forces?’ Fight For 
Freedom Ep2. 27 July 2022. Available online: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​s5BI​bmms​NF0
United 24. ‘Why Did Russia FAIL? Inside the Battle for Kyiv.’ 12 January 2023. Available 
online: www.yout​ube.com/​watch?v=​U-​W1GuXP​hFw&t=​1s
UN News. ‘UN Aims to Boost Aid to Frontline Areas of Ukraine; Black Sea Grain Exports 
Near 18 Million Tonnes.’ 18 January 2023. Available online: https://​news.un.org/​en/​
story/​2023/​01/​1132​607
USAID. ‘Agriculture Resilience Initiative –​ Ukraine (AGRI –​ Ukraine).’ Available 
online: www.usaid.gov/​ukra​ine/​agri​cult​ure-​res​ilie​nce-​ini​tiat​ive-​agri-​ukra​ine
US Embassy & Consulates in Italy. ‘Working to Keep Electricity on in Ukraine.’ Available 
online: https://​it.usemba​ssy.gov/​work​ing-​to-​keep-​elec​tric​ity-​on-​in-​ukra​ine/​
US Embassy in Ukraine. ‘Press Releases: Russia’s Dangerous Escalation in the Kerch 
Strait.’ 26 November 2018 (accessed 14 June 2022). Available online: https://​ua.usemba​
ssy.gov/​press-​relea​ses-​russ​ias-​danger​ous-​esc​alat​ion-​in-​the-​kerch-​str​ait/​
US Embassy in Ukraine. ‘USS Donald Cook Arrives in Odesa, Ukraine.’ 25 February 2019 
(accessed 14 August 2022). Available online: https://​ua.usemba​ssy.gov/​uss-​don​ald-​
cook-​arri​ves-​in-​odesa-​ukra​ine/​
Vannek, Lyudmila.‘Dudayev’s Battalion Arose in Donbas in Opposition to Kadirovites –​ 
Lyoma Chabaev.’ Radio Freedom, 8 October 2014. Available online: www.radio​svob​
oda.org/​a/​26627​819.html
Van Sant, Shannon. ‘Kyiv Argues Russian Cyberattacks Could Be War Crimes.’ Politico, 
9 January 2023. Available online: www.polit​ico.eu/​arti​cle/​vic​tor-​zhora-​ukra​ine-​rus​sia-​
cybe​ratt​ack-​inf​rast​ruct​ure-​war-​crime/​
Vikhrov, Maxim. ‘Terror and Silence. How the Russians Force the Ukrainians of Donbas 
to Fight against their Own Country.’ The Ukrainian Week, 13 May 2022. Available 
online: https://​tyzh​den.ua/​ter​ror-​and-​sile​nce-​how-​the-​russi​ans-​force-​the-​ukr​aini​ans-​of-​
don​bas-​to-​fight-​agai​nst-​their-​own-​coun​try/​
Vinchin, ‘Cyberattacks Hit European Wind Energy Companies, Three Fall Victims to the 
Hacks.’ 5 May 2022 (accessed 15 June 2023). Available online: www.vinc​hin.com/​
en/​news/​cyber​atta​cks-​hit-​europ​ean-​wind-​ene​rgy-​compan​ies-​three-​fall-​vict​ims-​to-​the-​
hacks.html
Whitmore, Sarah. ‘Ukraine’s Parliament: One Year at War.’ Hansard Society, 23 
February 2023. Available online: www.han​sard​soci​ety.org.uk/​blog/​ukrai​nes-​par​liam​
ent-​one-​year-​at-​war
Yaroslava, Denkovych. ‘In Kyiv, Nine More People Were Exposed for Publishing Videos 
of Air Defense Operations.’ TSN, 31 May 2023. Available online: https://​kyiv.tsn.ua/​
u-​kiy​evi-​vikr​ili-​sche-​dev-​yatoh-​lyu​dey-​yaki-​publ​ikuv​ali-​video-​rob​oti-​ppo-​foto-​2340​
379.html
Zabrodskyi, Mykhaylo et al. Preliminary Lessons in Conventional Warfighting from Russia’s 
Invasion of Ukraine: February–​July 2022. London: Routledge, 2022.
Zahorodnyi, Oleksandr. ‘A Quadrocopter for the Destruction of “Shahed” Drones: In 
Ukraine, They Began to Create a Unique Drone.’ TSN, 25 December 2022 (accessed 13 
May 2022). Available online: https://​tsn.ua/​exclus​ive/​kvadr​okop​ter-​dlya-​znis​chen​nya-​
shahi​div-​v-​ukray​ini-​poch​ali-​stvo​ryuv​ati-​unikal​niy-​bezp​ilot​nik-​2230​489.html?fbc​lid=​
IwAR0g46_​CGKjjAaacOPfygQkGQBLF16WM​hKYw​7fey​SAt5​H6i5​kAqT​biZz​lmI
Zhorohov, Mikhail. Air War in Ukraine, February–​May 2022. Chernihiv: AirHub, 2022.
Zysk, Katarzyna. ‘Russia’ In The Handbook of European Defence Policies and Armed 
Forces, edited by H. Meijer and M. Wyss. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2018, 96–​97.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

INDEX
Note: Endnotes are indicated by the page number followed by “n” and the note number 
e.g., 23n15 refers to note 15 on page 23.
A2AD (anti-​access and area denial 
capabilities) 100
active defence 38–​39, 40
adaptation 5, 6, 7, 11, 17, 18, 41, 103, 129, 
202, 211, 216; post-​Soviet 28; rapid 18, 
88; Russian 93, 104, 115, 116, 196–​197; 
Ukrainian 100, 103, 133, 165, 169–​170, 
191, 199, 201, 204, 205, 207; of 
Ukrainian society 15, 167–​168, 206
aerial reconnaissance 110
agriculture 161–​162
Agriculture Resilience Initiative (AGRI)–​
Ukraine 161
air attacks 114, 121; resilience to 169
air cover no-​fly zones 176
air defences: ground-​based (GBAD) 7, 101, 
179, 198; military assistance to Ukraine 
181, 182, 187; mobile 102, 107; Russian 
45, 84, 103, 110, 115, 126; Ukrainian 3, 
61, 90–​91, 100, 101, 102, 107, 
108–​109, 114, 150, 190, 198, 200; 
Western 108–​109
air denial 3, 100, 102, 103, 109–​110, 117
air deterrent no-​fly zones 176
air domain 100–​117
air occupation no-​fly zones 176
air raid sirens 169, 205
air superiority 100, 102, 113, 116
air warfare 3, 62, 69, 90, 100–​117
aircraft carriers 121
AJP-​3.2 (British Allied Joint Publication-​
3.2) 5, 7
Aksyonov, Sergey 45
All-​Terrain-​Vehicles (ATV) 82
Alman, David 17
American military assistance, to Ukraine 
178–​179
ammunition 84, 216; Russian 84, 88, 93, 
105, 198; Ukrainian 50, 56–​57, 84, 85, 
86, 90, 91, 94, 95, 101, 108, 174, 179, 
180, 181, 182, 183, 188–​189, 199, 200, 
201, 205, 210–​211
ammunition depot explosions 56–​57
amphibious landings 123–​124, 125, 134
analytical framework 4–​20
annexation of Crimea 1, 15, 44, 45, 48, 
121–​122, 133, 144
antagonism 35, 36, 37, 39
anti-​access and area denial capabilities 
(A2AD) 100
Anti-​Aircraft Defense Missile Artillery 
Forces 113–​114
anti-​aircraft missiles 179, 180
anti-​terrorist operation (ATO) 46, 49–​50, 
54, 61, 63, 64, 75, 94, 106
anti-​unmanned aircraft systems 112
Antonov airport 81–​82, 102
AOR (Area of Responsibility) 12
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Index  237
APC (armoured personnel carriers) 88–​89, 
91, 179, 180, 182
appeasement, of Russia-​sponsored 
separatists 55
Area of Responsibility (AOR) 12
armed aggression, against Ukraine 33, 34, 
54–​55
armed forces: conventional 68; Russian 
27, 36, 37, 68–​72, 74, 198, 207; Soviet 
25, 28; structuring of 2, 16–​18, 19, 204, 
216–​217 
armoured personnel carriers (APC) 88–​89, 
91, 179, 180, 182
arsenals 11, 31, 36, 57, 94, 95, 117, 179, 
181, 210
artillery 82, 84–​86
Assad regime 69–​70, 71, 72
Association Agreement, with the EU 44
asymmetry 2, 3, 12, 18, 33, 34, 38, 
40–​41, 65, 121, 127, 128, 130, 132–​133, 
195–​198
Atlantic Council 144
ATO (anti-​terrorist operation) 46, 49–​50, 
54, 61, 63, 64, 75, 94, 106
attack aircraft 108, 112, 113
attrition warfare 8, 17, 24, 28, 38–​39, 86, 
91, 109, 156, 186, 187, 201, 202, 205, 
211
ATV (All-​Terrain-​Vehicles) 82
Australia 183, 185
Azov regiment 41, 51, 64–​65, 83, 84
Azovstal plant 64, 83, 106
Bakhmut 72, 91–​92, 110, 142, 191, 
196–​197, 201, 205
balanced fleet 121
ballistic missiles 3, 36, 52, 91, 101, 107, 
108, 109, 117
battalion tactical groups (BTGs) 87, 92
battalions: Chechen 67; ethnic 68, 70, 71, 
74, 75; fighting 50–​51; Hospitallers 
medical 164; national 51; volunteer 49, 
51, 63, 64, 68, 70, 71, 76
battle damage assessment (BDA) 105, 148
battle of signatures 12
battle readiness 74, 77, 92, 94, 116, 125, 
186, 207, 208
Bayraktar TB2 drones 56, 103, 109–​110, 
126, 164, 165, 180
BDA (battle damage assessment) 105, 148
beehive analogy, of Ukrainian strategic 
culture and fighting spirit 199
Belarus 52, 53, 66, 68, 72, 90, 101
Belgium 62, 183
Biden, President Joe 52, 178
Birds of Madyar 110, 166
Black Sea 45, 47, 51, 123, 127, 130, 169, 
198
Black Sea fleet, Russian 32, 53–​54, 110, 
121–​122, 124, 126, 127, 128, 134
Black Sea Grain Initiative 129, 130
blackouts 108, 160, 162, 167–​168, 206
blitzkrieg 8, 26, 34–​35
blockading, of seaports 123–​124, 129–​130, 
132, 160
bombing campaign, Russian 107, 108, 161, 
200, 206, 211
Borrell, Josep 178
Bosporus Strait 124, 130
bots 143, 145, 147, 149
Brezhnev, President Leonid 26
British Allied Joint Publication-​3.2 
(AJP-​3.2) 5, 7
British Army doctrine 10
Bronstein, Lev Davidovich 24, 27
Brovdi, Robert 110, 111, 142, 166 
BTGs (battalion tactical groups) 87, 92
Budanov, Brigadier General Kyrylo 52, 84
Budapest Memorandum 31
C2 (command and control) 14, 16, 19, 28, 
31, 45, 50, 74, 93, 95, 199, 207
C3I (command and control, 
communications and intelligence) 51, 56
C4 (Command, Control, Communications, 
Computers) 69
Cable News Network (CNN) effect 138
Canada 142, 183, 184–​185, 212
cannon fodder, grinding of Russian 93, 196, 
196–​197, 201, 204–​205, 207, 212
CAPs (combat air patrols) 105
CAR (Conflict Armament Research) 
105–​106
Carlson, Chris 126
Carvin, Andy 145
CAS (close air support) 95, 106–​107, 125, 
139, 176, 196–​197, 198
casualties: mass 15, 91, 204; Russian 70, 
71, 72, 83, 87, 90, 93, 97, 115, 174, 200, 
204–​205, 207; Ukrainian 46, 52, 84, 
96–​97, 107, 198, 205, 213
ceasefire 1, 46, 51–​57
cellphones 139, 148, 154, 155, 169
centralised control 74
CFSP (Common Foreign and Security 
Policy) 178
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

238  Index
CGS (Chief of General Staff) 55
chatbots 149
Chechnya 36, 37, 48, 49, 66, 67, 69, 76
Chief Intelligence Office (GRU) 151, 
152–​153, 156
Chief of General Staff (CGS) 55
chronology of events 2014–​2015 44–​51
CINC (Commander in Chief) 55, 63
civil preparedness 15
civil society, Ukrainian 3, 159, 167, 175, 
196, 197, 206
civil war, in Russia 23–​24
civilian infrastructure, Ukrainian 3, 90, 
107, 108, 117, 151, 154, 161, 162, 200
civil–​military collaboration, in cyber 
domain 153–​154, 154–​155, 156, 166
civil–​military relations 14, 205–​206
Clausewitz, Carl von 16, 26
Clear Sky 2018 62
close air support (CAS) 95, 106–​107, 125, 
139, 176, 196–​197, 198
close combat 82, 113
CNN (Cable News Network) effect 138
cognitive readiness 61, 206
cohesion: force 1, 2, 9, 20, 73, 76, 92, 93, 
94; interservice 35, 94, 213; moral 8
COIN (counterinsurgency) operations 11, 
12
Cold War 15, 16; post-​ see post-​Cold War 
2, 11, 15, 16, 19, 23–​41, 50, 68, 69, 70, 
111, 121, 166, 168, 175, 180, 186, 199, 
203, 207
collective performance 9, 213
combat air patrols (CAPs) 105
combat effectiveness 9, 10
combat readiness 74, 77, 92, 94, 116, 125, 
186, 207, 208
combatants 2, 8–​9, 10, 44, 61–​77, 201, 212
combined arms approach 18–​20, 82, 95, 
185, 208, 209
Come Back Alive foundation 164
command and control (C2) 14, 16, 19, 28, 
31, 45, 50, 74, 93, 95, 199, 207
command and control, communications and 
intelligence (C3I) 51, 56
Command, Control, Communications, 
Computers (C4) 69
Commander in Chief (CINC) 55, 63
commercial drones 110, 202
Common Foreign and Security Policy 
(CFSP) 178
communications 15, 27, 51, 56, 69, 95, 
151, 179
communism 24
competition for influence 13
comprehensive defence 2, 14–​16, 30, 33, 
35, 50, 159, 204, 205–​206; see also total 
defence
comradeship 8, 9, 76–​77, 94, 212
Concept for ensuring the national system of 
resilience 159–​160
conceptual component, of fighting power 2, 
4, 5, 6, 9, 23–​41, 116, 196, 207, 208
conceptual innovation see adaptation
Conflict Armament Research (CAR) 
105–​106
conscription 30, 31, 51, 69, 70, 74, 76, 92, 
126, 196, 203, 209; see also military 
service
control of the sea 3, 132–​133, 134
conventional armed forces 68
conventional military service 51
cooperation 27, 35, 39, 51, 73, 131, 185, 
211, 213; pillar of comprehensive 
defence 33
corruption 32, 52, 57, 69, 73, 74, 170, 197
counterinsurgency (COIN) operations 11, 
12
counteroffensives 175, 185; Russian 
strategy 38–​39; Soviet era doctrine 
26; Ukrainian see Ukrainian 
counteroffensives
counter-​propaganda, Ukrainian 145
covert operations 35
Crimea: liberation of 91; Parliament of 
45; Russian annexation of 1, 15, 44, 45, 
48, 121–​122, 133, 144; Russian land 
access to 123; Russian militarisation of 
2, 45, 46–​47, 49, 52, 53–​54; Russian 
occupation of 151; loss of Ukrainian 
naval fleet 122
critical infrastructure 37, 38, 72, 122, 
159–​160
critical mass 18, 69, 90–​91, 92, 94, 95–​96, 
101, 103–​104, 129, 156, 187–​188, 190, 
199–​200, 202–​203, 204, 211, 216; 
see also mass approach
critical thinking 6, 28, 41, 93, 197, 209
cross-​domain integration 2, 18–​20, 100, 
156, 198
cross-​domain warfare 2, 14, 18–​20, 100, 
117, 156, 198
crowdfunding 3, 50–​51, 104, 110, 140, 149, 
165, 166, 175, 202, 205, 206, 215
cruise missiles 113, 121, 124, 125, 127, 
129, 132, 134, 179
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Index  239
cutting-​edge technologies 11–​12, 12–​13, 
14, 16, 17, 18, 95, 116, 121, 177, 186, 
188, 189, 190, 195, 199–​203, 216
cyber aspects of the war 138–​156
cyber war, Russian 150, 152, 156
cyberattacks, Russian 3, 51, 150–​153, 154, 
156
cybersecurity 143, 154
Cyborgs 46
Czech Republic 181, 183–​184, 202
Danilov, Oleksiy 33, 187
Dardanelles 124, 130
DDoS (distributed denial-​of-​service) 151
decentralisation 14, 40, 73–​74, 86, 168, 199
deception 27, 87, 88, 138
decision-​making 11–​12, 24, 39–​40, 47, 
52, 86, 168, 174, 186, 196, 199, 205; 
hierarchical 41, 62, 74, 86, 93, 167, 217
dedovschina system 197
deep operation 25, 26, 27, 28, 39
defence: active 38–​39, 40; air see air 
defences; comprehensive 2, 14–​16, 30, 
33, 35, 50, 159, 204, 205–​206; of Kyiv 
82–​83; mobile air 102, 107; national 
15, 23, 30, 32, 77, 150, 163–​164, 189; 
strategic 26; territorial 33, 34, 49, 51, 
63, 64, 66, 82, 83, 164, 201, 203; total 2, 
14–​16, 96, 159, 163, 165, 167–​169, 204, 
205–​206, 217
Defence in Competitive Age 131–​132
defensive approaches 24–​25, 26, 28, 30, 35, 
36, 37, 38
defensive sufficiency 36
delayed battles 94
demobilisation 24, 34
demoralisation 85, 87, 90
Denmark 62, 126–​127, 182, 183–​184, 
184–​185
Deptula, Lt. Gen. (Ret.) David 17, 200
detection, of drones 128–​129
deterrence pillar, of comprehensive defence 
33, 38
diplomacy 33, 39, 52, 53, 145, 146–​147, 
160
discipline 8, 9, 76
disinformation 3, 27, 138, 139, 140, 141, 
142, 143, 144, 145–​146, 147–​148, 149, 
155; see also fake news; propaganda, 
Russian
dispersion 34–​35, 62, 64, 67, 74, 94, 103, 
108, 113
distributed denial-​of-​service (DDoS) 151
diversification of equipment 191
Dnipro River 88, 89–​90
doctrine: Gerasimov’s 38–​39, 40; military 
see military doctrine; Mosquito 56; post-​
Cold War Russian military 36; post-​Cold 
War Ukrainian military 30–​33; Putin’s 
37; Russian military 35–​39, 40; single-​
service 196; Soviet military 86, 116, 196, 
207; Ukrainian military 29–​35
Donbas 32, 44, 47, 48–​49, 52, 54, 55, 70, 
75–​76, 81, 82, 83, 84–​85, 87, 90, 91, 112
Donetsk 45, 52, 53, 54–​55, 83, 91; airport 
46, 106
Donetsk People’s Republic 48
drone strikes 75, 125
drone warfare 109–​112
drones: Bayraktar TB2 56, 103, 109–​110, 
126, 164, 165, 180; commercial 110, 
202; detection of 128–​129; kamikaze 
107, 108, 109, 110, 112, 114, 165, 211; 
swarms of 128
Dvoretskyi, Oleksandr 161
Eastern Ukraine 45, 46, 63, 64, 91, 212
education, military 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 19, 32, 
64–​65, 94, 114, 116, 208, 209, 216
EEZ (exclusive economic zone), of Ukraine 
122
electricity supply 108, 162 (power supply)
electronic warfare (EW) 95, 101, 111–​112, 
114, 122, 123, 200
EPF (European Peace Facility) 178, 181
equipment, military 9, 12–​13, 20, 50, 
61, 106, 164, 175, 178, 179, 180, 181, 
188, 189, 200, 202, 205, 210, 211; 
diversification of 191; interoperability of 
189–​191, 210–​211
Estonia 62, 152, 180–​181, 182, 183–​184
ethical foundations, of military operations 
8–​10
ethnic battalions 68, 70, 71, 74, 75
ethnic rivalry 93
ethos 8–​9, 40, 77, 205, 212
EU see European Union (EU)
EUMAM (European Union Military 
Assistance Mission Ukraine) 185
European Peace Facility (EPF) 178, 181
European Union (EU) 30, 31, 32, 33, 
44, 153, 160, 168, 177, 178, 180, 185, 
189, 209; Military Assistance Mission 
Ukraine (EUMAM) 185
EW (electronic warfare) 95, 101, 111–​112, 
114, 122, 123, 200
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

240  Index
exclusive economic zone (EEZ), of Ukraine 
122
Executioners of Slovyansk, The 46
exercises, military see military exercises
Facebook 138–​139, 140, 148
factories 57, 64, 162, 168
fake evidence 143, 144, 147
fake news 138, 143, 144, 145; see also 
disinformation; propaganda, Russian
false flag narratives 149
farmers 161–​162 
fear tactics 212 
Federal Security Service (FSB) 46, 47, 51, 
152, 156
fighting battalions 50–​51
fighting ethos 205
fighting power: conceptual component of 
2, 4, 5, 6, 9, 23–​41, 116, 196, 207, 208; 
moral component of 7, 8–​9, 9–​10, 
212–​213; physical component of 2, 6–​7, 
7–​8, 9, 10, 57, 155, 175, 203, 205, 
208–​211; resilient 2, 3, 4, 10–​11, 20, 
195–​213
fighting readiness 74, 77, 92, 94, 116, 125, 
186, 207, 208
fighting spirit 8, 76, 94, 199, 205, 212, 
215–​216
Finland 182, 183, 184
fire coordination 56, 111, 140, 190, 208
firepower 3, 7, 26, 27, 132–​133, 200, 202, 
203; Russian 47, 91–​92, 95, 130, 134, 
211, 216–​217; Soviet 121; Ukrainian 86, 
91, 103, 106, 128, 174, 175, 186, 190, 
211
First World War 25–​26, 50
focused innovation 169–​170
fog of war 14, 87, 139, 149, 155
food supplies 71, 130, 131, 168, 182
force cohesion 1, 2, 9, 20, 73, 76, 92, 93, 94
force design 17, 92–​93, 122, 202
force employment 8, 16, 92–​93
force multiplication 2, 13, 16, 18, 92, 188, 
199–​203, 204
foreign legions 65–​68, 96, 203
foreign military assistance see international 
military assistance
foreign policy: Russian 35, 37; Soviet 27; 
Ukrainian 29, 30, 32, 40 
former criminals, recruitment of 72, 75, 91, 
93, 201, 205, 212, 217
FoxBlade wiper malware attacks 151, 152, 
153
France 146, 181, 183
frozen conflict 44, 49, 52
FSB (Federal Security Service) 46, 47, 51, 
152, 156
funerals 205
Gareev, Makhmut 36
GBAD (ground-​based air defences) 7, 101, 
179, 198
General Armageddon 107
General Makarov 127
General Staff Academy 24
Georgia 12, 32, 37, 49, 52, 62, 64, 68, 69, 
70, 76, 115, 146
Georgian Legion 66–​67
Gerasimov, Chief of the General Staff 
General Valery 37, 38, 39, 40; doctrine 
of 38–​39, 40
Germany 180–​181, 182, 183, 185
Ghost of Kyiv 101
Girkin, Igor 46, 48
Glantz, Colonel David 27
Global South 146–​147
Gorbachev, Mikhail 26
Gorshkov, Admiral Sergey 121
governance 168
Gray, Colin 13, 103
green corridor arrangement 46
green men 45, 47–​48
ground forces 26, 52, 53, 56, 62, 73, 84, 
91, 92, 96, 106, 115, 121, 125, 134, 153, 
166, 182, 198, 199
ground-​based air defences (GBAD) 7, 101, 
179, 198
GRU (Chief Intelligence Office) 151, 
152–​153, 156
hackers, pro-​Russian 146, 151, 152, 153
Harding, Emily 147, 148
hazing system 197
Heavenly Hundred, killing of 44
helicopters 53, 82, 87, 103, 106, 181, 190, 
198; Mi-​8 84, 102, 182; Sea King 132, 
179
Hertling, Lieutenant General (Ret.) Mark 
73
Hetman Ivan Mazepa 131
hierarchical decision-​making 41, 62, 74, 
86, 93, 167, 217
HIMARS (High Mobility Artillery Rocket 
Systems) 72, 86, 87, 93, 95, 179, 185
historical context 2, 44–​57, 121, 146, 167
Hockenhull, General Sir Jim 148–​149
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Index  241
Hospitallers medical battalion 164
Hostomel airport 81–​82, 102
Houck, Shannon 204
howitzers 57, 85, 89, 91, 93, 95, 146, 180, 
181, 182, 183, 185
human intelligence (HUMINT) 101, 107, 
140, 166
human physical and mental readiness 61, 
206
human–​machine integration 13
HUMINT (human intelligence) 101, 107, 
140, 166
hunger tactics 123–​124, 129–​130, 131
hybrid warfare 38–​39, 40
IDCC (International Donor Coordination 
Centre) 177
IFU (International Fund for Ukraine) 178, 
179
IFVs (infantry fighting vehicles) 88, 180, 
183
Ignat, Yuriy 108, 112–​113
Ilovaisk 46, 48
independence: of Donetsk region 45, 49; of 
Georgia 67; of Ichkeria 67; of Luhansk 
region 45, 49; of Russian media 145; 
of Ukraine 30, 31, 47, 67, 76, 165, 167, 
182, 212
infantry fighting vehicles (IFVs) 88, 180, 
183
infiltration into Ukrainian society 47
information technology aspects of the war 
138–​156
information warfare 1, 14, 138–​156, 160
infrastructure: civilian 3, 90, 107, 108, 117, 
151, 154, 161, 162, 200; critical 37, 38, 
72, 122, 159–​160; Russian targeting of 
37, 38, 39, 45, 72, 90, 100, 101, 104, 
107, 108, 117, 121, 129, 151, 154, 156, 
160, 161, 162, 200; transport 100, 107, 
122, 129–​130, 160; of Ukraine 3, 
15–​16, 33, 49, 51, 53; Ukrainian 
targeting of 86 
initial stage of invasion 81–​83
innovation 3, 5–​6, 133, 170, 195–​198, 199, 
206; focused 169–​170; smart 191
innovative thinking 6, 28, 41, 116, 197, 
204, 206, 207, 208, 216
Integrated Operating Concept 20
integration: cross-​domain 2, 18–​20, 
100, 156, 198; human-​machine 13; 
interservice 18, 19–​20, 69, 198–​199, 
208; multidomain (MDI) 12, 19–​20
intelligence, surveillance and 
reconnaissance (ISR) 37, 69, 74, 85, 101, 
110, 111, 122–​123, 169, 198, 200
interactionalism 39
interim government, of Ukraine 44, 45, 49
International Donor Coordination Centre 
(IDCC) 177
International Fund for Ukraine (IFU) 178, 
179
International Legion 66, 74
international military assistance 84, 90, 95, 
103, 174–​191, 200, 210
International Security Program 147
interoperability: between allied nations 6, 
7, 12, 18, 62, 189; of ammunition 
210–​211; of military equipment and 
skills 189–​191; between units 9
interservice cohesion 35, 94, 213
interservice integration 18, 19–​20, 69, 
198–​199, 208
inter-​state warfare 12, 77, 95–​96, 106, 110, 
175, 186, 187, 188, 195, 199–​200, 207, 
208, 209, 210, 211
invasion: of Crimea 1, 15, 44, 45, 48, 
121–​122, 133, 144; of Georgia 32; 
of Ukraine 1, 53, 146, 150, 153
ISR see intelligence, surveillance and 
reconnaissance (ISR)
Issersson, Gregorii 25, 39
Japan 183
Javelin missiles 56, 179, 182
JFO (Joint Force Operation) 54
Joint Concept Note 1/​20 Multidomain 
Integration 20
Joint Force Operation (JFO) 54
Joint Forces of the Armed Forces of 
Ukraine 53
Joint Operations Command 31–​32
Joint Operations Doctrine, of United 
Kingdom 19
jointness 18, 19–​20, 69, 198–​199, 208
Kadyrov’s Chechens 70, 93
kamikaze drones 107, 108, 109, 110, 112, 
114, 165, 211
Kastus Kalinouski regiment 68
Kerch Strait 124
KGB (State Security Committee) 26, 35, 37
Kharkiv 48, 64, 65, 70, 83, 86, 87, 88, 89, 
93, 104, 105, 107, 114, 142
Kherson 64, 70, 83, 87–​88, 89, 90, 91, 93, 
104, 105, 107, 108, 124, 127, 161, 163
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

242  Index
Khrushchev, President Nikita 26
kidnapping of Ukrainian children 159, 212
kinetic war 1, 2, 11, 27, 38, 128, 129, 139, 
154, 175, 176, 187, 198, 209–​210
Kramatorsk 46, 91, 106, 107
Kropyva app 85, 164
Kubrakov, Oleksandr 160
Kuchma, President Leonid 31
Kyiv: battle for 81, 94; defence of 82
land domain 3, 81–​97, 123
land warfare 90, 96, 103, 133, 182, 195
land-​centric warfare 12, 85, 95, 195–​198, 
202
Latvia 182, 183–​184
leadership: military 27, 72–​73, 74, 81, 96, 
168; political 24, 25–​26, 27, 28, 81, 
141, 215; Russian 71; Soviet 24, 27; 
Ukrainian 47, 90, 96, 142
legacy materiel 134
legal foundations, of military operations 
8–​10
Leonhard, Robert 186
liberation 49, 64, 65, 68, 90, 91, 106, 205, 
215–​216
Lithuania 182, 183–​184, 185
little green men 45
local referendum, in Crimea 45
logistics 7–​8, 9, 13, 35, 130, 162, 175, 176, 
188, 203, 210, 211; Russian 53, 82, 84, 
86, 88, 89, 110, 123, 198; Soviet 35–​36; 
Ukrainian 32, 50, 65, 67, 95, 107, 109, 
114, 122, 177, 178, 180, 181, 184, 186, 
187, 200, 201
loitering munitions 107, 108, 109, 110, 
112, 114, 165, 211
long-​range missile attack campaign, 
Russian 100, 107–​108
losses see casualties
Luhansk 45, 53, 54, 67, 86, 87
Madyar 142, 166
Maidan 49, 73, 163, 167
maintenance 6, 7, 13, 121, 122, 179, 185, 
187, 189, 190, 191, 201
Malaysia Airlines Flight MH17 48
malware attacks 151, 152
Mamulashvili, Mamuka 66–​67
MANPADS (man-​portable air-​defence 
systems) 82, 95, 102, 103, 104, 108, 
190
manpower see personnel 
maritime domain 3, 52, 62, 120–​134
Maritime Mine Counter Measures 
(MMCM) programme 131–​132
Mariupol 51, 64, 81, 83, 104, 106, 123, 
124; siege of 83–​84
maskirovka 27, 87, 88, 138
mass 12–​13, 16–​18; critical see critical 
mass
mass approach 2, 12, 16, 18, 28, 36, 40–​41, 
84, 92, 93, 94, 103–​104, 107, 116, 117, 
156, 188, 200, 203, 204–​205, 208; 
see also critical mass
massacres 46, 48
massive air attacks 114, 121
materiel, military 127–​128, 209–​211; 
Russian 69, 70, 71, 87, 93, 94–​95, 107, 
117, 126, 133, 134; Ukrainian 50, 57, 
88–​89, 90, 106, 133, 174, 186, 189
MDI (multidomain integration) 12, 
19–​20
media platforms 138–​139, 140, 141–​142, 
143, 145, 147–​148, 155, 166, 216
mercenaries, Russian 37, 48, 71–​72, 201, 
208, 217; see also private military 
companies (PMCs); Wagner Group
Mi-​8 helicopters 84, 102, 182
Microsoft 153–​154
militarisation of Crimea, Russian 2, 45, 
46–​47, 49, 52, 53–​54
military assistance, international 84, 90, 95, 
103, 174–​191, 200, 210
military aviation, Ukrainian 102, 111, 
112–​114, 134
military bases 129; Russian 45, 53, 127; 
Ukrainian 31, 32, 45, 47, 49
military build-​up, near the Ukrainian border 
52
military doctrine 2, 5, 10, 11, 18; 
comparison of 39–​41; and information 
warfare 154; Russian 35–​39, 40; Soviet 
23–​29; Ukrainian 29–​35
military education 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 19, 32, 
64–​65, 94, 114, 116, 208, 209, 216
military equipment 9, 12–​13, 20, 211; 
interoperability of 189–​191; Russian 
106, 200, 211; Ukrainian 50, 61, 164, 
175, 178, 179, 180, 181, 188, 189, 202, 
205, 210
military exercises 51, 52, 53, 54, 62, 69, 90, 
93, 113–​114, 115, 116, 122, 199, 207, 
208, 216
military industry 11; Russian 121, 211; 
Swedish 182–​183; Ukrainian 50, 51, 52, 
111, 175, 202; Western 210–​211
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Index  243
military leadership 27, 72–​73, 74, 81, 96, 
168
military materiel see materiel, military
military readiness 74, 77, 92, 94, 116, 125, 
186, 207, 208
military reform: Russian 68–​69, 76, 197, 
203; Ukrainian 29, 30, 32, 68, 197, 207
Military Security Strategy of Ukraine, The 
33–​34
military service 212; Russian 120–​121; 
Ukrainian 51; see also conscription
military strategy: Russian 38–​39; Ukrainian 
49
military thinking: Russian 2, 39, 207; 
Soviet 23, 26, 27, 28; Ukrainian 2, 87
military training 7; Russian 48; Ukrainian 
32, 55, 75, 82
mine hunters 131
Mineral-​U radar 122–​123
mines 95; sea 128, 130–​131, 133
Ministry of Defence of Ukraine 29, 49, 56, 
63, 65, 87, 150
Ministry of Internal Affairs of Ukraine 49, 
64
Minsk II Ceasefire Agreement 46
miscalculations, by Russians 81, 82
missiles: anti-​aircraft 179, 180; ballistic 
3, 36, 52, 91, 101, 107, 108, 109, 117; 
cruise 113, 121, 124, 125, 127, 129, 132, 
134, 179; Javelin 56, 179, 182; Neptune 
antiship 123, 125–​126, 133; Norwegian 
Advanced Surface-​to-​Air (NASAMS) 
108, 109, 179, 183
mission command 14, 41, 73–​74, 93, 109, 
199, 205, 207
MLRS (Multiple Launch Rocket System) 
56, 84, 87, 111, 179, 181, 182
MMCM (Maritime Mine Counter 
Measures) programme 131–​132
mobile air defences 102, 107
mobile phones 139, 148, 154, 155, 169
mobility of various factories 168
mobilisation: Russian 69, 70–71, 90, 93; 
Soviet 26, 29; Ukrainian 34, 49, 51, 56, 
94, 97, 201, 203, 209
modern warfare 2, 3, 4, 6, 39, 46, 68–​69, 
71, 94, 105, 110, 112, 128, 132, 150; key 
trends/​themes in 11–​20; and resilient 
fighting power 195–​213
modernisation 16, 20; Russian 68, 69, 92, 
122, 203, 207; Ukrainian 31, 51, 55, 56, 
73, 122–​123, 197, 207
Molotov cocktails 166, 206
monopolarism 36
Montreux Convention 124
Moores, Matt 143
moral cohesion 8
moral component, of fighting power 7, 8–​9, 
9–​10, 212–​213
moral resilience 212
morale 6, 8, 9, 10; Russian 38, 127, 139, 
145, 212; Ukrainian 76, 77, 84, 89, 
108, 139, 142, 155–​156, 165, 205, 212, 
215–​216
Moskva 3, 53, 121, 123, 125–​126, 127, 133
Mosquito doctrine 56
Mostoviy, Colonel Oleksandr 113
motivation: to fight 6, 14, 61, 77, 212; 
Russian 24, 77; Ukrainian 66, 76, 77, 
113, 190, 206, 215
Motorola 48
multidomain integration (MDI) 12, 19–​20
Multiple Launch Rocket System (MLRS) 
56, 84, 87, 111, 179, 181, 182
Mykolaiv 89, 122, 124
NAFO (North Atlantic Fellas Organization) 
138, 139, 142–​144
Naiev, Lieutenant-​General Serhii 53
NASAMS (Norwegian Advanced Surface-​
to-​Air Missile System) 108, 109, 179, 
183
national battalions 51
national defence 15, 23, 30, 32, 77, 150, 
163–​164, 189
National Guard: Russian 37; Ukrainian 51, 
55, 64
National Security and Defense Council of 
Ukraine (NSDC) 29, 30, 32, 33, 46, 187
national sovereignty, of Ukraine 49, 55, 
76, 167
national strategy, of Ukraine 29, 33, 40, 
198, 205–​206
NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) 
NCO (non-​commissioned officer) 65, 216
Neptune antiship missiles 123, 125–​126, 
133
Netherlands, The 62, 181, 183–​184
Neuberger, Ann 153–​154
New Generation of Warfare (NGW) 38, 39
New Zealand 183, 185
Next generation Light Anti-​tank Weapons 
(NLAWS) 96
NFZ (no-​fly zone), over Ukraine 3, 
175–​177
NGW (New Generation of Warfare) 38, 39
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

244  Index
night-​time flights 100, 104, 110, 115, 166
NLAWS (Next generation Light Anti-​tank 
Weapons) 96
no-​fly zone (NFZ), over Ukraine 3, 
175–​177
non-​alignment: of Sweden 182; of Ukraine 
30, 31, 32
non-​commissioned officer (NCO) 65, 216
Norberg, Johan 69
Nord Stream II gas pipeline 54
normative acts 29, 31, 33
North Atlantic Fellas Organization (NAFO) 
138, 139, 142–​144
North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
(NATO): definition of comprehensive 
defence 15; and Russia 35, 36, 37, 40, 
52, 53, 115, 146, 153, 177; and Soviet 
Union 121; and Ukraine 30, 31–​32, 33, 
34, 35, 55, 56, 57, 62, 65, 66, 95, 122, 
177, 179–​180, 181, 182, 185, 197, 207; 
Warsaw summit in 2016 15
Northern Ukraine 102, 104–​105
Norway 67, 110, 182, 184, 185
Norwegian Advanced Surface-​to-​Air 
Missile System (NASAMS) 108, 109, 
179, 183
NotPetya malware 151, 152
Novofedorivka 45
Novorossiysk 127, 128
NSDC (National Security and Defense 
Council of Ukraine) 29, 30, 32, 33, 46, 
187
nuclear weapons 26, 30–​31, 36, 38, 195
numeric superiority 16, 85, 86, 89, 92, 93, 
94–​95, 115, 116, 124, 132, 188, 203, 211
Odesa 52, 124, 125, 129, 130, 131, 162, 
169
offensive approaches 26, 28
Oksanchenko, Col. Oleksandr 101
Oleschuk, Lieutenant General Mykola 113, 
114
online platforms 138–​139, 140, 141–​142, 
143, 145, 147–​148, 155, 166, 216
open-​source intelligence (OSINT) 138, 
148–​150
Operation Interflex 62, 184, 185
Operation Orbital 62, 184–​185
Operation Unifier 184
operational experience 5, 12, 32, 51, 61, 
63, 67, 69, 70, 71, 75–​76, 93, 113, 
114–​115, 134, 175–​176, 187–​188, 
208, 215 
operational performance 6, 9, 19
Orange Revolution 31, 165, 167
organisational change 197
Orthodox Church of the Russian 
Patriarchate 47
OSINT (open-​source intelligence) 138, 
148–​150
out-​of-​area operations 11, 15, 200
partisan warfare 34, 40, 41, 63, 74, 199
patriotic war 205, 206, 212
Pavlov, Arseniy 48
peace dividend 11, 12, 15, 16, 35, 210
peer conflict 17
Penney, Maj. (Ret.) Heather 17, 200
people see personnel
performance: collective 9, 213; 
decentralised 73; operational 6, 9, 19; 
Russian 47, 49, 68, 69, 71, 74, 89, 92, 
94, 114, 207–​208, 213; Ukrainian 51, 73, 
74, 85, 116, 213; unified 196
personnel 2, 6, 9, 92, 154–​155, 203–​205; 
Russian 51, 52, 69, 70, 93, 95, 107, 
114–​116, 117, 153, 196; Ukrainian 31, 
32, 52, 53, 55, 62, 74, 90, 101, 112–​114, 
122; see also training courses
Petraeus, US Army Gen (Ret.) David 95, 
212
physical component, of fighting power 2, 
6–​7, 7–​8, 9, 10, 57, 155, 175, 203, 205, 
208–​211
pilots: Russian 102–​103, 104, 114–​116; 
Ukrainian 100, 101, 103, 106, 112–​113, 
114, 116, 117, 132, 183, 185
platforms 6, 7, 16, 18; media 138–​139, 
140, 141–​142, 143, 145, 147–​148, 155, 
166, 216; Russian military 53, 106; 
Ukrainian military 112, 169, 179, 189, 
210; unmanned 202
PMCs (private military companies) 71–​72, 
74, 75–​76; see also mercenaries; Wagner 
Group
political leadership 24, 25–​26, 27, 28, 81, 
141, 215
political will 2, 13–​14, 25
Poland 14, 62, 73, 95, 124, 145–​146, 177, 
180, 183–​184, 191, 202
Polyakov, Leonid 30
Poroshenko, President Petro 32, 52, 54, 
56, 57
Portugal 181, 183
post-​Cold War conceptualisation of the role 
of the military 23
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Index  245
post-​Cold War military doctrine: Russian 
36; Ukrainian 30–​33
post-​Cold War reorganisation: Russian 
35–​39; Ukrainian 29–​35
post-​conflict settlement 34
post-​Soviet adaptation 28
POW (prisoners of war) 64, 68
power supply 108, 162
precision strikes 95, 110
President of Ukraine, and legal mechanism 
of doctrine 29, 30
principles of war 5, 16
prisoners, recruitment of 72, 75, 91, 93, 
201, 205, 212, 217
prisoners of war (POW) 64, 68
private military companies (PMCs) 37, 
71–​72, 74, 75–​76; see also mercenaries; 
Wagner Group
procurement 32, 52, 56, 180, 181, 189, 210
professional training 50, 51, 96
professionalism 49, 113
propaganda, Russian 3, 14, 28, 70, 
138–​139, 140, 143, 144–​148, 155, 160, 
216–​217; see also disinformation; 
fake news
pro-​Russian hackers 146, 151, 152, 153
protracted warfare 15, 18, 26, 70, 95, 170, 
186, 211
Prytula Foundation 164–​165
Putin, President Vladimir 36, 37, 52, 53, 
70, 71, 146; doctrine of 37
Ramstein format 177–​178, 183
rapid adaptation 18, 88
rapid assault 25
readiness 6, 7, 18, 24, 31, 32, 33, 55; of 
civil society 167; cognitive 61, 206; 
combat 74, 77, 92, 94, 116, 125, 186, 
207, 208; of cyber activity 151–​152; of 
the fighting power 210; human physical 
and mental 61, 206; societal 205–​206
recruited prisoners 72, 75, 91, 93, 201, 205, 
212, 217
Red Army 23–​24, 25
reinforcement period of 2016–​2022 
51–​57
repairs 106, 109, 169, 180, 190, 202, 205
reserves: Russian 69, 86, 126; Soviet 24, 
26; Ukrainian 32, 34, 55, 56, 75, 82, 90, 
94, 96, 97, 204, 209
resilience: of agriculture 161; to air attacks 
169; and comprehensive defence 33; 
moral 212; national system of 159–​160; 
sovereign 13; of Ukrainian people 
159–​170
resilient fighting power 2, 3, 4, 10–​11, 20, 
195–​213
resistance movement 33, 34
Revolution of Dignity 94, 165, 167
rigid thinking 197
Romania 62, 130, 152, 181
RT television channel 146
Russian Air and Space Forces 102, 
104–​105, 107, 115, 116, 117
Russian Airborne Forces (VDV) 45, 81–​82, 
96
Russian Black Sea fleet 32, 53–​54, 110, 
121–​122, 124, 126, 127, 128, 134
Russian Federation 35, 54–​55
Russian Navy 121, 126, 127, 133
Russian tactics 65, 82, 85, 91, 96, 100, 151, 
152, 207–​208; cannon fodder 93, 196, 
196–​197, 201, 204–​205, 207, 212; fear 
212; hunger 123–​124, 129–​130, 131; 
scorched-​earth 196–​197
Ryan, Mick 12–​13, 82, 141, 186
sabotage 57, 63, 71, 74, 75, 84, 94, 105, 
122, 140, 174, 210, 211
SBU (Ukrainian law enforcement) 46, 48
scandals, impacting Ukrainian military 52, 
56–​57
scorched-​earth tactics 196–​197
Sea King helicopters 132, 179
sea mines 128, 130–​131, 133
Sea of Azov 51, 52, 64, 122, 123, 124, 128, 
132
Second World War 14, 25–​26, 27, 28, 50, 
71, 96, 121, 133, 217
security policy 29, 178
self-​sufficiency 18, 168, 210
semi-​swarm tactics 127
separatism 44, 46, 49
sequential operations 25
Sevastopol 54, 110; Naval Base 123, 127, 
128, 130
Shiba Inu 143
Shoigu, Defence Minister Sergei 69
shoot-​and-​scoot tactics 107
single-​service doctrine 196
skills: interoperability of 189–​191; survival 
65, 94, 184; of Ukrainian military 
aviation 112–​114, 115–​116
Skybiuk, Colonel Ihor 88, 89, 142
Slipchenko, General Vladimir 36
Slovakia 181–​182, 183–​184
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

246  Index
Sloviansk 46
smart innovation 191
smartphones 139, 148, 154, 155, 169
Snake Island 106, 110, 126, 127
social media 110, 138–​139, 140, 143, 145, 
146, 148, 149, 156, 166–​167
societal adaptation, Ukrainian 15, 167–​168, 
206
societal readiness, Ukrainian 205–​206
SOFs (Special Operations Forces) 48, 71, 
72
south-​eastern Ukraine 46–​47
sovereign resilience 13
sovereignty, Ukrainian 49, 55, 76, 167
Soviet Armed Forces 25, 28
Soviet leadership 24, 27
Soviet military doctrine 86, 116, 196, 207
Soviet Navy 121
Soviet strategic thinking 23–​41, 207
Spain 181
Special Forces 45
Special Operations Command 32
Special Operations Forces (SOFs) 48, 71, 
72
Spencer, John 96
Spetsnaz 45
Sputnik television channel 144, 146
SSSCIP (State Service of Special 
Communications and Information 
Protection of Ukraine) 151, 152
Stalin, Joseph 25, 26, 27, 28, 93, 121
Starokostiantyniv Air Base 62
State Border Guard Service 55
State Program for the Development of the 
Armed Forces of Ukraine until 2020, 
The 55
State Security Committee (KGB) 26, 35, 37
State Service of Special Communications 
and Information Protection of Ukraine 
(SSSCIP) 151, 152
state-​on-​state warfare 74
Stoltenberg, NATO Secretary General Jens 
177
Storm assault units 91
strategic defence 26
strategic thinking 16; Russian 207; Soviet 
23–​41, 207
strategy: military see military strategy; 
national (of Ukraine) 29, 33, 40, 198, 
205–​206
Stringer, Air Marshal Johnny 169
structuring, of armed forces 2, 16–​18, 19, 
204–​205, 216–​217
Sukhankin, Sergei 71–​72
Sun Tzu 16
Sunak, Prime Minister Rishi 179
Suporovska, Yana 166
supply chains 7–​8, 13, 35, 87, 107, 109, 
161, 168, 170, 174, 175, 178, 186, 201
Surovikin, General Sergey 107
surprise 8, 17, 25, 26, 27, 28–​29, 35, 37, 
38, 40–​41, 47, 48, 81, 88, 101, 105, 125, 
134
surrenders 68, 71, 83, 84, 93, 103, 145, 
212, 215
survivability 51, 76, 93, 112, 127, 133, 162, 
168, 174, 209
survival, of Ukrainian nation 76, 77
survival skills 65, 94, 184
sustainment 2, 6, 7–​8, 11, 18, 56, 70, 86, 
106, 160, 174–​175, 186, 190, 191, 203, 
206, 209, 210–​211, 216
Svechin, A. A. 24–​25, 39
swarm tactics 129
Sweden 182–​183, 184, 185
Swedish Defence University 185
Syrsky, Colonel General Oleksandr 87, 88, 
91–​92
system-​of-​systems approach 12
tactical solutions 204, 208, 209, 216
tactics 6; Russian see Russian tactics; 
semi-​swarm 127; Soviet 25; swarm 129; 
Ukrainian see Ukrainian tactics; Wagner 
Group 91
Taiwan 183
Tallinn Pledge 181–​182, 183–​184, 190
targeting 
Tarnavskyi, Brigadier General Oleksandr 
89
Tavria 89
TDF (Territorial Defence Forces) 63, 74, 
75, 164
technologies, cutting-​edge see cutting-​edge 
technologies
Telegram 68, 72, 140, 145, 146, 147, 148
television channels 146
terrain 27, 72, 123, 195; knowledge of 95, 
114; Ukrainian 34, 40, 47, 62, 63, 75, 89, 
94, 103, 200; urban 92, 96, 184
territorial defence 33, 34, 49, 51, 63, 64, 
66, 82, 83, 164, 201, 203
Territorial Defence Forces (TDF) 63, 74, 
75, 164
territorial integrity 76, 205, 206, 212
territorial reserve 32
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Index  247
terrorism 36, 54, 55
thinking: critical 6, 28, 41, 93, 197; 
innovative 6, 28, 41, 116, 197, 204, 
206, 207, 208, 216; military see military 
thinking; rigid 197; Soviet strategic 
23–​41, 207; strategic see strategic 
thinking; unconventional 65, 74, 204, 
217 
TikTok 76, 141–​142, 148, 150
time 11–​12, 17, 18, 20, 139, 145, 147, 
152–​153, 154, 165, 186–​187, 200, 202
timeliness 106, 186–​187, 189, 202, 203
total defence 14–​16, 96, 159, 163, 
165, 167–​169, 206, 217; see also 
comprehensive defence
total war 14–​15, 77, 205, 210
total/​comprehensive defence 2, 14–​16, 
159, 204, 205–​206; see also defence, 
comprehensive; defence, total
training courses 62, 63, 175, 181, 184–​185, 
190, 196, 197, 203–​204
traitors 25, 50
transformation of Ukraine, during 
reinforcement period 54–​56
transport infrastructure 100, 107, 122, 
129–​130, 160
transportation 15, 108, 124, 160, 161, 164, 
179–​180, 182, 188, 189
trench warfare 66, 139
Triandafilov, Vladimir 25
Trotsky, Leon 24, 27
Tsaturian, Mariia 163
Tuckachevsky, Mikhail 25
Turchynov, Oleksandr 49
Turkey: Black Sea Grain Initiative 129, 
130; cooperation agreement with 
Ukraine 131; exercise of right under 
Montreux Convention 124; provision 
of training to Ukraine 62; provision of 
weapons to Ukraine 56, 180
Twitter (X) 138–​139, 140–​141, 141–​142, 
142–​143, 148; Ukrainian (UkrTwi) 
140–​141, 166
UAVs see unmanned air vehicles (UAVs)
UDCG (Ukraine Defence Contact Group) 
177–​178
UkrAF see Ukrainian Air Force (UkrAF)
Ukraine Defence Contact Group (UDCG) 
177–​178
Ukrainian Air Force (UkrAF) 49, 62, 100, 
101, 102, 103, 106, 107, 108, 109, 
112–​114, 115–​116, 117, 200
Ukrainian Army Aviation 106–​107
Ukrainian counteroffensives: spring-​
summer 2014 48–​49; September 2022 
88, 89; spring 2023 150; summer 2023 1, 
2, 87, 93, 97, 105, 107, 142, 187, 211
Ukrainian Foreign Legion 65–​66
Ukrainian law enforcement (SBU) 46, 48
Ukrainian National Defence Intelligence 
Agency 52
Ukrainian Navy 122, 123; future of 
131–​132; loss during annexation of 
Crimea of 133
Ukrainian Parliament 30, 44, 160
Ukrainian Railways 160–​161
Ukrainian tactics 41, 82, 85, 91, 93, 95, 96, 
101, 104, 107, 115, 124, 133, 140, 184, 
196, 205, 207
Ukrainian Twitter (UkrTwi) 140–​141, 
166
Ukrenergo 163
Ukroboronprom 50, 103, 210
UkrTwi (Ukrainian Twitter) 140–​141, 
166
unconventional thinking 65, 74, 204, 217
unification 55, 196, 211
unified performance 196
United Kingdom 67; military assistance 
from 62, 110, 131–​132, 177, 179–​180, 
184, 185
United States 13, 17–​18, 36, 39, 53, 67; 
Agency for International Development 
(USAID) 161; Air Force (USAF) 17, 62, 
176–​177; military assistance from 177, 
178–​179, 180, 181, 183, 185
unmanned air vehicles (UAVs) 91–​92, 101, 
106, 110, 112, 113, 117, 127, 128–​129, 
131, 133, 175, 182, 195
unmanned platforms 202
unmanned sea vehicles (USVs) 3, 124, 
127–​129, 133
unmanned undersea vehicles (UUVs) 129, 
133, 134
urban terrain 92, 96, 184
urban warfare 62, 67, 69, 71, 74, 75, 91, 96, 
112, 197, 198
USAF (United States Air Force) 17, 62, 
176–​177
USAID (United States Agency for 
International Development) 161
USVs (unmanned sea vehicles) 3, 124, 
127–​129, 133
UUVs (unmanned undersea vehicles) 129, 
133, 134
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

248  Index
value of life, in Putin’s Russia 204–​205
Varfolomeev, N. E. 25
VDV (Russian Airborne Forces) 45, 81–​82, 
96
Venable, Heather 17
Viasat satellite communication network 
151, 152
video reports 141, 142, 145, 150
Vilkha Multiple Launch Rocket System 56
VKontakte (VK) 148
VKS (Vozdushno-​kosmicheskiye sily) 102, 
104–​105, 107, 115, 116, 117
volunteer battalions 49, 51, 63, 64, 68, 70, 
71, 76
volunteering movement 50–​51, 163–​167, 
169, 170, 205, 206
Vorobyov, Colonel General Hennadiy 
Petrovych 73, 197 
Vozdushno-​kosmicheskiye sily (VKS) 102, 
104–​105, 107, 115, 116, 117
vseokhoplyuyucha oborona 2, 14–​16, 30, 
33, 35, 50, 159, 204, 205–​206
Wagner Group 71–​72, 75–​76, 91, 93, 
196–​197, 201, 205, 207, 208, 212
Wallace, UK Defence Secretary Ben 131
war crimes 76, 110, 154
war of attrition see attrition warfare
war of destruction 24
warfare: air 3, 62, 69, 90, 100–​117; attrition 
see attrition warfare; cross-​domain 2, 14, 
18–​20, 100, 117, 156, 198; of destruction 
24; drone 109–​112; electronic (EW) 95, 
101, 111–​112, 114, 122, 123, 200; hybrid 
38–​39, 40; information 1, 14, 138–​156, 
160; inter-​state see inter-​state warfare; 
kinetic see kinetic war; land 90, 96, 
103, 133, 182, 195; land-​centric 12, 85, 
95, 195–​198, 202; modern see modern 
warfare; New Generation of (NGW) 
38, 39; partisan 34, 40, 41, 63, 74, 199; 
patriotic 205, 206, 212; protracted 15, 
18, 26, 70, 95, 170, 186, 211; state-​
on-​state 74; total 14–​15, 77, 205, 210; 
trench 66, 139; urban 62, 67, 69, 71, 74, 
75, 91, 96, 112, 197, 198
warfighting experience see operational 
experience
warrior ethos 76–​77, 212
weapons of mass destruction (WMD) 36
Western air defences 108–​109
Western practice 17, 29, 40, 197
winter intensification 81
Winter War 28, 29
WMD (weapons of mass destruction) 36
World War I 25–​26, 50
World War II 14, 25–​26, 27, 28, 50, 71, 96, 
121, 133, 217
X (Twitter) 138–​139, 140–​141, 141–​142, 
142–​143, 148
Yanukovych, President Viktor 32, 44–​45, 
165
youth-​driven approach, to achieving 
Western professionalism 197
YouTube 140, 146
Yushchenko, President Viktor 31–​32
Zaluzhny, General Valery 41, 61, 86, 
197
Zaporizhzhya nuclear power plant 108
Zelenskyy, President Volodymyr 33, 52, 56, 
57, 63, 66, 141, 142, 145, 180, 212
Zhora, Viktor 152, 154
Zinkevych, Yana 164