This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
1 
 
 
 
Trust in scientists and their role in society across 68 countries 
Viktoria Cologna1,2*, Niels G. Mede2, Sebastian Berger3, John Besley4, Cameron Brick5,6, Marina Joubert7, 
Edward W. Maibach8, Sabina Mihelj9, Naomi Oreskes1, Mike S. Schäfer2, Sander van der Linden10, Nor 
Izzatina Abdul Aziz11, Suleiman Abdulsalam12, Nurulaini Abu Shamsi13, Balazs Aczel14, Indro 
Adinugroho15,16, Eleonora Alabrese17, Alaa Aldoh5, Mark Alfano18, Innocent Mbulli Ali19, Mohammed 
Alsobay20, Marlene Altenmüller21, R. Michael Alvarez22, Richard Amoako23, Tabitha Amollo24, Patrick 
Ansah23, Denisa Apriliawati25, Flavio Azevedo26, Ani Bajrami27, Ronita Bardhan28, Keagile Bati29, Eri 
Bertsou30, Cornelia Betsch31, Apurav Yash Bhatiya32, Rahul Bhui20,33, Olga Białobrzeska34, Michał Bilewicz35, 
Ayoub Bouguettaya36, Katherine Breeden37, Amélie Bret38, Ondrej Buchel39, Pablo Cabrera-Álvarez40, 
Federica Cagnoli41, André Calero Valdez42, Timothy Callaghan43, Rizza Kaye Cases44, Sami Çoksan45, 
Gabriela Czarnek46, Steven De Peuter47, Ramit Debnath22,48, Sylvain Delouvée49, Celia Díaz-Catalán40, Lucia 
Di Stefano41, Kimberly C. Doell50, Simone Dohle51, Karen M. Douglas52, Charlotte Dries53, Dmitrii Dubrov54, 
Małgorzata Dzimińska55, Ullrich K. H. Ecker56, Christian T. Elbaek57, Mahmoud Elsherif36, Benjamin Enke58, 
Tom W. Etienne59, Matthew Facciani60, Antoinette Fage-Butler61, Md. Zaki Faisal62, Xiaoli Fan63, Christina 
Farhart64, Christoph Feldhaus65, Marinus Ferreira18, Stefan Feuerriegel66, Helen Fischer67,68, Jana Freundt69, 
Malte Friese70, Simon Fuglsang71, Albina Gallyamova54, Patricia Garrido-Vásquez72, Mauricio Garrido 
Vásquez72, Winfred Gatua73, Oliver Genschow74, Omid Ghasemi75, Theofilos Gkinopoulos46, Jamie Gloor76, 
Ellen Goddard63, Mario Gollwitzer21, Claudia González Brambila77, Hazel Gordon15, Dmitry Grigoryev54, 
Gina M. Grimshaw78, Lars Guenther79, Håvard Haarstad80, Dana Harari81, Lelia N. Hawkins82, Przemysław 
Hensel83, Alma Cristal Hernández-Mondragón84, Atar Herziger81, Guanxiong Huang85, Markus Huff67, 
Mairéad Hurley86, Nygmet Ibadildin87, Maho Ishibashi88, Mohammad Tarikul Islam89, Younes Jeddi12, Tao 
Jin90, Charlotte A. Jones91, Sebastian Jungkunz92, Dominika Jurgiel93, Zhangir Kabdulkair87, Jo-Ju Kao94, 
Sarah Kavassalis82, John R. Kerr95, Mariana Kitsa96, Tereza Klabíková Rábová97, Olivier Klein98, Hoyoun 
Koh99, Aki Koivula100, Lilian Kojan42, Elizaveta Komyaginskaya54, Laura König101, Lina Koppel102, Alexandra 
Kosachenko103, John Kotcher8, Laura S. Kranz78, Pradeep Krishnan30, Silje Kristiansen104,105, André 
Krouwel106, Toon Kuppens107, Eleni A. Kyza108, Claus Lamm50, Anthony Lantian109, Aleksandra Lazić110, 
Oscar Lecuona de la Cruz111, Jean-Baptiste Légal109, Zoe Leviston112, Neil Levy18, 113, Amanda Lindkvist102, 
Grégoire Lits114, Andreas Löschel65, Alberto López Ortega106, Carlos Lopez-Villavicencio115, Nigel Mantou 
Lou116, Chloe H. Lucas91, Kristin Lunz-Trujillo117,118, Mathew D. Marques119, Sabrina Mayer92, Ryan 
McKay120, Hugo Mercier121, Julia Metag122, Taciano L. Milfont123, Joanne Miller124, Panagiotis Mitkidis57, 
Fredy Monge-Rodríguez115, Matt Motta43, Iryna Mudra96, Zarja Muršič125, Jennifer Namutebi126, Eryn J. 
Newman112, Jonas P. Nitschke50, Fernando Luiz Nobre Cavalcante127, Ntui-Njock Vincent Ntui128, Daniel 
Nwogwugwu129, Thomas Ostermann130, Tobias Otterbring131, Jaime Palmer-Hague132, Myrto Pantazi98, Philip 
Pärnamets133, Paolo Parra Saiani41, Mariola Paruzel-Czachura134,135, Michal Parzuchowski34, Yuri Pavlov103, 
Adam R. Pearson136,  Myron A. Penner132, Charlotte R. Pennington137, Katerina Petkanopoulou138, Marija 
Petrović110, Jan Pfänder122, Dinara Pisareva99, Adam Ploszaj139, Karolína Poliaková97, Ekaterina Pronizius50, 
Katarzyna Pypno134, Diwa Malaya Quiñones140, Pekka Räsänen100, Adrian Rauchfleisch94, Felix G. 
Rebitschek53,141, Cintia Refojo Seronero40, Gabriel Rêgo142, James P. Reynolds137, Joseph Roche86, Simone 
Rödder143, Jan Philipp Röer130, Robert M. Ross18, Isabelle Ruin144, Osvaldo Santos145, Ricardo R. Santos145, 
Philipp Schmid31, 146, 147, Stefan Schulreich148,149, Bermond Scoggins150, Amena Sharaf151, Justin Sheria 
Nfundiko152, 153, Emily Shuckburgh48, Johan Six154, Nevin Solak151, Leonhard Späth154, Bram Spruyt155, 
Olivier Standaert114, Samantha K. Stanley112, 156, Gert Storms47, Noel Strahm3, Stylianos Syropoulos157, 
Barnabas Szaszi14, Ewa Szumowska46, Mikihito Tanaka158, Claudia Teran-Escobar144, Boryana Todorova50, 
Abdoul Kafid Toko12, Renata Tokrri159, Daniel Toribio-Florez52, Manos Tsakiris120, 160, Michael Tyrala161, 
Özden Melis Uluğ162, Ijeoma Chinwe Uzoma163, Jochem van Noord26, Christiana Varda108,164, Steven 
Verheyen165, Iris Vilares90, Madalina Vlasceanu166, Andreas von Bubnoff167, Iain Walker112, 168, Izabela 
Warwas55, Marcel Weber70, Tim Weninger60, Mareike Westfal74, Florian Wintterlin122, Adrian Dominik 
Wojcik169, Ziqian Xia170, Jinliang Xie171, Ewa Zegler-Poleska139, Amber Zenklusen30, Rolf A. Zwaan165 
 
*Corresponding author. Email: viktoriacologna@gmail.com  Author affiliations can be found on page 34. 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
2 
Abstract 
Science is crucial for evidence-based decision-making. Public trust in scientists can help 
decision-makers act based on the best available evidence, especially during crises1,2. However, in 
recent years the epistemic authority of science has been challenged, causing concerns about low 
public trust in scientists3. We interrogated these concerns with a pre-registered 68-country survey 
of 71,922 respondents and find that in most countries, most people trust scientists and agree that 
scientists should engage more in society and policymaking. We find variations between and 
within countries, which we explain with individual- and country-level variables, including 
political orientation. While there is no widespread lack of trust in scientists, we cannot discount 
the concern that lack of trust in scientists by even a small minority may affect considerations of 
scientific evidence in policymaking. These findings have implications for scientists and 
policymakers seeking to maintain and increase trust in scientists. 
Main text 
Public trust in science provides many benefits to society. It helps people make informed 
decisions (e.g., on health and nutrition) based on the best available evidence, provides the 
foundation for evidence-based policymaking, and facilitates government spending on research. 
Trust in science and scientists enables management of global crises like the COVID-19 
pandemic and climate change. Societies with high public trust in science and scientists dealt with 
the COVID-19 pandemic more effectively, as citizens were more likely to comply with non-
pharmaceutical COVID-19 interventions2 and had higher vaccine confidence1. People with high 
trust in scientists are also more likely to engage in individual and collective action on climate 
change4,5. 
Studies find that, globally, most people trust science, and scientists are among the most 
trusted actors in society6–8. Despite these findings, there is a popular dominant narrative claiming 
there is a crisis of trust in science and scientists3,9. This narrative well predates the COVID-19 
pandemic and may alter people’s views about scientists10–12. Therefore, it is important to revisit 
this narrative and provide robust empirical evidence on whether it is accurate. 
Most previous studies have been limited to the Global North, typically the United States 
or Europe, including our own previous work (see e.g.,13–19). A few studies go beyond these 
regions6–8,20–23. However, they assess a limited range of theoretical constructs. We address this 
limitation in two ways: First, we analyse the extent to which people believe that scientists should 
be involved in society and policymaking. We refer to this as normative perceptions of science in 
society and policymaking. Second, we investigate which issues people want scientists to 
prioritise in their work, and how such perceptions are related to their trust in scientists. Previous 
studies have shown that trust is affected by the perception of value alignment24. People who feel 
that their concerns and values are not reflected in the priorities of scientists may therefore doubt 
the trustworthiness of scientists. 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
3 
 
 
 
Our large-scale, pre-registered survey expands and strengthens previous work by offering  
the largest global dataset on trust in scientists post-COVID-19 pandemic16, and by investigating 
the public’s normative perceptions of the role of scientists in society and policymaking and their 
desired research priorities. We use a theoretically informed multidimensional trust measure25 and 
examine relevant demographic, ideological, attitudinal, and country-level factors to explain trust 
across countries7. We survey underrepresented countries and individuals in research26 and, in 
almost all countries, have worked with local research partners27,28.  
Our study answers the following questions: 1) How much do people around the world 
trust scientists, and how do levels of trust vary across countries? 2) How do demographic, 
ideological, attitudinal, and country-level factors relate to trust in scientists (see fig. S1a for a 
directed acyclic graph), and how do these relationships vary between countries? 3) What are 
people’s normative perceptions of scientists in society and policymaking, and how do they differ 
across countries? 4) What issues do people want scientists to prioritise, and do they believe that 
scientists actually address these priorities? See the preregistration for more detailed research 
questions and hypotheses: [URL REDACTED] 
By investigating trust in scientists, we do not mean to imply that trust is always 
warranted. In some situations, low trust may be warranted. For example, science’s fraught 
historical relationship with racism, its role in perpetuating racialized forms of knowledge 
production, sustaining racial paradigms29, and disregarding ethical canons by experimenting on 
non-White human subjects30, has reduced research participation in some populations31. Further, 
the epistemic authority of science and scientists has been challenged by mis- and 
disinformation32,33,  a “reproducibility crisis”34, conspiracy theories35,36, and science-related 
populist attitudes37,38. Science-related populism has been conceptualised as a perceived 
antagonism between ‘the ordinary people’ and common sense versus academic elites and 
scientific expertise37. Unlike political populism, which criticises political elites and their political 
power claims, science-related populism criticises academic elites, challenges their decision-
making authority in scientific research, and suggests that their epistemic truth claims are inferior 
to the common sense of ‘the people’37. Anti-science attitudes, even if held by only a minority of 
people, raise concerns about a potential crisis of trust in science which could challenge the 
epistemic authority of science and the role of scientists in supporting evidence-based 
policymaking20,37. These concerns, which have been prominently discussed in leading news 
media, have been exacerbated as trust in scientists and their desired role in policymaking has 
become divided along partisan lines. Several studies show that in the United States and some 
other countries, conservatives and right-leaning individuals have low levels of trust in scientists, 
hold stronger anti-science attitudes, and express low confidence that scientists act in the best 
interest of the public, provide benefits to society, and apply reliable methods19–21,39,40. Global 
empirical evidence is needed to determine how widespread such critical attitudes toward science 
are across countries and population groups. 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
4 
 
 
 
Our survey goes beyond commonly studied correlates of trust in scientists in four 
important ways. First, we investigate how trust in scientists relates to science-related populist 
attitudes. Science-related populists deny that scientists are knowledgeable experts and believe 
that they do not act in the interest of the general public: two key aspects of trust in scientists37. 
Second, we investigate whether trust in scientists is related to people’s social dominance 
orientation (SDO), which has been defined as “the degree to which individuals desire and 
support group-based hierarchy and the domination of ‘inferior’ groups by ‘superior’ groups”41 
(p. 48). Individuals high in SDO are arguably less likely to trust scientists as they perceive 
universities as hierarchy-attenuating social institutions42. Previous research supports this, 
showing that SDO is a predictor of low trust in scientists43 and distrust in climate science19,43. 
However, it is unknown how SDO relates to trust in scientists across many countries. Third, we 
investigate what goals people want scientists to prioritise in their work and how this relates to 
trust. Fourth, we investigate whether people perceive that their desired priorities are tackled by 
science. 
To answer our research questions, we conducted a crowd-sourced Many Labs project 
with the same translated online questionnaire given to 71,922 respondents in k = 68 countriesi on 
all inhabited continents (fig. S2). The survey covered 31% of the world’s countries that together 
make up 79% of the global population. Data were collected between November 2022 and August 
2023, with quota samples that were weighted according to national distributions of age, gender, 
and education level, as well as country sample size. As recommended by other global studies on 
trust in scientists7, we provided respondents with a definition of science and scientists to mitigate 
semantic variations across languages (see SI) ii. We measured trust in scientists (instead of 
science) because “science” is more abstract than “scientists” and therefore makes a less clear 
referent: People may think of scientific institutions, scientific communities, scientific methods, 
or individual scientists when being asked about their general perception of “science”. However, 
these trust measures can be distinguished both conceptually and empirically25,44. For example, 
research has shown that less educated people trust scientific methods more than scientific 
institutions44. General measures that assess trust in the scientific community only capture some 
of the conceptually established dimensions of perceived trustworthiness (e.g., expertise)25. We 
reduced this ambiguity by avoiding the abstract category “science,” and using the more concrete 
reference object “scientists”7. We slightly deviated from the preregistration because of 
multicollinearity (exclusion of confidence in science as a model covariate) and sparsely 
populated sample strata in certain countries (collapsing neighbouring strata during post-hoc 
weighting; see SI). All analyses can be reproduced with the replication materials available at: 
[URL REDACTED] 
  
 
 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
Trust in scientists across the world  
We employed an index composed from a 12-item scale measuring four established dimensions of 
trustworthiness: perceived competence, benevolence, integrity, and openness13,25,45. This scale is 
based on the most comprehensive review of trust measures used to assess trustworthiness 
perceptions of scientists45. It was pre-tested to confirm its reliability, relies on accepted 
conceptual assumptions that we validated in factor analyses, and has high reliability across 
countries46. However, confirmatory factor analyses show that we can only assume configural 
invariance and no metric or scalar invariance46. This is a common caveat of multilingual survey 
research and to some extent unavoidable47. When these components of trustworthiness 
perceptions are aggregated to a single score, the index represents an integrative measure of 
public trust in scientists with strong reliability (Cronbach’s α = 0.93 and ω = 0.95). Therefore, 
we used the aggregate index for our main analyses (see SI for additional analyses with individual 
trust dimensions). 
Globally, trust in scientists is moderately high (global M = 3.62, SD = 0.70; 1 = very low, 
2 = somewhat low, 3 = neither high nor low, 4 = somewhat high, 5 = very high). No country 
shows low overall trust in scientists (Fig. 1). Across the globe, people perceive scientists as 
having high competence (M = 4.02, SD = 0.71), with 78% believing that scientists are qualified 
to conduct high-impact research (5% believe they are unqualified and 16% selected the scale 
midpoint; fig. S3). People perceive scientists to have moderate integrity (M = 3.58, SD = 0.78), 
and benevolent intentions (M = 3.55, SD = 0.82; table S1). For example, 57% of people believe 
that most scientists are honest (11% believe they are dishonest and 31% selected the scale 
midpoint) and 56% believe that most scientists are concerned about people’s wellbeing (15% 
believe they are not concerned and 29% selected the scale midpoint). Scientists’ perceived 
openness to feedback is slightly lower (M = 3.33, SD = 0.86), with 42% believing that scientists 
pay somewhat or very much attention to others’ views. Globally, 75% agree that scientific 
research methods are the best way to find out if something is true or false. Trust in scientific 
methods moderately correlates with trust in scientists (r = 0.47, p < .001), supporting previous 
findings on the multidimensionality of trust in science44.  
While trust in science is moderately high overall, there are notable variations across 
countries and regions (Fig. 1). Contrary to previous studies7,8, we do not find a clear pattern that 
scientists are less trusted in Latin American and African countries. However, we do find patterns 
within specific regions. For example, Russia as well as several former Soviet republics and 
satellite states, such as Kazakhstan, show relatively low trust in scientists.  

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
6 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1. Weighted means (M) for trust in scientists across countries and regions (1 = very 
low, 3 = neither high nor low, 5 = very high). Note. Vertical line denotes weighted global 
mean. Horizontal lines indicate standard errors (SE). Country-level SEs range between 0.008-
0.133. 
 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
Correlates of trust in scientists and cross-country variations  
To identify correlates of trust in scientists globally, we fitted linear random-intercept regression 
models that included post-stratification weights to provide estimates that are nationally 
representative in terms of gender, age, and education in almost all countries. To investigate how 
trust in scientists differs across population groups, we assessed several demographic variables 
and analysed their correlation with trust in scientists. We find higher levels of trust among many 
demographic groups: women, older people, residents of urban (versus rural) regions, people with 
high incomes, religious, educated, liberal, and left-leaning (Fig. 2, see also table S2). Differences 
across countries and sociodemographic groups can be explored with an online data visualisation 
tool developed for this project: [URL REDACTED] 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
8 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2. Standardised estimates of weighted blockwise multilevel regression model testing the 
association of trust in scientists with demographic characteristics, attitudes, and country-
level indicators (random intercepts across countries). Block 1 uses data from all 68 countries, 
block 2 uses data from 67 countries (all except Malaysia, where social dominance orientation 
was not measured), block 3 uses data from 66 countries (all except Malaysia and Mexico, where 
willingness to be vulnerable to science was not measured), block 4 uses data from 51 countries 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
9 
 
 
 
(all except those where PISA’s literacy scores were not available, see SI). Full regression results 
are reported in table S2. Results of exploratory analyses with individual trust dimensions are 
reported in fig. S4-S7. * p < .05, ** p < .01, *** p < .001. 
 
One might assume that trust in science would correlate with tertiary education, as people 
with more years of schooling and university education have had more chances to build a closer 
relationship with science and experience the competence and benevolence of scientists, for 
example48. However, our data shows only a small positive relationship between tertiary 
education and trust in scientists on average (b = 0.035, p < .001). In fact, in most countries we 
find little or no credible evidence for a relationship between tertiary education and trust (fig. S8). 
Overall, the relationships between demographic characteristics and trust in scientists are very 
small (marginal effects plots with unstandardized units are shown in fig. S9). 
Many might also assume that religiosity is associated with lower trust in scientists, given 
that many studies conducted in Global North countries find this relationship (see e.g.,19,49). 
However, against this assumption, one previous study found that only 29% of people worldwide 
believe that science stands in disagreement with their religion7. Another study found that while 
religiosity is associated with negative attitudes towards science in the United States, the 
relationship is inconsistent across the world50. Indeed, we find that, globally, religiosity is 
positively associated with trust in scientists (b = 0.051, p < .001). However, as previous studies 
have also shown, we find substantive differences across countries and regions50,51. In Muslim 
countries such as Türkiye, Bangladesh, and Malaysia (fig. S10), trust is positively associated 
with religiosity. In contrast, in many Christian-majority European countries, and in Israel, trust is 
negatively associated with religiosity. Qualitative interviews conducted by the Pew Research 
Center put these findings into context52. They found that most Muslim participants did not 
perceive a conflict between science and religion, because their holy text, the Quran, proclaims 
many principles of science. Conversely, some Christians perceive that science disagrees with 
their religion, even though there are pronounced variations across countries52. Our findings are 
consistent with these results.  
Other positive correlates of trust in scientists include people’s willingness to rely on 
scientific advice and thus make themselves vulnerable to scientists, the belief that science 
benefits people like them, and trust in scientific methods. 
Our study also sheds light on individual attributes that are associated with lower trust in 
scientists, namely conservative political orientation, social dominance orientation, and science-
populist attitudes. Previous studies, which mostly focused on North America and Europe, have 
found right-leaning and conservative political orientation to be negatively associated with trust in 
scientists19,20. Our study partly confirms these findings. We find a negative association between 
trust and conservative political orientation. However, we find a very small, positive relationship 
between right-leaning political orientation and trust. Given that some recent global social science 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
10 
 
 
 
studies used a left-right measure to assess political orientation while others used a liberal-
conservative measure53–55, we used both measures and analysed how results vary depending on 
the measure in question. We find that the relationships between the two measures of political 
orientation and trust vary substantially across countries (Fig. 3a and 3b; fig. S11-S12). For 
example, in the United States, trust is associated with a liberal orientation but not with one’s self-
placement on the left-right spectrum. More generally, right-leaning and conservative political 
orientation are negatively associated with trust in scientists in several European and North 
American countries, so previous research, which has disproportionally focused on these 
countries, has tended to stress right-leaning and conservative distrust. However, in most 
countries (k = 41 for left-right measure and k = 48 for liberal-conservative measure), our data do 
not show credible evidence of a relationship between political orientation and trust in scientists. 
Furthermore, in some Eastern European, South-East Asian, and African countries, right-leaning 
individuals have higher trust in scientists. These contrasting findings may be explained by the 
fact that in some countries right-leaning parties may have cultivated reservations against 
scientists among their supporters, while in other countries left-leaning parties may have done so56 
(see fig. S11). In other words, the attitudes of political leadership rather than peoples’ political 
orientation may better explain politically correlated attitudes towards scientists (see SI for 
selected country-specific explanations). We encourage future research to investigate differences 
in the two measures of political orientation on the country level (for broader discussions on these 
measures see57–60). 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
11 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Relationship of political orientation measures and trust in scientists. Visualises 
standardised country-level effects of political orientation (3a: 1 = left – 5 = right; 3b: 1 = liberal 
– 5 = conservative) on trust in scientists (1 = very low, 3 = neither high nor low, 5 = very high). 
These effects are sums of the global effect for political orientation and the random effect within 
each country; they were estimated with weighted linear multilevel regressions that contained 
random intercepts and random slopes for political orientation (3a: left-right; 3b: liberal-
conservative) across countries. These models control for demographic characteristics. 
Significance tests used percentile bootstrapping. Countries with significant country-level effects 
(p < .05) are displayed in colours: Countries coloured in shades of blue show a positive country-

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
12 
 
 
 
level association of left-leaning (3a) respectively liberal (3b) orientation and trust in scientists 
(i.e., right-leaning resp. conservatives have lower trust). Countries coloured in shades of red 
show a positive country-level association of right-leaning (3a) respectively conservative (3b) 
orientation and trust in scientists (i.e., left-leaning resp. liberals have lower trust). Countries with 
non-significant effects are shaded in dark grey. Countries with no available data are shaded in 
light grey. 
 
 Some studies have looked at social dominance orientation—that is to say, a preference 
for social hierarchy and inequality—and found it to be negatively associated with trust in 
scientists19,43.  Our results confirm this: The low global mean for SDO (M = 3.62, SD = 1.76; 1 = 
extremely oppose – 10 = extremely favor) is consistent with the overall moderately high trust in 
scientists. Moreover, we find that those who favour hierarchy enhancement (i.e., more strongly 
endorse SDO) are less likely to trust scientists (b = -0.098, p < .001). This may be because they 
see universities (i.e., scientists) as institutions that weaken social hierarchies42. 
We also find that low trust in scientists is associated with science-related populist 
attitudes—that is, beliefs that people’s common sense is superior to the expertise of scientists 
and scientific institutions. This corroborates findings on single countries38, and is first global 
evidence that populist resentment against science, a prevalent component of the trust crisis 
narrative, may undermine public trust in scientists. 
We also tested pre-registered hypotheses assuming that trust in scientists is linked to 
country-level indicators, including GDP per capita, PISA’s science literacy score, and the 
Academic Freedom index. Contrary to the finding of the Wellcome Global Monitor7, we find 
that trust is weakly correlated with the Gini inequality index (i.e., trust is higher in countries with 
more income inequality). One possible explanation for the discrepancy between the Monitor and 
our study is that urban populations—which are more likely to trust scientists (Fig. 2)—were 
overrepresented in our samples from countries with high Gini scores, e.g., South Africa. 
However, a non-preregistered analysis advised against this explanation: The extent of 
oversampling urban participants (difference of urban-residence individuals in sample vs. in 
population) did not moderate the effect of the Gini index on trust in scientists. We found 
tentative support for another explanation: The relationship between income inequality and trust 
(fig. S13) is largely driven by countries with a high degree of corruption (primarily Latin 
American countries as well as Sub-Saharan African countries), as indicated by a significant, but 
very low-powered (1 – β = 0.25 at α = .05) interaction effect of the Gini index × Transparency 
International’s Corruption Perceptions Index61 (table S3). This suggests that people in countries 
with high inequality may see scientists as a trustworthy alternative to perceivably corrupt 
governments and political and economic elites62–64. Comparing trust in scientists to trust in the 
national government (based on country estimates from the Wellcome Global Monitor) supports 
this assumption. Some countries with higher perceived corruption rank considerably lower in 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
13 
 
 
 
trust in the government than in trust in scientists, whereas the opposite applies to less corrupt 
countries with lower perceived corruption (see fig. S14). Overall, trust in the government and 
trust in scientists are not significantly correlated at the country level (r = 0.138, t = 1.104, df = 
63, p = .274). We do not find credible evidence that trust is higher in countries with higher 
average science literacy scores and government expenditures on education, which challenges 
assumptions that public understanding of science, and policy measures to increase such 
understanding, foster trust in scientists65. 
 
Normative perceptions of scientists’ role in society and policymaking  
Left-right divides in public opinion about science often centre on the question of whether 
scientists should take an active role in policymaking66. We find that people tend to agree that 
scientists should engage in society and policymaking (global M = 3.64, SD = 0.87, 1 = strongly 
disagree – 5 = strongly agree). Globally, a large majority (83%) agrees that scientists should 
communicate about science with the public, particularly in African countries. Globally, only a 
minority disagrees that scientists should actively advocate for specific policies (23%), 
communicate their findings to politicians (19%) and be more involved in the policymaking 
process (21%). However, perceptions differ across countries (fig. S15).  
About a quarter of the global sample selected the scale midpoints, therefore neither 
agreeing nor disagreeing on whether scientists should be more involved in policymaking and 
society (Fig. 4). People with high trust in scientists strongly favour scientists’ engagement in 
society and policymaking (b = 0.262, p < .001), especially in English-speaking countries (fig. 
S16). Support for scientists’ engagement in society and policymaking also varies both between 
and within countries. People who are younger, have tertiary education and higher income, or live 
in urban areas, generally approve of scientists’ engagement in policymaking (table S4). Also, 
right-leaning people and conservatives disapprove of scientists’ engagement in society and 
policymaking. 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
14 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4. Normative perceptions of scientists in society and policymaking using weighted 
response probabilities. 
 
Desired research priorities and perceptions that these are tackled  
We hypothesised that trust in scientists relates to another normative belief about science: 
Expectations about which societal goals scientists should prioritise67. We compared whether 
people’s expectations match their perceptions of whether scientists actually tackle the following 
goals: improving public health, solving energy problems, reducing poverty, and developing 
defence and military technology. 
Globally, people assign the highest priority to improving public health (M = 4.49, SD = 
0.84, 1 = low – 5 = high), followed by solving energy problems (M = 4.38, SD = 0.90), and 
reducing poverty (M = 4.08, SD = 1.10). Responses suggest a substantial discrepancy between 
what they perceive science is currently prioritising and what they expect scientists to prioritise, 
with poverty reduction showing the most substantial discrepancy (Fig. 5). The least desired 
research goal is developing defence and military technology (M = 3.10, SD = 1.36). Again, there 
are large differences between global regions (ranging from M = 1.88, SD = 1.21 in Uruguay to M 
= 4.07, SD = 1.52 in the Democratic Republic of Congo). In African and Asian countries, people 
often demand high priority for developing defence and military technology, as opposed to people 
in most European and Latin American countries (fig. S17). Overall, people tend to think science 
prioritises developing defence and military technology more than they desire.  
 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
15 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 5. Perceived research priorities for four goals of scientific research (blue) and desired 
research priorities (red). Grey horizontal lines indicate the discrepancy between perceived 
research priorities (“Science aims to tackle this goal”) and desired priorities (“Scientists should 
prioritize this goal”). Stars indicate results of weighted paired-samples t-tests for significant 
differences between perceptions and expectations, *** p < .001. 
 
Further analyses show that the discrepancy between people’s perceived and desired research 
priorities is associated with trust in scientists. On the one hand, higher trust is linked to a lower 
likelihood that scientists’ efforts do not meet people’s expectations for the following goals: 
improve public health, solve energy problems, and reduce poverty (table S5; see exploratory 
analyses with reversed hypothesised causality in table S6). In other words, the more people trust 
scientists, the more they perceive that scientists’ efforts exceed expectations. On the other hand, 
a higher likelihood that peoples’ perceived efforts exceed expectations is associated with less 
trust in scientists in the case of developing defence and military technology (i.e., those who think 
scientists are too focused on defence and military technology trust science less).  
  
Discussion and recommendations  
Our global, 68-country survey challenges the idea that there is a widespread lack of public trust 
in scientists. In most countries, scientists and scientific methods are trusted. This finding is in 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
16 
 
 
 
line with other international studies on trust in scientists6–8 . Our study thus confirms, expands 
and strengthens previous work that refutes the narrative of a wide-ranging crisis of trust. We 
expand previous studies by providing the largest dataset on trust in scientists post-pandemic and 
relying on a theoretically informed multidimensional trust measure. We also show that certain 
factors, such as being male, conservative, having a social dominance orientation and science-
populist attitudes, are correlated with lower trust in scientists. 
Public perception of scientific integrity—one of four components of trust—is high, but 
perceptions of scientists’ openness are comparably lower. Therefore, scientists wishing to gain 
more public trust could work on being more receptive to feedback, more transparent about their 
funding and data sources, and invest more effort into communicating about science with the 
public—which we found to be desired by 83% of respondents.  We recommend avoiding top-
down communication but encouraging public participation in genuine dialogue, in which 
scientists seek to consider the insights and needs of other societal actor68. While our cross-
sectional data cannot speak to the causality of these recommendations, they are supported by the 
extensive literature on the determinants of trust in scientists (see e.g., 13,25,69). 
Trust differs considerably across countries (Fig. 1, fig. S18-21), and there is substantial 
variation of the trust dimensions, which demonstrates the importance of using multidimensional 
trust measures like ours in comparative survey research25. This, in turn, will help scientists and 
science communicators to better understand how to act in ways that increase different 
components of trustworthiness perceptions, i.e., competence, integrity, benevolence, and 
openness. Relatedly, trust in scientists varies across population groups, with women, older and 
more educated people trusting scientists more. While demographic characteristics likely cannot 
cause views about scientists per se, they reflect shared direct or mediated experiences with 
scientists. For example, women’s lived experiences with science are likely different from those 
of men. Media coverage disproportionally features male scientists and portrays them differently 
than female scientists, which may evoke different trustworthiness perceptions across genders70,71.   
This information can help scientists and science communicators to better tailor their 
communication to different audiences. Our study assessed trust in scientists without 
distinguishing between different scientific fields. In some countries, trust may depend on the 
scientists’ discipline and the potential impacts of science on public policy18,72.  
Trust and its correlates such as right-leaning and conservative political orientation, 
education and religiosity clearly vary across countries. This exemplifies the need for more 
international research that includes underrepresented countries and understudied subpopulations. 
Our findings also highlight the inconsistency in the association between political orientation 
depending on the measure used (left-right versus liberal-conservative) and country of study, as 
well as the importance of ideology—specifically SDO—in relating to trust in scientists. While 
previous research finds that SDO is associated with the rejection of specific scientific 
information, such as the reality of climate change73 or the safety and efficacy of vaccines26, our 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
17 
 
 
 
findings support the idea that SDO may play a more fundamental role in undermining trust in 
scientists more generally. Scientists who challenge unjust social hierarchies might increase 
benevolence perceptions among some groups but would likely further decrease trust among 
people with social dominance orientations. Interventions could be developed to build perceived 
trustworthiness of scientists and involve trusted communicators outside of scientific institutions. 
While no country has low trust in scientists on average, lack of trust in scientists by even 
a small minority needs to be taken seriously. Distrusting minorities may affect considerations of 
scientific evidence in policymaking, as well as decisions by individuals that can affect society at 
large, especially if they receive extensive news media coverage and include people in positions 
of power that can influence policymaking11,74,75. A minority of 10% can be sufficient to flip a 
majority76 and when a critical mass value of 25% is reached, majority opinion could be tipped77. 
In the context of climate change, an agent-based model showed that an evidence-resistant 
minority can delay the process of public opinion converging with the scientific consensus78. 
Future research should investigate the size of these distrusting minorities across countries and 
their characteristics. 
In most countries, a majority of people want scientists to take part in policymaking. 
Future global comparative research should analyse whether opinions differ depending on a 
scientist’s expertise regarding a policy issue79 and public support for the policy in question15,80,81. 
Future studies should also examine whether normative perceptions of science in policymaking 
shift when specific scientific disciplines or policy issues are mentioned in real-world settings. 
A majority of the public want scientists to prioritise research on public health and solving 
energy problems. Yet, most people believe that scientists are currently not tackling these issues 
sufficiently and think that defence and military technology are prioritised too much. As the 
perceived benefits of science are strongly correlated with trust in scientists, greater consideration 
of public research priorities by scientists, funding agencies and philanthropists, presents an 
important avenue to increase trust. At the same time, science communication efforts could 
increasingly focus on highlighting ongoing research on public health and solving energy 
problems to elevate the prominence of this research in the minds of the public. Our study has 
several limitations, mostly related to the global data collection effort. For example, our survey 
was fielded in English/French in some countries where English/French are not the most 
commonly spoken languages, including Botswana, Ethiopia, Ghana, India, Kenya, and Nigeria. 
This likely resulted in the oversampling of more educated population segments. This limitation 
arises from the fact that our survey was fielded as an online survey, which considerably limited 
the representability of populations in certain countries with lower internet penetration. We 
provide a more detailed discussion of our limitations in the SI. 
Newspapers, opinion pieces, and books3 have spread narratives of low public trust in 
scientists. However, such claims remain largely unsubstantiated by empirical evidence6–8. Our 
Many Labs study provides decision-makers, scientists, and the public with large-scale and open 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
18 
 
 
 
public opinion data on trust in scientists that can help these stakeholders maintain, and 
potentially increase, trust in scientists. 
 
 
Online Methods  
 
Overview 
The data underlying the analyses were collected in a global, pre-tested, pre-registered, cross-
sectional online survey (N = 71,922 participants in k = 68 countries) between November 2022 
and August 2023 as part of the TISP Many Labs project (“Trust in Science and Science-Related 
Populism”). TISP is an international, multidisciplinary consortium of 241 researchers from 169 
institutions across all continents. Researchers conducted surveys within 88 post-hoc weighted 
quota samples in 68 countries, using the same questionnaire translated into 37 languages. In the 
following, we will describe the procedures used to collect and analyse the data. Further details 
are available in the SI and Mede et al.46. 
 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) Approval 
Our questionnaire was considered exempt from full IRB review from the Harvard University-
Area Committee on the Use of Human Subjects (protocol # IRB22-1046) in August 2022. A 
modified IRB application was submitted and considered exempt from full IRB review by the 
Harvard University-Area Committee on the Use of Human Subjects in November 2022 (protocol 
# IRB22-1046). All authors have informed themselves whether IRB approval was required from 
their institutions and obtained IRB approval if necessary.  
 
Pre-test 
A pre-test with n = 401 was conducted in the United States in October 2022 to validate the 
measures used in the questionnaire. Average completion time was 14 minutes. The questionnaire 
was slightly modified and two questions were added to the survey after the pre-test. Data from 
the pre-test was not included in the final analyses.  
 
Questionnaire 
In total, we measured 111 variables. No identifiable information was collected. The complete 
questionnaire (in English) is available at the Open Science Framework: [URL REDACTED] 
The core questionnaire contained the components described in the following. Participants were 
presented with these components in the order in which they are explained below, but the order of 
questions and items of multi-item scales was randomised.   
 
 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
19 
 
 
 
Consent form  
Participants were asked to carefully read a consent form (approved under IRB protocol # IRB22-
1046), which included some general information about the study and the anonymity of the data.  
 
Demographic data - Part I 
Participants who consented to participating in the study were then asked to indicate their gender 
(0 = Female, 1 = Male, 2 = Prefer to self-describe, 99 = prefer not to say), age, and level of 
education (1 = Did not attend school, 2 = Primary education, 3 = Secondary education (e.g., high 
school), 4 = Higher education (e.g., university degree or higher education diploma)). 
 
Attention check I 
The first attention check asked participants to write the number “213” into a comment box. 
Participants who failed the attention check were redirected to the end of the survey and were not 
remunerated. See SI for details on how many respondents failed this attention check in the 
overall sample and across countries. 
 
Definition of science and scientists 
Participants were presented with a definition of science and scientists: When we say “science”, 
we mean the understanding we have about the world from observation and testing. When we say 
“scientists”, we mean people who study nature, medicine, physics, economics, history, and 
psychology, among other things. This definition was based on the Wellcome Global Monitor7. 
We added it because in-depth interviews conducted by the Monitor7 suggested that including a 
definition would improve the reliability of cross-country comparisons.  
 
Media use and engagement with science 
Participants were asked how often they had come across information about science in ten 
different places (e.g., in news articles in printed newspapers or magazines) and how often they 
had engaged with science in four different ways (e.g., have conversations with friends) in the last 
12 months (1 = never, 7 = once or more per day).  
 
Open-ended questions 
Participants were randomly assigned to answer one of two open-ended questions. One question 
asked participants to write who they think benefits the most from science and why, and the 
second question asked about their opinion on what makes a scientist trustworthy.  
 
Perceived benefits of science 
Participants were asked how much they perceived that scientific research benefits people like 
themselves in their country (1 = not at all, 5 = very strongly), and which geographic region 
benefits the most and the least from the work that scientists do (1 = Africa, 2 = Asia, 3 = 
Australia and Oceania, 4 = Europe, 5 = Latin America, 6 = North America). 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
20 
 
 
 
 
Desired and perceived goals of science 
Participants were asked what goals scientists should prioritize (four items, 1 = very low priority, 
5 = very high priority), and how strongly they believed that science aims to tackle these goals (1 
= not at all, 5 = very strongly).  
 
Normative perceptions of science and society 
Participants rated their agreement to six statements (e.g., scientists should be more involved in 
the policy-making process) (1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree). Five of these statements 
were taken from66.  
 
Willingness to be vulnerable to scientists 
Participants’ willingness to be vulnerable to scientific guidance was assessed with three items (1 
= not at all, 5 = very strongly). Willingness to be vulnerable has been conceptualized as a 
behavioural trust measure as it reflects the ceding of authority48. 
 
Trust in scientists 
Trust in scientists was assessed with 12 questions on four different dimensions of trustworthiness 
(i.e., competence, integrity, benevolence, openness) (1 = very [unqualified], 5 = very 
[qualified]), based on Besley et al.48. Psychometric analyses (e.g., scale reliability, exploratory 
and confirmatory factor analyses, measurement invariance tests) can be found in the SI.  
 
Trust in scientific methods 
Participants indicated their level of agreement on whether scientific research methods are the 
best way to find out if something is true or false (1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree). 
 
General trust in scientists 
A single question taken from Funk et al.82 was used to measure participants’ level of confidence 
in scientists (1 = no confidence at all, 5 = a great deal of confidence).  
 
Outspokenness about science  
Three items based on McKeever et al.83 were used to measure outspokenness about science (e.g., 
I will share my opinions about scientific issues, regardless of what others think of them) (1 = 
strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree).  
 
Science-related populism 
Science-related populist attitudes were assessed with the SciPop Scale38, which comprises eight 
items (1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree).  
 
 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
21 
 
 
 
Attention check II 
In the second attention check, participants were instructed to select “strongly disagree” to a 
question. Participants who did not select “strongly disagree” were redirected to the of the survey 
and were not remunerated. See SI for details on how many respondents failed this attention 
check in the overall sample and across countries. 
 
Social dominance orientation 
To assess social dominance orientation, we used four items from Pratto et al.84 (1 = extremely 
opposed, 10 = extremely favour).  
 
Trust in climate scientists 
Participants were asked how much they trust in scientists in their country who work on climate 
change (1 = not at all, 5 = very strongly).  
 
Emotions about climate change 
Nine different emotions (e.g., helpless) were assessed (1 = not at all, 5 = very strongly).  
 
Perception of government action on climate change 
Participants were asked about their perception of government action on climate change with 
seven items (1 = strongly disagree, 5 = strongly agree)85.  
 
Support for climate policies 
Participants indicated their support for five policies (1 = not at all, 3 = very much; 4 = not 
applicable, which was recoded as missing).  
 
Perceptions of extreme weather events 
Participants indicated to what extent they believe that climate change has increased the impact of 
six weather events over the last decades (1 = not at all, 5 = very much). They also indicated 
whether they expected that climate change will increase the impact of these events in the future 
(1 = not at all, 5 = very much).  
 
Demographic data - Part II 
Participants indicated their household’s yearly net income (in local currency), their political 
orientation on a spectrum from liberal to conservative (1 = strongly liberal, 5 = strongly 
conservative, 99 = I don’t know) and on a spectrum from left-leaning to right-leaning (1 = 
strongly left-leaning, 5 = strongly right-leaning, 99 =  I don’t know), their religiosity (1 = not 
religious at all, 5 = very strongly religious), and whether they live in a rural or urban area.  
Collaborators were allowed to add questions at the end of the survey. Additional questions did 
not have to be approved by the lead author. 
 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
22 
 
 
 
Translations 
The original English survey was translated into the local language where necessary. Translations 
were done by native speakers who were familiar with the study background and, in many cases, 
had expertise on survey research and/or the conceptual underpinning of the measures. Minor 
linguistic adjustments were made to the survey if deemed necessary. Major changes in the 
wording of the original survey instrument had to be approved by the project lead. In total, the 
survey instrument was translated into 36 languages and dialects46.  
 
Preregistration 
We submitted a comprehensive preregistration prior to the data collection to the Open Science 
Framework (OSF) on 15 November 2022. It included detailed descriptions of our research 
questions and hypotheses, instruments, data collection, and analytical procedures: [URL 
REDACTED] Please see SI for deviations from the preregistration. 
 
Power analysis 
To determine our minimum target sample size, we ran simulation-based power analyses using 
the R package simr (v1.0.7)86, which is designed to conduct power analyses for generalized 
linear mixed models such as those we used in the main study (for detailed information see SI).  
 
Data collection 
Procedure and final sample 
Data were collected in surveys that used quotas for age (five bins: 20% 18-29 years, 20% 30-39 
years, 20% 40-49 years, 20% 50-59 years, 20% 60 years and older) and gender (two bins: 50% 
male, 50% female). Participants had to be 18 years of age or older and provide informed consent 
to participate in the study. Data were collected between November 2022 and August 2023. See 
Mede et al., 46 for an overview of survey periods across countries. The median completion time 
was 18 minutes. 
The surveys were programmed in Qualtrics. Participants that completed the survey were 
remunerated according to the market research company’s local rates. All data was collected via 
online surveys, except for the Democratic Republic of Congo, where participants were 
interviewed in face-to-face interviews and responses recorded in Qualtrics by the interviewers. 
Collaborators were instructed to work with the market research company Bilendi & Respondi, 
except for most African countries, where collaborators collected data with MSi. Convenience 
samples were not accepted.   
A total of n = 72,135 individuals from 88 samples across k = 68 countries completed the 
survey (n = 71,922 after exclusion of duplicate respondents). See Mede et al. 46 for an overview 
of all included countries and valid sample sizes across countries (i.e., after exclusion of duplicate 
respondents) and SI for detailed characteristics of the final sample and the representativeness of 
surveyed countries by income and regions (Tables S12-13).  

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
23 
 
 
 
Preparing the dataset 
Exclusion of non-completes and data quality test 
We excluded all respondents who did not complete the survey, because they cancelled 
participation during the survey, were filtered as their gender × age quota was already full, or 
because they did not pass one of the two attention checks. 4.24% of respondents who reached the 
first attention check did not pass it (“Please write the number 213 into the comment box”). 
24.38% of respondents who reached the second attention check did not pass it (“To show us that 
you are still paying attention, please select ‘strongly disagree’”; 46). We excluded all respondents 
who managed to complete the survey more than once despite countermeasures (e.g., IP address 
checks). In total, we excluded 213 duplicate respondents. 
 
Outlier value removal 
We removed extreme outlier values for age and household income: Age outliers were defined as 
values smaller than 18 and bigger than 100. Income outliers were defined as values that were 
smaller than zero, equal to zero, or outside 5 × the interquartile range of the log-transformed 
income distribution within each country after exclusion of values smaller than zero or equal to 
zero. This led to the removal of the age values of 8 respondents and the removal of the income 
values of 2,457 respondents (1,365 respondents indicated income values equal to or smaller than 
0; 1,092 respondents indicated income values outside 5 × the interquartile range of the log-
transformed income distribution within each country after exclusion of values equal to or smaller 
than 0). 
 
Post-hoc weighting 
We computed post-stratification weights with the R package survey (v4.4-2)87 to ensure that our 
models would estimate parameters that are representative for target populations in terms of 
gender, age, and education and have more precise standard errors (SEs). We used raking88 to 
compute four kinds of weights, i.e. (A) post-stratification weights at country level, (B) sample 
size weights for each country, (C) post-stratification weights for the complete sample, and (D) 
rescaled post-stratification weights for multilevel analyses46. 
 
Scale reliability 
Scales were combined into indices and psychometric properties were assessed for all indices (see 
SI), including scale reliability (Cronbach’s Alpha and Omega) and cross-country measurement 
invariances. Scale reliability was good for all scales46.  
 
 
 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
24 
 
 
 
Analyses 
Factors explaining trust in scientists 
To investigate explanatory factors of trust in scientists and explore how their influence varies 
across countries, we ran a block-wise linear multilevel regression analysis with the R package 
lme4 (v1.1-35)89. The model included rescaled post-stratification weights90. 
All independent variables in the first, second, and third block were scaled by country means and 
country SDs. All independent variables in the fourth block were scaled by grand means and 
grand SDs. 
We first tried to fit a model with random intercepts and random effects for all 
independent variables. However, this model failed to converge with three negative eigenvalues 
and also had a singular fit, i.e., some random effects correlations were close to -1/+1, and some 
random effects variances were close to 0. This was likely because the random effects structure 
was too complex. Therefore, we simplified the model as follows: To test global effects of the 
independent variables on trust in scientists, we fitted a model that contained random intercepts 
across countries (but no random effects) and inspected fixed effects estimates. To investigate 
how the influence of independent variables varies across countries, we fitted separate models, 
each of which contained random intercepts across countries and random effects for one particular 
independent variable. For example, we fitted a regression model with random intercepts across 
countries and random effects for political orientation (but no random effects for all other 
independent variables) to assess how the effect of political orientation on trust in scientists varies 
across countries. This entire procedure was completely in line with our preregistration. 
Before we fitted the multilevel models, we confirmed that they would fit the data better than 
fixed-effects models. First, we inspected intra-class correlations for trust in scientists (ICC = 
0.170). Second, we ran a likelihood-ratio tests: It showed that a random-intercept null model 
explaining trust in scientists had significantly better fit than a fixed-effects null model (χ² = 
6,024.9, p < .001). 
Moreover, we tested for multicollinearity of independent variables for the most complex 
model, i.e., after inclusion of all three blocks of independent variables (see table S16). All 
variance inflation factors (VIF) were well below even a very conservative threshold value of 491. 
 
Normative perceptions of science in policymaking 
To examine whether the public demands that scientists should take an active role in society and 
policymaking, we ran two analyses: First, we computed weighted probabilities of responses to 
the five items measuring these perceptions. This analysis provided estimates that are 
approximately representative with regards to gender, age, education, and country sample size. 
Second, we tested explanatory factors of normative perceptions of science in policy-making and 
society: We fitted a linear multilevel regression model with the R package lme489, which 
explained the average agreement to the five individual items measuring those perceptions, 
included the rescaled post-stratification weights, and contained trust in scientists, science-related 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
25 
 
 
 
populist attitudes, and sociodemographic variables as independent variables, i.e. gender (binary; 
1 = male), age (continuous), education (binary; 1 = tertiary education), annual household income 
in US dollar (continuous, log-transformed), place of residence (binary; 1 = urban), right-leaning 
political orientation (continuous), conservative political orientation (continuous), and religiosity. 
All independent variables were scaled by country means and country SDs.  
We specified random intercepts across countries and random effects for trust in scientists 
and science-related populist attitudes. Significance tests of regression estimates relied on the 
Satterthwaite method92. Before we fitted the multilevel model, we confirmed that it would fit the 
data better than a fixed-effects model. First, we inspected the intra-class correlation of the 
normative perceptions index (ICC = 0.104). Second, we ran a likelihood-ratio test, which showed 
that a random-intercept null model had significantly better fit than a fixed-effects null model 
(χ² = 3780.6, p < .001). Moreover, we tested for multicollinearity of independent variables (see 
table S17). All VIF values were well below even a very conservative threshold value of 491. 
 
Perceived and desired priorities of scientific research 
To explore desires that scientists should prioritize four specific goals (improving public health, 
solving energy problems, reducing poverty, developing defences and military technology) as 
well as perceptions that science actually tackles these goals, we ran three analyses: First, we 
inspected weighted mean values of responses to the four items measuring priority desires as well 
as weighted mean values of responses to the four items measuring perceptions that science 
actually devote efforts to the four goals. 
Second, we ran weighted paired-samples t-tests to analyse if mean values of desires and 
perceptions differed significantly from each other. These analyses provided estimates that are 
approximately representative with regards to gender, age, education, and country sample size.  
Third, we tested explanatory factors of the discrepancy between the desire that scientists should 
prioritize the four goals and perceptions that science actually tackles them. To do so, we ran four 
block-wise linear multilevel regression analyses with the R package lme489. Each model 
explained the discrepancy between desires that scientists should prioritize one of the four goals 
and perceptions that science actually tackles them, with higher outcome variable values 
indicating that perceptions are more likely to exceed desires and lower outcome variable values 
indicating that perceptions are more likely to stay behind desires. All models included rescaled 
post-stratification weights90. 
For each of the four models, we specified random intercepts across countries and random 
effects for trust in scientists and science-related populist attitudes. Significance tests of 
regression estimates relied on the Satterthwaite method92. Before we fitted the multilevel models, 
we confirmed that they would fit the data better than fixed-effects models. First, we inspected the 
intra-class correlations of the four discrepancy scores (health: ICC = 0.112; energy: ICC = 0.079; 
poverty: ICC = 0.134; defence: ICC = 0.107). Second, we ran likelihood-ratio tests, which 
showed that random-intercept null models had significantly better fit than fixed-effects null 
models (health: χ² = 3,246.2, p < .001; energy: χ² = 2,264.4, p < .001; poverty: χ² = 4,835.2, 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
26 
 
 
 
p < .001; defence: χ² = 3,669.0, p < .001). Moreover, we tested for multicollinearity of 
independent variables for the most complex models (see table S18). All VIF values were well 
below even a very conservative threshold value of 491. 
 
References:  
1. 
Sturgis, P., Brunton-Smith, I. & Jackson, J. Trust in science, social consensus and vaccine 
confidence. Nat Hum Behav 5, 1528–1534 (2021). 
2. 
Algan, Y., Cohen, D., Davoine, E., Foucault, M. & Stantcheva, S. Trust in scientists in 
times of pandemic: Panel evidence from 12 countries. Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 118, e2108576118 (2021). 
3. 
Nichols, T. M. The Death of Expertise: The Campaign against Established Knowledge and 
Why It Matters. (Oxford University Press, New York, NY, 2017). 
4. 
Cologna, V. & Siegrist, M. The role of trust for climate change mitigation and adaptation 
behaviour: A meta-analysis. Journal of Environmental Psychology 69, 101428 (2020). 
5. 
Cologna, V., Hoogendoorn, G. & Brick, C. To strike or not to strike? an investigation of the 
determinants of strike participation at the Fridays for Future climate strikes in Switzerland. 
PLOS ONE 16, e0257296 (2021). 
6. 
IPSOS. Ipsos Global Trustworthiness Monitor: Stability in an Unstable World. (2022). 
7. 
Wellcome Global Monitor. Wellcome Global Monitor: How does the world feel about 
science and health? https://wellcome.org/sites/default/files/wellcome-global-monitor-
2018.pdf (2018). 
8. 
Wellcome Global Monitor. Wellcome Global Monitor: How Covid-19 affected people’s 
lives and their views about science. https://cms.wellcome.org/sites/default/files/2021-
11/Wellcome-Global-Monitor-Covid.pdf (2020). 
9. 
Jamieson, K. H. Crisis or self-correction: Rethinking media narratives about the well-being 
of science. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 115, 2620–2627 (2018). 
10. Shanahan, E. A., Mcbeth, M. K. & Hathaway, P. L. Narrative Policy Framework: The 
Influence of Media Policy Narratives on Public Opinion. Politics & Policy 39, 373–400 
(2011). 
11. Toff, B. Exploring the effects of polls on public opinion: How and when media reports of 
policy preferences can become self-fulfilling prophesies. Research & Politics 5, 
2053168018812215 (2018). 
12. Sonck, N. & Loosveldt, G. Impact of Poll Results on Personal Opinions and Perceptions of 
Collective Opinion. International Journal of Public Opinion Research 22, 230–255 (2010). 
13. Hendriks, F., Kienhues, D. & Bromme, R. Measuring Laypeople’s Trust in Experts in a 
Digital Age: The Muenster Epistemic Trustworthiness Inventory (METI). PLOS ONE 10, 
e0139309 (2015). 
14. Wintterlin, F. et al. Predicting Public Trust in Science: The Role of Basic Orientations 
Toward Science, Perceived Trustworthiness of Scientists, and Experiences With Science. 
Frontiers in Communication 6, (2022). 
15. Cologna, V., Baumberger, C., Knutti, R., Oreskes, N. & Berthold, A. The Communication 
of Value Judgements and its Effects on Climate Scientists’ Perceived Trustworthiness. 
Environmental Communication 16, 1094–1107 (2022). 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
27 
 
 
 
16. Bromme, R., Mede, N. G., Thomm, E., Kremer, B. & Ziegler, R. An anchor in troubled 
times: Trust in science before and within the COVID-19 pandemic. PLOS ONE 17, 
e0262823 (2022). 
17. Motta, M. The enduring effect of scientific interest on trust in climate scientists in the 
United States. Nature Clim Change 8, 485–488 (2018). 
18. McCright, A. M., Dentzman, K., Charters, M. & Dietz, T. The influence of political 
ideology on trust in science. Environ. Res. Lett. 8, 044029 (2013). 
19. Azevedo, F. & Jost, J. T. The ideological basis of antiscientific attitudes: Effects of 
authoritarianism, conservatism, religiosity, social dominance, and system justification. 
Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 24, 518–549 (2021). 
20. Mede, N. G. Legacy media as inhibitors and drivers of public reservations against science: 
global survey evidence on the link between media use and anti-science attitudes. Humanit 
Soc Sci Commun 9, 1–11 (2022). 
21. Rutjens, B. T. et al. Science Skepticism Across 24 Countries. Social Psychological and 
Personality Science 13, 102–117 (2022). 
22. Chan, E. Are the religious suspicious of science? Investigating religiosity, religious context, 
and orientations towards science. Public Underst Sci 27, 967–984 (2018). 
23. Gil de Zúñiga, H., Ardèvol-Abreu, A., Diehl, T., Gómez Patiño, M. & Liu, J. Trust in 
Institutional Actors across 22 Countries. Examining Political, Science, and Media Trust 
Around the World. (2019) doi:10.4185/RLCS-2019-1329en. 
24. Siegrist, M., Cvetkovich, G. & Roth, C. Salient Value Similarity, Social Trust, and 
Risk/Benefit Perception. Risk Analysis 20, 353–362 (2000). 
25. Besley, J. C. & Tiffany, L. A. What are you assessing when you measure “trust” in 
scientists with a direct measure? Public Underst Sci 09636625231161302 (2023) 
doi:10.1177/09636625231161302. 
26. Ghai, S., Forscher, P. S. & Chuan-Peng, H. The illusion of generalizability in one big team 
science study. Preprint at https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/avcsp (2023). 
27. Forscher, P. S. et al. The Benefits, Barriers, and Risks of Big-Team Science. Perspect 
Psychol Sci 18, 607–623 (2023). 
28. Odeny, B. & Bosurgi, R. Time to end parachute science. PLoS Med 19, e1004099 (2022). 
29. Dubow, S. Racial irredentism, ethnogenesis, and white supremacy in high-apartheid South 
Africa. Kronos 41, 236–264 (2015). 
30. Brandt, A. M. Racism and Research: The Case of the Tuskegee Syphilis Study. The 
Hastings Center Report 8, 21–29 (1978). 
31. Scharff, D. P. et al. More than Tuskegee: Understanding Mistrust about Research 
Participation. J Health Care Poor Underserved 21, 879–897 (2010). 
32. West, J. D. & Bergstrom, C. T. Misinformation in and about science. Proceedings of the 
National Academy of Sciences 118, e1912444117 (2021). 
33. Roozenbeek, J. et al. Susceptibility to misinformation about COVID-19 around the world. 
Royal Society Open Science 7, 201199 (2020). 
34. Hendriks, F., Kienhues, D. & Bromme, R. Replication crisis = trust crisis? The effect of 
successful vs failed replications on laypeople’s trust in researchers and research. Public 
Underst Sci 29, 270–288 (2020). 
35. Rutjens, B. T. & Većkalov, B. Conspiracy beliefs and science rejection. Current Opinion in 
Psychology 46, 101392 (2022). 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
28 
 
 
 
36. Douglas, K. M. Are Conspiracy Theories Harmless? The Spanish Journal of Psychology 24, 
e13 (2021). 
37. Mede, N. G. & Schäfer, M. S. Science-related populism: Conceptualizing populist demands 
toward science. Public Underst Sci 29, 473–491 (2020). 
38. Mede, N. G., Schäfer, M. S. & Füchslin, T. The SciPop Scale for Measuring Science-
Related Populist Attitudes in Surveys: Development, Test, and Validation. International 
Journal of Public Opinion Research 33, 273–293 (2021). 
39. Funk, C., Tyson, A., Kennedy, B. & Johnson. Science and Scientists Held in High Esteem 
Across Global Publics. Pew Research Center Science & Society 
https://www.pewresearch.org/science/2020/09/29/science-and-scientists-held-in-high-
esteem-across-global-publics/ (2020). 
40. Li, N. & Qian, Y. Polarization of public trust in scientists between 1978 and 2018: Insights 
from a cross-decade comparison using interpretable machine learning. Politics and the Life 
Sciences 41, 45–54 (2022). 
41. Sidanius, J. & Pratto, F. Social Dominance: An Intergroup Theory of Social Hierarchy and 
Oppression. (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1999). 
doi:10.1017/CBO9781139175043. 
42. Sidanius, J., Pratto, F., Martin, M. & Stallworth, L. M. Consensual Racism and Career 
Track: Some Implications of Social Dominance Theory. Political Psychology 12, 691–721 
(1991). 
43. Kerr, J. R. & Wilson, M. S. Right-wing authoritarianism and social dominance orientation 
predict rejection of science and scientists. Group Processes & Intergroup Relations 24, 
550–567 (2021). 
44. Achterberg, P., de Koster, W. & van der Waal, J. A science confidence gap: Education, 
trust in scientific methods, and trust in scientific institutions in the United States, 2014. 
Public Underst Sci 26, 704–720 (2017). 
45. Besley, J. C., Lee, N. M. & Pressgrove, G. Reassessing the Variables Used to Measure 
Public Perceptions of Scientists. Science Communication 1075547020949547 (2020) 
doi:10.1177/1075547020949547. 
46. Mede, N. G. et al. Perceptions of Science, Science Communication, and Climate Change 
Attitudes in 67 Countries: The TISP Dataset. (2024) doi:10.31234/osf.io/jktsy. 
47. Putnick, D. L. & Bornstein, M. H. Measurement invariance conventions and reporting: The 
state of the art and future directions for psychological research. Developmental Review 41, 
71–90 (2016). 
48. Besley, J. C., Lee, N. M. & Pressgrove, G. Reassessing the Variables Used to Measure 
Public Perceptions of Scientists. Science Communication 43, 3–32 (2021). 
49. Rutjens, B. T. & van der Lee, R. Spiritual skepticism? Heterogeneous science skepticism in 
the Netherlands. Public Underst Sci 29, 335–352 (2020). 
50. McPhetres, J., Jong, J. & Zuckerman, M. Religious Americans Have Less Positive 
Attitudes Toward Science, but This Does Not Extend to Other Cultures. Social 
Psychological and Personality Science 12, 528–536 (2021). 
51. De Cruz, H. Religion and Science. in The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy (eds. Zalta, 
E. N. & Nodelman, U.) (Metaphysics Research Lab, Stanford University, 2022). 
52. Johnson, C., Thigpen, C. & Funk, C. On the Intersection of Science and Religion. Pew 
Research Center’s Religion & Public Life Project 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
29 
 
 
 
https://www.pewresearch.org/religion/2020/08/26/on-the-intersection-of-science-and-
religion/ (2020). 
53. Vlasceanu, M. et al. Addressing climate change with behavioral science: A global 
intervention tournament in 63 countries. Science Advances 10, eadj5778 (2024). 
54. Van Bavel, J. J. et al. National identity predicts public health support during a global 
pandemic. Nat Commun 13, 517 (2022). 
55. De keersmaecker, J., Schmid, K., Sibley, C. G. & Osborne, D. The association between 
political orientation and political knowledge in 45 nations. Sci Rep 14, 2590 (2024). 
56. Lasco, G. & Curato, N. Medical populism. Social Science & Medicine 221, 1–8 (2019). 
57. Otjes, S. & Rekker, R. Socialised to think in terms of left and right? The acceptability of the 
left and the right among European voters. Electoral Studies 72, 102365 (2021). 
58. Weeden, J. & Kurzban, R. Do People Naturally Cluster into Liberals and Conservatives? 
Evolutionary Psychological Science 2, 47–57 (2016). 
59. Thorisdottir, H., Jost, J. T., Liviatan, I. & Shrout, P. E. Psychological Needs and Values 
Underlying Left-Right Political Orientation: Cross-National Evidence from Eastern and 
Western Europe. Public Opinion Quarterly 71, 175–203 (2007). 
60. Bauer, P. C., Barberá, P., Ackermann, K. & Venetz, A. Is the Left-Right Scale a Valid 
Measure of Ideology? Polit Behav 39, 553–583 (2017). 
61. Transparency International. 2022 Corruption Perceptions Index. Transparency.org 
https://www.transparency.org/en/cpi/2022 (2022). 
62. The Cultural Authority of Science: Comparing across Europe, Asia, Africa and the 
Americas. (Routledge, London, 2018). 
63. Clausen, B., Kraay, A. & Nyiri, Z. Corruption and Confidence in Public Institutions: 
Evidence from a Global Survey. The World Bank Economic Review 25, 212–249 (2011). 
64. Jong-sung, Y. & Khagram, S. A Comparative Study of Inequality and Corruption. Am 
Sociol Rev 70, 136–157 (2005). 
65. Sturgis, P. & Allum, N. Science in Society: Re-Evaluating the Deficit Model of Public 
Attitudes. Public Underst Sci 13, 55–74 (2004). 
66. Cologna, V., Knutti, R., Oreskes, N. & Siegrist, M. Majority of German citizens, US 
citizens and climate scientists support policy advocacy by climate researchers and expect 
greater political engagement. Environ. Res. Lett. 16, 024011 (2021). 
67. Besley, J. C. The National Science Foundation’s science and technology survey and support 
for science funding, 2006–2014. Public Underst Sci 27, 94–109 (2018). 
68. Bubela, T. et al. Science communication reconsidered. Nat Biotechnol 27, 514–518 (2009). 
69. Fiske, S. T. & Dupree, C. Gaining trust as well as respect in communicating to motivated 
audiences about science topics. PNAS 111, 13593–13597 (2014). 
70. Freedman, G., Moutoux, I., Hermans, I. & Green, M. C. “She made a mean beef 
stroganoff”: Gendered portrayals of women in STEM in newspaper articles and their 
effects. Communication Monographs 91, 262–282 (2024). 
71. Mitchell, M. & McKinnon, M. ‘Human’ or ‘objective’ faces of science? Gender stereotypes 
and the representation of scientists in the media. Public Underst Sci 28, 177–190 (2019). 
72. Myers, T. A. et al. Predictors of trust in the general science and climate science research of 
US federal agencies. Public Understanding of Science 26, 843–860 (2017). 
73. Stanley, S. K. & Wilson, M. S. Meta-analysing the association between social dominance 
orientation, authoritarianism, and attitudes on the environment and climate change. Journal 
of Environmental Psychology 61, 46–56 (2019). 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
30 
 
 
 
74. Franta, B. Weaponizing economics: Big Oil, economic consultants, and climate policy 
delay. Environmental Politics 31, 555–575 (2022). 
75. Oreskes, N. & Conway, E. M. Merchants of Doubt: How a Handful of Scientists Obscured 
the Truth on Issues From Tobacco Smoke to Global Warming. (Bloomsbury Press, 2010). 
76. Xie, J. et al. Social consensus through the influence of committed minorities. Phys. Rev. E 
84, 011130 (2011). 
77. Centola, D., Becker, J., Brackbill, D. & Baronchelli, A. Experimental evidence for tipping 
points in social convention. Science 360, 1116–1119 (2018). 
78. Lewandowsky, S., Pilditch, T. D., Madsen, J. K., Oreskes, N. & Risbey, J. S. Influence and 
seepage: An evidence-resistant minority can affect public opinion and scientific belief 
formation. Cognition 188, 124–139 (2019). 
79. Oreskes, N. What Is the Social Responsibility of Climate Scientists? Daedalus 149, 33–45 
(2020). 
80. Beall, L., Myers, T. A., Kotcher, J., Vraga, E. K. & Maibach, E. W. Controversy matters: 
Impacts of topic and solution controversy on the perceived credibility of a scientist who 
advocates. PLOS ONE 12, e0187511 (2017). 
81. Kotcher, J., Myers, T. A., Vraga, E. K., Stenhouse, N. & Maibach, E. W. Does Engagement 
in Advocacy Hurt the Credibility of Scientists? Results from a Randomized National 
Survey Experiment. Environmental Communication 11, 415–429 (2017). 
82. Funk, C., Hefferon, M., Kennedy, B. & Johnson, C. Trust and Mistrust in Americans’ 
Views of Scientific Experts. Pew Research Center Science & Society 
https://www.pewresearch.org/science/2019/08/02/trust-and-mistrust-in-americans-views-of-
scientific-experts/ (2019). 
83. McKeever, R., McKeever, B. W. & Li, J.-Y. Speaking up Online: Exploring Hostile Media 
Perception, Health Behavior, and Other Antecedents of Communication. Journalism & 
Mass Communication Quarterly 94, 812–832 (2017). 
84. Pratto, F. et al. Social dominance in context and in individuals: Contextual moderation of 
robust effects of social dominance orientation in 15 languages and 20 countries. Social 
Psychological and Personality Science 4, 587–599 (2013). 
85. Hickman, C. et al. Climate anxiety in children and young people and their beliefs about 
government responses to climate change: a global survey. The Lancet Planetary Health 5, 
e863–e873 (2021). 
86. Green, P. & MacLeod, C. J. SIMR: an R package for power analysis of generalized linear 
mixed models by simulation. Methods in Ecology and Evolution 7, 493–498 (2016). 
87. Lumley, T. survey: Analysis of Complex Survey Samples. (2023). 
88. Battaglia, M. P., Hoaglin, D. C. & Frankel, M. R. Practical Considerations in Raking 
Survey Data. Survey Practice 2, (2009). 
89. Bates, D. et al. lme4: Linear Mixed-Effects Models using ‘Eigen’ and S4. (2023). 
90. Patil, I. et al. datawizard: Easy Data Wrangling and Statistical Transformations. (2023). 
91. O’brien, R. M. A Caution Regarding Rules of Thumb for Variance Inflation Factors. Qual 
Quant 41, 673–690 (2007). 
92. Satterthwaite, F. E. Synthesis of variance. Psychometrika 6, 309–316 (1941). 
93. van der Meer, T. & Hakhverdian, A. Political Trust as the Evaluation of Process and 
Performance: A Cross-National Study of 42 European Countries. Political Studies 65, 81–
102 (2017). 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
31 
 
 
 
94. O’Brien, T. L. & Noy, S. Cultural Authority in Comparative Context: A Multilevel 
Analysis of Trust in Science and Religion. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 57, 
495–513 (2018). 
95. Vallejo, B. M. & Ong, R. A. C. Policy responses and government science advice for the 
COVID 19 pandemic in the Philippines: January to April 2020. Progress in Disaster 
Science 7, 100115 (2020). 
96. Tony Blair Institute for Global Change. Pandemic Populism: An Analysis of Populist 
Leaders’ Responses to Covid-19. https://www.institute.global/insights/public-
services/pandemic-populism-analysis-populist-leaders-responses-covid-19 (2020). 
97. Buštíková, L. & Baboš, P. Best in Covid: Populists in the Time of Pandemic. Politics and 
Governance 8, 496–508 (2020). 
98. Allen, M. S., Iliescu, D. & Greiff, S. Single Item Measures in Psychological Science. 
European Journal of Psychological Assessment 38, 1–5 (2022). 
99. Tavakol, M. & Dennick, R. Making sense of Cronbach’s alpha. Int J Med Educ 2, 53–55 
(2011). 
100. Streiner, D. L. Starting at the Beginning: An Introduction to Coefficient Alpha and Internal 
Consistency. Journal of Personality Assessment 80, 99–103 (2003). 
101. Wuttke, A., Schimpf, C. & Schoen, H. When the Whole Is Greater than the Sum of Its 
Parts: On the Conceptualization and Measurement of Populist Attitudes and Other 
Multidimensional Constructs. American Political Science Review 114, 356–374 (2020). 
102. Mede, N. G., Schäfer, M. S., Metag, J. & Klinger, K. Who supports science-related 
populism? A nationally representative survey on the prevalence and explanatory factors of 
populist attitudes toward science in Switzerland. PLOS ONE 17, e0271204 (2022). 
103. Mede, N. G., Schäfer, M. S. & Metag, J. Cognitio populi – Vox populi: Implications of 
science-related populism for communication behavior. Communications (2023) 
doi:10.1515/commun-2022-0059. 
104. World Bank & OECD. GDP per capita (current US$). (2022). 
105. Directorate-General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics, Republic of China. Statistical 
Yearbook of the Republic of China 2021: Per capita income and consumption. (2022). 
106. UNESCO Institute for Statistics. Government expenditure on education, total (% of GDP). 
(2022). 
107. Directorate-General of Budget, Accounting and Statistics, Republic of China. Statistical 
Yearbook of the Republic of China 2021: Summary of R&D expenditure. (2022). 
108. World Bank. Gini index. Poverty and Inequality Platform. (2022). 
109. World Economics. Gini Coefficient. (2022). 
110. PISA. Science performance (PISA): Boys / Girls, Mean score, 2018 or latest available. 
(2022). 
111. OECD. Pisa Database. (2022). 
112. V-Dem. Country-Year: V-Dem Core Dataset v13. (2023). 
113. Spannagel, J. & Kinzelbach, K. The Academic Freedom Index and Its indicators: 
Introduction to new global time-series V-Dem data. Qual Quant (2022) 
doi:10.1007/s11135-022-01544-0. 
114. Norris, P. & Inglehart, R. Cultural Backlash: Trump, Brexit, and Authoritarian Populism. 
(Cambridge University Press, 2019). 
115. Devinney, T. M. & Hartwell, C. A. Varieties of populism. Global Strategy Journal 10, 32–
66 (2020). 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
32 
 
 
 
116. Guan, T. & Yang, Y. Rights-oriented or responsibility-oriented? Two subtypes of populism 
in contemporary China. International Political Science Review 42, 672–689 (2021). 
117. Zhang, C. Right-wing populism with Chinese characteristics? Identity, otherness and global 
imaginaries in debating world politics online. European Journal of International Relations 
26, 88–115 (2020). 
118. Aslanidis, P. Populism and Social Movements. in The Oxford Handbook of Populism (eds. 
Kaltwasser, C. R., Taggart, P., Espejo, P. O. & Ostiguy, P.) 0 (Oxford University Press, 
2017). doi:10.1093/oxfordhb/9780198803560.013.23. 
119. Lam-Knott, S. “Populism” in Hong Kong’s contemporary politics. The Immanent Frame. 
https://tif.ssrc.org/2020/02/26/populism-in-hong-kongs-contemporary-politics/ (2020). 
120. Ng, H.-Y. & Kennedy, K. J. Localist groups and populist radical regionalism in Hong 
Kong. China: An International Journal 17, 111–134 (2019). 
121. Tang, G. Media populism in post-handover Hong Kong: an investigation of media framing 
of public finance. Chinese Journal of Communication 10, 433–449 (2017). 
122. Claessens, S., Kyritsis, T. & Atkinson, Q. D. Cross-national analyses require additional 
controls to account for the non-independence of nations. Nat Commun 14, 5776 (2023). 
123. Paccagnella, O. Centering or Not Centering in Multilevel Models? The Role of the Group 
Mean and the Assessment of Group Effects. Eval Rev 30, 66–85 (2006). 
124. Enders, C. K. & Tofighi, D. Centering predictor variables in cross-sectional multilevel 
models: A new look at an old issue. Psychological Methods 12, 121–138 (2007). 
125. Yaremych, H. E., Preacher, K. J. & Hedeker, D. Centering categorical predictors in 
multilevel models: Best practices and interpretation. Psychological Methods 28, 613–630 
(2023). 
126. Kenward, M. G. & Roger, J. H. Small Sample Inference for Fixed Effects from Restricted 
Maximum Likelihood. Biometrics 53, 983–997 (1997). 
127. Luke, S. G. Evaluating significance in linear mixed-effects models in R. Behav Res 49, 
1494–1502 (2017). 
 
 Notes: 
i The term “country” in this article refers to both sovereign states and territories not recognized as 
such. 
iiFor example, “science” does not translate precisely into German, Swedish, and Polish, where 
the term also encompasses the “humanities”. 
 
Acknowledgments: We thank Damiano Lombardi (University of Zurich) for managing the 
author list and author contributions and Peter Licari (Technite) for valuable methodological 
advice. 
 
Funding: The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to 
publish or preparation of the manuscript. Detailed funding information has been removed for this 
preprint and is available upon request. 
 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
33 
 
 
 
Author contributions:  
Conceptualization: VC, NM, SB, JB, CB, MJ, EWM, SM, NO, MS, SVDL 
Data curation: NM 
Formal analysis: NM 
Methodology: VC, NM, SB, JB, CB, MJ, EWM, SM, NO, MS, SVDL 
Project admin.: VC 
Software: VC, NM 
Supervision: VC, NM 
Validation: VC, NM 
Visualization: VC, NM 
Investigation: VC, NM, NIAA, SA, NAS, BA, IA, EA, AA, MA, IMA, MA, RMA, RA, 
TA, DA, FA, AB, RB, KB, EB, AYB, OB, KB, AB, OB, PCA, FC, ACV, TC, RKC, SC, 
GC, SDP, RD, SD, CDC, LDS, KD, SD, KMD, CD, DD, MD, UKHE, TWE, MF, AFB, 
ZF, XF, CF, CF, MF, SF, HF, JF, MF, SF, AG, PGV, MGV, WG, OG, OG, TG, JG, EG, 
MG, CGB, HG, DG, GMG, LG, HH, LNH, PH, ACHM, AH, GH, MH, MH, NI, MI, 
MTI, YJ, TJ, CAJ, SJ, DJ, MZK, JK, SK, JRK, MK, TKR, OK, HK, AK, LK, EK, LK, 
AK, LSK, PK, SK, TK, AK, EAK, CL, AL, AL, JBL, ZL, NL, AL, GL, AL, ALO, CLV, 
NML, CHL, KLT, MDM, SM, HM, JM, TLM, JM, PM, FMR, MM, IM, ZM, JN, EJN, 
JPN, FLNC, NNVN, DN, TO, JPH, MP, PP, PPS, MPC, MP, YP, ARP, MP, KP, MP, JP, 
DP, AP, KP, EP, KP, DMQ, PR, AR, FGR, CRS, GR, JR, SR, JPR, RMR, IR, OS, RRS, 
PS, BS, AS, JSN, ES, NS, LS, BS, OS, SKS, GS, SS, BS, ES, MT, CTE, CTE, BT, AKT, 
RT, DTF, MT, OMU, ICU, JVN, CV, SV, IV, AVB, IW, IW, MW, TW, MW, FW, 
ADW, ZX, JX, EZP, AZ, RAZ 
Resources: NIAA, SA, NAS, BA, IA, EA, AA, MA, IMA, MA, MA, RMA, RA, TA, 
DA, FA, AB, RB, KB, EB, AYB, OB, KB, AB, OB, PCA, FC, ACV, TC, RKC, SC, GC, 
SDP, RD, SD, CDC, LDS, KD, SD, KMD, CD, DD, MD, UKHE, TWE, MF, AFB, ZF, 
XF, CF, CF, MF, SF, HF, JF, MF, SF, AG, PGV, MGV, WG, OG, OG, TG, JG, EG, 
MG, CGB, HG, DG, GMG, LG, HH, LNH, PH, ACHM, AH, GH, MH, MH, NI, MI, 
MTI, YJ, TJ, CAJ, SJ, DJ, MZK, JK, SK, JRK, MK, TKR, OK, HK, AK, LK, EK, LK, 
AK, LSK, PK, SK, TK, AK, EAK, CL, AL, AL, JBL, ZL, NL, AL, GL, AL, ALO, CLV, 
NML, CHL, KLT, MDM, SM, HM, JM, TLM, JM, PM, FMR, MM, IM, ZM, JN, EJN, 
JPN, FLNC, NNVN, DN, TO, JPH, MP, PP, PPS, MPC, MP, YP, ARP, MP, KP, MP, JP, 
DP, AP, KP, EP, KP, DMQ, PR, AR, FGR, CRS, GR, JR, SR, JPR, RMR, IR, OS, RRS, 
PS, BS, AS, JSN, ES, NS, LS, BS, OS, SKS, SS, BS, ES, MT, CTE, CTE, BT, AKT, RT, 
DTF, MT, OMU, ICU, JVN, CV, SV, IV, AVB, IW, IW, MW, TW, MW, FW, ADW, 
ZX, JX, EZP, AZ, RAZ 
Funding acquisition: VC, NO, MS, JB, EM, SB, CB, BA, IA, EA, MA, MA, RMA, DA, 
AB, RB, EB, CB, AYB, RB, OB, MB, AB, KB, AB, OB, PCA, FC, ACV, TC, SC, GC, 
RD, SD, CDC, LDS, KD, SD, KMD, CD, DD, MD, UKHE, ME, BE, TWE, MF, AFB, 
XF, CF, CF, MF, SF, HF, JF, MF, SF, AG, MGV, WG, OG, OG, TG, JG, EG, MG, 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
34 
 
 
 
CGB, HG, DG, GMG, LG, HH, LNH, PH, ACHM, AH, GH, MH, MH, NI, MI, CAJ, SJ, 
DJ, MZK, JK, SK, JRK, TKR, OK, HK, TK, AK, LK, EK, LK, LK, AK, JK, LSK, PK, 
SK, AK, EAK, CL, AL, AL, JBL, ZL, NL, AL, GL, AL, ALO, CLV, NML, CHL, KLT, 
MDM, SM, RM, HM, JM, TLM, JM, PM, FMR, MM, EJN, JPN, TO, TO, JPH, MP, PP, 
PPS, MPC, MP, YP, ARP, MP, CRP, KP, JP, DP, AP, EP, KP, PR, AR, FGR, CRS, JPR, 
JR, SR, JPR, RMR, IR, OS, RRS, PS, SS, BS, AS, JSN, ES, JS, NS, LS, BS, OS, SKS, 
GS, SS, ES, MT, CTE, CTE, BT, RT, DTF, MT, MT, OMU, ICU, JVN, CV, SV, IV, 
AVB, IW, IW, MW, TW, MW, FW, ADW, ZX, JX, EZP, AZ, RAZ 
Writing-orig. draft: VC 
Writing – review & editing: VC, NM, SB, JB, CB, MJ, EWM, SM, NO, MS, SVDL, 
NIAA, SA, NAS, BA, IA, EA, AA, MA, IMA, MA, MA, RMA, RA, TA, PA, DA, FA, 
AB, RB, KB, EB, CB, AYB, RB, OB, MB, AB, KB, AB, OB, PCA, FC, ACV, TC, 
RKC, SC, GC, SDP, RD, SD, CDC, LDS, KD, SD, KMD, CD, DD, MD, UKHE, ME, 
BE, TWE, MF, AFB, ZF, XF, CF, CF, MF, SF, HF, JF, MF, SF, AG, PGV, MGV, WG, 
OG, OG, TG, JG, EG, MG, CGB, HG, DG, GMG, LG, HH, LNH, PH, ACHM, AH, GH, 
MH, MH, NI, MI, MTI, YJ, TJ, CAJ, SJ, DJ, MZK, JK, SK, JRK, MK, TKR, OK, HK, 
AK, LK, EK, LK, LK, AK, JK, LSK, PK, SK, TK, AK, EAK, CL, AL, AL, OLC, JBL, 
ZL, NL, AL, GL, AL, ALO, CLV, NML, CHL, KLT, MDM, SM, RM, HM, JM, TLM, 
JM, PM, FMR, MM, IM, ZM, JN, EJN, JPN, FLNC, NNVN, DN, TO, TO, JPH, MP, PP, 
PPS, MPC, MP, YP, ARP, MP, CRP, KP, MP, JP, DP, AP, KP, EP, KP, DMQ, PR, AR, 
FGR, CRS, GR, JPR, JR, SR, JPR, RMR, IR, OS, RRS, PS, SS, BS, AS, JSN, ES, JS, 
NS, LS, BS, OS, SKS, GS, SS, BS, ES, MT, CTE, CTE, BT, AKT, RT, DTF, MT, MT, 
OMU, ICU, JVN, CV, SV, IV, MV, AVB, IW, IW, MW, TW, MW, FW, ADW, ZX, JX, 
EZP, AZ, RAZ 
 
Competing interests: The authors declare no competing interests. 
 
Supplementary Information is available for this paper. 
 
Affiliations: 
 
1Department of the History of Science, Harvard University; Cambridge, 02138, USA. 
2Department of Communication and Media Research, University of Zurich; Zurich, 8050, Switzerland. 
3Institute of Sociology, University Bern; Bern, 3012, Switzerland. 
4Department of Advertising + Public Relations, Michigan State University; East Lansing, 48824, USA. 
5Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam; Amsterdam, 1018 WT, The Netherlands. 
6Department of Psychology, Inland Norway University of Applied Sciences; Elverum, 2418 Norway 
7Centre for Research on Evaluation, Science and Technology, Stellenbosch University; Stellenbosch, 7600, 
South Africa. 
8Centre for Climate Change Communication, George Mason University; Fairfax, 22030, USA. 
9Centre for Research in Communication and Culture, Loughborough University; Loughborough, LE11, UK. 
10Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge; Cambridge, CB2 3EB, UK. 
11Institute of Malaysian and International Studies, National University of Malaysia; Bangi, 43600, Malaysia. 
12School of Collective Intelligence, Mohammed VI Polytechnic University; Ben Guerir, 43150, Morocco. 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
35 
 
 
 
13Department of Science and Technology Studies, Faculty of Science, Universiti Malaya; Kuala Lumpur, 
50603, Malaysia. 
14ELTE Institute of Psychology, Eotvos Lorand University; Budapest, 1064, Hungary. 
15Department of Psychology, University of Sheffield; Sheffield, S10 2TN, UK. 
16Faculty of Psychology, Atma Jaya Catholic University of Indonesia; Jakarta, 12930, Indonesia. 
17Department of Economics, University of Bath; Bath, BA2 7AY  UK. 
18Department of Philosophy, Macquarie University; Sydney, 2109, Australia. 
19Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Dschang; Dschang, BP 96, Cameroon. 
20Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Cambridge, 02142, USA. 
21Department of Psychology, LMU Munich; Munich, 80802, Germany. 
22Division of Humanities and Social Science, California Institute of Technology; Pasadena, 91125, USA. 
23Department of Communication, George Mason University; Fairfax, 22030, USA. 
24Department of Physics, Egerton University; Egerton, 20115, Kenya. 
25Department of Psychology, Universitas Islam Negeri Sunan Kalijaga; Yogyakarta, 55281, Indonesia. 
26Department of Social Psychology, University of Groningen; Groningen, 9712, The Netherlands. 
27Museum of Natural Sciences “Sabiha Kasimati”, University of Tirana; Tirana, 1010, Albania. 
28Department of Architecture, University of Cambridge; Cambridge, CB2 3EB, UK. 
29Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Botswana; Gaborone, Botswana. 
30Institute of Political Science, University of St. Gallen; St. Gallen, 9000, Switzerland. 
31Institute for Planetary Health Behaviour, University of Erfurt; Erfurt, 99089, Germany. 
32Department of Economics, University of Birmingham; Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK. 
33Institute for Data, Systems, and Society, Massachusetts Institute of Technology; Cambridge, 02142, USA. 
34Department of Psychology, SWPS University of Social Sciences and Humanities; Warsaw, 03-815, Poland. 
35Faculty of Psychology, University of Warsaw; Warsaw, 00-183, Poland. 
36School of Psychology, University of Birmingham; Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK. 
37Computer Science Department, Harvey Mudd College; Claremont, 91711, USA. 
38Department of Psychology, Nantes Université, LPPL, Nantes, 44000, France 
39Institute for Sociology, Slovak Academy of Sciences; Bratislava, 813 64, Slovakia. 
40Department of Scientific and Innovation Culture. Spanish Foundation for Science and Technology; 
Alcobendas, Madrid, 28100, Spain. 
41Department of International and Political Sciences, University of Genoa; Genoa, 16125, Italy. 
42Institute for Multimedia and Interactive Systems, University of Lübeck; Lübeck, 23562, Germany. 
43Department of Health Law, Policy, and Management, Boston University School of Public Health; Boston, 
02118, USA. 
44Department of Sociology, University of the Philippines Diliman; Quezon City, 1101, Philippines. 
45Department of Psychology, Erzurum Technical University; Erzurum, 25050, Türkiye. 
46Institute of Psychology, Jagiellonian University; Kraków, 31-007, Poland. 
47Department of Psychology, KU Leuven; Leuven, 3000, Belgium. 
48Cambridge Zero, University of Cambridge; Cambridge, CB2 3EB, UK. 
49Department of Psychology, Université Rennes 2; Rennes, 35000, France. 
50Department of Cognition, Emotion, and Methods in Psychology, University of Vienna; Vienna, 1010, 
Austria. 
51Institute of General Practice and Family Medicine, University of Bonn, University Hospital Bonn; Bonn, 
53127, Germany. 
52School of Psychology, University of Kent; Canterbury, CT2 7NP, UK. 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
36 
 
 
 
53Harding Center for Risk Literacy, University of Potsdam; Potsdam, 14482, Germany. 
54Center for Sociocultural Research, HSE University; Moscow, 101000, Russia. 
55Department of Labor and Social Policy, University of Lodz; Lodz, 90-136, Poland. 
56School of Psychological Science, University of Western Australia; Perth, 6009, Australia. 
57Department of Management, Aarhus University; Aarhus, 8000, Denmark. 
58Department of Economics, Harvard University; Cambridge, 02138, USA. 
59Department of Political Science & Annenberg School for Communication, University of Pennsylvania; 
Philadelphia, 19104, USA. 
60Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Notre Dame; Notre Dame, 46556, USA. 
61School of Communication and Culture, Aarhus University; Aarhus, 8000, Denmark. 
62a2i Programme of ICT Division and UNDP Bangladesh; Dhaka, 1207, Bangladesh. 
63Department of Resource Economics and Environmental Sociology, University of Alberta; Edmonton, T6G 
2R3, Canada. 
64Department of Political Science and International Relations, Carleton College; Northfield, 55057, USA. 
65Faculty of Management and Economics, Ruhr-University Bochum; Bochum, 44801, Germany. 
66LMU Munich School of Management, LMU Munich; Munich, 80539, Germany. 
67Leibniz Institut für Wissensmedien; Tübingen, 72076, Germany. 
68Department of Psychology, Eberhard Karls Universität Tübingen; Tübingen 72076, Germany. 
69School of Social Work, Lucerne University of Applied Sciences and Arts; Lucerne, 6002, Switzerland.  
70Department of Psychology, Saarland University; Saarbrücken, 66123, Germany. 
71Department of Political Science, Aarhus University; Aarhus, 8000, Denmark. 
72Department of Psychology, Universidad de Concepción; Concepción, 4030000, Chile. 
73Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Bristol; Bristol, BS8 1QU, UK. 
74Institute for Management & Organization, Leuphana University; Lueneburg, 21335, Germany. 
75School of Psychology, University of New South Wales; Sydney, 2052, Australia. 
76Research Institute for International Management, University of St. Gallen; St. Gallen, 9000, Switzerland. 
77Department of Business Administration, Instituto Técnológico Autónomo de México; Mexico City, 01080, 
Mexico. 
78School of Psychology, Victoria University of Wellington; Wellington, 6012, New Zealand. 
79Department of Media and Communication, LMU Munich; Munich, 80799, Germany. 
80Department of Geography, University of Bergen; Bergen, 5020, Norway. 
81Faculty of Data and Decision Sciences, Technion - Israel Institute of Technology; Haifa, 3200003, Israel. 
82Hixon Center for Climate and the Environment, Harvey Mudd College; Claremont, 91711, USA. 
83Faculty of Management, University of Warsaw; Warsaw, 02-678, Poland. 
84Secretaría de Planeación, Centro de Investigación y de Estudios Avanzados del Instituto Politícnico 
Nacional; Mexico City, 07360, Mexico. 
85Department of Media and Communication, City University of Hong Kong; Hong Kong. 
86School of Education, Trinity College Dublin; Dublin, D02 PN40, Ireland. 
87Department of International Relations and Regional Studies, KIMEP University; Almaty, 050010, 
Kazakhstan. 
88Graduate School of Interdisciplinary Information Studies, University of Tokyo; Tokyo, 113-0033, Japan. 
89Department of Government & Politics, Jahangirnagar University; Dhaka, 1342, Bangladesh. 
90Department of Psychology, University of Minnesota; Minneapolis, 55455, USA. 
91School of Geography, Planning, and Spatial Sciences, University of Tasmania; Tasmania, 7005, Australia. 
92Political Sociology, University of Bamberg; Bamberg, 96047, Germany. 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
37 
 
 
 
93Institute of Psychology, Nicolaus Copernicus University; Toruń, 87-100, Poland. 
94Graduate Institute of Journalism, National Taiwan University; Taipei, 106216, Taiwan. 
95Department of Public Health, University of Otago; Wellington, 6021, New Zealand. 
96Department of Journalism and Mass Communication, Lviv Polytechnic National University; Lviv, 79000, 
Ukraine. 
97Institute of Communication Studies and Journalism, Charles University; Prague, 116 36, Czech Republic. 
98Center for Social and Cultural Psychology, Université Libre de Bruxelles; Brussels, 1050, Belgium. 
99School of Sciences and Humanities, Nazarbayev University; Astana, 010000, Kazakhstan. 
100Department of Social Research, University of Turku; Turku, 20500, Finland. 
101Faculty of Life Sciences: Food, Nutrition and Health, University of Bayreuth; Kulmbach, 95326, Germany. 
102Department of Management and Engineering, Linköping University; Linköping, 581 83, Sweden. 
103Department of Psychology, Ural Federal University; Yekaterinburg, 620075, Russia. 
104Department of Information Science and Media Studies, University of Bergen; Bergen, 5020, Norway. 
105Centre for Climate and Energy Transformation (CET), University of Bergen; Bergen, 5020, Norway. 
106Department of Communication Science and Political Science, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam; Amsterdam, 
1081, The Netherlands. 
107Faculty of Behavioural and Social Sciences, University of Groningen; Groningen, 9712, The Netherlands. 
108Department of Communication and Internet Studies, Cyprus University of Technology; Limassol, 3036, 
Cyprus. 
109Laboratoire Parisien de Psychologie Sociale, Université Paris Nanterre; Nanterre, 92000, France. 
110Laboratory for Research of Individual Differences, University of Belgrade; Belgrade, 11000, Serbia. 
111Department of Social Psychology and Methodology, Universidad Autónoma de Madrid; Madrid, 28049, 
Spain. 
112School of Medicine and Psychology, Australian National University; Canberra, 2601, Australia. 
113Uehiro Centre for Practical Ethics, University of Oxford; Oxford, OX1 1PT, UK. 
114Institut Langage et Communication, University of Louvain; Louvain-la-Neuve, 1348, Belgium. 
115Departamento de Psicología, Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia; La Molina, 15023, Peru. 
116Department of Psychology, University of Victoria; Victoria, V8P 5C2, Canada. 
117Harvard Kennedy School's Shorenstein Center, Harvard University; Cambridge, 02138, USA. 
118Network Science Institute, Northeastern University; Boston, 02115, USA. 
119School of Psychology and Public Health, La Trobe University; Melbourne, 3086, Australia. 
120Department of Psychology, Royal Holloway, University of London; Egham, TW20 0EX, UK. 
121Institut Jean Nicod, Département d’études cognitives, ENS, EHESS, PSL University, CNRS; Paris, 75005, 
France. 
122Department of Communication Science, University of Muenster; Münster, 48143, Germany. 
123School of Psychology, University of Waikato; Hamilton, 3240, New Zealand. 
124Department of Political Science and International Relations, University of Delaware; Newark, 19716, USA. 
125Office for Quality Assurance, Analyses and Reporting, Project EUTOPIA, University of Ljubljana; 
Ljubljana, 1000, Slovenia. 
126Department of Management and Supply Chain Studies, Nkumba University; Entebbe, 0256, Uganda. 
127Department of User Experience, Inteli; São Paulo, 05508-070, Brazil. 
128Malaria Epidemiology and Drug Resistance Laboratory, University of Buea; Buea, Cameroon. 
129Communication Arts Programme, Bowen University; Iwo, 284, Nigeria. 
130Department of Psychology and Psychotherapy, Witten/Herdecke University; Witten, 58455, Germany. 
131Department of Management, University of Adger; Kristiansand, 4604, Norway. 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
38 
 
 
 
132Faculty of Humanities and Social Sciences, Trinity Western University; Langley, V2Y 1Y1, Canada. 
133Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet; Stockholm, 171 77, Sweden. 
134Institute of Psychology, University of Silesia in Katowice; Katowice, 40-007, Poland. 
135Penn Center for Neuroaesthetics, University of Pennsylvania; Philadelphia, 19104, USA. 
136Department of Psychological Science, Pomona College; Claremont, 91711, USA. 
137School of Psychology, Aston University; Birmingham, B4 7ET, UK. 
138Department of Psychology, University of Crete; Rethymno, 74100, Greece. 
139Science Studies Laboratory, University of Warsaw; Warsaw, 00-927, Poland. 
140Department of Psychology, University of the Philippines Diliman; Quezon City, 1101, Philippines. 
141Max Planck Institute for Human Development; Berlin, 14195, Germany. 
142Social and Cognitive Neuroscience Laboratory, Mackenzie Presbyterian University; São Paulo, 01302-907, 
Brazil. 
143Department of Social Sciences, University of Hamburg; Hamburg, 20144, Germany. 
144Institut des Géosciences de l'Environnement, University Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, IRD, Grenoble-INP; 
Grenoble, 38000, France. 
145Institute of Environmental Health, Lisbon School of Medicine, University of Lisbon; Lisbon, 1649-028, 
Portugal. 
146Department of Implementation Research, Bernhard-Nocht-Institute for Tropical Medicine; Hamburg, 20359, 
Germany. 
147Centre for Language Studies, Radboud University Nijmegen; Nijmegen 6500 HD, The Netherlands 
148Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Vienna; Vienna, 1090, Austria. 
149Department of Cognitive Psychology, Universität Hamburg; Hamburg, 20146, Germany. 
150School of Politics and International Relations, Australian National University; Canberra, 2601, Australia. 
151Independent Researcher 
152Département de Sociologie, Université Officielle de Bukavu; Bukavu, 570, DR Congo.. 
153Faculté des Sciences Sociales, Université Catholique de Bukavu; Bukavu, 285, DR Congo. 
154Department of Environmental Systems Science, ETH Zurich; Zurich, 8092, Switzerland. 
155Sociology Department, Vrije Universiteit Brussel; Brussel, 1050, Belgium. 
156UNSW Institute for Climate Risk & Response, University of New South Wales; Sydney, 2066, Australia. 
157Department of Psychology and Neuroscience, Boston College; Chestnut Hill, 02467, USA. 
158Faculty of Political Science and Economics, Waseda University; Tokyo, 169-8050, Japan. 
159Department of Law, University "Aleksandër Moisiu" Durrës; Durrës, 2009, Albania. 
160Centre for the Politics of Feelings, University of London; London, WC1E 7HU, UK. 
161 Division of Public Policy, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology; Hong Kong  
162School of Psychology, University of Sussex; Falmer, BN1 9QH, UK. 
163Molecular Haematology and Immunogenetics Laboratory, Department of Medical Laboratory Science, 
Faculty of Health Sciences and Technology, College of Medicine, University of Nigeria Nsukka; Nsukka, 
410105, Nigeria. 
164School of Sciences, UCLan Cyprus; Pyla, 7080, Cyprus 
165Department of Psychology, Education and Child Studies, Erasmus University Rotterdam; Rotterdam, 3062, 
The Netherlands. 
166Department of Psychology, New York University; New York, 10003, USA. 
167Department of Technology and Bionics, Rhine-Waal University; Kleve, 47533, Germany. 
168Melbourne Centre for Behaviour Change, University of Melbourne; Melbourne, 3010, Australia. 
169Faculty of Philosophy and Social Science, Nicolaus Copernicus University; Toruń, 87-100, Poland. 

This is a preprint and is undergoing peer review. 
 
 
39 
 
 
 
170School of Economics and Management, Tongji University; Shanghai, 200092, China. 
171School of Environment, Tsinghua University; Beijing, 100084, China.