Palgrave’s Critical Policing Studies
Series Editors
Elizabeth Aston
 School of Applied Sciences
Edinburgh Napier University
Edinburgh, UK
Michael Rowe
 Department of Social Sciences Newcastle City Campus
Northumbria University
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK

In a period where police and academics benefit from coproduction in research 
and education, the need for a critical perspective on key challenges is pressing. 
Palgrave’s Critical Policing Studies is a series of high quality, research-based books 
which examine a range of cutting-edge challenges and developments to policing 
and their social and political contexts. They seek to provide evidence-based case 
studies and high quality research, combined with critique and theory, to address 
fundamental challenging questions about future directions in policing.
Through a range of formats including monographs, edited collections and 
short form Pivots, this series provides research at a variety of lengths to suit 
both academics and practitioners. The series brings together new topics at 
the forefront of policing scholarship but is also organised around who the 
contemporary police are, what they do, how they go about it, and the ever-
changing external environments which bear upon their work.
The series will cover topics such as: the purpose of policing and public 
expectations, public health approaches to policing, policing of cyber-­crime, 
environmental policing, digital policing, social media, Artificial Intelligence 
and big data, accountability of complex networks of actors involved in 
policing, austerity, public scrutiny, technological and social changes, over-
policing and marginalised groups, under-policing and corporate crime, insti­
tutional abuses, policing of climate change, ethics, workforce, education, 
evidence-based policing, and the pluralisation of policing.
Editorial Board:
Dr Matthew Bacon (University of Sheffield)
Dr Isabelle Bartkowiak-Theron (University of Tasmania)
Professor Sofie de Kimpe (Free University Brussels)
Professor Jacques du Maillard (CESDIP, France)
Professor Nick Fyfe (Robert Gordon University)
Dr Laura Huey (University of British Columbia)
Dr Bethan Loftus (Bangor University)
Dr Ali Malik (Northumbria University)
Professor Monique Marks (Durban University of Technology)
Dr Angus Nurse (Middlesex)
Dr Louise Porter (Griffith University)
Dr Pamela Ugwudike (Southampton University)
Professor James Willis (George Mason University)
Dr Andrew Wooff (Edinburgh Napier University)
Prof. K. Jaishankar, (Raksha Shakti University)

Jacques de Maillard
Kristof Verfaillie  •  Mike Rowe
Editors
The Politicization of 
Police Stops in 
Europe
Public Issues and Police Reform

ISSN 2730-535X	
        ISSN 2730-5368  (electronic)
Palgrave’s Critical Policing Studies
ISBN 978-3-031-35124-2        ISBN 978-3-031-35125-9  (eBook)
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-35125-9
© The Editor(s) (if applicable) and The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer International 
Publishing AG, part of Springer Nature 2024
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are solely and exclusively licensed by the Publisher, whether 
the whole or part of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, 
reuse of illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in any other physical way, 
and transmission or information storage and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by 
similar or dissimilar methodology now known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication 
does not imply, even in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors, and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book 
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or 
the editors give a warranty, expressed or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any 
errors or omissions that may have been made. The publisher remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
Cover illustration: Colors Hunter-Chasseur de Couleurs/Getty Images
This Palgrave Macmillan imprint is published by the registered company Springer Nature Switzerland AG.
The registered company address is: Gewerbestrasse 11, 6330 Cham, Switzerland
Paper in this product is recyclable.
Editors
Jacques de Maillard
University of Versailles 
Saint-Quentin-en-Yvelines
Cesdip, Guyancourt, France
Mike Rowe
Management School
University of Liverpool
Liverpool, UK
Kristof Verfaillie
Vrije Universiteit Brussel
Brussels, Belgium

In memory of Dr Vicky Conway.

vii
The chapters collected here are one part of the outputs that have emerged 
from participants on an EU-funded Collaboration on Science and 
Technology (COST) Action on Police Stops. This Action began work in 
2018 with four key themes. We explored: the practice of police stops; 
how those stops were experienced; the ways in which the police were 
accountable for their actions; and the political and social context in which 
police stops took place. This volume is the output of the last of these 
themes. Specifically, we wanted to understand why it was that a practice 
so controversial in the United States and the United Kingdom had 
received comparatively little attention elsewhere among EU states. What 
was it about the histories, legal systems or social fabric of countries that 
might influence the prominence of police stops as a public issue. In 
answer to so broad a question, we find the echoes of colonialism in the 
United Kingdom, France, Belgium and the Netherlands. Recent experi­
ences of authoritarian government in Eastern Europe were a more perti­
nent influence, tending to make for more tolerance of policing as it 
reformed. Across the south of Europe, in particular, migration has also 
played into the mix. But these grander narratives are then the backdrop 
to local dramas, whether that be deaths at the hands of the police or con­
troversies over the misuse of powers.
Preface

viii 
Preface
We bring together here thirteen chapters exploring the rise, fall and 
rise again of policing as a public issue to further our understanding and, 
perhaps, to prompt reflection and a reinvigorated debate. But we do so 
while reminding readers that this is one element of the output from the 
COST Action on Police Stops. There will be a second volume in Palgrave’s 
Critical Policing Studies series exploring the governance and accountabil­
ity of police stops. There has also been a special issue of the Journal of 
Organizational Ethnography and a podcast series (Vos Papiers S’il Vous 
Plait) as well as papers and reports (currently available at: polstops.eu/).
Guyancourt, France
Jacques de Maillard
Liverpool, UK 
Mike Rowe
Brussels, Belgium 
Kristof Verfaillie 
January 2023

ix
The editors would like to thank the authors of the chapters and other 
contributors to a series of online workshops in which these were developed 
during the pandemic. While these were not the convivial, in-person sym­
posia we might have wished for, they did serve to bring out the themes 
and issues that you will find in this volume. We would also like to thank 
Sofie De Kimpe as the Chair of the COST Action on Police Stops for her 
support, and for the invaluable assistance of Mirko Miceli and Irina 
Baraliuc with all the details. Finally, thank you to the staff at Palgrave for 
their patience as this collection has come together.
January 2023 	
Jacques de Maillard, Mike Rowe, 
and Kristof Verfaillie
Acknowledgements

xi
	 1	 Police Stops in Europe: A Citadel Under Siege, But Still 
Standing
    1
Jacques de Maillard, Mike Rowe, and Kristof Verfaillie
Part I  Police Stops, Protest and the Democratisation Process     25
	 2	 The Rise of Police Stops as a Public Issue in Twenty-First 
Century Poland
  27
Dorota Czerwińska
	 3	 The Issue of Police Stops in Croatia
  51
Ruža Karlović, Željko Karas, and Ivana Glavina Jelaš
	 4	 Police Stops in Hungary: In the Light of Public Debates 
and Media Coverage
  73
Valéria Kiss, István Hoffman, and Fruzsina R. Tóth
	 5	 Policing Migration, Protest, and Sovereignty: The 
Politicisation of Stop and Search Practices in Spain
  97
Cristina Fernández-Bessa, Manuel Maroto-Calatayud, and 
José A. Brandariz
Contents

xii 
Contents
Part II  Ethnic Profiling in European Countries
  121
	 6	 Contrôles au faciès in France: From Denial to Recognition 
to Inaction
123
Magda Boutros
	 7	 Human Rights, Criminalisation of Migrants and Racism 
Debates: Public Discussions About Police Stops and 
Ethnic Profiling in Finland
147
Suvi Keskinen and Markus Himanen
	 8	 Police Identity Checks in Belgium: A Critical Media 
Content Analysis
171
Ludovic De Vocht, Antoinette Verhage, and Sofie De Kimpe
	 9	 Police Stops in Norway: Public Controversies and 
Minority Status
197
Helene O. I. Gundhus and Randi Solhjell
Part III  Political Debates, Limitation and Extensions of 
Police Powers
  221
	10	 The Power of a Stooshie: Learning the Lessons of Stop 
and Search in Scotland for Implementing Organisational 
Change in Policing
223
Megan O’Neill
	11	 Contextualising Police Stops in Public Debates: Policy 
Turning-Points in Germany
245
Hartmut Aden, Alexander Bosch, Jan Fährmann, and 
Roman Thurn
	12	 The Politics of “Stop & Search” in the Netherlands: 
A Process of Juridification
267
Jan Terpstra and Renze Salet

xiii
  Contents 
	13	 Police Stop and Search Practices in Austria
289
Hannah Reiter
	14	 Regulating Stop-and-Search in England and Wales: 
Public Controversy as a Catalyst for Control
311
Estelle Marks and Ben Bowling
Index
339

xv
Hartmut  Aden  Hochschule für Wirtschaft und Recht Berlin, Berlin 
Institute for Safety and Security Research (FÖPS Berlin), Berlin, Germany
Alexander  Bosch,  sociologist and ethnographer, works at the Berlin 
Institute for Safety and Security Research (FÖPS Berlin) at the Berlin 
School of Economics and Law (HWR Berlin).
Magda Boutros  University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
Ben Bowling  King’s College London, London, UK
José A. Brandariz  is Professor of Criminal Law and Criminology at the 
University of A Coruña.
Dorota Czerwińska  University of Wrocław, Wrocław, Poland
Sofie De Kimpe  Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium
Jacques 
de 
Maillard  University 
of 
Versailles-Saint-Quentin, 
Versailles, France
Ludovic De Vocht  Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium
Jan Fährmann  is a lawyer and criminologist. He works in a law firm for 
criminal law, in research and teaching at the Berlin School of Economics 
and Law and in a parliamentary faction. He works in the Federal Ministry 
of Health of the Federal Republic of Germany.
Notes on Contributors

xvi 
Notes on Contributors
Cristina Fernández-Bessa  is a Ramón y Cajal distinguished research 
fellow at the University of A Coruña.
Ivana Glavina Jelaš  Police College, Zagreb, Croatia
Helene  O.  I.  Gundhus  is Professor and Head of Department of 
Criminology and Sociology of Law at the University of Oslo, and 
Professor II at the Norwegian Police University College.
Markus Himanen  University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
István Hoffman,  PhD, dr. habil. (1981), is a professor at the Eötvös 
Loránd University (Budapest, Hungary), Faculty of Law, Department of 
Administrative Law, a senior research fellow at the Centre for Social 
Sciences (Budapest, Hungary), Institute for Legal Studies, and university 
professor at the Maria Curie-Skłodowska University (Lublin, Poland), 
Faculty of Law and Administration.
Željko Karas,  PhD, is a college professor and Vice Dean of the Police 
University College in Croatia.
Ruža Karlović  Police College, Zagreb, Croatia
Suvi Keskinen  is Professor of Ethnic Relations at the Swedish School of 
Social Science, University of Helsinki, Finland.
Valéria Kiss,  PhD (1983), is an assistant professor at Eötvös Loránd 
University, Center for Theory of Law and Society.
Estelle Marks  King’s College London, London, UK
Manuel  Maroto-Calatayud  Complutense University of Madrid, 
Madrid, Spain
Manuel  Maroto-Calatayud  is Professor of Criminal Law and 
Criminology at the Complutense University of Madrid.
Megan O’Neill  University of Dundee, Dundee, UK
Hannah Reiter  is a senior researcher with VICESSE (Vienna Centre for 
Societal Security). 
Mike Rowe  University of Liverpool, Liverpool, UK

xvii
  Notes on Contributors 
Renze  Salet  was Assistant Professor of Criminology at the Radboud 
University, Nijmegen, the Netherlands.
Randi  Solhjell  is a postdoctoral researcher at the Department of 
Criminology and Sociology of Law, University of Oslo. 
Jan  Terpstra  is Emeritus Professor of Criminology at the Radboud 
University, Nijmegen, the Netherlands. He is also a research fellow at 
Free University of Brussels (Belgium) and at Leyden University (campus 
the Hague), the Netherlands. 
Roman Thurn  is finishing his doctorate at the Institute of Sociology at 
the Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität in Munich. He is a research assis­
tant at the Berlin School of Economics and Law.
Fruzsina R. Tóth  is an assistant professor at Eötvös Loránd University, 
Center for Theory of Law and Society.
Kristof Verfaillie  Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium
Antoinette Verhage  University of Gent, Gent, Belgium

xix
ACC	
Assistant Chief Constable
AEL	
Arabic European League, Belgium
ALES	
Austrian Centre for Law Enforcement Sciences
BBC	
British Broadcasting Corporation
BFMTV	
Television News Channel, France
BLM	
Black Lives Matter
BUSSS	
Best Use of Stop and Search Scheme, England and Wales
BVODH	
Neighbourhood Brigades of Observation of Human 
Rights, Spain
CERD	
Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination
CESDIP	
Centre de Recherches Sociologique sur le Droit et les Institutions 
Pénales, France
CJPOA	
Criminal Justice and Public Order Act (1994), England 
and Wales
CND	
Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament
CNP	
Spanish National Police
COST	
European Cooperation on Science and Technology
CUP	
Popular Unity Candidacy, Spain
ECHR	
European Convention on Human Rights
ECRI	
European Commission against Racism and Intolerance
ECtHR	
European Court of Human Rights
EELV	
Green Party, France
EHRC	
Equality and Human Rights Commission, England and Wales
Abbreviations

xx 
Abbreviations
ERC	
Republican Left of Catalonia, Spain
EU	
European Union
EUROCRIM	
European Society of Criminology Conference
FI	
France Insoumise, political party
FRA	
Fundamental Rights Agency
HMIC	
Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary, England 
and Wales
HMICS	
Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary for Scotland
HRW	
Human Rights Watch
HS	
Helsingin Sanomat newspaper, Finland
IAA	
Internal Affairs Act, Croatia
IAG	
Independent Advisory Group
ICERD	
UN International Convention on the Elimination of All 
Forms of Racial Discrimination
ID	
Identity
IRA	
Irish Republican Army
JCHR	
Joint Committee on Human Rights, UK
LDO	
Equality and Anti-Discrimination Ombudsman, Norway
LOPSC	
Law for the Protection of Public Security, Spain
LPF	
Law on the Police Function, Belgium
NATO	
North Atlantic Treaty Organization
NGO	
Non-Government Organization
NPD	
National Police Directorate, Norway
NSSU	
National Stop Search Unit, Scotland
OMOD	
Center for Social Justice, Norway
ORF	
National Broadcasting Service, Austria
ORMO	
Volunteer Reserve of the Citizens’ Militia, Poland
OSJI	
Open Society Justice Initiative
PACE	
Police and Criminal Evidence Act (1984), England and Wales
PCF	
French Communist Party
PGPD	
Coalition for the Police Management of Diversity, Spain
PIPE	
Programme for Effective Identity Checks Projects, Spain
QC	
Queen’s Council
SEPOS	
Social Exclusion, Polarization and Security in the Nordic 
Welfare State research project
SHRC	
Scottish Human Rights Commission
SNV	
Serbian National Council

xxi
  Abbreviations 
SPA	
Scottish Police Authority
SPG	
Police Security Act, Austria
SPÖ	
Social Democratic Party, Austria
STEPSS	
Strategies for Effective Police Stop and Search, Spain
SUP	
Unified Police Union, Spain
TA	
Terrorism Act (2000), England and Wales
UDI	
Centre-right party, France
VwGH	
Supreme Administrative Court, Austria
YLE	
Yleisradio, Finnish National Broadcasting Company

xxiii
Fig. 4.1	
Number of ID checks by the Hungarian Police 
(2010–2018). Source: Statistics of the activities on protecting 
public order (Hungarian Police) (http://www.police.hu/sites/
default/files/Kozrendvedelem%20HK%202018.%2012.
pdf, downloaded on 22nd August 2021)
82
Fig. 4.2	
Police stops in Belügyi Szemle 2015–2019
88
Fig. 4.3	
Stop and search related to political and public issues (own 
edition)
90
Fig. 4.4	
Normalization through stop and search
91
Fig. 4.5	
Stop and search in crime news
92
Fig. 4.6	
Articles specifically on the work of the police
92
Fig. 4.7	
Police abuse of power
93
Fig. 6.1	
Number of parliamentary sessions in which “contrôles au 
faciès” is mentioned, 1982–2018
133
Fig. 14.1	
All police stops data for England and Wales
315
Fig. 14.2	
Police stops under PACE s.1 and related powers requiring 
reasonable suspicion
317
Fig. 14.3	
Police stops under suspicionless search powers (s.44/s.47A 
TA 2000 and s.60 CJOPA 1994)
318
List of Figures

xxv
Table 2.1	
Number of ID checks (including road checks) in Poland in 
2011–2020
29
Table 2.2	
The use of “ID checks of citizens” in the chosen Polish 
media in 2001–2020
41
Table 4.1	
Key topics in the media (own edition)
89
Table 8.1	
GoPress keyword and results in number of articles 
(2001–2022)
181
List of Tables