/ Published online: 11 March 2024
Vol.:(0123456789)
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13178-024-00948-x
Trans Bans Expand: Anti‑LGBTIQ+ Lawfare and Neo‑fascism
Tiffany Jones1 
Accepted: 6 February 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Introduction  Anti-fascist theories suggest different meanings for anti-LGBTIQ+ rights laws. This paper explores how 2023 
increases in US anti-LGBTIQ+ bill attempts can be explained.
Methods  A Critical Discourse Analysis of 1054 US anti-LGBTIQ+ state-level bill submissions from 1 Jan 2018 to 31 
December 2023, compared 2023 trends to previous data.
Results  The co-ordinated neofascist mobilisation behind US hyper-productivity and erratic contradictory justifications of anti-
LGBTIQ+ bills expanded exponentially, emphasising less resisted campaigns. Initially smaller bills targeted political weak 
spots: transgender youth in primary schools, bathrooms and politically enabling Republican-governed states. Increasingly 
bills expanded in number, frequency, size, and punitive reach against LGBTIQ+ and other citizens’ rights, in wider contexts 
(higher education, public and Democrat-governed spaces). By 2023, bill strategies used hypocritical and hypothetical anti-
LGBTIQ+ logics; replicated federally to thwart democratic and economic structures.
Conclusions  Anti-fascist, Queer and critical socialist theories explained the 2023 bills’ increase as building upon past partisan 
mobilisation on wedge transgender state election issues; towards neofascist diminishment of increasingly wider-ranging and 
higher-level US democratic structures, rights protections, and economic functioning. Policy attacks on vulnerable social 
groups’ rights — particularly trans youth — can signal ‘early stages’ within neo-fascist strong-man state-identity creation 
supporting democratic structure diminishments.
Policy Implications  Multi-level multi-cultural pluralist democratic institutions and support structures with inter-reinforced 
rights recognition expansions should be required by and should protect the rights of all citizens.
Keywords  Fascism · LGBT · Transphobia · Homophobia · Law
Introduction
Elite-led political campaign mobilisations undoing lesbian, 
gay, bisexual, transgender, intersex and queer (LGBTIQ+) 
peoples’ protections in law, or ‘anti-LGBTIQ+ lawfare’, 
recently emerged and spread (Datta, 2023; Jones, 2023). 
Across 2009–2018, $707.2 million USD was redeployed 
by 54 US, Russian and other European non-government, 
political and religious entities for promoting anti-
LGBTIQ+ laws internationally — especially ‘anti-gender’ 
bills restricting transgender and gender diverse (TGD) 
people’s and women’s rights in Africa, Europe, the Americas 
and Australia (Datta, 2023; Jarkovska, 2020; Jones, 2023). 
The US Trump Administration used social media to revoke 
LGBTIQ+ and gender identity protections including 
coverage within Title IX; devolving ‘sex’ definitions and 
discrimination to state jurisdictions (US Department of 
Justice, 2017). In 2018–2022, 543 anti-LGBTIQ+ senate 
and house bills were submitted in US state-level parliaments 
— attempting:
1.	 Restricting TGD students from school-based athletics 
and facilities access aligned to their gender,
2.	 Restricting textual representation of LGBTIQ+ themes, 
or
3.	 Expanding religious dominion in services over 
LGBTIQ+ rights (Jones, 2023).
President Biden issued an executive order protecting 
LGBTIQ+ youth equal treatment in facilities and athletics 
access (Biden, 2021), and legislation safeguarding marriage 
 *	 Tiffany Jones 
	
tiffany.jones@mq.edu.au
1	
School of Education, Macquarie University, Building 29WW 
Room 389 NSW 2109, Sydney, Australia
Sexuality Research and Social Policy (2025) 22:69–84 

Sexuality Research and Social Policy (2025) 22:69–84
equality from court and state interventions (Biden, 2022). 
Americans also supported safe accepting schools (96%) for 
LGBTQ people (GLAAD, 2023). Nonetheless, the total 
US state-level anti-LGBTIQ+ bill submissions in 2023 
outnumbered those from any past year. This article examines 
strategies motivating increased 2023 US state-level anti-
LGBTIQ+ lawfare. It considers literature theorising the 
‘functions’ of anti-LGBTIQ+ backlash, and then compares 
2023 trends in US anti-LGBTIQ+ state-level bills to 
2018–2022 patterns.
Literature Review: An Anti‑fascist 
Assemblage Lens on Anti‑LGBTIQ+ Lawfare
Anti-LGBTIQ+ lawfare may have multi-factorial causes. 
Dominant liberal-progressive theoretical models of human 
rights assume progressive increases in gender and sexuality 
freedoms and rights within democratic societies where ‘civi-
lising’ structures increase, like elected representative gov-
ernments and courts (Elias, 2000). Anti-LGBTIQ+ laws are 
understood as temporary retrogressive slippages corrected 
by rights expansion trends over time as reason and empathy 
increase through structural oversights and expanded educa-
tion (Elias, 2000).
Critical socialist theoretical models of human rights 
assume an ongoing power struggle across class systems 
necessitating either revolutionary actions to achieve or 
rights-defensive actions to maintain (Carlson, 1992). Anti-
LGBTIQ+ laws and identity-related debates are understood 
as repressive efforts supporting the political subordination 
of lower classes perpetuated strategically by political and 
resource dominant classes, to distract lower classes from 
hierarchical structural economic abuse and inaction (Carl-
son, 1992). Responses support LGBTIQ+ freedoms but re-
focus debates on economic concerns (Carlson, 1992).
Post-/de-colonial and multi-cultural feminist rights mod-
els conversely question the inevitability of rights progress, 
conceiving anti-LGBTIQ+ lawfare as indicating flaws inher-
ent to monolithic patriarchal colonising societies enforc-
ing social-moral binary-sex prototypes enlivened in times 
of democratic vs. autocratic power instability and violent 
‘corrective’ morality-based (re)organisation attempts 
(O’Sullivan, 2021; Okin, 1999; Serano, 2007; Smith, 
2015). Such laws maintain the incomprehensibility of dif-
ference in complex erasures of gender diversity and kinship 
(O’Sullivan, 2021; Serano, 2007); making femininity, LGB-
TIQ+ and racial diversity socio-cultural scapegoats/ ‘whip-
ping girls’: diverse women are penalized for weakness yet 
also for surpassing weak domestic reproductive femininity 
models, transmen for lacking men’s strength, and trans-
women for society’s discomfort with their ‘trading down’ 
(Serano, 2007). Rights barriers are theorised as best met by 
pluralist institutional structures supporting multi-cultures 
(Okin, 1999).
Some Queer Theory scholars critiqued notions of LGB-
TIQ+ rights progress as non-hierarchical or global by 
considering how neoliberalism is together sympathetic and 
antagonistic towards LGBTIQ+ students; supporting limited 
inclusion of ‘normative’ and norm-aspiring sub-groups fol-
lowing conventional relationships and recognisable gender 
patterns only (Binnie, 2014; Epprecht, 2013). Queer theo-
rists used the terms political homophobias and transphobias 
to explain how anti-LGBTIQ+ policies, campaigns and state 
policing enabled right-wing religious authoritarian politi-
cal groups in Post-Apartheid South Africa and Uganda to 
regain power during crises (Epprecht, 2013). European 
neo-conservative authoritarian populist election campaigns 
utilised political transphobias and homophobias to energise 
politicised faith (especially Christian evangelical) move-
ments, alongside ‘gender ideology’ (anti-transphobic educa-
tion) movements and media-driven moral panics (Jarkovska, 
2020). In Turkey, right-wing parties used political homo/
transphobias to impose LGBTIQ+ ‘age-inappropriateness’ 
text bans (Altay, 2022). In Queer analyses, anti-LGB-
TIQ+ lawfare thus fortifies repressive authoritarian power.
An Anti-fascist assemblage lens can combine a plural-
ity of perspectives on anti-LGBTIQ+ laws, requiring only 
prioritising opposing dictatorial political systems of state 
control without political opposition allowed (Seidman, 
2019). An Anti-fascist Queer Feminism could see resur-
gent anti-LGBTIQ+ (especially anti-gender) lawfare within 
existing colonial patriarchies as potentially concomitantly 
disingenuous for fascist purposes and constituting genuine 
freedom reductions harming material conditions for fascist 
purposes like prioritising state-based identities (Mason, 
2022; Seidman, 2019). Anti-fascist lenses suggest expand-
ing anti-LGBTIQ+ bill hyper-productivity may signify wider 
coordinated resurgences in (neo)fascist tendencies behind 
extremist populisms (Mason, 2022). (Neo)fascisms claim 
to (re-)make nations’ ‘greatness’ through enforcing nation-
serving identity cumulatively achieved state-by-state, which 
all identity serves and for which sexual or reproductive free-
doms are considered harmful (Passmore, 2002). Neofas-
cisms (lacking Marxists) dismantle the advancement of ‘cul-
tural Marxists’ — channelling popular anger about economic 
hardship into hatred against minorities, LGBTIQ+ people, 
women etc. Neofascisms spread five myths (Mason, 2022, 
pp.33–34):
1.	 LGBTIQ+ and other rights movements replaced cis-
gender binary-sexed peoples’ reproductive, social and 
economic opportunities;
70

Sexuality Research and Social Policy (2025) 22:69–84 
2.	 Since democratic (LGBTIQ+) rights enable 
replacement, strong rulers should create ‘emergency 
states’ undoing them;
3.	 Promoting (LGBTIQ+) diversity destroys ‘natural’ 
binary male–female roles, relationships and reproduc-
tion;
4.	 Authoritarian populists should exert (anti-LGBTIQ+) 
pressure within institutions whilst countering liberal 
(pro-LGBTIQ+) information in online ‘meta-politics’; 
towards
5.	 Catastrophe(s) catalysing whole-scale (re)purification of 
nation-centred identity.
Both anti-LGBTIQ+ youth rights and anti-abortion 
rights laws thus communicate (neo)fascist paternal domi-
nance and female subordination, anti-liberalist anti-rights 
enmities, and dystopic moral panic narratives first at 
smaller state levels expanded in (meta)political and real-
world national, regional work etc. (Mason, 2022). The fas-
cist Nazi German government revoked doctor protections 
of transgender people and increasingly targeted the LGB-
TIQ+ community via ‘Paragraph 175’ on homosexual sex 
and ‘183’ on cross-dressing, erasing LGBTIQ+ people’s 
institutional protections before deporting them to camps 
(Nunn, 2022). Foci in neofascist campaigns use fabricated, 
hypocritical and hypothetical rights claims opportunistically 
to mask links to maligned classical fascisms and reduce 
‘other’ rights first (Mason, 2022). The claims are incited by 
populist right-wing elected politicians yet linked to extrem-
ists, advertised via social media, and serve wider politically 
symbolic and pragmatic purposes diminishing democracies 
(Mason, 2022). Judith Butler notes neofascist trends in Latin 
America, Europe, Africa and Asia variably use anti-gender 
transphobias, homophobias and misogynies to divide and 
weaken feminist LGBTIQ+ allied political power, increase 
nationalist destruction fears and destabilise democracies 
(Parsons, 2021).
Methods
Critical post-structuralist lenses conceive (LGBTIQ+) 
subjects as an entry-point into understanding the wider dis-
courses of knowledge and power constituting them in laws 
(Butler, 2004; Fairclough, 2005; Mason, 2022). Foucault 
suggests that institutions create contradictory discourses that 
inadvertently make LGBTIQ+ subjects more understand-
able in a ‘tactical polyvalence’ of implied identities, despite 
attempting to repress them (Foucault, 1976, pp.155–156). 
Bills aimed at restricting LGBTIQ+ identities ironically 
amplify their visibility. Butler (2004) developed this idea, 
contending that restricting LGBTIQ+ identities and bod-
ies requires discussions of many perspectives questioning 
constructions of sex and gender; exposing their constructed 
nature. Probing for features central to such frameworks, this 
study examined anti-LGBTIQ+ bills’ discursive functions.
Viewing proposed bills as mobilizing particular dis-
courses/worldviews throughout their documents and 
progressions (Rogers et al., 2005), this research applied 
Foucault’s (1976) social theory of discourse, considering 
statements and their meanings within their contextual and 
interactive conditions. Fairclough (1989) organises Fou-
cault’s theory into a threefold model of bill discourses:
1.	 Text in bill attempts and versions;
2.	 Discursive processes by which laws are developed and 
deciphered;
3.	 Social practice in laws’ assemblage and translation con-
texts.
This model integrates Foucault’s ideas into a social 
model of text-based discourses, expanding the analysis 
of LGBTIQ+ discourses in relation to bill production and 
interpretation. While primarily considering bill texts, the 
interpretation of bills is contextualised by the circumstances 
influencing and receiving their manufacture. This study 
asked: 1. What do patterns in US state anti-LGBTIQ+ bills 
in 2023, compared to those in 2018–2022, now suggest 
about the bills’ functions?; and 2. Are any implementations 
of anti-LGBTIQ+ bills in 2023 suggesting new information 
on their functions?
An emancipatory study was designed to foreground LGB-
TIQ+ policy and legislation concerns (Mertens, 1998). A 
Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA) was performed on pub-
licly available senate bills (SB)/files (SF) and house bills 
(HB)/files (HF) proposed in American states between 1 
January 2018 and 31 December 2023, in any way directly or 
indirectly limiting LGBTIQ+ rights or enabling any parties 
to do so. The study conceived diminishment of any LGB-
TIQ+ rights in proposed laws by utilising learning from the 
researcher’s ‘insider’ and ‘academic’ LGBTIQ+ expertise, 
15 + years of engagement in LGBTIQ+ policy studies and 
reference group insights. The analysis covered 50 Ameri-
can states, discounting the District of Columbia/Washington 
D.C. and Puerto Rico for non-state status within 2018–2023. 
Extensive searches were conducted on state government, 
party, American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) and Legis-
can bill databases. All versions of relevant bills were down-
loaded from Senate or House repositories in PDF or copy-
pasted into Word, in all public draft and final versions for 
analyses.
The CDA utilized Fairclough’s threefold approach (1989), 
deemed valid and rigorous when correctly applied (Rog-
ers et al., 2005), because it acknowledges that laws/policies 
have applications beyond their stated meanings. Descriptive, 
interpretive, and explanatory analyses involved examining 
71

Sexuality Research and Social Policy (2025) 22:69–84
texts, their contexts, production, distribution and consump-
tion (Fairclough, 1989:144); using notes on state govern-
ment and ACLU websites, house and senate meetings and 
journalists’ reporting. The first stage of CDA described the 
formal features and meaning of the texts, focusing on states, 
themes and production process staging. Fairclough’s 10 
CDA questions were then applied to analyse texts’ vocabu-
lary, grammar and textual structures (1989, pp.110–139). 
Settings of text development and reception were considered 
for contextualizing the bills’ manufacture and perceived and 
manifested applications. Numeric information (totals, per-
centages) was calculated, recorded in tables and graphs, and 
compared to reveal any patterns.
Results
Escalating State‑Identity‑Defining Anti‑LGBTIQ+ Bill 
Hyper‑Productivity
Overall, 1054 anti-LGBTIQ+ bills were submitted to US 
state parliaments across 2018–2023. Annual total bill 
attempts escalated from 43 in 2018 (4.1% of the total) to 
511 in 2023 (48.5%). Building on an overall steady increase, 
2023 showed the largest increase (Fig. 1). The average 
(mean) amount of anti-LGBTIQ+ bills attempted per state 
was ~21 (~3.5/years) overall. Lower cumulative amounts of 
anti-LGBTIQ+ bills attempted occurred overall in currently/
recently Democrat-run states, including none (0) in New 
York and below three in California, Colorado, Maryland and 
New Mexico. Significantly higher numbers of anti-LGB-
TIQ+ bill attempts occurred in currently/recently Republican- 
run states particularly (> 60) in: Missouri (88), Texas (88), 
Tennessee (75), Iowa (68), and Oklahoma (68). These five 
states also had higher anti-LGBTIQ+ bill attempts each year.
Whilst overall the 10 top states for anti-LGBTIQ+ hyper-
productivity were Republican-voting, and the 10 
lowest largely Democrat-voting, in 2023 ~10 bills were 
attempted per state (a median of ~15) and some Democrat 
states attempted anti-LGBTIQ+ bills for the first time 
(Figs. 2 and 3). Exponential attempts were especially seen 
in politically enabling Republican-governed states. Missouri 
(48), Texas (55), Tennessee (26), Iowa (29) and Oklahoma 
(35) had attempt totals in 2023 near-matching their totals 
from the five past years (Fig.  2). Thus, exponentially 
increased anti-LGBTIQ+ lawfare became state-identity-
defining in 2023 within key ‘Southern Republican-run’ 
states.
Evolving Bill Forms and Strategies
Switching Emphasis in 2023’s Increased TGD Youth Rights 
Restrictions
Most states that passed anti-LGBTIQ legislation had 
engagement with well-funded conservative religious advo-
cacy organisations The Heritage Foundation, Family Policy 
Alliance and Alliance Defending Freedom (Datta, 2023; 
Human Rights Campaign, 2023). These entities worked to 
draft model legislation, recruit legislators, testify for bills in 
committee hearings and organise de-transitioners to lobby 
or testify (e.g. American College of Paediatricians for 
restricting gender affirmations in Kentucky, de-transitioner 
Chloe Cole for Florida bills), and fund legal defense when 
bills were challenged in courts. The primary 2018–2023 
Fig. 1   US state anti-
LGBTIQ+ bills attempts by year 
(2018–2023)
72

Sexuality Research and Social Policy (2025) 22:69–84 
Fig. 2   Total no. of anti-LGBTIQ+ bills attempts by state 2018–2022 (above map), compared to 2018–2023 (below map)
73

Sexuality Research and Social Policy (2025) 22:69–84
dominant tactic attempted transgender and gender diverse 
(TGD) youth rights restriction (56.6%, most of the 1054 
total 2018–2023 anti-LGBTIQ+ bills) in healthcare (249, 
23.6%), athletics (200, 19.0%), diverse gender identifica-
tion/ID documentation or expression (79, 7.5%), or single-
sex facilities (69, 6.5%) aligned to their gender identities 
(Fig. 3). Restrictions on TGD youth in healthcare, ID and 
single-sex facilities increased significantly in 2023 com-
pared to 2018–2022, and restrictions enforcing biological 
binary essentialism over TGD healthcare and ID (e.g. Idaho 
Government, 2020; Oklahoma Government, 2022a) became 
the key growing emphases in a range of legislatures by the 
end of 2023. These bills followed the since-repealed HB2 
(North Carolina Government, 2017) precedent, banning 
TGD youths’ bathroom access based on gender identities 
since Title IX’s change (US Department of Justice, 2017).
A typical 1-pg 2023 TGD athletics ban HB6213 featured a 
long explanatory title encapsulating its full edict — ‘An Act Pro-
hibiting Student Athletes who were Born as Males from Partici-
pation in Women’s Interscholastic Athletic Events’ (Connecticut 
Government, 2023). It was deferred to a senate committee 
like most bills of its type in US states over the past 6 years. Its 
stated purpose was: To eliminate unfair competition in women’s 
interscholastic sporting competition (Connecticut Government, 
2023, p.1), yet it entirely ignored more prevalent and profound 
athletics access and achievement threats (social class, rurality 
and government funding differentials). Its sole actual purpose 
was restricting TGD youth sporting options without providing 
alternatives (like many bills of its type). An archetypal passed 
healthcare restriction, SB199 (Arkansas Government, 2023a), 
titled Concerning Medical Malpractice and Gender Transition 
in Minors; and to Create the Protecting Minors from Medical 
Malpractice Act of 2023 banned typically wide-ranging and 
ambiguous provision of permanent gender reassignment surgery 
(…) cross-sex hormones or puberty-blocking drugs to any indi-
vidual who is under eighteen (p.1). It effectively outlawed atypi-
cal/non-existent procedures like surgery on minors, purely to 
legislatively target TGD youth. Like earlier bills examined (e.g. 
Tennessee Government, 2021), it called these acts malpractice, 
professional misconduct or child abuse to evince a strong-man 
parental protective state. Where some bills banned interventions 
even for youth born with physical intersex variations which may 
be popular with that community, such bills were not designed 
‘for’ or with that community; stemming only from a misunder-
standing of people with intersex variations as being TGD youth. 
Bills like HB1 (Tennessee Government, 2023a) were often later 
used to clarify that these bans still allowed enforced ‘corrective 
surgery’ on children with intersex variations (the only gender-
related surgeries performed on LGBTIQ+ youth and unwanted 
by them according to research, Jones et al., 2016), allowing: 
The performance or administration of the medical procedure is 
to treat a minor’s congenital defect, precocious puberty (p.3). 
Bans criminalising TGD medical interventions spread from 
Alaska (Alaska Government, 2019) to for example Arizona and 
Tennessee, Alabama and Arkansas. Such states further pushed 
education and health providers and professionals to withhold 
gender-affirming care for youth via both regulatory and fund-
ing restrictions. Oklahoma Government (2022b) threatened 
Fig. 3   Form of US state anti-LGBTIQ+ bills attempted 2018–2023 (N = 1054) by year
74

Sexuality Research and Social Policy (2025) 22:69–84 
healthcare providers’ funding and professionals’ licensing over 
gender-affirming care, and Texas investigated parents obtaining 
care for TGD children (Wagner, 2022).
Single-sex facilities bills included SB0458 (Montana 
Government, 2023) with its archetypally long 68wd title 
including an act generally revising the laws to provide 
a common definition for the word sex when referring to 
a human; and amending sections (listing 30 + legislation 
sections). It redefined multi-variate causal and somewhat 
subjectively interpretive factors of sex overly simplisti-
cally by chromosomal biological essentialism regard-
less of natural diversity in sex variations or genders. It 
pronounced:
The sexes are determined by the biological and genetic 
indication of male or female, including sex chromo-
somes, naturally occurring sex chromosomes, gonads, 
and nonambiguous internal and external genitalia pre-
sent at birth, without regard to an individual’s psycho-
logical, behavioral, social, chosen, or subjective expe-
rience of gender (Montana Government, 2023, p.2).
Many of the bills since 2018 and increasingly in 2023 
banned TGD people from all public school bath/change-
rooms and restrooms — and required or allowed for such 
facilities to be made accessible for use by cisgender male or 
female students only, usually without requiring alternative 
options for TGD people. Many bills allowed schools and 
premises to supply only single-sex bathrooms and athlet-
ics inaccessible to TGD people, allowing but not requiring 
unisex alternatives (Missouri Government, 2018; Montana 
Government, 2023). Where options for bathrooms simply 
were not mandated for the marginal group’s use; bills effec-
tively rendered public space inaccessible to them.
A conservative construction of female rights as restricted 
by TGD youth was usually asserted, assuming male domi-
nance (cisgender boys’ and trans girls’ ‘biological advan-
tages’), and sexual aggression. Parents’ rights were typically 
cited towards TGD youth ID restrictions such as for HB105 
(Alaska Government, 2023a). An example of an identifica-
tion documentation (ID) restriction HF9 was titled An Act 
relating to parental and guardian consent and information 
regarding the gender identity of students enrolled in a school 
district or charter school (Iowa Government, 2023). It pro-
hibited school districts or charter schools from accommo-
dating student TGD identities in any way without written 
parental consent or keeping students’ TGD identity disclo-
sures private even from unsupportive or proactively punitive 
parents; regardless of the safety of the student. It also banned 
bizarre educator actions never cited or evident as occurring 
anywhere, including:
Coercing a student to undergo any medical procedure, 
treatment, or intervention that is designed to affirm 
the student’s gender identity if that gender identity is 
different than the sex listed on a student’s official birth 
certificate (Iowa Government, 2023, pp.2-3).
The laws thus both appeared to care about child rights on 
the one hand in calling certain hallucinated actions ‘child 
abuse’ and yet likely will subject outed TGD youth to puni-
tive parents potentially exposing them to the high rates of 
rejection, violence and homelessness acknowledged for this 
youth group (UNESCO, 2016). From 2023, such bills also 
included increased restrictions on drag or gender diverse 
expression which became defined as sexual abuse of children 
in education or public spaces, promoted by various Republi-
can Senators who themselves did drag in public or schools. 
Drag-ban HB1266 banning drag within the definition of 
sexually oriented business (Texas Government, 2023a) was 
authored by Republican legislator Nate Shatzline — photo-
graphed in drag for school theatre-work (Lee, 2023). Drag-
ban SB3 banning male or female impersonators as harmful 
to minors (Tennessee Government, 2023b) was signed by 
Republican Governor Bill Lee — photographed in drag at 
school in his yearbook (Lee, 2023).
By 2023, standards across anti-TGD restriction bills 
became even stricter and covered more identity concepts. 
In 2023, more states followed Oklahoma Government’s 
(2022b) ban of nonbinary designations or related symbols 
(“X”) on birth certificates — reducing possible recognitions 
sometimes useful for some TGD and intersex people. Anti-
TGD ban contexts also expanded from lower (early, primary, 
secondary) to higher education arenas HB1468 required staff 
to ignore TGD identification in all education including col-
lege (Arkansas Government, 2023b); HB1434 required court 
intervention (Virginia Government, 2023). The Republican 
governor of Nebraska ordered the chief medical officer to 
draft LB574 (Nebraska Government, 2023), to restrict TGD 
youth healthcare and education for the safety of girls, and 
in its final passed version also banned abortion for girls — 
threatening the licences of doctors performing the procedure.
TGD youth restriction ban texts were typically concise (a 
few paragraphs or 1–2 pages), directly stating their restric-
tive aims and prohibiting specific access for TGD youth. 
They often lacked detailed explanations or definitions. Some 
texts vaguely suggested that TGD rights might harm spe-
cific genders, particularly women or girls, without present-
ing evidence or real-world examples. In HB261 (Alabama 
Government, 2023a, pp.3–5) ‘biological males’ (in the 
bill’s terms this term included TGD male-to-female/non-
binary students) were claimed as bigger, faster, stronger, 
and more physically powerful than ‘biological females’ 
and ‘having separate athletic teams based on the athletes’ 
biological sex reduces the chance of injury to biological 
female athletes and promotes sex equality’. However, the 
athletics ban only banned TGD participation according to 
75

Sexuality Research and Social Policy (2025) 22:69–84
gender identity; allowing any females or males in mixed, 
co-ed or intramural sex teams in the exact same athletics/
sports — contradicting sex segregationist logic and women’s 
rights claims. This contradiction existed in other bills of 
this type, especially from 2023. Occasionally parents’ rights 
were cited as in potential breach; such as in the SB1001 ban 
on the use of TGD students’ affirming pronouns and names 
(Arizona Government, 2023a). Later, single-sex facilities 
bans made schools liable if they allowed TGD people into 
bath-/change-/sleeping-rooms fitting their identity not their 
biological sex (or else staff or single-occupancy options). 
Some, like SB1040 (Arizona Government, 2023b), also ena-
bled any person who encountered the TGD person therein 
or the encountering person’s family (spouse, parent, guard-
ian, child, sibling or grandparent) to privately sue the school 
up to 2 years later for psychological, emotional and physi-
cal harm. By 2023, TGD youth healthcare could be called 
‘mutilation’ in bills (New Jersey Government, 2023) and 
lead to imprisonment (professionals, parents, school staff).
An Idaho legislator credited the conservative Christian 
entity Alliance Defending Freedom (ADF), an anti-LGB-
TIQ+ and anti-abortion hate group according to the South-
ern Poverty Law Center, as co-writing TGD youth athlet-
ics bans imitated and implemented by ~24 states (Corbin, 
2021). Whilst 10 main US bodies and several US conserva-
tive Republican politicians most notably contributed to sup-
porting extremist anti-gender bills internationally in Europe 
and Africa especially since 2009, the ADF and American 
Center for Law and Justice (ACLJ) were noted for prolific 
reach and impact on anti-LGBTIQ+ and anti-abortion work 
in Europe by 2018 (Datta, 2023). The ADF then recorded 
significantly increased revenue of $104.5 m in 2021, donat-
ing to over a dozen anti-LGBTIQ+ and anti-abortion groups 
advancing athletics and reproductive rights-restricting bills 
(Gabbat, 2023). TGD bans in healthcare, ID and athletics 
increased exponentially overall over the period examined 
and especially in 2023. In 2023, TGD healthcare restrictions 
increased the most, whilst athletics exclusions (which had 
more than tripled in 2021) became de-emphasised. Single-
sex facility restrictions dipped in the middle of the period 
(Fig. 3). Finally, ages and contexts of TGD restriction appli-
cations expanded in 2023, especially in states with prior ban 
attempts. Some TGD athletics bans expanded from primary 
to secondary and higher education (Alabama Government, 
2023d; Colorado Government, 2023). TGD youth health 
care bans expanded from medical to insurance contexts 
(Florida Government, 2023d, e). Further, identity/expression 
restrictions moved from documents and schools to public 
space generally.
Mounting 2023 Focus on LGBTIQ+ Textual and Other 
Representation Restrictions  The second dominant 
strategic approach pursued restricting LGBTIQ+ textual 
or other representations (in 27.6%, over a quarter of the 
2018–2023 anti-LGBTIQ+ bills examined); including 
school or curricula restrictions (198, 18.8%), local 
protection restrictions (17, 1.6%) or other forms banning 
textual or allied group representation supports affecting 
LGBTIQ+ people (77, 7.3%) variably (Fig. 3). Restrictions 
on LGBTIQ+ representations intensified as an overall 
strategy in 2023 compared to 2018–2022. Textual and 
other representation restriction further sometimes featured 
in some of the other bills too, though not as the core 
focus in those additional cases. Several bills restricted 
local cities and other local government entities from 
passing LGBTIQ+ protections surpassing state protection 
levels. Attempts at anti-LGBTIQ+ school or curricula 
restrictions increased dramatically in 2022 more than 
doubled in 2023; whilst other representation restrictions 
had weaker trajectories (Fig. 3). School or curricula restrictions 
were supported by the coalition of advocates pushing other 
(e.g. anti-TGD) bills in conjunction with distinct anti-freedom 
groups. For example, ‘Moms for Liberty’ — a funded conserva-
tive parent group — travelled across US states promoting ban 
bills in hearings; in 2023 founder Bridget Zeigler's same-sex 
liaisons were therein exposed. Text ban bills typically used par-
ent rights as justification. HB509 was tellingly titled ‘Relating to 
Parental Rights in Education’ (Hawai’i Government, 2023) and 
banned instruction related to sexual orientation and gender iden-
tity in public schools from kindergarten to third-grade curricula. 
Florida’s HB1557 colloquially named ‘Don’t Say Gay’ (Florida 
Government, 2022) used parent rights to restrict ‘age-inappropri-
ate’ textual pedagogy into twelfth grade and enforce school and 
district disclosures of student TGD status to parents, empowering 
parents to sue for non-compliance (p.1).
By 2023 education, training and curricula restrictions of 
these kinds usually became longer, and more wide-reaching 
in scope and context of application. For example, SB1694 
banned public entities including universities from diversity 
equity and inclusion training and promoting any theories or 
positions on (Arizona Government, 2023c, p.1):
Bias, cultural appropriation, allyship, transgenderism, 
microaggressions, microinvalidation, group margin-
alisation, anti-racism, systemic oppression, ethno-
centrism, structural racism or inequity, social justice, 
intersectionality, neopronouns, inclusive language, 
heteronormativity, disparate impact, gender identity 
or theory, racial or sexual privilege.
Bills like SB937 introduced bizarre contradictory 
backgrounded legal definitions of ‘sexual orientation’ and 
‘gender identity’ as dogma ‘from the religion of secular 
humanism’ and ‘religion’ as answering ‘greater questions 
like “why are we here,”’ (Oklahoma Government, 2023, 
pp.3–7). Also, by 2023, distinctions between obscene 
76

Sexuality Research and Social Policy (2025) 22:69–84 
material and those engaged in its production lessened. 
Typical of obscenity-themed text restriction bills, HB401 
restricted ‘male or female impersonators, commonly known 
as drag queens or drag kings’ as ‘sexual or gender oriented 
material’ in K-12 public schools, public libraries and public 
places minors are present (Alabama Government, 2023b, 
p.8). Whilst porn was banned but not porn stars as people, by 
2023, bills like HB401 banned individuals (impersonators, 
queens, kings) not their moments of drag engagement from 
public and education spaces. Some bills had amendments 
during editing processes subsuming ‘drag’ into bans on 
viewing of texts or people vaguely interpreted as ‘prurient’ 
or ‘sexually explicit’, like SB1030. Further, lessons on not 
just sexual themes but ‘gender identity’ were more often 
restricted in 2023 (Alaska Government, 2023b, p.2). 
Punishments for violations of such bills increased, including 
prison for individuals in breach, or complete de-funding of 
schools (Texas Government, 2023a, 2023b).
The local protection restriction bill attempts stemmed 
from the Republican North Carolina Governor Pat McCrory 
Administration’s (North Carolina Government, 2017) HB2, 
which pre-emptively banned NC local and city jurisdictions 
from surpassing state LGBTIQ+ rights protections. Though 
repealed in 2020, its anticipatory rights restriction was repli-
cated by other states. HB405 (Alabama Government, 2023c), 
classed as Anti-LGBTQ+ (other), was a 7 pg document rede-
fined woman and man, and mother and father, to exclude 
LGBTQ+ people from state-related law or data collection 
using the terms. SB1417 (Arizona Government, 2023d), 
also classed as Anti-LGBTQ+ (other), excluded TGD peo-
ple from definitions of women or men based on parents’ 
and disability-related rights, preventing TGD people from 
changing diapers for people with disabilities outside of their 
assigned sex. Finally, ages and contexts of LGBTIQ+ restric-
tion applications expanded in 2023, especially in states with 
prior bans or attempts. For example, curricula bans on sexu-
ality and gender diversity information were often extended 
from lower/primary grades to secondary/higher education 
grades or settings (Alabama Government, 2023e; Florida 
Government, 2023b, c; Missouri Government, 2023), and 
bans on state entities’ ‘ideological’ policies were extended to 
activities funding (Alaska Government, 2023c). Restrictions 
on local governments’ insurance funding for education staff 
expanded against abortions and gender diversity supports 
(Kansas Government, 2023).
Wavering Use of Anti‑LGBTIQ+ Religious Exemptions  The 
third most dominant strategic approach attempted 
religious exemptions enabling discrimination against 
LGBTIQ+ people based on organisational or individual 
beliefs and/or doctrines (165, ~16% of all 2018–2023 
anti-LGBTIQ+ bills analysed). Religious exemption bills 
or bill sub-sections can also be called ‘First Amendment 
Defense Acts/FADAs’, ‘Restoration of Religious Freedom’ 
bills or ‘Parent Rights Acts’. These bills included religious 
exemptions in education, adoption/fostering, healthcare and 
other areas or generalised ‘religious freedom’ including 
dominion over others (Fig.  3). Religious exemptions 
decreased to 8.6% (under a tenth) of the 2023 strategic bills 
thus far, having previously constituted 22.3% (almost a 
quarter) of all bills produced across 2018–2022. Framework 
precedents for such bills included HB1523 (Mississippi 
Government, 2016) stipulating safeguarding of certain 
religious beliefs and ‘moral convictions’ over others, 
particularly exclusive recognition of marriage between 
a man and a woman, and determination of gender by 
‘immutable biological sex’ (p.1). This precedent typified 
how such bills legislated Judeo-Christian dominion over 
citizens’ sex, gender and sexuality.
Empowered subjects and authorities in sentences (the 
subject ‘doing/ avoiding’ the actions) included religious, 
entities, government employees, grantees, contractors, busi-
nesses and individuals. Verbs in sentences tended to assert 
their religiosity enabled their right to choose, express, act 
or discriminate with immunity against LGBTIQ+ people. 
Objectified parties in sentences (those objects to which 
actions were done) were LGBTIQ people, same-sex and 
de-facto couples and their families, single parents, and 
youth. Sometimes, as in the 10-page HF 227 (Iowa Gov-
ernment, 2020, p.3), religious people were cast as potential 
victims of governments when their pursuit of discrimination 
or dominion over LGBTIQ or other people was mediated. 
This bill repeated oft-cited ‘immutability of sexes’ phrasing 
from the Mississippi prototype (p.3+). Exemptions often 
foregrounded lengthier socio-political manifestos (~4–11 
pages) than other bill forms, extolling biological essential-
ism or rhetorising religious dominion as free speech or acts, 
mirroring manifestos from surrounding submissions and 
online debates (e.g., Georgia Government, 2018).
The pursuit of religious exemption bills wavered across 
2018–2023 (Fig. 3), expanding again slightly in number 
in 2023 where states had prior exemptions and exemp-
tion attempts. For example, HB911 would expand existing 
exemptions to prevent reporting on sexuality or gender iden-
tity discrimination by the state, schools or individuals (Flor-
ida Government, 2023a). By 2023, these bills became usu-
ally broader (less limited in what religious freedom allowed 
by whom). This generalised religious empowerment under-
scored efforts spreading religiously-driven institutional and 
professional discriminations in healthcare provisions beyond 
existing targets like TGD healthcare, non-heterosexual next-
of-kinship recognitions, or women’s reproductive care (con-
traception, abortion)… to any citizen’s healthcare. For exam-
ple, HB58 titled ‘An act relating to protecting the exercise 
of medical ethics within the medical profession’ (Kentucky 
Government, 2023) sought to enable broad-based denial of 
77

Sexuality Research and Social Policy (2025) 22:69–84
healthcare rights even by institutions, based on the supposed 
individual right to religious ‘freedom’:
A medical practitioner, health care institution, or 
health care payer shall have the right not to participate 
in or pay for any health care service which violates his, 
her, or its conscience (…) shall not be liable civilly, 
criminally, or administratively (pp.3-4).
The above invention of an institutions’ ‘conscience’ is a 
fictional misinterpretation of an individual human’s right 
to religious freedom (from not for religious institutional 
dominion). It makes religious ethics replace medical ethics; 
though religious ethics are distinct, oppositional and enable 
rights breaches and deaths in medical contexts. Like several 
of the bills examined, it was tabled as an ‘emergency’ bill 
side-stepping proper scrutiny. Whilst it nonetheless died in 
committee, this bill showed a considerable escalation in the 
whole-scale denial of rights in healthcare building on past 
anti-LGBTIQ+ bills healthcare rights breaches. Increas-
ingly, these bills will place organisations’ religious dominion 
over citizens based on organisations’ religious convictions, 
moral consciences, beliefs or human rights — though they 
technically have none…. They only replicate their leaders’ 
will (e.g. international religious bodies funding anti-LGB-
TIQ+ bill promotions and Republican state leaders’ will).
Expanding Text Interaction and Interpretation 
Battles
Of 1054 bills attempted in 2023, most bills had overall 
not passed especially in Democratic-run states (e.g. New 
York had zero). At least 415 were clearly ‘dead’ within 
their submission years (39.4% or two-fifths) overall; 198 
in 2023 (38.7%). Upon the year’s completion, at least 146 
(28.6%) of the 2023 bills remained referred to a committee, 
mostly delayed indefinitely. However, ~150 bills were sent 
for authorisation overall across 2018–2023 (almost 15%). 
A higher portion was sent for authorisation in 2023, and 
over twice as many bills (112) than in the previous years 
combined passed in some form.
Approved bills were largely submitted for Governors’ 
signing and approval; another stage at which bills could be 
thwarted. Since 2021, precedents of Governor resistance 
grew and Governors even started directly calling out the 
high-level coordination of anti-LGBTIQ+ bills publicly. So 
far, 16 bills had Governor vetoes across 2021–2023. Thir-
teen attempts were made to overrule vetoes overall by the 
legislature, Senate and House bodies; most veto overrules 
succeeded (passing bills in Indiana and Kentucky for exam-
ple). A few bills were then signed by other officials in lieu 
of the Governor (Speaker, Secretary of State, President), or 
passed without a signature (e.g. in Louisiana). Utah’s leg-
islature overrode Republican Governor Spencer Cox’s veto 
of HB11’s TGD youth athletics restriction, adding bans on 
complaints against it (Utah Government, 2022). It faced 
court suspension (Hill, 2022). Two vetoes in Louisiana and 
South Dakota were held; those Bills died by 2022. Most 
(10+) vetoes occurred in 2023, when defiant opposition to 
bills by lone representatives on the floor heightened. For 
example, Senator Machaela Cavanaugh undertook a multi-
month filibuster since February 2023 to prevent LB574 — 
TGD youth healthcare restrictions (Nebraska Government, 
2023). In 2023, Kansas Governor Laura Kelly thrice vetoed 
anti-LGBTIQ+ bills as distracting from economic goals. 
When the House and Senate overrode her veto, she ensured 
her veto prefaced each final bill text, including lines suggest-
ing anti-LGBTIQ+ bills were economic distractions: ‘I’m 
focused on the economy. Anyone care to join me?’ (e.g. 
Kelly, 2023, p.1).
However, most signed bills also arose later in the exam-
ined period; well over half in 2021–2023. Tennessee passed 
the most bills (10+ ongoing), followed by Montana, South 
Dakota, Florida, Arkansas and Alabama (6+) — states with-
out LGBTIQ+ anti-discrimination or conversion therapy ban 
protections. Multiple bills also passed in Oklahoma, Indi-
ana, Missouri, South Carolina and Texas for example. Bills 
also passed in Iowa, West Virginia, Arizona, Utah, Idaho, 
Kentucky, Louisiana, Ohio etc. Bills restricting TGD youth 
rights were not only the dominant numeric bill attempts 
made but the most likely to pass: firstly, TGD youth ath-
letics exclusions (20+); secondly, TGD youth healthcare 
restrictions (17+) and thirdly, pronouns and accurate ID 
restrictions (10+) and sex-segregated bathroom bills (10+). 
There were also multiple examples (10+) of signed anti-
LGBTIQ school or curriculum restriction bills — restricting 
textual content, staff responses to identity disclosures and 
so forth. Although they were the most often passed anti-
LGBTIQ+ bills, athletics exclusions and drag bans faced 
more federal judges and court reversals by 2023 — favour-
ing TGD people in Idaho, Connecticut and West Virginia; 
and favouring drag as constitutionally protected free speech 
in Tennessee. Further rising submissions were filed against 
athletics exclusions by 2023 by athletes, coaches, women’s 
rights groups, and medical experts — explaining the coordi-
nated 2023 shift away from athletics exclusions and towards 
anti-LGBTIQ+ bill youth-focussed restrictions garnering 
less court opposition (TGD healthcare, curricula and ID 
restrictions).
In states like Tennessee where TGD bans passed, state 
officials seized access to TGD and even cisgender peoples’ 
medical records for investigations into their gender 
counselling histories from July 2023… subsequently, 
Tennessee become one of 19 states calling for access to 
78

Sexuality Research and Social Policy (2025) 22:69–84 
medical records of women’s abortions or reproductive 
healthcare (Russell, 2023). In 2023 in states with anti-
LGBTIQ+ school restrictions or religious exemption bills, 
some schools became emboldened to fire LGBTIQ+ staff. 
They subsequently also fired cisgender staff who clarified 
their pronouns/gender on emails because they had non-
gendered names (Dorman, 2023). Similarly, by 2023, staff 
in Florida and other locations were being investigated 
for showing movies — including Disney cartoons 
— with LGBTIQ+ characters or content (Chamlee, 
2022). Application of text bans to school and library 
books increased from 483 in 2018 to 1477+ by mid-
2023 (74% coordinated on larger scales by groups like 
Moms for Liberty) (Matza, 2023). Bans largely concentrated 
in Texas, Florida, Missouri, Utah and South Carolina; mostly 
targeting books featuring racial and LGBTQ+ diversity (Pen 
America, 2023). By July, over 600 books were banned in 
Frisco Independent School District (Texas), Wentzville School 
District (Missouri), and Escambia County Public Schools 
(Florida) in 2023 alone. This expanded lawsuits in 2023 
including by Utah parents concerned about ‘vulgarity’ bans… 
also now being used against Christian bibles (Matza, 2023).
Towards the end of 2023, Mike Johnson former attor-
ney and spokesperson for the Alliance Defending Freedom 
(ADF) hate group, ascended to US Speaker of the House of 
Representatives. The three foci of anti-LGBTIQ+ lawfare 
strategies finally recurred nationally in Republican amend-
ments to Democrat-led US Federal Congress House spend-
ing appropriations bills (reappropriating citizen taxes to fund 
US national parks, roads, embassies and defense). Repub-
licans (including Oklahoma Republican Tom Cole) added 
policy riders to at least 12 bills (including the ‘National 
Defense Authorization Act’ and one funding the Interior 
Department, Sentner, 2023). These repeated state-level 
bill rhetoric on (1) TGD rights restrictions (8 federal bill 
amendments restricted gender-affirming care; 3 restricted 
drag shows); (2) LGBTIQ+ textual or other representations 
restrictions (11 amendments restricted diversity, inclusion 
and equity programs; 8 restricted pride flags); and (3) anti-
LGBTIQ+ religious exemptions (10 amendments exempted 
‘religious discrimination’ on disapproval of gay marriage). 
These amendments also blocked ‘critical race theory edu-
cation’ and abortions (Sentner, 2023). They were used to 
slow and potentially halt federal funding of even mundane 
non-partisan government agencies complicating effective 
governance; thwarting Congress’ efforts to keep the US 
federal government operating past September; potentially 
damaging the US economy preceding the 2024 election. In 
blocking services meeting marginal groups’ needs, they also 
delayed other US citizens’ job-training, aged care and meals, 
services and defense.
Discussion
Political Transphobia for Freedom Reduction
The study revealed the exponential increase and opportun-
istic state-by-state expansion in bills attempting to restrict 
LGBTIQ+ rights in 2023, as a strategically accelerated bill 
hyper-productivity that expanded the types of bills issued 
across 2018–2022 most where these were least combatted. 
A cohort of hate groups contributed towards the increasingly 
punitive modelling, manufacture and house/senate legisla-
ture and online promotions of bills speculatively by context. 
This campaigning reflected (neo)fascist organised efforts at 
overwhelming and exhausting political and minority oppo-
sition to freedom reductions (Mason, 2022, p.184). It used 
similar exponential timelines, geographic mapping patterns 
and conservative think-tank mobilisations of coordinated 
us-vs-them ban policy narrative strategies to overlapping 
proliferations of US abortion, book and ‘critical race theory 
education’ bans (Bertrand et al., 2023; Guttmacher Insti-
tute, 2023; Matza, 2023). Rather than attempting one bill per 
state outright banning LGBTIQ+ or general human rights 
for example, the bills annually targeted broken-down free-
dom elements as more vulnerable smaller sub-components, 
initially TGD youth athletics, but increasingly healthcare, 
curricula and ID. Whilst TGD youth were most directly tar-
geted for control in bills attempted since 2018, their target-
ing in 2023 changed from emphasising athletics exclusions 
and stressing schooling ages (complicated by mounting law-
suits and executive interference — Biden, 2021), to more 
viable bill types (healthcare and ID restrictions) in more 
contexts/ages in 2023. TGD youth were likely especially 
targeted as one of the smaller and least socially and legally 
protected LGBTIQ+ sub-groups since Trump’s 2017 Title 
IX’s Twitter rescindment announcement. Neofascist coordi-
nation was also reflected in the use of anti-TGD hate groups 
simultaneously engaged in institutional bill development and 
metapolitical efforts at relentless enmity-creation, casting 
TGD identity as both enforced child abuse and naive experi-
mentation, in both social media and bill messaging.
TGD youth restrictions initially mostly targeted contexts 
of greatest opportunity — school bath/changerooms, 
athletics and healthcare in Republican states lacking 
LGBTIQ+ discrimination protections strongly supported 
by hate groups using moralising transphobic anti-rights 
discourses as ‘corrective’ (e.g. the ADF etc.). Hate group 
influence was comparably offset in states like New York 
and California by sizeable rights bodies headquarters (UN, 
GLSEN, GSA Network etc.). Anti-TGD bills irrationally 
over-reached beyond fair restrictions, partially targeting 
TGD identities (as suspiciously motivated) and female 
identities (as weak) categorically; both standard ‘whipping 
79

Sexuality Research and Social Policy (2025) 22:69–84
girls’ for neofascist conservative socio-political animus 
(Serano, 2007). Sex segregation bills cast TGD youth as 
implied rapists of cisgender females or exposing male 
genitalia magically through individualised bath/changeroom 
walls — without evidence. Falsely problematised bath/
changerooms access continues ableist colonising patriarchal 
marginalisation tactics which historically kept women, 
people with disabilities, black and Indigenous people from 
education and civic life (O’Sullivan, 2021; Okin, 1999; 
Smith, 2015). Athletics bans were similarly disingenuous 
and nonsensical: never only targeting activities/levels where 
cisgender female differences matter and ignoring more 
impactful differences skewing athletics (class, rurality). 
Instead, broad-based misgendering bans ousted TGD 
females and youth often completely; without alternative 
arrangements and sometimes hypocritically allowing 
cisgender mixed participations. Anti-TGD lawsuits were 
encouraged based on discomfort — furthering existing 
privileging of others’ comfort over TGD rights (Serano, 
2007). However, as backlash to athletics exclusions 
increased TGD health restrictions became primarised as the 
key politically symbolic bans, even targeting non-occurring 
youth treatments, but with devastating real-world outcomes 
affecting youth, professionals and their families.
The anti-LGBTIQ+ bills cumulatively satisfied Mason’s 
(2022, p.8) asserted standard operating features of lawfare 
with fascist tendencies where attacks were pre-empted 
on social media, politically symbolic, incited by populist 
elected politicians linked to extremists, and serving wider 
political purposes opportunistically. Whilst more bills passed 
in 2023 than in previous years, most did not pass and over 
a third died in their submission year strategically delayed 
by committees. Even states passing multiple bills had many 
unsuccessful attempts and sometimes fraught processes 
of production and interaction around Governor signage, 
court intervention and blockages and repeals. Expansions 
in hyper-productivity aligned more to what bill types 
passed with least disruption, and to US state and federal 
election cycles in ways that served Queer notions of political 
homophobia and transphobia as useful for and motivated by 
goals of autocratic power expansions (Smith, 2015). The 
2023 increase in anti-LGBTIQ+ bills preceding the 2024 US 
presidential election manifested the most aggressive punitive 
freedom restrictions and the greatest expansion across all 
(even Democrat-run) states and criminalisation of a variety 
of TGD people, family supporters and professionals. The 
expanded freedom reduction within anti-LGBTIQ+ bills by 
2023 indicated (neo)fascist efforts beyond the politically 
symbolic, towards pragmatically effective freedom 
reductions especially targeting TGD ‘cultural Marxist 
enemies’, to reduce freedom generally (Mason, 2022). 
The study showed the 2023 bills upped targeted freedom 
restriction age-groups from childhood to adolescence/
adulthood, extended targeted education contexts from 
elementary to higher education, expanded targeted locations 
from school bath/changerooms to spaces beyond education 
(e.g. ‘in public’) and extended targeted groups from TGD to 
broader groups (LGBTIQA+ people, professionals, women, 
parents, religious people, patients, citizens). Increasingly, 
bills instead featured outright targeting of general citizens’ 
health, privacy, religious and other rights and restricted 
many texts and freedoms. These increased bills’ expanded 
unconstitutional applications and punishments attracted 
heightened backlash by 2023 (Bollinger, 2023a). Republican 
officials saw restricting TGD phenomena as ‘winning’ 
strong-man authoritarian state-identity-defining messaging 
(Wagner, 2022) and rarely admitted dissent.
Tactical Erasures, Hypocrisies and Mythologies
Many bills defied official advice on LGBTIQ+ needs and 
erased identities accepted in mainstream psycho-medical, 
rights, and education discussions (APA, 2022; GLAAD, 
2023; UNESCO, 2017). They attempted to render TGD and 
intersex identities or bodies as less conceivable, recordable 
and liveable in education, health, or public spaces (Butler, 
2004). However, bills’ banning of named sex, gender and 
race theories and symbols/identities admits their exist-
ence; bills’ pushing of sex-gender essentialism and hetero-
sexual procreative marriage confesses their mutability and 
alternatives.
The 2023 bills were more brazenly hypocritical in using 
liberal and critical rights discourses to diminish rights than 
the 2018–2022 bills (Jones, 2023). Firstly, TGD youth 
rights restrictions were initially utilised within liberal log-
ics of female equity and radical logics of female differ-
ence requiring separatism for safety and fairness across 
2018–2022 (e.g. Utah’s HB11), to deny TGD youth — then 
adults — access to public space. This rhetoric manifests 
sexual/gendered opportunity replacement fears core to fas-
cist ‘de-humanised enemy’ creation and the first key myths 
of neofascisms (Mason, 2022). However, by 2023, the same 
hate groups supposedly uplifting females’ rights when pro-
moting TGD youth restrictions also attacked women’s abor-
tion/contraception rights. Of the top 12 states for 2023 anti-
LGBTIQ+ bills hyper-productivity most (9) issued abortion 
bans (Corbin, 2021; Guttmacher Institute, 2023). In 2023, 
Nebraskan conservatives used ‘women’s rights’ to push an 
anti-LGBTIQ+ education bill then banned abortion within it. 
Similarly, 2023 Alabaman bills both restricted TGD people 
to protect girls in all athletics/sports regardless of any actual 
strength bases to any specific sport, yet enabled cisgender 
boys/men to play sports with and against cisgender girls/
females in all athletics/sports… expanding girls/women’s 
rights was valued less than restricting rights. Many states 
80

Sexuality Research and Social Policy (2025) 22:69–84 
in 2023 banned both females’ and TGD people’s access to 
needed healthcare and invaded their medical records (e.g. 
Kansas, Tennessee). The fascist illogical nature of ‘reli-
gious’ and ‘female’ sensitivity rights claims became much 
more visible in 2023 as actually used for anti-TGD harass-
ment in bills like SB1040 (Arizona Government, 2023b). 
This bill illogically empowered family members of teachers 
or students who saw TGD people in school bathrooms, to 
years later sue schools they never attended for harms.
Secondly, textual restrictions were initially utilised in 
2018–2022 to claim libertarian logics of power mediation 
(state-to-city to school hierarchical rule) and to extend par-
ent market-client rights to protectionist ‘dominion’ over edu-
cation and public spaces (e.g. Hawai’i Government, 2023). 
Anti-LGBTIQ+ bills avowed parents’ rights (Idaho’s HB509, 
Arizona’s 1417) and made these rights disavowable (Ala-
bama’s HB405 for LGBTIQ+ parents, Oklahoma Govern-
ment’s 2018 SB1140 for adoptive/foster parents, Arizona’s 
1417 for TGD parents). These bills echoed authoritarian 
textual ban trends’ protectionist logics decreasing public 
representation, expression and gatherings (Altay, 2022), and 
neofascist tendencies defending any phenomena against free-
doms of expression and information (Mason, 2022, p.191). 
The 2023 versions of text restrictions more directly banned 
TGD people themselves as pornographic. Moreover, restrict-
ing teaching even the concept of gender identity (e.g. Alaska 
Government, 2023b; Arizona Government, 2023e) prevents 
TGD, feminist and even conservative religious gender teach-
ings or positions.
Thirdly, religious exemptions initially utilised liberal 
logics of individuals’ religious freedoms (e.g. Mississippi’s 
HB1523). However, the bills showed typical authoritarian 
turns by falsely extending individuals’ religious ‘freedom’ 
to organisational dominions over others (Smith, 2015). This 
supports the second and fourth myths of the ‘strong’ leader-
ship undoing rights in an ‘emergency state’ where higher 
goods (religious rights) are supposedly threatened (Mason, 
2022). Further, religious rights were asserted to enable Utah 
and Texas school ‘vulgarity’ bans restricting gender and 
sexuality representations, yet the bans also removed bibles 
by 2023 (Matza, 2023). Anti-LGBTIQ+ lawfare therefore 
only feigned rights towards increasingly diminishing human 
rights and identities in 2023, transferring empowerment and 
identities from citizens to institutions, and perpetuating the 
third neofascist myth of marginal rights and people themselves as 
destructive against state-identity (Mason, 2022). Anti-LGBTIQ 
lawfare since 2018 in the US thus used Foucault’s (1976) ‘tac-
tical polyvalence’ for fascist purposes; where the same and 
opposing (anti-/pro-rights) discourses by 2023 had hypocriti-
cal uses. Hypocrisy (personal and political) is not accidental 
but key within neofascist strategies reducing all rights, starting 
with vulnerable (LGBTIQ+) rights whilst feigning — then 
later attacking — other groups’ interests. Disingenuously 
unstable, hypocritical and contradictory rights uses reducing 
freedom are inherently neofascist (Mason, 2022, p.191).
Diminishing Democracy and Institutions
The study had limited exploration of bill impacts. However, 
anti-LGBTIQ+ bill hyper-productivity inherently diminishes 
democracy by ignoring most American’s support for anti-
discrimination protections for LGBTIQ+ people (GLAAD, 
2023) and side-lining economic reforms (Kelly, 2023). 
The bills’ cumulative freedom reductions continue, yet go 
beyond colonial patriarchal erasures (O’Sullivan, 2021), 
ground-up religious backlash within hierarchical uncertainty 
(Smith, 2015) or class-based economic distractions (Carlson, 
1992). Indeed, 2023 bills signified newer, more sharply 
increased political aggressions defining ‘state identities’ to 
which even bill authors' identities are sacrificed. These 2023 
aggressions particularly simultaneously: (1) suggested con-
fused “genuine” religious and feminist rights interests; (2) 
supported some disingenuous hypocritical Republican (re)
election opportunisms especially anti-drag bills supported 
by Republicans who wore drag (Lee, 2023) and (3) served 
organised neofascist attacks on democracies and institutions 
putting a punitive fascist state-identity above all other politi-
cal activity in several states. Aggressions included repeated 
genuine freedom reductions harming material conditions for 
disingenuous showboating for fascist purposes (Mason, 2022; 
Seidman, 2019). They supported autocratic power expansions 
reducing wider rights (Guttmacher Institute, 2023) and oppo-
sition shut-down via gerrymandering, voter suppression, and 
election denial tactics effective at dismantling single-member 
district electoral systems (Bernard, 2023).
The study showed US professions and professionals are 
being reshaped and diminished (not yet irredeemably) by 
anti-LGBTIQ+ lawfare. US education and health institu-
tions are increasingly undergoing police investigations into 
their practices (Chamlee, 2022) and firing LGBTIQ+ and 
random other staff over identities, actions or texts support-
ing diversity (Dorman, 2023). This may exacerbate existing 
dire industry staffing shortages and surveillance burdens 
and reduce information provisions to LGBTIQ+ people and 
citizens. Medical records of many citizens including TGD 
people and women are being accessed and used for investi-
gations (Russell, 2023). Whilst allied outcry from women 
and TGD people may be reduced by inter-group enmity dis-
tractions and wider society’s acceptance of both as whip-
ping girls, the precedents risk all US citizens’ healthcare 
freedoms and medical privacy.
The study contributed evidence on anti-LGBTIQ+ bans 
to Bertrand et al.’s (2023) argument on Critical Race Theory 
bans that the US is seeing growing use of highly polarizing 
rhetoric ‘slash-and-burn’ political rhetoric combining iden-
tity assassination, violation of traditional political norms, 
81

Sexuality Research and Social Policy (2025) 22:69–84
and the dismantling of governmental institutions through 
us-versus-them policy dynamics. This creates a kind of 
narrative spillover contributing to an overall decline in US 
public confidence in both educational and political institu-
tions (Bertrand et al., 2023); a feature useful in neo-fascist 
anti-democratic goals.
The contexts of the bills’ debates, passage and applica-
tions reduced the wellbeing of American LGBTIQ+ youth; 
as did linked restrictions on LGBTIQ+ school curricula 
(Human Rights Campaign, 2023; Trevor Project, 2023). 
Nearly two-thirds of 28,000 US LGBTQ youth aged 
13–24 years reported that hearing about potential state or 
local laws restricting school coverage of LGBTQ topics 
decreased their mental health; nearly a third that their mental 
health was poor mostly or always due to anti-LGBTIQ+ poli-
cies/bills (Trevor Project, 2023, p.4). The liveability of TGD 
youth identities likely reduced. Bill strategies found most 
effective for neofascist networks’ representation at the local 
and state levels will likely spread in the US and interna-
tionally where unopposed. Concepts and speakers from US 
anti-TGD healthcare and education bill debates have already 
emerged across Australia, Africa and Europe; albeit meet-
ing resistance (Datta, 2023; Gabbat, 2023; Mason, 2022). 
Groups developing US anti-LGBTIQ+ state bills like Fam-
ily Watch International for Arizona, promote far worse bills 
internationally when able — like Uganda’s Anti-Homosex-
uality (‘Kill the Gays’) Act (Bollinger, 2023b). Neofascist 
efforts at erasing people and freedoms — from politically 
to lethally — expand opportunistically, surpassing tempo-
rary backlash and requiring more direct legislative resistance 
than in liberal-progressive imaginings.
Conclusions
An anti-fascist theoretical assemblage can deepen and unify 
intersectional analyses and perhaps, opposition to, anti-
LGBTIQ+ (and clearly related anti-abortion, and culturally 
imperialist) lawfare. An anti-fascist assemblage emphasises 
the coordinated anti-democratic imperatives behind current 
US conservative populist anti-LGBTIQ+ campaigns and 
explains their relationships to reductions of reproductive, 
racial, economic, voter, privacy and other rights protections. 
It highlights neofascist utilisations and agitations of divisions 
between targeted groups. These harmful distractions assist 
diminishment of democratic structures and economies and 
identity variations; increasing possibilities for US Republi-
cans’ state and federal influence, and harm to their opposi-
tion. The anti-LGBTIQ+ lawfare examined here reflected 
other neofascist attacks similarly promoted via social media 
promotion, politically symbolic yet genuinely harmful, incited 
by populist elected politicians linked to extremists, push-
ing key myths and serving wider democratic and economic 
diminishment and anti-LGBTIQ hyper-masculinised state-
identity production (Mason, 2022; Parsons, 2021). Where 
these neofascist strategies expand to other states, federally 
and internationally, citizens should expect campaigns initially 
targeting small ‘political weak spots’ like TGD youth… later 
expanding as possible. Unimpeded, anti-LGBTIQ+ restriction 
and criminalisation grow in size, reach (higher ages, contexts 
and legislatures) and punitive nature. They ultimately jeop-
ardise more citizens’ information access, healthcare privacy, 
and free complaints against laws. Freedoms enjoyed by those 
groups ‘opposing’ LGBTIQ+ people become hypocritically 
increasingly affected. Diminishing democracy is neofascist 
anti-LGBTIQ+ lawfare’s ‘real’ target.
Multi-level multi-cultural pluralist institutions and sup-
port structures with inter-reinforced rights recognition 
expansions cannot last as gifts to be given nor removed 
by all-powerful leaders in executive orders. They must be 
imperatives required and protected by ‘resilient institutions 
and the anti-fascism of ordinary people’ (Mason, 2022; 
p.xvii). Academics and advocates should oppose anti-LGB-
TIQ+ bills. They should offer evidence-supported needs-
based alternatives centring human rights and mediating 
liveable services for all, and education against false inter-
marginal-group enmities outlining how neofascist rights 
reductions harm citizens generally. Future studies should 
investigate action-based anti-fascist processes to reinforce 
democratic structures, rights and freedoms.
Author Contribution  Not applicable/fully solo research study and 
publication.
Funding  Open Access funding enabled and organized by CAUL and 
its Member Institutions This work was funded by Macquarie University 
Research Assistance Scheme 2021.
Availability of Data and Material  https://​doi.​org/​10.​25949/​24190​026.
Code Availability  Not applicable.
Declarations 
Competing Interests  The author declares no competing interests.
Open Access  This article is licensed under a Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, 
adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, 
as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate 
if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this 
article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless 
indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended 
use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted 
use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 
holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/.
82

Sexuality Research and Social Policy (2025) 22:69–84 
References
Alabama Government. (2023a). HB261. Montgomery: Alabama 
Government.
Alabama Government. (2023b). HB401. Montgomery: Alabama 
Government.
Alabama Government. (2023c). HB405. Montgomery: Alabama 
Government.
Alabama Government. (2023d). SB211. Montgomery: Alabama 
Government.
Alabama Government. (2023e). HB354. Montgomery: Alabama 
Government.
Alaska Government. (2019). HB5. Juneau: Alaska Government.
Alaska Government. (2023a). HB105. Juneau: Alaska Government.
Alaska Government. (2023b). SB96. Juneau: Alaska Government.
Alaska Government. (2023c). HB174. Juneau: Alaska Government.
Altay, T. (2022). The pink line across digital publics. The European 
Journal of Women’s Studies, 29(1), 60S-70S.
APA. (2022). Diagnostic and statistical manual of mental disorders 
5TR. APA.
Arizona Government. (2023a). SB1001. Phoenix: Arizona Government.
Arizona Government. (2023b). SB1040. Phoenix: Arizona Government.
Arizona Government. (2023c). SB1694. Phoenix: Arizona Government.
Arizona Government. (2023d). SB1417. Phoenix: Arizona Government.
Arizona Government. (2023e). SB1030. Phoenix: Arizona Government.
Arkansas Government. (2023a). SB199. Little Rock: Arkansas 
Government.
Arkansas Government. (2023b). HB1468. Little Rock: Arkansas 
Government.
Bernard, T. (2023). Beyond gerrymandering. New Political Science, 
45(2), 359–379.
Bertrand, A., Lyon, M., Bertrand, A. R., & R. (2023). Narrative 
spillover: A narrative policy framework analysis of critical race 
theory discourse at multiple levels. Policy Studies Journal. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1111/​psj.​12523
Biden, J. (2021). Executive Order on Preventing and Combating 
Discrimination on the Basis of Gender Identity or Sexual 
Orientation. White House.
Biden, J. (2022). Statement By President Joe Biden on Bipartisan 
House Passage of the Respect for Marriage Act. White House.
Binnie, J. (2014). Neoliberalism, class, gender and lesbian, gay, 
bisexual, transgender and queer politics in Poland. International 
Journal of Politics, Culture, and Society, 27(2), 241–257.
Bollinger, A. (2023a). Trump judge throws out Tennessee’s drag ban 
in major victory. LGBTQ Nation. Retrieved June 6, 2023. www.​
lgbtq​nation.​com
Bollinger, A. (2023b). Rachel Maddow connects Uganda’s “Kill the 
Gays” bill to Arizona Christians. LGBTQ Nation. Retrieved June 
5, 2023. www.​lgbtq​nation.​com
Butler, J. (2004). Undoing gender. Routledge.
Carlson, D. (1992). Identity conflict and change. In J. T. Sears (Ed.), 
Sexuality and the curriculum (pp. 34–58). New York: Teachers 
College Press.
Chamlee, V. (2022). Florida teacher under investigation for showing 
students Disney movie with a gay character. People. Retrieved 
May 21, 2023. https://​people.​com
Colorado Government. (2023). HB23–1098. Denver: Colorado 
Government.
Connecticut Government. (2023). HB6213. Hartford: Connecticut 
Government.
Corbin, C. (2021). 30 U.S. states now considering version of Idaho’s 
transgender athlete bill. Idaho Capital Sun. Retrieved December 
12, 2021. https://​www.​idaho​ednews.​org
Datta, N. (2023). Tip of the iceberg. European Parliamentary Forum.
Dorman, J. (2023). A New York university fired two employees after 
they included their pronouns in work emails. Business Insider. 
Retrieved May 21, 2023. https://​www.​busin​essin​sider.​com
Elias, N. (2000). The civilizing process. Blackwell.
Epprecht, M. (2013). Hungochani. McGill Queen’s Press.
Hawai’i Government. (2023). HB509. Honolulu: Hawai’i Government.
Fairclough, N. (1989). Language and power. Longman.
Fairclough, N. (2005). Critical Discourse Analysis. Marges 
Linguistiques, 9(1), 76–94.
Florida Government. (2022). CS/CS/HB1557. Tallahassee: Florida 
Government.
Florida Government. (2023a). HB991. Tallahassee: Florida 
Government.
Florida Government. (2023b). HB1069. Tallahassee: Florida 
Government.
Florida Government. (2023c). SB266. Tallahassee: Florida 
Government.
Florida Government. (2023d). SB254. Tallahassee: Florida 
Government.
Florida Government. (2023e). HB1421. Tallahassee: Florida 
Government.
Foucault, M. (1976). The history of sexuality (Vol. 1). Penguin.
Gabbat, A. (2023). Revealed: Christian legal non-profit funds US anti-
LGBTQ+ and anti-abortion organizations. Guardian. Retrieved 
July 30, 2023. https://​www.​inkl.​com/​news/
Georgia Government. (2018). SB361. Atlanta: Georgia Government.
GLAAD. (2023). Accelerating acceptance. GLAAD.
Institute, G. (2023). US Abortion Policies and Access After Roe. 
Guttmacher Institute.
Hill, G. (2022). Transgender girls allowed to play girls’ sports in Utah, 
Judge decides. Washington Post. Retrieved April 21, 2023. https://​
www.​washi​ngton​post.​com)
Human Rights Campaign. (2023). LGBTQ+ Americans Under Attack. 
HRC.
Idaho Government. (2020). HB509. Boise: Idaho Government.
Iowa Government. (2020). HF227. Iowa City Iowa Government.
Iowa Government. (2023). HF9. Iowa City: Iowa Government.
Jarkovska, L. (2020). The EU as a child molester. Sex Education, 20(2), 
138–153.
Jones, T. (2023). United States of hate: Mapping backlash bills against 
LGBTIQ+ youth. Sex Education. Online first.
Jones, T., Carpenter, M., Hart, B., Ansara, G., Leonard, W., & Lucke, 
J. (2016). Intersex: Stories and statistics from Australia. Open 
Book Publishers.
Kansas Government. (2023). HB2436. Topeka: Kansas Government.
Kelly, L. (2023). Message from the Governor. Topeka: Kansas Government.
Kentucky Government. (2023). HB58. Frankfort: Kentucky 
Government.
Lee, L. (2023). 2 Republican leaders pushing for anti-drag laws have 
dressed in what could be considered drag based on the bill texts’ 
definition. Business Insider. Retrieved March 2, 2023. https://​
www.​busin​essin​sider.​com).
Mason, P. (2022). How to stop fascism. Penguin.
Matza, M. (2023). Utah primary schools ban Bible for ‘vulgarity and 
violence’. BBC News. Retrieved June 3, 2023. https://​www.​bbc.​
com
Mertens, D. (1998). Research methods in education and psychology. 
Sage.
Mississippi Government. (2016). HB1523. Jackson: Mississippi 
Government.
Missouri Government. (2018). SB690. Jefferson City: Missouri 
Government.
Missouri Government. (2023). HB489. Jefferson City: Missouri 
Government.
Montana Government. (2023). SB0458. Helena: Montana Government.
Nebraska Government. (2023). LB574. Lincoln.
83

Sexuality Research and Social Policy (2025) 22:69–84
New Jersey Government. (2023). S3076. Trenton: New Jersey 
Government.
North Carolina Government. (2017). HB2. Charlotte: North Carolina 
Government.
Nunn, Z. (2022). Trans liminality and the Nazi state. Past & Present, 
gtac018(1), 1–35.
Okin, S. (1999). Is multiculturalism bad for women? Oxford University 
Press.
Oklahoma Government. (2018). SB1140. Oklahoma City: Oklahoma 
Government.
Oklahoma Government. (2022a). SB1100. Oklahoma City: Oklahoma 
Government.
Oklahoma Government. (2022b). SB1819. Oklahoma City: Oklahoma 
Government.
Oklahoma Government. (2023). SB937 Oklahoma City: Oklahoma 
Government.
O’Sullivan, S. (2021). The Colonial Project of Gender. Genealogy, 
5(67), 67–69.
Parsons, V. (2021). Judith Butler says the ‘anti-gender ideology 
movement’ is a dangerous ‘fascist trend’. Pink news. Retrieved 
October 26, 2021. www.​thepi​nknews.​com
Passmore, K. (2002). Fascism. Oxford Academic Books.
Pen America. (2023). Banned in the USA. Pen America.
Rogers, R., Malancharuvil-Berkes, E., Mosley, M., et al. (2005). 
Critical discourse analysis in education. Review of Educational 
Research, 75(3), 365–416.
Russell, J. (2023). Republican AGs demand Biden administration allow 
them to keep access to out-of-state medical records. California: 
LGBTQnation.
Serano, J. (2007). Whipping girl. Seal Press.
Seidman, M. (2019). The rise of counterrevolutionary anti-fascism 
in the United States from the Munich Conference to the fall of 
France. Journal of History and Culture, 7(1), 37–68.
Sentner, I. (2023). Culture war consumes Congress as lawmakers 
confront spending deadline. Politico. Retrieved July 7, 2023. 
https://​www.​polit​ico.​com).
Smith, N. (2015). Rejecting rights. African Affairs, 114(456), 341–360.
Texas Government. (2023a). HB1266. Austin: Texas Government.
Texas Government. (2023b). HB4534. Austin: Texas Government.
Tennessee Government. (2021). SB0657/HB0578. Nashville: Tennessee 
Government.
Tennessee Government. (2023a). HB1. Nashville: Tennessee 
Government.
Tennessee Government. (2023b). SB3. Nashville: Tennessee 
Government.
Trevor Project. (2023). U.S. National Survey on the Mental Health of 
LGBTQ Young People. West Hollywood: Trevor Project.
UNESCO. (2016). Call for Action by Ministers. UNESCO.
UNESCO. (2017). International technical guidance on sexuality 
education. UNESCO.
US Department of Justice. (2017). Dear Colleague Letter. US 
Government.
Utah Government. (2022). HB11. Salt Lake City: Utah Government.
Virginia Government. (2023). HB1434. Richmond: Virginia 
Government.
Wagner, J. (2022). Biden accuses Texas Gov. Abbot of ‘government 
overreach at its worst’ for instigating parental investigating parents 
of children transitioning gender. Washington Post. Retrieved 
March 3, 2022. https://​www.​washi​ngton​post.​com
Publisher's Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to 
jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
84