1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Author Accepted Manuscript (AAM) 
 
 
 
Aagaard, P., Easton, M., & Head, B. W. (2024).  
Policy expertise in times of crisis. Policy & Politics, 52(1), 2-23.  
 https://doi.org/10.1332/03055736Y2023D000000016   
 
Blog:https://policyandpoliticsblog.com/2024/01/17/policy-
expertise-in-turbulent-times-introduction-to-special-issue/ 
 
 
 

 
 
 
2 
 
Policy advisory systems in times of crisis: 
challenges for expertise in policymaking  
 
Abstract 
Policy advisory systems which provide evidence-informed policy advice to governments are placed 
under great stress in times of crisis and rapid change. Crisis situations may give rise to conflicting 
interpretations by stakeholders about how to respond. These conflicts are compounded by inevitable 
gaps in knowledge and uncertainties about how the crisis conditions might develop. All 
governments face unruly challenges from time to time, although the contemporary era seems to be 
characterised by very frequent crises. These take many forms, ranging from financial and political 
disruptions through to health pandemics, natural disasters, and threats to national security.  
Such decision-making stresses have been especially evident during the COVID-19 crisis, 
commencing in 2020. The pandemic crisis took different trajectories in various countries. This 
introductory article introduces a group of research studies that analyse various aspects of how 
governmental policy advisory systems responded to this crisis. Policy advice was formulated 
against a background of controversies about how to prioritise health outcomes, economic 
livelihoods, and social interaction. These research studies analyse policy advisory systems with 
particular attention to the quality of the available knowledge base, the disciplinary mix of expertise 
within advisory bodies, the roles of experts as either trusted insiders or as external commentators, as 
providers or ‘shapers’ of knowledge, and the degree of (in)formality in their relationships with 
politicians. These core issues are also addressed in research on creeping crises such as climate 
change. Taken together, the articles provide insights into how the knowledge provided through 
policy advisory systems is informing crisis governance.  

 
 
 
3 
 
 
Introduction – crisis and uncertainty 
The aim of this special issue is to identify and describe how the recurrent crises and turbulence of 
recent years have impacted the policy advisory systems of modern governments, with particular 
reference to the COVID-19 pandemic. The case studies that follow demonstrate that the institutional 
capacities of governments, across a wide range of countries, have been challenged by crisis 
conditions and by the public controversies engendered by crisis situations. The core theme is the 
institutional relationships between expert advisors and political decision-makers, with a focus on 
how these relationships were questioned and modified under conditions of conflict and crisis. These 
debates have implications for broader issues such as democratic accountability and legitimacy, and 
effective and efficient governance, but these broad themes are not tackled here. In short, the special 
issue aims to advance the study of the relationship between experts in policy advisory systems and 
political decision-makers, under conditions of crisis. This introductory article provides an analysis 
of the key concepts and research themes examined in the case studies and concludes with a brief 
account of the contributions advanced by the case studies.  
   We are living in turbulent times. Governments have been confronted by multiple interacting 
crises, like the COVID-19 pandemic, global warming, and economic instability. Decision-makers 
are faced with complex challenges, where the problems are ‘surprising, inconsistent, unpredictable, 
and uncertain’ (Ansell, Sørensen and Torfing, 2021, p. 950). These unpredictable and sometimes 
contentious problems are likely to have large impacts – not only on social and economic wellbeing, 
but also on the capacities of institutions to anticipate and mobilise effective responses. The impacts 
of these crises on policy governance arrangements can be detected across diverse fields such as 
health, finance, safety and security. Similarly, in the private sector, business executives have been 

 
 
 
4 
 
developing conceptual frames to make sense of living in a ‘VUCA’ world, characterised by 
‘volatility, uncertainty, complexity, and ambiguity’ (Bennett and Lemoine, 2014).  
   Crises draw attention to governmental capacities for rapid action and adaptive responses, with a 
high premium on risk assessment and organisational coordination (Christensen et al, 2016). But 
behind the scenes, the quality of policy responses may partly depend on the analyses and 
recommendations provided by expert advisory bodies. Research on expert advisory bodies has 
examined the different ways in which government agencies have selected ‘relevant and legitimate’ 
forms of expertise, and how such knowledge has been incorporated in policy advisory systems 
(Craft and Wilder, 2017; Crowley and Head, 2017). Researchers have also raised the prospect that 
more collaborative, robust and adaptive policy advisory systems might become necessary for 
addressing future crisis situations (Zaki and Wayenberg, 2020; Boin and t’Hart 2022).  
   In recent years, the COVID-19 pandemic has sharpened the focus of academic research on the 
institutional capacities of crisis response and the potential roles of experts and knowledge 
partnerships. For example, health experts were heavily involved in providing advice and 
recommending strategies for coping with the pandemic, with messages directed not only towards 
government decision-makers but also to the general public (Boin, McConnell and ‘t Hart, 2021; 
Galanti and Saracino, 2021; Pattyn, Matthys and Hecke, 2021). Given the large number of recent 
international crises, such as financial meltdowns and pandemics, the research literature on crisis 
management has been reconsidering how various forms of expertise can be mobilised. Strategies 
that rely on a narrow band of specialists to address complex and fast-moving scenarios are 
increasingly seen as inadequate. Instead, there is growing support for using broad-based 
approaches, such as multi-stakeholder forums and knowledge partnerships, to deal with situations 
where no single group has sufficient knowledge and experience to provide authoritative advice and 

 
 
 
5 
 
build public confidence (Lavazza and Farina, 2020; Moore and MacKenzie, 2020; Rajan et al., 
2020).  
   Thus, according to recent work on collaborative approaches (Ansell, Sørensen and Torfing, 2021), 
both public and private actors will need to engage in ‘flexible adaptation’ and ‘proactive 
innovation’ to generate governance solutions for turbulent challenges. This perspective goes beyond 
promoting the goal of resilience, which generally focuses on the capacity of social groups, 
businesses and institutions to bounce back to their previous state in the aftermath of crises and 
challenges. While the resilience literature also notes the importance of individuals adapting in 
positive ways to enhance their pre-crisis functioning (such as increasing their skills and capacities –
Laureys and Easton, 2019), the ‘robustness’ literature is more focused on the importance of building 
institutions and processes that can withstand shocks and disturbances (Capano and Woo, 2017; 
Howlett, Capano and Ramesh, 2018). For example: 
In turbulent situations, foresight, protection, and resilience are not enough. Instead, the 
public sector must meet turbulence with robust strategies, where creative and agile public 
organizations adapt to the emergence new disruptive problems by building networks and 
partnerships with the private sector and civil society. (Ansell, Sørensen and Torfing, 2021, p 
952).  
   In the face of contemporary crises, effective communication among epistemic communities in 
different sectors is all the more valuable. The important inter-dependencies between the sectors – 
government, private business, community organisations, academia, media and the (natural) 
environment – need to be recognised and strengthened. Productive interaction across the sectors has 
been well documented in knowledge-intensive industries, as exemplified in the Quintuple Helix 
framework (Carayannis and Campbell, 2010) for encouraging creative and innovative solutions for 

 
 
 
6 
 
societal problems. The information and communication aspects of collaboration, for crisis 
management more broadly, are increasingly dependent on the quality of the digital (e-government) 
dimension of modern governance (Mergel et al, 2018).   
   The quality of policy advisory systems influences the capacity of governments to manage both 
mainstream issues and unexpected major crises. Advisory systems have normally been designed for 
providing expert information about known problems, and for recommending policy measures or 
programs that can stabilise or improve the situation (Jensen et al., 2022, pp 223-4). However, under 
conditions of crisis and disaster, there are likely to be serious gaps in knowledge, disagreement 
about the scope of the risks, and conflict about appropriate measures to contain the negative impacts 
(Drennan, McConnell and Stark, 2015). The future design of advisory systems may therefore need 
to adapt to these unpredictable and fast-moving situations by considering more inclusive and 
flexible forms of engagement with experts and stakeholders (Boin and Lodge, 2016).   
   In liberal democracies, the traditional narrative has been that various forms of expertise are valued 
for their contribution to the quality of political debate and governmental decision-making. Elected 
government ministers hold executive authority to make decisions, but they are usually expected to 
take account of expert advice. To the extent that experts are seen as objective, reliable and credible 
sources of information and advice, they can provide a further layer of legitimacy for the policy 
process owing to their specialised knowledge. However, in the contemporary era of turbulent and 
politicised crises, the idealised picture of experts as objective and non-partisan is less persuasive to 
the public, owing to several factors such as the interdependency of ministerial offices and policy 
advisory systems; the partisan mediatisation of crisis issues leading to increased pressure on 
decision-making; and the very rapid dissemination of information (and disinformation) through 
digital channels of communication. 

 
 
 
7 
 
   Among OECD liberal democracies, the institutional relationships between expert knowledge 
systems and governmental processes are quite diverse (OECD 2015; Hustedt and Veit, 2017). Much 
more diversity is evident when the scope of research is extended to include the full range of Low 
and Middle-Income Countries (LMIC) and non-liberal regimes. Leaving aside the likely effect of 
autocratic leadership styles, several key factors may seriously limit the capacity of governments to 
deploy the most effective available responses. These factors include resource issues (e.g. gaps in 
data collection and analysis, lack of science advisory infrastructure, limited funding for research 
and evaluation), and network issues (e.g. poor linkages between academia and policymaking). 
Recent research indicates that decision-makers in LMICs prefer using evidence obtained from 
similar settings or regional contexts, rather than deferring to OECD-centred research (Damba et al, 
2022; Witter et al, 2019). Research programs have not yet yielded significant work on the 
institutional structures and operational mechanisms of science advice processes in LMICs, taking 
into account the socio-economic constraints, socio-cultural norms and types of political leadership 
in those countries.  
   Studies of policy advisory bodies in liberal democracies tend to show that experts are often 
sharing the ‘driving seat’ during crises, but that high-level policymakers decide on the key strategic 
directions which entail difficult choices and trade-offs among competing goals and stakeholder 
interests. Thus, the research themes of this special issue draw upon three interrelated bodies of 
literature which inform and shape the landscape of expert-policymaker relations under conditions of 
crisis and turbulence. The core focus is to examine the various contributions of experts, inside and 
outside government, to policymaking on complex issues under conditions of conflict and 
uncertainty. A related concern is how these issues become highly politicised, with implications for 
the (perceived) politicisation of expert advice. Finally, it is important to frame this analysis in the 
context of crisis governance. To set the scene, it is necessary to clarify different types of crises 

 
 
 
8 
 
(recurrent, creeping, and acute) before proceeding to our main focus on expert policy advisory 
processes. 
   The crisis literature has identified several major forms and features. Crises are understood as 
serious forms of disruption, characterised by threat, urgency, and uncertainty. The term ‘crisis’ 
generally denotes a perceived major threat – social, political, financial, etc – to ‘core values or 
functionality’ of a national or an organisational system, ‘which must be dealt with under conditions 
of uncertainty’ (Boin et al. 2018, p. 24). There is some overlap with the fields of disaster 
management and emergency response, but the latter are usually about responding to physical 
hazards such as industrial explosions, storms, floods, droughts, wildfires, earthquakes, and volcanic 
eruptions. The terminology of ‘disasters’ and ‘emergencies’ may also have more specific meanings 
within legislative or regulatory instruments, but we will use the generic term ‘crises’ in this article.  
   The literature distinguishes between various types of crises. For example, crises unfold differently 
according to variations in policy sectors, spatial scales, and developmental timelines. Thus, a crisis 
might develop within a specific sector or policy domain, such as finance, health, transportation, 
housing, energy, or information technology; but spillover effects could also greatly affect related 
policy domains, and some of these threats and responses are likely to recur from time to time. A 
specific crisis might have only local impacts within a country, whereas other crises might cascade 
across international borders. For example, civil wars and famines may generate waves of refugees, 
who are displaced from their homelands and who seek security elsewhere in unfamiliar countries. 
Thus, crises may interact with each other in a cascading and compounding manner.  
   Finally, while most of the crisis literature has focused on ‘acute’ crises which emerge rapidly and 
require immediate responses, other types of crises are slow to develop over many years (Boin, 
Ekengren and Rhinard, 2021). ‘Creeping’ crises, such as climate change, may fail to achieve the 

 
 
 
9 
 
public salience necessary for attracting political attention and policy debate. In the absence of 
widespread awareness of emergent risks, these slow-onset crises may escape priority concern until 
urgent symptoms of harm have been recognised by political and media opinion leaders (Boin, 
Ekengren and Rhinard, 2020; Staupe-Delgado and Rubin, 2022). 
 
Dimensions of expertise in policy and politics 
   In policy and politics, the contributions of experts have always been important, but the form and 
content of valued expertise is highly variable. In liberal democracies since the 1950s, there has been 
a broad consensus that public policy and public administration should be substantially anchored in 
empirical and scientific knowledge about trends and issues (Adams 2004, pp 30-31). The sources of 
expert-based information include the social and natural sciences, policy analytics, governmental 
reports, and research coming from universities, think tanks, and consulting firms. Policy-related 
experts include policy analysts, scientists, and researchers in governmental and non-government 
organisations. There is much diversity across these groups of experts in terms of their financial 
incentives and professional cultures. Many have careers that include working in more than one 
sector, such as academia, nonprofit, private corporations, think tanks and government (Weible 
2008, p 216).  
   The research literature about ‘expertise’ is very broad, multi-disciplinary, and draws attention to 
several criteria for recognising expertise including formal qualifications and peer reputation (Eyal 
2019, ch 2). Much of the recent literature draws a distinction between the term ‘technical 
specialists’ whose knowledge scope is specific and narrow, and the term ‘experts’ whose deeper 
and wider knowledge has developed through experience in different situations (Goldman 2001; 
Grundmann 2018). However, for the present purpose of examining public policy advisory systems, 

 
 
 
10 
 
we take a pragmatic view of experts as those employed in professional roles in the policy-related 
functions of government, together with those employed in non-government organisations (such as 
research institutes, think tanks, consulting firms, and business or community organisations) who 
have been invited to be members of governmental policy advisory bodies. The valued forms of 
knowledge might range from scientific research through to knowledge of policy options, policy 
instruments, program management, and processes for building capability and support.    
   The ongoing demarcation between expert scientific knowledge and the lay knowledge based on 
experience has had the effect of conferring scientific experts with ‘epistemic authority’ (Gieryn 
1983). It was notable, in the first year of COVID-19, that government leaders relied heavily on the 
authority of health scientists to defend unpopular restrictions and lockdowns (MacAulay, et al, 
2023; Lynggaard et al, 2023). However, such reliance on the epistemic authority of health scientists 
was short-lived as attention turned to economic recovery and social connectivity. The temporary 
elevation of health science as the key to public safety did not shift the long-term underlying distrust 
of expertise in many countries where anti-elitist political rhetoric has been amplified by populist 
media channels (Nichols 2017). Debate about the threats of technocracy and elitism has a long 
history, not only among populists. Many writers on democracy and accountability have championed 
more participatory forms of decision-making, voicing concerns about the scientization of politics 
and the need for open discussion of complex policy issues (Fischer 1990). Technical specialists may 
have superior knowledge about technical processes, but the policy choices for complex issues often 
turn on normative considerations such as social values and the distributional outcomes for a diverse 
range of stakeholders (Lavazza and Farina, 2020, p 10).  
   The roles of experts are likely to vary in accordance with different policy domains, and the 
institutional patterns in various policy subsystems and advisory mechanisms. For example, 

 
 
 
11 
 
researchers have drawn distinctions between unitary, collaborative, and adversarial subsystems 
(Weible, Pattison and Sabatier, 2010). The relationships among experts might exhibit a high degree 
of agreement or consensus; in other cases, the experts may be engaged in attempts to reconcile 
differences to achieve shared goals and approaches; and in other fields the disagreements are so 
fundamental that the policy domain is characterised by polarisation and adversarial positions. 
Among scholarly experts, these matters of dispute might include relevant theories, methods, 
empirical data, and standards of validation. 
   In OECD countries, but also increasingly in other countries, policymakers seek expert advice 
through scientific advisory committees (SACs) not only on technical issues but also on complex 
social issues. A recent scoping review of scientific advisory committees in Europe and the United 
States (Groux, Hoffman and Ottersen, 2022) proposed six broad analytical categories for 
distinguishing between the types and functions of SACs. Their typology was based on 
distinguishing between the policy sector in which the SAC was established (e.g., national security, 
health or education); its jurisdictional level (e.g. national, or sub-national); the duration or longevity 
of the SAC (e.g. ad hoc, or permanent); the target audience for its advisory outputs (e.g. Ministers, 
or broader networks); its degree of independence (arms-length or embedded); and the type of advice 
it typically delivers (e.g. explanatory or prescriptive recommendations). Each of these dimensions is 
important for understanding the operating landscape of each SAC, and case studies that explore 
these dimensions could throw light on which institutional designs could make SACs more effective 
in specific contexts. Given the OECD-related background of these studies, much more attention is 
required to provide a comparative international picture of SAC developments in LMICs.  
   In the following sections, we very briefly address several analytical themes in the research 
literature on the dynamics of expert policy advisory systems. In particular, we explore the 
positioning of experts as insiders or outsiders in the political system, the formal and informal 

 
 
 
12 
 
dimensions of their advisory roles, their influence as knowledge providers or shapers, and their 
either non-partisan or politicised relationships to the political system. We will then consolidate the 
discussion by focusing on the relations between experts and policymakers during crises such as the 
pandemic.   
 
Insider/outsider positioning 
   The proximity of experts to decision-makers is a key element in how a policy advisory system 
works. The relevant experts can be either within the public bureaucracy or based in diverse non-
government organisations. A century ago, Weber’s claim about the growing power of bureaucrats 
(Weber 1958, pp 228-235) was based on his concern that ministers would be over-reliant on the 
deep content knowledge of their bureaucratic advisors. The modern situation is different, insofar as 
the sources of advice for policymakers have proliferated, and many non-governmental stakeholders 
are regularly involved in policy discussions with ministers (Craft and Howlett, 2013). Ministers 
have considerable discretion concerning where they seek advice and which sources are seen as 
trustworthy, so the insider status of policy bureaucrats has been weakened in a more pluralist 
advisory context.   
   Studies of business lobbies and pressure groups in recent decades have shown not only that public 
bureaucrats have lost their monopoly over ministerial access, but also that some external lobbyists 
have been very influential. In differentiating between insiders and outsiders, Page (1999) argued 
that insiders were those who had frequent contacts with senior policymakers, and who were 
regularly consulted on all relevant matters in their field. Hence, they could influence policy through 
direct contacts. By contrast, outsiders are those excluded from the corridors of power; hence, they 
were more likely to engage in alternative methods to influence policy, such as organising 
demonstrations and running critical commentaries in the media. He suggested that there is a 

 
 
 
13 
 
spectrum of access to decision-making processes, so the binary insider-outside labels can be 
misleading (Page 1999, p 212). In another study, examining the policy influence of bureaucratic 
experts, Page argued that it is the status or reputation of expert groups, committees, and institutions, 
rather than the specific content of their expertise, that mainly accounts for their influence (Page 
2010, p 270).  
   This analysis underlines the importance of the proximity of experts to decision-makers as a key 
element within an advisory system. The literature also examines the design aspects of policy 
advisory systems (Aubin and Brans, 2021) such as the scope and powers of advisory bodies, and the 
basis of making appointments (such as specific knowledge expertise, or the representation of 
sectoral interests).  
Formal/informal dimension 
   The interaction between formal organisational structures and informal social relations is one of 
the basic issues in organisational theory. It is well accepted that formal and informal ties interact 
and overlap within organisations (Yakubovich and Burg, 2019). While difficult to research, an 
interesting dimension is the degree of formality and informality in the relationships and interactions 
between experts and politicians. For example, research on lobbying in relation to climate policy 
(Coen 2007; Gullberg 2008) showed that expert-politician relations can be based predominantly on 
political or personal networks (individual connections between scientists and policymakers, ad hoc 
uptake of scientific research, conferences, and workshops) rather than simply relying on formal 
public administrative processes.   
    Informal relations are built up within and between groups of experts and politicians. These links 
can take a variety of formats depending on people’s background, ranging from ‘associations for 
alumni’ to trusted relationships and friendships that transcend occupations and status. Again, this 

 
 
 
14 
 
dimension is not binary and relationships between people can have both formal and informal 
dimensions. This adds complexity to the relationships found within expert advisory structures and 
between involved experts and politicians.  
 
Experts as providers or shapers 
   The research literature on experts in the policy process often raises the question of experts as 
knowledge ‘shapers’ or as knowledge providers. A traditional view of technical expertise stressed 
that objectivity and detachment are desirable (Pielke 2007). Many experts, including within the 
health sector, are content simply to provide scientific information rather than consider the policy 
implications. In a recent UK-based interview study (N=93), most scientists expressed a desire to 
provide evidence for informing policymakers, rather than a desire to advocate for specific policy 
options (Atkinson et al 2022). Another recent study, based on interviewing health scientists on 
advisory boards in Europe, showed a similar pattern of uncertainty about the scope of their roles, 
including how their health expertise might contribute to addressing broader inter-disciplinary policy 
problems (Colman, Wanat et al, 2021).  
   However, others have argued that experts should adopt a more active role by seeking to become 
knowledge-shapers rather than just being information-providers. In this approach, experts are also 
engaging actively with others to solve problems by framing and communicating the nature of the 
problem and pathways for improvement (Hordijk and Baud 2006; Sprujit et al. 2014). In policy 
studies theory, such as the advocacy coalition framework, experts are seen as brokers and 
entrepreneurs in terms of policy debate and policymaking (Weible et al, 2020; Petridou and 
Mintrom, 2021). In the climate-change literature, the role of experts has been seen as not only 
providing scientific information, but also engaging strategically with the public and policymakers to 

 
 
 
15 
 
enhance mobilisation and to shape key narratives and goals regarding climate change (Howarth et 
al. 2020; Biermann 2021; Livingston 2023).  
   Experts take up different roles in policymaking depending on the nature of the issue and the 
prominence of expert knowledge in framing the issue. In recent years, there has been strong 
involvement by non-government experts in climate change policy development through linking 
science, politics, and advocacy (Pralle 2009; Esguerra et al, 2017). In the traditional agenda-setting 
literature, experts in policy communities were characterised as primarily disseminating evidence-
based information to policymakers and the public (Kingdon 1995, p 228). However, experts who 
take on wider roles as public knowledge-shapers contribute importantly to the framing of issues, 
both in the sphere of formal decison-making and more broadly among the general public. Some 
experts play important public roles in media advocacy, agenda-setting, and policy debate (Dorfman 
and Krasnow 201; Christensen 2021). Expert advisors are often encouraged by the media and by 
political decision-makers to participate in the public debate, in order to clarify issues, increase 
public understanding, and build legitimacy around new policies. 
Politicisation: inevitable or useful 
   Politicisation is a term with several different meanings. It can be identified with the conflictual 
aspects of partisan political debate; or it can be focused on cases of in-group patronage, favouritism, 
and exclusion; or it can be seen more positively as a necessary quality for attracting priority support 
by policy entrepreneurs and political leaders. Politicisation is sometimes contrasted with the notion 
that liberal democracies should accord the highest importance to knowledge and expertise in public 
policymaking and public debate. Indeed, there has been a broad push towards ‘evidence-based’ or 
‘evidence-informed’ policymaking since the 1990s (Head, 2016; Christensen 2021), entailing a 
greater reliance on scientific research expertise. With a growing emphasis on expert knowledge and 
expert judgement comes a need to ensure supplies of reliable and relevant information. The 

 
 
 
16 
 
production and quality assurance of knowledge for specific policies and regulations requires careful 
oversight (Majcen 2017). Experts may hope they are contributing to an objective policy process 
based on scientific expertise, evidence, facts, and rationality. However, their endeavours are not 
generally used in a value-free way by decision-makers, who are more inclined to seek evidence-
informed arguments in support of their chosen options (Cairney 2016).  
   Research on the politicisation of policy advisory systems draws attention to several common 
practices such as politically appointed ministerial advisors, partisan selection of advisory committee 
members, and biased framing of the terms of reference for public inquiries and advisory bodies 
(Craft and Halligan, 2017; Fischer, Wenholt, Rowe and Frewer, 2014; Hustedt and Veit, 2017). The 
politicisation of an issue may make it more challenging for scientific expertise to set the terms of 
discussion in policymaking (Radaelli 1999; Weingart 1999; Lacey et al., 2018). With complex 
issues, such as climate change, policymaker interests vary and scientific expertise may be reframed 
for political ends (Liberatore and Funtowicz, 2003; Head 2016, p 474). When issues are heavily 
politicised, the distinct and separate roles of expert scientific advisors, experienced policy 
bureaucrats, and ministerial decision-makers and their staff, can become blurred (Hodges et al, 
2022; Christensen and Lægreid, 2022). In these circumstances partisan expertise may become more 
likely to over-ride the professional advice of public servants and expert committees. Jasanoff (2003) 
notes that government decision-makers may move between two contradictory positions: either they 
assert that all expert knowledge is ‘biased’ – thereby justifying their politicised appointments to 
advisory bodies – or alternatively they adopt ‘the elitist view of expertise as superior knowledge’. In 
order to overcome or reframe this dichotomy, she argues that expert advice should itself be 
subjected to close scrutiny especially when it has consequences for regulatory decision-making: 

 
 
 
17 
 
experts exercise a form of delegated authority and should thus be held to norms of 
transparency and deliberative adequacy that are central to democratic governance 
(Jasanoff 2003, p 157). 
 
Expert-politician relations during crisis 
   The role of experts in policy advisory positions varies across policy fields and policy issues, 
depending on institutional contexts and policy history including knowledge uncertainties and 
partisan disagreements. This brings us to the core questions raised in this special issue: How do 
conditions of crisis and turbulence affect the ways in which policy advisory systems function? How 
do crisis conditions affect the activities of public agencies in gathering and appraising reliable 
information, consulting with key stakeholders and the public, assessing future risks, and developing 
sound policy options for the consideration of ministers?  
   Recent research shows how crisis management obscures the classic dichotomy between politics 
and administration, including the provision of expert advice. Research on expert involvement in 
policymaking during diverse types of crises is extensive (Bækkeskov 2016; Topp et al., 2018; 
Cairney and Oliver, 2020; Boin, Ekengren and Rhinard, 2021; Laage-Thomsen and Frandsen, 
2022). In a context of crisis or high turbulence, the pre-existing institutional arrangements for policy 
advice may either facilitate or frustrate appropriate involvement of experts. In response to crisis 
situations, political systems are usually expected to utilise existing practices (path dependence) even 
if the threats, urgency, and uncertainty create pressures and opportunities for new approaches to 
crisis management. On the other hand, during times of turbulence the existing advisory structures 
can be adapted, modified, or even circumvented depending on the type of crisis (Boin and Lodge, 
2016; Boin, McConnell and ‘t Hart, 2021). The dynamics of crisis decision-making are likely to 
expose weaknesses in resources, analytical expertise, and capacity to adjust rapidly to changing 

 
 
 
18 
 
circumstances. Below we briefly highlight some of the key factors influencing the performance of 
policy advisory systems under the pressure of crisis conditions (fast-spaced expertise-informed 
decision-making; diversity of expertise; stakeholder agreement; politicization pressure; and the 
salience of expertise). 
 
Fast-spaced expertise-informed decision-making 
 
One factor influencing policy advisory systems is the need for fast-paced decision-making. 
Governments typically involve and rely on expertise when information and knowledge are scarce 
(Fakhruddin, 2020; Hodges et al. 2022). This has become increasingly required even in ‘normal’ 
times but is greatly intensified in crisis conditions (Boin et al., 2021; Comfort et al., 2020). 
Politicians need experts and expertise during crisis, as governments often lack sufficient, reliable 
information at a time when reluctance to act is not an option (Rubin et al., 2021). Ministers demand 
real-time information about the evolving crisis, which in turn puts pressure on existing channels of 
information-gathering and analysis. In an acute crisis there is no time for the rigorous and 
comprehensive ‘long-term’ science that experts usually prefer, and little time to double-check 
findings, or use extensive peer review, or commission new research. There are likely to be big gaps 
in the data, major difficulties in estimating the trajectory of the crisis, and large uncertainties about 
effective interventions to manage the situation.  Instead, experts and decision-makers must rely on 
‘real-time’ science or ‘good enough’ knowledge. Expertise must be exercised under unfavourable 
conditions such as lack of time (short deadlines), insufficient data, uncertain parameters for 
modelling, lack of skilled personnel, and lack of key supplies and facilities and support for 
vulnerable and disadvantaged groups. 
   Experts appear to be especially dominant in the first phase of a crisis, when there is an immediate 
need for person-linked trusted expert advice to make rapid responses to an uncertain and threatening 

 
 
 
19 
 
situation (Hadorn et al., 2022). In this phase policymakers are often relying on trusted individual 
experts who already have a history of interaction with policymakers. This leads to better adoption of 
science-based information and advice than a system based on analysis of a complex evidence base. 
According to a comparative study of experience in Germany, Switzerland and Italy, countries with 
policy advisory systems designed to use personal expertise may be better placed to incorporate 
scientific knowledge into their decisions in times of acute crisis than are countries with policy 
advisory systems that relied primarily on research evidence and public reports (Hadorn et al, 2022).  
 
Diversity of expertise 
A second factor affecting policy advisory systems during crises is the choice and range of expertise 
that is drawn upon by executive government. Governments need experts to gain and maintain public 
sensemaking around crisis management, especially during the first phases of a crisis. The framing 
of a crisis in a particular way will influence the breadth of expertise that is seen as most relevant – 
for example, a national security crisis will accord priority to military and policing expertise 
(Christensen et al, 2013), whereas a deadly infection among livestock will accord priority to health 
and agriculture expertise (Frewer and Salter, 2002). The more ‘technical’ the problem, the more 
likely that external scientific expertise will be sought by policymakers. With complex issues, such 
as climate change, policymakers’ interests will vary and multidisciplinary scientific expertise may 
be more or less welcome (Liberatore and Funtowicz, 2003; Radaelli, 1999; Weingart, 1999). Some 
governments in liberal-democratic societies have begun to facilitate diversity within expert advisory 
systems in the belief that it stimulates scientific clarification and public understanding. 
 
Stakeholder agreement 

 
 
 
20 
 
A third factor that can complicate the development of appropriate policy responses is the level of 
stakeholder agreement about values and goals. If stakeholders have different views about core 
principles and objectives that need to be observed during the crisis, the capacity of a democratic 
government to develop legitimate and effective response measures is further tested. Governments 
need experts to justify unpopular crisis interventions. Having good science is useful for decision-
makers, but science itself does not resolve the difficult choices and trade-offs between competing 
perspectives. Stakeholder involvement and agreement are important here. It is democratically risky 
for politicians to make blunt interventions, based on advice that has not been scrutinised through 
scientific review and public debate (Rubin et al., 2021). 
 
Politicisation pressure 
A fourth factor affecting policy advisory systems during crises is politicisation. Some governments 
may amplify the perception of threat to justify actions that would not otherwise be accepted, 
whereas others may downplay the threat to avoid taking drastic actions (Boin et al. 2018, p 25). The 
prospect of growing politicisation of policy choices under crisis conditions has been discussed by 
several scholars (e.g. Christensen and Lægreid, 2022; Craft and Howlett, 2013). There is also a risk 
that reliance on rigorous evidence will be undermined when preferred ‘insiders’ occupy the key 
advisory roles (Rubin et al., 2021). Politicisation affects the tension between maintaining the 
independent character of expert scientific advice and the harnessing of that advice to political 
objectives. As noted previously, crisis pressures tend to blur the classic dichotomy between politics 
and administration, including how advice is accessed and managed (Christensen and Lægreid 2022; 
Weingart 1999).  
Salience of expertise 

 
 
 
21 
 
A fifth factor is the salience of expert knowledge during crises, when threat, urgency and 
uncertainty emerges. Governments often give prominence to experts (also described as frontstage 
legitimation) in crisis situations (Hadorn 2022; Hodges et al, 2022). Increasingly, expert advisors – 
from inside and outside government – play a public communication role during crisis, being thrust 
into the media spotlight to support political leaders and provide public explanations and 
justifications of policy measures (Poulsen 2022). In general, the media play a large role in 
positioning experts in crisis situations, especially in the early stages of the crisis. However, the 
public salience of expertise can also be manifested in critical commentaries on crisis responses by 
experts who feel impelled to exercise their independent judgement. Giving visibility to experts may 
also be important from the viewpoint of democratic accountability and transparency, since 
unelected experts may be influencing decisions that affect citizens’ liberties and livelihoods.  
   The above features of expert advisory systems in acute crises can be different from the dynamics 
found in slow-onset or creeping crisis, like climate change. Though urgency and uncertainty are 
major challenges, the main political challenge is agenda-setting or making the issues more salient in 
public discussion. Furthermore, it can be difficult to maintain public attention and momentum in 
relation to creeping crises, because interventions to curb these crises often need to be implemented 
over decades (Boin, Ekengren and Rhinard, 2020; Staupe-Delgado and Rubin, 2022). 
Contributions in this special issue  
The special issue includes the following contributions (see table 1): 
(Table 1) 
Easton, Yarnold, Vervaenen, De Paepe & Head describe expert perspectives on the changing 
relational dynamics of policy advisory systems during the first two years of the COVID-19 crisis in 
Belgium and Australia. Although both countries had policy advisory structures in place prior to the 

 
 
 
22 
 
crisis; earlier research shows the different nature of the policy advisory systems in both countries 
during the pandemic. While Australia’s mostly adapted policy advisory structure remained 
relatively stable, Belgium’s activated and ad hoc policy advisory structures underwent ongoing 
changes throughout the crisis (Easton et al., 2022). Taking these findings into account; a qualitative 
analysis of 34 interviews with key expert informants is used to examine how expert advice was 
sought, provided, and utilized in crisis decision making; the specialized knowledge base of experts 
in relation to the goals of COVID-19 advisory bodies; and the relationships with other experts and 
policymakers. Their data, on the first two years of the crisis, shows the expanding breadth of 
perceived ‘relevant’ expertise as the scope of the challenge was re-framed from a health crisis to an 
all-encompassing socio-economic crisis. The experts interviewed illustrate the salience of expertise 
during crisis, the fast-spaced expertise-informed decision-making that took place and their 
experience with politicization pressure. Insights are given on how formal and informal dynamics 
unfold. Furthermore, this piece of research highlights that experts in advisory bodies are embedded 
in networks that facilitate links between different institutions, issue domains, and varieties of 
expertise. Therefore, effective crisis advisory bodies should incorporate experts from diverse 
backgrounds who can act as boundary spanners to link internal and external networks. 
In “The promise and performance of data ecosystems”, Howard & Hyland-Wood present a case 
study of infectious disease modelling as part of Australia’s COVID-19 response. The authors 
suggest that the rise of ecosystem thinking in public policy and administration represents a new, 
radically decentred model of policy action. It focuses on ecosystems of data-driven modelling and 
experts who utilise government public health data. They present a conceptual framework that 
suggests effective data ecosystems undertake organic adaptation, display institutional leadership, 
and respond instrumentally to policymakers’ information needs. Their work is based on a case study 
of how Australia's infectious disease data ecosystem performed before and during the COVID-19 

 
 
 
23 
 
pandemic. In-depth interviews with data experts involved in infectious disease modelling in 
Australia revealed trade-offs within and between organic, institutional, and instrumental 
dimensions, which COVID-19 exacerbated. The authors conclude that data ecosystems represent a 
hybrid form of policymaking in practice and that tensions must be managed to maximise the 
contributions of data ecosystems for evidence-informed decision-making. They touch upon a crucial 
element in how to prepare better for crises in the future.  
 
In ‘Between naked power and technocracy’, Aagaard, Poulsen & Chatzopoulou compare 
relations between experts and politicians during the COVID-19 crisis in Denmark, Greece, and the 
United States. For their comparative case study, data is collected from media, newspapers, and 
public documents. Their empirical findings show a high degree of national path dependency in 
national institutional arrangements in crisis management, connected with variations in increased 
pressure for politicisation. The authors indicate how systemic and governance characteristics affect 
expert politics responses in the three cases. The findings demonstrate a high resemblance in 
responses between Greece and Denmark, compared to the United States. Lastly, the authors 
formulate new research propositions for expert‒politician relations during crisis situations that 
address issues of experts’ roles in public sensemaking during crises, issues which are especially 
important in an era of recurring and overlapping crises. 
 
Lynggaard, Exadaktylos, Jensen & Kluth explore the role of expertise in shaping policy 
responses during politicized/depoliticized processes. Drawing on unique empirical evidence from a 
survey among political science experts across 31 countries in Europe; they examine knowledge 
exchanges before, and at different stages within, the COVID-19 pandemic. They found patterns of 
change between normal policymaking conditions to conditions of politicization/depoliticization as 

 
 
 
24 
 
triggered by the pandemic. It allows them to offer a novel typology, classifying the role of experts 
as leading, antagonistic, managerial, and auxiliary. During the Covid-19 pandemic a dramatic shift 
of the role experts occurred whereby even in countries where experts previously had an auxiliary 
role, leading decisions became the norm. They conclude that the role of experts oscillates depending 
on the issue at hand and the way that either political actors utilize expertise to legitimize decisions 
or experts themselves turn into political actors within politicized decision environments.  
 
An important contribution to broaden insights on expert advisory systems in low- and middle-
income countries (a gap mentioned above by Groux et al. (2022) is the research of Naomi, Allen, 
Rima Mbaabu, Mendes, Ndongwe, Djindan, Gardia de Paredes & Kandanamull. Their article 
on 'Evidence-to-policy pathways and pandemic governance’ addresses comparative institutional 
insights from COVID-19 responses in low- & middle-income countries in the global South. 
Drawing on six individual case studies (Panama, Jamaica, Sri Lanka, Indonesia, Kenya, and 
Zimbabwe) representing Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean and Africa; the authors’ highlight 
issues of weak science advice infrastructure, poor linkages between academia and policy, as well as 
limited research funding opportunities. At the same time their findings suggest that the presence of 
well-established institutions and pathways for science advice generally improved the uptake of 
scientific evidence in pandemic decision-making. Their analysis shows how contextual factors can 
severely impede processes of evidence generation and evidence-informed policy development. The 
author’s point out that there exists a critical need for models of science advice adapted for local 
contexts to serve governments more effectively in bridging the evidence to policy gap.  
Most studies have identified the main challenges faced by expert agencies involved in evidence-
based policymaking as managing uncertainty, time pressure, and communication. However, less 
focus has been devoted to analysing the concrete challenges faced by expert agencies during 

 
 
 
25 
 
creeping crises. Creeping crises are characterized by spatial and temporal fragmentation and 
elusiveness, which create an additional challenge for expert agencies: placing the crises on the 
political agenda. Zaman, Rubin and Delgado fill this gap with their contribution on “The scope 
for expert-led agenda setting during creeping crises: the curse of complacency”. Comparing two 
global creeping crises: climate change (CC) and antimicrobial resistance (AMR), this article 
highlights two distinct strategies for influencing policymaking. The analysis shows how two expert 
agencies, the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Framework Convention 
on Climate Change (UNFCCC), pursue different strategies when setting the global agenda and 
influencing policymaking. The findings show that the WHO’s approach to policymaking regarding 
AMR has been mostly guided by top-down, science-led, formal engagements and strategies. This 
approach has successfully increased the salience of the global challenge of AMR, providing strong, 
evidence based solutions, but it has been less successful in promoting the challenge onto the global 
political agenda. In contrast, the UNFCCC’s approach to policymaking has relied more on 
horizontal, bottom-up, multidisciplinary, informal strategies. This approach has enabled a broader 
coalition of advocacy actors and placed CC persistently on the global political agenda. In this way, 
the article enhances our understanding of the role experts play in drawing attention to creeping 
crises. 
 
Further insights on climate policy in the EU is provided by Dupont, Rosamond & Zaki. In 
“Investigating the scientific knowledge-policy interface in EU climate policy”, the authors provide 
an historical overview of the evolution of knowledge exchange architecture for climate policy in the 
EU. They investigate whether evolutions in the knowledge architecture reflect shifts in the 
politicisation of climate change and focus on knowledge exchange with the European Commission. 
Drawing on 34 semi-structured interviews carried out between 2010 and 2022, their analysis reveals 

 
 
 
26 
 
reveal connections between the development of the formal and informal aspects of the knowledge 
exchange architecture and the shifts in politicisation in different time periods. They find that when 
the politicisation of climate change led to a negative or constraining context, the informal aspects of 
the knowledge exchange architecture closed, making it more challenging for multidisciplinary 
scientific knowledge to enter the process. However, the formal aspects of the knowledge exchange 
architecture remained in place, even under constraining conditions. With their contribution, the 
authors provide a nuanced assessment of the connections between the effects of politicisation and 
the potential for meaningful scientific-policy knowledge exchange, contributing to literature on both 
the politicisation of climate change and on knowledge exchange architectures. 
 
References  
Adams, D. (2004). Usable knowledge in public policy. Australian Journal of Public Administration, 
63(1), 29-42. 
Ansell, C., Sørensen, E. and Torfing, J. (2021). The COVID-19 pandemic as a game changer for 
public administration and leadership? The need for robust governance responses to turbulent 
problems, Public Management Review, 23(7), 949-960. 
Aubin, D., and Brans, M. 2021. Styles of policy advice, in M. Howlett and J. Tosun (eds), 
Routledge handbook of policy styles, London: Routledge, pp. 286-299.  
Bennett, N., and Lemoine, G.J. (2014). What a difference a word makes – understanding threats to 
performance in a VUCA world. Business Horizons 57(3), 311-317. 
Biermann, F. (2021). The future of ‘environmental’ policy in the Anthropocene: time for a 
paradigm shift, Environmental Politics, 30 (1-2), 61-80. 

 
 
 
27 
 
Boin, A., Ekengren, M. and Rhinard, M. (2020). Hiding in plain sight: conceptualizing the creeping 
crisis, Risk, Hazards and Crisis in Public Policy, 11(2), 116-138.  
Boin, A., Ekengren, M. and Rhinard, M. (Editors) (2021) Understanding the Creeping Crisis. 
Palgrave Macmillan: Cham.  
Boin, A., Hart, P.‘t. and S. Kuipers (2018). The crisis approach, in H. Rodríguez, W. Donner and J. 
Trainor (eds.), Handbook of Disaster Research, 2nd edition, Springer, pp 23-38. 
Boin, A., and ‘t Hart, P. (2022). From crisis to reform? Exploring three post-COVID pathways.  
Policy and Society, 41(1), 13-24.  
Boin, A., and Lodge, M. (2016). Designing resilient institutions for transboundary crisis 
management: A time for public administration. Public Administration, 94(2), 289-298.  
Boin, A., McConnell, A., and ‘t Hart, P. (2021). Governing the pandemic: A crisis management 
perspective. London: Palgrave. 
Cairney, P., and Wellstead, A. (2021). COVID-19: effective policymaking depends on trust in 
experts, politicians, and the public, Policy Design and Practice, 4(1), 1-14.   
Capano, G., and Woo, J. (2017). Resilience and robustness in policy design: a critical appraisal, 
Policy Sciences 50(3), 399-426.  
Carayannis, E., and Campbell, D. (2010). Triple helix, quadruple helix and quintuple helix. 
International Journal of Social Ecology and Sustainable Development, 1(1), 41-69.  
Christensen, T., and Lægreid, P. (2022). Scientization under pressure – the problematic role of 
expert bodies during the handling of the COVID-19 pandemic. Public Organization Review, 
22(2), 291-307. 

 
 
 
28 
 
Christensen, T., Danielsen, O., Lægreid, P., and Rykkja, L. (2016). Comparing coordination 
structures for crisis management in six countries. Public Administration, 94(2), 316-332.  
Coen, D. (2007). Empirical and theoretical studies in EU lobbying. Journal of European Public 
Policy, 14(3), 333-345. 
Comfort, L., Kapucu, N., Ko, K., Menoni, S., and Siciliano, M. (2020). Crisis decision‐making on a 
global scale: transition from cognition to collective action under threat of COVID-19. Public 
Administration Review, 80(4), 616–622.  
Craft, J., and Halligan, J. (2017). Assessing 30 years of policy advisory system scholarship. Policy 
Sciences, 50(1), 47-62.  
Craft, J., and Howlett, M. (2013). The dual dynamics of policy advisory systems: the impact of 
externalization and politicization on policy advice. Policy and Society, 32(3), 187-197. 
Craft, J., and Wilder, M. (2017). Catching a second wave: context and compatibility in advisory 
system dynamics. Policy Studies Journal, 45(1), 215-239.  
Crowley, K. and Head, B.W. (2017). Expert advisory bodies in the policy system, in M. Brans, I. 
Geva-May and M. Howlett (eds), Routledge handbook of comparative policy analysis, London: 
Routledge, pp. 181-198. 
Damba, F., Mtshali, N., and Chimbari, M. (2022). Barriers and facilitators of translating health 
research findings into policy in sub-Saharan Africa: a scoping review. Humanities and Social 
Sciences Communications, 9(1), 1-15. 
Drennan, L., McConnell, A. and Stark, A. (2015). Risk and crisis management in the public sector 
(2nd ed.). Routledge.  

 
 
 
29 
 
Druckman, J.N. (2017). The crisis of politicization within and beyond science. Nature Human 
Behaviour, 1(9), 615-617.  
Easton, M., De Paepe, J., Evans, P., Head, B.W., and Yarnold, J. (2022). Embedding expertise for 
policy responses to COVID-19: comparing decision-making structures in two federal 
democracies. Public Organization Review, 22(2), 309-326. 
Esguerra, A., Beck, S. and Lidskog, R. (2017) ‘Stakeholder engagement in the making: IPBES 
legitimization politics’, Global Environmental Politics, 17(1), 59-76.  
Eyal. G. (2019). The crisis of expertise. Cambridge: Polity. 
Fischer, F. (1990). Technocracy and the politics of expertise. Sage. 
Fischer, A., Wentholt, M., Rowe, G., and Frewer, L. (2014). Expert involvement in policy 
development: a systematic review of current practice. Science and Public Policy, 41(3), 332-343.  
Frewer, L., and Salter, B. (2002). Public attitudes, scientific advice and the politics of regulatory 
policy: the case of BSE, Science and Public Policy, 29(2), 137-145. 
Galanti, M. and Saracino, B. (2021). Inside the Italian COVID-19 task forces. Contemporary Italian 
Politics, 13(2), 275-291. 
Gieryn, T.F. (1983). Boundary work and the demarcation of science from non-science, American 
Sociological Review, 48(6), 781-795.  
Goldman, A.I. (2001). Experts: which ones should you trust? Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research, 63(1), 85-110.  
Groux, G., Hoffman, S. and Ottersen, T. (2018). A typology of scientific advisory committees. 
Global Challenges, 2(9), 1800004.  

 
 
 
30 
 
Grundmann, R. (2018). The rightful place of expertise, Social Epistemology, 32(6), 372-386. 
Gullberg, A. T. (2008b). Lobbying friends and foes in climate policy: The case of business and 
environmental interest groups in the European Union. Energy Policy, 36(8), 2964-2972. 
Hadorn, S., Sager, F., Mavrot, C., Malandrino, A., and Ege, J. (2022) Evidence-based policymaking 
in times of acute crisis: Comparing the use of scientific knowledge in Germany, Switzerland, and 
Italy. Politische Vierteljahresschrift, 63(2), 359-382.  
Head, B.W. (2016). Toward more ‘evidence‐informed’ policy making? Public Administration 
Review, 76(3), 472-484. 
Hodges, R., Caperchione, E., van Helden, J., Reichard, C., and Sorrentino, D. (2022). The role of 
scientific expertise in COVID-19 policy-making: evidence from four European countries. Public 
Organization Review, 22(2), 249-267.  
Hordijk, M., and Baud, I. (2006). The role of research and knowledge generation in collective 
action and urban governance: How can researchers act as catalysts? Habitat International, 30(6), 
668-689. 
Howarth, C., Parsons, L. and Thew, H. (2020). ‘Effectively communicating climate science beyond 
academia‘, One Earth, 2(4), 320-324.  
Howlett, M., Capano, G. and Ramesh, M. (2018). Designing for robustness: surprise, agility and 
improvisation in policy design, Policy & Society, 37(4), 405-421.  
Hustedt, T., and Veit, S. (2017). Policy advisory systems: change dynamics and sources of 
variation. Policy Sciences, 50(1), 41-46.  

 
 
 
31 
 
Jensen, M.D., Lynggaard, K. and Kluth, M. (2022). Paths, punctuations, and policy learning: 
comparing patterns of European use of scientific expertise during the COVID-19 crisis, Public 
Organization Review, 22(2), 223-247.  
Kingdon, J. (1995). Agendas, alternatives and public policies, 2nd edition. London: Pearson.  
Lacey, J., Howden, M., Cvitanovic, C., and Colvin, R. (2018). Understanding and managing trust at 
the climate science–policy interface. Nature Climate Change, 8(1), 22-28.  
Laage-Thomsen, J., and Frandsen, S. (2022). Pandemic preparedness systems and diverging 
COVID-19 responses ….. expert perceptions of pandemic response in Denmark, Norway, and 
Sweden. Globalization and Health, 18(3). 
Laureys, V., and Easton, M. (2019). Resilience of public and private security providers: a state-of-
the-art literature review. Policing – An International Journal 42(2), 126-140.  
Lavazza, A. and Farina, M. (2020). The role of experts in the COVID-19 pandemic and the limits of 
their epistemic authority in democracy, Frontiers in Public Health, 8, art356. 
Liberatore, A., and Funtowicz, S. (2003). ‘Democratising’ expertise, ‘expertising’ democracy: What 
does this mean, and why bother? Science and Public Policy, 30(3), 146-150.  
Livingston, J. (2023). A global goal for climate change: the place of science in politics. Social 
Research, 90(1), 111-126. 
Lynggaard, K., Jensen, M., and Kluth, M. (eds) (2023). Governments’ responses to the Covid-19 
pandemic in Europe. Cham: Palgrave.  
MacAulay, M., Fafard, P., Cassola, A. and Palkovits, M. (2023) Analysing the ‘follow the science’ 
rhetoric of government responses to COVID-19, Policy & Politics, XX(XX): 1–20. 

 
 
 
32 
 
Majcen, Š. (2017). Evidence based policy making in the European Union: the role of the scientific 
community. Environmental Science and Pollution Research, 24(9), 7869-7871.  
Mergel, I.,  Gong, Y., Bertot, J. (2018) Agile government: Systematic literature review and future 
research. Government Information Quarterly, 35(2), 291-298. 
Moore, A. and MacKenzie, M. (2020) Policy making during crises: how diversity and disagreement 
can help manage the politics of expert advice. British Medical Journal, 371 (4039), 1-3. 
Nichols, T. (2017) The death of expertise. Oxford: Oxford University Press.  
OECD (2015). Scientific advice for policy making: the role and responsibility of expert bodies and 
individual scientists. Paris: OECD STI Policy Paper 21.  
Pattyn, V., Matthys, J. and van Hecke, S. (2021). High-stakes crisis management in the Low 
Countries: comparing government responses to COVID-19, International Review of 
Administrative Sciences, 87(3): 593‒611.  
Page, E.C. (1999). The insider/outsider distinction. British Journal of Politics and International 
Relations, 1(2), 205-214.  
Page, E.C. (2010). Bureaucrats and expertise. Sociologie du travail, 52 (2), 255-273. 
Petridou, E., and Mintrom, M. (2021). A research agenda for the study of policy entrepreneurs. 
Policy Studies Journal, 49(4), 943-967.  
Pielke, R. A. (2007) The honest broker: Making sense of science in policy and politics, Cambridge 
University Press.  
Poulsen, B. (2022). When civil servants go frontstage – the mediatization of the role of the civil 
servant during the COVID-19 crisis. Administrative Sciences, 12, 73. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/admsci12030073  

 
 
 
33 
 
Pralle, S. B. (2009). Agenda-setting and climate change, Environmental Politics, 18(5), 781- 799.  
Radaelli, C. (1999). The public policy of the European Union: whither politics of expertise? Journal 
of European Public Policy, 6(5), 757-774.  
Rajan, D., Koch, K., et al. (2020) Governance of the COVID-19 response: A call for more inclusive 
and transparent decision- making. BMJ Global Health, 5(5), 1-8.  
Rubin, O., Errett, N., Upshur, R., and Baekkeskov, E. (2021). The challenges facing evidence-based 
decision making in the initial response to COVID-19. Scandinavian Journal of Public Health, 
49(7), 790-796.  
Staupe-Delgado, R. and Rubin, O. (2022). Challenges associated with creeping disasters in disaster 
risk science and practice: considering disaster onset dynamics, International Journal of Disaster 
Risk Science, 13(1), 1-13.  
Topp, L., Mair, D., Smillie, L., and Cairney, P. (2018). Knowledge management for policy impact: 
the case of the European Commission’s Joint Research Centre, Palgrave Communications, 4(87), 
1-10.  
Weber, M. (1958). From Max Weber: essays in sociology, eds H.Gerth and C.W. Mills. Oxford 
University Press.  
Weible, C. (2008). Expert-based information and policy subsystems: a review and synthesis. Policy 
Studies Journal, 36(4), 615–635.  
Weible, C., Pattison, A. and Sabatier, P. (2010). Harnessing expert-based information for learning 
and the sustainable management of complex socio-ecological systems, Environmental Science & 
Policy, 13(6), 522-534.  

 
 
 
34 
 
Weible, C., Ingold, K., Nohrstedt, D., Henry, A. and Jenkins-Smith, H. (2020). Sharpening 
advocacy coalitions. Policy Studies Journal, 48(4), 1054-1081.  
Weingart, P. (1999). Scientific expertise and political accountability: Paradoxes of science in 
politics, Science and Public Policy, 26(3), 151-161.  
Witter, S., Anderson, I., et al. (2019). What, why and how do health systems learn from one 
another? Insights from eight low-and middle-income country case studies, Health Research Policy 
and Systems, 17(1), 1-13. 
Yakubovich, V., and Burg, R. (2019). Friendship by assignment? From formal interdependence to 
informal relations in organizations. Human Relations, 72(6), 1013-1038.   
Zaki, B.L., and Wayenberg, E. 2020. Shopping in the scientific marketplace: COVID-19 through a 
policy learning lens. Policy Design and Practice, 4(1), 15-32. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
35 
 
Title 
Issue 
Type of study 
Crisis focus 
Authors 
Expert perspectives on the 
changing dynamics of policy 
advisory systems. 
Focus on expert 
experiences in Belgium 
and Australia 
Qualitative, 
case study, 
comparative 
 
COVID 
Easton, Yarnold, 
Vervaenen, De 
Paepe & Head 
How data-sharing 
ecosystems respond to 
compounding crises 
Data ecosystems in the 
same case in Australia 
Qualitative, 
case study 
COVID 
Howard & 
Hyland-Wood 
Between Naked power and 
Technocracy 
Politicization in three case 
studies – Denmark, 
Greece, and the US 
Qualitative, 
case study, 
comparative 
COVID 
Aagaard, Poulsen 
& Chatzopoulou 
Between Depoliticization 
and Politicization: the role 
of expertise in Covid-19 
politics in Europe 
Politicization in 31 EU 
countries 
Quantitative, 
comparative 
COVID 
Lynggaard, 
Exadaktylos, 
Jensen & Kluth 
Evidence-to-policy pathways 
and pandemic governance 
Comparative institutional 
insights from COVID-19 
responses in six LMIC 
countries (Panama, 
Jamaica, Sri Lanka, 
Indonesia, Kenya, and 
Zimbabwe) 
Qualitative, 
comparative 
COVID 
Naomi, Allen, 
Rima Mbaabu, 
Mendes, 
Ndongwe, 
Djindan, Gardia 
de Paredes & 
Kandanamull 
The curse of complacency – 
the scope for expert-led 
agenda setting during 
creeping crises 
Creeping crisis– entering 
climate debate. 
 
Qualitative, 
case study, 
comparative 
Climate crisis 
Zaman, Rubin & 
Delgado 
The evolution of knowledge 
exchange architecture for 
climate action, with 
politicisation of climate 
change in the European 
Union 
EU climate policy & 
knowledge architecture.  
 
Qualitative, 
historical 
Climate crisis 
Dupont, 
Rosamond & Zaki 
Table 1: Overview of contributions in this special issue.