CHAPTER 6 
Hungary, the EU and Russia’s War Against 
Ukraine: The Changing Dynamics of EU 
Foreign Policymaking 
Patrick Müller and Peter Slominski 
Introduction 
The EU’s ability to forge a common response to Russia’s war of aggres-
sion against Ukraine is frequently understood as a crucial ‘test case’ for its 
internal cohesion and effectiveness as a foreign policy actor (Zerka 2022). 
Notably, it marks an important turning point in the European secu-
rity order, with several EU countries announcing plans to substantively 
increase their defence spending. Simultaneously, NATO has experienced 
a ‘revival’, strengthening its Eastern ﬂank, showing determination to 
upgrade its defence and deterrence capabilities, and developing a new
P. Müller envelope symbol
Faculty of Social and Human Sciences, University of Deusto, Bilbao, Spain 
e-mail: Patrick.mueller@da-vienna.ac.at 
Vienna School of International Studies, Vienna, Austria 
P. Slominski 
Department of Political Science, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: Peter.slominski@univie.ac.at 
© The Author(s) 2024 
C. Wiesner and M. Knodt (eds.), The War Against Ukraine 
and the EU, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-35040-5_6 
111

112
P. MÜLLER AND P. SLOMINSKI
security concept that pays greater attention to key security threats and 
aims at building resilience, most notably with respect to Russia and China. 
Yet, Russia’s invasion and annexation of parts of Ukraine not only are 
considered as a central threat to Europe’s security architecture but also 
as a fundamental challenge to the post-World War II liberal international 
order the EU is built upon (Gould-Davies 2023). These principles include 
the respect of international law, sovereignty of states as well as the non-
intervention, or annexation, of territory by force. In this respect, Russia’s 
war on Ukraine has been described as a test for the post-national EU with 
its values of openness, freedom, solidarity and individual responsibility 
(Zerka 2023). This is even more the case if we bear in mind that the 
Ukraine war has increased geopolitical conﬂicts reinforcing pre-existing 
challenges for the EU’s core tenets such as protectionism and the (re-) 
emergence of a more interventionist state in countries as diverse as China 
and the US (Gerstle 2022). 
Besides the development of a more robust ‘hard power’—which, if at 
all possible, can hardly be achieved in the short term, the most realistic 
paths the EU might pursue are sanctions against the Russian aggressor 
and the political, economic as well as military support of Ukraine (Wood 
2023). As several of these measures require unanimity among the 27 
Member States, the EU’s capacity to act is anything but a given. Unsur-
prisingly, EU institutions like the European Commission are eager to 
emphasize that the EU and its Member States ‘stand united in their 
unwavering support for Ukraine’, while ﬁrmly condemning Russia’s war 
of aggression (European Council 2023). In addition, the fact that the EU 
has so far successfully adopted eleven packages of far-reaching sanctions 
against Russia is frequently used as evidence to demonstrate its capacity 
for a decisive and uniﬁed response (see the chapter by Knodt and Ringel, 
in this volume). 
At the same time, divergences and tensions among the EU and its 
Member States persist. As we will argue in this chapter, important internal 
challenges to the EU’s unity as an international actor are not only related 
to differing views on foreign policy questions, or differing interests and 
vulnerabilities among Member States. This is the case when it comes 
to issues like national security, individual economic and energy relations 
with Russia or the management of dealing with more than eight million 
Ukraine refugees (UNHCR N/A). Rather, they also involve internal 
disagreement and increasing contestation of the core values and norms on 
which the EU is built, including the respect for democracy and the rule of

6
HUNGARY, THE EU AND RUSSIA’S WAR AGAINST UKRAINE …
113
law, which the EU also seeks to promote externally (see also the chapter 
by Wiesner, in this volume). In the past two decades, these contestations 
have occurred in several EU Member States and are typically associated 
with the rise of populist radical right parties, notably (but not exclusively) 
in Central and Eastern Europe (Orenstein and Bugariˇc 2022). 
In this chapter, we will explore what CFSP bargaining strategies 
Hungary has employed in its conﬂict with EU institutions over rule of law 
issues and how these strategies have affected decision-making processes 
within the CFSP. We will argue that to account for important develop-
ments in EU foreign policy it is important to take the growing relevance 
of the internal–external policy nexus into consideration. In a situation of 
growing internal polarization and politicization in the EU, we also witness 
a growing instrumentalization of foreign policy decisions for domestic 
gains (Müller and Gazsi 2023). We expect that Member States which 
have signiﬁcant material relations with third countries that compete with 
the EU for inﬂuence and also deviate from the EU’s normative consensus 
are more likely to pursue domestic objectives at the expense of the EU’s 
foreign policy cohesion (see the chapters by Smith and by Zarembo, in 
this volume). We observe this hostage-taking strategy of foreign policy 
negotiations in the EU’s Common Foreign and Security Policy (CFSP) 
and in NATO, which overlaps with the CFSP in signiﬁcant ways in the 
security domain. Hostage-taking has mainly been discussed in the context 
of EU-NATO relations, showing that states can use their membership 
in one institution to hold the other institution, in which they are not 
a member, hostage (Hofmann 2009). Building on and adapting this 
concept, this chapter shows that the EU and NATO member Hungary 
can hold both institutions hostage in the pursuit of its non-foreign policy 
objectives (see also Gehring and Oberthür 2009). Speciﬁcally, we show 
how Hungary’s populist radical right government has relied on a tactic of 
blocking and delaying key decisions in the framework of the CFSP and 
NATO in order to enhance its negotiation leverage in its internal dispute 
with EU institutions. 
Since the government of Prime Minister Viktor Orbán took ofﬁce in 
2010, Hungary has acquired a reputation for democratic backsliding, for 
letting ﬁnancial corruption proliferate, and for the erosion of the rule 
of law (de la Baume 2022). This has brought Hungary into a growing 
conﬂict with EU institutions, especially with the European Parliament. 
In September 2018, the European Parliament arrived at the conclusion 
that there is a ‘clear risk of a serious breach of the EU founding values

114
P. MÜLLER AND P. SLOMINSKI
in Hungary’ triggering the Article 7-procedure which might lead to the 
suspension of Hungary’s voting rights in the council (European Parlia-
ment 2018). In 2022, the parliament was even more concerned, stating 
that ‘Hungary has become an “electoral autocracy”’ and that further EU 
inaction ‘would amount to a rule of law breach by the council’ (European 
Parliament 2022). In April 2022, the European Commission triggered 
the so-called conditionality mechanism against Hungary, allowing the EU 
to cut off a Member State from EU money to protect the EU’s ﬁnan-
cial interests (Wahl 2022). As we will show in this chapter, the Orbán 
government has repeatedly responded to its growing conﬂict with EU 
institutions by blocking and delaying key foreign policy decisions in the 
framework of CFSP and NATO. 
In terms of theory, our argument of hostage-taking in international 
institutions is based on the understanding of the EU as a multi-level 
governance system that allows for the linkage of different policy issues 
and arenas, including overlapping international institutions like NATO. 
The fact that key foreign policy decisions in the CFSP, as well as in 
NATO, require unanimity among the Member States provides for nego-
tiation strategies that we call ‘hostage-taking’. Here, the ‘hostage-taker’ 
uses its veto position within an international organization to increase 
its bargaining power within the same, or overlapping, institutions. The 
hostage-taker may link different institutional ﬁelds through condition-
ality to leverage its interest. Accordingly, common governance objectives, 
joint problem-solving and institutional norms will be subordinated to the 
promotion of an actor’s self-interest. At the same time, the hostage-taker 
needs to be mindful that using a veto position in an international orga-
nization may be costly, not least given the consensus-oriented culture 
of institutions like CFSP and NATO. To minimise these costs, hostage-
taking will often be backed by rhetorical strategies that seek to provide 
political legitimacy to obstructive behaviour. Among other things, a 
hostage-taker may produce ‘constructed demands’ that are framed to 
appear ‘legitimate’ but have the sole purpose of dragging out negotia-
tions for as long as possible, thereby increasing the costs for the other 
side. 
The chapter proceeds as follows. We ﬁrst develop our theoretical 
argument about hostage-taking in international negotiation and related 
negotiation strategies. We conceive negotiation dynamics as an interac-
tive process that unfolds between a hostage-taker, here Hungary, and the 
political target, here the EU institutions and the other Member States.

6
HUNGARY, THE EU AND RUSSIA’S WAR AGAINST UKRAINE …
115
Subsequently, we examine the case of Hungary’s conﬂict with EU insti-
tutions over rule of law issues, which have involved an increasing reliance 
on hostage-taking strategies in the framework of CFSP and NATO. The 
conclusion discusses our main ﬁndings. 
The EU’s Multi-level Governance System 
in a Changing International Environment 
The EU has been described as a multi-level and multi-sector governance 
system, where national actors share important powers with a range of EU 
institutions, like the European Commission, the European Parliament and 
the European Court of Justice and EU agencies, with competence attri-
bution differing across different policy areas. While national actors have 
lost some of their autonomy, they ‘are not sub-ordinate’ (Mayntz 1999) 
as they participate in EU-level decision-making. Among other things, 
this allows different actors in the multi-level EU governance system to 
link different arenas and issue areas across policy domains (Kardasheva 
2013). In the context of the EU, issue linkage has often been studied 
as a strategy employed by actors like the Commission or the European 
Parliament that aim at resolving deadlock in negotiations and moving 
integration forward (Falkner 2011; Héritier 2015; Schmidt 2000). At the 
same time, the EU’s multi-level governance system is itself embedded in 
an international system, marked by considerable regime complexity, which 
contributes to overlap between different international institutions (Knodt 
2004; Alter and Meunier 2009; Müller et al. 2014). This opens up addi-
tional opportunities for linking arenas between international institutions 
with overlapping membership, mandates and resources (Hofmann 2011). 
For instance, building on classical work on two-level game theory, it has 
been argued that linking EU-level negotiations with negotiation processes 
in international institutions enabled the stalemate in the evolution of 
EU ﬁnance and agricultural policies to be overcome (Kudrna and Müller 
2017; Putnam 1988). While issue linkage can be regarded as a familiar 
negotiation strategy in many EU policy areas, it is uncommon in the ﬁeld 
of CFSP. Both constructivist and institutionalist scholars emphasize the 
importance of informal norms, such as diffuse reciprocity, trust, mutual 
responsiveness, and the consensus reﬂex. This ‘culture of compromise’ 
(Costa and Müller 2019) that has not eliminated national interests but 
instead has transformed nation states to Member States which are increas-
ingly unwilling to use their veto-rights in CFSP negotiations or to link

116
P. MÜLLER AND P. SLOMINSKI
CFSP negotiations to issues under negotiations in other policy domains 
(Lewis 2000; Bickerton  2012; Schimmelfennig and Thomas 2009). 
Still, we can expect to see more competitive bargaining situations— 
including the use of veto positions—when EU-decision-making is highly 
politicized within the domestic arena; when the Member State which is 
willing to use—or threaten with—its veto shares few interests and/or 
norms with the other Member States; or when Member States have mutu-
ally exclusive policy preferences thereby making a compromise unlikely 
(Thomas 2021). While competitive bargaining appears well-suited to 
explaining Hungary’s negotiation strategies within CFSP and NATO 
against the background of the Ukraine war, we argue that Hungary’s 
issue-linkage strategy is not only a tool to block consensus but is— 
at the same time somehow paradoxically—also a source for possible 
compromise. Contrary to Thomas’ argument, the current negotiation 
constellation cannot be characterized by a mutually exclusive policy pref-
erence. Instead, Hungary may be willing to compromise under the 
condition that it receives money from the Covid-recovery fund and/or 
concessions in the Article 7-procedure. 
Hostage-Taking in CFSP and NATO Negotiations 
From such a perspective, we suggest conceiving Hungary’s Ukraine-
related negotiation strategies as a form of hostage-taking. Hostage-taking 
constitutes a strategy in which the linking of different arenas or issue 
areas primarily serves to increase an actor’s own clout. Here, the threat 
or use of the veto position in one negotiation-setting is used to inﬂict 
substantive, asymmetrical cost on other actors to realize political objec-
tives in another negotiation-setting. These costs may be material in 
nature, or they may involve reputational costs. For instance, if a Member 
State blocks a common EU foreign policy decision, it not only limits 
the EU’s capacity to promote important foreign policy objectives but 
also undermines its image as an international actor. The growing rele-
vance of foreign policy decisions in times of augmented security risks, 
geopolitical change, growing competition and an increasingly fragmented 
international order makes foreign policy decisions particularly relevant to 
strategies of hostage-taking, as the incapacity for timely, effective and 
uniﬁed action can involve signiﬁcant costs for the EU. This, in turn, 
increases the threat potential of individual Member States to impose 
substantive costs to an international institution by blocking or delaying

6
HUNGARY, THE EU AND RUSSIA’S WAR AGAINST UKRAINE …
117
key foreign policy decisions (Higgott and Reich 2022). What is more, 
foreign policy decision in the CFSP and overlapping international insti-
tutions like NATO are particularly vulnerable to hostage-taking as they 
grant signiﬁcant (veto) powers to individual Member States. Constituting 
a domain of ‘core state powers’, foreign policy cooperation is particu-
larly sensitive for Member States, which seek to preserve their national 
capacity to act. Both within the CFSP, as well as within NATO (which 
since the accession of Finland has 22 Member States in common with the 
EU) important decisions, are still taken by consensus. By granting a veto 
position to their Member States, key foreign policy decisions in the frame-
work of CFSP and NATO may be delayed or even blocked by individual 
Member States. 
At the same time, it is important to note that relying on coercive 
negotiation strategies like hostage-taking marks a signiﬁcant break with 
the consensus-oriented culture that prevails in the CFSP. In particular, 
works on normative institutionalism and research on the Europeaniza-
tion of foreign policy have pointed to the importance of CFSP’s “culture 
of cooperation”, marked by procedural norms like information sharing, 
consensus-seeking, and the respect of previously agreed language and 
positions (Thomas 2011; Schimmelfennig and Thomas 2009). While 
Member States may still seek to protect important national interests on 
some sensitive issues in CFSP negotiations, national representatives in 
CFSP-bodies are generally expected to avoid unilateral actions and to 
play a constructive role in building consensus (de Flers and Müller 2012). 
What is more, research has generally assumed that negotiation dynamics 
in the CFSP framework are largely insulated from negotiations in settings 
dealing with internal EU policy areas. Employing veto-threats in CFSP 
negotiations as an instrument for gaining leverage in negotiations in other 
EU policy domains thus represents a signiﬁcant departure from core 
procedural CFSP norms and established negation practices. Yet, taking 
foreign policy decisions hostage may not be limited to the CFSP-arena. 
A hostage-taker may also use a veto position in an overlapping institution 
like NATO to increase leverage in another institution. Interestingly, works 
on regime complexes and overlapping international institutions have thus 
far primarily focused on broader institutional relationships like competi-
tion, the division of labour, or coexistence (Hofmann 2019). Others have 
looked at the interaction of overlapping institutions in terms of the diffu-
sion and transfer of standards and norms (Jachtenfuchs and Knodt 2002).

118
P. MÜLLER AND P. SLOMINSKI
Conversely, the way members in overlapping institutions obstruct nego-
tiations in one institutional setting to extract concessions in another has 
received little attention thus far. 
For the hostage-taker, the instrumentalization of foreign policy as a 
strategy to enhance leverage in intra-EU negotiations requires the ability 
to impose substantive and asymmetrical costs on the negotiation part-
ners. By blocking or delaying certain decisions, the hostage-taker may 
seek to progressively increase the costs for the other parties or may even 
decide to take further foreign policy decisions hostage to increase the 
stakes. At the same time, the use of veto-threats in foreign policy settings 
is not cost-free. On the one hand, using veto-threats involves reputa-
tional costs, given the consensus-oriented policymaking culture prevailing 
in CFSP and in overlapping institutions like NATO. As such, a hostage-
taker will often try to mitigate reputational costs by trying to make his 
demands appear legitimate. This may involve a recourse to ‘constructed’ 
arguments, where important positions put forward in the negotiations do 
not represent the real issues at stake but simply serve as a pretext for 
delaying, or even blocking, foreign policy decisions. This can involve the 
exaggeration of certain institutional, procedural or political constraints 
to buy more time and deﬂect pressure. Moreover, it may involve a 
hostage-taker making high opening demands in a foreign policy setting 
that clearly exceeds realistic expectations, e.g. by arguing that important 
foreign policy interests are at stake (Dür and Mateo 2008). Here, the 
rational is to avoid—at least publicly—the impression of instrumentalizing 
foreign policy decisions for other purposes. Overall, for a hostage-taker 
constructed negotiation positions serve the purpose of maintaining the 
appearance of adhering to act within the discursive bounds of the insti-
tutional culture prevailing in a given foreign policy setting. Here, the 
intention is to limit the reputational damage and deﬂect the pressure that 
comes with such an aggressive negotiation strategy. 
At the same time, the targets of hostage-taking strategies in foreign 
policy settings will seek to defend their interests by taking measures 
designed to overcome blockade and stalemate in foreign policy negoti-
ations. Hence, we conceive of hostage-taking as an interactive process 
between a Member State (hostage- taker) and the remaining Member 
States and EU institutions which unfolds over time. In particular, the 
targets of hostage-taking can be expected to take countermeasures 
designed to increase the pressure on the hostage-taker. This may involve 
“tit-for-tat” strategies that inﬂict damage on areas important to the

6
HUNGARY, THE EU AND RUSSIA’S WAR AGAINST UKRAINE …
119
hostage-taker in order to change the relative costs of hostage-taking 
behaviour in their favour (Axelrod and Dion 1988). Here, the multi-
level and multi-sector EU governance system grants ample opportunities 
for EU institutions and other Member States to increase the pressure 
on a hostage-taker in other negotiation settings and to retaliate against 
veto-threats and blockades. Similarly, in situations where a hostage-
taker is blocking negotiations in overlapping international institutions like 
NATO, other EU Member States may seek to motivate powerful coun-
tries like the United States into taking action against the hostage-taker. 
At the same time, this may involve strategies of blaming and shaming, 
which can inﬂict reputational damage on the hostage-taker. Moreover, 
the targets of hostage-taking can try to circumvent or out-lever the veto 
position of a Member State. For instance, in the framework of the CFSP, 
the High Representative for Foreign Affairs may resort to policy positions 
and declarations that are supported by a large majority, but not by all EU 
Member States in situations where a Member State blocks progress (von 
der Burchard and Herszenhorn 2021). In the following, we examine the 
hostage-taking strategies employed by Hungary in its conﬂict with EU 
institutions over rule of law issues, as well as the EU’s response. 
Hungary and the EU’s Rule of Law Crisis 
The gradual erosion of the rule of law and democratic institutions in 
Hungary under the government of Prime Minister Viktor Orbán has led 
to increasing conﬂict with EU institutions. In September 2018, the Euro-
pean Parliament arrived at the conclusion that there is a ‘clear risk of 
a serious breach of the EU founding values in Hungary’ triggering the 
Article 7-procedure, which allows the Union to suspend the country’s 
voting rights (European Parliament 2018). However, the decision as to 
whether such serious and persistent violations of core EU values exist 
requires unanimity in the council. Hungary, as the affected Member State, 
could not have blocked the vote but could have counted on the support 
of Poland, against which the EU has also initiated Article 7 proceedings. 
This meant that further steps in the procedure had little chance of success 
as long as both Member States politically supported each other. Against 
this backdrop, the EU has worked to strengthen its rule of law powers 
and eventually adopted the Conditionality Regulation (2020/2092) to 
protect the Union’s budget (European Union 2020). Under this regime, 
the Commission, after consulting the Member State concerned, is entitled

120
P. MÜLLER AND P. SLOMINSKI
to propose implementing measures to the council if ‘breaches of the prin-
ciples of the rule of law in a Member State affect or seriously risk affecting 
the sound ﬁnancial management of the Union budget or the protection 
of the ﬁnancial interests of the Union in a sufﬁciently direct way’ (Article 
4(1) of the Conditionality Regulation). 
In April 2022, the European Commission ﬁnally triggered the condi-
tionality mechanism against Hungary. This was followed by a process of 
assessment and information exchange with the Hungarian government, 
which led to a Commission proposal for a council decision in September 
of the same year. In particular, the Commission called for the suspension 
of funds under the Cohesion Policy of e7.5 billion (European Commis-
sion 2022b). However, the subsequent decision-making process revealed 
divergences among EU Member States. A group of twelve Member States 
led by France, Germany and Italy called on the Commission to reconsider 
its proposal, arguing that certain progress made by the Hungarian govern-
ment on anti-corruption measures had not been sufﬁciently taken into 
account (Tamma 2022). Conversely, other Member States, including the 
Benelux countries, Denmark, Sweden and Latvia, supported the position 
of the Commission calling for the blocking of the 7.5 billion. 
In December 2022, the EU Member States were able to forge a polit-
ical compromise and agreed to reduce the blockage of funds from the 
Cohesion Policy from e7.5 to e6.3 billion (European Council 2022). At 
the same time,  the freeze of a further  e5.8 billion in Corona aid assigned 
to Hungary from the EU’s so-called Recovery and Resilience Facility 
(RRF) was considered but a positive assessment of Hungary’s spending 
plan was decided (European Commission 2023). This measure ensured 
that these funds, which are also being withheld by the EU, will not expire 
at the end of 2023. At the same time, however, the EU Member States 
made the actual disbursement of the RRF conditional on further reform 
efforts by Hungary in the ﬁelds of rule of law, judicial independence and 
anti-corruption, and on the protection the EU’s budget. To specify these 
objectives, the Commission has drawn up 27 ‘milestones’ that have to be 
fulﬁlled by Hungary before any disbursement can take place. Hungarian 
government representatives considered the agreement reached an impor-
tant success, as it meant that not only would the disbursement of money 
from the RRF not simply expire but also that the withholding of EU 
funds was reduced by e1.2 billion. Hungary had thus at least gained 
time to be able to loosen the disbursement of further EU funds in the 
future after all. However, this agreement has not resolved the conﬂict

6
HUNGARY, THE EU AND RUSSIA’S WAR AGAINST UKRAINE …
121
between the EU and Hungary. While signalling a will for compromise, the 
EU continued to block billions in funds earmarked for Hungary, whose 
disbursement is linked to a series of far-reaching reforms. In response, 
Hungary instrumentalized important foreign policy decisions within the 
framework of the CFSP, as well as within NATO, to exercise pressure 
on its European partners. As we will show below, Hungary’s government 
used hostage-taking strategies to manage the conﬂict with EU institu-
tions, also contributing to the compromise reached in December 2022 
on the disbursement of part of the EU funds. 
Taking Foreign Policy Decisions Hostage: 
Hungary in the CFSP and NATO 
To forge a uniﬁed response of the EU and its Western allies towards 
Russia’s war against Ukraine, CFSP and NATO have functioned as central 
settings for cooperation. Given the high salience of the Ukraine war, these 
foreign policy settings also provide important opportunities for countries 
like Hungary, whose right-wing populist government has developed close 
relations to Russia, to take foreign policy decisions hostage. As we will 
show, Hungary’s government has sought to make use of these opportu-
nities, blocking important foreign policy decisions related to the Ukraine 
war in both the CFSP and NATO and so increasing its leverage in its rule 
of law conﬂict with EU institutions. 
Hungary in the CFSP: Instrumentalizing Decisions on the Ukraine 
War 
Hungary not only maintains close political and economic ties with Russia 
but also has difﬁcult relations with Ukraine, especially with respect to 
Hungarian minority communities (Nattrass 2022; see also the chapter by 
Knodt and Wiesner, in this volume). Mindful of the importance of its 
relations with Russia, Hungary has repeatedly insisted on watering down 
both joint sanctions against Russia and a common approach towards 
supporting Ukraine. Taking such decisions is not only crucial for the 
EU to be able to act decisively on the conﬂict. It is also important for 
the EU to demonstrate foreign policy unity and strength in the face 
of intensifying security threats and future crises. The decision-making 
process for the ten EU sanctions packages against Russia adopted to date 
within the framework of the CFSP requires unanimity among the Member

122
P. MÜLLER AND P. SLOMINSKI
States. The various sanction measures against Russia must also be renewed 
every six months, again requiring the consent of all Member States. Simi-
larly, important EU measures to support Ukraine also require unanimity 
(European Commission 2022a). 
In December 2022, the Hungarian government refused to approve 
an EU aid package to Ukraine (der Spiegel 2022). The EU aid package 
included a loan of e18 billion to Kiev to support, among other things, 
the operation of hospitals, emergency shelters and the electricity supply. 
Against this background, the Czech presidency called for a reassess-
ment of the European Commission’s proposed freezing of EU funds for 
Hungary (see above). At the same time, the Czech government, in its 
function as EU presidency, sought ways to adopt the aid package without 
Hungary’s consent. To this end, it was decided on 10 December that the 
loans should not be covered by the EU budget as originally planned, but 
should instead be taken over by individual EU Member States. A unani-
mous decision would then no longer be required to move forward with 
the aid package, effectively circumventing the Hungarian blockade. At the 
same time, the Hungarian government was given time to join the original 
plan for the aid package, which provided for the guarantees for the loans 
to run through the EU budget. This made a ﬁrst compromise possible, 
whereby the Hungarian government ﬁnally abandoned its original veto 
position against the EU aid package for Ukraine on 12 December. At 
the same time, Hungary also gave up its opposition to a minimum tax 
directive planned by the EU, which, however, Poland continued to block, 
which meant that Hungary’s decision in this regard had no particular 
urgency (Allenbach-Ammann 2022). It was also important for Hungary 
to ensure that there would be no loss of its entitlement to EU funds. The 
Hungarian government’s concession promoted the compromise described 
above that involved more limited ﬁnancial sanctions against Hungary, 
with the EU Member States deviating from the Commission’s original 
demands. 
However, even though Hungary had abandoned its initial veto posi-
tions in the EU negotiations on the EU aid package for Ukraine as well 
as on the EU minimum tax directive, it still had a considerable threat 
potential vis-à-vis the EU. The hostage-taking of EU negotiations by 
the Hungarian government merely shifted to other issues, in the context 
of the EU in particular to decisions relating to the extension of sanc-
tions against Russia. Hungary had initially used its veto position in CFSP 
decisions on the imposition and extension of sanctions packages against

6
HUNGARY, THE EU AND RUSSIA’S WAR AGAINST UKRAINE …
123
Russia, primarily to inﬂuence the design of speciﬁc sanctions measures. 
The Hungarian government insisted, for example, in February 2023, on 
the removal of certain individuals from the EU sanctions list. In addi-
tion, in February 2023, Hungary blocked a proposal by all other 26 
EU Member States to reduce the regular renewal period of EU sanc-
tions against Russia from six to twelve months, which would have had 
the effect of limiting Hungary’s blocking options. The fact that Hungary 
has not yet used its veto position in the CFSP negotiations on EU sanc-
tions against Russia more aggressively could also be due to the fact that 
Budapest is aware of the escalation potential of such a step. After all, 
Poland is a staunch supporter of EU sanctions measures and its support is 
of central importance for Hungary, especially in the course of the Article 
7 proceedings. In particular, in the event of a far-reaching Hungarian 
blockade of EU sanctions, Poland could deviate from protecting Hungary 
from far-reaching consequences—up to and including loss of votes in the 
council—in the ongoing Article 7 proceedings (Hegedüs 2021). 
Hungary and the NATO Accession of Finland and Sweden 
While initially strategies of taking foreign policy negotiations hostage by 
Hungary’s government were largely focused on the CFSP, there were 
also subsequent attempts to instrumentalize decisions within the frame-
work of NATO. At the centre of these were the negotiations on the 
admission of the EU Member States Finland and Sweden into NATO. 
In the course of the Ukraine war, there was a far-reaching change of 
direction in the security and defence policies of Finland and Sweden, 
which applied for NATO membership in May 2022 after a long period 
of military neutrality. In the ensuing process for the admission of the two 
countries into NATO, the consent of all NATO countries was required. 
Moreover, all NATO Member States had to sign the accession protocols, 
which usually requires a national parliamentary decision. While this was 
done in less than ninety days in most NATO Member States, the process 
stalled due to the attitudes of Turkey and Hungary. Turkey’s govern-
ment emphasized early on that it attached certain political conditions to 
the ratiﬁcation of the accession protocols of Sweden and Finland. The 
reservations about the accession of Sweden, which the Turkish govern-
ment accuses of supporting the Kurdish terrorist organization PKK, were 
particularly serious.

124
P. MÜLLER AND P. SLOMINSKI
Turkey’s very explicit and confrontational position on Sweden’s NATO 
accession allowed the Hungarian government to adopt a somewhat 
toned-down veto threat. Yet the Hungarian government under Orbán 
has maintained extremely close political relations with the Turkish govern-
ment of Erdogan for many years (Verseck 2019). The Hungarian govern-
ment mainly referred to procedural domestic reasons for non-ratiﬁcation. 
This was also ofﬁcially conﬁrmed by Hungary to diplomatic represen-
tatives of both states. The NATO allies were thus confronted with a 
situation in which Hungary, unlike Turkey, at least ofﬁcially did not asso-
ciate any clear arguments and demands with its stance. At the same time, 
Hungary repeatedly postponed ratiﬁcation, with its ofﬁcial justiﬁcation 
changing over time. For example, it was increasingly emphasized that due 
to the implementation of the reforms demanded by Brussels with regard 
to the rule of law, the Hungarian Parliament was busy and could not 
devote sufﬁcient time to the NATO accession process (Tamma 2023). In 
doing so, the government in Budapest sent a signal to its EU partners 
that the ratiﬁcation of Finland’s and Sweden’s membership applications 
was linked to Hungary’s conﬂict with the EU institutions on the rule of 
law. Subsequently, there was also increased criticism of Sweden’s position 
by government representatives from Hungary. In particular, this criticism 
referred to critical statements made by Swedish representatives, including 
Prime Minister Ulf Kristersson, with regard to issues of democracy and 
the rule of law in Hungary. 
In March 2023, however, there was movement in the political ratiﬁca-
tion process with regard to Finland’s application for NATO membership 
after it became clear that Turkey would abandon its blockade of Finland’s 
membership. At the beginning of March, Hungarian Deputy Prime 
Minister Zsolt Semjen demanded that a parliamentary session dealing 
with NATO enlargement to include the two Nordic countries, origi-
nally scheduled for 20 March, be postponed for a week. The reason 
given was the ongoing negotiations with the EU Commission on rule 
of law issues (Daily Sabah 2023). With Turkey’s change of position, 
however, Hungary was in danger of becoming increasingly isolated on 
the question of Finnish accession, which also disproportionately increased 
the costs of the hostage-taking for Hungary. Without further addressing 
the alleged problem of a “heavy workload” or “the lack of time”, the 
Hungarian Parliament ﬁnally voted in favour of Finland’s NATO acces-
sion on 27 March, while the decision regarding Sweden was further 
postponed. Through this ‘release of a hostage’ move, Hungary, on the

6
HUNGARY, THE EU AND RUSSIA’S WAR AGAINST UKRAINE …
125
one hand, signalled a willingness for compromise, but, on the other hand, 
still retained the possibility of exerting pressure on its European part-
ners through the pending ratiﬁcation of Sweden’s NATO accession. The 
hostage-taking of the multilateral negotiations on Sweden’s NATO acces-
sion must thus be understood as a process that will continue, not least 
because of Hungary’s unresolved conﬂict with the EU institutions over 
the rule of law. 
Conclusion 
This chapter has highlighted how, as the conﬂict between Hungary and 
the EU over backsliding on democracy and the rule of law has intensiﬁed, 
a mode of contestation in EU foreign policymaking has gained promi-
nence in which strategies of holding foreign policy decisions hostage play 
a crucial role. A recently published study by Ramses Wessel and Viktor 
Szép (2022) has identiﬁed thirty cases of vetoes, veto-threats and delays 
in the area of CFSP in the period between 2016 and 2022, 60% of which 
fell on Hungary. This shows that Hungarian attempts at hostage-taking in 
the context of the EU’s response to the Ukraine war are not just isolated 
cases, but are part of a broader pattern of behaviour in CFSP negotia-
tions. This also means that in order to understand “domestic” negotiation 
results at the EU level, such as the compromise reached in December 
2022 on the disbursement of part of the EU funds, it is increasingly 
necessary to also illuminate their relationship to key foreign policy deci-
sions. Simultaneously, it is increasingly important for the understanding 
of negotiation dynamics in the CFSP domain to pay attention to the 
fact that individual Member States can instrumentalize important foreign 
policy decisions for the assertion of their interests within other EU policy 
domains. This also applies to institutions that overlap with the EU, such 
as NATO. 
Overall, it has become clear that the Orbán government’s attempts to 
hold foreign policy negotiations hostage to increase its leverage vis-à-vis 
its European partners thus far have had only limited success, especially 
with regard to the loosening of EU funds intended for Hungary. At the 
same time, however, it is becoming apparent that the determining mode 
of negotiation with Hungary is a mutual trial of strength, whereby threats 
of blockade by Hungary are answered by the other EU partners with 
strategies of circumventing Hungary’s veto position, isolating Hungary 
in the NATO negotiations, and building up counter-pressure. This also

126
P. MÜLLER AND P. SLOMINSKI
raises the question of the effects of strategies of hostage-taking—and asso-
ciated countermeasures by the other EU Member States—on the existing 
culture of cooperation within the framework of foreign policy institu-
tions such as the CFSP but also within NATO. In both institutions, 
informal norms based on cooperation, voluntary consensus-seeking and 
active information exchange traditionally play an important role. 
If the instrumentalization of the veto position held by EU Member 
States in central foreign policy institutions becomes common practice, this 
will further weaken the decision-making capacity of central foreign policy 
institutions. Recently, for example, the government in Bucharest threat-
ened to block Austria in the framework of the OSCE and the NATO 
Partnership for Peace if the government in Vienna did not give up its 
blockade against Romania’s accession to the Schengen area. This also 
shows that long demanded institutional reforms—such as the extension of 
EU majority decisions into the area of CFSP—would not only have the 
advantage of simplifying decision-making in the foreign policy domain. 
It would also ensure that strategies of instrumentalizing veto positions 
within the CFSP for the assertion of interests in other EU policy areas 
by individual Member States are no longer possible. In times of increased 
polarization and politicization in the EU, it is essential that foreign policy 
does not increasingly become the plaything of hostage-takers. 
References 
Allenbach-Ammann, János. 2022. “Orbán macht Rückzieher: EU einigt sich auf 
Ukraine-Hilfe und Mindeststeuer.” www.euractiv.de., December 13. Accessed 
July 12, 2023. https://www.euractiv.de/section/ﬁnanzen-und-wirtschaft/ 
news/orban-macht-rueckzieher-eu-einigt-sich-auf-ukraine-hilfe-und-mindes 
tsteuer/. 
Alter, Karen J., and Sophie Meunier. 2009. “The Politics of International Regime 
Complexity.” Perspectives on Politics 7: 13–24. https://doi.org/10.1017/S15 
37592709090033. 
Axelrod, R., and Dion, D. (1988). The further evolution of cooperation. Science 
242(4884): 1385–1390. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.242.4884.1385 
Baume, Maia de la. 2022. “EU Report Renews Hungary, Poland Rule-of-
Law Critiques amid Key Negotiations—POLITICO.” POLITICO, July 13. 
Accessed July 13, 2023. https://www.politico.eu/article/commission-unveil-
critical-rule-law-report-against-hungary-poland/. 
Bickerton, Chris J. 2012. European Integration: From Nation-States to Member 
States. Oxford: OUP.

6
HUNGARY, THE EU AND RUSSIA’S WAR AGAINST UKRAINE …
127
Burchard, Hans von der, and David M. Herszenhorn. 2021. “Borrell Calls 
for Israeli-Palestinian Ceaseﬁre, but Hungary Blocks Joint EU Position.” 
POLITICO (blog), May 18. Accessed July 12, 2023. https://www.pol 
itico.eu/article/borrell-calls-for-israeli-palestinian-ceasefire-as-hungary-blo 
cks-joint-eu-position/. 
Costa, Oriol, and Patrick Müller. 2019. “Une Liaison Transnationale: Exploring 
the Role of NGOs in EU Foreign Policy-Making on the ICC.” Compar-
ative European Politics 17 (April 13): 696–713. https://doi.org/10.1057/ 
s41295-018-0121-6. 
Daily Sabah. 2023. “Hungary Set to Delay Vote on Nordic Countries’ NATO 
Bid.” Daily Sabah, March 15. Accessed July 12, 2023. https://www.dailys 
abah.com/politics/hungary-set-to-delay-vote-on-nordic-countries-nato-bid/ 
news. 
De Flers, Nicole Alecu, and Patrick Müller. 2012. “Dimensions and Mechanisms 
of the Europeanization of Member State Foreign Policy: State of the Art 
and New Research Avenues.” Journal of European Integration 34: 19–35. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/07036337.2011.566330. 
der Spiegel. 2022. “EU-Staaten Beschließen Milliardenschweres Hilfspaket Für 
Die Ukraine.” December 10. Accessed July 12, 2023. https://www.spiegel. 
de/ausland/eu-staaten-beschliessen-milliardenschweres-hilfspaket-fuer-die-ukr 
aine-a-1ad00594-78ed-41fb-b635-5aa0cee02205. 
Dür, Andreas, and Gemma Mateo. 2008. Bargaining Power and Negotia-
tion Tactics: Negotiations on the EU’s Financial Perspective, 2007–2013. 
Dublin: Dublin European Institute. https://www.ucd.ie/t4cms/WP_08-2_ 
Duer_Mateo.pdf. 
European Commission. 2022a. “EU Assistance to Ukraine.” Accessed February 
26, 2022. https://eu-solidarity-ukraine.ec.europa.eu/eu-assistance-ukraine_ 
en. 
European Commission. 2022b. “EU Budget: Commission Proposes Measures to 
the Council Under the Conditionality Regulation.” Text. European Commis-
sion - European Commission. Accessed September 18, 2022. https://ec.eur 
opa.eu/commission/presscorner/detail/en/ip_22_5623. 
European Commission. 2023. “Commission endorses Hungary’s e4.6 billion 
REPowerEU chapter, to complement its recovery and resilience plan.” 
November 23. Accessed December 6, 2023. https://ec.europa.eu/commis 
sion/presscorner/detail/en/ip_23_5991 
European Council. 2022. “Rule of Law Conditionality Mechanism: Council 
Decides to Suspend e6.3 Billion Given Only Partial Remedial Action by 
Hungary.” December 28. Accessed December 12, 2022. https://www.consil 
ium.europa.eu/en/press/press-releases/2022/12/12/rule-of-law-condition 
ality-mechanism/.

128
P. MÜLLER AND P. SLOMINSKI
European Council. 2023. “EU Response to Russia’s Invasion of Ukraine.” Euro-
pean 
Council. 
https://www.consilium.europa.eu/en/policies/eu-response-
ukraine-invasion/. 
European Parliament. 2018. “Rule of Law in Hungary: Parliament Calls on the 
EU to Act | News | European Parliament.” European Parliament. Accessed 
September
12,
2018.
https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-
room/20180906IPR12104/rule-of-law-in-hungary-parliament-calls-on-the-
eu-to-act. 
European Parliament. 2022. “MEPs: Hungary Can No Longer Be Considered 
a Full Democracy | News | European Parliament.” European Parliament. 
Accessed September 15, 2022. https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/ 
press-room/20220909IPR40137/meps-hungary-can-no-longer-be-consid 
ered-a-full-democracy. 
European Union. 2020. Regulation (EU, Euratom) 2020/2092 of the European 
Parliament and of the Council of 16 December 2020 on a General Regime 
of Conditionality for the Protection of the Union Budget. OJ L. Vol. 433I. 
http://data.europa.eu/eli/reg/2020/2092/oj/eng. 
Falkner, Gerda. 2011. The EU’s Decision Traps: Comparing Policies. Oxford: 
OUP. 
Gehring, Thomas, and Sebastian Oberthür. 2009. “The Causal Mechanisms 
of Interaction Between International Institutions.” European Journal of 
International Relations 15: 125–156. 
Gerstle, Gary. 2022. The Rise and Fall of the Neoliberal Order: America and 
the World in the Free Market Era. Oxford and New York: Oxford University 
Press. 
Gould-Davies, Nigel. 2023. “The Astonishing Endurance of Unity on Ukraine.” 
Foreign Affairs, March 8. Accessed March 8, 2023. https://www.foreignaf 
fairs.com/ukraine/astonishing-endurance-unity-ukraine. 
Hegedüs, Daniel. 2021. “The European Commission’s Latest Move Against 
Hungary Is Risky but Right | Strengthening Transatlantic Cooperation.” 
GMFUS, May 2. Accessed July 12, 2023. https://www.gmfus.org/news/eur 
opean-commissions-latest-move-against-hungary-risky-right. 
Héritier, Adrienne. 2015. “Covert Integration in the European Union.” In Euro-
pean Union, edited by Jeremy Richardson and Sonia Mazey, Vol. 4, 351–369. 
Routledge. 
Higgott, Richard, and Simon Reich. 2022. “The Age of Fuzzy Bifurcation: 
Lessons from the Pandemic and the Ukraine War.” Global Policy 13: 627–639. 
https://doi.org/10.1111/1758-5899.13141. 
Hofmann, Stéphanie C. 2009. “Overlapping Institutions in the Realm of Inter-
national Security: The Case of NATO and ESDP.” Perspectives on Politics 7: 
45–52. https://doi.org/10.1017/S1537592709090070.

6
HUNGARY, THE EU AND RUSSIA’S WAR AGAINST UKRAINE …
129
Hofmann, Stéphanie C. 2011. “Why Institutional Overlap Matters: CSDP in the 
European Security Architecture.” JCMS: Journal of Common Market Studies 
49: 101–120. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-5965.2010.02131.x. 
Hofmann, Stephanie C. 2019. “The Politics of Overlapping Organizations: 
Hostage-Taking, Forum-Shopping and Brokering.” Journal of European 
Public Policy 26: 883–905. https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763.2018.151 
2644. 
Jachtenfuchs, Markus, and Michèle Knodt, eds. 2002. Regieren in inter-
nationalen Institutionen. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-663-11271-6. 
Kardasheva, Raya. 2013. “Package Deals in EU Legislative Politics.” Amer-
ican Journal of Political Science 57: 858–874. https://doi.org/10.1111/ajps. 
12035. 
Knodt, Michèle. 2004. “International Embeddedness of European Multi-Level 
Governance.” Journal of European Public Policy 11: 701–719. https://doi. 
org/10.1080/1350176042000248106. 
Kudrna, Zdenek, and Patrick Müller. 2017. “Harmonizing Internationally to 
Harmonize Internally: Accounting for a Global Exit from the EU’s Decision 
Trap.” Journal of Common Market Studies 55: 815–881. https://doi.org/10. 
1111/jcms.12511. 
Lewis, Jeffrey. 2000. “The Methods of Community in EU Decision-Making and 
Administrative Rivalry in the Council’s Infrastructure.” Journal of European 
Public Policy 7: 261–289. https://doi.org/10.1080/135017600343197. 
Mayntz, Renate. 1999. “Multi-Level Governance: German Federalism and the 
European Union.” Governing Beyond the Nation-State: Global Public Policy, 
Regionalism or Going Local, 101–114. 
Müller, 
Patrick, 
and 
David 
Gazsi. 
2023. 
“Populist 
Capture 
of 
Foreign 
Policy Institutions: The Orbán Government and the De-Europeanization of 
Hungarian Foreign Policy.” JCMS: Journal of Common Market Studies 61: 
397–415. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcms.13377. 
Müller, Patrick, Zdenek Kudrna, and Gerda Falkner. 2014. “EU–Global Interac-
tions: Policy Export, Import, Promotion and Protection.” Journal of Euro-
pean Public Policy 21: 1102–1119. https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763. 
2014.914237. 
Nattrass, William. 2022. “Hungary’s “Pro-Russia” Stance Was Inevitable.” 
POLITICO (blog), September 15. Accessed July 12, 2023. https://www. 
politico.eu/article/hungary-pro-russia-stance-inevitable/. 
Orenstein, Mitchell A., and Bojan Bugariˇc. 2022. “Work, Family, Fatherland: The 
Political Economy of Populism in Central and Eastern Europe.” Journal of 
European Public Policy 29: 176–195. https://doi.org/10.1080/13501763. 
2020.1832557.

130
P. MÜLLER AND P. SLOMINSKI
Putnam, Robert D. 1988. “Diplomacy and Domestic Politics: The Logic of Two-
Level Games.” International Organization 42: 427–460. https://doi.org/ 
10.1017/S0020818300027697. 
Schimmelfennig, Frank, and Daniel C Thomas. 2009. “Normative Institution-
alism and EU Foreign Policy in Comparative Perspective.” International 
Politics 46: 491–504. https://doi.org/10.1057/ip.2009.4. 
Schmidt, Susanne K. 2000. “Only an Agenda Setter?: The European Commis-
sion’s Power over the Council of Ministers.” European Union Politics 1: 
37–61. https://doi.org/10.1177/1465116500001001003. 
Tamma, Paola. 2022. “France and Germany Hand Orbán Rule-of-Law Lifeline.” 
POLITICO, December 5. Accessed July 12, 2023. https://www.politico.eu/ 
article/viktor-orban-emmanuel-macron-olaf-scholz-eu-countries-aid-rule-of-
law-tussle/. 
Tamma, Paola. 2023. “Hungary Has Approved Finland Joining NATO. But Its 
Delays Raise Deeper Concerns.” Atlantic Council (blog), March 28. Accessed 
July 12, 2023. https://www.atlanticcouncil.org/blogs/new-atlanticist/hun 
gary-has-approved-ﬁnland-joining-nato-but-its-delays-raise-deeper-concerns/. 
Thomas, Daniel C. 2011. Making EU Foreign Policy: National Preferences, 
European Norms and Common Policies. Springer. 
Thomas, 
Daniel 
C. 
2021. 
“The 
Return 
of 
Intergovernmentalism? 
De-
Europeanisation and EU Foreign Policy Decision-Making.” Journal of Euro-
pean Integration 43: 619–635. https://doi.org/10.1080/07036337.2021. 
1927013. 
UNHCR. N/A. “Situation Ukraine Refugee Situation.” Operational Data Portal 
UNHCR. N/A. Accessed July 12, 2023. https://data2.unhcr.org/en/situat 
ions/ukraine. 
Versek, 
Keno. 
2019. 
“Orbáns 
Allianz 
mit 
Erdogan—DW—07.11.2019.” 
dw.com. Accessed July 12, 2023. https://www.dw.com/de/besondere-bez 
iehungen-orb%C3%A1ns-allianz-mit-erdogan/a-51146541. 
Wahl, Thomas. 2022. “Commission Triggers Conditionality Mechanism against 
Hungary.” August 10. Accessed July 12, 2023. https://eucrim.eu/news/com 
mission-triggers-conditionality-mechanism-against-hungary/. 
Wessel, Ramses A., and Viktor Szép. 2022. “The Implementation of Article 31 
of the Treaty on European Union and the Use of Qualiﬁed Majority Voting: 
Towards a More Effective Common Foreign and Security Policy?” Study for 
the European Parliament. 
Wood, Steve. 2023. “Germany and Nord Stream 2: Evolution and End of an 
Incongruous Policy.” International Politics, April 25. https://doi.org/10. 
1057/s41311-023-00453-9. 
Zerka, Pawel. 2022. “War in Ukraine: A Resilience Test for European Solidarity.” 
ECFR. Accessed July 12, 2023. https://ecfr.eu/article/war-in-ukraine-a-resili 
ence-test-for-european-solidarity/.

6
HUNGARY, THE EU AND RUSSIA’S WAR AGAINST UKRAINE …
131
Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ 
by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction 
in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original 
author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and 
indicate if changes were made. 
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the 
chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line 
to the material. If material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons 
license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds 
the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright 
holder.