“This book compels researchers, activists, policymakers, and practitioners to ‘think outside 
the box’ when it comes to transforming how police respond to rape. Hohl and Stanko’s 
ofering will undoubtedly become a classic piece of innovative feminist scholarship.” 
– Walter DeKeseredy, Anna Deane Carlson Endowed 
Chair of Social Sciences, West Virginia University 
“How do we increase ofender accountability for rape and sexual assault? This book makes 
an argument that is both impassioned and evidence-based, built on the radical assumption 
that women have the right to be safe. The authors recognise that transforming justice 
outcomes requires a transformational shift in police investigative procedures to ensure 
ofender accountability for rape becomes a police priority: women deserve nothing less. 
A compelling and comprehensive argument demonstrating the urgent need for 
a transformational shift in police investigative procedures to hold men who rape 
accountable when they victimise women.” 
– Jan Jordan, Emerita Professor of Criminology, 
Victoria University of Wellington 
“Failures around the investigation and prosecution of rape represent one of the greatest 
continuing policing and justice-related scandals of our age. Written by authors who truly 
deserve to be called experts, this book is both timely and of huge importance. It will change 
the way we think about these issues and it should change the way we deal with them.” 
– Tim Newburn, Professor of Social Policy, 
London School of Economics and Political Science 
“Operation Soteria Bluestone ofers the opportunity for change and the promise of a 
better future if only it can prevail over police history and culture. The early signs are 
promising and so this is very much a story of hope but, as the authors argue, one that 
is fragile and susceptible and requires genuine acceptance and buy in at every level of 
policing. This is an important book and one to which policing must pay attention.” 
– Chief Constable Sarah Crew, Avon and Somerset Police, 
National Police Chiefs’ Council Lead for Adult Sexual Ofences 
“This long-awaited book is vital from two of the foremost academic researchers and 
activists in the policing of rape. It provides an historical context for why the policing of 
rape has so dismally failed to date and ofers a blueprint for transformational change.” 
– Harriet Wistrich, Director of the Centre for Women’s Justice 
“The project that is the subject of this book comes from a place of anger and exasperation 
at the failings of the police to investigate rape well. Stemming from a far-sighted vision 
of how to sustainably transform the policing of rape and improve the victim-survivor 
experience, the authors instigated a brave and ambitious academic-police collaboration 
that seemed impossible to pull of. But by drawing together feminist research and insights 
on rape and wider policing scholarship to construct a multi-faceted framework for 
changing the ways in which rape is investigated, and embedding this in police practice, 
they have pulled it of. This book is as much about police culture as it is about policing 
rape. It ofers hope, inspiration and a tangible way forward for police to improve the 
investigation of rape. It deserves to be read.” 
– Michele Burman, Professor of Criminology, University of Glasgow 


 
 
 
 
 
 
POLICING RAPE 
The policing of rape is in permacrisis. This book addresses the question of 
why police investigations continue to fail most rape victim-survivors and 
puts forward a framework for what policing can do to change this. Low 
conviction rates and poor victim-survivor experiences are the hallmarks of 
the rape justice gap. Three decades of research, policy, and legal changes 
have tweaked rape investigations to alleviate some of their ills; however, 
for the majority of victim-survivors, the process remains gruelling. 
Police forces are notoriously resistant to reform, even in the face of 
rapidly declining public trust. The starting point of this book is the 
recognition that if we want profound change in policing, we must try 
something new. To do so, the authors move from asking “What is it 
about rape that makes it so difcult for police to investigate it well?” to 
asking “What is it about the police that makes it so difcult for police 
to investigate rape well?”. Policing Rape sets out a practice-oriented 
theoretical framework for radically and sustainably transforming rape 
investigations, rape prevention, and the quality of ofcer engagement 
with victim-survivors. The authors refect on the journey of putting this 
framework into practice within Operation Soteria Bluestone as a step on 
the path towards a radical transformation of rape policing. 
This book is essential reading for all those looking to understand and 
improve the policing of rape. 
Katrin Hohl is Professor of Criminology and Criminal Justice at City, 
University of London. 
Elizabeth A. Stanko OBE is Professor Emerita of Criminology at Royal 
Holloway University and has spent 15 years in policing. 

Routledge Frontiers of Criminal Justice 
Restorative Justice at a Crossroads 
Dilemmas of Institutionalisation 
Edited by Giuseppe Maglione, Ian D. Marder and Brunhilda Pali 
The Lived Experiences of Claiming Wrongful Conviction in Prison 
Maintaining Innocence 
Emma Burtt 
Sexual Ofences Against Children in India 
Understanding the Criminal Justice Responses 
Sonali Swetapadma and Paromita Chattoraj 
Prison Recipes and Prison Cookbooks 
A.E. Stearns 
Genetics and the Politics of Security 
A Social Science Perspective 
Joëlle Vailly 
Holistic Responses to Reduce Reofending 
Ian Mahoney and Rahmanara Chowdhury 
Policing Rape 
The Way Forward 
Katrin Hohl and Elizabeth A. Stanko 
For more information about this series, please visit: www.routledge.com/ 
Routledge-Frontiers-of-Criminal-Justice/book-series/RFCJ 

POLICING RAPE 
The Way Forward 
Katrin Hohl and Elizabeth A. Stanko 

Designed cover image: © Getty Images/SCM Jeans
First published 2025
by Routledge
4 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
and by Routledge
605 Third Avenue, New York, NY 10158
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
© 2025 Katrin Hohl and Elizabeth A. Stanko
The right of Katrin Hohl and Elizabeth A. Stanko to be identified as 
authors of this work has been asserted in accordance with sections 77 
and 78 of the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or 
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, 
or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including 
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval 
system, without permission in writing from the publishers.
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks 
or registered trademarks, and are used only for identification and 
explanation without intent to infringe.
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN: 978-0-367-00036-3 (hbk)
ISBN: 978-1-032-80022-6 (pbk)
ISBN: 978-0-429-44486-9 (ebk)
DOI: 10.4324/9780429444869
Typeset in Sabon
by Apex CoVantage, LLC

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
Foreword 
Acknowledgements 
List of abbreviations 
viii 
ix 
xi 
1 
Introduction 
1 
2 
“Default policing”: policing was never designed 
to investigate every rape 
12 
3 
Ditching blind spots and red herrings: suspect-
focused investigations 
35 
4 
Prevention is better than prosecution: stopping 
known perpetrators 
64 
5 
The journey matters as much as the destination: 
a procedural justice approach to police 
engagement with victim-survivors 
88 
6 
Taking responsibility: organisational enablers of 
better rape policing 
115 
7 
Putting the framework into practice: Operation 
Soteria Bluestone 
144 
8 
Conclusion 
170 
Index 
177 

FOREWORD 
Policing changed in 2021. The murder of Sarah Everard by a serving 
police ofcer and the eventual bringing to justice of another serving 
ofcer, a serial rapist and abuser, saw an unprecedented downslide in 
public trust and confdence in policing, not among minority groups 
where trust has long been in defcit, but among the majority, among 
women above all. For policing to rebuild trust and confdence and safe­
guard policing by consent, it must now win back the confdence of the 
majority, and the confdence of women as well as those who are seen as 
the “minority” and marginalised. This means tackling sexual violence, 
the most extreme manifestation of interpersonal violence and one which 
disproportionately victimises women and privileges men, in society but 
also in policing organisations, in a substantive, transformative, and sus­
tainable way. Doing so will be the litmus test of police legitimacy from 
now on. Operation Soteria Bluestone ofers the opportunity for change 
and the promise of a better future if only it can prevail over police his­
tory and culture. The early signs are promising, and so this is very much 
a story of hope but, as the authors argue, one that is fragile and suscepti­
ble and requires genuine acceptance and buy-in at every level of policing. 
This is an important book and one to which policing must pay attention. 
Sarah Crew 
Chief Constable of Avon & Somerset Police, England 
National Police Chiefs’ Council Lead for Adult Sexual Ofences 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This book has been in gestation for eight years. We began working on 
this manuscript out of our shared frustration at the state of the police 
responses to rape and our shared conviction that policing can be made 
better. Years before we could apply our ideas to policing practice through 
Project Bluestone and Operation Soteria Bluestone, we began to sketch a 
framework for radical intervention in rape policing. This book preserves 
how we think and create together as a team. It demonstrates our trust 
and friendship over the past 15 years. 
The project would not have happened without the untiring lobby­
ing of the many feminists agitating for a world without male violence 
against women and girls. The activists demanded that policing do so 
much better. We tested our ideas with some of them years in advance of 
this book. When the opportunity to create Project Bluestone appeared, 
and Operation Soteria Bluestone unfolded, we felt we had a clear 
grounding from victim-survivors’ experiences. We hope that we have 
translated the needs and wishes of victim-survivors into a police prac­
tice that makes a diference. Working alongside many dedicated police 
ofcers and feminist academics enabled us to implement the theoretical 
framework set out in this book. This experience has been the privilege 
of our working lives. We are grateful to those who facilitated both pro­
jects and shared our journey. Without Chief Constable Sarah Crew, 
there would be no Project Bluestone and no Operation Soteria Blue-
stone, and we are indebted to her for her leap of faith, courage, and 
leadership. We thank the National Police Chiefs’ Council, the Home 
Ofce, the Home Ofce’s Science, Technology, and Research Fund, and 
the Mayor’s Ofce for Policing and Crime for funding, programme sup­
port, and sponsorship. We thank Avon & Somerset Police, Durham 
Constabulary, the London Metropolitan Police, West Midlands Police, 
South Wales Police, the Crown Prosecution Service, and the College of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
x Acknowledgements 
Policing for their trust and courage in working with us. We thank Mel 
Laremore, Cath Larsen, Lorett Spierenberg, Charlotte Leason, Ed Yax­
ley, Phil Sparrow, David Ashton, Annie Miller, Lisa Simpson, Richard 
Marsh, Sarah O’Leary, Helen Whittle, Lizzie Peters, Robin Merrett, 
and Vicky Gleave for the shared journey and for what they have taught 
us. We thank our academic colleagues on Project Bluestone and Opera­
tion Soteria Bluestone who have put their hearts and souls into putting 
our framework to the empirical test, and who are now developing these 
ideas into their own: our team of over 50 researchers, in particular, pil­
lar leads Miranda Horvath, Kari Davies, Kelly Johnson, Olivia Smith, 
Emma Williams, Joanna Lovett, and Tiggey May, but also Patrick Tid­
marsh, Andy Myhill, Cassandra Wiener, Oona Brooks-Hay, Richard 
Harding, Liz Kelly, Fiona Vera-Gray, and Gavin Hales. We encourage 
our readers to seek out their Operation Soteria publications, too. We 
are indebted to Merili Pullerits for her invaluable work in proofng the 
manuscript (any remaining mistakes are ours). Katrin’s biggest thank 
you is to Ian for his unwavering support, cheerleading, and endless 
patience as the book took over. I love you and I could not have done 
this book or Operation Soteria Bluestone without you. Betsy is thankful 
to the Royal Marsden Hospital staf, her daughter Rosa Stanko-Green, 
and Rosa’s partner Timothy Evers, for keeping me laughing. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
ABE 
Achieving Best Evidence 
APP 
Authorised Professional Practice 
BTP 
British Transport Police 
CID 
Criminal Investigations Department 
CPIA 1996 Criminal Procedures and Investigations Act 1996 
CPS 
Crown Prosecution Service 
DCC 
Deputy Chief Constable 
DCI 
Detective Chief Inspector 
DFU 
Digital Forensic Unit 
DS 
Detective Sergeant 
FRO 
First Response Ofcer 
HMICFRS 
His Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire & 
Rescue Services 
ISVA 
Independent Sexual Violence Advocate 
MAPPA 
Multi-Agency Public Protection Arrangements 
MOSOVO Management of Sexual or Violent Ofenders 
NFA 
No Further Action 
NOM 
National Operating Model 
NPCC 
National Police Chiefs’ Council 
PCC 
Police and Crime Commissioner 
PEQF 
Police Education Qualifcations Framework 
PNC 
Police National Computer 
PND 
Police National Database 
RASSO 
Rape and Serious Sexual Ofences 
SARC 
Sexual Assault Referral Centre 
SHPO 
Sexual Harm Prevention Order 
SOA 2003 
Sexual Ofences Act 2003 
SOIT 
Sexual Ofences Investigative Trained 
SOLO 
Sexual Ofences Liaison Ofcer 
SRO 
Sexual Risk Order 

 
 
 
 
 
xii Abbreviations 
SSAIDP 
Specialist Sexual Assault Investigation Development 
Programme 
VAWG 
Violence Against Women and Girls 
ViSOR 
Violent and Sex Ofender Register 

 
 
1 
INTRODUCTION 
The policing of rape is in permacrisis. In this book, we set out to address 
the question of why police investigations continue to fail most rape victim-
survivors and put forward a framework for what police forces might 
do to change this. Police reform is a wicked problem, long on attempts 
and short on successes. Barely a week goes by without policing making 
the headlines with scandals of police-perpetrated sexual violence and 
domestic abuse, a culture of misogyny and racism, reports of police­
traumatised victim-survivors, and routine failures to apprehend danger­
ous perpetrators. Public goodwill is fading with every broken pledge of 
reform. One police force inspection follows the next, each independent 
inquiry into police standards, professionalism, and efectiveness more 
damning than those gone before, all documenting the “slow-motion 
emergency” of failing police forces.1 Senior police leaders respond with 
rhetoric and action plans. Beneath the surface of the pledges and initia­
tives sits a deep reservoir of police nostalgia and mythology, entrenched 
ways of thinking and doing, antiquated systems and approaches to 
ofcer learning, the use of data, and digital technology. Paralytic police 
forces are treading water as they attempt to stay afoat amidst the waves 
of scandal threatening to sink policing as we know it. The specifc task 
of reforming the police response to rape is particularly challenging. Pros­
ecution rates for rape are lower than for any other crime type (Home 
Ofce, 2023). The subject of rape is emotive because it is fraught with 
stigma, shame, myths, and stereotypes. Rape is an iconic ofence in the 
measure of women’s equality in society (Hohl and Stanko, 2015). As 
such, how police respond to rape has a lighthouse efect, symbolic of 
how policing positions itself vis-à-vis the question of women’s status in 
society and towards male victim-survivors still stigmatised by a crime 
overwhelmingly committed by men against women. Every chapter in 
this book describes a key feature of default police approaches to rape 
and then proposes a way of shifting policing to a new default. Together, 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429444869-1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 Introduction 
these interlocking shifts in thinking and doing set out our framework for 
a way forward in the policing of rape towards greater justice for victim-
survivors and towards ending sexual violence. 
Rape is efectively decriminalised in England and Wales (Hohl and 
Stanko, 2015; Victims’ Commissioner, 2020). In the year ending March 
2023, just 2.1% of police-recorded rapes result in a suspect being 
charged or summonsed, up from 1.3% the year prior (Home Ofce, 
2023). The police investigation process is so gruelling for victim-
survivors that it has been described as secondary victimisation 
(Campbell et al., 2001; Hohl et al., 2023). A large body of literature 
has examined the factors associated with the attrition of rape com­
plaints, that is, the reasons why hardly any rape complaints are tested 
in a court of law. There is also a large body of literature examining 
rape myths and stereotypes and tracing their infuence on police deci­
sion-making (Jordan, 2022a, 2022b). Police cultures ripe with sex­
ism and misogyny are a further angle from which to understand why 
police services are systematically failing rape victim-survivors (Greg­
ory and Lees, 1999; Casey, 2023; Jordan, 2022a). Countless studies 
have examined the efectiveness of varied attempts at improving rape 
investigations, such as the introduction of specialist rape investiga­
tion units (Rumney et al., 2019); victim-survivor engagement ofc­
ers with specialist sexual ofences training (McMillan, 2015); better 
victim-survivor interviewing techniques (Westera et al., 2019); inde­
pendent victim-survivor support workers (Smith and Daly, 2020); 
and specialist measures to support victim-survivors when giving evi­
dence in court (Majeed-Ariss et al., 2021; Smith, 2018; McMillan 
and Thomas, 2013). Socio-legal scholars have examined the legal 
framework of rape investigations and prosecutions and have helped 
to bring about legal reform, for example restricting the use of sexual 
history evidence (Conaghan and Russell, 2023; Temkin and Krahé, 
2008). Others have evidenced that some victim-survivors are more 
disadvantaged than others, with race and ethnicity, disability, prior 
sexual victimisation, sex work, and a range of further rape-myths­
related victim-survivor characteristics all playing a role (Kelly et al., 
2005; Hohl and Stanko, 2015; Walker et al., 2021). After three dec­
ades of research, government reviews, and legal changes, we are left 
with a justice system that has been tweaked to alleviate some of its 
ills. Yet rape prosecution rates have remained stubbornly low and 
the criminal justice process continues to come at a high personal cost 
to victim-survivors (George and Ferguson, 2021; Hohl et al., 2023). 
Fundamentally, we are still treading water in the pursuit of a justice 
system that does right by victim-survivors. 

 
 
 
 
Introduction 3 
Improving the police response to rape and other forms of sexual vio­
lence has always mattered to victim-survivors. Victim-survivors pay the 
price for a failing criminal justice system in damages to their mental 
and physical health, family and work life, fnances, and above all, their 
personal safety (George and Ferguson, 2021; Hohl et al., 2023). What 
appears to have changed is that rape investigation failures now also cut 
to the core of the legitimacy of the police service in modern Britain. We 
often talk about the police and public trust in the police as being broken, 
as if the issue was one of restoring policing to its former glory. Yet polic­
ing is Britain’s least changed public service and has been branded reform 
resistant: refusing, subverting, and delaying transformational change at 
every turn (Savage, 2003). This is not to say that policing is the same 
as it was 150 years or even a decade ago. Police services continuously 
engage in change programmes and a dizzying array of initiatives that 
give the illusion of change, exhausting ofcers in the process. We sug­
gest that these initiatives and activities mask a lack of deep introspec­
tion and reform. Policing bolts on additional requirements, tools, and 
principles without resetting its core. As such, police reforms resemble an 
ever-growing scafolding to prop up policing’s crumbling foundational 
myths in the attempt to delay the ultimately inevitable paradigm shift. 
This view is shared by many policing scholars, police leaders, and front-
line ofcers who feel the strain of ever-greater public expectations, scant 
resources, and growing anti-police sentiment (Loader, 2020; HMICFRS, 
2021). In this book, we examine low rape prosecution rates and poor 
police experiences for rape victim-survivors as a problem of a police ser­
vice in dire need of a reset. We outline how typical elements of frontline 
policing and general crime investigation play out when ofcers respond 
to rape disclosures. We term this “default policing”, and we trace its ori­
gins and impacts on rape investigations, rape suspects, and rape victim-
survivors. If policing is serious about wishing to improve its responses to 
rape radically, it must – and can – reset its default modes. 
The societal context for change 
The groundswell of the #MeToo movement, followed by a series of 
highly mediatised rape murders of women, shocked the British public. 
The Sarah Everard murder by a serving police ofcer was a watershed 
moment for policing. For the frst time since the recording of public 
trust in the police in public opinion surveys, public trust has taken a 
sharp and sustained downturn, with survey respondents who say that 
they do not have confdence in the police now outnumbering the con­
fdent (YouGov, 2023). In the 28 weeks following the Sarah Everard 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 Introduction 
murder, a further 81 women were killed by men in the UK. Some of 
these men were serving police ofcers (Smith, 2021). The public gaze 
has turned frmly to the police to put a stop to the rapes, the sexual 
assaults, and the murders, especially those committed by ofcers within 
its ranks. How police respond to rape has become a litmus test for polic­
ing. Police services must now convince the public, and especially those 
feeling at risk of or already harmed by sexual violence, that the police 
have rape victim-survivors’ best interests at heart. The police must con­
vince victim-survivors that they can trust ofcers with their story and 
that they are doing the right thing by getting the police involved. The 
police must convince the public that they are contributing to the reduc­
tion of sexual violence, not tolerating or perpetrating it. Senior police 
leaders have acknowledged sexual violence as a new strategic priority 
for policing (National Police Chiefs’ Council (NPCC), 2023) but are yet 
to fnd a way of turning the tide on low prosecution rates, poor victim-
survivor experiences, and waning public confdence in the police’s ability 
to keep women safe. Much depends on police services stepping up to the 
challenge, for victim-survivors and for the legitimacy of policing itself. 
The approach: six-pillar framework 
This book sets out our theoretical thinking and conceptual approach 
as it inspired Operation Soteria Bluestone. Operation Soteria Bluestone 
is an ambitious, government-funded, NPCC-led, police-academic col­
laboration, aiming to increase outcome justice and improve victim-
survivors’ experiences of the criminal justice process for adult rape and 
serious sexual ofences (RASSO). The programme began in 2021 under 
the leadership of Chief Constable Sarah Crew, with Stanko and Hohl 
as its joint strategic academic leads. The framework is organised into 
six pillars and draws on our reading of the feminist literature on sexual 
violence, policing scholarship, and procedural and organisational jus­
tice theories. The structure of the book and the six-pillar framework 
are as follows. Chapter 2 views rape investigations through a polic­
ing lens of the unspoken rules of police practice as they have been 
documented in police ethnographic studies: “default” policing. Taking 
a policing perspective on rape investigations reveals some of the rea­
sons why rape investigations are so rarely successful by design rather 
than by mistake. It also reveals why some rapes are less likely than 
others to attract the sparse police resourcing that will never stretch 
to fully investigating every rape. This wide-lens perspective situates 
rape within policing in general, and it is from this venture point that 
we then move to the six-pillar framework. Our framework initially 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 5 
comprised fve pillars, published in Hohl and Stanko (2022). We added 
a sixth pillar while implementing the framework within Operation 
Soteria Bluestone (see Chapter 7). The aim of this framework is four­
fold: frst, to improve criminal justice outcomes in rape cases; second, 
to improve the victim-survivor experience of the criminal justice pro­
cess, as well as develop a more nuanced understanding of police sym­
bolic power and what police procedural justice and legitimacy mean in 
the eyes and experiences of victim-survivors; third, for police forces to 
take greater responsibility for the prevention and disruption of perpe­
trators known to the police; fourth, to increase the efcient use of over­
stretched police resources while promoting organisational procedural 
justice. The six pillars (Figure 1.1) comprise the three workhorses of 
day-to-day police work, supported by three organisational enablers. 
The workhorses of day-to-day police responses to rape are investiga­
tions (Pillar One), prevention (Pillar Two), and engaging with victim-
survivors (Pillar Three). 
Chapter 3 sets out the rationale for Pillar One: suspect-focused inves­
tigations to redress the current over-focus on victim-survivor credibility 
that comes at the expense of a fair and efective investigation. Chapter 4 
describes the thinking behind Pillar Two, arguing that rape prevention is 
doubly marginalised within policing. It sets out how police forces should 
and can do more to prevent perpetrators already known to the police 
from causing further sexual harm. Chapter 5 integrates feminist-informed 
victim-survivor research with Procedural Justice Theory and discusses 
the practical utility of an integrated framework for improving police 
engagement with victim-survivors. The chapter is the basis of Pillar Three. 
Suspect
focused 
invesgaons 
Stopping
known 
perpetrators 
Procedural 
jusce
approach to 
vicm-
survivor 
engagement 
Oÿcer
learning, 
development
and well-
being 
Data and 
analycs 
Digital
forensics 
Pillar 1 
Pillar 2 
Pillar 4 
Pillar 3 
Pillar 5 
Pillar 6 
FIGURE 1.1 The six-pillar framework of Operation Soteria Bluestone 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6 Introduction 
Chapter 6 then turns to the enablers for police organisational change, rec­
ognising that if we want ofcers to go diferently about their daily work of 
investigation, prevention, and victim-survivor engagement, police forces 
must take organisational responsibility for enabling this. We suggest three 
organisational enablers mirroring the three types of resources available to 
police forces: people, data, and technology (Pillar Four: ofcer well-being, 
learning, and development; Pillar Five: the use of data and analytics; and 
Pillar Six: digital forensics). The six-pillar framework puts forward a set 
of interlocking principles, shifts in thinking, and organisational levers 
that, in conjunction, may have the potential to contribute to a reset of 
the police response to sexual violence. The six-pillar framework has been 
implemented in the pilot study Project Bluestone and then Operation Sote­
ria Bluestone since 2021. Hohl and Stanko have worked with a team of 
over 50 academics and fve police forces to put these ideas to the test and 
use them to develop guidance, tools, and processes for practical use. The 
programme has led to the development of the frst National Operating 
Model (the NOM) for RASSO. All 43 police forces in England and Wales 
have committed to adopting the NOM, supported by the government, the 
NPCC, and the College of Policing, England and Wales’s body responsible 
for setting police standards. Chapter 7 documents our journey and learn­
ings from Operation Soteria Bluestone. We do not cover the empirical 
fndings of Operation Soteria Bluestone in great detail, though a few are 
referenced. Initial results can be found in Stanko (2022), and more journal 
articles, monographs, and edited volumes are likely to follow, published 
by our co-investigators.2 The remit of this book is to set out the underpin­
ning theoretical framework of the programme. 
Scope and terminology 
This book focuses on the police response to rape. However, the arguments 
apply similarly to all other sexual ofences. The Sexual Ofences Act (SOA) 
2003 sets out the current legal defnitions of rape, sexual assault, and the 
range of other sexual ofences, such as assault by penetration or causing 
sexual activity without consent. We use these terms in line with their legal 
defnitions. In places, we summarise sexual ofending as sexual violence. 
We concentrate on adult victim-survivors. Some overlap notwithstand­
ing, child sexual abuse requires separate analyses because the law, some 
elements of the criminal justice process, the context, and the challenges 
difer and cannot be subsumed under sexual violence perpetrated by 
adults against adults. The scholarly literature ofers the terms complain­
ant, victim, survivor, and victim-survivor. Within the justice system, the 
term rape complainant refers to a person who has made a report of rape 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 7 
to the police. Yet this term is alienating to those whose rape has come to 
police attention through a third-party report or because they disclosed it 
without intending to make a formal complaint (Lovett et al., 2022). We 
accept that for some, the term victim has connotations of weakness and 
passivity and that this is why the term survivor is preferred by many, in 
particular among our feminist sisters. We recognise the empowering efect 
the term survivor has and that it acknowledges the agency, strength, and 
resilience of those with lived experience of sexual violence (Kelly, 1988). 
We must also recognise that not everyone survives sexual violence. To 
those who have lost a loved one through sexual violence-related murder 
or suicide, the term survivor is inappropriate. And not all victims identify 
as survivors (Hunt, 2022). The term victim-survivor seeks to be inclusive 
of all, and we follow this convention in this book. In places, we use victim 
or survivor where this felt better suited to the particular context of the 
sentence. Finally, this book focuses on England and Wales. The extant 
literature has established that other jurisdictions face similar challenges 
(Gangoli and Westmarland, 2011; McGlynn and Munro, 2010). As such, 
we hope that our arguments and conclusions will also be relevant to rape 
policing discussions in other national contexts. 
Hope 
This book is written from a place of hope. Police forces can do right by 
victim-survivors and stop some perpetrators. This is evidenced in the 
data. Some rape disclosures result in charges and convictions, and some 
victim-survivors have been able to move forward with their lives after 
sexual violence because of the way police ofcers supported them (Hohl 
et al., 2023). To be clear, the positive examples are comparatively small 
in number and point to a system stacked against victim-survivors and 
in need of deep reform. Abolitionist feminists see the reformist posi­
tion as wrong and level a charge of cruel optimism (and worse) against 
feminists working to reform policing. In this view, “carceral feminists” 
are seen as funnelling more victim-survivors and suspects into a justice 
system that only serves to perpetrate further violence, does nothing to 
reduce harm, maintains structures of inequalities, and is illegitimate in 
its entirety (Day and McBean, 2022; Pali and Canning, 2022). While 
our stance difers, we agree on a major point: the law and the police 
are powerful tools. Police forces can and do cause harm. For us, this 
means we must not leave them unchecked. We have a responsibility to 
ensure police powers are not abused, police are held accountable and 
are governed efectively. The police represent the state, the law, society, 
and community (Loader and Mulcahy, 2003). As such, their actions 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
8 Introduction 
carry symbolic power. Part of this symbolic power is the police’s role as 
“arbiters of moral conduct. They defne respectable and disrespectable 
behaviour. They can delineate the normative from the deviant” (Brad­
ford et al., 2021: 645). Consequently, how police treat rape reports 
and engage with rape victim-survivors and rape suspects – including 
within their own ranks – sends a powerful signal to wider society as 
to the fault line between what is and is not morally and legally accept­
able. Harnessing this symbolic power of the police by visibly improving 
the police response to rape has the potential to aid the cause of ending 
sexual violence and male violence against women and girls. In a democ­
racy, the law and the police should be accessible and fair to all, and this 
must include rape victim-survivors. It is with this aim and the belief that 
policing can do right by victim-survivors that we have developed our 
framework. We wish for you to read this book with hope that change is 
possible and that the police can be in the service of those harmed by or 
at risk of harm from sexual violence. 
Notes 
1 The phrase “slow-motion emergency” is from Anoosh Chakelian’s 
headline about police forces in the New Statesman, which she in turn 
borrowed from Matt Lloyd-Rose’s description of police work in his 
2023 book “Into the night: A year with the police”. Available at: 
www.newstatesman.com/the-weekend-report/2023/09/inside­
britain-failing-police-forces. 
2 See Stanko (2022) Appendix Three for a full list of academic con­
tributors to Operation Soteria Bluestone. 
References 
Bradford, B., Jackson, J. and Milani, J. (2021). Police legitimacy. In J.C. 
Barnes and D.R. Forde (Eds.) The encyclopaedia of research methods 
in criminology and criminal justice. Hoboken: Wiley, 642–650. 
Campbell, R., Wasco, S.M., Ahrens, C.E., Sef, T. and Barnes, H.E. 
(2001). Preventing the ‘second rape’: Rape survivors’ experiences 
with community service providers. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 
16(12): 1239–1259. 
Casey, L. (2023). Baroness Casey review fnal report: March 2023. 
Available at: www.met.police.uk/SysSiteAssets/media/downloads/ 
met/about-us/baroness-casey-review/update-march-2023/baroness­
casey-review-march-2023a.pdf 
Conaghan, J. and Russell, Y. (2023). Sexual history evidence and the 
rape trial. Bristol: Policy Press. 
Day, A.S. and McBean, S.O. (2022). Abolition revolution. London: 
Pluto Press. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 9 
Gangoli, G. and Westmarland, N. (2011). International approaches to 
rape. Bristol: The Policy Press. 
George, R. and Ferguson, S. (2021). Review into the criminal justice sys­
tem response to adult rape and serious sexual ofences across England 
and Wales: Research report. HM Government. Available at: https:// 
assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/60cbb9318fa8f57ce78d4d85/ 
rape-review-research-report.pdf 
Gregory, J. and Lees, S. (1999). Policing sexual assault. London: Routledge. 
HM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire & Rescue Services (2021). State 
of policing – The annual assessment of policing in England and 
Wales 2021. Available at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/ 
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fle/1076309/ 
State-of-policing-2021-1-single-page.pdf 
Hohl, K., Reid, A.K., Molisso, S. and Pullerits, M. (2023). Rape and 
sexual assault survivors’ experience of the police in England and 
Wales. Survey Report I: January–June 2023. City, University of Lon­
don. Available at: https://openaccess.city.ac.uk/id/eprint/31310/9/ 
Survey%20Report%20I%2021%20September%202023%20 
UPDATE%2020%20September.pdf 
Hohl, K. and Stanko, E.A. (2015). Complaints of rape and the criminal 
justice system: Fresh evidence on the attrition problem in England 
and Wales. European Journal of Criminology, 12(3): 324–341. 
Hohl, K. and Stanko, E.A. (2022). Five pillars: A framework for trans­
forming the police response to rape and sexual assault. International 
Criminology, 2(3): 222–229. 
Home Ofce (2023).Crime outcomes in England and Wales 2022 to 2023. 
Available at: www.gov.uk/government/statistics/crime-outcomes-in­
england-and-wales-2022-to-2023/crime-outcomes-in-england-and­
wales-2022-to-2023 
Hunt, S.L. (2022). Sexual harassment and assault during feld research. 
PS: Political Science & Politics, 55(2): 329–334. 
Jordan, J. (2022a). Tackling rape culture: Ending patriarchy. London: 
Routledge. 
Jordan, J. (2022b). Women, rape and justice: Unravelling the rape conun­
drum. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Kelly, L. (1988). Surviving sexual violence. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Kelly, L., Lovett, J. and Regan, L. (2005). A gap or a chasm? Attrition 
in reported rape cases. Home Ofce research study 293. London: 
Home Ofce. 
Loader, I. (2020). Revisiting the police mission: Insights Paper 2. The 
Police Foundation. Available at: www.policingreview.org.uk/wp­
content/uploads/insight_paper_2.pdf 
Loader, I. and Mulcahy, A. (2003). Policing and the condition of Eng­
land: Memory, politics and culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Lovett, J., Hales, G., Kelly, L., Vera-Gray, F., Uzelac, G., Buil-Gil, D. and 
Myhill, A. (2022). Appendix 11 – data and performance. In Opera­
tion Soteria Bluestone year 1 report 2021–2022, 155–177. Avail­
able at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
10 Introduction 
system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1128688/E02836356_ 
Operation_Soteria_Y1_report_Accessible.pdf 
Majeed-Ariss, R., Brockway, A., Cook, K. and White, C. (2021). ‘Could 
do better’: Report on the use of special measures in sexual ofences 
cases. Criminology & Criminal Justice, 21(1): 89–106. 
McGlynn, C. and Munro, V.E. (Eds.) (2010). Rethinking rape law: 
International and comparative perspectives. Abingdon: Routledge. 
McMillan, L. (2015). The role of the specially trained ofcer in rape and 
sexual ofence cases. Policing and Society, 25(6): 622–640. 
McMillan, L. and Thomas, M. (2013). Police interviews of rape victims: 
Tensions and contradictions. In M.A.H. Horvath and J.M. Brown 
(Eds.) Rape: Challenging contemporary thinking. Abingdon: Rout-
ledge, 255–280. 
National Police Chiefs’ Council (2023). Violence against women and 
girls: Strategic threat risk assessment 2023. Available at: www.npcc. 
police.uk/SysSiteAssets/media/downloads/our-work/vawg/violence­
against-women-and-girls-strategic-threat-risk-assessment-2023.pdf 
Pali, B. and Canning, V. (2022). Challenging co-optive criminalisation: 
Feminist-centred decarceration strategies for interpersonal and sexual­
ised violence. The Howard Journal of Crime and Justice, 61(1): 68–86. 
Rumney, P.N., McPhee, D., Fenton, R.A. and Williams, A. (2019). A 
police specialist rape investigation unit: A comparative analysis of 
performance and victim care. Policing and Society, 30(5): 548–568. 
Savage, S. (2003). Tackling tradition: Reform and modernisation of the 
British Police. Contemporary Politics, 9(2): 171–184. 
Smith, K.I. (2021). The 81 women killed in 28 weeks. The Guardian. 
2 October. Available at: www.theguardian.com/society/2021/oct/02/ 
the-81-women-killed-in-28-weeks 
Smith, O. (2018). Rape trials in England and Wales: Observing justice 
and rethinking rape myths. Cham: Springer. 
Smith, O. and Daly, E. (2020). Evaluation of the sexual violence com­
plainants’ advocate scheme. Loughborough University. Available 
at: https://needisclear.fles.wordpress.com/2020/11/svca-evaluation­
fnal-report-1.pdf 
Stanko, B. (2022). Operation Soteria Bluestone year 1 report 2021–2022. 
Available at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/ 
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fle/1128688/E02836356_ 
Operation_Soteria_Y1_report_Accessible.pdf 
Temkin, J. and Krahé, B. (2008). Sexual assault and the justice gap: A 
question of attitude. Oxford: Hart Publishing. 
Victims’ Commissioner (2020). 2019/20 annual report victims’ com­
missioner for England and Wales. Available at: https://cloud­
platform-e218f50a4812967ba1215eaecede923f.s3.amazonaws.com/ 
uploads/sites/6/2021/12/Victims-Commissioners-Annual-Report­
2019-20-with-hyperlinks.pdf 
Walker, S.J.L., Hester, M., McPhee, D., Patsios, D., Williams, A., Bates, 
L. and Rumney, P. (2021). Rape, inequality and the criminal justice 
response in England: The importance of age and gender. Criminology 
& Criminal Justice, 21(3): 297–315. 

 
 
Introduction 11 
Westera, N.J., Powell, M.B., Milne, B. and Goodman-Delahunty, J. 
(2019). Police interviewing of sexual assault victims: Current organi­
sational responses and recommendations for improvement. In R. Bull 
and I. Blandón-Gitlin (Eds.) Handbook of legal and investigative psy­
chology. Abingdon: Routledge, 182–196. 
YouGov (2023). Public opinion trace on the question ‘Are the police 
doing a good job?’, May 2023. Available at: https://yougov.co.uk/ 
topics/legal/trackers/are-the-police-doing-a-good-job 

 
 
 
2 
“DEFAULT POLICING” 
Policing was never designed to 
investigate every rape 
Introduction 
Most people, when asked about the task of the police, will think of 
some form of law enforcement: catching criminals, fghting crime, or 
at least issuing parking fnes and speeding tickets. Rape is one of the 
most serious ofences in English law and carries a maximum sentence 
of life imprisonment. One might thus expect that investigating rape is 
among police priorities – and be surprised to fnd that, de facto, it is 
not. The same year charge/summons rate for rape in the year ending 
2022 is 2.1%, lower than any other crime type (Home Ofce, 2022a). 
Few suspects are arrested, and even fewer are brought before a court of 
law (CPS, 2023). While a charge/summonsed rate of 2.1% is a failure 
of law enforcement, perhaps counterintuitively, it is an indicator of the 
(former) success of a policing model that aims to conceal coercive police 
powers and foreground the democratic ideal of “policing by consent”. 
As such, low charge rates are no accident. They are a direct consequence 
of rape investigations falling outside the “default zone” of what the 
police were initially designed to do. The paramount police mandate is 
the preservation of social order (Banton, 1964; Reiner, 2010). If we are 
to understand why rape reports rarely result in criminal charges, we 
must understand police priorities, the nature of police calls for service, 
and the default approach ofcers take to responding to them. Police 
services were designed by white Victorian upper-class men with the pres­
ervation of hegemonic control of urban, industrialised public spaces in 
mind. Women’s lives, legal status, and rights were very diferent then. 
Then, as today, much of the male violence against women and girls 
happened in private spaces. The police were set up with public spaces in 
mind. Police services were not designed thinking about women and the 
crimes that disproportionality afect. What is more, law enforcement has 
only ever been one and never the main tool of policing (Goldstein, 1979; 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429444869-2 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Default policing” 13 
Waddington, 1999). Under-enforcement of the law is inevitable and not 
unique to sexual ofences. This is especially true today. A mere 5.6% 
of all crimes result in a charge and/or summons (Home Ofce, 2022a). 
While this overall charge rate is low, it is still a multiple of the charge 
rate for rape. Rape and other forms of male violence against women and 
girls remain an afterthought for policing as a function of democratic 
security, under-resourced and under-valued to this day. 
Feminist scholars and researchers of rape and sexual assault over 
the years have attributed this to the way in which women are seen and 
treated. Gendered stereotypes and rape myths act to discredit victim-
survivors’ lived experiences of rape in the eyes of police and other criminal 
justice agents (Jordan, 2022). The infuence of rape myths is only part 
of the story. Gregory and Lees (1999), in their seminal book Policing 
sexual assault, examined police practice in how complaints of rape and 
sexual assault are treated within English police forces. Gregory and Lees 
lamented a prosecution rate of 8.9% in 1995 compared to 24% in 1985, 
fgures that read aspirational in 2023. A key plank of their argument is the 
direct link between low prosecution rates and a hyper-masculine, misogy­
nistic police culture, also evidenced in police-perpetrated sexual assaults. 
We want to go further and examine internal features of police forces that 
infuence its culture and play a role in low rape prosecution rates and poor 
victim-survivor experiences. These features reveal themselves when we fip 
the question from “What is it about rape that makes it so difcult for 
police to investigate it well?” to “What is it about the police that makes 
it so difcult for police to investigate rape well?”. This would seem an 
obvious question for policing research. Yet, policing scholars have thus far 
shown remarkably little interest in how police engage with those subjected 
to, or accused of, rape and other sexual violence, with key early works 
being produced not by policing scholars but by feminist sociologists and 
socio-legal scholars such as Adler (1987), Temkin (1999), and Gregory 
and Lees (1996, 1999). The policing of rape is at the periphery of policing 
research, mirroring its position within policing itself. If we are to dramati­
cally and sustainably improve how the police respond to rape and other 
forms of sexual violence, we must understand the police as an institution. 
In this chapter, we describe “default policing”. That is the purpose, 
principles, and priorities that inform police practice. Practices are 
shaped by the skills, knowledge, and attitudes of the workforce. Not 
only do we suggest that the under-enforcement of rape law is in line 
with the original function of police services, but we also suggest that 
triage of crime and social harms is inevitable and not random. We show 
how rarely enforcing the law is, in fact, a by-product of the success 
of the evolution of a “policing by consent” approach to legitimising 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
“Default policing” 
police authority. Next, we show what happens when a default policing 
approach is applied to how police engage with rape victim-survivors and 
respond to rape disclosures. We conclude that transforming the police 
response to rape necessitates resetting default policing to enable parity 
of the safety of women from male sexual violence as a core democratic 
function built into the DNA of policing practices. 
Default policing is not designed to investigate 
every crime 
Law enforcement as a last resort 
Contrary to the narrow and skewed portrayal of police work in the 
media, law enforcement is not and never has been the primary purpose 
of the police. This becomes apparent when we peel back the layers of 
myths that conceal the realities of the English police since its incep­
tion. The frst modern English police service – often described as the 
“world’s best” (Weinberger, 2016) – was the London Metropolitan 
Police, founded in 1829 by the then Home Secretary Sir Robert Peel. The 
Peelian principles, wrongly attributed to him, are often said to defne 
the English police mandate and underpin “policing by consent” to this 
day (though others say they were only ever a branding exercise with 
tentative links to practice; see Loader, 2016). Peel’s principles were, in 
fact, only formulated a century later by Charles Reith and further devel­
oped through police textbooks over the decades (Emsley, 2013). Peel is 
important as a person because of the background he brought to design­
ing the English policing system – specifcally, his background in colonial 
policing. Before becoming Home Secretary, Peel was Under-Secretary of 
State for War & the Colonies and then Secretary for Ireland, where his 
1814 Peace Preservation Act shaped the Royal Irish Constabulary. Here, 
a key concern for Peel was Irish resistance to British colonial rule. Peel 
used the newly formed police services as a street presence for intelligence 
gathering and to keep a lid on social unrest. Peel did not design Irish 
police forces to protect the Irish people from crime but to protect the 
interest of the ruling British Empire. More generally, policing in colonial 
contexts served to maintain British rule, particularly to control enslaved 
people, often through brutal force and coercion (Killingray, 1991). 
At home, the formation of the Metropolitan Police served a parallel 
purpose of aiding the preservation of social order, including its struc­
tures of power and inequality. Promoted to Home Secretary, Peel faced 
problems of social and political unrest during the industrialisation and 
urbanisation period (Evans, 2006). It is in this context and to address 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Default policing” 15 
these problems that Peel set up the Metropolitan Police in 1829. The of­
cial narrative, the “orthodox view” of police history, purports the idea 
that the policing system was established to address increasing crime and 
disorder that were the side efects of rapid urbanisation. According to 
this narrative, the police’s main goals were the prevention of crime and 
the protection of the public. In contrast, the “revisionist view” suggests 
that the policing system was there primarily to protect the interests of the 
ruling classes. In this reading of policing history, the ofcial narrative of 
crime prevention and public protection was rhetoric used to disguise the 
true purpose of the police and to enable the new police to gain enough 
public trust to be a respected and efective authority on the streets (Bowl­
ing et al., 2019). Crime prevention and crime fghting, in this reading of 
policing history, were never the main purpose of the police. Within the 
same historical context, rape was a property crime committed against the 
father or husband of the victim-survivor (Brownmiller, 1975). Domestic 
violence was regarded as a private matter, not a police matter, and hus­
bands and fathers were within their rights to physically discipline their 
wives and children (Stanko, 1985). Police forces themselves continued to 
be shaped by men for much of its history. The frst female Chief Constable 
in England was not appointed until 1995, and until recently, female Chief 
Constables have continued to be rare exceptions.1 One might argue that 
none of this history matters for how police forces operate today in general 
or in relation to rape specifcally. The remainder of this chapter suggests 
that its historical legacies continue to shape policing practice to this day. 
Then and now, ofcers rarely invoke the law when responding to 
the wide array of incidents they are called to attend. Typically, ofcers 
rely on citizen respect for police authority and the “or else” of coer­
cive police powers, as well as ofcers’ interpersonal skills. Authorita­
tive intervention, without the use of the law or force, is the norm. This 
applies when ofcers break up street fghts, move rowdy drinkers along, 
control crowds, arbitrate in a neighbourly dispute, regulate trafc, and 
even at domestic abuse incidents (Bittner, 1970; Banton, 1964; Thacher, 
2022). What is more, as Brodeur put it: 
It may be possible that the police are, in fact, having more efect by 
being a threat than in carrying out this threat, the threat leaving more 
to the imagination than its (potentially unimpressive) fulflment. 
Needless to say, the threat has to be forcefully realised when neces­
sary in order to maintain its credibility. It is this pairing of forceful­
ness – at times, pushed to the extreme – and underacting that is the 
specifc feature of police action. 
(Brodeur 2010: 344 – italics in the original) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
“Default policing” 
Ironically, the less ofcers need to resort to law enforcement, the more 
successful the police are in (re-)producing legitimate authority. Ofc­
ers who break up a drunken street brawl by talking both parties out of 
the fght and into going home are using and reinforcing their authority. 
Conversely, ofcers resorting to the use of force, arrest, or even tasers to 
control the situation are likely to garner less respect from those involved 
and chip away, rather than afrm, the notion of policing by consent. As 
such, the craft of handling trouble without resorting to coercive use of 
force or the law is often seen as a hallmark of good policing (Bowling 
et al., 2019). Minimal law enforcement helps to conceal the coercive 
nature of policing and reinforces the sense that in Britain, we have a 
model of “policing by consent” – people cooperating with police because 
they perceive the police as a legitimate authority. 
What is more, the police contribution to crime prevention is minimal. 
A range of studies have explored whether there is a causal relationship 
between police activities and crime. Bowling et al. (2019) provide a com­
prehensive review of studies evaluating the efectiveness of police strate­
gies in reducing crime. The picture that emerges is one of null, minimal, 
or inconclusive efects of increased police patrol on crime rates, public 
fear of crime, and public satisfaction with the police. In the few studies 
where there is evidence of a link between police action and crime reduc­
tion, the efect tends to be small, localised, and contingent on conducive 
social and economic conditions (ibid). Even the widely cited success of 
the New York Police Department’s “zero-tolerance policing strategy” 
in the 1990s has since been questioned. The dramatic drop in crime, 
including homicides and other serious violent crimes attributed to this 
policing approach, has since been shown to be, in fact, a consequence of 
wider societal change and a global downward trend in crime (Bowling, 
1999; Zimring, 2011). Police efectiveness studies tend to focus on street 
crime, not specifcally on rape and sexual violence. The fndings dent 
the myth of police as general crime fghters and place police failings to 
prevent sexual violence into a wider context of police forces having little 
efect on ofending generally. 
Little police time is spent on law enforcement. This, in part, is due to 
the largely reactive nature of policing. In Bittner’s much-quoted words, 
the problems to which police are called “involved something-that­
ought-not-to-be-happening-and-about-which-someone-had-better-do­
something-now!” (Bittner, 1974: 30). The police are the public service 
of last resort, “equipped, entitled, and required to deal with every exi­
gency in which force may have to be used, to meet it” (ibid.: 45). Legally 
enshrined, the police in Western societies send police ofcers to deal 
with all the problems in which force, or coercive persuasion, may have 

 
 
“Default policing” 17 
to be used, even if in practice it rarely will. The police are the “or else” 
of society. Those calling for police assistance or at the receiving end of a 
police intervention are acutely aware of the “or else” that comes with a 
police request for compliance with whatever the ofcer asks the citizen 
to do or, more often, cease doing (Bittner, 1990). Among the wide array 
of potential police tasks, ethnographic studies over the decades have 
produced often-quoted conclusions such as: 
When one looks at what policemen actually do, one fnds that crimi­
nal law enforcement is something that most of them do with a fre­
quency located somewhere between virtually never and very rarely. 
(Bittner, 1990: 154) 
The policeman on patrol is primarily a ‘peace ofcer’ rather than a 
‘law ofcer’. Relatively little of his time is spent enforcing the law in 
the sense of arresting ofenders; far more is spent ‘keeping the peace’ 
by supervising the beat and responding to requests for assistance. 
(Banton, 1964: 127) 
These assessments still hold true decades later. In 2015, 83% of calls 
to the police were not crime-related (College of Policing, 2015). Men­
tal health crises account for an increasing amount of police time. With 
other public services, including public health services, dangerously 
under-resourced and overstretched, more falls to the “last resort” pub­
lic service of police, whose mandate is so broad it must respond to all 
calls for assistance, even when it is not a matter of crime and order. It 
is not uncommon for a police ofcer to spend much of her shift in a 
hospital waiting room, unable to leave the person until they have been 
seen by a medic or mental health clinician (HMICFRS, 2018). In 2023, 
for instance, the National Police Chiefs’ Council (NPCC) negotiated 
an agreement with the National Health Service to reduce police time 
regarding callouts for mental health. The Metropolitan Police stated: 
“We are failing Londoners a second time by taking large amounts of 
ofcer time away from preventing and solving crime as well as dealing 
properly with victims” (Metropolitan Police, 2023a). Rape and other 
sexual ofences account for a relatively small slice of public demand on 
police time when placed in the context of overall police demand. 
Under-enforcement is inevitable and selective 
Even if the police were to concern themselves solely with law enforce­
ment, attending to more than a fraction of all ofending is a practical 

 
 
 
 
 
18 “Default policing” 
impossibility. The number of potential ofenders and crimes far outstrips 
police capacity. In the words of Bowling and colleagues: 
The police may be the normal gateway to the criminal justice pro­
cess, but it is a gate that they open relatively seldom [. . .] The basic 
reason for this is the huge array of potential ofences and ofenders 
relative to any conceivable resources of policing [. . .] The toughest 
zero-tolerance or the smartest intelligence-led approaches cannot do 
more than chip away at the edges of this mass potential of targets. 
(Bowling et al., 2019: 261) 
Further, the gap between potential crimes and ofcers’ capacity to 
respond to them is widening. In 2020, there were approximately 
153,000 full-time equivalent police ofcers to respond to over 6.1 mil­
lion police-recorded crimes, compared to 172,000 ofcers in 2010 hav­
ing to deal with only 4.3 million crimes (Clark, 2023a, 2023b). Key 
measures of police law enforcement activity also show a decline, despite 
police-recorded crime increasing by 9% over the same time period 
(Clark, 2023a). In the year ending March 2021, police made less than 
half (46%) the number of arrests compared to 2006/07 and fewer stop 
and searches (Ministry of Justice, 2008; Home Ofce, 2022b). They 
now solve a lower percentage of recorded crime than ever: 5.6% in 
2020/21 (Home Ofce, 2022a) compared to 27% in 2006 and 49% 
in 1955 (Ministry of Justice, 2010), signifcant changes in recording 
rules and practices notwithstanding. Austerity has further widened the 
gap between public expectation and demand for policing services and 
resourcing levels (HMICFRS, 2021). Enforcing no more than a frac­
tion of rape crimes appears to be a practical necessity, given the very 
real resource constraints. There are few exceptions to this, principally 
homicide and terrorism. These crimes carry a maximum sentence of 
life imprisonment and are relatively rare in occurrence. Rape carries an 
equivalent maximum sentence, but – and it is a big but – rape is not rare. 
Rape is 100 times more prevalent than homicide. In 2021/22, police in 
England and Wales recorded 666 homicides, compared to 63,136 rapes 
(ONS, 2022). Placed in this wider context, the notion that the police 
can fully investigate all rapes brought to their attention seems a fantasy. 
The incidents singled out for law enforcement is not a random draw. 
Ofcer decisions on when and against whom to use force or their powers 
of arrest, investigation, and charge are infuenced by policing priorities 
but also societal prejudice and stereotypes. One of the most criticised 
aspects of the “law and order” mandate of policing is the evidently 
selective way in which police exercise discretion to use police powers 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Default policing” 19 
to preserve the current order, including structures of inequality – in other 
words, institutionalised discrimination in policing practice. Bowling 
et al. (2019) review policing’s long history of explicit discrimination and 
enforcement of racial segregation, for example, in South Africa and the 
US, policing slavery in the British Empire, policing poverty in England 
in the 19th century, and policing religious confict and ethnic minor­
ity communities. A large catalogue of studies reveals implicit and less 
overt racial discrimination in contemporary Britain, including in stop 
and search, arrest, and charge (Bowling and Philips, 2002; Delsol and 
Shiner, 2015), but also in the treatment of Black and minoritised ethnic 
people that appears to lack in dignity, fairness, and respect (Bradford, 
2016). Discrimination also plays out internally: Black and minority eth­
nic ofcers are far less likely to get promoted, far more likely to leave 
the service, and more likely to report bullying from colleagues (Hasan, 
2021; Casey, 2023). Racial discrimination is most evidenced in over-
policing, for example, in disproportionality and discriminatorily high 
rates of stop and search. Gender discrimination tends to take the form 
of under-policing. 
Decades of research evidence show that women and girls subject to 
male violence experience discrimination through police inaction and 
police-perpetrated sexual violence. Domestic abuse now makes up as 
much as a quarter of police calls for service (HMICFRS, 2019). Domes­
tic abuse is highly gendered; nine out of ten perpetrators are male and 
eight out of ten victim-survivors are female (ONS, 2020). Domestic 
homicides account for the vast majority of femicides (Femicide Census, 
2022). Despite this, ofcers tend to have little understanding and profes­
sional curiosity about this type of crime, and attempts to harness police 
authoritative intervention are often inadequate (Hoyle, 1998; Myhill, 
2019). This can include, for example, ofcers advising a domestic abuser 
to buy fowers to “make up” with their abused partner instead of taking 
steps to safeguard the victim-survivor and arrest or otherwise intervene 
around the perpetrator (HMIC, 2014). Another example includes ofc­
ers telling a rape victim-survivor to “go home and have a stif drink” 
in place of investigating the rape.2 The attrition of rape complaints is a 
manifestation of gender-based discrimination and injustice in policing. 
It extends to female ofcers subjected to sexual violence and misogyny 
from male colleagues (Gregory and Lees, 1999; HMICFRS, 2022). 
Under-enforcement of rape law and under-protection of women from 
rape is not an anomaly within an otherwise fair policing system. It forms 
part of a pattern of selective, discriminatory use of – or a decision not 
to use – police powers that serve to protect the existing social order, 
delivering “parking tickets and class repression” (Marenin, 1982), white 

 
 
 
20 “Default policing” 
privilege, and patriarchy. For women from Black and minoritised ethnic 
backgrounds such patterns are particularly likely to be overlooked in 
analyses that focus on either race or gender, but miss the intersectional­
ity of both (Crenshaw, 1991). The police mandate was not set with the 
policing needs of women in mind, let alone those of Black and minori­
tised women. As such, default policing is policing where law enforce­
ment, including rape law enforcement, is institutionally disincentivised 
and plays a secondary “means to an end” role within what is largely a 
peacekeeping mission. 
The impact of default policing on the police 
response to rape 
The Worboys case: law enforcement failure, order 
maintenance success 
John Worboys was a London black cab taxi driver who, over many 
years, routinely drugged female customers and then sexually assaulted 
them. In 2003, fve years before Worboys was frst charged, a member 
of the public took one of the Worboys’ rape victims, “DSD”, into Hol­
loway police station immediately after Worboys had raped her. Here 
is an excerpt from the High Court ruling on the Metropolitan Police 
investigation of the Worboys rapes: 
Immediately following her attack, [DSD] was disorientated, incapaci­
tated and vomiting. When she frst came into contact with police very 
shortly after the assault, she appeared to be a drunk or a drug addict 
or both; and the police assumed as much. In an extraordinary twist 
of fate, she was in fact transported to the police station by Worboys 
himself, who had been persuaded to take DSD to the police station by 
a Good Samaritan third party, who also accompanied both Worboys 
and DSD to the station. But because she was mischaracterised as a 
drunk, she was not treated as a victim of crime, no one took the name 
or address of Worboys or his vehicle registration. He was treated as 
a model citizen. And no one took the name or address of the third 
party who accompanied them. 
(DSD and NBV v Met Police, 2014: 12) 
DSD appeared on drugs or drunk and was covered in vomit. Ofcers 
resolved the situation by taking DSD to the nearest hospital. The law 
and legal powers did not have to be invoked to resolve the situation, and 
so they were not. Had ofcers followed their own police force guidance 

 
 
“Default policing” 21 
on drug-assisted rape and, crucially, approached the situation with a 
professionally curious mindset, they might have asked more questions. 
That might have led ofcers to taking a closer look inside Worboys’ taxi 
when they retrieved DSD from its backseat. In the boot, they would have 
discovered Worboys’ rape kit, consisting of date-rape drugs, alcohol, 
and sex toys. Instead, ofcers remained in their default zone of order 
maintenance and miscellaneous social service. Worboys was treated as 
a model citizen (DSD and NBV v Met Police, 2014: 12). DSD was the 
problem to be solved. Within hours of being at the hospital, and as soon 
as regaining full consciousness, DSD realised she had been raped by the 
taxi driver and told her boyfriend. Her boyfriend made an immediate 
police report on her behalf. An ofcer took DSD’s frst account the same 
morning while she was still in the hospital. Despite the report being 
made within 24 hours of the rape, ofcers were unable to trace Wor­
boys because Holloway station had failed to take basic details just hours 
earlier (ibid.). Worboys was not interviewed until fve years later for a 
diferent rape. During those fve years, he committed countless further 
rapes, using the same modus operandi. A total of 105 rape cases have 
now been linked to Worboys. He was never charged in connection with 
DSD (Hattenstone and Allison, 2018). 
The High Court ruled that the Metropolitan Police investigation of 
Worboys constituted a systemic failure in the police services’ legal duty 
to investigate rape and serious assault allegations and, as such, was in 
violation of Article 3 of the Human Rights Act. Yet, ironically, the Hollo­
way police station incident is successful policing when measured against 
the overarching policing goal of order maintenance: the immediate situ­
ation was resolved by driving DSD to a hospital. DSD received medical 
care and no longer posed a risk of causing a public disturbance. Ofcers 
achieved this through an authoritative intervention – in this case, tak­
ing DSD to the hospital – without activating the law or police powers, 
exemplifying and reinforcing police authority in the process. Worboys is 
a further winner in the process, being treated as a model citizen, getting 
away with rape, and being free to continue ofending. The “losers” in 
this policing model are DSD and countless other women Worboys was 
free to sexually assault because police had failed DSD. 
Danger, primacy, and the default zone of policing 
Ofcers are not immune to the crime-buster police image. Many join the 
police because they are attracted to carefully cultivated police images, 
not only by the media but also by police forces themselves (Loftus, 
2010). The 2022 Metropolitan Police recruitment campaign features car 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
22 “Default policing” 
chases and crime scenes with the slogan, “Choose a career most people 
only see on screen” (Metropolitan Police, 2022). The crime focus myth 
is further reinforced by police forces being organised by crime type, 
including the labelling of many of its branches and departments, such 
as counter-terrorism, roads and transport, or organised crime (see Met­
ropolitan Police, 2023b). Similarly, police administrative data collection 
and police performance measures narrowly concern themselves with 
crime-related police activity such as detection rates, arrests, charges, and 
prosecutions (Bittner, 1990; Rumney and McPhee, 2023), and police 
force internal promotion and performance criteria align to reward police 
bravery. While some police work does involve catching criminals and 
car chases, the vast majority is “boring, tiresome, sometimes dirty [. . .] 
rarely dangerous” (Manning, 1977: 158–159). The danger of police 
work has a “prominent position within occupational consciousness” 
(Loftus, 2010: 13) and is a “principal variable” (Skolnick, 1966: 44) of 
police culture. “[T]he police ofcer faces, round every corner she turns 
or behind every door whose bell she rings, potential danger. Hence cop­
ing with violence is a recurring feature of police culture” (Bowling et al., 
2019: 172). At the same time, situations that carry the possibility of 
requiring the use of police powers tend to attract considerably greater 
ofcer attention and resources than incidents that do not. For example, 
ofcers may rush to a “live” (in progress) burglary but not attend a 
burglary that is only discovered days later, despite forensic opportunities 
still being present. Bittner (1990) suggests that even when suspects will­
ingly comply with an arrest, ofcers often put on handcufs in a symbolic 
show of police powers. Once an incident is no longer “live” or the pri­
mary investigation is complete, police interest tails of: 
Like doctors in a war zone, criminal investigators employ a triage 
strategy. If a crime cannot be solved more or less on the spot, the 
case will probably be closed, and the detectives will move on to more 
promising cases. [. . .] The likelihood of solving a crime varies with 
the nature of the ofence, with higher rates for confrontational crimes 
and lower rates for property crimes. 
(Bayley, 1994: 145) 
The default setting for police work is to prioritise live cases, yet 
rapes are rarely reported as they happen or immediately after. In police 
jargon, “live stranger rapes” are rapes reported to police shortly after 
the rape, where the suspect is unknown. The likelihood of a crime 
being solved dramatically reduces if this cannot be done within the 
frst few days of it being reported; this applies to all crime types. This 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Default policing” 23 
particularly disadvantages rape cases because the vast majority (76%) 
are disclosed to police only weeks, months, or years after they hap­
pened, particularly if the victim-survivor and suspect are known to 
each other (Wunsch et al., 2021). Only a quarter of rapes are reported 
within the frst 24 hours. What is more, rapes where the perpetrator is 
a partner or family member are less likely to be reported immediately 
(ibid). As a result, they are less likely to be seen as a live danger, typi­
cally do not receive the same amount of investigative resources and are 
typically not treated with the same urgency. 
In ofcer interviews conducted by Hohl in 2016 and 2021, ofc­
ers universally described “stranger rape” cases, especially when they 
occur in public spaces, as receiving a “Rolls Royce” service. Then, as 
one participating ofcer put it, “It is all hands on deck; everyone drops 
everything and mucks in.” This, ofcers frequently reasoned, is neces­
sary because the attacker is a danger to the wider public and could rape 
another victim at any time. Entire teams dedicate their shifts to securing 
forensic evidence, identifying witnesses, and apprehending suspects. The 
urgency and resource expended are rarely replicated when the assailant 
is closely related to the victim-survivor, for example, the partner or a 
family member. Ofcers act as if such ofenders pose less of a risk of 
repeat ofending. Yet the evidence suggests the reverse. Often, there is a 
history of prior sexual ofending against the very same victim-survivor, 
and a proportion of those ofenders also abuse women and children out­
side of their relationships (see Chapter 4). However, ofcer interviewees 
suggested that these suspects do not trigger the same sense of urgency. 
They are likely to downgrade the possibility of legitimate force being 
needed, particularly in cases where the suspect is a current or former 
intimate partner. This may be linked to a sense that these perpetrators 
are “only” a danger to this particular woman, unlike a stranger rapist 
who may strike again against any woman at any time. Domestic abuse 
is perhaps the most iconic illustration of how danger and ofending that 
occurs in private, domestic spaces was not a police matter (Hoyle, 1998; 
Stanko, 1985), and it is still to this day considered by many ofcers to 
be “rubbish work” (Myhill, 2019; Myhill et al., 2023). 
Most rapes happen in private spaces, often in the perpetrator’s or 
the victim-survivor’s home. Only one in four police-recorded rapes 
occurs in public spaces (Hohl and Stanko, 2015). This means that 
most rape cases fall outside the default zone of police priorities for live 
stranger rape perpetrated in public spaces eligible for a “Rolls Royce” 
service. The SOA 2003 states the legal defnition of rape. This defni­
tion makes no mention of the location of the rape or the relationship 
between the victim and the ofender, rendering them extra-legal factors 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24 “Default policing” 
that should have no bearing on case outcomes (Temkin and Krahé, 
2008). Yet police crime data shows that charge rates vary signifcantly 
depending on the victim-suspect relationship, from 8.2% for strangers 
to 1.2% for intimate partners (Lovett et al., 2022), and varies similarly 
depending on whether the rape took place in a public space or a private 
space (Hohl and Stanko, 2015). Stranger rapes in public not only meet 
the criteria of danger but also that of being located within a public 
space and converge with rape myths around “real rapes”. The latest 
live stranger case will take precedence; domestic and family rape cases 
go on the back burner, alongside non-recent reports and last month’s 
live stranger case. In sum, the two-tier system of live stranger rapes and 
everything else is a complex cocktail of rape myths, case complexity, 
and a seemingly universal law of police culture and resourcing that 
prioritises live danger cases that either get solved relatively quickly or 
not at all. 
Resetting default policing is necessary for public trust 
What has been termed “Peel’s mantra” – the public are the police, and 
the police are the public – is common parlance even today. Efective 
policing depends on public cooperation and compliance. The police rely 
on the public to report, discover, and solve crimes. Ofcers also rely on 
public cooperation to resolve most incidents without resource-consuming 
legal force or law enforcement to control public order situations, regu­
late trafc, or conduct trafc stops and searches efciently. The public-
police relationship is as essential for the police to function efectively 
today as it was for gaining public acceptance when police services were 
frst established (Loader and Mulcahy, 2003). Democratic governance 
and governments began to recognise the importance of public satisfac­
tion in public services, introducing mechanisms to measure public per­
ceptions of policing in the 1980s (Hough and Mayhew, 1983). Over the 
past three decades, academic and media assessments of public support 
for the police and empirical legitimacy overwhelmingly describe a trajec­
tory of decline in public confdence: the public is growing disenchanted, 
cynical, and critical of the police (Newburn, 2008; Reiner, 2010; Harkin, 
2014; Goldsmith and McLaughlin, 2022; Casey, 2023). Public criticism 
of the police has increased, but so too have public expectations of what 
policing might be able to achieve. The list of police responsibilities and 
priorities is ever expanding, ranging from anti-social behaviour and men­
tal health emergencies to bicycle thefts and burglaries, from cyber-crime 
to hate crime, and from domestic abuse to international organised crime 
(HMICFRS, 2021; Reiner, 2010). There is debate about how to defne 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Default policing” 25 
the policing remit and manage the varied and evolving contemporary 
issues facing policing today. If they fail to deal with the vast array of 
issues, the police risk losing legitimacy. The police face losing legitimacy 
over how they treat people, too. Following the George Floyd murder in 
Minnesota in the US in 2020, for instance, activists in the UK argued 
that British policing, much like its US counterpart, is inherently lacking 
legitimacy and is institutionally anti-working class, racist, misogynistic 
and, as such unreformable and must be defunded, with money used for 
preventing social harms instead (Day and McBean, 2022; McElhone 
et al., 2023). Other commentators argue against defunding and suggest 
that the police must and can be reformed (McGlynn, 2022; Fleetwood 
and Lea, 2022). Police abolitionist and reformist thinkers do agree on 
the centrality of how the police relates to the public and the importance 
of attending to questions of how the police exercise its coercive power in 
assessing the legitimacy of policing. 
Some have questioned whether academia and the media are overstat­
ing this crisis in public trust in the police. The Crime Survey for Eng­
land and Wales – widely considered the most robust measure of public 
attitudes towards the police and crime – continues to evidence public 
support has remained relatively stable and at a high level through the 
decades (Bradford, 2016). Large, representative studies have shown that 
public trust is largely insensitive to media reporting on crime and on 
police scandals and failings, however dramatic these may be, and that 
such failings would, at most, cause a small, temporary dip in public 
confdence (Jackson et al., 2013; Hohl et al., 2013), confrming Rein­
er’s (2010) conclusion that the police are a “Tefon service”: no scandal 
sticks. Bradford (2016) suggests that this may be explained, at least in 
part, by a strong association between people’s social identity and per­
ceived police legitimacy. Put simply, those who identify as law-abiding 
British citizens tend to have more positive views of the police and tend 
to grant police support regardless of how these are put into question by 
police inefectiveness or high-profle police scandals. Other research sug­
gests that public trust in the police is expressive of wider perceptions of 
social cohesion and moral consensus within society (Jackson and Brad­
ford, 2009; Bradford and Myhill, 2015). These theories and empirical 
studies demonstrate that there is more to public judgements of and trust 
in the police than mere assessments of police actions. 
The year 2021 marks a plot twist in the British public’s relationship 
with, and especially women’s confdence in, the police. A serving Met­
ropolitan Police ofcer used his warrant card to “arrest”, kidnap, rape, 
torture, and murder Sarah Everard (Fulford, 2021). When investigat­
ing the case, the Metropolitan Police uncovered that the ofcer had a 

 
 
 
26 “Default policing” 
long history of sexual ofending, had gained the nickname “the rapist” 
among ofcer colleagues and that the Met’s vetting system still allowed 
him to transfer into the Metropolitan Police’s Parliamentary and Dip­
lomatic Protection command (Sinclair, 2021). Women, in particular, 
expressed fears for their personal safety from male police ofcers follow­
ing the murder. The Metropolitan Police further shocked the public with 
its heavy-handed policing of peaceful vigils attended mostly by women 
in Everard’s memory on Clapham Common, South London (Karim, 
2021). As a consequence of the murder, the Met advised women to allay 
their fear of police by suggesting that they “fag down a bus” if they 
felt unsafe when approached by a lone male police ofcer (Ward and 
McTaggart, 2021). The Met’s approach to women’s safety seemed tone-
deaf and showed no trace of a reset of how it viewed its responsibility 
in assuring women’s safety. The deep shock and horror felt by women 
nationwide was palpable (Davis, 2022). Within months, another serv­
ing Met ofcer pleaded guilty to 85 counts of sexual ofences, includ­
ing 48 rapes, following an investigation by a diferent police force. He 
had gotten away with over a decade of sexual and domestic violence 
perpetrated against countless women, including female police ofcers. 
His known violence against women earned him the nickname “Bastard 
Dave” among ofcer colleagues. Yet he was still able to pass vetting and 
progress in his career. Two years prior, 70% of the UK public felt “the 
police were doing a good job” (a widely used measure of public trust), 
while only 54% said so in February 2022, falling further still to 47% in 
May 2023, the lowest level on record (YouGov, 2023). One might won­
der whether wider societal change and the social movements to which 
this change is giving rise to, such as #MeToo and Black Lives Matter, 
have corroded policing’s Tefon coating and prepared the ground for 
these scandals to stick. How police respond to rape and other forms of 
male violence against women and girls, thus far falling outside default 
policing, has now become a litmus test for public trust in the police. The 
police response to sexual violence has moved from marginal to central, 
and public trust in the police and public perceptions of the police have 
become bound up with the police response to rape. 
For police to pass this litmus test, it needs to reset default policing. 
This requires revisiting the purpose, principles, priorities, and institu­
tionalised ways of working within policing. Good starting points are the 
four questions posed by Robert Reiner in 2015: 
Who defnes the peace the police keep? Whose law and what order 
do the police enforce (however legally)? If the cops are called because 
someone wants something that ought not to be happening stopped 

 
“Default policing” 27 
now, why should the caller’s claim be prioritised over the people 
whose activities are to be stopped? Who decides when the use of 
force is situationally justifed, and according to what principles? 
(Reiner, 2015: 323) 
Reiner essentially poses the question of who policing should be for and 
against. Who gets to make the rules of policing practice and defne the 
aims, purpose, and core function of the police? And how should the 
public be assured that democratic oversight of such rules and functions 
is in place? Such questions draw in the wider debates among policing 
scholars and commentators on the past, present, and future of policing. 
Loader (2016, 2020), too, argues for a return to the drawing board. 
He outlines the pros and mostly cons of the theoretical approaches 
commonly taken to attempt to defne police priorities, functions, and 
principles. Whether that is starting from historical analysis, Peelian 
principles, the omnibus police mandate, empirical observation of the 
nature of public calls for service to police and how ofcers spend their 
time, or questions of whether the police should or can efectively fght 
crime, the conclusion is that none of these have been efective at bringing 
policing into the 21st century. But there is a question Reiner does not 
ask. That is, who decides what (largely hidden) knowledge is handed 
down from police ofcer to police ofcer, in efect, shoring up the insti­
tutionalisation of a way of working that perpetuates and excludes or 
diminishes the benefts of peace, access to law, and use of law for some 
people? We assert that this question is relevant to our study of the polic­
ing of sexual violence. Whether and how the police protect society from 
perpetrators of sexual violence and safeguard those disproportionately 
raped – women – can no longer remain at the periphery of our discus­
sions of policing. While we may not yet have answers, what is evident is 
that when such questions are asked, the excluded and the marginalised 
demand a seat at the table to defne ways of providing safety and secu­
rity in a democratic society. 
Ultimately, any transformation of default policing requires public 
trust to be baked into the solutions. The outcry about the way in which 
the police have managed male violence against women developed at 
pace following the Everard murder. The justice gap for rape and other 
sexual ofences became even more indicative of the ills of today’s police. 
The outcry of how women were being raped, abused, and ignored in 
law became louder by the day. It was harder as a senior police ofcer 
to say, “Trust me, I’m a police ofcer.” Yet the introspection into the 
police organisation remained opaque. Day after day, new examples 
come to light of predatory police ofcers and faulty decision-making. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28 “Default policing” 
The institution of policing remains notoriously resistant to change. 
Bayley (1994: 148) observed that “police organisations do not adapt 
to the work they must do. Rather, the work they must do is adapted 
to the police organisation”. Similarly, Savage (2003) argues that polic­
ing is reform resistant and has succeeded in frustrating attempts of 
major reform and subverting modernisation eforts. He concludes that 
police forces have seen the least change in terms of their governance and 
accountability compared to any other part of the public sector. If the 
police service is to meet the challenge women’s trust in the police has put 
to it, it must begin to embrace, not frustrate, transformational change. 
Conclusion 
Default policing has not developed with rape and other forms of male 
violence against women in mind. As a result, policing is neither designed 
to prevent or criminally investigate rape, nor does it measure its success 
in women’s safety from sexual violence. Low rape prosecution rates and 
poor victim-survivor experiences have become a problem for policing 
because they are now challenging the foundation of efective policing: 
public trust in the police and public perceptions of the police as legitimate 
authority holders. Improving how police respond to rape and other forms 
of sexual violence requires resetting default policing with and for women. 
Our modern policing system was designed by white, Victorian, upper-
class men to serve the interests of men like them. It emerged within the 
colonial context of the British Empire with a focus on controlling native 
populations and enslaved people and, in England, controlling the working 
classes and preserving order in public spaces within fast-growing industrial 
towns and cities. The safety of women, and in particular ethnic minori­
tised women, was an afterthought, outside the default zone of policing 
for most of policing history. For rape victim-survivors, the consequences 
of this are police services not ft for rape law enforcement and not set up 
with the interests of rape victim-survivors at heart. This chapter outlined 
a series of empirical facts about policing today: the number of rapes and 
men committing rape far outstrips police capacity to prosecute them all. 
The police contribution to the prevention of rape is minimal. The selec­
tive (under-)enforcement of rape ofending is systematically infuenced by 
societal prejudice and stereotypes, including rape myths and racism. Most 
rapes take place in domestic settings, away from the public spaces that 
remain the primary default focus of policing. The results are rape prosecu­
tion rates lower than the prosecution rates for any other crime type and 
poor rape victim-survivor experiences of the police process, particularly 
for victim-survivors from minoritised backgrounds. 

 
  
  
“Default policing” 29 
Improving the police response to rape requires a transformational 
shift in whose peace we are asking the police to keep. Existing insti­
tutional arrangements of policing appear unable to deliver sustainable 
change to practice. Shifting policing requires cutting to its core. This 
requires scholars to look beyond the role of rape myths and stereotypes 
as the sole drivers of the justice gap in sexual ofences to consider how 
their efects are compounded by default policing. Rape is a relationship-
based crime often committed by men in positions of power over their 
victims. As such, rape is enabled by existing power relationships and 
structures within a patriarchal society (more on this in Chapter 3). To 
challenge rape is to challenge social order. Making rape a priority in 
police practice would constitute a de facto change to the police man­
date. To truly protect the public in a democratic society against crime 
requires policing to embrace gender and race equality. The remainder of 
this book sets out our approach to the transformation of rape investiga­
tion. It begins by focusing rape investigations on the suspect’s ofending 
behaviour. 
Notes 
1 This is now changing rapidly. In 2023, 40% of Chief Constables in 
England and Wales are female, according to a Telegraph press article 
published in 2023 (Hymas, 2023). 
2 Personal observation during a historic cold case review in one Eng­
lish police force. 
References 
Adler, Z. (1987). Rape on trial. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Banton, M. (1964). The policeman in the community. London: Tavistock. 
Bayley, D.H. (1994). Police for the future. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press. 
Bittner, E. (1970). The function of the police. Rockville: Center for Stud­
ies of Crime and Delinquency, National Institute of Mental Health. 
Bittner, E. (1974). Florence Nightingale in pursuit of Willie Sutton: A 
theory of the police. In H. Jacob (Ed.) The potential for reform of 
criminal justice, Sage criminal justice system annuals. Beverly Hills: 
Sage Publications, 17–44. 
Bittner, E. (1990). Aspects of police work. Boston: Northeastern Uni­
versity Press. 
Bowling, B. (1999). The rise and fall of New York murder: Zero tol­
erance or crack’s decline? British Journal of Criminology, 39(4): 
531–554. 
Bowling, B. and Phillips, C. (2002). Racism, crime and justice. Harlow: 
Longman. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
30 “Default policing” 
Bowling, B., Reiner, R. and Sheptycki, J. (2019). Politics of the police. 
5th ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Bradford, B. (2016). The dog that never quite barked: Social identity 
and the persistence of police legitimacy. In M. Bosworth, C. Hoyle 
and L. Zedner (Eds.) Changing contours of criminal justice. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 29–41. 
Bradford, B. and Myhill, A. (2015). Triggers of change to public con­
fdence in the police and criminal justice system: Findings from the 
Crime Survey for England and Wales panel experiment. Criminology & 
Criminal Justice, 15(1): 23–43. 
Brodeur, J.-P. (2010). The policing web. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Brownmiller, S. (1975). Against our will: Men, women and rape. New 
York: Bantam. 
Casey, L. (2023). Baroness Casey Review fnal report: March 2023. 
Available at: www.met.police.uk/SysSiteAssets/media/downloads/ 
met/about-us/baroness-casey-review/update-march-2023/baroness­
casey-review-march-2023a.pdf 
Clark, D. (2023a). Number of crime ofences in England and Wales 2002– 
2023. Statista. Available at: www.statista.com/statistics/283069/ 
crimes-in-england-and-wales/ 
Clark, D. (2023b). Number of police ofcers in the UK 2003–2022. 
Statista. Available at: www.statista.com/statistics/303963/uk-police­
ofcer-numbers/ 
College of Policing (2015). College of policing analysis: Estimating 
demand on the police service. Available at: https://paas-s3-broker­
prod-lon-6453d964-1d1a-432a-9260-5e0ba7d2fc51.s3.eu-west-2. 
amazonaws.com/s3fs-public/2021-03/demand-on-policing-report.pdf 
Crenshaw, K. (1991). Demarginalising the intersection of race and sex: 
A Black feminist critique of antidiscrimination doctrine, feminist 
theory, and antiracist politics. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Crown Prosecution Service (2023). CPS data summary Quarter 4 
2022–2023. Available at: www.cps.gov.uk/publication/cps-data­
summary-quarter-4-2022-2023 
Davis, M. (2022). Sarah Everard’s murder was a ‘watershed moment for 
women’s safety that was wasted’. The Independent. 27 February. Avail­
able at: www.independent.co.uk/news/uk/sarah-everard-government­
cressida-dick-metropolitan-police-london-b2024216.html 
Day, A.S. and McBean, S.O. (2022). Abolition revolution. London: 
Pluto Press. 
Delsol, M. and Shiner, M. (Eds.) (2015). Stop and search: The anatomy 
of police power. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. 
DSD and NBV v Commissioner of Police for the Metropolis (2014). 
EWHC 436 (QB). Royal Courts of Justice. Available at: www.judiciary. 
uk/wp-content/uploads/JCO/Documents/Judgments/dsd-and-nbv-v­
met-police.pdf 
Emsley, C. (2013). Peel’s principles, police principles. In P. Dick, M. Sil­
vestri and L. Westmarland (Eds.) The future of policing. Abingdon: 
Routledge, 41–52. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Default policing” 31 
Evans, E.J. (2006). Sir Robert Peel: Statesmanship, power and party. 
2nd ed. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Femicide Census (2022). Femicide census 2020. Available at: www.femici 
decensus.org/wp-content/uploads/2022/02/010998-2020-Femicide­
Report_V2.pdf 
Fleetwood, J. and Lea, J. (2022). Defunding the police in the UK: Criti­
cal questions and practical suggestions. The Howard Journal of 
Crime and Justice, 61(2): 167–184. 
Fulford, A.B. (2021). Wayne Couzens sentencing remarks. 30 September 
2021 Central Criminal Court. Available at: www.judiciary.uk/wp­
content/uploads/2021/09/Wayne-Couzens-Sentencing-Remarks.pdf 
Goldsmith, A. and McLaughlin, E. (2022). Policing’s new vulnerability: 
Re-envisioning local accountability in an era of global outrage. The 
British Journal of Criminology, 62(3): 716–733. 
Goldstein, H. (1979). Improving policing: A problem-oriented approach. 
Crime & Delinquency, 25(2): 236–258. 
Gregory, J. and Lees, S. (1996). Attrition in rape and sexual assault 
cases. British Journal of Criminology, 36(1): 1–17. 
Gregory, J. and Lees, S. (1999). Policing sexual assault. Abingdon: 
Routledge. 
Harkin, D. (2014). The police and punishment: Understanding the pains 
of policing. Theoretical Criminology, 19(1): 43–58. 
Hasan, M. (2021). Racist bullying of BAME (Black and Asian Minority 
Ethnic) women within police services in England: Race, gender and 
police culture. International Journal of Police Science & Manage­
ment, 23(2): 182–195. 
Hattenstone, S. and Allison, E. (2018). Nick Hardwick: ‘I’m not over­
joyed that my career has been sacrifced for John Worboys’. The 
Guardian. 
Available 
at: 
www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2018/ 
jun/02/nick-hardwick-im-not-overjoyed-that-my-career-has-been­
sacrifced-for-john-worboys 
HM Inspectorate of Constabulary (2014). Derbyshire Constabulary’s 
approach to tackling domestic abuse. Available at: https://assets­
hmicfrs.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/uploads/2014/03/derbyshire­
approach-to-tackling-domestic-abuse.pdf 
HM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire & Rescue Services (2018). 
Policing and mental health: Picking up the pieces. Available at: www. 
justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmicfrs/wp-content/uploads/policing­
and-mental-health-picking-up-the-pieces.pdf 
HM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire & Rescue Services (2019). 
The police response to domestic abuse: An update report. Available at: 
www.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/hmicfrs/wp-content/uploads/the­
police-response-to-domestic-abuse-an-update-report.pdf 
HM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire & Rescue Services (2021). 
State of policing – The annual assessment of policing in England and 
Wales 2021. Available at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/ 
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fle/1076309/ 
State-of-policing-2021-1-single-page.pdf 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32 “Default policing” 
HM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire & Rescue Services (2022). 
Police perpetrated domestic abuse: Report on the Centre for Women’s Jus­
tice super-complaint. Available at: www.gov.uk/government/publications/ 
police-super-complaints-force-response-to-police-perpetrated-domestic­
abuse/police-perpetrated-domestic-abuse-report-on-the-centre-for­
womens-justice-super-complaint 
Hohl, K. and Stanko, E.A. (2015). Complaints of rape and the 
criminal justice system: Fresh evidence on the attrition problem 
in England and Wales. European Journal of Criminology, 12(3): 
324–341. 
Hohl, K., Stanko, B. and Newburn, T. (2013). The efect of the 2011 
London disorder on public opinion of police and attitudes towards 
crime, disorder, and sentencing. Policing: A Journal of Policy and 
Practice, 7(1): 12–20. 
Home Ofce (2022a). Crime outcomes in England and Wales 2021 to 2022. 
Available at: www.gov.uk/government/statistics/crime-outcomes-in­
england-and-wales-2021-to-2022/crime-outcomes-in-england-and­
wales-2021-to-2022 
Home Ofce (2022b). Police powers and procedures: Stop and search and 
arrests, England and Wales, year ending 31 March 2021. Available at: 
www.gov.uk/government/statistics/police-powers-and-procedures­
stop-and-search-and-arrests-england-and-wales-year-ending­
31-march-2021 
Hough, M. and Mayhew, P. (1983). The British Crime Survey: First report. 
Home Ofce research study 76. London: HM Stationary Ofce. 
Hoyle, C. (1998). Negotiating domestic violence. Oxford: Oxford Uni­
versity Press. 
Hymas, C. (2023). Record 40 per cent of chief constables are now 
women amid anti-misogyny drive. The Telegraph. 9 January. Avail­
able at: www.telegraph.co.uk/news/2023/01/09/record-40-per-cent­
chief-constables-now-women-amid-anti-misogyny/ 
Jackson, J. and Bradford, B. (2009). Crime, policing and social order: 
On the expressive nature of public confdence in policing. The British 
Journal of Sociology, 60(3): 493–521. 
Jackson, J., Bradford, B., Stanko, B. and Hohl, K. (2013). Just authority? 
Trust in the police in England and Wales. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Jordan, J. (2022). Women, rape and justice: Unravelling the rape conun­
drum. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Karim, F. (2021). Sarah Everard vigil: I was arrested for standing 
there, says Patsy Stevenson. The Times. 15 March. Available at: 
www.thetimes.co.uk/article/sarah-everard-vigil-arrest-interview­
8tkn50dgs 
Killingray, D. (1991). Guarding the extending frontier: Policing the 
Gold Coast, 1865–1913. In D.M. Anderson and D. Killingray (Eds.) 
Policing the empire: Government, authority and control, 1830–1940. 
Manchester: Manchester University Press. 
Loader, I. (2016). Changing climates of control: The rise and fall of 
police authority in England & Wales. Changing Contours of Crimi­
nal Justice, 10(3): 427–440. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
“Default policing” 33 
Loader, I. (2020). Revisiting the police mission: Insights Paper 2. The 
PoliceFoundation. Available at: www.policingreview.org.uk/wp-content/ 
uploads/insight_paper_2.pdf 
Loader, I. and Mulcahy, A. (2003). Policing and the condition of England: 
Memory, politics and culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Loftus, B. (2010). Police occupational culture: Classic themes, altered 
times. Policing and Society, 20(1): 1–20. 
Lovett, J., Hales, G., Kelly, L., Vera-Gray, F., Uzelac, G., Buil-Gil, D. and 
Myhill, A. (2022). Appendix 11 – data and performance. In Operation 
Soteria Bluestone year 1 report 2021–2022, 155–177. Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/ 
uploads/attachment_data/file/1128688/E02836356_Operation_ 
Soteria_Y1_report_Accessible.pdf 
Manning, P.K. (1977). Police work. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology Press. 
Marenin, O. (1982). Parking tickets and class repression: The concept of 
policing in critical theories of criminal justice. Contemporary Crises, 
6(3): 241–266. 
McElhone, M., Kemp, T., Lamble, S. and Moore, J.M. (2023). Defund – 
not defend – the police: A response to Fleetwood and Lea. The How­
ard Journal of Crime and Justice, 62(2): 277–282. 
McGlynn, C. (2022). Challenging anti-carceral feminism: Criminalisa­
tion, justice and continuum thinking. Women’s Studies International 
Forum, 93: 102614. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wsif.2022.102614 
Metropolitan Police (2022).Choose a career most people only see on screen. 
YouTube. Available at: www.youtube.com/watch?v=JKU4WwBItCY 
Metropolitan Police (2023a). Introduction of right care, right person model. 
Available at: www.met.police.uk/notices/met/introduction-right­
care-right-person-model/ 
Metropolitan Police (2023b). Senior management team. Available at: 
www.met.police.uk/police-forces/metropolitan-police/areas/ 
about-us/about-the-met/senior-management-team/ 
Ministry of Justice (2008). Arrests for recorded crime (notifable ofences) 
and the operation of certain police powers under PACE England and 
Wales 2006/07. Available at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/ 
media/5a7c5016e5274a1b00422ea6/arrests-recorded-crime-engl­
wales-2006-07-b.pdf 
Ministry of Justice (2010). Criminal statistics: England and Wales 2009 
statistics bulletin. Available at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/ 
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fle/217947/ 
criminal-statistics-annual.pdf 
Myhill, A. (2019). Renegotiating domestic violence: Police attitudes and 
decisions concerning arrest. Policing and Society, 29(1): 52–68. 
Myhill, A., Johnson, K., McNeill, A., Critchfeld, E. and Westmarland, 
N. (2023). ‘A genuine one usually sticks out a mile’: Policing coercive 
control in England and Wales. Policing and Society, 33(4): 398–413. 
Newburn, T. (Eds.) (2008). Handbook of policing. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Ofce for National Statistics (2020). Domestic abuse and the crimi­
nal justice system, England and Wales. Available at: www.ons. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34 “Default policing” 
gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/articles/ 
domesticabuseandthecriminaljusticesystemenglandandwales/ 
november2020 
Ofce for National Statistics (2022). Crime in England and Wales: 
Year ending September 2021. Available at: www.ons.gov.uk/ 
peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/bulletins/ 
crimeinenglandandwales/yearendingseptember2021 
Reiner, R. (2010). The politics of the police. 4th ed. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Reiner, R. (2015). Revisiting the classics: Three seminal founders of 
the study of policing: Michael Banton, Jerome Skolnick and Egon 
Bittner. Policing and Society, 25(3): 308–327. 
Rumney, P.N. and McPhee, D. (2023). Vulnerability, resilience, and 
rape: Uncovering the hidden work of police ofcers during rape 
investigations. International Review of Victimology, 29(3): 366–384. 
Savage, S. (2003). Tackling tradition: Reform and modernisation of the 
British police. Contemporary Politics, 9(2): 171–184. 
Sinclair, L. (2021). Wayne Couzens nicknamed ‘the rapist’ three years 
before he was hired by Met. The Standard. 10 July. Available at: 
www.standard.co.uk/news/crime/wayne-couzens-nickname-met­
police-sarah-everard-b945119.html 
Skolnick, J.H. (1966). Justice without trial: Law enforcement in a demo­
cratic society. New York: John Wiley and Sons Inc. 
Stanko, E.A. (1985). Intimate intrusions: Women’s experience of male 
violence. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Temkin, J. (1999). Reporting rape in London: A qualitative study. The 
Howard Journal of Criminal Justice, 38(1): 17–41. 
Temkin, J. and Krahé, B. (2008). Sexual assault and the justice gap: A 
question of attitude. Oxford: Hart Publishing. 
Thacher, D. (2022). Shrinking the police footprint. Criminal Justice Ethics, 
41(1): 1–24. 
Waddington, P. (1999). Police (canteen) sub-culture: An appreciation. 
British Journal of Criminology, 39(2): 287–309. 
Ward, V. and McTaggart, I. (2021). Scotland Yard urge women to ‘wave 
down a bus’ if they are concerned about being approached by a lone male 
ofcer. The Telegraph. 1 October. Available at: www.telegraph.co.uk/ 
news/2021/10/01/call-999-have-doubts-police-ofcer-says-minister/ 
Weinberger, B. (2016). The best police in the world: An oral history of 
English policing from the 1930s to the 1960s. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Wunsch, D., Davies, T. and Charleton, B. (2021). The London rape review 
2021. Mayor of London Ofce for Policing and Crime. Available at: 
www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/fles/fnal_rr_victimtech_61221.pdf 
YouGov (2023). Public opinion trace on the question ‘Are the police 
doing a good job?’, May 2023. Available at: https://yougov.co.uk/ 
topics/legal/trackers/are-the-police-doing-a-good-job 
Zimring, F.E. (2011). The city that became safe: New York’s lessons for 
urban crime and its control. New York: Oxford University Press. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
DITCHING BLIND SPOTS 
AND RED HERRINGS 
Suspect-focused investigations 
Introduction 
To be fair and efective, rape investigations must centre on the suspect’s 
actions and behaviour surrounding an alleged rape, rather than on judg­
ing the victim-survivor against common rape myths and misconcep­
tions. We propose a suspect-focused principle for rape investigations 
as a mechanism to overcome some of the well-documented biases and 
failures. Existing research has consistently revealed an over-focus on the 
victim-survivor within investigations, driven by myths and stereotypes 
about how “real victims” behave during or after a “real rape” (see Jor­
dan, 2022; Horvath and Brown, 2022 for reviews). In this chapter, we 
propose that curiosity about and expert knowledge of sexual ofend­
ing behaviour allows investigators to pivot away from over-focusing on 
victim-survivor credibility and towards scrutiny of those responsible for 
sexual ofending: perpetrators. We begin by examining the current crim­
inal justice practices of testing victim-survivor credibility against rape 
myths and stereotypes. We show that suspects are a blind spot in rape 
investigations. Shifting to suspect-focused investigations is a cornerstone 
of resetting the default police approach to rape investigations. 
A large body of research documents the reasons why the vast major­
ity of investigations do not result in a suspect being charged, in the UK 
and around the globe (Lovett and Kelly, 2009; Daly and Bouhours, 
2010; Gangoli and Westmarland, 2011; FitzGerald and Skilbrei, 2022). 
There is research identifying the factors that play into ofcer decision-
making in the case, for example, whether the victim-survivor has 
previously reported a rape, has a mental health condition, or is in a rela­
tionship with the suspect (Walker et al., 2021; Hohl and Stanko, 2015; 
Kelly et al., 2005), as well as what makes a victim-survivor credible in 
the eyes of investigators (Jordan, 2004; O’Neal, 2019). Most scholars 
agree that rape myths and misconceptions are shaping judgements of 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429444869-3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 Ditching blind spots and red herrings 
victim-survivor credibility and afecting case outcomes. A near-universal 
recommendation of the academic work and the government-commissioned 
reports is that ofcers should receive training on rape myths and miscon­
ceptions to counter their apparent infuence on criminal justice decision-
making. However, there is little evidence that such training has resulted 
in better investigations or improved justice outcomes (see Chapter 6). 
Telling ofcers what not to believe, think, or do regarding rape myths 
and stereotypes is a weak intervention. In this chapter, we build on 
existing literature but propose a further avenue through which to work 
towards unbiased, fair, and efective rape investigations. 
Out of 100 rapes recorded by the police in the UK, less than two will 
result in a suspect being convicted (ONS, 2018). Given that false allega­
tions of rape are rare (CPS, 2013), the low conviction rate suggests that 
a large number of guilty suspects walk free. Such failures in law enforce­
ment have grave consequences. Perpetrators can become emboldened by 
a cursory police investigation that signals to them that they are untouch­
able and have no reason to fear the police (Godenzi, 1994; Chopin et al., 
2020). Some victim-survivors of ongoing sexual violence report their 
perpetrator laughing in their face because ofcers did not believe them, 
just as the perpetrator had said they would not. Perpetrators then use 
this to further imprint on the victim-survivor that no one will believe 
them. Victim-survivors describe how this adds to their sense of worth­
lessness and hopelessness that they could ever escape the abuse (Hohl 
et al., 2023). Poor investigations can make victim-survivors feel disbe­
lieved, devalued, or even blamed for what happened to them. To victim-
survivors, it is extremely important that ofcers look at all the evidence, 
do all they can to stop the perpetrator, and that the investigation process 
shows the perpetrator that their actions were wrong (Hohl et al., 2023). 
What is more, perpetrators learn from failed police investigations and 
use this knowledge to avoid future detection (Beauregard and Bouchard, 
2010). Fair and efective investigations are essential because failure to 
place thorough scrutiny on the suspect increases the risk of further harm 
to victim-survivors. 
The problems of low prosecution rates and inefective police inves­
tigations are well documented, as are their roots in rape myths and 
stereotypes and the ensuing consequences for victim-survivors and for 
societies in which rape is de facto decriminalised (Hohl and Stanko, 
2015; Victims’ Commissioner, 2020). In this chapter, we propose a shift 
in thinking that may unlock a route to improved police investigations. 
We begin by evidencing how a victim-survivor credibility focus, fed by 
rape myths and misconceptions, has become entrenched in police inves­
tigations. Then, we show how this creates a critical blind spot in the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ditching blind spots and red herrings 37 
investigation where suspects receive insufcient scrutiny and sometimes 
no scrutiny at all. We reveal how some suspects beneft more than oth­
ers from this investigative blind spot, with cultural and racial stereo­
types playing a role. We propose a way forward through suspect-focused 
investigations, which are bound by a human rights legal framework and 
underpinned by evidence-based knowledge of the psychology of sexual 
ofending. It is the application of such specialist knowledge within the 
police investigation process that is the antidote to the infuence of rape 
myths and misconceptions. 
Red herrings: victim-survivor credibility as the frst 
and main site of police investigative focus 
Rape and sexual ofences difer from other crimes in that the victim­
survivor’s state of mind – whether or not they were consenting or able 
to consent to sexual activity – is a point to prove within the legal case. 
The current defnition of rape in English law is set out in the SOA 2003 
and has three components. The frst is the intentional penetration of the 
vagina, anus, or mouth with a penis. In cases involving adult victims, that 
sexual activity took place is often uncontested and the least challenging 
element of the investigation. More difculty is typically involved in estab­
lishing the two additional conditions necessary to meet the legal defnition 
of rape: the victim’s lack of consent or lack of ability to freely consent, and 
the suspect’s reasonable belief of the victim’s consent or ability to consent 
(Temkin and Krahé, 2008). As such, the legal defnition of rape necessi­
tates an examination of some facts of the case that pertain to the victim-
survivor. There is a clear legal framework and guidance regarding directly 
relevant, proportionate, and reasonable lines of enquiry in rape investiga­
tions (CPS, 2023). Sexual history evidence has been a battleground for 
feminist challenges on what constitutes directly relevant lines of enquiry, 
and many hard-fought debates have led to a change in legal guidance to 
limit its use in rape trials. However, scholars still fnd these guidelines 
are easily and routinely circumvented in practice (Smith, 2018; McG­
lynn, 2017; Herriott, 2023). More recently, police and Crown Prosecu­
tion Service (CPS) requests for disclosure of victim-survivors’ counselling 
notes have become visible examples of investigations leaning into victim-
survivors’ lives, and where the question of what counts as directly relevant, 
proportionate, and reasonable is highly contested. The women’s sector 
is campaigning for legal changes that would mean counselling notes are 
only requested in exceptional circumstances (Rape Crisis, 2023). What 
is more, it is not in fact the role of the police to judge the credibility of 
a victim-survivor’s account, or that of any other witness, or even that of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
38 Ditching blind spots and red herrings 
the suspect for that matter. In the English legal system, the role of the 
police is to unearth all relevant evidentiary material, not to judge it. It is 
for the Crown Prosecutor to assess that evidence when deciding whether 
or not to charge a suspect, and it is for the court to judge the credibility 
of the accounts of the victim(s), witness(es), and the accused (Temkin and 
Krahé, 2008). While the law allows or even requires investigation of the 
victim-survivor’s state of mind – their consent or ability to freely consent – 
these enquiries have legal boundaries and do not justify what is currently 
the norm in rape investigations: victim-survivor credibility as the frst and 
sometimes only site of the police investigation. 
Rape myths and misconceptions shape 
the victim-survivor credibility focus 
Criminal investigations routinely over-reach legal boundaries and over-
focus on the credibility of the victim-survivor’s account beyond what is 
justifed by rape law and statutory guidance. This results in rape victim-
survivors feeling that they, rather than the perpetrator, are the suspect 
under investigation and on trial (Gregory and Lees, 1999; Jordan, 2004; 
Kelly, 2010; Brooks-Hay et al., 2019; Smith, 2018). The investigation 
of the credibility of the victim-survivor often takes the form of scruti­
nising so-called third-party material, including, for example, the victim­
survivor’s social service records, counselling notes, school and medical 
records, alongside the contents of their mobile phone, other digital devices, 
and social media accounts. Such requests are often disproportionate and 
stretch well beyond what is directly relevant to the case (Murphy et al., 
2022; Victims’ Commissioner, 2019). The evidential value of such victim-
related material is often low, yet the impact on victim-survivors is pro­
found. The prosecution must notify the suspect of all evidentiary material 
they intend to rely on in the prosecution as well as all unused material. 
This rule is essential for a fair trial, but it comes at a cost to victim-
survivors. It means the suspect may gain sight of highly personal and 
intimate information relating to the victim-survivor if such has been col­
lected by the police (Rumney and McPhee, 2021). In many police forces, 
frontloading the investigation of the credibility of the victim-survivor 
as a witness is hardwired into police organisational processes and takes 
place long before a suspect is interviewed – if ofcers interview them at all 
(Hohl et al., 2022). Such practices result in victim-survivors, not suspects, 
becoming the primary focus of the investigation. 
Rape myths and stereotypes – more recently termed rape miscon­
ceptions and assumptions – are often considered to be the driving force 
behind such over-focus on victim-survivors. It is thought that these myths 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ditching blind spots and red herrings 39 
and misconceptions activate when ofcers form judgements on whether 
complaints of rape are truthful and indeed a criminal ofence. Smith (2018) 
provides a useful thematic grouping of rape myths falling into four catego­
ries: beliefs that efectively blame the victim-survivor (e.g. getting drunk, 
dressing provocatively, firting with a man who later sexually assaults 
them); beliefs that cast doubt on the allegations (e.g. delayed reporting, 
ongoing contact with the perpetrator, the belief that most rape allegations 
are false and that women claim to have been raped out of revenge, jeal­
ousy, or regret of what was consensual sex at the time); beliefs that excuse 
the accused (e.g. rape as crime of passion, uncontrollable male sexuality 
once ignited); and beliefs that assume rape only occurs in certain groups 
(e.g. male rape only happens to gay men). 
A further example of such misconceptions is that rape only occurs 
between strangers and that if the victim-survivor and the perpetrator 
are in an ongoing relationship, this does not really constitute rape. Or 
if the victim-survivor stays in the relationship or engages in consensual 
sex with the accused after the alleged rape, then it cannot really have 
been rape, so the misconception goes (Russell, 1982; Finkelhor and Yllö, 
1985; Campbell, 1989; Wiener, 2023; Areh et al., 2009; Yllö and Torres, 
2016). Yet the legal defnition of rape (SOA, 2003) makes no mention of 
the relationship between the ofender and the victim. In law, it is irrele­
vant to the question of whether or not the accused is guilty of an ofence 
of rape. In practice, the victim-perpetrator relationship matters tremen­
dously for criminal justice outcomes. One in three police-recorded rapes 
takes place in the context of domestic abuse. Operation Soteria Blue-
stone research found that while the charge rate for rapes perpetrated by 
complete strangers was 8.2%, this fell to 3.4% where the suspect had 
recently met the victim-survivor, and to only 1.2% where the suspect 
was a current or former intimate partner (Lovett et al., 2022b). Such 
rape myths, coupled with a lack of understanding of sexual ofending 
behaviour in general and sexual ofending in the context of domestic 
abuse in particular, can lead ofcers to over-focus on the credibility of 
the victim-survivor’s account for their actions before, during, and after 
the alleged rape. They can lead to ofcers failing to look for evidence of 
perpetrator actions that may be proof of their manipulation, coercion, 
and control of the victim-survivor, that is, actions capable of removing 
the victim-survivor’s freedom and choice to engage in sexual activity. 
Rape myths can also blind ofcers to evidence that the perpetrator could 
not have reasonably believed the victim-survivor was consenting, given 
he knowingly and deliberately took steps to remove the victim-survivor’s 
freedom and choice through the use of threats, coercion, and a wider 
web of controlling behaviours (Wiener, 2023; Stark, 2007; Hamilton 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
40 Ditching blind spots and red herrings 
and Tidmarsh, 2022). Myths and misconceptions become a red her­
ring of the rape investigation. There is a vast literature exploring rape 
myths and misconceptions, assumptions and stereotypes, and evidenc­
ing their impact on criminal justice decision-making (Kelly et al., 2005; 
Temkin and Krahé, 2008; Brown and Horvath, 2009; Jordan, 2004, 
2022; Parrat and Pina, 2017; Shaw et al., 2017; O’Neal, 2019; Smith, 
2018; Ellison and Munro, 2009). Some recent studies have found rela­
tively low levels of rape myth acceptance among ofcers and are more 
cautious about strong causal claims of their direct impact on decision-
making (Sleath and Bull, 2017; Hine and Murphy, 2019). However, 
these studies focus on how rape myth acceptance operates on the level 
of individual ofcers’ beliefs. Rape myths may however also infuence 
decision-making in less direct, mechanical ways, for example through a 
downstream orientation in investigator decision-making. 
Downstream orientation and denial of agency 
There is some evidence that ofcers who do not personally hold rape 
myths may still be infuenced by them in their decision-making. In 
2015/16, Hohl conducted a study of RASSO ofcers’ perception of 
decision-making in rape cases (Hohl, 2016). As part of the study, Hohl 
conducted semi-structured interviews with a random probability sample 
of 20 ofcers working in the specialist rape investigation units of a large 
police force in England. The sample included ofcers of Detective Inspec­
tor, Detective Sergeant, Detective Constable, Sexual Ofences Investiga­
tive Trained (SOIT) ofcer, and Police Constable Investigator rank/role. 
A core theme emerging from the interviews was ofcers’ articulation of 
what might be called an enlightened understanding of rape. These ofc­
ers named a large variety of rape myths and stereotypes, declared them 
inaccurate, and expressed heartfelt sympathy for rape victim-survivors. 
In the interviews, almost all ofcers showed an acute awareness of some 
victim-survivors’ complex lives and explained that perpetrator(s) look 
for and exploit certain vulnerabilities. These ofcers often also asserted 
that they thought very few rape complaints were false. Virtually all of 
these ofcers went on to say that while they personally do not believe 
rape myths, prosecutors and juries did – and that they are the ultimate 
decision-makers calling the shots. Senior ofcers lamented that their 
success was measured in prosecution rates and that their performance 
metrics are penalised if they take too many chances in putting “weak” 
or “borderline” cases to the CPS, de facto discouraging them from 
sending anything but the most robust cases to the CPS for a charging 
decision. Further, ofcers emphasised that their focus on investigating 

 
 
 
 
 
Ditching blind spots and red herrings 41 
victim-survivor credibility and their requests for third-party material 
was driven by the CPS. The CPS can return a case fle to the police 
with an action plan requesting further evidence to be collected before a 
charging decision can be made, delaying the case and creating additional 
work for ofcers. To avoid case fles being returned with an action plan, 
investigators would pre-emptively request all available third-party mate­
rials and carry out extensive digital downloads from victim-survivors’ 
electronic devices, regardless of whether they thought it necessary, pro­
portionate, or relevant to the case. Another study found that ofcers 
were seemingly unaware that they could challenge the CPS prosecutor if 
they felt the request was disproportionate or not directly relevant to the 
case (Gekoski et al., 2023). In sum, ofcers denied personally believing 
rape myths but said they felt their hand forced by the CPS and courts 
who make decisions on victim-survivor credibility further down the line. 
A large body of literature evidences this downstream orientation in 
ofcer decision-making and how this feeds a vicious cycle of attrition – 
police pre-emptively closing investigations because they anticipate a 
CPS prosecutor will not charge or a jury will not convict. This includes 
second-guessing the CPS prosecutors’ prediction of how a presumed 
biased jury might see the case. Each criminal justice agent is putting their 
understanding to one side to give priority to the presumed rape myths 
that infuence decision-making at the next stage in the criminal justice 
process (Munro and Kelly, 2013; Campbell et al., 2015). Paradoxically, 
when Hohl (2016) asked follow-up questions about whether ofcers felt 
that they could typically predict the jury verdict in any one case, most 
said that they could not: juries were unpredictable, they said. This fnd­
ing mirrors Sinclair’s (2022) study of 29 serving and retired ofcers. Sin­
clair exposes the fawed logic of investigators’ downstream orientation 
while at the same time saying that jury decisions are impossible to pre­
dict. This fnding is reminiscent of Sykes and Matza’s (1957) techniques 
of neutralisation. Techniques of neutralisation enable us to release 
cognitive dissonance, shame, or guilt from knowingly doing wrong. 
Ofcers blaming the victim-survivor credibility focus in their investiga­
tion on higher forces (in this case, the wider criminal justice system) is 
a technique of neutralisation. In doing so, ofcers deny responsibility 
for their actions, their action’s impact on case outcomes and victim-
survivors. Denial of inquiry or denial of victimhood is another technique 
of neutralisation. Examples of this involve ofcers resolving any feel­
ings of guilt for dropping rape cases by telling themselves (and others) 
the allegations are false anyway. These forms of denial allow a victim-
credibility focus to live on within investigations and permit ofcers to 
evade feeling responsible for it and denying their ability to change it. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
42 Ditching blind spots and red herrings 
Victim-survivor credibility as the frst port of call in rape investiga­
tions is well-evidenced. Standard investigative practices result in dis­
proportionate requests for victim-survivor third-party materials, digital 
devices, and counselling notes. Coupled with this is an assumption that 
within those materials could be found an answer to whether the victim-
survivor is telling the truth and whether the alleged incident meets 
the legal defnition of rape. It implies that the primary question is not 
whether sexual activity took place, whether the victim-survivor con­
sented, or whether the suspect could have reasonably believed that the 
victim-survivor consented (i.e. the three legs of the legal defnition of 
rape), but whether the victim-survivor can be believed in their naming 
the sexual activity as non-consensual. Rape myths and misconceptions 
fuel such a victim-survivor credibility focus, in particular those pertain­
ing to reasons why victim-survivors may be mistaken or lie outright. 
They also absolve perpetrators and switch the locus of responsibility 
onto victim-survivors. While the evidence on individual ofcers’ rape 
myths acceptance is mixed, arguably, it makes little diference whether 
these beliefs are held by ofcers personally or whether they infuence 
their decision-making through a collective downstream orientation. The 
outcome is the same. If the latter holds, however, it partially explains 
the persistence of the issue and why rape myth-busting training of indi­
vidual ofcers appears to be largely inefective (see Chapter 6). More 
importantly, this has profound implications for the quality and fairness 
of an investigation. The victim-survivor credibility focus is a red herring 
that draws the investigative focus away from the suspect’s behaviour. In 
efect, suspects have become the blind spot of rape investigations. 
Blind spots: how perpetrators are missing from 
rape investigations 
A suspect’s behaviour surrounding an alleged rape should be the focus 
of any criminal investigation. According to the Criminal Procedures and 
Investigations Act (CPIA) 1996 (Section 2.1): “a criminal investigation is 
an investigation conducted by police ofcers with a view to it being ascer­
tained whether a person should be charged with an ofence, or whether a 
person charged with an ofence is guilty of it”. In England and Wales, the 
College of Policing further sets standards for policing, including so-called 
Authorised Professional Practice (APP). The APP for investigations speci­
fes that “investigators conducting an investigation should impartially fol­
low all reasonable lines of enquiry to gather material which points both 
towards and away from a suspect” (College of Policing, 2022). Both the 
CPIA 1996 and College of Policing APP centre the police investigation 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ditching blind spots and red herrings 43 
and decision-making on the suspect. No mention is made of the victim(s). 
This may surprise many rape victim-survivors. As outlined above, wide-
ranging disclosure requests from police to access the victim-survivor’s 
third-party material and digital devices upon reporting to police set the 
tone for what is to come: intense scrutiny of all material pointing towards 
or away from the credibility of the victim-survivor. When it comes to 
police default practice, the focus of investigations centres on the cred­
ibility of the victim-survivor instead of where it ought to be, according 
to the CPIA 1996 and the College of Policing APP, on evidential material 
pointing towards and away from the suspect. 
Rape suspects occupy a relatively small space within rape investiga­
tions. Research undertaken as part of Operation Soteria Bluestone sug­
gests that suspect checks against police national databases were conducted 
in less than half of cases (Horvath et al., 2022). Further, case fle reviews 
and interviews with ofcers revealed that investigators did not always 
make links between diferent sexual ofence disclosures against the same 
suspect. This was especially so for suspects where previous sexual ofence 
disclosures had not resulted in the suspect being charged (the most com­
mon outcome of any sexual ofence investigation). Further, key investiga­
tive milestones for securing evidence pointing towards or away from the 
suspect were missed in half of the cases. For example, no forensic evi­
dence was obtained despite clear opportunities to do so, forensic samples 
were collected but never submitted for testing, or if tested, the results not 
recorded in the case fle. Evidence of ofender risk management activities 
was found in just one in ten cases (Horvath et al., 2022; Davies et al., 
2022). Operation Soteria Bluestone research further showed that the 
median time between a rape report and a suspect being interviewed was 
70 days (Lovett et al., 2022a), with no suspect interview being conducted 
in four out of ten cases (Horvath et al., 2022). Overall, these fndings 
point to a pattern of routinely missed opportunities and long delays in the 
investigation of evidentiary material relating to the suspect. 
What is more, ofcers do not always treat rape suspects like a sus­
pect in a serious violent crime investigation. In rape cases, suspects are 
often not formally arrested but instead invited for a voluntary inter­
view, or “a chat”, as one ofcer put it (Hohl et al., 2023). In a large sur­
vey of rape and sexual assault victim-survivors in England and Wales, 
some respondents recounted how ofcers appeared to have greater sym­
pathy for the suspect and were more concerned about the impact of the 
allegation on the suspect than they showed concern for the needs of the 
victim-survivor. Some respondents report that this way of interacting 
with rape suspects emboldened and empowered them to sexually abuse 
again (Hohl et al., 2023). This fnding chimes with research suggesting 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44 Ditching blind spots and red herrings 
that the more ofenders get away with their ofending, the more this 
reduces their perception of the risk of punishment (Paternoster and 
Piquero, 1995; Staford and Warr, 1993). Additionally, repeated police 
contact may make perpetrators more forensically aware (Beauregard 
and Bouchard, 2010), aiding perpetrators in evading ever having to 
have consequences for their actions in a criminal court. In sum, police 
interactions with rape suspects may have perverse consequences when 
ofcers do not conduct investigations in a manner that treats rape sus­
pects like crime suspects. 
Lack of suspect focus in research and ofcer 
learning and development 
Ofcers are not alone in paying comparatively little attention to per­
petrators of sexual violence. Academic studies on sexual violence, and 
specifcally on the police investigation of sexual ofences, have produced 
a far larger body of literature on victim-survivors than on perpetrators. 
A simple Google Scholar search conducted in October 2023 provides a 
crude indicator (see Table 3.1). The results suggest that for every 1 arti­
cle about rape and sexual assault ofenders, there are 1.3 articles on rape 
and sexual assault victim-survivors. Focusing on the police investigation 
of rape and sexual assault, the ratio tilts further to almost 18 publica­
tions about victim-survivors per 1 academic publication on suspects and 
the police investigation. Not only is there less research on sexual ofend­
ing behaviour, but the research that does exist is under-used in police 
training. The literature on sexual ofenders, while comparatively small, 
has produced a wealth of knowledge on those who sexually ofend 
that is directly relevant to ofcer training on sexual ofence investiga­
tions. This literature covers theories of motivations for ofending and 
sex ofender typologies (Lalumière et al., 2005; Seto, 2019; Robertiello 
and Terry, 2007; Godenzi, 1994); research on the onset, desistance and 
recidivism of sex ofending (Harris, 2021; McAlinden et al., 2017), in 
particular among adolescents (Seto and Lalumière, 2010); the efective­
ness of ofender intervention and rehabilitation programmes (Kim et al., 
2016); and perpetrator strategies for ofending, including strategies for 
keeping victim-survivors silent and covering up the ofending (Tidmarsh, 
2021). However, reviews of ofcer training and continuous professional 
development routinely show a near-complete absence of learning on 
sexual ofender behaviour and how to utilise this knowledge in rape and 
other sexual ofences investigations (Williams et al., 2022; see also Chap­
ter 6). Perpetrators remain in the margins of sexual violence research 
and a blind spot in sexual ofences investigative training. 

 
  
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ditching blind spots and red herrings 45 
TABLE 3.1 Google Scholar search results for perpetrator versus victim-related 
search terms 
Search term 
Victim versus 
Number of Victim to 
base 
suspect terms 
results 
suspect ratio 
rape OR sexual 
AND victims OR 
assault 
survivors OR 
victim-survivors 
ofenders OR 
perpetrators OR 
suspects 
rape OR sexual 
AND victims OR 
assault AND 
survivors OR 
police 
victim-survivors 
ofenders OR 
perpetrators OR 
suspects 
rape OR sexual 
AND victims OR 
assault AND 
survivors OR 
investigation 
victim-survivors 
ofenders OR 
perpetrators OR 
suspects 
810,000 
1.3 to 1 
629,000 
459,000 
19.4 to 1 
23,700 
448,000 
17.9 to 1 
25,200 
Perpetrators as blind spots as a societal issue 
Perpetrators of sexual violence are, however, very much a focus within 
feminist criminology. It is an uncontested empirical fact that the vast 
majority of sexual violence is perpetrated by men against women. 
From a feminist criminologist perspective, acts of male sexual violence 
against women are not isolated incidents but a pervasive manifestation 
of gender inequality. Feminists argue that rape and other forms of sex­
ual violence are tools used by men to maintain control and dominance 
over women, and some simply feel entitled to use women as objects for 
sexual gratifcation (Stanko, 1985; Brownmiller, 1975; Millet, 1970; 
Walklate, 1997). The feminist perspective emphasises the importance 
of acknowledging the power dynamics at play in sexual violence and 
highlights the role of societal norms, the objectifcation of women, and 
rape culture in the prevalence and persistence of sexual crimes. As such, 
shifting the locus of responsibility for sexual violence onto perpetrators 
has been a central tenant of the feminist argument of the past 50 years. 
A core plank of the argument is the absence of perpetrators from rape 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46 Ditching blind spots and red herrings 
prevention advice and strategies which are instead directed at women 
and what they must do to protect themselves (Stanko, 1997; Berrington 
and Jones, 2002; Brooks, 2011; McMillan and White, 2023). A promi­
nent example is the trope that women who get drunk on a night out 
only have themselves to blame if they are raped. It is only “common 
sense” for young women not to get excessively drunk and to “maintain 
control and respectability”, or if they really must drink to excess, to 
always buddy up with a sober friend to keep safe (Brooks, 2011; Finch 
and Munro, 2007). Similarly, self-defence courses and “anti-rape tech­
nology”, including rape alarms or bras and shorts that are difcult to 
remove, are marketed towards women. These examples illustrate how 
responsibility for sexual victimisation is both individualised and gen­
dered – it is up to each and every woman to keep herself safe, and she 
has only herself to blame if she fails to do so (Walklate, 1997). One 
antidote feminist campaigners have developed are adverts that place the 
focus and responsibility back onto those who commit sexual ofences. 
For example, the “10 Top Tips to End Rape” poster shown in Figure 
3.1. This puts the spotlight on the existing blind spot of mainstream 
rape prevention advice: the men who commit rape. 
Some categories of perpetrator are bigger blind spots than others. 
McMillan and White (2023), in their review of the range of sexual 
ofence prevention strategies, discuss not only the “invisible” but also the 
“imagined” perpetrator in mind when designing anti-rape technologies 
and self-defence courses, namely “stranger danger” attacks by unknown 
men in public places. In particular, this involves perpetrators whose 
modus operandi is to use surprise moments and force to overpower 
their victims. The imagined perpetrator is not the husband or father, 
family friend, boss, teacher, or medical professional the victim-survivor 
trusts or even depends on (Stanko, 1988). Media reporting perpetuates 
a certain image of rapists, portrayed as “perverts” and “monsters” with 
an out-of-control sex drive or sick sexual desires – essentially, outcasts 
of society. It is a depiction that places a reassuring distance between 
rapists and ordinary men (Mason and Monckton-Smith, 2008; Ryan, 
2011). Media reporting disproportionally covers cases in which the per­
petrator fts this stereotype. Everyday sexual violence of abusive part­
ners, family members, and men in positions of power and trust features 
less frequently, further reinforcing myths and stereotypes (Greer, 2012; 
O’Hara, 2012; Mack and McCann, 2021). Myths and stereotypes pro­
tect those who “don’t look like rapists” and are seemingly “nice guys” 
with “good jobs”, who are good-looking, white, successful, and well-
to-do, and who “don’t need to rape to have sex”. In police decision-
making, there is evidence that rape cases are more likely to be dropped 
if the suspect is not deemed a “credible criminal”: a white man with 

 
  
 
 
 
Ditching blind spots and red herrings 47 
FIGURE 3.1 “10 Top Tips to End Rape” poster by Rape Crisis Scotland. 
Reprinted with permission 
no prior criminal record. Research has shown that the police were less 
likely to dismiss a case when the suspect was of colour or had a prior 
police record (Hohl and Stanko, 2015; Nielsen et al., 2018). Some per­
petrators are, therefore, more likely to be out of the focus of police 
investigation and prosecution because rape myths, misconceptions, and 
racial stereotypes obscure our understanding of rapists. 
The suspect is the focus of a criminal investigation – except when the 
crime in question is a sex ofence. Then, victim-survivor credibility is the 
focus, while suspects often only receive cursory and delayed investigative 

 
 
 
 
48 Ditching blind spots and red herrings 
attention. At times this includes ofcer “himpathy” for rape suspects. 
Myths about rape and rapists, including racial stereotypes, protect some 
rapists more than others. Crucially, they shift the focus of suspicion, 
blame, and responsibility onto the victim-survivor. Ofcers are not alone 
in falling for the red herring of victim-survivor credibility and perpe­
trator blind spots: academic research, ofcer training, and “common 
sense” rape prevention advice all have more to say about the role of 
victim-survivors in sexual ofending than about those who commit it. 
Feminist analyses begin with the simple observation that perpetrators, 
not victim-survivors, are the ones who rape – and that most perpetrators 
are men. It is perpetrators who are responsible for their ofending and at 
whom we should direct our gaze when investigating rapes and design­
ing rape prevention strategies. The question that presents itself, then, is, 
how can we ditch the red herrings and blind spots to arrive at a fair and 
efective investigation of complaints of rape? 
The way forward: suspect-focused investigations 
Suspect-focused investigations begin where the ofending begins: with 
the ofender’s actions. Suspect-focused investigations examine the sus­
pect’s ofending behaviour as the primary site of interest. They impar­
tially follow relevant and proportionate lines of enquiry to gather 
evidentiary material that points away or towards the suspect, in line 
with the 1996 CPIA and the APP for investigations. Practically, this 
means asking questions about what happened before, during, and after 
the rape in a manner that centres on the suspect’s behaviour, not that of 
the victim-survivor. Here are some examples to illustrate the diferences: 
Victim-focused: Did the victim-survivor physically resist the rape? Are 
there injuries to prove it? 
Suspect-focused: Did the perpetrator take actions to manipulate or 
coerce the victim-survivor into a situation where they did not have the 
freedom or ability to not partake in or be subjected to sexual activity? 
Victim-focused: Was the victim-survivor laughing and smiling at the per­
petrator earlier in the evening, seeming firtatious and “up for it”? 
Suspect-focused: Is there evidence of perpetrator “love bombing”, groom­
ing, and manipulation relevant to the alleged rape that might explain 
victim-survivor behaviour prior to the rape? 
Victim-focused: Did the victim-survivor consume drugs or alcohol prior 
to the alleged ofence? 
Suspect-focused: Did the suspect insist on more alcohol, keep encourag­
ing the victim-survivor to drink more, or discreetly pour more drinks? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ditching blind spots and red herrings 49 
Victim-focused: Did the victim-survivor continue to message the perpe­
trator after the rape? Did they act as if nothing had happened? 
Suspect-focused: Who controls the relationship? Is there evidence of the 
suspect being in a position of power over the victim-survivor that 
would limit their freedom and ability to extract themselves from the 
relationship? Is there evidence of the perpetrator manipulating the vic­
tim-survivor into thinking and feeling they are responsible for what 
happened, or reframing the sexual assault as consensual? Did the 
suspect initiate communications continuing as before? 
Victim-focused: Has the victim-survivor previously reported a sexual 
assault to the police? Have they had episodes of mental ill-health, 
school absences, or social service involvement in the past? 
Suspect-focused: Has the suspect been reported to have sexually 
assaulted or attempted to sexually assault anyone before? Are there 
similarities in modus operandi? 
Such questions about the suspect’s behaviour provide pieces of a puzzle 
that tells a diferent story: the story of the protagonist of sexual ofend­
ing. Notice how victim-focused questions play on common myths and 
misconceptions about rape, whereas the suspect-focused questions 
derive from sexual ofending behaviour research. For rape and sexual 
ofences, such expert knowledge appears particularly important to 
counter rape myths and misconceptions. The remainder of this section 
seeks to illustrate how knowledge of the psychology of sexual ofending 
can change our interpretation of victim-survivor and suspect behaviour 
before, during, and after a rape. We lean heavily on Tidmarsh’s (2021) 
“Whole Story” approach here because it is based on a comprehensive 
understanding of the sexual ofending psychology and intervention lit­
erature combined with his practitioner experience working with young 
people who sexually ofend. The approach demonstrates how sexual 
ofending knowledge can be practically applied and speaks to inves­
tigators in a way that we have experienced as policing’s “light bulb” 
moment in Operation Soteria Bluestone (see Chapter 7).1 
The “Whole Story” approach 
Tidmarsh’s (2021) “Whole Story” approach is based on the notion that 
sexual ofending is a relationship-based crime. The perpetrator seeks 
to create or exploit a relationship with the victim-survivor that enables 
the sexual ofending and allows them to get away with it. This applies 
to stranger rapes as much as it does to rape within intimate relation­
ships or family settings. Perpetrators use a range of techniques to groom, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 Ditching blind spots and red herrings 
manipulate, and coerce victim-survivors into situations where their free­
dom and ability to escape the sexual assault are removed. Tidmarsh 
draws particular attention to the early stages of the relationship, where 
the ofender is deliberate in setting the terms of the relationship before 
any sexual activity occurs. This stage is central to understanding the 
whole story of a rape but is often missed by police investigators. This 
frst stage, which he calls “Grooming 1”, is non-sexual grooming. He 
argues that this stage always exists, however short it may be in a stran­
ger rape or however long it has been cultivated in the case of intimate 
partner or family sexual violence. This may include showering the vic­
tim-survivor with attention and validation (“love bombing”) to gain 
access and trust. It also lays the foundations for making the victim-
survivor feel responsible for what happens after. Grooming 1 may also 
include perpetrators getting to know the victim-survivor to collect 
insights into any insecurities or anything they may feel ashamed of or 
frightened about. Perpetrators may also be keen to fnd out what things 
or which people in the victim-survivor’s lives matter most to them – this 
is invaluable information should the perpetrator later need to coerce or 
threaten the victim-survivor into silence. Using these tactics, the perpe­
trator creates or manipulates the relationship with their chosen victim in 
a manner that gives them the necessary access, power, and control over 
their victim to enable the sexual ofending. It is also the groundwork 
for getting away with sexual violence or to repeat the sexual violence 
over a long period. Grooming 1 is hard to spot in the moment. Much 
of what the perpetrator does in this stage will appear normal and inno­
cent. It is often only with the beneft of hindsight that the perpetrator’s 
intent becomes clear to the victim-survivor and to others. Unless police 
investigations capture evidence pertaining to this stage, it will be difcult 
for them, a prosecutor, and a jury to fully understand what crime took 
place, why it could take place, and why the victim-survivor acted the 
way they did during and after the sexual violence. 
Knowledge of Grooming 1 can fip what may appear to be a weakness 
in the victim-survivor’s account into a coherent legal narrative of sexual 
ofending that makes for a more compelling case. The “Whole Story” 
approach, in line with previous research, suggests that perpetrators fnd 
or create such vulnerability in victim-survivors as part of the coercion or 
manipulation that often precedes a rape and that they silence victim-survivors 
afterwards (Tidmarsh, 2021; Chopin et al., 2020). Perpetrators may 
look for ways of creating economic dependencies, for example, by forcing 
a partner into a traditional homemaker role without an income, control­
ling access to a partner’s own money, or forcing someone into debt, for 
example as part of trafcking, sex work, or drug addiction. Perpetrators 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ditching blind spots and red herrings 51 
may prey on those with drug or alcohol dependencies, disability, neuro­
diversity, or mental health conditions. Finding or creating vulnerability in 
victim-survivors may also involve exploiting a position of power or trust, 
for example as a teacher, carer, parent, medical professional, taxi driver, 
or police ofcer. Perpetrators can also create vulnerability through manip­
ulating their victim’s alcohol and drug consumption. Some perpetrators 
are opportunistic, for example, by taking advantage of someone already 
being very drunk. Others engineer the situation to separate their target 
from their friends, classmates or family, or simply by making them miss 
the last train home at the end of a night out. Knowledge of sexual ofender 
tactics enables a shift in how ofcers understand and present in their case 
fle these so-called victim-survivor vulnerabilities. An ofcer who under­
stands Grooming 1 may see victim-survivor vulnerabilities in a diferent 
light and recognise them as something the perpetrator may have plausibly 
created or abused. Such awareness puts ofcers in a position to identify 
and pursue lines of enquiry and to collect relevant evidentiary material for 
prosecutors and juries to test such hypotheses. Yet, without knowledge 
of Grooming 1, and under the infuence of rape myths and misconcep­
tions, victim-survivor vulnerabilities are typically interpreted as weaken­
ing the credibility of the victim-survivor as a witness to their own rape. 
Evidence from police case fle reviews suggests that perpetrator-created or 
exploited vulnerabilities also make the victim-survivor vulnerable to their 
case being dropped by criminal justice decision-makers (Williams and 
Stanko, 2009; Hohl and Stanko, 2015). This pattern of attrition includes 
victim-survivors being less likely to be believed and less likely to see their 
perpetrator charged if they were under the infuence of alcohol when the 
rape occurred (regardless of who poured the drinks); have a learning, 
socio-psychological, or physical disability; are a drug or alcohol user, care 
leaver, sex worker, or previously known to police or social services (Kelly 
et al., 2005; Hohl and Stanko, 2015; Horvath and Brown, 2022). Victim-
survivor vulnerabilities become a form of victim responsibilisation (Gar­
land, 1996), shifting the focus of responsibility, blame, and investigative 
attention away from the suspect and onto the victim-survivor. A “Whole 
Story” suspect-focused approach keeps the attention on how the suspect 
may have created or abused victim-survivor vulnerabilities and disables 
the red herring of victim-blaming and shaming. 
Tidmarsh (2021) further suggests how the “Whole Story” does not 
fnish when the rape or sexual assault is over but continues afecting the 
victim-survivor’s mind, body, and actions. Where there is an ongoing 
relationship between the perpetrator and the victim-survivor, the perpe­
trators will likely continue to deploy various tactics to ensure the victim-
survivor feels responsible for what happened or is gaslit into thinking 

 
 
 
 
 
52 Ditching blind spots and red herrings 
what happened was not really rape – powerful tools to ensure the victim-
survivor stays silent. If Plan A – victim-survivor remains silent – fails, 
the Grooming 1 phase has laid the groundwork for Plan B: enough 
“evidence” planted to make it appear plausible that the encounter was 
consensual. Plan B is likely to be successful when others, including inves­
tigators, fail to spot sexual ofending tactics and cannot unmask the 
planting of evidence. Experienced sex ofenders are more often forensi­
cally aware and will use their past experience to reduce the risk of detec­
tion (Hazelwood and Burgess, 2001; Park et al., 2008). Interestingly, 
Chopin et al. (2020) found that not all sex ofenders appear to use strat­
egies to avoid detection. However, their study only considers traditional 
“CSI efect” tactics, such as being mindful not to leave fngerprints or 
other DNA evidence. Tidmarsh’s (2021) scope is broader and includes 
documenting tactics ofenders use to manipulate the primary source of 
evidence: the victim-survivor. Ensuring victim-survivor silence is their 
frst and most powerful defence, evidenced in the small proportion of 
rapes reported to the police (Hohl and Stanko, 2015). Then, the police 
will have no victim-survivor account at all. A suspect-focused investiga­
tion should include looking for actions the suspect has taken to avoid 
detection, including those that may result in the victim-survivor not giv­
ing or delaying giving an account to the police, or withdrawing their 
support for a police investigation and prosecution. 
Suspect focus applied to rape in the 
context of coercive control 
A “Whole Story” approach is especially important when rape occurs 
within an intimate partner relationship. Such rapes account for a third 
of police-recorded rapes, making it the most prevalent suspect-victim 
relationship type (Wunsch et al., 2021; Lovett et al., 2022b). Yet it is 
perhaps in this context that consent and reasonable belief of consent 
are most poorly understood. Investigative strategies that work of the 
template of stereotypical (stranger rape) ways of evidencing non-consent 
are unlikely to succeed. Stark, in his seminal book Coercive control– 
how men entrap women in personal life (2007), suggests that alongside 
physical assaults, 60–80% of domestic abuse victim-survivors seeking 
outside help are subjected to multiple tactics designed to frighten, inti­
mate, isolate, and degrade them: in other words, tactics of coercive con­
trol. He defnes coercive control as: 
a malevolent course of conduct that subordinates women to an alien 
will by violating their personal integrity (domestic violence), denying 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Ditching blind spots and red herrings 53 
them respect and autonomy (intimidation), depriving them of social 
connectedness (isolation) and appropriating or denying them access 
to the resources required for personhood and citizenship (control). 
(Stark, 2007: 15) 
Stark categorises coercive control as a liberty or capture crime, compar­
ing it to hostage and war prison camp tactics. Importantly, Stark pairs 
the perpetrator tactics with the impact coercive controlling behaviour 
has on the victim-survivors, considering perpetrator behaviour and victim-
survivor response together as part of the coercive control paradigm (see 
also Russell, 1982; Finkelhor and Yllö, 1985). “Rape as routine” forms 
part of sexual coercion and is often part and parcel of coercive control 
(Stark and Hester, 2019; Stark, 2007; Palmer and Wiener, 2021; Wiener, 
2023). Sexual violence functions to instil fear and a constant credible 
threat of the “or else”. The frst rape or other sexual assault can be a 
transformative moment that gives credibility to any subsequent threats 
and demands. Wiener (2023) gives the example of Louise: 
Richard seemed to believe that in order to keep me, he needed to rule 
me. Early in our relationship, we argued and he called me degrading 
names. I angrily expressed regret for becoming involved with him 
and said, “You will never touch me again. Now, get out.” Richard 
sneered, “I can fuck you whenever I want to.” I raised my voice, 
reiterating that he should leave. Richard pushed me to the foor and 
sat on me, delivering repeated hard slaps across my face, and then 
raped me, taunting me with the fact that he could and would do 
what he liked, when he liked. I actually did feel like conquered prop­
erty: worthless. The rape ended – at least for the time being – fur­
ther talk of leaving.” [Louise’s quote ends] [. . .] For the rest of their 
time together Richard only needed to warn, “don’t make me come 
and get you”, and she would submit to sex. His threat had credibil­
ity. She knew what he would do if she did not submit. The regular 
(unwanted) sex that they had was Richard exercising sexual control: 
having sex when and how he wanted. 
(Wiener, 2023: 21) 
Another example is Sally Challen, who went on to kill her husband after 
decades of coercive controlling abuse. Sally experienced routine rape as 
part of the coercion: 
After we returned from America, Richard [Challen] started calling 
me slut, and other horrible things. He did anally rape me a few more 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54 Ditching blind spots and red herrings 
times. I didn’t resist, I just let him do it, but it would have been clear 
that I didn’t want it. Occasionally I tried to get out of sex, by saying 
that I had a headache, but he would proceed anyway. He would tell 
me to “Go upstairs and get ready”, which would mean being clean 
and washed, and sometimes he would leave me waiting for ages. 
(Wiener, 2023: 22, transcribed from a BBC 2 
interview with Sally Challen) 
Both perpetrators used rape in combination with non-sexual tactics to 
intimate, degrade, humiliate, violate, isolate, and control their victims. 
This context to the rapes, both in terms of perpetrator tactics and victim-
survivor impacts, is essential to understanding whether or not Louise and 
Sally freely consented to sex and, importantly, whether the Richards could 
have reasonably believed that consent was freely given. In both exam­
ples, rape became a routine that lasted years. In the context of a coercive 
controlling relationship, the freedom to consent may have been removed 
days, weeks, months, or years before the rape. There may be no physical 
struggle, no screaming “no!” in the moment, because the credible threat, 
the “or else” is implied (Stark, 2016). Any one incident of rape will have 
a dual impact; the immediate violation and the becoming “part of the 
fabric of the chronic abuse that she was subjected to every single day” 
(Wiener, 2023: 22). Palmer and Wiener (2021) explain how a rape estab­
lishes ownership and worthlessness, which, once established, is then rein­
forced by “low level” everyday sexual violations – unwanted touching, 
grabbing, and sexualised remarks that serve to remind and reinforce the 
subjugation and control. Investigators and prosecutors approaching the 
collection and interpretation of evidentiary material on the question of 
consent without understanding coercive control are unlikely to produce 
a compelling case of rape. A narrow focus on overt signs of non-consent 
or threat of violence in the moment misses the context of entrapment 
in a web of coercion, violence, and control. It also misses key evidence 
to challenge whether a suspect could have reasonably believed that there 
was consent, given their coercive controlling conduct and keen knowl­
edge of its impacts on the victim-survivor. In short, without taking into 
account all of the suspect’s relevant behaviour towards the victim-survivor 
over the course of the relationship and without considering the impact of 
this behaviour on the victim-survivor, investigators are unlikely to see the 
whole story of sexual ofending within intimate relationships. 
Swinging the pendulum too far the other way? 
Advocating a move to suspect-focused investigations might sound like 
we are swinging the pendulum too far the other way. A couple of media 

 
 
 
Ditching blind spots and red herrings 55 
commentators warned that the principle we are proposing – and have 
implemented in Operation Soteria Bluestone (Chapter 7) – is danger­
ous. The concern is that suspect-focused investigations violate suspect 
rights, remove the presumption of innocence or even reverse the burden 
of proof (Scott, 2023; Philipps, 2023). These concerns are unfounded. 
Suspect-focused investigations are mandated by law because they are 
what is set out in the CPIA 1996. This is also refected in the College 
of Policing APP for investigations in general. Additionally, we neither 
propose nor have the means to reverse the burden of proof or remove 
the presumption of innocence. Suspect rights are enshrined in law, and 
we do not suggest altering or undermining these. What we propose is 
that investigations follow the law and police professional guidance, and 
are informed by evidence-based knowledge and understanding of sexual 
ofending behaviour rather than by rape myths and misconceptions. 
Asking questions about what the suspect did guides the identifcation 
of relevant lines of enquiry towards gathering of evidentiary material 
that is directly relevant and proportionate as part of a fair and efective 
investigation. Because of the current over-focus on victim-survivor cred­
ibility and the persuasiveness of rape myths, the term “suspect-focused 
investigations” is there to make explicit that sexual ofending starts with 
the ofender and that suspect behaviour needs to be given much greater 
attention than it is currently receiving. It is also important to note that a 
shift away from a victim-survivor focus must not be read as decentring 
victims’ rights and needs within the criminal justice process. Victims’ 
rights, needs, and wishes must remain at the heart of how ofcers, pros­
ecutors, and courts engage with victim-survivors and criminal justice 
decision-makers must always consider the impact of their decisions on 
victim-survivors (see Chapter 5). Suspect-focused investigations help 
stop practices that violate victims’ rights through unjustifed incursions 
into victim-survivors’ backgrounds. Unless investigations begin where 
sexual ofending begins, with the perpetrator’s behaviour, investigators 
will miss key evidence hiding in plain sight and end up not telling the 
whole story of directly relevant evidence. With key jigsaw pieces miss­
ing, the victim-survivor’s account is less likely to make sense and be less 
compelling as an account of a crime, making the police investigation 
part of the process of silencing and discrediting victim-survivors. 
Conclusion 
Just as rape investigations fall outside the default zone of policing (see 
Chapter 2), suspects are not the default subject of such investigations. 
In this chapter, we have shown how victim-survivors’ actions and back­
grounds are often the frst and main site of the investigation, while 

 
 
  
56 Ditching blind spots and red herrings 
perpetrators remain in the shadows. Suspect background checks, arrests, 
and interviews are often delayed or not done at all. This emboldens 
perpetrators and leaves victim-survivors feeling that they, not the per­
petrator, are under investigation. There is now greater recognition that 
this is the problem at the heart of the criminal justice process, resulting 
in justice systems failing victim-survivors and letting perpetrators get 
away with their ofending (HM Government, 2021). This comes after 
a long history of feminist analyses and campaigning to end the respon­
sibilisation of women for male sexual violence. Ofcers must show 
more professional curiosity about the suspects’ behaviour and ofending 
background. Police ofcers require expert (specialist) knowledge about 
sexual ofending to inform relevant lines of enquiry and to make sense 
of the evidentiary material they gather, unobscured by rape myths and 
misconceptions. We have leaned heavily on Tidmarsh’s (2021) “Whole 
Story” approach to illustrate what this may look like in practice and on 
Wiener (2023) for examples of coercive control. Compared to research 
on victim-survivors, the research on sex ofenders is relatively small. It 
is smaller still for sexual ofending in the context of coercive control. 
More research on perpetrators is needed to deepen our understanding of 
sexual ofending. Ofcer learning and development programmes must 
fnd ways to efectively teach ofcers how to use academic knowledge in 
their investigations (more on this in Chapter 6). In the next chapter, we 
take the suspect focus further to argue that policing should and can take 
greater responsibility for the prevention of sexual violence. 
Note 
1 For comprehensive overviews of the psychology of sexual ofending 
literature, see Sanders et al. (2017) and Cording and Ward (2021). 
References 
Areh, I., Mesko, G. and Umek, P. (2009). Attribution of personal char­
acteristics to victims of rape – Police ofcers’ perspectives. Studia 
Psychologica, 51(1): 85–100. 
Beauregard, E. and Bouchard, M. (2010). Cleaning up your act: Foren­
sic awareness as a detection avoidance strategy. Journal of Criminal 
Justice, 38(6): 1160–1166. 
Berrington, E. and Jones, H. (2002). Reality vs. myth: Constructions of 
women’s insecurity. Feminist Media Studies, 2(3): 307–323. 
Brooks, O. (2011). ‘Guys! Stop doing it!’: Young women’s adoption and 
rejection of safety advice when socialising in bars, pubs and clubs. 
The British Journal of Criminology, 51(4): 635–651. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ditching blind spots and red herrings 57 
Brooks-Hay, O., Burman, M. and Bradley, L. (2019). Justice journeys: 
Informing policy and practice through lived experience of victim-
survivors of rape and serious sexual assault. The Scottish Centre for 
Crime and Justice Research. Available at: www.sccjr.ac.uk/wp-content/ 
uploads/2019/08/Justice-Journeys-Report_Aug-2019_FINAL.pdf 
Brown, J. and Horvath, M.A.H. (2009). Do you believe her, and is it 
real rape? In M.A.H. Horvath and J. Brown (Eds.) Rape: Challenging 
contemporary thinking. Collumpton: Willan, 325–342. 
Brownmiller, S. (1975). Against our will: Men, women and rape. New 
York: Bantam. 
Campbell, B.A., Menaker, T.A. and King, W.R. (2015). The determina­
tion of victim credibility by adult and juvenile sexual assault investi­
gators. Journal of Criminal Justice, 43(1): 29–39. 
Campbell, J.C. (1989). Women’s responses to sexual abuse in intimate 
relationships. Health Care for Women International, 10(4): 335–346. 
Chopin, J., Beauregard, E. and Bitzer, S. (2020). Factors infuenc­
ing the use of forensic awareness strategies in sexual homicide. 
Journal of Criminal Justice, 71: 101709. https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
jcrimjus.2020.101709 
College of Policing (2022). APP (authorised professional practice). 
Available at: www.college.police.uk/app 
Cording, J. and Ward, T. (2021). Theories of sexual ofending. In J. 
Brown and M. Horvath (Eds.) The Cambridge handbook of forensic 
psychology. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 109–127. 
Criminal Procedures and Investigations Act (1996). c.25. Available at: 
www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/1996/25 
Crown Prosecution Service (2013). Charging perverting the course of jus­
tice and wasting police time in cases involving allegedly false rape and 
domestic violence allegations –Joint report to the Director of Public Pros­
ecutions. Available at: www.cps.gov.uk/sites/default/fles/documents/ 
publications/perverting_course_of_justice_march_2013.pdf 
Crown Prosecution Service (2023). Rape and sexual ofences – Chapter 
three: Case building. Available at: www.cps.gov.uk/legal-guidance/rape­
and-sexual-ofences-chapter-3-case-building#:~:text=Prosecutors%20 
should%20advise%20investigators%20to,CCTV%20or%20 
direct%20witness%20evidence 
Daly, K. and Bouhours, B. (2010). Rape and attrition in the legal pro­
cess: A comparative analysis of fve countries. Criminal Justice: A 
Review of Research, 39(1): 565–650. 
Davies, K., Horvath, M., Allen, K., Barbin, A., Barrett, S., Bond, E., Cri­
vatu, I., Cross, M., Dalton, T., Ferreira, J., Gekoski, A., Heimer, R., 
Iliuta, A., Khan, A., Hardiman, M., Majid, A., Manning, M., Mas­
sey, K., Spence, R., Trott, L. and Woodhams, J. (2022). Appendix 
8 – Pillar two: Targeting repeat suspects. In Operation Soteria Blue-
stone year 1 report 2021–2022, 100–123. Available at: https://assets. 
publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/ 
attachment_data/fle/1128688/E02836356_Operation_Soteria_Y1_ 
report_Accessible.pdf 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58 Ditching blind spots and red herrings 
Ellison, L. and Munro, V.E. (2009). Reacting to rape: Exploring mock 
jurors’ assessments of complainant credibility. The British Journal of 
Criminology, 49(2): 202–219. 
Finch, E. and Munro, V.E. (2007). The demon drink and the demonised 
woman: Socio-sexual stereotypes and responsibility attribution in rape 
trials involving intoxicants. Social & Legal Studies, 16(4): 591–614. 
Finkelhor, D. and Yllö, K. (1985). License to rape: Sexual abuse of 
wives. New York: Free Press. 
FitzGerald, S. and Skilbrei, M.L. (2022). Sexual politics in contempo­
rary Europe: Moving targets, sitting ducks. Cham: Springer Nature. 
Gangoli, G. and Westmarland, N. (2011). International approaches to 
rape. Bristol: The Policy Press. 
Garland, D. (1996). The limits of the sovereign state: Strategies of crime 
control in contemporary society. British Journal of Criminology, 
36(4): 445–471. 
Gekoski, A., Davies, K. and Allen, K. (2023). Barriers and challenges 
to police and Crown Prosecution Service joint working on rape and 
serious sexual ofence cases: A police perspective. Policing: A Journal 
of Policy and Practice, 17. https://doi.org/10.1093/police/paad041 
Godenzi, A. (1994). What’s the big deal? We are men, and they are 
women. In T. Newburn and E. Stanko (Eds.) Just boys doing busi­
ness? London: Routledge, 135–152. 
Greer, C. (2012). Sex crime and the media. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Gregory, J. and Lees, S. (1999). Policing sexual assault. London: Routledge. 
Hamilton, G. and Tidmarsh, P. (2022). The intersections of family vio­
lence and sexual ofending. London: Routledge. 
Harris, D.A. (2021). Desistance from sexual ofending. Current Psychia­
try Reports, 23: 7. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11920-020-01219-3 
Hazelwood, R.R. and Burgess, A.W. (2001). The behavioral oriented 
interview of rape victims: The key to profling. In R.R. Hazelwood 
and A.W. Burgess (Eds.) Practical aspects of rape investigation: A 
multidisciplinary approach. Boca Raton: CRC Press, 115–131. 
Herriott, C. (2023). Sexual history evidence in rape trials: Is the jury 
out? Abingdon: Routledge. 
Hine, B. and Murphy, A. (2019). The infuence of ‘high’ vs. ‘low’ rape 
myth acceptance on police ofcers’ judgements of victim and perpetra­
tor responsibility, and rape authenticity. Journal of Criminal Justice, 
60: 100–107. 
HM Government (2021). Tackling violence against women strategy. 
Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/tackling­
violence-against-women-and-girls-strategy 
Hohl, K. (2016). Understanding the victim account in the context of the 
investigation and prosecution of rape complaints. Knowledge Fund 
EITSO project: Briefng report. City University London. Available at: 
https://library.college.police.uk/docs/PKF1/08_008.pdf 
Hohl, K., Johnson, K. and Molisso, S. (2022). A procedural justice the­
ory approach to police engagement with victim-survivors of rape and 
sexual assault: Initial fndings of the ‘Project Bluestone’ pilot study. 
International Criminology, 2(3): 253–261. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ditching blind spots and red herrings 59 
Hohl, K., Reid, A.K., Molisso, S. and Pullerits, M. (2023). Rape and 
sexual assault survivors’ experience of the police in England and 
Wales. Survey report I: January–June 2023. City, University of Lon­
don. Available at: https://openaccess.city.ac.uk/id/eprint/31310/9/ 
Survey%20Report%20I%2021%20September%202023%20 
UPDATE%2020%20September.pdf 
Hohl, K. and Stanko, E.A. (2015). Complaints of rape and the criminal 
justice system: Fresh evidence on the attrition problem in England 
and Wales. European Journal of Criminology, 12(3): 324–341. 
Horvath, M. and Brown, J. (2022). Rape: Challenging contemporary 
thinking – 10 years on. 2nd ed. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Horvath, M., Davies, K., Allen, K., Barbin, A., Barrett, S., Bond, E., Cri­
vatu, I., Cross, M., Dalton, T., Ferreira, J., Gekoski, A., Heimer, R., 
Iliuta, A., Khan, A., Hardiman, M., Majid, A., Manning, M., Mas­
sey, K., Spence, R., Trott, L. and Woodhams, J. (2022). Appendix 
7 – Pillar one: Suspect focused investigations. In Operation Soteria 
Bluestone year 1 report 2021–2022, 74–99. Available at: https://assets. 
publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attach­
ment_data/fle/1128688/E02836356_Operation_Soteria_Y1_report_ 
Accessible.pdf 
Jordan, J. (2004). The word of a woman: Police, rape and belief. Lon­
don: Palgrave. 
Jordan, J. (2022). Women, rape and justice: Unravelling the rape conun­
drum. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Kelly, L. (2010). The (in) credible words of women: False allegations in 
European rape research. Violence Against Women, 16(12): 1345–1355. 
Kelly, L., Lovett, J. and Regan, L. (2005). A gap or a chasm? Attrition 
in reported rape cases. Home Ofce research study 293. London: 
Home Ofce. 
Kim, B., Benekos, P.J. and Merlo, A.V. (2016). Sex ofender recidivism 
revisited: Review of recent meta-analyses on the efects of sex ofender 
treatment. Trauma, Violence, & Abuse, 17(1): 105–117. 
Lalumière, M.L., Harris, G.T., Quinsey, V.L. and Rice, M.E. (2005). The 
causes of rape: Understanding individual diferences in male propen­
sity for sexual aggression. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. 
Lovett, J., Hales, G., Kelly, L., Khan, A., Hardiman, M. and Trott, L. 
(2022a). What can we learn from Police data about timeliness in 
rape and serious sexual ofence investigations in England and Wales? 
International Criminology, 2(3): 286–298. 
Lovett, J., Hales, G., Kelly, L., Vera-Gray, F., Uzelac, G., Buil-Gil, D. 
and Myhill, A. (2022b). Appendix 11 – data and performance. In 
Operation Soteria Bluestone year 1 report 2021–2022, 155–177. 
Available 
at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/ 
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fle/1128688/E02836356_ 
Operation_Soteria_Y1_report_Accessible.pdf 
Lovett, J. and Kelly, L. (2009). Diferent systems, similar outcomes? 
Tracking attrition in rape cases across Europe. London: Child and 
Woman Abuse Studies Unit, London Metropolitan University. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 Ditching blind spots and red herrings 
Mack, A.N. and McCann, B.J. (2021). ‘Harvey Weinstein, monster’: 
Antiblackness and the myth of the monstrous rapist. Communica­
tion and Critical/Cultural Studies, 18(2): 103–120. 
Mason, P. and Monckton-Smith, J. (2008). Confation, collocation and 
confusion: British press coverage of the sexual murder of women. 
Journalism, 9(6): 691–710. 
McAlinden, A.M., Farmer, M. and Maruna, S. (2017). Desistance from 
sexual ofending: Do the mainstream theories apply? Criminology & 
Criminal Justice, 17(3): 266–283. 
McGlynn, C. (2017). Rape trials and sexual history evidence: Reform­
ing the law on third-party evidence. The Journal of Criminal Law, 
81(5): 367–392. 
McMillan, L. and White, D. (2023). The missing and imagined perpe­
trator in rape prevention eforts. Women’s History Review, 32(7): 
1040–1058. 
Millet, K. (1970). Sexual politics. New York: Avon. 
Munro, V.E. and Kelly, L. (2013). A vicious cycle? Attrition and convic­
tion patterns in contemporary rape cases in England and Wales. In 
M.A. Horvath and J.M. Brown (Eds.) Rape: Challenging contempo­
rary thinking. London: Routledge, 281–300. 
Murphy, A., Hine, B., Yesberg, J.A., Wunsch, D. and Charleton, B. 
(2022). Lessons from London: A contemporary examination of the 
factors afecting attrition among rape complaints. Psychology, Crime 
& Law, 28(1): 82–114. 
Nielsen, L.H., Hansen, M. and Ingemann-Hansen, O. (2018). Predicting 
charges and convictions for rape suspects in Denmark: Characteristics 
associated with the notion of the ‘credible criminal’. Journal of Scandi­
navian Studies in Criminology and Crime Prevention, 19(2): 136–151. 
Ofce for National Statistics (2018). Sexual ofending: Victimisation 
and the path through the criminal justice system. Available at: www. 
ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/articles/ 
sexualoffendingvictimisationandthepaththroughthecriminaljustice 
system/2018-12-13 
O’Hara, S. (2012). Monsters, playboys, virgins and whores: Rape myths 
in the news media’s coverage of sexual violence. Language and Lit­
erature, 21(3): 247–259. 
O’Neal, E.N. (2019). ‘Victim is not credible’: The infuence of rape cul­
ture on police perceptions of sexual assault complainants. Justice 
Quarterly, 36(1): 127–160. 
Palmer, T. and Wiener, C. (2021). Telling the wrong stories: Rough sex 
coercive control and the criminal law. Child and Family Law Quar­
terly, 33(4): 331–346. 
Park, J., Schlesinger, L.B., Pinizzotto, A.J. and Davis, E.F. (2008). Serial 
and single-victim rapists: Diferences in crime-scene violence, inter­
personal involvement, and criminal sophistication. Behavioral Sci­
ences & the Law, 26(2): 227–237. 
Parratt, K.A. and Pina, A. (2017). From ‘real rape’ to real justice: A 
systematic review of police ofcers’ rape myth beliefs. Aggression and 
Violent Behavior, 34: 68–83. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Ditching blind spots and red herrings 61 
Paternoster, R. and Piquero, A. (1995). Reconceptualising deterrence: 
An empirical test of personal and vicarious experiences. Journal of 
Research in Crime and Delinquency, 32(3): 251–286. 
Philipps, M. (2023). New approach to rape is founded on a myth. 
The Times. 10 July. Available at: www.thetimes.co.uk/article/new­
approach-to-rape-is-founded-on-a-myth-pnr5nb9k3 
Rape Crisis (2023). Keep counselling confdential. Available at: https:// 
rapecrisis.org.uk/get-involved/keep-counselling-confdential/ 
Rape Crisis Scotland (no date). 10 top tips to end rape [online poster]. Avail­
able at: www.rapecrisisscotland.org.uk/resources/rcstoptenposta4fn.pdf 
Robertiello, G. and Terry, K.J. (2007). Can we profle sex ofenders? A 
review of sex ofender typologies. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 
12(5): 508–518. 
Rumney, P. and McPhee, D. (2021). The evidential value of electronic 
communications data in rape and sexual ofence cases. Criminal Law 
Review, 1: 20–33. 
Russell, D.E.H. (1982). Rape in marriage. New York: Collier Books. 
Ryan, K.M. (2011). The relationship between rape myths and sexual 
scripts: The social construction of rape. Sex Roles, 65(11–12): 
774–782. 
Sanders, T. (Ed.) (2017). The Oxford handbook of sex ofences and sex 
ofenders. New York: Oxford University Press. 
Scott, M. (2023). The police haven’t learned from the Carl Beech fasco. 
The Spectator. 22 July. Available at: www.spectator.co.uk/article/ 
the-police-havent-learned-from-the-carl-beech-fasco/ 
Seto, M.C. (2019). The motivation-facilitation model of sexual ofending. 
Sexual Abuse, 31(1): 3–24. 
Seto, M.C. and Lalumière, M.L. (2010). What is so special about 
male adolescent sexual ofending? A review and test of expla­
nations through meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 136(4): 
526–575. 
Sexual Ofences Act (2003). c.42. Available at: www.legislation.gov.uk/ 
ukpga/2003/42/contents 
Shaw, J., Campbell, R., Cain, D. and Feeney, H. (2017). Beyond surveys 
and scales: How rape myths manifest in sexual assault police records. 
Psychology of Violence, 7(4): 602–614. 
Sinclair, O. (2022). The attrition problem: The role of police ofcer’s 
decision making in rape cases. Journal of Investigative Psychology 
and Ofender Profling, 19(3): 135–150. 
Sleath, E. and Bull, R. (2017). Police perceptions of rape victims and the 
impact on case decision-making: A systematic review. Aggression and 
Violent Behavior, 34(1): 102–112. 
Smith, O. (2018). Rape trials in England and Wales: Observing justice 
and rethinking rape myths. Cham: Springer. 
Staford, M.C. and Warr, M. (1993). A reconceptualisation of general 
and specifc deterrence. Journal of Research in Crime and Delin­
quency, 30(2): 123–135. 
Stanko, E.A. (1985). Intimate intrusions: Women’s experience of male 
violence. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
62 Ditching blind spots and red herrings 
Stanko, E.A. (1988). Fear of crime and the myth of the safe home: A 
feminist critique of criminology. In K. Yllö and M. Bograd (Eds.) 
Feminist perspectives on wife abuse. Newbury Park: Sage Publica­
tions, 75–88. 
Stanko, E.A. (1997). Safety talk: Conceptualising women’s risk assessment 
as a technology of the soul. Theoretical Criminology, 1(4): 479–499. 
Stark, E. (2007). Coercive control: How men entrap women in personal 
life. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Stark, E. (2016). Foreword. In L. McOrmond-Plummer, J.Y. Levy-Peck 
and P. Easteal (Eds.) Perpetrators of intimate partner sexual violence: 
A multidisciplinary approach to prevention, recognition and inter­
vention. London: Routledge, xx–xxv. 
Stark, E. and Hester, M. (2019). Coercive control: Update and review. 
Violence Against Women, 25(1): 81–104. 
Sykes, G. and Matza, D. (1957). Techniques of neutralisation: A theory 
of delinquency. American Sociological Review, 22(6): 664–670. 
Temkin, J. and Krahé, B. (2008). Sexual assault and the justice gap: A 
question of attitude. Oxford: Hart Publishing. 
Tidmarsh, P. (2021). The whole story: Investigating sexual crime – 
Truth, lies and the path to justice. London: Jonathan Cape. 
Victims’ Commissioner (2019). 2018/19 annual report victims’ com­
missioner for England and Wales. Available at: https://cloud­
platform-e218f50a4812967ba1215eaecede923f.s3.amazonaws.com/ 
uploads/sites/6/2021/12/annual-report-2018-2019.pdf 
Victims’ Commissioner (2020). 2019/20 annual report victims’ com­
missioner for England and Wales. Available at: https://cloud­
platform-e218f50a4812967ba1215eaecede923f.s3.amazonaws.com/ 
uploads/sites/6/2021/12/Victims-Commissioners-Annual-Report­
2019-20-with-hyperlinks.pdf 
Walker, S.J.L., Hester, M., McPhee, D., Patsios, D., Williams, A., Bates, 
L. and Rumney, P. (2021). Rape, inequality and the criminal justice 
response in England: The importance of age and gender. Criminology 
& Criminal Justice, 21(3): 297–315. 
Walklate, S. (1997). Risk and criminal victimisation: A modernist 
dilemma? The British Journal of Criminology, 37(1): 35–45. 
Wiener, C. (2023). Coercive control and the criminal law. Abingdon: 
Routledge. 
Williams, E., Miller, N., Harding, R., Sondhi, A., Maguire, L., Norman, 
J., Abinashi, D. and Ward, R. (2022). Appendix 10 – Pillar four: 
Ofcer learning, development and well-being. In Operation Sote­
ria Bluestone year 1 report 2021–2022, 140–154. Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/ 
uploads/attachment_data/file/1128688/E02836356_Operation_ 
Soteria_Y1_report_Accessible.pdf 
Williams, E. and Stanko, B. (2009). Reviewing rape and rape allegations 
in London: What are the vulnerabilities of the victims who report 
to the police. In M. Horvath and J. Brown (Eds.) Rape: Challenging 
contemporary thinking. Cullompton: Willan, 207–227. 

 
 
 
Ditching blind spots and red herrings 63 
Wunsch, D., Davies, T. and Charleton, B. (2021). The London rape review 
2021. Mayor of London Ofce for Policing and Crime. Available at: 
www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/fles/fnal_rr_victimtech_61221.pdf 
Yllö, K. and Torres, M.G. (Eds.) (2016). Marital rape: Consent, mar­
riage, and social change in global context. Oxford: Oxford Univer­
sity Press. 

 
 
 
4 
PREVENTION IS BETTER THAN 
PROSECUTION 
Stopping known perpetrators 
Introduction 
The declared primary goal of the police is to prevent crime, not to catch 
criminals (Home Ofce, 2012). When it comes to sexual violence, police 
have all but abandoned this frst Peelian principle. Policing is almost 
entirely reactive, with investigative action sparked only after a crime 
has already happened. Putting perpetrators before a court of law may 
be a way of attempting to right a wrong, but it cannot undo a rape. For 
the majority of victim-survivors, the criminal investigation elongates the 
trauma and does not end with the perpetrator(s) facing trial (Hohl et al., 
2023). As such, preventing rape should be the priority; prosecuting rape 
a last resort. The existing policing literature on crime prevention has 
largely side-lined the topic of sexual violence. Where it does exist, it 
tends to focus narrowly on stranger rapists or “target hardening” advice 
to women thereby placing the focus and responsibility back onto victim-
survivors to keep themselves safe (see also Chapter 3). For police forces, 
stopping perpetrators already known to the police should be an obvious 
place to start. 
To sexual violence victim-survivors, the police stopping their attacker 
from causing further sexual harm matters deeply. In a survey of nearly 
2,000 rape and sexual assault victim-survivors on their experience of the 
police, the most frequently cited reason for reporting the rape or sexual 
assault to the police was to keep others safe. This mattered above and 
beyond any other potential outcome, including the perpetrator getting 
convicted (Hohl et al., 2023). Studies on the prevalence of serial sex 
ofenders suggest that victim-survivors are right to be concerned about 
their perpetrator going on to sexually ofend again. As such, policing 
is yet to act upon a near-universal tenant of criminological research: 
a small number of ofenders account for a large proportion of crimi­
nal ofending (Lovell et al., 2020; Thornberry and Krohn, 2006). It is 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429444869-4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prevention is better than prosecution 65 
unrealistic to expect that the police can prevent all sexual violence (see 
Chapter 2). What rape victim-survivors and the general public should 
reasonably be able to expect, however, is that police forces abide by the 
frst Peelian principle and proactively contribute to crime prevention. 
For sexual violence, this means policing should honour every victim-
survivor report by treating the information ofered up by victim-survivors 
as valuable and valued intelligence. 
Any known perpetrator disruption strategy must begin by understand­
ing the prevalence and nature of repeat ofending. The frst section of this 
chapter outlines some of the key research fndings and arguments in this 
area. We then move to examining how police forces count repeat per­
petrators and the barriers to police forces joining the dots between sex 
ofences committed by the same (known) suspect. The section concludes 
that rape crime prevention is doubly marginalised within policing and 
policing research, with neither rape nor prevention within the default 
zone of policing. We propose a way forward that starts from the point of 
accepting that repeat perpetrators cannot be dismissed as rare, mentally 
ill outcasts. Prevention in the form of disruption of known perpetrators 
builds on the suspect-focused investigation approach set out in Chapter 
3. It requires testing and applying the full range of legal disruption tools 
available to police forces, such as civil orders. 
The everydayness of repeat perpetrators 
Repeat sex ofenders are not rare. We might be excused in thinking they 
are, partly because so little data is published on them. Almond et al. 
(2015) found that 36% of convicted ofenders of serial sexual assault 
received a further conviction of a sexual contact ofence, with a medium 
number of 5.5 post-ofence convictions. Earlier studies suggest that most 
convicted sex ofenders go on to re-ofend and that sex ofenders are 
three times more likely than other ofenders to re-ofend within the same 
crime type (Alper and Durose, 2019; Greenall and Richardson, 2015). 
Operation Advance, an extensive cold case review of unsolved stranger 
rapes, found that 72% of ofenders identifed in the review had convic­
tions prior to the rape that they were eventually convicted of, and 90% 
had continued ofending after that ofence. In total, 59% had other sex 
ofence convictions, with an average of 22 ofences per ofender (All-
sop, 2013). Convicted sex ofenders, once in treatment, will often admit 
multiple further sex ofences that have not yet come to police attention 
(Tidmarsh, 2021; Weinrott and Saylor, 1991). Groth et al. (1982) sur­
veyed 83 incarcerated rapists who admitted to a mean of 5.2 rapes, out 
of which the police recorded an average of 2.8 rapes. Abel et al. (1987) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
66 Prevention is better than prosecution 
estimate a mean of seven rapes per convicted sex ofender. However, the 
median was one rape each, suggesting a highly skewed distribution, with 
most admitting only to the ofence for which they are currently incarcer­
ated and some admitting to a number far exceeding the mean number of 
seven rapes per ofender. These studies are all based on detected rapists. 
Convicted sex ofenders form a minority of the perpetrators of all sexual 
ofences (Jordan, 2022). Detected rapists are just the tip of the iceberg, 
but their data alone is enough to conclude that repeat sexual violence 
perpetration is no minor issue. 
While some sex ofenders only commit sexual ofences, most known 
sex ofenders also commit other types of ofences (Lussier, 2005; Soothill 
et al., 2000). Roach and Pease (2013a, 2013b) suggest that most crimi­
nal ofenders are not specialists, and they argue that individuals who 
break the law are likely to do so in more than one way. In the words 
of Schneider (2005: 3), shop thieves should be “policed as though they 
were burglars on their day of rather than shop thieves pure and simple”. 
A small number of prolifc ofenders often account for a large amount of 
various types of harm. Similarly, for sexual ofending, men who disre­
gard rape law are also likely to engage in other forms of violence against 
women and girls (Dobash and Dobash, 1999). When it comes to sexual 
ofending, the empirical evidence base for this is relatively small (see 
Chapter 3). Moreover, what we do know about sex ofenders largely 
derives from studies of incarcerated rapists, despite evidence that they 
may systematically difer from undetected rapists. Convicted sex ofend­
ers are overwhelmingly convicted of stranger rapes, even though stran­
ger rapes account for a relatively small percentage of rapes. Undetected 
rapists typically feel little danger of getting caught – their experience has 
taught them so. While to a convicted rapist, the criminal justice system is 
“enemy No. 1”, for the undetected rapist, the opposite holds. To them, 
the criminal justice system is an ally that attests to their innocence of any 
criminal wrongdoing. Undetected rapists are less likely to feel guilt and 
more likely to blame the victim-survivor. Their self-image often remains 
intact with their sexual ofending compartmentalised (Godenzi, 1994). 
The empirical studies paint a picture very diferent from media portray­
als (see Chapter 3): one where men who rape do not see themselves as 
doing wrong and are not necessarily specialists but may also engage 
in other forms of violence against women and girls, and where prolifc 
repeat perpetrators account for much of the sexual harm in society. 
Feminist theories argue that acts of sexual violence are not iso­
lated events perpetrated by a small number of mentally ill individuals. 
Instead, they locate rape within societal structures of gender inequality. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prevention is better than prosecution 67 
In patriarchal societies, hegemonic attitudes and beliefs about women’s 
value and status subordinate them to men. Feminist theories seek to sur­
face how patriarchal structures privilege men and disempower women 
(Brownmiller, 1975; Stanko, 1985; Beneke, 1982; Ward, 1995). Femi­
nist scholars argue that it is attitudes, beliefs, and values that enable men 
to cross the line from sex to rape. Misogynist attitudes and beliefs might 
fnd expression in further forms of male violence against women such as 
stalking, domestic abuse, image-based abuse, and honour-based violence 
(Flood and Pease, 2009). Attitudes and beliefs are typically held over 
long periods or even lifetimes. They are often closely linked with a per­
son’s self-identity (Glick and Fiske, 1996; Fiske et al., 2010; Albarracin 
and Shavitt, 2018). Because attitudes and beliefs are deeply held, men 
enabled by them in their sexual or other ofending against women may 
feel entitled to abuse women time and again. Such analyses sit in stark 
contrast to those portraying rape and sexual assault as a one-of, “heat 
of the moment” blips explained as the behaviour of a few men with 
pathological, uncontrolled sex drives (McMahon, 2010) or dismissed 
as provoked by a victim-survivor who aroused the perpetrator beyond 
a presumed “point of no return” (Muehlenhard and MacNaughton, 
1988; Grubb and Turner, 2012). The feminist argument encourages us 
to examine repeat sexual ofending by investigating the link between 
misogynistic attitudes and beliefs and sexual violence. 
Misogynistic attitudes and beliefs create an environment conducive 
to normalising and justifying rape and its everydayness. Andrew Tate is 
a social media infuencer whose videos have been viewed more than 11.6 
billion times and who has become a household name among teenage 
boys. In 2022, Romanian police arrested him for allegations of rape and 
human trafcking (Tahsin et al., 2023). Ten years prior, in 2013, Amelia, 
a young woman in England, met Andrew Tate, and the two began dat­
ing. At one point, when they are together, she tells him that she has only 
had sex twice before and that she does not want to have sex with him. 
Tate assures her that they will only be kissing. She recalls how, after this, 
he stopped suddenly and lay back down on the bed. She says that when 
she asked what was wrong, he said, “I am just debating whether I should 
rape you or not.” Amelia reports that he then proceeded to violently 
rape and strangle her. Amelia, like many victim-survivors, continued the 
relationship with Tate (ibid.). This is common in the context of coercive 
controlling behaviour in abusive relationships, which are characterised 
by a mixture of consensual sex and rape. Research details how victim-
survivors’ trauma responses include inability to accept and name what 
happened to them as rape (Weiner, 2023). Amelia reported the alleged 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68 Prevention is better than prosecution 
rape to the police in 2014. No charges were brought, despite her pre­
senting voice recordings from Tate, according to Vice: 
“I love raping you.” 
“When ur under my control, I do what I please.” 
“Am I a bad person . . . because the more you did not like it, the 
more I enjoyed it.” 
(Tahsin et al., 2023) 
Further reports of rapes and sexual assaults committed by Tate were made 
to the police by other women in the following years. Tate was by then a 
repeat suspect on UK police data systems, with multiple alleged ofences of 
rape and sexual assault as well as multiple other alleged crimes of domes­
tic violence, assault, and human trafcking. However, English police did 
not act upon knowing about these patterns of alleged repeat ofending, 
and no criminal charges were ever brought against Tate. Tate was even­
tually arrested for human trafcking and rape by Romanian police in 
December 2022, ten years after Amelia reported his sexual violence to the 
police – a decade-long campaign of alleged rape, sexual assault, domestic 
abuse, and human trafcking of a known, named suspect in plain sight on 
social media. Across countless videos and interviews, Tate frames women 
as objects owned by men, created specifcally and entirely to serve men 
and their sexual pleasure (Das, 2022). In one video, seemingly with full 
conviction and pride, Tate says, “I go out and f*ck and I come back to her, 
and I do not care about her, and I only love my girl. That’s not cheating; 
that’s exercise” (Wyder, 2022). Tate’s statements exemplify, in the words 
of Bart and O’Brien (1993: 92), men who “feel they have a right to this 
sex object that is created for them”. Tate’s words are strikingly similar to 
the words of rapists interviewed decades earlier: 
“The reason I rape is because I like the idea that I can do whatever I 
want to a sex object . . . you look at a girl and she looks like some­
thing out of the Playboy and you have her there and you can do 
whatever you want”. He is 22 years old, convicted of the rapes of 
four women, and describes it as ‘fucking’, not ‘rape’. 
(Bart and O’Brien, 1993: 98) 
Rape is a man’s right. If a woman doesn’t want to give it, the man 
should take it. Women have no right to say no. Women are made to 
have sex. It’s all they are good for. Some women would rather take a 
beating but they always give in, it’s what they are for. 
Quote from an interview with a convicted 
multiple rapist (Scully and Marolla, 1985: 261) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prevention is better than prosecution 69 
Andrew Tate is only one prominent example of what Bates (2021) 
calls the “manosphere”: the collection of internet forums, blogs, 
YouTube, and TikTok channels marked by extreme misogyny. Bates 
describes “pick-up artists” as self-appointed gurus providing advice 
to men on how to get women to have sex with them. She documents 
how these portray women as objects for pleasure whose inconvenient 
resistance to sex needs to be overcome. The tactics proposed include 
negging, dehumanising insults, and “cave-manning” (pulling, throw­
ing, or dragging women onto the bed). Bates’ analysis is strikingly 
similar to that of Grifn (1971) half a century earlier. Grifn (ibid.: 
29) writes, “In the spectrum of male behaviour, rape, the perfect com­
bination of sex and violence, is the penultimate act. Erotic pleasure 
cannot be separated from culture. In our culture, male eroticism is 
wedded to power.” Gavey’s (2005) socio-cultural analysis shows that 
the everydayness of coercion and acquiescence to sex in heterosexual 
relationships provides the “cultural scafolding of rape”, blurring the 
lines and making rape seem not all too diferent from sex. Gavey con­
cludes that rape is far from rare and that, instead, it is repeated and 
“almost ordinary”. The continuum of women’s experiences of sexual 
violence, a concept introduced by Kelly (1988), similarly emphasises 
the everydayness of sexual violence and the fuid grey zone between 
sex and rape. These analyses further explain why policing is ill-
advised to proceed from an assumption of rape as a one-of event and 
should treat every rape disclosure as intelligence about a potential 
repeat perpetrator. 
In today’s world, online pornography has become part of the cultural 
scafolding of rape. Online pornography consumption is highly preva­
lent, with more than 85% of men using it regularly and evidence that 
this is infuencing sexual scripts (Wright, 2014; Sun et al., 2016). Sexual 
scripts are our learnt understandings of sexuality and shape what we deem 
appropriate or inappropriate sexual contact, and shape our sexual activ­
ity, and how we experience and make sense of these activities (Simon and 
Gagon, 2003). Vera-Gray et al. (2021) show how pornography functions 
to erode the boundary between sex and sexual violence within hegemonic 
sexual scripts. Their analysis of 150,000 video titles on the three most 
popular pornography websites in the UK evidences routine humiliation, 
degradation, and torture of women in mainstream pornography. Further, 
words that signify sexual violence occurred most often in combination 
with the word “teen” and in combination with words that indicate sexual 
activity between family members (i.e. incest). These fndings are the results 
of an analysis of the landing pages of mainstream online porn websites, 
not niche content, meaning they will be seen by anyone accessing these 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
70 Prevention is better than prosecution 
websites. Other studies of online porn document routine depictions of 
sexual practices involving choking, gagging, slapping, torturing, decep­
tion, non-consensual or otherwise criminal acts. Almost always, these acts 
are performed by men on women. The women’s bodies become objec­
tifed for male gratifcation, and their degradation and humiliation are 
framed as sexual pleasure (Vannier et al., 2014). The routine display of 
such videos on the landing pages of mainstream pornography websites 
widely consumed by teenagers (and adults) positions what is unlawful 
material (clearly describing rape or incest) as normal and legitimate for 
everyday consumption (Vera-Gray et al., 2021). Other studies have evi­
denced a link between pornography consumption and sexually coercive 
behaviour (Marshall et al., 2021) and how pornography is now part of 
how people form their understanding of sexuality and appropriate sex 
acts (Simon and Gagon, 2003). In sum, these studies suggest that within 
mainstream online pornography, rape and other forms of sexual violence 
are ordinary and routine, and this, in turn, functions to normalise sexual 
violence within hegemonic sexual scripts. Those holding those scripts, in 
turn, are more likely to engage in sexual acts that meet the legal defnition 
of rape and other sexual ofences. 
Repeated sexual violence also routinely forms part of terror 
regimes. This is perhaps most obvious where rape is used as a weapon 
of war, as has been documented in Vietnam (Weaver, 2010), China 
(Hill et al., 2021), Bosnia (Amnesty International, 1993; Benard, 
1994), Africa (United Nations, 2020), Ukraine (Barber, 2022), and 
Iraq and Syria (Ahram, 2019). Closer to home and part of everyday 
policing in the UK is what Johnson (1995) termed “intimate terror­
ism”. Sexual violence is almost always present in intimate partner 
coercive control (Stark, 2007; Palmer and Wiener, 2021; Wiener, 
2023). Coercive control is a form of domestic abuse in which the per­
petrator uses a range of highly personalised tactics of manipulation, 
isolation, surveillance, threats, emotional and physical violence, and 
fnancial exploitation to achieve total control over their partner. Coer­
cive control is deeply rooted in a desire to control and own the other. 
It is intimate terrorism designed to remove dignity, agency, and per­
sonhood from the victim-survivor and make the perpetrator the centre 
of the victim-survivor’s thinking and self-identity. Coercive control is 
highly gendered, not only in that it is primarily perpetrated by men 
against women but also because it uses gendered norms and structures 
of inequality as part of the abuse. For example, coercively controlling 
men will often use control tactics that play on the performance of tra­
ditional gender roles – an always immaculately clean house, dinner on 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prevention is better than prosecution 71 
the table, perfect physical appearance, dressing in a certain way, and 
sexually performing in particular ways (Stark, 2007). As such, con­
trol of the woman’s sexuality, sexual degradation, rape, and constant 
“low-level” sexual assaults and threats form part of the abuse (Wie­
ner, 2023). Police ofcers must be aware of the possibility of ongoing 
sexual violence when responding to domestic abuse incidents instead 
of treating rape disclosures as isolated, past events divorced from their 
broader relationship context. 
Feminist analyses root sexual violence in misogynistic attitudes and 
beliefs. Such analyses put repeat ofending into a new light and explain 
why it may be far more prevalent and, in many ways, far more ordi­
nary than one might believe based on common rape myths and media 
portrayals. Studies of sex ofenders and undetected rapists support such 
analyses, suggesting that those who successfully avoid detection hold 
beliefs about their ofending and their self-identity that enable them 
to cross the line between living an ordinary life and sexually ofending 
time and again. Rape and other forms of sexual violence do not take 
place in a vacuum. They must be understood within their broader social 
context and the wider cultural scafolding as it is shaped by online por­
nography and social media. If policing is to contribute to the detection 
and prevention of rape, policing strategies and tactics must be alive to 
the nature of sexual ofending. 
Police practices hindering repeat perpetrator 
identifcation and disruption 
At present, police rarely identify repeat perpetrators, let alone stop them. 
The mediatised grooming gangs in Rochdale, Oxford, or Telford, and 
individuals such as John Worboys, Kirk Reid, Wayne Couzens, or David 
Carrick are the tip of the iceberg of repeat perpetrators who are eventu­
ally charged with multiple acts of sexual violence. The true level of repeat 
perpetration is unknown, even to police forces themselves. Multiple bar­
riers stand in the way of ofcers identifying repeat perpetrators in their 
crime recording systems. This begins with the lack of a clear and shared 
defnition of what constitutes a “repeat suspect”. Operation Soteria Blue-
stone research found that police forces typically do not have a defnition 
of what counts as a repeat suspect (only of “repeat ofenders”, referring 
to those who have been convicted). In some forces, repeat suspects only 
included those who have been previously convicted of a sexual ofence 
or have at least been previously charged with one, and excludes previ­
ous reports that resulted in the default outcome in sexual ofences: no 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72 Prevention is better than prosecution 
criminal charges (Davies et al., 2022). In England and Wales, the work­
ing defnition of a convicted sex ofender on police recording systems 
even excludes some convicted sexual ofenders. The Rehabilitation of 
Ofenders Act (1974) means that spent convictions are cleared from 
a person’s police record. Most sexual ofence convictions, like any 
other conviction, disappear from police systems after the sentence has 
been served and a set period of years has passed.1 Ofcial defnitions 
of serial rapists widely accepted in the serial ofender literature and 
used by government agencies defne a serial rapist as an ofender who 
has committed more than two ofences against two diferent victim-survi­
vors (Slater et al., 2014). This defnition, as well as the literature in question, 
appears to focus primarily on stranger rapes (a minority of ofences; see 
Lovett et al., 2022). This excludes repeat ofending against the same victim-
survivor by the same ofender as is common in family sexual abuse, domes­
tic abuse, and abuse in institutional settings. Police forces using narrow 
defnitions of serial ofending overlook the non-stranger rapists, in efect 
searching the rockpools while ignoring the ocean of the majority of perpe­
trators who go undetected and who repeatedly ofend against people they 
are in close relationships with. 
Currently, statistics on repeat suspects are not routinely generated by 
police forces and not included in ofcial crime statistics. Although under­
reporting leads to an underestimation of the prevalence of repeat per­
petrators, there are some contexts where repeat ofending is commonly 
known, such as domestic abuse. Sexual violence within coercive control­
ling relationships is rarely disclosed, and as a result, there are no reliable 
estimates of the true number of rapes within such relationships (Myhill 
and Hohl, 2019). In England and Wales, domestic abuse is now de facto 
a volume crime, accounting for about 20% of all police-recorded crimes 
(ONS, 2022). We know that any fgure based on police data is likely an 
underestimation of alleged perpetrators known to police given the poor 
quality of police-recorded data with high proportions of both missing 
data and incorrectly entered data (Lovett et al., 2022; see also Chapter 
6). Errors in recording suspect data correctly, or at all, start a cascade of 
issues for police investigations. Each failure to record information on sus­
pects identifed by the victim-survivor reduces the quality and quantity of 
intelligence on potential perpetrators that can be used to identify patterns 
of ofending behaviour. As a consequence, police forces systematically fail 
to build the data, intelligence, and evidence base for preventing known 
perpetrators from continuing their sexual ofending. 
As outlined in Chapter 3, victim-blaming attitudes, rape myths, and 
stereotypes draw attention to victim-survivors as the common denomi­
nator and invisibilise suspects as the common thread. Empirical studies 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prevention is better than prosecution 73 
have repeatedly shown that many ofcers believe that few rape reports 
are genuine and that most victim-survivors do not want to go ahead 
with an investigation (Saunders, 2012; McMillan, 2018). If ofcers think 
a case is not “a runner” (Saunders, 2012) or “not genuine” (Stanko, 
2022), they may see little reason to begin proactively checking for repeat 
perpetration by the same named suspect. This protects the suspect from 
scrutiny and reduces the chances of ofcers joining the dots between 
cases with the same named suspect(s). In the Rochdale grooming gang 
case, the alleged common denominator was “troubled girls” (Jay, 2014). 
In the Worboys case, it was young women who liked to party in cen­
tral London’s nightclubs, drink too much, and make their way home 
alone (albeit in a licenced taxi) (see Chapter 2). In both examples, the 
explanation for the repeated rape reports of the same suspects was to 
be found in the girls and women. Each time, the suspect remained in 
the shadows, barely in the scope of a police investigation that was more 
determined on fnding evidence on the (lack of) credibility of the victim-
survivor than on uncovering patterns of ofending behaviour. Each time, 
this resulted in less evidentiary material being collected to support the 
victim-survivors’ accounts and, by extension, less material for joining 
the dots. Taking every rape disclosure seriously, as well as accurate and 
comprehensive recording of information on police systems are a neces­
sary (if insufcient) basis for identifying repeat suspects and patterns of 
repeat ofending. 
The “incident focus” of the police mindset is a further barrier to spotting 
patterns in ofending behaviour. Incident focus describes ofcers’ concern 
with resolving the immediate incident before them without considering 
the broader context of the relationship and the dynamics between the par­
ties involved. There is a plausible reason for this. The law requires ofcers 
to distil from a singular incident one or more discrete criminal charges, 
with little provision made in law for prosecuting patterns of behaviour. 
The coercive and controlling behaviour law introduced in 2015 forms 
the exception but is rarely used in practice (Barlow et al., 2020). The 
mismatch between the incident focus of policing and the true nature of 
the repeat ofending is perhaps most evident in domestic abuse. Domestic 
abuse, and in particular coercive control, is almost always an ongoing pat­
tern of behaviour. However, police are notoriously poor at identifying and 
responding to it (Stark, 2007; Myhill and Johnson, 2016; Myhill et al., 
2023). This extends to the investigation of rapes that take place in the 
context of a coercive controlling relationship – the nature of that sexual 
violence is routine and repeated. The coercive control literature would 
suggest that many, if not most, suspects in these cases are prime candi­
dates for repeat sexual ofending against the same victim-survivor (their 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
74 
Prevention is better than prosecution 
partner) and that this pattern is likely to repeat across intimate relation­
ships (Stark, 2007). However, an incident focus that blanks out the rela­
tionship context of the incident, combined with a victim-survivor rather 
than suspect focus, renders repeat perpetrators invisible in plain sight. 
Practical barriers also get in the way of identifying repeat suspects, spe­
cifcally within police data. Operation Soteria Bluestone research found 
police forces in England and Wales have outdated and clunky IT systems 
that make the routine, systematic checking for patterns of repeat suspects 
difcult. Trained staf and certain licences are required to access the Police 
National Database (PND), but there is not always one on shift to allow 
for immediate suspect checks. As a result, suspect checks are delayed or 
missed, or when they eventually occur, the inquiry’s outcome is not always 
noted in the case fle (Davies et al., 2022). This problem may appear eas­
ily fxable by upgrading IT systems and training ofcers but require large 
fnancial investments few forces are able to make. The Police National 
Computer (PNC) and the PND are the central national policing systems 
in the UK and have long been deemed unft for purpose and were due to 
be replaced by a new system in 2020. The new system is already delayed, 
over budget, limited in functionality and some say, outdated (National 
Audit Ofce, 2021). A shortage of ofcer resources further adds to the 
pressure. There is little doubt that ofcers carry high and often unmanage­
able workloads (HMICFRS, 2021; Williams et al., 2022), a further reason 
why ofcers may stick to the bare minimum (or less) with anything that is 
outside the immediate incident focus and where there is no “live danger” 
(see Chapter 2), with little resource devoted to the identifcation of repeat 
perpetrators to prevent their further ofending. 
One of policing’s paradoxes is the mismatch between its declared prin­
ciples and its practice. Crime prevention is the frst Peelian principle, yet 
in practice, it is marginal to police activity. In this section, we showed 
how little status, priority, strategic thinking, resource, and activity are 
devoted to it. Ofcers lack accurate and complete data, analytic resources, 
and a clear defnition of what counts as a repeat suspect to identify the 
prevalence of repeat perpetrators. The lack of data, combined with the 
red herring of victim-survivor credibility, reduces the likelihood of ofcers 
joining the dots to uncover repeat perpetrators. The default of policing is 
reactive, after-the-fact investigation. However, police forces possess both 
the intelligence and the legal tools to disrupt perpetrators known to them. 
The way forward: routine identifcation and 
disruption of known perpetrators 
Every rape disclosed to police provides intelligence to the police about 
potential perpetrator(s). Victim-survivors are lived experience experts of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prevention is better than prosecution 75 
the specifc sexual ofending behaviour of their attacker. This unwanted 
expertise is incredibly valuable. When reporting to the police, the victim-
survivor transfers to the police their frst-hand knowledge of how the 
perpetrator groomed, manipulated, or coerced them into a situation 
where the perpetrator took their freedom to choose, took advantage of 
their inability to make a choice, or acted against their express choice and 
raped them. With strangers accounting for less than 10% of recorded 
rapes, in the majority of police-recorded rapes victim-survivors are able 
to provide the name and often also the contact details for the suspect 
(Wunsch et al., 2021). At this point, the police have a duty to investigate 
the reported rape. Police then also have a duty to use this intelligence 
to stop known perpetrators from raping again, as afrmed powerfully 
by the verdict in DSD and NBV v the Commissioner of Police for the 
Metropolis (Fulford, 2021). We have outlined above some of the reasons 
why police forces routinely fail to meet this duty and now turn to the 
tools available to police forces to fulfl their duty to victim-survivors and 
society at large. 
Police forces already possess wide-ranging powers and tools to 
stop known perpetrators, including those never charged or even those 
acquitted of sexual ofences. The obvious port of call is law enforcement 
of the most recent crime reported against a suspect. Ofce for National 
Statistics (ONS) analysis indicates that less than two out of 100 rapes 
reported to the police will result in a conviction (ONS, 2018), mean­
ing that in more than 98% of cases, the law enforcement route will not 
stop a perpetrator. What is more, investigations take months or years. 
In 2023, rape cases in England and Wales took an average of 309 days 
from report to a police decision in the case, and a further 142 days for 
the CPS to make a charging decision. If a suspect is charged, long waits 
for a trial date means a further 369 days for a court outcome (HM Gov­
ernment, 2023). Most suspects are now released under investigation 
with no bail conditions, meaning the investigation process in itself is not 
a means of disrupting a suspect’s ability to ofend further (Sosabowski 
and Johnston, 2023). If criminal prosecution of a repeat suspect’s most 
recent suspected crime is unlikely to succeed, or ofcers are looking to 
strengthen an ongoing investigation, they may conduct a cold case review 
of previous incidents naming the same suspect. Allsop (2013) provides 
evidence that such cold case reviews are efective, however, concedes that 
they are resource-intensive and, therefore, rarely done. Live cases tend to 
take priority over historic cases (see also Chapter 2). Consideration must 
also be given to how reopening cases and re-contacting victim-survivors 
years or decades later may impact victim-survivors. An unexpected call 
from the police may be unwelcome, especially if the original police expe­
rience was poor. The few studies that have examined the impact of cold 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
76 
Prevention is better than prosecution 
case reviews on victim-survivors found that being re-contacted can cause 
signifcant emotional stress and recurring post traumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD) symptoms. If ofcers decide to re-contact victim-survivors, they 
must consider that victim-survivors will need emotional support and tan­
gible assistance to support them (Regoeczi and Wright, 2016; Campbell 
et al., 2023). There is very little research on this subject, and to our knowl­
edge, none specifcally within the English legal system. What is more, the 
deterrent efect of law and criminal justice on perpetrators is generally 
contested. With it, so is its efectiveness in crime prevention beyond the 
relatively small number of perpetrators prison removes from the commu­
nity at any one time (Robinson and Darley, 2004; Apel and Nagin, 2011). 
Perhaps in recognition of the limitations of the speed, capacity and con­
viction rates in criminal investigations of sexual ofences, lawmakers have 
created further tools for disruption of suspected or known sex ofenders. 
All police forces in England and Wales have specialist Management 
of Sexual or Violent Ofenders (MOSOVO) ofcers tasked with assess­
ing and monitoring the ongoing risk of convicted sex ofenders. Their 
remit is the essence of proactive, preventative work to stop known per­
petrators from causing further sexual harm (College of Policing, 2023b). 
Among colleagues, MOSOVO ofcers are sometimes called “scum cud­
dlers”, suggestive of the status of sex ofender management work within 
policing. MOSOVO ofcers conduct risk assessments of registered 
sex ofenders, mainly through unannounced home visits and by using 
risk assessment checklists to identify risk factors and protective factors 
(Nash, 2016). Ofcers do so as part of Multi-Agency Public Protection 
Arrangements (MAPPA). MAPPA was set up to improve cooperation 
and information fow between all agencies involved in managing reg­
istered sex ofenders – the police, prisons, and probation services and 
sometimes also housing, health, and social services. In the year ending 
March 2022, 66,741 registered sex ofenders were managed as part 
of MAPPA. Of these, 98% are so-called Level 1 ofenders, meaning 
ofenders of the lowest risk category where no multi-agency meetings 
are foreseen, and interagency cooperation primarily involves exchang­
ing information (Ministry of Justice, 2022). For these 98% of MAPPA 
management ofenders, the prison and probation service involvement 
has long ended, and the police are now the only agency monitoring and 
managing the sex ofender. This may include police reviewing and assess­
ing registered sex ofenders’ online activity, including whether they view 
or store sexual ofending relevant images and videos on their devices 
to assess the registered sex ofender’s intent or risk of further sexual 
ofending. In practice, ofcers often lack the technological capabilities, 
skills, resources, and time to monitor online activity and digital devices 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prevention is better than prosecution 77 
efectively (Horsman, 2023). MOSOVO ofcers feel ill-equipped for 
their role, poorly resourced, and perceive tensions between their specifc 
role requirements and general policing policies (Mydlowski and Turner-
Moore, 2023). The picture that emerges is one in which policing has 
sole responsibility for the management of over nine in ten registered 
sex ofenders without the necessary training, intelligence, capacity, and 
technological capabilities to do so. 
Over the past decade, means for preventing known perpetra­
tors from causing further sexual harm have been strengthened and 
expanded beyond convicted sex ofenders. Civil orders provide police 
forces with a way of imposing protective prohibitions on those sus­
pected of committing sexual ofences, regardless of whether they have 
been convicted. The two main civil orders police can apply for are 
Sexual Harm Prevention Orders (SHPOs) and Sexual Risk Orders 
(SROs), introduced into legislation through the Anti-social Behaviour, 
Crime and Policing Act 2014 and in efect since 2015. They replaced 
previous civil orders limited to protecting children. Police forces con­
sidered them cumbersome and unnecessarily restrictive in their appli­
cation (Davies et al., 2013). SHPOs require ofenders to register with 
the police as sex ofenders and prohibit them from doing anything 
described in the SHPO. While the police can apply for SHPOs, only 
the courts can issue them. The court needs to be satisfed that the 
order is both proportionate and necessary for protecting the public 
from sexual harm. Breach of a SHPO is a criminal ofence and carries 
severe sanctions of up to fve years imprisonment (a more serious sanc­
tion than those attached to some sexual ofences). Police forces can 
apply for SROs where an individual is deemed a risk even though they 
have never been convicted of any sexual ofending. Again, the police 
force must evidence reasonable cause to believe that the individual may 
ofend in the future and that it is necessary to impose prohibitions on 
them to protect the public from sexual harm. The burden of proof for 
the reasonable cause of concern in a magistrate’s court is far lower 
than that in a criminal investigation (“more likely than not”), where a 
jury must be sure of the suspect’s guilt (“beyond reasonable doubt”). 
This reasonable cause may arise from a police investigation that did 
not result in the suspect being charged or from an investigation that is 
still ongoing. An individual subject to an SRO must notify local police 
of their name and home address within three days of the order being 
made and notify them of any changes to this information. A breach of 
an SRO is a criminal ofence punishable by a maximum of fve years 
imprisonment and is subject to full notifcation requirements (Home 
Ofce, 2022; College of Policing, 2023a). 

 
 
78 Prevention is better than prosecution 
The prohibitions and restrictions a SHPO or SRO can impose on 
an individual include the person not being allowed to visit parks, play­
grounds, swimming pools, or other places where children tend to be if 
they are considered a risk to children; letting police review their online 
activity and check their digital devices at any time, prohibition from 
deleting their online browsing history; requirement to notify the police 
when starting a new relationship; and foreign travel restrictions if there 
is reasonable concern that the person may cause sexual harm abroad 
(Home Ofce, 2022; College of Policing, 2023a). SHPOs can be tailored 
to the modus operandi of the perpetrator. For example, the British Trans­
port Police (BTP) successfully applied for an SHPO for a male ofender 
who repeatedly posted videos on social media of himself masturbating 
in front of and exposing himself to other male passengers on London 
underground trains and, on one occasion, ejaculating over a sleeping 
passenger. The SHPO included a prohibition to use public transport in 
London unless having paid for the journey in a manner that allows his 
identifcation (e.g. contactless payment with a bank card), prohibits the 
ofender from any flming or photographing on the transport network, 
requires him to make his digital devices available to ofcers on request, 
and prohibits him from deleting his internet usage history. In the case of 
another perpetrator convicted of exposing himself to lone female passen­
gers on the London underground, BTP successfully applied for a SHPO 
that precludes this ofender from approaching, touching, or attempting 
to communicate with any female unknown to him in any public place 
in the UK, including on the transport network. The ofender’s modus 
operandi included sitting opposite a lone passenger, his genitals only 
covered by a coat, which he would then lift to expose himself. As a 
result, BTP included in the SHPO a prohibition to sit immediately next 
to or opposite any lone female passenger unknown to him on public 
transport and a prohibition to place a coat or any other item over his 
lap in any public place. In another case, BTP used a Criminal Behaviour 
Order to prevent a male suspect from touching his crotch area while on 
any form of public transport within London. This man is also prohibited 
from making deliberate, constant, or fxated eye contact with any female 
passenger travelling on any form of public transport within London. 
These are only three examples from one police force.2 Common to all is 
that the process begins by identifying the perpetrator’s modus operandi 
across a series of incidents and then using this knowledge to disrupt their 
approach using a civil order. 
Civil orders give police powerful tools to restrict a suspect’s sexual 
harm-relevant behaviour. There are a range of further civil orders availa­
ble to police forces. These include Domestic Violence Protection Orders, 

 
 
 
 
 
Prevention is better than prosecution 79 
Domestic Violence Protection Notices, and other protective orders pri­
marily designed with stalking and harassment in mind, but which may 
also serve to protect from potential sexual harm (College of Policing, 
2023a). Civil orders exist in law specifcally for harm prevention and to 
enable police forces to fulfl their crime prevention duty. Their preven­
tion promise is only realised when they are efectively applied in police 
practice. There is very little data and research on police forces’ use of 
civil orders. In 2015/16, 5,931 SHPOs were authorised, with the num­
ber steadily declining to 4,325 in 2019/20, before increasing back to 
5,731 in 2020/21. In the past three years, between 37 and 45 SROs 
have become subject to full yearly notifcation requirements (Ministry of 
Justice, 2022). To the best of our knowledge, there is no published data 
on the total number of issued SROs. We also could not fnd any pub­
lished evaluation or research on the efectiveness of SHPOs and SROs 
in preventing sexual ofending, their impacts on individuals who have 
SHPOs or SROs placed on them, or their impacts on victim-survivors 
or those deemed at risk of future victimisation by the person subject to 
the SHPO/SRO. Research on ofcers’ knowledge, understanding, and 
use of civil orders, as well as obstacles to their use, is minimal. There 
is also limited research on the efectiveness of MAPPA as the central 
pathway for reducing further ofending. In 2015, the Ministry of Justice 
published an early evaluation of MAPPA for the period of 2000–2010, 
which concluded that MAPPA might decrease proven re-ofending in 
the MAPPA-eligible population by four percentage points and decrease 
proven serious re-ofending by two percentage points. The authors 
clearly emphasise the study’s limitations, including the inability to rule 
out that the observed statistical estimate may be explained by something 
other than a direct efect of MAPPA (Bryant et al., 2015). Given sex 
ofence prevention is mainly reliant on MOSOVO ofcers, MAPPA, and 
civil orders, there is a concerning paucity of empirical research on their 
efectiveness and their impacts on perpetrators, victim-survivors, polic­
ing, and society. 
Conclusion 
Prevention is better than prosecution. Criminal investigations of rape 
are few, slow and often traumatic for victim-survivors. No criminal 
investigation can turn back the clock and undo a rape. The frst Peelian 
principle states that policing’s primary purpose is preventing crime. In 
practice, the police response to rape is almost exclusively reactive. Police 
investigate rape as discrete incidents, one at a time. Minimal resources 
and professional status are aforded to the management of known sex 

 
 
 
80 Prevention is better than prosecution 
ofenders and rape prevention programmes, even though sexual ofend­
ing is a prime candidate for preventative interventions. Like with other 
ofending, prolifc repeat ofenders are likely to account for a large vol­
ume of harm. What is more, the nature of sexual ofending and the 
cultural scafolding of rape are such that men who sexually ofend once 
are likely to do so again. They may also engage in other forms of male 
violence against women and girls. For police forces, this means that an 
obvious place from which to begin rape prevention eforts is by target­
ing those already known to police for their sexual ofending: the rape 
suspects already in their databases. Rape victim-survivors are lived 
experience experts on their attacker’s sexual ofending behaviour. Typi­
cally, the attacker is someone known to their victim, and often, a victim-
survivor can provide their attackers’ names and contact details alongside 
intelligence on their modus operandi. The law has equipped ofcers 
with criminal investigation powers as well as with a range of civil orders 
explicitly designed to prevent further ofending by known suspects and 
convicted sex ofenders. However, in practice, police forces make little 
use of either. Failures and missed opportunities in individual investiga­
tions reduce the quality of police data. This is further compounded by 
missing and incorrectly entered data on police crime recording systems 
(see also Chapter 6). IT systems are clunky and make it difcult and 
sometimes impossible for forces to even count the number of repeatedly 
named sex ofence suspects already on their books. 
There exists little research on police rape prevention strategies and 
tactics, suggesting that policing’s apparent lack of curiosity and drive to 
prevent sexual ofending also aficts the feld of policing research. Civil 
orders are potentially powerful legal means and should attract robust 
evaluation and evidence-based development. As such, the problem of 
rape prevention is not so much a question of a lack of tools, but of test­
ing and using them. At present, we have little evidence to understand 
police practice around these tactics; how efective they are in prevent­
ing sexual violence; and how they impact perpetrators, victim-survivors, 
and society. When it comes to the intelligence and data necessary for 
targeted rape prevention, victim-survivors are already providing it. 
However, police forces need to become better at storing and analysing it 
systematically for operational and strategic use. Police rape prevention 
is doubly marginalised. Rape and prevention both sit outside the default 
zone of policing. The price is paid by the victim-survivors of attackers 
the police had known about but did not attempt to stop. Ultimately, 
failing to take sexual violence prevention seriously as a remit for polic­
ing is failing to make the protection of women (and men) from sexual 
violence a priority. 

 
  
  
 
 
Prevention is better than prosecution 81 
Notes 
1 The time someone spends on the register will be determined by 
the sentence or disposal they receive. If they receive a prison sen­
tence of 30 months or more, they will be on the register indef­
nitely, although they can ask for this to be reviewed after 15 years 
have elapsed. Further information at https://unlock.org.uk/advice/ 
sexual-ofence-convictions-what-you-need-to-know/ 
2 Hohl would like to thank the British Transport Police for provid­
ing case examples in personal correspondence (November 2023) and 
permission to include them in this chapter. 
References 
Abel, G.G., Becker, J.V., Mittelman, M., Cunningham-Rathner, J., Rou­
leau, J.L. and Murphy, W.D. (1987). Self-reported sex crimes of nonin­
carcerated paraphiliacs. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 2(1): 3–25. 
Ahram, A.I. (2019). Sexual violence, competitive state building, and 
Islamic State in Iraq and Syria. Journal of Intervention and State-
building, 13(2): 180–196. 
Albarracin, D. and Shavitt, S. (2018). Attitudes and attitude change. 
Annual Review of Psychology, 69: 299–327. 
Allsop, C. (2013). Motivations, money and modern policing: Account­
ing for cold case reviews in an age of austerity. Policing and Society, 
23(3): 362–375. 
Almond, L., McManus, M.A., Worsley, J. and Gregory, P. (2015). Cold 
case reviews of serious sexual ofenders: An exploration of pre-and 
post-index ofending patterns. Journal of Forensic Psychology Prac­
tice, 15(3): 205–225. 
Alper, M. and Durose, M. (2019). Recidivism of sex ofenders released 
from state prison: A 9-year follow-up (2005–2014). Bureau of Jus­
tice Statistics, U.S. Department of Justice. Available at: https://bjs. 
ojp.gov/content/pub/pdf/rsorsp9yfu0514.pdf 
Amnesty International (1993). Bosnia-Herzegovina: Rape and sexual 
abuse by armed forces. Available at: www.amnesty.org/en/documents/ 
EUR63/001/1993/en/ 
Apel, R. and Nagin, D.S. (2011). General deterrence: A review of recent 
evidence. In J.Q. Wilson and J. Petersilia (Eds.) Crime and public 
policy. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 411–436. 
Barber, H. (2022). Castration, gang-rape, forced nudity: How Russia’s sol­
diers terrorise Ukraine with sexual violence. The Telegraph. 28 November. 
Available at: www.telegraph.co.uk/global-health/terror-and-security/ 
how-russian-soldiers-terrorise-ukraine-sexual-violence/ 
Barlow, C., Johnson, K., Walklate, S. and Humphreys, L. (2020). Put­
ting coercive control into practice: Problems and possibilities. The 
British Journal of Criminology, 60(1): 160–179. 
Bart, P.B. and O’Brien, P.H. (1993). Stopping rape: Successful survival 
strategies. New York: Teachers College Press. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
82 Prevention is better than prosecution 
Bates, L. (2021). Men who hate women: From incels to pickup artists: 
The truth about extreme misogyny and how it afects us all. Naper­
ville: Simon & Schuster UK. 
Benard, C. (1994). Rape as terror: The case of Bosnia. Terrorism and 
Political Violence, 6(1): 29–43. 
Beneke, T. (1982). Men on rape. New York: St. Martin’s Press. 
Brownmiller, S. (1975). Against our will: Men, women and rape. New 
York: Simon & Schuster. 
Bryant, S., Peck, M. and Lovbakke, J. (2015). Reofending analysis of 
MAPPA eligible ofenders. Ministry of Justice. Available at: https:// 
assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5a7f796ed915d74e33f7a8b/ 
reofending-analysis-of-mappa-eligible-ofenders.pdf 
Campbell, R., Gregory, K., Goodman-Williams, R., Engleton, J. and 
Javorka, M. (2023). Victim notifcation protocols for untested sexual 
assault kits: Survivors’ and advocates’ perspectives on law enforce­
ment-led outreach methods. Violence Against Women, 29(15–16): 
3101–3125. 
College of Policing (2023a). Court orders and notices. Available at: www. 
college.police.uk/app/major-investigation-and-public-protection 
/managing-sexual-ofenders-and-violent-ofenders/court-orders-and­
notices#:~:text=Sexual%20harm%20prevention%20order%20 
(SHPO),-Relevant%20legislation&text=The%20order%20 
will%20have%20specific,the%20offender%27s%20risk%20 
management%20plan 
College of Policing (2023b). Sexual or violent ofender manager (MOS­
OVO). Available at: https://profdev.college.police.uk/professional­
profle/sexual-or-violent-ofender-manager-mosovo/ 
Das, S. (2022). Inside the violent, misogynistic world of TikTok’s new 
star, Andrew Tate. The Guardian. 6 August. Available at: www. 
theguardian.com/technology/2022/aug/06/andrew-tate-violent­
misogynistic-world-of-tiktok-new-star 
Davies, H., Beddoe, C., McCourt, S., McIntyre, J., Geden, J. and Mor­
gan, A. (2013). Civil prevention orders sexual ofences act 2003. 
Available at: www.ecpat.org.uk/Handlers/Download.ashx?IDMF= 
cc782ae4-fd99-429c-84e4-43c1f1e62b5d 
Davies, K., Horvath, M., Allen, K., Barbin, A., Barrett, S., Bond, E., Cri­
vatu, I., Cross, M., Dalton, T., Ferreira, J., Gekoski, A., Heimer, R., 
Iliuta, A., Khan, A., Hardiman, M., Majid, A., Manning, M., Mas­
sey, K., Spence, R., Trott, L. and Woodhams, J. (2022). Appendix 
8 – Pillar two: Targeting repeat suspects. In Operation Soteria Blue-
stone year 1 report 2021–2022, 100–123. Available at: https://assets. 
publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/ 
attachment_data/fle/1128688/E02836356_Operation_Soteria_Y1_ 
report_Accessible.pdf 
Dobash, E. and Dobash, R.P. (Eds.) (1999). Rethinking violence against 
women. Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications. 
Fiske, S.T., Gilbert, D.T. and Lindzey, G. (Eds.) (2010). Handbook of 
social psychology. Vol. 2. 5th ed. Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Prevention is better than prosecution 83 
Flood, M. and Pease, B. (2009). Factors infuencing attitudes to violence 
against women. Trauma, Violence, & Abuse, 10(2): 125–142. 
Fulford, A.B. (2021). Wayne Couzens sentencing remarks. 30 September 
2021 Central Criminal Court. Available at: www.judiciary.uk/wp­
content/uploads/2021/09/Wayne-Couzens-Sentencing-Remarks.pdf 
Gavey, N. (2005). Just sex? The cultural scafolding of rape. Hove: 
Routledge. 
Glick, P. and Fiske, S.T. (1996). The ambivalent sexism inventory: Dif­
ferentiating hostile and benevolent sexism. Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 70(3): 491–512. 
Godenzi, A. (1994). What’s the big deal? We are men, and they are 
women. In T. Newburn and E. Stanko (Eds.) Just boys doing busi­
ness? London: Routledge, 135–152. 
Greenall, P.V. and Richardson, C. (2015). Adult male-on-female stran­
ger sexual homicide: A descriptive (baseline) study from Great Brit­
ain. Homicide Studies, 19(3): 237–256. 
Grifn, S. (1971). The politics of rape. Ramparts Magazine, 10: 26–35. 
Groth, A.N., Longo, R.E. and McFadin, J.B. (1982). Undetected recidi­
vism among rapists and child molesters. Crime & Delinquency, 
28(3): 450–458. 
Grubb, A. and Turner, E. (2012). Attribution of blame in rape cases: A 
review of the impact of rape myth acceptance, gender role conformity 
and substance use on victim blaming. Aggression and Violent Behav­
ior, 17(5): 443–452. 
HM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire & Rescue Services (2021). 
A joint thematic inspection of the police and Crown Prosecu­
tion Service’s response to rape – Phase one: From report to police 
or CPS decision to take no further action. Criminal Justice Joint 
Inspection. Available at: https://hmicfrs.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/ 
publication-html/a-joint-thematic-inspection-of-the-police-and­
crown-prosecution-services-response-to-rape-phase-one/ 
Hill, M., Campanale, D. and Gunter, J. (2021). ‘Their goal is to destroy eve­
ryone’: Uighur camp detainees allege systematic rape. BBC News. 2 Feb­
ruary. Available at: www.bbc.co.uk/news/world-asia-china-55794071 
HM Government (2023). Criminal justice system overview. Filters: Adult 
rape, national, rolling annual and last updated November 2022. 
Available at: https://criminal-justice-delivery-data-dashboards.justice. 
gov.uk/overview 
Hohl, K., Reid, A.K., Molisso, S. and Pullerits, M. (2023). Rape and 
sexual assault survivors’ experience of the police in England and 
Wales. Survey Report I: January–June 2023. City, University of Lon­
don. Available at: https://openaccess.city.ac.uk/id/eprint/31310/9/ 
Survey%20Report%20I%2021%20September%202023%20 
UPDATE%2020%20September.pdf 
Home Ofce (2012). Defnition of policing by consent. Available at: 
www.gov.uk/government/publications/policing-by-consent 
Home Ofce (2022). Sex ofender management: Police, crime, sen­
tencing and courts act 2022 factsheet. Available at: www.gov.uk/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
84 Prevention is better than prosecution 
government/publications/police-crime-sentencing-and-courts-bill­
2021-factsheets/police-crime-sentencing-and-courts-bill-2021-sex­
ofender-management-factsheet 
Horsman, G. (2023). Reviewing the devices of those subject to Sexual 
Harm Prevention Orders (SHPOs): iOS opportunities, limitations 
and strategies. Australian Journal of Forensic Sciences: 1–23. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/00450618.2023.2252472 
Jay, A. (2014). Independent inquiry into child sexual exploitation in 
Rotherham. Available at: www.rotherham.gov.uk/downloads/fle/279/ 
independent-inquiry-into-child-sexual-exploitation-in-rotherham 
Johnson, M.P. (1995). Patriarchal terrorism and common couple vio­
lence: Two forms of violence against women. Journal of Marriage 
and the Family, 57: 283–294. 
Jordan, J. (2022). Women, rape and justice: Unravelling the rape conun­
drum. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Kelly, L. (1988). Surviving sexual violence. Cambridge: Polity Press. 
Lovell, R., Huang, W., Overman, L., Flannery, D. and Klingenstein, 
J. (2020). Ofending histories and typologies of suspected sexual 
ofenders identifed via untested sexual assault kits. Criminal Justice 
and Behavior, 47(4): 470–486. 
Lovett, J., Hales, G., Kelly, L., Vera-Gray, F., Uzelac, G., Buil-Gil, D. and 
Myhill, A. (2022). Appendix 11 – data and performance. In Opera­
tion Soteria Bluestone year 1 report 2021–2022, 155–177. Available 
at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/ 
uploads/attachment_data/fle/1128688/E02836356_Operation_Soteria_ 
Y1_report_Accessible.pdf 
Lussier, P. (2005). The criminal activity of sexual ofenders in adult­
hood: Revisiting the specialization debate. Sexual Abuse: A Journal 
of Research and Treatment, 17(3): 269–292. 
Marshall, E.A., Miller, H.A. and Boufard, J.A. (2021). Bridging the 
theoretical gap: Using sexual script theory to explain the relationship 
between pornography use and sexual coercion. Journal of Interper­
sonal Violence, 36(9–10): NP5215–NP5238. 
McMahon, S. (2010). Rape myth beliefs and bystander attitudes among 
incoming college students. Journal of American College Health, 
59(1): 3–11. 
McMillan, L. (2018). Police ofcers’ perceptions of false allegations of 
rape. Journal of Gender Studies, 27(1): 9–21. 
Ministry of Justice (2022). Multi-agency public protection arrangements 
(MAPPA) annual report 2021/22. Available at: https://assets.publishing. 
service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ 
data/fle/1113769/MAPPA_Annual_Report_2022.pdf 
Muehlenhard, C.L. and MacNaughton, J.S. (1988). Women’s beliefs 
about women who ‘lead men on’. Journal of Social and Clinical Psy­
chology, 7(1): 65–79. 
Mydlowski, L. and Turner-Moore, R. (2023). Tensions between police 
training and practice for the risk assessment of registered sex ofend­
ers in England and Wales. Journal of Sexual Aggression: 1–14. https:// 
doi.org/10.1080/13552600.2023.2190752 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Prevention is better than prosecution 85 
Myhill, A. and Hohl, K. (2019). The ‘golden thread’: Coercive control 
and risk assessment for domestic violence. Journal of Interpersonal 
Violence, 34(21–22): 4477–4497. 
Myhill, A. and Johnson, K. (2016). Police use of discretion in response 
to domestic violence. Criminology & Criminal Justice, 16(1): 3–20. 
Myhill, A., Johnson, K., McNeill, A., Critchfeld, E. and Westmar­
land, N. (2023). ‘A genuine one usually sticks out a mile’: Policing 
coercive control in England and Wales. Policing and Society, 33(4): 
398–413. 
Nash, M.R. (2016). ‘Scum cuddlers’: Police ofender managers and the 
sex ofenders’ register in England and Wales. Policing and Society, 
26(4): 411–427. 
National Audit Ofce (2021). The national law enforcement data pro-
gramme. Available at: www.nao.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2021/09/ 
The-National-Law-Enforcement-Data-Programme.pdf 
Ofce for National Statistics (2018). Sexual ofending: Victimisa­
tion and the path through the criminal justice system. Available at: 
www.ons.gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/ 
articles/sexualofendingvictimisationandthepaththroughthecriminal­
justicesystem/2018-12-13 
Ofce for National Statistics (2022). Domestic abuse in England and 
Wales overview: November 2022. Available at: www.ons.gov. 
uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/bulletins/ 
domesticabuseinenglandandwalesoverview/november2022 
Palmer, T. and Wiener, C. (2021). Telling the wrong stories: Rough sex 
coercive control and the criminal law. Child and Family Law Quar­
terly, 33(4): 331–346. 
Regoeczi, W. and Wright, V. (2016). Final report: An evaluation of the 
Cuyahoga County Prosecutor’s Ofce sexual assault victim advocacy 
initiative. Available at: https://services.dps.ohio.gov/OCCS/Pages/ 
Public/Reports/FinalReportSAVAEvaluation.pdf 
Rehabilitation of Ofenders Act (1974). c.53. Available at: www.legislation. 
gov.uk/ukpga/1974/53 
Roach, J. and Pease, K. (2013a). Evolution and crime. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Roach, J. and Pease, K. (2013b). Police overestimation of criminal career 
homogeneity. Journal of Investigative Psychology and Ofender Pro­
fling, 11(2): 164–178. 
Robinson, P.H. and Darley, J.M. (2004). Does criminal law deter? A 
behavioural science investigation. Oxford Journal of Legal Studies, 
24(2): 173–205. 
Saunders, C.L. (2012). The truth, the half-truth, and nothing like the 
truth: Reconceptualizing false allegations of rape. British Journal of 
Criminology, 52(6): 1152–1171. 
Schneider, J.L. (2005). The link between shoplifting and burglary: The 
booster burglar. British Journal of Criminology, 45(3): 395–401. 
Scully, D. and Marolla, J. (1985). ‘Riding the bull at Gilley’s’: Convicted 
rapists describe the rewards of rape. Social Problems, 32(3): 251–263. 
Simon, W. and Gagnon, J.H. (2003). Sexual scripts: Origins, infuences 
and changes. Qualitative Sociology, 26(4): 491–497. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
86 Prevention is better than prosecution 
Slater, C., Woodhams, J. and Hamilton-Giachritsis, C. (2014). Can serial 
rapists be distinguished from one-of rapists? Behavioral Sciences & 
the Law, 32(2): 220–239. 
Soothill, K., Francis, B., Sanderson, B. and Ackerley, E. (2000). Sex 
ofenders: Specialists, generalists – or both? British Journal of Crimi­
nology, 40(1): 56–67. 
Sosabowski, M.H. and Johnston, E. (2023). Released under investigation: 
High time to bail out. The Journal of Criminal Law, 87(4): 266–280. 
Stanko, B. (2022). Operation Soteria Bluestone year 1 report 2021–2022. 
Available at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/ 
system/uploads/attachment_data/fle/1128688/E02836356_Operation_ 
Soteria_Y1_report_Accessible.pdf 
Stanko, E. (1985). Intimate intrusions. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Stark, E. (2007). Coercive control: How men entrap women in personal 
life. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Sun, C., Bridges, A., Johnson, J.A. and Ezzell, M.B. (2016). Pornog­
raphy and the male sexual script: An analysis of consumption and 
sexual relations. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 45(4): 983–994. 
Tahsin, J., Shea, M. and Hume, T. (2023). ’I love raping you’: What Andrew 
Tate told women who accused him of rape. Vice. 11 January. Available 
at: www.vice.com/en/article/wxn3dm/andrew-tate-whatsapps-arrest 
Thornberry, T.P. and Krohn, M.D. (Eds.) (2006). Taking stock of delin­
quency: An overview of fndings from contemporary longitudinal 
studies. New York: Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Tidmarsh, P. (2021). The whole story: Investigating sexual crime – 
Truth, lies and the path to justice. London: Jonathan Cape. 
United Nations (2020). Confict-related sexual violence: Report of the 
United Nations Secretary-General. Available at: www.un.org/sexual 
violenceinconflict/wp-content/uploads/2020/07/report/conflict­
related-sexual-violence-report-of-the-united-nations-secretary-general/ 
2019-SG-Report.pdf 
Vannier, S., Currie, A.B. and O’Sullivan, L.F. (2014). Schoolgirls and 
soccer moms: A content analysis of free ‘teen’ and ‘MILF’ online por­
nography. The Journal of Sex Research, 51(3): 253–264. 
Vera-Gray, F., McGlynn, C., Kureshi, I. and Butterby, K. (2021). Sexual 
violence as a sexual script in mainstream online pornography. The 
British Journal of Criminology, 61(5): 1243–1260. 
Ward, C.A. (1995). Attitudes toward rape: Feminist and social psycho­
logical perspective. London: Sage Publications. 
Weaver, G.M. (2010). Ideologies of forgetting: Rape in the Vietnam 
War. Albany: State University of New York Press. 
Weinrott, M.R. and Saylor, M. (1991). Self-report of crimes committed 
by sex ofenders. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 6(3): 286–300. 
Wiener, C. (2023). Coercive control and the criminal law. Abingdon: 
Routledge. 
Williams, E., Miller, N., Harding, R., Sondhi, A., Maguire, L., Nor­
man, J., Abinashi, D. and Ward, R. (2022). Appendix 10 – Pillar 
four: Ofcer learning, development and well-being. In Operation 

 
 
 
 
Prevention is better than prosecution 87 
Soteria Bluestone year 1 report 2021–2022, 140–154. Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/ 
uploads/attachment_data/file/1128688/E02836356_Operation_ 
Soteria_Y1_report_Accessible.pdf 
Wright, P.J. (2014). Pornography and the sexual socialization of children: 
Current knowledge and a theoretical future. Journal of Children and 
Media, 8(3): 305–312. 
Wunsch, D., Davies, T. and Charleton, B. (2021). The London rape 
review 2021. Mayor of London Ofce for Policing and Crime. 
Available at: www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/fles/fnal_rr_victimtech_ 
61221.pdf 
Wyder, A. (2022). Andrew Tate’s chokehold on young, lost men. Trill 
Mag. 26 August. Available at: www.trillmag.com/life/social-media/ 
andrew-tates-chokehold-on-young-lost-men%EF%BF%BC/ 

 
 
5 
THE JOURNEY MATTERS AS 
MUCH AS THE DESTINATION 
A procedural justice approach to police 
engagement with victim-survivors 
Introduction 
Improving outcome justice – charges and convictions – is necessary but 
insufcient to close the rape justice gap. How ofcers treat rape victim-
survivors during an investigation afects them as much, if not more, than 
its outcome. Both Procedural Justice Theory and the feminist-informed 
literature on victim-survivor research provides evidence to support 
this claim. In this chapter, we place feminist-informed victim-survivor 
research into the context of Procedural Justice Theory. Procedural Jus­
tice Theory explains why the quality of police engagement with mem­
bers of the public can have a profound impact on people’s self-identity 
and sense of worth and belonging within society. It also explains why 
wider public trust in the police, as well as peoples’ willingness to report a 
crime to the police or to support an investigation, depends on how ofc­
ers treat people. We outline what a victim-survivor research-informed 
procedural justice approach could look like. The proposed approach 
widens the default police performance focus on criminal justice out­
comes to include victim-survivor experiences of police encounters, as 
measured through the components of procedural fairness. 
Feminist-informed victim-survivor research has extensively docu­
mented the aspects of police investigations and ofcer interactions that 
shape victim-survivors’ negative experiences of the process. This includes 
the impacts of intrusive investigations on victim-survivors (see Chapter 
3) and the efects of ofcer demeanour on victim-survivors (e.g. Camp­
bell, 2005; Smith, 2018; Smith and Daly, 2020; Rich, 2019). The past 
decades have seen signifcant improvements in the way forensic medi­
cal examinations and victim-survivor interviews are being conducted. In 
England and Wales, a Victims’ Code of Practice sets out victims’ rights 
(Ministry of Justice, 2023). Many police forces now have dedicated 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429444869-5 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The journey matters as much as the destination 89 
victim engagement ofcers with specialist sexual ofences training, and 
there is independent victim-survivor support (Brown et al., 2010; Tong 
et al., 2011; Westmarland et al., 2012; McMillan and Thomas, 2013). 
This scholarly research on rape victim-survivor experiences of the police 
sits separately from the general policing literature on the relationship 
between the police and the public. Within the general policing literature, 
Procedural Justice Theory has become a dominant paradigm for under­
standing the relationships between public perceptions of and public trust 
in the police, police legitimacy and the public’s willingness to cooperate 
with the police and to comply with the law (e.g. Tyler, 2006; Tyler and 
Huo, 2002; Jackson et al., 2012, 2013). Only a handful of studies have 
tested the applicability of Procedural Justice Theory to police-victim 
interactions, and rape victim-survivors particularly (e.g. Elliot et al., 
2014; Lorenz, 2017; Wemmers, 2008, 2013). Prior to Operation Soteria 
Bluestone, no such study had been conducted in the UK (see Hohl et al., 
2022, and Chapter 7). We address this gap by assessing the face-value 
compatibility of feminist-informed victim-survivor research and Proce­
dural Justice Theory. We outline the value of the procedural justice lens 
for understanding the importance of procedurally fair police engage­
ment with rape victim-survivors, both for their experience of justice 
and for UK policing’s ability to regain/retain public trust, especially 
that of women. 
Increasing rape prosecution and conviction rates are rightful aims of the 
survivor support sector, police forces, and the government (HM Govern­
ment, 2021). However, low prosecution and conviction rates are not the 
only, and perhaps not even the main, reason why rape victim-survivors 
experience police investigation as “secondary victimisation”. Secondary 
victimisation describes the additional trauma that can be inficted upon a 
rape victim-survivor by the criminal justice process (Campbell and Raja, 
1999; Stanko, 1985). Police ofcers behaving in ways that signal disbelief, 
disinterest, blame, or a lack of empathy towards victim-survivors can be 
deeply damaging (Campbell, 2005). Excessive questioning of the victim-
survivor and intrusive investigation of their personal records and data – for 
example, the downloading of mobile phone content or medical, social ser­
vices and school records – can amplify trauma. This is especially true when 
such intrusive investigations are unjustifed and disproportionate (Dodge 
et al., 2019; Information Commissioner’s Ofce, 2022). The way police 
interact with victim-survivors and approach their cases can be life changing. 
In a large survey, some victim-survivors described feeling well supported by 
ofcers and reported that ofcers had treated them with kindness, empa­
thy, and care. These victim-survivors said that the ofcer’s conduct helped 
them to move forward with their lives after sexual violence. However, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
90 The journey matters as much as the destination 
75% of victim-survivors reported that their mental health had worsened as 
a direct result of what the police did or failed to do in their case (Hohl et al., 
2023). Some reported having suicidal feelings and suicide attempts. Many 
regretted having trusted the police with what happened to them, stopped 
reporting subsequent sexual violence, and began avoiding any form of 
police interaction, even if this leaves them exposed to ongoing sexual vio­
lence or domestic abuse. Half of victim-survivors who withdrew from the 
investigation said “more kindness and understanding from ofcers” would 
have enabled them to continue with the case (ibid). The study attests to 
the importance of appropriate and empathetic treatment of rape victim-
survivors by ofcers and the harm that fows from ofcers’ failures to do so. 
Government and police forces are increasingly recognising the importance 
of victim-survivor experience for their trust in the police. 
For rape victim-survivors, the journey matters as much as the des­
tination. In this chapter, we argue that a procedural justice framework 
informed by victim-survivor research provides a useful framework for 
understanding why the quality of police interactions with rape victim-
survivors matters. Our starting point is a review of the feminist-informed 
research that documents rape victim-survivors’ current experiences of 
their police interactions. We introduce Procedural Justice Theory and 
explore its contribution to understanding why these police interactions 
afect rape victim-survivors the way that they do. We then map the princi­
ples of procedural justice onto the victim-survivor literature to assess the 
face-value compatibility of the two bodies of research. Finally, we explore 
its practical use in improving how police forces engage with victim-
survivors based on a case study from Project Bluestone. The current default 
key performance measures for police forces’ success in responding to rape 
and sexual ofences are charges and convictions. We conclude that police 
forces must widen their perspective to aford equivalent importance to the 
quality of their engagement with victim-survivors. 
The criminal justice journey as an assault course for 
victim-survivors 
The criminal justice journey is an assault course for many rape victim-
survivors. In 2020, less than half (48%) of rape victim-survivors felt 
the police had treated them with sensitivity, fairness, and respect when 
they reported to police, slightly fewer than in the 2018 wave of the same 
survey (54%) (Molina and Poppleton, 2020). In 2023, 75% of victim-
survivors taking part in a police experience survey said their mental health 
worsened as a result of the police investigation (Hohl et al., 2023). 
Victim-survivors are aware of the low level of prosecutions for rape and 

 
 
 
 
 
The journey matters as much as the destination 91 
often feel a deep sense of unfairness about the rights, protections, and 
legal representation aforded to rape suspects that are not available to 
victim-survivors (Frazier and Haney, 1996). Just 14% of the victim-survivors 
taking part in the Victims’ Commissioner’s survey felt that they could 
obtain justice by reporting to the police (Molina and Poppleton, 2020). 
In their interviews with Scottish rape victim-survivors, Brooks-Hay et 
al. (2019) found that none of the interviewees whose rapist was found 
guilty felt that justice had been done because of how they experienced 
the process leading up to the conviction. Victim-survivors are telling us, 
through these studies, that outcome justice is not their only, and per­
haps not even their primary concern. Existing research gives us a good 
grasp of what exactly it is about the process that leaves victim-survivors 
traumatised and with a sense that, whatever the outcome of the case, the 
process has undermined any sense of justice. 
Rape investigations are more intrusive for victim-survivors than 
investigations of other crime types. Rape victim-survivors’ bodies, mem­
ories, and personal data are all avenues of enquiry and put under the 
microscope. Over the past decades, there have been notable improve­
ments. Victim-survivors no longer need to give evidence at the station 
counter. There are now private, dedicated interviewing suites. There are 
Sexual Assault Referral Centres (SARCs) with doctors and nurses spe­
cially trained to collect medical forensic evidence sensitively (Champion 
et al., 2021). These measures are tangible improvements; however, they 
do not fundamentally alter the intrusive nature of a police investigation. 
The following quotes from victim-survivors taking part in a lived experi­
ence focus group conducted by Smith et al. (2022) for Operation Soteria 
Bluestone research illustrate the point: 
You’re put in an intrusive situation when you get raped and then 
the investigation’s just intrusive as well from start to fnish. (Victim-
survivor, National Panel 3) 
(Smith et al., 2022: 122) 
I did everything I could and everything I was asked by the police, but 
dealing with them has been the worst and most traumatic experience. 
They are inhumane, misogynistic, thoughtless and cruel. . . . I have 
been violated and scrutinised, my blood was taken, swabs from all 
parts of my body, people looking at my genitals, touching me, my 
phone and belongings taken and never returned. My history taken 
and reviewed and judged for any scraps of information they could 
use against me. (Victim-survivor, Force A) 
(Smith et al., 2022: 124) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
92 The journey matters as much as the destination 
There have also been steps backwards. Today, digital forensic evidence, 
such as victim-survivors’ mobile phone contents and other digital 
devices, frequently enters the focus of the investigation (see Chapter 
6). One study estimates that these are requested in one in fve cases 
(Hohl et al., 2023). The UK Victims’ Commissioner (2021) estimates 
that 40–65% of these requests are not proportionate. Data held by the 
Victims’ Commissioner’s ofce also suggests that some victim-survivor 
cases were dropped because they declined to consent to digital data 
disclosure, even if there were no reasonable lines of enquiry that would 
render such a request proportionate or relevant. This, the Victims’ 
Commissioner argued, had a chilling efect on victim-survivors’ willing­
ness to report to the police (ibid.). Too often, ofcers do not provide 
victim-survivors with the information necessary to make an informed 
decision about handing over their phones and social media accounts for 
investigative purposes. Some may not know or comprehend what they 
have consented to and what legal impact this may have; for example, 
that this may mean that the material may be disclosed to the defend­
ant and shown in court (Smith et al., 2022). Seizure of data relevant to 
the attack exacerbates victim-survivors’ feelings of intrusion and allows 
the defence counsel additional opportunities to introduce rape myths 
and misconceptions (Smith and Daly, 2020; Smith et al., 2022; May 
et al., 2022). As such, the advent of digital forensic technologies has 
expanded the multitude of ways in which rape investigations are inti­
mate intrusions. 
Many scholars have argued that rape myths and stereotypes can col-
our how ofcers engage with victim-survivors in ways that are harmful to 
victim-survivors. This includes making victim-survivors feel that they are 
to blame if they consumed alcohol prior to being attacked and extends to 
making victim-survivors feel judged if they continue a relationship with 
the perpetrator after a rape, especially in contexts of coercive control. 
Similarly, stereotypes and prejudice surrounding sex work may result in 
ofcers not taking rape reports from a sex worker seriously, and male 
rape victim-survivors may be disbelieved based on the misconception 
that men, especially heterosexual men, cannot be raped (for reviews, see 
Brown and Horvath, 2009; Jordan, 2022). At times ofcers lack empathy 
and understanding of the psychological consequences of sexual assault, 
which can result in secondary traumatisation of rape victim-survivors. 
Experiencing rape can cause PTSD, anxiety, depression, and a wide range 
of other mental health issues that can be highly distressing and disabling. It 
may result in victim-survivors being unable to talk about what happened 
or parts of what happened, forgetting aspects of the events, or appearing 
calm and unphased because of the numbness and detachment that can 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The journey matters as much as the destination 93 
follow traumatic events. Some victim-survivors may appear irritable, 
angry, unfocused, or jumpy (Mason and Lodrick, 2013). All this can 
impact how victim-survivors present to the police, including during their 
police interview. The police interview is a central moment in the investi­
gation process, as this is where police elicit the victim-survivor’s detailed 
account of the events. The victim-survivor’s account informs police lines 
of enquiry and is key evidentiary material ofcers use to judge the cred­
ibility and strength of the case. In the interview, investigators ask vic­
tim-survivors to recount in minute detail what has happened to them. 
Victim-survivors are frequently interrupted and repeatedly asked about 
minutiae that appear peripheral or irrelevant to them and are unlikely to 
be recalled by anyone, let alone by someone in a state of trauma (Westera 
et al., 2011; Hohl and Conway, 2017). When ofcers are not trauma-
responsive in how they approach the interview and other interactions 
with victim-survivors, this can signifcantly reduce the quality of the evi­
dence elicited from the interview as well as result in further trauma for 
the victim-survivor (Risan et al., 2016, 2020; Rich, 2019). Academics 
and practitioners have called for trauma-informed police responses to 
rape, but best practice is yet to be consistently applied. 
Long delays in the investigation can increase the toll the criminal 
justice process takes on victim-survivors. It takes an average of 451 days 
from an adult rape report to result in a CPS charging decision, and on 
average, a further 369 days from a charge for the case to complete at 
Crown Court (HM Government, 2023). Often there is a furry of activ­
ity and a sense of progress at the start of an investigation. What follows, 
however, are long waits for the results of forensic analyses or for the 
investigating ofcer to return to the case amidst their large number of 
other concurrent investigation demands. Weeks, months, or sometimes 
years go by without victim-survivors hearing from investigators. For 
much of this time, victim-survivors are likely to feel that the ofcer is no 
longer progressing the investigation. This is exacerbated when ofcers 
fail to provide regular updates to victim-survivors. Providing reassur­
ance and information about delays matters (Hohl et al., 2023). Ofcers 
failing to look at all the evidence, making mistakes, and missing oppor­
tunities to capture all the evidence, as well as the long delays during 
the investigation, can further dent a victim-survivor’s confdence in the 
process and have detrimental impacts on victim-survivor mental health 
(Brooks-Hay et al., 2019; Hohl et al., 2023). Long delays and errors in 
the investigation are part of the tapestry of how many victim-survivors 
feel harmed by the investigation and wider criminal justice process. 
In sum, the existing literature provides rich documentation of the 
factors that shape rape victim-survivor experiences of the investigation 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
94 The journey matters as much as the destination 
process. Any police investigation that takes evidence from the victim­
survivor’s body, memory, personal records, or digital devices is intru­
sive. This is especially so when such intrusions are disproportionate or 
unnecessary, and more likely to arise from victim credibility-focused 
investigations (see also Chapter 3). Academics, victim-survivors, and 
practitioners have advocated for changes in police practice to limit inti­
mate intrusions to their legal boundaries and to put in place mitigating 
measures such as SARCs, interviewing suites, or independent victim-survivor 
support through Independent Sexual Violence Advocates (ISVAs). Oth­
ers have emphasised the need for ofcers to be trauma-informed to 
minimise the risk of the police interviews and other ofcer interactions 
with victim-survivors resulting in secondary victimisation. This litera­
ture provides evidence-based, concrete recommendations for policing 
on how to improve. Yet the UK government’s end-to-end rape review 
(2021) concluded that the process remains gruelling for victim-survivors 
and that not enough progress had been made. In the UK, this resulted in 
the Prime Minister apologising to rape victim-survivors for “the trauma 
they have been through” (Evening Standard, 2021). To understand why 
the way ofcers treat victim-survivors can have such profound impacts, 
we must also consider the symbolic power of the police as state authori­
ties and representatives of the law. 
The symbolic power of the criminal justice journey 
How others react to a rape disclosure can profoundly afect how a victim-
survivor feels and thinks about what happened to them. Insensitive, 
doubting, or blaming reactions can make victim-survivors feel that it 
is psychologically unsafe or pointless to seek help, and have a silencing 
efect. Such reactions can also increase feelings of self-blame, self-doubt, 
and shame (Ahrens, 2006; Filipas and Ullman, 2001). For victim-survivors 
from racialised and minoritised communities, this is compounded by 
institutionalised discrimination and racism, further functioning to 
silence victim-survivors (Begum and Gill, 2022). How police ofcers 
respond to rape disclosures is no exception. Sensitivity and compassion 
from ofcers can have a “therapeutic” efect on victim-survivors, aid­
ing or at least not impeding recovery from sexual violence (Wemmers, 
2013; Lorenz, 2017; Greeson et al., 2014). Conversely, ofcer language, 
tone of voice, body language, or other ofcer actions that signal to the 
victim-survivor that they are not believed or not taken seriously, ofc­
ers minimising, denying, and reframing the victim-survivor’s account of 
a rape as “regretful sex”, a “false allegation”, or the result of “mental 
health issues”, can be (re-)traumatising and stall recovery (Rich, 2019). 

 
 
 
 
 
The journey matters as much as the destination 95 
There is wider signal value to how police respond to a victim-survivor’s 
lived experience, as encapsulated in this quote from a victim-survivor: 
If police are not taking it seriously enough and it is a criminal ofence, 
why shouldn’t society do the same? 
(Victim-survivor, quoted in Smith et al., 2022: 124) 
This victim-survivor cuts to the heart of the symbolic power, the signal 
value, which police actions carry. If the police do not take rape seriously, 
why should anyone else? If the police do not appear to apply or follow 
the law on rape, why should anyone else? Police are representatives of 
the state, the law, society, and community (Loader and Mulcahy, 2003). 
When people deem the police a legitimate authority, police function as 
respected representatives of state, society, law, and order. As such, the 
police can shape the public’s behaviour, particularly people’s willingness 
to obey the law and cooperate with the police. Police symbols, such as 
the uniform and police badge, are potent reminders of the authority of 
the police. As such, “police serve as arbiters of moral conduct. They 
defne respectable and disrespectable behaviour. They can delineate the 
normative from the deviant” (Bradford et al., 2021: 645). Police deline­
ate the fault line between “right” and “wrong” and separate the con­
doned from the condemned through the way they interact with members 
of the public, including rape victim-survivors. 
Procedural Justice Theory 
Procedural Justice Theory is a theory that links people’s perceptions of 
the quality of police interactions to their trust in the police and their 
perceptions of police legitimacy. Put simply, when ofcers are perceived 
to be treating people with fairness, dignity, and respect, this fosters posi­
tive assessments of police trustworthiness and legitimacy, resulting in a 
greater willingness to cooperate with police and comply with the law. A 
large body of research consistently evidences that people’s perceptions 
of police procedural fairness have a far greater impact on public trust in 
the police than people’s perceptions of police efectiveness. That is, when 
it comes to public trust in the police and public perceptions of police 
legitimacy, procedural justice matters more than outcome justice (Tyler, 
2006; Murphy et al., 2009; Jackson et al., 2012, 2013). Police forces 
in the UK and elsewhere have begun to recognise the importance of 
police procedural fairness for public trust. There are now a range of case 
studies on how Procedural Justice Theory has shaped police policy and 
practice, for example, in the areas of neighbourhood policing and police 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
96 The journey matters as much as the destination 
performance measurements, stop and search practices, trafc policing, 
public order events, and the policing of Covid-19 lockdown legislation 
(Bradford, 2020). The thinking and language of Procedural Justice The­
ory have become embedded in policing and hold currency among senior 
ofcers, underpinned by a realisation that the legitimacy of the police 
depends on procedural justice. 
The social psychological theory that has given rise to Procedural Jus­
tice Theory explains why perceptions of police procedural fairness shape 
people’s judgements of the police. It also explains how the quality of 
police interaction can infuence people’s self-identity. In the words of 
Bradford et al. (2014: 527), the police are an “engine of identity pro­
duction and infuence”. Social identity theory posits that we all have a 
psychological need of belonging to social groups. Feeling like one is a 
respected group member is essential for self-validation (Festinger, 1954). 
Even the most tenuous connection to a group can make us feel a sense of 
group identifcation. For example, strangers randomly assigned to “blue 
group” or “red group” stickers within a lab experiment quickly develop 
in-group and out-group sentiments based on their “blue group” and 
“red group” stickers. Perceived group membership shapes our feelings, 
judgements, and behaviour towards others purely based on whether 
they are members of our in-group or not (Brewer and Kramer, 1986; 
Kramer and Brewer, 1984; Tajfel and Turner, 1979). Not only do groups 
shape how we see and treat others, we also derive information about 
our group status from how valued members and authorities within that 
group treat us (Tyler et al., 1996; Tajfel and Turner, 1986, but see also 
labelling theory, Becker, 1963 and Bradford et al., 2014). The underly­
ing assumption is that how in-group authorities treat us is an indicator 
of how the whole group views us (Smith et al., 1998). As such, the qual­
ity of police interactions can have profound impacts on our sense of self 
and our sense of belonging. 
Police are representatives of the state, law, and society. They are 
important prototypical group representatives of dominant norms and 
values within that society (Sunshine and Tyler, 2003a; Loader and 
Mulcahy, 2003). We draw inferences about our group status and self-
identity from whether the police, as representatives of the state, society, 
and law, interact with and act towards us with procedural fairness. Pro­
cedural fairness is often defned as consisting of four key components: 
voice, dignity and respect, neutrality, and trustworthy motives (Brad­
ford et al., 2021; Tyler, 2006). When ofcers treat us with dignity and 
fairness, appear unbiased (neutral) in their decision-making, and show 
a willingness to consider our side of the story, this signals to us that 
we are valued group members. Conversely, if authorities interact with 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The journey matters as much as the destination 97 
us in ways that appear to be biased (not treating us fairly and equally 
compared to others within the group) or are rude or dismissive, this 
communicates to us a marginal or insecure group status. This, then, by 
extension, negatively impacts our sense of self-worth. Crucially, it is the 
quality of the interaction with the group authority, not whether the out­
come of this interaction is favourable for us, that shapes how we judge 
authority holders within our group and how we judge our own status 
and self-worth (Bradford et al., 2021; Tyler, 2006; Tyler and Huo, 2002; 
Sunshine and Tyler, 2003b). How the police treat us impacts us because 
of their symbolic status within society. 
Not everyone is equally concerned with the identity implications 
of how group authorities treat them. When we feel unsure or insecure 
about our status within a group, we are particularly attuned to how 
group authorities like the police treat us, scanning for status-relevant 
information (Sunshine and Tyler, 2003a; Smith et al., 1998; Tyler and 
Lind, 1992; Lind and Tyler, 1988). Rape is an act of violation which 
attempts to deny the victim-survivor their will, worth, and personhood. 
Victim-survivors report to the police because the police are an ofcial 
authority. This means rape victim-survivors may be particularly attuned 
to whether ofcers treat them in ways that reafrm their status as val­
ued and worthy members of society. Given the nature of rape and its 
impact on victim-survivors, rape victim-survivors are thus behaving in 
entirely rational ways when seeking, in their interactions with ofcers, 
recognition that what happened to them was wrong. Based on social 
identity theory, rape victim-survivors are also responding in entirely 
expected and proportionate ways if they are being deeply afected by 
the quality of those interactions in their sense of self-worth, trauma, 
and recovery. As such, social identity theory challenges the problem­
atic beliefs held by some ofcers about rape victim-survivors being 
uniquely “over-sensitive” or “hard work” if they are highly sensitive to 
police interactions (Hohl et al., 2022). Procedural Justice Theory and 
the underpinning social identity theory thus appear useful in explaining 
victim-survivor responses to the quality of police interactions. 
Procedural Justice Theory has largely overlooked 
rape victim-survivors 
Procedural Justice Theory has been tested extensively in a variety of con­
texts, however rarely in relation to police interactions with rape victim-
survivors. The main practical applications of Procedural Justice Theory are 
people’s diferential experiences and judgements of the police based on their 
race or ethnicity (Tyler and Huo, 2002; Jackson et al., 2013) or multiple 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
98 The journey matters as much as the destination 
national identities (Bradford, 2012). Such studies overwhelmingly take the 
form of public opinion surveys. These surveys typically ask respondents to 
answer questions based on hypothetical scenarios of short, police-initiated 
contacts such as trafc stops. When tested in scenarios of public-initiated 
contact, the examples typically only probe the respondents’ imagined will­
ingness to assist the police, such as willingness to contact the police to report 
a low-level crime where little is at stake (such as pick-pocketing) or tend to 
remain abstract, for example, by asking about one’s willingness to coop­
erate with the police after witnessing “a” crime (Hickman and Simpson, 
2003; Elliott et al., 2011; Murphy and Barkworth, 2014; Wemmers, 2008, 
2013; Elliott et al., 2014; Lorenz, 2017; Tankebe, 2013). With the excep­
tion of Murphy and Barkworth (2014), these studies do not distinguish 
between victim-survivors of diferent crime types. Additionally, all retain a 
narrow focus on the outcome variable of a generic willingness to cooper­
ate with police or contact police again (for example, “if the police needed 
your help, how likely would you help them?” in Elliott et al., 2011). Only 
a handful of studies have explicitly focused on rape victim-survivors and 
the impact of police interactions on their sense of self-identity, self-worth, 
and recovery from rape or sexual assault. These studies generally support 
the idea that police behaviour towards victim-survivors afects their self-
worth and identity, and experience of trauma. Specifcally, ofcer behav­
iour acknowledging the harm done to the victim-survivor, non-judgemental 
and compassionate listening, and treating the victim-survivor as a valued 
person can help validate the victim-survivor’s lived experience. This, in turn, 
can reduce the trauma associated with the crime and promote recovery. 
Behaviour that denies voice and does not acknowledge harm or is judge-
mental, uncaring, intimidating, or insensitive has been found to exacerbate 
trauma, slow down recovery, and act as a form of secondary victimisation 
(Elliott et al., 2011, 2014; Lorenz, 2017; Wemmers, 2008, 2013; Greeson 
et al., 2014). These empirical studies have been conducted in the United 
States, Canada, and Australia. To the best of our knowledge, Hohl et al. 
(2022), developed in parallel with this chapter, is the frst of its kind in a 
British context. To date, these studies also have limited uptake in the proce­
dural justice literature and the literature on victim-survivors’ experiences of 
the justice process, and are not yet informing how police interact with rape 
victim-survivors (though this is changing with Operation Soteria Bluestone; 
see Chapter 7). 
Applying a Procedural Justice framework to police 
interactions with rape victim-survivors 
To address this gap in the literature, we begin by mapping the rape 
victim-survivor experience literature onto Procedural Justice Theory to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The journey matters as much as the destination 99 
assess the face-value validity of the applicability of the theory to this 
context. Procedural Justice Theory research has identifed four compo­
nents of procedural fairness: voice, dignity and respect, neutrality, and 
trustworthy motives (Bradford et al., 2021; Tyler, 2006). The follow­
ing sections explain each component and draw out its relation to the 
evidence on how victim-survivors experience and are impacted by the 
police investigation. Given the strength of the evidence base on victim-
survivors’ experiences of the criminal justice system, failure to pass this 
basic face-validity test would render any attempt to explore its use in 
improving police practice premature and instead merit exploration of 
why the general principles of procedural justice do not appear to apply to 
rape victim-survivors. In turn, the face-value compatibility of Procedural 
Justice Theory with the empirical fndings on victim-survivor experience 
would suggest that Procedural Justice Theory may be an efective Trojan 
horse for importing the latter into policing, using language and concepts 
UK policing has already adopted elsewhere. 
Voice 
Voice, sometimes called “active participation”, captures a person’s per­
ception of whether ofcers allowed them to tell their (side of the) story, 
listened to them and took their rights and interests into account when 
making decisions about them. Yet police interviewing guidelines encour­
age ofcers to ask the same question in diferent ways to test the reli­
ability and consistency of a victim-survivor’s account. Ofcers also tend 
to ask victim-survivors to recall events in chronological order as this 
is most useful from their perspective. Some interrupt victim-survivors 
when they don’t recall events in a chronological order. Such practices do 
not always allow victim-survivors to tell their story in a way, words 
and at a pace that make sense to them or refect their memory of events 
(Hohl and Conway, 2017). Further, some ofcers use police jargon, give 
little or no explanation of the next steps in the police process, and do 
little to encourage victim-survivors to query anything about the process 
they may not understand or feel uneasy about (HM Government, 2021). 
Multiple handovers between ofcers and police departments mean 
victim-survivors are often asked to repeat their account several times 
(Hohl et al., 2022). It is thus unsurprising that many studies converge 
on fnding that many rape victim-survivors feel that they are not heard 
or understood, interrupted, or rushed by ofcers (Patterson, 2011; Gree­
son et al., 2014; Johnson, 2017; Brooks-Hay et al., 2019). As such, the 
principle of voice requires ofcers to approach every interaction with an 
awareness of what this particular victim-survivor may need to be able 
to tell their story in their own words and to actively participate in the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
100 The journey matters as much as the destination 
process. At times, this requires ofcers to adjust the process to victim-
survivor needs rather than rigidly sticking to interview templates and 
investigation checklists. 
Dignity and respect 
Ofcers treating people with dignity and respect in direct interactions is a 
further component of procedural fairness (Winick, 2007; Jackson and Brad­
ford, 2010; Tankebe, 2013). Dignity and respect also feature prominently 
in the victim-survivor literature. In early studies of victim-survivor experi­
ences of reporting rape to the police, the focus was very much on the lack 
of dignity aforded to victim-survivors. Victim-survivors were expected to 
give intimate accounts of the rape at station counters without privacy and 
without the right to ask for a female ofcer to take their account. Insen­
sitive medical forensic examinations and intrusive and unnecessary ques­
tioning about victim-survivors’ periods and sex life were commonplace 
(Temkin, 1998; Fisher et al., 2000; Campbell and Raja, 2005). Today, 
victim-survivors must expect their mobile phone contents and social media 
accounts to be scoured not only for evidence surrounding the ofence but 
also for their credibility as a witness. This is on top of third-party materials, 
which include medical, school, and social services records and sometimes 
even counselling notes. Presently, wide-ranging “fshing expeditions” well 
beyond the relevancy and proportionality test set out in CPS guidance (CPS, 
2023) are the norm (Dodge et al., 2019; Smith and Skinner, 2017). In rape 
investigations, the principle of dignity and respect includes ofcers adhering 
to the legal guidance on requesting only directly relevant and proportion­
ate third-party material and digital forensic evidence from a victim-survivor 
and explaining clearly why it is needed, thereby enabling victim-survivors to 
give (or withhold) informed consent. 
Hohl et al. (2022) identify ofcers acting in ways that are respectful 
of victim-survivor needs as a further facet of dignity and respect. This 
includes needs arising from all forms of disabilities, learning difculties, 
and neurodiversity, as well as from limited English language skills or 
immigration status. Dignity and respect should be aforded to all victim-
survivors regardless of their sex, gender, culture, religion, sexuality, age, 
or race. One way in which police can respect victim-survivor needs is to 
make a support referral to an ISVA service that can ofer independent sup­
port to victim-survivors throughout the criminal justice process. Where 
victim-survivors come from racialised and minoritised backgrounds, 
so-called “by and for” services (e.g. run by and for Black women) are 
particularly efective at providing such support (Love et al., 2017). On a 
strategic level, police forces, in eye-level partnership with ISVA services 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The journey matters as much as the destination 101 
and the wider victim-survivor support sector, lay the groundwork for 
good ofcer-ISVA communication in individual cases (Hohl et al., 2022). 
Respect in the context of rape investigations also means being sensitive 
to the emotional drain of police questioning and forensic examinations. 
It includes building rapport with victim-survivors before asking intru­
sive questions and being mindful of tone of voice, body language, and 
word choices that may come across as cold, unsupportive, or intimidat­
ing (Greeson et al., 2014; Ahrens et al., 2007; Konradi, 2007; Patterson, 
2011). For many victim-survivors, being treated with dignity and respect 
means being seen and treated as a “whole person” and a “human being” 
(Smith et al., 2022). Dignity and respect within rape investigations are 
multi-faceted and can be expressed or denied in a multitude of ways. 
Neutrality 
The principle of neutrality typically refers to ofcers being unbiased 
when making decisions that afect the victim-survivor, regardless of their 
race, sex, gender, class, age, and other characteristics. At frst glance, 
the parallels to victim-survivor literature are straightforward. A key 
fnding of victim-survivor research is the existence of bias in ofcer 
decision-making in the form of the infuence of rape myths and stereo­
types (Temkin and Krahé, 2008; Brown and Horvath, 2009; Horvath 
and Brown, 2022; Jordan, 2004, 2022; Gavey, 2005). When ofcers 
go to great lengths to examine material about the victim-survivor while 
barely scrutinising the suspect, this violates the neutrality principle (see 
Chapter 3). Time and again, empirical studies fnd that many victim-
survivors do not experience the criminal justice process as a level playing 
feld: the imbalance of rights and protections aforded to suspects and 
victim-survivors, and the extent of intrusion into third-party and digi­
tal material often results in a strong feeling of an unfair, unbiased, and 
unbalanced decision-making process (Smith, 2018; Hohl et al., 2023; 
Molina and Poppleton, 2020). As such, violations of the neutrality prin­
ciple cut to the heart of how the investigation process appears unjust to 
victim-survivors. 
Elsewhere Hohl et al. (2022) have argued that in some police forces, 
bias is hardwired into standard processes within rape investigations. The 
sequencing of the police investigation can inadvertently result in the victim-
survivor credibility becoming the frst and primary site of the investi­
gation, resulting in perceptions of a process that is biased against the 
victim-survivor. Avon and Somerset Police had set up a specialist unit for 
so-called “historic” or “non-recent” rapes and serious sexual ofences, 
defned as reported more than 30 days after the incident occurred. These 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
102 The journey matters as much as the destination 
cases were considered non-urgent and not requiring immediate CID 
(Criminal Investigation Department) attention. The window for secur­
ing forensic evidence would have closed, and suspects unlikely to be 
considered a live risk (see also Chapter 2 on the primacy of live cases in 
policing). While the unit was set up with the best intentions to ensure 
victim-survivors of such non-recent cases would not have to wait weeks 
for a CID ofcer to attend, they resulted in what was de facto a “vic­
tim credibility investigation unit”. Ofcers would interview the victim-
survivor and ask for third-party material and digital downloads upfront 
to speed up the process. The case would only be passed to CID for a full 
investigation, including a potential arrest and interview of the suspect, 
if and once the victim-survivor credibility checks had been completed. 
Such sequencing has a detrimental impact on the neutrality of the pro­
cess. Avon and Somerset Police have stopped this practice as a result of 
the research (Hohl et al., 2022). 
Operation Soteria Bluestone scholars have also argued that the term 
“neutrality” is problematic in the context of rape investigations. To victim-
survivors, “neutral” can signal “cold and uncaring” (Smith et al., 2022) 
rather than fair and unbiased. Among ofcers, some felt neutrality and 
unbiased decision-making meant to believe no one, including victim-
survivors. This view tends to go along with ofcers portraying them­
selves as “neutral evidence collectors” with an almost mechanical job of 
collecting evidence, denying agency or responsibility for criminal justice 
decision-making (Hohl et al., 2022; see also Chapter 3). Such portray­
als betray the empirical reality that 86% of police-recorded rapes are 
closed by the police without ever reaching the CPS or courts (Wunsch 
et al., 2021). In the vast majority of rape reports, the police are the only 
decision-makers involved, and ofcers carry full responsibility for the 
case outcome. Other ofcers afrm that victim-survivors need to feel 
believed and taken seriously by police in order to be able to participate 
in a criminal justice process in the frst place (Hohl et al., 2022). In sum, 
while there is clear face-value mapping of victim-survivor research onto 
the Procedural Justice Theory component of “neutrality” in terms of its 
content, the term itself carries multiple conficting interpretations, and 
some of which are problematic in the context of police interactions with 
rape victim-survivors. 
Trustworthy motives 
Trustworthiness pertains to people feeling that ofcers take decisions 
with their best interests at heart and act in ways that show concern 
for those impacted by police decisions (Rosenbaum et al., 2017; Tyler, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The journey matters as much as the destination 103 
2006). Again, there are obvious parallels to several recurring fndings in 
the victim-survivor literature. Victim-survivors who feel that ofcers act 
or speak in ways that signal that they are not taking their rape report 
seriously, belittle, blame, or shame them can make victim-survivors lose 
confdence in the police. It is also a main barrier to victim-survivors 
reporting sexual violence to the police in the frst place (Lorenz, 2023; 
Campbell, 2006; Molina and Poppleton, 2020) or result in victim-
survivors withdrawing from the investigation (Hohl et al., 2023). The 
way ofcers speak to victim-survivors also plays a role in their per­
ceptions of ofcers’ trustworthy motives (Mulvihill et al., 2019). This 
includes the tone of voice, choice of words, and timing of a police 
phone call. For example, an ofcer calling a victim-survivor at 11 pm to 
deliver a routine update might suit the ofcer on a nightshift, but might 
be distressing to a victim-survivor who is not expecting a late-night call. 
Victim-survivors often mentally prepare for a prearranged call from the 
police, and if that call does not come, this can be distressing. When 
ofcers routinely fail to honour agreed call times, this may signal to 
the victim-survivor that the ofcer has lost interest or faith in the case 
and no longer has the victim-survivor’s best interests at heart (Hohl et al., 
2022). How ofcers communicate shapes victim-survivors’ judge­
ments of ofcer trustworthiness. 
Further, victim-survivors may feel that the police act against their 
best interests when the investigation over-focuses on their credibility. 
This can include an ofcer requesting what victim-survivors feel is exces­
sive third-party material and digital downloads of their personal devices. 
Unwarranted requests for personal information may result in victim-
survivors questioning whose side the police are on (Smith, 2018; Smith 
and Daly, 2020). What is more, some victim-survivors feel the police 
are not doing enough to keep them safe from the perpetrator (Smith 
et al., 2022; Hohl et al., 2023) and to hold perpetrators to account 
(Smith, 2018). “Trustworthy motives” takes on another meaning when 
women no longer feel safe in the presence of police ofcers. In 2021, the 
high-profle case of Sarah Everard, a young woman who was abducted, 
raped, and murdered by a serving Metropolitan Police ofcer caused 
shock waves across Britain. The case ignited public outrage and debate 
about deep-seated misogyny within the Metropolitan Police and polic­
ing in the UK more widely, and prompted the Casey report (2023) into 
the standards and culture within the Met. Another serving Metropolitan 
Police ofcer pleaded guilty to 49 rapes and dozens of further domestic 
abuse-related charges in 2023. The Centre for Women’s Justice super-
complaint on police-perpetrated domestic abuse further highlighted that 
not all ofcers are safe for women (HMICFRS, 2022). Cases like these 

 
104 The journey matters as much as the destination 
are a constant reminder to women that there are rapists, domestic abus­
ers, and murderers among the ranks of those there to protect them. In 
the UK, whether ofcers have trustworthy motives towards women has 
never felt more in doubt than today. 
This section mapped victim-survivor experience literature onto the 
four components of the procedural justice framework: voice, dignity and 
respect, neutrality, and trustworthy motives. At face value, the victim-
survivor literature can be systematised in this way. This supports the 
idea that procedural justice is compatible with the existing evidence 
base for ofcer-victim interactions. Where the two bodies of literature 
difer is the focus of theoretical explanation. Procedural Justice Theory 
explains why victim-survivors are deeply afected by how ofcers treat 
them: ofcers are representatives of society and the law, and as such, 
how they treat us impacts the sense of self, belonging, value, and worth 
as a rape victim-survivor before the law and within society. The focus 
of feminist literature, on the other hand, is explaining why rape victim-
survivors experiences are consistently poor. This literature suggests that 
rape myths and stereotypes, and misogynist cultures within policing 
and wider society are at play. The two bodies of literature also difer in 
their preferred empirical method. The empirical research on Procedural 
Justice Theory mainly relies on general population surveys measuring 
people’s perceptions of the police and future willingness to cooperate 
with the police. The hypothetical scenarios tend to revolve around situ­
ations where little is at stake. In contrast, victim-survivor research tends 
to be based on in-depth interviews and focus groups with rape victim-
survivors, producing rich descriptions and analyses of lived experiences. 
Given the diferences in the questions, theoretical approaches, and 
empirical methods, the core fndings of these two bodies of literature 
are strikingly similar. There is, we suggest, beneft in using a Procedural 
Justice Theory language to communicate victim-survivor research fnd­
ings to police forces. 
Case study: Avon and Somerset Police 
Project Bluestone 
The language of Procedural Justice Theory is well understood by police 
forces in the UK. It shapes how senior ofcers talk about public conf­
dence in the police, and how police forces in England approached the 
policing Covid-19-related restrictions using the “four Es” of engage, 
explain, encourage, and enforce. Can it also be used to help police forces 
understand and improve what matters for rape victim-survivors? Ini­
tial fndings from Project Bluestone in Avon and Somerset Police are 

 
 
 
 
 
 
The journey matters as much as the destination 105 
promising. Hohl et al. (2022) used a procedural justice framework to 
co-produce with ofcers empirical research and solutions for improving 
procedural fairness in how ofcers engage with rape victim-survivors. 
Having victim-survivor experiences presented back to them through a 
procedural justice framework was enlightening for some ofcers. In par­
ticular, the underlying social psychological theory on the signal value 
of police actions as authority holders resonated with ofcers. In focus 
groups, prior to introducing Procedural Justice Theory, none of the ofc­
ers expressed awareness of the power imbalance between themselves 
and victim-survivors. In contrast, ISVAs were acutely aware of these 
positionalities and how victim-survivors would be “hyper-sensitive” to 
how ofcers treated them and ofcers’ tone of voice, body language, 
and exact choice of words because of their police role. For example, a 
throwaway, well-intentioned ofcer comment such as “I have a good 
feeling about this case” could leave the victim-survivor feeling sure that 
their case would go to court. Similarly, victim-survivors would inter­
pret an ofcer no longer returning calls or providing case updates as 
the ofcer having lost interest or confdence in their case. When ofcers 
were presented with these fndings, framed through procedural justice 
language and with explanations of the symbolic power of the quality 
of ofcer interactions with victim-survivors, ofcers had “light bulb” 
moments. Ofcers confrmed that their experience was indeed that their 
police ofcer status conferred authority in that way, just that it was not 
something that they had previously been encouraged to refect upon. 
What is more, framing the fndings through a procedural justice frame­
work appeared to increase ofcer buy-in towards the study’s recommen­
dations (Hohl et al., 2022; Smith et al., 2022). 
Creating practical guidance aimed at frontline ofcers and investi­
gators helped translate the theory into practice. Hohl et al. (2022), in 
collaboration with Avon and Somerset Police ofcers, developed a range 
of tools to support ofcers in improving how they interact with victim-
survivors along procedural justice dimensions. This included, for example, 
the co-development of an information guide for victim-survivors about 
the investigation process, victims’ rights, and how to access support. 
Avon and Somerset Police are now sharing this guide with victim-survivors 
on frst contact and are making it available for anyone to view on their 
website. Information about the process and victims’ rights is hoped to 
empower victim-survivors to actively participate in the process. Hohl 
et al.’s (2022) fndings and recommendations around a closer partner­
ship working with the local ISVA service were taken on board. ISVAs 
are now involved earlier in the investigations and receive regular updates 
about progress in the case, enabling them to better support their clients. 

 
 
 
 
106 The journey matters as much as the destination 
One victim-survivor reported she felt “safe, heard” by ofcers. An ISVA 
described that while previously ofcers had not been responsive to their 
emails and phone calls, they now hear back from ofcers quickly. Fur­
ther, ofcers are now “talking diferently” in a “trauma-informed” man­
ner and delaying victim-survivor interviews to respect victim-survivor 
wishes and needs (Topping, 2022). Ofcers also took on board that 
victim-survivors need to feel believed to be in a position to participate in 
a criminal investigation. Finally, a victim-survivor communication tem­
plate was developed, which ofcers now complete with victim-survivors, 
noting victim-survivor wishes on how they would like to be contacted 
by police, including the contact details of the ISVA or intermediary, thus 
aiding communication that signals trustworthy motives (Hohl et al., 
2022). The approach also includes respecting victim-survivor wishes, 
such as being collected in an unmarked police car by plainclothes ofcers 
not to reveal police involvement to cohabitants and neighbours (Top­
ping, 2022). These examples show how a procedural justice framework 
can be an efective language within police-academic co-production. 
There is also promising anecdotal evidence suggestive of improvements 
in the victim-survivor experience, but a rigorous empirical evaluation 
of the approach’s efectiveness is yet to take place (see also Chapter 7). 
Conclusion 
Whatever the outcome of a police investigation, how the police treat 
victim-survivors during the investigation deeply impacts victim-survivors. 
For many, how the police respond to their case is life changing. Dec­
ades of victim-survivor research have carefully documented victim-
survivors’ experiences of the police process. Victim-survivor research 
has contributed to our theoretical understanding of the reasons why 
some ofcers may treat victim-survivors the way they do. Specifcally, 
feminist researchers have surfaced the role of rape myths, stereotypes, 
and misogynistic attitudes in shaping ofcer demeanour towards victim-
survivors. Much of the victim-survivor research is focused on identify­
ing, understanding, and addressing poor police practice. However, there 
too are research fndings that evidence good police experiences and how 
these can have a profoundly positive impact on victim-survivors’ lives 
and their ability to move forward after sexual violence. While police 
engagement with rape victim-survivors has come a long way in the 
past 30 years, police investigations remain intimate intrusions. Victim-
survivors are unlikely to feel that justice has been served if they were not 
been treated with fairness, dignity, and respect throughout the process. 
Procedural Justice Theory explains the symbolic power of the quality 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The journey matters as much as the destination 107 
of police interactions on rape victim-survivors’ sense of their worth, 
value, and status as victim-survivors of rape within society. The princi­
ples of procedural fairness mean that ofcers should interact with rape 
victim-survivors in ways that give voice to their story, treat everyone 
with dignity and respect regardless of who they are, exercise neutrality 
in their decision-making, and have trustworthy motives. Victim-survivor 
research and Procedural Justice Theory have largely developed in iso­
lation from one another, asking diferent questions (why versus how), 
originating from diferent theoretical starting points (feminism versus 
social psychology), and favouring diferent empirical methods (quali­
tative versus quantitative methods). Nevertheless, their conclusions on 
what matters to victim-survivors are remarkably consistent. 
In this chapter, we have argued that there is much to be gained from 
bringing to bear both bodies of literature when considering how to 
achieve a new default police approach to victim-survivor engagement. 
Victim-survivor research has produced a rich understanding of the 
victim-survivor experience and has contributed to changes in rape law 
and police and criminal justice practice over the decades. On a practical 
level, we suggest that using the language of Procedural Justice Theory 
may aid policing in assimilating victim-survivor research fndings more 
readily. Police forces have some control over the quality of their crimi­
nal investigations, but ultimately, they cannot (and should not) control 
criminal justice outcomes. How ofcers treat rape victim-survivors is, 
however, entirely within the control of policing. We will turn to how 
police forces can enable this in the next chapter (Chapter 6). 
Putting victim-survivor research and the principles of procedural jus­
tice side by side shows that, ultimately, what rape victim-survivors want 
from the police is to be treated with procedural fairness. Rape victim-
survivors are not irrational if the quality of police interactions deeply 
impacts them. Procedural fairness is the basis of public trust in the police, 
police legitimacy, and the proper functioning of the police and the law. 
Policing has recognised the signifcance of procedural justice for public 
trust in the police and public perceptions of police legitimacy in a range 
of areas. As a result, Procedural Justice Theory now carries currency and 
impact on policing in Britain and elsewhere. Policing may yet have to 
realise the signifcance of treating all rape victim-survivors with proce­
dural fairness, not only for victim-survivors but also for police legitimacy. 
References 
Ahrens, C.E. (2006). Being silenced: The impact of negative social reac­
tions on the disclosure of rape. American Journal of Community Psy­
chology, 38(3–4): 263–274. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
108 The journey matters as much as the destination 
Ahrens, C.E., Campbell, R., Ternier-Thames, N.K., Wasco, S.M. and 
Sef, T. (2007). Deciding whom to tell: Expectations and outcomes 
of rape survivors’ frst disclosures. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 
31(1): 38–49. 
Becker, H.S. (1963). Outsiders. London: Free Press. 
Begum, H. and Gill, A.K. (2022). Understanding the experiences of Brit­
ish South Asian male survivors of child sexual abuse. In A.K. Gill 
and H. Begum (Eds.) Child sexual abuse in Black and minoritised 
communities. Cham: Palgrave MacMillan, 59–113. 
Bradford, B. (2012). Policing and social identity: Procedural justice, 
inclusion and cooperation between police and public. Policing and 
Society, 24(1): 22–43. 
Bradford, B., Jackson, J. and Milani, J. (2021). Police legitimacy. In J.C. 
Barnes and D.R. Forde (Eds.) The encyclopaedia of research methods 
in criminology and criminal justice. Hoboken: Wiley, 642–650. 
Bradford, B., Murphy, K. and Jackson, J. (2014). Ofcers as mirrors: 
Policing, procedural justice and the (re)production of social identity. 
British Journal of Criminology, 54(4): 527–550. 
Bradford, B., Stott, C., Radburn, M. and Savigar-Shaw, L. (2020). Mak­
ing an impact on policing and crime. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Brewer, M.B. and Kramer, R.M. (1986). Choice behavior in social 
dilemmas: Efects of social identity, group size, and decision framing. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 50(3): 543–549. 
Brooks-Hay, O., Burman, M. and Bradley, L. (2019). Justice journeys: 
Informing policy and practice through lived experience of victim-
survivors of rape and serious sexual assault. The Scottish Centre for 
Crime and Justice Research. Available at: www.sccjr.ac.uk/wp-content/ 
uploads/2019/08/Justice-Journeys-Report_Aug-2019_FINAL.pdf 
Brown, J. and Horvath, M.A.H. (2009). Do you believe her, and is it 
real rape? In M.A.H. Horvath and J. Brown (Eds.) Rape: Challenging 
contemporary thinking. Collumpton: Willan, 325–342. 
Brown, J., Horvath, M.A.H., Kelly, L. and Westmarland, N. (2010). 
Connections and disconnections: Assessing evidence, knowledge and 
practice in responses to rape. London: Government Equalities Ofce. 
Campbell, R. (2005). What really happened? A validation study of rape 
survivors’ help-seeking experiences with the legal and medical sys­
tems. Violence and Victims, 20(1): 55–68. 
Campbell, R. (2006). Rape survivors’ experiences with the legal and 
medical systems. Violence Against Women, 12(1): 30–45. 
Campbell, R. and Raja, S. (1999). Secondary victimisation of rape vic­
tims: Insights from mental health professionals who treat survivors of 
violence. Violence and Victims, 14(3): 261–275. 
Campbell, R. and Raja, S. (2005). The sexual assault and secondary vic­
timisation of female veterans: Help-seeking experiences with military 
and civilian social systems. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 29(1): 
97–106. 
Casey, L. (2023). Baroness Casey Review fnal report: March 2023. Avail­
able at: www.met.police.uk/SysSiteAssets/media/downloads/met/ 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The journey matters as much as the destination 109 
about-us/baroness-casey-review/update-march-2023/baroness­
casey-review-march-2023a.pdf 
Champion, H., Lock, K., Puntan, L. and Hendra, H. (2021). Evaluation of 
rape survivors’ experience of the police and other criminal justice agen­
cies. Opinion Research Services and HMICFRS. Available at: https:// 
assets-hmicfrs.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/uploads/evaluation-of­
rape-survivors-experience-of-the-police-and-other-criminal-justice­
agencies.pdf 
Crown Prosecution Service (2023). Rape and sexual ofences – Chap­
ter 3: Case building. Available at: www.cps.gov.uk/legal-guidance/ 
rape-and-sexual-ofences-chapter-3-case-building 
Dodge, A., Spencer, D., Ricciardelli, R. and Ballucci, D. (2019). ‘This 
isn’t your father’s police force’: Digital evidence in sexual assault 
investigations. Australian & New Zealand Journal of Criminology, 
52(4): 499–515. 
Elliott, I., Thomas, S. and Oglof, J. (2011). Procedural justice in con­
tacts with the police: Testing a relational model of authority in a mixed 
methods study. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 17(4): 592–610. 
Elliott, I., Thomas, S. and Oglof, J. (2014). Procedural justice in victim-
police interactions and victims’ recovery from victimisation experi­
ences. Policing and Society: An International Journal of Research 
and Policy, 24(5): 588–601. 
Evening Standard (2021). Boris Johnson apologises to victims and sur­
vivors following Rape Review. YouTube. Available at: www.youtube. 
com/watch?v=w0by0fOzcDU 
Festinger, L. (1954). A theory of social comparison processes. Human 
Relations, 7(2): 117–140. 
Filipas, H. and Ulman, S. (2001). Social reactions to sexual assault 
victims from various support sources. Violence and Victims, 16(6): 
673–692. 
Fisher, B., Cullen, F.T. and Turner, M.G. (2000). The sexual victimisa­
tion of college women. Washington, DC: National Institute of Jus­
tice, US Department of Justice. 
Frazier, P.A. and Haney, B. (1996). Sexual assault cases in the legal sys­
tem: Police, prosecutor, and victim perspectives. Law and Human 
Behavior, 20(6): 607–628. 
Gavey, N. (2005). Just sex? The cultural scafolding of rape. Hove: 
Routledge. 
Greeson, M.R., Campbell, R. and Fehler-Cabral, G. (2014). Cold or car­
ing? Adolescent sexual assault victims’ perceptions of their interac­
tions with the police. Violence and Victims, 29(4): 636–651. 
Hickman, L.J. and Simpson, S.S. (2003). Fair treatment or preferred 
outcome? The impact of police behavior on victim reports of domes­
tic violence Incidents. Law Society Review, 37(3): 607–634. 
HM Government (2021). The end-to-end rape review report on fndings 
and actions. Available at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/ 
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fle/1001417/ 
end-to-end-rape-review-report-with-correction-slip.pdf 

 
 
 
 
 
110 
The journey matters as much as the destination 
HM Government (2023). Criminal justice system overview. Filters: 
adult rape, national, rolling annual and last updated November 
2022. Available at: https://criminal-justice-delivery-data-dashboards. 
justice.gov.uk/overview 
HM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire & Rescue Services (2022). Police 
perpetrated domestic abuse Report on the Centre for Women’s Justice 
super-complaint. Available at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/ 
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/1086988/ 
police-perpetrated-domestic-abuse-report-cwj-super-complaint.pdf 
Hohl, K. and Conway, M.A. (2017). Memory as evidence: How normal 
features of victim memory lead to the attrition of rape complaints. 
Criminology & Criminal Justice, 17(3): 248–265. 
Hohl, K., Johnson, K. and Molisso, S. (2022). A Procedural Justice The­
ory approach to police engagement with victim-survivors of rape and 
sexual assault: Initial fndings of the ‘Project Bluestone’ pilot study. 
International Criminology, 2(3): 253–261. 
Hohl, K., Reid, A.K., Molisso, S. and Pullerits, M. (2023). Rape and 
sexual assault survivors’ experience of the police in England and 
Wales. Survey Report I: January–June 2023. City, University of Lon­
don. Available at: https://openaccess.city.ac.uk/id/eprint/31310/9/ 
Survey%20Report%20I%2021%20September%202023%20 
UPDATE%2020%20September.pdf 
Horvath, M. and Brown, J. (2022). Rape: Challenging contemporary 
thinking – 10 years on. 2nd ed. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Information Commissioner’s Ofce (2022). Information commissioner’s 
opinion: Who’s under investigation? The processing of victims’ per­
sonal data in rape and serious sexual ofence investigations. Available 
at: https://ico.org.uk/media/4020539/commissioners-opinion-whos­
under-investigation-20220531.pdf 
Jackson, J. and Bradford, B. (2010). What is trust and confdence in the 
police? Policing, 4(3): 241–248. 
Jackson, J., Bradford, B., Hough, M., Myhill, A., Quinton, P.K. and 
Tyler, T. (2012). Why do people comply with the law? Legitimacy 
and the infuence of legal institutions. British Journal of Criminology, 
52(6): 1051–1071. 
Jackson, J., Bradford, B., Stanko, E.A. and Hohl, K. (2013). Just author­
ity? Trust in the police in England and Wales. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Johnson, H. (2017). Why doesn’t she just report it? Apprehensions and 
contradictions for women who report sexual violence to the police. 
Canadian Journal of Women and the Law, 29(1): 36–59. 
Jordan, J. (2004). The word of a woman: Police, rape and belief. Lon­
don: Palgrave. 
Jordan, J. (2022). Women, rape and justice: Unravelling the rape conun­
drum. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Konradi, A. (2007). Taking the stand: Rape survivors and the prosecu­
tion of rapists. Westport: Praeger Publishers. 
Kramer, R.M. and Brewer, M.B. (1984). Efects of group identity on 
resource use in a simulated commons dilemma. Journal of Personal­
ity and Social Psychology, 46(5): 1044–1057. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The journey matters as much as the destination 111 
Lind, A. and Tyler, T. (1988). The social psychology of procedural jus­
tice. New York: Plenum Press. 
Loader, I. and Mulcahy, A. (2003). Policing and the condition of Eng­
land: Memory, politics and culture. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Lorenz, K. (2017). Reporting sexual assault to the police: Victim experi­
ences and the potential for procedural justice. Doctoral dissertation. 
University of Illinois Chicago. 
Lorenz, K. (2023). How do investigation experiences shape views of the 
police? Qualitatively exploring sexual assault survivors’ interactions 
with police detectives and subsequent views of the police. Crime & 
Delinquency, 69(2): 342–366. 
Love, G., De Michele, G., Giakoumidaki, C., Sánchez, E.H., Lukera, M. 
and Cartei, V. (2017). Improving access to sexual violence support 
for marginalised individuals: Findings from the lesbian, gay, bisexual 
and trans* and the black and minority ethnic communities. Critical 
and Radical Social Work, 5(2): 163–179. 
Mason, F. and Lodrick, Z. (2013). Psychological consequences of sexual 
assault. Best Practice & Research Clinical Obstetrics & Gynaecol­
ogy, 27(1): 27–37. 
May, T., Talbot, C., Skinner, R., Atkinson, S., Barbin, A., Butt, C., Holt-
man, E., Jefs, T., Latif, A., Majid, A., Markham-Woods, G., Garrido 
Marquez, T., Reid, E. and Trott, L. (2022). Appendix 12 – Pillar six: 
Examining, understanding, and improving the use of digital material in 
RAOSO investigations. In Operation Soteria Bluestone year 1 report 
2021–2022, 178–190. Available at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov. 
uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fle/1128688/ 
E02836356_Operation_Soteria_Y1_report_Accessible.pdf 
McMillan, L. and Thomas, M. (2013). Police interviews of rape victims: 
Tensions and contradictions. In M.A.H. Horvath and J.M. Brown 
(Eds.) Rape: Challenging contemporary thinking. Abingdon: Rout-
ledge, 255–280. 
Ministry of Justice (2023). Greater support and better outcomes for 
victims of sexual violence. Press Release. Available at: www.gov.uk/ 
government/news/greater-support-and-better-outcomes-for-victims­
of-sexual-violence 
Molina, J. and Poppleton, S. (2020). Rape survivors and the criminal jus­
tice system. Available at: https://cloud-platform-e218f50a4812967ba 
1215eaecede923f.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/sites/6/2021/12/Rape­
Survivors-and-the-CJS_FINAL-v2.pdf 
Mulvihill, N., Gangoli, G., Gill, A.K. and Hester, M. (2019). The expe­
rience of interactional justice for victims of ‘honour’-based violence 
and abuse reporting to the police in England and Wales. Policing and 
Society, 29(6): 640–656. 
Murphy, K. and Barkworth, J. (2014). Victim willingness to report 
crime to police: Does procedural justice or outcome matter most? 
Victims & Ofenders, 9(2): 178–204. 
Murphy, K., Tyler, T.R. and Curtis, A. (2009). Does procedural justice 
help authorities when people question the underlying legitimacy of 
the law. Regulation and Governance, 3(1): 1–26. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
112 
The journey matters as much as the destination 
Ofce for National Statistics (2018). Sexual ofending: Victimisation and 
the path through the criminal justice system. Available at: www.ons. 
gov.uk/peoplepopulationandcommunity/crimeandjustice/articles/ 
sexualofendingvictimisationandthepaththroughthecriminaljustice 
system/2018-12-13 
Patterson, D. (2011). The impact of detectives’ manner of questioning on 
rape victims’ disclosure. Violence Against Women, 17(11): 1349–1373. 
Rich, K. (2019). Trauma-informed police responses to rape victims. 
Journal of Aggression, Maltreatment & Trauma, 28(4): 463–480. 
Risan, P., Binder, P.E. and Milne, R. (2016). Regulating and coping with 
distress during police interviews of traumatised victims. Psychologi­
cal Trauma: Theory, Research, Practice, and Policy, 8(6): 736–744. 
Risan, P., Milne, R. and Binder, P.E. (2020). Trauma narratives: Rec­
ommendations for investigative interviewing. Psychiatry, Psychology 
and Law, 27(4): 678–694. 
Rosenbaum, D.P., Maskaly, J., Lawrence, D.S., Escamilla, J.H., Enciso, 
G., Christof, T.E. and Posick, C. (2017). The police-community 
interaction survey: Measuring police performance in new ways. 
Policing: An International Journal, 40(1): 112–127. 
Smith, H.J., Tyler, T.R., Huo, Y.J., Ortiz, D.J. and Lind, E.A. (1998). 
The self-relevant implications of the group-value model: Group 
membership, self-worth, and treatment quality. Journal of Experi­
mental Social Psychology, 34(5): 470–493. 
Smith, O. (2018). Rape trials in England and Wales: Observing justice 
and rethinking rape myths. Cham: Springer. 
Smith, O. and Daly, E. (2020).Evaluation of the sexual violence complain­
ants’ advocate scheme. Loughborough University. Available at: https:// 
needisclear.files.wordpress.com/2020/11/svca-evaluation-final­
report-1.pdf 
Smith, O., Johnson, K., Brooks-Hay, O., Geoghean-Fittall, S., Jen­
nings, B., Harris, A., Hillyard, S., Hohl, K., Molisso, S., Myhill, 
A. and Walling-Wefelmeyer, R. (2022). Appendix 9 – Pillar three: 
Embedding procedural justice and engaging victims. In Operation 
Soteria Bluestone year 1 report 2021–2022, 123–139. Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/ 
uploads/attachment_data/file/1128688/E02836356_Operation_ 
Soteria_Y1_report_Accessible.pdf 
Smith, O. and Skinner, T. (2017). How rape myths are used and challenged 
in rape and sexual assault trials. Social & Legal Studies, 26(4): 441–466. 
Stanko, E.A. (1985). Intimate intrusions: Women’s experience of male 
violence. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul. 
Sunshine, J. and Tyler, T. (2003a). Moral solidarity, identifcation with 
the community, and the importance of procedural justice: The police 
as prototypical representatives of a group’s moral values. Social Psy­
chology Quarterly, 66(2): 153–165. 
Sunshine, J. and Tyler, T.R. (2003b). The role of procedural justice 
and legitimacy in shaping public support for policing. Law Society 
Review, 37(3): 513–548. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The journey matters as much as the destination 113 
Tajfel, H. and Turner, J.C. (1979). An integrative theory of inter-group 
confict. In W.G. Austin and S. Worchel (Eds.) The social psychology 
of inter-group relations. Monterey: Brooks/Cole, 33–47. 
Tajfel, H. and Turner, J.C. (1986). The social identity theory of inter­
group behavior. In S. Worchel and W. Austin (Eds.) Psychology of 
intergroup relations. Chicago: Nelson Hall, 7–24. 
Tankebe, J. (2013). Viewing things diferently: The dimensions of public 
perceptions of police legitimacy. Criminology, 51(1): 103–135. 
Temkin, J. (1998). Medical evidence in rape cases: A continuing problem 
for criminal justice. Modern Law Review, 61(6): 821–848. 
Temkin, J. and Krahé, B. (2008). Sexual assault and the justice gap: A 
question of attitude. Oxford: Hart Publishing. 
Tong, S., Horvath, M. and Williams, E. (2011). Critical issues in rape 
investigation: A UK perspective. The Journal of Criminal Justice 
Research, 1(2): 1–18. 
Topping, A. (2022). ‘Everyone wants to get involved’: Inside a new 
police approach to tackling rape. The Guardian. 24 October. Available 
at: www.theguardian.com/society/2022/oct/24/operation-bluestone­
inside-new-police-approach-to-tackling-rape 
Tyler, T.R. (2006). Why people obey the law. Princeton: Princeton Uni­
versity Press. 
Tyler, T.R., Degoey, P. and Smith, H. (1996). Understanding why the 
justice of group procedures matters: A test of the psychological 
dynamics of the group-value model. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 70(5): 913–930. 
Tyler, T.R. and Huo, Y.J. (2002). Trust in the law: Encouraging public 
cooperation with the police and courts. New York: Russell-Sage. 
Tyler, T.R. and Lind, E.A. (1992). A relational model of authority in 
groups. Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 25: 115–191. 
Victims’ Commissioner (2021). Victims’ Commissioner briefng on the 
data extraction power clauses in Part 2 Chapter 3 of The Police, Crime, 
Sentencing and Courts Bill. Available at: https://cloud-platform­
e218f50a4812967ba1215eaecede923f.s3.amazonaws.com/uploads/ 
sites/6/2021/12/Digital-extractio-long-October-2021-Victims­
Commissioners-Briefing-on-the-digital-download-clauses-of­
the-PCSC-Bill-1-1.pdf 
Wemmers, J.-A. (2008). Victim participation and therapeutic jurispru­
dence. Victims and Ofenders, 3(2–3): 165–191. 
Wemmers, J.-A. (2013). Victims’ experiences in the criminal justice sys­
tem and their recovery from crime. International Review of Victimol­
ogy, 19(3): 221–233. 
Westera, N.J., Kebbell, M.R. and Milne, R. (2011). Interviewing rape 
complainants: Police ofcers’ perceptions of interview format and 
quality of evidence. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 25(6): 917–926. 
Westmarland, N., Aznarez, M., Brown, J. and Kirkham, L. (2012). 
The benefts of specialist rape teams: A report commissioned and 
funded by the Association of Chief Police Ofcers (ACPO). Durham: 
Durham University. 

 
 
 
114 
The journey matters as much as the destination 
Winick, B.J. (2007). Therapeutic jurisprudence and victims of crime. In 
E. Erez, M. Kilchling and J.-A. Wemmers (Eds.) Therapeutic jurispru­
dence and victim participation in justice: International perspectives. 
Durham: Carolina Academic Press, 3–14. 
Wunsch, D., Davies, T. and Charleton, B. (2021). The London rape review 
2021. Mayor of London Ofce for Policing and Crime. Available at: 
www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/fles/fnal_rr_victimtech_61221.pdf 

6 
TAKING RESPONSIBILITY 
Organisational enablers of better 
rape policing 
Introduction 
Police forces are responsible for enabling their ofcers to conduct efec­
tive suspect-focused investigations (Chapter 3), prevent repeat ofend­
ing (Chapter 4), and engage well with victim-survivors (Chapter 5). 
Ofcer training has long been the go-to recommendation for improv­
ing rape investigations. However, we know that current police train­
ing approaches are largely inefective in improving police responses to 
rape (Stanko and Hohl, 2018). Others point out that if we want better 
rape policing, we must tackle the police cultures that tolerate or even 
encourage misogyny, racism, and homophobia, and introduce practi­
cal steps such as stricter vetting and disciplinary processes to root out 
rogue ofcers one by one. Police organisations perpetually engage in 
change programmes and initiatives (Casey, 2023). Despite these eforts 
to change, rape investigation and prevention still fall outside the default 
zone of policing (see Chapters 2 and 4). The core working laws and 
principles of policing have not changed at a deep enough level to meet 
today’s expectations of how policing responds to rape. While some 
forces have established dedicated units to manage RASSO, we found 
these to be stafed by inexperienced investigators with unmanageable 
workloads who do not have specialist knowledge guiding their decision-
making (Stanko, 2022). In terms of providing the public with competent 
rape investigations, the police service appears impenetrable to radical 
and sustainable improvement. This chapter outlines three organisational 
enablers of driving systemic improvements in typical police organisa­
tional infrastructures. The enablers mirror the three key resources police 
forces have at their disposal: people (ofcers and staf); intelligence and 
data; and technology, specifcally, digital forensics. In the policing litera­
ture, police powers, including the state-sanctioned use of force that can 
extend to the lethal use of force, are considered policing’s key resource 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429444869-6 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
116 
Taking responsibility 
(Bowling et al., 2019). Critical refections on police powers sit alongside 
issues of police governance and accountability, including police account­
ability for abuses of power and police misconduct borne out of cultures 
of misogyny, racism, or homophobia. This however is outside the scope 
of this chapter and book (though see Chapters 7 and 8). Our focus in 
this chapter is to challenge the police service to change its internal organ­
isational functions to meet the needs of a modern democratic public 
service. Those outside policing do not see how these functions operate 
inside police organisational structures. We focus on these here because 
they are the levers for changing default policing (see Chapter 2). The 
way these functions are managed inside today’s police forces produces a 
lack of investigative skills, unmanageable workloads, and condones the 
low priority and status given to rape investigations. This lack of organi­
sational support remains hidden from the wider public, diminishing the 
ability of the wider policing ecosystem and third sector to support polic­
ing in their eforts to improve rape policing. 
There exists a sizeable literature on police training, learning, and 
development as a tool for improving how ofcers investigate rape spe­
cifcally, and police professionalism generally. This literature considers 
questions about the content, delivery mode, and assessment of ofcer 
learning and development (Belur et al., 2020b). It suggests that using 
research evidence (Stanko and Dawson, 2016) and higher education 
degrees would uplift police professionalism (Hough and Stanko, 2020). 
Sitting alongside the specifc question of learning and development is the 
police organisational justice literature that considers how police organi­
sations might increase ofcer responsiveness to new policies and learn­
ing (Blader and Tyler, 2003; Bradford et al., 2014; Myhill and Bradford, 
2013). We argue that the principles of organisational justice should guide 
how the police relate to their ofcers, including how organisations pro­
vide continuous learning and development and look after ofcer mental 
health. We expand this to also consider the interface between ofcers 
and two of their primary resources: intelligence and data about rape and 
other sexual ofences disclosed to them, and technological capabilities 
for discovering and using supporting evidence. Today, digital devices 
are a potential source of evidence in 90% of recorded crimes (Wilson-
Kovacs, 2021). In rape cases, police requests for access to rape victim-
survivors’ digital devices are the norm (Rumney and McPhee, 2021). 
Because of the prevalence of digital evidence and the impacts of “digital 
strip searches” on rape victim-survivors, we focus on this type of techno­
logical enabler. To date, insufcient attention has been paid to how the 
three resources – people, data, and digital forensics – can work together 
to enable good day-to-day police work in rape cases. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taking responsibility 117 
Attempts at improving the police response to rape have been plenti­
ful, but not successful enough to signifcantly and sustainably improve 
case outcomes, victim-survivor experiences, or reduce sexual violence. 
In England and Wales, the most recent concerted efort is the CPS-police 
joint national action plan (CPS and NPCC, 2021) and the schedule of 
actions and commitments made by the government in response to the 
publication of its end-to-end rape review (HM Government, 2021b), 
including Operation Soteria (see Chapter 7). The key to success, where 
previous attempts have had limited efect, is recognising that if police 
forces want ofcers to do things diferently, they must think diferently 
about how their organisation will enable that change. Neither train­
ing, isolated initiatives, nor ordering ofcers to do things diferently are 
sufcient in isolation (if at all) (Chan, 1997; Stanko and Hohl, 2018; 
Williams and Cockcroft, 2019). People – both police ofcers and staf – 
are policing’s biggest asset and most signifcant risk. Research provides 
strong evidence of the link between a fair organisational climate and 
ofcers’ willingness to implement change and reform (Brimbal et al., 
2020). What is more, ofcers are unlikely to provide a procedurally 
just service to their communities and rape victim-survivors if they do 
not experience such treatment from their organisation (Nix and Wolfe, 
2016; Wolfe and Lawson, 2020). Hence, the relationship between police 
organisations and their staf must be the starting point of any discussion 
of police organisational levers for change. This must include considera­
tion of the extent to which police organisations take responsibility for 
providing an organisational climate conducive to ofcer welfare and 
learning and development, including ofcers’ ability to apply evidence-
based knowledge and understanding in their day-to-day working envi­
ronment. Police organisations risk inconsistent and poor service to 
victim-survivors if they rely on the skills, resilience, and ingenuity of 
individual ofcers to compensate for systematic organisational failings 
in creating a working environment where ofcers have the knowledge, 
data, technological capabilities, and competencies to respond to rape 
disclosures efectively. 
In this chapter, we tackle three organisational levers police forces 
have at their disposal: people (ofcers and staf), data, and (digital foren­
sic) technology. We show for each why they are a necessary (if on their 
own, insufcient) enabler of good rape policing, summarise the current 
state of UK policing in this area, and propose a way forward. We begin 
with organisational justice theory to centre organisational responsibility 
for staf well-being and development, and its direct links to the quality 
of police investigations and engagement with victim-survivors. We then 
turn to the second enabler: police understanding and use of data. When 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
118 
Taking responsibility 
disclosing to the police, victim-survivors trust ofcers with invaluable 
detail about the perpetrator(s) and their modus operandi. These disclo­
sures come at great expense to victim-survivors, who often fnd themselves 
further traumatised and further harmed by the way the criminal justice 
process treats them (Hohl et al., 2023; see also Chapter 5). We discuss 
how police services currently handle the intelligence victim-survivors 
and other witnesses give policing when reporting sexual violence, and 
outline how policing can improve the way it uses data and intelligence. 
Finally, we turn to technology, the police forces’ third resource for fnd­
ing and utilising supporting evidence. Given the centrality of digital 
forensic evidence, we examine the current use of digital forensics in rape 
investigations, and how this may be improved. The golden thread run­
ning through this chapter is the assertion that police forces have for too 
long left it up to individual ofcers to “muddle through”, falling back 
onto the skills and knowledge these ofcers happen to bring to the job or 
the ofcers’ attempts to work around inadequate systems and processes, 
and that this must and can change. 
Organisational enabler 1: ofcer welfare, 
learning, and development 
Organisational, not individual, responsibility for 
ofcer welfare 
Police organisations that wish for their ofcers to treat rape victim-
survivors well must begin by treating their ofcers the way they want 
these ofcers to treat victim-survivors. Literature on police cultures and 
cultural change is extensive (Chan, 1997; Loftus, 2009; Cockcroft, 2013; 
Mastrofski, 2004; Savage, 2003). However, absent in this literature has 
long been consideration of the relationship between police organisations 
and their ofcers (Bradford et al., 2014). A series of empirical studies 
have now shown that ofcers’ perceptions of police organisational justice 
predict ofcers’ attitudes towards the public, as well as ofcer compli­
ance with new policies and principles (Donner et al., 2015; Bradford 
and Quinton, 2014; Trinkner et al., 2016; Wolfe and Lawson, 2020). 
They have also highlighted the importance of a procedurally fair organi­
sational climate to ofcers’ general openness to change (Brimbal et al., 
2020). The components of organisational fairness are the same as those 
of Procedural Justice Theory (see Chapter 5). This includes ofcers feel­
ing they have a voice and that senior management take their concerns 
into account when making decisions that afect them, and good organisa­
tional communication involves fairness and respect. In organisational 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taking responsibility 119 
settings, fairness also includes ofcers feeling they receive recognition 
and reward for good work. Opportunities for continuous learning and 
development and career progression matter, too. The quality of the inter­
actions ofcers have with their direct supervisors is essential, particularly 
in relation to feeling supported and empowered to try new ideas (Roberts 
and Herrington, 2013; Bradford et al., 2014; Blader and Tyler, 2003; Nix 
and Wolfe, 2016). In their application of organisational justice theory to 
why ofcers voluntarily resign from policing, Charman and Tyson (2023) 
found that in such situations, a perceived lack of voice, recognition of 
ofcer skills and experience, as well as barriers to development and pro­
gression are signifcant factors in ofcers leaving the job. As such, the 
organisational justice literature provides a wealth of evidence on how 
police forces can create an organisational climate where ofcers are more 
likely to conduct competent rape investigations and engage with rape 
victim-survivors in procedurally fair ways. 
Recognition of the need to change begins by acknowledging the 
impact of rape investigations on ofcers. Police ofcers are routinely 
exposed to traumatic material and frequently interact with traumatised 
victim-survivors. This can cause secondary and vicarious trauma in 
ofcers, as well as burnout and compassion fatigue (Foley et al., 2022). 
This, in turn, can lower ofcers’ empathy towards victim-survivors and 
lessen ofcers’ ability to engage with victim-survivors in compassion­
ate ways (Turgoose et al., 2017). It is thus unsurprising that stress and 
mental health conditions are highly prevalent among ofcers (Syed et al., 
2020; Burke, 2017). Chronic work-related stress, burnout, and emo­
tional exhaustion can afect ofcer decision-making and result in the 
depersonalisation of victim-survivors (Maslach and Leiter, 2016, 1997). 
Organisational justice research has shown that ofcers’ perceptions of 
organisational support and organisational fairness can reduce ofcer 
stress and emotional exhaustion (Smith et al., 2022; Brunetto et al., 
2023), lessen cynicism towards the job (Bradford and Quinton, 2014; 
Donner et al., 2015), and contribute to their overall well-being (Kypria­
nides et al., 2022; Trinkner et al., 2016). These research fndings under­
score police organisational responsibility for mitigating the impacts of 
police work on ofcer mental health. Focusing on ofcer well-being is 
vital in reducing the risk of ofcers being unable to carry out their work 
efectively, including their ability to empathise with victim-survivors. 
The principles of procedural fairness can guide police organisations 
here. This requires forces to not only adopt a proactive approach to 
supporting ofcers once burnout and emotional exhaustion have already 
occurred, but also take preventative steps by addressing the underlying 
issues contributing to chronic stress and burnout among ofcers. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
120 
Taking responsibility 
Operation Soteria Bluestone scholars found that ofcers tasked with 
rape investigations typically face high workloads and poor work-life 
balance combined with a sense that their work carries low status within 
the wider organisation (Sondhi et al., 2023). Victim liaison ofcer roles, 
sometimes called Sexual Ofences Investigative Trained (SOIT) or Sexual 
Ofence Liaison Ofcers (SOLOs), lack career progression or develop­
ment pathways, leading to these roles being viewed as “dead-end” jobs 
(Hohl, 2016). There is also the hidden work of committed ofcers who 
spend considerable time building rapport with victim-survivors, safe­
guarding, making support referrals, and engaging in multi-agency work, 
or helping victim-survivors access practical support and assistance. This 
work is rarely acknowledged or organisationally rewarded (Rumney and 
McPhee, 2023). As part of Operation Soteria Bluestone, Sondhi et al. 
(2023) found that rape and serious sexual ofence investigators display 
higher levels of burnout, emotional exhaustion, and depersonalisation 
than frontline medics did during the Covid-19 pandemic. This may also 
contribute to the high attrition of rape complaints because investigators 
are simply too exhausted and overloaded to fully investigate every case. 
Several studies have shown that burnout is associated with tendencies 
to depersonalise victim-survivors, loss of ability to feel concern for oth­
ers, cynicism and disengagement. Emotional exhaustion and burnout 
also result in greater acceptance of rape myths, including the belief that 
many complaints of rape are false. Chronically stressed ofcers are more 
likely to rely on such rape myths as mental shortcuts (heuristics) during 
decision-making in rape cases. Depersonalisation, disengagement, cyni­
cism, and rape myths-based heuristics are all subconscious attempts by 
the body to shut out tasks with which the mentally exhausted or burnt-
out mind can no longer cope (Lathan et al., 2022; Stinchcomb, 2004; 
Burke, 2017). Excessive workloads and burnout may also play a part 
in the prevalence of errors and omissions in rape investigations, such as 
failures to submit forensic evidence for testing or skipping suspect back­
ground checks (see Chapter 3). In sum, chronic stress among RASSO 
investigators is common, with impacts on investigators’ (dis)engagement 
with victim-survivors and the likelihood of rape myths bias seeping into 
the investigation. 
The traumatic nature of rape investigations is not the only source of 
work-related chronic stress and burnout in ofcers; some argue it is not 
even the primary source. Police organisations place the onus on ofcers 
to look after their own mental well-being (Bullock and Garland, 2020; 
Randall and Buys, 2013). Occupational health policies and procedures 
in place to ensure ofcers get help de facto disincentivise the disclosure 
of mental health concerns. It is well documented that ofcers routinely 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taking responsibility 121 
lie in mental health assessments because they fear that disclosing the 
truth would lead to being removed from their duties. Instead, ofcers 
resort to cynicism, dark humour, and self-medication (Chan, 2007; 
Waters and Ussery, 2007; Fox et al., 2012). A majority of RASSO ofc­
ers continue their full-time duties or even work overtime despite feeling 
too unwell to go to work as a result of work-related stress (Maguire 
and Sondhi, 2022). Within such organisational climates, chronic stress 
becomes normalised, and an attitude of carrying on regardless is consid­
ered an occupational status symbol, with an unspoken collective denial 
of the personal impact of repeated exposure to deeply traumatic case­
work and organisational stressors (Stinchomb, 2004). Ofcer well-being 
research and organisational justice research converge on the conclusion 
that police forces must take organisational responsibility for ofcers’ 
work-related well-being and cease relying on individual ofcers’ resil­
ience and coping strategies (Williams et al., 2022). Consistent with 
organisational justice theory, many studies have now evidenced the sig­
nifcance of organisational stressors and how they can be reduced. This 
includes police forces taking action to ensure ofcers feel consulted in 
decisions that afect them, good communication from supervisors and 
senior management, and the feeling among ofcers that the organisation 
cares about them, that their work is valued, and that they will receive 
recognition and reward for good work (Bradford and Quinton, 2014; 
Blader and Tyler, 2003; Stinchomb, 2004; Bullock and Garland, 2020). 
Increasingly, there is recognition that efective continuous learning and 
development is an aspect of organisational justice and can contribute to 
ofcer well-being (Sondhi et al., 2023). Symbolically, it signals that the 
organisation is investing in its ofcers, and practically, continued learn­
ing can provide ofcers with a sense of progression and professional 
development. 
Training: a solution to the learning and 
development problem? 
Additional and better training is a go-to solution recommended in 
government reports and academic articles on the topic of rape inves­
tigations. Training is expected to have the capacity to change ofcers’ 
thinking, attitudes, and actions. Prominent recent examples include the 
police-CPS joint national action plan (CPS and NPCC, 2021), Casey 
review (2023), end-to-end rape review (HM Government, 2021b), 
Angiolini review (2015), and Stern review (2010). At the same time, the 
research on police training suggests that training is often inadequate and 
that it has thus far failed to improve rape investigations. Police training 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
122 
Taking responsibility 
programmes are typically run in-house, with each police force draw­
ing up their own content or alternatively paying a private provider to 
do so.1 However, there needs to be more transparency in the training 
content and its delivery. Training remains hermeneutically sealed from 
outside scrutiny and largely insulated from academic input. It is up to 
each individual force and dependent on what connections, if any, forces 
may have to individual academics, whether and what academic evi­
dence, if any, might make it into the training materials. Those designing 
and delivering in-house training are typically not subject matter experts. 
The learning model across England and Wales is that police trainers are 
supposed to be experts in training, capable of designing and delivering 
learning packages on any subject. As a result, the quality of training 
materials is variable, often outdated, or wholly inadequate. Some train­
ers also lack teaching qualifcations. Police training holds a low status 
within the organisation, and trainer roles are sometimes given to those 
who need to be removed from public-facing duties (Stanko and Hohl, 
2018). Williams et al. (2022) paint a similar picture, having reviewed the 
rape investigations in fve police forces in England and Wales as part of 
Operation Soteria Bluestone. Rape investigators are supposed to qualify 
for their role by completing the Specialist Sexual Assault Investigation 
Development Programme (SSAIDP). In practice, Williams and colleagues 
found that few RASSO ofcers had completed this compulsory training 
and were simply deployed without it. Planned ofcer training days were 
routinely cancelled due to operational demands. While training may be 
a go-to recommendation for improving rape investigations, the research 
shows that in practice, it is marred with problems. 
Given the inefectiveness of traditional police training, a move to 
nationally standardised, evidence-informed ofcer learning and devel­
opment is a logical step. In England and Wales, this step was taken by 
introducing the Police Education Qualifcations Framework (PEQF) in 
2016. The idea was that making a policing degree from a Higher Edu­
cation institution mandatory for police ofcers would raise the stand­
ards of police service and increase police professionalism (Hunter and 
May, 2020). While the Home Secretary reversed the mandatory degree 
requirement a few short years later in 2022 (Hamilton, 2022), the PEQF 
remains relevant and, in England and Wales, has become a lightning 
rod for the discussion of the questions of what a police national cur­
riculum ought to look like in terms of its learning outcomes, contents, 
teaching-learning modes, and assessment (Belur et al., 2020a; Hough 
and Stanko, 2020). It has also brought to the surface what Williams 
and Cockcroft (2019) term “the knowledge wars”: the tension between 
academic knowledge and experiential knowledge or craft in policing 

 
 
 
 
 
Taking responsibility 123 
(see also Fleming and Rhodes, 2018; Stanko and Hohl, 2018). Degree-
holding recruits or ofcers obtaining degrees while in service often fnd 
their academic qualifcations met with indiference, tokenistic recogni­
tion, or hostility from peers and supervisors. Moreover, some report 
defensiveness and rejection from peers and supervisors when they try 
to apply what they have learnt. Any gains in knowledge, skills, and atti­
tudes stemming from ofcer training are undermined and possibly lost 
when ofcers (re-)enter their day job (Williams et al., 2019; Hallenberg 
and Cockcroft, 2017). Organisational justice theory would suggest that 
unsupportive and undermining reactions from supervisors and middle 
management may be particularly damaging because they signal that the 
organisation is not recognising or valuing ofcers’ commitment to learn­
ing, knowledge, and professionalism. Such messages are disempowering 
and stife ofcers’ attempts to apply new knowledge and skills. Supervi­
sors and management must set the tone and create a supportive environ­
ment where ofcers feel empowered to apply and share new knowledge. 
Otherwise, any investment in ofcer learning and development remains 
a wasted opportunity. 
Ultimately, learning and development programmes aim to equip ofc­
ers for their role. In Stanko and Hohl (2018), we set out that improv­
ing rape investigations requires equipping ofcers with knowledge, 
understanding, and skills that are grounded in the academic evidence 
base and the craft of policing, as well as a data-based understanding 
of the local patterns and profles of sexual ofending. In Chapter 3, we 
argued that ofcers need evidence-based (specialist) knowledge of sex­
ual ofending. In Australia, Darwinkel et al. (2013) evaluated a four-
week training package based on Tidmarsh’s “Whole Story” approach, 
a type of suspect-focused investigation (see Chapter 3). The main aim 
of the training was to give ofcers the required knowledge, skills, and 
attitudes to identify elements of grooming in sexual ofending relation­
ships and to elicit these elements from victim-survivors and suspects 
in interview. According to this study, the training efectively reduced 
victim-blaming and increased ofcer confdence that their investigations 
would result in a charge. This was a several weeks-long classroom-based 
programme, something police forces in the UK have largely replaced 
by e-learning or blended learning (combining online self-study and 
short in-person elements) to reduce costs and ofcer abstractions. Some 
studies have found that shorter blended learning programmes can be 
efective in reducing rape myths acceptance and in improving ofcer 
attitudes towards victim-survivors (McKee et al., 2020). Such training 
programmes focus on erasing problematic attitudes and beliefs about 
rape that are thought to sit behind the attrition of rape cases. However, 

 
 
 
 
 
124 
Taking responsibility 
they do not necessarily include a signifcant suspect-focused element to 
replace the rape myths with an evidence-based understanding of perpe­
trator sexual ofending behaviour. Moreover, like most of these stud­
ies, Darwinkel et al. (2013) tested ofcer beliefs immediately before and 
after the training. Measuring training efectiveness immediately after the 
course will not pick up the potentially training-negating efect of peer 
and supervisor indiference once ofcers go back on duty, or the peer 
and supervisor pushback towards ofcers applying their new knowl­
edge. There is also an emerging evidence based on “attitudinal rebound­
ing” in ofcer attitudes and beliefs about rape. Attitudinal rebounding 
refers to the fnding of a signifcant short-term reduction in rape myths 
beliefs immediately after the training, followed by a quick return to 
their baseline prior beliefs about a month post-training (Lathan et al., 
2022). As such, while there is now increasing recognition of the need for 
evidence-based training that dispels rape myths and misconceptions and 
builds ofcer knowledge of sexual ofending behaviour, it is currently 
unclear whether these initial positive efects can successfully convert into 
sustained change. 
One approach is to open police training to academic expertise, lived 
experience, and victim support from outside of policing. Various stud­
ies have now highlighted the importance of the co-production of train­
ing materials between police practitioners, academics, and third-sector 
experts such as the ISVA services. There are examples of ofcers efec­
tively co-leading training with an ISVA from local rape crisis centres or 
co-leading training between a senior ofcer and an academic expert. In 
both cases, the role of the ofcers is to increase buy-in from attendees 
and create the space for the civilian subject matter expert to present 
information that challenges ofcers’ current practices and deeply held 
beliefs. The presence of a respected senior ofcer means learners are 
more likely to engage, rather than dismiss, such content. A joint deliv­
ery approach can help overcome the knowledge – practice binary and 
address this in the classroom (Lathan et al., 2022; Tidmarsh, 2021). 
Based on the authors’ own experience of co-designing a specialist sexual 
ofences investigative training in England in 2015/16, we believe that 
such co-production between craft and science is essential (Stanko and 
Hohl, 2018). It may be speculated that such an approach may deepen 
learning, make it more resilient to potential attitudinal rebounding, and 
increase post-training supervisory support. 
Organisational justice theory provides a unifying framework and 
principles for how police organisations think about their responsibili­
ties towards and communications with their ofcers and staf. From it 
fow concrete steps that police forces can take to create a climate within 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taking responsibility 125 
which ofcers feel valued and enabled by the organisation to carry out 
their work efectively. In the context of rape investigations, this means 
addressing ofcer well-being and investing in efective learning and 
development programmes. It also means an organisational climate that 
does not undo ofcer learning and development by ignoring, dismissing, 
or sabotaging ofcers’ attempts to introduce academic knowledge into 
their team’s daily investigation, prevention and victim-survivor engage­
ment work. Fundamentally, it means that police services should not rely 
on the skills and attitudes individual ofcers happen to bring to their 
role. Furthermore, it should not fall to individual ofcers’ resilience to 
compensate for the lack of organisational will to prioritise rape inves­
tigations and resource them adequately (see also Williams et al., 2022). 
Police ofcers and staf are human beings and policing’s most critical 
resource. Police forces must take responsibility for ofcer and staf 
working environments, work-related attitudes, knowledge, and skills. 
This also includes police forces taking responsibility for enabling their 
ofcers and staf to efectively use the two other critical organisational 
assets: data and technology. 
Organisational enabler 2: data 
Intelligence and data are the lifeblood of policing. Without them, 
ofcers cannot detect crime, cannot built a case, and have no material 
upon which to base intelligence-led disruption and prevention work. 
In rape cases, victim-survivor witness statements tend to be the key 
data source. Victim-survivors supply this data and information often 
at signifcant cost to themselves, a fact sometimes forgotten once their 
story takes the form of a line of data in a police system. It takes great 
courage to report a rape to the police, and many victim-survivors 
experience the investigation process as harrowing, re-traumatising, 
and intrusive. Victim-survivors may have told others that “something” 
happened. In the police interview, they must entrust the police with 
every intimate detail of what exactly occurred during the rape because 
the criminal justice process requires this level of minutiae from victim-
survivors (Hohl and Conway, 2017). Whatever ofcers have recorded in 
the system about the case, including any information victim-survivors 
shared, stays on police databases available for future investigation and 
prevention work. Police administrative data can be used to identify 
patterns of sexual ofences reported in local police force areas. Police-
recorded crime data also enables transparency and public accountabil­
ity. For all these reasons, police data should be treated as precious, and 
one must never forget that behind each line of data is the story of a 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
126 
Taking responsibility 
victim-survivor and their valuable intelligence about perpetrators. Yet, 
in police practice, data entry and analysis are considered an adminis­
trative nuisance that takes time away from actual police work. Incom­
plete and incorrectly entered data are the norm (HMIC, 2014; Lovett 
et al., 2022). This dramatically reduces the accuracy and usefulness of 
police administrative data, seemingly confrming that data entry and 
analysis are unimportant, and so a downward spiral ensues. A century 
ago, Fosdick (1920: 339) observed that police forces sufered from an 
“amazing lack of ordinary business system in the prosecution of the 
work”, and 50 years ago Greenwood and colleagues stated that “police 
agencies do not routinely collect and summarise data that can be used 
to determine the efectiveness of investigation activities” (Greenwood 
et al., 1977: 249). In 2023, Ashby (2023) found that it is still uncom­
mon for police forces to use data for strategic forecasting, despite the 
obvious benefts of doing so in times of overstretched resources. In this 
section, we outline the problem of poor data accuracy and integrity, 
discuss whether this really matters for victim-survivors and efective 
police work, and why police services appear to struggle to take respon­
sibility for ensuring that police data are an enabler, rather than a drain, 
on efective police responses to rape. 
In 2014, police administrative data lost the National Statistics des­
ignation in a damning inditement of its accuracy and integrity. The 
police inspection body for England and Wales, His Majesty’s Inspec­
torate of Constabulary (HMIC), concluded that across the country, 
there was lax compliance with the national standard for crime record­
ing and severe under-recording of crime, particularly of sexual ofences 
(HMIC, 2014).2 Sexual ofences, domestic abuse-related crimes, and 
victim-survivors with protected characteristics such as race, sex, gender 
reassignment, and disabilities were particularly afected by poor record­
ing.3 HMIC (2014) identifed a lack of understanding of the recording 
requirements, defcits and inadequacies in the recording process, and 
insufcient supervision as responsible for the problem. The inspector­
ate further found unacceptable delays in creating crime records, which 
meant some victim-survivors were not receiving timely referrals to ISVA 
services. This is because in some forces, ISVA support referrals are only 
triggered by a victim-survivor’s report being ofcially recorded on the 
police system. The inspection body’s report also drew links between 
poor data integrity and victim-survivors’ confdence to report similar 
crimes to the police in the future. Further, the report found that the 
wider policing ecosystem, including the Home Ofce and policing over­
sight bodies, had repeatedly missed opportunities to address the issue 
(HMIC, 2014; HM Government, 2014). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taking responsibility 127 
Following the 2014 report, HMIC has reintroduced an ongoing 
police data integrity inspection scheme. It also introduced measures to 
stop the under-recording of rape, making it difcult for police forces 
to “no crime” a rape, i.e. to remove a rape disclosure from the crime 
statistics. These have largely (but not completely) stopped the under-
recording of rape. However, it has created new problems, such as 
some ofcers railroading victim-survivors who never meant to make 
a formal complaint of rape into criminal investigations (Lovett et al., 
2023). To reduce “no-criming” police forces are no longer allowed to 
close a case if there are any outstanding investigative actions to com­
plete, for example witnesses not yet interviewed or CCTV footage not 
yet analysed. This invertedly creates zombie cases languishing in police 
systems. Zombie cases are cases ofcers have no intention of investi­
gating further but do not formally close because that would require 
completing all outstanding investigative actions (Stanko, 2022). The 
introduction of measures to improve data quality has remedied some 
issues but created others in the process. 
Rape crime records may no longer be missing at scale. Instead, criti­
cal data about police-recorded rapes are missing or incorrectly entered. 
As part of Operation Soteria Bluestone, Lovett et al. (2022) analysed 
data from fve police force areas. They found that victim-survivor eth­
nicity was not recorded in 16% to 68% of cases despite such infor­
mation being available. The victim-suspect relationship was missing in 
17% to 62% of cases, again, despite this information being available. 
Suspect age was missing in up to 41% of cases, and suspect ethnic­
ity was missing in up to 58% of cases, including cases where a sus­
pect had been identifed. The fnding mirrors the broader issue of poor 
police recording of protected characteristics for all crimes, with police 
forces failing to record victim-survivor ethnicity in two-thirds of cases 
(compared to victim-survivor age missing in only one in four cases) 
(HMICFRS, 2023). When protected characteristics are not recorded or 
recorded incorrectly, it becomes impossible to accurately assess whether 
all victim-survivors and suspects are being treated fairly, regardless of 
their race, disability status, or sex. As part of Operation Soteria Blue-
stone, Lovett and colleagues conducted focus groups and interviews 
to understand the practical barriers to improving data quality. They 
found that police data systems are often outdated, clunky, freeze, or 
crash mid-data-entry, making data entry cumbersome and excessively 
time-consuming. Crime analysts, in turn, found their ability to analyse 
the data for operational and strategic purposes difcult, with data sys­
tems not designed with analytic purposes in mind. As a result, in some 
forces, analysts have resorted to creating their own parallel datasets and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
128 
Taking responsibility 
conducting time-consuming dip samples, severely limiting their ability 
to contribute up-to-date ongoing analyses to support rape investigation 
and prevention (Lovett et al., 2022). Uplifting police data quality and 
analytic capability to a level where data becomes an enabler, rather than 
a nuisance, appears to be an insurmountable problem within policing. 
Scholars and victim-survivor advocates have long argued that the 
undercounting of rape and other forms of male violence against women 
and girls is symptomatic of a police service in which the words of rape 
victim-survivors do not count (Jordan, 2004, 2022; Kelly et al., 2005). 
Hall (2022) observes that police inspectorates have seized upon the pub­
lic narrative of making the criminal justice system more victim-friendly. 
Hall is critical of a direct causal connection being drawn between data 
quality and the quality of police service to victim-survivors. He suggests 
that “victims are once again being used as the ultimate justifcation for 
a punitive approach” and that the true aim of data quality improvement 
regimes is the expansion of “a culture of control” and over-policing 
(Hall, 2022: 29). Indeed, the National Crime Recording Standards now 
have “the twin aims of being victim-focused and maintaining consistency 
in recording across forces” (Home Ofce, 2018: 1). They set out how 
ofcers must apply legal crime defnitions to what the victim-survivor 
(or third-party) reports, with “the intention that victims are believed 
and beneft from statutory entitlements under the Code of Practice for 
Victims of Crime” (College of Policing, 2023: 9). Similarly, HMIC states 
that not recording or incorrectly recording what victim-survivors report 
means forces are letting victim-survivors down, and that this directly 
afects the quality of police service to victim-survivors as well as victim-
survivor confdence in the police (HMIC, 2014). However, HMIC 
(2014) has pointed out that police managerialism and performance 
management are partly to blame because they incentivise police forces to 
under- and mis-record crimes that have low detection rates, such as rape. 
HMIC further speculates that such senior management decisions are 
likely to afect ofcers’ attitudes towards data recording and ultimately 
erode data integrity. Some Police and Crime Commissioners dropped 
police performance targets in response to this fnding (HM Government, 
2014). The UK government has reintroduced performance targets in 
their Beating Crime plan (HM Government, 2021a) and in response to 
the end-to-end rape review (HM Government, 2021b). Accurate and 
comprehensive recording of rapes and data associated with rape reports 
are essential for police investigations, the identifcation of repeat perpe­
trators, and ensuring that every victim-survivor report is counted. 
Using police crime data to improve policing is the subject of large 
bodies of literature in problem-oriented policing, intelligence-led 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taking responsibility 129 
policing, and crime science. All include at their core an element of analy­
sis of police data to identify patterns in known ofending. The basic idea 
of intelligence-led policing is that police gather data about crimes and 
suspects, analyse this data, and then tactically use the insights to efec­
tively deploy their resources where they are most efective: in locations 
identifed as crime hotspots and on suspects identifed as repeat ofend­
ers. Intelligence-led policing arose out of a recognition of the prob­
lems of reactive policing. There was an emerging understanding that a 
few prolifc ofenders are responsible for a large majority of the harm. 
Smarter, more intelligent solutions were needed, and the idea was to 
capitalise on the technological advances in IT systems during the 1980s 
(Tilley, 2008; Weisburd and Braga, 2019). The discipline of crime sci­
ence similarly relies on data and its analysis as part of its science-based 
approach to crime prevention and detection (Laycock, 2005; Sidebot­
tom et al., 2020). Problem-oriented policing, frst proposed by Goldstein 
(1979), involves systematically analysing police data to understand and 
solve crime and disorder-related problems, though their solution may 
not narrowly focus only on police tactics but could involve commu­
nity and partnership working. These bodies of literature sit apart from 
the feminist literature on sexual violence, with little cross-fertilisation 
to inform police approaches to repeat sexual perpetrator identifca­
tion and disruption. There are notable exceptions, such as the recent 
Thames Valley Police initiative “Project Vigilant”, aimed at detecting 
sexually predatory behaviour and proactively intervening to prevent it. 
Non-uniformed ofcers attend bars and clubs in Oxford’s night-time 
economy, looking for vulnerable people and sexually predatory behav­
iour. When they spot something risky or suspicious, they alert uniformed 
ofcers who would then intervene and proactively disrupt the unfolding 
potential sexual assault. Thames Valley Police attribute a 50% reduc­
tion in rape and a 30% reduction in sexual assaults to Project Vigilant 
(Magill and Squires, 2023). Half of the individuals stopped as part of 
Project Vigilant were previously known to police, with 12% previously 
known for sexual ofences. The approach also uses police data to iden­
tify sexual violence hotspots to disrupt perpetrators who repeatedly prey 
on women in these areas. In the project’s 2021 evaluation, Magill et 
al. (2023) recommended that police employ an analyst to produce a 
suspect-focused dataset. As such, a large body of literature exists on 
how police forces can take responsibility for using their data to improve 
investigation, prevention, and practical resource allocation, which could 
be brought to bear in rape prevention (see also Chapter 4). 
Police-recorded crime data, including in rape cases, are a by-product 
of live administrative IT systems not designed with data analysis in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
130 
Taking responsibility 
mind. Data do not appear to be valued by police services despite the 
personal cost to the victim-survivors who supply much of it through 
their account of what happened to them, and despite its potential 
for improving the efectiveness and efciency of investigation and 
prevention eforts. When forces use data, it is often for performance 
management. The way some senior ofcers implement performance 
management lowers ofcer morale (Cockcroft and Beattie, 2009), 
reduces ofcers’ sense of organisational justice and may thus be coun­
terproductive. Ultimately, police services must take responsibility for 
creating the conditions in which the entering and use of police data 
is not an uphill battle. Data entry and analysis should not be seen as 
abstracting ofcers from “real” police work but as an integral part of 
it. This requires investment in user-friendly data systems. It requires an 
organisational climate in which ofcers are willing to adopt new poli­
cies (see above section on organisational justice) and where ofcers can 
see that data entry and analysis is valued and leads to improvements. 
It requires forces to invest in crime analysts who routinely analyse 
police administrative data to support operational and tactical policing. 
Police forces must have mechanisms through which data-based prob­
lem profles on rape and sexual inform strategic decision-making and 
resource planning. All these proposals require police organisations to 
take responsibility for putting their ofcers and staf into a position in 
which correct data entry and routine use of data are no longer down to 
the personal choices of individual ofcers, but supported and enabled 
by user-friendly systems, learning and development, and processes that 
function. 
Organisational enabler 3: digital forensics 
Digital forensic evidence is a staple of crime investigations; over 90% of 
recorded crime has a digital element. This is unsurprising given that for 
most people, digital devices have become an extension of their self, hold­
ing intimate information about their lives and relationships (Wilson-
Kovacs, 2021). While medical forensic evidence may be able to prove 
that sexual intercourse between the parties in question took place, digi­
tal forensic evidence also has the potential to speak the typically more 
difcult question of the victim-survivor’s consent and the suspect’s rea­
sonable belief of consent. Digital forensic capabilities and competence 
have become critical enablers of efective rape investigations. Ofcers 
routinely engage with victim-survivors over the disclosure of their per­
sonal digital data, shaping victim-survivor experiences of the justice pro­
cess. The current state of police digital forensics in English and Welsh 

 
 
 
 
 
Taking responsibility 131 
police forces is summarised in this quote from an HMICFRS inspection 
report (2022: 1–2): 
It has become increasingly clear that the police service hasn’t kept 
pace with the scale of the challenges they face. In some cases, we 
found that the police simply didn’t understand what digital forensics 
meant. We found a national backlog of over 25,000 devices waiting 
to be examined. This didn’t include all the devices likely to be in 
the system. We found delays in some areas so egregious that vic­
tims were being failed. In some areas, the system of digital forensic 
examination is slow, inefective and less professionally managed than 
the other police forensic disciplines. We also had little confdence 
that the police service had a coherent plan for improving the current 
situation. We found that the needs of victims were rarely taken into 
consideration when the police seized digital devices for examination 
to secure evidence of crime. In an age where so many live on and 
through these devices, there appears to be little recognition of the 
efect this can have on an already traumatised victim. 
This excerpt from the HMICFRS inspection report is a damning indict­
ment of inadequate digital forensic capabilities in police services and its 
direct impact on victim-survivors. Elsewhere in the report (ibid.), the 
inspection documents the efects of long delays and failures to analyse 
digital forensic evidence on case progression, with dangerous suspects 
being able to continue ofending. Others have pointed out the legal and 
ethical issues associated with police gathering data from victim-survivors’ 
digital devices. This includes ofcers downloading victim-survivors’ 
entire digital device content, often without meaningful informed con­
sent, and with the possibility that the material could be disclosed to 
the defence counsel and, thus, the accused. In some instances, victim-
survivors have been told that their case would be dropped if they did 
not agree to the police downloading their phone contents, even though 
the request was disproportionate and there was no reason to believe 
their phone would contain material directly relevant to the investiga­
tion (May et al., 2022; Kearns and Muir, 2019; Rumney and McPhee, 
2021; see also Chapter 3). In the remainder of this section, we outline 
the reasons for the current shortcomings, place them into the context of 
broader issues of rape investigations and victim-survivor engagement, 
and sketch out a way forward. 
Under-resourcing and under-investment in technology and ofcer 
training emerge as key organisational barriers to the efective and ethi­
cal use of digital forensics. Current systems are often incompatible with 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
132 
Taking responsibility 
newer digital devices. More user-friendly processes and data manage­
ment systems are also required to ensure downloads adhere to the 
agreed investigative parameters and follow secure storage, access control 
and deletion protocols. Some ofcers download far more from victim-
survivors’ phones than has been agreed (e.g. “golden copies” of the entire 
device content) because they lack the technical capability or competence 
to restrict the download to the directly relevant parameters (e.g. time 
frames, keywords). Furthermore, messy recording systems do not allow 
tracking the use and efectiveness of digital forensics (Wilson-Kovacs, 
2021; Horsman, 2023; May et al., 2022). Digital forensic analyses are 
typically carried out by Digital Forensic Units (DFUs) which have no 
expert training on sexual ofending. Conversely, rape investigators tend 
not to have expert training in digital forensics. The results are digital 
extractions with search terms that are “basic and sexual” such as “nob, 
dick, boobs, fsting, drugs, porn, fuck, fnger, tits” (May et al., 2022: 
186). Interestingly, rarely do ofcers search for words such as “sorry”, 
or have a digital forensic strategy capable of uncovering typical perpe­
trator tactics such as grooming, manipulation, gaslighting, coercion, or 
attempts to blackmail their victim before and/or after the rape (ibid.). In 
interviews and focus groups, ofcers tell of far too few digital experts 
trained to use the technology vis-à-vis an increasing number of police-
recorded rapes and the bulging volume of potentially relevant digital 
material. Some ofcers feel the lack of training and adequate resourcing 
is in part due to senior leadership teams not understanding the technol­
ogy or the complexity and pressing nature of the issue, and as a result, 
having little appetite for signifcant investments in digital forensics (Wilson-
Kovacs, 2021; May et al., 2022). At a strategic level, police forces and 
the wider policing ecosystem are yet to agree a national standard for dig­
ital forensics, ofcer learning and development, processes and protocols 
in line with victims’ rights, data protection, and privacy rights (Muir 
and Walcott, 2021; HMICFRS, 2022). The emerging picture is one of 
inadequate resources and protocols, and a lack of national coordination 
to get a grip on the issues. 
There are also clear parallels to ofcer learning and development 
(organisational enabler 1) and the use of data (organisational enabler 
2). Individual ofcers are muddling through, aware of and speaking 
candidly about how the lack of adequate training, resources, and data 
systems undermines efective investigations and fails victim-survivors, in 
full view of the police organisation. Ofcers are looking to police senior 
leadership teams to take organisational responsibility for equipping them 
with the tools and learning to improve on what they recognise as inad­
equate practices. The problems that mar investigations, prevention, and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taking responsibility 133 
victim-survivor engagement also thread through digital forensic practices. 
Examples include ofcers undertaking “fshing expeditions” on victim-
survivors’ digital devices well outside the legal boundaries of directly rel­
evant and proportionate lines of enquiry, and well outside data privacy 
and protection laws (see Chapter 5). This is an extension of investigative 
practices that over-focus on victim-survivor credibility. A lack of specialist 
knowledge and understanding of perpetrator behaviour means ofcers use 
unsophisticated search terms incapable of revealing evidence of groom­
ing, manipulation, and coercion to tell the whole story of the abuse (see 
Chapter 3). A lack of digital forensic data and process management sys­
tems reduces the quality of data available for identifying patterns of repeat 
perpetrators, further hampering already under-developed rape prevention 
eforts (see Chapter 4). There, too, are strong parallels between digital 
forensic evidence and other types of forensic evidence. There is exten­
sive literature documenting the vast amount of untested sexual assault 
kits (sometimes also called “early evidence kits” or simply “rape kits”), 
collected from victim-survivors through invasive forensic medical exami­
nations, but never analysed despite their investigative potential (Lovell 
and Lanhinrichsen-Rohling, 2022). Campbell and Feeney (2022) vividly 
describe these kits as “on the shelves, covered in dust”, and Casey (2023) 
provides the memorable imagery of medical forensic evidence stufed into 
overfowing, broken fridges. As such, digital forensic evidence is an exten­
sion of general approaches to collecting evidence from victim-survivors 
and then failing to deploy it within the investigation, or merely using it to 
investigate the victim-survivor’s credibility outside of legal limits. In Chap­
ter 5, we examined why and how the principles of procedural fairness 
should guide ofcer engagement with victim-survivors. When it comes 
to engaging with victim-survivors over police requests for access to their 
digital devices, ofcers routinely fail to provide victim-survivors with the 
information required to make an informed decision about handing their 
digital devices to investigators (Rumney and McPhee, 2021). Intrusive 
digital strip searches that are not warranted by directly relevant and pro­
portionate lines of enquiry can undermine victim-survivors’ sense of dig­
nity and dent the neutrality (in the sense of being free from bias) of the 
investigation. As such, questions of procedural fairness arise whenever 
ofcers engage with victim-survivors over requests for extracting digital 
forensic material from their electronic devices. May et al. (2022), who 
pioneered digital forensics within Operation Soteria Bluestone, make sim­
ilar observations of parallels with the fndings of the fve other pillars of 
the programme (see Figure 1.1 in Chapter 1). These parallels suggest that 
the problem of digital forensics at its core is not a problem of technology 
or resource, but a microcosm of police approaches to rape in general. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
134 
Taking responsibility 
As such, whether policing fnds a way forward in improving its digi­
tal forensics is both a test case for, and intrinsically linked to, its ability 
to improve policing of rape as a whole. Efective use of digital forensic 
evidence requires specialist knowledge of sexual ofending and a spe­
cialist understanding of digital forensics. Some recommend upskilling 
both rape investigators and DFU specialists and ensuring they seamlessly 
work together to combine both areas of expertise into an efective digital 
investigative strategy (May et al., 2022; Wilson-Kovacs, 2021). Others 
have argued that digital evidence is so mainstream that digital forensics 
cannot remain a specialism contained within DFUs. Instead, they argue, 
it must be part of every investigator’s skillset, and that all ofcers tasked 
with crime investigations must receive digital forensic training (Muir 
and Walcott, 2021). Victim-survivors’ rights and decisions must be cen­
tred in the development of consent forms and protocols to ensure digital 
intrusion only occurs when it is justifed and strictly within the bounds 
of directly relevant, proportionate lines of enquiry. Free, informed con­
sent must replace the current status quo where some victim-survivors 
feel blackmailed into handing over their devices or risk forfeiting access 
to criminal justice (Rumney and McPhee, 2021). Academic and policing 
commentators agree on the need for investment in technology, training 
and ongoing learning and development for ofcers, a digital case man­
agement system, and national standards for digital forensic protocols 
(May et al., 2022; Muir and Walcott, 2021; Horsman, 2023). The issue 
of digital forensics is systemic, and police organisations must ensure that 
ofcers have the skills and resources required to competently engage 
with the digital world that has become so central to people’s lives and 
therefore to crime investigations. 
Conclusion 
When rape investigations fail routinely, responsibility for these failures 
lies with the police force’s organisational centre. The price is paid by 
victim-survivors and by society, with perpetrators free to continue their 
ofending. The price is also paid by the ofcers who sacrifce their mental 
health by attempting to compensate for organisational defcits through 
working overtime and who experience the moral injury that comes from 
letting down victim-survivors and failing to stop known perpetrators. 
Police leaders do not seem to tire of blaming a “few bad apples” for 
police-perpetrated sexual violence and emphasise how seriously they 
take their responsibility for “cutting out the cancer of rogue ofcers” 
from the police service (France, 2023). Removing police perpetrators is a 
bare minimum. Moving forward requires police forces as organisational 

 
 
Taking responsibility 135 
entities to take decisive positive steps so they are adequately equipped 
to respond to rape and other sexual violence. In this chapter, we focused 
on the organisational levers available to police forces for enabling a shift 
to suspect-focused investigations (Chapter 3), disruption of known per­
petrators (Chapter 4), and procedurally fair engagement with victim-
survivors (Chapter 5) as the new default in policing. The three levers 
are people, data, and (digital forensic) technology. Within each of these 
areas, police services must consider how they can shape the organisa­
tional climate, processes, and systems so organisational responsibilities 
do not slip onto the shoulders of individual ofcers and create the risk – 
and reality – of inconsistent and inadequate service delivery. 
Ofcers need evidence-based knowledge and understanding of sexual 
ofending behaviour. This needs to be taught by police-academic and 
police-sector partnerships to ensure the quality of the learning content 
and to increase the likelihood of ofcers being receptive to academic and 
lived experience knowledge. Police forces must create working environ­
ments where ofcers feel empowered to apply new knowledge and test 
new skills. Senior leaders and supervisors must recognise and reward 
ofcers who strive to build their knowledge and improve their investiga­
tive and victim-survivor engagement skills. Chronic stress and burnout 
increase rape myths acceptance and lower empathy towards victim-
survivors. Police forces can use learning and development, resourcing, 
and the principles of organisational (procedural) justice in their com­
munications with ofcers to reduce organisational stressors. As such, 
ofcer well-being, learning, and development is the frst organisational 
enabler. Moving to the second organisational enabler, police-recorded 
crime data is the lifeblood of crime investigation and prevention. Police 
forces should treat every rape disclosure as the precious source of intel­
ligence that it is. Investing in data integrity and data analysis are not sec­
ondary side functions of police organisations, but core to police services 
understanding the patterns of sexual violence in their force area and 
using this information to improve their operational and strategic eforts. 
Similarly, digital forensic material can be vital evidence in a suspect-
focused investigation. However, if poorly used, it will increase undue 
victim-credibility focus and replicate the errors and missed opportuni­
ties that are so well- documented in the wider rape investigation lit­
erature. As such, digital forensics is the third organisational enabler. 
Digital forensic investigative strategies and victim-survivor communica­
tion about potential digital evidence on their devices need to be seen as 
an extension of the principles outlined in Chapters 3 and 5. The way 
forward includes investment in ofcer competence through continuous 
learning and development on digital forensics and data management 

 
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
136 
Taking responsibility 
processes and systems. There are no silver bullets in the quest for a new 
default police approach that centres rape victims’ rights and focuses the 
investigation on sexual ofending behaviour. The six-pillar framework, 
comprised of the principles set out in Chapters 3 to 5 and supported by 
the three critical organisational enablers put forward in this chapter, is a 
starting point. In the next chapter, we document the journey of attempt­
ing to implement these ideas within Project Bluestone and Operation 
Soteria Bluestone. 
Notes 
1 Based on learning outcomes set by the College of Policing for all 
police forces in England and Wales. 
2 Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary (HMIC) was given 
responsibility for carrying out inspections of Fire and Rescue 
Services in July 2017, from which point it became Her Maj­
esty’s Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire & Rescue Services 
(HMICFRS). 
3 In 2023, protected characteristics in the UK included age, gender 
reassignment, being married/in a civil partnership, being pregnant 
or on maternity leave, disability, race (including colour, nationality, 
ethnic or national origin), religion or belief, sex, and sexual orienta­
tion. Available at: www.gov.uk/discrimination-your-rights. 
References 
Angiolini, E. (2015). Report of the independent review into the inves­
tigation and prosecution of rape in London. Available at: www.cps. 
gov.uk/sites/default/fles/documents/publications/dame_elish_angiolini_ 
rape_review_2015.pdf 
Ashby, M. (2023). Forecasting crime trends to support police strategic deci­
sion making. CrimRxiv. https://doi.org/10.21428/cb6ab371.8c79f146 
Belur, J., Agnew-Pauley, W., McGinley, B. and Tompson, L. (2020b). A 
systematic review of police recruit training programmes. Policing: A 
Journal of Policy and Practice, 14(1): 76–90. 
Belur, J., Agnew-Pauley, W. and Tompson, L. (2020a). Designing a graduate 
entry route for police recruits: Lessons from a rapid evidence assessment 
of other professions. Police Practice and Research, 21(2): 134–151. 
Blader, S.L. and Tyler, T.R. (2003). What constitutes fairness in work 
settings? A four component model of procedural justice. Human 
Resource Management Review, 13(1): 107–126. 
Bowling, B., Reiner, R. and Sheptycki, J. (2019). Politics of the police. 
5th ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Bradford, B. and Quinton, P. (2014). Self-legitimacy, police culture and 
support for democratic policing in an English constabulary. British 
Journal of Criminology, 54(6): 1023–1046. 

 
 
 
 
 
Taking responsibility 137 
Bradford, B., Quinton, P., Myhill, A. and Porter, G. (2014). Why do 
‘the law’ comply? Procedural justice, group identifcation and ofcer 
motivation in police organizations. European Journal of Criminol­
ogy, 11(1): 110–131. 
Brimbal, L., Bradford, B., Jackson, J., Hartwig, M. and Joseph, E. 
(2020). On the importance of a procedurally fair organizational cli­
mate for openness to change in law enforcement. Law and Human 
Behaviour, 44(5): 394–411. 
Brunetto, Y., Farr-Wharton, B., Wankhade, P., Saccon, C. and Xerri, M. 
(2023). Managing emotional labour: The importance of organisational 
support for managing police ofcers in England and Italy. The Inter­
national Journal of Human Resource Management, 34(4): 832–854. 
Bullock, K. and Garland, J. (2020). ‘The organisation doesn’t particu­
larly consider itself responsible for you’: Organisational support 
for ofcers injured in the line of duty and organisational (in)justice. 
Policing and Society, 30(7): 818–834. 
Burke, R.J. (2017). Stress in policing: Sources, consequence, and inter­
ventions. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Campbell, R. and Feeney, H. (2022). ‘On the shelves, covered in dust’: 
The history of untested sexual assault kits in the United States. In 
R.E. Lovell and J. Langhinrichsen-Rohling (Eds.) Sexual assault kits 
and reforming the response to rape. Abingdon: Routledge, 9–23. 
Casey, L. (2023). Baroness Casey review fnal report: March 2023. 
Available at: www.met.police.uk/SysSiteAssets/media/downloads/ 
met/about-us/baroness-casey-review/update-march-2023/baroness­
casey-review-march-2023a.pdf 
Chan, J. (1997). Changing police culture. Melbourne: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press. 
Chan, J. (2007). Police stress and organization culture. In M. O’Neill, 
M. Marks and A.M. Singh (Eds.) Police occupational culture. Lon­
don: Elsevier, 129–151. 
Charman, S. and Tyson, J. (2023). Over and out: The damaged and 
conficted identities of ofcers voluntarily resigning from the police 
service. Policing and Society, 33(7): 767–783. 
Cockcroft, T. (2013). Police culture: Themes and concepts. Abingdon: 
Routledge. 
Cockcroft, T. and Beattie, I. (2009). Shifting culture: Managerialism and 
the rise of ‘performance’. Policing: An International Journal of Police 
Strategies and Management, 32(3): 526–540. 
College of Policing (2023). ‘Investigation process’ as part of authorised 
professional practice. Available at: www.college.police.uk/print/pdf/ 
node/2365 
Crown Prosecution Service and National Police Chiefs’ Council (2021). 
Police-CPS joint national RASSO action plan. Available at: www. 
cps.gov.uk/sites/default/fles/documents/publications/RASSO-JNAP­
2021-v1-0.pdf 
Darwinkel, E., Powell, M. and Tidmarsh, P. (2013). Improving police 
ofcers’ perceptions of sexual ofending through intensive training. 
Criminal Justice and Behavior, 40(8): 895–908. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
138 
Taking responsibility 
Donner, C., Maskaly, J., Fridell, L. and Jennings, W.G. (2015). Polic­
ing and procedural justice: A state-of-the-art review. Policing: An 
International Journal of Police Strategies and Management, 38(1): 
153–172. 
Fleming, J. and Rhodes, R. (2018). Can experience be evidence? Craft 
knowledge and evidence-based policing. Policy & Politics, 46(1): 3–26. 
Foley, J., Hassett, A. and Williams, E. (2022). ‘Getting on with the job’: 
A systematised literature review of secondary trauma and post-traumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD) in policing within the United Kingdom (UK). 
The Police Journal, 95(1): 224–252. 
Fosdick, R.B. (1920). American police systems. New York: Century Co. 
Fox, J., Desai, M.M., Britten, K., Lucas, G., Luneau, R. and Rosenthal, 
M.S. (2012). Mental-health conditions, barriers to care, and produc­
tivity loss among ofcers in an urban police department. Connecticut 
Medicine, 76(9): 525–531. 
France, A. (2023). Rowley says progress made on ‘cutting out the 
cancer’ of rogue ofcers in the Met. The Standard. 6 September. 
Available at: www.standard.co.uk/news/london/mark-rowley-met­
police-scotland-yard-crime-rogue-ofcers-b1105246.html 
Goldstein, H. (1979). Improving policing: A problem-oriented approach. 
Crime & Delinquency, 25(2): 236–258. 
Greenwood, P., Chaiken, J. and Petersilia, J. (1977). The criminal inves­
tigation process. Lexington: The Rand Corporation. 
Hall, M. (2022). Counting crime: Discounting victims? International 
Review of Victimology, 28(1): 3–32. 
Hallenberg, K. and Cockcroft, T. (2017). From indiference to hostility: 
Police ofcers, organizational responses and the symbolic value of 
‘in-service’ higher education in policing. Policing, 11(3): 273–288. 
Hamilton, F. (2022). Suella Braverman drops demand for police recruits 
to have a degree. The Times. 11 November. Available at: www. 
thetimes.co.uk/article/suella-braverman-drops-demand-for-police­
recruits-to-have-a-degree-pp7gfkb9l 
HM Government (2014). The Government response to the sixteenth 
report from the Home Afairs Select Committee session 2013–14 HC 
757: Police and Crime Commissioners: Progress to date. Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/ 
uploads/attachment_data/fle/387123/PCCprogressToDate.pdf 
HM Government (2021a). Beating crime plan: Fewer victims, peaceful 
neighbourhoods, safe country. Available at: https://assets.publishing. 
service.gov.uk/media/6135f34ed3bf7f05b7bcb54e/Crime-plan-v10. 
pdf 
HM Government (2021b). The end-to-end rape review report on fnd­
ings and actions. Available at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/ 
government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fle/1001417/ 
end-to-end-rape-review-report-with-correction-slip.pdf 
HM Inspectorate of Constabulary (2014). Crime-recording: Making the 
victim count. Available at: https://assets-hmicfrs.justiceinspectorates. 
gov.uk/uploads/crime-recording-making-the-victim-count.pdf 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Taking responsibility 139 
HM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire & Rescue Services (2022). 
Digital forensics: An inspection into how well the police and other 
agencies use digital forensics in their investigations. Available at: 
https://assets-hmicfrs.justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/uploads/inspection­
police-other-agencies-digital-forensics-investigations.pdf 
HM Inspectorate of Constabulary and Fire & Rescue Services (2023). 
Police performance: Getting a grip. Available at: https://assets-hmicfrs. 
justiceinspectorates.gov.uk/uploads/peel-spotlight-report-police­
performance.pdf 
Hohl, K. (2016). Understanding the victim account in the context of the 
investigation and prosecution of rape complaints. Knowledge Fund 
EITSO project: Briefng report. City University London. Available at: 
https://library.college.police.uk/docs/PKF1/08_008.pdf 
Hohl, K. and Conway, M.A. (2017). Memory as evidence: How normal 
features of victim memory lead to the attrition of rape complaints. 
Criminology & Criminal Justice, 17(3): 248–265. 
Hohl, K., Reid, A.K., Molisso, S. and Pullerits, M. (2023). Rape and 
sexual assault survivors’ experience of the police in England and 
Wales. Survey Report I: January–June 2023. City, University of Lon­
don. Available at: https://openaccess.city.ac.uk/id/eprint/31310/9/ 
Survey%20Report%20I%2021%20September%202023%20 
UPDATE%2020%20September.pdf 
Home Ofce (2018). The National Crime Recording Standard (NCRS): 
What you need to know. Available at: https://assets.publishing. 
service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_ 
data/fle/116269/ncrs.pdf 
Horsman, G. (2023). Digital evidence strategies for digital forensic sci­
ence examinations. Science & Justice, 63(1): 116–126. 
Hough, M. and Stanko, E.A. (2020). Designing degree-level courses for 
police recruits in England and Wales: Some issues and challenges. 
Policing: A Journal of Policy and Practice, 14(1): 31–42. 
Hunter, G. and May, T. (2020). Views from the frontline: Graduate 
police recruits on the status of evidence-based practice. Policing: A 
Journal of Policy and Practice, 14(1): 91–103. 
Jordan, J. (2004). The word of a woman: Police, rape and belief. London: 
Palgrave. 
Jordan, J. (2022). Women, rape and justice: Unravelling the rape conun­
drum. Abingdon: Routledge. 
Kearns, I. and Muir, R. (2019). Data driven policing and public value. The 
Police Foundation. Available at: www.police-foundation.org.uk/2017/ 
wp-content/uploads/2010/10/data_ driven_policing_fnal.pdf 
Kelly, L., Lovett, J. and Regan, L. (2005). A gap or a chasm? Attrition 
in reported rape cases. Home Ofce research study 293. London: 
Home Ofce. 
Kyprianides, A., Bradford, B., Beale, M., Savigar-Shaw, L., Stott, C. 
and Radburn, M. (2022). Policing the COVID-19 pandemic: Police 
ofcer well-being and commitment to democratic modes of policing. 
Policing and Society, 32(4): 504–521. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
140 
Taking responsibility 
Lathan, E.C., Langhinrichsen-Rohling, J., Stefurak, J.T., Duncan, J. 
and Selwyn, C.N. (2022). Trauma-informed sexual assault investiga­
tions training: Lessons learned attempting to enhance sexual assault-
related understanding and reduce rape myth beliefs and burnout 
among police ofcers. Policing: A Journal of Policy and Practice, 
16(4): 539–559. 
Laycock, G. (2005). Defning crime science. In M.J. Smith and N. Tilley 
(Eds.) Crime science: New approaches to preventing and detecting 
crime. Devon: Willan Publishing, 3–26. 
Loftus, B. (2009). Police culture in a changing world. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Lovell, R.E. and Langhinrichsen-Rohling, J. (Eds.) (2022). Sexual assault 
kits and reforming the response to rape. London: Taylor & Francis. 
Lovett, J., Dhaliwal, S., Hales, G., Kelly, L., Nath, P., Sood, A., Swaby, 
J., Uzelac, G., Vera-Gray, F., Buil-Gil, D., Myhill, A. and McGlynn, 
C. (2023). Recording, reporting, and charge rates for rape in Eng­
land and Wales: Briefng 2. Child & Woman Abuse Unit, London 
Metropolitan University. Available at: https://cwasu.org/wp-content/ 
uploads/2023/07/cwasu-briefng-02-110923.pdf 
Lovett, J., Hales, G., Kelly, L., Vera-Gray, F., Uzelac, G., Buil-Gil, D. and 
Myhill, A. (2022). Appendix 11 – data and performance. In Operation 
Soteria Bluestone year 1 report 2021–2022, 155–177. Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/ 
uploads/attachment_data/file/1128688/E02836356_Operation_ 
Soteria_Y1_report_Accessible.pdf 
Magill, C. and Squires, P. (2023). Researching project vigilant, a police 
response to violence against women in the night time economy: 
Reclaiming the night? In D. Martin and S. Tong (Eds.) Introduction 
to policing research: Taking lessons from practice. 2nd ed. Abingdon: 
Routledge, 287–306. 
Magill, C., Squires, P., Solaas, J., Havard, T. and Flood, C. (2023). Pro­
ject Vigilant: Evaluation report. University of Brighton. Available at: 
https://cris.brighton.ac.uk/ws/portalfles/portal/39952805/Project_ 
Vigilant_Evaluation.pdf 
Maguire, L. and Sondhi, A. (2022). Stress-related psychosocial risk factors 
among police ofcers working on Rape and Serious Sexual Ofences. 
The Police Journal. https://doi.org/10.1177/0032258X221128398 
Maslach, C. and Leiter, M.P. (1997). The truth about burnout: How 
organizations cause personal stress and what to do about it. San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
Maslach, C. and Leiter, M.P. (2016). Understanding the burnout experi­
ence: Recent research and its implications for psychiatry. World Psy­
chiatry, 15(2): 103–111. 
Mastrofski, S.D. (2004). Controlling street-level police discretion. The 
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, 
593(1): 100–118. 
May, T., Talbot, C., Skinner, R., Atkinson, S., Barbin, A., Butt, C., 
Holtman, E., Jefs, T., Latif, A., Majid, A., Markham-Woods, G., 

 
 
 
 
 
Taking responsibility 141 
Garrido Marquez, T., Reid, E. and Trott, L. (2022). Appendix 12 – 
Pillar six: Examining, understanding, and improving the use of digi­
tal material in RAOSO investigations. In Operation Soteria Blue-
stone year 1 report 2021–2022, 178–190. Available at: https://assets. 
publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/ 
attachment_data/fle/1128688/E02836356_Operation_Soteria_Y1_ 
report_Accessible.pdf 
McKee, Z., Mueller-Johnson, K. and Strang, H. (2020). Impact of a 
training programme on police attitudes towards victims of rape: A 
randomised controlled trial. Cambridge Journal of Evidence-Based 
Policing, 4: 39–55. 
Muir, R. and Walcott, S. (2021). Unleashing the value of digital foren­
sics. The Police Foundation. Available at: www.police-foundation. 
org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2010/10/value_of_digital_forensics.pdf 
Myhill, A. and Bradford, B. (2013). Overcoming cop culture? Organi­
zational justice and police ofcers’ attitudes toward the public. Polic­
ing: An International Journal of Police Strategies & Management, 
36(2): 338–356. 
Nix, J. and Wolfe, S.E. (2016). Sensitivity to the Ferguson Efect: The 
role of managerial organizational justice. Journal of Criminal Justice, 
47(1): 12–20. 
Randall, C. and Buys, N. (2013). Managing occupational stress injury in 
police services: A literature review. International Public Health Jour­
nal, 5(4): 413–425. 
Roberts, K. and Herrington, V. (2013). Organisational and procedural 
justice: A review of the literature and its implications for polic­
ing. Journal of Policing, Intelligence and Counter Terrorism, 8(2): 
115–130. 
Rumney, P.N. and McPhee, D. (2021). The evidential value of electronic 
communications data in rape and sexual ofence cases. Criminal Law 
Review, 1: 20–33. 
Rumney, P.N. and McPhee, D. (2023). Vulnerability, resilience, and 
rape: Uncovering the hidden work of police ofcers during rape 
investigations. International Review of Victimology, 29(3): 366–384. 
Savage, S. (2003). Tackling tradition: Reform and modernisation of the 
British Police. Contemporary Politics, 9(2): 171–184. 
Sidebottom, A., Bullock, K., Armitage, R., Ashby, M., Clemmow, C., 
Kirby, S., Laycock, G. and Tilley, N. (2020). Problem-oriented polic­
ing in England and Wales 2019. Available at: https://discovery.ucl. 
ac.uk/id/eprint/10094764/1/Problem-Oriented%20Policing%20 
in%20England%20and%20Wales.pdf 
Smith, C., Han, Y., Dupré, K. and Sears, G.J. (2022). Perceived organi­
zational support and its interaction with voice on police ofcers’ 
organizational cynicism, stress and emotional exhaustion. Policing: 
An International Journal, 45(2): 200–217. 
Sondhi, A., Harding, R., Maguire, L. and Williams, E. (2023). Under­
standing factors associated with burnout symptoms amongst inves­
tigators working on Rape and Serious Sexual Ofence (RASSO) 

 
 
 
142 
Taking responsibility 
investigations in England and Wales. Policing: A Journal of Policy 
and Practice, 17. https://doi.org/10.1093/police/paad020 
Stanko, B. (2022). Operation Soteria Bluestone year 1 report 2021–2022. 
Available at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/ 
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fle/1128688/E02836356_ 
Operation_Soteria_Y1_report_Accessible.pdf 
Stanko, E.A. and Dawson, P. (2016). Police use of research evidence: 
Recommendations for improvement. Cham: Springer International 
Publishing. 
Stanko, E.A. and Hohl, K. (2018). Why training is not improving the 
police response to sexual violence against women: A glimpse into 
the ‘black box’ of police training. In E. Milne, K. Brennan, N. South 
and J. Turton (Eds.) Women and the criminal justice system: Failing 
victims and ofenders? Cham: Palgrave MacMillan, 167–186. 
Stern, V. (2010). The Stern review: A report by Baroness Vivien Stern 
CBE of an independent review into how rape complaints are handled 
by public authorities in England and Wales. Government Equalities 
Ofce and Home Ofce. Available at: https://webarchive.national 
archives.gov.uk/ukgwa/20100610085503mp_/www.equalities.gov. 
uk/pdf/Stern_Review_acc_FINAL.pdf 
Stinchcomb, J.B. (2004). Searching for stress in all the wrong places: 
Combating chronic organizational stressors in policing. Police Prac­
tice and Research, 5(3): 259–277. 
Syed, S., Ashwick, R., Schlosser, M., Jones, R., Rowe, S. and Billings, J. 
(2020). Global prevalence and risk factors for mental health prob­
lems in police personnel: A systematic review and meta-analysis. 
Occupational and Environmental Medicine, 77(11): 737–747. 
Tidmarsh, P. (2021). The whole story: Investigating sexual crime – 
Truth, lies and the path to justice. London: Jonathan Cape. 
Tilley, N. (2008). Modern approaches to policing: Community, prob-
lem-oriented and intelligence-led. In T. Newburn (Ed.) Handbook of 
policing. 2nd ed. Abingdon: Routledge, 373–403. 
Trinkner, R., Tyler, T.R. and Gof, P.A. (2016). Justice from within: The 
relations between a procedurally just organizational climate and 
police organizational efciency, endorsement of democratic policing, 
and ofcer well-being. Psychology, Public Policy, and Law, 22(2): 
158–172. 
Turgoose, D., Glover, N., Barker, C. and Maddox, L. (2017). Empathy, 
compassion fatigue, and burnout in police ofcers working with rape 
victims. Traumatology, 23(2): 205–213. 
Waters, J.A. and Ussery, W. (2007). Police stress: History, contributing 
factor, symptoms, and interventions. Policing: An International Jour­
nal of Police Strategies and Management, 30(2): 169–188. 
Weisburd, D. and Braga, A.A. (2019). Introduction: Understanding 
police innovation. In D. Weisburd and A.A. Braga (Eds.) Police inno­
vation: Contrasting perspectives. 2nd ed. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1–26. 
Williams, E. and Cockcroft, T. (2019). Knowledge wars: Professionali­
sation, organisational justice and competing knowledge paradigms 

 
 
 
Taking responsibility 143 
in British policing. In L. Huey and R. Mitchell (Eds.) Evidence-based 
policing: An introduction. Bristol: Policy Press, 131–141. 
Williams, E., Miller, N., Harding, R., Sondhi, A., Maguire, L., Nor­
man, J., Abinashi, D. and Ward, R. (2022). Appendix 10 – Pillar 
four: Ofcer learning, development and well-being. In Operation 
Soteria Bluestone year 1 report 2021–2022, 140–154. Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/ 
uploads/attachment_data/file/1128688/E02836356_Operation_ 
Soteria_Y1_report_Accessible.pdf 
Williams, E., Norman, J. and Rowe, M. (2019). The police education 
qualifcation framework: A professional agenda or building profes­
sionals? Police Practice and Research, 20(3): 259–272. 
Wilson-Kovacs, D. (2021). Digital media investigators: Challenges and 
opportunities in the use of digital forensics in police investigations in 
England and Wales. Policing: An International Journal, 44(4): 669–682. 
Wolfe, S.E. and Lawson, S.G. (2020). The organizational justice efect 
among criminal justice employees: A meta-analysis. Criminology, 
58(4): 619–644. 

 
 
 
 
 
7 
PUTTING THE FRAMEWORK 
INTO PRACTICE 
Operation Soteria Bluestone 
Introduction 
In 2019, there was a shared sense of urgency across the victim support 
sector, the public, and the police service to improve the investigation and 
prosecution of rape. The government found it impossible to claim that 
the justice system got it right for victim-survivors of rape in the face of 
overwhelming evidence to the contrary, resulting in the announcement 
of their review into the investigation and prosecution of rape (Home 
Ofce, 2019). The unleashing of the sense of urgency picked up pace 
during the pandemic and was brought to a fever pitch. In March 2021, a 
young woman was abducted, raped, and killed by a serving police ofcer 
(Dodd and Siddique, 2021). Now not only was there outrage about how 
the police treated rape victim-survivors but police ofcers themselves 
were exposed as perpetrators.1 As academics, we were determined to 
ofer an approach to the problem through an evidence-informed lens. As 
women, we were determined that the insights from the decades of aca­
demic research and victim-survivors’ lived experiences were translated 
in a way that would empower police ofcers themselves to design the 
institutional change they needed. As women academics, we saw a burn­
ing platform of crumbling public trust in the police. Policing appeared inca­
pable of permitting outside scrutiny or review to profoundly alter police 
practice. Patriarchal rhetoric that ultimately blames the raped for their 
plight seemed to be alive and well. But as we have argued in the previous 
chapters, victim-blaming, rape myths, and stereotypes are only part of 
the story. The challenge for us was using this “hot climate” (Murray and 
Harkin, 2017) as the grease of change. 
This chapter documents the beginning of something new. It takes 
the reader through an experiment in twinning academic insight, meth­
odology, and evidence to policing practice as we sought to implement 
the ideas of this book in police forces across England and Wales within 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429444869-7 

 
 
 
Putting the framework into practice 145 
the pilot Project Bluestone with Avon and Somerset Police (2021) and 
Operation Soteria Bluestone (2021–2023). We do not claim that this 
is “the answer”, nor do we suggest that this approach works every­
where. We do claim that the approach disrupts policing’s business as 
usual and provides a steer to assist ofcers themselves to change their 
business model in the investigation of rape and other sexual ofences in 
England and Wales. Some forces have already changed their practices 
and investigations during the project. The chapter will describe how 
we worked in close collaboration with police services to introduce a 
theory-led, evidence-based approach that puts insight into practice and 
is a spark for change. Using our six-pillar framework and working with 
police colleagues, we lit a slow burn of transformation in contemporary 
British policing. The framework, brought to life by this close working 
collaboration of policing personnel, academics, project support, and 
third-sector infuence, gave rise to the National Model for the Investi­
gation of Rape and Serious Sexual Ofences in England and Wales: the 
NOM (College of Policing, 2023). 
This chapter starts with a discussion about researching the eco-structure 
of the police and its policing cultures. Policing’s cultural context is both 
the starting and landing point for change. The chapter summarises the 
social science methods used to interrogate policing practices and inves­
tigators’ lived experiences through the lens of our framework. We dis­
cuss how we harnessed the insight to broker solutions through police 
ofcer-academic collaboration, third-sector consultation, and govern­
ment support. This discussion is critical to evidence-informed policing 
as a mechanism to professionalise policing practice. The last part of the 
chapter outlines how we used research to devise the NOM as the frst 
national model for the investigation of rape and serious sexual ofences. 
Working inside: researching the police 
We set up this project to work within and beside policing as a co-produced 
knowledge-into-practice exchange. Its mission was to do what no 
inspection or inquiry has done to date: improve the investigation of rape 
through intense knowledge brokerage. Not only did we need to lever­
age an appreciation of the institutional support for change, but we also 
needed to acquire and mobilise an acute appreciation of the environ­
ment inside policing as a cultural institution and of the lived experience 
of investigators. We began this project with eyes wide open to policing 
cultures. Stanko (2007: 215) observed that to truly negotiate integrating 
new knowledge into practice, one needs “a keen understanding of the 
deep inners of police organisations [. . .] with its ‘snakes and ladders’ of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
146 
Putting the framework into practice 
change”. We also drew on the early research studies of policing outlined 
in Chapter 2. We took inspiration from “being a police ofcer” (van 
Maanen, 1974) and refected on how ofcers exercise discretion on the 
street and in law (Banton, 1964; Skolnick, 1966; Muir, 1977); the aspects 
of police culture that fostered distrust of outsiders, especially academic 
researchers, and policing’s democratic mandate and institutional lega­
cies informed by its colonial roots (Bowling et al., 2019). Chan (1997) 
muses openly about the near impossibility of changing policing culture 
as it is intertwined with its wider social contexts (habitus). 
Researching police and policing is tricky without an appreciation of 
the internal working cultures of policing. Research processes are only 
successful with open access to police forces and awareness of maintain­
ing honest engagement during the research process. During this project, 
we were continuously alert to the internal politics of policing cultures 
and their impact on the lived experiences of investigators (Punch, 1985; 
Smith and Gray, 1985; Reiner, 2010). How police ofcers manage rank, 
dodge illegality and unethical practices of colleagues, treat the public 
disrespectfully and with suspicion, and endure bullying from colleagues 
afects the atmosphere within which the wide variety of research activi­
ties occurred.2 During the project, a highly critical report on the London 
Metropolitan Police laid bare the impact of these kinds of behaviours 
within the largest police force in the country (Casey, 2023). We were 
conscious that our research would likely expose police ofcer actions 
and activity that might not be viewed as in line with force policy, the law, 
or indeed, compatible with the ideals of democratic public safety.3 Aca­
demic commentators recognise that research might uncover police prac­
tices that could be ethically and/or legally problematic and spook trust 
(Worden and McLean, 2022). Academics are not always welcome and 
are often viewed with suspicion, especially as the evolution of academic 
inquiry documented during the turbulent late 20th century (race riots, 
policing protests such as the Vietnam War and the miner’s strikes, racial 
and other discrimination, for example) placed policing as a strong arm of 
the state’s hold on political and other forms of societal power (Crawford, 
2017). Successful police-researcher partnerships have been described as 
ones where researchers value police culture and practitioners commit to 
the research mission (Rojek et al., 2015). Tompson et al. (2017) remind 
us that police-researcher partnerships are essential mechanisms to enable 
policing to consider applying the evidence generated through the research 
and for the researcher to appreciate the work involved in applying aca­
demic knowledge to practice. 
Sklansky (2014) suggests an appeal to ideals of professionalism – high 
standards and internalised norms – as a mechanism to use occupational 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Putting the framework into practice 147 
pride as a lever to uplift practice. We have worked with skilled, commit­
ted ofcers. We drew on learning from previous academic discussions of 
collaborations with policing. Worden and McLean (2022), for instance, 
explore a range of functional collaborations of police-academic partner­
ships to accomplish improvements in strategic problem-solving, evalu­
ation research, and organisational development (such as in establishing 
and retaining a Compstat structure that makes a diference to police 
performance), or public policy development. They argue that studying 
the police should not be considered by the police (nor by the academ­
ics) as some kind of “evidence-based muckraking” (ibid.: 2). We con­
tinually paid attention to creating the conditions which allowed police 
ofcer research participants to feel safe when speaking about their work 
environment and in front of other colleagues. To research such a high-
profle, sensitive topic as rape inside a police service, we drew on our 
keen sensitivity to the world of the investigator to allow us to document 
the barriers to better investigations. As researchers of policing over dec­
ades, we accepted that there was likely suspicion on both sides of the 
academic-police collaboration. This is often a hidden feature of polic­
ing projects. Working within and with the police for over four decades, 
Stanko’s awareness of the hypersensitivity of police ofcers about being 
exposed during research and of the nervousness of police leaders to polit­
ical criticism, newspaper headlines, and political policy makers’ politics 
is acute. For this project, she drew on this insider knowledge on her 
lived experience in policing to guide any nervousness into constructive 
debate (Stanko, 2007). Hohl had 15 years of experience in researching 
policing using hard-to-access police internal data on sexual ofences and 
domestic abuse, interviewing rape investigators, and developing police 
sexual ofences specialist training materials, and had established work­
ing relationships with several police forces. Understanding how policing 
works as a closed, organisational entity enabled us to face many of these 
sensitivities head-on. These sensitivities were acknowledged and built 
into our support for the academic teams and our discussions with police 
ofcers. The teams required continuous attention, sparking active dis­
cussion with senior ofcers and the academic teams who were uncover­
ing problematic decision-making and damaging practices that needed to 
be challenged, oftentimes immediately. This kind of support happened 
throughout the research processes. 
Our six-pillar framework grounded us in the policing cultures 
we worked in as much as in the research questions we explored. We 
couched the project in a procedurally just narrative as fundamental to 
police practice and linked to core features of police practice in the inves­
tigation of rape and other sexual ofences, including how investigators 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
148 
Putting the framework into practice 
are treated by the police forces they work for (see Chapters 5 and 6). 
The discourses of voice, respect, and fair treatment echo throughout 
the language we used to broker our insight. This ethos was built into 
the academic-police ofcer team’s ways of working, and this built trust 
in the work’s mission. Commitment to public service, pride in the job, 
teamwork, and good leadership are aspects of policing culture that wel­
come change (see also Bradford et al., 2014). We relied on committed 
police ofcers to steer us through the choppy waters of elements of toxic 
police culture that inevitably raised its head throughout the research. It 
was apparent to us that many ofcers themselves sufered from a defcit 
of organisational support – an indication of a defcit of organisational 
justice (see also Chapter 6). Embedding the evolution of the research 
and the solutions at the very heart of the programme enabled owner­
ship throughout the ranks and the police leadership. 
The Soteria approach 
Transformational change will not happen without senior ofcer buy-
in and leadership. When the then Deputy Chief Constable (DCC) 
of Avon and Somerset Police, Sarah Crew,4 addressed an academic 
seminar devoted to research on rape and other sexual ofences in 
early July 2020, she spoke sincerely about wanting to change the way 
police investigate rape. She did not, she admitted, have a plan to do 
this. She did have the reigns on what is known in British policing as 
the national lead for a National Police Chiefs’ Council (NPCC) port­
folio – adult rape and sexual ofences – and consequently, ofered her 
force as a testbed for the approach.5, 6 Crew brought much more to 
the reach of the police-academic collaboration. As an inspirational 
senior leader, she wanted to shift the landscape of policing in the 
investigation of rape in a sustainable way across the country. She was 
involved in the ongoing cross-government review and development 
of a new police - CPS Joint National Action Plan (CPS and NPCC, 
2021). The project was poised to infuence the ways of working in 
one police service, and shift the ways of working for investigations 
across the country. Our project had just achieved one of the hardest 
parts of doing research in policing: full research access and a commit­
ment to full collaboration to inform co-produced solutions that had 
national reach. Much of Crew’s commitment was founded on trust 
and an appreciation of Stanko’s long association with British polic­
ing practice and research and Hohl’s highly regarded methodological 
rigour and academic contributions to understanding male violence 
against women. 

 
Putting the framework into practice 149 
The research design was iterative and included a range of empirical 
methods to document and analyse how investigations were conducted, 
scrutinise the force’s learning and development, and review and consider 
the contribution of analytic functions to supporting better investigations. 
Work began on the “proof of concept” in January 2021 under the 
banner of “Project Bluestone” within Avon and Somerset Police,7 and 
the initial framework emerged as fve strands of work packages called 
the “fve-pillars framework” (Hohl and Stanko, 2022). Each pillar had 
an academic lead and a police lead within Avon and Somerset Police. 
Recruiting academic leads for the fve pillars brought together foren­
sic psychologists, criminologists, sociologists, and women’s studies and 
data analysis experts. Amid the Covid pandemic, the UK was continually 
in and out of lockdowns with restricted in-person contact. Undaunted, 
the academic teams organised focus groups and interviews via MS 
Teams, conducted data analysis and case fle reviews, and studied count­
less documents on ofcer training and well-being.8 The mixed method 
approach enabled researchers to search through their accumulating data 
corpus for common themes. These themes braided together and helped 
us understand the contribution of the (then) fve-pillar approach as a 
way forward. Throughout the project, academic and police pillar leads 
and teams would meet weekly or bi-weekly to discuss emerging research 
fndings and co-create ideas for practical solutions to the issues uncov­
ered by the research. This way of gathering research evidence proved 
efcient when the project expanded to further police forces as part of 
Operation Soteria Bluestone (more on this later). Expanding the police-
academic collaborative research and development of solutions to a total 
of fve so-called “deep dive” or “pathfnder” forces and then later to 
an additional 14 so-called “expansion forces” enabled us to test the 
emerging fndings and consider solutions in diferent local police force 
contexts. Over the 30 months of the collaboration, the academic-police 
relationship took on a central role at the heart of the project. 
The design of the research explicitly sought the insight of local ISVA 
services, such as SafeLink, on how policing practice was afecting victim-
survivors. When we began our research in Avon and Somerset Police, 
the relationship between the police and the local ISVA service had atro­
phied. Two years on, at the ISVA service now works closely with inves­
tigators to support victim-survivors. Integral to our learning was fnding 
mechanisms to include local victim-survivors’ voices in our developing 
insight using the lens of procedural justice (see Chapter 5). Practically, to 
succeed, our work had to repair this relationship, weaving the improve­
ments needed in policing practice to align with engaging with victim-
survivors. When we tested this approach with an additional 14 forces 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
150 
Putting the framework into practice 
in late 2022, we included third-sector participants as critical friends in 
reviewing force capability and capacity to investigate rape and other 
sexual ofences. 
The starting point of the project were the ideas in this book, ini­
tially summarised in a fve-pillars framework frst published in Hohl 
and Stanko (2022). Upon suggestion from policing and with govern­
ment support, we added a sixth pillar to explore investigators’ collection 
and use of digital evidence (see Chapter 6). This strand was not part of 
our initial fve-pillars framework (Hohl and Stanko, 2022) or the early 
manuscript of this book, and we credit the Pillar Six lead Tiggey May 
with opening our eyes to the importance of rape investigations keeping 
step with the transformation of daily life into a digital world. 
Following the Project Bluestone Pilot in Avon and Somerset in early 
2021, we received funding for Operation Soteria Bluestone to repeat 
the same research design in four further police forces: the Metropolitan 
Police, Durham Constabulary, West Midlands Police, and South Wales 
Police. Each of these deep dives comprised an intensive three-month 
research phase. The extensive data collected during the deep dives were 
analysed, and emerging fndings were discussed with the police forces 
before they were shared with key stakeholders and considered for their 
challenge to ofcial policy and practice. The empirical research provided 
a solid ground from which to argue for change. Below is a summary 
of the kinds of data gathered and analysed from fve police forces (see 
Stanko, 2022, for a comprehensive overview): 
• Data on 81,705 RASSO cases reported between January 2018 and 
November 2021. 
• 233 case fle reviews on recent rape investigations (police internal 
peer review based on academic coding frame and training). 
• Review of 741 case fles of closed investigations with outcomes 14, 
15, and 15 (Home Ofce crime closure codes that indicate a decision 
not to charge a suspect). 
• Observations of rape investigators and victim liaison ofcers on shift, 
review of Achieving Best Evidence (ABE) interviews with victim-survivors, 
and review of body-worn video footage frst responder interactions 
with victim-survivors. 
• Reviews of training courses. 
• Ofcer survey on well-being, learning, and development. 
• Interviews and focus groups with ofcers of all ranks and roles, 
ISVAs, CPS lawyers, and victim-survivor lived-experience panels. 
• Review of all force internal RASSO-related policy documents. 
Individual pillar teams analysed their data as it emerged, force by 
force. The high-level learning gained strength, with the research teams 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Putting the framework into practice 151 
continually crossing over each other to challenge or support other 
pillars’ observations and conclusions. Neither the researcher nor the 
operational police ofcer was a bystander in this work. The iterative 
feedback shared with each force required a trusting collaboration so 
that we could discuss how to consider mechanisms that would lead to 
building an organisational environment in each local force that was 
responsive to the research fndings. Researchers and operational police 
ofcers had to trust each other in the research process so that the analy­
sis, insight, and solutions were not separated, side-lined, or couched in 
a language of blame. As academics we needed to retain our academic 
integrity and independence at all times, and this required sharing fnd­
ings in their fullness with clarity and candour, and to make them pub­
lic (see, for example, Stanko, 2022 and the academic articles listed in 
Appendix 13 of Stanko, 2022). The initial knowledge exchange and the 
ideas for change took place out of the gaze of an inquisitive press. This 
did not feel like other research projects we have conducted. It was not 
an academic project generating reports that few ofcers or civil servants 
knew how to put into practice. We wanted to change policing practice, 
and so did the ofcers. We could only do this together given a policing 
environment where there is resistance and misaligned organisational 
structures. 
Not surprisingly, in the fve police forces we worked with, we found 
variations in police cultures and organisational structures. We worked 
with investigators who desperately wanted our insight to advocate for 
change inside their police force. By the time senior ofcers were brought 
into the debate, the fndings were already discussed with the appropriate 
force pillar leads. Force pillar leads heard the fndings as they emerged so 
that they could consider how to advocate for change and the plans that 
would set out the change needed. This approach gave police pillar leads 
an opportunity to discuss and challenge each other on a peer-to-peer basis. 
They felt a sense of ownership of the fndings and a stake in the solution, 
drawing out an understanding in ofcers that this research is not impos­
ing solutions, but leading to their solutions. Throughout the 30 months, 
researcher-police teams debated the fndings, mused about the generated 
insight, drafted and refned guidance, and considered practical solutions 
beneftting both police ofcers and victim-survivors using the insight from 
the collaboration. We met ofcers who appeared annoyed or defensive 
or felt disempowered to change organisational structures. We worked 
with many receptive ofcers who were actively engaged with our fndings, 
began changing practice, and sought out organisational support. There 
were emotional costs of doing this work, not only because of the subject 
matter but because we were negotiating within the closed-of space that 
policing enjoyed (and sufered from). We knew that any research within 
the police service on its handling of rape cases had the potential to stir up 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
152 
Putting the framework into practice 
anxiety in participating ofcers, who may be concerned that what they 
did or said would be individually criticised or add to the already abun­
dant highly critical news headlines. Some ofcers are themselves victim-
survivors of sexual violence. The police and the academic team had to 
manage the expectations of the public and the political climate within 
which this collaboration worked. The research documented the distress 
of police ofcers trying to do a good job and the harmful decisions made 
by other police ofcers. It felt like we were walking through a minefeld, 
a delicate balancing act to understand the barriers to good investigations, 
never losing sight of the rights and needs of victim-survivors. We ofered 
clinical supervision to the researchers and support to the individual police 
ofcers. We had to fnd mechanisms to leverage insight into agreed def­
nitions of the problem, consider the insight to enable a diferent way 
of working, and co-produce solutions in-house. Every deep dive force 
accepted the fndings as an accurate (though painful to hear) picture of the 
state of play. An overview of the empirical fndings of the research from 
each of the pillars is published in Stanko (2022). The following examples 
illustrate some key issues identifed by the six research teams. 
Investigation of rape and sexual ofending in the context of domes­
tic abuse. The analysis of the over 80,000 recorded RASSO crimes 
revealed domestic abuse as the context to over one-third of police-
recorded rapes and serious sexual ofences (Lovett et al., 2022). While 
this is widely known in the academic literature and the day-to-day 
investigator workloads, the project’s research demonstrated how 
investigators managed these investigations, often leading to poor jus­
tice outcomes and poor experiences for victim-survivors. Moreover, 
many police forces had separate investigation units for domestic abuse. 
Still, these units seldom liaised with rape and sexual ofences investiga­
tors to bring together the individual but related crime incidents many 
victim-survivors report to the police. This led to fragmented investiga­
tion eforts, a neglect of the criminal ofence of coercive and control­
ling behaviour to demonstrate evidence of the ofender’s crime, and a 
duplication of efort by diferent investigators. It also led to further 
unsafety and little recourse to public protection for victim-survivors 
if investigators focused on the rape sexual ofence divorced from the 
context of (sometimes still ongoing) coercive control. Diferent forces 
explored diferent solutions to this issue, some by bringing the investi­
gation teams together or identifying the need for additional specialist 
learning and development.9 
Crime closure codes and “telling, not reporting”. Case reviews 
uncovered a related issue that the Pillar Five research team termed the 
recording of “telling not reporting” cases (Lovett et al., 2023a, 2023b). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Putting the framework into practice 153 
The Pillar Five team analysed 741 rape case fles to explore ofcer use of 
the ofcial Home Ofce crime closing codes. The fndings suggested that 
up to 40% of the cases closed under “outcome 16” – a crime closure 
code indicating that the investigation had to be closed because the victim 
had withdrawn support for a prosecution – included cases in which the 
victim-survivor never wanted an investigation in the frst place. Some­
times the rape had been disclosed to the police by a third party without 
the knowledge or agreement of the victim-survivor. Other times, the 
victim-survivor had told an ofcer about what had happened without 
intending to make a formal complaint of rape or realising what they 
had disclosed would result in an ofcial police record. This included, 
for example, cases where the sexual violence came to light as part of a 
police interaction during a domestic abuse incident. At times, the case 
fle notes revealed that when investigators contacted victim-survivors to 
follow up on a third-party or inadvertent disclosure, victim-survivors 
were distressed to learn that these were being investigated as formal 
complaints of rape. In police data, giving these cases an outcome closure 
code that carries an interpretation of “victim withdrawal” had the efect 
of responsibilising victim-survivors for not cooperating with criminal 
investigations they never wanted, leading to de facto blaming of victim-
survivors for failed rape investigations (Lovett et al., 2022). Work is 
underway nationally to address how to fx this and devise appropriate 
outcome closure codes that better capture the circumstances without 
blaming victim-survivors. There is a whole picture of victim-survivors’ 
attempts to access police protection and law to alleviate the abuse they 
have experienced at the hands of grooming and coercively controlling 
perpetrators that is found in police records of repeat victimisation domi­
nated by domestic abuse. 
Limited specialist learning and development on sexual ofences. Pillar 
Four research documented a severe defcit in specialist learning and devel­
opment and the impact of this on investigators’ capability and confdence. 
Many investigators were young in service; a worrying few had completed 
accredited investigator courses, and even fewer had completed the spe­
cialist course on sexual ofences investigation. This fostered attitudes that 
blamed victim-survivors and excused ofenders, wasted time and efort, 
and led to staf burnout, with direct impacts on case outcomes (Williams 
et al., 2022). The research documented the damaging efects that current 
ways of approaching learning have on ofcers and how it has led to poorer 
investigative outcomes. To address this, the Pillar Four team developed 
masterclasses: a new course featuring insight into ofending behaviour 
and investigative curiosity, and ofering specialist knowledge about bet­
ter engagement with victim-survivors using appropriate language and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
154 
Putting the framework into practice 
trauma-informed perspectives. Collaboration between academics and their 
police counterparts led to advocating for the greater use of critical refec­
tion and case reviews to accumulate force-based solutions to improve the 
continuous development of RASSO investigators (Norman et al., 2022). 
The Pillar Four team’s work on learning and development sparked a col­
laboration with the College of Policing, leading to a wholesale overhaul of 
the national approach to RASSO-related learning informed by academic 
best practices and understanding how learning must be built on a scafold 
of continuously refreshed knowledge. 
Failure to investigate suspects’ criminal histories. Pillars One and Two 
found evidence supporting the arguments outlined in Chapters 3 and 4, 
that is, a lack of suspect focus led to a failure to investigate suspects’ previ­
ous ofending histories and serial ofending (against the same or multiple 
victim-survivors). The pillar teams documented the widespread neglect of 
investigators’ use of intelligence on suspects’ previous criminal histories, 
as well as frequent delays and missed opportunities in investigations. The 
fndings led to ofcers understanding the benefts of linking ofender man­
agement intelligence and developing new ways of working within RASSO 
investigations. Learning about disrupting ofending, harnessing the insight 
of other units within the police force, and working with victim-survivor 
support partnerships all enable better victim-survivor care and challenge 
suspect behaviour (Horvath et al., 2022; Davies et al., 2022). 
The collective body of empirical fndings from Operation Soteria 
Bluestone has sparked diferent conversations and actions in diferent 
forces. Some forces had more favourable environments to hear the cri­
tique of practice arising from the fndings than others. In some forces, 
ofcers were open and bold, encouraged by senior ofcers leading 
by example. In others, we found ofcers much more nervous about 
being honest and worried about how their superiors would react to 
the more uncomfortable fndings, and the knowledge that their own 
police ofcers helped produce them. We discovered that brokering 
the knowledge and insight generated by the researchers into practice, 
then carved into practice by the ofcers, required individual, organi­
sational, and system support. Our work as lead academics required 
that we continuously steered the development of the work across all 
these arenas. 
Specialism versus specialist units 
We are well aware of attempts to professionalise rape and other sex­
ual ofence investigations through the creation of specialist rape inves­
tigation units. In England and Wales, specialist units supporting the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Putting the framework into practice 155 
investigation of rape appeared in some police forces in the 2000s. Van 
Staden and Lawrence (2010) showed that such units can have benefts 
for ofcers working in them and for their relationship with independent 
victim-survivor support services. However, they did not fnd evidence of 
improved outcomes in criminal charges. Their key recommendation – 
specialist training – was a persistent recommendation of ofcial reviews 
and inspections in the decades before and following their report. Rum­
ney et al. (2020) demonstrate that a specialist unit outperformed the 
non-specialist investigative approach in many, but not all, performance 
measures. The authors suggest that specialist teams formed a stronger 
working and support unit and created a shared sense of purpose. Much 
of the beneft of specialist units was crushed in the past decade by the 
cuts to policing budgets (Sparrow and Hohl, 2023). No sustainable solu­
tion to rape investigation was ofered post-austerity. Moreover, Opera­
tion Soteria Bluestone advocated the necessity of specialist knowledge, 
but not necessarily of specialist units, to improve investigators’ prac­
tice. Dalton et al. (2022) show that expert knowledge – rather than 
specialist units per se – is associated with improved policing outcomes. 
What we found through our Soteria Bluestone research was the persis­
tent failure of the police service to treat the professionalisation of rape 
and sexual ofence investigators as a core aspect of policing. Despite 
the various reconfgurations of police forces’ approaches to deploying 
investigators, no past initiatives have delivered sustained improvement 
in criminal charges. Discussions of stafng levels largely drove internal 
debates about establishing such units, the difculty of recruiting ofcers 
into RASSO roles, and diminishing police budgets to sustain a dedicated 
RASSO unit. Absent was a discussion about whether investigators – 
whether they worked in a specialist unit or not – were prepared and sup­
ported by their forces for this specialised kind of investigation. By and 
large, police forces depended on the omni-competence of investigators 
to investigate any crime. Where police forces had specialist investiga­
tors, their expertise was further fragmented by the often-siloed way of 
deploying staf across overlapping crime types or forms of abuse, such 
as domestic abuse or child abuse units. Being able to say a force had 
specialist rape investigation units gave the public the impression that 
investigators had the right expertise and learning support. The Soteria 
Bluestone research documented the instability of specialist investigation 
units and variability in the extent to which ofcers had the competence, 
confdence and resources to carry out specialist rape investigations (Hor­
vath et al., 2022; Williams et al., 2022). The poor levels of appropriate 
knowledge about sexual ofending, trauma, and sexual victimisation – 
exacerbated by ever-changing chains of command and the churn of 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
156 
Putting the framework into practice 
serving investigators – left investigators without the right skills. There 
was an almost universal failure to ensure these skills were fostered and 
retained (Stanko, 2022). 
A diferent way of working 
The research and insight-led collaboration sparked a diferent way of 
working. The continuous feedback of fndings and insight into each 
force’s pillar leads and leadership created an active, ongoing conversa­
tion. Some forces appointed a programme manager who worked with 
in-force pillar leads to identify actions fowing from the research. Some 
forces chose to weave these actions into ongoing change and improve­
ment plans. Others created a bespoke improvement plan. The Opera­
tion Soteria oversight programme board overseen by the government 
required monthly updates from forces to reinforce the message that 
change was expected. Inevitably, some forces stalled in their planning, 
and momentum slowed because of the churn of investigators and sen­
ior responsible ofcers. The frst force involved in the work – Avon 
and Somerset Police – transformed its relationship with the CPS and 
the ISVA services. CPS and ISVA service refections on how Operation 
Soteria Bluestone has changed ways of working within this police force 
area are as follows: 
We are speaking in a whole new language; one of looking at the 
perpetrator’s behaviour frst, hearing the victim throughout and chal­
lenging myths and stereotypes that have, for so many years, been the 
norms. We’ve switched from focusing on how to overcome the chal­
lenges in cases to a more holistic view which focuses on strengths, 
and we are building cases today that we would not have done two 
years ago. We consider ourselves truly fortunate to be involved in 
what feels and looks like true progress – without being one bit com­
placent as to what still needs to be done together. 
(Chief Crown Prosecutor; quoted in Stanko, 2022: 46) 
I have been blown away by the patience, support and care that you have 
shown my client throughout this process. The time that you have spent 
to make her feel as comfortable as possible has not gone unnoticed. You 
have involved me in each step of the process, which in turn helped her to 
feel even more supported and for the whole process to run as smoothly 
as it can. I haven’t before seen such a fantastic example of joint working 
and I just wanted to say how grateful I am for your work. 
(ISVA; quoted in Stanko, 2022: 46) 

 
 
 
 
Putting the framework into practice 157 
Our overall approach harnessed the accumulation of insight and 
research evidence to build a robust case for a rapid uplift in policing’s 
specialist knowledge and continuous development in rape and other 
sexual ofences. Improvements can be measured through administrative 
data and surveys of staf, victim-survivor support agencies, and victim-
survivors themselves. The timing of this work, described as the stars 
aligning, was critical to the way the fndings were heard and action 
taken as a result by police, government, and researchers alike. The 
insight was translated into practical solutions to remove the barriers 
to bringing about the change advocated for decades (Stanko and Crew, 
2022). Durrant et al. (2023: 3) present three critical features of knowl­
edge-led insight mobilisation into changing practice: “It is relational; 
it involves the integration of diferent forms of knowledge [craft and 
theory-generated]; and it is tailored to local contexts, culture and capac­
ity for evidence use at individual, organisational and system levels.” We 
took the fndings fowing from 30 months of research and refection and 
used them to create the framework for the National Operating Model 
(NOM) for RASSO investigations. 
The national operating model for the investigation of 
rape and serious sexual ofences 
In this section, we explain how we translated the research and insights 
from the active engagement with policing, the third sector, the govern­
ment, and the lead academic team into a national operating model. 
The NOM sets out mechanisms that, taken together, would improve 
rape investigations and has been adopted by all 43 police forces in Eng­
land and Wales. We extracted learnings from the experience of the fve 
research deep dives and combined them with insights from an additional 
14 forces who used the approach to test their organisational capability 
to support the model. Throughout the months of engaging with forces, 
it was clear that there needed to be a way of framing the NOM in a 
way that encourages the police to think more widely than the mantra 
of “investigators need more training” (see Chapter 6). We wanted to set 
out a clear vision for what organisational support for a good investiga­
tion looks like and how to monitor how well the force was doing to 
improve the eco-structure for transformation. It had to be fexible so 
that each force recognised the benefts of using the model as a frame­
work for improvement. We ofered three aims of the NOM: 
• To provide outcome justice for all victim-survivors of rape and other 
sexual ofences. This translates into an investigation process guided 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
158 
Putting the framework into practice 
by the European Convention on Human Rights, so that all parties are 
treated fairly under the law. 
• To provide procedural justice for all victim-survivors and all suspects. 
This translates into whether victim-survivors’ wishes and needs are 
central to the investigation, regardless of whether a suspect is charged. 
We proposed this be measured through victim-survivor voices via an 
independent survey, such as Hohl et al. (2023). 
• To contribute to the reduction and prevention of rape and other sexual 
ofences. This requires that ofending, especially when repeated, is suc­
cessfully stopped, including through civil or criminal legal avenues. 
The Operation Soteria Bluestone academic team used the ideas outlined 
in this book and the empirical research insights to guide the “how” of 
the aims through three principles for investigations of rape and other 
sexual ofences. The investigations should be: 
• Suspect-focused. This is accomplished frst by embedding the spe­
cialist knowledge of sexual ofending behaviour and its impact on 
victim-survivors into how investigators learn and develop their inves­
tigation skills (see Chapter 3). An understanding of repeat ofending 
is relevant here (see Chapter 4). 
• Victim-centred. This is realised by placing victims’ rights and 
needs at the heart of ofcer decision-making and applying the 
principles of procedural fairness. Practically, this can be addressed 
by appropriately providing victim-survivors with information, 
empowering them to make informed decisions, treating them with 
dignity and respect, and adhering to requirements already embod­
ied in law, such as the Victims’ Code of Practice (Ministry of Jus­
tice, 2020), and the European Convention on Human Rights, the 
Human Rights Act 1998, and the Data Protection Act 2018 (see 
also Chapter 5). 
• Context-led. Most sexual ofending occurs within some form of rela­
tionship; rarely is there no prior relationship in sexual ofending. 
Investigations need to extract how suspects exploit the nuances of 
power relationships and relationship contexts as a mechanism for 
committing the ofences. Understanding victim-survivors and their 
broader social and cultural contexts must inform investigations and 
victim-survivor engagement. Considerations of trauma, danger, and 
risk, as well as community condemnation, surround victim-survivors 
and must inform police investigations. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Putting the framework into practice 159 
We created a layered approach to a holistic model that recognises that 
a good investigation and good investigators must be supported by a 
fexible organisational structure that promotes improvement across all 
six pillars. The visual representation in Figure 7.1 shows the diferent 
layers. These layers work together to improve and monitor improve­
ment in investigation and the skills of investigators. The fve layers sup­
port a strategic understanding of how the work of the six pillars can be 
brought together to overcome the barriers to change and to monitor 
where improvement stalls. The Vision Layer contains the aims and prin­
ciples set out above. The Flight Deck provides a performance framework 
that encourages the public, the police, and Police and Crime Commis­
sioners (PCCs) to monitor each police service’s progress of improve­
ment in England and Wales.10 The Strategic Layer sets out strategic 
guidance based on the six pillars. The Operational Layer contains advice, 
guidance, and a roadmap for the investigators’ journey through a rape 
investigation.11 The ffth layer, the Foundational Enablers, provides new 
learning and development programmes and guidance on improving the 
analytics required to monitor outcomes, victim-survivor experience, and 
investigator well-being properly. As part of this, the Pillar Four team 
worked with the College of Policing to design new specialist training 
courses to support investigators. At the same time, the College is refresh­
ing its professionally accredited course on sexual ofence investigation. 
Using these layers, the NOM organises the over 90 practical prod­
ucts developed by the academic team and ofcers. To give examples, the 
products include guidance and templates for letters to victim-survivors, 
guidance on using disruption tactics for ofending, learning and devel­
opment programmes, well-being support, and many more (College of 
Vision 
Flightdeck 
Strategic layer 
Opera  onal layer 
Founda onal enablers 
FIGURE 7.1 The NOM for the investigation of rape and serious sexual 
ofences layers 

 
 
 
160 
Putting the framework into practice 
Policing, 2023). Scaling up – transforming policing practice – depends 
on adopting the NOM one force at a time. As police force operational 
independence is set in law, we needed to ofer an accessible mechanism 
to guide strategic thinking, modify internal ways of working to support 
transformative and sustainable change, and provide tools for the public 
and PCCs to hold police forces to account. This project started with an 
open mind about how solutions tailored by committed ofcers might 
address the in-force barriers we documented through our pillar method­
ology. It is up to each force to fnd its way of using the NOM in its own 
force’s local context. At the time of writing, the NOM has been adopted 
by the NPCC as its Authorised Professional Practice in England and 
Wales for the investigation of rape and serious sexual ofences, and all 
43 police forces in England and Wales have made a commitment to the 
Home Secretary on adopting the NOM. The NOM marks the beginning 
of the improvement journey for police forces. 
Case study12 
We conducted the “Project Bluestone” pilot research with Avon and 
Somerset Police in January 2021. A specialist RASSO team – known 
as “Bluestone” – had been in place from 2009 until 2015. When we 
conducted the research in 2021, the force had decided to reinvigorate 
its earlier approach to rape investigation with a small team devoted to 
investigating “historic”, non-recent rapes and serious sexual ofences. 
This “Bluestone team” was located within a broader Criminal Investiga­
tion Department (CID) team and led by a Detective Superintendent. It 
comprises 145 posts and up to two Detective Chief Inspectors (DCIs), 
with the majority of ofcers (107) recruited fairly recently and thus 
young in service. Avon and Somerset Police have been gathering RASSO-
related data since December 2021 to monitor the impact of Project Blue-
stone. Early indicative data are promising. For example, the adult rape 
charge rate more than doubled over the last 12 months compared to the 
previous 12 months (from 4% to 8%), and adult rape charges have also 
doubled in volume over the same time frame (from 69 to 141) (Mizon, 
2023). Following the launch of the NOM in July 2023, the force focused 
on implementing the numerous NOM products as it transitions from 
Project Bluestone to business as usual. Business as usual will not have 
the beneft of a project manager, and the hope is that continuous moni­
toring will help to identify any arising barriers. A key priority will be 
to continue the accredited specialist learning and development of ofc­
ers newly recruited into the RASSO team. Key themes summarising 
the efort to orchestrate change as part of Operation Soteria Bluestone 

 
 
 
Putting the framework into practice 161 
were identifed through interviews with strategic leads, RASSO investi­
gators, frst response ofcers, and the project manager. The themes relate 
to leadership and governance, partnerships and teamwork, vision, “the 
Bluestone feel”, openness, consultation and communication, and lessons 
learnt. 
Leadership and governance 
A clear governance structure comprises a Senior Responsible Ofcer, a 
project manager, and the six pillar leads. The Senior Responsible Ofcer 
is responsible for Project Bluestone and implementing its recommenda­
tions, while the force RASSO lead manages the operational team. The 
Senior Responsible Ofcer, project manager, and ofcer pillar leads have 
formed a tactical group that has met every month throughout the pro­
ject. Each pillar lead also heads their own working group. The force’s 
Constabulary Management Board provides strategic oversight. Strong 
leadership cascades from the top. The force beneftted from its engage­
ment with the academics throughout the 30 months of the project. 
Chief Constable Sarah Crew leads the NPCC’s portfolio for adult sexual 
ofences and believes in empowering her staf. The Senior Responsible 
Ofcer can make key decisions and recommend these as force policy. Pil­
lar leads can also infuence the direction of the force’s operating model 
and are selected for being open-minded thinkers and problem-solvers 
who can handle uncertainty, are not averse to taking risks, and can exer­
cise autonomy. They are typically at the rank of Detective Chief Inspec­
tor, Detective Inspector, or police staf equivalent. 
Partnerships and team-working 
The force works closely with local victim-survivor support agencies 
(ISVAs and SARCs) and the local CPS. The Senior Responsible Ofcer 
describes this as a partnership of equals where the force, CPS, and victim-
survivor agencies all work together for better victim-survivor outcomes 
with mutual respect, transparency, and supportive challenge. Much 
time and efort has been invested in maintaining these partnerships 
throughout the project. Victim-survivor support agencies are seen as 
“critical friends” with an important role in amplifying the voice of victim-
survivors. This has manifested in some SARC-led training for the force’s 
emergency response team (e.g. 999 emergency calls) and other public 
contact teams to develop and use a shared language around victim-
survivors. Developing the relationship with local CPS was an early focus 
for the Senior Responsible Ofcer. Local CPS is now embedded into 

 
162 
Putting the framework into practice 
the governance structure, with involvement in NFA scrutiny panels and 
working groups. The Senior Responsible Ofcer, RASSO investigators, 
and frst responders all agree that the relationship with the CPS is much 
more positive and far less “us and them”: “In the last year, [CPS have] 
realised, actually, we are quite good at our jobs, and we are all on the 
same side” (RASSO investigators, focus group). The increases in Early 
Advice referrals to the CPS for RASSO cases illustrate this improved 
partnership. The comments of the ISVAs and other victim-survivor sup­
port groups tell a similar story about this collaboration and its impact 
on victim-survivors and their supporters alike: “I felt sick at the thought 
of going anywhere near the police, but the experience was so diferent! 
You (the ISVA) and the ofcer have made me feel so safe, supported, and 
truly listened to. Both your kindness has made a huge diference to my 
life, whatever happens next” (Victim-survivor). 
Vision 
Ofcers of all ranks and roles had a clear, shared sense of vision and 
purpose. This comprised the “what” of the NOM principles of suspect-
focused, victim-centred, and context-led investigations, and the “whys” 
of improving justice outcomes and victim-survivors’ experiences, and 
regaining victim-survivors’ trust in the police service. The investiga­
tors were the frst to beneft from Tidmarsh’s (2021) “Whole Story” 
approach to learning about sexual ofending, which has been described 
as “pivotal” in reinforcing the messages of the NOM (see also Chapter 
3). Most of the force’s RASSO investigators have participated in spe­
cialist knowledge seminars. Continuous professional development ses­
sions are considered essential and have been enthusiastically received by 
ofcers within the RASSO team. Applying the NOM has led to a shift 
in thinking and doing, and investigators systematically use refective 
practice. RASSO investigators say, for example, that they are “talking 
through [cases] as colleagues . . . why they’ve done it [the investigation] 
that way . . . using the suspect-focused approach and stuf like that, 
that we haven’t used in the past” (RASSO investigators, focus group). 
High-level messaging in the form of blogs authored by the force’s Chief 
Constable articulates this vision forcefully. 
The “Bluestone feel” 
The past 30 months of collaboration with the academic teams and access 
to specialist learning have improved the morale of ofcers who feel they 

 
Putting the framework into practice 163 
are now a force priority. RASSO team members are described as pas­
sionate, enthusiastic, and committed individuals. There has been a clear 
drive to recruit volunteers into the team who share these qualities so that 
no one is “being pushed onto Bluestone who [doesn’t] necessarily want 
to be there . . . I don’t think it’s something you can just step into and 
not really care about” (RASSO investigators, focus group). Passionate 
volunteers are seen as having the potential to create a dominant culture 
within RASSO teams, which will socialise less enthusiastic individuals. 
Sometimes, the drive to do better for victim-survivors can be detrimental 
to ofcers’ well-being (see also Chapter 6). There is still work to be done 
to support investigators’ well-being: “We don’t get the opportunity to 
speak to a sergeant and say, how are you feeling? That sounded pretty 
horrifc. Do you need to talk to anybody? And sadly, I think a lot of the 
time it comes down to you managing that yourself” (RASSO investiga­
tors, focus group). 
Openness, consultation, and communication 
As the original pathfnder force, Avon and Somerset Police have been 
a testbed. This has been enabled by a Senior Responsible Ofcer who 
has been open-minded, progressive, and receptive to new initiatives and 
to change itself. Key to this openness is an honest and humble recog­
nition of the force’s past mistakes and poor practices concerning rape 
investigation (publicly by the Chief Constable), along with a desire to 
do better for victim-survivors. Newsletters keep staf informed about 
the implementation of change. For example, “Blueprint” is a Bluestone 
newsletter distributed to RASSO team members. There is also a more 
comprehensive CID newsletter, “In the Know”, along with the force-
wide communication in “Good to Know”. All these largely electronic 
forms of communication have been used to spread the learning from 
the collaboration. There are still frustrations, such as the clunky access 
to online resources from the College of Policing’s Knowledge Hub, the 
national repository for NOM products. The Bluestone team welcomes 
ongoing consultation and communication about the project to the force 
and the wider community. 
Lessons learnt/what could be done diferently? 
One key lesson learnt is the need for greater continuity at the force pillar 
lead level since several leads were changed due to operational demand, 
sickness, and promotion. It is worth noting that high turnover of staf is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
164 
Putting the framework into practice 
typical within policing. In addition, it was also felt that creating a deputy 
position for the Senior Responsible Ofcer would be benefcial in shar­
ing the workload and considering how to create a knowledgeable legacy 
in the force. Investigators continue to be frustrated by the slowness of 
change and ofcers’ lack of ability to change the wider criminal justice 
system, in particular what happens in the courtroom, meaning that good 
investigative work could be undone: “because it’s been hideously trau­
matic for the victim, blatantly unfair in court, and I think we could . . . I 
actually thought, well, what are we doing all this for?” (RASSO investi­
gators, focus group). 
Conclusion 
The core ingredients that gave rise to the creation of the NOM were strong 
leadership through Chief Constable Sarah Crew, the strong commitment 
of the researchers who had devoted their careers to researching sexual 
violence and policing, and brave, dedicated operational ofcers keen to 
become and to be seen as professional investigators. The NOM embraces 
the scholarly evidence on procedural justice (see Chapter 5) and applies it 
in practice to victim-survivor experiences and police actions. It harnesses 
the academic understanding of the importance of organisational justice for 
those employed within the police service (see Chapter 6). Fundamental is a 
keen understanding of policing practice in situ. This research project was 
no simple application of academic fndings. We are acutely aware of the 
most signifcant risk: post-innovation failure. It remains to be seen whether 
the national roll-out of the NOM can succeed in retaining the integrity 
and fdelity of the vision of the NOM. It will require resilience, creativ­
ity, and fexibility. We acknowledge that many scholars have struggled to 
infuence sustained change in policing practices over decades. Much inno­
vation in policing inspired by academic insight is pushed aside – even if 
the innovation demonstrates improvement in outcomes – when the next 
Chief Constable, senior leader, or political priority appears. We hope that 
does not happen here. A former senior police ofcer, in a recent discus­
sion with Stanko, reminded her that her frst report on the investigation 
of rape in the London Metropolitan Police Service in 2005 was explicitly 
required to exclude information that “would attract negative headlines”.13 
The 2005 report was a litany of data that would have hit the front pages 
of every newspaper. There was no attempt then to glean lessons about how 
to improve investigations; the force simply denied the problem. At the time 
of writing, the NPCC, Home Ofce, and College of Policing had set up a 
joint Soteria Unit to support the nationwide implementation of the NOM 
as the authorised professional practice for the investigation of RASSO in 

 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Putting the framework into practice 165 
England and Wales. Times have changed since 2005. It remains to be seen 
whether the NOM’s vision is sustainable. We will all learn the legacy of this 
work together over time. 
Notes 
1 Sarah Everard was abducted, raped, and killed by Wayne Couzens 
in March 2021, and yet another inquiry into how police violence 
against women was taking place throughout the summer of 2021. 
There was a lot going on in the public debate, and this project and 
its researchers were in the middle of the storm. 
2 Being a police ofcer demands that one actively negotiates a working 
environment that is often stressful, unsettling, and upsetting. Using 
autobiographies of police ofcers ofers a glimpse of the meaning of 
belonging inside the police service, and what the experiences of ofc­
ers who speak about being “included” and “excluded” feel about 
the job (see as examples, Malton and Mulholland, 2023; McDonald, 
2023; Sutherland, 2018; Logan, 2020; Paddick, 2008). All ofcers 
must duck and dive their way through policing, whether they are a 
target of discrimination or not. 
3 At the time of writing, there is key attention on the police mecha­
nisms for dismissing ofcers who committed ofences, especially of 
sexual violence and domestic abuse. See also Casey (2023). 
4 Sarah Crew was appointed Chief Constable of Avon and Somerset 
Police in 2021. 
5 Curious about what new research on rape might be brewing in the 
academic community (Stanko having stepped back from day-to-day 
academic life), Stanko joined the online seminar, to listen quietly in 
the background. 
6 DCC Crew had designed an investigation team a decade earlier, which 
operated as a problem-solving investigation team, combining disruption 
methods as well as a ‘an ofender centric’ mindset in their investigations. 
“Sadly” she mused “this experiment came to an end as [fscal] austerity 
bit.” The way of organising investigations fell to its default position. 
7 The Home Ofce Police Science, Technology, Analysis and Research 
programme funded the pilot for three months, January–March 2021. 
8 Moreover, the logistics of the 18 months of active research were com­
plex. Seven universities; over 20 Data Protection Impact Assessments 
and data sharing agreements with four diferent forces, each of which 
had entirely diferent systems, priorities, and decision-making mecha­
nisms for enabling any of the researchers to ask questions or explore 
crime data; security vetting for all researchers, multiple times, as some 
forces did not recognise the vetting from other forces; force project 
managers; pillar leads in each force; logistics of arranging innumerable 
interviews, focus groups, observation sessions, viewing of body-worn 
video or video recorded interviews with victim-survivors; and more. It 
is not an exaggeration to say that these processes had to be managed 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
166 
Putting the framework into practice 
too. Too often considered background noise of research, these are the 
research necessities that frequently derail collaborations. 
9 Follow-up research into the overlap between RASSO and domestic 
abuse was conducted by Cassandra Wiener, Andy Myhill, and Merili 
Pullerits. A number of journal articles are in preparation. 
10 The performance framework can be found here: www.college.police.uk/ 
national-operating-model-rasso/measuring-success-transparency­
and-data. 
11 The investigators’ journey can be found here: www.college.police.uk/ 
national-operating-model-rasso/investigators-journey. 
12 This case study was developed by Clare Rawdin, Linda Maguire, and 
Bernhard Burnes as part of the Pillar Four “Theory of Change” work 
stream based on a series of interviews and focus groups conducted 
within Avon and Somerset Police by Katrin Hohl in April 2023. The 
themes were developed by Katrin Hohl. Becca Potton and Darren 
Assante from the Mayors’ Ofce for Policing and Crime, London, pro­
vided research assistance. The case study is a product within the NOM. 
13 Personal interview 2019. See the London rape review by Wunsch 
et al. (2021). 
References 
Banton, M. (1964). The policeman in the community. London: Tavistock. 
Bowling, B., Reiner, R. and Sheptycki, J.W. (2019). The politics of the 
police. 5th ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Bradford, B., Quinton, P., Myhill, A. and Porter, G. (2014). Why do 
‘the law’ comply? Procedural justice, group identifcation and ofcer 
motivation in police organizations. European Journal of Criminol­
ogy, 11(1): 110–131. 
Casey, L. (2023). Baroness Casey review fnal report: March 2023. 
Available at: www.met.police.uk/SysSiteAssets/media/downloads/ 
met/about-us/baroness-casey-review/update-march-2023/baroness­
casey-review-march-2023a.pdf 
Chan, J. (1997). Changing police culture. Melbourne: Cambridge Uni­
versity Press. 
College of Policing (2023). National operating model for the investiga­
tion of rape and serious sexual ofences. Available at: www.college. 
police.uk/national-operating-model-rasso 
Crawford, A. (2017). Research co-production and knowledge mobilisa­
tion in policing. In J. Knutsson and L. Tompson (Eds.) Advances in 
evidence-based policing. Abingdon: Routledge, 195–213. 
Crown Prosecution Service and National Police Chiefs’ Council (2021). 
Police-CPS joint national RASSO action plan. Available at: www. 
cps.gov.uk/sites/default/fles/documents/publications/RASSO-JNAP­
2021-v1-0.pdf 
Dalton, C.T., Barrett, S., Horvath, M.A. and Davies, K. (2022). A sys­
tematic literature review of specialist policing of rape and serious 
sexual ofences. International Criminology, 2(3): 230–252. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Putting the framework into practice 167 
Davies, K., Horvath, M., Allen, K., Barbin, A., Barrett, S., Bond, E., Cri­
vatu, I., Cross, M., Dalton, T., Ferreira, J., Gekoski, A., Heimer, R., 
Iliuta, A., Khan, A., Hardiman, M., Majid, A., Manning, M., Massey, 
K., Spence, R., Trott, L. and Woodhams, J. (2022). Appendix 8 – Pil­
lar two: Targeting repeat suspects. In Operation Soteria Bluestone year 
1 report 2021–2022, 100–123. Available at: https://assets.publishing. 
service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/ 
fle/1128688/E02836356_Operation_Soteria_Y1_report_Accessible.pdf 
Dodd, V. and Siddique, H. (2021). Sarah Everard murder: Wayne Couzens 
given whole-life sentence. The Guardian. 30 September. Available at: 
www.theguardian.com/uk-news/2021/sep/30/sarah-everard-murder­
wayne-couzens-whole-life-sentence 
Durrant, H., Havers, R., Downe, J. and Martin, S. (2023). Improving 
evidence use: A systematic scoping review of local models of knowl­
edge mobilisation. Evidence & Policy: 1–23. Available at: https:// 
orca.cardiff.ac.uk/id/eprint/162080/1/Durrant%20et%20al%20 
E%26P%202023%20Improving%20evidence%20use.pdf 
Hohl, K., Reid, A.K., Molisso, S. and Pullerits, M. (2023). Rape and 
sexual assault survivors’ experience of the police in England and 
Wales. Survey Report I: January–June 2023. City, University of Lon­
don. Available at: https://openaccess.city.ac.uk/id/eprint/31310/9/ 
Survey%20Report%20I%2021%20September%202023%20 
UPDATE%2020%20September.pdf 
Hohl, K. and Stanko, E.A. (2022). Five pillars: A framework for trans­
forming the police response to rape and sexual assault. International 
Criminology, 2(3): 222–229. 
Home Ofce (2019). Government sets out key measures to tackle 
violence against women and girls. Available at: www.gov.uk/ 
government/news/government-sets-out-key-measures-to-tackle-violence­
against-women-and-girls 
Horvath, M., Davies, K., Allen, K., Barbin, A., Barrett, S., Bond, E., 
Crivatu, I., Cross, M., Dalton, T., Ferreira, J., Gekoski, A., Heimer, 
R., Iliuta, A., Khan, A., Hardiman, M., Majid, A., Manning, M., 
Massey, K., Spence, R., Trott, L. and Woodhams, J. (2022). Appen­
dix 7 – Pillar one: Suspect focused investigations. In Operation 
Soteria Bluestone year 1 report 2021–2022, 74–99. Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/ 
uploads/attachment_data/file/1128688/E02836356_Operation_ 
Soteria_Y1_report_Accessible.pdf 
Logan, L. (2020). Closing ranks: My life as a cop. London: SPCK Publishing. 
Lovett, J., Dhaliwal, S., Hales, G., Kelly, L., Nath, P., Sood, A., Swaby, 
J., Uzelac, G., Vera-Gray, F., Buil-Gil, D., Myhill, A. and McGlynn, 
C. (2023a). Recording, reporting, and charge rates for rape in Eng­
land and Wales: Briefng 2. Child & Woman Abuse Unit, London 
Metropolitan University. Available at: https://cwasu.org/wp-content/ 
uploads/2023/07/cwasu-briefng-02-110923.pdf 
Lovett, J., Dhaliwal, S., Hales, G., Kelly, L., Nath, P., Sood, A., Swaby, 
J., Uzelac, G., Vera-Gray, F., Buil-Gil, D., Myhill, A. and McGlynn, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
168 
Putting the framework into practice 
C. (2023b). Reasons rape investigations are closed by police: Briefng 
3. Child & Woman Abuse Unit, London Metropolitan University. 
Available at: https://cwasu.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/07/cwasu­
briefng-03-100723-1.pdf 
Lovett, J., Hales, G., Kelly, L., Vera-Gray, F., Uzelac, G., Buil-Gil, D. and 
Myhill, A. (2022). Appendix 11 – data and performance. In Operation 
Soteria Bluestone year 1 report 2021–2022, 155–177. Available at: 
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/ 
uploads/attachment_data/file/1128688/E02836356_Operation_ 
Soteria_Y1_report_Accessible.pdf 
Malton, J. and Mulholland, H. (2023). The real prime suspect: Crime. 
Sexism. Corruption: The real-life inspiration for Jane Tennison. Lon­
don: Octopus Publishing Group. 
McDonald, J. (2023). No comment: What I wish I’d known about 
becoming a detective. London: Bloomsbury Publishing. 
Ministry of Justice (2020).Code of practice for victims of crime in England 
and Wales November 2020. Ministry of Justice. Available at: https:// 
assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/60620279d3bf7f5ceaca0d89/ 
victims-code-2020.pdf 
Mizon, E. (2023). This week in Bristol: Rape charges double – to 8%. The 
Bristol Cable. 12 May. Available at: https://thebristolcable.org/2023/05/ 
this-week-in-bristol-rape-charges-double-to-8/#:~:text=%25%20 
to%208%25. 
Muir, W.K. (1977). Police: Streetcorner politicians. Chicago: The Uni­
versity of Chicago Press. 
Murray, K. and Harkin, D. (2017). Policing in cool and hot climates: 
Legitimacy, power and the rise and fall of mass stop and search in 
Scotland. British Journal of Criminology, 57(4): 885–905. 
Norman, J., Fox, A., Harding, R., Majid, A., Williams, E., Davies, K. 
and Horvath, M.A. (2022). Critical refection: The importance of 
case reviews and refective practice in rape and serious sexual ofences 
investigations. International Criminology, 2(3): 276–285. 
Paddick, B. (2008). Line of fre: The autobiography of Britain’s most 
controversial policeman. London: Simon and Schuster. 
Punch, M. (1985). Conduct unbecoming: The social construction of 
police deviance and control. London: Tavistock. 
Reiner, R. (2010). The politics of the police. 4th ed. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. 
Rojek, J., Martin, P. and Alpert, G.P. (2015). Developing and maintain­
ing police-researcher partnerships to facilitate research use: A com­
parative analysis. New York: Springer-Verlag. 
Rumney, P.N.S., McPhee, D., Fenton, R.A. and Williams, A. (2020). 
A police specialist rape investigation unit: A comparative analy­
sis of performance and victim care. Policing and Society, 30(5): 
548–568. 
Sklansky, D.A. (2014). The promise and perils of police professionalism. In 
J. Brown (Ed.) The future of policing. Abingdon: Routledge, 343–355. 
Skolnick, J.H. (1966). Justice without trial: Law enforcement in a demo­
cratic society. New York: John Wiley and Sons Inc. 

 
 
 
 
 
Putting the framework into practice 169 
Smith, D.J. and Gray, J. (1985). Police and people in London. London: 
Gower Publishing. 
Sparrow, P. and Hohl, K. (2023). Specialist rape investigation units: South 
Wales Police journey to higher charging rates, faster investigations 
and better victim experience. Policing Insight. Available at: https:// 
policinginsight.com/feature/analysis/specialist-rape-investigation­
units-south-wales-police-journey-to-higher-charging-rates-faster­
investigations-and-better-victim-experience/ 
Stanko, B. (2022). Operation Soteria Bluestone year 1 report 2021–2022. 
Available at: https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/government/ 
uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/fle/1128688/E02836356_ 
Operation_Soteria_Y1_report_Accessible.pdf 
Stanko, E.A. (2007). From academia to policy making: Changing police 
responses to violence against women. Theoretical Criminology, 
11(2): 209–219. 
Stanko, E.A. and Crew, S. (2022). From Project Bluestone to Operation 
Soteria Bluestone: An academic-police collaboration. International 
Criminology, 2(3): 299–304. 
Sutherland, J. (2018). Blue: A memoir – Keeping the peace and falling to 
pieces. London: Weidenfeld & Nicolson. 
Tidmarsh, P. (2021). The whole story: Investigating sexual crime – 
Truth, lies and the path to justice. London: Jonathan Cape. 
Tompson, L., Belur, J., Morris, J. and Tufn, R. (2017). How to make 
police-researcher partnerships mutually efective. In J. Knutsson and 
L. Tompson (Eds.) Advances in evidence-based policing. Abingdon: 
Routledge, 175–194. 
van Maanen, J. (1974). Working the street: A developmental view of 
police behaviour. In H. Jacob (Ed.) The potential for reform of crimi­
nal justice. Beverly Hills: Sage, 83–130. 
van Staden, L. and Lawrence, J. (2010). A qualitative study of a dedi­
cated sexual assault investigation unit. London: Home Ofce. 
Williams, E., Norman, J., Ward, R. and Harding, R. (2022). Linking 
professionalism, learning and wellbeing in the context of rape inves­
tigation: Early fndings from Project Bluestone. International Crimi­
nology, 2(3): 262–275. 
Worden, R.E. and McLean, S.J. (2022). Collaborative practitioner– 
researcher partnerships in policing: Two researchers’ refections. 
Policing: A Journal of Policy and Practice, 16(3): 329–343. 
Wunsch, D., Davies, T. and Charleton, B. (2021). The London rape review 
2021. Mayor of London Ofce for Policing and Crime. Available at: 
www.london.gov.uk/sites/default/fles/fnal_rr_victimtech_61221.pdf 

8 
CONCLUSION 
The policing of rape must and can change. Better investigations, rape 
prevention, and police engagement with victim-survivors matter to those 
directly harmed by sexual violence and to society at large, for sexual vio­
lence afects all. It also matters for police legitimacy. How police forces 
respond to male violence against women and girls, in particular sexual 
violence, is no longer marginal to public perceptions of and trust in the 
police. There are no silver bullets, no shortcuts, and no simple answers. 
We ofered a six-pillar framework for better day-to-day police responses 
to rape disclosures and set out three organisational enablers of that 
day-to-day work. The framework seeks to reset policing’s default ways. 
The reset button is buried deep within the policing mission, shored up 
through entrenched institutional resistance to deep reform. In building 
a case for a victim-centred and suspect-focused approach, we challenge 
policing to recognise its responsibility for the safety and protection of 
victim-survivors of sexual violence as part of its duty to the public. This 
requires more than rhetoric, localised initiatives, and sticking plasters. It 
requires an allocation of resources to match the task, investment in the 
organisational enablers of good rape policing, and a willingness to adapt 
investigations and prevention strategies to the nature of sexual ofend­
ing. These organisational responsibilities cannot be met by shifting 
responsibility and blame onto individual ofcers’ attitudes, behaviours, 
and beliefs, a fallacy that also underpins the “few bad apples” narrative. 
Rape and other forms of male violence against women and girls are 
an afterthought of contemporary policing. Modern police forces bear 
the legacy of being an arm of the law established by and with ruling men 
in mind. For police forces, investigating every criminal act is impossible 
and undesirable. As a result, the British default policing model incentiv­
ises ofcers to prioritise order maintenance over law enforcement and to 
focus on “live danger” situations in public spaces, one incident at a time. 
This approach is resulting in the disproportionate under-enforcement of 
DOI: 10.4324/9780429444869-8 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 171 
male violence against women and girls, in particular for victim-survivors 
from racialised and marginalised backgrounds. When the lens of default 
policing is applied to police practices with rape victim-survivors, it sheds 
light on the unseen ways in which the nature of policing infuences rape 
investigations. We argued that the rape justice gap cannot be solved by 
improving investigation in isolation from changing the police as a cul­
tural, democratic institution. Specifcally, it cannot be resolved by bolt­
ing rape policing onto existing policing priorities and principles without 
rethinking their core: who benefts, who sufers, or who is invisibilised. 
We conclude that to fx the police response to rape and other forms 
of sexual violence, policing must overcome its resistance to reform and 
reset default policing by, with, and for victim-survivors. 
Rape and other forms of sexual ofending difer from other crime 
types in that victim-survivor credibility is often the primary focus of the 
investigation while the suspect remains a blind spot. We argued that the 
over-investigation of victim-survivors is driven directly and indirectly 
not only by rape myths and misconceptions, but also by a lack of knowl­
edge about sexual ofending behaviour, and the general default ways of 
policing. We showed that suspects receive comparatively little attention, 
shielded from scrutiny by missed and delayed opportunities in the inves­
tigation. What is more, police infrastructure, including learning and 
development programmes, digital forensic capabilities, and data sys­
tems do little to enable ofcers to spot patterns of repeat perpetration. 
Suspect-focused investigations require the police to understand the 
academic and lived experience evidence on sexual ofender tactics in 
targeting their victims, and in using relationship contexts to render their 
targets vulnerable to sexual coercion and exploitation. We proposed 
using Tidmarsh’s (2021) approach to “Whole Story” investigations of 
perpetrators’ sexual ofending behaviour. We argued that shifting the 
police default from a victim-focused to a suspect-focused investigation 
is a necessary step in any transformation of policing practice around 
sexual violence. 
The most common reason victim-survivors report to the police is to 
stop the perpetrator from sexually ofending again (Hohl et al., 2023). 
As such, sexual violence prevention is central to what victim-survivors 
and the public expect from the police. It remains peripheral to default 
policing. Victim-survivors bring intelligence about sexual abusers to the 
police on a daily basis. These victim-survivor accounts lay bare the per­
petrator’s tactics. This intelligence somehow largely disappears in police 
databases. Not all victim-survivors want to participate in the criminal 
justice process; however, they often gift the police with their account 
to enable the police to do something to stop the perpetrator(s). At 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
172 
Conclusion 
present, police forces aford minimal resourcing and strategising to pre­
venting known perpetrators from continuing their ofending. The law pro­
vides police services with wide-ranging powers and tools, including civil 
orders that can be applied even when a suspect has been acquitted or not 
yet been charged with a sexual ofence. In practice, the use of civil orders, 
their efectiveness and impacts are barely tested. We propose that there is a 
way forward within existing police powers and legal frameworks, and it is 
up to the police to use these. We acknowledge that there are practical bar­
riers and resource constraints. Many of these – IT systems, data quality, 
incident focus, poor workforce planning, resource constraints – are not 
specifc to rape policing. However, the safety of the public from the harm 
of sexual predators is no longer an “add-on” but integral to contemporary 
public expectations of the police service. Sexual violence prevention must 
be considered essential to policing and resourced accordingly. 
A further way in which the police must improve their practice is through 
placing the principles of procedural fairness centre stage in their interac­
tions with victim-survivors. Police forces cannot and should not control 
convictions (this is a matter for the courts). How ofcers treat victim-
survivors during their interactions is entirely within policing’s control. 
The quality of police interactions with victim-survivors matters deeply. 
Procedural Justice Theory suggests that whether ofcers enable a person 
to actively participate in the process and treat them with fairness, dignity, 
and respect can afect their sense of identity and belonging within society. 
Perceptions of procedural fairness also shape people’s trust in the police, 
which infuences a person’s willingness to report a crime to the police and 
support an investigation. We combined feminist-informed victim-survivor 
research with Procedural Justice Theory to show its usefulness in improv­
ing police engagement with victim-survivors. Procedural Justice Theory is 
a dominant paradigm in scholarly thinking and police policy on the rela­
tionship between the police and the public; however, it is rarely applied 
to police encounters with rape victim-survivors. It is central to Operation 
Soteria Bluestone and the NOM. 
If we want ofcers to do things diferently in their day-to-day inves­
tigations, prevention activities, and victim-survivor interactions, police 
services must take responsibility for furnishing their workforce with the 
necessary skills, tools, and organisational climate. Organisational Jus­
tice Theory provides a framework for understanding the relationship 
between police services and their ofcers. Police organisations taking 
care of their ofcers is essential not only for ofcer well-being but also 
because how police organisations treat their ofcers directly afects how 
ofcers treat rape victim-survivors. Ofcers who sufer from high work­
loads, chronic stress, and burnout are more likely to lose empathy for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Conclusion 173 
victim-survivors, more likely to be biased by rape myths in their decision-
making, and more likely to drop rape cases. Police forces’ care for 
their ofcers should include efective, career-long learning and devel­
opment, ensuring that ofcers can create and use good quality police 
data and analytics, and equipping ofcers with digital forensic investi­
gation skills and capabilities. All three of these pillars must be uplifted 
across police forces in England and Wales. At present, police forces 
are doing and investing too little to live up to policing’s promise that 
police forces take sexual violence seriously and will investigate every 
rape (NPCC, 2023a). 
At the time of writing, the ideas outlined in this book were being 
implemented in England and Wales as part of Operation Soteria Blue-
stone. Operation Soteria Bluestone is a government-funded, police-
academic collaboration aimed at transformational change in police 
responses to rape and sexual ofences. Its objectives include increasing 
outcome justice in rape and other sexual ofence cases, as well as improv­
ing victim-survivor experiences of the justice process. This collaboration 
between academics and ofcers of all ranks and roles gave rise to the 
NOM. The emerging evidence suggests it is efective in improving justice 
outcomes and procedural justice for rape victim-survivors in some of the 
pathfnder police force areas. The project was a learning opportunity 
for us as academics and for the police service. We repeatedly came up 
against aspects of default policing, ofcers resistant to change or com­
fortable with “how we do things here”. At the same time, we could 
not aford to disregard the concerns of the ofcers who carried moral 
injury, chronic stress, and vicarious trauma due to policing’s current 
ways of working and organisational climates. We needed to navigate 
the institutionalised resistance and institutional self-harm it caused to 
police ofcers in order to improve matters for victim-survivors. We dem­
onstrated through Operation Soteria Bluestone that some police forces 
are willing to take on board evidence-informed ideas from outside of 
policing. Changing police practice came from the inside. It is too early 
to tell whether any of the improvements attributed to Operation Soteria 
Bluestone are sustainable. It is up to the police service, the government, 
and public leadership to insist that policing’s default is reset. 
The success of the six-pillar framework, Operation Soteria Bluestone, 
and the NOM will be measured in charges and convictions, victim-survivor 
experience, and public trust in the police response to sexual violence. 
In policing, only what is counted counts, and police forces are unlikely 
to prioritise rape policing unless they are held accountable for the qual­
ity of their investigations, prevention, and victim-survivor engagement. 
The policing ecosystem and the public must be able monitor the NOM 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
174 
Conclusion 
implementation and its progress. Careful attention must be paid not 
only to police forces meeting performance targets but also to how these 
are met. Policing and the wider justice system have a track record of hit­
ting the numbers without achieving the aims behind them, or even mak­
ing matters worse in the process (Hohl, 2021). We have included in the 
NOM a holistic set of key performance indicators for all six pillar areas 
to help guard against spurious improvements in specifc performance 
measures at the expense of victim-survivors, ofcers, or long-term sus­
tainability (College of Policing, 2023). We showed that, at present, 
police data quality and analytic capability are so poor that police forces 
cannot reliably account for the sexual ofending that is on their books 
or the impacts of police actions on the recorded incidents. It also means 
that we do not have an accurate picture of whether police forces provide 
an equal service to all victim-survivors, regardless of their race, sex, dis­
ability status, or any other protected characteristic.1 As such, careful 
thought and investment needs to be put into measuring holistically the 
quality of police responses to rape. 
Measuring police performance must not be an end in itself. Within 
police forces, senior leaders should use the data to assess their organisa­
tion’s performance, diagnose problems, and act upon the diagnosis to cor­
rect course. Transparency about police performance in the six pillar areas is 
also essential for police accountability and governance within a democracy. 
The topics of police governance, oversight, and accountability are outside 
the scope of this book. Still, they are signifcant factors that will infuence 
the success of Operation Soteria Bluestone. Similarly, the focus of this book 
is on the police and excludes the other stages of the criminal justice pro­
cess. The police are the gatekeepers of the criminal justice system, and for 
most victim-survivors, the police will remain the only criminal agency that 
they have contact with. How the police interact with a victim-survivor and 
how well they conduct the investigation play a pivotal role in a rape case’s 
fate if it journeys beyond the investigation stage. The CPS also contrib­
utes to the rape justice gap through its decision-making, excessive requests 
for third-party and digital material, and the quality of their victim-survivor 
engagement (George and Ferguson, 2021). The court experience, too, is 
often deeply traumatic for victim-survivors, marred by a victim-credibility 
focus and the continued infuence of rape myths (Smith, 2018). Operation 
Soteria includes a CPS workstream (CPS, 2023; King et al., 2023), but the 
applicability and efects of the principles of the six-pillar framework on CPS 
charging decisions, prosecutions, and courts are yet to be evaluated. Opera­
tion Soteria Bluestone pathfnder forces have seen a doubling and tripling 
of the number of rape reports the police refer to the CPS for a charging 
decision (NPCC, 2023b). This increases the pressure on the CPS, courts, 
and prisons at a time when the criminal justice system is already stretched 

 
 
 
 
  
Conclusion 175 
beyond breaking point. In 2023, the British justice system ran out of court­
rooms, judges, and barristers resulting in a backlog of over 62,000 crown 
court cases and year(s)-long waits for trial dates. The system is also fast 
running out of prison spaces for convicted ofenders (Dalton, 2023). Unless 
the wider criminal justice system can keep step with Operation Soteria Blue-
stone, any improvements at the police stage will dissipate. 
Police forces are modern society’s invention and relatively young in 
humankind’s history. Organisational change is difcult and police forces 
may resist deep reform, but this does not mean that the status quo – the 
current default approach – is set in stone. The way forward is neither 
easy nor straightforward, and we have outlined some of these chal­
lenges. Policing is in permacrisis, and nothing short of radical change 
will do if police services wish to remain relevant and legitimate in 
today’s democratic societies. We have put forward our six-pillar frame­
work and the Operation Soteria Bluestone approach to police-academic 
co-production of part of the solution to the problem of rape policing. 
As the NOM is being rolled out to all 43 police forces nationally, the 
challenges ahead are its scalability and sustainability. Sexual violence 
intersects with other forms of male violence against women and girls. 
We have highlighted the prevalence of sexual violence in the context of 
domestic abuse, and future work should seek to integrate rape policing 
with the police response to these intersecting relationship-based, gen­
dered crimes. Change confned to police forces, without reform of the 
policing ecosystem and wider criminal justice system, will necessarily be 
limited in its efectiveness. A new perspective on the policing of rape – a 
reset of default policing – is a frst step on a long road to making policing 
an ally in the quest for ending male violence against women and girls. 
Note 
1 In 2023, protected characteristics in the UK were: age, gender reas­
signment, marriage/civil partnership, pregnancy and maternity leave, 
disability, race (including colour, nationality, ethnic or national ori­
gin), religion or belief, sex, and sexual orientation. Available at: 
www.gov.uk/discrimination-your-rights. 
References 
College of Policing (2023). National operating model for the investiga­
tion of rape and serious sexual ofences. Available at: www.college. 
police.uk/national-operating-model-rasso 
Crown Prosecution Service (2023). The National Operating Model for 
adult rape prosecution. Available at: www.cps.gov.uk/publication/ 
national-operating-model-adult-rape-prosecution 

 
 
 
 
176 
Conclusion 
Dalton, J.(2023). Judges told not to jail rapists due to overcrowded prisons. 
The Independent. 12 October. Available at: www.independent.co.uk/ 
news/uk/home-news/prisons-overcrowding-jail-rapists-murder­
b2428333.html 
George, R. and Ferguson, S. (2021). Review into the criminal justice sys­
tem response to adult rape and serious sexual ofences across England 
and Wales: Research report. HM Government. Available at: https:// 
assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/60cbb9318fa8f57ce78d4d85/ 
rape-review-research-report.pdf 
Hohl, K. (2021). New scorecards show under 1% of reported rapes lead 
to conviction – criminologist explains why England’s justice system 
continues to fail. The Conversation. 1 April. Available at: https:// 
theconversation.com/new-scorecards-show-under-1-of-reported­
rapes-lead-to-conviction-criminologist-explains-why-englands-justice­
system-continues-to-fail-180345 
Hohl, K., Reid, A.K., Molisso, S. and Pullerits, M. (2023). Rape and 
sexual assault survivors’ experience of the police in England and 
Wales. Survey Report I: January–June 2023. City, University of Lon­
don. Available at: https://openaccess.city.ac.uk/id/eprint/31310/9/ 
Survey%20Report%20I%2021%20September%202023%20 
UPDATE%2020%20September.pdf 
King, A., Munro, V.E. and Andrade, L.Y. (2023). Operation Soteria: 
Improving CPS responses to rape complaints and complainants. 
University of Warwick. Available at: www.cps.gov.uk/sites/default/ 
fles/documents/publications/Soteria%20Interim%20Findings%20 
Report%20FINAL%20-%2004.07.23%20-%20accessible.pdf 
National Police Chiefs’ Council (2023a). In focus – rape: We need an 
open and honest conversation about rape and sexual ofences. Avail­
able at: https://news.npcc.police.uk/releases/in-focus-rape-we-need­
an-open-and-honest-conversation-about-rape-and-sexual-ofences 
National Police Chiefs’ Council (2023b). Op Soteria rolled out across 
England and Wales. Available at: https://news.npcc.police.uk/ 
releases/victims-rights-and-needs-at-centre-of-transformative-new­
approach-to-rape-investigations-and-prosecutions 
Smith, O. (2018). Rape trials in England and Wales: Observing justice 
and rethinking rape myths. Cham: Springer. 
Tidmarsh, P. (2021). The whole story: Investigating sexual crime – 
Truth, lies and the path to justice. London: Jonathan Cape. 

 
 
INDEX 
#MeToo movement 3, 26 
Adler, Z. 13 
Angiolini review 121 
Authorised Professional Practice 
(APP) 42–43, 48, 55 
Avon and Somerset Police 101–102, 
104–106, 145, 148–149, 156, 
160–164 
Bart, P.B. 68 
Bates, L. 69 
Bayley, D.H. 28 
Beating crime plan 128 
Bittner, E. 22 
Black Lives Matter 26 
Black and minoritised people 
19, 20 
Bowling, B. 18 
British Transport Police (BTP) 78 
Brodeur, J.-P. 15 
Campbell, R. 133 
Carrick, David 71 
Casey review 103, 121 
cave-manning 69 
Centre for Women’s Justice 103 
Charman, S. 119 
Chief Constables 15 
civil orders 65, 77–79, 80, 172 
Cockcroft, T. 122 
Code of Practice for Victims of 
Crime 128 
coercive control 39, 52–54, 56, 
67–68, 70–74, 92, 133, 152, 
153 
College of Policing 6, 42–43, 55, 
164 
consent 6, 37–38, 39, 42, 52, 54, 
92, 100, 131, 134 
Crew, Sarah 148, 164 
crime closure codes 152–153 
crime data 125–130; see also data 
crime prevention 15–17, 64–65, 
74, 79–80, 135 
Criminal Behaviour Order 78 
Criminal Procedures and 
Investigations Act [CPIA] 
(1996) 42, 48 
Crown Prosecution Service (CPS) 
37, 38, 40–41, 75, 117, 156, 
161, 174 
data 89, 92, 117–118, 125–130 
Data Protection Act (2018) 158 
default policing: defnition 13–14; 
impact on police response to 
rape 20–24; law enforcement 
as last resort 14–17; mandate 
12–13, 173; under-policing 
17–20, 28, 170–171; rape 
investigations 4–5, 18–21, 26, 
74, 79–80, 115–116, 170–171; 
reforms 1–2, 3; resetting for 
public trust 24–28 
Deputy Chief Constable (DCC) 148 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
178 
Index 
digital data disclosure 92 
digital devices 89, 92, 116, 131–133 
digital forensics 118, 130–136 
Digital Forensic Units (DFU) 132 
dignity 100–101 
discrimination 19, 94, 146 
domestic abuse/violence 1, 15, 
19, 23, 24, 26, 28, 39, 52, 67, 
68, 70–71, 72, 73, 78–79, 90, 
103–104, 126, 147, 152–153, 
155, 175 
Domestic Violence Protection 
Notices 79 
Domestic Violence Protection 
Orders 78 
downstream orientation 40–42 
DSD (victim-survivor) 20–21 
end-to-end rape review 121 
European Convention on Human 
Rights 158 
Everard, Sarah 3, 26–27, 103 
evidentiary material 37–38, 42, 
55, 89, 92, 116, 132 
false allegations 36, 94 
Feeney, H. 133 
female ofcers 19 
feminism 107; feminist theories 
66–67 
Floyd, George 25 
Gavey, N. 69 
gender discrimination 19 
Gregory, J. 13 
Grifn, S. 69 
grooming 48, 123, 132, 133, 153 
Grooming 1 phase 50–52 
grooming gangs 71, 73 
group membership 96–97 
Hall, M. 128 
Her Majesty’s Inspectorate of 
Constabulary (HMIC) 126, 
127, 128, 131, 136n2 
His Majesty’s Inspectorate of 
Constabulary and Fire & 
Rescue Services (HMICFRS) 
126, 127, 131 
homicides 18, 19 
homophobia 115, 116 
Human Rights Act (1998) 21, 158 
Independent Sexual Violence 
Advocates (ISVAs) 94, 100, 
105–106, 124, 126, 149, 156, 
161, 162 
informed consent 92, 100, 130, 
131, 134 
injustice in policing 19 
intelligence-led policing 
128–129 
intimate terrorism 70 
Johnson, M.P. 70 
justice: criminal 4–5, 6, 13, 18, 
35–36, 40–41, 51, 55–56, 
66, 76, 89, 90–91, 93, 94, 
100–102, 118, 125, 128, 
134, 164, 171, 174–175; gap 
27, 29; organisational 4, 5, 
116–119, 121, 123, 124, 130, 
135, 148, 149, 164, 172; 
outcome(s) 4, 36, 39, 88, 91, 
95, 107, 152, 157, 162, 173; 
procedural justice 5, 88–90, 
95–99, 103–107, 135, 158, 
164, 172, 173 
Kelly, L. 69 
knowledge wars 122–123 
law enforcement 12, 14–17, 20, 
24, 28, 36, 75, 170 
leadership 4, 132, 148, 156, 161, 
164, 173 
Lees, S. 13 
live stranger rapes 22–24; see also 
stranger rapes 
male victim-survivors 1 
Management of Sexual of 
Violent Ofenders (MOSOVO) 
76–77 
manosphere 69 
May, Tiggey 150 
McLean, S.J. 147 
McMillan, L. 46 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Index 179 
media 14, 21, 24, 25, 46, 54–55, 
66, 71; social 38, 67, 68, 71, 
78, 92, 100 
medical forensic evidence 133 
mental health emergencies 17 
Metropolitan Police 14–15, 
20–22, 103 
Metropolitan Police 
Parliamentary and Diplomatic 
Protection 26 
minoritised ethnic people 19, 20, 
28, 94, 100 
misogyny 1, 2, 13, 19, 25, 67, 69, 
71, 91, 103, 104, 106, 115, 116 
moral injury 134, 173 
Multi-Agency Public Protection 
Arrangements (MAPPA) 
76, 79 
National Crime Recording 
Standards 128 
National Health Service 17 
National Model for the 
Investigation of Rape and 
Serious Sexual Ofences (NOM) 
145, 157–160, 164–165, 172, 
173–174, 175 
National Operating Model 
(NOM) 6 
National Police Chiefs’ Council 
(NPCC) 4, 6, 17 
neutrality 101–102 
New York Police Department 
16–17 
no-criming 127 
O’Brien, P.H. 68 
ofcers as perpetrators 134, 144 
ofcer learning and development 
1, 5, 44, 56, 116, 122, 123, 
125, 132 
ofcer well-being 6, 119, 121, 
125, 135, 172 
Operation Soteria Bluestone: 
Bluestone feel 162–163; case 
study 160–164; communication 
163; consultation 163; digital 
forensics 172; framework 4–6, 
144–157, 160–161; impact 
of intrusive investigations 91; 
impact of rape investigations on 
police ofcers 120; leadership/ 
governance 161; lesson learned 
163–164; National Model 
for the Investigation of Rape 
and Serious Sexual Ofences 
(NOM) 157–160; neutrality 
102; objectives 173; ofcer 
training 122; openness 163; 
partnerships/team-working 
161–162; suspect checks 43, 
74; vision 162 
organisational enablers: data 
117–118, 125–130, 171; 
digital forensics 118, 
130–136, 171; ofcer 
learning/development 171; 
ofcer training 115, 117, 
121–125, 131–134, 171; 
ofcer welfare/learning/ 
development 117–125 
organisational fairness 
118–119 
organisational justice theory 
118–119 
Peelian principles 14–15, 27, 64, 
65, 74, 79 
Peel, Robert 14–15, 24 
performance management 130 
perpetrators: blind spots 
45–48; coercive control 39, 
52–54, 70–74; failed police 
investigations 36–37, 154; 
feminist perspective 45–46; 
identifcation/disruption 
64–65, 71–79, 129; imagined 
46; police 1, 19, 26–27, 
103–104, 134; procedural 
justice 158; repeat ofenders 
23, 65–72, 171–172; repeat 
suspects 71, 74; research 
literature 44; stereotypes 
46–48; suspect checks 43, 
74; treatment by ofcers 
43–44, 55–56; victim-suspect 
relationship 22–24, 26–27, 
29, 39 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
180 Index 
pick-up artists 69 
police administrative data 125–130 
Police and Crime Commissioners 
(PCCs) 159 
Police-CPS Joint National Action 
Plan 117, 121, 148 
police cultures 2, 13, 24–25, 27, 
96–97, 115, 118, 145–146, 151 
Police Education Qualifcations 
Framework (PEQF) 122 
Police National Computer (PNC) 
74 
Police National Database (PND) 74 
policing: crime focus myth 16, 
21–22, 74; crime prevention 
15–17, 64–65, 74, 79–80, 135; 
discrimination 19; history 15, 
19, 28; under-enforcement 
of law 18–20; incident 
focus 73–74; intelligence-led 
128–129; law enforcement 
16–17; mandate 12, 18–19, 
20, 27, 28; ofcer training 2, 
36, 42, 44, 48, 74, 89, 115, 
117, 121–125, 131–134, 147, 
149, 150, 155, 157, 159, 161, 
171; ofcer welfare/learning/ 
development 117–121, 135; 
organisational enablers 
118–136; police-recorded 
crimes 18; policing by consent 
12, 13, 14, 16; procedural 
fairness 107; reforms 1, 3, 
7–8; researching 145–148; 
standards for criminal 
investigation 42–43; Tefon 
coating 25, 26; see also default 
policing 
pornography 69–70 
prejudice 18 
prevention 5, 6, 15, 16, 56, 
74, 76, 79, 125, 129, 130, 
132, 170–173; see also rape 
prevention; sexual ofences, 
prevention strategies 
procedural fairness 88, 95–96, 
99, 100, 105, 107, 119, 133, 
138, 172 
Procedural Justice Theory: 
applying framework to police 
interactions with rape victim-
survivors 5, 98–104, 106–107, 
172; concept 88–89, 95–97; 
dignity 100–101; neutrality 
101–102; Project Bluestone 
104–106; rape victim-survivors 
97–98; respect 100–101; 
trustworthiness 102–104; 
voice 99–100 
Project Bluestone 6, 90, 104–106, 
136, 145, 149–150 
“Project Vigilant” 129 
property crime 15 
public trust 3, 15, 25–28, 88, 89, 
95, 107, 144, 173 
racial discrimination 19 
racism 1, 28, 94, 115, 116 
rape: charge/summons rate 12; 
coercive control 39, 52–54, 
67–68, 70–74; conviction 
rates 36, 89; crime records 
127–128; cultural scafolding 
69; defnition 6, 23–24, 37, 39, 
42, 70; domestic abuse/violence 
152; under-enforcement of law 
13, 19, 28, 170–171; myths 
40, 42; national model for 
investigation 145; non-recent 
reports 24; place of occurrence 
23–24, 28; police-perpetrated 
26–27, 103–104; prevalence 
18; prevention (see rape 
prevention); prosecution rates 
1, 2, 3, 13, 28, 36, 40, 89; 
relationship-based crime 29, 39, 
49–52; reports 8, 67–68, 73, 
92, 102, 128, 171–172, 174; 
stranger rapes 22–24, 39, 65 
rape and serious sexual ofences 
(RASSO) 4, 40, 115, 122, 150, 
160, 162 
rape investigations: context-led 
158; default policing 4–5, 
18–21, 26, 74, 79–80, 
115–116; delays/errors 93; 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
Index 181 
denial of inquiry 41–42; 
denial of victimhood 41–42; 
downstream orientation 40–41; 
evidentiary material 37–38; 
failures/missed opportunities 
80; holistic model 159–160; 
impact on police ofcers 
119–121; impact on 
victim-survivors 35–42, 
48–49, 55, 88, 89, 91; ofcer 
decision-making factors 
35–36, 38–42; ofcer learning/ 
development programmes 116; 
ofcer training 44; perpetrators 
42–48; police interview 93; 
reforms 2; specialist units 
154–156; standards for 
criminal investigation 42–43; 
suspect-focused 5, 35, 37, 
48–49, 54–55, 158; suspect 
rights 55; victim-centred 
158; victim-focused 48–49; 
victim-survivor credibility focus 
35–42, 55, 94 
rape misconceptions 35–36, 
38–40, 42, 55, 171 
rape myths 2, 13, 24, 28, 35–36, 
38–40, 55, 72, 92, 104, 171 
rape prevention 5–6, 28, 45–48, 
56, 64–65, 71, 72, 74, 76–80, 
115, 125, 128–130, 132–133, 
158, 170, 171–172, 173 
rape stereotypes 1, 2, 28, 29, 
35–36, 38–40, 52–53, 72, 92, 
101, 104, 106, 144, 156 
rape reporting 43, 93, 103 
rape victim-survivors: blaming 
39, 41, 48, 51, 66, 72, 
89, 94, 103, 123, 144, 
153; counselling notes 37; 
credibility focus 35–42, 55, 
94, 171; crime data 125–130; 
criminal justice journey 
as assault course 90–94; 
defnition 6–7; discrimination 
19; failing criminal justice 
system 3–4; Grooming 1 phase 
50–52; impact of evidentiary 
material 38–40, 92; impact of 
intrusive investigations 35–42, 
48–49, 55, 88, 89, 91; male 1, 
92; outcome justice 157–158; 
overinvestigation 171; police 
engagement 5, 92, 94–97, 
171–172; police-traumatised 
1; prevention (see rape 
prevention); procedural 
justice 158; rape myths 2; 
responsibilisation 51, 56; 
secondary victimisation 2; 
support 2; treated as property 
crime 15; trauma 1, 64, 67, 
79, 89, 91–93, 94, 97–98, 
118–121, 125, 155, 158, 164, 
173, 174; withdrawal 153 
Rehabilitation of Ofenders Act 
(1974) 72 
Reid, Kirk 71 
Reiner, Robert 25, 26–27 
Reith, Charles 14 
relationship-based crime 29, 39, 
49–52 
respect 100–101 
Royal Irish Constabulary 14 
Savage, S. 28 
secondary victimisation 2, 89 
serial rapists 72 
sexism 2 
sexual assault kits 133 
Sexual Assault Referral Centres 
(SARCs) 91, 94, 161 
Sexual Harm Prevention Orders 
(SHPOs) 77–79 
sexual history evidence 2, 37 
Sexual Ofence Liaison Ofcers 
(SOLOs) 120 
sexual ofences: Avon and 
Somerset Police specialist 
unit 101; civil orders 172; 
data 116, 125–126, 129, 
147, 174; default policing 
27, 29; defnition 6; demand 
on police time 17; digital 
forensics 132, 134; disclosures 
43; under-enforcement of law 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
182 Index 
13; history of prior against 
same victim-survivor 23; 
investigative training 44; 
investigators 120; learning/ 
development programmes 
123–124; national model for 
investigation 145, 157–160; 
ofcer learning/development 
programmes 135; performance 
measures 90; police-
perpetrated 26; prevention 
strategies 46, 75–79; Project 
Bluestone 160–164, 173; 
repeat ofenders 71–72; Soteria 
approach 148, 152–154; 
victim-survivor engagement 
ofcers 2, 89 
Sexual Ofences Act [SOA] (2003) 
6, 23, 37 
Sexual Ofences Investigative 
Trained (SOIT) 120 
sexual ofenders 44, 65–66; see also 
perpetrators 
sexual ofending: defcit in 
specialist learning and 
development 153–154; 
domestic abuse/violence 39, 
152; legal defnition 37, 70; 
prevention strategies 71, 75–79, 
80, 170; rape prevention advice 
48; as relationship-based crime 
49–52, 54, 56; repeat ofenders 
66, 67, 72, 73; reporting 75; 
suspect-focused investigations 
55, 171 
Sexual Risk Orders (SROs) 77–79 
sexual scripts 69–70 
sexual violence: barriers for 
reporting 103; coercive 
control 52–54, 70–74; failed 
police investigations 36; 
feminist theories 66–71, 129; 
as ordinary/routine 69–70; 
perpetrator identifcation/ 
disruption 129; police ofcers as 
victims 152; police-perpetrated 
1, 19, 26–27, 103–104, 
134; police response 1, 3, 8, 
13–14, 16, 26–27, 89–90, 
117–118, 135, 170–171, 173, 
175; prevention 64–65, 80, 
171–172; priority for policing 
4; relationship-based crime 29, 
49–52; sexual ofending as 6; 
stereotypes 46–48; “telling not 
reporting” cases 153; terror 
regimes 70; victim-survivor (see 
rape victim-survivors) 
sex work 2, 50, 51, 92 
Sklansky, D.A. 146 
social identity theory 96 
social media see media 
social psychological theory 96 
Specialist Sexual Assault 
Investigation Development 
Programme (SSAIDP) 122 
specialism 134, 154–156 
specialist knowledge 37, 56, 115, 
123, 133, 134, 153, 155, 157, 
158, 162 
specialist units 154–156 
stereotypes: cultural 37; gendered 
13; ofcer decisions based on 
18; perpetrators 46–48; racial 
37, 48; rape stereotypes 1, 2, 
28, 29, 35–36, 38–40, 52–53, 
72, 92, 101, 104, 106, 144, 
156 
Stern review 121 
stress: emotional 76; ofcers 
119–121, 135, 165n2, 
172–173; post-traumatic 
stress disorder (PTSD) 76, 92 
stranger rapes 22–24, 39, 65 
suspect rights 55 
symbolic power 7–8 
Tate, Andrew 67–69 
techniques of neutralisation 41 
telling, not reporting 152–153 
Temkin, J. 13 
Thames Valley Police 129 
third-party material 38, 42, 89, 
92, 132 
Tidmarsh, P. 49–52, 56, 123, 
171 

 
 
 
Index 183 
TikTok 69 
trauma: 1, 64, 67, 79, 91–93, 
97–98, 118–121, 125, 155, 
158, 164, 173, 174; secondary 
2, 89, 92, 94, 98, 119; 
vicarious 119, 173 
trustworthiness 102–104 
Tyson, J. 119 
undetected rapists 66 
Vera-Gray, F. 69 
victim liaison ofcers 120 
Victims’ Code of Practice 88, 
158 
victims’ rights 55, 88, 105, 132, 
136, 158 
victim-survivor see rape 
victim-survivor 
victim-suspect relationship 22–24, 
26–27, 29, 39 
voice 99–100 
White, D. 46 
“Whole Story” approach 49–52, 
56, 123, 171 
Williams, E. 122 
Worboys, John 20–21, 71, 73 
Worden, R.E. 147 
YouTube 69 
zero-tolerance policing 16 
zombie cases 127