35
© The Author(s) 2024
K. Agata et al. (eds.), Public Administration in Japan, Governance 
and Public Management, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-58610-1_3
CHAPTER 3
Central and Local Government Relations
Masatsugu Ito
3.1    Introduction
The aim of this chapter is to clarify the characteristics of the relationship 
between the central and local governments in Japan in the context of 
international comparisons and historical developments as well as to pro­
vide an overview of the impact of decentralization reforms that have been 
taking place since the 1990s and a perspective on the future.
1
­
In this way, Japan as a unitary state applies a uniform two-tier system to 
the entire country. At the same time, there is a special system that is applied 
to metropolitan areas that are home to large concentrations of population. 
This special system for metropolitan areas encompasses a system that is 
based on two different ideas that emerged due to historical reasons.
M. Ito (*) 
Graduate School of Law and Politics, Tokyo Metropolitan University, 
Hachioji, Japan
e-mail: itomasa@tmu.ac.jp

36
First, the system is one that is based on the notion of transferring some 
of the authority vested in prefectural governments to the local autono­
mous bodies (local governments) of large cities to give these local autono­
mous bodies greater authority than other municipalities. The current 
Local Autonomy Act sets forth a system of government ordinance-­
designated cities and core cities. Authority over administrative affairs 
related to child welfare, urban planning, environmental preservation, and 
more is transferred from the prefectural government to each government 
ordinance-designated city with a population of at least 500,000 people 
designated by a Cabinet order. In addition, while authority over adminis­
trative affairs related to health, sanitation, urban planning, and more is 
transferred from the prefectural government to each core city designated 
by a Cabinet order with a population of at least 200,000 people, the scope 
of this authority is more narrowly set than it is for government ordinance-­
designated cities. Twenty cities have been designated as government 
ordinance-­designated cities while sixty-two cities, including prefectural 
capitals and cities located in metropolitan areas, have been designated as 
core cities (as of April 1, 2024).
Second, and in contrast, the metropolitan government system is a spe­
cial system for the centralized management of metropolitan areas by a 
wide-area local autonomous body. Constituting a wide-area local autono­
mous body, a metropolitan government has special wards, which are basic 
local autonomous bodies. In areas where special wards are located, the 
metropolitan government is centrally in charge of firefighting, water sup­
ply, sewage treatment, transportation, and other such functions. The met­
ropolitan government system can be traced to the establishment of the 
Tokyo Metropolitan Government in 1943 during the Second World War 
when the dual system consisting of the city of Tokyo and Tokyo Prefecture 
was overcome by combining these two entities in order to build a system 
for defending the capital. The metropolitan government system applies 
only to Tokyo and functions as a de facto system for the capital.
How can we characterize the relationship between the central and local 
governments in Japan, which are predicated on the existence of two-tier 
local governments and which include this special system for metropolitan 
areas? In order to clarify the characteristics of the relationship between the 
central and local governments of Japan in the context of international 
comparisons and historical development in this chapter, the author has set 
forth the following two perspectives.
 
M. ITO

37
The first is a multifaceted perspective on the relationship between the 
central and local governments. In general, the relationship between the 
central and local governments can be seen through the lenses of central­
ization and decentralization, but what this specifically means is ambigu­
ous. Tulia G. Falleti compared the decentralization of power in various 
Latin American countries with respect to three aspects: administrative 
decentralization, fiscal decentralization, and political decentralization. 
Administrative decentralization refers to policies to transfer distributive 
authority related to education, welfare, housing, and other social services 
to local governments. Fiscal decentralization means policies to increase 
the revenue or fiscal authority of local governments. Political decentraliza­
tion refers to electoral reforms and constitutional amendments that 
increase the political authority of local governmental entities and establish 
or expand the representative nature of local political entities (Falleti, 2010, 
pp. 33–39).
The second is a perspective that regards the relationship between the 
central and local governments through not just the lenses of centralization 
and decentralization but also the lenses of interfusion and separation. 
AMAKAWA Akira, who studied the reformation of Japan’s local govern­
ment system both after the Second World War and during the Occupation 
period, set forth the lenses of interfusion and separation from the perspec­
tive of the extent to which the central and local governments are able to 
play a part in providing administrative services at a local level 
(Amakawa, 1981).
Interfusion refers to circumstances wherein local governments are com­
prehensively responsible for the provision of administrative services at a 
local level, while the central government is able to be broadly involved in 
the execution of affairs by local governments. In general, with an inter­
fused relationship between the central and local governments, the author­
ity of local governments is explained with generalized examples, the role 
of local offices of the central government is limited, and local governments 
delegated by the central government provide a wide range of services. 
However, the central government is typically involved in matters related to 
standards and methods for the execution of affairs by local governments.
In contrast, separation refers to circumstances wherein there is a clear 
division of the roles and authority of the central and local governments 
with respect to the provision of administrative services. With a separation-­
type relationship between the central and local governments, local govern­
ments can only exercise authority as concerns matters for which authority 
3  CENTRAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT RELATIONS 

38
has been enumerated. Matters coming within the jurisdiction of the cen­
tral government, even if they concern local administrative services, are 
carried out through local offices of the central government.
In general, interfusion applies to the relationship between the central 
and local governments throughout continental Europe while separation 
applies in Anglo-Saxon countries (Nishio, 2007). Given that Japan largely 
modernized by applying the German model of governance, the relation­
ship between the central and local governments in this country is charac­
terized by interfusion.
In this chapter, the historical development of the relationship between 
the central and local governments in Japan will be analyzed with respect to 
three aspects – public administration, finance, and politics – and how the 
relationship between the central and local governments in Japan, with its 
interfused character, came to be formed.
3.2    Historical Construction of Central 
and Local Government Relations in Modern Japan
3.2.1    Construction of Modern State and Local 
Government Systems
In Japan during the period extending from the seventeenth century to the 
middle of the nineteenth century, matters not coming under the direct 
control of the ruling Tokugawa family were governed with relative auton­
omy by each clan. However, the Tokugawa government came to be dis­
solved upon contact with Western nations. As the task of building a 
modern state came to be set with the Meiji Restoration (1868), the rela­
tionship between the central and local governments underwent funda­
mental changes.
In 1871, the Meiji government dissolved the clans that had existed 
until then and replaced them with new prefectural governments and 
appointed bureaucrats dispatched by the state as prefectural governors to 
thereby set up a centralized system of government. In 1888, a system in 
which municipalities, as basic local bodies, are placed in charge of educa­
tion, tax collection, family registers, and other affairs required for the 
building of a modern state was developed. In addition, regulations gov­
erning prefectures and counties were put in place in 1890.
 
M. ITO

39
The local system that was developed during the Meiji Period had the 
following characteristics as seen with respect to the aspects of public 
administration, finance, and politics.
First, an interfused relationship between the central and local govern­
ments was established in terms of public administration. Since prefectural 
governors and head county officials were officials dispatched by the Home 
Ministry, prefectures and counties possessed a strong character as local 
general offices of the national government. On the other hand, munici­
palities were granted a certain degree of autonomy. For this reason, the 
government of the time adopted an agency-delegated function system 
under which mayors were regarded as subordinate organs of the state and 
made to execute affairs of the state accordingly in order to ensure that 
these affairs were executed at the local level. Conversely, the state posi­
tioned municipalities as comprehensive administrative entities that execute 
affairs of the state in addition to their own affairs. By establishing an inter­
fused relationship between the central and local governments, the govern­
ment established a system to ensure the implementation of state policy and 
public administration at a local level.
Second, the financial independence of local governments was restricted 
under the local system established during the Meiji Period. With prefec­
tural taxation being legalized in 1878 and municipal taxation being legal­
ized in 1888, prefectures and municipalities came to be entitled to levy 
and collect local taxes. However, most local taxes were surtaxes on national 
taxes and other such levies. On the other hand, costs related to compul­
sory education and other matters became a burden for smaller municipali­
ties, such that the guaranteeing of financial resources appropriate for the 
delivery of administrative services in local areas became a challenge.
Third, elements of political decentralization were also recognized, 
albeit to a limited extent, under the local system established during the 
Meiji Period. Both prefectures and municipalities established their own 
assemblies. While the right to vote for the members of prefectural and 
municipal assemblies was limited in the beginning to men who had paid at 
least a certain amount of tax, the restriction based on the amount of tax 
paid was lifted in 1926. In addition, a system under which municipal 
assemblies elect mayors came to be established in 1926.
3  CENTRAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT RELATIONS 

40
3.2.2    Progress of “Functional Centralization”
Thus, from the end of the nineteenth century to the beginning of the 
twentieth century, Japan came to establish a centralized local system espe­
cially in the aspects of public administration and finance in order to pro­
mote modernization. However, the relationship between the central and 
local governments changed as urbanization and industrialization took 
hold from the 1930s onward and as the country placed itself on a war 
footing from the 1940s onward.
First, in the area of public administration, the expansion and specializa­
tion of individual administrative functions caused ministries to establish 
and expand local offices, as a result of which the interfused character of the 
system became relatively weakened. The expansion of the functions of 
public administration in the area of rural public works and functions of 
sanitation and social administration as well as the increasing tendency of 
ministries to establish their own local offices upset the system under which 
the affairs of the central government and the affairs of the local govern­
ment were implemented on an interfused basis through the channel of 
prefectures to municipalities.
Second, in the area of finance, a financial adjustment system was devel­
oped, and the link between central government finances and local govern­
ment finances was strengthened. Beginning in the 1930s, the impact of 
the Great Depression plunged rural areas in Japan into hard times and 
placed the finances of towns and villages in dire straits. Thus, the amount 
of state subsidies allocated to local governments by individual ministries of 
the central government went up, and the introduction of a financial adjust­
ment system to allocate a portion of national taxes according to the fiscal 
strength of local governments was studied. Consequently, a system for 
carrying out a partial tax transfer to local governments was established 
in 1940.
Third, political centralization occurred under the wartime regime. In 
1943, the prefectural and municipal systems were amended, such that 
mayors of cities came to be appointed by the Home Ministry on the rec­
ommendation of the municipal assembly of each city, and mayors of towns 
and villages came to be elected by the municipal assembly of each town or 
village, subject to approval by the prefectural governor. With the abolition 
of the City of Tokyo under the Tokyo metropolitan government system 
that was enacted in the same year, the municipal assembly of the City of 
Tokyo was abolished, thereby setting back democracy in the capital.
 
M. ITO

41
These changes to the relationship between the central and local govern­
ments from the 1930s onward are known as functional centralization 
(Ichikawa, 2012). Accompanied by an expansion of the government’s 
administrative and fiscal functions and a tightening of the relationship 
between the central and local governments, functional centralization 
formed a basis for the transition of Japan to a welfare state in the years fol­
lowing the Second World War. At the same time, institutional decentral­
ization with respect to the aspects of public administration, finance, and 
politics was spearheaded by the General Headquarters for the Allied Forces 
(GHQ) in Japan after Japan was defeated in the Second World War. The 
relationship between the central and local governments in postwar Japan 
can be seen in terms of both functional centralization and institutional 
decentralization.
3.3    Continuity and Change in Central and Local 
Government Relations in Postwar Japan
3.3.1    Decentralization in Occupied Japan
After the Second World War, the relationship between the central and 
local governments changed substantially amid the democratization of 
Japan by the GHQ, which was in charge of the occupation of the country.
First, political decentralization progressed significantly. New provisions 
governing local autonomy were included in the Constitution of Japan, 
which came into force in 1947. Whereas prewar laws concerning the local 
system of government stipulated local entities on an individual basis, the 
Local Autonomy Act was likewise enacted in 1947 as a uniform code pro­
viding for local autonomy. The reformation of the local system as spear­
headed by the GHQ led to the introduction of a system under which 
residents directly and publicly elect prefectural governors and municipal 
mayors as well as the recognition of women’s suffrage in elections of the 
heads of local governments and members of local assemblies.
3  CENTRAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT RELATIONS 

42
the Home Ministry, which had been in charge of controlling the thoughts 
of the people prior to the war, was dismantled at the behest of the GHQ 
in 1947, such that there was no ministry exercising overall control over 
local governments until 1960, when the Ministry of Home Affairs was 
established.2
Third, the authority of local autonomous bodies in fiscal matters was 
also fortified. The Local Tax Act was enacted in 1950, which abolished 
surtaxes on national taxes and expanded local tax revenues.
3.3.2    Sustaining an Interfused Relationship Between Central 
and Local Governments
Institutional reforms carried out thusly between the latter half of the 
1940s and the first half of the 1950s helped promote local decentraliza­
tion in Japan. If anything, however, decentralization accompanying the 
postwar reformation of the local system of government tended to work to 
strengthen the interfused character of the relationship between the central 
and local governments that had been in place since the Meiji Period.
First, as a paradoxical consequence of the decentralization of politics to 
the prefectures, prefectural governors came to be subject to the command 
and supervision of central government ministries through the system of 
agency-delegated functions. As mentioned earlier, prewar governors were 
state officials dispatched by the Home Ministry and subject to the com­
mand and supervision of the national government. However, governors in 
postwar Japan came to be publicly elected, and prefectures managed to 
acquire a character as local governments constituted by the political repre­
sentatives of the people. Fearing that publicly elected governors would no 
longer comply with instructions issued by the central government, minis­
tries indicated that they felt a sense of mistrust in these publicly elected 
governors. In this connection, the prewar system of agency-delegated 
functions under which mayors were seen as subordinate organs of the state 
and made to execute affairs of the state accordingly was expanded in its 
application to prefectural governors to ensure the execution of the affairs 
of the state by prefectures.
­
 
M. ITO

43
number of municipalities during the 1940s rose to approximately 10,000, 
and it became difficult for smaller towns and villages to efficiently carry 
out the administrative tasks they were newly empowered to perform. In 
this connection, large-scale municipal mergers took place in the 1950s to 
increase the size of municipal populations and expand their administrative 
underpinnings.3 These major mergers of the Showa Period reduced the 
number of municipalities from approximately 10,000 to around 3500.4 At 
the same time, municipalities obtained a basis as entities capable of com­
prehensively providing social services. Consequently, the relationship 
between the central and local governments in Japan came to maintain an 
interfused character.
Third, in addition, fiscal decentralization also helped maintain the 
interfused relationship between the central and local governments. Despite 
an expansion of local taxes after the war, municipalities were not granted 
sufficient financial resources that could be considered consistent with their 
authority. For this reason, municipal finances were strained in the 1950s. 
In connection with this, the Act on National Treasury’s Sharing of 
Compulsory Education Expenses was enacted in 1952 to develop contri­
butions by the national treasury for compulsory education. The Local 
Allocation Tax Act was enacted in 1954 to stabilize financial coordination 
between the central and local governments. In these ways, the develop­
ment of systems to guarantee the financial resources of local governments 
strengthened the financial basis of municipalities in particular.
Thus, the decentralization of power that occurred during the 
Occupation further strengthened the interfused character of the relation­
ship between the central and local governments in Japan. On the other 
hand, amid increased demand for social services and an expansion of the 
administrative functions of both the central and local governments after 
the Second World War, the trend toward functional centralization that 
began in the 1930s persisted. In postwar Japan, however, the system of 
agency-delegated functions was also extended to prefectures, while the 
administrative and fiscal infrastructure of municipalities was upgraded 
through municipal mergers and the development of a financial adjustment 
system, such that an interfused relationship between the central and local 
governments through which local governments are comprehensively 
responsible for delivering local social services under the supervision of the 
central government was maintained rather than a separate relationship 
through which ministries of the central government provide services by 
setting up local offices for each type of social service.
3  CENTRAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT RELATIONS 

44
3.3.3    Central and Local Government Relations Under the Rule 
of the LDP Government
The postwar relationship in Japan between the central and local govern­
ments remained stable under the longtime rule of the Liberal Democratic 
Party (LDP) between 1955 and 1993. The LDP government, which 
achieved high levels of economic growth that began in the 1960s, proac­
tively promoted regional development in accordance with the idea of 
undertaking the balanced development of national land. Local govern­
ments also demanded the development of infrastructure based on a 
national land plan spearheaded by the central government and mobilized 
locally elected Diet members to lobby offices in charge of public works in 
order to obtain subsidies for public works. Under the long-term rule of 
the LDP, local governments pursued public works and regional develop­
ment through political channels linking the central government and local 
governments and often engaged in fierce political competition to attract 
projects and obtain subsidies in a way that resembled the clientelism that 
can be observed in Italy and other southern European countries (Tarrow, 
1977; Calder, 1988; Muramatsu, 1997).
From the latter half of the 1960s to the 1970s, the problem of pollu­
tion garnered attention as a negative aspect of economic growth in Japan, 
and governors and mayors who were supported by the Socialist Party and 
Communist Party were elected to form local governments in such metro­
politan areas as Tokyo, Osaka, and Yokohama. These progressive local 
governments opposed the conservative rule of the central government and 
developed policies that emphasized the environment and welfare. As Japan 
entered a period of lower economic growth from the end of the 1970s, 
however, these governments were criticized for increasing the budget defi­
cits of local governments and went on the decline.
Thus, while political dynamism in the form of opposition to the central 
government by prefectural governors and municipal mayors who came to 
be publicly elected as a result of the political decentralization that had 
been achieved during the Occupation era was observed during the 1970s, 
the interfused relationship between the central and local governments 
remained stable under the long-term rule of the LDP. Local governments 
attended to their own administrative duties as well as to agency-delegated 
functions under the direction and supervision of the central government 
on the assumption that financial resources were guaranteed by local alloca­
tion taxes and subsidies from the national coffers.
 
M. ITO

45
With respect to this relationship between the central and local govern­
ments under the rule of the LDP, it is recognized that local governments 
were given the latitude to exercise policy discretion and that the system 
was not always centralized (Reed, 1986). In addition, as mentioned ear­
lier, it is a fact that competition arose between local governments to attract 
projects and obtain subsidies. However, the general framework of the 
administrative and fiscal systems governing the relationship between the 
central and local governments did not change throughout the LDP’s 
long-term rule. In addition, a system of government ordinance-designated 
cities was set up as a special exemption for large cities in 1956. Although 
the number of government ordinance-designated cities increased through­
out the postwar years, the two-tier prefectural-municipal system itself was 
maintained.
3.4    Decentralization Reform and Central 
and Local Government Relations
3.4.1    Decentralization Reform Since the 1990s
The stable relationship between the central and local governments that 
lasted until the 1980s underwent significant changes beginning in the 
1990s when the period of LDP rule came to an end. With a falling birth­
rate and aging society and the rise of globalization in the late 1980s, the 
belief that local governments should attempt to deal with local issues in 
accordance with local circumstances rather than have a uniform national 
response applied became the prevailing view in society. In addition, as 
administrative reforms were being advanced at the national level to deal 
with budget deficits from the 1980s onward, the idea of promoting the 
streamlining of the central government through decentralization along­
side deregulation was put forth. Moreover, as part of the process leading 
up to the change of government that took place in July 1993 after revela­
tions of collusion and scandals involving bureaucrats and politicians 
emerged at the beginning of the 1990s, it was argued that making a break 
with the profit-driven politics that was allowed to operate under LDP rule 
required, in addition to such political reforms as electoral reform and 
reform of the political funding system, a way to limit the powers of the 
central government through decentralization reform.
3  CENTRAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT RELATIONS 

46
As a result, decentralization reform has been ongoing in Japan since the 
late 1990s. First, decentralization reform consisting of the abolition of the 
system of agency-delegated functions, the stipulation of rules governing 
the involvement of the central government in local government, and the 
establishment of a system for the handling of disputes between the central 
government and local governments was carried out based on the Act on 
the Promotion of Decentralization, which was enacted in 1995. Under 
this initial wave of decentralization reform, amendments were made to the 
Local Autonomy Act and other relevant pieces of legislation in order to 
ban the arbitrary involvement of the central government in local govern­
ment and expand the freedom of local governments to make their own 
decisions.
­
­
­
5
Third, a second wave of decentralization reform was promoted from 
the late 2000s onward and involved a review of the involvement of the 
central government in local government and the transfer of authority by 
the central government to local governments. When local governments 
conduct their affairs, central government ministries sometime mandate 
methods and criteria for the execution of these affairs in laws and regula­
tions. Under the second wave of decentralization reform, the imposition 
of mandates and frameworks by the central government in this manner 
was abolished or relaxed, and authority was transferred from the central 
government to prefectures and from prefectures to municipalities.
­
6
2018
 
M. ITO

47
3.4.2    Characteristics of Central and Local Government 
Relations in Japan
Decentralization reform changed the relationship between the central and 
local governments in Japan, but it also retained the following interfused 
characteristics.
­
­
3.1
­
­
3.2
3.3
­
Thus, an interfused character maintained since the Meiji Period is 
incorporated into the relationship between the central and local govern­
ments in Japan, which is characterized by the scope and volume of activi­
ties carried out by local governments that are relatively large by international 
standards. If we look back at the history of the relationship between the 
3  CENTRAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT RELATIONS 

48
 
central and local governments in Japan, we see that, while decentralization 
was intensively attempted during two periods—the Occupation period 
after the Second World War and the period from the 1990s onward—the 
interfused relationship between the central and local governments has 
 
M. ITO

49
 
­
 
­
been reinforced or maintained in administrative and financial terms. In 
order to grasp the characteristics of public administration in Japan, the 
significant role to be fulfilled by local governments cannot be ignored. 
3  CENTRAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT RELATIONS 

50
Conducting research into individual areas of public administration requires 
an understanding of the structure of the relationship between the central 
and local governments in each relevant area.
3.5    Perspectives for the Future
As has been made clear in this chapter, the relationship between the cen­
tral and local governments in Japan was developed along with the forma­
tion of the modern state. While this relationship underwent centralization 
during the Second World War, we have been experiencing decentralization 
in terms of administrative, financial, and political aspects over a period of 
approximately 130  years. At the same time, the interfused relationship 
between the central and local governments that formed during the Meiji 
Period has been maintained to this day, such that local governments play 
a huge role in the area of public administration in Japan.
However, Japan has been affected by various crises since the 2010s that 
have been redefining the relationship between the central and local gov­
ernments in this country.
First, major disasters, including the Great East Japan Earthquake that 
struck in March 2011, provided opportunities to rethink the roles of the 
central and local governments in crisis management and recovery. With 
the Great East Japan Earthquake, municipality-centered recovery efforts 
were advocated, and local governments in Japan were recognized as exhib­
iting resilience (Samuels, 2013). On the other hand, the Basic Act on 
Disaster Management was amended in 2012 to reinforce the coordinating 
authority of the national and prefectural governments as concerns support 
operations between local governments and wide-area evacuations.
Second, the COVID-19 pandemic exposed a lack of coordination 
between the central and local governments and between prefectural and 
municipal governments with respect to infectious disease control. Some 
observers have argued that the strengthening of the autonomy of local 
governments through decentralization reform led to inadequate responses 
to COVID-19 (Takenaka, 2020).
Third, Japan is faced with a crisis in which a declining birthrate and 
aging population are diminishing the sustainability of local communities. 
The trend toward centralization in Tokyo remains unabated, while the 
existence of communities in places other than metropolitan areas is threat­
ened by a shrinking population. In a society in which the population is 
 
M. ITO

51
shrinking, ensuring the sustainability of small local governments in par­
ticular is a challenge.
In order to address such crises consisting of large-scale disasters, new 
infectious diseases, and a shrinking population, the belief that Japan should 
restructure the relationship between the central and local governments 
and choose to go with centralization may gain momentum in the future. 
Alternatively, if depopulation were to progress to the breaking point, 
large-scale municipal mergers and a review of the two-tier local system 
may again be put forth for consideration.
In light of the history of the country to date, however, it is hard to 
imagine that Japan will abandon the interfused relationship between the 
central and local governments and pursue a form of governance that 
bypasses local governments. In other words, it appears inconceivable that 
Japan will move in the direction of separation of the central and local gov­
ernments. Local governments will likely continue to play a key role in 
Japanese governance.
Notes
1.	 About 1718 municipalities and 47 prefectures as of April 1, 2024.
2.	 The prewar Home Ministry enjoyed comprehensive jurisdiction over local 
administration and finances, the police, public works, health, labor, and reli­
gion (Shinto). From the 1930s onward, the Home Ministry harnessed the 
Special Higher Police to suppress communists and anarchists, spearheaded 
the Movement for General Mobilization of the National Spirit, and sup­
ported militarism.
3.	 For this municipal merger, a target population of 8000 people was set as the 
size of the population that can accommodate the affairs for which munici­
palities were newly responsible, such as junior high school education, social 
welfare, and firefighting.
4.	 In the process of the modernization of Japan, large-scale municipal mergers 
have occurred three times. The first was “the great Meiji merger,” which 
occurred at the end of the nineteenth century in line with the establishment 
of the municipal system of cities, towns, and villages. The second was known 
as “the great Showa merger,” as described here. The third was “the great 
Heisei merger,” which will be discussed later. The Meiji (1868–1912), 
Showa (1926–1989), and Heisei (1989–2019) periods refer to divisions of 
era in Japan as defined by the period of each emperor’s reign.
5.	 This municipal merger caused the number of municipalities to decrease 
from 3229 as of April 1999 to 1727 as of April 2010.
3  CENTRAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT RELATIONS 

52
6.	 However, the Discussion Forum Between the National and Local Governments 
was established by law in 2011 to promote the participation of local govern­
ments in national politics; discussions between local government representa­
tives in national associations and the relevant ministers are regularly held.
References
Amakawa, A. (1981). Koiki Gyosei to Chiho Bunken [Regional Administration 
and Decentralization]. In Jurist Zokan Sogo Tokushu 29 Gyosei no Tenkanki 
[Jurist, Extra Edition 29: Public Administration at a Turning Point]. Yuhikaku.
Calder, K. E. (1988). Crisis and Compensation: Public Policy and Political Stability 
in Japan, 1949–1986. Princeton University Press.
Falleti, T. G. (2010). Decentralization and Subnational Politics in Latin America. 
Cambridge University Press.
Hijino, K. V. L. (2018). Local Politics and National Policy: Multi-level Conflicts in 
Japan and Beyond. Routledge.
Ichikawa, Y. (2012). Nihon no Chuo Chiho Kankei: Gendaigata Shuken Taisei no 
Kigen to Fukushikokka [Central-Local Relations in Japan: the Origin of Modern 
Centralized Regime and Welfare State]. Horitsu bunkasha.
Muramatsu, M. (1997). Local Power in the Japanese State. University of 
California Press.
Nishio, M. (2007). Chiho Bunken Kaikaku [Decentralization Reform]. Tokyo 
University of Tokyo Press.
Reed, S. (1986). Japanese Prefectures and Policy Making. The University of 
Pittsburgh Press.
Samuels, R. (2013). 3.11: Disaster and Change in Japan. Cornell University Press.
Takenaka, H. (2020). Korona Kiki no Seiji: ABE Seiken vs. Chiji [Politics of the 
COVID-19 Crisis: Abe Administration vs. Governors]. Chuo Koron Shinsha.
Tarrow, S. (1977). Between Center and Periphery: Grassroots Politicians in Italy 
and France. Yale University Press.
 
M. ITO

53
Open Access   This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons 
Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/
by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction 
in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original 
author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and 
indicate if changes were made.
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the 
chapter’s Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to 
the material. If material is not included in the chapter’s Creative Commons license 
and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the 
permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copy­
right holder.
3  CENTRAL AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT RELATIONS