Vol.:(0123456789)
The Review of International Organizations (2025) 20:231–259
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11558-024-09556-1
INTRODUCTION
Illiberal regimes and international organizations
Christina Cottiero1 · Emilie M. Hafner‑Burton2 · Stephan Haggard2 · 
Lauren Prather2 · Christina J. Schneider3
Published online: 2 August 2024 
© The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Science+Business Media, LLC, part of Springer Nature 
2024
Abstract
Illiberal regimes have become central players in international organizations. In this 
introduction to the special issue, we provide a unified framework for understanding their 
effects. We start by outlining the theoretical foundations of this work, focusing first on 
why regime type matters for international cooperation. We then show how differing 
memberships and decision-making processes within international organizations affect 
the influence illiberal regimes can wield, the activities they undertake, and the impact 
that they have on domestic political outcomes. Collectively and individually, the 
contributions to this special issue broaden the theoretical literature on illiberal regimes 
in international organizations and produce novel data about how they are implicated in 
the politics and operations of multilateral and regional IOs. This research has important 
implications for how democracies can and should cope with the challenges to global 
governance that arise from illiberal regimes.
Responsible editor: Axel Dreher
 *	 Christina J. Schneider 
	
cjschneider@ucsd.edu
	
Christina Cottiero 
	
c.cottiero@utah.edu
	
Emilie M. Hafner‑Burton 
	
ehafner@ucsd.edu
	
Stephan Haggard 
	
shaggard@ucsd.edu
	
Lauren Prather 
	
lprather@ucsd.edu
1	
Department of Political Science at the University of Utah, Salt Lake City, USA
2	
School of Global Policy and Strategy (GPS) & UC Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation 
(IGCC), University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, USA
3	
Department of Political Science & UC Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation (IGCC), 
University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, USA

232
	
Cottiero et al.
1  Introduction
The last decade has seen a marked turn in the study of international organizations (IOs), 
with increasing attention given to the regime type of their members. This move corresponds 
to anxiety about the fate of democratic rule and the consequences of its erosion on the 
prospects for international order. Long standing authoritarian regimes, including both 
great powers and influential regional actors, are pursuing more assertive foreign policies 
and challenging dominant international norms in the process. At the same time, the Third 
Wave of democratization has crested if not reversed. Countries that recently transitioned 
to democratic rule and were once considered consolidated now appear vulnerable to 
democratic backsliding or outright reversion to autocratic rule. Even in advanced industrial 
democracies, illiberal leaders are openly challenging democratic norms.
These developments raise myriad questions about how the diverse population of 
illiberal regimes and political movements (including outright authoritarian ones) 
affect cooperation through international organizations.1 Are such regimes willing 
and able to cooperate effectively? If they do, around what purposes are they likely 
to do so? And if those aims are illiberal, what are the consequences for cooperation 
through international organizations? What are the downstream consequences for 
political developments at the national level?
We are by no means the first to take note of the role that illiberal regimes have come 
to play in formal international organizations. Viewed through a longer lens, we should 
not be surprised at these developments. The disciplinary attachment to the idea of a 
“liberal international order” overlooks the fact that norms in multilateral institutions, 
including the United Nations itself, were always contested by a politically diverse 
membership (Lake et al. 2021). Consider, for example, the relative weight that newly 
independent countries gave to economic, social, and cultural rights over civil and political 
rights, or to collective rights such as “self-determination.” The Non-Aligned Movement 
and groupings such as the Group of 77 always had politically diverse memberships and 
were by no means democratic on average. Regional organizations in the developing 
world–in Africa, the Middle East, Latin America, and Southeast Asia–were made up of 
competitive authoritarian regimes or outright autocracies and were often formed in part 
to contest global norms (Getachew, 2019; Mohamedou, 2016; Wichhart, 2019).
Research on illiberal regimes in international organizations was initially 
advanced by regional studies scholars. After the dissolution of the Soviet Union and 
the Warsaw Pact, alternative regional organizations formed with and without Russia, 
attracting the attention of scholars of Post-Soviet countries. Limited progress 
1   Although the contributors to the special issue focus on the distinction between democratic and author-
itarian regimes, we also have an interest in illiberal political movements and backsliding in democracies 
and thus use the broader term “illiberal regimes.” Linz (1978) uses four characteristics to define illiberal 
political leaders or parties: the refusal to respect the democratic process as the legitimate and legal chan-
nel for securing political power; the refusal to acknowledge the legitimacy of justifiable rival parties and 
opponents; the use or tolerance of political violence and willingness to violate the physical integrity of 
rivals and opponents; and the willingness to curb the civil and political liberties of minority populations. 
Authoritarian regimes are illiberal virtually by definition, but illiberal leaders and parties are increasingly 
visible in democratic countries as well.

233
Illiberal regimes and international organizations﻿	
toward economic integration and ongoing border disputes among members of the 
Commonwealth of Independent States seemed to reinforce perceptions that illiberal 
regimes were less able to cooperate through regional organizations (Kubicek, 2009). 
Scholars of Africa, the Middle East, and Latin America drew similarly pessimistic 
conclusions about the efficacy of newly-formed organizations that seemed “designed 
to fail” at achieving the idealized model of economic and political integration 
exhibited by the European Union (Barnett and Solingen 2007; Herbst 2007; 
Malamud 2022).
However, subsequent work demonstrated that illiberal regimes enjoyed other benefits 
from regional organizations, including reinforcement and legitimation of illiberal 
sovereignty norms (Debre, 2021a, 2022; Libman & Obydenkova, 2018a; Obydenkova 
& Libman, 2019; Russo & Stoddard, 2018), e.g., around “information security” 
(Allison, 2018); coordination of common positions, such as the Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization’s proposals around internet sovereignty advanced at the International 
Telecommunications Union (Hulvey, 2022); and the facilitation of transnational 
repression, including through the maintenance of regional “black lists” of wanted 
dissidents (Cooley & Schaaf, 2017; Debre, 2021a). The Color Revolutions and the Arab 
Spring, in particular, provided impetuses for illiberal regimes to strengthen their 
coordination against pressures to liberalize and democratize, sparking a debate about 
whether these efforts should be viewed in terms of autocracy promotion or democracy 
prevention (Bader et al., 2010; Risse & Babayan, 2015; von Soest, 2015; Tansey, 2016b; 
Weyland, 2017; Whitehead, 2014; Yakouchyk, 2019).
The contributions to this special issue constitute a current sample of the burgeoning 
research on these emerging themes. They contribute on the theoretical front and 
produce novel data about how regime type and commitment to illiberal political 
norms are implicated in the politics and operations of both multilateral and regional 
IOs. In this introduction, we start by outlining the theoretical foundations of this 
work, focusing first on why regime type matters for international cooperation. We pay 
particular attention to political purposes: how autocracies, backsliding democracies, 
and illiberal political movements protect themselves from domestic and foreign 
challenges by drawing on the resources–both material and ideational–that international 
organizations might provide.
In a second theoretical step, we consider the implications for international organizations: 
how differing membership compositions and decision-making processes affect the 
influence illiberal regimes can wield and the activities they undertake. In the course of 
describing these various activities, we introduce the papers in the volume and how they 
relate to the wider research agenda we track. We consider three different organizational 
settings and suggest that they have structured both the theoretical and empirical debates. 
First, there is growing interest in authoritarian IOs, defined as those that are dominated by 
autocratic members. These organizations are regional. Some were founded as autocratic 
clubs and have persisted as such. At the same time, new regional organizations of this sort 
have emerged since the end of the Cold War, often around explicitly political objectives. 
These regional organizations made up of authoritarian regimes are of particular interest 
because they provide insight into what clubs of autocrats might seek and the precise IO 
functions from which they can benefit.

234
	
Cottiero et al.
A second set of organizations are the multilateral ones, which have always had 
a heterogeneous membership, including both significant democratic and autocratic 
blocs and a variety of “swing states” that fall in between. Research on multilateral 
IOs focuses on the role that regime type and political orientation plays in the politics 
of the United Nations (UN) family but also a variety of functional organizations 
with global memberships.
Finally, there are regional organizations, which are controlled by democracies 
and grounded in liberal norms, but which are nonetheless facing the challenge of 
backsliding regimes in their midst. As we will see, a substantial literature has devel-
oped around the European Union (EU) and European institutions on these issues, 
but other regions–most notably the Western Hemisphere and Central and South 
America–face similar challenges.
Our discussion, and the contributions to this Special Issue, provide a theoreti-
cal framework that brings the role of illiberal regimes in international organizations 
into sharper focus. Whereas international organizations have traditionally been seen 
as instruments to promote economic and political liberalism, our approach explains 
why illiberal regimes can profit from participation in international organizations. 
Many of the organizations discussed in the volume are central to the shared demo-
cratic vision of the so-called Liberal International Order, one that is supportive of 
democracy, economic openness and other liberal values. The volume also has impli-
cations for policy: how democracies can and should cope with the challenge of illib-
eral regimes in global and regional organizations.
2  Domestic interests of illiberal regimes
Given the focus on domestic political characteristics, the theory underlying research 
on illiberal regimes and international organizations needs to be grounded at the 
country level. The main protagonists are liberal democratic regimes and their illib-
eral counterparts. Research on regime type often adheres to a democratic-author-
itarian binary, but ongoing debates over conceptualization and measurement have 
underlined the diversity of authoritarian regimes. Like democratic regimes, authori-
tarian regimes come in a variety of different forms: competitive authoritarian sys-
tems, typically with dominant parties; single-party regimes; military dictatorships; 
and a handful of monarchies, mainly concentrated in the Middle East and North 
Africa.
As noted in the introduction, we adopt the term “illiberal” regimes because of 
the growing significance of illiberal leaders and parties and processes of backsliding 
in nominally democratic countries.2 Backsliding starts in duly-elected democracies, 
which cross at least some minimal threshold of electoral democratic rule. But they 
experience democratic regress as a result of actions taken by illiberal executives that 
are elected (Arriola et al., 2021; Bartels, 2023; Bermeo, 2016a; Grumbach, 2023; 
Hafner-Burton & Schneider, 2023; Haggard & Kaufman, 2021a, 2021b; Levitsky & 
2   See for example Meyerrose and Nooruddin (2023) and Winzen (2023) in this volume.

235
Illiberal regimes and international organizations﻿	
Ziblatt, 2018; Mainwaring & Pérez-Liñán, 2014; Vachudová, 2020; Waldner & Lust, 
2018). The actions of these executives can–but need not–culminate in reversion to 
outright authoritarian rule.
We assume that illiberal incumbents desire first and foremost to remain in power 
and consolidate their rule against possible challenges and that they will use coopera-
tion in international organizations to promote their interests and protect against these 
threats.3 The threats illiberal regimes face can be divided into domestic and foreign 
ones. At home, illiberal regimes deal with three somewhat different challenges, not 
altogether mutually exclusive. Two emanate from forces which may well be more 
authoritarian than the incumbent. First, illiberal leaders, especially in autocratic 
countries, face threats from within their own ranks in the form of military or palace 
coups (Belkin & Schofer, 2003; Biddle & Zirkle, 1996; Böhmelt & Pilster, 2015; De 
Bruin, 2018; Geddes et al., 2018; Kim & Sudduth, 2021; Powell, 2012; Quinlivan, 
1999; Roessler, 2011; Sudduth, 2017). Second, illiberal leaders in autocracies have 
a higher risk of civil war and face threats from insurgents or rebel groups who seek 
to install themselves as rulers (Hegre, 2001; Lyons, 2016). Illiberal incumbents in 
democracies who rig elections also face similar threats of violence and even civil 
war (Donno et al., 2022; Hafner-Burton et al., 2014, 2018).
Third, illiberal regimes face threats to their rule from groups that seek to liberal-
ize politics or press for transitions to liberal democratic rule. These challenges can 
come from various sources. In more democratic contexts, elections are the main 
threat to the political survival of illiberal leaders. Strategies that lead to executive 
aggrandizement are therefore often geared around creating an uneven electoral play-
ing field that makes it more difficult for the political opposition to get into power 
even in the presence of regular elections (Haggard & Kaufman, 2021b). But elec-
tions also take place in less democratic contexts. A significant literature shows that 
elections in competitive authoritarian contexts are tools of regime maintenance, but 
they may also constitute focal or rallying points for the opposition (Blaydes, 2010; 
Bunce & Wolchik, 2006; Gandhi, 2008; Gandhi & Lust-Okar, 2009; Gandhi & Prze-
worski, 2007). Threats may also come from organized civil society groups such as 
churches, unions, non-governmental organizations (NGOs), and other professional 
associations. These challenges often take the form of spontaneous mass mobiliza-
tion by citizens in protests (Haggard & Kaufman, 2016; Stephan & Chenoweth, 
2008; Teorell, 2010). But they frequently involve organized collective action such as 
strikes, coordinated anti-regime protests, or the blockage of strategic transport and 
communication nodes (Steinert-Threlkeld, 2017; Tufekci & Freelon, 2013; Tufekci 
& Wilson, 2012). These political threats are all compounded by underlying socio-
economic conditions that can increase vulnerability, from long-standing inequities 
to the business cycle and more serious economic crises.
Challenges to illiberal regimes are by no means limited to those emanating from 
within the domestic political arena. They also arise from pressures from abroad, 
3   Of course, the nature and intensity of the threats we discuss vary across democracies and autocracies. 
While we discuss those threats for both regimes together for the sake of parsimony, our analysis on how 
this affects cooperation in international organizations takes into account these important variations.

236
	
Cottiero et al.
which in turn can amplify the domestic pressures just outlined. Most directly con-
nected to democratic challenges from within are so-called “diffusion” processes that 
operate across international borders (Brinks & Coppedge, 2006; Gleditsch & Ward, 
2006). Illiberal leaders have long been concerned about democratic movements in 
their neighborhood, and the possible diffusion of those movements to their own 
countries. These challenges include cross-border networks of opposition groups as 
well as international and national NGOs. The likelihood of diffusion dramatically 
increased with the advent of the internet and the spread of information technolo-
gies. For example, advanced cell phone technology and social media allowed for 
more efficient cross-border mobilization against regimes in the Color Revolutions 
and the Arab Spring (Bunce & Wolchik, 2006; Hale, 2013; Lankina et al., 2016; 
Steinert-Threlkeld, 2017). Early victories for pro-democracy activists inspired oppo-
sition supporters in neighboring countries, helping opposition groups mobilize 
resources at home and abroad. Opposition groups also learn from the experiences 
of their counterparts in neighboring countries, updating their strategies in line with 
what works.
Illiberal regimes face another challenge in the form of democracy promotion by 
leading Western governments, NGOs, and international organizations and, more 
broadly and diffusely, efforts to propagate democratic institutions and norms. In the 
post-Cold War period, the United States and the European Union generally have had 
lower tolerance for autocratic leaders. After the fall of the Berlin Wall, the geostra-
tegic rationale for supporting authoritarian regimes weakened. Western democracies 
became increasingly bold in promoting democracy globally. In the United States, 
democracy promotion became a central pillar in the foreign policy strategy of the 
George W. Bush and the Bill Clinton administrations (Kurlantzick, 2013, 24).
Democracy promotion and preservation was quickly adopted by international 
organizations dominated by democracies as well (Donno, 2013a, 2013b; Pevehouse, 
2002a; Poast & Urpelainen, 2015, 2018). These IOs promoted democracy by providing 
financial and technical assistance directly for democratic elections, political parties, 
and civil society groups. Democratic IOs also engaged in a broader set of activities 
to promote democracy including observing elections, conditioning membership in 
international institutions on a commitment to democratic norms, adopting democracy 
clauses and mandates, suspending or sanctioning member states for violating 
democratic norms, and conditioning foreign aid, trade and investment on human rights 
and even democracy commitments.4 Not only is the membership in the EU conditional 
on countries adhering to democratic norms, but it has also used its economic heft 
to force parties to accept democratic rules as a precondition for various association 
agreements (Börzel & Risse, 2009a, 2009b; Schimmelfennig & Scholtz, 2008; 
Schimmelfennig & Sedelmeier, 2002; Schneider, 2009; Vachudová, 2005). The World 
Bank, followed by many other regional and international development organizations, 
started to apply broad democracy and good governance conditionality to its programs 
in the late 1990s (Ferry et  al., 2020). The European Bank for  Reconstruction and 
Development even specified in its charter that it would only operate in countries that 
4  Von Borzyskowski & Kartal (2023) offer an overview of the literature.

237
Illiberal regimes and international organizations﻿	
applied principles of multiparty democracy and pluralism (Guriev & Treisman, 2022, 
187). Commitment to democracy has become a condition for membership in regional 
organizations such as the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the Organization 
of American States, and the African Union. And the commitment to democracy, 
human rights, and good governance has become a typical condition for international 
trade agreements as well (Hafner-Burton, 2005, 2009). Even though these efforts 
have been applied and enforced rather inconsistently (Börzel, 2015; Bush, 2015; 
Kurlantzick, 2013; Tieku, 2009; Von Borzyskowski & Vabulas, 2019), democracy 
promotion and other instruments of socialization contributed to democratization in 
a number of contexts (Börzel & Risse, 2009a, 2009b; Schimmelfennig & Scholtz, 
2008; Vachudová, 2005), and at a minimum put pressure on illiberal leaders in both 
autocracies and democracies.5 It was precisely these forms of democracy promotion 
which generated a more hopeful literature on what multilateral and regional 
organizations might accomplish.
3  From domestic politics to international organizations
If the first theoretical step in this growing literature involves clarifying the interests 
of illiberal regimes, the second requires showing how cooperating through interna-
tional organizations–or obstructing liberal ones–may blunt these challenges. Under-
lying this argument is the empirically-grounded assumption that member state gov-
ernments are the principals in international organizations, which take decisions and 
delegate powers, and that the composition of the membership thus matters for the 
objectives and outcomes of international cooperation (Cottiero & Haggard, 2023; 
Davies, 2018; Debre, 2021a, 2021b, 2022; Ferry et  al., 2020; Gray, 2009, 2013; 
Greenhill, 2016; Hafner-Burton & Schneider, 2019; Libman & Obydenkova, 2018b; 
Obydenkova & Libman, 2019; Stoddard, 2017; Tallberg et  al., 2016; Vinokurov, 
2017).
This research reaches the conclusion that the regime type and political orienta-
tion of member states have implications for what IOs do. Although the traditional 
scholarship on IOs tended to see them as vehicles to promote political and economic 
liberalism, we expect, as a sustained hypothesis, that the domestic political objec-
tives of their members can vary. Simply put, international organizations made up 
of democracies are likely to pursue different objectives than those made up of illib-
eral regimes, ceteris paribus. International organizations composed of democracies 
should be more likely to support democratic norms and institutions (Checkel, 2001; 
Donno, 2013b; Hafner-Burton, 2005, 2013; Lankina & Getachew, 2006; Mansfield 
& Pevehouse, 2006, 2008; Mattli & Plümper, 2002; Pevehouse, 2002a, 2002b, 2005; 
Poast & Urpelainen, 2015, 2018; Schimmelfennig & Sedelmeier, 2002), either 
5   Although democracy promotion has been effective in different contexts, it is limited to contexts in 
which domestic actors are committed to democratic reform and it has also been criticized as potentially 
having unintended negative consequences (Börzel and Pamuk 2012; Kelemen 2017, 2020; Meyerrose 
2020, 2024).

238
	
Cottiero et al.
because these objectives align with their values (Moravcsik, 2000) or because they 
have incentives to lock in democratic gains against possible risks of reversion to 
autocratic rule (Hafner-Burton, 2005; Hafner-Burton et al., 2015; Mansfield & Peve-
house, 2008).
But we would not expect illiberal leaders to pursue those same objectives. Indeed, 
a growing body of research–including the papers in this special issue–has demon-
strated that illiberal leaders cooperate to undermine democracy promotion (Bader 
et al., 2010; Bank, 2017; Cooley, 2015; Diamond et al., 2016; Risse & Babayan, 
2015; von Soest, 2015; Tansey, 2016a; Tansey et al., 2017; Weyland, 2017; White-
head, 2014; Yakouchyk, 2019), and that regional organizations with authoritarian 
members are more likely to support and legitimize the authoritarian status quo in 
their member states (Cottiero & Haggard, 2023; Debre, 2021a, 2021b; Libman & 
Obydenkova, 2018a). In the next section, we outline how autocratic clubs might 
cooperate to advance political objectives. Our theoretical framework starts from the 
assumption that illiberal leaders have different priorities than their liberal counter-
parts, which are especially grounded in the challenges to their political rule, and also 
affect the outcomes they pursue in IOs (Ginsburg, 2020). However, their capacity to 
use IOs to promote favorable outcomes depends to a significant extent on the homo-
geneity or heterogeneity of the IO membership. The framework can be articulated 
by considering organizations with different memberships: those that are predomi-
nantly authoritarian; those with heterogeneous membership; and those that are dom-
inated by democracies but face illiberal challenges.
At one extreme are international organizations, which we will call authoritarian. 
Empirically, these are either regional or cross-regional organizations. We call these 
international organizations authoritarian not because of how they are governed, but 
solely on the basis of the political orientation of their membership. Using internal 
decision-making processes or outcomes as the basis on which to designate regional 
organizations as authoritarian is problematic not only for conceptual reasons: what 
does it mean exactly that “decision-making processes” or “outcomes” are authoritar-
ian? International organizations controlled by autocrats sometimes mimic the prac-
tices of organizations controlled by democracies (Debre & Morgenbesser, 2017). 
They also sometimes involve significant pooling and delegation (Daugirdas & Gins-
burg, 2022). Furthermore, international organizations controlled by democracies 
sometimes inadvertently bring about anti-democratic outcomes (Hafner-Burton & 
Schneider, 2023; Kelemen, 2017, 2020, 2024; Meyerrose, 2020, 2024), and cer-
tainly need not be structured in a democratic way.
Authoritarian IOs are thus not defined by their decision-making processes or any 
possible consequences of their actions. Rather, we focus on the regime type and 
political orientation of their member states, capturing the identity and preferences 
of their members. Whether measured as the share of illiberal regimes in the organi-
zation or the average democracy score, homogeneously-authoritarian organizations 
should have shared interests in resisting democracy promotion and supporting illib-
eral incumbents.
In such a setting it is easy to construct an informal model in which reciprocity 
provides the foundation for cooperation. Imagine an illiberal incumbent who faces 
both current and future challenges. In the current period, they are willing to make 

239
Illiberal regimes and international organizations﻿	
contributions to the organization–whether in the form of financial levies, personnel, 
or other material support–in anticipation that the organization will promote regime 
stability and come to their support in the face of a future challenge (Cottiero, 2023). 
Whether such cooperation actually takes place is an empirical question we explore 
below, but in principle there is no fundamental limit to the cooperation of illiberal 
leaders beyond the underlying resource constraints generated by what members can 
provide.
Now consider a stylized international organization that is more heterogeneous, in 
which there is a bloc of democratic states that are committed to democratic norms 
and their enforcement; a bloc of states that are illiberal and thus challenged by 
and opposed to such norms; and a bloc of swing states in which preferences fall in 
between. Those preferences may depend on how democratic any given swing state 
is but also on more contingent considerations, which may not align perfectly with 
regime type or political orientation. For example, a consolidated Latin American 
democracy in a multilateral organization might well align against a proposal for a 
free and open internet in part because of sovereignty concerns (Hulvey, 2022).
In such a heterogenous institutional setting, there is some competitive process of 
coalition formation with democratic and illiberal regimes presenting both arguments 
to persuade and inducements, both positive and negative, to secure support. Illiberal 
regimes can deploy the instruments of statecraft in order to influence norms, votes, 
procedures, and operations. Their success will depend on the relative balance of 
attention given to multilateral diplomacy, diplomatic capabilities, and the material 
and ideational resources that can be brought to bear around illiberal aims. It is clear 
that with growing resources, particularly coming from China and rich oil-producing 
states, multilateral organizations might be convinced to act in ways that blunt demo-
cratic challenges or protect authoritarian incumbents. They may establish policies 
favorable to illiberal regimes or, at least, obstruct policies that promote liberal demo-
cratic norms, including through the UN human rights machine. In regional organi-
zations with heterogeneous memberships, illiberal members can also find common 
cause with democratic co-members by emphasizing regional stability or sovereignty 
norms (Davies, 2018; Stoddard, 2017).
Finally, we can imagine an organization that is homogenous, but democratic. 
We would think that these organizations–again necessarily regional or cross-
regional  rather than multilateral–would be best positioned to advance democratic 
norms and secure compliance from their members. As a result, even the appearance 
of a backsliding state would not constitute a significant challenge because the major-
ity would be able to operate to restrict the backslider’s options. For example, the 
liberal democratic majority can threaten punishment or even expulsion. But we can 
see a variety of ways in which this may not prove to be the case, as the EU’s ongoing 
struggles with Hungary and Poland have demonstrated (Kelemen, 2017, 2020). Even 
in a solidly democratic organization, the exercise of sanctions may prove unappeal-
ing either because of the belief that the backsliding state will turn around or to sus-
tain unity. In addition, democratic regional organizations’ formal and informal deci-
sion-making norms–most notably the widespread use of consensus decision-making 
rules–may also empower illiberal regimes and provide opportunities for backsliding 
states to evade censure and to use their veto to push for policies they desire. The 

240
	
Cottiero et al.
more heterogenous Association of Southeast Asian Nations has faced this problem 
as the efforts of democracies to advance human rights norms have repeatedly been 
stymied by pushback from illiberal members (Plunkett & Tansey, 2022). Where 
regional organizations include more complex institutional arrangements–such as 
parliaments–the opportunities for protective coalitions to form among illiberal states 
and parties expand.6
Following the stylized examples outlined above, we organize the remaining dis-
cussion by considering autocratic regional organizations, debates about illiberal 
regimes in multilateral organizations, and the particular problems that arise when 
democratic organizations confront illiberal and backsliding regimes in their midst. 
In the course of doing so, we also review the contributions of the volume as they 
each focus on one of these particular organizational settings.
4  Autocratic regional organizations
We start with a consideration of autocratic regional organizations: those made up 
predominantly of authoritarian members. Regional organizations are diverse; they 
include complex, multi-purpose institutions with a range of capabilities and highly 
focused technical organizations. Here, we focus our attention on formal organiza-
tions that could plausibly provide multiple forms of significant support to incum-
bents. Using a simple count of such regional organizations whose members, on aver-
age, fall above or below 0.5 on V-Dem’s electoral democracy index in any given 
year, Cottiero and Haggard (2023) find that a majority of regional organizations 
have always included a plurality of authoritarian member states.7
Next, we need to ask what these institutions are doing and whether it matters at the 
national level. Autocratic organizations provide a good analytic starting point in this 
regard precisely because of their relative homogeneity. Building on an extant literature 
on how IOs made up of democracies might sustain democratic rule, we consider paral-
lel mechanisms through which international organizations controlled by illiberal regimes 
may contribute to consolidating illiberal rule. Cottiero and Haggard (2023) group these 
forms of cooperation under three widely-recognized functions that IOs perform: pooling 
of resources; solving coordination and collective action problems; and legitimation.
First, IOs pool and channel material support to members. Material support can be 
particularly important in times of political challenge. As a wide-ranging literature 
on foreign aid has shown, financial support can have the unintended consequence 
of bolstering the resilience of illiberal regimes (Ahmed, 2012; Bak & Moon, 2016; 
6   See, for example, Winzen (2023) and Lipps and Jacob (2024) in this volume.
7   Those organizations with average scores above .5 are considered at least minimally democratic; those 
falling below are classified as autocratic IOs, even if made up of competitive authoritarian members and 
illiberal, backsliding democracies. This is a widely used conceptualization of autocratic international 
organizations (Cottiero & Haggard, 2023; Debre, 2021a, 2021b, 2022; Libman & Obydenkova, 2018b; 
Obydenkova & Libman, 2019). An alternative way to characterize regional organizations would be to use 
the share of members that are authoritarian or democratic using a threshold for electoral democracy of 
0.5 (Hafner-Burton et al. 2024, this volume).

241
Illiberal regimes and international organizations﻿	
Bermeo, 2011, 2016b; Dutta et al., 2013; Ping et al., 2022; Yuichi Kono & Monti-
nola, 2009). In authoritarian IOs, the bulk of funding disbursed comes from wealthy 
illiberal member states with the intent of supporting illiberal co-members’ resilience 
(Cottiero & Schneider, 2024). This is the case in IOs anchored by China, Russia, the 
Gulf monarchies, and prior to its economic collapse, Venezuela (Carvalho & Lopes, 
2022; Söderbaum et al., 2021). Authoritarian IOs with poorer memberships, such 
as those in Central Africa, raise funding to support members from global institu-
tions, donor states, and regional banks. In both scenarios, support funneled through 
authoritarian IOs serves multiple functions for illiberal regimes at the domestic 
level: funding development projects that are popular with the public; supplying 
liquidity during crises; or providing resources that can be distributed through cor-
ruption, clientelism, and patronage.
IOs dominated by illiberal regimes can also support members’ military and police 
forces. Security cooperation in authoritarian IOs ranges from regional training programs 
and information-sharing platforms to peacekeeping brigades. Although a minority of 
authoritarian IOs create mutual defense pacts, a significant number of authoritarian IOs 
organize drills to reveal and strengthen military and police capabilities. Some authori-
tarian regional organizations have also coordinated interventions to defeat challengers 
under the guise of counterterrorism or peace enforcement operations, with extensive 
contributions from illiberal regimes (Cottiero & Haggard, 2023). Moreover, there are 
limited, but nonetheless important, examples in which authoritarian regional organiza-
tions have intervened in the face of anti-regime protests. The Collective Security Treaty 
Organization (CSTO) intervention in Kazakhstan in 2022, for example, symbolized 
regional leaders’ support for the Kazakh government’s efforts to suppress protests and 
attempt to deter other regime opponents (Libman & Davidzon, 2023).
Second, authoritarian IOs are sites of coordination, where illiberal members 
agree on collective responses to threats ranging from counter-regime protests to 
coups d’état. Coordination between illiberal member states produces common mes-
saging and legislative action in the face of pro-democracy protests, as well as prom-
ises to extradite wanted individuals, regardless of whether they are engaged in politi-
cal speech or armed resistance. Latching onto the “War on Terror” to justify their 
actions, authoritarian IOs have coordinated not only against widely-recognized ter-
ror groups, but also democratic oppositions mislabeled as terrorists. The Shanghai 
Cooperation Organization, for example, has supported its members’ coordination 
against “terrorism,” defined very broadly to cover a wide array of threats to illiberal 
regimes, including those that emanate from human rights activists (Aris, 2009). The 
goal of this coordination is to prevent regional democratic diffusion.
Third, authoritarian IOs support the consolidation of illiberal regimes through 
socialization and legitimation. Such organizations endorse illiberal incumbents and 
promote statist norms such as “unlimited sovereignty” at the expense of participa-
tory institutions. Although democratic as well as illiberal IOs may enshrine norms 
of non-interference, illiberal IOs are more likely to support regimes restricting activ-
ities that democracies would tolerate, such as protests.
Three of the contributions to the special issue address legitimation issues and 
all focus on the type of ideational and normative support authoritarian regional 
IOs can provide. Hafner-Burton et al. (2024, this volume) provide an example of 

242
	
Cottiero et al.
how authoritarian IOs challenge liberal norms and deflect attention from their own 
behavior. A large and growing number of illiberal regional organizations formally 
adopt good governance mandates in issue areas such as democracy promotion, cor-
ruption, and human rights. However they adopt these good governance mandates, 
which appear to conflict with the norms and standards these regimes apply at home, 
when they face pressure from inside or outside the IO to adopt them. Moreover, not 
all aspects of good governance are equally threatening, and autocratic IOs minimize 
those challenges by imposing the norms on outside actors and strategically defining 
norms to minimize actual commitments.
A particular form of legitimation that we identify in a number of authoritarian 
IOs is the dispatch of low-quality election monitors to endorse the results of rigged 
elections (Debre & Morgenbesser, 2017; Kelley, 2012; Merloe, 2015), a practice we 
call “election validation.” Illiberal leaders face significant domestic and international 
pressures to organize elections. For illiberal incumbents that hold elections, main-
taining power often necessitates rigging elections to ensure victory. Yet, flawed elec-
tions can be used by domestic actors to mobilize against incumbents (Donno et al., 
2022). Moreover, international pressure to democratize has constrained incumbents 
to invite international election monitors who report on the quality of elections and 
call out instances of cheating (Donno, 2013a; Hyde, 2015; Hyde & Marinov, 2014; 
Kelley, 2012).
Authoritarian IOs’ low-quality or “zombie” monitoring missions offer a means 
to muddy the informational waters. Instead of identifying and calling out instances 
of election fraud, they seek to validate victory for illiberal incumbents. Two of the 
articles in the special issue grapple with the phenomenon of low-quality election 
observation. Bush et  al. (2024, this volume) document the rise of low-quality 
monitors and investigate the characteristics of countries that invite them. They 
theorize that incumbents invite low-quality election monitors as a result of both 
international and domestic factors. One set of international incentives comes 
from powerful authoritarian states such as Russia, which are challenging the 
norms and practices of the liberal international order. One way Russia has done 
this is by supporting the supply of low-quality election monitoring, frequently 
through authoritarian IOs of which Russia is a key member. Bush et al. (2024, this 
volume) show that countries with strong ties to Russia are more likely to invite low-
quality monitors to their elections. However, Russia and the authoritarian IOs it 
leads are not alone; regional organizations in Africa and elsewhere also engage in 
the practice of election validation through low-quality monitoring. A second finding 
from this paper is that countries with membership in more autocratic IOs are also 
more likely to invite these election validators.
Morrison et al., (2024, this volume) also take up the issue of election monitoring 
and relate it to national-level outcomes. They show that inviting low-quality 
international election observers to elections may be a successful strategy for illiberal 
incumbents. They test whether zombie monitors actually provide the validation that 
incumbents seek and whether they convince domestic audiences. Theoretically, they 
highlight how low-quality election monitors will offer competing judgments about 
election integrity to those of high-quality election monitors invited to the same 
elections. Because low-quality observers tend to offer more positive judgments than 

243
Illiberal regimes and international organizations﻿	
high-quality monitors, the competing judgments dampen the ability of opposition 
actors to mobilize protests around a flawed election. Bogus election-monitoring thus 
helps to neutralize electoral threat to illiberal leaders.
We started this discussion of authoritarian IOs by asking what they did, but also 
whether it mattered. The activities described above are examples of the actions 
authoritarian regional organizations take to support illiberal member states. How-
ever, as Morrison et  al. (2024, this volume) demonstrate, research on authoritar-
ian regional organizations has not stopped at parsing what organizations do; it has 
increasingly extended into the task of explaining how membership in authoritar-
ian organizations has deleterious consequences for democracy at the country level. 
In this research, political developments at the country level become dependent 
variables. Cottiero and Haggard (2023) and Debre (2022) find that membership in 
authoritarian IOs is associated with reduced odds of liberalization or democratiza-
tion. Such research naturally raises important selection issues. However, if regional 
organizations are investing in the functions that we have outlined above, then there 
is good reason to believe that they are doing so for a reason.
5  Illiberal regimes in multilateral organizations
Multilateral organizations with global or near-global membership have always 
encompassed regimes and governments of vastly different sorts, running from hard 
autocratic regimes, through competitive authoritarian ones, to the full array of 
democratic governments, with some now challenged by illiberal leaders and parties. 
The advanced industrial democracies historically enjoyed a variety of organizational 
advantages in these institutions, which allowed them to exercise significant influence 
if not outright control of agendas. However, new research in this area has highlighted 
how illiberal regimes have sought to challenge norms, sway votes, and influence 
procedures that ultimately affect what these organizations are able to do.
Norms, such as those having to do with political and economic liberalism, have 
always been contested in global multilateral organizations but now are even more 
sharply so; as a result this new set of theoretical concerns is fundamentally ideational 
and thus links to a variety of constructivist concerns. The nature of the contestation 
is wide-ranging, but we can outline several examples of ideational cleavages in these 
organizations.
Principles of non-intervention and non-interference have long stood as 
constitutive elements of multilateral institutions, but those norms have been 
repurposed to combat liberal normative commitments. The long fight over the 
Responsibility to Protect principle (R2P) is exemplary of these differences, 
pitting liberal interventionists who view sovereignty as a contract with limitations 
against illiberal regimes that promote expansive conceptions of sovereignty. The 
latter are cautious about the prospect of facing external meddling and pressures 
around human rights (Chen & Yin, 2020). Contestation over unlimited or 
constrained sovereignty is also rife in the arena of global internet governance. The 
notion that states’ rights to regulate the internet are unlimited has butted heads 
with the multi-stakeholder internet governance model where private actors have 

244
	
Cottiero et al.
a seat at the table. Illiberal regimes argue that existing governing arrangements 
should be replaced by a multilateral state-led model, and these ideas have gained 
popularity among illiberal and backsliding regimes (Flonk et al., 2020; Harnisch, 
2020; Hulvey, 2022).
 Illiberal regimes are also growing more assertive in contesting what constitutes 
fundamental human rights, contradicting the positions of global multilateral and 
liberal international organizations. An important line of argument that dates to the 
1950s, if not earlier, is that developing countries should prioritize economic and 
social rights over political ones and norms such as “stability” over participation and 
consent of the governed. China, for example, has sought to lessen the UN Security 
Council’s focus on civil and political rights as a source of human protection and 
foundation for peacebuilding (Foot, 2020). By contrast, liberals argue that without 
civil and political rights, economic and social rights are unlikely to be realized. 
Illiberal regimes have also framed certain rights espoused by liberal international 
organizations, including women’s rights and LGBTQ + rights, as contrary to 
traditional values (Ayoub & Stoeckl, 2024; Pauselli & Urzúa, 2024; Sanders & 
Jenkins, 2022; Velasco, 2023). In establishing these counter-positions, they seek to 
undermine liberal norm promotion.
The commitment to economic openness is also increasingly contested by 
illiberal regimes.  Economic liberalization has been a leitmotif of the Bretton 
Woods system, the World Trade Organization, and the myriad trade and 
investment agreements that grew up over the last three decades. New revisionist 
thinking has challenged these norms and argued for more interventionist 
states and the freedom to pursue selective protection. Illiberal regimes have 
demonstrated that they do not view deep economic liberalization as an inevitable, 
necessarily desirable outcome of cooperation through multilateral or regional 
organizations (Weiss & Wallace, 2021).
As a final example, a new line of challenge to the postwar order–carried by both 
China and Russia–is that alliances are outdated, old-fashioned Cold War relics. 
Rather, security should be managed through less restrictive strategic partnerships 
(Nadkarni, 2010) or other forms of cooperative security. For those that see alliances 
as foundationally protective, particularly in the wake of the Ukraine War, these 
claims ring hollow.
These are perhaps the most prominently contested norms, but certainly not the 
only norms that are in play. Illiberal regimes have sought to push idiosyncratic 
normative projects, such as the sustained Russian campaign at the UN to enshrine 
anti-Nazi norms (Baturo, 2023). But norms are at risk more generally, including 
epistemic ones. Carnegie et al. (2024) show that illiberal governments are moti-
vated to withhold and distort scientific information, thereby stymieing the abil-
ity of international organizations to govern in areas of pressing global concern. 
It is easy to see that along many of these normative divisions, regime type and 
political orientation are likely to play a central role in defining preferences and 
positions in international fora; illiberal regimes have divergent preferences from 
liberal ones.

245
Illiberal regimes and international organizations﻿	
Promoting alternative norms is one thing; securing support in line with them 
is another. A striking feature of the new research on multilateral institutions is the 
attention to the determinants of voting by illiberal regimes in general assemblies 
(Binder and Payton, 2022; Brazys & Dukalskis, 2017) or high-profile bodies within 
multilateral organizations such as the UN Human Rights Council (Hug & Lukács, 
2014; Pauselli et al., 2023). Meyerrose and Nooruddin (2023), this volume show 
how illiberal coalitions in backsliding democracies take actions in the UN Human 
Rights Council that are surprisingly similar to the posture of autocratic regimes. 
They vote against targeted resolutions that name and shame specific countries 
and de-emphasize issues that threaten state sovereignty and control over citizens. 
Moreover, they turn the tables on advanced industrial democracies in their Universal 
Periodic Review reports, tending to lodge more critical observations against them 
than they pose to illiberal regimes.
The extent to which illiberal regimes are successful at affecting IO decision-
making and operations depends on at least four factors. The first is their sheer 
heft: the resources they bring to bear and whether they are dominant actors within 
the organization. Based on the notion that formal decision-making power in IOs 
usually rests in the relative structural power of its members, ample evidence 
points to the ability of powerful states and their allies to tilt the outcomes and 
benefits of IOs in their favor (Hug & König, 2002; Schneider & Urpelainen, 2013; 
Steinberg, 2002; Stone, 2002, 2004, 2008; Thacker, 1999). Just as the United 
States government used its structural power to tilt decision-making outcomes 
in the International Monetary Fund (IMF) or the World Bank, illiberal leaders 
in powerful autocracies may also bring about policy change by leveraging their 
outsized formal or informal influence.
This type of influence frequently manifests itself in vote-buying or vote-influencing 
activities. The ability of the U.S. and advanced industrial states to influence voting 
in global multilateral IOs, and particularly the UN, is well  documented (Dreher 
et al., 2008; Vreeland, 2019; Vreeland & Dreher, 2014). An emerging literature is 
now tracking Chinese vote-buying efforts in the multilaterals (Brazys & Dukalskis, 
2017; Dreher et al., 2022; Kaya et al., 2021; Lu, 2024; Raess et al., 2022; Steinert 
& Weyrauch, 2024). Rising illiberal powers also seek to influence bureaucratic 
procedures at the multilaterals. For example, in 2012 China succeeded in pushing the 
IMF to reform its surveillance policies (Zangl et al., 2016).
The second factor is whether weaker states are able to form interest coalitions 
within the multilateral institutions (Lyne et  al., 2009; McLean & Stone, 2012; 
Schneider & Tobin, 2013). Developing countries have long caucused in multilateral 
organizations, either through formal organizations of their own or through formal 
groupings within the UN, such as the G77. Inboden (2021a, 2023) shows how the 
leaders of China and Russia have relied on these voting coalitions, especially the 
Like-Minded Group in the UN human rights bodies, to constrain the international 
human rights system and to peddle favorite narratives.
A third factor that influences illiberal influence is formal decision-making proce-
dures, which we take up in more detail in the following section. In some multilateral 
settings, unanimity or consensus-based decision-making provide opportunities for 

246
	
Cottiero et al.
illiberal regimes to influence outcomes or simply to stymie action (Blake & Payton, 
2015; Lewis, 2005; Steinberg, 2002; Zamora, 1980).8 The dysfunction of the UN 
Security Council—rooted in the veto of its permanent member states–and the break-
down of the World Trade Organization’s Doha Round are well-known and, as we 
will see, democratic organizations face this problem in spades.
Finally, we need to trace the causal chain from norms, through decision-making 
and voting, to whether these prior steps matter at the operational level: in what 
organizations do. Much more work needs to be done in this vein, but a newer strand 
of research focuses on how illiberal states can influence multilateral organizations’ 
staff, procedures, and operations. This work emphasizes that illiberal states attempt 
to control important committees and elected positions within global multilateral 
organizations to secure agenda-setting power, block undesirable proposals, and 
use organization resources and influence for regime-boosting purposes (Fung & 
Lam, 2021). Scholars have raised alarm about China’s efforts to fill UN committee 
positions so that it can block criticism and prevent accreditation of human rights 
NGOs, an outgrowth of increasingly assertive Chinese foreign policy efforts to 
reshape the content of human rights norms under President Xi (Dukalskis, 2023; 
Inboden, 2021b, 2022). Illiberal regimes have also sought to take the reins of 
functional, issue-specific IOs like Interpol, the global policing organization (Lemon, 
2019). After liberal members of Interpol and Interpol staff pushed for reforms that 
would prevent member states from abusing Interpol’s red notices to target exiled 
regime opponents and asylees, one of the prominent Interpol abusers, the United 
Arab Emirates, successfully campaigned for the Interpol presidency.9
Just as the research on authoritarian IOs has moved beyond what those 
organizations do to their causal effects, similar arguments have been made about 
illiberal regimes in multilateral organizations. Posed most bluntly, does participation 
in the liberal international order necessarily promote liberal values and behaviors? 
Although norm-contestation and the undermining of the deliberative process 
has been at the center of attention, an equally concerning trend is the ability of 
illiberal leaders in democracies and autocracies to use membership in multilateral 
organizations to undermine democracy or consolidate autocracy at home (Hafner-
Burton & Schneider, 2023). Participation in IOs certainly can promote healthy 
democracies when leaders espouse pluralist values and aspire to promote democratic 
norms and institutions, but it also creates powerful political opportunities for illiberal 
leaders to pursue executive aggrandizement. Illiberal leaders can use any economic 
benefits from integration in multilateral IOs and the inflow of additional resources 
(i.e., through foreign aid and loans, foreign direct investment, and trade) to increase 
their legitimacy, to buy political support from relevant elites and citizens, and to 
deter political opponents (Ahmed, 2012; Bak & Moon, 2016). In short, integration 
into these institutions provides established and aspiring autocrats with a powerful 
8  Note, however, that underrepresented states can also link their veto power in one issue area to achieve 
policy success in other issue areas (Schneider, 2011).
9  BBC. “UAE general accused of torture elected Interpol president” https://​www.​bbc.​com/​news/​world-​
middle-​east-​59417​409 Published November 25, 2021.

247
Illiberal regimes and international organizations﻿	
toolkit in the campaign to undermine democratic institutions at home, to consolidate 
their power, and to shift the global dialogue away from civil and political rights and 
related democratic norms.
6  Illiberal regimes in democratic regional organizations
Finally, we turn to the third organizational setting: the challenges that democratic 
regional organizations have faced vis-à-vis the rise of illiberalism among their 
members. Many of the preoccupations in this literature mirror the challenges liberal 
regimes face in the multilaterals, but with the surprising result that they can occur 
even where illiberal challengers are in a distinct minority. The Western Hemisphere 
provides a ripe research opportunity that is so far underexploited. As a region, which 
stood at the center of the Third Wave, it has recently been challenged by a wave 
of backsliding, experiments in illiberal IO building, and complex struggles over 
how organizations like the European Union, the Organization of American States, 
Mercosur, and the Union of South American States should respond.
However, this debate is most developed in the case of the European Union, and 
centers on three questions. The first is how membership in the European Union, 
or other democratic organizations, might have contributed to the rise of illiberal 
leaders and democratic backsliding in its member states; this debate is similar to 
the debate around multilaterals that we just reviewed. One argument focuses on the 
strengthening of executive power relative to domestic legislatures and judiciaries 
through increasing delegation of policy autonomy to the European Union and 
other international organizations (Meyerrose, 2020, 2024). Another argument has 
highlighted the ability of illiberal regimes to exploit the economic support and 
financial resources provided by regional organizations to gain and maintain political 
power at home (Hafner-Burton & Schneider, 2023; Kelemen, 2020; Mares & 
Young, 2019; Scheiring, 2020; Scheiring, 2021; Scheppele, 2022). Many illiberal 
leaders were also able to exploit the growing anxiety about economic inequality 
and immigration to politicize the European Union as the scapegoat, and to portray 
themselves as the only viable option to protect citizens against those negative forces 
(Agh, 1999; Bartels, 2023; Grzymala-Busse, 2019; Vachudová, 2020).
The second debate centers around how democratic backsliding has affected 
cooperation within the European Union. The nascent work provides strong evidence 
that illiberal regimes have used their standing in regional organizations to push 
their positions and to derail cooperation where they deem it necessary for political 
survival. Winzen (2023, this volume) shows that illiberal leaders have started to vote 
against proposals in the Council, the EU’s main decision-making body, especially 
when the proposals threaten their ability to pursue executive aggrandizement. He 
calls these EU measures “backsliding-inhibiting competences,” and demonstrates 
how illiberal governments oppose them. Similarly, Lipps and Jacob (2024, this 
volume) provide evidence about the increasing assertiveness of illiberal leaders by 
considering roll call votes in the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe 
(PACE), one of the most powerful international parliaments, which is committed 
to promoting liberal values. They find that illiberal parties from illiberal domestic 

248
	
Cottiero et al.
environments challenge the majority most often, and gain a platform for doing so. 
To the extent that more countries are governed by illiberal leaders, there is a rising 
concern that this will lead to gridlock in the EU decision-making process, ultimately 
hindering cooperation in the European Union.
A final debate is around the question of why the EU has  failed to respond more 
aggressively to what can now be seen as a campaign not only to evade censure but to 
fundamentally challenge EU norms with respect to democracy and the rule of law 
(Kelemen, 2024). Kelemen argues that the outcome was overdetermined, but rested on a 
number of features of the EU as an institution. Although the EU is the most supranational 
of all international organizations, intergovernmentalism continues to play a powerful role 
in the politics of the EU. Even in the EU, norms of sovereignty, non-interference, and 
tolerance shape the organization’s politics (De Búrca, 2022; Kelemen, 2020; Priebus, 
2022; Winzen, 2023). For example, Winzen (2023, this volume) shows how norms of 
accommodation and even consensus decision-making allowed Hungary and Poland to 
evade censure. He shows that backsliders limit their opposition to a well-defined subset of 
EU competences that threaten their autocratic projects the most. Moreover, they can only 
rely on accommodation in the Council if the democratic member states perceive their 
opposition as having some legitimacy. Yet, the conclusion is clear: even in an organization 
with outsized democratic majorities and at least qualified majority voting, the organization 
has been reluctant to punish clear derogations from the rule of law.
Similarly, backsliders are able to use unanimity and consensus rules as a way 
to veto decisions they dislike, including the sanctioning of like-minded leaders in 
the organization (Von Borzyskowski & Vabulas, 2019). Strategic incentives matter 
as well in the willingness of more liberal leaders to shield their illiberal counter-
parts from sanctions and increased pressures to democratize. For example, evidence 
points to strategic incentives in the European Parliament. The European People’s 
Party, under the leadership of conservative parties in Europe, was deeply concerned 
about what the expulsion of Hungary’s Fidesz would mean for its ability to maintain 
majority status in the European Parliament (Herman et al., 2021; Kelemen, 2020; 
Meijers & Van Der Veer, 2019).
The extent to which this erosion will continue is an open debate. After nearly a decade 
of turning a blind eye as democracy was incrementally being rolled back, the European 
Union shifted its stance and started to express concern (Blauberger & Sedelmeier, 2024). 
They put into place a new sanctioning regime in 2020 in reaction to egregious viola-
tions of democracy and the rule of law in Hungary, as well as Poland (EU Regulation 
2020/2092). At the same time, there is evidence that the European Union has also started 
to apply measures to help liberal countries fend off Eurosceptics and illiberal threats in 
the domestic political arena (Mariano & Schneider, 2022).
But it is not proven that these actions will be effective (Stiansen et al., 2024). Even 
though the EU has withheld significant funding from Hungary, the unanimity rules 
in some areas of EU policy-making have given the Hungarian regime significant 
abilities to force the release of at least part of the funds. For example, in 2023 Viktor 
Orbán threatened to veto the Council decision to support Ukraine’s membership 
in the EU and successfully negotiated the release of a significant portion of the 
withheld funds. More research is needed to understand the effectiveness of EU 
sanctions, and the ability of illiberal regimes to withstand them.

249
Illiberal regimes and international organizations﻿	
7  Conclusion
This special issue is by no means the only collective effort to consider the effects of 
illiberal regimes on international organizations, and unfortunately it is unlikely to 
be the last. But it is important to underscore how this line of research upsets con-
ventional presumptions and has important implications for policy that remain to be 
fleshed out. The idea that liberal international institutions are “easy to join but dif-
ficult to overturn” (Ikenberry, 2018) is clearly under challenge. The advanced indus-
trial democracies once used international organizations to advance their material 
and ideational interests, but the fight is now on with illiberal regimes over the future 
direction of these institutions. To understand the policy implications of these devel-
opments, we see three avenues of research that are particularly relevant.
First, there is significant variance in the extent to which authoritarian interna-
tional organizations cooperate and in the capacity of illiberal regimes to influence 
existing institutions. Earlier generations of research assumed that democracies 
were not only more capable of cooperating; they would also be more willing to 
pool autonomy and delegate authority in the first place. Empirical research, how-
ever, has found little evidence that the regime type of the membership matters for 
delegation and pooling (Hooghe & Marks, 2015). Yet we should not necessarily 
overstate the challenge either. Democracies face some illiberal actors and interna-
tional organizations that are capable of leading material and ideational challenges 
to existing IOs; other illiberal institutions and coalitions are much less effective. We 
need a better understanding of the effectiveness of authoritarian coalitions in these 
institutions and what they are seeking to do with respect to norms, mandates, vot-
ing, staffing, and operations. For example, our discussion highlighted attempts by 
illiberal regimes to influence the staffing of international organizations, as well as 
their budgets. Given the proven effectiveness of these informal means of influenc-
ing the design and decision-making outcomes of international organizations, a better 
understanding of these developments is critical for our understanding of the effects 
that illiberal regimes have in international organizations.
Second, we are just starting to gain a better understanding of the influence of 
international organizations at the country level. It is one thing to track what IOs do; 
it is another to trace their effects. Initial studies have focused on broad outcomes 
such as the propensity to democratize or liberalize, or the stability of authoritarian 
rule. But the menu of relevant outcomes is much wider. For example, the contribu-
tion by Morrison et al. (2024, this volume), and the emerging literature on elec-
tion monitoring, shows how zombie organizations can easily sow confusion among 
publics, influencing both election outcomes and the propensity of publics to protest 
contested or fraudulent elections. Similarly, even though Winzen (2023, this vol-
ume) demonstrates that illiberal regimes have to navigate politics in democratically-
led IOs very carefully, their ability to challenge existing norms and block particular 
decisions is likely to have consequences for the effectiveness of these institutions. 
Our theoretical framework that treats members as principals that pursue preferences 
that are driven at least in part by their regime type, provides new insights into study-
ing the effects of international organizations on domestic political outcomes.

250
	
Cottiero et al.
Finally, we cannot understand the consequences of the rise of illiberalism 
without considering the reactions of the democracies. As the discussion of the 
European Union highlighted, democratic members have potentially conflicting 
preferences when trying to react to the actions of illiberal regimes within their 
midst, frequently hesitating to take strong and decisive action. At the same time, 
democratic-led international organizations have pursued various strategies to 
address the rise of autocratic institutions, ranging from dismissive to adversarial 
to accommodating. Understanding the conditions under which democracies 
are willing to counter the illiberal threat to international cooperation, whether 
bilaterally or multilaterally, and when it is successful, is the core policy question 
raised by this new research.
Beyond the more short-term responses of democracies to the rise of illiberalism 
in international cooperation, there is much uncertainty about the long-term 
consequences of these developments. While we do not expect democracies to exit 
existing multilateral regimes wholesale, selective examples of such a response, 
including the American and Israeli withdrawal from the UN Educational, 
Scientific, and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), do exist. An alternative 
response entails continued cooperation by democracies, but with a rebalance of 
participation across organizations through a greater focus on “allies and partners,” 
as an effort to strengthen international organizations of the like-minded and the 
creation of alternative, liberal spaces that would necessarily be plurilateral in 
form. While each of these alternatives have found supporters, at the time of writing 
this article it is not clear whether these withdrawals or rebalancing efforts will 
enhance the bargaining power of democracies or end in a declining commitment 
to multilateralism that illiberal political movements in the advanced democracies 
have long sought. A final possible outcome is that democracies understand the 
political risks of inattention and re-engage with global institutions more forcefully. 
This does not mean anything resembling victory, but would help understand 
the protracted strategic competition unfolding in the complex and fragmented 
institutions of global governance.
Acknowledgements  We received many constructive comments on the articles in this special issue and 
would like to thank Alex Baturo, Austin Beacham, Furkan Benliogullari, Sarah Bush, Kristina Daugirdas, 
Maria Debre, Thales De Carvalho, Daniela Donno, Thomas Flaherty, Bianca Freeman, Tom Ginsburg, 
Julia Gray, Judy Goldstein, Peter Gourevitch, Mark Hallerberg, Rachel Ann Hulvey, Ayse Kaya, David 
Lake, Dayra Lascano, Jana Lipps, Yan Liu, Lucie Lu, Elena McLean, Anna Meyerrose, Duong Pham, 
Nita Rudra, Rachel Schoner, Al Song, Malika Talgatova, Jonas Tallberg, Eric Thai, Carl Vikberg, 
Thomas Winzen and the participants in the workshops on “The Authoritarian Turn in International 
Relations” and “Authoritarian Regimes, Democratic Backsliding, and International Organizations.” We 
are indebted to the UC Institute on Global Conflict and Cooperation, the UCSD School of Global Policy 
and Strategy (GPS), the Fritz Thyssen Foundation (#2022-00228), and the Smith Richardson Foundation 
(#2020-2364) for financial support of this project.
Declarations 
Competing interests  No competing interests.

251
Illiberal regimes and international organizations﻿	
References
Agh, A. (1999). Europeanization of policy-making in east central Europe: The Hungarian approach to EU 
accession. Journal of European Public Policy, 6(5), 839–854. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13501​76993​
43414
Ahmed, F. Z. (2012). The perils of unearned foreign income: Aid, remittances, and government survival. 
American Political Science Review, 106(1), 146–165. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0003​05541​10004​75
Allison, R. (2018). Protective Integration and Security Policy Coordination: Comparing the SCO and 
CSTO. The Chinese Journal of International Politics, 11(3), 297–338. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​cjip/​
poy008
Aris, S. (2009). The Shanghai Cooperation Organisation:‘Tackling the three evils’. A regional response to 
non-traditional security challenges or an anti-Western bloc? Europe - Asia Studies, 61(3), 457–482. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​09668​13090​27533​09
Arriola, L. R., Devaro, J., & Meng, A. (2021). Democratic subversion: Elite cooptation and opposition 
fragmentation.  American Political Science Review, 115(4), 1358–1372. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​
S0003​05542​10006​29
Ayoub, P., & Stoeckl, K. (2024). The global resistance to LGBTIQ rights. Journal of Democracy, 35(1), 
59–73. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1353/​jod.​2024.​a9153​49
Bader, J., Grävingholt, J., & Kästner, A. (2010). Would autocracies promote autocracy? A political econ-
omy perspective on regime-type export in regional neighbourhoods. Contemporary Politics, 16(1), 
81–100. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13569​77100​35939​04
Bak, D., & Moon, C. (2016). Foreign direct investment and authoritarian stability. Comparative Political 
Studies, 49(14), 1998–2037. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​00104​14016​655536
Bank, A. (2017). The study of authoritarian diffusion and cooperation: Comparative lessons on interests 
versus ideology, nowadays and in history. Democratization, 24(7), 1345–1357. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1080/​13510​347.​2017.​13123​49
Barnett, M., & Solingen, E. (2007). Designed to fail or failure of design? The origins and legacy of the 
Arab League. In Crafting Cooperation: Regional International Institutions in Comparative Per-
spective, eds. Amitav Acharya and Alastair Iain Johnston. Cambridge University Press, 180–220. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​CBO97​80511​491436.​006
Bartels, L. M. (2023). Democracy erodes from the top: Leaders, citizens, and the challenge of populism 
in Europe. Princeton University Press.
Baturo, A. (2023). “Russia’s Global Anti-Nazism Campaign: Seeking support in international organiza-
tions.” IGCC Working Paper No. 3. escho​larsh​ip.​org/​uc/​item/​7w850​4tk
Belkin, A., & Schofer, E. (2003). Toward a structural understanding of coup risk. Journal of Conflict 
Resolution, 47(5), 594–620. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​00220​02703​258197
Bermeo, N. (2016a). On democratic backsliding. Journal of Democracy, 27(1), 5–19. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1353/​jod.​2016.​0012
Bermeo, S. B. (2011). Foreign aid and regime change: A role for donor intent. World Development, 
39(11), 2021–2031. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​world​dev.​2011.​07.​019
Bermeo, S. B. (2016b). Aid is not oil: Donor utility, heterogeneous aid, and the aid-democratization rela-
tionship. International Organization, 70(1), 1–32. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0020​81831​50002​96
Biddle, S., & Zirkle, R. (1996). Technology, civil-military relations, and warfare in the developing world. 
Journal of Strategic Studies, 19(2), 171–212. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​01402​39960​84376​34
Binder, M., & Payton, A. L. (2022). With frenemies like these: Rising power voting behavior in the UN 
general assembly. British Journal of Political Science, 52(1), 381–398. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​
S0007​12342​00005​38
Blake, D. J., & Payton, A. L. (2015). Balancing design objectives: Analyzing new data on voting rules 
in intergovernmental organizations. The Review of International Organizations, 10(3), 377–402. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11558-​014-​9201-9
Blauberger, M., Ulrich, S. (2024). Sanctioning democratic backsliding in the European Union: Trans-
national salience, negative intergovernmental spillover, and policy change. Journal of European 
Public Policy: 1–27. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13501​763.​2024.​23184​83
Blaydes, L. (2010). Elections and distributive politics in Mubarak’s Egypt. Cambridge University Press.  
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​CBO97​80511​976469

252
	
Cottiero et al.
Böhmelt, T., & Pilster, U. (2015). The impact of institutional coup-proofing on coup attempts and coup 
outcomes. International Interactions, 41(1), 158–182. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​03050​629.​2014.​
906411
Börzel, T. A. (2015).  The noble west and the dirty rest? Western democracy promoters and illiberal 
regional powers. Democratization, 22(3), 519–535. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13510​347.​2014.​10003​
12
Börzel, T. A., & Pamuk, Y. (2012). Pathologies of Europeanisation: Fighting corruption in the Southern 
Caucasus. West European Politics, 35(1), 79–97. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​01402​382.​2012.​631315
Börzel, T. A., Risse, T. (2009a). The transformative power of Europe: The European Union and the diffu-
sion of ideas. Freie Universität Berlin, Otto-Suhr-Institut für Politikwissenschaft.
Börzel, T., & Risse, T. (2009b). Revisiting the nature of the beast - politicization, European identity, and 
postfunctionalism: A comment on Hooghe and Marks. British Journal of Political Science, 39(1), 
217–220. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0007​12340​80004​6X
Brazys, S., & Dukalskis, A. (2017). Canary in the coal mine? China, the UNGA, and the changing world 
order. Review of International Studies, 43(4), 742–764. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0260​21051​70000​
67
Brinks, D., & Coppedge, M. (2006). Diffusion is no illusion: Neighbor emulation in the third wave of 
democracy. Comparative Political Studies, 39(4), 463–489. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​00104​14005​
276666
Bunce, V. J., & Wolchik, S. L. (2006). International diffusion and postcommunist electoral revolutions. 
Communist and Post-Communist Studies, 39(3), 283–304. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​postc​omstud.​
2006.​06.​001
Bush, S. S., Cottiero, C., & Prather, L. (2024). Zombies ahead: Explaining the rise of low-quality election 
monitoring. The Review of International Organizations (forthcoming)
Bush, S. S. (2015). The taming of democracy assistance: Why democracy promotion does not confront 
dictators. Cambridge University Press.  https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​CBO97​81107​706934
Carnegie, A., Clark, R., & Zucker, N. (2024). Global governance under populism: The challenge of 
information suppression. IGCC Working Paper. https://​ucigcc.​org/​publi​cation/​global-​gover​nance-​
under-​popul​ism-​the-​chall​enge-​of-​infor​mation-​suppr​ession/
Carvalho, T., & Lopes, D. B. (2022). International clientelistic networks: The case of Venezuela at the 
United Nations general assembly, 1999–2015. Latin American Politics and Society, 64(3), 37–66. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​lap.​2022.​11
Checkel, J. T. (2001). Why comply? Social learning and European identity change. International Organi-
zation, 55(3), 553–588. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1162/​00208​18015​25075​51
Chen, Z., & Yin, H. (2020). China and Russia in R2P debates at the UN security council. International 
Affairs, 96(3), 787–805. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​ia/​iiz229
Cooley, A. (2015). Countering democratic norms authoritarianism goes global. Journal of Democracy, 
26(3), 49–63. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1353/​jod.​2015.​0049
Cooley, A., & Schaaf, M. (2017). Grounding the backlash: Regional security treaties, counternorms, and 
human rights in Eurasia. In Stephen Hopgood, Jack Snyder, and Leslie Vinjamuri (Eds.), Human 
rights futures. (pp. 159–188).  Cambridge University Press.  https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​97811​08147​
767.​007
Cottiero, C. (2023). Protection for hire: Cooperation through regional organizations. International Studies 
Quarterly, 67(4). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​isq/​sqad0​82
Cottiero, C., & Haggard, S. (2023). Stabilizing authoritarian rule: The role of international organizations. 
International Studies Quarterly, 67(2). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​isq/​sqad0​31
Cottiero, C., Schneider, C. (2024). International financial institutions and the promotion of autocratic 
resilience. IGCC Working Paper.
Daugirdas, K., Ginsburg, T. (2022). Are authoritarian international organizations different? Evidence 
from a new dataset of IO charters. Paper presented at the Workshop on Authoritarian Regimes, 
Democratic Backsliding, and International Organizations. UC San Diego.
Davies, M. (2018). Regional organisations and enduring defective democratic members. Review of Inter-
national Studies, 44(1), 174–191. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0260​21051​70003​65
De Bruin, E. (2018). Preventing coups d’état: how counterbalancing works. Journal of Conflict Resolu-
tion, 62(7), 1433–1458. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​00220​02717​692652
De Búrca, G. (2022). Poland and Hungary’s EU membership: On not confronting authoritarian govern-
ments. International Journal of Constitutional Law, 20(1), 13–34. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​icon/​
moac0​08

253
Illiberal regimes and international organizations﻿	
Debre, M. J. (2021a). Legitimation, regime survival, and shifting alliances in the Arab league: Explaining 
sanction politics during the Arab spring. International Political Science Review, 42(4), 514–530. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​01925​12120​937749
Debre, M. J. (2021b). The dark side of regionalism: How regional organizations help authoritarian 
regimes to boost survival. Democratization, 28(2), 394–413. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13510​347.​
2020.​18239​70
Debre, M. J. (2022). Clubs of autocrats: Regional organizations and authoritarian survival. The Review of 
International Organizations, 17(3), 485–511. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11558-​021-​09428-y
Debre, M. J., & Morgenbesser, L. (2017). Out of the shadows: Autocratic regimes, election observation 
and legitimation. Contemporary Politics, 23(3), 328–347. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13569​775.​2017.​
13043​18
Diamond, L., Plattner, M. F., & Walker, C. (2016). Authoritarianism goes global: The challenge to 
democracy. Johns Hopkins University Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1353/​book.​47469
Donno, D. (2013a). Defending democratic norms: International actors and the politics of electoral mis-
conduct. Oxford University Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​acprof:​oso/​97801​99991​280.​001.​0001
Donno, D. (2013b). Elections and democratization in authoritarian regimes. American Journal of Politi-
cal Science, 57(3), 703–716. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​ajps.​12013
Donno, D., Morrison, K., & Savun, B. (2022). Not all elections are created equal: Election quality and 
civil conflict. Journal of Politics, 84(1), 134–147. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1086/​714778
Dreher, A., Fuchs, A., Parks, B., Strange, A., & Tierney, M. J. (2022). Banking on Beijing: The aims and 
impacts of China’s overseas development program. Cambridge University Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1017/​97811​08564​496
Dreher, A., Nunnenkamp, P., & Thiele, R. (2008). Does US aid buy UN general assembly votes? A disag-
gregated analysis. Public Choice, 136(1/2), 139–164. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11127-​008-​9286-x
Dukalskis, A. (2023). A fox in the henhouse: China, normative change, and the UN human rights council. 
Journal of Human Rights, 22(3), 334–350. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​14754​835.​2023.​21939​71
Dutta, N., Leeson, P. T., & Williamson, C. R. (2013). The amplification effect: Foreign aid’s impact on 
political institutions. Kyklos, 66(2), 208–228. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​kykl.​12018
Ferry, L. L., Hafner-Burton, E. M., & Schneider, C. J. (2020). Catch me if you care: International devel-
opment organizations and national corruption. The Review of International Organizations, 15(4), 
767–792. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11558-​019-​09371-z
Flonk, D., Jachtenfuchs, M., & Obendiek, A. S. (2020). Authority conflicts in internet governance: Lib-
erals vs. sovereigntists? Global Constitutionalism, 9(2), 364–386. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S2045​
38172​00001​67
Foot, R. (2020). China, the UN, and human protection: Beliefs, power, image. Oxford University Press. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​oso/​97801​98843​733.​001.​0001
Fung, C. J., & Lam, S.-H. (2021). Staffing the United Nations: China’s motivations and prospects. Inter-
national Affairs, 97(4), 1143–1163. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​ia/​iiab0​71
Gandhi, J. (2008). Political institutions under dictatorship. Cambridge University Press. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1017/​CBO97​80511​510090
Gandhi, J., & Lust-Okar, E. (2009). Elections under authoritarianism. Annual Review of Political Science, 
12(1), 403–422. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1146/​annur​ev.​polis​ci.​11.​060106.​095434
Gandhi, J., & Przeworski, A. (2007). Authoritarian institutions and the survival of autocrats. Comparative 
Political Studies, 40(11), 1279–1301. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​00104​14007​305817
Geddes, B., Wright, J., & Frantz, E. (2018). How dictatorships work: Power, personalization, and col-
lapse. Cambridge University Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​97813​16336​182
Getachew, A. (2019). Worldmaking after empire: The rise and fall of self-determination. Princeton Uni-
versity Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1515/​97806​91184​340
Ginsburg, T. (2020). Authoritarian international law? American Journal of International Law, 114(2), 
221–260. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​ajil.​2020.3
Gleditsch, K. S., & Ward, M. D. (2006). Diffusion and the international context of democratization. Inter-
national Organization, 60(04), 911–933. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0020​81830​60603​09
Gray, J. (2009). International organization as a seal of approval: European Union accession and investor 
risk. American Journal of Political Science, 53(4), 931–949. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​1540-​5907.​
2009.​00409.x
Gray, J. (2013). The company states keep: International economic organizations and investor percep-
tions. Cambridge University Press.  https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​CBO97​81139​344418

254
	
Cottiero et al.
Greenhill, B. (2016). Transmitting rights: International organizations and the diffusion of human rights 
practices. Oxford University Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​acprof:​oso/​97801​90271​633.​001.​0001
Grumbach, J. M. (2023). Laboratories of democratic backsliding. American Political Science Review, 
117(3), 967–984. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0003​05542​20009​34
Grzymala-Busse, A. (2019). The failure of Europe’s mainstream parties. Journal of Democracy, 30(4), 
35–47. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1353/​jod.​2019.​0067
Guriev, S., & Treisman, D. (2022). Spin dictators: The changing face of tyranny in the 21st century. 
Princeton University Press.
Hafner-Burton, E. M. (2005). Trading human rights: How preferential trade agreements influence gov-
ernment repression. International Organization, 59(03), 593–529. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0020​
81830​50502​16
Hafner-Burton, E. M. (2009). The power politics of regime complexity: Human rights trade conditional-
ity in Europe. Perspectives on Politics, 7(1), 33–37. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S1537​59270​90900​57
Hafner-Burton, E.M. (2013). Making human rights a reality. Princeton University Press. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1515/​97814​00846​283
Hafner-Burton, E. M., Hyde, S. D., & Jablonski, R. S. (2014). When do governments resort to elec-
tion violence? British Journal of Political Science, 44(1), 149–179. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0007​
12341​20006​71
Hafner-Burton, E. M., Hyde, S. D., & Jablonski, R. S. (2018). Surviving elections: Election violence, 
incumbent victory and post-election repercussions. British Journal of Political Science, 48(2), 
459–488. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0007​12341​60002​0X
Hafner-Burton, E. M., Mansfield, E. D., & Pevehouse, J. C. W. (2015). Human rights institutions, sover-
eignty costs and democratization. British Journal of Political Science, 45(1), 1–27. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1017/​S0007​12341​30002​40
Hafner-Burton, E. M., & Schneider, C. J. (2019). The dark side of cooperation: International organiza-
tions and member corruption. International Studies Quarterly, 63(4), 1108–1121. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1093/​isq/​sqz064
Hafner-Burton, E. M., & Schneider, C. J. (2023). The international liberal foundations of democratic 
backsliding. IGCC Working Paper No. 9. escho​larsh​ip.​org/​uc/​item/​0965w​1jb
Hafner-Burton, E., Pevehouse, J., Schneider, C.J. (2024). Enlightened dictators? Good governance in 
autocratic international organizations. The Review of International Organizations. Advance online 
publication. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11558-​024-​09550-7
Haggard, S., Kaufman, R. (2021a). Backsliding: Democratic regress in the contemporary world. Cam-
bridge University Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​97811​08957​809
Haggard, S., & Kaufman, R. (2021b). The anatomy of democratic backsliding. Journal of Democracy, 
32(4), 27–41. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1353/​jod.​2021.​0050
Haggard, S., & Kaufman, R. R. (2016). Democratization during the third wave. Annual Review of Politi-
cal Science, 19(1), 125–144. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1146/​annur​ev-​polis​ci-​042114-​015137
Hale, H. E. (2013). Regime change cascades: What we have learned from the 1848 revolutions to the 
2011 Arab uprisings. Annual Review of Political Science, 16(1), 331–353. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1146/​
annur​ev-​polis​ci-​032211-​212204
Harnisch, S. (2020). Spreading cyber-autocracy? The Shanghai Cooperation Organization and the diffu-
sion of norms of ‘internet sovereignty.’ In Authoritarian gravity centers: A cross-regional study of 
authoritarian promotion and diffusion, eds. Marianne Kneuer and Thomas Demmelhuber. Rout-
ledge. https://​doi.​org/​10.​4324/​97810​03008​804
Hegre, H. (2001). Toward a democratic civil peace? Democracy, political change, and civil war, 1816–
1992. American Political Science Review, 95(1), 33–48. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0003​05540​10001​
19
Herbst, J. (2007). Crafting regional cooperation in Africa. In A. Acharya and A. I. Johnston (Eds.), Craft-
ing cooperation: Regional international institutions in comparative perspective (pp. 129–144). 
Cambridge University Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​CBO97​80511​491436.​004
Herman, L. E., Hoerner, J., & Lacey, J. (2021). Why does the European right accommodate backsliding 
states? An analysis of 24 European people’s party votes (2011–2019). European Political Science 
Review, 13(2), 169–187. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S1755​77392​10000​23
Hooghe, L., & Marks, G. (2015). Delegation and pooling in international organizations. The Review of 
International Organizations, 10, 305–328. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11558-​014-​9194-4

255
Illiberal regimes and international organizations﻿	
Hug, S., & König, T. (2002). In view of ratification: governmental preferences and domestic constraints 
at the Amsterdam intergovernmental conference. International Organization, 56(2), 447–476. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1162/​00208​18023​20005​531
Hug, S., & Lukács, R. (2014). Preferences or blocs? Voting in the United Nations human rights 
council. The Review of International Organizations, 9(1), 83–106. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s11558-​013-​9172-2
Hulvey, R. (2022). Cyber sovereignty: How China is changing the rules of internet freedom. UC Institute 
on Global Conflict and Cooperation Working Paper. https://​ucigcc.​org/​publi​cation/​mobil​izing-​for-​
sover​eignty-​chinas-​social-​strat​egy-​to-​write-​new-​rules-​of-​the-​game-​in-​cyber​space/
Hyde, S. D. (2015). The Pseudo-democrat’s dilemma: Why election observation became an international 
norm. Cornell University Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​7591/​corne​ll/​97808​01449​666.​001.​0001
Hyde, S. D., & Marinov, N. (2014). Information and self-enforcing democracy: The role of international 
election observation. International Organization, 68(2), 329–359. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0020​
81831​30004​65
Ikenberry, G. J. (2018). Why the liberal world order will survive. Ethics & International Affairs, 32(1), 
17–29. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0892​67941​80000​72
Inboden, R.S. (2021a). China and the international human rights regime: 1982–2017. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​97811​08888​745
Inboden, R. S. (2021b). China at the UN: Choking civil society. Journal of Democracy, 32(3), 124–135. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1353/​jod.​2021.​0038
Inboden, R. S. (2022). China and authoritarian collaboration. Journal of Contemporary China, 31(136), 
505–517. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​10670​564.​2021.​19858​28
Inboden, R.S. (2023). Defending the global human rights system from authoritarian assault. IGCC 
Report. https://​ucigcc.​org/​publi​cation/​defen​ding-​the-​global-​human-​rights-​system-​from-​autho​ritar​
ian-​assau​lt/
Kaya, A., Kilby, C., & Kay, J. (2021). Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank as an instrument for Chi-
nese influence? Supplementary versus remedial multilateralism. World Development, 145. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​world​dev.​2021.​105531
Kelemen, R. D. (2017). Europe’s other democratic deficit: National authoritarianism in Europe’s demo-
cratic union. Government and Opposition, 52(2), 211–238. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​gov.​2016.​41
Kelemen, R. D. (2020). The European Union’s authoritarian equilibrium. Journal of European Public 
Policy, 27(3), 481–499. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13501​763.​2020.​17124​55
Kelemen, R.D. (2024). Will the European Union escape its autocracy trap? Journal of European Public 
Policy: 1–24. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13501​763.​2024.​23147​39
Kelley, J.G. (2012). Monitoring democracy: When international election observation works, and why it 
often fails. Princeton University Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2307/j.​ctt7r​gss
Kim, N. K., & Sudduth, J. K. (2021). Political institutions and coups in dictatorships. Comparative Politi-
cal Studies, 54(9), 1597–1628. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​00104​14021​997161
Kubicek, P. (2009). The  Commonwealth of Independent States: An example of failed regionalism? 
Review of International Studies, 35(S1), 237–256. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0260​21050​90085​0X
Kurlantzick, J. (2013). Democracy in retreat: The revolt of the middle class and the worldwide decline of 
representative government. Yale University Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​12987/​97803​00188​967
Lake, D. A., Martin, L. L., & Risse, T. (2021). Challenges to the liberal order: Reflections on interna-
tional organization. International Organization, 75(2), 225–257. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0020​
81832​00006​36
Lankina, T., Libman, A., & Obydenkova, A. (2016). Authoritarian and democratic diffusion in post-com-
munist regions. Comparative Political Studies, 49(12), 1599–1629. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​00104​
14016​628270
Lankina, T. V., & Getachew, L. (2006). A geographic incremental theory of democratization: Territory, 
aid, and democracy in postcommunist regions. World Politics, 58(4), 536–582. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1353/​wp.​2007.​0011
Lemon, E. (2019). Weaponizing interpol. Journal of Democracy, 30(2), 15–29. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1353/​
jod.​2019.​0019
Levitsky, S., & Ziblatt, D. (2018). How democracies die. Crown Publishing.
Lewis, J. (2005). The janus face of Brussels: Socialization and everyday decision making in the European 
Union. International Organization, 59(4), 937–971. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0020​81830​50503​20
Libman, A., & Davidzon, I. (2023). Military intervention as a spectacle? Authoritarian regionalism and 
protests in Kazakhstan. International Affairs, 99(3), 1293–1312. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​ia/​iiad0​93

256
	
Cottiero et al.
Libman, A., & Obydenkova, A. V. (2018a). Regional international organizations as a strategy of autoc-
racy: The Eurasian economic union and Russian foreign policy. International Affairs, 94(5), 1037–
1058. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​ia/​iiy147
Libman, A., & Obydenkova, A. V. (2018b). Understanding authoritarian regionalism. Journal of Democ-
racy, 29(4), 151–165. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1353/​jod.​2018.​0070
Linz, J. (1978). The breakdown of democratic regimes: Crisis, breakdown, and reequilibration. Johns 
Hopkins University Press.
Lipps, J., Jacob, M. S. (2024). Undermining liberal international organizations from within: Evidence 
from the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe. The Review of International Organiza-
tions (forthcoming)
Lu, L. (2024). Be my friendly reviewers: How China shapes its reviews in the UN human rights regime. 
Unpublished Working Paper.
Lyne, M. M., Nielson, D. L., & Tierney, M. J. (2009). Controlling coalitions: Social lending at the multi-
lateral development banks. The Review of International Organizations, 4(4), 407–433. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1007/​s11558-​009-​9069-2
Lyons, T. (2016). The importance of winning: Victorious insurgent groups and authoritarian politics. 
Comparative Politics, 48(2), 167–184. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5129/​00104​15168​17037​745
Mainwaring, S., Pérez-Liñán, A. (2014). Democracies and dictatorships in Latin America: Emergence, 
survival, and fall. Cambridge University Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​CBO97​81139​047845
Malamud, A. (2022). Regionalism in the Americas: Segmented, overlapping, and sovereignty-boosting. 
In J. Rüland & A. Carrapatoso (Eds.). Handbook on global governance and regionalism (pp. 230–
247). Edward Elgar Publishing. https://​doi.​org/​10.​4337/​97818​00377​561.​00027
Mansfield, E. D., & Pevehouse, J. C. (2006). Democratization and international organizations. Interna-
tional Organization, 60(1), 137–167. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0020​81830​60600​5X
Mansfield, E. D., & Pevehouse, J. C. (2008). Democratization and the varieties of international organiza-
tions. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 52(2), 269–294. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​00220​02707​313691
Mares, I., & Young, L. (2019). Varieties of clientelism in Hungarian elections. Comparative Politics, 
51(3), 449–480. https://​doi.​org/​10.​5129/​00104​1519X​15647​43496​9911
Mariano, N., & Schneider, C. J. (2022). Euroscepticism and bargaining success in the European Union. 
Journal of European Public Policy, 29(1), 61–77. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13501​763.​2021.​19919​85
Mattli, W., & Plümper, T. (2002). The demand-side politics of EU enlargement: Democracy and the 
application for EU membership. Journal of European Public Policy, 9(4), 550–574. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1080/​13501​76021​01524​39
McLean, E. V., & Stone, R. W. (2012). The Kyoto protocol: Two-level bargaining and European integra-
tion: The Kyoto Protocol. International Studies Quarterly, 56(1), 99–113. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​
1468-​2478.​2011.​00706.x
Meijers, M. J., & Van der Veer, H. (2019). MEP responses to democratic backsliding in Hungary and 
Poland. An analysis of agenda‐setting and voting behaviour. Journal of Common Market Studies, 
57(4), 838–856. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​jcms.​12850
Merloe, P. (2015). Authoritarianism goes global: Election monitoring vs. disinformation. Journal of 
Democracy, 26(3), 79–93. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1353/​jod.​2015.​0053
Meyerrose, A. M. (2020). The unintended consequences of democracy promotion: International organiza-
tions and democratic backsliding. Comparative Political Studies, 53(10–11), 1547–1581. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1177/​00104​14019​897689
Meyerrose, A. M. (2024). Building strong executives and weak institutions: How European integration 
contributes to democratic backsliding. The Review of International Organizations, 19(2), 307–343. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11558-​023-​09507-2
Meyerrose, A. M., & Nooruddin, I. (2023). Trojan horses in liberal international organizations? How 
democratic backsliders undermine the UNHRC. The Review of International Organizations. 
Advance online publication. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11558-​023-​09511-6
Mohamedou, M.-M. (2016). Arab agency and the UN project: The league of Arab States between univer-
sality and regionalism. Third World Quarterly, 37(7), 1219–1233. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​01436​
597.​2016.​11544​37
Moravcsik, A. (2000). The origins of human rights regimes: Democratic delegation in postwar Europe. 
International Organization, 54(2), 217–252. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1162/​00208​18005​51163
Morrison, K., Burcu S., Donno, D., Davutoglu, P. (2024). Competing judgments: Multiple election 
observers and post-election contention. The Review of International Organizations. Advance 
online publication. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11558-​023-​09528-x

257
Illiberal regimes and international organizations﻿	
Nadkarni, V. (2010). Strategic partnerships in Asia: Balancing without alliances. Routledge. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​4324/​97802​03865​019
Obydenkova, A.V., Libman, A. (2019). Authoritarian regionalism in the world of international organiza-
tions: Global perspective and the Eurasian enigma. Oxford University Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1093/​oso/​97801​98839​040.​001.​0001
Pauselli, G., Urdínez, F., & Merke, F. (2023). Shaping the liberal international order from the inside: 
A natural experiment on China’s influence in the UN human rights council. Research & Politics, 
10(3). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​20531​68023​11935​13
Pauselli, G., & Urzúa, M.-J. (2024). Why autocracies fear LGBTQ+ rights. Journal of Democracy, 35(2), 
80–92. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1353/​jod.​2024.​a9228​35
Pevehouse, J. C. (2002a). Democracy from the outside-in? International organizations and democrati-
zation. International Organization, 56(3), 515–549. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1162/​00208​18027​60199​
872
Pevehouse, J. C. (2002b). With a little help from my friends? Regional organizations and the consoli-
dation of democracy. American Journal of Political Science, 46(3), 611–626. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
2307/​30884​03
Pevehouse, J. C. (2005). Democracy from above: Regional organizations and democratization. Cam-
bridge University Press.  https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​CBO97​80511​491078
Ping, S.-N., Wang, Y.-T., & Chang, W.-Y. (2022). The effects of China’s development projects on 
political accountability. British Journal of Political Science, 52(1), 65–84. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1017/​S0007​12342​00003​81
Plunkett, A., & Tansey, O. (2022). Contesting the anti-coup norm: ASEAN responds to the 2021 
Myanmar Coup. IGCC Working Paper. https://​ucigcc.​org/​publi​cation/​conte​sting-​the-​anti-​coup-​
norm-​asean-​respo​nds-​to-​the-​2021-​myanm​ar-​coup/
Poast, P., & Urpelainen, J. (2015). How international organizations support democratization: Prevent-
ing authoritarian reversals or promoting consolidation? World Politics, 67(1), 72–113. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0043​88711​40003​43
Poast, P., & Urpelainen, J. (2018). Organizing democracy: How international organizations assist 
new democracies. The University of Chicago Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​7208/​chica​go/​978-​02265​
43512.​001.​0001
Powell, J. (2012). Determinants of the attempting and outcome of coups d’état. Journal of Conflict 
Resolution, 56(6), 1017–1040. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​00220​02712​445732
Priebus, S. (2022). The commission’s approach to rule of law backsliding: Managing instead of 
enforcing democratic values? Journal of Common Market Studies, 60(6), 1684–1700. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1111/​jcms.​13341
Quinlivan, J. T. (1999). Coup-proofing: Its practice and consequences in the Middle East. Interna-
tional Security, 24(2), 131–165. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1162/​01622​88995​60202
Raess, D., Wanlin, R., Wagner, P. (2022). Hidden strings attached? Chinese (commercially oriented) 
foreign aid and international political alignment. Foreign Policy Analysis, 18(3). https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1093/​fpa/​orac0​10
Risse, T., & Babayan, N. (2015). Democracy promotion and the challenges of illiberal regional pow-
ers: Introduction to the special issue. Democratization, 22(3), 381–399. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​
13510​347.​2014.​997716
Roessler, P. (2011). The enemy within: Personal rule, coups, and civil war in Africa. World Politics, 
63(2), 300–346. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0043​88711​10000​49
Russo, A., & Stoddard, E. (2018). Why do authoritarian leaders do regionalism? Ontological security 
and Eurasian regional cooperation. The International Spectator, 53(3), 20–37. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1080/​03932​729.​2018.​14884​04
Sanders, R., & Jenkins, L. D. (2022). Special issue introduction: Contemporary international anti-
feminism. Global Constitutionalism, 11(3), 369–378. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S2045​38172​
20001​44
Scheiring, G. (2020). The retreat of liberal democracy: Authoritarian capitalism and the accumula-
tive state in Hungary. Palgrave Macmillan. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​030-​48752-2
Scheiring, G. (2021). Dependent development and authoritarian state capitalism: Democratic back-
sliding and the rise of the accumulative state in Hungary. Geoforum, 124, 267–278. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/j.​geofo​rum.​2019.​08.​011
Scheppele, K. L. (2022). How viktor orbán wins. Journal of Democracy, 33(3), 45–61. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1353/​jod.​2022.​0039

258
	
Cottiero et al.
Schimmelfennig, F., & Scholtz, H. (2008). EU democracy promotion in the European neighbourhood: 
Political conditionality, economic development and transnational exchange. European Union 
Politics, 9(2), 187–215. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​14651​16508​089085
Schimmelfennig, F., & Sedelmeier, U. (2002). Theorizing EU enlargement: Research focus, hypoth-
eses, and the state of research. Journal of European Public Policy, 9(4), 500–528. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1080/​13501​76021​01524​11
Schneider, C. J. (2009). Conflict, negotiation, and European Union enlargement. Cambridge Univer-
sity Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​CBO97​80511​575235
Schneider, C. J. (2011). Weak states and institutionalized bargaining power in international organi-
zations. International Studies Quarterly, 55(2), 331–355. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​1468-​2478.​
2011.​00651.x
Schneider, C. J., & Urpelainen, J. (2013). Distributional conflict between powerful states and interna-
tional treaty ratification. International Studies Quarterly, 57(1), 13–27. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​
isqu.​12024
Schneider, C. J., & Tobin, J. (2013). Interest coalitions and multilateral aid allocation in the European 
Union. International Studies Quarterly, 57(1), 103–114. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​isqu.​12062
Söderbaum, F., Spandler, K., & Pacciardi, A. (2021). Contestations of the liberal international order: A 
populist script of regional cooperation. Cambridge University Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​97810​
09030​915
Steinberg, R. H. (2002). In the shadow of law or power? Consensus-based bargaining and outcomes in 
the GATT/WTO. International Organization, 56(2), 339–374. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1162/​00208​18023​
20005​504
Steinert, C. V., & Weyrauch, D. (2024). Belt and road initiative membership and voting patterns in the 
United Nations general assembly. Research & Politics, 11(1). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​20531​68024​
12337​84
Steinert-Threlkeld, Z. C. (2017). Spontaneous collective action: Peripheral mobilization during the Arab 
spring. American Political Science Review, 111(2), 379–403. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0003​05541​
60007​69
Stephan, M. J., & Chenoweth, E. (2008). Why civil resistance works: The strategic logic of nonviolent 
conflict. International Security, 33(1), 7–44. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1162/​isec.​2008.​33.1.7
Stiansen, Ø., Naurin, D., Michailidou, A., & Riganova, A. (2024). Enforcing the rule of law in the EU: 
Effects on public opinion. IGCC Working Paper No. 21. escho​larsh​ip.​org/​uc/​item/​2jz3g​89m
Stoddard, E. (2017). Authoritarian regimes in democratic regional organisations? Exploring regional 
dimensions of authoritarianism in an increasingly democratic West Africa. Journal of Contempo-
rary African Studies, 35(4), 469–486. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​02589​001.​2017.​13472​54
Stone, R. W. (2002). Lending credibility: The international monetary fund and the post-communist tran-
sition. Princeton University Press.
Stone, R. W. (2004). The political economy of IMF lending in Africa. American Political Science Review, 
98(4), 577–591. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0003​05540​40413​6X
Stone, R. W. (2008). The scope of IMF conditionality. International Organization, 62(4), 589–620. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0020​81830​80802​11
Sudduth, J. K. (2017). Coup risk, coup-proofing and leader survival. Journal of Peace Research, 54(1), 
3–15. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​00223​43316​676885
Tallberg, J., Sommerer, T., & Squatrito, T. (2016). Democratic memberships in international organiza-
tions: Sources of institutional design. The Review of International Organizations, 11(1), 59–87. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11558-​015-​9227-7
Tansey, O. (2016a). International politics of authoritarian rule. Oxford University Press. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1093/​acprof:​oso/​97801​99683​628.​001.​0001
Tansey, O. (2016b). The problem with autocracy promotion. Democratization, 23(1), 141–163. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13510​347.​2015.​10957​36
Tansey, O., Koehler, K., & Schmotz, A. (2017). Ties to the rest: Autocratic linkages and regime survival. 
Comparative Political Studies, 50(9), 1221–1254. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​00104​14016​666859
Teorell, J. (2010). Determinants of democratization: Explaining regime change in the world, 1972–2006. 
Cambridge University Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​CBO97​80511​762727
Thacker, S. C. (1999). The high politics of IMF lending. World Politics, 52(1), 38–75. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1017/​S0043​88710​00200​25
Tieku, T. K. (2009). Multilateralization of democracy promotion and defense in Africa. Africa Today, 
56(2), 74–91. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2979/​AFT.​2009.​56.2.​74

259
Illiberal regimes and international organizations﻿	
Tufekci, Z., & Freelon, D. (2013). Introduction to the special issue on new media and social unrest. 
American Behavioral Scientist, 57, 843–847. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​00027​64213​479376
Tufekci, Z., & Wilson, C. (2012). Social media and the decision to participate in political protest: Obser-
vations from Tahrir Square. Journal of Communication, 62(2), 363–379. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​
1460-​2466.​2012.​01629.x
Vachudová, M. (2020). Ethnopopulism and democratic backsliding in central Europe. East European 
Politics, 36(3), 318–340. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​21599​165.​2020.​17871​63
Vachudová, M. (2005). Europe undivided: Democracy, leverage, and integration after communism. 
Oxford University Press. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1093/​01992​41198.​001.​0001
Velasco, 
K. 
(2023). 
TTransnational 
backlash 
and 
the 
deinstitutionalization 
of 
liberal 
norms: LGBT+ rights in a contested world. American Journal of Sociology, 128(5), 1381–1429. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1086/​724724
Vinokurov, E., Libman, A. (2017). Re-evaluating regional Organizations: Behind the smokescreen of offi-
cial mandates. Springer. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​978-3-​319-​53055-0
Von Borzyskowski, I., & Kartal, M. (2023). Democracy assistance by international organizations. In 
Handbook on Democracy and Security. Edgar Elgar Publishing, Chapter 6, 84–111. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​4337/​97818​39100​208.​00013
Von Borzyskowski, I., & Vabulas, F. (2019). Credible commitments? Explaining IGO suspensions to 
sanction political backsliding. International Studies Quarterly, 63(1), 139–152. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1093/​isq/​sqy051
Von Soest, C. (2015).  Democracy prevention: The international collaboration of authoritarian regimes. 
European Journal of Political Research, 54(4), 623–638. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​1475-​6765.​12100
Vreeland, J.R. (2019). Corrupting international organizations. Annual Review of Political Science, 22, 
205–222. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1146/​annur​ev-​polis​ci-​050317-​071031
Vreeland, J. R., & Dreher, A. (2014). The political economy of the United Nations Security Council: 
Money and influence. Cambridge University Press.  https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​CBO97​81139​027755
Waldner, D., & Lust, E. (2018).  Unwelcome change: Coming to terms with democratic backsli-
din. Annual Review of Political Science, 21(1), 93–113. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1146/​annur​ev-​polis​
ci-​050517-​114628
Weiss, J. C., & Wallace, J. L. (2021). Domestic politics, China’s rise, and the future of the liberal inter-
national order. International Organization, 75(2), 635–664. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0020​81832​
00004​8X
Weyland, K. (2017). Autocratic diffusion and cooperation: the impact of interests vs. Ideology. Democra-
tization, 24(7), 1235–1252. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13510​347.​2017.​13078​23
Whitehead, L. (2014). Antidemocracy promotion four strategies in search of a framework. Taiwan Jour-
nal of Democracy, 10(2), 1–24.
Wichhart, S. (2019). The formation of the Arab league and the United Nations, 1944–5. Journal of Con-
temporary History, 54(2), 328–346. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​00220​09418​799178
Winzen, T. (2023). How backsliding governments keep the european union hospitable for autocracy: evi-
dence from intergovernmental negotiations. The Review of International Organizations. Advance 
Online Publication. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11558-​023-​09518-z
Yakouchyk, K. (2019). Beyond autocracy promotion: A review. Political Studies Review, 17(2), 147–160. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​14789​29918​774976
Yuichi Kono, D., & Montinola, G. R. (2009). Does foreign aid support autocrats, democrats, or both? The 
Journal of Politics 71(2), 704–718. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1017/​S0022​38160​90905​50
Zamora, S. (1980). Voting in international economic organizations. American Journal of International 
Law, 74(3), 566–608. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2307/​22016​50
Zangl, B., Heußner, F., Kruck, A., & Lanzendörfer, X. (2016). Imperfect adaptation: How the WTO and 
the IMF adjust to shifting power distributions among their members. The Review of International 
Organizations, 11(2), 171–196. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11558-​016-​9246-z
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.