Volume 2 | October 2024 | 797–798 | 797
nature reviews bioengineering
https://doi.org/10.1038/s44222-024-00253-7
Editorial
Funding research on women’s health
Women’s health research has long been 
underfunded, in part owing to stigmas 
associated with conditions that primarily affect 
women. Equitable health research funding 
requires transparency from funding agencies, 
investment in women-centred innovations, 
support for women in science and a cultural 
shift in how health issues are viewed.
R
esearch related to women’s health is critically 
underfunded. In 2020, only 5% of global research 
and development (R&D) funding was allocated to 
women’s health research. This was split into 4% 
for women’s cancers and 1% for all other women-specific 
health conditions, with 25% of that further limited to fertil-
ity research1. Although fertility is an important aspect of 
healthcare, this narrow focus overlooks a broader spec-
trum of health conditions that disproportionally affect 
women, including autoimmune diseases and depressive 
disorders, as well as conditions that present different 
symptoms in women than men, such as cardiovascular 
disease2. Therefore, more comprehensive investment 
is needed across key areas of healthcare, including con-
ditions specific to women, diseases with sex-based dif-
ferences, conditions with higher prevalence in women 
and conditions that are historically under-researched in 
women and female models — this will require diverse and 
global mechanisms.
In particular, government grants have a vital role in sup-
porting scientific research globally; however, fund allo-
cation is often not representative of disease burden. For 
example, in the National Institutes of Health, conditions 
that predominantly affect men receive disproportionately 
high funding compared with their disease burden3. Fur-
thermore, the ability of government agencies to address 
gaps in health research is hindered by a lack of transpar-
ency in funding distribution4. Thus, commitments to ana-
lyse and publish data on grants for women’s healthcare 
research are crucial.
Philanthropic organizations and global partnerships 
complement government funding by identifying and 
addressing critical priorities in healthcare. In this issue, 
Ru-fong Joanne Cheng and Mark A. Barone from the 
Gates Foundation’s Women’s Health Innovations team 
outline how they aim to close healthcare funding gaps by 
increasing R&D funding for women’s health and by shap-
ing policies that prioritize underfunded areas. Similarly, 
the Global Alliance for Women’s Health provides valuable 
frameworks to guide investments and engage with experts 
in the women’s health space. This type of public and private 
sector involvement is vital for supporting women-centred 
products and technologies.
Investing in scientists can also advance healthcare 
equity. All-female research teams are 35% more likely to 
develop medical treatments which serve women’s needs, 
compared to all-male research teams5. Organizations such 
as the African-German Network of Excellence in Science 
and the Bayer Foundation’s Women Empowerment Award 
reward women, particularly individuals from low- and 
middle-income countries, with grants and awards to sup-
port healthcare research and entrepreneurship. Impor-
tantly, more women will be required in the boardrooms 
and decision-making roles at funding agencies to make 
funding women’s health research a priority.
Outside of academia, the FemTech industry is emerg-
ing as a key player in biotech and health innovation. With 
about 70% of FemTech companies founded or co-founded 
by women, this sector drives the development of health-
care solutions tailored to women’s needs. However, these 
businesses are largely fuelled by venture capital firms, in 
which male partners dominate, and FemTech companies 
often face bias and scepticism, with women’s health fre-
quently dismissed as being ‘too niche’5. In 2021, FemTech 
companies reached US$2.5 billion in funding globally, 
representing about 3% of all digital health investment. 
Reproductive health currently dominates this sector but 
expanding focus into other areas, guided by input from 
patients and healthcare providers, could further drive 
growth. Encouragingly, in Africa, the share of women-led 
health tech investments rose from 1.4% to 31% between 
2022 and 2023. Companies such as Rwanda-founded 
Kasha, which offers customers discrete access to women’s 
health care products, are leading the way, underscoring the 
importance of person-centred design in FemTech services.
Stigma has compounded funding disparities, as condi-
tions in which individuals are blamed for their ailments 
are often underprioritized. For example, endometriosis 
affects roughly 10% of women assigned female at birth6 
but has long been wrongly stereotyped as stemming from 
life choices, leading to chronic underfunding despite its 
disease burden. Similarly, multiple sclerosis predomi-
nantly affects women and was historically thought to be 
caused by ‘hysteria’; today, it remains underfunded rela-
tive to its impact4. Organizations such as the World Endo-
metriosis Society and the MS International Federation 
address disease-specific funding disparities. Closing the 
gap between men’s and women’s health research requires 
not only funding but also a cultural shift in how health 
issues are viewed.
Women’s health is not a niche industry. A 2024 report 
from the World Economic Forum in collaboration with the 
McKinsey Health Institute determined that closing invest-
ment gaps in women’s healthcare could boost the global 
economy $1 trillion annually by 2040, demonstrating the 
vast economic potential of equitable healthcare funding. 
 Check for updates
“Viewing 
women’s 
health as 
a compre-
hensive and 
essential part 
of healthcare 
will drive 
better 
policies, more 
research 
and greater 
investment to 
benefit society 
as a whole”

Volume 2 | October 2024 | 797–798 | 798
nature reviews bioengineering
Editorial
Viewing women’s health as a comprehensive and essential 
part of healthcare will drive better policies, more research 
and greater investment to benefit society as a whole.
Published online: 11 October 2024
References
1.	 Moley, K. Closing the gender health gap is a $1 trillion opportunity. 
Biopharma Dealmakers https://doi.org/10.1038/D43747-024-00021-X (2024).
2.	 Temkin, S. M. et al. Chronic conditions in women: the development of a 
National Institutes of health framework. BMC Womens Health 23, 1–11 (2023).
3.	 Smith, K. Women’s health research lacks funding – these charts  
show how. Nature https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-023-01475-2  
(2023).
4.	 Mirin, A. A. Gender disparity in the funding of diseases by the U.S.  
National Institutes of Health. J. Womens Health 30, 956–963  
(2021).
5.	 Koning, R., Samila, S. & Ferguson, J. P. Who do we invent for? Patents by 
women focus more on women’s health, but few women get to invent. 
Science (1979) 372, 1345–1348 (2021).
6.	 Horne, A. W. & Missmer, S. A. Pathophysiology, diagnosis, and 
management of endometriosis. BMJ 379, e070750 (2022).