*Corresponding Author’s Email: b.machaal@uiz.ac.ma 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Teaching, Learning and Education 
Vol. 1, Issue. 1, 2024, pp. 14-25 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.33422/ictle.v1i1.582  
Copyright © 2024 Author(s)  
ISSN: 3030-122X online 
 
 
 
 
 
Transforming Education for the 21st Century: 
Enhancing Graduate Employability through 
Curriculum Revamp 
Brahim Machaal 
Ibn Zohr University – Morocco 
 
Abstract 
This paper reports on a study examining how well the curriculum of a bachelor’s program at 
a Moroccan university equips students with 21st-century skills to enhance employability. A 
mixed-method approach was used, combining curriculum evaluation, questionnaires and 
interviews with both students and faculty. The curriculum evaluation reviewed course content 
for the inclusion of key skills such as creativity, problem-solving, and digital literacy. The 
questionnaires gauged students' perceptions of their preparedness for the job market, while 
semi-structured interviews explored faculty perspectives on the curriculum's effectiveness in 
developing employability skills. Results from the curriculum evaluation revealed that most 
courses lacked alignment with 21st-century skills. Questionnaire data showed that a majority 
of students felt unprepared for the job market. In contrast, faculty interviews indicated that 
instructors believed their courses offered sufficient skill development, attributing students' 
perceived lack of readiness to poor attendance and absenteeism.The study concludes that 
more interactive, engaging instruction is necessary, and students should be trained in 
metacognitive skills such as self-motivation and responsibility to foster lifelong learning and 
resilience. The findings also emphasize the urgent need for a curriculum revamp to integrate 
21st-century skills, aligning with the evolving demands of the job market. 
Keywords: Curriculum revamp, graduate employability, 21st century skills 
1. Introduction 
Given the ever-changing job market, tertiary education institutions and universities in 
Morocco face the daunting challenge of preparing graduates for future employment by 
incorporating employability skills, such as 21st-century skills (21CSs), into their educational 
and training programs. Against this backdrop, the present paper reports the findings of a 
study investigating the extent to which the Professional Bachelor in Applied Foreign 
Language Studies (AFLS Bachelor) program at the Multidisciplinary Faculty of Taroudant in 
Morocco equips graduates with 21CSs to maximize their employability. 

Machaal / Transforming Education for the 21st Century : Enhancing Graduate Employability… 
15 
There have been numerous reports indicating that Moroccan university graduates are not 
acquiring employability-compatible skills and competencies. More than 70% of Moroccans 
surveyed recently believe that the country's educational system does not adequately prepare 
young people for the job market (HCP, 2022; Aida, 2022; Mansouri, 2022). In fact, all 
students surveyed in this study expressed that they do not feel their studies are relevant to the 
job market, adding that this mismatch is largely due to weaknesses in the curricula 
(Mansouri, 2022). The author further argues that these curricula need to be improved to help 
students acquire the necessary employability skills and knowledge. 
The significant changes in the 21st-century workplace compel educational institutions to 
either design new programs or revamp existing curricula to ensure their educational offerings 
align with the evolving job market's needs (INFERS, 2021). Curriculum reviews are essential 
for developing the desired knowledge and skills, improving student attainment, expanding 
learning experiences, and enhancing employability (Johnson, 2001). Several studies and 
research initiatives have focused on curriculum reforms that cover essential 21CSs and 
competencies (Santiago & Benavides, 2019; American Institutes for Research, 2019; 
National Education Association, 2017). The following literature review introduces key 21CSs 
and their inclusion in curriculum revamps. 
2. Literature survey   
21CSs have been identified to include critical thinking, problem-solving, communication, 
collaboration, creativity, innovation, digital literacy, global awareness, adaptability, and 
social intelligence (The Partnership for the 21st Century Skills, 2007; World Economic 
Forum, 2016). Given their pivotal role in securing employment, the Organization for 
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) has continuously promoted the 
importance of the 21CSs through initiatives such as the Education 2030 Framework for 
Action and the Innovative Learning Environments (ILE) framework (2017). This framework 
emphasizes the importance of creating learning environments that promote essential 21CSs 
and competencies, such as creativity, critical thinking, collaboration, and communication.  
Equally, the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) 
has developed initiatives such as the Global Education 2030 Agenda, which highlights the 
need for education systems to focus on developing learners' competencies, including 
cognitive, socio-emotional, and behavioral skills, to prepare them for the changing workforce 
and society (2015). Efforts by these international organizations have been instrumental in 
promoting the need to prepare learners for the challenges and opportunities of the 21st 
century and in providing frameworks and resources to support curriculum revamp initiatives. 
Similarly, there is a growing body of literature related to the instruction methods, 
employability skills and competencies that curriculum design as well as revamp should 
include. Brown and Lee (2020) identified factors such as employability skills and effective 
pedagogical practices as being conducive to training job-ready graduates. By the same token, 
a study conducted by the University of Melbourne found that successful curriculum revamps 
require a focus on student-centered learning, integrated and trans-disciplinary learning, as 
well as technology integration (Santiago & Benavides, 2019). Equally, the American 
Institutes for Research found in a study that successful curriculum revamps require a focus on 
project-based learning, performance assessments, and student voice and choice (2019).  
Correspondingly, Rodriguez and Kim (2019) examined how multicultural education 
contributes to intercultural competencies, communication skills, global awareness, and 
adaptability in diverse work settings to prepare students for employment in multicultural and 
global contexts. To that end, (Johnson, 2017) examined how project-based learning 

Machaal / Transforming Education for the 21st Century : Enhancing Graduate Employability… 
16 
approaches can enhance students' critical thinking, problem-solving abilities, teamwork 
skills, and real-world application of knowledge that would contribute to fostering work-ready 
competencies and align educational experiences with the demands of the labor market. In a 
related study, Jones and Williams (2018) explored the relationship between interdisciplinary 
learning and employability in higher education to conclude that the inclusion of 
interdisciplinary learning experiences contribute to the development of students' transferable 
skills that enhance employability; such as adaptability, creativity, and problem-solving 
abilities. Other relevant studies emphasized the significance of lifelong learning in enhancing 
graduates' employability in an evolving labor market and suggest implications for educational 
practice and policy development (Smith & Johnson, 2019; Thompson and Anderson, 2021).  
Similarly, there is a growing body of literature related to the instructional methods, 
employability skills, and competencies that curriculum design, as well as revamps, should 
include. Brown and Lee (2020) identified factors such as employability skills and effective 
pedagogical practices as being conducive to training job-ready graduates. In the same vein, a 
study conducted by the University of Melbourne found that successful curriculum revamps 
require a focus on student-centered learning, integrated and transdisciplinary learning, and 
technology integration (Santiago & Benavides, 2019). Equally, the American Institutes for 
Research found that successful curriculum revamps require a focus on project-based learning, 
performance assessments, and student voice and choice (2019). 
Correspondingly, Rodriguez and Kim (2019) examined how multicultural education 
contributes to intercultural competencies, communication skills, global awareness, and 
adaptability in diverse work settings, preparing students for employment in multicultural and 
global contexts. Similarly, Johnson (2017) examined how project-based learning approaches 
can enhance students' critical thinking, problem-solving abilities, teamwork skills, and real-
world application of knowledge, which contribute to fostering work-ready competencies and 
aligning educational experiences with labor market demands. In a related study, Jones and 
Williams (2018) explored the relationship between interdisciplinary learning and 
employability in higher education, concluding that interdisciplinary learning experiences 
contribute to the development of students' transferable skills, such as adaptability, creativity, 
and problem-solving abilities. Other studies emphasize the significance of lifelong learning in 
enhancing graduates' employability in an evolving labor market and suggest implications for 
educational practice and policy development (Smith & Johnson, 2019; Thompson & 
Anderson, 2021). 
Undeniably, the involvement of all stakeholders in the curriculum review process is essential 
for its success. According to Pegg (2014), the key ingredients for any curriculum review 
include a clear vision shared by all staff involved in the initiative. This ensures full 
engagement and guarantees the success of the curriculum review. In addition, curriculum 
revamps, as well as designs, should focus on both internal and external interventions to 
future-proof graduates' employability by integrating 21CSs and competencies. Collaboration 
with industry can enrich curriculum content through input from industry professionals, guest 
lecturers, internships, and collaborative projects. 
Furthermore, curriculum review efforts should examine the outcomes and impact of industry 
collaboration on graduates' employability and career success to bridge the gap between 
academia and real-world job market demands (Adams & Johnson, 2017; Davis & Thomas, 
2022). Studies confirm that internships and cooperative education programs contribute to the 
development of practical skills, industry knowledge, and professional networks, ultimately 
improving graduates' employability prospects. 

Machaal / Transforming Education for the 21st Century : Enhancing Graduate Employability… 
17 
It is worth noting that, despite their numerous benefits, curriculum revamps can face 
challenges. Research has found that challenges to implementing curriculum revamps include 
resistance to change, lack of resources, and insufficient teacher training (National Education 
Association, 2017). The study recommends strategies such as providing professional 
development for teachers, involving stakeholders in the process, and allocating adequate 
resources to overcome these challenges. It also highlights that a curriculum revamp should 
foster instructional innovations such as project-based and interdisciplinary learning, industry 
input, and internships. 
Although there are a few reports on curriculum review efforts in Morocco at the primary 
school level (CCA, 2021), there doesn’t seem to be much focus on curriculum reviews for 
university programs to ensure graduate employability. The present study seeks to draw 
attention to this topic and attempts, at the same time, to fill the existing gap in the literature.  
3. Research methods and data analysis 
As stated in the Introduction, this research was undertaken to establish the extent to which 
the AFLS Bachelor curriculum was designed to equip its graduates with 21CSs and therefore 
prepare them for employment. To collect data about this subject, the study undertook a 
comprehensive curriculum evaluation and used questionnaires and interviews to gauge 
related students’ and teachers’ perceptions. These research instruments were used to 
complement each other, allowing the author to form a clear picture about the topic. Collected 
data was part quantitative and part qualitative. However, all collected data was analyzed 
thematically in relation to the 21CSs listed below. These skills (illustrated by Graph 1) have 
been suggested by the Partnership for the 21st Century Skills (Trilling & Fadel, 2009). In the 
final analysis, the findings were triangulated to draw conclusions and suggest 
recommendations for an academic change. 
Nine faculty members of the AFLS Bachelor and 89 of their students participated in this 
study. They were all informed about the nature and purpose of the research, and their 
participation testifies to their consent for their contributions to be used for academic research 
purposes. The research started towards the end of 2021 and was undertaken over four full 
academic semesters to allow for a maximum number of students to participate. The study was 
completed by the end of 2023. 
3.1 Curriculum analysis 
The curriculum analysis undertaken for this research used the available course descriptions 
and focused on the main components of the AFLS Bachelor curriculum, i.e. its objective, 
content, method and evaluation. Course syllabi were useful in revealing both the nature of the 
content as well as the assessment methods in use. The instruction methods and the objectives 
of the curriculum were evaluated by the students and teachers involved in the questionnaires 
and interviews through the responses they provided. 
The main expressed objective of the curriculum of the AFLS Bachelor was to equip students 
with the knowledge, skills and ability required to secure employment in the area of 
communication, including journalism and translation. To attain this objective, the curriculum 
adopted a content that was thought would equip graduates with the key sought-after skills in 
the field of communication in its various forms and occurrences. In addition, the program 
includes in its final semester a compulsory internship for each student to undertake for a 
minimum of a month in a business or an office work environment, public or private, and 
prepare a report that should be defended in front of a jury. The purpose of the internship is to 

Machaal / Transforming Education for the 21st Century : Enhancing Graduate Employability… 
18 
prepare students for employment through familiarizing them with real-life work 
environments.  
3.1.1 Course content analysis 
Over all, course content analysis revealed that the AFLS Bachelor curriculum is lacking in 
focus and requires major revisions in subject contents, forms of assessment and instruction 
methods. As far as learning content is concerned, it was found to be repetitive and focused 
mainly on communication as a major skill to the detriment of other important skills. 
Regarding instruction methods, the lack of guidelines for engaging class activities and 
practice opportunities turned the teaching materials into theoretical and knowledge-based 
content delivery, thus missing out on opportunities to afford students with possibilities to 
develop key employability skills. Finally, the assessment methods used are mainly 
summative for most courses as they rely on the end of semester exams to assess students 
learning and knowledge achievements. The findings mentioned above are summed up in 
Table 1 below. 
Table 1. Findings of the curriculum analysis 
Curriculum component 
      Findings of the curriculum analysis 
Content 
 
The content of most courses seemed obsolete and not in line with the 
development of key 21CSs. For instance, the courses of foreign 
civilization focused mostly on providing students with loads of 
information without helping them to develop multicultural 
competencies. Equally, the final test evaluates knowledge and not skills 
or competencies. 
 
The content seems redundant and irrelevant of 21st -century job market. 
For instance there are too many courses focusing on communication in 
its different forms while other skills were ignored. If this course were 
combined, they will leave room for more information technology 
oriented literacy courses. 
Instruction Methods 
 
Lectures were long and dry and prevented instructors from making 
classes students-centered and students from owning their learning and 
develop autonomy. 
 
Some courses were test oriented and provided handouts compiled to 
provide students with summaries of the courses in preparation for the 
final exam. 
Assessment Methods 
 
Most assessment methods are not aligned with the professional 
bachelor objectives as they are summative assessments of knowledge 
more than skills. 
 
There were no assessment rubrics which left evaluations methods open 
to various interpretations or simply not valid for the assessment they 
were used for. 
 
3.2 Questionnaires and interviews 
Data collected from questionnaires and interviews offers valuable insights into the 
perceptions of both students and professors regarding the alignment of AFLS Bachelor 
curriculum with 21CSs. These insights can be utilized by educational institutions to refine 
thei curricula and instructional methods, ultimately rising to meet the needs of their students 
and significantly enhance their learning outcomes and employability. 
Interestingly, it appears that professors consider self-direction, inclusive of autonomy and 
independence, to be the skill most developed by their students, receiving a high score of 90%. 
However, students did not assign high scores to any of the listed skills. The next highest score 
of 60% was allocated by both teachers and students for skills such as civic literacy, 
information literacy, creativity, leadership, flexibility and adaptability. In contrast, both 
parties rated the inclusion of critical thinking and technology literacy quite low. 

Machaal / Transforming Education for the 21st Century : Enhancing Graduate Employability… 
19 
Graph 1. Students and teachers perceptions of 21st century skills presence in AFLS Bachelor curriculum 
 
 
Overall, both faculty members and students believe that all the listed 21CSs are included in 
most of their courses, with scores ranging from 40% to 80% and an average of nearly 50% 
for such inclusion as shown by Graph 2 below.  
Graph 2. 21st Century Skills inclusion in the AFLS Bachelor curriculum 
 
 
These findings are supported by the fact that only 50% of the students reported that the 
courses they took for their bachelor's degree prepared them for the job market, as shown in 
Graph 3 below. This consistency in students' responses is noteworthy. However, 80% of the 
teachers believe that their courses prepared students for jobs, which seems to contradict their 
responses regarding the availability of 21CSs in the curriculum of 48,5%. This apparent 
contradiction was discussed during follow-up interviews with faculty members who 
attributed the discrepancy to students’ constant absenteeism. 
 
 
 
 
 
21st century skills
0%
50%
100%
Students
Prodessors
51.00%
48.50%
21st Century Skills inclusion in the AFLS Bachelor program 
21st century skills

Machaal / Transforming Education for the 21st Century : Enhancing Graduate Employability… 
20 
Graph 3. Perceptions about the extent to which AFLS Bachelor curriculum prepared students for the job market 
 
Based on the findings of this research, the content of the AFLS Bachelor program curriculum 
does not seem to be conducive to future-proofing employment for college graduates as it 
lacked key 21CSs. The curriculum therefore requires a holistic and dynamic approach in its 
renovation. The ever-changing job market demands graduates who possess a diverse skill set, 
adaptability, and a commitment to lifelong learning (Thompson & Anderson, 2021). Some of 
the strategies and considerations that will help in developing this skill set may include 
fostering adaptability, emphasizing digital literacy and technological skills, fostering an 
entrepreneurial mindset and encouraging lifelong learning to stay updated with industry 
trends (Smith & Johnson, 2021). 
In addition, students’ and professors’ attitudes towards curriculum revamps are crucial to the 
success of such academic renovation. Practice has shown that students' attitudes towards 
curriculum revamps could possibly be positive when the revamps were focused on practical 
applications of knowledge and skills, active and interactive learning, and flexibility in the 
learning process. Equally, professors' attitudes towards curriculum revamps would be 
positive when provided with training and support, involved in the decision-making process, 
but mainly when they could see the benefits of the revamp for themselves and their students.  
4. Findings and Discussion  
    The chief finding of the present research points towards the need to revamp the targeted 
curriculum in order to align it with the needs of the job market through the inclusion of the 
21CSs. The discussion of the above findings will therefore focus on comparing the 
conclusions reached by this research with the reported findings of related studies in relation 
to curriculum revamp, with a view to equip graduates with key employability skills, also 
referred to as future-proofing graduates for employability. 
However, what emerged from the triangulation of all data collected by this research is a 
major contradiction between, curriculum evaluation and students’ interviews and 
questionnaires on one side and the perceptions and opinions of faculty members on the other 
side. To summarize these findings, the table below highlights the main points of data 
collected and how they answer the main question of the extent to which the AFLS Bachelor 
includes 21st CSs in order to prepare graduates for employment. 
50%
80%
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Students
Teachers
The program prepared students for the job market 

Machaal / Transforming Education for the 21st Century : Enhancing Graduate Employability… 
21 
Table 2. A summary of the findings  
Curriculum Evaluation 
 Students’ perceptions 
Faculty members’ perceptions 
-The content of most courses 
seemed obsolete and not in line 
with the development of key 
21CSs. 
-The content seems redundant 
and irrelevant for 21st century 
job market. 
- 51% perceive that 21CSs are 
included 
in 
the 
courses 
delivered. 
- Around 50% of students 
reported that the courses taken 
for their Bachelor prepared 
them for the job market. 
- 48.5% perceive that the listed 21st CSs 
are 
provided 
through 
the 
courses 
delivered. 
- 80% of the faculty members perceive that 
the Bachelor program prepared the 
students for employment 
Contradiction 
attributed 
to 
students’ 
absenteeism. 
 
Evidence from students’ questionnaires contradicts the findings of a report by the Higher 
Council for Education, Training and Scientific Research concluding that nearly 70% of 
higher education graduates are employed (CSEFRS, 2021). The conclusions reached by this 
governmental body also contradict unpublished feedback from past graduates of the AFLS 
Bachelor who struggle to secure employment. It would therefore seem that the curriculum did 
not reach its objective of equipping students with employability skills. This means that the 
curriculum in question is in need of a revamp to include 21CSs, such as creativity, problem 
solving and digital literacy, in order for it to become conducive to future-proofing 
employment for graduates. 
5. Implications and recommendations  
    The chief implication of this research findings is the imperative need for the effective 
integration of the 21CSs, mainly creativity, problem solving and digital literacy, in higher 
education curricula through a constructive revamp of course content, assessment methods and 
instruction approaches in order to future-proof employment for college graduates. This 
important endeavor requires a forward-thinking approach to equip students with the skills and 
knowledge needed to thrive in the current and future job market. For that purpose, this author 
recommends adopting the considerations and strategies that follow for revamping the current 
curriculum of the AFLS Bachelor program.  
There is a need to focus on developing skills that enable graduates to adapt to changing 
circumstances and be able to think critically. In fact, fostering adaptability and critical 
thinking skills is one approach that could be adopted for future-proofing employment for 
graduates through curriculum revamp. The focus should be put on developing skills that 
enable graduates’ resilience towards changing circumstances and to think critically. This 
involves emphasizing problem-solving, creativity, and the ability to learn new things quickly 
through the incorporation of project-based learning, case studies, and real-world challenges to 
promote key employability skills in the updated curriculum. These skills will enable 
graduates to better navigate changing employment circumstances, as they would develop 
adaptive skills to succeed in a rapidly evolving job market (Smith & Johnson, 2019; Roberts 
and Brown, 2020). 
Another important aspect is the development of technological and digital literacy, as 
equipping graduates with proficiency in technology, data analysis, coding, and emerging 
technologies like artificial intelligence can enhance their employability in the digital age. To 
ensure that graduates are familiar with a broad range of digital tools and platforms relevant to 
their field requires them to take courses on coding and others courses related to emerging 
technologies like artificial intelligence (Brown & Lee, 2020). 

Machaal / Transforming Education for the 21st Century : Enhancing Graduate Employability… 
22 
Furthermore, helping students develop a mindset of lifelong learning through the integration 
of opportunities for continuous skill development in the curriculum and encouraging self-
directed learning can prepare graduates for the unpredictable job market (Thompson & 
Anderson, 2021). This entails incorporating opportunities for continuous skill development 
into the curriculum, such as teaching students how to access and evaluate information, 
encourage self-directed learning, and promote engagement with professional development 
resources beyond graduation. In addition, incorporating courses or modules that promote 
understanding of different cultures, languages, and perspectives will afford graduates 
opportunities to nurture cultural competence and diversity awareness, which will in turn 
prepare them for success in tomorrow’s globalized industries (Rodriguez & Kim, 2019).  
A successful curriculum revamp should also allow practical experiences for employment 
through internships, cooperative education programs, and hands-on learning opportunities. 
Such opportunities will bridge the gap between theory and practice and help graduates to gain 
industry-specific skills and build professional networks (Adams et al., 2018; Davis & 
Thomas, 2022). For instance, establishing partnerships with local industries to offer students 
opportunities for hands-on learning, networking, and gaining industry-specific skills will 
encourage even more experiential learning. Apprenticeships, capstone projects, and 
community engagement initiatives will also allow students to apply their skills in real-world 
settings and build a network of professional contacts (Adams & Johnson, 2017; Smith & 
Brown, 2022). To that end, the revised curriculum will should reflect awareness about 
frequent updates with industry trends through regular revisions to align with emerging skills 
and knowledge requirements so that graduates’ skills remain relevant in the job market 
(Smith, 2018; Johnson & Roberts, 2021).   
 Furthermore, the inclusion of courses or training on career development support that focus 
on employability and long-term career success will play a significant role in future-proofing 
employment for college graduates. In fact, providing services such as resume writing, 
interview preparation, and networking workshops will help graduates to navigate the job 
market and secure employment (Thompson et al, 2019). Equally, promoting an 
entrepreneurial spirit by integrating courses or modules on entrepreneurship will motivate 
graduates to develop innovative thinking, problem-solving skills, and a business mindset, 
leading to self-employment or job creation.  
In addition to the above recommendations, mechanisms to evaluate and assess the impact of 
the newly developed curriculum need to be put in place in order to monitor and learn from 
the implementation phase and improve the curriculum further as illustrated by Figure1 below. 
Indeed, the continued monitoring and evaluation of the curriculum is a vital requirement in 
higher education where the focus is always shifting, and where curricula need to keep up with 
and reflect the changes in the job market. This academic vigilance complemented by 
subsequent timely and appropriate interventions can only be guaranteed if all stakeholders 
embrace this change process from its inception. In fact, proofing graduates for future 
employment is a continuous process, and the curriculum should be regularly evaluated and 
updated to align with evolving industry demands. As already stated, collaboration with 
industry partners and employers is crucial to ensure that graduates possess the skills and 
knowledge needed for future employment. Therefore, curriculum designers and renovators 
must regularly assess industry trends, conduct research, and seek feedback from stakeholders 
to ensure that the curriculum remains relevant and aligned with the needs of the job market 
(Smith & Roberts, 2023).  
 
 

Machaal / Transforming Education for the 21st Century : Enhancing Graduate Employability… 
23 
Figure1. Curriculum review cycle 
                      
 
To sum up, there are strategies that could provide a road map for higher education institutions 
to prepare graduates effectively for employment. Hence, the endeavor to future-proof 
employment opportunities for college graduates via curriculum revamp necessitates a 
multifaceted approach by cultivating adaptability, underscoring digital literacy and 
technological proficiency, promoting lifelong learning, offering practical experiences, staying 
attuned to industry trends, providing robust career development support, and instilling an 
entrepreneurial mindset. In so doing, higher education institutions can bestow upon graduates 
the skills and knowledge required for thriving in an ever-evolving and dynamic job market. 
In addition, engaging educators and policymakers, will enable institutions to develop 
curricula that align with the demands of the modern job market and empower graduates to 
succeed in a rapidly changing world.  
6. Conclusion  
In closing, this study seeks to illuminate the path toward preparing graduates of a 
Professional Bachelor program in Applied Foreign Language Studies for the unpredictable 
job market through a carefully planned and executed curriculum revamp to include creativity, 
problem solving and digital literacy as key 21CSs. It reaffirms the profound responsibility 
that all stakeholders in higher education share in shaping graduates' future. The study lays out 
a road map for institutions to design or revamp curricula that equip graduates with the skills 
and attributes required in the ever-shifting job market. Furthermore, it highlights the need for 
a collaborative approach, where educators, employers, and policy makers unite to bridge the 
gap between academia and industry; ensuring graduates hit the ground running with the 
required amounts of confidence and resilience when they embark on their professional 
journey. 
The study highlights that it is imperative for higher education institutions to ensure that 
graduates are not only job-ready but equally equipped with the required resilience to fit in an 
increasingly complex and interconnected global economy. Proofing graduates for future 
employment is an ongoing journey that requires commitment, collaboration and a steadfast 
dedication to the holistic development of students. As the employment landscape continues 
its transformation, the commitment to evolving, adapting and empowering graduates should 
remain the chief mission of all stakeholders. Preparing job-ready graduates through 
curriculum design or revamp is a multifaceted endeavor that demands innovation, 
adaptability and foresight. Throughout this paper, I have suggested a number of strategies, 
informed by research and expertise, enabling higher education institutions to empower their 
graduates for the dynamic world of work. Key findings of this paper underscore the 
importance of adaptability, digital literacy, entrepreneurship and lifelong learning as essential 
Review
Curriculum 
Share & 
Consult
Develop & 
Improve 
Implement 
Monitor

Machaal / Transforming Education for the 21st Century : Enhancing Graduate Employability… 
24 
pillars in preparing graduates for an ever-evolving job market. The cultivation of hands-on 
experiences and industry relevance through curricular updates further fortifies students for 
success and paves their way in a shifting landscape to secure employment. 
Nevertheless, the journey to proofing graduates for employment does not culminate with 
curriculum design or revamp. Curriculum revamp is inevitably a process that results in a 
cycle requiring an ongoing commitment to industry collaboration, career development 
support, and fostering an entrepreneurial mindset. These multifaceted strategies prepare 
graduates not only to secure jobs but above all to create opportunities and lead innovation in 
the workplace. 
 
References 
Adams, J., & Johnson, M. (2017). Industry collaboration in curriculum design: A case study 
of a future-focused university program. Journal of Higher Education Policy and 
Management, 39(6), 642-657. 
Brown, C., & Lee, S. (2020). Developing employability skills in higher education: A 
systematic review of the literature. Higher Education Research & Development, 39(3), 
409-427. 
CSEFRS (2021). Insertion professionnelle des lauréats de l’enseignement supérieur. available 
on: 
https://www.csefrs.ma/wp-content/uploads/2021/10/Re%CC%81sume%CC%81-
Rapport-Insertion-V-Fr-FINAL.pdf  
Davis, R., & Thomas, S. (2022). Enhancing graduate employability: The role of internships 
and cooperative education programs. Journal of Education and Work, 35(2), 211-231. 
Johnson, J. A. (2001). Principles of Effective Change: Curriculum Revision that Works. 
Journal of Educational Leaders. Vol.1, Number1, Fall. The University of Iowa. 
Johnson, L. (2017). Preparing college graduates for the workforce: The role of project-based 
learning. Journal of Higher Education Theory and Practice, 17(1), 26-37. 
Jones, K., & Williams, A. (2018). Interdisciplinary learning and employability in higher 
education: A systematic review. Teaching in Higher Education, 23(4), 475-492. 
Mansouri, Z. (2022). Moroccan University Graduates’ Employability Through the Lens of 
the Employer: A Qualitative Study. Journal of Performance Management, ISSN: 2820-
7327, Volume 1, Issue 1 (2022), pp. 30-40. 
OECD, (2017). "Education 2030 Framework for Action and the Innovative Learning 
Environments." 
OECD 
Publishing, 
2017, 
available 
on: 
http://www.oecd-
ilibrary.org/education/education-2030-framework-for-action-and-the-innovative-
learning-environments_9789264279286-en  
Partnership for 21st Century Skills (2016). Framework for 21st century learning. Available at 
https://www.marietta.edu/sites/default/files/documents/21st_century_skills_standards_bo
ok_2.pdf  
Peg, A. (2013). "We think that’s the future": Curriculum reform initiatives in higher 
education. 
Retrieved 
on 
28/12/2023 
from: 
https://www.heacademy.ac.uk/sites/default/files/curriculum_reform_final_19th_dec_1.pdf         
Rodriguez, J. & Kim, Y. (2019). Enhancing employability skills through multicultural 
education: A systematic review. Journal of Studies in International Education, 23(1), 21-
39. 

Machaal / Transforming Education for the 21st Century : Enhancing Graduate Employability… 
25 
Smith, E. & Johnson, T. (2019). Future-proofing employability: Graduate perspectives on the 
value of a university education. Higher Education Research & Development, 38(2), 367-
382. 
Soffel, J. S. (2016). Jobs and The Future of Work: Ten 21st-century skills every student 
needs. Retrieved April 28, 2024, from https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2016/03/21st-
century-skills-future-jobs-students/   
Thompson, J. & Anderson, L. (2021). Lifelong learning for employability: A systematic 
review of the literature. Journal of Further and Higher Education, 45(4), 515-531. 
Therriault, S. B. (2019, March 10). College and Career Readiness. American Institutes for 
Research. 
Retrieved 
April 
20, 
2024, 
from 
https://www.air.org/our-
work/education/college-and-career-readiness?page=3   
Trilling, B., & Fadel, C. (2009). 21st century skills: Learning for life in our times. Jossey-
Bass/Wiley 
UNESCO, (2015)."Global Education 2030 Agenda." Unesco.org, UNESCO, available on: 
www.unesco.org/en/global-education-2030-agenda   
USAID (2021). "Morocco Curriculum Review and Capacity Building Activity (CCA) Final 
Report" available on: https://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00XX57.pdf