REVIEW ARTICLE
The effects of PISA on global basic education
reform: a systematic literature review
Jian Li1, Eryong Xue2✉& Siyuan Guo3
The Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) is a vehicle for promoting stu-
dents’ learning that plays a signiﬁcant role in basic education reform globally. Few studies
have used the transnational academic achievements of PISA as evidence to systematically
summarize the primary motivation behind PISA’s participation in global decision-making and
the core issues of PISA’s impact on education reform. Using a systematic review approach,
we aimed to analyze ﬁndings from empirical research about the impact of PISA on global
basic education policies and to provide an overview of the effects of PISA on global basic
education reform. The Social Sciences Citation Index (SSCI) and Scopus databases were
searched for empirical research written in English, focusing on basic education, and including
search terms such as PISA, educational reform, and policy. A total of 85 studies were
included in the review and systematically synthesized to determine the effect of PISA on
global basic education reform. PISA drives policy discussions on education quality and equity
through its pursuit of educational quality, data-based comparative analysis, and evidence-
based research paradigms. PISA’s impact has extended far beyond its original function of
measuring the quality of education among countries, and it profoundly affects global edu-
cation governance through ‘soft’ governance of the education system. We present a speciﬁc
mechanism model of PISA’s impact on the development of education policies that demon-
strates the two-way interaction between PISA and education reform, providing a theoretical
reference for future academic research on education reform linked to PISA.
https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
OPEN
1 Institute of International and Comparative Education, Beijing Normal University, 100875 Beijing, China. 2 China Institute of Education Policy, Faculty of Education,
Beijing Normal University, 100875 Beijing, China. 3 Faculty of Education, Beijing Normal University, 100875 Beijing, China. ✉email: eryongxue@bnu.edu.cn
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |  (2025) 12:106 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
1
1234567890():,;

Introduction
S
ince the advent of the knowledge economy era in the 1990s,
building a modern education power has become a corner-
stone of socio-economic and technological competition
among countries. While benchmark indicators such as invest-
ment in education as a share of gross domestic product (GDP) are
recognized as ‘supply’ variables in a country’s knowledge econ-
omy, effectively measuring the impact of domestic investment in
education on students’ knowledge and skills remains a challenge.
Furthermore, intensifying globalization has meant that countries
have begun to pay attention to the guiding role of international
references in the formulation of public and education policies.
However, a set of evaluation tools with international compar-
ability and common recognition among countries has not been
established to evaluate national education systems and effectively
monitor talent training quality (Baird et al. 2011). The Organi-
zation for Economic Development and Co-operation (OECD)
proposed the Program for International Student Assessment
(PISA) in 1995 and ofﬁcially launched it in 1997, in response to
these needs.
The main objective of PISA is to assess the ability of 15-year-
olds in countries around the world to apply their knowledge and
skills in reading, mathematics, and science to real-life challenges
(OECD, 2022b). The assessment provides a dynamic and regular
program of educational evaluation and monitoring to compare
international levels of education, analyze education systems,
improve education quality and provide data support for policy
making (Gillis et al. 2016). Studying the effect of PISA on edu-
cation reform may provide an important reference to enable
better understanding of the global education system, reﬂection on
the educational status quo, and improvement of education poli-
cies and quality.
PISA is designed to assist governments in monitoring the
outcomes of education systems using a common, internationally
recognized framework for assessing and reporting student
achievement. With the acceleration of globalization, economic
and human capital competition among countries has become
more intense, and quality education is key to improving
national competitiveness and innovation ability. PISA can be
regarded as the OECD’s embodiment of the neoliberal free
market concept in the ﬁeld of education. It emphasizes
accountability, standardization, and the promotion of compe-
tition among schools, in part reﬂecting the human capital
strength of countries in the global economic competition
(Pons, 2017). PISA survey data can be used to construct a macro
measure of human capital to support the improvement of
education systems in participating countries from an economic
development perspective (OECD, 2022a).
Driven by globalization and economic integration, the ﬁeld of
education governance has developed a comparative focus in
recent years, with education no longer conﬁned to the scope of a
single country but rather a global issue (Madsen, 2022). As a
widely recognized authoritative brand launched by the OECD,
PISA beneﬁts from its characteristics of ‘de-contextualization’ and
‘generality’, providing possibilities for international education
comparison in the context of globalization (Grek, 2010). PISA is
also a driving force for ‘governing by numbers and evidence-
based policy making in the ﬁeld of education (Grek, 2009; Lawn,
2003). The large-scale international data provided by PISA pro-
vide policy makers with comparable data on a global scale to help
them better understand the functioning of education systems and
student performance, using quantitative data and indicators to
formulate more effective policies and reform programs. Thus,
PISA results are gradually becoming evidence of the legitimiza-
tion of political action, and PISA’s ‘soft’ governance tools are
receiving increased scholarly attention. PISA itself constitutes a
form of control for effective governance through information and
indicators. PISA data are analyzed and interpreted by change
agents for use in education policy making and reform. The OECD
provides remote guidance to national policymakers by reporting
PISA results and global rankings. The results can be used to verify
the legitimacy of reforms already implemented in a country, or as
motivation to follow the policy recommendations of the OECD or
launch new reforms (Gillis et al. 2016).
Growing numbers of empirical studies demonstrate the
transformative effect of PISA in the ﬁeld of global basic edu-
cation. PISA and its associated global series of education
comparison indicators have direct and indirect inﬂuences on
education policies (Yore et al. 2010). The direct impact comes
from a country’s performance in the assessment, or from
OECD policy recommendations related to PISA. In other
words, education policy reform is promoted according to PISA
results, and education reform is guided by PISA (Neumann
et al. 2010). For example, in 2001, Germany experienced ‘PISA
shock,’ later described as a decisive watershed in German
education policy making. Immediately after the publication of
the PISA results at the end of 2001, Germany—under external
pressure from PISA—put forward a comprehensive education
reform agenda, with at least three output-based reform norms
directly linked to PISA: establishing education standards and
centralized
monitoring,
top-reducing
governance,
and
improving education standards. The effect was to strengthen
school autonomy and expand empirical educational research
and decision-making.
Unlike the direct impact on the German education sector, the
indirect impact of PISA tests is related to the use of PISA com-
petency standards as a universal framework to justify particular
policies. Countries that perform well on PISA, such as Finland,
tend to interpret PISA results as an endorsement of their own
policy initiatives and political positions. PISA results have been
used to mobilize policy action to legitimize domestic education
reforms aimed at ensuring continuous improvement in Finnish
performance (Grek, 2009). Rautalin and Alasuutari (2009) ana-
lyzed the process of combining knowledge production in OECD
with the formation of Finnish education policies, pointing out
that Finland’s basic education policies were largely unaffected
because of the country’s high performance on the PISA. However,
Finnish national policy makers (i.e., ofﬁcials in the Ministry of
Education and the National Board of Education) tend to use PISA
results and international rankings to justify their policy goals. In
this sense, the key concepts, measurement objects, and mea-
surement techniques adopted in PISA are all indirectly incorpo-
rated as part of the national education policy discourse (Rautalin
and Alasuutari, 2009).
Researchers also pay attention to the factors that inﬂuence
policy response. The educational reform effects of PISA relate to
each country’s political, historical, and cultural educational
practices, and factors inﬂuencing the policy responses of nation-
states are diverse and interwoven. Countries with similar PISA
results or rankings may initiate very different education policies
(Baird et al. 2016). France and the United Kingdom, for example,
obtained similar results in the 2001 PISA, but have since adopted
different strategies to improve their educational performance. In
the case of France, the response may be related to the skeptical
attitude of the French public and policymakers towards com-
parative assessments and criticisms of cultural bias, inadequate
statistical methods, and oversimpliﬁcation of indicators (Dobbins
and Martens, 2012). In China, the government’s policy responses
to external inﬂuences are heavily inﬂuenced by the country’s
cultural traditions and political system. The education model
advocated by the OECD is seen as Western, neoliberal, eco-
nomically
driven,
and
diminishing
the
role
of
national
REVIEW ARTICLE
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
2
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |  (2025) 12:106 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z

governments. Countries that attach great importance to their own
cultural traditions and political stability may differ in their policy
responses to PISA results compared with Western countries (Xie
et al. 2022). In summary, research conﬁrms that policy responses
of individual countries to PISA results cannot be attributed to a
single actor but reﬂect tight networks of social relations and
material conditions, and policymakers’ deﬁnitions of policy
conﬂict and convergence.
Responses to PISA results may also vary across PISA cycles and
across countries and regions. When the results are published,
policymakers, media, and citizens in many countries tend to react
strongly (e.g., in Germany, Turkey, Denmark, Mexico, and Por-
tugal), while responses in other countries (e.g., the United States,
Finland, and France) demonstrate extreme indifference. Studies
have suggested that the opportunity for countries to make policy
responses to PISA results is related to changes in the international
situation and in cases of a sudden large gap between a country’s
long-term self-perception and the newly released empirical results
(Martens and Niemann, 2013). Bieber and Martens (2011) ana-
lyzed the impact of PISA results on education policy by com-
paring the United States and Switzerland. They argued that PISA
results had an immediate impact in Switzerland, leading to policy
development and convergence with OECD recommendations.
However, ﬁndings for the U.S. merely conﬁrmed what had
already been agreed on in that country—that the U.S. education
system
was
below
international
standards.
Therefore,
the
domestic pressure caused by this problem was not exacerbated by
the empirical ﬁndings at the time of their release (Bieber and
Martens, 2011). In 2009, however, researchers observed a spurt of
academic discussion about PISA and U.S. students’ ability to
learn, with PISA results becoming central to U.S. educational
discussions. Studies suggest that the change in perception of the
problem occurred because China (Shanghai), the U.S.’s most
direct rival in the world economic market, performed very well in
the same PISA test, which was interpreted as China’s economic
output surpassing that of the U.S. in future. This perception
directly triggered a new round of education reform in the U.S.
(Martens and Niemann, 2013).
International organizations play an important role in global
policy-making, and the topic has gained increasing attention.
Empirical research on the effect of PISA on basic education
reform in various countries is relatively new but has already
yielded rich results regarding the conceptual framework, policy
responses, policy convergence, and factors inﬂuencing basic
education policies affected by PISA. These studies reveal the
impact of PISA as a tool for global education governance and its
power to deepen competitive comparisons in education. Discus-
sion of educational policy reform driven by PISA tends to focus
on the internal research of nation-states, analyzing the mechan-
ism and path of PISA’s inﬂuence on education policies in coun-
tries
and
regions
by
exploring
their
policy
convergence
mechanisms and policy translation framework. For example,
Bieber and Martens (2011) focused on factors that lead to
voluntary convergence of policies, namely cross-border commu-
nication, regulatory competition, and independent problem-
solving by establishing a theoretical framework for causal
mechanisms of voluntary convergence of education policies. In
contrast, Xie et al. (2022) borrowed the ‘ti (体, ‘essence’) and yong
(用, ‘function’) framework.’ to analyze China’s political actions in
dealing with problems under the external inﬂuence of PISA. The
body-use framework has been used in China since ancient times
to explain Sino-Western relations—‘body’ refers to the funda-
mental, intrinsic, and essential nature of things, and ‘use’ means
the appearance and function of body (Xie et al. 2022). Moving
beyond country-speciﬁc studies, research has paid little attention
to supra-national organizations or institutions and has not
adequately analyzed the types of capital they can call on and their
ability to inﬂuence nation-state policy—a process that deserves
further exploration in the current era of globalization.
The empirical study of basic education policies informed by
PISA has become a hot spot in the ﬁeld of global comparative
research on basic education policies. However, to date there are
no studies systematically summarizing the evidence of transna-
tional academic achievements of PISA research to understand the
motivation underlying PISA’s participation in global decision-
making and the core issues of PISA’s impact on education reform.
Using a systematic review approach, this study aimed to ana-
lyze ﬁndings from empirical research about the impact of PISA
on global basic education policies and to provide an overview of
the effects of PISA on global basic education reform. The study
may serve as an information reference for empirical research on
the effect of global basic education reform associated with PISA.
The following research questions were addressed:
Research Question 1: What are the main characteristics of
PISA impact policy research (research area, research object,
research methodology and design, conceptual framework, and
theoretical model)?
Research Question 2: What are the core issues of PISA
affecting education reform?
Research Question 3: What factors inﬂuence PISA’s effect, i.e.,
under what conditions does PISA have an impact on national
policy making?
Methods
A systematic review of the literature was undertaken to reveal the
overall trend, shortcomings, and future research directions of
existing studies Newman and Gough, 2020). Systematic reviews
aim to improve the literature by systematically collecting, ana-
lyzing, and summarizing all relevant research literature on a
particular topic. The approach is characterized by well-deﬁned
research questions, a rigorous literature search and screening
processes, systematic data extraction and analysis methods, and
transparent reporting standards (Newman and Gough, 2020; Xiao
and Watson, 2019). As a stand-alone research method, systematic
reviews critically evaluate relevant literature to promote the
development of pertinent theories and create a key knowledge
source for the target research ﬁeld. Systematic reviews have been
widely used in ﬁelds such as medicine, social sciences, education,
and environmental sciences (Lame, 2019).
Design and search procedure. The databases searched in this
study included the Social Sciences Citation Index (SSCI) (Web of
Science) and Scopus. The main English language journals that
contained relevant studies included the Oxford Review of Edu-
cation, International Journal of Science and Mathematics Educa-
tion, Journal of Education Policy, International Journal of
Qualitative Studies in Education, European Journal of Education,
Comparative Education, Assessment in Education: Principles,
Policy & Practice, German Politics, and European Education.
These journals are rigorously peer-reviewed and representative
academic journals in the ﬁeld of education. The key search terms
were (PISA OR ‘Program for International Student Assessment’)
AND (‘education polic*’ OR ‘educational polic*’ OR ‘education
reform’ OR ‘educational reform’) AND (‘impact*’ OR ‘inﬂuence*’
OR ‘effect*’ OR ‘consequence*’). As of September 13, 2023, 2199
initial articles were retrieved. After excluding duplications, a total
of 1754 articles were obtained.
Selection/Extraction process. To ensure the accuracy and relia-
bility of the study results based on the research questions,
inclusion criteria were formulated for the 1754 literature items
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
REVIEW ARTICLE
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |  (2025) 12:106 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
3

initially retrieved: (1) peer-reviewed and written in English; (2)
journal article; and (3) uses empirical research methods (i.e.,
qualitative, quantitative or mixed-methods research). After pre-
liminary screening of abstracts and conclusions, a total of 625
articles were selected for this study. The full texts were down-
loaded and read, and secondary screening took place based on the
following criteria (shown in Table 1): (1) the full text of the
original article could be downloaded; (2) the research focused on
the impact of PISA on education policy; and (3) the research
focused on the basic education stage. These criteria ensured that
only those articles that substantively explore the impact of PISA
tests on international basic education policy were retained. Sub-
stantive discussions typically included empirical investigations of
the impact of PISA tests, discussion about the impact of PISA
emerging from empirical research, or research that focuses on the
impact of PISA tests. After secondary screening, 18 studies that
did not respond to the research question were excluded, and
85 studies that could respond to at least one research question
were retained for inclusion in the analysis phase of this study. The
PRISMA ﬂow chart (Fig. 1) shows the 85 selected studies that
were analyzed in terms of author, year, country, conceptual fra-
mework, research method, and research conclusion.
Based on research methods and data types, we divided
empirical research methods into three categories: qualitative,
quantitative, and mixed-methods research. Of the 85 empirical
research studies, 49 adopted qualitative data analysis methods
and 36 studies used mixed research methods. Quantitative
research data mainly came from the Trends in International
Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS), PISA scores, and
ranking data. Qualitative research data included ofﬁcial policy
documents issued by central government departments such as the
Ministry of Education, state media reports and political speeches,
relevant policy research and consulting reports of scholars
engaged in education policy formulation, and interview docu-
ments and data from government ofﬁcials and experts. Most
Table 1 Selection criteria.
Inclusion criteria
Exclusion criteria
Not duplicates
Duplicates
Written in English
Written in other languages
Full text available
Full text unavailable
Journal publication
Non-journal publication
Empirical studies
Literature reviews, commentaries, or meta-
analyses
Focus on basic education
ﬁeld
Not in basic education ﬁeld
Fig. 1 Prisma diagram of the study selection process.
REVIEW ARTICLE
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
4
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |  (2025) 12:106 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z

studies were case studies, historical comparative studies, and
international comparative studies to analyze the effect of PISA on
global basic education reform.
In the evaluation of research quality, the included literature can
be divided into evaluation effect literature, descriptive literature,
and explanation literature, and the quality evaluation methods
adopted by different types of literature are different. For
descriptive literature, the quality of descriptive literature is judged
according to the information source, the correlation between the
research
purpose
and
research
method,
and
professional
authority. As for the qualitative literature explaining the reasons,
there is no uniﬁed quality evaluation standard in the world. This
study mainly considers two aspects: The validity of the research
(including whether the data collection method and analysis
method are clearly explained, the validity test of the data source
and analysis process, the validity test of the respondents on the
data, and whether the special or contradictory data are clearly
described, etc.), the relevance of the research (including whether
the research results have new knowledge or theories proposed,
and whether the research results can be widely applied to the
same type of people or other groups) Other population, whether
the ﬁndings can be generalized to similar environments, etc.)
This study further describes the 85 articles included in the
analysis, summarizing their main arguments, research methods,
and design. We analyzed the empirical results of the literature
and explored the effect of PISA on global basic education reform.
Data analysis was executed in two steps based on the coding
analysis. For the ﬁrst step, individual articles were analyzed to
identify the separate codes and create a speciﬁc codebook. In the
second step, a series analysis approach, including regional
distribution and core themes analysis, was undertaken to address
the research questions. Data analyses were conducted by the
authors, and discussion took place until mutual agreement was
reached. Detailed descriptions of the analyses are given in the
following sections.
In terms of their conceptual framework, many of the research
papers adopted theoretical frameworks for policy formulation
and analysis. These included agenda-setting theory (Martens and
Niemann, 2013), contemporary human capital theory and
governance frameworks for globalization and education (Sellar
and Lingard, 2018), the causal mechanism theory of voluntary
convergence in education policy (involving policy reference and
transfer) (Bieber and Martens, 2011), and the body-use frame-
work, an analytical framework Chinese policymakers use to
interpret and negotiate the relationship between internal reform
agendas and external inﬂuences (Xie et al. 2022). Researchers
point out that power—in its broadest sense—must be viewed as a
network of governance intertwined with knowledge, subject
status, and participant identity when speaking of the public policy
process. Thus, political sentiment is an important lever for policy
change (Sellar and Lingard, 2018), and affective theoretical
frameworks and critical discourse analysis are useful for analyzing
textual materials to explore the effect of PISA on policy
development and comparison. Discourse analysis helps to
deconstruct the structural relations of dominance, power, and
control between local and foreign countries, expressed in
language.
Results
Regional distribution analysis. Current research on the impact
of PISA on international basic education policies and educational
reform shows clear regional distribution patterns (Fig. 2). The
countries and regions included in the dataset are relatively narrow
in scope, with some countries repeatedly appearing. Frequently
included regions included Australia, Western European countries
(e.g., Germany, the United Kingdom, France, Switzerland, and
Spain),
Nordic
countries
(Finland,
Norway,
and
Sweden),
Southern Cone countries (Argentina, Uruguay, and Chile), the
United States, Canada, and some Asian countries (mainly Japan,
Shanghai, China, South Korea, and Jordan). PISA has attracted
participation from more than 90 countries and economies around
the world as part of the OECD Global Initiative (OECD, 2022b).
However, as of September 2023, relevant research literature was
available for only 17 countries. This indicates that although PISA
and its impact have become a research focus, in-depth studies on
the impact of PISA on international basic education policies
remain relatively limited, and the research scope is narrow.
39 studies were undertaken in Western Europe (20 in Germany, 8
in France, 5 in the United Kingdom, 5 in Spain, and 2 in Swit-
zerland), 16 in Asia (8 in China, 2 each in Japan, South Korea,
Jordan, and Australia), 14 in Northern Europe (6 in Finland, 8 in
Norway), 10 in North America (5 in the United States and 5 in
Canada) and 6 in South America (2 each in Argentina, Uruguay
and Chile).
Literature with Western European countries as the main
research objects accounted for 45.9% of the total. The main
research object of the literature was EU countries or member
states of the European Economic Area (EEA), accounting for
62.4% of the total. Thus, European countries are the focus of
studies on the effects of global basic education reforms associated
with PISA, likely related to the OECD’s close ties with the
European education system where it plays an important role.
Europe represents an important part of the OECD world, and the
OECD and the European Commission have long shared broadly
similar policy agendas. Data on European education systems
deﬁned and collected by the OECD intersect with data from the
EU, helping to create a manageable and sustainable common
space—the European Education Space. Therefore, PISA—as the
main tool for providing data for European education systems—
has shaped the way European education networks operate, and
the policy areas of concern have received extensive attention from
European scholars since the ﬁrst PISA results (Grek, 2009).
Core ways in which PISA affects education reform. The policy
responses of nation-states to PISA scores and rankings within a
given PISA cycle vary. PISA’s ofﬁcial position is that the test
results reﬂect the quality and equity of learning outcomes
achieved across the globe. Therefore, this study also uses the
analytical framework of ‘quality’ and ‘fairness’ to analyze the
effect of PISA on basic education reform.
From
a
quality
perspective,
through
PISA
the
OECD
emphasizes a comprehensive assessment of students’ knowledge
and skills in reading, mathematics, and science to meet real-life
challenges. The PISA Competency Framework requires education
systems to equip young people with the knowledge and tools they
need to address challenges facing modern societies, such as
rapidly
changing
labor
markets,
continued
digitization
of
economies and societies, social mobility, growing inequality
within countries, large-scale international migration ﬂows, and
climate change (OECD, 2019). The impact of PISA on the reform
of basic education to improve the quality of education in
countries manifests in three levels: macro, middle, and micro
decision-making levels. The impacts at each of these levels are
discussed in the following sections.
At the macro decision-making level, the impact of PISA is
manifested in (1) accepting the neoliberal educational values
advocated by PISA and increasing educational expenditure (e.g.,
in
Germany
and
France);
(2)
accepting
the
concepts
of
‘competence’ and ‘literacy’ (e.g., in Japan); (3) inﬂuencing the
acceptability of PISA’s ideal societies and the choice of reference
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
REVIEW ARTICLE
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |  (2025) 12:106 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
5

societies (e.g., in South Korea); (4) strengthening international
cooperation with PISA and OECD (e.g., in Uruguay); and (5)
promoting evidence-based education policies (e.g., in Japan,
Germany and Jordan). German society was shocked when the
ﬁrst PISA results came out in 2000. From the 1970s to the early
2000s, Germany had failed to create human capital and, in OECD
terms, deprived a large proportion of its students of the
opportunity to acquire academic qualities needed to obtain
optimal rewards in their working lives (Martens and Niemann,
2013). The poor PISA results exposed the hidden dangers of the
Fig. 2 Overview of the selected publication. a Illustrates the regional distribution analysis (top), b shows core themes/issues (middle), and c represents
time trends of the academic studies included in the review (bottom).
REVIEW ARTICLE
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
6
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |  (2025) 12:106 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z

German education system, and thus, directly started all-round
education reform in that country. Niemann et al. (2017) analyzed
the policy responses and debates in Germany after the release of
the 2000 PISA results, pointing out that the ﬁrst PISA test showed
that the German education system did not meet the required
standards of effectiveness and efﬁciency, revealing a large gap
between Germany and high-performing countries in the ﬁeld of
education. It also exposed the stalled state of education reform,
directly pushing education themes onto the public policy agenda
and further reinforced policy actions by policymakers to offset
performance deﬁcits. PISA also promoted the integration of
comparative cultural paradigms into German educational policy
making. Yore et al. (2010) argue that the educational reforms
implemented
in
Germany
after
the
ﬁrst
round
of
PISA
results were made public (in 2000) reﬂect a paradigm shift,
including a stronger positioning of the educational output
perspective. Education policy making was no longer only
concerned
with
the
realization
of
certain
principles
but
incorporated a new governance model of evidence-based policy
making (Yore et al. 2010).
For Japan, the impact of PISA testing on basic education policy
was reﬂected in the prominence of ‘PISA competence’ and ‘PISA
literacy’ in policy objectives. Unlike Germany, the results of the
second PISA in 2003 showed that the crux of the problem with
Japanese education lay in the content of education rather than the
system or organization (Ninomiya, 2019). The ‘yutori education’
policy implemented in Japan in the 1980s and 1990s led to
declining academic levels and learning abilities of Japanese
students at the end of the 20th century, attracting great attention
from Japanese educationalists, economists, and administrators.
After the release of the second PISA results, many news outlets
reported extensively on the results of the survey and compared
the results of the 2003 assessment with those from 2000. The
results showed that Japanese students had fallen in the rankings
in several focus areas (MEXT, 2004), conﬁrming the decline in
student academic achievement since the 1980s and the wide-
spread talk of an education crisis in Japan. In 2004, spurred by the
publication of the PISA 2003 results, the idea of PISA literacy was
formally incorporated as a main goal of national education policy.
PISA literacy refers to reading and broader knowledge of the
entire curriculum. It focuses on higher-order competencies such
as problem-solving, knowledge application, creative work, and
knowledge recall (National Institute for Education Policy, 2019).
PISA literacy brought a new concept of academic achievement to
Japanese education with different meanings and achievements
from the previous understanding of academic achievement
(Ninomiya, 2019).
The impact of PISA on Korea’s basic education policy at the
macro level is related to the choice of the reference society. Kim
and Choi (2023) point out that before the launch of PISA, South
Korea had been ‘silently borrowing’ from Japan’s education
policies. While the results of PISA 2009 led Western educators to
study education policies in Shanghai, South Korea turned its
attention to Finland, one of the top-achieving countries in PISA
2003 (Kim and Choi, 2023). Acosta (2020) argues that for
Southern Cone countries such as Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay,
the value of PISA lies in its association with the OECD. In other
words, the policy impact of PISA is reﬂected in establishing ties
with OECD at the level of the education system, making domestic
education affairs a part of national economic policy and the
international affairs agenda. Countries in that region derive value
from PISA by becoming a global governance complex for
sustainable development (Acosta, 2020).
At mid-level decision-making, PISA’s impact mainly manifests
as: (1) improving teacher education in the initial stage of teacher
pre-service
education
and
teacher
continuing
professional
development by establishing colleges in universities (e.g., in
Jordan and France); (2) benchmarking the PISA test standards in
the assessment system, introducing large-scale national education
assessment, and strengthening national education and teaching
standards reviews (e.g., in Switzerland, Norway and China); and
(3) tools to strengthen monitoring and continuous improvement
of processes and results in school education management (e.g., in
Japan). Speciﬁcally, Bieber and Martens (2011) pointed out that
in Switzerland, the introduction of the national education
standard (the Interstate Compulsory Education Harmonization
Agreement of the Swiss school system or HarmoS) meant greater
consideration of students’ abilities and marked the rise of a new
test culture. This involved a shift from input-oriented funda-
mentals to underlying logic targeting efﬁciency and output
control (Bieber and Martens, 2011). The Canada Education
Indicators Plan introduced the same regionally uniform indica-
tors used in the OECD report, including the PISA-based ‘Student
Achievement Excellence’ indicator. PISA results became the basis
for determining whether Canada’s education level was excellent
and whether the country’s education policies were successful
(Baird et al. 2016). In China, the impact of PISA on educational
assessment
was
reﬂected
in
the
establishment
of
a
new
educational quality assurance system based on the existing
large-scale
examination
system.
In
2007,
the
Ministry
of
Education established a monitoring center to carry out a pilot
program to monitor the quality of compulsory education. The
Ministry of Education’s report on the center refers to the
standards of educational quality and student ability followed by
PISA tests, based on critical research and adaptation of PISA
indicators. The report describes six subject indicators for
mathematics, language, science, ethics, physical education, and
art (Xie et al. 2022). Ninomiya (2019) believes that PISA has also
inﬂuenced the construction of the evidence-based improvement
cycle in the Japanese school education management system –
school administrators focus on the academic achievement of the
school, check the corresponding information about the educa-
tional process and outcomes according to set goals, and use this
information as evidence to promote the improvement cycle of
educational management (Ninomiya, 2019).
At the micro level of decision-making, the policy effect of PISA
manifests in: (1) curriculum reform—accepting the competence
standards advocated by PISA and reforming the curriculum on
this basis, e.g., Germany’s emphasis on improving reading skills
and promoting learning in mathematics and science; (2) the
school system or changes in the school system, including the
reform of the original education system, the adjustment of the
compulsory education period, the uniﬁcation of the school
system, and the standard PISA test period. For example,
Germany’s discourse on curriculum reform based on PISA
results deals with how well students can apply their knowledge
and skills to solve relevant problems in a variety of situations.
Knowledge mastery is no longer regarded as the key indicator to
judge students’ academic success; but rather, students’ learning
ability acquired through course learning is the focus of course
evaluation. Neumann et al. (2010) discussed the impact of the
PISA test on German science education in detail, reporting that
the PISA was the basis for the construction of the NES
curriculum. The NES incorporates the concepts of scientiﬁc
literacy used in the PISA testing framework, including under-
standing and practice in science-related situations, with a strong
emphasis on the role of science in everyday life (Neumann et al.
2010) (see Table 2).
Educational equity was the second dimension we considered in
recognizing the policy changes in PISA countries. PISA is based
on the principle that equitable education is key to achieving
sustainable and inclusive growth. The PISA deﬁnition of equity in
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
REVIEW ARTICLE
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |  (2025) 12:106 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
7

education includes the two related concepts of inclusiveness and
equity. Inclusion is a measure of whether an education system
ensures that all students acquire basic foundational skills. Equity
is related to students’ access to quality education and, more
speciﬁcally, the extent to which background circumstances
inﬂuence educational outcomes (OECD, 2019). Overall, PISA’s
equity framework focuses on whether a country or region’s
education system can ensure that all students, regardless of their
background
or
circumstances,
have
access
to
high-quality
education.
For equity of opportunity, PISA considers whether all students
can acquire basic foundational skills. This relates to access to
educational resources and academic and social segregation
between schools (OECD, 2010). At the level of policy response,
Table 2 Educational Policy Reform Described in Selected Studies.
Policy reform
Example
Macro-view
Embrace the neoliberal educational values advocated by PISA
and increase education expenditure
(Germany)
“PISA has propelled educational themes directly onto the public policy
agenda, further reinforcing policymakers’ actions to address performance
deﬁcits. It has encouraged the integration of a comparative cultural paradigm
into Germany’s educational policy formulation.” (Niemann et al. 2017)
Embrace the concepts of competency and proﬁciency
(Japan)
“Under the inﬂuence of the PISA 2003 results release, the term ‘PISA literacy’
emerged in Japan as a new academic achievement concept, encompassing
meanings and accomplishments different from the conventional
understanding of academic achievement, namely, ‘robust academic
proﬁciency,’ involving the application of high-level knowledge and skills.”
(Ninomiya, 2019)
Alter the level of acceptance of an ideal society and reference
social choices
(South Korea)
“Prior to the introduction of PISA, South Korea had been adopting Japanese
education policies through ‘silent borrowing.’ The 2009 PISA results piqued
the interest of Western educators in studying Shanghai’s education policies,
while South Korea shifted its focus to Finland, one of the top-ranking
countries in the 2003 PISA assessment.” (Kim and Choi, 2023)
Enhance international collaboration with PISA and OECD
(Argentina, Chile, and Uruguay)
“The policy impact generated by PISA testing is now manifested through the
implementation of PISA tests, which establish a connection with the OECD at
the education system level. This integration of domestic education affairs into
national economic policies and international affairs agendas has propelled the
country towards becoming a comprehensive global governance entity for
sustainable development.” (Acosta, 2020)
Promote the implementation of evidence-based educational
policies
(Germany)
“Educational policy formulation no longer simply focuses on the
implementation of certain principles but has integrated a new governance
model of ‘evidence-based policymaking’.” (Yore et al. 2010)
Middle view
Enhancing the initial stage of teacher pre-service education by
establishing teacher training colleges within universities to
support ongoing professional development for teachers
(Canada)
“Extended teacher training duration (2012).” “Reduced training for many arts
and humanities subject teachers.” (Baird et al. 2016)
Aligning with PISA test standards in the assessment system,
introducing a nationwide large-scale educational evaluation,
and reinforcing the national review of educational and teaching
standards.
(Switzerland)
“The introduction of the national education standards, the HarmoS standards,
signiﬁes a greater emphasis on students’ competencies and marks the
emergence of a different testing culture. This culture involves a shift from
input-oriented foundational principles to a fundamental logic focused on
efﬁciency and output control.” (Bieber and Martens, 2011)
Enhancing monitoring and management tools for continuous
improvement of processes and outcomes in school education
management
(Japan)
“PISA has inﬂuenced the construction of an ‘evidence-improvement cycle’ in
Japan’s school education management system, where school administrators
shift their focus towards ‘academic achievement’ within the school. They
examine educational process information and outcome data based on
established goals and, using this evidence, promote a continuous cycle of
educational management improvement.” (Ninomiya, 2019)
Micro-view
Adopting the competency standards advocated by PISA and
reforming the curriculum based on this foundation. Emphasis is
placed on enhancing reading skills and promoting the learning
of mathematics and science
(Germany)
“PISA testing forms the foundation of Germany’s scientiﬁc education NES
curriculum. NES incorporates the concepts of scientiﬁc literacy used in the
PISA testing framework, encompassing understanding and practice related to
situations relevant to science, with a particular emphasis on ‘science playing a
critical role in real-life contexts.’”(Neumann et al. 2010)
Reforms in educational systems or school systems, including
reconﬁguring the existing education system, adjusting
compulsory education duration, implementing a uniform school
system, and aligning with the testing cycle of PISA
(Switzerland)
“Coordinated the national education structure.” “Extended compulsory
education duration (from 9 to 11 years) (in 2006).” (Bieber and Martens, 2011)
REVIEW ARTICLE
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
8
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |  (2025) 12:106 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z

nation-states use PISA results as a policy guideline for equity in
educational opportunities, which usually means: (1) harmoniza-
tion of admission policies or relaxation of admission criteria (e.g.,
in Switzerland); (b) promotion of equal opportunities for women,
low-income
families
or
ethnic
minorities
in
science
and
technology (e.g., in France); and (3) increasing the number and
size of full-time schools (e.g., in Germany). The Swiss HarmoS
incorporated OECD recommendations to promote social inclu-
sion and equal opportunities, requiring that the duration of
compulsory education be extended from 9 to 11 years and that
children must attend kindergartens and basic schools at the age of
four (Bieber and Martens, 2011). France’s Film Act introduced
intensive reforms to promote equal opportunities and democra-
tize schools, such as a 20% increase in the number of bachelor’s
degree graduates from low-income families and a 15% increase in
women in science and technology ﬁelds (‘ﬁlieres’) (Dobbins and
Martens, 2012). Meanwhile, the impact of PISA on Germany’s
educational equity and inclusion policies includes early progress
for
students
(especially
for
those
from
socioeconomically
disadvantaged backgrounds), improvement of students’ basic
skills, better cooperation between pre-school institutions and
primary schools, quality assurance measures, advanced teacher
training, and expansion of all-day schools (Niemann et al. 2017).
From the perspective of process equity, PISA tests focus on
students’ learning process, including their motivation, self-
cognition, and learning strategies (OECD, 2010). In response to
PISA’s demand for fairness in the education process, the policy
responses of countries and regions mainly include: (1) introdu-
cing personalized learning assistance into the education system
and providing remedial teaching (e.g., in France); (2) establishing
national uniﬁed teaching standards and implementing the
national curriculum; (3) delegating autonomy to individual
schools; and (4) improving the level of teacher education and
improving the quality of education in every school. For example,
the French Ministry of Education’s Orientation and Planning Act
on the Reconstruction of the Republic’s Schools, adopted in July
2013, aimed to restructure the education system and improve the
quality and equity of school education. According to Michel
(2017), the Act was related to the educational equity framework
of PISA, and the main policy measures adopted included:
prioritizing primary education and basic skills, identifying key
knowledge and competencies by increasing basic cultural and
civic education, strengthening priority education for disadvan-
taged students, improving the learning environment and school
spirit in schools, improving initial teacher education, and
continuing teacher professional development through the crea-
tion of colleges within universities. In addition, top-reducing
detailed governance and strengthening school autonomy were
also important ways to promote fairness in the process.
Rautalin and Alasuutari (2009) believe that the decentralization
of educational decision-making power in Finland is an important
argument used by Finnish policy makers to prove the superiority
of the country’s education policy and system. Globally, most
countries have adopted the policy practice of giving schools more
decision-making power and autonomy to improve education
implementation. For example, in 2007, the German state of
Saxony implemented mandatory school independence, requiring
the establishment of an executive school board in each school to
bridge the gap between schools (Hartong, 2012). In this way,
schools and educational institutions can better meet the needs of
students and parents, respond more ﬂexibly to local differences,
and provide a more equitable and diverse educational experience.
Reducing centralization helps democratize the education system
and meet the needs of communities.
For outcome equity, PISA tests assess whether students have
the knowledge and skills needed to fully participate in society by
comparing their knowledge and skills in areas such as reading,
mathematics, science and problem-solving (OECD, 2010). To
respond to the requirements of the PISA educational equity
framework, countries and regions typically adopt policy responses
to meet the central goal of education according to the PISA
competency
requirements,
emphasizing
the
conformity
of
educational quality rather than just quantitative equity. For
example, in 2008, Japan released a new National Learning
Curriculum that retained the concept of ‘passion for life’
originally proposed in the 1998 Curriculum, while offering a
new deﬁnition of academic achievement. The new approach
comprised three elements: “a solid grasp of basic knowledge and
skills”, “development of thinking, decision-making, expression
and other abilities necessary to solve problems”, and “develop-
ment of active learning attitude and development of students’
personality” (Ninomiya, 2019) (see Table 3).
Factors affecting the inﬂuence of PISA education reform and
the speciﬁc mechanism of policy response. The factors inﬂu-
encing the policy responses of nation-states are diverse and
interwoven. Studies have demonstrated that policy changes and
reforms inﬂuenced by PISA are related to the date of release of
the PISA results, but actual political initiatives are more likely to
be based on the socio-economic and socio-political outlook of
ruling parties (Baird et al. 2016; Choi and Jerrim, 2016; Yore et al.
2010). At the same time, education issues between countries and
regions are increasingly interrelated because of globalization and
changing educational needs. The increasing pressure of transna-
tional governance in the ﬁeld of education has also been proved
to be closely related to the policy reform effect of PISA (Dobbins
and Martens, 2012). Therefore, to explore the factors inﬂuencing
the effect of PISA education reform, that is, the extent to which
nation-states can implement reforms and take corrective action,
we should consider the interaction of historical, sociological,
political, and cultural factors in countries and regions and place
national policy responses in the framework of the global
education ﬁeld.
International organizations play an important role in the global
dissemination of policy paradigms and ideas. Nation-states’
recognition and acceptance of the scientiﬁc nature of interna-
tional organizations and their educational ideas is a prerequisite
for inﬂuencing policy formulation. International organizations
need to be seen as legitimate authorities and experts to
successfully inﬂuence policymaking at the nation-state level
(Martens and Niemann, 2013). For example, in exploring the
reasons for France’s initial indifference to PISA and its ranking,
Dobbins and Martens (2012) suggest that the French public and
policymakers held skeptical attitudes to the comparative assess-
ment methodology adopted by the OECD, arguing that PISA
suffers from cultural bias, inadequate statistical methods, and
oversimpliﬁed indicators. In Finland, by contrast, PISA is
considered a “legitimate and important barometer” (Rautalin
and Alasuutari, 2009). Thus, the key concepts, measurement
objects and measurement techniques used in PISA have been
incorporated as part of the Finnish educational policy discourse
(Rautalin and Alasuutari, 2009).
PISA is often considered part of the globalization of education.
Even countries with high-ranking positions, such as Finland, are
under pressure to borrow educational ideas and practices. China
is no exception. Closer engagement with international organiza-
tions produces chances to gain symbolic capital and national
prestige (Xie et al. 2022, p. 13).
At the supranational level, contextual factors such as transna-
tional pressures, the international situation, regional economic
development
policies,
and
the
dominant
framework
of
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
REVIEW ARTICLE
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |  (2025) 12:106 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
9

contemporary education policies are seen as important and
decisive conditions for nation-states to transform their education
systems and take corrective measures under the inﬂuence of
PISA. Sellar and Lingard (2018) explored Australia’s attitude to
Shanghai’s 2009 PISA performance, highlighting the rise of the
so-called ‘Asian Century’ as an important contextual factor in
Australia’s education policy response, that is, Australia’s future
economic development will be closely linked to Asia’s economic
prosperity, especially that of China. The superior performance of
international competitors makes countries realize that their
economic development and statehood are being challenged
(Martens and Niemann, 2013). The U.S. domestic policy response
to PISA exempliﬁes this point: the U.S. realized the signiﬁcance of
PISA for national development when noting the excellent
performance of students in Shanghai, China (who were taking
the test for the ﬁrst time)—not, as one might expect, by reﬂecting
on the mediocre performance of its own students. The PISA
results of China, the most direct competitor in the global
economic market, caused a strong reaction in the U.S. with then-
President Obama using an analogy of a “new Sputnik impact.”
Thus, a new round of comprehensive education reform was
started in the U.S. (Martens and Niemann, 2013).
Finally, regional economic development policies and the
dominant framework of contemporary education policies are
also important factors affecting PISA education reform. Michel
(2017) used multi-country comparisons to analyze the role of
PISA in the convergence of European education policies and
proposed that PISA focuses on educational output and how
Table 3 Regional cases of educational policy reform from selected studies.
Policy reform
Example
Educational opportunity equity
Uniﬁed admission policies or relaxed admission standards
(Germany)
“The ‘Interstate Agreement on Compulsory Education Coordination (HarmoS)’
is considered to incorporate recommendations from the OECD for promoting
social inclusion and equal opportunities. It requires extending compulsory
education from nine to eleven years and mandates that children must enter
kindergarten and elementary school at the age of four.” (Bieber and Martens,
2011)
Promoting equal opportunities for women, low-income families, or
minority ethnic groups in the ﬁeld of science and technology
(France)
“The ‘Fillon Law’, aimed at promoting equal opportunities and democratizing
schools, introduced a series of intensive reform measures, such as increasing
the number of bachelor’s degree graduates from low-income families by 20%
and raising the number of women in the ﬁeld of science and technology
(‘ﬁlières’) by 15%.” (Dobbins and Martens, 2012)
Increasing the number and scale of full-time schools
(Germany)
“The impact of PISA on Germany’s education equity and inclusion policies
includes early student progress, particularly among socioeconomically
disadvantaged students. It has led to improvements in basic skills, enhanced
cooperation between preschool institutions and primary schools, quality
assurance measures, advanced teacher training, and the expansion of full-time
schools.” (Niemann et al. 2017)
Educational process equity
Introduce personalized learning support within the education system
and provide tutoring
(France)
“The ‘Direction and Planning Law for the Reconstruction of the Republic
School’ approved by the French Ministry of Education in July 2013 aimed to
rebuild the French education system, with a focus on enhancing school
education quality and equity.” (Michel, 2017)
Devolve autonomy to individual schools
(Germany)
“In 2007, the German state of Saxony introduced compulsory school
autonomy, requiring the establishment of school boards in every school. This
measure aimed to bridge the hierarchical gap between schools.” (Hartong,
2012)
Establish national uniﬁed teaching standards and implement a national
curriculum
(France)
“Prioritizing primary education and basic skills, afﬁrming core essential
knowledge and competencies through increased emphasis on basic culture and
civic education, enhancing priority education for disadvantaged students,
improving the learning environment and school culture. Enhancing initial
teacher education and supporting the ongoing professional development of
teachers by establishing teacher training colleges at universities.” (Rautalin
and Alasuutari, 2009)
Enhance the level of teacher education and improve the quality of
education in every school
Educational outcome equity
Adopt education’s central objectives based on PISA competency
requirements and emphasize qualitative educational quality rather than
merely responding with policies focused on equitable quantity
(Japan)
“In 2008, Japan introduced the new ‘National Learning Curriculum,’ retaining
the concept of ‘passion for life’ originally proposed in the 1998 ‘National
Learning Curriculum.’ However, it provided a new deﬁnition of academic
achievement, consisting of three elements: ‘mastery of fundamental
knowledge and skills,’ ‘cultivation of thinking, decision-making, and
communication abilities, as well as other skills required for problem-solving,’
and ‘fostering an attitude of active learning and developing students’
individuality.’” (Ninomiya, 2019)
REVIEW ARTICLE
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
10
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |  (2025) 12:106 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z

students apply the knowledge and skills learned in school to their
future work and society. Thus, PISA’s educational conceptual
framework is closely related to the Lisbon Strategy of the
European Union and has attracted the policy responses of
European countries, widely promoting educational reform in EU
countries with the goal of making Europe the most dynamic
knowledge economy in the new century (Michel, 2017).
In Europe, it is particularly difﬁcult to isolate the inﬂuence of
PISA from the impact of the initiatives of the European
Commission which have been more and more frequent and
important in the last 10 years in the domain of education because
of the implementation of the ‘Open Method of Coordination’ and
the adoption of crucial policy recommendations. Indeed, the
initiatives and recommendations of the OECD and the EU
Council and Commission have become more and more intricate
in recent years because of the reciprocal inﬂuence and closer
cooperation of these two international institutions. (Michel, 2017,
p. 207).
At the nation-state level, important driving forces for PISA-
related education policy responses include the self-perception
of each country and region on the education system, its own
cultural traditions, and domestic political system and environ-
ment. Speciﬁcally, Martens and Niemann point out two crucial
conditions for exploring factors that inﬂuence PISA’s effect on
education reform. First, that the subject matter assessed by
PISA is given weight in national discourse, and second, that a
large gap between national self-perception and empirical
outcomes can be observed. When the two conditions are met
at the same time, PISA will have a great impact on education
policies (Martens and Niemann, 2013). For example, the results
of the ﬁrst PISA test revealed the gap between Germany’s PISA
performance and its self-image as an educational power,
exposing the problems of the German education system in
promoting social inequality and low efﬁciency in talent
training. These catalysts helped the country launch compre-
hensive education reform under the inﬂuence of PISA (Xie et al.
2022). Similarly, in Switzerland and Norway, where education
systems are considered to be among the best in Europe,
students’ PISA scores fall short of national expectations, even
though they are often well above the OECD average. The
contradiction between national PISA scores and long-standing
national attitudes has pushed education reform to the top of the
political agenda and greatly increased pressure for education
reform (Bieber and Martens, 2011.
Policy responses from external inﬂuences are heavily inﬂu-
enced by a country’s own cultural traditions and political systems.
In other words, the socio-cultural traditions and political
institutional background within a nation-state constitute the
‘translation’ framework for external inﬂuences to drive domestic
policy responses (Xie et al. 2022). In their analysis of Norway’s
PISA-related policy responses, Baird et al. (2016) found that the
Nordic model, a cultural background factor promoted in Norway,
has always placed great emphasis on ‘Education for all’ (EFA) and
inclusion, which concurs with the PISA framework. In addition,
the absence of the word ‘accountability’ in the Norwegian
language and the country’s traditional support for strong
autonomy of schools and municipalities may also have inﬂuenced
the policy response in the country (Baird et al. 2016). In the case
of South Korea, Kim and Choi (2023) observe that the country’s
policy response incorporates characteristics different from those
of many Western countries. They believe that this is closely
related to the political structure and background characteristics of
South Korea. Speciﬁcally, the South Korean government already
has a very strong presence, and emerging actors such as the
education governor are decentralizing education policy. At the
same time, teachers and parents counterbalance the power of the
government through strong unions and frequent elections,
while private enterprises’ involvement in education is taboo
(Kim and Choi, 2023). Domestic politics are critical in shaping
policy responses. Ruling parties advocating globalization and a
neoliberal reform agenda tend to respond positively to PISA
(Xie et al. 2022).
From the perspective of internal actors, key factors inﬂuencing
the effect of PISA education reform include the actions and
political opinions of domestic political groups and their policy
consensus to implement effective improvements to domestic
problems. The actor-network theory points out that although
international organizations can be regarded as important policy
actors in the global political ﬁeld, their inﬂuence on a country’s
policy making is the result of dynamic tussling between the
subjects embedded in the policy network in a speciﬁc social
environment.
For
historical
and
institutional
reasons,
the
‘national science’ produced by the French central administrative
elite remains strong, and the government and ofﬁcial scholars
remain legitimate and authoritative sources of knowledge. The
PISA tests have awakened a spirit of reform among political
forces. International comparative statistics and assessments have
stimulated extensive public debate on the shortcomings of the
French system by providing examples of foreign best practices
and provided justiﬁcation for speciﬁc educational policy reforms
(Dobbins and Martens, 2012). The U.S. school system is highly
decentralized, and the federal government has little inﬂuence in
the ﬁeld of education, which prevents it from responding
immediately to PISA (Engel and Frizzell, 2015). In Finland, the
interpretation of PISA results tends to favor those responsible for
actions within the central government, and the superior academic
performance of Finnish students is believed to be the result of
educational reforms and decisions made by the central govern-
ment. The deﬁciencies of Finnish students were attributed to the
behavior of other agents (Rautalin and Alasuutari, 2009). In
general, from the level of internal actors, there are at least two
factors affecting PISA education reform. First, whether PISA
provides a new conceptualization method for national decision-
makers, and second, whether it can justify the policy direction
that has been chosen. Based on this, some scholars have started to
pay attention to political factors in the application of PISA results,
such as:
In justifying the argument that PISA is a reliable barometer
of the national educational systems, the central government
ofﬁcials’ texts particularly emphasize PISA’s scientiﬁc
nature. In so doing, it is repeatedly contrasted with many
earlier international studies, which are deemed political in
nature. Thus, scientiﬁcity is used as a self-evident premise
on which the argument of PISA’s reliability is built. The
institution of science is invoked as a guarantee that the
reports published are not compromised by what interested
parties consider to be politically desirable research results
(Rautalin and Alasuutari, 2009, p. 546).
The excerpt above suggests that the building of a speciﬁc
mechanism model of policy impact should start from the three
dimensions of supranational, nation-state and internal actor
network levels, placing national policy responses in the global
education ﬁeld for consideration. At the outermost supranational
level, OECD ideas do not invariably translate into national policy:
“The transmission of [transnational] ideas is an active process,
and ideas are formed and transformed in different ways in
different contexts. Policy paradigms are disseminated at the
international level, and international organizations play an
important role in the dissemination of policy ideas.” The OECD
and other international organizations adopt a soft governance
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
REVIEW ARTICLE
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |  (2025) 12:106 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
11

model to assess the domestic education policy performance of
countries by quantifying the link between PISA scores and the
economic development of nation-states, working to promote the
‘best mode’ (Baird et al. 2016). The OECD makes PISA-
participating countries part of an international cognitive com-
munity in which education policies and their goals and
approaches are discussed using the same concepts and scores
(Rautalin and Alasuutari, 2009).
At the intermediate nation-state level, PISA and its interna-
tional rankings set up model societies for policy borrowing (that
is, the transfer of policy from one country to another). In other
words, PISA provides an institutional template for countries to
follow
in
implementing
education
reforms
and
suggests
alternative policy options. Finland’s education system is a
reference society that has received much attention through
PISA. Other countries and regions with high PISA rankings,
such as Japan, Shanghai, and Hong Kong, are also being
regarded as new model societies (Kim and Choi, 2023; Sellar
and Lingard, 2018). At the most internal level of the network of
actors, studies have conﬁrmed that PISA’s promotion of
education reform depends on the translation and transmission
of the information contained in PISA through national policy
networks, involving policymakers and members of political
parties, associations, and the media (Schleicher, 2017). Thus,
the speciﬁc mechanism of the impact of PISA-related education
policies is driven by the international political background
established by the supranational OECD, the policy borrowing
behavior from model societies at the nation-state level, and
the effective information translation of internal actor networks
(see Fig. 2 and Table 4).
Table 4 Selected sample of studies included in the systematic review.
Author
date
Countries/Regions
Key ﬁndings
Acosta
2020
Argentina
Uruguay
Chile
“Evidence for policy together with national politics seem to be at the base of the differences
among the different cases toward linkages between national educational policy and PISA.”
“Settling the issue of national evaluation is one of them; whether to combine it with international
assessment as in the Chilean case, to reﬁne national assessments like Uruguay or to create new
local or regional initiatives, as in Argentina until 2016.”
Baird et al.
2016
Canada,
China (Shanghai),
England, France,
Norway, Switzerland
“A policy reaction of ‘scandalization’ was evident in four of the six cases; a technique used to
motivate change. Five of the six cases showed ‘standards-based reforms’ and two had reforms in
line with the ‘ideal-governance’ model. However, these are categorizations: the actual reforms
had signiﬁcant differences across countries. There are chronological problems with the notion
that PISA results were causal with regard to policy in some instances. Countries with similar
PISA results responded with different policies, reﬂecting their differing cultural and historical
education system trajectories.”
Dobbins and Martens
2012
French
“The PISA study has brought new momentum to French education policy, despite an earlier
period of detachment from the OECD. International comparative statistics and evaluations have
not only stimulated broad public debate on the shortcomings of the French system and provided
examples of foreign best practices but also justiﬁed concrete education policy reforms. This
applies to the most recent reforms, which purportedly align the French education system with
the demands of a competitive knowledge-based economy. In this context, the allusion to the
Finnish model has also provided a window of opportunity for a convergence of policy ambitions
between right- and left-wing political forces.”
Rautalin and
Alasuutari
2009
Finnish
“The excellent learning outcomes of Finnish students are claimed to be due to educational
reforms conducted and decisions made by the central government, whereas shortcomings and
areas in which the ofﬁcials see a need for improvement are argued to be dependent on the
actions of other agents.”
Michel
2017
Europe
“The limits of the inﬂuence of PISA and international standards in education towards a
convergence of education systems because of the importance of their speciﬁc historic and
cultural contexts.”
Niemann et al.
2017
Germany
“One prominent case for the impact of PISA is Germany. PISA was a decisive watershed in
German education policymaking. Almost instantly after the PISA results were publicized in late
2001, a comprehensive education reform agenda was put forward in Germany. The experienced
reform dynamic was highly surprising because the traditional German education system and
politics were characterized by deep-rooted historical legacies, many involved stakeholders at
different levels, and reform-hampering institutions. Hence, a backlog of grand education reforms
has prevailed in Germany since the 1970s. The external pressure exerted by PISA completely
changed that situation.”
Bieber and Martens
2011
Switzerland
United States
“In the PISA context, OECD inﬂuence not only consists in identifying systemic weaknesses. From
best practice examples of ‘winner countries’ such as Finland, it drew recommendations to
improve education systems and furthered them at the international level. These entered national
policies to a different degree.”
“Policy convergence towards OECD recommendations differs highly. The results show the whole
range of policy reactions to PISA, from comprehensively reforming the education system in well-
scoring Switzerland to not giving it any importance in the underperforming US. Switzerland
introduced reforms in social equity as a result of PISA, while in the US, it has been far from the
center of attention in recent and on-going reforms in education policy.”
Martens and
Niemann
2013
Germany
United States
“We argued that two dimensions need to be considered when seeking to understand under what
conditions R&R have an impact on national policymaking, namely that the relation between the
self-perception and the actual results needs to be taken into account, and the issue—in our case,
education policy—needs to be framed as problematic within the national context.”
REVIEW ARTICLE
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
12
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |  (2025) 12:106 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z

Conclusion
This study systematically reviewed the literature on the impact
of PISA on education reform and explored three core research
questions in depth. First, regarding the main characteristics of
PISA affecting policy research, we ﬁnd that the research covers
the macro, meso, and micro decision-making levels, involving
the education systems of multiple countries and regions. The
research objects include policy documents, educational reform
measures
and
concrete
implementation
effects.
Research
methods and designs are diverse, combining quantitative and
qualitative analysis, including cross-country comparisons, case
studies, and analysis of policy texts. The conceptual framework
and theoretical model mainly focus on the two core dimensions
of “quality” and “equity” and explore how PISA can promote
education reform by inﬂuencing the education system. Sec-
ondly, the core issues of PISA’s impact on education reform are
mainly reﬂected in its advocacy of neoliberal educational values,
concepts of competence and literacy, and the pursuit of an ideal
society. By providing internationally comparable data, PISA
prompts countries to rethink their education systems and take
steps to improve the quality and equity of education. PISA
focuses not only on students’ knowledge and skills in reading,
math, and science but also on the real-life application of these
skills and the impact of education systems on socioeconomic
inequality. Finally, the impact of PISA on national decision-
making is constrained by a variety of factors. These factors
include the date of the PISA results, the socio-economic and
socio-political outlook of the ruling party, globalization and
changes in educational needs, and the historical, sociological,
political, and cultural context of the country. In addition, the
role of international organizations in the global dissemination
of policy paradigms and ideas, transnational pressures, the
international situation, regional economic development policies,
and the prevailing framework of contemporary education policy
are also important inﬂuencing factors. At the nation-state level,
the self-perception of the education system, cultural traditions,
domestic political system, and environment also have a sig-
niﬁcant impact on PISA results. Therefore, the promotion effect
of PISA on education reform is realized under the joint action
of three levels: supranational, nation-state, and internal actor-
network, and the speciﬁc effect depends on the comprehensive
effect of these factors.
Discussion
This systematic literature review explored the effect of PISA on
global basic education reform by focusing on three core themes:
the main characteristics of PISA’s impact on policy research,
PISA’s impact on education reform, and the factors inﬂuencing
PISA’s effect. Based on the value orientation underlying PISA,
the paper analyzed PISA’s impact on education reform and
showed the two-way interaction between PISA and education
reform. Through building a speciﬁc mechanism model of PISA’s
inﬂuence on the development of education policies, this paper
aimed to describe current empirical research on the effect of
global basic education reform brought about by PISA. The
review will serve as an information reference for promoting
future empirical analysis of the effect of global basic education
reform based on PISA.
PISA drives policy discussions on education quality and equity
in countries around the world through its quantitative pursuit of
education quality, data-based comparative analysis, and evidence-
based research paradigms. On the one hand, the PISA ranking
serves as a comparative benchmark for nation-states to measure
their own education levels in the world. On the other hand, PISA
data are used as a reference for countries to promote education
improvement. In addition, from a global perspective, PISA’s
reform effect on global basic education is closely related to the
current operating mechanism of global education governance,
and it serves as an important policy tool for the OECD to par-
ticipate in global governance. Research shows that with con-
tinuing globalization, PISA is increasingly recognized by the
international community. The assessment has gone far beyond its
original function of measuring the quality of education among
countries or regions and profoundly affects the pattern of global
education governance through ‘soft’ governance. Speciﬁcally, the
impact of PISA at the macro level of basic education policy is
related to the choice of the reference society of the nation-state.
Some countries have established ties with the OECD by imple-
menting PISA and making their education affairs part of the
national economic policy and international affairs agenda, help-
ing their country become part of a global governance complex for
sustainable development (see Fig. 3).
We argue that to accurately understand the policy responses of
nation-states (with their unique historical, social, political, and
cultural factors) to PISA, it is necessary to consider the responses
of countries in the context of the global education ﬁeld frame-
work model. That model comprises three levels of supranational,
nation-state, and internal actor-network. Within the nation-state
level, political actors embedded in policy networks, and associa-
tions, and media, become important in shaping the actual poli-
tical and policy agenda. Within and outside the nation-state (i.e.,
the supranational global education policy ﬁeld), supranational
organizations or institutions represented by the OECD (and the
model societies established through their available capital) also
have an indirect impact on national education policies. Cultural,
historical, and institutional contexts must also be considered. The
speciﬁc mechanism model of PISA’s impact on the development
of education policies established in this study helps to show the
two-way interaction between PISA and education reform, reveal
the internal mechanism of PISA’s impact on education reform,
Fig. 3 The proposed model for policy effect mechanisms.
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
REVIEW ARTICLE
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |  (2025) 12:106 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
13

and provide a theoretical reference for future academic research
on the effect of education reform triggered by PISA.
Limitations. This study has some limitations. The current scope
of research on the effects of global basic education reform and
PISA is mainly focused on European countries. Thus, the review
does not accurately reﬂect the situation in other regions and
countries worldwide. Such regional limitations prevent us from
obtaining a full understanding of PISA’s effects on a global scale.
Cultural bias should also be considered regarding the selection of
reference societies by nation-states and the process of external
policy reference. Shanghai’s high PISA scores, for example, have
sparked urgency in some Western countries to pay more atten-
tion to educational practices in Asia. However, these Western
countries may still be affected by cultural biases that cause them
to prefer to look to non-Eastern cultural contexts for reference.
Therefore, when studying PISA effects and global education
reform, we need to carefully consider the inﬂuence of regional
differences and cultural factors to ensure that research ﬁndings
and policy recommendations fully reﬂect the needs and contexts
of different countries and regions.
Received: 14 September 2024; Accepted: 14 January 2025;
References
Acosta F (2020) Systematic reviews in educational research: methodology, per-
spectives and application. Eur Educ 52(2):87–101. https://doi.org/10.1080/
10564934.2020.1725390
Baird J-A, Isaacs T, Johnson S, Stobart G, Yu G, Sprague T, Daugherty R (2011)
Policy Effects of Pisa. Oxford University Centre for Educational Assessment
Baird J-A, Johnson S, Hopfenbeck TN, Isaacs T, Sprague T, Stobart G, Yu G (2016)
On the supranational spell of PISA in policy. Educ Res 58(2):121–138.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00131881.2016.1165410
Bieber T, Martens K (2011) The OECD PISA Study as a Soft Power in Education?
Lessons from Switzerland and the US. Eur J Educ 46(1):101–116. https://doi.
org/10.1111/j.1465-3435.2010.01462.x
Choi Á, Jerrim J (2016) The use (and misuse) of PISA in guiding policy reform: the
case of Spain. Comp Educ 52(2):230–245
Dobbins M, Martens K (2012) Towards an education approach a la ﬁnlandaise?
French education policy after PISA. J Educ Policy 27(1):23–43. https://doi.
org/10.1080/02680939.2011.622413
Engel LC, Frizzell MO (2015) Competitive comparison and PISA bragging rights:
sub-national uses of the OECD’s PISA in Canada and the USA. Discourse
Stud Cult Polit Educ 36(5):665–682. https://doi.org/10.1080/01596306.2015.
1017446
Gillis S, Polesel J, Wu M (2016) PISA Data: raising concerns with its use in policy
settings. Aust Educ Res 43(1):131–146. https://doi.org/10.1007/s13384-015-
0183-2
Grek S (2009) Governing by numbers: the PISA “effect” in Europe. J Educ Policy
24(1):23–37. https://doi.org/10.1080/02680930802412669
Grek S (2010) International Organisations and the shared construction of policy
‘problems’: problematisation and change in education governance in Europe.
Eur Educ Res J 9(3):396–406. https://doi.org/10.2304/eerj.2010.9.3.396
Hartong S (2012) Overcoming resistance to change: PISA, school reform in Ger-
many and the example of Lower Saxony. J Educ Policy 27(6):747–760. https://
doi.org/10.1080/02680939.2012.672657
Kim Y, Choi T-H (2023) The inﬂuence of the Programme for International Student
Assessment on educational governance situated in the institutional setting of
South Korea. Policy Futur Educ. https://doi.org/10.1177/14782103231192741
Lame G (2019) Systematic literature reviews: an introduction. Proc Des Soc: Int
Conf Eng Des 1(1):1633–1642. https://www.cambridge.org/core/journals/
proceedings-of-the-international-conference-on-engineering-design/article/
systematic-literature-reviews-an-introduction/
40D4CEA7A7CC3FB6ED6233E79A0A2A1F
Lawn M (2003) The ‘Usefulness’ of learning: the struggle over governance, meaning
and the European education space. Discourse: Stud Cult Politics Educ
24(3):325–336. https://doi.org/10.1080/0159630032000172515
Madsen M (2022) Competitive/comparative governance mechanisms beyond
marketization: a reﬁned concept of competition in education governance
research. Eur Educ Res J 21(1):182–199. https://doi.org/10.1177/14749041
20958922
Martens K, Niemann D (2013) When do numbers count? The differential impact
of the PISA rating and ranking on education policy in Germany and the US.
Ger Politics 22(3):314–332. https://doi.org/10.1080/09644008.2013.794455
Meyer H-D, Benavot A (2013) PISA, power, and policy: The emergence of global
educational governance
Michel A (2017) The contribution of PISA to the convergence of education policies
in Europe. Eur J Educ 52(2):206–216. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejed.12218
Morris P (2015) Comparative education, PISA, politics and educational reform: s
cautionary note. Comp: A J Comp Int Educ 45(3):470–474
Neumann K, Fischer HE, Kauertz A (2010) From PISA to educational standards:
the impact of large-scale assessments on science education in Germany. Int J
Sci Math Educ 8(3):545–563. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10763-010-9206-7
Newman M, Gough D (2020) Systematic reviews in educational research: metho-
dology, perspectives and application. In: Zawacki-Richter O, Kerres M,
Bedenlier S, Bond M, Buntins K (eds) Systematic reviews in educational
research: methodology, perspectives and application. Springer Nature, pp.
3–22
Niemann D, Martens K, Teltemann J (2017) PISA and its consequences: shaping
education
policies
through
international
comparisons.
Eur
J
Educ
52(2):175–183. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejed.12220
Ninomiya S (2019) The impact of PISA and the interrelation and development of
assessment policy and assessment theory in Japan. Assess Educ: Princ Policy
Pract 26(1):91–110. https://doi.org/10.1080/0969594X.2016.1261795
Pereyra MA, Kotthoff H-G, Cowen R (2011) PISA under examination: changing
knowledge, changing tests, and changing schools. In: Pereyra M A, Kotthoff
H-G, Cowen R (eds) Pisa under examination. Sense Publishers, Brill, pp. 1–14
Pons X (2017) Fifteen years of research on PISA effects on education governance: a
critical review. Eur J Educ 52(2):131–144. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejed.12213
Rautalin M, Alasuutari P (2009) The uses of the national PISA results by Finnish
ofﬁcials in central government. J Educ Policy 24(5):539–556. https://doi.org/
10.1080/02680930903131267
Rautalin M, Alasuutari P, Vento E (2019) Globalisation of education policies: Does
PISA have an effect? J Educ Policy 34(4):500–522
Schleicher A (2017) Seeing education through the prism of PISA. Eur J Educ
52(2):124–130. https://doi.org/10.1111/ejed.12209
Schleicher A, Zoido P (2016) The policies that shaped PISA, and the policies that
PISA shaped. In: K. Mundy K, Green A, Lingard B, Verger A (eds) The
handbook of global education policy, 1st edn. Wiley, pp. 374–384
Sellar S, Lingard B (2018) International large-scale assessments, affective worlds
and policy impacts in education. Int J Qual Stud Educ 31(5):367–381. https://
doi.org/10.1080/09518398.2018.1449982
Sjøberg S (2015) OECD, PISA, and globalization: the inﬂuence of the international
assessment regime. In Education policy perils. Routledge, pp. 102–133
Xiao Y, Watson M (2019) Guidance on conducting a systematic literature review. J
Plan Educ Res 39(1):93–112. https://doi.org/10.1177/0739456X17723971
Xie A, Li J, Ma F (2022) Understanding China’s policy responses to Pisa: using a ti
and yong framework. Comp Educ. https://doi.org/10.1080/03050068.2022.
2157014
Yore LD, Anderson JO, Chiu M-H (2010) Moving PISA results into the policy
arena: perspectives on knowledge transfer for future considerations and
preparations. Int J Sci Math Educ 8:593–609
Zheng J, Cheung K, Sit P (2022) Insights from two decades of PISA-related studies
in the new century: a systematic review. Scand J Educ Res. https://doi.org/10.
1080/00313831.2022.2148273
Author contributions
Substantial contributions to the conception or design of the work: Jian Li. and Eryong,
Xue; the acquisition, analysis, or interpretation of data for the work: Jian Li, Eryong, Xue
and Siyuan, Guo; Drafting the work or revising it critically for important intellectual
content: Jian Li, Eryong, Xue and Siyuan, Guo; Final approval of the version to be
published: Jian Li and Eryong, Xue.
Funding
This study is funded by the Fundamental Research Funds for theCentral Universities
(NO.1233300002).
Competing interests
The authors declare no competing interests.
REVIEW ARTICLE
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
14
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |  (2025) 12:106 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z

Ethical approval
This article does not contain any studies with human participants performed by any of
the authors.
Informed consent
This article does not contain any studies with human participants performed by any of
the authors.
Additional information
Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Eryong Xue.
Reprints and permission information is available at http://www.nature.com/reprints
Publisher’s note Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁliations.
Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License,
which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any
medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and
the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modiﬁed
the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted
material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material
in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated
otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s
Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from
the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/
licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
© The Author(s) 2025
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
REVIEW ARTICLE
HUMANITIES AND SOCIAL SCIENCES COMMUNICATIONS |  (2025) 12:106 | https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-025-04403-z
15