Vol.:(0123456789)
The Review of International Organizations (2024) 19:641–664
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11558-024-09558-z
1 3
INTRODUCTION
The life cycle of international cooperation: Introduction 
to the special issue
Julia Gray1
Published online: 11 July 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
International organizations’ lives often extend far beyond the moment of their ini-
tial contracting. How IOs do adapt to shifting circumstances in their member states 
global geopolitical changes, and even internal dynamics within the IO itself? This 
special issue on the life cycle of international cooperation explores the ebbs and 
flows of the IOs that underpin the international system. Firm theory, organiza-
tional sociology, and agency theory all have incorporated life cycles perspectives 
into the study of organizations, but IR has yet to fully harness these frameworks. A 
life cycles approach centers on, first, incorporating the IO itself as the core unit of 
analysis and, second, the dynamic processes within IOs — including life stages such 
as false starts, consolidation, inertia, growth, revitalization, death, and succession. 
Incorporating these dynamic processes into our understanding of IOs reminds us 
that historically, IOs have always experienced periods of both flourishing and falter-
ing. Grasping the mechanisms that drive these changes is indispensable for a thor-
ough understanding of the international system’s vitality and resilience. Articles in 
this issue explore the durability of IOs in the face of crises; the measures that IOs 
deploy to legitimize their existence; the role of individual leaders’ rhetoric in IO 
vitality; the tradeoffs that member states face between pulling the plug on an IO 
versus creating a new institution; the effect of member-state IO withdrawal on the 
international system overall; and the mass public’s perceptions of such withdrawals.
Keywords  International organization · International cooperation · Liberal order · 
Firms · Principal agent theory
Responsible editor: Axel Dreher
 *	 Julia Gray 
	
jcgray@sas.upenn.edu
1	
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA

642
	
J. Gray 
1 3
International organizations (IOs) today face challenges at a scale and scope that, 
to some, seem insurmountable. Countries that many assumed were democratizing 
now seem to be backsliding, despite predictions that their IO memberships served 
as credible commitments to political and economic reform (Baccini & Urpelainen, 
2014; Pevehouse, 2002; Simmons, 1998), posing direct or indirect challenges to 
those IOs’ legitimacy (Tallberg & Zürn, 2019). Economic and political tensions 
appear to be straining countries’ ability and willingness to adhere to their multilat-
eral commitments (Kucik & Peritz, 2021). IOs themselves look to be in ill health, 
as they struggle to enforce their mandates in the face of member-state pushback 
and backsliding (Meyerrose, 2020). At the same time, skepticism with internation-
alism seems on the rise (Copelovitch & Pevehouse, 2019), while institutions that 
pose challenges to the liberal order may be growing in stature (Debre, 2022). All of 
this could mean that the liberal order is straining against its limits (Börzel & Zürn, 
2021).
However, claims about the rise and fall of international orders require close scru-
tiny of the IOs that underpin those orders in the first place, and whether one views 
these fluctuations as ordinary or extraordinary. The current state of global govern-
ance falls into perspective if one views international cooperation as subject to many 
fluctuations within their broader cycle of life.1 In a life cycles view, the bargains 
behind the initial IO contract are but one moment within an IO’s broader exist-
ence, and as IOs live their lives, they frequently experience variations in vitality as 
a response to internal and external pressures (Gray, 2018, 2020). Consider the fluc-
tuations in the trade regime, both overall2 and within the constituent organizations 
themselves, which have experienced death, stagnation, revitalization, and inertia. 
The vitality of those individual organizations are closely linked — both as cause and 
consequence — to the state of the cooperative liberal order more broadly.
This special issue explores the life cycle of international organizations, a frame-
work that offers theoretical as well as empirical advances in the study of global gov-
ernance. The articles in this issue center on the survival, decline, and adaptation of 
IOs. In some articles, IO life stages act as an outcome of interests (Eilstrup-San-
giovanni & Verdier, 2024; Haftel & Nadel, 2024). Other articles examine phenom-
ena at the IO level that drive variation in IO vitality, such as legitimation activities 
(Schmidtke & Lenz, 2024), individual-level participation in IO debates (Baturo & 
Gray, 2024), and a hegemon’s threat of withdrawal (Vabulas & von Borzyskowski, 
2024). There is also an investigation of the consequences of IO vitality for the inter-
national system (Schmidt, 2024). The articles in this special issue examine both the 
1  Life stages initially had a broader meaning, stemming from the evolutionary perspective in biology, 
where a person’s life moved sequentially and predictably through different stages (childhood, puberty, 
adulthood, old age), although these stages are more about development than about vitality or survival per 
se.
2  The 20th century saw the short-lived Reciprocal Trade Agreements Act (Gowa and Hicks, 2012) to 
the failed International Trade Organization to the less formal General Agreements on Tariffs and Trade, 
which itself experienced ebbs and flows (Stiles, 1995) to the leap to the World Trade Organization, itself 
currently in crisis (Kucik et al., 2022). In contrast, scholars largely celebrated the formation of the WTO 
and the proliferation of regional and preferential trade agreements as signs of the vitality of the trade 
regime (Dür et al., 2014).

643
1 3
The life cycle of international cooperation: Introduction…
determinants of various stages of IO lives as well as how IOs themselves — and 
their member states — deal with issues of vitality, and how variation in IO vitality 
impacts the broader landscape of international cooperation. This provides a founda-
tion for understanding how the institutions undergirding the international order can 
respond to their challenges, and the conditions under which they are likely to adapt, 
survive, wither, or die altogether.
IOs can experience several potential life stages, although not all of the stages are 
sequential, and not all IOs experience all of them. False starts, for failed negotiations 
or IOs that do not get off the ground, can even happen repeatedly for one coopera-
tive effort (Kaya, 2016). Extant scholarship extensively documents the second stage, 
births, although ratification can delay the date in force (Haftel & Thompson, 2018). 
IOs may already in this period fall into stagnation, a state that can occur when IOs 
cannot get off the ground or when levels of inactivity turn them into zombies (Gray, 
2018). Alternately, periods of high levels of activity can ensue, in which meetings 
and outputs occur; these can be periods of consolidation, growth and development 
— although it is important to stress that this is not synonymous with efficiency or 
performance, as growth can veer into mission creep and change can be suboptimal. 
Revitalization can occur in periods of stagnation as well as in productivity, or even 
following IO death. Succession or institutional replacement can occur after formal 
death — sometimes immediately and sometimes after several years (Cottrell, 2009). 
As with firms and agencies, however, the normative or substantive question of inter-
est can determine a researcher’s theory and measurement of each particular stage.
Well before their contracts are inked, international agreements can go through 
protracted and sometimes collapsed negotiations (Ye, 2023); their launch can 
be delayed or undermined in the legislature (Campello & Lemos, 2015; Haftel & 
Thompson, 2013; Kaya, 2016) or the introduction of legal reservations to the treaty 
(McKibben & Western, 2020), often from the very governments that signed the 
deal. Once launched, political turnover in member states can run IO commitments 
off track (Gray & Kucik, 2017; Grieco et al., 2009). Furthermore, IOs can fall into 
inertia (Genschel, 1997) and decline (Bunte et al., 2022; Debre & Dijkstra, 2021, 
2023) or, conversely, survive early challenges only to fail subsequently (Hirschmann, 
2023). In other words, IOs — like firms, agencies, and countless other organizations 
in both the public and private sphere3 — regularly confront existential challenges 
to which they must react in the interest of survival. These challenges often push 
IOs into different states of being at various points in their existence. A move toward 
international cooperation may drift into a zombie state even immediately after its 
birth, if member states delay ratification (as in many bilateral investment treaties 
(Haftel & Thompson, 2013) or if key members fail to ratify it altogether (as in the 
3  Although this special issue focuses primarily on formal intergovernmental organizations, many other 
forms of global cooperation also experience ebbs and flows in their life cycle, such as international non-
governmental organizations (Bush and Hadden, 2024), treaties (Fitzmaurice & Merkouris, 2020), infor-
mal organizations (Roger and Rowan, 2022), international norms and ideas (Finnemore & Sikkink, 1998; 
Stimmer, 2019), and diplomatic activities (Gray and Potter, 2020; Pouliot, 2015). Because the physical 
manifestations of their activities and the level at which they manifest differ so widely, they are not the 
primary focus of the matter of this SI — although many other scholars have discussed the variation in 
their vitality.

644
	
J. Gray 
1 3
case of the postwar International Trade Organization (Kaya, 2016)). IOs may go 
from inertia to revitalization, as in the case of the post–World War II World Bank 
(Hosman, 2023) or, alternately, from inertia to death, as did the West European 
Union (Hofmann, 2009).
Acknowledging these life stages — and tracking them across IOs over time — 
reveals that the current crisis is hardly atypical in a historical context. The current 
strain on the liberal order is but one instance of the setbacks to which IOs frequently 
adapt — sometimes reacting to crisis, but often simply as a matter of course. And 
although states are almost always relevant to IOs, state-centric perspectives on IO 
vitality are incomplete. Pivots to, first, the IO itself as a unit of analysis and, second, 
the dynamic processes within IOs help define a life cycle framework.
This research takes seriously the primacy of IOs themselves in the study of global 
cooperation (March & Olsen, 1998; Ness & Brechin, 1988) and treats their vital-
ity as a precondition for understanding international order. Although state-centered 
approaches usefully explain the bargains behind formal IO design and change (Lip-
scy, 2017), we cannot fully grasp the effectiveness of international cooperation 
unless we first take stock of the causes and consequences of the dynamic processes 
within IOs (Fioretos, 2017). This is particularly important because, despite issues of 
selection bias4 (which make it difficult to separate out the independent effects of IOs 
from the preferences of the member states that select into them; and false positives5 
(which misattributes effects to IOs due to the preponderance of unobservable fac-
tors) in the empirical study of IOs, we know that IOs experience variation in vitality, 
regardless of design, members, issue area, or geography. Just as the trends of the 
1990s — when an unprecedented number of countries formed and joined IOs after 
the end of the Cold War — led to scholarly exuberance about IOs, so too do we risk 
excessive disenchantment with IOs in the current era.
1  Variation in an IO’s vitality over its life cycle
A life cycle perspective acknowledges, first, that IO vitality can rise and fall both 
within IOs and across the broader system (Abbott et al., 2016; Reinsberg, 2024) — 
and that such variation is neither exceptional nor linear. That is, all IOs go through 
various life stages, but the stages are neither inevitable nor necessarily sequential. 
This stands in contrast with many of the claims within the organizational life cycle 
literature, where a firm moves through successive stages over time. In contrast, IOs 
can ebb and flow through many different states in the course of their existence (Gray, 
2020), and dynamic processes within IOs suggest that the good times as well as the 
bad can often prove ephemeral. For every heady beginning, member-state retrench-
ment and contestation can emerge later down the line (Chaudoin, 2014). The ter-
rain of international cooperation is complex, and conditions both within and across 
IOs can shift dramatically even within a few years of the organization’s founding 
(Hirschmann, 2023). Furthermore, “efficient” design cannot insulate IOs from 
4  Downs et al. 1996; Vreeland, 2003; von Stein, 2005; Donno et al., 2015.
5  Chaudoin et al., 2018.

645
1 3
The life cycle of international cooperation: Introduction…
inertia and death: even prominent IOs such as the UN and its various agencies, the 
IMF, the World Bank, the WTO, and NATO, have experienced moments of decline 
and have even been on the brink of dissolution (McCalla, 1996). Acknowledging 
this reality offers a more sanguine picture of the history of international cooperation: 
IOs very frequently tackle hard problems and experience fluctuations in their vitality 
as they react to challenges.
We see these principles animated in the historical arc of international organiza-
tions. At the very inception of formal intergovernmental cooperation, the League 
of Nations hit trouble once the US Senate failed to ratify it in 1919 — despite the 
pivotal role that the US had played in its founding and designing (Lavelle, 2007). 
The International Trade Organization never got off the ground for the same rea-
son (Kaya, 2016), and even the GATT, though successful in its initial round of 
trade liberalization, subsequently experienced a “lost decade” of failed negotia-
tions despite multiple rounds of talks (Stiles, 1995). Indeed, in the immediate 
post–World War II era — often hailed as a watershed moment for international 
cooperation — the International Monetary Fund and the World Bank found their 
mission of post-war European reconstruction quickly eclipsed by the scale and 
scope of the Marshall Plan, hastily put into place by the US as distrust of the 
Soviets deepened. The United Nations hit challenges to its mandate once the for-
mer colonies joined in 1960 – only 14 years after the organization was put into 
place — and Secretary General Dag Hammerskjold’s ambitious plans for a more 
interventionist UN went nowhere, after his tragic death alongside Cold War ten-
sions tipped the organization into inertia. Even after the fall of the Berlin Wall, 
another period in which IOs seemed to be on the rise, many of the organizations 
and agreements that countries were rapidly forming, joining, and signing expe-
rienced drift (Gray, 2018). Although many of those organizations subsequently 
found their footing, notably, all of those examples can arise from periods that 
scholars consider to be fertile ground for durable interstate cooperation — in the 
shadow of damaging wars and at the closure of protracted eras of political ten-
sion. If such variation in vitality emerges even in those moments when interests 
seem aligned and commitments seem sincere, even more variation arises when 
IOs are formed in the presence of domestic or interstate conflict.
Different stages of life are, again, not necessarily synonymous with effectiveness 
or compliance; an organization’s life stage can be a necessary but insufficient condi-
tion for performance more broadly (Gutner & Thompson, 2010). Even though, for 
example, death and false starts may seem incompatible with good performance, an 
organization might die precisely because it has performed effectively and finished 
the job; or a series of false starts may lead to a better-designed agreement once it 
finally does emerge. At the same time, revitalization or rebirth through replacement 
also may not result in increased effectiveness, as Eilstrup and Verdier point out in 
this issue.
Second, IO life cycles, and their often-circular ebbs and flows more broadly, 
have consequences for the international system: when IOs decline, die, or 
change, this does not simply mean that efficient actors are just pruning off dying 
branches and moving to an optimal equilibrium of international cooperation. 
Rather, various stages in an IO’s cycle of life can represent changing realities, not 

646
	
J. Gray 
1 3
necessarily efficiency, and even IOs whose designs reflect protracted periods of bar-
gaining msay find themselves paralyzed by crisis. The actors who engage with IOs 
— from bureaucrats to world leaders — have their own motivations for engaging 
with IOs, and as such IO adaptations often reflect the motivations of those individ-
ual actors, rather than an efficient response to a “market failure” in cooperation.
Although studies of international cooperation recognized that all IOs did not 
experience equally good health (Strange, 1998; Shanks et al., 1996), attention tended 
to focus on out- comes and processes related to the member state: whether countries 
complied with their commitments to economic and political openness and, if they 
benefitted from those commitments, in terms of increased trade, investment, or FDI. 
At the same time, the rational design agenda put member-state bargains as central to 
explaining variation in formal IO design. Focusing on granular, temporal variation 
in the IO itself — decline, inertia, or death — has been less common, for several 
reasons. First, countries report — or researchers collect — their national- level polit-
ical and economic information into easily accessible repositories; most IOs have no 
such mandate. Furthermore, the IOs that tend to have the best data are usually the 
larger, more prominent, often Western ones, even though such IOs only make up a 
small fraction of the total IO population over time. This makes the study of IO vital-
ity in the face of these challenges particularly difficult — but it also means that due 
to these selection processes, our understanding of IOs tends to be informed by the 
larger and better-performing ones for which more data are available, creating prob-
lems for inference.
Although many scholars have studied formal change in IOs,6 the variation in 
IO vitality can arise from informal as well as formal practices (Roger, 2020; Vab-
ulas & Snidal, 2013) and is best put into perspective by examining IOs over the 
entire course of their life. While states and their preferences are important to, and 
often drivers of, IO life stages, other actors and structures also have agency in IOs: 
bureaucracies, representatives, and delegates in particular. Nonetheless, for many 
of these stages — particularly birth and the negotiation of successor institutions, 
which require the formal agreement of member-state governments— state-centric 
approaches are especially ­useful5; in contrast, stages such as inertia and overall sur-
vival require focus on IOs (Haftel & Nadel, 2024) or on the individuals within IOs 
(Baturo & Gray, 2024). At the same time, IR applications of organizational ecology 
(Abbott et al., 2016; Keohane & Morse, 2014) acknowledge the broader ecosystem 
in which IOs operate, but tend to put member state choices as the primary drivers. 
We may assume that the organizations that states design — to say nothing of the 
states themselves — simply behave in rational, or boundedly rational, ways, and that 
the same processes of power- and interest- based bargaining remain at play through-
out the course of an IO’s existence. But it is unclear whether the same frameworks 
that drive a state to join an IO also determine its functioning, or dysfunction, going 
6  IR scholars examine formal change in rules and procedures of IOs (Jupille et al., 2013; Lipscy, 2015), 
while the historical institutionalist literature (Fioretos et al. 2016; Mahoney and Thelen, 2010; Thelen, 
2009) provides insight to international organizations (Fioretos, 2017; St John, 2018; Fioretos, 2019). 
Within the IR literature more broadly, the survival and termination on alliance termination offers paral-
lels (Walt, 1997).

647
1 3
The life cycle of international cooperation: Introduction…
forward (Barnett & Finnemore, 1999). Other frameworks — such as organizational 
culture, theories of bureaucracy, and principal agent models — should also be taken 
into account in determining an IO’s cycle of life.
In sum, a life cycles approach expands our understanding of international coop-
eration temporally (because lives are dynamic processes, and because looking at 
false starts and failures often require a long view), geographically (in cross-region 
comparison, because many similarly structured IOs face different fates), and struc-
turally (in looking at IO bureaucracies and durations themselves and not just the 
interests, capabilities, and preferences of their member states). This means bringing 
history and time into the study of IOs; comparing institutions in the global South 
as well as the developed world; and taking seriously the individuals within the IOs 
— meaning staff, negotiators, advisers, and delegates — alongside member-state 
governments.
2  Life cycle theory across disciplines, and applications to IOs
Scholarship across economics, sociology, public administration, management, and 
anthropology has used the life cycle concept to study myriad institutions, includ-
ing firms, agencies, cultural units, and private as well as nonprofit organizations. 
Although these varied research agendas carry useful lessons for the study of inter-
national cooperation, they also have some limits in their applicability, with political 
agencies as perhaps the most useful comparison (Lewis, 2002).
The preponderance of economic models in IR make it somewhat surprising that a 
life cycles approach has been so long in coming to the study of international cooper-
ation.7 But approaches in firm studies and industrial organization take life cycles as 
a given and necessary reality within a competitive context (Agarwal & Gort, 2002; 
Brüderl et al., 1992). Firm perspectives emphasize that changing market conditions, 
customer demands, and technological advancements mean that firms must almost 
constantly adapt to re- main profitable and avoid failure (Christensen, 1997; Mans-
field, 1963), particularly when they are in competitive markets (Porter, 1985). Such 
approaches contextualize an organization’s survival as hinging on a fast-changing 
environment with many competing pressures — an utterly different backdrop than 
an approach that considers IOs as operating in a relatively stable international sys-
tem, as seems to be the presumption of many analyses of the liberal order.
Given the mercurial conditions in which they must operate, and the degree to 
which exogenous conditions shape firm behavior (Meyer & Rowan, 1977), firms 
as organizations inevitably go through cycles of life, and those that cannot adapt 
will fail. But even that adaptation — often  conceptualized in these frameworks 
as the introduction of new products or services — is often followed by periods 
7  See Keohane (1984), where Chapter 6 looks at political market failures and the Coase theorem. Eco-
nomic models of bargaining featured prominently IR approaches to cooperation; see Krasner (1991); 
Morrow (1994); Abbott and Snidal (1998); Fearon (1998); Koremenos et al. (2001) for foundational con-
tributions. However, the focus on symmetry in bargaining and the resultant contract obscure the fate of 
the institution, once formed. Although Waltz (1979) compared state survival to firm survival, he does not 
incorporate life stages in his framework.

648
	
J. Gray 
1 3
of consolidation (Tushman & O’Reilly, 1996; Williamson, 1965) before a firm is 
forced to innovate once more. Even a firm that successfully innovates under one 
set of conditions may fail when confronted with a different challenge.8 Extensive 
literature, for example, investigates the role of systemic factors such as low interest 
rates, weak banks, and bankruptcy laws on the preponderance of “zombie” firms — 
defined as unprofitable firms with low stock market valuation — in a given setting 
(Storz et al., 2017; Banerjee and Hofmann, 2018; Andrews and Petroulakis, 2019).
And yet IOs differ from firms in several important ways.9 Most IOs do not depend 
on profitable outputs in to survive (Dunne et al., 1988; Klepper and Simons, 2000).10 
Furthermore, depending on their mandate, they do not all face pressures to grow and 
expand to increase their profit margin (Audretsch, 1995); think of technical organi-
zations that regulate fairly conscribed issue areas such as river navigation or com-
modity prices. Additionally, they do not necessarily enjoy economies of scale, nor 
do they necessarily have a need to seek new markets (Caves, 1998); although some-
times change and expansion can be efficient (Haftel & Hofmann, 2017), indeed, 
expansion into new domains often results in mission creep, and the transposition of 
particular models in different geographic and political contexts often results in an 
implementation gap (Gray, 2014; Lenz, 2012). Although firm life cycle theory looks 
at outputs that include a broad range of organizational activities and structure, it 
tends to assume that life stages are sequential and irreversible — and yet we see IOs 
that move between inertia and rebirth and back again.11 This is partially due to the 
relative longevity of IOs compared with firms, not least because the bureaucracies 
of IOs often become entrenched (Strange, 1998). Around half of all businesses fail 
within one and a half years, and the median age of all firms is only seven years. In 
contrast, although newer IOs have a higher probability of dying (Debre & Dijkstra, 
2021), death itself is relatively rare in some subsets of IOs12 but across two centuries 
of global governance occurs around 30 percent of the time (Eilstrup-Sangiovanni, 
2021). Furthermore, in terms of financing, IOs experience perhaps the opposite 
trajectory of firms: IOs start out with funding commensurate with their goals but 
often fall into deficits, given budget arrears and overextensions (Engel and Mattheis, 
2019), while firms usually lose money in their initial years before turning profits, 
which perhaps contributes to the liability of newness in firm life cycles (Brüderl 
& Schussler, 1990). Finally and relatedly, innovation plays an outsized role in both 
firm and product life cycles: market shares depend on novelty, which means that firm 
survival hinges on generating — or at least creating the perception of — product 
8  Notably, this literature also acknowledges that selection and endogeneity are a problem for inference: 
see Thompson (2005).
9  At the same time, firms themselves hardly operate on the basis of market forces alone (Jensen, 2000; 
Levinthal & March, 1981), although a full discussion is beyond the scope of this paper.
10  International financial institutions and development banks are one exception to this; they finance 
themselves at least in part through the interest on their loans (Vreeland, 2003).
11  Many IOs in the global South, for example, disbanded only to revitalize decades later — such as the 
East African Community, which died in 1977 and reformed in 1997, as did the Arab Maghreb Union, 
which fell into dormancy in 1998 despite attempts at revitalization.
12  See Gray (2018) on economic IOs, where death is around 12 percent of the sample. That said, because 
many IOs emerged only at the end of the Cold War, the sample for newer IOs is to some extent censored.

649
1 3
The life cycle of international cooperation: Introduction…
innovation. International organizations, however, have a strong status quo bias and 
indeed often struggle to actualize the very details of their founding bargain, given 
systemic as well as member-state shifts.
This points to a need to study IO life cycles as organizations operating largely 
outside of market forces, in which agency theory and the study of bureaucracy take 
central roles.13 As intergovernmental structures, IOs act as bureaucracies (DiMaggio 
& Powell, 1983; Niskanen, 1971; Weber, 1922). Like domestic agencies and public 
administrations, they can face pathologies in balancing the interests of competing 
factions (March & Simon, 1958; Moe, 1984). They walk a similar line between the 
autonomy necessary for them to fulfill their mandates, versus accountability for their 
processes, as illustrated in principal-agent models (Johnson, 2014; Pollack, 1997; 
Vaubel, 2006); the distant nature of IO secretariats also can make monitoring dif-
ficult (Hawkins et al., 2006; Honig, 2018). International public administrations oper-
ate in conditions similar to the complex and multifaceted environment of competi-
tive business markets, but with the stickiness and status-quo bias of agencies (Knill 
& Bauer, 2007). Although firms can also operate through processes of bounded 
rationality and principal-agent dynamics, agencies are also subject to interest group 
mobilization and network dynamics (Balla & Gormley, 2017).
Furthermore, the agents involved in IOs produce outputs that can be difficult to 
judge using market standards. This means that rather than being motivated by per-
formance, they tend to be incentivized by, as Downs (1967, page 35) put it, a “com-
plex set of goals including the following elements: power, income, prestige, secu-
rity, convenience, loyalty (to an idea, an institution, or the nation), pride in excellent 
work, and desire to serve the public interest.” In the absence of clearly defined out-
puts, agents must cultivate personal reputations (Carpenter & Krause, 2012) that 
can help them build coalitions and gain control of their policy domains (Carpenter, 
2000). This allows agents to maneuver within the existing rules and confines of their 
mandates (Potter, 2019).14
These are strikingly different units of analysis and incentive structures than what 
much of the research on IOs of the past decades considers. The primacy of state 
interests and the nature of the cooperative problem led to a focus on international 
bargains, with the state (or the state-IO) as the unit of analysis and the IO itself 
defined by static features of the agreement at a fixed point (its onset, or a subsequent 
formal revision). While the literature on international public administration deline-
ates the particularities of global agencies (Fleischer & Reiners, 2021; Thorvalds-
dottir et al., 2021), the cycle of life has yet to be fully incorporated as an important 
theoretical framework.
A life cycles approach, then, necessitates two pivots. The first is continuing to 
move away from the state as the unit of analysis, as has been long promoted by 
13  See Brierley et al. (2023) for an excellent recent overview of the literature on bureaucracies in US 
politics. Seminal works include Blau and Scott (1962), which developed frameworks for cross-organi-
zational comparison; Niskanen (1968) on the political environment in which bureaucrats operate; Potter 
and Shipan (2019) on nonmarket decisionmaking in bureaucratic rulemaking.
14  Similarly, in the management literature (Suchman, 1995), organizations build, maintain and defend 
legitimacy; while at all those stages organizations exhibit vitality, the challenges and appropriate 
responses differ at each stage.

650
	
J. Gray 
1 3
constructivist frameworks (Finnemore, 1996; Finnemore & Sikkink, 2001) to the IO 
itself (as Haftel and Nadel, and Schmidtke and Lenz, do in this issue), to the indi-
viduals operating within that IO (Gray and Baturo, in this issue), to the broader sys-
tem in which those IOs operate (Schmidt, and Vabulas and von Borzyskowski in this 
issue).15 The second pivot focuses on temporal processes within a given IO (Han-
rieder, 2015), and by extension on the broader history of IOs beyond just the period 
after the fall of the Berlin Wall. The markers of formal change within an IO — such 
as an amendment to the agreement or a change in its membership structure — are 
far less frequent than the gradual shifts and de facto daily practices that can mark the 
different stages of a life cycle.
Studying an organization’s life cycle also places IOs in a broader comparative and 
systemic context. If we seek to explain organizational life stages, we must consider 
why IOs with similar attributes experience different fates; this requires comparing 
IOs in the global North as well as the global South, and considering the trajectories 
of IOs beyond the ones that are the easiest to study. Furthermore, IOs interact with 
the broader population of other IOs in the system; this draws literature on organiza-
tional ecology (Abbott et al., 2016; Gehring & Faude, 2014), networks within IOs 
(Greenhill & Lupu, 2017), and regime complexity in IR (Henning & Pratt, 2024).16 
Life cycles approaches can intersect with social evolutionary models of organiza-
tions (Aldrich, 1979), which assume that some organizations will select into sur-
vival while others fall out of the sample (Campbell, 1965).
The precise markers to identify various life stages differ even in the foundational 
life cycles literature. Several distinct models have been postulated, ranging from 
three to ten stages (Lester et al., 2003). In studies of the firm, the phases follow some 
arc including startup, growth, maturity, decline, renewal (five); growth, maturity, 
and decline (three); alternately innovation, growth, and decline, followed by renewal 
(four). For Downs (1967), government bureaus experience specific dynamics in each 
life stage: for example, a struggle for autonomy may take place before or immedi-
ately following an agency’s birth; then establishing of legitimacy; then expansion, 
and then to formalization and control. The IO life cycle stages described above — 
false starts, births, stagnation, change, death, and succession — can vary depending 
on the issue area that the IO covers, and particular markers for those stages may 
vary depending on researchers’ theoretical interest, just as in the life cycles litera-
tures across disciplines.17 There are limits to the metaphor: unlike in organic life 
cycles, not every IO experiences all those stages, nor necessarily in exact sequence. 
Nonetheless, the determinants and consequences of variation in IO vitality across 
life stages are an important component of international order.
15  In this issue, Eilstrup and Verdier use state-centric perspectives on IO bargains around death and 
replacement.
16  The same holds true for NGOs; Bush and Hadden (2024) show that INGOs in the US make choices 
about their founding, mission scope, and geographic location based on the existing population of other 
NGOs.
17  For example, Debre and Dijkstra (2023) use a definition of decline that centers on the population and 
on the frequency of its mentions at the UN, while others focus on IO outputs to define their vitality; see 
Tallberg et al. (2016); Gray (2018).

651
1 3
The life cycle of international cooperation: Introduction…
3  Units of analysis in IO stages
The study of organizational life cycles almost by definition moves the unit of analy-
sis away from the principal (in this case, the member state) and onto the agent (in 
this case, the organization) (Pollack, 1997). That said, research in organizational life 
cycles across disciplines grapples with some disagreement over several issues. First, 
what do they define as an organization? Second, given any particular definition, who 
are the relevant actors within and outside the IO? How do variations in IO life stages 
impact the overall system of international cooperation?
First, the parameters of what counts as an organization are particularly impor-
tant, as they define the subsequent empirical domain, as well as suggesting vary-
ing definitions of output that would be consistent with vitality. Organizational life 
cycle metaphors across disciplines and subfields offer their own scope conditions. 
In the pioneering use of a life cycle metaphor in the study of institutions, Marshall 
(1890) compared firms to trees in a forest, with the idea that they compete for scarce 
resources (in this metaphor, sunlight). The idea of organizational life cycles prolif-
erated in economics and in management studies, with firms as the unit of analysis. 
Sociologists broadened the lens to public institutions such as schools (Hannan & 
Freeman, 1977). In American politics, scholars also examined the creation and ter-
mination of individual agencies at the domestic level (Heclo, 1977; Lewis, 2002).18 
A substantial literature in international public administration applies organizational 
theories to IOs (Bauer et al., 2017; Fleischer & Reiners, 2021; Knill & Steinebach, 
2022). This line of research emphasizes that IPAs represent actors distinct from their 
member states, with an independent influence on international policy, given the 
degree of autonomy and resources that they possess (Knill et al., 2022). Such a view 
focuses on the IO itself, and its attributes, including the composition of its staff and 
the resources that it possesses or lacks (Graham, 2017). Constructivist frameworks 
have long emphasized the importance of individuals and cultures within IOs (Bar-
nett & Finnemore, 2004; Barnett & Solingen, 2007; Chwieroth, 2009; Finnemore, 
1996). At the same time, many international organizations can co- exist with infor-
mal institutions (Roger, 2020; Roger & Rowan, 2022) and, at different stages of their 
life cycle, such informality may prevail in alternate but linked venues (Lugg, 2024).
The choice of the unit of analysis conditions the study of the relevant actors, as 
different types of agents inhabit different types of organizations. For example, firm 
life cycle theories place heavy emphasis on leadership in organizations, with manag-
ers and executives being central to the navigation between life stages (Hall & Woods, 
2018). For studies of government agencies, focus is given to the staff themselves and 
the nature of their appointment — on either a merit or political basis, with the latter 
18  The importance of endogenous design in these literatures is debated. Indeed, bargaining models 
assume that preferences and group characteristics (including the number of actors as well as their hetero-
geneity in terms of both capabilities and preferences) determine the structure of institutional choice, and 
that the institution one observes is the optimal one for the cooperation problem and the relevant actors. In 
studies of US agencies, different factions compete over the agency’s role and responsibilities, with every 
group lobbying for its own interests. The resulting compromises can make the resulting agency explicitly 
— and even intentionally — dysfunctional (Moe, 1989). But see, for example, Boin et al. (2010); in their 
study of FDR’s New Deal organizations design factors do matter, but their effects change over time.

652
	
J. Gray 
1 3
category subject to built-in obsolescence in the presence of turnover in the office 
of the executive as well as the legislature. For treaties, which also experience exits 
(Huikuri, 2023) and decline (Barnum & Lo, 2020) despite not having secretariats or 
staff, differing definitions of vitality depend on the issue area and the international 
law surrounding them; although all treaties should be ratified and entered into force, 
trade agreements would have different vitality benchmarks than would investment 
agreements,19 and security treaties often hinge on limiting outputs such as the pro-
liferation of arms or the development of nuclear weapons (Coe & Vaynman, 2020).
In this special issue’s articles, the particular life stages under study as well as the 
research question itself can suggest different units of analysis. In looking at legiti-
macy dynamics, Lenz and Schmidtke focus on how IOs grapple with challenges, 
whereas Vabulas and von Borzyskowski look at changes in legitimacy through the 
eyes of the mass public, in response to a member state exiting an IO. In terms of var-
iation in legitimacy and politicization within subagencies of an IO, Baturo and Gray 
examine the varying rhetoric of individual delegates that inhabit the public forum 
for debate. State-centered approaches are relevant to formal changes in IO structure; 
Eilstrup-Sangiovanni and Verdier, explain IO change in the standard rationalist and 
state-centric way without any focus on IO agency — although it is probable that 
decisionmakers at the IO level have some incentive in ensuring their own survival, if 
only so that they can keep their jobs. Finally, in looking at survival dynamics, Haf-
tel and Nadel focus on the IO’s overall duration in relation to crises, whereas in the 
question of broader impact Schmidt moves the focus to the system level.
4  Dynamic processes in IO life cycles
Many scholars bring organizational theory in the study of IOs; seminally, March 
and Olsen, (1998), Ness and Brechin, (1988) called for greater incorporation of the 
study of organizations in international cooperation, a call taken up by, among others 
Barnett and Finnemore, 1999, 2004 and Nielson and Tierney 2003.20 However, a 
life cycles approach — although in many other disciplines a logical extension of the 
study of organizations — has yet to be articulated in political science, largely due to 
two primary constraints, one theoretical and the second empirical. First, the theoreti-
cal lenses of rational design and open-economy politics placed heavy emphasis on 
state interests as the primary drivers of international cooperation. The primacy of 
economic bargaining models meant that, by extension, the preferences and the lever-
age of countries negotiating the agreement drew focus.
The prominence of rational bargaining frameworks had implications for the 
empirical domain of IO study. Such models also implied that countries’ prefer-
ences over approaching a particular cooperation problem — and who would pay the 
19  See Gray and Slapin (2012); Gray (2014), who evaluate trade agreements based on expert assessments 
of trade created as a function of firm behavior, whereas investment agreements’ formal legal status and 
legal remedies underscore their vitality.
20  Other prominent examples include Weaver, 2008; Johnson, 2014; Heldt, 2017 in their incorporation of 
principal agent dynamics; see also Pouilot and Therien, 2023.

653
1 3
The life cycle of international cooperation: Introduction…
costs and bear the consequences of cooperation — girded the agreement itself. This 
meant that either a binary measure of the organization itself, or else easily coded 
aspects of the contract — such as its level of legalization (McCall Smith, 2000), 
depth (Dür et al., 2014), authority (Hooghe & Marks, 2020; Hooghe et al., 2016; 
Zürn, 2012, 2020), flexibility (Kucik & Reinhardt, 2008), or breadth of issues cov-
ered (Haftel, 2013; Kelemen et al., 2014) — served as a reflection of the potential 
gain from agreement relative to the costs of institutional setup. In such frameworks, 
if the gains were small, an agreement would not be formed, or would fall apart once 
formed.21 Such assumptions proved sufficient given the dominant research method-
ologies following the Cold War — namely, time-series cross-section analyses moti-
vated by formal models in which states were the primary actors.22 A binary indicator 
of IO existence meant that hundreds of IOs could be accounted for using the same 
metric; a focus on the gains of cooperation at the state level meant that researchers 
could rely on readily available economic and political statistics.
But a life cycle approach requires two shifts away from the state-year, or IO-year 
level. The first is to investigate change over time. The importance of temporal pro-
cesses in IOs is critical to a life-cycles perspective. Time is particularly important 
because it lays bare the way that institutions — and actors within those institutions 
— can maneuver around whatever formal design states concocted. The periods 
of activity between formal treaty revisions often see informal shifts within IOs as 
actors navigate existing rules, and these changes only becomes apparent through 
scrutinizing how IOs work over time (Buzas & Graham, 2020). Time elucidates how 
design features play out in real life, but in the shadow of formal changes, as has been 
acknowledged in agency studies of delegation; Boin et al. (2010) argue that feedback 
effects in the way that staff and other actors inhabit IO designs mean that agency 
survival is not simply a function of initial institutional design.22 Wilks and Bartle 
(2002) also note that in competition agencies, delegations mean that agents develop 
their own preferences, influence, and legitimacy, such that they are no longer 
dependent on politicians; they describe this as an unanticipated and even unintended 
consequences of delegation. Organizational life cycle theory more broadly empha-
sizes that organizations evolve independently from their size and chronological age; 
rather than years in existence, decreased flexibility and adaptability are the appro-
priate markers of decline (Adizes, 1979; Mosca et al., 2021). Second, a life cycles 
approach necessarily requires close scrutiny of the inner workings of IOs, and mak-
ing decisions about what “counts” in the development of an IO’s trajectory. This 
often means shifting the unit of analysis away from the country level, and away from 
a binary coding of the IO itself that remains unchanged throughout time. Instead, 
IO scholarship on vitality needs to look within the IO itself to its agencies and sub-
agencies; at its leadership as well as its broader staff; at its reports and outputs; at 
informal processes alongside formal changes; and at the failed initiatives within IOs 
as well as the successful ones.
21  As Koremenos, (2013, 338) put it, “Cooperation is not always worth it. Theories of agreement design 
make sense at the stage at which cooperation is thought to be worth it.”
22  But see Johns (2007); Fang (2008).

654
	
J. Gray 
1 3
This can result in varying judgments in defining stages in an IO’s cycle of life. 
Design, formation, and ratification are relatively easy to observe and uncontrover-
sial to record. However, scholars may have reasonable differences in opinion on 
the thresholds and cutpoints for vitality that constitute different stages of life. How 
long do IOs have to stay inert to count as dead? How fundamentally do IOs have to 
change in order to count as a new organization, versus a successor, versus a continu-
ation of the previous one? Informal practices that play a key role in determining life 
stages only become apparent through examining IOs over their entire history, and 
researchers may come to different decisions about operationalizing different stages 
in the cycle of life.
5  Articles in the special issue
Many scholars assume that domestic crises herald the end of cooperation. IO skep-
tics might argue that international cooperation is a luxury for most countries, and 
that when times are tough, countries will reallocate their attentions to domestic 
matters. Such inattention could contribute to inertia in IOs, ultimately leading to 
their death — indeed, many IOs have died or gone inert in the face of violent con-
flict (such as the Mano River Union’s long paralysis in the face of civil conflicts, or 
the Central American Common Market’s inertia following the 1979 “soccer war” 
between El Salvador and Honduras). Haftel and Nadel, however, argue and show 
that crises are often a chance for an IO to show its quality and for member states 
to appreciate the benefits that IOs can bring. Although many scholars assume that 
crises lead to the rise of populist leaders who then renege on their international com-
mitments, Haftel and Nadel argue that, in fact, economic hard times underscore the 
ability of IOs to tackle the root causes of crises and to mitigate their most pernicious 
effects. Not only do economic crises not result in IO death, but they can even prolong 
an IO’s lifespan. Haftel and Nadel further argue that IOs with an economic mandate 
especially enjoy the support of crisis-ridden member states. They also expect cur-
rency crises to have greater cross-border repercussions, compared to banking and 
sovereign debt crises, due to their greater potential for cross-border contagion. This, 
in turn, will result in greater need for a coordinated response through IOs. Their 
findings imply that the benefits of IOs can come into focus during economic crises, 
and that IOs that can help states withstand economic shocks may prove particularly 
long-lasting, and perhaps even more vital (Haftel,  2020).
Even when IOs do fold, death is not always the end. Eilstrup and Verdier exam-
ine the relationship between IO death and institutional replacement. Departing from 
arguments that status quo pressures and bounded rationality will nudge states toward 
sticking with the existing institution (Jupille et al., 2013), Eilstrup and Verdier show 
an important incentive to form a new IO altogether. By reconfiguring the institution 
anew, states can bypass members who might have acted as veto players in the IO’s 
activities and scope. As such, they argue that simply reforming an existing IO may 
just perpetuate the problems that led to a standstill in the first place. The authors 
use a game-theoretic model to illustrate the incentive structures faced by the rel-
evant actors, and the strategic calculations that those actors make in their struggles 

655
1 3
The life cycle of international cooperation: Introduction…
to make cooperation possible. They thus highlight the importance of perceptions of 
performance in IO life cycles as well as the difficulty of inferring effectiveness from 
any one of an IO’s life stages on its own. Death and replacement are not necessarily 
signs of failure; rather, they can be rational responses to gridlock in an existing IO. 
Furthermore, killing off and reconstituting an IO may be the best chance of achiev-
ing meaningful cooperation. Although this article, in the tradition of rational design, 
focuses primarily on the incentives and strategies of member states — not of IO 
agents themselves — it nonetheless highlights important patterns in the types of bar-
gains that countries consider.
A single IO can contain many different and largely autonomous branches, each 
of which serve a different function. Furthermore, individuals play different roles 
within different arms in an IO. In the case of the UN, for example, the Security 
Council plays a different function than do the UN’s myriad agencies, some of which 
have more vitality than others at different points. In this context, Baturo and Gray 
(2024) examine the increased tendency of world leaders to use the UNGA as a pul-
pit. The UNGA has long been in the throes of various revitalization initiatives; these 
coincided with what seems to have been a shift in leader attendance at the assem-
bly. Although historically,  leaders infrequently spoke at the UN, around the year 
2000, the norm shifted, and heads of state now take their country’s speaking slot 
around half of the time. But do their appearances help move along the agenda of 
international cooperation and enhance the UNGA’s vitality? Two possibilities pre-
sent themselves: either heads of state appear at IOs because their country prioritizes 
international cooperation, and as such their presence could indicate the salience of 
the IO’s agenda to their own nation. Alternately, leaders could appear for their own 
motivations, whether for personal prestige or as a result of the constraints or man-
dates of their own political situation at home (Baturo & Gray, 2023). Speech — 
itself a relevant output in the vitality of the UNGA — varies between leaders and 
those of other delegates. Consistent with theories of leader communication (Dewan 
& Myatt, 2008), that rather than adapt their language to be more congruent with 
their environment (Bayram & Ta, 2019; Lindsey, 2017), leaders instead use more 
general language and talk about items distant from the session’s agenda. These find-
ings suggest that leaders may politicize IOs, rather than enhance them through their 
presence.
The vitality of IOs’ general assemblies also bridges with the strategies that IOs 
undertake to legitimate their own existence (Bexell et al., 2022; Gronau & Schmidtke, 
2016). This shifts the presumption of agency from member states and delegates, and 
assumes instead that IO staff and leadership can play an active role in their organiza-
tion’s survival and vitality. Indeed, as bureaucracy scholarship acknowledges, reputa-
tions and legitimacy allow agencies to exercise and even increase their autonomy (Car-
penter, 2001). For IOs, the act of legitimation can serve as an attempt to revitalize or 
to ensure its autonomous functioning. Schmitdke and Lenz investigate IOs’ strategies 
of legitimation in reference to an IO’s cycle of life. They show that IO legitimation is 
not reactive, but rather proactive; that is, IOs often attempt to get ahead of the narra-
tive when they expand their authority. Taking the unit of analysis down to the level of 
the agent, Schmidtke and Lenz show that acts of legitimation go hand in hand with an 
increase in authority, and that — mindful of the potential political backlash — IOs take 

656
	
J. Gray 
1 3
steps to improve their reputations in advance. This brings in canonical arguments about 
bureaucratic authority and reputations at the international level, while also extending an 
important argument in the study of bureaucracies against a backdrop of anticipated IO 
decline and pushback. Their findings also elucidate the slippery nature of measurement 
of IO life stages; even if we see no contestation emerge in an IO’s lifespan, it could be 
due to active, behind-the-scenes management on the part of the IO.
How do variations in IO life stages impact the overall system of international coop-
eration? In this issue, Schmidt addresses the systemic consequences of IO vitality by 
examining how treaty withdrawal impacts the broader system of international law. 
While a single state leaving an IO has been linked to IO decline and death (Vabulas 
and von Borzyskowski, 2021), Schmidt argues treaty withdrawal has both a direct and 
an indirect effect on the negotiation of new multilateral treaties. On the one hand, treaty 
withdrawal has a direct effect on the treaty regime where it occurs by prompting a crisis 
that leads remaining states to negotiate new agreements so that the regime may adapt 
and survive. On the other hand, withdrawal sours diplomatic relations between treaty 
members and the withdrawing state, inhibiting their ability to negotiate new agree-
ments successfully in other areas of cooperation. Consequently, withdrawal can have 
two opposing effects on the life stages of international institutions: it can both prompt 
periods of revitalization and increase the risk of false starts in the form of failed nego-
tiations. Schmidt tests this argument using an original panel of treaty regimes drawn 
from comprehensive UN data. He finds statistical support for both the direct and indi-
rect effects of withdrawal. However, his analysis indicates that withdrawal’s negative 
indirect effect far exceeds its positive direct effect — there would have been nearly one-
third more multilateral treaties created from 1945 through 2018 had there not been any 
withdrawals during this period.
Beyond the overall system effects, what are the repercussions of withdrawal 
on the ground? Vabulas and von Borzyskowski examine the domestic politics 
of IO withdrawal. They argue that politicians (with a focus on the US case) 
announce IO withdrawal on the campaign trail to rally domestic electoral sup-
port. This is because Americans’ support for multilateralism divides along 
party lines, and discussing IO withdrawal can activate those preferences. 
Moreover, when politicians frame an IO withdrawal as benefiting US national 
interests, voters are more likely to favor IO withdrawal. These expectations are 
tested with data from four US survey experiments during the 2017–2021 Trump 
administration and the authors find empirical support for these arguments. The 
results show that IO withdrawal (and how it is framed) affects voters’ choice of 
candidates and support of policies meaning that different stages of the IO life 
cycle may affect (and be affected by) domestic politics. Their paper also shows 
that even when IOs are going through challenging stages of their life cycles, a 
large proportion of the public may still value remaining in the IO, emphasiz-
ing the importance of examining the long view of IOs. The authors reason that 
sunk cost fallacies, status quo bias, and loss aversion may pose friction points 
that prevent the public from capriciously supporting withdrawal from stagnat-
ing IOs.

657
1 3
The life cycle of international cooperation: Introduction…
6  Conclusion
This special issue seeks to show that IOs always operate within different stages 
within an overall life cycle –– a concept that is used extensively in economics, 
management, and organizational sociology but has yet to be systematically stud-
ied in the context of international cooperation. Any IO that attempts to tackle 
a serious cooperation problem will face challenges, and its vitality will likely 
shift in the face of those challenges. Assuming that IOs will simply operate with-
out confronting setbacks — and, indeed, without bending and even reshaping to 
accommodate some of those strains — fundamentally misreads the actual trajec-
tories of international cooperation, which forever travel through various stages of 
life.
The application of firm and organizational life-cycle theory to the study of inter-
national organizations provides a framework for understanding the developmental 
trajectories and adaptive behaviors of IOs on the global stage. The articles in this 
special issue show the implications of IOs moving through not just inception but 
also growth, maturity, and decline phases, shed- ding light on the unique challenges 
and opportunities encountered at each stage. IOs not only establish their missions 
but also evolve their structures and respond to external pressures; these life-cycle 
dynamics matter for the effectiveness, relevance, and sustainability of international 
organizations in an ever-changing global landscape.
Viewing international cooperation through a life-cycle lens reveals a more 
dynamic, porous international order. Many empirical studies focus implicitly on the 
formation of international agreements, assuming that if countries form an IO, they 
want it to succeed. This perspective suggests that once IOs are formed, they will 
naturally progress upward, and any changes signify successful bargains. But some 
kinds of IO changes are better understood either as a form of self-destruction, or as 
an attempt to revitalize when failure seems imminent. Contrary to common percep-
tions, IO dissolution may not always be a failure of cooperation. Sometimes IOs 
conclude their missions and dissolve; in that instance IO death can be a positive 
rather than a negative development. Conversely, IOs that find ways to survive in the 
midst of crises may outlive their mandate and persist despite inefficiency.
Such a view sheds new light on an empirical puzzle in the study of international 
cooperation. International institutions are generally assumed to be “sticky” – that 
is, they are thought to remain largely unchanged once they form. But in fact, IOs 
can change quite a bit, and those changes vary in scope and in degree. International 
organizations’ dynamism occurs not only in the formal revisions and renegotiations 
on which scholars have previously focused, but also in their daily operations. IOs’ 
life stages reveal new angles on  the complexities of international cooperation. Their 
vitality varies over time, as the same IO transitions through different life stages, and 
across space, as different IOs with similar designs experience varying vitality. Rec-
ognizing this complexity illuminates the practice and performance of international 
cooperation.23 Rather than expecting one moment of vitality to be a referendum on 
23  On the former, see Adler and Pouliot (2011); Pouliot (2015); on the latter, Gutner and Thompson 
(2010); Lall (2018).

658
	
J. Gray 
1 3
an IO for all time, scholarship can instead focus both on the potential for IO resil-
ience in the face of crisis or, conversely, whether a period of IO strength can create 
unintended consequences.
This special issue aims to provide scholars and policymakers with a grounded, 
empirically contextualized view of the current challenges facing international coop-
eration. The research framework of IO life cycles contextualizes both positive and 
negative fluctuations in IO vitality within organizations and across the broader sys-
tem, helping us distinguish between changes leading toward decline, mission creep, 
and pathology, versus those that signal efficiency. This framework for studying inter-
national cooperation considers historical realities, selection, and normative biases, 
and the unintended consequences of IO formation. A life cycles perspective suggests 
that our current crisis in international governance is not only recognizable, but also 
surmountable.
Acknowledgements  Many thanks to the authors of the special issue, as well as Axel Dreher, Raymond 
Hicks, Daniela Donno, Jeff Kucik, Dorothy Kronick, and Rachel Potter for valuable feedback on this 
introduction.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Com-
mons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article 
are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is 
not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission 
directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​
ses/​by/4.​0/.
References   
Abbott, K. W., & Snidal, D. (1998). Why States Act through Formal International Organizations. Journal 
of Conflict Resolution, 42(1), 3–32.
Abbott, K. W., Green, J., & Keohane, R. (2016). Organizational Ecology and Institutional Change in 
Global Governance. International Organization, 70(2), 315–344.
Adizes, I. (1979). Organizational passages: Diagnosing and treating lifecycle problems of organizations. 
Organizational Dynamics, 8(1), 3–25.
Adler, E., & Pouliot, V. (2011). International Practices. International Theory, 3(1), 1–36.
Agarwal, R., & Gort, M. (2002). Firm and product life cycles and firm survival. American Economic 
Review, 92, 184–190.
Aldrich, H. E. (1979). Organizations and environments. Prentice Hall Inc.
Andrews, D & Petroulakis, F. (2019). Breaking the shackles: Zombie firms, weak banks and depressed 
restructuring in Europe. Working Paper Series 2240, European Central Bank.
Audretsch, D. B. (1995). Innovation, growth and survival. International Journal of Industrial Organiza-
tion, 13, 441–457.
Baccini, L., & Urpelainen, J. (2014). International institutions and domestic politics. The Journal of Poli-
tics, 76(1), 195–214.
Balla, S. J., & Gormley, W. T. (2017). Accountability and Performance. CQ Press.
Banerjee, RN & Hofmann, B. (2018). The rise of zombie firms: causes and consequences. BIS Quarterly 
Review, 67–78.
Barnett, M., & Finnemore, M. (1999). The Politics, Power, and Pathologies of International Organiza-
tions. International Organization, 53(4), 699–732.

659
1 3
The life cycle of international cooperation: Introduction…
Barnett, M., & Finnemore, M. (2004). Rules for the World: International Organizations in Global Poli-
tics. Cornell University Press.
Barnett, M., & Solingen, E. (2007). Designed to Fail or Failure of Design? The Origins and Legacy of the 
Arab League. In A. Acharya & A. Johnston (Eds.), Crafting Regional Cooperation (pp. 180–220). 
Oxford University Press.
Barnum, M., & Lo, J. (2020). Is the NPT unraveling? Evidence from text analysis of review conference 
statements. Journal of Peace Research, 57(6), 740–751.
Baturo, A. & Gray, J. (2023). The Incentives of Leaders in International Organizations: Evidence from 
the UN General Assembly. International Interactions.
Baturo, A. & Gray, J. (2024). Leaders in the United Nations General Assembly: Revitalization or politici-
zation? Review of International Organization.
Bauer, M., Knill, C., & Eckhard, S. (2017). International Bureaucracy. Challenges and Lessons for Pub-
lic Administration Research. Palgrave Macmillan.
Bayram, A. B., & Ta, V. (2019). Diplomatic Chameleons. Negotiation and Conflict Management 
Research, 12(1), 23–40.
Bexell, M., Jonsson, K., & Uhlin, A. (2022). Legitimation and Delegitimation in Global Governance: 
Practices, Justifications, and Audiences. Oxford University Press.
Blau, P. M., & Scott, W. R. (1962). Formal Organizations: A Comparative Approach. Stanford University 
Press.
Boin, A., Kuipers, S., & Steenbergen, M. (2010). The Life and Death of Public Organizations: A Ques-
tion of Institutional Design? Governance, 23, 385–410.
Börzel, T. A., & Zürn, M. (2021). Contestations of the Liberal International Order: From Liberal Multi-
lateralism to Postnational Liberalism. International Organization, 75, 282–305.
Brierley, S., Lowande, K., Potter, R., & Toral, G. (2023). Bureaucratic Politics: Blind Spots and Opportu-
nities in Political Science. Annual Review of Political Science, 26(1), 271–290.
Brüderl, J., & Schussler, R. (1990). Organizational Mortality: The Liabilities of Newness and Adoles-
cence. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35(3), 530–547.
Brüderl, J., Preisendorfer, P., & Ziegler, R. (1992). Survival chances of newly founded business organiza-
tions. American Sociological Review, 57, 227–242.
Bunte, J. B., Gertz, G., & Zeitz, A. O. (2022). Cascading noncompliance: Why the export credit regime is 
unraveling. Review of International Political Economy, 29(5), 1395–1419.
Bush, S. & Hadden, J. (2024). When David Becomes Goliath: How Growing Density Shapes INGOs in 
the 21st Century. Manuscript.
Buzas, Z., & Graham, E. (2020). Emergent Flexibility in Institutional Development: How International 
Rules Really Change. International Studies Quarterly, 64, 821–833.
Campbell, D. T. (1965). Variation and selective retention in socio-cultural evolution. In Herbert R. Bar-
ringer, George I. Blanksten, & Raymond W. Mack (Eds.), Social change in developing areas A 
reinterpretation of evolutionary theory (pp. 19–49). Schenkman.
Campello, D., & Lemos, L. (2015). The non-ratification of bilateral investment treaties in Brazil: A story 
of conflict in a land of cooperation. Review of International Polit- Ical Economy, 22, 1055–1086.
Carpenter, D. (2000). State Building through Reputation Building: Coalitions of Esteem and Program 
Innovation in the National Postal System, 1883–1913. Studies in American Political Development, 
14(2), 121–155.
Carpenter, D. (2001). The Forging of Bureaucratic Autonomy. Princeton University Press.
Carpenter, D., & Krause, G. (2012). Reputation and Public Administration. Public Administration 
Review, 72(1), 26–32.
Caves, R. (1998). Industrial organization and new findings on the turnover and mobility of firms. Journal 
of Economic Literature, 36, 1947–1982.
Chaudoin, S. (2014). Audience Features and the Strategic Timing of Trade Disputes. International 
Organization, 68(4), 877–911.
Chaudoin, S., Hays, J., & Hicks, R. (2018). Do We Really Know That the WTO Cures Cancer? False 
Positives and International Organizations., 48(4), 903–928.
Christensen, C. M. (1997). The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies Cause Great Firms to 
Fail. Harvard Business School Press.
Chwieroth, J. M. (2009). Capital Ideas. Princeton University Press.
Coe, A., & Vaynman, J. (2020). Why Arms Control Is So Rare. American Political Science Review, 
114(2), 342–355.

660
	
J. Gray 
1 3
Copelovitch, M., & Pevehouse, J. (2019). International organizations in a new era of populist nationalism. 
The Review of International Organizations, 14, 169–186.
Cottrell, M. P. (2009). Legitimacy and Institutional Replacement: The Convention on Certain Conven-
tional Weapons and the Emergence of the Mine Ban Treaty. International Organization, 63(2), 
217–248.
Debre, M. J. (2022). Clubs of autocrats: Regional organizations and authoritarian survival. The Review of 
International Organizations, 17(1), 485–511.
Debre, M., & Dijkstra, H. (2021). Institutional design for a post-liberal order: Why some international 
organizations live longer than others. European Journal of International Relations, 27(1), 311–339.
Debre, M., & Dijkstra, H. (2023). Are international organisations in decline? An absolute and relative 
perspective on institutional change. Global Policy, 14(1), 16–30.
Dewan, T., & Myatt, D. (2008). The Qualities of Leadership: Direction, Communication, and Obfusca-
tion. American Political Science Review, 102(3), 351–368.
DiMaggio, P., & Powell, W. (1983). The Iron Cage Revisited: Institutional Isomorphism and Collective 
Rationality in Organizational Fields. American Sociological Review, 48(2), 147–160.
Donno, D., Metzger, S., & Russett, B. (2015). Screening Out Risk: IGOs, Member State Selection, and 
Interstate Conflict. International Studies Quarterly, 59(2), 251–263.
Downs, A. (1967). Inside Bureaucracy. Little, Brown.
Downs, G., Rocke, D., & Barsoom, P. (1996). Is the Good News about Compliance Good News for Coop-
eration? International Organization, 50(3), 379–406.
Dunne, T., Roberts, M., & Samuelson, L. (1988). Patterns of firm entry and exit in US manufacturing 
industries. RAND Journal of Economics, 19, 495–515.
Dür, A., Baccini, L., & Elsig, M. (2014). The Design of International Trade Agreements. Review of Inter-
national Organizations, 9, 353–375.
Eilstrup-Sangiovanni, M. (2021). What Kills International Organizations. European Journal of Interna-
tional Relations, 27(3), 281–310.
Eilstrup-Sangiovanni, M. & Verdier, D. (2024). To reform or to replace? Succession as a mechanism of 
institutional change in intergovernmental organizations. Review of International Organization.
Engel, U., & Mattheis, F. (2019). The finances of regional organizations in the Global South. Routledge.
Fang, S. (2008). The Informational Role of International Institutions and Domestic Politics. American 
Journal of Political Science, 52(2), 304–321.
Fearon, J. (1998). Bargaining, Enforcement, and International Cooperation. International Organization, 
52(2), 269–306.
Finnemore, M. (1996). Norms, Culture, and World Politics: Insight from Sociology’s Institutionalism. 
International Organization, 50, 325–347.
Finnemore, M., & Sikkink, K. (1998). International Norm Dynamics and Political Change. International 
Organization, 52, 887–917.
Finnemore, M., & Sikkink, K. (2001). Taking Stock: The Constructivist Research Program in Interna-
tional Relations and Comparative Politics. Annual Review of Political Science, 4, 391–416.
Fioretos, O. (2017). International Politics and Institutions in Time. Oxford University Press.
Fioretos, O. (2019). Minilateralism and Informality in the International Monetary System. Review of 
International Political Economy, 26(6), 1136–1159.
Fioretos, O., Falleti, T., & Sheingate, A. (2016). The Oxford Handbook of Historical Institutionalism. 
Oxford University Press.
Fitzmaurice, M., & Merkouris, P. (2020). Treaties in Motion: The Evolution of Treaties from Formation to 
Termination. Cambridge University Press.
Fleischer, J., & Reiners, N. (2021). Connecting International Relations and Public Administration: 
Toward A Joint Research Agenda for the Study of International Bureaucracy. International Studies 
Review, 23(4), 1230–1247.
Gehring, T., & Faude, B. (2014). A theory of emerging order within institutional complexes. The Review 
of International Organizations, 9(4), 471–498.
Genschel, P. (1997). The Dynamics of Inertia: Institutional Persistence and Change in Telecommunica-
tions and Health Care. Governance, 10(1), 43–66.
Gowa, J., & Hicks, R. (2012). The most-favored nation rule in principle and practice. Review of Interna-
tional Organizations, 7(3), 247–266.
Graham, E. R. (2017). The institutional design of funding rules at international organizations: Explaining 
the transformation in financing the United Nations. European Journal of International Relations, 
23(2), 365–390.

661
1 3
The life cycle of international cooperation: Introduction…
Gray, J. (2014). Domestic Capacity and the Implementation Gap in Regional Trade Agreements. Com-
parative Political Studies, 47(1), 55–84.
Gray, J. (2018). Life, Death, or Zombie? The Vitality of International Organizations. International Stud-
ies Quarterly, 62, 1–13.
Gray, J. (2020). Life, Death, Inertia, Change: The Hidden Lives of International Organizations. Ethics 
and International Affairs, 34(1), 33–42.
Gray, J., & Kucik, J. (2017). Leadership Turnover and the Durability of Trade Agreements. Comparative 
Political Studies, 50(14), 1941–1972.
Gray, J., & Potter, P. (2020). Diplomacy and the Settlement of International Disputes. Journal of Conflict 
Research, 64, 1358–1389.
Gray, J., & Slapin, J. (2012). How effective are preferential trade agreements? Ask the experts. Review of 
International Organizations, 7(3), 309–333.
Greenhill, B., & Lupu, Y. (2017). Clubs of Clubs. Fragmentation in the Network of Intergovernmental 
Organizations, 61(1), 181–195.
Grieco, J. M., Gelpi, C., & Warren, T. C. (2009). When Preferences and Commitments Collide: The 
Effect of Relative Partisan Shifts on International Treaty Compliance. International Organization, 
63(2), 341–355.
Gronau, J., & Schmidtke, H. (2016). The Quest for Legitimacy in World Politics: International Institu-
tions’ Legitimation Strategies. Review of International Studies, 42(3), 535–557.
Gutner, T., & Thompson, A. (2010). The Politics of IO Performance. Review of International Organiza-
tions, 3(5), 227–248.
Haftel, Y. (2013). Commerce and Institutions. The Review of International Organizations, 8(3), 389–414.
Haftel, Y. Z., & Hofmann, S. C. (2017). Institutional Authority and Security Cooperation within Regional 
Economic Organizations. Journal of Peace Research, 54, 459–467.
Haftel, Y. Z., & Thompson, A. (2013). Delayed Ratification. International Organization, 67(2), 253–275.
Haftel, Y. Z., & Thompson, A. (2018). When do states renegotiate investment agreements? The impact of 
arbitration. The Review of International Organizations, 13, 25–48.
Haftel, Y. & Nadel, B. (2024). Economic Crises and the Survival of International Organizations. 2024. 
Review of International Organization.
Hall, N., & Woods, N. (2018). Theorizing the role of executive heads in international organizations. 
European Journal of International Relations, 24(4), 865–886.
Hannan, M. T., & Freeman, J. (1977). The population ecology of organizations. American Journal of 
Sociology, 82, 929–964.
Hanrieder, T. (2015). International Organization in Time. Fragmentation and Reform. Oxford University 
Press.
Hawkins, D. G., Lake, D., Nielson, D., & Tierney, M. (2006). Delegation and Agency in International 
Organizations. Cambridge University Press.
Heclo, H. (1977). A Government of Strangers: Executive Politics in Washington. The Brookings 
Institution.
Heldt, E. (2017). Regaining control of errant agents? Agency slack at the European Commission and the 
World Health Organization. Cooperation and Conflict, 52(4), 469–484.
Henning, C.R. & Pratt, T. (2024). Hierarchy and Differentiation in International Regime Complexes: A 
Theoretical Framework for Comparative Research. Review of International Political Economy, 
forthcoming.
Hirschmann, G. (2023). Crisis management in international organisations: the League of Nations’ 
response to early challenges. Cambridge Review of International Affairs. Forthcoming.
Hofmann, S. C. (2009). Overlapping Institutions in the Realm of International Security: The Case of 
NATO and ESDP. Perspectives on Politics, 7(1), 45–52.
Honig, D. (2018). Navigation by Judgment: Why and When Top-Down Management of Foreign Aid 
Doesn’t Work. Oxford University Press.
Hooghe, L., & Marks, G. (2020). A postfunctionalist theory of multilevel governance. The British Jour-
nal of Politics and International Relations, 22(4), 820–826.
Hooghe, L., Marks, G., Schakel, A. H., Chapman Osterkatz, S., Niedzwiecki, S., & Shair-Rosenfield, S. 
(2016). Measuring Regional Authority: A Postfunctionalist Theory of Governance (Vol. I). Oxford 
University Press.
Hosman, M. (2023). Internal Dynamics as Drivers of Change in International Organizations: The Econo-
mists’ Takeover at the World Bank. Swiss Political Science Review, 49(1), 41–60.

662
	
J. Gray 
1 3
Huikuri, T. (2023). Constraints and Incentives in the Investment Regime: How bargaining power shapes 
investment treaty reform. Review of International Organizations, 18, 361–391.
Jensen, M. C. (2000). A Theory of the Firm: Governance, Residual Claims and Organizational Forms. 
Harvard University Press.
Johns, L. (2007). A Servant of Two Masters: Communication and the Selection of International Bureau-
crats. International Organization, 61(02), 245–275.
Johnson, T. (2014). Organizational Progeny: Why Governments are Losing Control Over the Proliferat-
ing Structures of Global Governance. Oxford University Press.
Jupille, J., Mattli, W., & Snidal, D. (2013). Institutional Choice and Global Commerce. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Kaya, A. (2016). Designing the Multilateral Trading System: Voting Equality at the International Trade 
Organization. World Trade Review, 15(1), 25–49.
Kelemen, D., Menon, A., & Slapin, J. (2014). Wider and Deeper? Enlargement and Integration in the 
European Union. Journal of European Public Policy, 21(5), 647–663.
Keohane, R. (1984). After Hegemony: Cooperation and Discord in the World Political Economy. Prince-
ton University Press.
Keohane, R., & Morse, J. (2014). Contested Multilateralism. Review of International Organizations, 9, 
385–412.
Klepper, S., & Simons, K. L. (2000). The making of an oligopoly: firm survival and technological change 
in the evolution of the US tire industry. Journal of Political Economy, 108, 728–760.
Knill, C., & Bauer, M. W. (2007). Management Reforms in International Organizations. Nomos.
Knill, C., & Steinebach, Y. (2022). International Public Administrations in Global Public Policy Sources 
and Effects of Bureaucratic Influence. Routledge.
Knill, C., Steinebach, Y., & Bayerlein, L. (2022). How Administrative Styles Matter: International Public 
Administrations as Agents in Global Public Policy. In C. Knill & Y. Steinebach (Eds.), Interna-
tional Public Administrations in Global Public Policy: Sources and Effects of Bureaucratic Influ-
ence. Routledge.
Koremenos, B. (2013). The Continent of International Law. The Journal of Conflict Resolution, 57(4), 
653–681.
Koremenos, B., Lipson, C., & Snidal, D. (2001). The Rational Design of International Institutions. Inter-
national Organization, 55, 761–780.
Krasner, S. (1991). Global Communications and National Power, Life on the Pareto Frontier. World Poli-
tics, 43(3), 336–366.
Kucik, J., & Peritz, L. (2021). How Do Third Parties Affect Compliance in the Trade Regime? The Jour-
nal of Politics, 83(3), 1184–1189.
Kucik, J., & Reinhardt, E. (2008). Does Flexibility Promote Cooperation? An Application to the Global 
Trade Regime. International Organization, 62(03), 477–505.
Kucik, J., Peritz, L., & Puig, S. (2022). Legalization and Compliance: How Judicial Activity Undercuts 
the Global Trade Regime. British Journal of Political Science, 53(1), 221–238.
Lall, R. (2018). Beyond institutional design: Explaining the performance of international organizations. 
International Organization, 71(2), 245–280.
Lavelle, K. (2007). Exit, voice, and loyalty in international organizations: US involvement in the League 
of Nations. Review of International Organization, 2(4), 393–410.
Lenz, T. (2012). Spurred Emulation: The EU and Regional Integration in Mercosur and SADC. West 
European Politics, 35(1), 155–173.
Lester, D. L., Parnell, J. A., & Carraher, S. (2003). Organizational Life Cycle: A Five-Stage Empirical 
Scale. The International Journal of Organizational Analysis, 11(4), 339–354.
Levinthal, D., & March, J. G. (1981). A model of adaptive organizational search. Journal of Economic 
Behavior and Organization, 2(4), 307–333.
Lewis, D. E. (2002). The Politics of Agency Termination: Confronting the Myth of Agency Immortality. 
Journal of Politics, 64(1), 89–107.
Lindsey, D. (2017). Diplomacy Through Agents. International Studies Quarterly., 61(3), 544–556.
Lipcsy, P. (2017). Renegotiating the World Order: Institutional Change in International Relations. Cam-
bridge University Press.
Lipscy, P. Y. (2015). Explaining Institutional Change: Policy Areas, Outside Options, and the Bretton 
Woods Institutions. International Organization, 59(2), 341–356.
Lugg, A. (2024). Re-contracting International Organizations: Membership Change and the Creation of 
Linked Intergovernmental Organizations. Review of International Organizations.

663
1 3
The life cycle of international cooperation: Introduction…
Mahoney, J., & Thelen, K. (2010). Explaining Institutional Change: Ambiguity, Agency, and Power. 
Cambridge University Press.
Mansfield, E. (1963). Size of Firm, Market Structure, and Innovation. Journal of Political Economy, 
71(6), 556–576.
March, J. G., & Olsen, J. (1998). The Institutional Dynamics of International Political Orders. Interna-
tional Organization, 52(4), 943–969.
March, J., & Simon, H. (1958). Organizations. Wiley-Blackwell.
Marshall, A. (1890). Principles of Economics. Palgrave McMillan.
McCall Smith, J. (2000). The Politics of Dispute Settlement Design. International Organization, 54(1), 
137–180.
McCalla, R. B. (1996). NATO’s persistence after the cold war. International Organization., 50(3), 
445–475.
McKibben, H., & Western, S. (2020). Reserved Ratification: An Analysis of States’ Entry of Reservations 
Upon Ratification of Human Rights Treaties. British Journal of Political Science, 50(2), 687–712.
Meyer, J. W., & Rowan, B. (1977). Institutionalized Organizations: Formal Structure as Myth and Cer-
emony. American Journal of Sociology, 83, 340–363.
Meyerrose, A. M. (2020). The Unintended Consequences of Democracy Promotion: Inter- national 
Organizations and Democratic Backsliding. Comparative Political Studies, 53(10–11), 1547–1581.
Moe, T. (1984). The new economics of organization. American Journal of Political Science, 28, 739–777.
Moe, T. (1989). The Politics of Bureaucratic Structure. In John E. Chubb & Paul E. Peterson (Eds.), Can 
the Government Govern? (pp. 267–329). The Brookings Institution.
Morrow, J. (1994). Modeling the Forms of International Cooperation. International Organization, 48(3), 
387–423.
Mosca, L., Gianecchini, M., & Campagnolo, D. (2021). Organizational life cycle models: A design per-
spective. Journal of Organization Design, 10(1), 3–18.
Ness, G., & Brechin, S. (1988). Bridging the gap: International organizations as organizations. Interna-
tional Organization, 42(2), 245–273.
Nielson, D., & Tierney, M. (2003). Delegation to International Organizations: Agency Theory and World 
Bank Environmental Reform. International Organization, 57(02), 241–276.
Niskanen, W. (1968). Nonmarket Decision Making: The Peculiar Economics of Bureaucracy. The Ameri-
can Economic Review, 58(2), 293–305.
Niskanen, W. (1971). Bureaucracy and Representative Government. Transaction Publishers.
Pevehouse, J. (2002). With a Little Help from My Friends? American Journal of Political Science, 46(3), 
611–626.
Pollack, M. (1997). Delegation, Agency, and Agenda Setting in the European Community. International 
Organization, 51(1), 99–134.
Porter, M. E. (1985). The Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior Performance. Free 
Press.
Potter, R. (2019). Bending the Rules: Procedural Politicking in the Bureaucracy. University of Chicago 
Press.
Potter, R., & Shipan, C. (2019). Agency rulemaking in a separation of powers system. Journal of Public 
Policy, 39(1), 89–113.
Pouilot, V., & Therien, J. (2023). Global Policymaking. Cambridge University Press.
Pouliot, V. (2015). The Practice of Permanent Representation at International Organizations. In O. Send-
ing, V. Pouliot, & I. Neumann (Eds.), Diplomacy and the Making of World Politics (pp. 95–100). 
Cambridge University Press.
Reinsberg, B. (2024). Institutional overlap and the survival of intergovernmental organizations. West 
European Politics (forthcoming).
Roger, C. (2020). The Origins of Informality: Why the Legal Foundations of Global Governance Are 
Shifting, and Why It Matters. Oxford University Press.
Roger, C., & Rowan, S. (2022). Analyzing international organizations: How the concepts we use affect 
the answers we get. Review of International Organizations, 17, 597–625.
Schmidt, A. (2024). Treaty Withdrawal and the Development of International Law. Review of Interna-
tional Organizations.
Schmidtke, H. & Lenz, T. (2024). Expanding or defending legitimacy? Why international organizations 
intensify self-legitimation. Review of International Organization.
Shanks, C., Kaplan, J., & Jacobson, H. (1996). Inertia and Change in the Constellation of International 
Governmental Organizations, 1981–1992. International Organization, 50(4), 593–627.

664
	
J. Gray 
1 3
Simmons, B. (1998). Compliance with International Agreements. Annual Review of Political Science, 1, 
75–93.
St John, T. (2018). The Rise of Investor-State Arbitration: Politics, Law, and Unintended Consequences. 
Oxford University Press.
Stiles, K. (1995). The Ambivalent Hegemon: Explaining the ’Lost Decade’ in Multi- lateral Trade Talks, 
1948–1958. Review of International Political Economy, 2(1), 1–26.
Stimmer, A. (2019). Beyond Internalization: Alternate Endings of the Norm Life Cycle. International 
Studies Quarterly, 63(2), 270–280.
Storz, M., Koetter, M., Setzer, R. & Westphal, A. (2017). Do We Want These Two to Tango? On Zombie 
Firms and Stressed Banks in Europe. ECB Working Paper No. 2104.
Strange, S. (1998). Why do international organisations never die? In: Bob Reinalda and Bertjan Ver-
beek (editors), Autonomous Policy Making by International Organisations (London: Routledge): 
213–220.
Suchman, M. C. (1995). Managing Legitimacy: Strategic and Institutional Approaches. The Academy of 
Management Review, 20(3), 571–610.
Tallberg, J., & Zurn, M. (2019). The Legitimacy and Legitimation of International Organizations. The 
Review of International Organizations, 14, 581–606.
Tallberg, J., Sommerer, T., Squatrito, T., & Lundgren, M. (2016). The performance of international 
organizations: A policy output approach. Journal of European Public Policy, 23(7), 129–148.
Thelen, K. (2009). Institutional Change in Advanced Political Economies. British Journal of Industrial 
Relations, 47(3), 471–498.
Thompson, P. (2005). Selection and firm survival: Evidence from the shipbuilding industry, 1825–1914. 
Review of Economics and Statistics, 87, 26–36.
Thorvaldsdottir, S., Patz, R., & Eckhard, S. (2021). International bureaucracy and the United Nations sys-
tem: Introduction. International Review of Administrative Sciences, 87(4), 695–700.
Tushman, M. L., & O’Reilly, C. A. (1996). Ambidextrous Organizations: Managing Evolutionry and 
Revolutionary Change. California Management Review, 38(4), 8–29.
Vabulas, F. & von Borzyskowski, I. (2024). Public support for withdrawal from international organiza-
tions: Experimental evidence from the US. Review of International Organization.
Vabulas, F., & Snidal, D. (2013). Organization without delegation. The Review of International Organi-
zations, 8(2), 193–220.
Vaubel, R. (2006). Principal-agent problems in international organizations. Review of International 
Organizations, 1, 125–138.
von Stein, J. (2005). Do Treaties Constrain or Screen? American Political Science Review, 99, 611–622.
Vreeland, J. R. (2003). The IMF and Economic Development. Cambridge University Press.
Walt, S. M. (1997). Why alliances endure or collapse. Survival, 39(1), 156–179.
Weaver, C. (2008). Hypocrisy Trap: The World Bank and the Poverty of Reform. Princeton University 
Press.
Weber, M. (1922). Economy and Society. Mohr Siebeck.
Wilks, S., & Bartle, I. (2002). The Unanticipated Consequences of Creating Independent Competition 
Agencies. West European Politics, 25(1), 148–172.
Williamson, O. E. (1965). Innovation and Market Structure. Journal of Political Economy, 73(1), 67–73.
Ye, H. (2023). Delayed cooperation: political systems, elections, and the outcomes of trade negotiations. 
Review of International Political Economy.
Zürn, M. (2020). Unravelling multi-level governance systems. The British Journal of Politics and Inter-
national Relations, 22(4), 784–879.
Zürn, M. (2012). Global Governance as Multi-Level Governance. In D. Levi-Faur (Ed.), The Oxford 
Handbook of Governance (pp. 730–744). Oxford University Press. in The Oxford Handbook of 
Governance.
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps 
and institutional affiliations.