Vol.:(0123456789)
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11077-024-09536-7
RESEARCH ARTICLE
(Un)usual advocacy coalitions in a multi‑system setting: 
the case of hydrogen in Germany
Meike Löhr1,2   · Jochen Markard3,4   · Nils Ohlendorf5 
Accepted: 26 May 2024 / Published online: 12 August 2024 
© The Author(s) 2024
Abstract
Grand sustainability challenges span multiple sectors and fields of policymaking. Novel 
technologies that respond to these challenges may trigger the emergence of new policy 
subsystems at the intersection of established sectors. We develop a framework that 
addresses the complexities of ‘multi-system settings.’ Empirically, we explore belief and 
coalition formation in the nascent policy subsystem around hydrogen technologies in 
Germany, which emerges at the intersection of electricity, transport, heating, and industry 
and is characterised by a broad range of actors from different sectoral backgrounds. We 
find two coalitions: a rather unusual coalition of actors from industry, NGOs, and research 
institutes as well as an expectable coalition of gas and heat sector actors. Actors disagree 
over production, application, and import standards for hydrogen. However, there is 
widespread support for hydrogen and for a strong role of the state across almost all actors. 
We explain our findings by combining insights from the advocacy coalition framework and 
politics of transitions: Belief and coalition formation in a nascent subsystem are influenced 
by sectoral backgrounds of actors, technology characteristics, as well as trust and former 
contacts. Our study contributes to a better understanding of early stages of coalition 
formation in a multi-system setting.
Keywords  Multi-system interaction · Advocacy coalition framework · Nascent policy 
subsystem · Politics of transitions · Hydrogen · Energy transition
 *	 Meike Löhr 
	
meike.loehr@eawag.ch
	
Jochen Markard 
	
jmarkard@ethz.ch
	
Nils Ohlendorf 
	
nils.ohlendorf@bmwk.bund.de
1	
Institute of Social Sciences, University of Oldenburg, Oldenburg, Germany
2	
Department of Environmental Social Sciences, Eawag: Swiss Federal Institute of Aquatic Science 
and Technology, Duebendorf, Switzerland
3	
Institute of Sustainable Development, Zurich University of Applied Sciences, Winterthur, 
Switzerland
4	
Department of Management, Technology and Economics, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland
5	
Mercator Research Institute on Global Commons and Climate Change, Berlin, Germany

568
	
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597
Introduction
Grand sustainability challenges such as climate change, loss of biodiversity, or resource 
depletion pose massive threats to ecosystems and societal well-being. At the same time, 
many sustainability challenges are particularly difficult for policy to address: they span 
multiple subsystems of policy-making (Biermann et al., 2012; Brandenberger et al., 2022; 
Milhorance et al., 2021; Reber et al., 2022), they require policy support (e.g., to stimulate 
innovation) while being confronted with strong lock-ins around established socio-
technical systems (Unruh, 2000), and there are different groups of actors with conflicting 
views on potential solutions (Avelino et al., 2016; Markard & Rosenbloom, 2020). Grand 
sustainability challenges do not only confront established approaches in policy analysis 
(Levin et al., 2012) but also call for new ways of theorising to cope with the underlying 
complexity (Head & Alford, 2015).
Our study seeks to tackle some of these new complexities. We build on earlier research 
on the advocacy coalition framework (ACF) and the interdependence of developments in 
politics and technology (Schmidt & Sewerin, 2017). Markard et al. (2016) suggest that 
policy subsystems and socio-technical systems influence each other and may co-evolve 
over time. Drawing on policy feedback theory, Schmid et al. (2019) argue that changes in 
advocacy coalitions can be explained by feedback from earlier policy outcomes. Here, we 
take these ideas a step further. We include technology as well as the relevance of ‘sectoral 
backgrounds’ (e.g., established practices, norms, business models or infrastructures within 
a sector) to explain the formation of beliefs and coalitions of actors.
Empirically, we focus on hydrogen in the wider context of climate change and the 
transition to low-carbon energy systems. The energy transition has entered a new stage 
of development as many countries and regions, including large emitters such as the US, 
the EU or China, have formulated long-term targets of reaching net-zero greenhouse 
gas emissions (ECIU, 2021). Net-zero targets are a game changer because they require 
fundamental socio-technical transformations and policy changes in all sectors. They even 
necessitate entirely new approaches for decarbonisation such as novel fuels based on 
hydrogen. As a consequence, the net-zero energy transition confronts policy and politics 
with new complexities. This multi-system setting (Andersen & Geels, 2023; Löhr & 
Chlebna, 2023; Ohlendorf et  al., 2023; Rosenbloom, 2020) includes (i) transformations 
across multiple sectors (e.g., electricity, gas, transport, industry), (ii) the emergence of new 
technologies, and (iii) a large number of actors from different sectoral backgrounds.
Assuming that support by a broad range of actors is crucial for the progress of the net-
zero energy transition, we explore how actors position themselves, and form coalitions, 
when confronted with new, transformative technologies. We argue that, in certain cases, 
new policy subsystems emerge around new technologies and we build on the advocacy 
coalition framework (ACF) (Weible et al., 2020) to study them. While recent work has 
improved our understanding of nascent policy subsystems (Ingold et  al., 2017; Stritch, 
2015), we still know little about settings characterised by a complex interplay of multiple 
sectors, technologies and actors. We ask: How do actors form beliefs and coalitions in a 
new policy subsystem situated in a multi-system setting?
To address this, we develop a conceptual framework that builds on the ACF and the 
politics of transitions, a field of research to study policy struggles over large-scale system 
changes (Köhler et al., 2019). The transitions perspective highlights that actors are both 

569
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597	
challenged by (technological) innovations and, at the same time, embedded into (and 
influenced by) broader socio-technical systems, which we refer to as sectoral backgrounds. 
The ACF analyses changes in beliefs and coalitions to understand policy change within 
a policy subsystem (Weible et al., 2020). Next to beliefs, the ACF also emphasises the 
relevance of former contacts when actors enter a nascent subsystem (Ingold et al., 2017; 
Stritch, 2015). Combining both perspectives, we explain coalition formation both by 
specific sector and technology characteristics as well as former alliances, trust, and 
contacts.
Our empirical analysis focuses on novel technologies that emerge around hydrogen. 
Hydrogen is a relevant case because it can be used to decarbonise many different sectors, 
including heating, transport, electricity, and hard-to-decarbonise industries such as steel or 
cement. We study Germany as a country with ambitious policy goals for the development 
of hydrogen (BMWi, 2020) and an important location for several energy-intensive 
industries.
Methodologically, we apply a mixed methods approach to identify beliefs. We analyse 
42 position papers of key actors referring to the German hydrogen strategy, code the 
documents with QDA software and analyse the data through qualitative content analysis. 
To identify different advocacy coalitions, we apply a cluster analysis and visualise the 
results through multidimensional scaling. We also take a closer look at the three most 
conflictive policy core beliefs. We complement this analysis with insights from nine expert 
interviews.
We find two emerging coalitions: an expectable alliance of incumbent actors from the 
gas and heat sector and an unusual coalition of some industry actors, NGOs, and research 
institutes. While actors of both coalitions share a widespread support about using hydrogen 
to reach net-zero targets, conflicts emerge around its production, import, and application.
The paper is structured as follows: First, we outline the “Theoretical background”. 
In the section on “Methods and case” we explain our methods including case selection, 
introduction to our empirical case, data collection, coding and approach combining cluster- 
and qualitative content analysis. In the “Results” section, we present our results, including 
emerging advocacy coalitions and political conflicts. We discuss our findings in our 
“Discussion” section and end with a “Conclusion”.
Theoretical background
Policy analysis has started to address the increasing complexity of policymaking for 
grand sustainability challenges. Towards this end, scholars have explored different 
strands of literature within and beyond political sciences to develop new conceptual 
approaches or enhance existing ones (Blake et al., 2020; Brandenberger et al., 2022; 
Goyal & Howlett, 2020; Kammerer & Ingold, 2021; Kern & Rogge, 2018; Roberts 
& Geels, 2019). We do the same. Our study departs from the advocacy coalition 
framework (Sabatier, 1998) and draws on complementary insights from the politics 
of transitions (Köhler et  al., 2019). Our goal is to explain the formation of beliefs 
and new coalitions of actors in a nascent policy subsystem. Our key argument is that, 
beliefs are not only shaped by prior experiences and contacts (as the ACF suggests), 
but also by technology characteristics and the sectoral background of the actors 
(highlighted by the politics of transitions). Next, we briefly introduce and compare 
both approaches and present our combined conceptual framework.

570
	
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597
The advocacy coalition framework
The advocacy coalition framework is a well-established policy process theory to explain 
policy change (and stability) through the formation and change of beliefs and coalitions 
of actors (Sabatier, 1998; Weible et al., 2020). According to the ACF, advocacy coalitions 
form based on shared policy core beliefs and coordination within a policy subsystem 
(Sabatier & Jenkins-Smith, 1993). Policy core beliefs are subsystem-specific, normative 
and empirical (Weible & Ingold, 2018). They may change over time (e.g., several years) 
and lead to major policy change.1 Different coalitions compete over policy issues as they 
seek to influence policy. According to the ACF, policy core beliefs of a dominant coalition 
are eventually translated into policies (in the sense of policy strategies, or policy goals). 
Below, we revisit key concepts and knowledge gaps related to the particularities of our 
case: nascent subsystems, multiple subsystems, and the role of technology.
Nascent policy subsystems are emerging subsystems with first policy outputs and 
actors starting to professionalise in the respective area (Ingold et  al., 2017). However, 
coordination between actors, secondary aspects, and subsystem boundaries may still 
be in flux (Ingold et al., 2017; Weible et al., 2020), and policy issues may be discussed 
in different venues (Lemke et al., 2023). Of particular interest in such an early stage of 
development is the formation of policy core beliefs. Prior research suggests that policy 
core beliefs are not fully developed and unstable (Nohrstedt & Weible, 2010; Weible et al., 
2020). Actors may rely on experts or prior experiences from other policy fields when 
forming their beliefs (Ingold et al., 2017; Kammerer & Ingold, 2021). For example, factors 
such as trust or former contacts have been observed to affect coalition formation in nascent 
subsystems (Ingold et al., 2017). Also, the social influence, e.g., the relationships between 
actors, can influence belief changes and policy learning in nascent subsystems (Gronow 
et al., 2021). Overall, coordination between actors might be less established than in mature 
subsystems (Weible et al., 2020).
A second particularity is that we are confronted with actors from multiple systems. In 
policy research, scholars have started to address cross-cutting or ‘trans-subsystem’ policy 
challenges such as climate change or migration, widening the focus from single subsystems 
to interactions among several subsystems (Jones & Jenkins-Smith, 2009; Meckling & 
Goedeking, 2023; Milhorance et al., 2021; Reber et al., 2022). The literature on policy 
integration discusses multiple subsystems and sectors (Candel & Biesbroek, 2016; Kefeli 
et al., 2023; Tosun & Lang, 2017; Trein et al., 2023). Policy research has studied multiple 
issues, multiple-policy subsystems, an integration of instruments from multiple policy 
sectors, or actors engaging in multiple debates (Brandenberger et al., 2022; Hedlund et al., 
2021; Leifeld et al., 2022). Despite this recent progress, we still lack studies on how actors 
from different sectoral backgrounds interact as they form coalitions.
A third particularity is about subsystems, in which technology and technological change 
play a key role. There are two issues here. First, technology may reach across different 
subsystems or jurisdictions, which is why it has been termed an “ill-fitting problem” by 
Lewallen (2022). Second, there is a bi-directional relationship between technology change 
and policy change (Schmidt & Sewerin, 2017). In relation to the ACF, several studies have 
shown how technological change (related to renewable energies and low-carbon fuels) has 
1  In addition to policy core beliefs, deep core beliefs are also part of the three-tiered, hierarchical belief 
system. These fundamental normative convictions are very hard to change (Weible & Ingold, 2018). The 
very specific, often instrument-related and technical secondary aspects are relatively easy to change und 
span only limited parts of the subsystem (Sabatier 1998; Weible et al., 2020).

571
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597	
affected beliefs and coalitions (Lindberg & Kammermann, 2021; Markard et  al., 2016; 
Schmid et  al., 2019), with some coalitions even centring around specific technologies 
(Jacobsson & Lauber, 2006; Malmborg, 2023). To be clear, there are different types of 
policy issues and subsystems: Those in which technological change plays less of a role 
(e.g. smoking or pensions, Leifeld, 2013; Sato, 1999) and those where it is important. As 
we deal with a subsystem associated with policy issues around novel technologies, we need 
to consider (changing) technology characteristics to affect coalition formation. The nature 
of the policy subsystem also determines which actors participate in the policy process. In 
‘technology-heavy’ subsystems, we might see firms and industry associations as central 
actors seeking to shape policymaking.
Politics of transitions
Transition studies is a growing field of research concerned with the transformation of 
socio-technical systems (Köhler et al., 2019). We explain it in some more detail for those 
not familiar with it. Within this field, research on the politics of transitions explores 
the political struggles over the direction and pace of transformation processes and the 
associated policy changes (Meadowcroft, 2011; Roberts et al., 2018; Schmid et al., 2021). 
Actors target policy processes in order to shape the course of a transition in their favour 
(Lauber & Jacobsson, 2016; Löhr & Mattes, 2022; Markard et al., 2021; Rosenbloom et al., 
2018) and they also form alliances or coalitions to leverage their influence on policymaking 
(Culhane et al., 2021; Hess, 2019a, 2019b). To study the politics of transitions, scholars 
have combined key concepts from transition studies such as the multi-level perspective 
(Geels, 2002, 2019) with policy process frameworks (Kern & Rogge, 2018) such as the 
ACF (Markard et  al., 2016) or multiple streams (Derwort et  al., 2021). They drew on 
historical institutionalism (Roberts & Geels, 2019), institutional and transition work 
(Bjerkan et al., 2021; Löhr & Chlebna, 2023; Löhr et al., 2022; van Doren et al., 2020).
We briefly discuss key concepts and knowledge gaps related to our particular setting: 
socio-technical systems, multiple systems, (technological) innovation, and sectoral 
background.
Socio-technical 
transitions 
are 
understood 
as 
fundamental 
and 
long-term 
transformations of socio-technical systems (Geels, 2002; Köhler et al., 2019). Scholars also 
use the term “sustainability transitions,” if the focus is on transformations toward more 
sustainable modes of production and consumption (Markard et al., 2012). Socio-technical 
systems are semi-coherent sets of actors (e.g., firms, associations, NGOs, policymakers), 
institutions (e.g., policies, societal norms) and technologies that, together, provide essential 
services for society (Rip & Kemp, 1998). Socio-technical systems can be defined at various 
levels of aggregation but in many studies, they are equated with sectors such as energy 
supply, transport or food that fulfil key societal functions (for a comparison with policy 
subsystems see 2.3). Below, we primarily use the term sector(s) instead of socio-technical 
system(s) to avoid confusion with policy (sub-)systems.
Past research has mostly focused on the transition of single sectors (Geels, 2005, 
2006) but contexts, in which multiple socio-technical systems transform in parallel are 
receiving increasing attention (Andersen & Geels, 2023; Andersen & Markard, 2020; 
Löhr & Chlebna, 2023; Rosenbloom, 2020; Schot & Kanger, 2018). The net-zero energy 
transition is an example of such a multi-system setting: Multiple transitions unfold at 
the same time in multiple sectors (energy, transport, buildings, industry) and the success 
of the overarching transition depends on the various individual sectoral transformations 

572
	
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597
complementing each other, all the while adverse developments are equally conceivable 
(Markard & Rosenbloom, 2022; Ohlendorf et al., 2023).
Innovations are central to transitions (Elzen & Wieczorek, 2005; Smith et al., 2010). 
Together with exogenous developments (e.g., shocks), they are a key driver of system 
transformations. In the transitions literature, new technologies are often in the focus 
of empirical studies, but also non-technical innovations (e.g., institutional changes, new 
types of organisations, new practices) are important. Innovations emerge in niches (Geels, 
2002) and, once they have matured, they may diffuse widely, thereby leading to the decline 
of existing technologies and practices (Koretsky et  al., 2022). Transitions involve focal 
innovations (e.g., electric vehicles) but also complementary innovations (e.g., charging 
stations, batteries) (Andersen & Markard, 2020). In the case of multi-purpose technologies 
such as those around the energy carrier hydrogen, complementary innovations vary across 
sectors (Ohlendorf et al., 2023). For our study, it is important to note that the characteristics 
of both focal and complementary innovations influence the policy positions of actors. 
Policy positions may change, for example, as technologies mature (Markard et al., 2016).
Another key lesson from the politics of transitions is that actors are embedded into 
existing socio-technical systems (Geels, 2020). This sectoral embedding (or sectoral 
background) means that their activities and positions are shaped, i.e., facilitated and 
constrained, by established practices, norms, infrastructures, technologies etc. At the same 
time, they are challenged but also attracted by innovations. So, they are confronted with 
a tension between existing structures and potentially new ones. For our study, we need to 
consider that actors come from different sectors, each characterised by different practices, 
technologies, and transition challenges (Ohlendorf et  al., 2023). We expect that these 
sectoral backgrounds shape the policy positions of actors, and—eventually—the coalitions 
they build.
In terms of actors, transition research distinguishes between incumbent actors (e.g., 
established businesses) which often see transitions as threats (van Mossel et al., 2018) and 
niche actors or challengers (e.g. start-ups) which seek to foster transitions. Incumbents 
have been observed slowing down ongoing transitions (Markard & Rosenbloom, 2020; 
Smink et al., 2015) but also driving innovation (Berggren et al., 2015; Kishna et al., 2017).
Contrasting the advocacy coalitions framework and politics of transitions
Here, we juxtapose the ACF and politics of transitions (Table 1) to make similarities and 
differences explicit and prepare our combined conceptual approach. Key terms and their 
definitions may differ; we link those that are comparable.
General approach (policy and technological change): Both frameworks are concerned 
with how actors affect policy processes and how eventually, they might bring about policy2 
change. In the ACF, changes in policy core beliefs indicate a major policy change, changes 
in secondary aspects a minor policy change. Both approaches theorise (system) stability, 
i.e., why change does not occur, as well as the conditions under which it does. In the politics 
of transitions, policy changes unfold in the context of larger transition processes, in which 
technological change is also key. The ACF, in contrast, can be applied to a broad range of 
policy issues, whether related to transitions and technology change or not. The ACF takes 
a mid-term perspective (e.g., a decade, often addressing one case of policy change) while 
2  In both frameworks, policies are understood as the substance of policymaking, including general objec-
tives, programmes, strategies, regulations, or funding priorities.

573
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597	
transition perspectives have a long-term orientation (several decades, which might cover 
several major policy changes), even though studies often look at shorter periods. While 
technological change is key in politics of transitions, it is less central in the ACF.
System concept Both frameworks apply a system concept but there are differences. The 
policy subsystem is defined around a specific policy issue and a geographical scope, often 
a country (Sabatier & Jenkins-Smith, 1993; Weible & Ingold, 2018). The key elements are 
individual and collective actors forming coalitions. Typical ACF actors are policymakers, 
governmental officials, interest organisations or scientists that engage in the policy 
subsystem affairs. The socio-technical system includes actors, institutional structures, and 
technologies as key elements, which together fulfil a societal function (e.g., provision of 
transport). Typical ‘transition actors’ are firms, associations, NGOs and policymakers. 
Like the policy subsystem, the socio-technical system has a topical focus (typically defined 
as a sector) and a spatial boundary (often national level) (Köhler et al., 2019; Markard 
et al., 2012). Policy subsystems are considered to be stable over time, although this view is 
challenged in the analysis of nascent subsystems which are not stable yet. The emergence 
of a new subsystem may cause changes in adjacent policy subsystems. Socio-technical 
systems are rather stable as well, unless disrupted by a transition.
System emergence In the ACF, a policy subsystem emerges due to external shocks, new 
issues on the political agenda or actors being dissatisfied with the way an issue is treated 
in an existing subsystem (Beverwijk et al., 2008; Weible & Ingold, 2018). Socio-technical 
systems change as a result of external shocks in combination with innovation (Geels, 2002; 
Table 1   Comparison of the advocacy coalition framework and politics of transitions
Advocacy Coalition Framework
Politics of Transitions
General approach
Explain major (or minor) policy change or 
stability; can be applied to a broad range of 
policy issues; technological changeis not key
Explain polical struggles and socio-technical 
change including policy change in the context of 
larger socio-technical transions;technological 
change is key.
System emergence
Subsystems emerge due to external shocks, 
new issues on the polical agenda, 
dissasﬁed actors 
Systems change as a result ofexternal shocks, 
systems emerge due to innovaon; over me, 
systems mature and decline (lifecycle)
System concept
Policy subsystem: Set of actors engaging with 
the same policy issue, inﬂuencing policy 
subsystem aﬀairs 
Subsystem is largely stable
Socio-technical system: Actors, instuonal 
structures and technologies that together fulﬁl a 
societal funcon
System is largely stable 
Policy
General policy strategies, measures or 
regulaons that are inﬂuenced by policy core 
beliefs
General policy strategies, regulaons and policy 
instruments that are inﬂuenced by policy 
posions
Policy posions and 
beliefs of actors 
Policy posions of actors are shaped by the 
three-ered belief system including deep 
core beliefs, policy core beliefs and secondary 
aspects; experts and prior experiences maer 
in nascent subsystems
Policy posions are shaped by various factors, 
including established pracces and prior 
experiences but also opportunies / threats 
arising from innovaons
Coalions
Actors form coalions based on shared policy 
core beliefs and coordinaon
Originally no explicit conceptualisaon of 
coalions, typically dichotomy between 
incumbents and challengers

574
	
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597
Geels & Schot, 2007). System emergence is part of an entire lifecycle: innovations develop 
in niches, mature, diffuse widely and eventually decline (Markard, 2020).
Policy Both approaches address politics and policy. The ACF posits that the policy core 
beliefs of a dominant coalition are later translated into policies (Sabatier, 1998; Weible 
& Ingold, 2018). Policies include general strategies and measures, regulations, or policy 
instruments that address policy problems. In the ACF, policy outcomes result from the 
interplay of advocacy coalitions competing over different problem definitions (in the form 
of beliefs) that have undergone formal governmental decision-making. In the politics of 
transitions, politics in the form of struggles over vested interests and contested views on 
system change has been at the heart of theorising and analyses (Kern & Rogge, 2018). 
These power struggles, often between incumbents and challengers, influence policy outputs 
and may eventually lead to policy changes. While policy (or policy change) may rather be 
analysed as the dependent variable in the ACF, the politics of transitions see changes in 
policy, technology and organizations as co-evolutionary.
Policy positions of actors In the ACF, policy positions are modelled through the 
concept of beliefs: secondary aspects, policy core beliefs, and deep core beliefs (Weible 
& Ingold, 2018). The more specific a position is, the more likely the actor is to change 
it (e.g. secondary aspects). Policy core beliefs encompass positions on general policy 
solutions and policy instruments which can also be technology-related (Weible & Ingold, 
2018), e.g. a technology such as hydrogen is seen as a decarbonisation solution. Actors 
engage in policymaking to translate these beliefs into policies. In transition studies, policy 
positions are shaped by a variety of factors, including the sectoral embedding of actors: 
existing norms, practices, business models, or infrastructures (see above). Actors might 
be torn between existing assets and new (transition) challenges, including the use of new 
technologies.
Coalitions In the ACF, beliefs (and coordination) are key to identify advocacy coalitions 
as well as conflict and consensus about policy issues between coalitions (Sabatier, 1998). 
Recent ACF literature further differentiates coalition ideal types such as disconnected, 
ephemeral or adversarial advocacy coalitions. In case of the latter “policy actors share 
beliefs, coordinate their activities (…), use their resources competitively, and do all 
of this over extended periods of time” (Weible et al., 2020, p. 1067). Several empirical 
applications found coalitions for which technology-related beliefs matter (Jacobsson 
& Lauber, 2006; Lindberg & Kammermann, 2021; Malmborg, 2023; Schmid et  al., 
2019). The ACF mainly sees policy actors (e.g. interest groups, government officials or 
scientists) engaging in coalitions and influencing decision making (Weible et al., 2020). 
Actors may take different roles such as the policy broker who negotiates a compromise 
between coalitions. The politics of transitions start with a diverse set of actors engaging 
in politics, covering the policy as well as technological and industry dimensions. Roles 
of actors in coalitions are—apart from the challenger incumbent dichotomy—less clearly 
defined. Nevertheless, in the politics of transitions, the role of coalitions is increasingly 
acknowledged (Roberts et al., 2018), e.g. through applications of the ACF or discourse 
coalitions (Haukkala, 2018; Hess, 2019a; Lowes et al., 2020; Markard et al., 2016) but not 
as explicitly conceptualised as in the ACF.
Our key motivation to combine both perspectives is that they can complement 
each other in explaining belief and coalition formation in a nascent policy subsystem 
which emerges at the intersection of several sectors. Actors may cooperate for the first 
time, originate from different backgrounds (here: adjacent sectors) and bring different 
experiences. The transition perspective offers socio-technical explanations (concerning 

575
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597	
sectors and technologies) for how beliefs and coalitions form, while the ACF highlights 
trust and former contacts (Ingold et al., 2017).
At the intersection of the advocacy coalition framework and politics of transitions
The core element of our conceptual framework is a nascent policy subsystem3 emerging 
at the intersection of established (but transforming) socio-technical systems, or sectors 
(Fig. 1). In the subsystem, actors debate new policy issues that arise as one or more transi-
tions unfold.
In the new policy subsystem, we expect to find many actors that were (and still are) 
active in other policy subsystems4 and/or in the adjacent sectors. These are depicted in 
blue colours. There will also be new actors (e.g., new organisations), depicted in white. 
We expect those actors to join that have a stake in the novel technology and seek to shape 
future policies. Firms and industry associations from established sectors may see new 
business opportunities but they might also be challenged by the innovation. Policymakers, 
NGOs or think tanks may enter as well if they see potential in the novel field or have 
concerns.
We expect that actor beliefs and the formation of coalitions are shaped by several 
factors. These include the characteristics of the novel technology (white triangle), 
Fig. 1   Conceptual framework linking key elements of politics of transitions and the ACF to explain belief 
and coalition formation.
Actors forming coalitions in the nascent subsystem are influenced by different sectoral backgrounds and 
technologies which determine the newly emerging beliefs and eventually policies in the nascent subsystem. 
The figure shows a snapshot of a subsystem that may change over time 
3  We use the subsystem notion as the established term in the ACF. This does not imply that the policy sub-
system is a subsystem of the socio-technical systems, or sectors.
4  For the sake of simplicity, these are not depicted in our figure.

576
	
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597
the characteristics of existing sectoral technologies (blue triangles) and the sectoral 
background of actors (circles in different shades of blue). We also expect trust and former 
contacts (not visualised in the figure) to affect coalition formation.
Figure 2 is a conceptual figure with empirical elements. It illustrates how we have built 
our framework (right column) based on the inputs of the two perspectives (columns in the 
middle, with yellow and green colours) and the particularities of our empirical context 
(left column, different levels). The net-zero energy transition is characterised by a complex 
interplay of multiple actors with different sectoral backgrounds, multiple technologies, and 
multiple sectors.
In this context, nascent subsystems emerge, in which actors form coalitions. Belief and 
coalition formation are shaped by (i) trust and former contacts (from the ACF, no special 
symbols), (ii) technology characteristics (here related to hydrogen), and (iii) the sectoral 
backgrounds of the actors. Through the combination of these factors, our framework can 
not only explain ‘usual coalitions’ (e.g., of actors that have already collaborated in the past) 
but also ‘unusual coalitions,’ where actors from different sectors form a coalition because 
they have very similar views on the novel technology.
Methods and case
This chapter describes the selection of our case, our data, and methods. We follow a mixed-
method approach based on a qualitative content analysis of position papers, complementary 
semi-structured expert interviews and a cluster analysis.
Fig. 2   Conceptual framework on belief and coalition formation in a nascent policy subsystem in a multi-
system setting.
This figure assembles the conceptual elements we use from both perspectives. It highlights multiple 
technologies and sectors as key elements from the politics of transitions (in yellow) and coalitions, trust, 
former contacts and nascent subsystems from the ACF (darker green). Actors (in blue) appear in both 
frameworks (color figure online) 

577
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597	
Case selection: hydrogen in Germany
Given our interest to study a nascent policy subsystem in a multi-system, net-zero context, 
we decided to focus on hydrogen: a set of novel technologies and political activities that 
are potentially relevant to decarbonise different sectors, including hard-to-decarbonise 
industries (e.g., chemicals, steel, cement), electricity, mobility, and heating. Hydrogen is 
in an early stage of development and actors from the above sectors show a strong interest, 
start to position themselves and ask for political support.
Next, we decided to study Germany as a country with net-zero targets (Deutscher 
Bundestag, 2021), ambitious policy goals for the development of hydrogen (BMWi, 
2020), and an important location for several energy-intensive industries. In Germany, the 
net-zero energy transition is in an acceleration phase, which is characterised by a decline 
in established nuclear and fossil fuel technologies, an increase in renewable energy 
technologies and stronger system integration (Löhr & Mattes, 2022; Markard, 2018). These 
changes go along with many challenges and frictions and on all levels, such as contestation 
around further renewable energy expansion, energy prices, or the speed of coal phase-out 
(Chlebna & Mattes, 2020; Löhr et al., 2022; Rogge & Johnstone, 2017).
In this situation, hydrogen comes in as a supposedly attractive, complementary 
innovation as it is a storable and transportable energy carrier and climate neutral if 
generated from renewable energies.5 Recently, hydrogen gained particular attention—
politically and in industry—as potential solution to address hard-to-decarbonise industries 
such as aviation, shipping, chemicals, cement or steel (Belova et al., 2023; Kern et al., 
2023).
We pursue a single case study on hydrogen in Germany. This allows for an in-depth 
analysis of actors involved in the process, their policy positions and beliefs. Due to the 
early stage of development, a case study allows us to answer ‘how’ questions (Yin, 2018): 
how beliefs and coalitions form in a new subsystem.
Hydrogen as a nascent policy subsystem
A policy subsystem is determined by a substantive focus (here: new policies for hydrogen), 
a geographical scope (here: Germany and its federal government, which has the ability 
to implement ambitious hydrogen policies) and a set of actors (see below) that engage in 
subsystem affairs (Sabatier & Jenkins-Smith, 1993; Weible & Ingold, 2018). To identify 
a nascent policy subsystem, Ingold et al. (2017) suggest three criteria: (1) a lack of final 
policy outputs, (2) first actors specialising in the new policy area and (3) a great belief 
diversity concerning policy core beliefs and secondary aspects. Here, we discuss the first 
two points. The third will be assessed in the results section.
First, in the past, hydrogen was associated with fuel cell applications in transport and 
heating. In Germany, we find early policy outputs such as an R&D programme from 2007. 
However, a comprehensive hydrogen policy strategy targeting multi-sectoral uses has not 
been formulated until recently. In 2019, a new dynamic started to unfold with first hydro-
gen strategies being published by the federal states (Flath et al., 2023), numerous events, 
including a national hydrogen conference organised by four different federal ministries 
5  Mostly mentioned in the debate about hydrogen are the following three ‘hydrogen colors’: ‘Green’ hydro-
gen is produced through electrolysis by renewable sources, ‘blue’ hydrogen is produced from steam reduc-
tion of natural gas combined with carbon capture and storage (CCS). ‘Grey’ hydrogen is generated from 
steam reforming of fossil fuels and the ­CO2 is released into the atmosphere.

578
	
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597
(Fig. 3). The involvement of different ministries points to the multi-system character of 
hydrogen, i.e. existing jurisdictional boundaries do not fit the new policy issues (Lewal-
len, 2022). The hydrogen conference was key for the political process toward the German 
hydrogen strategy, which was adopted in June 2020 and qualifies as first major policy out-
put. With its hydrogen strategy, the German government seeks to establish a (hardly exist-
ing) hydrogen market (supported with 7 billion euros) and build international partnerships 
for hydrogen imports (another 2 billion euros). Until 2030, 5GW of hydrogen production 
capacity shall be installed, another 5GW until 2035.6 The focus of the German government 
is on green hydrogen, while blue hydrogen is seen as a bridge technology.
The hydrogen strategy is the focal event for our paper.7 Our analysis covers the year 
preceding its publication and position papers published until December 2020. Even after 
the publication of the strategy, many policy issues such as application in different sectors, 
grid use, international agreements, import standards etc. still need to be clarified. Many of 
these decisions are likely to be contested, which is why our study offers important insights. 
While the hydrogen strategy qualifies as a first policy output, there is no hydrogen law to 
date, which shows that the policy subsystem is only just emerging.
Second, shortly before and around the publication of the hydrogen strategy, more and 
more actors began to engage with hydrogen, e.g., creating networks like the research 
network on hydrogen or the European Renewable Hydrogen Coalition. Also, the German 
hydrogen and fuel association (DWV) increased its activity, e.g. publishing three position 
papers since 2019 in contrast to only one before 2019. Along with the publication of the 
hydrogen strategy actors that did not have much expertise on hydrogen started to focus on 
the new area, e.g. NGOs:
Fig. 3   Key policy events and creation of associations targeting the development of hydrogen in Germany 
and the EU (color figure online)
6  The 2021 coalition agreement foresees 10GW until 2030.
7  We do not concentrate on subsequently adopted regulation such as the 2021 amendment to the German 
energy law (EnWG) (see 3.3). It adds regulation on hydrogen grids and non-discriminatory access. The 
2021 amended renewable energy law (EEG) contains regulation on hydrogen, providing under certain con-
ditions exemption from the EEG levy for the production of green hydrogen. The update of the hydrogen 
strategy, published in July 2023, is not part of our analysis but we link back to it in our discussion.

579
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597	
Then, there are also the stakeholders, such as all the NGOs and BUND and WWF 
and Greenpeace and so on, who have an issue with this import topic and of course 
want to take a closer look at it, but some of whom are also only just starting to get 
really deep into it, […] who are […] starting a bit later than the technology and 
economic policy steps that have already been taken. (EXP1, Research institute)
While some industry actors already had some expertise on hydrogen, NGOs, research 
institutes and associations (e.g. on renewable energies) only started to engage with the 
topic around 2020.
Procedurally, the process [on developing a hydrogen strategy] in Germany has been 
strongly influenced by the Gas 2030 Dialogue of the [energy ministry]. … NGOs 
weren’t really planned at first, until at some point [an NGO] said: “Friends, it doesn’t 
work like that. I want to get involved here too.” (EXP6, Think tank)
We thus observe a growing number of actors specialising in the topic, new networks and 
associations formations as well as publications. This indicates that the policy subsystem is 
still in its formation phase.
Data collection
To identify policy core beliefs, we analysed position papers and press releases of key actors 
related to the national hydrogen strategy that have been published between October 2019 
and December 2020.
To identify the most influential actors subject to our analysis, we followed a three-step 
approach. First, we prepared a list of around 80 actors working on hydrogen, including 
companies, (industry) associations, NGOs, and research institutes. Second, following the 
reputational approach (French, 1969), we conducted nine interviews with hydrogen experts 
selected by visibility in the debate and recommendation between February and April 2021. 
We asked each expert to rank the actors on our list on a three-step scale (very important, 
important, less important) with respect to hydrogen in Germany. We also asked the experts 
to add missing, but “very important” actors. This led to a list of 63 actors.
In a third step, we excluded all actors without position paper or press releases on the 
hydrogen strategy and included those actors that were part of joint position papers (but 
were not on our list before). Our final sample covers 46 actors (with 42 position papers). 
Most actors are (industry) associations or companies; some published joint position papers 
(see Table 2).8 Our cluster analysis includes 33 position papers that contain sufficient data 
to identify beliefs (see section “Coding and analysis”).
Finally, the interviews also aimed at better understanding hydrogen politics in Germany: 
We asked about consent and conflicts about the use, production or imports of hydrogen and 
about emerging coalitions around hydrogen. Six interviews were recorded and transcribed, 
extensive notes exist for the remaining three (Table 3).
8  The joint position papers include 4 actors we did not have in our initial actor list. These are marked in 
italics: VEA, VIK, SET and Wirtschaftsvereinigung Stahl

580
	
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597
Coding and analysis
We developed the coding system deductively based on the ACF (Sabatier, 1998; Weible & 
Ingold, 2018), where policy core beliefs are defined as subsystem-specific, normative and 
empirical. They concern the problem severity, positions on general policy solutions and 
policy instruments (Weible & Ingold, 2018). They may include policy positions (Ingold 
et al., 2016). We adapted these to hydrogen and derived an initial set of ten policy core 
beliefs. These were later reduced to eight as we dropped two (on system structure and alter-
native solutions) for which we could hardly identify relevant mentions. We discussed the 
beliefs and their respective four subcodes in several rounds of iteration within the author 
team. Two authors coded these beliefs with QDA software for a subset of five position 
papers to further refine the initial set of policy core beliefs and subcodes. Table 4 shows 
the final coding scheme. Each policy core belief includes a lead question and is subdivided 
into four subcodes, covering the range of positions on the topic. For example, “hydrogen 
as a solution” addresses the importance of hydrogen as a response to climate change. Sub-
codes range between “Hydrogen is not important” and “Hydrogen is very important.”
The final coding scheme was applied to all 42 position papers. To improve reliability, all 
authors co-coded all codes that received only one or diverging codings. We discussed these 
passages in detail and adjusted the coding where needed.
We use a cluster analysis to identify advocacy coalitions. Each subcode was assigned 
a number from 1 to 4. The mean value by actor and policy core belief was then used to 
perform a hierarchical cluster analysis which we performed with Stata. We compared 
Table 2   List of key hydrogen actors in our study
Actor type
No. of position
papers
Actors
Companies
11
50Hertz, Amprion, MAN Energy Soluons, RWE, Salzgier, Siemens Energy,
Tennet, Thüga, Thyssenkrupp, Vaenfall, Wintershall
Associaons
18
BDEW, BDH, BDI, BEE, BWE, dena, DIHK, DVGW, DWV, FNB Gas, NOW, OGE, PtX 
Allianz, VCI, VDA, VDI, VDMA, VKU
Research 
instutes and 
think tanks
5
DLR, EWI, Fraunhofer IEG, FZ-Jülich, Öko-Instut
NGOs
4
BUND, DUH, Klima Allianz, WWF
Joint 
posion 
papers8
4
•
Gas actors: Gascade, OGE, Thüga, Uniper, VCI, VIK, Wintershall
•
DWV, VDMA, VKU
•
IG BCE & VCI
•
Industry associaons: BDEW, DVGW, FNBGas, SET, Wirtschasvereinigung 
Stahl, VCI, VEA, Zukun-Erdgas
Table 3   List of interview partners
Code
Actor group
Ranking of actor list
Transcription
EXP1
Research instute
x
x
EXP2
Research instute
x
x
EXP3
NGO
x
x
EXP4
NGO
x
x
EXP5
Research instute
x
EXP6
Think tank
x
EXP7
Research instute
x
EXP8
NGO
x
EXP9
Ministry

581
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597	
Table 4   Policy core belief dimensions and codes
Policy core
belief (N)
Lead question
Sub-codes
Mean /
Standard
Deviation
Problem
severity,
cause and
solution
Severity of
the problem
(41)
How important 
is a (polical) 
response to 
climate change?
CC1: Climate change is one problem among others.
CC2: Climate change is somewhat important.
CC3: Climate change is important, net zero by 2050.
CC4: Climate change is very important, there is an 
urgent need to decarbonise.
3.10/
0.41
Hydrogen as
solution
(42)
How important 
is hydrogen as a 
response to 
climate change?
H1: H2 is not important. It is the last resort aer all other 
opons have been exhausted.
H2: H2 is somewhat important but other pathways than 
H2 preferred.
H3: H2 is important but one soluon among many.
H4: H2 is very important. 
3.15
0.68
Role of
government
in
subsystem
affairs
Role of
government
vs. market
(42)
How important 
is the role of 
the state (vs. 
market) when 
developing 
hydrogen 
technology and 
infrastructure?
SM1: The state is not important. Markets will do it alone. 
SM2: The state is somewhat important. It is needed to 
fund the H2 economy in transion period.
SM3: State is important. It is needed to lay regulatory 
foundaons.
SM4: State is very important. It should play a strong role 
in developing H2.
3.15
0.49
General
goals for
policy
subsystem
Expansion of
renewables
for hydrogen
production
(solution)
(39)
How important 
is the 
(domesc) 
expansion of 
renewables to 
produce 
hydrogen?
R1: Expansion of renewables is not important.
R2: Expansion of renewables is somewhat important.
R3: Expansion of renewables is important.
R4: Expansion of renewables is very important.
3.25
0.77
Position on
general
policy
solutions
and
instruments
Production:
Green H2 vs
blue
(38)
How should 
hydrogen be 
produced? 
(Importance of 
green H2)
GB1: Green H2 is not important. Any H2 will do.
GB2: Green H2 is somewhat important. But blue H2 is a 
viable opon as well.
GB3: Green H2 is important. Blue H2 only temporarily.
GB4: Green H2 is very important. It should be the only 
opon to produce H2.
3.01
1.01
H2 imports
(32)
Under which 
condions 
should 
hydrogen be 
imported?
I1: Condions for imported H2 are not important.
I2: Condions are somewhat important. There should be 
minimum standards.
I3: Condions are important. There should be high 
standards for imported H2 (env, soc, pol).
I4: Condions are very important. There should be high 
standards and we should avoid H2 imports as much as 
possible.
2.22
0.94
Gas
infrastructure
(26)
How important 
is it to use the 
exisng gas 
grid?
G1: It is very important to use the exisng natural gas 
grid (and foster it) for H2.
G2: It is important. Grid adjustments may be needed.
G3: It is somewhat important. The exisng gas grid is of 
limited use.
G4: It is not important. Separate or new infrastructure 
may be needed.
1.86
0.52
Sectors
(38)
How important 
is it to priorize 
which sectors 
can use 
hydrogen?
S1: Priorisaon of sectors is not important. H2 can be 
used in all sectors, including heang. 
S2: Priorisaon of sectors is somewhat important. H2
can also be used for individual transport.
S3: Priorisaon of sectors isimportant. H2 should be 
used primarily in hard-to-decarbonise sectors.
S4: Priorisaon of sectors is very important. H2 can only 
be used in hard-to-decarbonise sectors.
2.11
1.04
Source: Policy core beliefs based on Weible and Ingold (2018) and adapted to our case. Policy core 
beliefs on production, imports, gas infrastructure and sectors reflect general goals and positions on policy 
solutions. N is the number of actors for which results could be obtained. The policy core beliefs with the 
highest standard deviation are analysed separately as “Most conflicting policy core beliefs” in the respective 

582
	
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597
the sensitivity of the results with respect to similarity and dissimilarity measures, which 
provide roughly similar outcomes, not affecting our main findings. We furthermore test 
the effect of missing data points by reducing the number of included policy core beliefs 
from eight to six, and by imputing missing observations for actors with up to two missing 
values. Missing values are replaced with the mean value of the respective policy core 
belief across all other actors. Both approaches increase the number of actors included to 
the analysis, first by reducing the amount of required but also used information, second via 
extrapolating information.
Our main specification considers all eight policy core beliefs, allows for up to two 
imputed values per actor, and thereby covers information from 33 position papers. This 
specification applies the average linkage method and the Euclidean distance measure. Our 
main findings (see next section) are robust over the applied similarity measure.9 We cre-
ate and analyse dendrograms to identify clusters of actors (see fig. 6 in the appendix). We 
select the two largest clusters with the greatest distance to one another. We also discuss 
one cluster dominated by companies and associations from the gas sector that has addi-
tionally been identified in our interviews but does not represent the third largest cluster. 
The results are visualised via multi-dimensional scaling that illustrates the belief distance 
between actors in a two-dimensional graphic (see Fig. 4). Multi-dimensional scaling trans-
lates the eight policy core beliefs and their corresponding dimensions used in the cluster 
analysis into two dimensions. We present the findings in the section on “Emerging advo-
cacy coalitions”.
To better understand which potential conflicts emerge in the nascent subsystem, we ana-
lyse particularly conflicting policy core beliefs. We therefore zoom into the three policy 
core beliefs with the highest standard deviations of actor codes, namely hydrogen produc-
tion, application of hydrogen in different sectors and imports. We plot the mean belief 
values of all actors in a two-dimensional graphic with three policy core beliefs as axes 
(see Fig. 5). This shows in which specific positions actors disagree most. Our conceptual 
framework contributes to explain why actors build their beliefs. The findings are shown in 
Sect. 4.2.
Results
In the following, we present the results of our cluster analysis and zoom into three beliefs, 
which point to emerging conflicts.
Emerging advocacy coalitions
We find two emerging coalitions (see Fig. 4, Tables 5, 6 and the dendrogram in the appen-
dix). The first and smaller coalition, hereafter “green coalition” (left side, green circle), 
section
Table 4   (continued)
9  We further ran sensitivity checks and tested different cluster algorithms (single linkage which serves to 
determine outliers and ward linkage) and distance measures (squared euclidean distance and absolute-value 
distance (Manhattan)).

583
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597	
includes NGOs, renewable energy associations, some research institutes and a few compa-
nies. The second coalition is bigger and consists of energy and industry associations, some 
research institutes, gas sector actors and actors devoted to hydrogen or fuel cells. It is posi-
tioned on the right side, hereafter “blue coalition” (blue circle). Belief distance and hetero-
geneity in the blue coalition are larger than in the green coalition. Consequently, some blue 
coalition actors, e.g. the automobile association VDA or the Association of German Engi-
neers VDI, are closer to some green coalition actors than to their own coalition allies. We 
identify a third group of actors as a subset of the large blue coalition. These include the gas 
transmission grid operator OGE, the ‘gas actors’, the gas company Wintershall, the energy 
and water association BDEW or the energy and water supplier Thüga (see upper right in 
Fig. 4 and dendrogram in appendix) (Table 6).
Overall, the distance between the two coalitions is not very large and coalition 
boundaries are not clear cut. Beliefs are not much polarised but rather distributed 
heterogeneously, pointing to a greater belief diversity not only between but also within 
coalitions. This is to be expected in a nascent policy subsystem where beliefs are still 
forming (see section on “Hydrogen as a nascent policy subsystem”).
Qualitatively, we find that most actors welcome and support the hydrogen strategy of the 
German government. There is a high degree of consensus that climate change is important 
and net-zero should be achieved by 2050.10 Most actors argue that hydrogen is either one 
solution among many or very important for decarbonisation.
Interestingly, most actors of both coalitions also call for the state to play a strong role 
in supporting the development of hydrogen technologies and implement the necessary 
regulatory foundations. While one would expect especially industry actors to opt for 
market-based solutions (without much state intervention), the early phase of hydrogen 
development seems to be the reason for the manifold calls for a regulatory basis, whose 
Fig. 4   Emerging hydrogen advocacy coalitions.
Relative distance of actors based on their policy core beliefs. Colours indicate the sector of origin as shown 
in Table 5. The two dimensions result from multi-dimensional scaling (see section "Coding and analysis") 
(color figure online) 
10  This common understanding seems to become a new common sense and thereby diverging from beliefs 
just a few years ago (Löhr 2020; Leipprand et al., 2017; Markard, Suter and Ingold 2016).

584
	
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597
foundations were only laid after the consultation with the publication of the national 
hydrogen strategy.
Fig. 5   Policy core beliefs regarding the production, application and imports of hydrogen.
The figure shows the three most conflictive belief dimensions on hydrogen production (x-axis), application 
(y-axis) and imports (coloured dots). Blue dots were accorded when an actor reached above average 
codings for import standards (more than 2, 5, meaning high import standards are important) and red 
dots for below average codings (less than 2, 5 meaning less attention should be paid to import standards). 
Dotted lines show several actors sharing the same position. Please note that more actors than in the cluster 
analysis were integrated in this figure as only three positions were needed (color figure online) 
Table 5   Actors per sector
Sector
Actor
Industry
BDI, DIHK, Salzgier, Siemens Energy, Thyssenkrupp, VCI, VDI, VDMA

IG BCE & VCI
Electricity
50Hertz, Amprion, BEE, BWE, RWE, Tennet, Vaenfall
Mobility
MAN Energy Soluons, VDA
Gas / heat
BDH, DVGW, FNB Gas, OGE, Thüga, Wintershall

Gas actors: Gascade, OGE, Thüga, Uniper, VCI, VIK, Wintershall
Hydrogen
DWV, NOW, PtX Allianz
Multiple
sectors
BDEW, VKU

DWV, VDMA, VKU

Industry associaons: BDEW, DVGW, FNBGas, SET, Wirtschasvereinigung Stahl, VCI, VEA,
Zukun-Erdgas
Research
/
think tanks
Dena, DLR, EWI, FZ-Jülich, Fraunhofer IEG,Öko-Instut
NGOs
BUND, DUH, Klima Allianz, WWF
Please note that some actors pursue activities in more than one sector (e.g. BDEW and VKU are active in 
the electricity and gas sector)

585
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597	
Despite this broad consensus, there are also differences between the two coalitions. We 
present general differences below and the three emerging conflicts on hydrogen production, 
application and import in the section on "Most conflicting policy core beliefs".
Actors in the green coalition give greatest importance to a (political) response to climate 
change but do not necessarily see hydrogen as the main or only solution to respond to the 
decarbonisation challenge. Green coalition actors stress the need for energy efficiency and 
electrification.
(…) the environmental associations (…) are not interested in the volume, but rather 
think: Oh, better not so much at first or at all. (EXP1, Research institute)
Significantly expanding renewable energies—for direct electrification as well as green 
hydrogen production—is a core belief of this coalition, which would also rather produce 
hydrogen domestically, define high standards for imports and rather construct a new 
hydrogen infrastructure than expanding the existing natural gas grid. This coalition regards 
hydrogen as an expensive and scarce good, mainly to be used in hard-to-decarbonise 
industries.
Most actors of the blue coalition argue that hydrogen is important or very important 
for decarbonisation. A large majority of actors including utilities and many industry actors 
advocate for a significant expansion of renewable energies in Germany whereas only very 
few actors think that hardly any renewable energy expansion is needed. This large support 
for renewable energy expansion in Germany differs strongly from earlier research results 
on renewables just a few years ago (Strunz et al., 2016). Interestingly, also actors from the 
coal and chemical industry, which have opposed renewable energies for long (Lauber & 
Jacobsson, 2016), now demand a rapid renewable energy expansion:
A hydrogen economy requires the accelerated and cost-efficient expansion of 
renewable energies and the accelerated expansion of electricity grids. (IG BCE & 
VCI, Mining, Chemistry and Energy Union & Chemical Industry Association).
Beliefs about the application of hydrogen in different sectors and the use of the natural gas 
grid differ and are important reasons for the observed heterogeneity within this coalition. 
The actors in the identified subset of the blue coalition express strong beliefs about using 
and expanding the existing natural gas grid for hydrogen while other actors did not position 
themselves on this topic. As the former come from the natural gas and / or the heating 
sector, their beliefs are in line with prior experiences.
Table 6   Actors and actor types per coalition
Actor type
Green coalition
Blue coalition
Companies
50Hertz, Amprion, Thyssenkrupp, MAN 
Energy Soluons
Siemens Energy, Thüga, Wintershall
Associaons
BEE, BWE
BDI, DIHK, BDH, VKU, BDEW, OGE, PtX Allianz, 
VDI, VDA, DWV, DVGW
Research instutes 
and think tanks
Öko-Instut, FZ-Jülich
DLR, EWI, Fraunhofer IEG
NGOs
BUND, DUH, Klima Allianz, WWF
Joint 
posion 
papers (associaons 
and companies)
•
Gas actors: Gascade, OGE, Thüga, Uniper, 
VCI, VIK, Wintershall
•
DWV, VDMA, VKU
•
IG BCE & VCI
•
Industry 
associaons: 
BDEW, 
DVGW, 
FNBGas, SET, Wirtschasvereinigung 
Stahl, VCI, VEA, Zukun-Erdgas

586
	
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597
With the BDEW it’s clear how they position themselves, because they have the gas 
industry [as members], which above all wants to see hydrogen flowing through their 
grids. (EXP2, Research institute)
Actors within this subset of the blue coalition typically refer to “climate neutral gases” 
instead of hydrogen. These actors advocate for the use of blue or any hydrogen (including 
grey hydrogen) in all sectors and also for heating purposes. They advocate for blending 
hydrogen and natural gas while opponents would prefer to use the “expensive good” 
hydrogen in pure form.
Despite the early development stage of the subsystem, our interview partners already 
pointed to this emerging coalition (EXP2, EXP3, EXP4).
In the building sector, we see an unholy alliance between the building industry and 
the gas industry. The building industry has been resisting for years and decades that 
energy-efficient building renovation is promoted more strongly and, on the other 
hand, the gas industry is now afraid that it will lose its markets there. And heat is 
incredibly important for gas. (EXP4, NGO)
The other alliance is very, very clearly the fossil continuation together with the use in 
building heat. Building heat is the battlefield on which the future of the distribution 
grids will be decided. There is a very strong alliance here, which I have already felt. 
(EXP3, NGO).
Most conflicting policy core beliefs
Despite much consensus on developing hydrogen technologies, we identified three major 
lines of conflict. These include: (i) how to produce hydrogen, (ii) in which sectors and 
applications to use hydrogen and (iii) whether to formulate criteria for hydrogen import 
(strict criteria or few or no criteria, see blue, red and grey dots) (see Table 4).
Hydrogen production (x-axis, Fig.  5): Hydrogen can be produced from renewable 
energy sources (green hydrogen) or with natural gas and carbon capture technology (blue 
hydrogen). There is a clear divide between actors that favour green hydrogen (mostly 
e-NGOs, research institutes, energy associations, the automobile association, utilities, 
TSOs as well as Siemens Energy, MAN Energy Solutions and Thyssenkrupp) and those 
for whom blue hydrogen is also a viable option (most gas and industry actors). Some of the 
latter reject the “colour debate” about hydrogen production stating that any climate neutral 
form of hydrogen will be useful:
The current discussion about what colour hydrogen should have is not helpful: 
green hydrogen is produced by electrolysis with renewable energies, blue hydrogen 
is produced from natural gas, and turquoise hydrogen is produced by methane 
pyrolysis. All variants are climate-neutral because the ­CO2 does not escape into 
the atmosphere. Since we will need large quantities of hydrogen in the future, the 
VDMA advocates the use of all forms of hydrogen that are climate-neutral. (VDMA, 
Mechanical Engineering Industry Association)
Next to these main groups, there are a few outliers. Three gas actors (Wintershall, Thüga 
and OGE) even accept hydrogen that is produced from fossil fuels without CCS.
Application of hydrogen (y-axis, Fig. 5): Many actors want to use hydrogen in a broad 
range of applications, including individual transport, and, partly, even heating. This group 

587
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597	
of actors (lower part of the figure) includes industry actors, gas suppliers and three research 
institutes. Some of these actors also favour large hydrogen quantities.
I have the feeling that the Federal Ministry of Economics and Technology, the 
Ministry of Transport and many industry representatives are actually part of a very 
large coalition whose goal is simply to make the issue a big one. The goal could be: 
the greater the demand, the greater the export potential for technology from Germany 
and so on, the bigger the cake for everyone. (EXP1, Research institute)
The opposing view is typically expressed by e-NGOs, electric utilities, TSOs, 
Thyssenkrupp and MAN Energy Solutions: hydrogen should only or primarily be used as 
the last resort for decarbonisation in a limited range of applications. Some of these actors 
also make a connection between production and the application of hydrogen:
...caution is advised - hydrogen and PtX materials are not panaceas. Only if they are 
produced under strict sustainability standards and entirely from renewable energies can 
they serve as a complementary means of reducing emissions in certain applications. In 
many areas, however, their use would be inefficient and costly. An accelerated shift to 
renewable energies, the reduction of energy consumption, energy efficiency increases 
in all sectors and a comprehensive mobility transition remain the most important 
challenges in climate protection- and must be a clear priority for politics. (DUH)
Imports (colours, Fig. 5): A similar picture emerges if we look at the policy core beliefs 
regarding the import of hydrogen. Some actors argue that there should be strict standards 
for hydrogen imports (blue dots): it should be produced from renewable energy sources, 
and it should be beneficial for the exporting countries (e.g. in terms of social justice). 
These positions are put forward by e-NGOs, some research institutes and, not surprisingly, 
the association of renewable energy producers. A majority of actors, however, formulate 
less ambitious import conditions (red dots), or do not mention import standards (grey dots).
Summary
Our analysis revealed a high level of consensus on key belief dimensions, even though 
the policy subsystem and the associated policy issues are new, and the actors come from 
different sectoral backgrounds. In fact, most actors regard climate change as important 
or very important and support the net-zero target. Most also view the development of 
hydrogen technologies as a key strategy for decarbonisation. Some actors, mostly e-NGOs, 
take a more critical stance though as they highlight e.g. high costs and energy losses when 
producing hydrogen. It is interesting to see that the support for hydrogen reaches across all 
sectors, i.e. does not seem to be affected by past experiences. Next to this broad consensus, 
we identified three emerging conflicts: how hydrogen is produced, where it is used and 
whether to apply strict standards for imports or not.
We found two main coalitions: a larger one that includes many major industry 
associations and gas suppliers (including a gas-centred sub-coalition), and a smaller one 
with renewable energy associations, e-NGOS, electricity grid operators and two industry 
players. There is a high degree of heterogeneity within11 and little distance between the 
coalitions. This is in line with earlier findings about coalitions in nascent subsystems not 
necessarily showing clear and expectable boundaries (Ingold et al., 2017; Nohrstedt et al., 
11  Especially in the larger coalition.

588
	
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597
2020). However, there are also unexpected findings such as the smaller coalition, in which 
e-NGOs and industry actors seem to form an ‘unusual alliance.’ We explore this further 
below.
Discussion
Here, we discuss our findings in the light of earlier studies. We draw on the key elements of 
our framework and we also discuss advantages and limitations of our approach.
Broad support for a novel technology: The ACF stipulates that policy core beliefs only 
change very slowly (Jenkins-Smith et al., 2017), which means that they may stand in the way 
when actors are confronted with novel and partly disruptive technologies. The transitions 
perspective arrives at a similar conclusion: Incumbent industry actors have often been 
observed to resist change (Smink et al., 2015; Wesseling et al., 2014) and to defend existing 
practices rather than embracing novel technologies (Hess, 2014; Lauber & Jacobsson, 2016; 
Stefes & Hager, 2020). So how to explain the extraordinary support for hydrogen?
Both technology and sector characteristics play a role here. In sectors such as steel or 
chemicals, incumbents have hardly any low-carbon technology alternatives to hydrogen. 
In the gas and heat sector, there are alternatives (heat pumps), but hydrogen is viewed as 
a way to also use existing assets (gas infrastructure) in the future (Ohlendorf et al., 2023). 
So, industry actors support hydrogen because it aligns well with their sectoral background 
and/or the limited technology alternatives within the sector. Technology characteristics 
also explain policy core beliefs such as those around a strong role for government: a 
new and expensive technology, especially with major infrastructural needs, cannot be 
realised without significant financial support by the state. These findings are in line with 
the acknowledgement of technology-related beliefs in earlier ACF research (Lindberg & 
Kammermann, 2021; Markard et al., 2016; Schmid et al., 2019).
Unusual ‘alliances’: Prior ACF research on environmental topics found that e-NGOs and 
think tanks typically form an ‘environmental’ coalition, while firms and industry associations 
are rather positioned in an ‘economic’ coalition (Haukkala, 2018; Leipprand et al., 2017; 
Markard et  al., 2016; Hirschl, 2008). This speaks to the ACF idea of former ties being 
important. Our findings resemble the latter: both coalitions are made up of a mix of industry 
actors, associations and think tanks. This is what we call unusual alliances. It was particularly 
surprising to see the firms Thyssenkrupp (steel, machinery), and MAN Energy Solutions 
(trucks, machinery), 50Hertz and Amprion (TSOs) in a coalition together with environmental 
NGOs.
We can explain unusual alliances by technological characteristics and the sectoral 
backgrounds of actors. Hydrogen offers new business opportunities for large plant 
manufacturers such as MAN Energy Solutions and Thyssenkrupp, whose technological 
experiences and capabilities (and the associated beliefs) are well aligned with the new 
technology. Similarly, TSOs such as 50Hertz and Amprion but also the utilities RWE and 
Vattenfall are deeply embedded in the electricity sector (renewable energy production, 
grid operation). On top of that, they benefit from a growing demand for hydrogen (which 
is rather power intensive if produced by electricity). For e-NGOs, green hydrogen is the 
only form of hydrogen they support—with caution though. This is well aligned with their 
(former) policy core beliefs (e.g. around resource protection and sufficiency) in other 
policy fields.

589
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597	
Expectable alliances Earlier studies on emerging subsystems have shown that trust and 
former ties play a role in coalition formation and that actors seek to speak with one voice 
(Ingold et al., 2017; Nohrstedt et al., 2020). We can corroborate this through evidence on 
joint position papers (Table 2). These point to ‘expectable’ alliances of actors who have 
cooperated since long in the same sector such as the gas actors or the union IGBCE and the 
chemical industry association VCI.
While the ACF perspective would be sufficient to explain expectable alliances, our 
combined approach also highlights sectoral differences which might be needed for future 
developments: If each group of actors wants to use hydrogen in their specific sector and 
application, there might not be enough hydrogen for all, some actors suggest using it where 
it is needed most. So, we might see situations, in which existing ties break up because of 
competing interests.
Emerging conflicts The conflicts identified above do not run between actors that are in 
favour or against a technology or policy (Leipprand & Flachsland, 2018; Schmid et al., 
2019), but unfold around how questions around production, application, and imports.
Beliefs on production and application are strongly influenced by sectoral and 
technological characteristics. The latter mostly depends on a preference for a broad 
application of hydrogen. This may indicate that how questions and finding a common 
solution reaching decarbonisation become more important than sticking to prior contacts.
Both, technological and sectoral characteristics seem to be particularly important 
in situations, in which former ties and existing contacts are of limited relevance for the 
underlying policy issue. Our empirical evidence for both, expected and unusual alliances, 
thus supports our combined conceptual endeavour. Our combined perspective elucidates 
belief and coalition formation in nascent subsystems in contexts where explaining change 
becomes more relevant than stability.
The emerging beliefs in a nascent subsystem may have broader effects. They may spill 
over to an adjacent policy subsystems and contribute to policy change (Jones & Jenkins-
Smith, 2009; Meckling & Goedeking, 2023). A newly formed coalition in a nascent policy 
subsystem may influence policies in the system of origin, to which actors ‘return’ with their 
(new) beliefs (possibly presenting a new solution to an unresolved problem). The new ties 
that develop between actors in unusual coalitions may further lead to new collaborations 
advocating for novel solutions in adjacent policy subsystems, possibly even triggering 
(major) policy change.
Our approach advances theory by combining two strands of research that, independently 
from each other, started to analyse actor and policy dynamics in multi-system settings. We 
concentrated on a few key elements from each theoretical perspective, but we believe that 
incorporating other elements such as the ACF’s policy learning (Goyal & Howlett, 2020) 
might enhance our understanding of these processes, particularly in terms of their future 
development when analysing longer time frames.
Our study addresses the emergence of coalitions and a new subsystem at the intersection 
of several sectors. It may thus also inform policy integration analyses which address cross-
sectoral policy problems (Kefeli et al., 2023; Milhorance et al., 2021). Policy integration is 
mainly understood as a process of multi-dimensional policy and institutional change (Can-
del & Biesbroek, 2016). Trein et al. (2023) advocate for a stronger focus on actor-oriented 
theories in policy integration studies to which the ACF would contribute (Kefeli et  al., 
2023). We think cross-sectoral analyses might also profit from paying more attention to 
technological change and transition dynamics. At the same time, the fine-grained coalition 
concept including the belief system represents a toolset that could inform transition studies 

590
	
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597
to engage in more detailed analyses of actors, actor groups and coalitions accelerating the 
transition and to identify their lines of conflict (Köhler et al., 2019).
This study is one of the first to address decarbonisation to net-zero from a multi-
system, -technology and -actor perspective. However, hydrogen is but one example of a 
new subsystem bridging existing ones and we expect multi-system interactions (or ‘multi-
sector policy subsystems’) to increase in the net-zero context (e.g., smart cities, low-
carbon lifestyles, biodiversity or carbon capture and storage (Finstad & Andersen, 2023)). 
Innovations, new technologies and their characteristics will be important in most of these, 
as well as (new or changed) roles of incumbents and their interactions with challengers. 
While our observations point to the emergence of a new subsystem (see 3.2), this does 
not mean that the nascent subsystem will stay independent forever. If energy policies are 
restructured to better account for multi-system interactions or, in practical terms, sector 
coupling (Löhr & Chlebna, 2023), the hydrogen subsystem might as well be absorbed by 
the energy subsystem, e.g. when hydrogen strategies are no longer defined separately but as 
part of energy policies. This remains to be seen.
For policymakers, the multi-system setting comes not only with more diverse groups 
of actors but also with a wider range of beliefs and interests. New alliances then do not 
necessarily form along prior contacts or sectors of origin but along new policy- or 
technology-specific dimensions. Our study identifies lines of conflict which policymakers 
need to address to ensure a smooth development of hydrogen in Germany and elsewhere. 
At the same time, it points to the limits of a fast and broad application of green hydrogen.
The identified conflicts are also visible in the updated hydrogen strategy from 2023 
(BMWK, 2023). The new strategy differs from the first, as some non-green hydrogen 
production technologies can now receive limited support during market formation. This 
means that the production method of hydrogen remains a point of conflict. The new strategy 
focuses on using hydrogen in hard-to-decarbonise sectors, including aviation and shipping, 
which conflicts with actors who also want to use it in heating. Political struggles around 
hydrogen production and use, referred to as ‘contested pathways’ by Kern et al. (2023), will 
continue.
We close this section with a brief reflection about the limitations of our study. While 
we have demonstrated the utility of a combined framework in one case, further studies will 
be needed on other cases. Also, due to our focus on the dynamics of a nascent subsystem, 
future research might want to explore how multi-system challenges play into more mature 
policy subsystems like water (Brandenberger et al., 2022). Another limitation is that we 
could not include all relevant actors into the formal parts of our analysis, as position papers 
were not always available (e.g., no position papers for the governing political parties or 
the federal government).12 We chose to rely on a single data source to ensure consistency, 
comparability, and reproducibility. Future studies might consider using a variety of sources 
to include a broader range of actors, potentially revealing further sub-coalitions. Also, we 
have not gathered systematic data on coordination between actors. We have some insights 
through joint position papers and the expert interviews, but these remain limited. Even 
though coordination is only about to emerge in a nascent subsystem and thus harder to 
study, future research might want to explore coordination systematically, e.g. with a survey 
(Stritch, 2015). Finally, we carried out a study for one point in time (because hydrogen is 
12  For an analysis of the discourse around hydrogen in Germany which covers a greater number of actors 
please refer to Ohlendorf et al. (2023) and to Belova et al. (2023).

591
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597	
new on the agenda). Longitudinal studies can be promising once the subsystem is more 
developed, to possibly uncover changes in beliefs and coalitions.
Conclusion
Grand sustainability challenges often confront a broad range of different sectors, and 
they span traditional fields of policymaking. Where new technologies are developed to 
address these challenges, new policy subsystems might emerge, in which actors tackle 
the associated policy issues. For subsystems that emerge at the interface of different 
sectors, we can expect a high level of complexity, e.g., due to the large number of actors 
with different backgrounds and experiences.
To address this complexity, our framework places the emerging subsystem into a 
context of existing (but changing) socio-technical systems (or sectors). We call this a 
multi-system setting. We offer three central explanations: First, beliefs are shaped by 
technology characteristics, including the novel technology the subsystem addresses 
as well as the technologies in the adjacent sectors. Second, as many actors in the new 
subsystem originate from the surrounding sectors, their beliefs are shaped by their 
sectoral backgrounds. Third, beliefs are also shaped by prior contacts and alliances.
Our framework combines and contextualizes a ‘classic’ ACF analysis (identifying 
beliefs, coalitions and policy subsystems) with elements from transition studies. 
In  situations where entire sectors are changing profoundly (e.g., as a response to 
grand sustainability challenges or other crises), we see new policy and technology 
developments, and new subsystems emerging, with a large number and variety of 
actors seeking to influence policymaking. In such dynamic settings, beliefs are shaped 
developments in the past (e.g., former contacts, experiences, sectoral backgrounds, 
characteristics of established technologies) but at the same time, they are challenged, 
and possibly reshaped, by developments unfolding in the present (e.g., novel 
technologies undermining existing businesses, shifting sectoral boundaries, socio-
political crises).
For these kinds of new challenges, it can be fruitful to adapt and remodel existing 
frameworks, sometimes even from different disciplines. Here, we showed one possible 
way of combining insights from transition research and policy analysis. Future studies 
might want to follow or challenge our approach as well as explore new avenues to tackle 
the new complexities.
Appendix
See Fig. 6.
Acknowledgements  Meike Löhr gratefully acknowledges funding by the German Research Founda-
tion (grant no. 316848319) in the context of the Emmy Noether-project “Regional energy transitions as a 
social process” (REENEA). Meike Löhr and Jochen Markard acknowledge funding from the Norwegian 
Research Council (Conflicting Transition Pathways for Deep Decarbonization, Grant number 295062/E20). 
Jochen Markard acknowledges funding from the Swiss Federal Office of Energy (SWEET program, PATH-
FNDR consortium). Nils Ohlendorf acknowledges funding by the German Federal Ministry of Education 
and Research (PEGASOS, funding code 01LA1826C). We thank participants and discussants at the 13th 
International Sustainability Transitions Conference, the EAWAG CIRUS coffee break, the Mohn Research 
Centre at Western Norway University of Applied Sciences, Manuel Fischer, project partners in the Pathway 

592
	
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597
project and members of the working group organisation and innovation at University of Oldenburg for their 
helpful comments and suggestions.
Funding  Open Access funding enabled and organized by Projekt DEAL.
Declarations 
Conflict of interest  The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, 
which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as 
you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons 
licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are 
included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the 
material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not 
permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly 
from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://​creat​iveco​mmons.​org/​licen​ses/​by/4.​0/.
References
Andersen, A. D., & Geels, F. W. (2023). Multi-system dynamics and the speed of net-zero transitions: Iden-
tifying causal processes related to technologies, actors, and institutions. Energy Research & Social 
Science. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​erss.​2023.​103178
Andersen, A. D., & Markard, J. (2020). Multi-technology interaction in socio-technical transitions: How 
recent dynamics in HVDC technology can inform transition theories. Technological Forecasting and 
Social Change. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​techf​ore.​2019.​119802
Fig. 6   Dendrogram of the cluster solution

593
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597	
Avelino, F., Grin, J., Pel, B., & Jhagroe, S. (2016). The politics of sustainability transitions. Journal of Envi-
ronmental Policy & Planning. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​15239​08X.​2016.​12167​82
Belova, A., Quittkat, C., Lehotský, L., Knodt, M., Osička, J., & Kemmerzell, J. (2023). The more the mer-
rier? Actors and ideas in the evolution of German hydrogen policy discourse. Energy Research & 
Social Science. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​erss.​2023.​102965
Berggren, C., Magnusson, T., & Sushandoyo, D. (2015). Transition pathways revisited: Established firms 
as multi-level actors in the heavy vehicle industry. Research Policy. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​respol.​
2014.​11.​009
Beverwijk, J., Goedegebuure, L., & Huisman, J. (2008). Policy change in nascent subsystems: Mozambican 
higher education policy 1993–2003. Policy Sciences. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11077-​008-​9072-0
Biermann, F., Abbott, K., Andresen, S., Bäckstrand, K., Bernstein, S., Betsill, M. M., et al. (2012). Science 
and government. Navigating the anthropocene: Improving Earth system governance. Science (new 
York, NY). https://​doi.​org/​10.​1126/​scien​ce.​12172​55
Bjerkan, K. Y., Hansen, L., & Steen, M. (2021). Towards sustainability in the port sector: The role of inter-
mediation in transition work. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​eist.​2021.​08.​004
Blake, K., Nahrath, S., & Ingold, K. (2020). Combining the institutional resource regime (IRR) framework 
with the advocacy coalition framework (ACF) for a better understanding of environmental govern-
ance processes: The case of Swiss wind power policy. Environmental Science & Policy. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/j.​envsci.​2020.​06.​010
BMWi. (2020). The national hydrogen strategy. Berlin.
BMWK (2023). Fortschreibung der Nationalen Wasserstoffstrategie: NWS 2023. Berlin.
Brandenberger, L., Ingold, K., Fischer, M., Schläpfer, I., & Leifeld, P. (2022). Boundary spanning through 
engagement of policy actors in multiple issues. Policy Studies Journal. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​psj.​
12404
Deutscher Bundestag. (2021). Entwurf eines Ersten Gesetzes zur Änderung des Bundes-Klimaschutzge-
setzes. Drucksache 19/30949.
Candel, J. J. L., & Biesbroek, R. (2016). Toward a processual understanding of policy integration. Policy 
Sciences. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11077-​016-​9248-y
Chlebna, C., & Mattes, J. (2020). The fragility of regional energy transitions. Environmental Innovation and 
Societal Transitions. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​eist.​2020.​07.​009
Culhane, T., Hall, G., & Roberts, J. T. (2021). Who delays climate action? Interest groups and coalitions in 
state legislative struggles in the United States. Energy Research & Social Science. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​erss.​2021.​102114
Derwort, P., Jager, N., & Newig, J. (2021). How to explain major policy change towards sustainability? 
Bringing together the multiple streams framework and the multilevel perspective on socio-technical 
transitions to explore the German “Energiewende.” Policy Studies Journal. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​
psj.​12428
ECIU 2021: Taking stock: a global assessment of net zero targets scrutinising countries, states and regions, 
cities and companies
Elzen, B., & Wieczorek, A. (2005). Transitions towards sustainability through system innovation. Techno-
logical Forecasting and Social Change. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​techf​ore.​2005.​04.​002
Finstad, J., & Andersen, A. D. (2023). Multi-sector technology diffusion in urgent net-zero transitions: 
Niche splintering in carbon capture technology. Technological Forecasting and Social Change. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​techf​ore.​2023.​122696
Flath, L., Kemmerzell, J., & Knodt, M. (2023). Hydrogen governance in Germany: A challenge for federal 
coordination. Regional & Federal Studies. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13597​566.​2023.​22327​35
French, R. M. (1969). Effectiveness of the various techniques employed in the study of community power. 
The Journal of Politics, 31, 818–820.
Geels, F. W. (2002). Technological transitions as evolutionary reconfiguration processes: A multi-level per-
spective and a case-study. Research Policy, 31(8–9), 1257–1274.
Geels, F. W. (2005). The dynamics of transitions in socio-technical systems: A multi-level analysis of the 
transition pathway from horse-drawn carriages to automobiles (1860–1930). Technology Analysis & 
Strategic Management. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​09537​32050​03573​19
Geels, F. W. (2006). The hygienic transition from cesspools to sewer systems (1840–1930): The dynamics 
of regime transformation. Research Policy. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​respol.​2006.​06.​001
Geels, F. W. (2019). Socio-technical transitions to sustainability: A review of criticisms and elaborations 
of the multi-level perspective. Current Opinion in Environmental Sustainability. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​cosust.​2019.​06.​009

594
	
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597
Geels, F. W. (2020). Micro-foundations of the multi-level perspective on socio-technical transitions: Devel-
oping a multi-dimensional model of agency through crossovers between social constructivism, evo-
lutionary economics and neo-institutional theory. Technological Forecasting and Social Change. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​techf​ore.​2019.​119894
Geels, F. W., & Schot, J. (2007). Typology of sociotechnical transition pathways. Research Policy. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​respol.​2007.​01.​003
Goyal, N., & Howlett, M. (2020). Who learns what in sustainability transitions? Environmental Innovation 
and Societal Transitions. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​eist.​2019.​09.​002
Gronow, A., Brockhaus, M., Di Gregorio, M., Karimo, A., & Ylä-Anttila, T. (2021). Policy learning as 
complex contagion: How social networks shape organizational beliefs in forest-based climate change 
mitigation. Policy Sciences. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11077-​021-​09418-2
Haukkala, T. (2018). A struggle for change—The formation of a green-transition advocacy coalition in Fin-
land. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​eist.​2017.​12.​001
Head, B. W., & Alford, J. (2015). Wicked problems. Administration & Society. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1177/​
00953​99713​481601
Hedlund, J., Bodin, Ö., & Nohrstedt, D. (2021). Policy issue interdependency and the formation of collabo-
rative networks. People and Nature. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​pan3.​10170
Hess, D. J. (2014). Sustainability transitions: A political coalition perspective. Research Policy. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/j.​respol.​2013.​10.​008
Hess, D. J. (2019a). Coalitions, framing, and the politics of energy transitions: Local democracy and com-
munity choice in California. Energy Research & Social Science. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​erss.​2018.​
11.​013
Hess, D. J. (2019b). Cooler coalitions for a warmer planet: A review of political strategies for accelerating 
energy transitions. Energy Research & Social Science. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​erss.​2019.​101246
Hirschl, B. (2008). Erneuerbare Energien-Politik Energiepolitik und Klimaschutz. Energy Policy and Cli-
mate Protection (1st ed.). VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften (GWV).
Ingold, K., Fischer, M., & Cairney, P. (2017). Drivers for policy agreement in nascent subsystems: An appli-
cation of the advocacy coalition framework to fracking policy in Switzerland and the UK. Policy 
Studies Journal. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​psj.​12173
Ingold, K., Fischer, M., Heikkila, T., & Weible, C. M. (2016). Assessments and aspirations. In C. M. Wei-
ble, T. Heikkila, & K. Ingold (Eds.), Policy debates on hydraulic fracturing: Comparing coalition 
politics in North America and Europe (pp. 239–264). Palgrave Macmillan.
Jacobsson, S., & Lauber, V. (2006). The politics and policy of energy system transformation—Explaining 
the German diffusion of renewable energy technology. Energy Policy. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​enpol.​
2004.​08.​029
Jenkins-Smith, H. C., Nohrstedt, D., Weible, C. M., & Ingold, K. (2017). The advocacy coalition frame-
work. An overview of the research program. In C. M. Weible (Ed.), Theories of the policy process 
(4th ed., pp. 135–171). Routledge.
Jones, M. D., & Jenkins-Smith, H. C. (2009). Trans-subsystem dynamics: Policy topography, mass opinion, 
and policy change. Policy Studies Journal. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​1541-​0072.​2008.​00294.x
Kammerer, M., & Ingold, K. (2021). Actors and issues in climate change policy: The maturation of a policy 
discourse in the national and international context. Social Networks. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​socnet.​
2021.​08.​005
Kefeli, D., Siegel, K. M., Pittaluga, L., & Dietz, T. (2023). Environmental policy integration in a newly 
established natural resource-based sector: The role of advocacy coalitions and contrasting concep-
tions of sustainability. Policy Sciences. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11077-​022-​09485-z
Kern, F., & Rogge, K. S. (2018). Harnessing theories of the policy process for analysing the politics of sus-
tainability transitions: A critical survey. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​eist.​2017.​11.​001
Kern, F., Schmelzle, F., & Hummel, M. (2023). Hydrogen as a panacea for decarbonising everything? 
Exploring contested hydrogen pathways in Germany. Environmental Research Letters. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1088/​1748-​9326/​acff0e
Kishna, M., Negro, S., Alkemade, F., & Hekkert, M. (2017). Innovation at the end of the life cycle: Discon-
tinuous innovation strategies by incumbents. Industry & Innovation. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13662​
716.​2016.​12261​63
Köhler, J., Geels, F. W., Kern, F., Markard, J., Onsongo, E., Wieczorek, A., et al. (2019). An agenda for sus-
tainability transitions research: State of the art and future directions. Environmental Innovation and 
Societal Transitions. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​eist.​2019.​01.​004
Koretsky, Z., Stegmaier, P., Turnheim, B., & van Lente, H. (Eds.). (2022). Technologies in decline: Socio-
technical approaches to discontinuation and destabilisation. Routledge.

595
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597	
Lauber, V., & Jacobsson, S. (2016). The politics and economics of constructing, contesting and restricting 
socio-political space for renewables—The German Renewable Energy Act. Environmental Innovation 
and Societal Transitions. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​eist.​2015.​06.​005
Leifeld, P. (2013). Reconceptualizing major policy change in the Advocacy Coalition Framework: A dis-
course network analysis of German pension politics. Policy Studies Journal. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​
psj.​12007
Leifeld, P., Henrichsen, T., Buckton, C., Fergie, G., & Hilton, S. (2022). Belief system alignment and cross-
sectoral advocacy efforts in policy debates. Journal of European Public Policy. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1080/​13501​763.​2021.​19451​31
Leipprand, A., & Flachsland, C. (2018). Regime destabilization in energy transitions: The German debate 
on the future of coal. Energy Research & Social Science. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​erss.​2018.​02.​004
Leipprand, A., Flachsland, C., & Pahle, M. (2017). Advocates or cartographers? Scientific advisors and the 
narratives of German energy transition. Energy Policy, 55, 9. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​enpol.​2016.​12.​
021
Lemke, N., Trein, P., & Varone, F. (2023). Agenda-setting in nascent policy subsystems: Issue and instru-
ment priorities across venues. Policy Sciences. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11077-​023-​09514-5
Levin, K., Cashore, B., Bernstein, S., & Auld, G. (2012). Overcoming the tragedy of super wicked prob-
lems: Constraining our future selves to ameliorate global climate change. Policy Sciences. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1007/​s11077-​012-​9151-0
Lewallen, J. (2022). Subsystems and ill-fitting problems: Clarifying a concept. Policy Studies Journal. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​psj.​12432
Lindberg, M. B., & Kammermann, L. (2021). Advocacy coalitions in the acceleration phase of the European 
energy transition. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​eist.​
2021.​07.​006
Löhr, M. (2020). Energietransitionen: Eine Analyse der Phasen und Akteurskoalitionen in Dänemark, 
Deutschland und Frankreich (1st ed.). Springer VS.
Löhr, M., & Chlebna, C. (2023). Multi-system interactions in hydrogen-based sector coupling projects: System 
entanglers as key actors. Energy Research & Social Science. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​erss.​2023.​103282
Löhr, M., Chlebna, C., & Mattes, J. (2022). From institutional work to transition work: Actors creating, main-
taining and disrupting transition processes. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions. https://​
doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​eist.​2021.​12.​005
Löhr, M., & Mattes, J. (2022). Facing transition phase two: Analysing actor strategies in a stagnating accelera-
tion phase. Technological Forecasting and Social Change. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​techf​ore.​2021.​121221
Lowes, R., Woodman, B., & Speirs, J. (2020). Heating in Great Britain: An incumbent discourse coalition 
resists an electrifying future. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​eist.​2020.​07.​007
Markard, J. (2018). The next phase of the energy transition and its implications for research and policy. Nature 
Energy. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​s41560-​018-​0171-7
Markard, J. (2020). The life cycle of technological innovation systems. Technological Forecasting and Social 
Change. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​techf​ore.​2018.​07.​045
Markard, J., Raven, R., & Truffer, B. (2012). Sustainability transitions: An emerging field of research and its 
prospects. Research Policy. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​respol.​2012.​02.​013
Markard, J., Rinscheid, A., & Widdel, L. (2021). Analyzing transitions through the lens of discourse networks: 
Coal phase-out in Germany. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​eist.​2021.​08.​001
Markard, J., & Rosenbloom, D. (2020). Political conflict and climate policy: The European emissions trading 
system as a Trojan Horse for the low-carbon transition? Climate Policy. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​14693​
062.​2020.​17639​01
Markard, J., & Rosenbloom, D. (2022). Phases of the net-zero energy transition and strategies to achieve it. In 
K. Araújo (Ed.), Routledge handbook of energy transitions. Routledge.
Markard, J., Suter, M., & Ingold, K. (2016). Socio-technical transitions and policy change—Advocacy coa-
litions in Swiss energy policy. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​eist.​2015.​05.​003
Meadowcroft, J. (2011). Engaging with the politics of sustainability transitions. Environmental Innovation and 
Societal Transitions. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​eist.​2011.​02.​003
Meckling, J., & Goedeking, N. (2023). Coalition cascades: The politics of tipping points in clean energy transi-
tions. Policy Studies Journal. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​psj.​12507
Milhorance, C., Le Coq, J.-F., & Sabourin, E. (2021). Dealing with cross-sectoral policy problems: An advo-
cacy coalition approach to climate and water policy integration in Northeast Brazil. Policy Sciences. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11077-​021-​09422-6

596
	
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597
Nohrstedt, D., & Weible, C. M. (2010). The logic of policy change after crisis: Proximity and subsystem inter-
action. Risk, Hazards & Crisis in Public Policy. https://​doi.​org/​10.​2202/​1944-​4079.​1035
Nohrstedt, D., Weible, C. M., Ingold, K., & Henry, A. D. (2020). Comparing policy processes: Insights and 
lessons from the advocacy coalition framework research program. Handbooks of research methods and 
applicationsIn B. G. Peters & G. Fontaine (Eds.), Handbook of research methods and applications in 
comparative policy analysis (pp. 67–89). Edward Elgar Publishing.
Ohlendorf, N., Löhr, M., & Markard, J. (2023). Actors in multi-sector transitions - discourse analysis on hydro-
gen in Germany. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​eist.​2023.​
100692
Reber, U., Fischer, M., Ingold, K., Kienast, F., Hersperger, A. M., Grütter, R., et al. (2022). Integrating biodiver-
sity: A longitudinal and cross-sectoral analysis of Swiss politics. Policy Sciences. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​
s11077-​022-​09456-4
Rip, A., & Kemp, R. (1998). Technological change. In S. Rayner & E. Malone (Eds.), Human choice and cli-
mate change 2 (pp. 327–399). Battelle Press.
Roberts, C., & Geels, F. W. (2019). Conditions for politically accelerated transitions: Historical institutionalism, 
the multi-level perspective, and two historical case studies in transport and agriculture. Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​techf​ore.​2018.​11.​019
Roberts, C., Geels, F. W., Lockwood, M., Newell, P., Schmitz, H., Turnheim, B., et al. (2018). The politics of 
accelerating low-carbon transitions: Towards a new research agenda. Energy Research & Social Science. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​erss.​2018.​06.​001
Rogge, K. S., & Johnstone, P. (2017). Exploring the role of phase-out policies for low-carbon energy transitions: 
The case of the German Energiewende. Energy Research & Social Science. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​erss.​
2017.​10.​004
Rosenbloom, D. (2020). Engaging with multi-system interactions in sustainability transitions: A comment on 
the transitions research agenda. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions. https://​doi.​org/​10.​
1016/j.​eist.​2019.​10.​003
Rosenbloom, D., Haley, B., & Meadowcroft, J. (2018). Critical choices and the politics of decarbonization path-
ways: Exploring branching points surrounding low-carbon transitions in Canadian electricity systems. 
Energy Research & Social Science. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​erss.​2017.​09.​022
Sabatier, P. (1998). The advocacy coalition framework: Revisions and relevance for Europe. Journal of Euro-
pean Public Policy. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1080/​13501​76888​00000​51
Sabatier, P., & Jenkins-Smith, H. (Eds.). (1993). Policy change and learning: An advocacy coalition approach 
(theoretical lenses on public policy). Westview Press.
Sato, H. (1999). The advocacy coalition framework and the policy process analysis: The case of smoking con-
trol in Japan. Policy Studies Journal. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/j.​1541-​0072.​1999.​tb019​51.x
Schmid, N., Beaton, C., Kern, F., McCulloch, N., Sugathan, A., & Urpelainen, J. (2021). Elite vs. mass politics 
of sustainability transitions. Environmental Innovation and Societal Transitions. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​
eist.​2021.​09.​014
Schmid, N., Sewerin, S., & Schmidt, T. S. (2019). Explaining advocacy coalition change with policy feedback. 
Policy Studies Journal. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​psj.​12365
Schmidt, T. S., & Sewerin, S. (2017). Technology as a driver of climate and energy politics. Nature Energy. 
https://​doi.​org/​10.​1038/​nener​gy.​2017.​84
Schot, J., & Kanger, L. (2018). Deep transitions: Emergence, acceleration, stabilization and directionality. 
Research Policy. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​respol.​2018.​03.​009
Smink, M. M., Hekkert, M. P., & Negro, S. O. (2015). Keeping sustainable innovation on a leash? Exploring 
incumbents’ institutional strategies. Business Strategy and the Environment. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1002/​bse.​
1808
Smith, A., Voß, J.-P., & Grin, J. (2010). Innovation studies and sustainability transitions: The allure of the multi-
level perspective and its challenges. Research Policy. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​respol.​2010.​01.​023
Stefes, C. H., & Hager, C. (2020). Resistance to energy transitions. Review of Policy Research. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1111/​ropr.​12390
Stritch, A. (2015). The advocacy coalition framework and nascent subsystems: Trade union disclosure policy in 
Canada. Policy Studies Journal. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​psj.​12112
Strunz, S., Gawel, E., & Lehmann, P. (2016). The political economy of renewable energy policies in Germany 
and the EU. Utilities Policy. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​jup.​2016.​04.​005
Tosun, J., & Lang, A. (2017). Policy integration: Mapping the different concepts. Policy Studies. https://​doi.​org/​
10.​1080/​01442​872.​2017.​13392​39
Trein, P., Fischer, M., Maggetti, M., & Sarti, F. (2023). Empirical research on policy integration: A review and 
new directions. Policy Sciences. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1007/​s11077-​022-​09489-9

597
Policy Sciences (2024) 57:567–597	
Unruh, G. C. (2000). Understanding carbon lock-in. Energy Policy. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/​S0301-​4215(00)​
00070-7
van Doren, D., Runhaar, H., Raven, R. P. J. M., Giezen, M., & Driessen, P. P. J. (2020). Institutional work in 
diverse niche contexts: The case of low-carbon housing in the Netherlands. Environmental Innovation 
and Societal Transitions. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​eist.​2020.​03.​001
van Mossel, A., van Rijnsoever, F. J., & Hekkert, M. P. (2018). Navigators through the storm: A review of 
organization theories and the behavior of incumbent firms during transitions. Environmental Innovation 
and Societal Transitions. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​eist.​2017.​07.​001
von Malmborg, F. (2023). Advocacy coalitions and policy change for decarbonisation of international maritime 
transport: The case of FuelEU maritime. Maritime Transport Research. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1016/j.​martra.​
2023.​100091
Weible, C. M., & Ingold, K. (2018). Why advocacy coalitions matter and practical insights about them. Policy 
& Politics. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1332/​03055​7318X​15230​06173​9399
Weible, C. M., Ingold, K., Nohrstedt, D., Henry, A. D., & Jenkins-Smith, H. C. (2020). Sharpening advocacy 
coalitions. Policy Studies Journal. https://​doi.​org/​10.​1111/​psj.​12360
Wesseling, J. H., Farla, J. C. M., Sperling, D., & Hekkert, M. P. (2014). Car manufacturers’ changing political 
strategies on the ZEV mandate. Transportation Research Part d: Transport and Environment. https://​doi.​
org/​10.​1016/j.​trd.​2014.​06.​006
Yin, R. K. (2018). Case study research and applications: Design and methods. Sage.
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.