Accepted: 7 August 2024 / Published online: 17 August 2024
© The Author(s) 2024
	
 Gulzhanat Gafu
gulzhanat.gafu@nu.edu.kz
Elaine Sharplin
elaine.sharplin@nu.edu.kz
Mark Israel
mark.israel@ahrecs.com
1	
Nazarbayev University Graduate School of Education Elaine Sharplin, Astana, Kazakhstan
2 
Office of the Provost, Nazarbayev University, Astana, Republic of Kazakhstan
3 
School of Media, Arts and Social Inquiry, Curtin University, Perth, Australia
4 
School of Social Sciences, University of Western Australia, Perth, Australia
Development, Adoption or Adaption? Researchers’ Attitudes 
to Forging Social Research Ethics Policy in Kazakhstan, 
Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan
Gulzhanat Gafu1
 · Elaine Sharplin2 · Mark Israel3,4
Journal of Academic Ethics (2025) 23:649–670
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10805-024-09560-5
Abstract
Since becoming independent from the Soviet bloc in the early 1990s, the Central Asian 
countries of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan have established strategic priori­
ties focused on the globalization and internationalization of higher education. These have 
emphasized the modernization of university systems with a focus on research to produce 
impactful knowledge and enhance global standing in knowledge production. Yet, the es­
poused strategic priorities have not been supported by policy development associated with 
research ethics. This article addresses the need for research ethics policy to facilitate 
internationalized knowledge production and dissemination. Developing research ethics 
policy is not without its difficulties. In many developing research contexts, commentators 
have criticized policy internationalisation which involves the direct transfer of research 
ethics policy from the Global North rather than engaging with and adapting policy to 
other cultural contexts. In the light of recent scholarly debates over policy borrowing and 
translation, this mixed methods study considers how and in what ways higher education 
research ethics policy can or should develop within Central Asia.
Keywords  Research ethics · Educational policy · Internationalization · Central asia
1 3

G. Gafu et al.
Introduction and Policy Context
Since becoming independent from the Soviet bloc in the early 1990s, the Central Asian coun­
tries of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan have established strategic priorities focused 
on the globalization and internationalization of higher education (Collins et al., 2022; Ibra­
sheva et al., 2021; Sagitova et al., 2024). Each country has ambitious goals to increase their 
participation and reputation in the international knowledge economy. Consequently, Higher 
Education Institutions (HEIs) are being transformed from predominantly teaching institu­
tions into teaching and research organisations. In pursuit of internationalisation, the educa­
tional policy landscape of these Central Asian Middle-Income Countries (MICs) has been 
overwhelmed by ‘traveling policies’ (Silova, 2005, p. 51) or ‘policy borrowing’ (Steiner-
Khamsi, 2016) ‘to ‘normalize’ their higher education systems’ (Smolentseva et al., 2018, 
p. 2). Reforms dominated by policy discourses from High Income Countries in the Global 
North are being migrated across boundaries with little reflection on their suitability to other 
contexts (Gan & Israel, 2019; Israel, 2018; Ruby & Li, 2020; Silova, 2005).
Attention to research development and knowledge production is intended to address 
under-development of these areas in the region (Jonbekova, 2020), in terms of quantity and 
quality, specifically in areas such as the social sciences. The limited development has been 
attributed to a combination of factors such as lack of funding (Ahn et al., 2018), brain drain 
due to the outflow of researchers after Soviet dissolution (Kataeva & DeYoung, 2018), sepa­
ration of research and teaching in universities, insufficient training in research methodology, 
lack of equipment and limited management of scientific activities (Jonbekova & Kuchu­
mova, 2020). In Kazakhstan, despite small, continuous increases in funding of research and 
development, engagement in global knowledge production remains low with limited num­
bers of publications in high-quality scholarly international journals (Lovakov & Yudkevich, 
2021). This is especially so in social sciences where Kazakhstani research remains on the 
outskirts of global knowledge production (Suyarkulova, 2018).
Recent policies in Kyrgyzstan, namely the National Development Strategy for 2018–
2040 and The Concept of Scientific and Innovative Development (2017), also indicate the 
country’s increased ambitions toward greater involvement in the global research landscape, 
‘Westernizing’ science and adopting various neoliberal approaches to research which have 
dismantled the centralized and planned science system (Syrgak, Sagitova & Parmenter., 
upcoming). These policies note the critical state of research in the country and stress the 
need for striving for international standards for the sustainable development of research 
capacity in Kyrgyzstan. Nevertheless, Kyrgyzstan science remains caught between two 
peripheries – the ‘Soviet periphery’ and the ‘global periphery’ (Silova, 2011) meaning a 
state of academic and financial reliance on transnational donor organizations and research 
centres. While the country is making efforts to dissolve the Soviet-style centralised and 
planned nature of science organizations, Syrgak, Sagitova & Parmenter (upcoming) argue 
that its effects are still persistent. For example, Kyrgyzstan has kept a hybrid degree struc­
ture maintaining both the Soviet Candidate of Science degree and the Western equivalent, 
the PhD (Ovezmyradov, 2023), unlike Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan who have both adopted 
the Bologna degree structure.
Over the last decade, the Uzbekistan government has also sought to stimulate research 
and development, by drawing educational practices from developed research nations 
(Uralov, 2020). There has been an active shift to internationalization of higher education 
1 3
650

Development, Adoption or Adaption? Researchers’ Attitudes to Forging…
and scientific research in Uzbekistan, largely attributed to large-scale policy changes at the 
end of 2016 (Eshchanov et al., 2019; Troitskiy & Yun, 2021; Uralov, 2020). However, as in 
Kazakhstan, there has been concern that unsustainable pressures to publish are providing 
perverse incentives for research students and academics to publish in predatory journals 
(Eshchanov et al., 2021).
Like many parts of both the Global North and the Global South (Israel, 2015), it is not 
surprising that research ethics policies in Central Asia have been created first in relation to 
biomedical research (Collins, Sharplin & Burkhanov, 2023) and that they remain undevel­
oped for the social sciences. Kazakhstan has had research ethics regulation in the biomedi­
cal field since 2005 (MoHRK, 2005; 2007) with a National Ethics Committee established 
in 2008 (MoHRK, 2008). While institutions are required to have a clinical research ethics 
commission review to become nationally accredited (Ramazanova et al., 2014), there is no 
similar regulation of human research in any other disciplines. Similarly, both in Kyrgyzstan 
and Uzbekistan, biomedical research is regulated by national laws and regulations (Collins 
et al., 2022; Zurdinov et al., 2007).
Lack of attention to social science research ethics policies and practices leaves partici­
pants vulnerable to harm in two ways. First, researchers may use practices that inadvertently 
place their participants at risk. There are no accountability processes such as peer review 
that might challenge this. Second, the use of imported research protocols and practices may 
cause harm within a culturally different context. As a result, a quantitative study by Ber­
ekeyeva et al. (2023, p. 20) reported a ‘considerable proportion of social science researchers 
in Central Asia (43.1%) lack education in research ethics, and consequently have a limited 
understanding of ethical practices in research with human participants’.
Few higher education institutions in Kazakhstan have institutional ethics review pro­
cesses (Sharplin et al., forthcoming). To fill the void in one discipline, the Kazakhstan Edu­
cation Research Association (KERA) created a Code of Research Ethics for Education in 
2020. This drew on the principlism that underpins the US Common Rule in human research 
ethics, embedding core ideas within Kazakh legislative codes.
In Kyrgyzstan, the government recognises the need for the introduction of international 
research ethics principles (Ministry of Justice of Kyrgyz Republic, 2017). However, despite 
national research policies, there is no common national document on the ethics of research. 
The 2023 Law on Science (Ministry of Justice of Kyrgyz Republic, 2023) simply indicates 
researchers must ‘carry out scientific activities without violating human rights and free­
doms, without causing harm to the life and health of others, as well as the environment’ 
(Article 8.2.2). Researchers are held responsible if they breach the norms of professional 
ethics and moral rules (Article 8.3).
In Uzbekistan, the government has endeavoured to boost research and development over 
the past decade. Comprehensive reforms have updated the regulatory structure for research 
administration and emphasised a global engagement for higher education, but no policy 
covers ethical practices in social science research. According to Collins et al. (2022, p. 13),
…there is minimal discussion within the country about international standards of 
research ethics in the fields of humanities and social sciences and their potential sig­
nificance for overall research integrity and the high-quality scientific knowledge pro­
duction sought after by the Uzbek government.
1 3
651

G. Gafu et al.
Where ethics review structures have been created by individual institutions, they appear to 
be largely imported from the Global North (Mirkasimov et al., 2021; Ubaydullaeva, 2020; 
Uralov, 2020).
The current practices are such that the majority of higher education institutions in all 
three countries, both public and private, have so called ethics committees that consider all 
ethics-related issues, including code of conduct matters. These committees review graduate 
students’ dissertations after they have been written to check for plagiarism and the alignment 
of methodology with what was initially proposed. Due to the lack of institutional or national 
research ethics procedures and regulations, social science researchers often carry out their 
research without an institutional approval process. The ethical conduct of the research is the 
individual researcher’s responsibility. However, they may refer to Codes of Professional 
Conduct that constitute and codify accountability for researchers.
Given the current vacuum in social science research ethics policies, it is timely to con­
sider how researchers may be most effectively guided to conduct ethical research which will 
assist Central Asian countries to participate in the knowledge economy. In light of scholarly 
and policy debates in favour of culturally and contextually relevant research ethics (see for 
example Chattopadhyay et al., 2013; Hellsten, 2015; Tosam, 2020), this article addresses 
the question of how and in what ways higher education policy could or should support 
culturally relevant research ethics in Central Asia. In doing so, we draw on 100 qualitative 
in-depth interviews conducted with social science researchers in three countries.
Literature Review
Policy Internationalisation and Globalization
A significant body of work on the internationalization of policy has focussed on the con­
cepts of traveling policies (Silova, 2005), policy borrowing (Steiner-Khamsi, 2016) or 
policy transfer (Stone et al., 2020). The literature has examined how policies are adopted, 
sometimes as a simple ‘transplant’ (Phillips & Ochs, 2004) or adapted (sometimes referred 
to as translation and customisation) within new contexts (Graham et al., 2013; Stone, 2017). 
Transnational organizations such as the Organisation of Economic Cooperation and Devel­
opment (OECD) and the World Health Organisation (WHO) are often powerful forces in 
the migration of policies from the Global North to the Global South (Draude, 2020; Spring, 
2014; Stone et al., 2020), with policymakers compelled to introduce practices consistent 
with multilateral organizations standards. These organizations have become ‘global norm 
setters’, with transnational policy borrowing the rule and not the exception (Steiner-Khamsi, 
2016, p. 388).
As in many other regions, there are strategic pressures for higher education in Central 
Asia to increase research performance. This has resulted in demands on higher education 
institutions and their researchers to compete on world rankings and publication metrics 
for promotion and renewal (Moss et al., 2007). Politicians regard university rankings as a 
measure of international competitiveness, with the pursuit of rankings reshaping national 
higher education systems (Anichkin & Kovalenko, 2018; Brink, 2023). However, to be 
competitive in international knowledge production, institutions require research policy and 
infrastructure to support their endeavours.
1 3
652

Development, Adoption or Adaption? Researchers’ Attitudes to Forging…
Spring (2014) argues that increasing internationalization in Kazakhstan is resulting in the 
‘homogenization’ of policies and practices. To guard against homogenization, Peters (2007) 
argues for the need to understand cultural preconditions before migrating policies. He states 
that ‘knowledge cultures are based on shared epistemic practices, they embody culturally 
preferred ways of doing things, often developed over many generations’ (p. 23). Under­
standing these preconditions is essential to evaluate the appropriateness of policy migration 
or the extent to which the policy should be contextually adapted.
Direct policy transfer has been strongly critiqued, particularly in non-Western settings, as 
neo-imperial where cultural diversity is assimilated to produce more monocultural practices 
(Helsten, 2015). Critics have questioned the universality of world cultural models by noting 
divergence between global norms and local meanings (Anderson-Levitt, 2003; Schriewer, 
2012; Steiner-Khamsi, 2004). The assumption of global ‘sameness’ fails to appreciate 
the diversity and uniqueness of contexts (Silova & Rappleye, 2015). Many comparative 
researchers have warned against transplanting policies from one country to another, particu­
larly educational reforms (Steiner-Khamsi, 2016).
Rather than perceiving policy migration as a binary choice of either policy cloning or 
policy uniqueness, Clapham (2023, citing Hodgson & Spours, 2016) advocates exploration 
of the extent to which a policy is culturally and contextually aligned or misaligned. It is 
therefore critical to examine the ‘cultural, philosophical, social and structural contexts’ of 
the host nation and the borrower jurisdiction (Clapham, 2023, p. 5).
Research Ethics Policy Migration
The global export of principlism forms ‘part of broader international flows of capital, stu­
dents and academics, as well as knowledge and ideology’ (Israel, 2018, p. 95). Global capi­
tal has shaped research ethics governance. In particular, US regulators have used health 
research funding as leverage to ensure American formal requirements are mirrored by insti­
tutions in countries that receive this funding. In addition, multinational research teams have 
been attracted to low- and middle-income countries for multicentre drug trials because of 
the lower risks of litigation, low labour costs, weak ethics review and the absence of other 
regulatory processes. Where jurisdictions have been unable or unwilling to develop their 
own research ethics review guidelines, international health bodies have supplied ‘best prac­
tice’ templates and standard operating protocols.
Another driver for international policy transfer in research ethics has been the influ­
ence of transnational professional networks (Israel, 2018). Growth in internationalization of 
higher education might play a part in providing access to and mobility within such global 
communities for Central Asian academics. Indeed, encouraging student and academic inter­
national mobility has become a part of national development plans in Central Asia (Alim­
ukhamedov, 2020).
The Global North dominates the destination countries for students from many low- and 
middle-income countries, though patterns have shifted and become more diverse over time 
as the dominance of North America and Western Europe has been challenged (Glass & 
Cruz, 2023). The situation is complex for Central Asia where UNESCO student mobility 
data shows most students from Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan and Kyrgyzstan who leave their 
countries to study, move to Russia. Similarly, Russian researchers have been the main part­
ners for scientists from these three countries (Alimukhamedov, 2020). However, there are 
1 3
653

G. Gafu et al.
smaller student flows to Europe, Northern America and within Central Asia. For example, 
Uzbekistan students are also found in Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan.
Research students and academics returning to Central Asia may facilitate international 
transfer of a range of policies. This group may have a disproportionate impact on policy for­
mation in their home country. In Kazakhstan, the Bolashak scholarship program has enabled 
elite students to complete an international higher education degree at top international uni­
versities, predominantly in North America and the United Kingdom, returning home with 
knowledge of research ethics policies and processes from hosting institutions (Sharplin et 
al., forthcoming). Students studying internationally may respond to their experiences of 
higher education research processes and policies in diverse ways. Some may uncritically 
adopt disciplinary, institutional or national practices they have been exposed to during their 
international experience. Others may resist, avoid or adapt practices.
Capacity-building programs funded by the Global North and delivered in the South 
may also promote policy transfer through epistemic communities. These are less well-
established in Central Asia than elsewhere. However, the United States Institutes of Health 
Fogarty International Centre has funded training that has included some researchers from 
Central Asia (Strosberg et al., 2013), with another grant funding the Central Asia Network 
for 2019–2024 (Fogarty International Center, n.d.). The creation of Nazarbayev University 
in Kazakhstan, with a specific mandate to modernize education has resulted in the introduc­
tion of an Americanized approach to research ethics, with a requirement for all researchers 
associated with the university to undertake US-based research ethics training (CITI Pro­
grams, n.d.).
The appropriateness of the adoption of US practices in other contexts, especially the 
use of CITI research ethics training, has been criticised (Bayer, 2011, quoted in Schrag, 
2011) particularly when deployed outside health sciences. Commentators in other parts of 
the world have questioned whether some of the systems supported by US-funded research 
ethics initiatives in lower- and middle- income countries are sustainable, well-designed and 
appropriate in these settings, and whether they rely too much on professionals from the 
United States (De Vries & Rott, 2011; Garrafa & Lorenzo, 2008; Hellmann et al., 2015).
The introduction of transnational higher education institutions, including branch cam­
puses or affiliates of international universities, and the use of strategic international partners 
in local universities may also accelerate policy transfer as either an intended or unintended 
consequence of the exercise of soft power. In Kazakhstan, Varpahovskis and Kuteleva 
(2023a) maintained that the role of transnational higher education institutions lay partly 
in ‘building regulatory capacities of Kazakhstan’s education system and diffusing transna­
tional education standards and practices’ (p.365). However, unreflexively replicating the 
policy of a home institution at a branch campus that operates in an entirely different context 
may do little to build the human capital and local culture that Lee and Kuzhabekova (2019) 
argued, based on the experience of Kazakhstan, was necessary to support and stimulate 
research in a sustainable manner.
Varpahovskis and Kuteleva (2023b) identified 61 transnational higher education institu­
tions operating in Kazakhstan (14), Uzbekistan (28) and Kyrgyzstan (19) in 2001. Kazakh­
stan is aiming to open 12 more branch campuses by 2029. In contrast, only four operated 
in Tajikistan and none in Turkmenistan. While not all the institutions were linked to an 
international parent institution, there were branch campuses of universities from Russia 
(Chankseliani, 2021), Türkiye, Germany, Egypt, the United States, the United Kingdom, 
1 3
654

Development, Adoption or Adaption? Researchers’ Attitudes to Forging…
South Korea, India, Italy, Singapore, Belarus and Latvia. In internationalized universities in 
all three countries, the initial approach has been to directly transfer research ethics policy 
from another context (Sagitova et al., 2024; Sharplin et al., forthcoming).
Many national regulators seeking to create a legislative basis for research ethics have 
assumed that the four pillars of principlism (Beauchamp & Childress, 2019), which under­
lie international research ethics, are universal. This has been contested, in particular within 
global bioethics (Chattopadhyay & De Vries, 2013; Tosam, 2020), by disciplines outside 
health sciences, and by researchers across the Global South (Israel, 2015, 2018). Zhaku­
pova et al. (2022, p. 40) examined the universality of ethics principles in Kazakhstan and 
concluded:
Considering the theoretical foundations of both Kazakh normative ethics and modern 
Western research ethics, we believe that it is possible to accept the dominant prin­
ciples of beneficence, non-harm, and justice, which are universal for Eastern and 
Western cultures of thought. The principle of respect for autonomy is less culturally 
compatible. On the one hand, thinking that recognizes (‘given by God’) the free will 
of people is consistent with the concept of autonomy, but collectivist and patriarchal 
cultural norms create some contradictions with this concept. The eclecticism of the 
past may allow these contradictions to coexist, but it is necessary to consider the opti­
mal ethical standards at the state level. [translated from Russian].
Approaches that are framed on the unquestioned universality of Eurocentric scientific and 
moral ideas lean towards cultural assimilation, having neo-colonial, paternalistic and impe­
rialistic features (Bamford, 2019). There is increasing resistance to this universalistic narra­
tive in many parts of the world. Academics who come from different cultural backgrounds 
tend to counter-argue that ‘out there’ there is a variety of different views that should be 
considered when we study ethics (Dower, 2014; Widdows, 2011). They advocate for ‘cross-
cultural and transnational ethical dialogue and finding ways to joint action’ (Hellsten, 2015, 
p. 8) to avoid oversimplifying cultures and polarizing between different values systems.
The three countries of Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan are all secular Muslim 
Majority countries where the majority of the population identify as Muslims although the 
state is designed as non-religious (Collins & Sharplin, 2024). In this context, principles 
derived from Islam might inform ethical research practices of Muslim scientists (Rattani, 
2019). It is valuable to hear the voices of Muslim researchers to contribute and partici­
pate in the ongoing research ethics conversation. Equally importantly, an understanding of 
the expected religious and associated cultural practices is important for researchers from 
other cultural backgrounds who may be working within a secular Muslim majority context 
(Collins & Sharplin, 2024). Collins & Sharplin (2024) contends that cultural and religious 
nuances can lead to varying interpretations of what constitutes harm though many principles 
of contemporary Western and Islamic ethics are somewhat compatible (Afifi, 2007). This 
can result in contradictions, especially concerning the balance between collective versus 
individual good and personal autonomy. Furthermore, due to conventional gender norms 
and expectations prevalent in Muslim-majority nations, nuances concerning women’s par­
ticipation in academic research have to be considered in applying ethical considerations 
(Collins & Sharplin, 2024; Tabaeva, 2023). Similarly, the interpretation and application of 
ethical principles might vary in other religions which should be taken into consideration.
1 3
655

G. Gafu et al.
Previous review of social science research ethics regulations conducted as part of this 
project (Syrgak, Sagitova & Parmenter, upcoming) concluded the growing focus on scien­
tific and research development in the Central Asian countries implies three possible path­
ways for establishing research ethics. First, social science research ethics might be adopted 
through the import and direct application of guidelines from countries of the Global North. 
While this approach promotes research collaboration and compliance with the requirements 
of international publication and some international funders such as the National Institutes 
of Health in the United States and the European Research Council, concerns arise regarding 
the lack of congruence between the realities of regional social science research and mere 
‘international’ checkbox compliance.
The second trajectory involves deriving social science research ethics from existing 
national biomedical research ethics policies and guidelines. Many countries have followed 
this path, including many in the Global North, but it risks ‘the colonization of social sciences 
research ethics by bioethics’ (Israel, 2018, p. 90). In this way, biomedical discourses, per­
sonnel and institutions can dominate the determination of what constitutes ethical research, 
displacing long-standing ethical social science practices and delegitimating social science 
expertise.
And the third scenario relies on the development of social science research ethics by 
professional associations, organizations, or higher education institutions engaged in social 
science research. This approach avoids ‘one-size-fits-all biomedical research ethical norms’ 
(Gan & Israel, 2019, p. 11), and can empower researchers to explore pertinent social issues 
using a range of methodologies and epistemologies that align with diverse disciplines. How­
ever, it may result in a patchwork of guidelines whose inconsistencies pose a barrier to 
collaborations across disciplines and institutions. In addition, many organizations, research 
institutions and countries lack the resources to create and maintain policy, guidance and 
resources.
This study seeks to inform the development of research ethics policy for Central Asian 
countries, navigating a pathway between international and disciplinary ethical imperialism, 
and the trap of ‘ethno-ethics’ that present distinct culturally fully embedded ‘ethical alterna­
tives’ – rather than constructive ways forward across cultural borders. The research team 
follows Clapham, 2023 (p. 83) in seeking ‘a more fundamental and multifaceted analysis 
that can start to bring together different views rather than alienate them from each other’. 
This is consistent with Gan & Israel (2019) who advocated respecting local histories and 
understanding local regulatory practices to enable ‘research ethicists to learn from others’. 
Our Central Asian study identifies that most higher education institutions do not have the 
institutional infrastructure to implement internationalized approaches to research ethics and 
that linguistic barriers and limited educational opportunities challenge any future research 
ethics policy development.
Methodology
To explore how and in what ways research policy can or should develop to support culturally 
relevant research ethics in Central Asia, we draw on 100 qualitative interviews with social 
science faculty members in three countries (Kazakhstan = 48, Kyrgyzstan = 22, Uzbeki­
stan = 30). The sampling of participants was purposeful, targeting social science researchers 
1 3
656

Development, Adoption or Adaption? Researchers’ Attitudes to Forging…
working in higher education institutions in the three countries, with the intention that these 
participants could provide insights into the research question – that is, they know the ethical 
practices and processes in their institutions that are related to their research. Researchers 
working in biomedical and STEM research were excluded because their experiences are not 
relevant to this particular study. We also used snowball sampling to extend the reach of our 
recruitment, particularly in Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan, where the research team initially 
had a smaller network. In Central Asia, recruitment is facilitated through trusted networks; 
a personal introduction is valued over institutional documentation. Based in Kazakhstan, the 
research team had extensive networking with and access to social scientists in Kazakhstan 
which provided more opportunities to recruit participants. At the same time, the number of 
participants also reflect the level of development of social science research – and the num­
ber of researchers. As such, Kazakhstan has been a leader in social science research since 
Independence, while Uzbekistan has been prioritizing hard sciences over social sciences 
(Collins et al., 2022).
The interviews were conducted online and in person, in Kazakh (14), Uzbek (8), Russian 
(66) and English (12), based on the preference of the participant. Due to the geographical 
distances and our limited resources, it was impossible to travel to all regions in all three 
countries to conduct interviews in person. Thus, most interviews were held online. Inter­
views were recorded, with the permission of participants, transcribed and translated into 
English so that they could be shared across a multilingual research team. The ability to 
offer a range of languages for interviews was important as attitudes towards globalization 
and regional collaboration might have changed according to fluency in English and Rus­
sian. The transcripts were cleaned to remove any identifying details and labelled with codes 
to preserve country identifiers and institutional identifiers. For example, participants were 
given codes of 001 for Kazakhstan, 002 for Kyrgyzstan and 003 for Uzbekistan. The coding 
was used for within and cross case analysis. Direct quotes from interviews included in the 
text also provide details of the participants’ education background as local/international as 
well as the language of interview.
The interview protocol consisted of nine main questions with potential probing sub-
questions covering aspects of participants’ backgrounds, their knowledge of research eth­
ics, institutional processes for research ethics regulation, their familiarity with international 
research ethics guidelines, their personal approaches to ethics in their own research and their 
perspectives on future development in research ethics in Central Asia. For this paper, we 
focus on interview questions such as: How do Central Asian researchers and research insti­
tutions believe social science research ethics should be developed? Should Central Asian 
cultural and contextual values be reflected in principles, protocols and process of social 
science research ethics? Is there any need for research ethics to be regulated by institutions 
and/or nationally?
Data was analysed using NVivo software, iteratively developing and refining codes 
through country team-based discursive and reflective practices from February to May 2023. 
Codes were amalgamated into categories and themes were generated. In this article we 
focus on research ethics policy development in the region, a subset of the research data. Key 
themes such as ‘need for national code’, ‘attitudes to research ethics regulations’, ‘Western-
adapted’, ‘regional’, ‘national’ were drawn from interviews. The research was approved 
by the Nazarbayev University Institutional Research Ethics Committee (no.577/26052022).
1 3
657

G. Gafu et al.
Findings
We present four themes that emerged from the data analysis:
	
●
Identifying the extent of the universality of research ethics principles presents partici­
pants attitudes towards international standards of research ethics in the context of their 
country and the region;
	
●
Identifying areas of cultural sensitivity for adaptation of the international to the local 
introduces perspectives of participants on whether international research ethics should 
be adapted towards culturally informed standards and policies;
	
●
Regional vs. National and National vs. Institutional regulation themes demonstrate par­
ticipants’ attitudes towards the levels at which research ethics needs to be potentially 
regulated as per the regulatory framework of the country or the region;
	
●
Fear of additional bureaucracy provides some insights into participants’ scepticism to­
ward the more regulatory nature of research ethics procedures.
We found significant variation in attitudes between countries, suggesting it might be dif­
ficult to reach a regional consensus. We also saw considerable variation within countries.
Identifying the Extent of the Universality of Research Ethics Principles
Views on the future development of research ethics in each country or region varied dra­
matically between the three countries. Of 48 respondents from Kazakhstan, more than half 
supported the idea of universality of research ethics and therefore the relevance of Western 
or internationally accepted principles of research ethics. Conversely, only two out of 20 
respondents in Kyrgyzstan and three out of 30 respondents in Uzbekistan perceived the uni­
versality of research ethics. Instead, they supported development of national research ethics 
regulations that reflect national and cultural values.
The majority of participants from Kazakhstan were strongly in favour of aligning with 
Western and therefore global standards:
And how well do they match? Well, it seems to me they do, why not? Because it’s 
international… the ethical principles, they do not have a nationality… And our prin­
ciples are the same as any world principles. (001ARKR, local, in Russian)

I think that gradually, slowly, European, Europeanization will dominate throughout 
the world, that is, we will gradually switch to Western scientific rules anyway. As 
our president says, we are supporters of international agreements, international law, 
our Kazakhs are such cosmopolitans, that is, we have no such concepts as ‘ours’ and 
‘yours’, we have cosmopolitan thinking, we are nomads, probably because of this our 
mindset is that of fast learners. (001PGAG, local, in Russian)
Kazakhstani respondents sought to promote research quality and facilitate international col­
laboration. This drive for international collaboration and publication is strongly pursued by 
national governments in all three countries. As such, a respondent from Uzbekistan also 
indicated that:
1 3
658

Development, Adoption or Adaption? Researchers’ Attitudes to Forging…
…it’s science after all. Why should each State have its own code? The fact that jour­
nals are global… All these citation standards are also global, so ethics is also, prob­
ably, global for a long time, right? (003BUIN, local, in Russian)
Respondents that indicated the universality of ethical principles diminished the signifi­
cance of the Central Asian context, and the relevance of nationality or borders in relation 
to research and science overall. Their justification lay in concepts of how the ‘world is one, 
people are the same’ and thus ‘World science is outside of all this – outside of politics, 
outside of national differences, and ethical norms are the same here’ (001AKRK, local in 
Russian). As a result, they argued any policies on research ethics should follow international 
standards:
The fact is that in every international code these points are still prescribed, regardless 
of whether [in] Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan or Kyrgyzstan. It should be unified, because 
research is something common. Universal. (001KNKA, local, in Russian)
Some respondents would justify their support for universality based on international human 
rights (001ALTN, local, in Russian). Similarly, as humans, as per some respondents, ‘ethi­
cal aspects are quite common for humans, with no special characteristics that correspond 
only to Kazakhstan’. And thus, ‘​thousands of millions of people have already done these 
studies before me and they have trodden this path, it doesn’t matter Kazakh or foreign’.
Support for Western standards was also a marker of a desire to tackle persistent Soviet-
style management and mindsets which were perceived to hinder university research policy 
development. Instead, internationally educated and experienced researchers sought to intro­
duce policies from successful research contexts. For example, a participant from Uzbekistan 
expressed a sceptical attitude to all Soviet-educated researchers suggesting they be replaced 
with the Western-educated for more effective implementation of international practices such 
as establishing IRBs [Institutional Research Boards] and respective policies (003WUDA, 
international, in English).
Identifying Areas of Cultural Sensitivity for Adaptation of the International to the 
Local
However, more than 50 per cent of respondents in three countries supported the introduction 
of more culturally nuanced research ethics policies.
I don’t deny the need [for Western research ethics], but it should be consistent with our 
mindset. And it is necessary to take sides that contribute to the development of our society. 
(001JUYM, local, in Kazakh)
The respondents’ focus on ‘mindset’ suggests a national or regional mindset should be 
considered, implying the need for policy adaptation not a simplistic transfer. They indicated 
differences in mindset and socio-cultural values and the vision of people with a reference to 
being Central Asian or Eastern rather than Western.
The words of our first President, ‘Democracy cannot be exported and imported’, so for 
the [research ethics] code, we should not copy, we should include the local diversity, it 
is very crucial. Actually, everything that is newly created is an old that is forgotten. Our 
1 3
659

G. Gafu et al.
ancestors, Eastern predecessors once used to teach them, Westerners, these principles. 
(003BUDD, local, in Russian)
…we are a nation, and we have our own values, our traditions. We say that this country is 
developed, even I just said that it is necessary as in developed countries, but we move a little 
away from our own, from our origins, from our values. We kind of overestimate Western 
values. (002IUAS, local, in Russian)
Previous research in the field has also highlighted that there is a nuanced aspect of mind­
set often associated with the Soviet past (Tampayeva, 2015; Yergebekov & Temirbekova, 
2012) and central controlled system, as well as international force that can ruin the national 
identity (Gafu, 2019). A stronger commitment to cultural and contextual adaptation of pol­
icy was more likely to come from Uzbek and Kyrgyz respondents.
Why should we adopt if we have our own way? If you want to see your own future 
of research in any field, you should find your own way. (003BUAM, international, in 
English).
The perspective of these respondents from Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan supported ‘our cul­
ture, our identity, our language, our way’. For example, the ‘Uzbekistani way of research’ 
was something expressed very distinctly as a respondent suggests that ‘we need to be recog­
nized by other countries and looking at the research, other countries should realize that the 
research belongs to Uzbekistan’ (003BUGO, local, in Uzbek). Another Uzbek respondent 
expressed a hope for having a regional code which must be written ‘in Kazakh, Uzbek, Kir­
giz, Tadjik, and Turkman languages, not in Russian as science must be in native language’. 
(003BUNA, local, in Uzbek)
There were also arguments for preserving national and cultural identity while aligning 
with international norms. A respondent from Kyrgyzstan suggested interpreting ‘higher val­
ues and the form of our ideology’ in order to have ‘interesting developments in research eth­
ics’ (002IUCS, local, in Russian). A respondent in Kazakhstan suggested what they called 
an ‘intermediate option’:
…we, of course, need to focus on the existing experience, on international global stan­
dards. But then, when we see how they work in our context, to see what fits and works 
and what doesn’t fit and doesn’t work then, perhaps, then we will begin to develop 
some of our own strategies and recipes, in order to promote our science. (001KTRT, 
local, in Russian)
There was some agreement among respondents knowledgeable about international research 
ethics principles that overarching research ethics principles can be used as a framework 
but then adapted to the specific cultural sensitivity of communities in local contexts. One 
suggested, for example, working in Uzbekistan with mahalla, the government-sanctioned 
local community authorities. Similarly, a respondent from Kyrgyzstan also referred to the 
importance of adapting to the context but preserving universal principles.
…it needs to be adapted. And to do this, you need to study the context very well. 
It turns out that the legal part is different, political and social, and then, of course, 
investigators’ current practices, best practices, challenges, they make some conclu­
1 3
660

Development, Adoption or Adaption? Researchers’ Attitudes to Forging…
sion. And still take these basic principles universal: voluntary participation, do no 
harm, confidentiality, anonymity, informed consent and then adapt them to our con­
text. (002IRKZ, international, in Russian)
While respondents in all three countries agreed most of the principles of internationally 
accepted research ethics might work, some argued they need to be applied in a way that made 
sense in context. For instance, in relation to informed consent to participate in research:
Purely being international is not suitable for us… signing consent forms, it’s a prime 
example. Our people do not like to sign all sorts of documents, but they can verbally 
give their consent. (002AUKD, international, in Russian)
Of course, this hostility to written consent is common to many countries with a history of 
authoritarian governments, collective decision-making, and a cultural emphasis on relation­
ships rather than rules (Collins, Sharplin & Burkhanov, 2023; Wynn & Israel, 2018). How­
ever, Whitsell and Merrill (2021) also noted the importance of ‘oral traditions, expectations 
of hospitality, gender roles and a mistrust of outsiders’ (p. 356) to any endeavour aimed at 
building culturally informed consent procedures in the Central Asian context.
Regional vs. National vs. Institutional Regulation
While the majority of respondents supported either adopting national or international 
research ethics regulations, a few advocated for a Central Asian supranational regional code. 
Those few came from Uzbekistan who believed regional policy would help strengthen cul­
tural values in Central Asia. The argument behind regional collaboration is based on the 
view that there is a similar ‘frame of mind’ across the Central Asian region which should be 
used to create common approaches to research ethics.
In our region, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan and even Afghanistan, 
the mindset is almost similar. That’s why on a regional level through collaborative 
methodologies, we should create the process. (003BUDD, local, in Russian)
A recent report from the World Bank (2023) highlights that regionalization in the higher 
education sector in Central Asia is limited in scope despite such initiatives now being imple­
mented in other supranational regions. The report suggests that ‘despite similarities between 
their higher education systems as well as shared challenges and opportunities, Central Asian 
countries have yet to develop their own framework for cooperation in higher education’ 
(p.7). Similarly, exploring the epistemic power of social science in Central Asia, Gafu & 
Parmenter (forthcoming) argue there is a potential for Central Asian social science ‘to use 
the richness of its past and current context to come together as an epistemic community and 
create a pluriepistemic foundation for future research in the region’ (p.1).
Given the long history of Soviet and post-Soviet strong centralised governance in the 
three countries, most research institutions have limited autonomy. As a result, respondents 
do not view institutions as key drivers of policy development and expressed their preference 
toward top-down government-led initiatives in promoting research ethics policies. Such an 
attitude was predominant among Uzbekistani participants.
1 3
661

G. Gafu et al.
So here, in Uzbekistan, local universities are controlled by ministries of higher educa­
tion and administrates… probably it would be simpler and easier to disseminate the 
policies and regulations, like if it is done at the national level, rather than letting the 
university choose to create their own regulations, it would be chaotic. (003SKEU, 
international, in English)
In Kazakhstan, though, due to recent reforms granting universities institutional autonomy, 
respondents envisage more institutional level regulation, with the state providing general 
guidelines. Similarly, in Kyrgyzstan, respondents expressed the need for national oversight, 
formalized across the system but with universities creating their own policies.
At the same time, there were also concerns that even state-mandated matters might not 
change straight away. Concerns were expressed toward the possibility of following rules 
once they are set as people tend to violate rules. For example, some respondents, particu­
larly in Kazakhstan, mentioned the failure to sanction academics who plagiarize.
In addition to institutional tailoring, one more interesting perspective addressed by a 
participant in Uzbekistan which aligns with debates among international researchers is the 
need for separate regulations and guidelines for different disciplines and methodologies. 
The respondent mentioned the US IRB system designed primarily for medical research 
which is not compatible with social sciences.
I think that at a national level there could be some general standards and particularly 
maybe with things like medical, that are going to be more equal across the nation. But 
I think it would be good for institutions to have them that are more tailored for differ­
ent types of research, since they’re going to be different, different ethical issues… the 
IRB and those codes can be very good at institutions, but it would be great if we could 
have like IRBs almost for each department. (003PUEB, international, in English)
Fear of Additional Bureaucracy
While the majority of respondents expressed a positive attitude towards research ethics 
regulation and setting up institutional research boards, there were also concerns about 
the potential increase of bureaucratic hurdles in gaining ethics review. A respondent from 
Kazakhstan mentions the complexity of adopting policies from elsewhere as ‘often these 
requirements become very formalized when they come to a specific locality and they gener­
ally lose their intended purpose and meaning. They just become a bureaucratic procedure, 
nothing else’ (001KTRT, local, in Russian)
There was a concern such bureaucracy might close the region to outside researchers 
as has occurred in Tajikistan. One respondent mentioned the case when an international 
student from Canada was caught for conducting interviews with representatives of opposi­
tion parties in Tajikistan (Clibbon, 2014; Niyozov, 2017). After this, Tajikistan legislation 
required international researchers to obtain official permission from the Tajikistan Acad­
emy of Sciences before conducting research in that country (Sabzalieva, 2019). The same 
restrictions are in place for local researchers who wish to travel abroad to attend confer­
ences (Sabzalieva, 2019) although such a law is unlikely in Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and 
1 3
662

Development, Adoption or Adaption? Researchers’ Attitudes to Forging…
Uzbekistan given they are actively seeking to align their research to international standards 
(DeYoung et al., 2018).
However, a respondent from Kyrgyzstan noted the frequent churn of government min­
isters undermined effective policy development and implementation. They noted the need 
for research ethics adoption at the national level was conveyed to one minister but once the 
minister was replaced the change did not occur.
Summary of Findings
The attitude of participants toward policy adoption, adaption or development of social sci­
ence research ethics in the region varies between and within each country. While many 
respondents from Kazakhstan prefer international research ethics guidelines and standards 
to be adopted as they perceive scientific research as universal, respondents from Kyrgyzstan 
and Uzbekistan are not very supportive, wanting processes that adapt to the context or are 
co-developed to be culturally and contextually nuanced and aligned with local and national 
ways of thinking.
Discussion
Despite similar development paths since independence, participants from the three Cen­
tral Asian countries expressed different views about the future direction for research ethics 
in their country and the region broadly. A bare majority of participants from Kazakhstan 
favoured internationalisation of research ethics and supported a Western or Eurocentric 
focus. The reason for this attitude might lie in the strong national policy agenda toward 
internationalization of higher education and research and more explicitly internationalized 
practices in Kazakhstan (Sagintayeva & Kurakbayev, 2013) in comparison with the other 
two countries. From the start of the Independence in 1991, Kazakhstan has opted to be open 
for global integration including in the higher education field. The strong internationalization 
agenda has been persistent in all reforms in higher education and research. For example, 
Kazakhstan established a major program of scholarships to support study abroad in 1993, 
became a Bologna Declaration signatory and implemented its standards in 2010, imple­
mented a trilingual education policy in schools and universities, and created Nazarbayev 
University as a new model of an internationalized university.
For more than a decade, the country has made it a priority for researchers to publish in 
high quality international publications and seek international collaborations and this has 
been reflected in faculty hiring and promotion practices (Kuzhabekova & Ruby, 2018). 
Kazakhstan has shown steady positive development and growth in the global share of Cen­
tral Asia publications and citations since 2011 (Ovezmyradov, 2023).
Furthermore, state programs such as the Bolashak Scholarship program have resulted in 
a significant number of potential change makers or policy ambassadors (Porto de Oliveira, 
2019) championing the introduction of policies consistent with those they worked with dur­
ing their own higher education in other countries (Tomanova & Zhumashov, 2014). These 
policy initiatives are likely to have influenced the views of respondents, encouraging them 
to look to international practices. Nevertheless, there was still some support for the need to 
contextualise research ethics to the cultural context of Kazakhstan.
1 3
663

G. Gafu et al.
Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan also prioritised internationalisation policies in developing 
their higher education and research systems. In Uzbekistan such policies proliferated in 
the post-Karimov period after 2016 (Collins et al., 2022) shown particularly in the increas­
ing number of international branch campuses. Kyrgyzstan’s internationalisation agenda 
has largely been associated with international donor organisations’ presence in the coun­
try (Amsler, 2008). Despite this, participants in these countries expressed strong support 
for national research ethics regulations that reflect national and cultural values. Kyrgyz­
stani researchers expressed some awareness of Western research practices. This seemed to 
empower them to question the value of globally prevalent research ethics policies and prac­
tices, demonstrating a heightened recognition of cultural and contextual differences to the 
international contexts from which research ethics policies are being adopted. Consequently, 
for Kyrgyz researchers there is a greater inclination to favour research ethics regulations 
established at the national level.
Similarly, Uzbek participants favoured a national code for research ethics rather than 
adopting a Westernised approach, but they also advocated for regional Central Asian policy. 
Some regional collaboration is taking place in Central Asian higher education and research. 
With the support of the World Bank, steps have been taken to create a Central Asian Higher 
Education Area by the Ministers of Education of five countries (Ambasz et al., 2023). Based 
on the European Higher Education Area (EHEA) model, this aims ‘to bring the national 
higher education systems into greater harmony’ (Harden-Wolfson, 2021).
Of the three countries, Uzbek researchers are most concerned about additional bureau­
cracy that could emerge as a consequence of research ethics regulations; they were sensitive 
to the persistence of a Soviet bureaucratic culture within a post-Soviet authoritarian regime. 
The main features of the Soviet bureaucracy, as reflected in universities in particular, were 
strict state oversight and a strict hierarchical organisational structure with top-down man­
agement, uniformity in all academic matters, including curriculum, course content, and 
research priorities, often with limited academic freedom and the ability to independently 
explore diverse ideas (Kuraev, 2016). The Communist Party enforced its ideological beliefs 
(De Witt, 1955), particularly in social sciences, and the focus was primarily on positivist 
research in STEM fields. In Central Asian countries, a bureaucratic approach remains evi­
dent in higher education, and there is a view that research ethics is about regulatory compli­
ance rather than the promotion of a genuine culture of ethics and integrity.
Sharplin et al. (forthcoming) argue the absence of research ethics policies and prac­
tices presents a potential barrier for the three countries examined in this article to achieve 
their strategic goals of producing knowledge that will have a global impact. In the absence 
of research ethics guidelines and codes, access to international funding and publication 
are more difficult to achieve. In order to become active contributors to global knowledge 
production, emerging research countries need to be aware of international standards and 
requirements; however, they can elect to manage the policy migration process, by craft­
ing internationalized policies to more appropriately fit within the socio-cultural context of 
countries. Zhakupova et al. (2022) have identified some universal elements that fit well in 
Kazakh contexts, but the participants we interviewed have identified national and, in the 
case of Uzbek participants, regional cultural contexts that ought to temper uncritical adop­
tion of internationalized policies.
Several limitations should be acknowledged within this study. First, we have relied on 
social science researchers’ perspectives in understanding how and in what ways higher edu­
1 3
664

Development, Adoption or Adaption? Researchers’ Attitudes to Forging…
cation research ethics policy can or should develop within Central Asia. Future research to 
explore the views of other stakeholders, for example policy makers or university adminis­
trators, would provide an additional lens on this topic.
Recruiting additional participants, particularly from regional areas of all three countries, 
would provide a more comprehensive picture, and including the other Central Asian coun­
tries of Tajikistan and Turkmenistan remains a very interesting possibility for further study. 
Although this project employed a mixed method design, the quantitative survey did not 
address the research question addressed in this article.
Conclusion
While the comparative study of social research ethics is still in its infancy, there are strong 
reasons to take an interest in how policies are developed, adopted or adapted. First, there is a 
lengthy history of regulation developed for biomedical research in the United States displac­
ing other approaches to ethical research. It would be hard to describe ethics imperialism as 
ethical; so, the displacement of one country’s approaches to ethics by another in the name 
of globalization and internationalization ought to be highlighted and resisted. Unreflexive 
adoption of approaches to research developed in the Global North can pose an unconscio­
nable risk to participants in another context. Equally, it would be a triumph of romanticism 
to imagine that local ethical approaches, no matter how rich, can be uncovered fully formed 
and applied to contemporary research agendas. Instead, the growth of reflective ethical 
thinking about research might be consciously fostered as part of growing commitment to 
democratisation and human rights. A nuanced position is preferable to the binary opposition 
of adoption or cultural uniqueness.
Second, if ethical research practices are to be encouraged, it is important to understand 
the pre-conditions for achieving this. Even when they have been happy with the content 
of ethics codes and guidelines, researchers in many countries have complained about the 
administrative burden and cognitive dissonance associated with a bureaucratic system that 
emphasises compliance over ethics.
To some extent, the context within which approaches to research ethics are developing 
in Central Asia is unique. Imperial ambitions and bureaucracy have particular Soviet and 
post-Soviet histories in Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan. However, the experiences 
of each of the countries in our study may also reflect some of the ways Middle-Income 
Countries can struggle to develop a coherent approach to social research ethics. Despite 
progressive investment in human capital and research infrastructure in some parts of the 
region, Central Asian researchers remain on the periphery of global knowledge production. 
Few parts of the Central Asian research ecosystem have proved to have the capability to 
create ethical guidance for social researchers; there are no national documents on research 
ethics and where stronger research institutions run ethics review processes, they have been 
imported by research managers from or with postgraduate experience in the Global North, 
and the United States in particular.
There is little agreement among researchers in Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan 
about what social research ethics and its review should look like, although there are differ­
ences in emphasis between each country that reflect their varied histories of engaging with 
the Russian and Soviet state, their experiences of post-Soviet authoritarian rule and democ­
1 3
665

G. Gafu et al.
ratisation as well as the access of researchers to international education and global research 
networks. Some researchers might express faith in international ethical principles, or at 
least more faith in that than what might be produced by regional, national or local institu­
tions. However, many are well aware of the difficulties that social researchers have faced in 
countries such as the United States and the United Kingdom and remain wary of how local 
bureaucracies might deploy ethics review.
Central Asian research and higher education policy could and should support cultur­
ally relevant research ethics built on two-way learning between research stakeholders in 
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Uzbekistan and different parts of the global research systems. 
At the very least, Central Asian communities and their researchers should be partners in 
research knowledge production within their countries, rather than being seen as primary 
raw materials for harvesting by external researchers. We are not alone in arguing these 
countries could craft research ethics policies that will enhance their achievement of strategic 
priorities, protect the welfare of participants and respect the socio-cultural contexts of each 
country.
In order to move forward with research ethics policy development, foundational work is 
needed to enrich the quality of discussion that will shape policy. In this light, we recommend 
all three countries start by prioritizing professional development for researchers by mandat­
ing research ethics education within higher education studies. It is vital to avoid reducing 
ethics to regulatory compliance; instead, research ethics needs to be part of a capacity-
building process to stimulate research of value to Central Asia.
Funding  This study was financed by Nazarbayev University Collaborative Research [grant number 
021220CRP0922], for which the authors are grateful.
Data Availability  The data has not been approved for sharing.
Declarations
Competing interests  The authors report there are no competing interests to declare.
Open Access   This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-
NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and 
reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the 
source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. 
You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. 
The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article’s Creative Commons licence, 
unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article’s Creative 
Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, 
you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit 
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/.
References
Afifi, R. Y. (2007). Biomedical research ethics: An islamic view–part I. International Journal of Surgery, 
5(5), 292–296. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijsu.2006.04.011
Ahn, E. S., Dixon, J., & Chekmareva, L. (2018). Looking at Kazakhstan’s higher education landscape: From 
transition to transformation between 1920 and 2015. 25 years of transformations of higher education 
systems in post-Soviet countries: Reform and continuity, 199–227.
1 3
666

Development, Adoption or Adaption? Researchers’ Attitudes to Forging…
Alimukhamedov, F. (2020). Central Asia: Crossing the threshold at different speeds. International Higher 
Education, 103, 12–14. https://www.internationalhighereducation.net/api-v1/article/!/action/getPdfO­
fArticle/articleID/2975/productID/29/filename/article-id-2975.pdf
Ambasz, D., Nikolaev, D., Malinovskiy, S., Olszak-Olszewski, A., Zavalina, P., & Álvarez, J. B. (2023). 
Towards Higher Education Excellence in Central Asia: A Roadmap for improving the Quality of Educa­
tion and Research through Regional Integration. World Bank Group.
Amsler, S. (2008). Higher education reform in post-soviet Kyrgyzstan: The politics of neoliberal agendas 
in theory and practice. In J. E. Canaan, & W. Shumar (Eds.), Structure and agency in the neoliberal 
university (pp. 121–148). Routledge.
Anderson-Levitt, K. (Ed.). (2003). Introduction to local meanings, global schooling: Anthropology and 
World Culture Theory. Springer.
Anichkin, E., & Kovalenko, K. (2018). Modernization of higher education in central Asian countries: 
Trends, problems and solutions. Journal of History Culture and Art Research, 7(3), 51–59. https://doi.
org/10.7596/taksad.v7i3.1703
Bamford, R. (2019). Ecolonizing Bioethics in African Philosophy. In G. Hull (Ed.), Debating African phi­
losophy (pp. 43–59). Routledge.
Beauchamp, T. L., & Childress, J. F. (2019). Principles of Biomedical Ethics (8th edition). Oxford University 
Press.
Berekeyeva, A., Sharplin, E., Courtney, M., & Sagitova, R. (2023). Attitudes to and practices in ethical 
human subject research among social science researchers in Central Asia. Research Ethics.
Brink, C. (2023). Academic rankings: The tide begins to turn. University World News. https://www.
universityworldnews.com/post.php?story=20231024130858697&utm_source=newsletter&utm_
medium=email&utm_campaign=GLNL0760
Chankseliani, M. (2021). The politics of exporting higher education: Russian university branch campuses in 
the Near abroad. Post-Soviet Affairs, 37(1), 26–44. https://doi.org/10.1080/1060586X.2020.1789938
Chattopadhyay, S., & De Vries, R. (2013). Respect for cultural diversity in bioethics is an ethical imperative. 
Medicine. Health Care and Philosophy, 16(4), 639–645. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11019-012-9433-5
CITI Programs (n.d.). https://about.citiprogram.org/
Clapham, A. (2023). Examining teaching for mastery as an instance of ‘hyperreal’ cross national policy bor­
rowing. Oxford Review of Education. https://doi.org/10.1080/03054985.2023.2229549
Clibbon, J. (2014). Alexander Sodiqov, University of Toronto researcher, being detained in Tajikistan. CBC 
News. 
https://www.cbc.ca/news/alexander-sodiqov-university-of-toronto-researcher-being-detained-
in-tajikistan-1.2707411
Collins, N., Gafu, G., Berekeyeva, A., & Jumakulov, Z. (2022). New regime, new policies: Research ethics 
development – A case study of Uzbekistan, Central Asian Survey. https://doi.org/10.1080/02634937.2
022.2058914
Collins, N., & Sharplin, E. (2024). Sources of authority influencing the development of research ethics policy 
in Muslim-majority secular jurisdictions: Compatibility, contradiction and compromise. Contemporary 
Islam, 1–19.
Collins, N., Sharplin, E., & Burkhanov, A. (2023). Challenges for political science research ethics in autocra­
cies: A case study of Central Asia. Political Studies Review. https://doi.org/10.1177/14789299231153074.
Connelly, J., & Grüttner, M. (Eds.). (2010). Universities under dictatorship. Penn State.
de Porto, O. (2019). Policy ambassadors: Human agency in the transnationalization of Brazilian social poli­
cies. Policy and Society, 1–17. https://doi.org/10.1080/14494035.2019.1643646
De Vries, R., & Rott, L. M. (2011). Bioethics as missionary work: The export of western ethics to developing 
Countries’. In C. Myser (Ed.), Bioethics around the Globe (pp. 3–18). Oxford University Press.
DeYoung, A. J., Kataeva, Z., & Jonbekova, D. (2018). Higher education in Tajikistan: Institutional landscape 
and key policy developments. 25 Years of Transformations of Higher Education Systems in Post-Soviet 
Countries: Reform and Continuity, 363–385.
Dower, N. (2014). Global ethics: Dimensions and prospects. Journal of Global Ethics, 10(1), 8–15. https://
doi.org/10.1080/17449626.2014.896575
Draude, A. (2020). Translation in motion: A concept’s journey towards norm diffusion studies. The Agency of 
the governed in the Global South (pp. 12–29). Routledge.
Eshchanov, R., Lamers, J., Bobojonova, G., & Bekchanov, D. (2019). Priority challenges of education sec­
tor reforms in modernizing Uzbekistan. European Journal of Research and Reflection in Educational 
Sciences, 7(12).
Eshchanov, B., Abduraimov, K., Ibragimova, M., & Eshchanov, R. (2021). Efficiency of publish or perish 
policy—some considerations based on the Uzbekistan experience. Publications, 9(3), 33.
Fogarty International Center (n.d). Doctoral/Postdoctoral: International Bioethics Research Postdoctoral 
Training-C Asia Network. https://www.fic.nih.gov/Grants/Search/Pages/bioethics-d43tw011237.aspx
1 3
667

G. Gafu et al.
Gafu, G. (2019). The effects of the introduction of an elite globalised university on other institutions: The 
case of Kazakhstan (Doctoral dissertation, UCL (University College London)).
Gafu and Parmenter (forthcoming). From epistemic oppression to pluri-epistemic potential: Social science 
research in Central Asia.
Gan, Z.-R., & Israel, M. (2019). Transnational policy migration, interdisciplinary policy transfer and decolo­
nization: Tracing the patterns of research ethics regulation in Taiwan. Developing World Bioethics, 
20(1), 5–15.
Garrafa, V., & Lorenzo, C. (2008). Moral imperialism and multi-centric clinical trials in peripheral countries. 
Cadernos De Saúde Pública, 24(10), 2219–2226. https://doi.org/10.1590/S0102-311X2008001000003
Glass, C. R., & Cruz, N. I. (2023). Moving towards multipolarity: Shifts in the core-periphery structure 
of international student mobility and world rankings (2000–2019). Higher Education, 85, 415–435. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10734-022-00841-9
Graham, E. R., Shipan, C. R., & Volden, C. (2013). The diffusion of policy diffusion research in political 
science. British Journal of Political Science, 43(3), 673–701.
Harden-Wolfson (2021). https://emmahardenwolfson.com/category/tajikistan/
Hellmann, F., Garrafa, V., Schlemper Jr, B. R., & Bittencourt, S. (2015). The Fogarty Training Program 
in low- and middle-income countries: International research ethics education or moral imperialism? 
Archives of Medical Research, 46(6), 515–516.
Hellsten, S. K. (2015). Ethics: Universal or global? The trends in studies of ethics in the context of globaliza­
tion. Journal of Global Ethics. 10.1080/17449626.2014.1001913
Ibrasheva, O. H., Rakisheva, A. K., Sharplin, E. D., & Ramazanova, M. Z. (2021). ИНТЕРНАЦИОНАЛИЗАЦИЯ 
ИССЛЕДОВАНИЙ ВЫСШЕГО ОБРАЗОВАНИЯ В КАЗАХСТАНЕ: КЕЙС РАЗВИТИЯ 
ИССЛЕДОВАТЕЛЬСКОЙ ЭТИКИ В СОЦИАЛЬНЫХ НАУКАХ (in Russian). The impact of inter­
nationalization on research in higher education in Kazakhstan. KazNU Bulletin, 69(4), 16–27.
Israel, M. (2015). Research ethics and integrity for social scientists: Beyond regulatory compliance.
Israel, M. (2018). Ethical imperialism? Exporting research ethics to the Global South. In R. Iphofen & M. 
Tolich (Eds.), The SAGE handbook of qualitative research ethics (pp. 89–102). Sage.
Jonbekova, D. (2020). Educational research in Central Asia: Methodological and ethical dilemmas in 
Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Tajikistan. Compare: A Journal of Comparative and International Educa­
tion, 50(3), 352–370.
Jonbekova, D., & Kuchumova, G. (2020). Ethical and methodological challenges of educational research in 
Central Asia. Journal of Educational Sciences. https://doi.org/10.26577/JES.2020.v65.i4.04
Kataeva, Z., & DeYoung, A. J. (2018). Faculty challenges and barriers for research and publication in Tajik 
higher education. European Education, 50(3), 249–265.
Kazakhstan Society for Educational Research (KERA) (2020). Ethical Code of Educational Researchers in 
Kazakhstan. https://shorturl.at/mFOP0
Kuraev, A. (2016). Soviet higher education: An alternative construct to the western university paradigm. 
Higher Education, 71(2), 181–193.
Kuzhabekova, A., & Ruby, A. (2018). Impact factor publication requirement in Kazakhstan. European Edu­
cation, 50(3), 266.
Lee, J. T., & Kuzhabekova, A. (2019). Building local research capacity in higher education: A conceptual 
model. Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management, 41(3), 342–357. https://doi.org/10.1080
/1360080X.2019.1596867
Lovakov, A., & Yudkevich, M. (2021). The post-soviet publication landscape for higher education research. 
Higher Education, 81(2), 273–299.
Ministry of Justice of Kyrgyz Republic (2017). The Concept of Scientific and Innovation Development in the 
Kyrgyz Republic till 2022. http://cbd.minjust.gov.kg/act/view/ru-ru/99770
Ministry of Justice of Kyrgyz Republic (2023). Law on Science of Kyrgyz Republic. http://cbd.minjust.gov.
kg/act/view/ru-ru/112661?cl=ru-ru
Mirkasimov, B., Malvicini, P. G., Kattaev, O., & Rikhsiboev, I. (2021). Building research capacity at a TNE 
institution: The case of Westminster International University in Tashkent. Importing Transnational Edu­
cation: Capacity Sustainability and Student Experience from the Host Country Perspective, 155–173.
Moss, G., Kubacki, K., Hersh, M., & Gunn, R. (2007). Knowledge management in higher education: A 
comparison of individualistic and collectivist cultures. European Journal of Education, 42(3), 377–394. 
http://www.jstor.org/stable/4543103
Niyozov, S. (2017). Fieldwork as socially constructed and negotiated practice. Reimagining utopias (pp. 
119–139). Brill.
Order of the Minister of Health of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 442 (2007, July 25). On the approval of 
the rules for conducting preclinical studies, biomedical experiments and clinical trials in the Republic 
of Kazakhstan. https://adilet.zan.kz/rus/archive/docs/V070004894_/25.07.2007
1 3
668

Development, Adoption or Adaption? Researchers’ Attitudes to Forging…
Order of the Ministry of Health of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 425 (2008, July 30). On the establishment 
of the Central Commission on Ethics. https://online.zakon.kz/document/%5C?doc_id=30197217&corr
=30197217&status=0&excludeArcBuh=0
Order of the Minister of Health of the Republic of Kazakhstan No. 53 (2005, February 14). On approval of 
the Instruction for conducting clinical trials and (or) testing of pharmacological and medicinal prod­
ucts in the Republic of Kazakhstan. https://adilet.zan.kz/rus/docs/V050003494_/links
Ovezmyradov, B. (2023). Applying quantified indicators in central Asian science: Can metrics improve the 
regional research performance? Scientometrics, 128(1), 177–206.
Peters, M. (2007). Higher education, globalization, and the knowledge economy: Reclaiming the cultural 
mission. Ubiquity, 8(18), 1–27.
Phillips, D., & Ochs, K. (2004). Researching policy borrowing: Some methodological challenges in com­
parative education. British Educational Research Journal, 30(6), 773–784.
Ramazanova, B. A., Kudaibergenova, T. A., & Eralieva, L. T. (2014). Guidelines for passing the ethical 
examination of research work. Local ethical commission: role, powers and procedures. KazNMU 
named after S.D. Asfendiyarova - Almaty, 2014.-- 99 p. https://goo.su/51TI
Rattani, A., & Hyder, A. A. (2019). Developing an islamic research ethics framework. Journal of Religion 
and Health, 58(1), 74–86. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10943-017-0508-8
Ruby, A., & Li, A. (2020). The Mobility of Education Policy in the 21st Century: Lessons from Other Fields. 
In FIRE: Forum for International Research in Education, 6(3), 83–93. Lehigh University Library and 
Technology Services.
Sabzalieva, E. (2019). Higher education policy in Central Asia and Afghanistan. University of Central Asia–
Institute of Public Policy and Administration (IPPA) Working Paper, (51).
Sagintayeva, A., & Kurakbayev, K. (2013). Internationalization of Higher Education in Kazakhstan. Going 
Global: Identifying trends and drivers of International Education. Emerald Group Publishing.
Sagitova, R., Sharplin, E., Ramazanova, M., Berekeyeva, A., & Parmenter, L. (2024). Understanding human 
participant research ethics: The perspectives of social scientists in Central Asia. International Journal 
of Educational Research, 124, 102303. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijer.2023.102303
Schrag, Z. M. (2011). 4 June, The CITI Program as Mortifyingly Stupid, Marxist Doxology. http://www.
institutionalreviewblog.com/2011/06/citi-program-as-mortifyingly-stupid.html
Schriewer, J. (2012). Meaning constellations in the world society. Comparative Education, 48(4), 411–422.
Sharplin, E. D., Gafu, G., Berekeyeva, A., Tabaeva, A., & Abildina, R. (forthcoming). Research Ethics Edu­
cation for the Social Sciences in Central Asian Contexts.
Silova, I. (2005). Traveling policies: Hijacked in Central Asia. European Educational Research Journal, 
4(1), 50–59.
Silova, I. (2011). Higher education reforms and global geopolitics: Shifting cores and peripheries in Russia, 
the Baltics, and Central Asia. Russian Analytical Digest, 97(30), 9–12.
Silova, I., & Rappleye, J. (2015). Beyond the world culture debate in comparative education: Critiques, alter­
natives and a noisy conversation. Globalisation Societies and Education, 13(1), 1–7.
Smolentseva, A., Huisman, J., & Froumin, I. (2018). Transformation of higher education institutional land­
scape in post-Soviet countries: From Soviet model to where? 25 Years of Transformations of Higher 
Education Systems in Post-Soviet Countries: Reform and Continuity, 1–43.
Spring, J. (2014). Globalization and educational rights: An intercivilizational analysis. Routledge.
Steiner-Khamsi, G. (Ed.). (2004). The global politics of educational borrowing and lending. Teachers 
College.
Steiner-Khamsi, G. (2016). New directions in policy borrowing research. Asia Pacific Educational Review, 
17, 381–390. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12564-016-9442-9
Stone, D. (2017). Understanding the transfer of policy failure: Bricolage, experimentalism and translation. 
Policy & Politics, 45(1), 55–70.
Stone, D., de Oliveira, P., O., & Pal, L. A. (2020). Transnational policy transfer: The circulation of ideas, 
power and development models. Policy and Society, 39(1), 1–18.
Strosberg, M. A., Gefenas, E., Loue, S., & Philpott, S. (2013). Building research ethics capacity in post-
communist countries: Experience of two Fogarty training programs. Journal of Empirical Research on 
Human Research Ethics, 8(5), 28–39. https://doi.org/10.1525/jer.2013.8.5.28
Suyarkulova, M. (2018). ‘Renegade Research’: Hierarchies of knowledge production in Central Asia. Open 
Democracy December, 10.
Syrgak, Z., Sagitova, R., & Parmenter, L. (upcoming). Historical overview of the development of social sci­
ence research ethics in Kyrgyzstan.
Tampayeva, G. Y. (2015). Importing education: Europeanisation and the Bologna Process in Europe’s back­
yard—the case of Kazakhstan. European Educational Research Journal, 14(1), 74–85.
Tomanova, M., & Zhumashov, Y. (2014). Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 143, 282–284.
1 3
669

G. Gafu et al.
Tosam, M. J. (2020). Global bioethics and respect for cultural diversity: How do we avoid moral relativism 
and moral imperialism? Medicine Health Care and Philosophy, 23(4), 611–620. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11019-020-09972-1
Troitskiy, E. F., & Yun, S. M. (2021). Uzbekistan: New milestones of Higher Education internationalization. 
Vysshee Obrazovanie v Rossii = Higher Education in Russia, 30(10), 157–168.
Ubaydullaeva, D. (2020). Franchise Branch campuses in Uzbekistan: The internationalisation of Higher Edu­
cation as a solution? Central Asian Affairs, 7(2), 152–174.
Uralov, O. S. (2020). Internationalization of higher education in Uzbekistan. Social Sciences & Humanities 
Open, 2(1), 100015.
Varpahovskis, E., & Kuteleva, A. (2023a). Transnational Higher Education—The Case of Kazakhstan. In A. 
Mihr, and Wittke, (Eds.) Human Rights Dissemination in Central Asia. Springer Briefs in Political Sci­
ence. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-27972-0_5
Varpahovskis, E., & Kuteleva, A. (2023b). Does soft power make authoritarian regimes import universities? 
Framing analysis of discourses around transnational higher education institutions in Kazakhstan. In N. 
Chitty, L. Ji, & G. Rawnsley (Eds.), Routledge handbook of soft power (2nd ed.). Routledge.
Whitsel, C., & Merrill, M. (2021). Towards building a culturally informed consent process in Central Asia. 
Central Asian Survey, 40(3), 351–367. https://doi.org/10.1080/02634937.2021.1898338
Widdows, H. (2011). Western and eastern principles and globalised bioethics. Asian Bioethics Review, 3(1), 
14–22.
Wynn, L. L., & Israel, M. (2018). The fetishes of consent: Signatures, paper, and writing in research ethics 
review. American Anthropologist, 120(4), 795–806.
Yergebekov, M., & Temirbekova, Z. (2012). The Bologna process and problems in higher education system 
of Kazakhstan. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, 47, 1473–1478.
Zhakupova, A.D., Sharplin, E., Ismagulova, A.E., Rakisheva, G.M., Ramazanova, M.R., & Abildina, 
R.Zh. (2022). Истоки и развитие исследовательской этики в Казахстане: Связана ли моральная 
философия кочевников с международной исследовательской этикой? (in Russian). Origins and 
development of research ethics in Kazakhstan: Is the moral philosophy of nomads related to interna­
tional research ethics? KazNU Bulletin, 80(2). Series in Philosophy, culture studies and politics.
Zurdinov, A., Tilekeeva, U., & Alisherov, B. (2007). Этическая экспертиза биомедицинских исследований 
в государствах-участниках СНГ. (in Russian). Ethical expertise of biomedical research in CIS coun­
tries. In A. Zurdinov (Ed.), Historical and cultural foundations. Phenix.
Publisher’s Note  Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and 
institutional affiliations.
1 3
670