DOI: 10.4324/9781003571384-7
This chapter has been made available under a CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 license.
7	
A New Growth Strategy 
for Developing Nations
Dani Rodrik and Joseph E. Stiglitz
7.1  Introduction
Not long ago, the development community was brimming with optimism about 
the developing world’s economic prospects. Economic growth was up, extreme 
poverty was sharply down, and a clear consensus seemed to have emerged on a 
broad growth strategy based on integration into the world economy. There were 
plenty of debates on the particulars of the strategy, of course. The experience 
of China, which had engineered history’s most spectacular poverty reduction, 
gave ammunition to advocates of both market-oriented and more state-directed 
approaches to development alike. Yet both sides agreed that, however achieved, 
export-oriented industrialisation was the right path.
This consensus has been recently shattered by several developments, however. 
In particular, technological changes have made manufacturing skills- and 
capital-intensive—and less and less labour-absorbing—undercutting the efficacy 
of industrialisation as a growth strategy. The ability to absorb labour was reduced at 
the same time as the comparative advantage of developing countries was attenuated. 
As Figure 7.1 shows, economic growth rates in the developing world were already 
dropping in the years preceding the COVID-19 pandemic.
The pandemic itself accelerated and exposed other, more subtle trends. With 
lower growth, the debt problems of developing countries became crushing, and 
low- and lower-middle-income countries lost precious access to financial markets. 
Geopolitical competition between the United States and China as well as the 
creeping backlash against hyper-globalisation transformed the global economic 
landscape and rendered the world economy less hospitable to growth through 
trade. As incomes in developed countries increased, there was a shift away from 
manufactured goods to services, so the share of global output in manufacturing 
was in decline. The impending climate-change crisis, and the requisite green 
transition, affected agricultural sectors in many developing countries adversely. It 
also reduced global demand for material goods, especially those with a high carbon 
footprint, and made the development of new technologies imperative—further 
disadvantaging developing countries.

90  The New Global Economic Order
This chapter argues that we are at a turning point in development strategy. 
Strategies that worked well in the past are unlikely to do so in the decades ahead. In 
particular, the manufacturing- and export-based growth strategies that drove East 
Asia’s development miracles are no longer suited for today’s low-income countries; 
at the very least, they are insufficient. New technologies, the climate challenge, 
and reconfiguration of globalisation require a new approach for development, 
emphasising two critical areas—the green transition and labour-absorbing services. 
Unfortunately, policymakers do not have ready-made formulas or successful 
models to emulate. Confronting this challenge head-on will require building greater 
capacity to understand new opportunities, constraints, and what works and does not 
as governments experiment with new policies on a number of fronts.
7.2  A Strategic Approach to Economic Development
The fundamental source of economic development in the long term is learning. 
Learning occurs at the level of the individual, reflected in the accumulation of 
human capital and learning-to-learn (Stiglitz, 1987). It also happens at higher, 
broader levels through organisational and societal learning, including improved 
governance, which entails not just understanding the principles of what makes 
Figure 7.1  Growth Rates of Developed and Developing Countries Since 1950
Sources: University of Groningen (2017), Maddison Historical Statistics, https://www.rug.nl/ggdc/
historicaldevelopment/maddison/?lang=en [accessed February 2024]; and World Bank, World 
Development Indicators, https://databank.worldbank.org/source/world-development-indicators [accessed 
February 2024].

A New Growth Strategy for Developing Nations  91
for good governance but overcoming the impediments to their implementation. 
Sustainable economic growth requires patience in building up these fundamentals, 
including steady investment in education and skills and the quality of institutions.
While the accumulation of these fundamental capabilities is indispensable for 
development, it is not sufficient; it is not a substitute for a strategy of economic 
development focussed on structural transformation.1 In all successful cases of 
economic growth, in East Asia and elsewhere, these fundamentals improved 
alongside rapid economic growth. They are as much a result of growth as they were 
a precondition. Sustained rapid growth, in turn, requires structural transformation; 
countries that experienced rapid growth (e.g. based on natural resources) and did 
not have structural transformation saw that growth evaporate at the end of the 
commodity boom. Moreover, countries that have focussed solely on fundamentals 
and invested in education and governance without promoting successful structural 
change have reaped meagre rewards in terms of economic growth.2 The supply 
of human capital and good institutions yield little growth without simultaneous 
changes on the demand side of the economy, which typically come from the 
promotion of new, modern economic activities and the structure of production, 
which comes from the industrial policies discussed later.
Still another essential element of the strategy focusses on macroeconomics. 
Small, open economies need to ensure that they have exchange rates that are 
competitive, maintaining an overall balance between aggregate supply and 
demand, without leaving the country dependent on short-term foreign capital 
(and hence subject to ‘sudden stops’3) and at as high a level of employment as 
possible. This has been a key failure of many resources-rich countries, as well as 
a reason that many countries following Washington Consensus policies failed to 
thrive economically. Larger economies must ensure adequate aggregate demand to 
maintain high levels of capacity and employment.
The current focus of development economics on randomised controlled trials 
(RCTs) and other rigorous methods of causal inference has obscured the importance 
of structural change and the need for an explicit strategy to promote it. RCTs have 
yielded many important policy insights in public health, education, and delivery of 
social services, and no doubt have contributed significantly to poverty reduction. 
Yet ultimately, long-term and sustainable economic development requires more 
than a series of local interventions restricted to policy domains where such 
experimental methods are applicable. The most spectacular growth miracles 
have been the result of sectoral or economy-wide policy reforms that fostered 
new economic activities without the prior benefit of RCTs. As an example, China 
explicitly experimented by trying new policy arrangements in some provinces 
before launching them elsewhere. Learning from policy successes and failures is 
possible even when policymakers’ causal inference standards fall short of RCTs 
or other econometric techniques of ‘evidence-based policymaking’. It would have 
been impossible to conduct RCTs to inform the significant strategies that really 
mattered; policymakers gleaned what they could by making inferences based on 
theory, history, econometric studies, and the limited experiments that could be 
conducted.

92  The New Global Economic Order
Rapid, sustained economic development thus requires an explicit strategy 
targeting structural transformation.4 The common element running through all of 
the rapid and sustained growth cases has been the strategy of industrialisation. 
During the early post-World War II era, this strategy was import-substituting 
industrialisation. Combining heavy state intervention with import barriers, 
import-substituting industrialisation focussed on building domestic manufacturing 
capacity—initially consumer goods, followed by intermediate and capital goods 
industries. While not every country did well under this strategy, many countries 
in Latin America, the Middle East, and Sub-Saharan Africa experienced rapid 
economic growth until the oil shock of the second half of the 1970s.
East and South-East Asian countries—led by Taiwan in the late 1950s and 
South Korea in the early 1960s—also heavily promoted industrialisation through a 
wide variety of measures, including access to credit and tax incentives, but pushed 
their nascent manufacturing enterprises early on to export. This export-oriented 
industrialisation model proved more sustainable and eventually became the one 
to emulate for countries adopting more market-oriented approaches under the 
influence of the Washington Consensus. True to its market focus and aversion to 
governmental intervention, however, the Washington Consensus remained focussed 
on ‘fundamentals’—investments in education, governance, and macroeconomic 
stability—and downplayed structural transformation strategies that were central to 
the success of East Asia, including the role of explicit trade and industrial policies 
to foster learning and new industries. Largely as a result, the growth payoff for 
Washington Consensus policies proved disappointing.
China was the most significant success story of the East Asian model. Once 
the government prioritised economic growth after 1978, its strategy combined 
market incentives with highly unconventional institutional arrangements—the 
household responsibility system, dual-track pricing in agriculture, township and 
village enterprises, and special economic zones—to foster structural change, 
productive diversification, and new capabilities. Industrial policies promoting new 
manufacturing activities were a critical part of China’s economic success. China 
was also a beneficiary of increased globalisation, but it became one largely through 
its own terms.
By the 1990s, globalisation had reached new heights. Under the new model of 
hyper-globalisation, removing or at least reducing transaction costs on international 
trade, finance, and investment—‘deep integration’—became a primary objective 
of economic policy. Reduction in these costs, along with technological advances, 
rendered global value chains (GVCs) the predominant force shaping global 
production. Joining GVCs, in turn, became the main vehicle for promoting 
economic growth. Entering GVCs, the thinking went, would help promote new 
industries, increase productivity, and generate the structural change needed for 
growth.5
However, just as global economic integration, export-oriented industrialisation, 
and GVCs became the foundations of a new economic development strategy, their 
benefits were being undermined by a process of ‘premature de-industrialisation’ 
in developing countries. The primary culprit was skills- and capital-biased 

A New Growth Strategy for Developing Nations  93
technological changes in manufacturing, which increased labour productivity 
substantially in advanced economies where innovations originate. They also 
undercut the comparative advantage of low-income economies in labour-intensive 
manufacturing. The quality and technological standards set by leading firms in 
GVCs rendered labour-intensive production in export-oriented sectors even less 
viable (Rodrik, 2016, 2022a).6
The result was that globally competitive formal manufacturing sectors in 
developing countries ceased being labour-absorbing sectors. They turned into 
‘enclave’ sectors where low amounts of these economies’ excess low-skilled 
workforce could be employed.7 In countries where manufacturing output was 
sustained, manufacturing employment still shrank as a share of total employment. 
In the few cases where manufacturing employment registered an increase, the rise 
was concentrated in small, informal, and low-productivity enterprises, while large, 
internationally competitive firms generated little demand for labour (Diao et al., 
2021).
Manufacturing employment matters. Historically, structural transformation 
in the form of industrialisation has been the key dynamic that has driven rapid 
economic growth.8 As workers moved from low- to higher-productivity sectors, 
they increased their earnings, aggregate productivity rose, and economic growth 
occurred. The key strategic question for the future is where the better, more 
productive jobs will come from.9 While manufacturing will remain an important 
sector for most countries, it cannot be the protagonist of economic growth as it 
was in East Asia and other successful economies of the past, because the global 
share of employment in manufacturing will decline, both because of the shift in 
global gross domestic product (GDP) away from manufacturing and the decreased 
labour intensity of manufacturing employment due technological change.10 Green 
industries and services must play an important role in filling the void, especially in 
the next few decades.11
7.3  The Green Transition
Climate change imposes a significant cost on low-income countries. Often, they 
are especially vulnerable because of their location in areas that are most affected. 
Their low resources and limited fiscal space make large-scale spending necessary 
for adaptation and response to the damage of climate change difficult, if not 
impossible. Their exposure to extreme weather events has also increased, resulting 
in losses to crops and livestock. The drag on growth is already evident in many 
cases and is reflected in higher borrowing spreads and reduced access to private 
finance in many countries.
In a world with complete, efficient markets and where governmental efforts 
are already optimised, the constraints imposed by climate change and requisite 
adjustments will reduce well-being and almost certainly growth. However, policy 
reforms—in part induced by the need to respond to climate change—can reduce the 
costs imposed by climate change and potentially produce better outcomes relative 
to the business-as-usual scenario. In particular, the climate challenge can become 

94  The New Global Economic Order
a growth opportunity if developing countries are able to turn it into an investment 
strategy.12 As several large-scale global models have shown, it is possible for 
well-designed climate actions to boost growth in developing countries (Lankes 
et al., 2024). However, a plausible and desirable path towards a green transition 
will require large up-front investments. It will also have to go beyond investment 
in climate-change mitigation to build cumulative and enduring capabilities in new 
productive domains (e.g. renewables and green industries).
There are multiple key investment priorities related to the green transition.13 The 
first is the transformation of the energy system, which entails moving from fossil 
fuels to renewable sources of energy. Without decarbonisation in developing 
countries—and the phasing out of coal-fired power plants in particular—it is 
difficult to see how the world can reach a target of net-zero emissions by the middle 
of the 21st century. Rapid technological progress and the sharp decline in prices of 
renewable energy have made this goal more attainable. Yet it will require massive 
new investments in infrastructure and electrification and in new sources of energy 
such as solar, wind, and green hydrogen.
There will also be requisite investments in each of the other systems that 
constitute a developing economy, and implementing some will be difficult because 
of the decentralised nature of the investments required. Transforming agriculture 
could lead to more productivity and higher standards of living for the large 
fractions of the population still dependent on that sector. Developing countries are 
also home to significant carbon sinks; by ensuring their restoration and protection, 
they can make a substantial contribution to mitigating climate change. This will 
require a wide range of public investments in agriculture, forests, soils, and 
oceans.14 Redesigning cities, with modern transport systems and efficient housing, 
could also contribute to lowering emissions and greater productivity.15
Another area is reducing the vulnerability of developing countries to damage 
from climate change. There are significant needs in building defences against rising 
sea levels, desertification, and extreme heat. Governments will need to increase 
investments in food and water systems, resilience of infrastructure and urban areas, 
and disaster risk management.
The total investment needed for such a strategy amounts to an additional 2% 
of global GDP per year by 2025 and an additional 4% of global GDP per year by 
2030 (excluding China) (Songwe et al., 2022). Many of these incremental expenditures 
reflect the up-front costs of replacing capital goods that would otherwise have to be 
replaced earlier. Some of these incremental costs arise from the fact that many green 
technologies are more capital-intensive than corresponding non-green technologies; 
that is, more labour is needed now, but with the benefit of less labour needed in the 
future. This is evident in the case of electric vehicles, where maintenance and driving 
costs are a fraction of those associated with internal combustion engines.
The feasibility of these actions depends on the availability of external financial 
support. Assuming half of the investment needs is met through domestic resource 
mobilisation, developing countries as a group would require an additional 2%–4% 
of GDP of external resource flows. Short of concerted global action by leading 
creditors and multilateral lenders, it is difficult to see how this could be achieved. 

A New Growth Strategy for Developing Nations  95
The COVID-19 pandemic and rising food and fuel costs have left the developing 
world with severe debt problems. While only a few countries have defaulted, scores 
of developing countries are currently illiquid. Net financial transfers to Africa 
have slowed down to a trickle, and low- and lower-middle-income countries have 
essentially lost access to bond markets.
Bridging the investment gap will require a new growth-oriented liquidity facility 
to allow the resumption of financial flows to these countries as well as speedier 
debt resolution (Rodrik and Diwan, 2023). These will have to be supplemented 
with domestic mechanisms to ensure adequate access to finance by households 
and firms, regardless of size, for green investments. Action on this front is in the 
interests of advanced economies as well since the climate transition is a global 
public good.16
If financing becomes available—and if the investment is deployed wisely—this 
ramping-up of investment for the climate transition could be an important element 
of the new growth strategy. Such an investment could yield additional growth of 
0.5%–1.0% per year for developing countries, assuming an incremental capital 
output ratio of 4.17
From a global perspective, the timing of the green transition may be ideal, as 
there is a surplus of labour available to make the investments. Some are worried 
about a savings glut or secular stagnation, suggesting a surfeit of savings; yet the 
global real interest rate has been low despite recent increases in the nominal rate. 
A key problem is the risk premium imposed on developing countries—and even on 
relatively safe investments within those countries.
7.4  Better Jobs in Services
Investment in the green transition would turn a cost for developing countries into 
a growth opportunity. Yet it is not clear where the better, more productive jobs 
will come from. The climate transition could create new jobs in building solar and 
wind facilities, infrastructure, and climate-change mitigation activities. It will also 
destroy actual—and potential—jobs in fossil fuel-dependent activities and brown 
manufacturing. Even if, on net, it increases labour demand, developing countries 
still face the challenge of absorbing large amounts of additional labour from the 
agriculture and informal sectors into modern, productive sectors.
The problem of job creation in Africa is particularly acute. The working-age 
population in Sub-Saharan Africa will increase by 740  million by 2050, more 
than doubling its current level of 630  million people (World Bank, 2023). In 
the absence of job creation in more productive sectors, the bulk of this labour 
supply will be absorbed by precarious, unproductive informal activities in urban 
areas, as is the case at present. It is unlikely that decarbonisation-led structural 
transformation will produce the many jobs needed, which would have been created 
in the past by industrialisation.
The same could be said for agriculture. Agricultural modernisation, including 
the use of new technologies and diversification into cash crops, has significant 
potential in many developing countries. Yet it is difficult to envisage agriculture 

96  The New Global Economic Order
as a labour-absorbing sector for the economy. Most of the new technologies in 
agriculture are labour-saving and capital-intensive. Historically, productivity gains 
in agriculture have been associated with reductions—rather than increases—in 
farm employment. It remains to be seen whether a different path could emerge in 
view of the new constraints posed by climate change and land scarcity.
Combined with the manufacturing trends discussed earlier, it is difficult to 
avoid the conclusion that services will remain the main labour-absorbing sector 
in developing countries. This poses a significant challenge. Some countries, 
such as India and the Philippines, have been successful in creating productive, 
globally competitive, tradable services industries. However, these are typically 
activities—such as information technology and business process offshoring—that 
are skills intensive. Such services sectors face the same disadvantage from a 
developmental standpoint as today’s GVC-oriented manufacturing firms—they have 
limited potential to create much employment for the typically low-educated, 
low-skilled workforce of a developing economy.
Moreover, today, jobs are being created in a very different segment of the 
economy—a hodgepodge of largely self-proprietorships or micro/small firms, 
typically non-tradable and often informal. The central question posed is whether 
productivity and demand can be increased in these labour-absorbing services 
activities. A three-pronged strategy is thus proposed for governments: (i) encourage 
lower-skilled job creation by larger firms that operate in non-tradable services, 
(ii) provide public inputs and access to productivity-enhancing investments for 
smaller enterprises, and (iii) invest in technologies that complement rather than 
replace low-skilled workers in services sectors.
The bulk of small, informal enterprises in developing countries will never 
become very productive. It is not realistic to aim for productivity increases for all 
of these firms. However, dualism can be reduced over time, both by encouraging 
the expansion of existing formal firms and by increasing productivity amongst 
some of the more dynamic, smaller, informal firms. Therefore, a strategy targeting 
the domestic services sector must be selective. The government would engage 
in a variety of programmes that have the potential to increase employment and 
productivity. It would then let the more entrepreneurial and dynamic amongst 
services-sector firms—including micro and small enterprises—select into and take 
advantage of these programmes.
The three elements of the strategy can be illustrated with concrete cases. As an 
example of the first component, the state government of Haryana, India, established 
a partnership in 2018 with the private cab aggregators Ola and Uber (Mugulur, 
2019). The partnership was motivated by the government’s objective to increase 
employment for young people. Based on an explicit quid pro quo, the government 
helped the firms identify and hire drivers by changing some of the regulations 
that hampered the expansion of ride-sharing services, sharing targeted databases of 
unemployed youth in the state, and holding exclusive job fairs for the companies. 
The firms, in turn, made soft commitments to expand the number of youth that they 
employed. It was understood that the promises, on each side, were not contractual 
obligations, but good-faith intentions subject to changing circumstances, 

A New Growth Strategy for Developing Nations  97
meant to engender mutual trust over time. In less than 1 year, the partnership is said 
to have created more than  44,000  new jobs for youth.
An example of the second type of programme is provided by a Colombian 
initiative to reduce the time and financial costs of street fruit and vegetable vendors 
in Bogotá (McKenzie, 2019). Unlike large retail stores, these vendors have 
inefficient supply chains, requiring them to spend an inordinate amount of time 
looking for and buying the products that they eventually sell. These vendors in 
Bogotá get up at 4:30 a.m. and spend 2 hours in travel to purchase produce from a 
central wholesaler. A social enterprise, Agruppa, came up with the idea that it could 
group and consolidate orders from individual vendors, buy in bulk directly from 
the growers, and deliver the fruits and vegetables to the vendors. This would not 
only reduce the costs of the vendors but also lessen prices for customers, often poor 
themselves. Using seed money from the World Bank, the initiative was launched 
with just a few products initially and then expanded. A World Bank evaluation 
found that it held promise, although the experiment eventually folded due to 
Agruppa’s inability to scale it up in a timely manner.
As both examples illustrate, local governments or entities will often be 
better placed than national governments to create jobs-centred partnerships with 
entrepreneurs or firms providing services. Given the multitude of services activities, 
variation in local circumstances, and heterogeneity in the size and shape of firms, 
local governments may also be better positioned to craft suitable arrangements. 
Significant experimentation with different types of initiatives is still needed, 
however, given the dearth of successful precedents to emulate. Moreover, social 
enterprises have often taken the lead in developing countries, as their approach is 
more conducive to experimentation.
There are some similarities between these programmes and what was needed 
to bring advances in technology to farmers in the United States in the 19th 
century, as both entailed many small enterprises scattered over the entire country. 
The Government of the United States created an agricultural extension service 
to engage in experimentation at the local level and to bring knowledge to local 
farmers. Similarly, governments in developing countries, both local and national, 
will have to become more entrepreneurial and more engaged with experimentation 
and focus on bringing innovation insights to small enterprises if the strategy is to 
make a significant difference beyond individual initiatives.
Finally, there is significant room to invest in and to deploy new technologies, 
especially for those employed in services. Automation and other innovations in 
manufacturing have been typically skills- and capital-biased, contributing to 
significant labour shedding in manufacturing globally. However, the direction of 
technological change is not exogenous and predestined; it responds to economic 
incentives, governmental policies, and prevailing social norms amongst the 
innovator community.18 Explicit governmental efforts to stimulate the development 
of labour-friendly technologies can play an important role in services. There 
are already some prominent examples of how digital technologies and artificial 
intelligence (AI) can empower lower-skilled workers to expand the range of tasks 
that they can perform, taking over some of the responsibilities of more experienced 

98  The New Global Economic Order
and skilled professionals and becoming more productive in the process. AI cannot 
just replace labour; it can augment labour’s productivity and thus even increase the 
demand for labour and wages (Korinek and Stiglitz, 2019).
In medicine and long-term care, digital tools enable the least-skilled caregivers 
to provide more advanced services to their patients. Specially designed software 
can assist community health workers in some countries by helping conduct timely 
visits and providing access to health and learning resources online. In education, 
similar digital tools can enable less experienced teachers to engage in pedagogy that 
is more closely tailored to the needs of different groups of students. In call services, 
conversational assistance by generative AI has been shown to significantly increase 
the productivity of the least experienced customer support employees.19 Since such 
technologies already exist, developing countries could facilitate their dissemination 
and use amongst domestic firms.
Today, it is widely recognised that governments have a critical role in fostering 
green technologies. Given the importance of promoting green jobs, it could be 
argued that governments have an equally critical role in promoting labour-friendly 
technologies.20 Since the bulk of innovation takes place in advanced economies, 
such nations could play a significant role in facilitating economic development. 
Rebuilding the middle class and overcoming labour market polarisation is a 
priority for them as well, so investing in labour-friendly technologies is a task that 
serves their own immediate interests. Still, the technologies that are appropriate 
for advanced countries may—and almost surely will—differ from those that are 
best for developing countries. There is scope for an international effort to develop 
all technologies; just like green innovation, labour-friendly innovation is a global 
public good.
Beyond the advanced economies, many middle-income countries—such as 
Brazil, India, South Africa, and Türkiye—are also becoming centres of innovation. 
There is some evidence that technologies and organisational forms that are more 
suited to the developing country context disseminate more rapidly amongst 
developing nations (Lerner et al., 2024). Hence, these larger economies amongst 
the developing world face significant opportunities but also bear significant 
responsibility in this area.
Even in the best-case scenario, a services-based model is unlikely to deliver 
growth rates approaching those experienced in East Asia in the past. Increasing 
productivity in labour-absorbing services is likely to prove more difficult than in 
manufacturing, even if the strategies outlined previously prove successful and a 
significant gap in productivity remains in the services sector between developed 
and developing countries. Manufacturing technologies are more standardised and 
are easier to copy despite large differences in developing countries.21
Yet there is another general equilibrium reason as well. Under manufacturing-led 
growth strategies, a succession of export-oriented sectors—such as toys, 
garments, automobiles, and steel—could take off, one after the other, without 
regard to domestic demand. In contrast, the expansion of non-tradable 
services—those that are most likely to absorb employment—is ultimately limited 
by the size of the domestic market. Individual services sectors cannot keep growing 
if other services sectors are not also expanding and increasing their productivity; 

A New Growth Strategy for Developing Nations  99
the growth of retail depends on the growth of personal services, hospitality, and the 
rest of the economy, for example. Otherwise, the profitability of the more rapidly 
expanding services would soon collapse. This complementarity on the demand side 
necessitates balanced growth and lowers the ceiling on the potential growth rate of 
the economy.22
The kind of growth strategy described is more inclusive and equitable. It delivers 
direct income gains for poorer segments of society through better jobs and builds 
a middle class, rather than waiting for a trickle-down phenomenon from the export 
champions and largest firms. The quality of growth is higher, even if its quantity 
is lower.
7.5  New Industrial Policies for the Green Transition and Labour-
Absorbing Services
Governments have a significant role to play in the strategy outlined, both for 
investments in the green transition and for good jobs programmes in services. 
Markets left to their own devices do not foster the kind of structural changes 
needed on either front. In general, structural transformation is impeded by 
credit and risk market failures, coordination failures, externalities, and learning 
spillovers. That is why the most rapidly growing economies of the past all relied 
heavily on industrial policies promoting productive diversification and the growth 
of new industries. Such barriers will be even greater in the transition to green 
industries and productive, labour-absorbing services. Hence, private markets and 
entrepreneurship must be augmented by a public vision and a supporting set of 
public incentives, inputs, and services.
In theory, market failures that impede dynamic efficiency can sometimes be 
addressed through targeted tax/subsidy schemes that result in private agents 
internalising the full social consequences of their actions. Learning spillovers and 
climate-change externalities, for example, should be corrected through Pigouvian 
subsidies and taxes, respectively. The magnitude of these interventions should 
equal the difference between private and social costs/benefits (at the margin), 
subject to second-best considerations (e.g. the deadweight loss of raising taxes), 
which may call for smaller interventions.23
In practice, governments face uncertainty on multiple dimensions, undermining 
the practical applicability of the standard recipe.24 Problems associated with 
imperfections of credit markets and the absence of insurance markets are not 
easily handled by the standard Pigouvian approach. The specific sources of 
market failures; their respective magnitudes; the behavioural responses of firms, 
investors, innovators, and consumers; range of possible technological trajectories; 
and efficacy of different types of policies can vary. In such contexts, learning and 
capacity building by the government must be built into policy design, rather than 
assumed. Moreover, the relationship between the government and firms has to 
be conceptualised as an inherently dynamic one. Although East Asian industrial 
policies are often portrayed as top-down policies implemented by autonomous, 
well-informed governments, the reality was quite different. Many of these 
governments started with little experience with and capacity to conduct extensive 

100  The New Global Economic Order
industrial policies. The requisite governmental capacity was not a precondition for 
their policies but was built over time. Successful industrial policies entail learning 
by society at large.25
The practice of industrial policy has five key interconnected elements: 
embeddedness, coordination, monitoring, conditionality, and institutional 
development. The first of these refers to the establishment of a strategic 
dialogue and collaboration with firms to elucidate the information on obstacles 
and opportunities for productive investments, including market failures. As the 
sociologist Peter Evans discussed, in successful cases, states’ relative autonomy 
from private firms—and hence their ability to prevent regulatory capture—was 
combined with embeddedness, which Evans (1995) defined as ‘institutionalized 
channels for the continual negotiation and re-negotiation of goals and policies’. 
These channels of communication enable governmental agencies to understand 
private firms’ constraints and potential as well as reshape their understanding in 
light of new information and changing circumstances. The channels can be ad hoc 
and informal or formal (e.g. joint councils, commissions, or roundtables).26
The second element is policy coordination. Unlike in the standard model, there 
is no presumption that Pigouvian taxes/subsidies will be adequate or that they can 
be specified ex ante. The requisite remedies may range from alterations in certain 
governmental regulations to the provision of specific training or technologies to 
financial incentives (e.g. the Haryana cab employment scheme). In many cases, 
finance and risk absorption has been crucial.27 The nature of the needed remedies 
become clear over time and cannot be determined at the outset. Appropriate 
responses may require actions across different parts of the government. Therefore, 
governmental agencies charged with industrial policies need the ability to 
coordinate and to mobilise these actions. If they lack the authority or capacity 
to do so effectively, they should be able to elevate the task to a higher level of 
governmental authority (e.g. governor or president’s offices).
Third, a government’s learning has to be systematised and reflected in its 
subsequent actions and decisions. This requires an explicit effort to monitor and 
to evaluate the outcomes of industrial policy decisions. Many of these decisions 
will inevitably lead to sub-optimal outcomes and mistakes. What matters for the 
success of industrial policies is not just the ability to ‘pick winners’28—or equally 
importantly, to identify projects with large externalities—but also the ability to let 
the losers go, a less difficult but still demanding requirement. Often, the phasing in 
or partial implementation of programmes can allow rigorous evaluation of policies 
through RCTs or econometric tools (e.g. the Bogotá fruit and vegetable vendor 
scheme). Yet even if formal evaluation methods cannot be deployed, it is possible 
to learn from outcomes and to adjust policies appropriately. For example, in China’s 
industrial policies, the willingness to experiment with new policies in designated 
zones or provinces was key as was its ability to adjust incentive schemes when they 
produced excess capacity or blatant inefficiency.
Fourth, and relatedly, successful industrial policies have typically provided 
strong incentives for compliance. In East Asia, the financial support was not 
a gift; continued support required sustained success on the part of the firm, 

A New Growth Strategy for Developing Nations  101
often with objective indicators, like exports. Governments looked for enterprises 
with substantial net worth, so they would also suffer significant losses in the event 
of failure.29
Fifth, successful industrial policies require new institutions and institutional 
development as previously discussed. In many countries, development banks have 
played an important role. Institutional arrangements were created so that they were 
not captured but were sensitive to market failures and social needs.
These lessons derive largely from the experience with industrial policy in 
manufacturing but are also broadly applicable to new challenges in decarbonisation 
and the services sector. They entail building a new kind of cooperative relationship 
between the government and private firms, with mutual responsibilities and 
obligations.
7.6  Concluding Remarks
In some ways, the challenges facing developing countries have not changed. 
Broad capabilities such as skills, education, learning, and good governance remain 
fundamental determinants of long-term economic development. Although these 
are necessary, they are not sufficient. Sustained growth will require structural 
transformation, and structural transformation will, in general, not necessarily come 
about on its own—at least at the pace desired. Explicit governmental policies are 
needed to foster it. Where structural change and associated policies are concerned, 
the future of economic growth will look very different from its past. The climate 
challenge, new technologies and digitalisation, premature de-industrialisation, the 
changing global geopolitical landscape, and receding hyper-globalisation render the 
export-oriented industrialisation strategies of the past less viable and effective. This 
chapter argued for a strategy with two key prongs—investment in the green transition 
and productivity enhancement in labour-absorbing, mostly non-tradable services.
This does not mean that other sectors of the economy, and manufacturing 
and agriculture, in particular, are unimportant and should be neglected. In 
most low-income economies, agriculture will continue to employ considerable 
numbers of people. Improving their plight will require investments in agricultural 
productivity and making use of new technologies as well as diversification into 
non-traditional crops. However, as agriculture modernises, it will almost certainly 
continue to release labour to the rest of the economy, necessitating the creation 
of more productive jobs in urban areas.30 In the past, manufacturing was the key 
sector that could absorb these new migrants as well as workers from unproductive 
informal activities. Productive manufacturing sectors can still make important 
contributions to the economy (e.g. generating exports, tax revenues, and demand 
spillovers for other domestic sectors). There are opportunities for strengthening 
links between manufacturing exporters, whether domestically or foreign-owned, 
and domestic suppliers and input providers to increase productive employment and 
to disseminate new technologies. Yet manufacturing’s ability to absorb the bulk 
of jobseekers will be much more limited than in the past, hence the emphasis on 
labour-absorbing services.

102  The New Global Economic Order
Steering the requisite structural changes will require new modes of industrial 
policies, focussed on these new strategic priorities. Economists traditionally 
view industrial policy as top-down interventions by ‘hard’ states that keep 
business and other stakeholders at arms’ length. This picture never accurately 
reflected how successful industrial policy was in East Asia. For green industries 
and services, it is even less useful. The significant uncertainties in technological 
evolution, heterogeneities amongst production units, and the highly dynamic 
settings in these new areas require a new model of iterative, strategic collaboration 
between firms and governmental agencies, both at the national and sub-national 
levels. The focus should be on experimentation and learning, with objectives, 
instruments, performance criteria, and institutions developed and shaped over time. 
Governmental capacity would be accumulated in the process, rather than presumed 
as given.
All governmental policies, either by commission or omission, shape the 
economy and affect economic growth. In that sense, every country has an industrial 
policy—some just do not recognise that. An awareness of how the rules of the 
game, public expenditures and taxes, and explicit industrial policies shape an 
economy is not only important to prevent capture but also to promote sustainable 
and inclusive growth.
Notes
	 1	 A key issue, addressed later in greater detail, is structural transformation towards what? 
The early success of East Asia was due to structural transformation from agriculture to 
manufacturing. The thrust of this chapter is that that form of structural transformation 
will not work, however. Learning and structural transformation imply that past 
comparative advantages do not matter as much as the new comparative advantages 
that are created in this dynamic process. South Korea in 1960 obviously did not have 
a comparative advantage in chips. An essential part of the structural transformation, 
though, is ‘learning to learn’, converting a static economy into a dynamic one (Stiglitz, 
1987).
	 2	 For example, Kerala State in India has consistently emphasised investments in 
education and health, but the improvement of human development indicators has not 
been matched with strong economic growth, undermining the long-run sustainability of 
its development model. This is also one reason why many countries in Latin America 
and Africa that adopted Washington Consensus policies have had disappointing 
growth outcomes, despite significant improvements in education, governance, and 
macroeconomic stability indicators. The empirical literature on conditional convergence 
suggested that there are returns to improvements in these fundamentals, but the estimated 
rates of conditional convergence are generally too slow and cannot account for the kind 
of rapid growth seen in successful cases in East Asia and elsewhere. See Rodrik (2014).
	 3	 Countries that are overly dependent on an inflow of foreign capital (and therefore face 
increasing indebtedness) are subject to sudden changes in market sentiment, engendering 
a crisis with significant consequences. Competitive exchange rates simultaneously 
reduce dependence on foreign capital inflows and are an instrument of industrial policy. 
See, for example, Guzman, Ocampo, Stiglitz (2018) and Rodrik (2008).
	 4	 There is extensive theoretical literature on why the government must do this and 
why markets themselves cannot be relied upon, which focusses on market failures. 
Beginning with the work of Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986) and Stiglitz and Weiss (1981), 

A New Growth Strategy for Developing Nations  103
an understanding developed of the range and nature of these market failures, and what 
governments can do to overcome them or at least mitigate their consequences (Stiglitz, 
1989). In the context of development and decisions about the structure of production, 
literature was generated on industrial policies for developing countries (Greenwald 
and Stiglitz, 2013) as discussions centred on the importance of innovation; these were 
dubbed learning, industrial, and technology policies (Noman and Stiglitz, 2011).
	 5	 Trade barriers did not fall uniformly; there was a large gap between rhetoric and reality. 
New trade barriers also appeared, such as those associated with intellectual property.
	 6	 In Africa, de-industrialisation had set in earlier. Its causes, consequences, and potential 
remedies are discussed in Noman and Stiglitz (2011).
	 7	 Two countries seem to be exceptions to this trend—Bangladesh and Viet Nam. 
Bangladesh is more of an apparent exception than a real one. While the country 
has been highly successful with ready-made garments for export, Bangladesh’s 
manufacturing sector remains heavily concentrated, and diversifying out of ready-
made garments has proved difficult. Despite its export orientation, the share of 
informal employment in textiles and garments is above 90%. A shortage of skills and 
need for technological upgrading are common themes in discussions of Bangladesh’s 
manufacturing sector, both of which obviate the country’s fundamental comparative 
advantage in low-skilled labour (Rodrik, 2022b). Viet Nam has been much more 
successful, with a particularly sharp rise in manufacturing employment after the mid-
2010s. Yet it has the singular advantage of geographical proximity to China and other 
East Asian exporters. It has been the leading beneficiary of the first rising wage costs 
in China, then the Trump tariffs on China, and eventually the US emphasis on ‘friend-
shoring’. In Viet Nam, too, integration into the world economy through inward direct 
investment has increased the demand for skills. Skills shortages—and consequent 
problems of ‘job hopping’ and ‘employer poaching’—are reported to be amongst the 
most important constraints that export-oriented foreign investors, such as Samsung, 
face (Sheldon and Kwon, 2023).
	 8	 Some natural resources-rich countries can manage periods of very rapid economic 
growth, but if the proceeds of the natural resources are not reinvested in structural 
transformation—which typically occurs—the growth is limited. When the resources run 
out or prices come down, growth stops and often reverses.
	 9	 The concern is not with the overall quantity of jobs or with full employment but with 
the structure of jobs. Reasonable macroeconomic policies—along with ‘flexible’ labour 
markets—will ensure full employment, but the resulting structure can be sub-optimal 
from a developmental standpoint and not growth-promoting. The focus, therefore, is on 
the creation of more jobs in the more productive sectors of the economy as a vehicle 
of structural transformation and growth, analogous to the role that industrialisation has 
played historically.
	10	 This is not to say that a few smaller countries may be able to establish a niche in 
manufacturing and succeed through such a strategy. Thus, the contention that a few 
countries have been able to sustain growth so far through a manufacturing export-
oriented strategy is not inconsistent with the overall thrust of this chapter.
	11	 Stiglitz (2021) deconstructed why the export-oriented industrialisation growth strategy 
was so successful and what a 21st-century replacement—a multi-pronged strategy—
may look like.
	12	 The reasons for this are set forth more fully in Stern and Stiglitz (2023).
	13	 This discussion follows Songwe et al. (2022) and Stern and Stiglitz (2023).
	14	 This can be an especially important part of development strategies if arrangements can 
be established that would compensate developing countries for the global environmental 
services that they provide.
	15	 The traffic jams that mark large capitals of developing countries around the world are 
bad for the climate and living standards.
	16	 See also chapters by Ocampo (Chapter 10) and Songwe (Chapter 12) in this collection.

104  The New Global Economic Order
	17	 This is a transitory increase in output associated with the green investment drive. It 
is a simple supply-side calculation, assuming that all of the additional investment is 
incremental to the capital stock. In practice, some of it may go to replace dirty productive 
capacity, in which case the incremental supply-side effect would be lower. There may be, 
however, additional demand-side effects, arising from reductions in under-employment 
and movement of labour from low-productivity to higher-productivity modern activities. 
This demand-side bonus can boost the growth rate further.
	18	 See Acemoglu and Restrepo (2020a) and Acemoglu (2021). For a broader discussion of 
the direction of innovation and its implications for development, see Korinek, Schindler, 
Stiglitz (2021).
	19	 For these and other examples, see Acemoglu and Restrepo (2020b); Acemoglu (2021); 
Rodrik (2022b); Kremer et al. (2021); Ton (2017); and Brynjolfsson, Li, Raymond 
(2023).
	20	 Within the standard market failures paradigm, there are a host of failures related to the 
pace and direction of innovation (e.g. Stiglitz and Greenwald, 2014).
	21	 This fact is reflected in the finding that formal manufacturing sectors have long exhibited 
unconditional convergence in labour productivity. That is, these sectors tend to catch up 
to the global productivity frontier regardless of local conditions, such as the quality 
of institutions or human capital. This has not been a regular feature of the rest of the 
economy (i.e. traditional agriculture and most services) (Rodrik, 2013).
	22	 Moreover, Baumol’s disease contends that the pace of innovation—the movement of the 
frontier itself—will be lower in services.
	23	 The implementation of such interventions faces important impediments in the presence 
of uncertainties and asymmetries of information. There is much literature on the design 
of optimal schemes in such circumstances. When there are multiple market failures, as is 
the case in practice, there cannot just be a reliance on Pigouvian subsidies. See the next 
footnote and Stiglitz (2019).
	24	 Economist Martin Weitzman showed that quantity targets may dominate Pigouvian price 
instruments in the presence of uncertainty about demand and supply elasticities. The price 
instrument may minimise the efficiency costs of the policy but risks undershooting and 
producing too small a behavioural response. Quantity targets may be superior when the 
social costs of missing the socially optimal target—reducing emissions, for example—
are higher than the deadweight costs that may otherwise be created (Weitzman, 1974). 
More generally, non-linear interventions are preferable to either of the two extremes. In 
some contexts, governments actually implement such schemes.
	25	 See Greenwald and Stiglitz (2013). A recent overview of the evidence on industrial 
policy is provided in Juhász, Lane, Rodrik (2024).
	26	 Executive roundtables (Mesas Ejecutivas) in Peru were discussed in Ghezzi (2017). As 
summarised in Juhász, Lane, Rodrik (2024): ‘The objective of the roundtables was to 
institutionalize public-private dialog aimed at addressing coordination failures among 
firms and between the firms and the government, and thereby encourage productivity-
increasing investments. The roundtables started as open-ended conversations to 
share information on and uncover constraints. Instead of lengthy industry reports, 
the focus was on developing an initial list of blockages or obstacles to productivity 
and means of removing them, to be revised as needed as more knowledge was 
acquired in the process. The responsibilities for action were divided into separate 
categories of “my problems” and “your problems.” The former category refers to 
government responsibilities (e.g., removing red tape for exports or establishing a 
national phytosanitary agency); the latter refers to firms’ actions (e.g., making specific 
investments in quality upgrading)’.
	27	 In the context of the East Asian miracle, see Stiglitz (1996) and Stiglitz and Uy (1996). In 
advanced countries, venture capital firms often play a role in coordinating the provision 
of critical inputs for the firms in which they invest.

A New Growth Strategy for Developing Nations  105
	28	 Under the old trade theory, picking winners was simple—identifying projects or sectors 
in which a country had a comparative advantage given its resources endowment (e.g. its 
capital, human capital, or natural capital). In more dynamic contexts, this approach is 
less helpful; with factor flows, comparative advantage relates only to immobile factors, 
and a country with a skills shortage may be able to obtain the requisite skills from abroad. 
More importantly, changing technologies; institutions; and more broadly, individual, 
organisational, and institutional learning mean that comparative advantages can change 
over time. Thus, a critical question facing any country as it embarks on structural change 
is what comparative advantages to acquire (Greenwald and Stiglitz, 2013).
	29	 For a discussion of conditionality, see Mazzucato and Rodrik (2023).
	30	 Changes in consumption patterns may ameliorate this tendency somewhat. For example, 
flowers and vegetables use more labour than wheat.
References
Acemoglu, Daron. 2021. “AI’s Future Doesn’t Have to Be Dystopian.” Boston Review, May 
20. https://www.bostonreview.net/forum/ais-future-doesnt-have-to-be-dystopian/.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Pascual Restrepo. 2020. “The Wrong Kind of AI? Artificial 
Intelligence and the Future of Labour Demand.” Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy 
and Society 13 (1): 25–35. https://doi.org/10.1093/cjres/rsz022.
Brynjolfsson, Erik, Danielle Li, and Lindsey R. Raymond. 2023. “Generative AI at Work.” 
Working Paper. Working Paper Series. Washington, DC: National Bureau of Economic 
Research. https://doi.org/10.3386/w31161.
Diao, Xinshen, Mia Ellis, Margaret S. McMillan, and Dani Rodrik. 2021. “Africa’s 
Manufacturing Puzzle: Evidence from Tanzanian and Ethiopian Firms.” Working Paper. 
Working Paper Series. Washington, DC: National Bureau of Economic Research. 
https://doi.org/10.3386/w28344.
Evans, Peter B. 1995. Embedded Autonomy: States and Industrial Transformation. Princeton 
Paperbacks. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ghezzi, Piero. 2017. “Mesas Ejecutivas in Peru: Lessons for Productive Development 
Policies.” Global Policy 8 (3): 369–80. https://doi.org/10.1111/1758–5899.12457.
Greenwald, Bruce, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 2013. “Industrial Policies, the Creation of a Learning 
Society, and Economic Development.” In The Industrial Policy Revolution I: The Role of 
Government Beyond Ideology, edited by Joseph E. Stiglitz and Justin Yifu Lin, 43–71. 
Basingstoke; New York: Palgrave Macmillan UK. https://doi.org/10.1057/9781137335173_4.
Greenwald, Bruce C., and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 1986. “Externalities in Economies with 
Imperfect Information and Incomplete Markets.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 
101 (2): 229. https://doi.org/10.2307/1891114.
Guzman, Martin, José Antonio Ocampo, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 2018. “Real Exchange 
Rate Policies for Economic Development.” World Development 110 (October): 51–62. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.worlddev.2018.05.017.
Juhász, Réka, Nathan Lane, and Dani Rodrik. 2024. “The New Economics of Industrial 
Policy.” Annual Review of Economics 16: 213–42. https://doi.org/10.1146/annurev-
economics-081023–024638.
Korinek, Anton, Martin Schindler, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 2021. “Technological Progress 
and Artificial Intelligence.” In How to Achieve Inclusive Growth, edited by Valerie Cerra, 
Barry Eichengreen, Asmaa El-Ganainy, and Martin Schindler, 163–211. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780192846938.003.0005.
Korinek, Anton, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 2019. “Artificial Intelligence and Its Implications for 
Income Distribution and Unemployment.” In The Economics of Artificial Intelligence: An 
Agenda, edited by Ajay Agrawal, Joshua Gans, and Avi Goldfarb, 349–90. University of Chicago 
Press. https://www.nber.org/books-and-chapters/economics-artificial-intelligence-agenda/
artificial-intelligence-and-its-implications-income-distribution-and-unemployment.

106  The New Global Economic Order
Kremer, Michael, Sasha Gallant, Olga Rostapshova, and Milan Thomas. 2021. “Is 
Development Economics a Good Investment? Evidence on Scaling Rate and Social 
Returns from USAID’s Innovation Fund.” Working Paper. https://cpb-us-w2.wpmucdn.
com/voices.uchicago.edu/dist/0/2830/files/2021/09/SROR−21.03.12_clean−3.pdf.
Lankes, Hans Peter, Rob Macquarie, Éléonore Soubeyran, and Nicholas Stern. 2024. “The 
Relationship between Climate Action and Poverty Reduction.” The World Bank Research 
Observer 39 (1): 1–46. https://doi.org/10.1093/wbro/lkad011.
Lerner, Josh, Junxi Liu, Jacob Moscona, and David Y Yang. 2024. “Appropriate 
Entrepreneurship? The Rise of China and the Developing World.” Harvard Business 
School Working Papers, no. 24-061, February.
Mazzucato, Mariana, and Dani Rodrik. 2023. “Industrial Policy with Conditionalities: 
A  Taxonomy and Sample Cases.” UCL Institute for Innovation and Public Purpose, 
Working 
Paper 
Series, 
October. 
https://www.ucl.ac.uk/bartlett/public-purpose/
publications/2023/oct/industrial-policy-conditionalities-taxonomy-and-sample-cases.
McKenzie, David. 2019. “Shortening Supply Chains for Fruit and Vegetable Vendors in 
Bogota.” Finance and PSD Impact, no. 54, August. https://doi.org/10.1596/32297.
Mugulur, Aneesh. 2019. “How Haryana is Working with Cab Aggregators to 
Solve the Unemployment Puzzle.” Samagra, Transforming Governance, July 5. 
https://samagragovernance.in/.
Noman, Akbar, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 2011. “Strategies for African Development.” In 
Good Growth and Governance in Africa: Rethinking Development Strategies, edited by 
Akbar Noman, Kwesi Botchwey, Howard Stein, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press. https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780199698561.001.0001.
Rodrik, Dani. 2008. “The Real Exchange Rate and Economic Growth.” Brookings Papers on 
Economic Activity, no. 2. https://www.brookings.edu/articles/the-real-exchange-rate-and-
economic-growth/.
Rodrik, Dani. 2013. “Unconditional Convergence in Manufacturing.” The Quarterly Journal 
of Economics 128 (1): 165–204. https://doi.org/10.1093/qje/qjs047.
Rodrik, Dani. 2014. “The Past, Present, and Future of Economic Growth.” In Towards a 
Better Global Economy: Policy Implications for Citizens Worldwide in the 21st Century, 
edited by Franklin Allen, Jere R. Behrman, Nancy Birdsall, Shahrokh Fardoust, Dani 
Rodrik, Andrew Steer, and Arvind Subramanian. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/acprof:oso/9780198723455.003.0002.
Rodrik, Dani. 2016. “Premature Deindustrialization.” Journal of Economic Growth 21 (1): 
1–33. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10887-015-9122-3.
Rodrik, Dani. 2022a. “An Industrial Policy for Good Jobs.” Policy Proposal. The Hamilton 
Project. https://www.hamiltonproject.org/wp-content/uploads/2023/03/20220928_THP_
Proposal_Rodrik_GoodJobs.pdf.
Rodrik, Dani. 2022b. “Prospects for Global Economic Convergence Under New 
Technologies.” In An Inclusive Future? Technology, New Dynamics, and Policy 
Challenges, edited by David Autor, Kaushik Basu, Zia Qureshi, and Dani Rodrik, 
88. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. https://www.brookings.edu/articles/
an-inclusive-future-technology-new-dynamics-and-policy-challenges/.
Rodrik, Dani, and Ishac Diwan. 2023. “Bridging the Climate-Development Gap.” Project 
Syndicate, September 26, 2023. https://www.project-syndicate.org/commentary/low-
middle-income-countries-debt-development-climate-crisis-by-dani-rodrik-and-ishac-
diwan-2023–09.
Sheldon, Peter, and Seung-Ho Kwon. 2023. “Samsung in Vietnam: FDI, Business–
Government Relations, Industrial Parks, and Skills Shortages.” The Economic and 
Labour Relations Review 34 (1): 66–85. https://doi.org/10.1017/elr.2022.3.
Songwe, Vera, Nicholas Stern, Amar Bhattacharya, and United Nations. Economic 
Commission for Africa. 2022. “Finance for Climate Action: Scaling up Investment 
for Climate and Development.” United Nations. Economic Commission for Africa, 
November. https://repository.uneca.org/handle/10855/49154.

A New Growth Strategy for Developing Nations  107
Stern, Nicholas, and Joseph E. Stiglitz. 2023. “Climate Change and Growth.” Industrial and 
Corporate Change 32 (2): 277–303. https://doi.org/10.1093/icc/dtad008.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1987. “Learning to Learn, Localized Learning and Technological 
Progress.” In Economic Policy and Technological Performance, edited by Partha 
Dasgupta and Paul Stoneman, 125–53. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. https://
doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511559938.007.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1989. The Economic Role of the State. Edited by Arnold Heertje. Oxford, 
UK; Cambridge, MA, USA: Basil Blackwell.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 1996. “Some Lessons from the East Asian Miracle.” The World Bank 
Research Observer 11 (2): 151–77.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 2019. “Addressing Climate Change Through Price and Non-Price 
Interventions.” European Economic Review 119 (October): 594–612. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.euroecorev.2019.05.007.
Stiglitz, Joseph E. 2021. “From Manufacturing-Led Export Growth to a Twenty-First 
Century Inclusive Growth Strategy: Explaining the Demise of a Successful Growth 
Model and What to Do about It.” In Inequality in the Developing World, edited by Carlos 
Gradín, Murray Leibbrandt, and Finn Tarp, 284–318. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
https://doi.org/10.1093/oso/9780198863960.003.0012.
Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Bruce C. N. Greenwald. 2014. Creating a Learning Society: A New 
Approach to Growth, Development, and Social Progress. Kenneth J. Arrow Lecture 
Series. New York: Columbia University Press.
Stiglitz, Joseph E, and Marilou Uy. 1996. “Financial Markets, Public Policy, and the East 
Asian Miracle.” The World Bank Research Observer 11 (2).
Stiglitz, Joseph E., and Andrew Weiss. 1981. “Credit Rationing in Markets with Imperfect 
Information.” The American Economic Review 71 (3): 393–410. https://www.jstor.org/
stable/1802787.
Ton, Zeynep. 2017. “The Case for Good Jobs.” Harvard Business Review, November 30, 
2017. https://hbr.org/2017/11/the-case-for-good-jobs.
University of Groningen. 2017. “Maddison Historical Statistics.” https://www.rug.nl/ggdc/
historicaldevelopment/maddison/.
Weitzman, Martin L. 1974. “Prices vs. Quantities.” The Review of Economic Studies 41 (4): 
477–91. https://scholar.harvard.edu/files/weitzman/files/prices_vs_quantities.pdf.
World Bank, dir. 2023. “Delivering Growth to People through Better Jobs in Africa.” World Bank 
Live. 
https://live.worldbank.org/en/event/2023/africa-pulse-regional-economic-update-
growth-people-better-jobs.
World Bank, dir. n.d. “World Development Indicators.” https://databank.worldbank.org/
source/world-development-indicators.