In Vietnam's postreform era, the proliferation of profiteering opportunities have, in addition to creating new forms of corruption, transmuted previously prevailing types of corrupt acts in multiple ways across different levels of state–society relations. Everyday corrupt practices have thus become an essential means of economic survival for many. Starting from the metaphorical framing of petty bribery as "making law," I propose the notion of what I term "corrupt exception" as a conceptual tool to explore the power dynamics of petty corruption between state agents and small-scale traders at the Vietnam–China border. Whereas bribery is felt by local traders to create better profit opportunities, the corrupt exception likewise pushes them into a de facto illegality where they remain subjected to arbitrary "lawmaking" and excluded from legal protection. I show that the metaphors employed by small-scale traders to negotiate complicit relationships with corrupt state officials both contest and reinforce the exercise of a localized form of sovereign power in a permanent state of corrupt exception in which "law" is "made" in exchange for bribes. A través de los distintos niveles de las relaciones Estado-sociedad en la era post-reforma de Vietnam, la proliferación de oportunidades de beneficio ha transformado en múltiples maneras las formas de corrupción anteriormente prevalecientes, al tiempo que han surgido nuevos tipos de actos corruptos. Así, las prácticas cotidianas de corrupción han devenido un medio esencial de subsistencia económica para muchos. A través de la interpretación metafórica de la pequeña corrupción como "hacer ley," propongo el término "excepción corrupta" como una herramienta conceptual para explorar las dinámicas de poder de la pequeña corrupción en la frontera entre Vietnam y China. Al tiempo que el soborno es percibido por los comerciantes locales como una herramienta para crear mejores oportunidades de beneficio, la excepción corrupta los conduce a una ilegalidad de facto dentro de cuyo marco dichos comerciantes permanecen sujetos a un "hacer ley" arbitrario y, por lo tanto, los excluye de cualquier protección legal. En este artículo muestro que las metáforas utilizadas por los pequeños comerciantes para negociar una complicidad compartida con los oficiales estatales corruptos, desafían, al tiempo que refuerzan, el ejercicio de un poder soberano localizado en un permanente estado de excepción corrupta donde "la ley" es "hecha" en el intercambio de los sobornos. Every morning, scores of Vietnamese transporters and trader intermediaries gather at the Lào Cai–Hekou border gate and wait for the checkpoint to open at 7:00 a.m. sharp. Their role in directing the flow of goods from Chinese wholesalers and retailers in Hekou, Yunnan Province, to Lào Cai City on the Vietnamese side of the border is crucial (see Figure 1). One of these intermediaries, whom I shall call Mr. Hưng, specializes in the supply of various goods to Lào Cai–based market vendors. As a local resident, Mr. Hưng holds a special border-crossing permit that entitles him to the duty-free import of Chinese-produced goods into Vietnam up to a maximum value of two million đồng (around $95) per person per day per load. His daily trading volume, however, exceeds this amount by far. Moreover, some of his goods do not comply with current quality and regulatory requirements. To reduce import costs and avoid closer scrutiny, Hưng has an arrangement with a set of customs officials on a 500,000 đồng (around $24) per month basis and schedules his trips to match their hours of duty. Once Hưng has passed the border gate, he may be pounced upon by a mobile patrol of the market control department in charge of trade law enforcement. For a monthly "fee" of 400,000 đồng (around $19) to the market control team, Hưng does not have to worry much about such encounters. According to the good-humored middleman, these arrangements are necessary for him and the market vendors he supplies to stay profitable in their business. "Making law [làm luật; i.e., negotiating a bribe] with customs officials and evading [import] tariffs are essential, otherwise we couldn't make enough for a living," he says (conversation with author, September 6, 2012). In this article, I examine how small-scale traders at the Lào Cai–Hekou border gate negotiate their cross-border trading opportunities with customs officials and other law-enforcing state agents. Through a detailed study of two corruption episodes at my major field site, a large state-run market in Lào Cai City, I illustrate that corruption encounters take place in two different directions: in the one described above, a transgressor of the law (in this case, the trader) negotiates a bribe to bypass a legal restriction or avoid being fined for its violation; in the other, a law enforcement official extorts a bribe from a (real or alleged) transgressor in return for not applying the law. In both cases, the authority to grant an unlawful exception to the legal provisions in place ultimately rests with those whose actual task it is to enforce compliance with the law. In their everyday encounters with borderland traders, local state officials thus assume a localized form of sovereign authority, defined by the ability to decide whether to enforce the law or to declare an exception. I suggest that the juridical concept of exception provides a useful conceptual tool to explore the power dynamics of petty corruption at the Vietnam–China border. This approach builds on the premise that the bribe arrangements of small-scale traders like Mr. Hưng are intimately bound up with the state official's assumed sovereign power to decide on an unlawful exception to the legal provisions that regulate cross-border trade. I define this exception as "corrupt" in the literal sense that it is granted in exchange for a bribe. The metaphorical framing of petty corruption as "making law" (làm luật) adds an intriguing twist to this notion. As Giorgio Agamben (1995:26) notes, "The law has a regulative character and is a 'rule' not because it commands and proscribes, but because it must first of all create the sphere of its own reference in real life and make that reference regular." This perspective holds that lawmaking is preceded and determined by an exceptional (and most often undesirable) situation or fact that continues to remain unregulated by law unless it is included into the legal order by its very exclusion from the normal sphere of life. It is in this light that Agamben (1995:26) sees the exception as "the originary form of law." Làm luật, however, in its euphemistic sense of negotiating a bribe arrangement, is not preceded by a situation unregulated by law. Rather, it blurs the distinction between the already existing legal framework and the transgressive fact by establishing an unlawful, corrupt exception from the law in the name of law. Anthropologists have analyzed the intricacies of illegal and semilegal flows of goods and people across national borders from a variety of perspectives: as an expression of resistance to states that fail to provide their citizens with sustainable employment opportunities (MacGaffey et al. 1991), as a subversive economy that imposes practical limits on the exercise of state power (Donnan and Wilson 1999), as a collaborative form of trade regulation governed by practical norms and mutual understanding between state agents and local traders (Titeca and de Herdt 2010; Walker 1999), or as a way for traders to challenge and reinterpret neoliberal logics of free trade to their own advantage (Galemba 2012). While each of these perspectives offers a valid way of understanding the particularities of borderland economies and the wider social, moral, and political processes in which they are embedded, the exigencies of systemic corruption in the broader context of Vietnam's socialist-oriented market economy require a view from a somewhat different perspective. Largely inspired by Agamben's work (1995, 2005), the concept of "the exception" has drawn much scholarly attention in the past decade, particularly in studies on neoliberal governmentality and citizenship regimes. In her book Neoliberalism as Exception (2006), Aihwa Ong deploys the exception to examine neoliberal strategies of governing in East and Southeast Asia that rely on the creation of "differently administered spaces of 'graduated' or 'variegated sovereignty'" (Ong 2006:7), such as free trade zones in border areas and other economic and administrative enclaves. Whereas the exception is most often associated with the suspension of basic citizen rights and the reduction of people to "bare life" (Agamben 1995), Ong's neoliberal zones of exception instead offer special economic opportunities to certain segments of the population while excluding others. In countries in which neoliberalism itself is not the norm, these logics of inclusion and exclusion demarcate the boundaries between what Ong calls "neoliberalism as exception" and "exceptions to neoliberalism" (Ong 2006:5). In contrast, the notion of what I term "corrupt exception" shifts attention to certain spaces of overlap between inclusion (into the neoliberal logics of economic self-advancement) and exclusion (from legal protection and, more generally, political participation) in a state in which corruption has become the norm rather than the exception. On the one hand, the corrupt exception at the Lào Cai–Hekou border gate is seen by many Vietnamese small-scale traders as essential for deriving a profitable income from cross-border trade and trade-related services. Oftentimes, traders construe their complicit arrangements with corrupt officials as benevolent exchange relationships from which they ultimately receive more than they give, and notions of hardship and family burdens are employed to elicit compassion and urge state officials to apply the law with reason and sentiment. Yet, on the other hand, the corrupt exception also constitutes a space of illegality in which the law is broken twice in the name of the law: first by the transgressor who violates the (real or alleged) law and then by the official who accepts or extorts a bribe in return for not applying the law. Through their inclusion into this space of illegal opportunity, the corrupt exception likewise excludes cross-border traders from legal protection in their economic pursuits and subjects them to predatory law-enforcement practices. Routine raids for substandard or prohibited goods are met with much resentment and moral outrage, as they are primarily (and most often correctly) seen as a pretext for negotiating the conditions of exchange required for the corrupt exception to apply. Corruption can hence also be understood as "a form of exchange: a polysemous and multi-stranded relationship and part of the way in which individuals connect with the state" (Shore and Haller 2005:7). If all forms of exchange are ultimately embedded in social and power relations and moral economies, then corruption, too, is subject to continuous processes of embedding and re-embedding in the changing societal, economic, and political contexts in which it occurs. Besides addressing the particular social and cultural complexities involved, an anthropological inquiry into the practices and discourses of corruption may further shed light on how, as Akhil Gupta (2005:175) suggests, "people imagine the state to be, what state actions are considered legitimate, and how ideas of rights of citizens and subjects are constituted." What Gupta does not take into account, however, is that citizens may also be, to some extent, co-opted into the wider political economy of systemic corruption. I argue that metaphors and other figures of speech play a crucial role in mediating such processes of embedding and co-opting. As cognitive tools "rooted in the cultural categories within which speakers construct their conversations" (Ben-Amos 1999:152; see also Lakoff and Johnson 1980), metaphors not only frame and shape human (self-)perception and social experience but also harbor the potential to transmit social commentary and political criticism. My findings show that although the growth of systemic corruption in Vietnam has transformed the overall ways in which Vietnamese citizens imagine and experience the state, the tropes, analogies, and metaphors employed by small-scale traders at the Vietnam–China border to negotiate complicit exchange relationships with state officials simultaneously contest and reinforce the exercise of assumed sovereign power in local sites of corrupt exception. Corruption has for a long time been most closely associated with underdevelopment and poor governance in the non-Western world. Since the end of the Cold War, however, the spread of neoliberal principles of market deregulation and privatization has spurred, contrary to the promises of dominant neoliberal perspectives, unprecedented forms and scales of corruption across the globe (Brown and Cloke 2004). Vietnam's shift from a centrally planned economy to a socialist-oriented market economy has had similar effects, and ordinary citizens feel increasingly disenchanted by the degree to which corruption in its manifold manifestations has come to permeate their lives.1 An escalating series of high-profile scandals revealing the close ties between the political elite and private business interests contributed not only to an upsurge in discontent among the general population (MacLean 2012) but also to an increased readiness to question the integrity of the political system and voice off-the-record anger, such as the market woman who whispered into my ear, "I just hate the system (chế độ). It is corrupt all the way through!" (conversation with author, September 15, 2012).2 The rise of corruption as a spiraling systemic phenomenon has apparently eroded respect for the state leadership to such a degree that expressions of discontent have become much bolder than in the past.3 Corruption is, of course, nothing new to Vietnam. Besides the most common contemporary terms for corruption and bribery, tham nhũng and hối lộ, the Vietnamese language is rich in metaphorical expressions denoting a variety of corruption-related practices in different historical and social class contexts. The phrase "the silver bullion pierces the paper document" [nén bạc đâm toạc tờ giấy], for example, dates back to ancient times and indicates a bribe paid to influence a mandarin official to revoke a decree or an edict. If the latter was a member of the petitioner's lineage, the mandarin official would even have been morally obliged to generously grant favors and privileges to his relative, true to the adage "one man becomes a mandarin, his entire lineage benefits" [một người làm quan, cả họ được nhờ]. Under French colonial rule (1884–1945), corruption and nepotism among mandarins and local notables became ever more pervasive (Gillespie 2002:174). The common people's attitude toward greedy and corrupt officials was encapsulated in a proverb that is still popularly used today: "At night we are robbed by bandits and at daytime by the mandarins" [cướp đêm là giặc, cướp ngày là quan]. During the so-called subsidy period from 1975–1986, bribing and gift giving was frequently referred to as lo lót ("taking care of the lining"), in the sense of feathering someone's nest to generate favorable conditions for oneself. Significant segments of the Vietnamese population, including traders and entrepreneurs, apparently "survived decades of central planning and official suppression by co-opting, corrupting and evading state regulators" (Gillespie 2009:248; MacLean 2008). In southern Vietnam, similar practices evolved during the cooperativization of private trade in the 1980s. Ann Marie Leshkowich (2008:23) relates that traders at Bến Thành market (Hồ Chí Minh City) "today joke that one of the great ironies of the central government's cooperative system was that the primary cooperation it fostered was between traders and market management in outwitting the state." As elsewhere in socialist economies, elaborate networks of social relations—based on mutual obligation and reciprocity and nurtured by the exchange of gifts and favors—played an important role in facilitating access to otherwise scarce goods.4 After economic reform, such networks—as well as corruption—not only became more or less "regular solutions to problems of exchange left unsolved by the rule of law and administrative reforms" (Abrami 2002:2) but gradually evolved into a system of rule that some scholars classify as neopatrimonial. In such a system, public offices become commodities that provide ample opportunities to earn back one's own investment by way of misappropriating public resources and extracting rents from below, parts of which are channeled upward in return for further patronage from higher levels of state bureaucracy. "By paying bribes we feed (nuôi sống) the tax inspectors and customs officials, and these in feed other Mr. Hưng to the elaborate patronage networks which in the state have come to be in Vietnam, to work in a place like this Lào Cai–Hekou border have to to way (conversation with author, 2012). In his it is to the of corruption in contemporary Vietnam. he is "the side of Vietnamese rich field of opportunities was up by the privatization of and As in the of such opportunities for and access to power is across social and in Vietnam. Corruption and its thus contributed to the sense of among the wider population the between the of social and and the of economic political and an between rich and as has in the of ordinary citizens be, in the social of corruption even as they are also its primary and It was not the that certain forms of corruption became in terms of làm that law to "the of power by officials to not by law," which then the of local solutions to centrally problems and the of to My however, that in its current the term more to the of existing legal the most làm situation the of an between the and a such as a is into the or to a valid during a of make law with local their across the border. illegal trade for example, in the and may even bribe người làm luật, to that each of a various the way and To on the and of goods on the more or less elaborate arrangements to be The term to a certain on the part of the in that their however, làm also to the of bribes from in return for not applying the law. the of the a of the Vietnamese political and legal Vietnam is a state by the of Vietnam, whose role as the in state and in the The as the of state power and of the is with the and as with processes elsewhere in the the is more During the era, and not considered in fact had a and thus the of national during the socialist period and often in then left to at the of which for a but of in local and Since the of to the in the the legal system has at establishing the rule of law and This that are by the that is also to further such as detailed and to the of the authority is not to the central of state but also place at the and can and from a perspective as a (Gillespie The of authority has not only to a proliferation of and but also its and often with each with new for corruption, an that sees as an of in the of China. In Vietnam, the of làm as an term for corruption that is power and, to that extent, an of and The of the law," as and is that the of its is already into the law as In sites of corrupt this as a rule and a form of localized sovereign power that authority by the as by Lào as an trading on Vietnam's with is by major associated with and in its ancient by French socialist and the experience of Chinese Vietnam in Lào Cai was to and its of whom had from the in the to return to their of the of relations in the border trade gradually On side of the the border economic zones in addition to of from in of work and a better life. on the one hand, was seen by the Vietnamese state as an important for the economic of the border that would create new for both the and for the population in the On the other hand, the advantage of economic growth to an trade for Vietnam, thus for and to the flow of Chinese goods from into a that would Vietnam's national Lào Cai City to the from the of the and and borders the Chinese of Hekou, Yunnan A across the and as an border for and (see Figure of the that the the major market is only a from the that as Lào to I Lào Cai market as my primary field for the dynamics of social relations and that the of small-scale market traders in cross-border economic As an important economic for in many parts of the small-scale cross-border trade of various means and to the on it and I was thus to not only about ways of relations with trading and but also about bribes paid to customs from and the exchange of gifts for favors to in the market The of corruption, however, was not part of my would have the of those for whom the of a in already a potential to border My official was to Lào and this is where my and I the of from to and in and September of During vendors with to their and much of daily of in the various the and flow of trading and social with market and law-enforcement and in and with vendors during the less however, we also to both of the border to the and of and to as as with transporters and trader intermediaries who the border on a some even times per In to where encounters between and officials are more in the of sovereign authority by Lào Cai–Hekou border gate officials place in the much more space of and practices that of the notion of does not for the that the attitude of Vietnamese state officials toward it is may the of Vietnam by its In a of corrupt this the of I on the rather common of forms of law such as and even of corrupt exception are thus in an of of the that in Lào Cai have the form of their My as to who their met with an that to the of some state their i.e., the and of the protection and can thus in of one of my more I shall call are many although many rich people are a in Lào Cai and in notes, 2012). Moreover, I was that the the Lào Cai–Hekou border gate is only the of the The place at is the time the i.e., becomes the of these are the patronage of some only and human who may the of corrupt that place at higher levels of the of power and opportunities to it is not to that is some to such and only a of my the of corruption who for the being in and perspective to the and of small-scale traders at the of the Vietnamese state, to shed light on the overall ways in which petty corruption between citizens and state officials and itself in contemporary Vietnamese In the I provide an of how small-scale traders frame and relationships of