When Nana Osei-Opare asked to reprint my article, “The Third International and the Struggle for National Liberation in South Africa,” I balked. I was only twenty-three when I wrote it for a graduate seminar at UCLA, and like most preliminary research projects it was based on a slim body of primary sources since I had no access to South African archives. I had just settled on an ambitious and unrealistic dissertation project comparing the histories of the Black Left in South Africa and the U.S. South—unrealistic because I had no prospect of getting into South Africa. In 1985, President P. W. Botha declared a state of emergency, and my participation in protests at the South African Consulate in Beverly Hills did not bode well for my visa application. Looking back at the essay three decades later, I find some of it downright embarrassing—particularly the occasional flights into rigid Marxist language, and the limited sources available to me. Of course, in 1986, the Soviet Union was three years from collapse and the Soviet Archives were several years from opening. But considering these constraints, and the audacity of youth, there are things about the article of which I’m proud. Taking a page from Cedric Robinson, whose book Black Marxism had just appeared in 1983, I suggest that a Black radical tradition rooted in earlier notions of African redemption, rural opposition culminating in resistance to the Land Act of 1913, and expressions of working-class and petit bourgeois African nationalism had already produced a vision of self-determination. These movements preceded the formation of the Communist Party of South Africa (CPSA), whose initial orientation was toward the white working class. Imagine a Communist Party anywhere back ing striking miners under the banner, “Workers of the World Unite and Fight for a WHITE SOUTH AFRICA!” When African trade unionists, as well as officials of the Communist International (Comintern) in Moscow, criticized Party leaders for their uncritical support of the Rand Revolt in 1922, to the exclusion of the more numerous African miners’ struggles, white South African