Contents: Pavel Zgaga/Ulrich Teichler/Hans G. Schuetze/Andra Wolter: Reforming Higher Education for a Changing World - Ulrich Teichler: The Future of Higher Education: A View Reflecting the State and the Tasks of Higher Education Research - Peter Scott: Mass to Market Higher Education Systems: New Transitions or False Dawn? - Pavel Zgaga: How to Gain Global Connectivity While Retaining Respect for Local Variations? A Reflection on Higher Education Reforms in South-east Europe - Hans G. Schuetze: Introductory Note - Marek Kwiek: Reforming European Universities: The Welfare State as a Missing Context - Shinichi Yamamoto: Higher Education Reform: Why Did It Start and Has It Ended? An Analysis of the Japanese Case - W. James Jacob/John N. Hawkins: Trends in Chinese Higher Education: Opportunities and Challenges - Andra Wolter: Massification and Diversity: Has the Expansion of Higher Education Led to a Changing Composition of the Student Body? European and German Evidence - Rolf von Lude: Academic Freedom under Pressure: From Collegial Governance to New Managerialism - Rosalind M. O. Pritchard: Academic Values and English Higher Education - William Bruneau: Five Defences of Academic Freedom in North American Higher Education - German Alvarez-Mendiola/Mitzi Danae Morales Montes: Trends in Private Higher Education in Mexico - Wietse de Vriesand/German Alvarez-Mendiola: Can Reform Policies be Reformed? An Analysis of the Evaluation of Academics in Mexico - Hans G. Schuetze: Private Higher Education in Canada and the United States: Development, Reform, and Likely Futures - Ulrich Teichler: After Decades of Declamation: Higher Education on the Move towards Lifelong Learning? - Anna Spexard: Higher Education and Lifelong Learning in the 21st Century: Policies and the Current State of Realization in Europe - Maria Slowey: Intergenerational Equality and Higher Education: Towards an Age-Friendly Higher Education? - Andra Wolter: Opening up Higher Education for New Target Groups in Germany: A Case Study for the Development of University Lifelong Learning - Maureen W. McClure: MOOCs: Hype or Hope? Conflicting Narratives in Higher Education Policy.