5G Cellular: Key Enabling Technologies and Research 
Challenges 
 
Ekram Hossain, Fellow, IEEE, and Monowar Hasan, Student Member, IEEE 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Manitoba, Canada 
Email: Ekram.Hossain@umanitoba.ca, monowar_hasan@umanitoba.ca 
 
The evolving fifth generation (5G) cellular wireless networks are envisioned to provide higher 
data rates, enhanced end-user quality-of-experience (QoE), reduced end-to-end latency, and 
lower energy consumption. This article presents several emerging technologies, which will 
enable and define the 5G mobile communications standards. The major research problems, which 
these new technologies breed, as well as the measurement and test challenges for 5G systems are 
also highlighted. 
 
Introduction 
 
The exponential growth of wireless data services driven by mobile Internet and smart devices has 
triggered the investigation of the 5G cellular network. Around 2020, the new 5G mobile networks 
are expected to be deployed. 5G networks will have to support multimedia applications with a 
wide variety of requirements, including higher peak and user data rates, reduced latency, 
enhanced indoor coverage, improved energy efficiency and so on.  
 
The primary technologies and approaches to address the requirements for 5G systems can be 
classified as follows [1-3]:  
 densification of existing cellular networks with the massive addition of small cells and a 
provision for peer-to-peer (P2P) communication (e.g., device-to-device [D2D] and 
machine-to-machine [M2M] communication-enabled multi-tier heterogeneous networks); 
 simultaneous transmission and reception (e.g., full-duplex [FD] communication);  
 massive multiple-input multiple-output (massive-MIMO) and millimeter-wave (mm-
wave) communications technologies; 

 improved energy efficiency by energy-aware communication and energy harvesting; 
 cloud-based radio access network (C-RAN); and  
 virtualization of wireless resources.  
 
The objective of this article is to provide a brief review of the emerging technologies that could 
shape the design of future 5G cellular networks. The key ideas for each of the technologies are 
stated, along with the potential impact on 5G requirements and the open research issues.  
 
The article is organized as follows: followed by a brief overview of the networks and devices for 
5G systems, a brief outline of the enabling technologies is presented. The key challenges related 
to measurement, testing, and validating the performance of 5G system components are briefly 
discussed. Then the fundamental research challenges for resource management in 5G systems are 
highlighted before we conclude the article. The visions and requirements of 5G networks and the 
corresponding technologies are presented in Table I.  
 
TABLE I 
FEATURES AND TRENDS OF 5G NETWORKS 
 
5G expectations and features 
Trends/proposals 
Capacity and throughput improvement, high data rate 
(~1000x of throughput improvement over 4G, cell data rate 
~10 Gb/s, signaling loads less than 1~100%) 
Spectrum reuse and use of different band (e.g., mm-
wave communication using 28~GHz and 38~GHz 
bands), multi-tier network, D2D communication, C-
RAN, massive-MIMO 
Reduced latency 
(2~5 milliseconds end-to-end latencies) 
Full-duplex communication, C-RAN, D2D 
communication 
Network densification 
(~1000x higher mobile data per unit area, 100~10000x 
higher number of connecting devices) 
Heterogeneous and multi-tier network 
Advanced services and applications  
(e.g., smart city, service-oriented communication) 
C-RAN, network virtualization, M2M 
communication 
Improved energy efficiency 
(~10x prolonged battery life) 
Wireless charging, energy harvesting 
Autonomous applications and network management, 
Internet of Things 
M2M communication, self-organizing and cognitive 
network 

 
 
 
Networks and Devices for 5G Systems 
 
The 5G networks will consist of nodes/cells with heterogeneous characteristics and capacities 
(e.g., macrocells, small cells [such as femtocells and picocells], D2D user equipments [UEs] 
etc.), which will result in a multi-tier architecture. Due to increasing complexity in network 
management and coordination among multiple network tiers, the network nodes will have the 
capability of self-organization (e.g., autonomous load balancing, interference minimization, 
spectrum allocation, power adaptation etc.) [2]. Also, a UE can have simultaneous active 
connections to more than one base station (BS) or access point (AP) using the same or different 
radio access technologies (RATs). The heterogeneous nodes (e.g., UEs, BSs, smart machines, 
wearable devices etc.) can be integrated through a unified (possibly cloud-based) network to 
provide seamless connectivity. The communication efficiency in 5G systems will be improved by 
incorporating techniques such as coordinated multipoint (CoMP) joint transmission and 
reception, network-assisted interference cancellation and suppression, spectrum reuse (e.g., non-
orthogonal multiple access), and three-dimensional or full-dimensional MIMO [4]. In addition, 
the use of a large number of remote radio heads (RRHs) connected to central processing nodes 
(e.g., clouds) with the high-speed backhaul/fronthaul is also envisioned [3].   
 
Due to the emerging trends of energy-aware FD communication and spectrum virtualization, 5G 
device architectures will be more complex than those with 4G systems. Devices in the 5G 
networks should be capable of operating in multiple spectrum bands, ranging from radio 
frequency (RF) to mm-wave, while being backward compatible (e.g., with existing technologies 
such as 3G and 4G). Due to energy hungry multimedia applications, energy efficiency will be an 
important feature for 5G user experience and hence it is desirable that the devices integrate 
energy harvesting technologies [3]. The need to support several RATs, FD communication and 
energy harvesting capabilities will breed many challenges for designing and testing the internal 
chips and front-end modules for 5G devices.   
 

Fig. 1 illustrates the aspects of 5G networks and devices discussed above. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
 
(c) 

 
(d) 
 
(e) 
 
Fig. 1. (a) An illustration of conventional and 5G cellular wireless network. (b) FD-enabled small 
cell network. (c) Schematic diagram of an RF energy-harvesting network. (d) An LTE-A system 
enhanced with cloud-based radio access network. (e) A high-level representation of cellular 
network virtualization. 
 
Enabling Technologies for 5G Cellular Networks 
 
Dense Heterogeneous Networks  
 
As shown in Fig. 1(a), the 5G cellular will be a mulit-tier heterogeneous network consisting of 
macrocells along with a large number of low power nodes such as (small cells, relays, remote 
radio heads [RRHs]) along with the provisioning for P2P (such as D2D and M2M) 
communication.  The deployments of heterogeneous nodes in 5G systems will significantly have 
much higher density than today’s conventional single-tier (e.g., macrocell) networks [5]. The 
heterogeneity of different classes of BSs (e.g., macrocells and small cells) provides flexible 
coverage area and improves spectral efficiency.  By reducing the size of the cell, the area spectral 

efficiency is increased through higher spectrum reuse. Additionally, the coverage can be 
improved by deploying small cells indoors (such as home, office buildings, public vehicles etc.). 
Wireless P2P communication (e.g., D2D/M2M communication among UEs and autonomous 
sensors/actuators) underlaying cellular architecture can significantly increase the overall 
spectrum and energy efficiency of the network. In addition, the network-controlled P2P 
communications in 5G systems will allow other nodes (such as relay or M2M gateway), rather 
than the macrocell BS, to control the communications among P2P nodes. Given that the inter-tier 
and intra-tier interferences are well managed, the adoption of multiple tiers in the cellular 
network architecture will provide better performance in terms of coverage, capacity, spectral 
efficiency, and power consumption [6]. 
 
Full-Duplex Communication 
 
In a FD communication scheme, a FD transceiver is capable of transmitting and receiving on the 
same frequency at the same time. It has been generally assumed that the wireless node (e.g., BS, 
UE etc.) cannot decode a received signal while it is simultaneously transmitting on a same 
frequency band due to internal interference between the transmitter and the receiver circuits 
(which is referred to as self-interference [SI]). However, with the recent advancements in the 
antenna and digital baseband technologies as well as the RF interference cancellation techniques, 
it is possible to build in-band FD radios. FD communication has the potential to double the 
spectral efficiency at the physical layer through the removal of a separate frequency band/time 
slot for both uplink and downlink transmission. Recent studies [7], [8] indicate that FD systems 
are feasible and can provide significantly higher data rates than the conventional half-duplex 
(HD) communication systems. FD technology can also solve the problems in existing wireless 
networks, such as hidden terminals, loss of throughput due to congestion, and large end-to-end 
delays [3]. For instance, FD communication scheme can reduce the latency by simultaneously 
receiving the feedback signals (i.e., channel state information [CSI], ARQ/ACK control signaling 
etc.) from the receiver during transmission. FD communication also enables a wireless node such 
as a BS to perform RF energy transfer [9] (e.g., wireless charging) while receiving uplink 
transmissions from UEs.  
 

One possible approach to minimize SI in FD radios is to combine the antenna cancellation, RF 
interference cancellation, and digital interference cancellation techniques [7]. For instance, let 
the transmission signal be split between two transmit antennas. For a particular wavelength λ, 
two transmit antennas are placed at d and  λ
2 + d  away from the receive antenna. Hence by 
offsetting the two transmitters by half a wavelength, we can let the signals to add destructively. 
As a result, the receiver antenna receives a much weaker signal (e.g., less self-interference) 
compared with any one of the local transmit signal.  After performing the antenna cancellation, 
the RF interference cancellation and the digital interference cancellation techniques can be 
employed to further decrease the self-interference. In RF interference cancellation technique, a 
noise canceler chip can remove a known analog interference signal from a received signal. Since 
the transmitted symbols are already known, a coherent detection mechanism is used in digital 
interference cancellation phase to reconstruct the signal.  
 
Considering the small transmit power requirements to reduce the effect of SI, low-power 
networks (e.g., small cell networks [SCNs]) and short-range communications (e.g., D2D and 
M2M communications, multi-hop relaying) are potential scenarios where FD technology can be 
practically beneficial. However, in FD systems, interference management becomes significantly 
more complex due to new interference situations. For a multi-user channel-sharing situation, in 
addition to intra-cell interference (among the users in a cell), there are inter-cell downlink-to-
uplink interference and inter-cell inter-user uplink-to-downlink interference. 
 
Energy-Aware Communication and Energy Harvesting  
 
One of the main challenges in 5G networks is to improve the energy efficiency of the battery-
constrained wireless devices. In the context of prolonging the battery life and also improving the 
overall energy efficiency of the network, harvesting energy from energy sources could be an 
attractive solution. For instance, the UEs can harvest energy from environmental energy sources 
(e.g., solar and wind energy). However, due to stochastic nature of environmental sources, the 
available energy levels may vary significantly over time, locations, weather conditions etc. 
Therefore, harvesting energy from these sources may not be feasible for reliable and quality-of- 
service (QoS)-constrained wireless applications. Alternatively, energy can also be harvested from 

ambient radio signals (e.g., RF energy harvesting). In an RF-powered energy-harvesting network 
(RF-EHN), the UEs can harvest energy from hybrid access point (HAP) using RF signals for 
their information processing and transmission [9]. RF energy transfer is characterized by low-
power and long-distance transfer, and thus suitable for cellular wireless environments (e.g., 
powering a large number of devices with relatively low energy consumption spreading in a wide 
area). Besides, the sustainable nature of RF energy sources make the RF-EHNs as a promising 
approach for future power/energy-constrained 5G wireless networks.  
 
Generally an RF-EHN, as presented in Fig. 1(c), consists of RF energy sources, which can be 
either dedicated RF energy transmitters or ambient RF sources (e.g., TV towers). The access 
points (APs) refer to traditional network nodes (such as BSs, relays, SBSs etc.). Typically, the 
APs and RF energy sources have continuous and fixed electric supply. The harvesting-enabled 
UEs can harvest energy from RF sources. Depending on the network, the AP and RF energy 
source can be the same (e.g., acts as HAP). The AP has an energy harvesting zone and an 
information transmission zone. Since the operating power of the energy-harvesting component is 
much higher than that of the information decoding component, the energy harvesting zone is 
smaller than the information transmission zone [9].  
 
As shown in Fig. 1(c), an RF energy-harvesting node (which could be user equipments [UEs], 
low-power femto APs etc.) consists of the following major components [9]: a low-power 
microcontroller, to process data from the network application; a low-power RF transceiver, for 
information transmission/reception; an energy harvester (composed of an RF antenna module, an 
impedance matching, a voltage multiplier, and a capacitor), to collect and convert RF signals into 
electricity. Besides, a power management module is used to decide whether the harvested energy 
should be used immediately or to store for future. The energy storage (e.g., battery) is used to 
reserve the harvested RF energy for future operation. 
 
Since the amount of harvested RF energy depends on the distance from the RF source, the 
network nodes in the different locations can have significant difference in the amount of 
harvested RF energy [9]. For instance, when the energy harvester is distance d apart from the 
transmitter with the unit transmit power, the amount of energy that can be harvested from the 

received signal is given by Eh(d) =  f(d, ), where f(d, ) is the received power and  is the 
conversion efficiency, which depends on the efficiency of the antenna, the accuracy of the 
impedance matching between the antenna and the voltage multiplier, and the power efficiency of 
the voltage multiplier that converts the received RF signals to DC voltage. The received power 
function f(d, ) is given by f(d, ) = Pr
det(d) × 10L × |r|2 where Pr
det(d) is the received power using 
any deterministic free space path-loss model (e.g., Friis equation), path-loss factor  L = –  
log10(d/d0) for a path-loss exponent  and reference distance d0, and r is a random number 
following complex Gaussian distribution. 
 
Simultaneous Information/Energy Transmission and FD-Enabled Energy Harvesting  
 
Since RF signals can carry both energy and information, theoretically RF energy harvesting and 
information reception can be performed from the same RF input signal. This scheme is referred 
to as the simultaneous wireless information and power transfer (SWIPT) [9]. Since information 
and power transfer operate with different power sensitivities at the receiver (e.g. –10 dBm and –
60 dBm for energy and information receivers, respectively) [6], and the conventional receiver 
architecture is designed for information transfer only, practical SWIPT optimal circuits for 
harvesting energy are not available yet.  
 
To implement SWIPT, one idea is to switch the receiver between two modes (e.g., information 
decoding and energy harvesting) based on instantaneous channel and interference condition.  In 
the recent literature [9], the following receiver designs are available: time switching (e.g., an 
antenna periodically switching between information decoding and energy harvesting circuits) and 
power splitting (e.g. the receiver separates the received signal into two streams for the 
information and energy receivers with the same or varying power levels).  
 
Leveraging the FD communication approach described before, the node can perform energy 
harvesting and data communication simultaneously. In cellular RF-EHNs, FD operations are 
typically supported with the use of dual-antenna HAPs [10]. However, this approach is different 
from conventional FD communication systems since one of those antennas performs downlink 
energy transfer to users and the other is used for information transmission in the uplink. Similar 

to any FD systems, self-interference (SI) is a critical issue for full-duplex HAPs, and there are 
ongoing research efforts (e.g., [10], [11]) to minimize SI in the HAPs. 
 
Cloud-Based Radio Access Network 
 
The concept of cloud-based radio access network (C-RAN) evolved from a distributed base 
station (DBS) architecture where a BS server is responsible for baseband processing. The 
baseband processing units (BBUs) of conventional cell sites are separated from the analog radio 
access units (referred to as remote radio heads [RRHs]) and moved to the cloud (e.g., BBU pool) 
for centralized signal processing and management.  A BBU pool serves a particular area with a 
number of RRH of macro and small cells. Based on baseband signals received from the cloud, the 
transmissions of radio signals to users are performed by the RRHs.  
 
In the 4G (e.g., LTE-A based cellular) architecture, radio and baseband processing functionality 
is integrated inside the BS and the inter-BS coordination is performed over X2 interface. In C-
RAN, as shown in Fig 1(d), the baseband processing (such as coding, modulation, fast Fourier 
transform [FFT], etc.) is performed in the cloud (e.g., BBU pool). A BBU pool is a virtualized 
cluster, which can consist of general purpose processors to perform baseband processing. At a 
remote site, the radio unit (e.g., RRH) is co-located with the antennas and performs digital 
processing, digital to analog conversion, analog to digital conversion, power amplification and 
filtering [12]. The backhaul connects the cloud with the mobile core network. The fronthaul 
(generally optical transport link) spans from the RRHs to the cloud for transmitting digital 
baseband signals. 
 
The advanced joint processing mechanism in the cloud can reduce the delay during intra-BBU 
pool handover in conventional BSs. The use of inexpensive and densely deployed RRHs in C-
RAN will enhance the scalability, improve network capacity, and extend the coverage of future 
5G systems. C-RAN architecture also significantly reduces the capital expenditure (CAPEX) and 
operational expenditure (OPEX). For example, C-RAN lowers the cost of baseband processing 
and reduces the power consumption by performing load balancing and cooperative processing of 
signals from several BSs. The number of BS sites can be greatly reduced by means of BBU 

aggregation in the cloud, which results in much lower cost of operation. In addition, C-RAN 
minimizes energy consumption by enabling the MIMO or coordinated multipoint (CoMP) 
concepts. The native centralized support for multi-standard operation in C-RAN will make inter-
RAT operation (e.g., scheduling, interference coordination or traffic management) and network 
maintenance (e.g., upgrade to newer technology) relatively easy [12]. 
 
Wireless Network Virtualization 
 
Cooperation and network virtualization will become one of the main trends in 5G systems. 
Together with C-RAN architecture, wireless network virtualization (WNV) facilitates resource 
sharing among many operators. WNV enables multiple network operators to share common 
resources (e.g., network infrastructure, backhaul, licensed spectrum, core and radio access 
network [RAN], energy/power etc.). The virtualization mechanism abstracts (e.g., isolates) the 
physical resources to a number of virtual resources, which is shared by different consumers (e.g., 
service providers).  The main advantages of WNV include: high resource utilization, improved 
system performance, reduced CAPEX and OPEX, better quality-of-experience (QoE) for the end 
users, and easier migration to newer technologies by isolating part of the network [13]. 
 
The virtualized wireless networks consist of an infrastructure provider (InP) and mobile virtual 
network operator (MVNO). The InP owns the physical cellular infrastructure and radio 
resources. The MVNO leases the resources from InP, creates and operates virtual resources, and 
assigns to the subscribers. The network resources (e.g., infrastructure, radio spectrum) belong to 
one or more InPs and are virtualized and spitted into slices. The MVNO utilizes the slices from 
InP depending on specific service level agreements (SLAs) and provides service to the end users 
without knowing the undelaying physical network architecture.  
 
Physical and virtual resource sharing in WNV: Depending on different degrees of 
virtualization, the WNV can be classified as: (i) Cross-infrastructure virtualization: enables to 
virtualized resources across InPs (inter-InP-virtualization) and within InPs (intra-InP-
virtualization). Hence all of the InPs in a geographical region can share the network resources 
across the MVNOs. (ii) Limited intra-infrastructure virtualization: considers resource 

virtualization within a single InP, e.g., radio spectrum and access network is shared by different 
MVNOs. 
 
A high level representation of WNV is illustrated in Fig. 1(e). The physical network sharing 
refers to the sharing of radio spectrum and/or wireless network infrastructure.  Radio spectrum 
resources refer to licensed or dedicated free spectrum bands, subchannels, or physical resource 
blocks (PRBs) for LTE-A networks. Using spectrum sharing, all or part of the spectrum owned 
by the InP are utilized by one or multiple MVNOs. Infrastructure sharing can be categorized as 
active and passive sharing [13]. Active sharing refers to sharing of network elements (e.g., RF 
antennas, BSs, backhaul and backbone, routers and switches in the core network etc.). The 
passive sharing is the sharing of non-networking materials (e.g., buildings, locations, cell sites 
etc.). The infrastructure sharing offers cross-infrastructure virtualization, e.g., multiple InPs can 
share the same physical network. 
 
Virtual wireless resources are created by slicing the physical network resources (e.g., spectrum 
and/or infrastructure) into virtual pieces. For example, an MVNO may have the core network but 
no radio coverage for a specific region, and may request RAN slice from the InP. The resource 
manager or virtualization controller (often referred to as hypervisor) is responsible for mapping 
the physical to virtual resources.  There are two parts of the controller, substrate controller and 
virtual controller [13]. The substrate controller allows InPs to virtualize and manage the substrate 
physical network where the virtual controller is used for MVNOs to manage the virtual slices or 
networks. Using the virtual controller, the MVNOs can customize their own networks and 
services. 
 
The virtual resources can be sliced into different levels as follows [13]: (i) Spectrum-level slicing: 
the radio resources are sliced and assigned to MVNOs by time/space multiplexing, or spectrum 
reuse method (e.g., underlay accessing). The hypervisor schedules the air interface resource (e.g., 
PRBs for LTE-A/LTE-B based network) between BS and UEs.  (ii) Network-level slicing: it 
allows to virtualize the physical network nodes (e.g., BSs, relays, femto APs), core networks 
(e.g., mobility management entity [MME], serving gateway [SGW]) and computing modules 
(e.g., CPU, memory, I/O devices) in a close geographical area into virtualized nodes based on 

some criterion (e.g., users link quality, MNVOs’ resource requirements, power budget, 
interference etc.). (iii) Flow-level slicing: In flow-level slicing, the resource slice is defined as the 
set of virtual resources (e.g., traffic flows) requested by the MVNOs. The resource slice could be 
based on bandwidth (e.g., data rate) and/or radio resource (e.g., time slot) and the cellular 
network topology is transparent to the MVNOs. 
 
Research Challenges for 5G Networks  
 
Despite the fact that aforesaid key-enabling technologies significantly improve the overall 
network performance and end-user QoE, there are several research challenges (from 
system/device design and testing to network management) to fulfill the requirements of 5G 
systems. In the following, we discuss the research challenges into two categories, namely, (i) 
measurement and test challenges for future 5G systems; and (ii) challenges for efficient 
management of the radio resources. 
 
Measurement and Test Challenges for 5G Systems 
 
In the following, we briefly present the key challenges related to measurement, testing, and 
validating the performance of 5G system components. Table II summarizes the issues that make 
the measurement and testing of 5G systems more challenging. 
 
Measurement and modeling of the propagation channels: The fundamental challenge to 
measure and model the propagation channel is mainly due to use of higher frequencies and 
various bandwidths, together with much larger antenna arrays. The growth of wireless traffic 
requires additional spectrums (e.g., higher frequencies in the mm-wave) and the enabling 
technologies such as large-scale MIMO and densification of network nodes impose new 
requirements for channel measurement/modelling in the spatial domain. The key 
challenges/considerations for measuring and modelling the 5G propagation channels can be 
summarized as follows [14].  
 

 Efficient and realistic measurement: Since the measurement data are crucial for the 
needed extensions/modifications of available propagation models, the measurement 
approach should capture diverse frequency range, spatial consistency, 3D (e.g., elevation) 
and spherical waves, as well as the new communications paradigms such as D2D/M2M 
and small cell communications. Besides, measurements should be carried out for mm-
wave (e.g., 60 GHz and above) both in indoor/outdoor and considering possible realistic 
use-cases (such as crowded areas, vehicle-to-vehicle/roadside communications etc.). 
 Spatial distributions and mobility: The existing channel models are drop-based, e.g., the 
scattering environment is randomly created for each link. However, since the density of 
links is expected to increase in 5G systems, it is important to model these links in a 
consistent manner which can also inherently support the heterogeneous mobility behavior 
of different network nodes.  
 Large-scale antenna arrays and mm-wave communication: It is envisioned that 5G 
systems will use very large-scale antenna arrays for directive communication. 
Considering these directive antennas, current channel models require corresponding 
improvement in angular resolution as well as sub-path amplitude distribution. In addition, 
these large-scale antenna arrays need spherical wave modelling instead of the commonly 
used plane wave approximation [14]. The use of mm-wave frequencies (particularly at 60 
GHz) is proposed to achieve spectrum and spatial multiplexing gain. However, the 
characteristics such as highly resolved angular properties and non-line-of-sight (NLOS) 
path-loss are not well known; and hence require further measurement studies. 
 
Testing 5G systems: The use of wide channel bandwidths, high data rate requirements, fast 
response times, more complex antenna configurations, and support for multiple radio access 
technology (RAT) pose significant challenges to the development of next generation BSs and 
devices. Testing of 5G systems is not limited to the hardware only, but it will be also required to 
validate new communications algorithms and approaches.  
 
From the perspective of an RF engineer, some of the key design and measurement challenges for 
5G systems are as follows [15, Ch. 6]: (i) the requirement to handle multiple channel bandwidths 
(e.g., 1.4 to 20 MHz for LTE-A), operability in higher bands (e.g., 60 GHz for mm-wave); (ii) 

The use of different transmission modes in LTE-A (e.g., orthogonal frequency-division multiple 
access [OFDMA] for uplink, single-carrier frequency-division multiple access [SC-FDMA] for 
downlink) and also provisioning for both transmission modes (e.g., time/frequency-division 
duplexing [TDD/FDD]); (iii) support for multi-RAT (e.g., due to multi-standard radio 
transmission requirements) and simultaneous transmission/reception of control, energy and data; 
(iv) the spectral, power, and time variations (due to heterogeneous network traffic and node 
density), and need to support multi-antenna techniques (e.g., transmitter diversity, spatial 
multiplexing, beamforming). The issues related to measurement and testing of the receiver radios 
for the 5G systems may include [15, Ch. 6]:  (i) verifying the RF and baseband receiver (e.g., 
autonomic gain control, baseband demodulation and hybrid automatic repeat request [HARQ] 
functional testing); (ii) receiver performance under impaired conditions (e.g., phase noise and 
additive white Gaussian noise [AWGN] impairments);  (iii) receiver performance testing (e.g., 
testing under channel propagation impairments); (iv) testing the MIMO-enabled systems (e.g., 
baseband coding assessment, receiver verification challenges such as isolation of signals, 
performance testing under static and faded channels). There are also challenges related to testing 
the 5G BSs and UEs as discussed below.  
 
 Challenges of testing the 5G BSs: 5G systems will be able to re-use some of the legacy 
infrastructure in the existing core network. However, the 5G air-interface specifications 
will include a range of new features and concepts, and thus require a significant 
development program. These features may include massive MIMO, low-latency HARQ 
procedures, high-order modulation schemes (e.g., 256 quadrature amplitude modulation 
[QAM]), the broad set of combinations/configurations of RF bands and channel 
bandwidths to provide the spectrum flexibility, testing FD radios, and energy harvesting 
capabilities. As opposed to conventional systems, future BSs (including small cell BSs, 
relays etc.) will also need to handle radio resource control (including admission control, 
load balancing and radio mobility decisions) on top of the traditional Layer 1 and Layer 2 
functionalities. In addition, the stress testing should be conducted for the BSs, clouds, and 
the core networks to validate the performance against large numbers of network nodes.  
 

 Challenges of testing the 5G UEs: The testing issues for 5G UEs are similar to those for 
traditional systems using measurement matrices such as maximum output power, power 
control, and receiver sensitivity. However, the need for the use of OFDMA transmission 
scheme in the downlink and SC-FDMA in the uplink in LTE-A/LTE-B based 5G systems, 
as well as support for simultaneous connections with provisioning for energy harvesting 
capabilities require new measurement concepts to support the necessary tests. For proper 
RF measurements, the test instrument should incorporate a signaling protocol that 
operates automatically with user definable parameters (such as channel number). The 
functional testing for the UEs should incorporate testing signaling protocol, end-to-end 
throughput, and handover testing. One of the principal challenges for testing 5G UEs is to 
ensure that the state change response requirements are met. For example, in idle mode, the 
device will be in a low power consumption state to ensure good battery life, and only 
periodically check for paging messages. When the device is in connected mode (e.g., data 
transmission is to be scheduled), the device must wake up and rapidly synchronize its 
uplink/downlink (or even both in case of FD communication). To ensure energy 
efficiency, battery drain testing should be performed in all the phases (e.g., product 
development, design validation, and application design) of system development cycles 
[15, Ch. 6].  
 
TABLE II 
MEASUREMENT AND TEST ISSUES FOR 5G SYSTEMS 
 
Particulars 
Issues to consider 
Channel measurement and 
modeling 
Massive number of devices, heterogeneous traffic pattern and 
node density,  support for spatial diversity (e.g., massive-
MIMO), operability in higher bands, new use cases (e.g., 
D2D/M2M communication) 
Testing RF modules, transmitters 
and receivers 
Testing support for MIMO and beamforming capabilities, 
testing simultaneous transmission/reception and FD radios, 
testing under different propagation bands and under 
impairments, cost effectiveness (testing large number of units 
with low cost) 
Testing BSs and UEs 
Stress testing with large number of nodes, various traffic 

patterns etc., performance testing with standard (e.g., LTE-A) 
specifications, flexibility to operate with multi-standard, 
energy efficiency testing for UEs and low power nodes (e.g., 
small cell BSs, relays, RRHs etc.) 
 
 
Research Challenges from the Perspective of Radio Resource Management 
 
The following section briefly outlines some of the fundamental research challenges in the context 
of radio resource management (RRM) in future 5G networks. Table III summarizes the open 
research issues. 
 
Interference management in heterogeneous networks: Due to the dense deployment of 
heterogeneous nodes in 5G networks, one approach of improving the resource utilization to use 
the available resources as a spectrum underlay manner. However, for the underlay 
communication 5G networks, interference management is one of the key challenges. One of the 
biggest challenges for muti-tier heterogeneous networks is to mitigate inter-cell and inter/intra-
tier interferences. In addition to heterogeneity and dense deployment of wireless devices, 
coverage and traffic load imbalance due to varying transmit powers of different BSs make the 
interference management and resource allocation problems more challenging than those in 
conventional single-tier systems. Besides, different access restrictions (e.g., public, private, 
hybrid etc.) in different tiers lead to diverse interference levels. The priorities in accessing 
channels necessitate the adaptation of different dynamic resource allocation strategies. The 
introduction of carrier aggregation, cooperation among BSs (e.g. CoMP), and the provision of 
P2P communication also complicate the dynamics of the interference. Besides, in order to 
improve the overall spectrum efficiency, the network nodes need to select the offloading (e.g., 
UEs in macro-tier may offload to SCNs) and mode selection (e.g., direct, D2D, relay-aided D2D 
etc.) decisions dynamically based on network condition (e.g., load, channel states, interference 
etc.). Since a large number of devices in 5G systems will reuse the same frequency, setting up 
(e.g., device discovery) and maintaining links for P2P communications could be difficult. Due to 
the huge number of devices and their massive accesses (especially for M2M communications), 
existing medium access control (MAC) mechanisms will need to be redesigned. 

 
Full-duplex communication: In the context of FD communication, SI limits the theoretical gain 
of the FD transmission. Even with the several SI cancellation mechanisms, a certain amount of SI 
remains in the system. To achieve the performance limit of FD transmission, efficient SI 
cancellation techniques are required that can eliminate residual SI. As has been mentioned before, 
there are new sources of inter-cell and intra-cell interference in FD communication due to 
simultaneous transmission/receptions. Moreover, due to high transmit power of BSs, downlink-
to-uplink interference becomes more severe compared to the uplink-to-downlink interference. 
Hence, to achieve maximal spectral efficiency, advanced channel estimation, interference 
management, and power allocation mechanisms (utilizing advanced techniques such as 
transceiver beam-forming, distributed space-time coding etc.) will be required considering new 
interference sources. Besides, the FD transceivers should able to opportunistically select the 
transmission modes (e.g., HD/FD) depending on the network dynamics. 
 
Energy-harvesting communication: For RF-EHNs, efficient wireless charging as well as 
channel, power, and time adaptation policies will need to be investigated. Conventional multiuser 
scheduling schemes (e.g., greedy/opportunistic/round-robin etc.) do not consider the amount of 
harvested energy and/or energy requirements, and may lead to energy (or transmit power) 
outages and/or energy overflows in RF-EHNs. Therefore, efficient multi-user scheduling 
schemes will be required for RF-EHNs. Also, efficient CSI acquisition techniques are required at 
HAPs to optimize the transmit power or energy harvesting duration to perform directional energy 
transfer depending on the channel conditions. Besides, the issues such as distributed energy 
beamforming, interference management, and effect of the mobility of devices/energy sources 
need to be investigated. 
 
Cloud-RAN: There are various challenges to deploy C-RANs, such as optimally utilizing the 
processing resource, efficiently using the fronthaul links connecting BBUs with RRHs, and 
centralized control of the propagation signal. The performance of C-RAN is constrained by the 
limited fronthaul capacity. Hence fronthaul-aware resource allocation schemes (including 
efficient signal quantization/compression and beamforming techniques) are required to maximize 
the network throughput. To achieve optimal energy savings of the C-RAN, RRHs need to be 

served optimally considering the number of active BBUs in the BBU pool and network load (e.g., 
traffic demand from UEs/RRHs). The existing resource sharing algorithms need to be enhanced 
considering clustering the cells (e.g., RRHs) and BBUs (in the cloud) to reduce scheduling 
complexity. 
 
Wireless network virtualization: A fully-functional WNV framework requires efficient resource 
utilization, inter-slice isolation, and customizable intra-slice resource allocation. The resource 
allocation algorithms need to be designed considering the finite and heterogeneous (e.g., 
spectrum, infrastructure, computing) resources, resource requirements of MVNOs, fairness 
criteria etc. Besides, control signaling and bootstamping issues need to be addressed for spectrum 
virtualization. The issues related to resource discovery, isolation, pricing-based allocation, and 
mobility management (e.g., seamless handover to different MVNO/InP) open up new research 
opportunities. 
 
TABLE III 
SUMMARY OF EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES FOR 5G CELLULAR NETWORKS 
 
Enabling 
technologies and 
trends 
Benefits and features 
Applicability 
Fundamental research challenges 
Heterogeneous 
multi-tier networks 
Increased throughput, spectrum 
utilization, energy efficiency, 
coverage expansion 
Small cell 
networks, 
D2D/M2M 
communication, 
Internet-of-Things 
Interference management, adaptive 
power control, dynamic mode 
selection and offloading to underlay 
network, device discovery, unified 
MAC design 
Full-duplex 
communication 
Spectrum efficiency, reduced 
latency, energy efficiency 
Small cell 
networks, D2D 
communication, 
cognitive radio 
networks, multi-
hop relaying 
SI reduction, cross-layer resource 
management, power allocation, 
interference management, 
synchronization and time adjustment 
to establish FD 
transmission, dynamic mode 
selection, designing a MAC protocol 
Energy harvesting 
networks 
Energy efficiency, wire free 
and energy-aware (green) 
Small cell 
networks, 
Muti-user scheduling, advanced 
channel acquisition, energy 

communication 
D2D/M2M 
communication 
beamforming, harvest/transmit time 
adaptation, interference 
management, SWIPT-enabled 
resource allocation 
Cloud RAN 
Scalability, energy/power 
savings, increased throughput, 
reduced delay, adaptability to 
dynamic traffic, reduced 
CAPEX/OPEX, easier network 
management 
Service oriented 
communication, 
heterogeneous 
networks 
BBU management (e.g., cooperation, 
interconnection, clustering), energy-
aware scheduling, fronthaul-aware 
resource allocation 
Wireless network 
virtualization 
Resource utilization, improved 
throughput, energy savings, 
reduced CAPEX/OPEX, 
enhanced QoE, easier 
migration/maintenance 
Service oriented 
communication 
(everything as a 
service) 
Isolation, resource allocation, 
fairness, revenue/price optimization, 
mobility management 
 
 
Conclusion 
 
We have provided an overview of several emerging technologies for 5G cellular wireless 
networks. Some of the open research problems have been outlined including those related to 
testing and measurement of 5G systems. In addition to the technologies discussed above, 
technologies such as mm-wave [3] and massive-MIMO [3], [4] will also impact the design and 
development of 5G networks. Future 5G cellular wireless networks will definitely be a 
combination of different enabling technologies. However, the biggest challenge will be to 
integrate all the enabling technologies and make them all work together. 
 
References 
 
[1] P. Demestichas, A. Georgakopoulos, D. Karvounas, K. Tsagkaris, V. Stavroulaki, J. Lu, C. Xiong, and 
J. Yao, “5G on the horizon: Key challenges for the radio-access network,” IEEE Vehicular Technology 
Magazine, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 47-53, Sept. 2013. 
[2] A. Zakrzewska, S. Ruepp, and M. Berger, “Towards converged 5G mobile networks - Challenges and 
current trends,” in Proc. ITU Kaleidoscope Academic Conference, pp. 39-45, Jun. 2014. 

[3] S. Talwar, D. Choudhury, K. Dimou, E. Aryafar, B. Bangerter, and K. Stewart, “Enabling technologies 
and architectures for 5G wireless,” in Proc. IEEE MTT-S International Microwave Symposium (IMS), pp. 
1-4, Jun. 2014. 
[4] Q. Li, H. Niu, A. Papathanassiou, and G. Wu, “5G network capacity: Key elements and technologies,” 
IEEE Vehicular Technology Magazine, vol. 9, no. 1, pp.71-78, Mar. 2014. 
[5] N. Bhushan, J. Li; D. Malladi, R. Gilmore, D. Brenner, A. Damnjanovic, R. Sukhavasi, C. Patel, and 
S. Geirhofer, “Network densification: The dominant theme for wireless evolution into 5G,” IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 82-89, Feb. 2014. 
[6] E. Hossain, M. Rasti, H. Tabassum, and A. Abdelnasser, “Evolution towards 5G multi-tier cellular 
wireless networks: An interference management perspective,” IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 21, 
no. 3, pp. 118-127, Jun. 2014. 
[7] J. Choi, M. Jain, K. Srinivasan, P. Levis, and S. Katti. “Achieving single channel, full duplex wireless 
communication,” in Proc. International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking, pp. 1-12, 
2010. 
[8] S. Hong, J. Brand, J. Choi; M. Jain, J. Mehlman, S. Katti, and P. Levis, “Applications of self-
interference cancellation in 5G and beyond,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 114-
121, Feb. 2014. 
[9] L. Xiao, P. Wang, D. Niyato, D. Kim, and Z. Han, “Wireless networks with RF energy harvesting: A 
contemporary survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2014. 
[10] X. Kang, C. K. Ho, and S. Sun, “Full-duplex wireless-powered communication network with energy 
causality,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1404.0471, 2014. 
[11] H. Ju and R. Zhang, “Optimal resource allocation in full-duplex wireless-powered communication 
network,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 62, no.10, pp. 3528-3540, Oct. 2014. 
[12] A. Checko, H.-L. Christiansen, Y. Yan, L. Scolari, G. Kardaras, M.-S. Berger, and L. Dittmann, 
“Cloud RAN for mobile networks - A technology overview,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,  
2014. 
[13] C. Liang and F.-R. Yu, “Wireless network virtualization: A survey, some research issues and 
challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2014. 
[14] J. Medbo, K. Borner, K. Haneda, V. Hovinen, T. Imai, J. Jarvelainen, T. Jamsa, A. Karttunen, K.  
Kusume, J.  Kyrolainen, P. Kyosti, J. Meinila, V. Nurmela, L. Raschkowski, A. Roivainen, and J. Ylitalo, 
“Channel modelling for the fifth generation mobile communications,” in Proc. 8th European Conference 
on Antennas and Propagation (EuCAP), pp. 219-223, Apr. 2014. 
[15] M. Rumney, ed. LTE and the Evolution to 4G Wireless: Design and Measurement Challenges (2nd 
ed.). John Wiley & Sons, 2013.  

[16] A. Ravelomanantsoa, H. Rabah, and A. Rouane, “Simple and efficient compressed sensing encoder 
for wireless body area network,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 63, no. 12, pp. 2973-2982, Dec. 2014. 
[17] S. Yarkan, “A generic measurement setup for implementation and performance evaluation of 
spectrum sensing techniques: Indoor environments,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 606-
614, Mar. 2015.  
[18] R. Yan, H. Sun, and Y. Qian, “Energy-aware sensor node design with its application in wireless 
sensor networks,” IEEE Trans. Instrum. Meas., vol. 62, no. 5, pp. 1183-1191, May 2013. 
 
 
Ekram Hossain (F’15) is a Professor (since March 2010) in the Department of Electrical and 
Computer Engineering at University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada. He received his Ph.D. in 
Electrical Engineering from University of Victoria, Canada, in 2001. Dr. Hossain’s current 
research interests include design, analysis, and optimization of wireless/mobile communications 
networks, cognitive radio systems, and network economics. He has authored/edited several books 
in these areas (http://home.cc.umanitoba.ca/~hossaina). Dr. Hossain serves as the Editor-in-Chief 
for the IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials and an Editor for IEEE Wireless 
Communications. Also, he serves on the IEEE Press Editorial Board. Previously, he served as the 
Area Editor for the IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications in the area of ``Resource 
Management and Multiple Access'' from 2009-2011, an Editor for the IEEE Transactions on 
Mobile Computing from 2007-2012, and an Editor for the IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in 
Communications – Cognitive Radio Series from 2011-2014. Dr. Hossain has won several 
research awards including the University of Manitoba Merit Award in 2010 and 2014 (for 
Research and Scholarly Activities), the 2011 IEEE Communications Society Fred Ellersick Prize 
Paper Award, and the IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference 2012 
(WCNC’12) Best Paper Award. Dr. Hossain was elevated to an IEEE Fellow “for contributions 
to spectrum management and resource allocation in cognitive and cellular radio networks”. He is 
a Distinguished Lecturer of the IEEE Communications Society (2012-2015). He is a registered 
Professional Engineer in the province of Manitoba, Canada.  
 
Monowar Hasan (S’13) is currently working toward his M.Sc. degree in the Department of 
Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada. He has 
been awarded the University of Manitoba Graduate Fellowship. Monowar received his B.Sc. 

degree in Computer Science and Engineering from Bangladesh University of Engineering and 
Technology (BUET), Dhaka, in 2012. His current research interests include Internet of things, 
wireless network virtualization, and resource allocation in 5G cellular networks. He served as a 
reviewer for several major IEEE journals and conferences.