Tackling Exascale Software Challenges in
Molecular Dynamics Simulations
with GROMACS
Szil´ard P´all1,2,†
Mark James Abraham1,2,†
Carsten Kutzner3
Berk Hess1,2
Erik Lindahl1,2,4
Feb 12, 2015
1Science for Life Laboratory, Stockholm and Uppsala, 171 21 Stockholm, Swe-
den,
2Dept. Theoretical Physics, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 10691 Stockholm,
Sweden,
3 Theoretical and Computational Biophysics Dept., Max Planck Institute for Bio-
physical Chemistry, Am Fassberg 11, 37077 G¨ottingen, Germany
4Center for Biomembrane Research, Dept. Biochemistry & Biophysics, Stock-
holm University, SE-10691 Stockholm, Sweden
Address correspondence to: Erik Lindahl, erik.lindahl@scilifelab.se
The ﬁnal publication is available at
http://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007%2F978-3-319-15976-8_1
† The authors contributed equally.
arXiv:1506.00716v1  [cs.CE]  2 Jun 2015

1
Abstract
GROMACS is a widely used package for biomolecular simulation, and over the
last two decades it has evolved from small-scale efﬁciency to advanced hetero-
geneous acceleration and multi-level parallelism targeting some of the largest
supercomputers in the world. Here, we describe some of the ways we have been
able to realize this through the use of parallelization on all levels, combined
with a constant focus on absolute performance. Release 4.6 of GROMACS uses
SIMD acceleration on a wide range of architectures, GPU ofﬂoading acceleration,
and both OpenMP and MPI parallelism within and between nodes, respectively.
The recent work on acceleration made it necessary to revisit the fundamental
algorithms of molecular simulation, including the concept of neighborsearching,
and we discuss the present and future challenges we see for exascale simulation
- in particular a very ﬁne-grained task parallelism. We also discuss the software
management, code peer review and continuous integration testing required for
a project of this complexity.
2
Introduction
Molecular Dynamics simulation of biological macromolecules has evolved from
a narrow statistical-mechanics method into a widely applied biophysical re-
search tool that is used outside theoretical chemistry. Supercomputers are now
as important as centrifuges or test tubes in chemistry. However, this success also
considerably raises the bar for molecular simulation implementations - it is no
longer sufﬁcient to reproduce experimental results or e.g. show proof-of-concept
relative scaling. To justify the substantial supercomputing resources required by
many computational chemistry projects the most important focus today is sim-
ply absolute simulation performance and the scientiﬁc results achieved. Exascale
computing has potential to take simulation to new heights, but the combination
of challenges that face software preparing for deployment at the exascale to de-
liver these results are unique in the history of software. The days of simply
buying new hardware with a faster clock rate and getting shorter times to solu-
tion with old software are gone. The days of running applications on a single
core are gone. The days of heterogeneous processor design to suit ﬂoating-point
computation are back again. The days of performance being bounded by the
time taken for ﬂoating-point computations are ending fast. The need to design
with multi-core and multi-node parallelization in mind at all points is here to
stay, which also means Amdahl’s law3 is more relevant than ever.1
A particular challenge for biomolecular simulations is that the computational
1Amdahl’s law gives a model for the expected (and maximum) speedup of a program
when parallelized over multiple processors with respect to the serial version. It states
that the achievable speedup is limited by the sequential part of the program.
2

problem size is ﬁxed by the geometric size of the protein and the atomic-scale
resolution of the model physics. Most life science problems can be reduced to
this size (or smaller). It is possible to simulate much larger systems, but it is
typically not relevant. Second, the timescale of dynamics involving the entire
system increases much faster than the length scale, due to the requirement of
sampling the exponentially larger number of ensemble microstates. This means
that weak scaling is largely irrelevant for life science; to make use of increasing
amounts of computational resources to simulate these systems, we have to rely
either on strong-scaling software engineering techniques, or ensemble simula-
tion techniques.
The fundamental algorithm of molecular dynamics assigns positions and
velocities to every particle in the simulation system, and speciﬁes the model
physics that governs the interactions between particles. The forces can then be
computed, which can be used to update the positions and velocities via New-
ton’s second law, using a given ﬁnite time step.
This numerical integration
scheme is iterated a large number of times, and it generates a series of sam-
ples from the thermodynamic ensemble deﬁned by the model physics. From
these samples, observations can be made that conﬁrm or predict experiment.
Typical model physics have many components to describe the different kinds
of bonded and non-bonded interactions that exist. The non-bonded interactions
between particles model behaviour like van der Waals forces, or Coulomb’s law.
The non-bonded interactions are the most expensive aspects of computing the
forces, and the subject of a very large amount of research, computation and
optimization.
Historically, the GROMACS molecular dynamics simulation suite has aimed
at being a general-purpose tool for studying biomolecular systems, such as
shown in Fig. 1.
The development of the simulation engine focused heavily
on maximizing single-core ﬂoating-point performance of its innermost compute
kernels for non-bonded interactions. These kernels typically compute the elec-
trostatic and van der Waals forces acting on each simulation particle from its
interactions with all other inside a given spherical boundary. These kernels were
ﬁrst written in C, then FORTRAN, and later optimized in assembly language,
mostly for commodity x86-family processors, because the data dependencies
of the computations in the kernels were too challenging for C or FORTRAN
compilers (then or now).
The kernels were also specialized for interactions
within and between water molecules, because of the prevalence of such inter-
actions in biomolecular simulations. From one point-of-view, this extensive use
of interaction-speciﬁc kernels can be seen as a software equivalent of application-
speciﬁc integrated circuits.
Recognizing the need to build upon this good work by coupling multiple
processors, GROMACS 4.014 introduced a minimal-communication neutral ter-
ritory domain-decomposition (DD) algorithm,7,8 with fully dynamic load bal-
ancing. This spatial decomposition of the simulation volume created high-level
3

Figure 1: A typical GROMACS simulation system, featuring the ligand-gated ion-channel membrane protein
GLIC (colored), embedded in a lipid membrane (grey). The whole system is solvated in water (not shown),
giving a total of around 145,000 atoms. Image created with VMD. 15
data parallelism that was effective for near-linear scaling of the computation at
around 400 atoms per core. The DD implementation required the use of MPI
for message-passing parallel constructs. However, the needs of many simulation
users can be met within a single node,23 and in that context the implementation
overhead of MPI libraries was too high, not to mention it is difﬁcult to em-
ploy in distributed computing. In GROMACS 4.5,20 we implemented a multi-
threaded MPI library with the necessary subset of the MPI API. The library has
both POSIX and Windows threads back-ends (hence called thread-MPI) and uses
highly efﬁcient hardware-supported atomic and lock-free synchronization prim-
itives. This allows the existing DD implementation to work across multiple cores
of a single node without depending on any external MPI library.
However, the fundamental limitation remained of a one-to-one mapping of
MPI ranks to cores, and to domains. On the one hand, there is always a limit to
how small a spatial domain can be, which will limit the number of domains the
simulation box can be decomposed into, which in turn limits the number of cores
that a parallelization with such a mapping can utilize. On the other hand, the
one-to-one domains to cores mapping is cache-friendly as it creates independent
data sets so that cores sharing caches can act without conﬂict, but the size of
the volume of data that must be communicated so that neighboring domains act
coherently grows rapidly with the number of domains. This approach is only
scalable for a ﬁxed problem size if the latency of communication between all
cores is comparable and the communication book-keeping overhead grows only
linearly with the number of cores. Neither is true, because network latencies
4

are orders of magnitude higher than shared-cache latencies. This is clearly a
major problem for designing for the exascale, where many cores, many nodes
and non-uniform memory and communication latencies will be key attributes.
The other important aspect of the target simulations for designing for strong
scaling is treating the long-range components of the atomic interactions. Many
systems of interest are spatially heterogeneous on the nanometer scale (e.g. pro-
teins embedded in membranes and solvated in water), and the simulation arte-
facts caused by failing to treat the long-range effects are well known. The de facto
standard for treating the long-range electrostatic interactions has become the
smooth particle-mesh Ewald (PME) method,12 whose cost for N atoms scales
as N log(N). A straightforward implementation where each rank of a parallel
computation participates in an equivalent way leads to a 3D Fast Fourier Trans-
form (FFT) that communicates globally. This communication quickly limits the
strong scaling. To mitigate this, GROMACS 4.0 introduced a multiple-program
multiple-data- (MPMD) implementation that dedicates some ranks to the FFT
part; now only those ranks do all-to-all FFT communication. GROMACS 4.5
improved further by using a 2D pencil decomposition11,16 in reciprocal space,
within the same MPMD implementation. This coarse-grained task parallelism
works well on machines with homogeneous hardware, but it is harder to port to
accelerators or combine with RDMA constructs.
The transformation of GROMACS needed to perform well on exascale-level
parallel hardware began after GROMACS 4.5. This requires radical algorithm
changes, and better use of parallelization constructs from the ground up, not as
an afterthought. More hands are required to steer the project, and yet the old
functionality written before their time must generally be preserved. Computer
architectures are evolving rapidly, and no single developer can know the details
of all of them. In the following sections we describe how we are addressing some
of these challenges, and our ongoing plans for addressing others.
3
Handling exascale software challenges: algo-
rithms and parallelization schemes
3.1
Multi-level parallelism
Modern computer hardware is not only parallel, but exposes multiple levels
of parallelism depending on the type and speed of data access and commu-
nication capabilities across different compute elements. For a modern super-
scalar CPU such as Intel Haswell, even a single core is equipped with 8 differ-
ent execution ports, and it is not even possible to buy a single-core chip. Add
hardware threads, complex communication crossbars, memory hierarchies, and
caches larger than hard disks from the 1990s. This results in a complex hierarchi-
cal organization of compute and communication/network elements from SIMD
5

units and caches to network topologies, each level in the hierarchy requiring a
different type of software parallelization for efﬁcient use. HPC codes have tra-
ditionally focused on only two levels of parallelism: intra-node and inter-node.
Such codes typically rely solely on MPI parallelization to target parallelism on
multiple levels: both intra-socket, intra-node, and inter-node.
This approach
had obvious advantages before the multi-core and heterogeneous computing
era when improvements came from CPU frequency scaling and evolution of
interconnect. However, nowadays most scientiﬁc problems require complex par-
allel software architecture to be able use petaﬂop hardware efﬁciently and going
toward exascale this is becoming a necessity. This is particularly true for molec-
ular dynamics which requires reducing the wall-time per iteration to improve
simulation performance.
On the lowest level, processors typically contain SIMD (single instruction
multiple data) units which offer ﬁne-grained data-parallelism through silicon
dedicated to executing a limited set of instructions on multiple, currently typ-
ically 4-16, data elements simultaneously.
Exploiting this low-level and ﬁne-
grained parallelism has become crucial for achieving high performance, espe-
cially with new architectures like AVX and Intel MIC supporting wide SIMD.
One level higher, multi-core CPUs have become the standard and several archi-
tectures support multiple hardware threads per core. Hence, typical multi-socket
SMP machines come with dozens of cores capable of running 2-4 threads each
(through simultaneous multi-threading, SMT, support). Simply running mul-
tiple processes (MPI ranks) on each core or hardware thread is typically less
efﬁcient than multi-threading. Achieving strong scaling in molecular dynamics
requires efﬁcient use of the cache hierarchy, which makes the picture even more
complex. On the other hand, a chip cannot be considered a homogeneous clus-
ter either. Accelerator coprocessors like GPUs or Intel MIC, often referred to as
many-core, add another layer of complexity to the intra-node parallelism. These
require ﬁne-grained parallelism and carefully tuned data access patterns, as well
as special programming models. Current accelerator architectures like GPUs
also add another layer of interconnect in form of PCIe bus (Peripheral Compo-
nent Interconnect Express) as well as a separate main memory. This means that
data movement across the PCIe link often limits overall throughput. Integration
of traditional latency-oriented CPU cores with throughput-oriented cores like
those in GPUs or MIC accelerators is ongoing, but the cost of data movement
between the different units will at least for the foreseeable future be a factor that
needs to be optimized for.
Typical HPC hardware exhibits non-uniform memory access (NUMA) behav-
ior on the node level: accessing data from different CPUs or cores of CPUs has
a non-uniform cost. We started multithreading trials quite early with the idea
of easily achieving load balancing, but the simultaneous introduction of NUMA
suddenly meant a processor resembled a cluster internally. Indiscriminately ac-
cessing memory across NUMA nodes will frequently lead to performance that
6

is lower than for MPI. Moreover, the NUMA behavior extends to other compute
and communication components: the cost of communicating with an accelerator
or through a network interface typically depends on the intra-node bus topology
and requires special attention. On the top level, the interconnect links together
compute nodes into a network topology. A side-effect of the multi-core evolution
is that, while the network capacity (latency and bandwidth) per compute node
has improved, the typical number of CPU cores they serve has increased faster;
the capacity available per core has decreased substantially.
In order to exploit the capabilities of each level of hardware parallelism,
a performance-oriented application needs to consider multiple levels of paral-
lelism: SIMD parallelism for maximizing single-core/thread performance; multi-
threading to exploit advantages of multi-core and SMT (e.g.
fast data shar-
ing); inter-node communication-based parallelism (e.g. message passing with
MPI); and heterogeneous parallelism by utilizing both CPUs and accelerators
like GPUs.
Driven by this evolution of hardware, we have initiated a re-redesign of
the parallelization in GROMACS. In particular, recent efforts have focused on
improvements targeting all levels of parallelization: new algorithms for wide
SIMD and accelerator architectures, a portable and extensible SIMD paralleliza-
tion framework, efﬁcient multi-threading throughout the entire code, and an
asynchronous ofﬂoad-model for accelerators. The resulting multi-level paral-
lelization scheme implemented in GROMACS 4.6 is illustrated in Fig. 2. In the
following sections, we will give an overview of these improvements, highlighting
the advances they provide in terms of making efﬁcient use of current petascale
hardware, as well as in paving the road towards exascale computing.
3.2
SIMD parallelism
All modern CPU and GPU architectures use SIMD-like instructions to achieve
high ﬂop rates. Any computational code that aims for high performance will
have to make use of SIMD. For very regular work, such as matrix-vector multi-
plications, the compiler can generate good SIMD code, although manually tuned
vendor libraries typically do even better. But for irregular work, such as short-
range particle-particle non-bonded interactions, the compiler usually fails since
it cannot control data structures. If you think your compiler is really good at
optimizing, it can be an eye-opening experience to look at the raw assembly
instructions actually generated. In GROMACS, this was reluctantly recognized
a decade ago and SSE and Altivec SIMD kernels were written manually in as-
sembly. These kernels were, and still are, extremely efﬁcient for interactions
involving water molecules, but other interactions do not parallelize well with
SIMD using the standard approach of unrolling a particle-based Verlet-list.25
It is clear that a different approach is needed in order to use wide SIMD exe-
cution units like AVX or GPUs. We developed a novel approach, where particles
7

CPU
cores
• cluster-pair search
• bonded interactions
• integration of forces
OpenMP threads
• spread/gather
• 3D-FFT
• solve
OpenMP threads
PME
nodes
PP
nodes
MPI
ranks
               EJECT             
             DVD-RW           
             DVD-RW           
             USB           
             SATA           
               PHONE             
               MIC             
               LINE-IN             
               AUDIO             
             POWER           
             CARD             READER           
           LCD-Pro         
             SELECT           
               MENU                            -             
               +             
Num
Lock
Caps
Lock
Scroll
Lock
Num
Lock
7
4
1
/
8
5
2
*
9
6
3
0
-
+
Scroll
Lock
Scrn
Print
SysRq
Pause
Break
Home
End
Page
Down
Page
Up
Insert
Delete
Enter
End
Home
PgUp
PgDn
Del
.
Ins
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
F6
F7
F8
F9
F10
F11
F12
Esc
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
(
)
*
&
^
%
$
#
@
!
`
~
-
_
=
+
\
|
Ctrl
Ctrl
Alt
A
S
D
F
G
H
J
K
L
Caps
Lock
;
:
'
"
Z
X
C
V
B
N
M
Shift
Shift
/
?
.
>
,
<
Alt Gr
Q
W
E
R
T
Y
U
I
O
P
[
{
]
}
Tab
workstations
compute
clusters
simulations
ensembles
of simulations
serial 
FFT 
library
SIMD
ﬂoating-point
operations
Nvidia GPUs
short-ranged 
interactions
Figure 2:
Illustration of multi-level parallelism in GROMACS 4.6.
This exploits several kinds of ﬁne-
grained data parallelism, a multiple-program multiple-data (MPMD) decomposition separating the short-
range particle-particle (PP) and long-range Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) force calculation algorithms, coarse-
grained data parallelism with domain-decomposition (DD) over MPI ranks (implemented either on single-
node workstations or compute clusters), and ensembles of related simulations scheduled e.g. by a distributed
computing controller.
are grouped into spatial clusters containing ﬁxed number of particles.17 First,
the particles are placed on a grid in the x and y dimensions, and then binned
in the z dimension. This efﬁciently groups particles that are close in space, and
permits the construction of a list of clusters, each containing exactly M particles.
A list is then constructed of all those cluster pairs containing particles that may
be close enough to interact. This list of pairs of interacting clusters is reused over
multiple successive evaluations of the non-bonded forces. The list is constructed
with a buffer to prevent particle diffusion corrupting the implementation of the
model physics.
The kernels that implement the computation of the interactions between two
clusters i and j use SIMD load instructions to ﬁll vector registers with copies
of the positions of all M particles in i. The loop over the N particles in j is
unrolled according to the SIMD width of the CPU. Inside this loop, SIMD load
instructions ﬁll vector registers with positions of all N particles from the j cluster.
This permits the computation of N interactions between an i and all j particles
simultaneously, and the computation of M × N interactions in the inner loop
without needing to load particle data. With wide SIMD units it is efﬁcient to
process more than one j cluster at a time.
M, N and the number of j clusters to process can be adjusted to suit the
underlying characteristics of the hardware. Using M=1 and N=1 recovers the
original Verlet-list algorithm. On CPUs, GROMACS uses M=4 and N=2, 4 or
8

8, depending on the SIMD width. On NVIDIA GPUs, we use M=8 and N=4
to calculate 32 interactions at once with 32 hardware threads executing in lock-
step. To further improve the ratio of arithmetic to memory operations when
using GPUs, we add another level of hierarchy by grouping 8 clusters together.
Thus we store 64 particles in shared memory and calculate interactions with
about half of these for every particle in the cluster-pair list.
The kernel implementations reach about 50% of the peak ﬂop rate on all
supported hardware, which is very high for MD. This comes at the cost of cal-
culating about twice as many interactions as required; not all particle pairs in all
cluster pairs will be within the cut-off at each time step, so many interactions are
computed that are known to produce a zero result. The extra zero interactions
can actually be put to use as an effective additional pair list buffer addition-
ally to the standard Verlet list buffer. As we have shown here, this scheme is
ﬂexible, since N and M can be adapted to current and future hardware. Most
algorithms and optimization tricks that have been developed for particle-based
pair lists can be reused for the cluster-pair list, although many will not improve
the performance.
The current implementation of the cluster-based non-bonded algorithm al-
ready supports a wide range of SIMD instruction sets and accelerator architec-
tures: SSE2, SSE4.1, AVX (256-bit and 128-bit with FMA), AVX2, BG/Q QPX, In-
tel MIC (LRBni), NVIDIA CUDA. An implementation on a ﬁeld-programmable
gate array (FPGA) architecture is in progress.
3.2.1
Multi-threaded parallelism
Before GROMACS 4.6, we relied mostly on MPI for both inter-node and intra-
node parallelization over CPU cores. For MD this has worked well, since there is
little data to communicate and at medium to high parallelization all data ﬁts in
L2 cache. Our initial plans were to only support OpenMP parallelization in the
separate Particle Mesh Ewald (PME) MPI ranks. The reason for using OpenMP
in PME was to reduce the number of MPI ranks involved in the costly collective
communication for the FFT grid transpose.
This 3D-FFT is the only part of
the code that involves global data dependencies. Although this indeed greatly
reduced the MPI communication cost, it also introduced signiﬁcant overhead.
GROMACS 4.6 was designed to use OpenMP in all compute-intensive parts
of the MD algorithm.2 Most of the algorithms are straightforward to parallelize
using OpenMP. These scale very well, as Fig. 3 shows. Cache-intensive parts of
the code like performing domain decomposition, or integrating the forces and
velocities show slightly worse scaling. Moreover, the scaling in these parts tends
to deteriorate with increasing number of threads in an MPI rank – especially with
2At the time of that decision, sharing a GPU among multiple MPI ranks was inefﬁ-
cient, so the only efﬁcient way to use multiple cores in a node was with OpenMP within
a rank. This constraint has since been relaxed.
9

large number of threads in a rank, and when teams of OpenMP threads cross
NUMA boundaries. When simulating at high ratios of cores/particles, each MD
step can take as little as a microsecond. There are many OpenMP barriers used
in the many code paths that are parallelized with OpenMP, each of which takes
a few microseconds, which can be costly.
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
OpenMP
MPI
MPI+OpenMP (two ranks)
#cores
performance (ns/day)
Figure 3:
Comparison of single-node simulation performance using MPI, OpenMP, and combined
MPI+OpenMP parallelization. The OpenMP multi-threading (blue) achieves the highest performance and
near linear scaling up to 8 threads. It only deteriorates when threads on OpenMP regions need to com-
municate across the system bus. In contrast, the MPI-only runs (red) that require less communication scale
well across sockets. Combining MPI and OpenMP parallelization with two ranks and varying the number of
threads (green) results in worse performance due to the added overhead of the two parallelization schemes.
Simulations were carried out on a dual-socket node with 8-core Intel Xeon E5-2690 (2.9 GHz Sandy Bridge).
Input system: RNAse protein solvated in a rectangular box, 24k atoms, PME electrostatics, 0.9 nm cut-off.
Accordingly, the hybrid MPI + OpenMP parallelization is often slower than
an MPI-only scheme as Fig. 3 illustrates. Since PP (particle-particle) ranks only
do low-volume local communication, the reduction in MPI communication from
using the hybrid scheme is apparent only at high parallelization. There, MPI-
only parallelization (e.g. as in GROMACS 4.5) puts a hard upper limit on the
number of cores that can be used, due to algorithmic limits on the spatial domain
size, or the need to communicate with more than one nearest neighbor. With the
hybrid scheme, more cores can operate on the same spatial domain assigned to
an MPI rank, and there is no longer a hard limit on the parallelization. Strong
scaling curves now extend much further, with a more gradual loss of parallel
efﬁciency.
An example is given in Fig. 4, which shows a membrane protein
system scaling to twice as many cores with hybrid parallelization and reach
double the peak performance of GROMACS 4.5. In some cases, OpenMP-only
parallelization can be much faster than MPI-only parallelization if the load for
each stage of the force computation can be balanced individually.
A typical
example is a solute in solvent, where the solute has bonded interactions but
the solvent does not. With OpenMP, the bonded interactions can be distributed
equally over all threads in a straightforward manner.
10

0
192
384
576
768
960
#cores
0
100
200
300
ns/day
MPI only
MPI + 2 OpenMP
MPI + 4 OpenMP
GMX4.5, MPI only
Figure 4: Improvements in strong scaling performance since GROMACS 4.5, using the M × N kernels and
OpenMP parallelization in GROMACS 4.6. The plot shows simulation performance in ns/day for different
software versions and parallelization schemes. Performance with one core per MPI rank is shown for GRO-
MACS 4.5 (purple) and 4.6 (black). Performance with GROMACS 4.6 is shown using two (red) and four
(green) cores per MPI rank using OpenMP threading within each MPI rank. Simulations were carried out on
the Triolith cluster at NSC, using two 8-core Intel E5-2660 (2.2 GHz Sandy Bridge) processors per node and
FDR Inﬁniband network. The test system is the GLIC membrane protein shown in Fig. 1 (144,000 atoms, PME
electrostatics.)
Heterogeneous parallelization
Heterogeneous architectures combine multiple types of processing units, typi-
cally latency- and throughput-oriented cores – most often CPUs and accelerators
like GPUs, Intel MIC, or FPGAs. Many-core accelerator architectures have been
become increasingly popular in technical and scientiﬁc computing mainly due
to their impressive raw ﬂoating point performance. However, in order to efﬁ-
ciently utilize these architectures, a very high level of ﬁne-grained parallelism
is required. The massively parallel nature of accelerators, in particular GPUs, is
both an advantage as well as a burden on the programmer. Since not all tasks
are well suited for execution on the accelerators this often leads to additional
challenges for workload distribution and load balancing. Moreover, current het-
erogeneous architectures typically use a slow PCIe bus to connect the hardware
elements like CPUs and GPUs and move data between the separate global mem-
ory of each. This means that explicit data management is required. This adds a
further latency overhead to challenge algorithms like MD that already face this
as a parallelization bottle-neck.
GPU accelerators were ﬁrst supported experimentally in GROMACS with
the OpenMM library,10 which was used as a black box to execute the entire
simulation on the GPU. This meant that only a fraction of the diverse set of
GROMACS algorithms were supported and simulations were limited to single-
GPU use. Additionally, while OpenMM offered good performance for implicit-
solvent models, the more common type of runs showed little speedup (and in
some cases slowdown) over the fast performance on multi-core CPUs, thanks to
the highly tuned SIMD assembly kernels.
With this experience, we set out to provide native GPU support in GRO-
11

MACS 4.6 with a few important design principles in mind. Building on the
observation that highly optimized CPU code is hard to beat, our goal was to en-
sure that all compute resources available, both CPU and accelerators, are utilized
to the greatest extent possible. We also wanted to ensure that our heterogeneous
GPU acceleration supported most existing features of GROMACS in a single
code base to avoid having to reimplement major parts of the code for GPU-only
execution. This means that the most suitable parallelization is the ofﬂoad model,
which other MD codes have also employed successfully.9,18 As Fig. 5 illustrates,
we aim to execute the compute-intensive short-range non-bonded force calcu-
lation on GPU accelerators, while the CPU computes bonded and long-range
electrostatics forces, because the latter are communication intensive.
The newly designed future-proof SIMD-oriented algorithm for evaluating
non-bonded interactions with accelerator architectures in mind has been dis-
cussed already. It is highly efﬁcient at expressing the ﬁne-grained parallelism
present in the pair-force calculation. Additionally, the atom cluster-based ap-
proach is designed for data reuse which is further emphasized by the super-
cluster grouping. As a result, our CUDA implementation is characterized by a
high ratio of arithmetic to memory operations which allows avoiding memory
bottlenecks. These algorithmic design choices and the extensive performance
tuning led to strongly instruction-latency bound CUDA non-bonded kernels, in
contrast to most traditional particle-based GPU algorithms which are reported
to be memory bound4,9. Our CUDA GPU kernels also scale well, reaching peak
pair-force throughput already around 20,000 particles per GPU.
In contrast to typical data-parallel programming for homogeneous CPU-only
machines, heterogeneous architectures require additional code to manage task
scheduling and concurrent execution on the different compute elements, CPU
cores and GPUs in the present case. This is a complex component of our het-
erogeneous parallelization which implements the data- and control-ﬂow with
the main goal of maximizing the utilization of both CPU and GPU by ensuring
optimal CPU-GPU execution overlap.
We combine a set of CPU cores running OpenMP threads with a GPU. As
shown in Fig. 5, the pair-lists required for the non-bonded computation are pre-
pared on the CPU and transferred to the GPU where a pruning step is carried
out after which the lists are reused for up to 100 iterations. The extreme ﬂoating-
point power of GPUs makes it feasible to use the much larger buffers required
for this. The transfer of coordinates, charges, and forces as well as compute
kernels are launched asynchronously as soon as data becomes available on the
CPU. This ensures overlap of CPU and GPU computation.
Additional effort
has gone into maximizing overlap by reducing the wall-time of CPU-side non-
overlapping program parts through SIMD parallelization (in pair search and con-
straints) and efﬁcient multi-threaded algorithms allowing GROMACS to achieve
a typical CPU-GPU overlap of 60-80%.
This scheme naturally extends to multiple GPUs by using the existing ef-
12

Bonded F
PME
Integration
Pair search,
Domain decomp.
Pair search & domain-decomposition: every 20-100 iterations
MD step
Constraints
Non-bonded F
offload
Non-bonded F
&
Pair-list 
pruning
CPU
OpenMP 
threads
GPU
CUDA
transfer x, q
transfer F, E
transfer list
Figure 5: GROMACS heterogeneous parallelization using both CPU and GPU resources during each simu-
lation time-step. The compute-heavy non-bonded interactions are ofﬂoaded to the GPU, while the CPU is
responsible for domain-decomposition book-keeping, bonded force calculation, and lattice summation algo-
rithms. The diagram shows tasks carried out during a GPU-accelerated normal MD step (black arrows) as
well as a step which includes the additional pair-search and domain-decomposition tasks are carried out (blue
arrows). The latter, as shown above in blue, also includes an additional transfer, and the subsequent pruning
of the pair list as part of the non-bonded kernel.
Source: http://dx.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.971161. Reused under CC-BY; retrieved 22:15, March 23, 2014 (GMT).
13

ﬁcient neutral-territory do main-decomposition implemented using MPI paral-
lelization. By default, we assign computation on each domain to a single GPU
and a set of CPU cores. This typically means decomposing the system into as
many domains as GPUs used, and running as many MPI ranks per node as
GPUs in the node. However, this will often require to run a large number of
OpenMP threads in a rank (8-16 or even more with a single GPU per node),
potentially spanning across multiple NUMA domains. As explained in the pre-
vious section, this will lead to suboptimal multi-threaded scaling – especially
affecting cache-intensive algorithms outside the CPU-GPU overlap region. To
avoid this, multiple MPI ranks can share a GPU, which reduces the number of
OpenMP threads per rank.
The heterogeneous acceleration in GROMACS delivers 3-4x speedup when
comparing CPU only with CPU-GPU runs. Moreover, advanced features like
arbitrary simulation box shapes and virtual interaction sites are all supported
(Fig. 6). Even though the overhead of managing an accelerator is non-negligible,
GROMACS 4.6 shows great strong scaling in GPU accelerated runs reaching 126
atoms/core (1260 atoms/GPU) on common simulation systems (Fig. 7).
Based on a similar parallelization design, the upcoming GROMACS version
will also support the Intel MIC accelerator architecture. Intel MIC supports na-
tive execution of standard MPI codes using the so-called symmetric mode, where
the card is essentially treated as a general-purpose multi-core node. However,
as MIC is a highly parallel architecture requiring ﬁne-grained parallelism, many
parts of typical MPI codes will be inefﬁcient on these processors. Hence, efﬁcient
utilization of Xeon Phi devices in molecular dynamics – especially with typical
bio-molecular simulations and strong-scaling in mind - is only possible by treat-
ing them as accelerators. Similarly to GPUs, this means a parallelization scheme
based on ofﬂoading only those tasks that are suitable for wide SIMD and highly
thread-parallel execution to MIC.
3.3
Ensemble simulations
The performance and scaling advances in GROMACS (and many other pro-
grams) have made it efﬁcient to run simulations that simply were too large only
a few years ago. However, infrastructures such as the European PRACE provide
access only to problems that scale to thousands of cores. This used to be an im-
possible barrier for biomolecular dynamics on anything but ridiculously large
systems when an implementation could only run well with hundreds of parti-
cles per core. Scaling has improved, but the number of computational units in
supercomputers is growing even faster. There are now multiple machines in the
world that reach roughly a million cores. Under ideal conditions, GROMACS
can scale to levels where each PP rank handles 40 atoms, but there are few if any
concrete biological problems that require 40 million atoms without correspond-
ing increases in the number of samples generated. Even in the theoretical case
14

cubic RF 0.9
cubic RF 1.1
dodec box + vsites
dodec box
cubic box, NPT
cubic box
0
50
100
150
200
250
91.2
70.0
202.4
100.7
88.6
84.8
55.6
38.9
110.0
49.3
35.9
38.0
55.4
40.7
169.1
77.3
56.3
53.5
30.4
20.8
63.7
28.4
20.5
21.2
2x (Xeon X5650+Tesla C2075)
2x Xeon X5650
Xeon X5650+Tesla C2075
Xeon X5650
ns/day
Figure 6: An important feature of the current heterogeneous GROMACS GPU implementation is that it works,
and works efﬁciently, in combination with most other features of the software. GPU simulations can employ
domain decomposition, non-standard boxes, pressure scaling, and virtual interaction sites to signiﬁcantly
improve the absolute simulation performance compared to the baseline. Simulation system: RNAse protein
solvated in rectangular (24 K atoms) and rhombic dodecahedron (16.8 k atoms) box, PME electrostatics, cut-
off 0.9 nm.
Hardware: 2x Intel Xeon E5650 (2.67 GHz Westmere), 2x NVIDIA Tesla C2070 (Fermi) GPU
accelerators.
Figure 7: Strong scaling of GROMACS 4.6 on the HYDRA heterogeneous GPU-equipped machine in Garching,
Germany. Grey lines indicate linear scaling. The hybrid version of GROMACS scales very well and achieves
impressive absolute performance for both small and large systems. For the smaller systems, peak performance
is achieved with 150 atoms per core, and the larger systems achieve sustained effective ﬂop rate of 0.2 petaﬂops
(only counting the number of useful ﬂoating-point operations, not the total).
Simulation systems: typical production systems of 81k atoms (circles), 2M atoms (stars), and 12M atoms
(triangles) in size. Hardware (per node): 2 10-core Xeon E5-2680v2 (2.8 GHz Ivy Bridge), 2 NVIDIA K20X,
InﬁniBand FDR14 (4 x 14 Gb/s) network.
15

where we could improve scaling to the point where each core only contains a
single atom, the simulation system would still be almost an order of magnitude
larger than the example in Fig. 1.
To adapt to this reality, researchers are increasingly using large ensembles of
simulations, either to simply sample better, or new algorithms such as replica
exchange simulation,24 Markov state models,22 or milestoning13 that analyze
and exchange data between multiple simulations to improve overall sampling.
In many cases, this achieves as much as two-fold superscaling, i.e., an ensem-
ble of 100 simulations running on 10 nodes each might provide the same sam-
pling efﬁciency as a single simulation running on 2000 cores. To automate this,
GROMACS has been co-developed with a new framework for Parallel Adaptive
Molecular Dynamics called Copernicus.19 Given a set of input structures and
sampling settings, this framework automatically starts a ﬁrst batch of sampling
runs, makes sure all simulations complete (with extensive support for check-
pointing and restarting of failed runs), and automatically performs the adaptive
step data analysis to decide what new simulations to start in a second genera-
tion. The current ensemble sampling algorithms scale to hundreds or thousands
of parallel simulations (each using up to thousands of cores even for small sys-
tems). For the ﬁrst time in many years, molecular dynamics might actually be
able to use all the cores available on next-generation supercomputers rather than
constantly being a generation or two behind.
3.4
Multi-level load balancing
Achieving strong scaling to a higher core count for a ﬁxed-size problem requires
careful consideration of load balance. The advantage provided by spatial DD
is one of data locality and reuse, but if the distribution of computational work
is not homogeneous then more care is needed.
A typical membrane protein
simulation is dominated by
• water, which is usually treated with a rigid 3-point model,
• a lipid membrane, whose alkyl tails are modeled by particles with zero
partial charge and bonds of constrained length, and
• a protein, which is modeled with a backbone of ﬁxed-length bonds that
require a lengthy series of constraint calculations, as well as partial charge
on all particles.
These problems are well known, and are addressed in the GROMACS DD
scheme via automatic dynamic load balancing that distributes the spatial vol-
umes unevenly according to the observed imbalance in compute load. This ap-
proach has limitations because it works at the level of DD domains that must
map to MPI ranks, so cores within the same node or socket have unnecessary
16

copies of the same data. We have not yet succeeded in developing a highly ef-
fective intra-rank decomposition of work to multiple cores. We hope to address
this via intra-node or intra-socket task parallelism.
One advantage of the PME algorithm as implemented in GROMACS is that it
is possible to shift the computational workload between the real- and reciprocal-
space parts of the algorithm at will. This makes it possible to write code that
can run optimally at different settings on different kinds of hardware. The per-
formance of the compute, communication and bookkeeping parts of the overall
algorithm vary greatly with the characteristics of the hardware that implements
it, and with the properties of the simulation system studied. For example, shift-
ing compute work from reciprocal to real space to make better use of an idle
GPU increases the volume that must be communicated during DD, while low-
ering the required communication volume during the 3D FFTs. Evaluating how
best to manage these compromises can only happen at runtime.
The MPMD version of PME is intended to reduce the overall communication
cost on typical switched networks by minimizing the number of ranks partici-
pating in the 3D FFTs. This requires generating a mapping between PME and
non-PME ranks and scheduling data transfer to and from them. However, on
hardware with relatively efﬁcient implementations of global communication, it
can be advantageous to prefer the SPMD implementation because it has more
regular communication patterns.2 The same may be true on architectures with
accelerators, because the MPMD implementation makes no use of the accelera-
tors on the PME ranks. The performance of both implementations is limited by
lack of overlap of communication and computation.
Attempts to use low-latency partitioned global address space (PGAS) meth-
ods that require single-program multiple-data (SPMD) approaches are particu-
larly challenged, because the gain from any decrease in communication latency
must also overcome the overall increase in communication that accompanies the
MPMD-to-SPMD transition.21 The advent of implementations of non-blocking
collective (NBC) MPI routines is promising if computation can be found to over-
lap with the background communication. The most straightforward approach
would be to revert to SPMD and hope that the increase in total communication
cost is offset by the gain in available compute time, however, the available perfor-
mance is still bounded by the overall cost of the global communication. Finding
compute to overlap with the NBC on the MPMD PME ranks is likely to deliver
better results. Permitting PME ranks to execute kernels for bonded and/or non-
bonded interactions from their associated non-PME ranks is the most straight-
forward way to achieve this overlap. This is particularly true at the scaling limit,
where the presence of bonded interactions is one of the primary problems in
balancing the compute load between the non-PME ranks.
The introduction of automatic ensemble computing introduces another layer
of decomposition, by which we essentially achieve MSMPMD parallelism: Multiple-
simulation (ensemble), multiple-program (direct/lattice space), and multiple-
17

data (domain decomposition).
3.5
Managing the long-range contributions at exascale
A promising candidate for exascale-level biomolecular simulations is the use
of suitable implementations of fast-multipole methods such as ExaFMM.6,27 At
least one implementation of FMM-based molecular dynamics running on 100,000
cores has been reported,5 but so far the throughput on problems of comparable
size is only equivalent to the best PME-based implementations.
FMM-based
algorithms can deliver linear scaling of communication and computation with
both the number of MPI ranks and the number of particles. This linear scaling
is expected to be an advantage when increasing the number of processing units
in the exascale era. Early tests showed that the iteration times of ExaFMM do-
ing only long-range work and GROMACS 4.6 doing only short-range work on
homogeneous systems of the same size were comparable, so we hope we can
deploy a working version in the future.
3.6
Fine-grained task parallelism for exascale
We plan to address some of the exascale-level strong-scaling problems men-
tioned above through the use of a more ﬁne-grained task parallelism than what
is currently possible in GROMACS. Considerable technical challenges remain
to convert OpenMP-based data-parallel loop constructs into series of tasks that
are coarse enough to avoid spending lots of time scheduling work, and yet ﬁne
enough to balance the overall load. Our initial plan is to experiment with the
cross-platform Thread Building Blocks (TBB) library,1 which can coexist with
OpenMP and deploy equivalent loop constructs in the early phases of develop-
ment. Many alternatives exist; those that require the use of custom compilers,
runtime environments, or language extensions are unattractive because that in-
creases the number of combinations of algorithm implementations that must be
maintained and tested, and compromises the high portability enjoyed by GRO-
MACS.
One particular problem that might be alleviated with ﬁne-grained task par-
allelism is reducing the cost of the communication required during the integra-
tion phase. Polymers such as protein backbones are modeled with ﬁxed-length
bonds, with at least two bonds per particle, which leads to coupled constraints
that domain decomposition spreads over multiple ranks.
Iterating to satisfy
those constraints can be a costly part of the algorithm at high parallelism. Be-
cause the spatial regions that contain bonded interactions are distributed over
many ranks, and the constraint computations cannot begin until after all the
forces for their atoms have been computed, the current implementation waits
for all forces on all ranks to be computed before starting the integration phase.
The performance of post-integration constraint-satisfaction phase is bounded by
18

the latency for the multiple communication stages required. This means that
ranks that lack atoms with coupled bonded interactions, such as all those with
only water molecules,literally have nothing to do at this stage. In an ideal im-
plementation, such ranks could contribute very early in each iteration to com-
plete all the tasks needed for the forces for the atoms involved in coupled bond
constraints. Integration for those atoms could take place while forces for interac-
tions between unrelated atoms are being computed, so that there is computation
to do on all nodes while the communication for the constraint iteration takes
place. This kind of implementation would require considerably more ﬂexibility
in the book-keeping and execution model, which is simply not present today.
4
Handling exascale software challenges: pro-
cess and infrastructure
4.1
Transition from C to C++98
The major part of the GROMACS code base has been around 1-1.5 million lines
of C code since version 4.0 (http://www.ohloh.net/p/gromacs). Ideally, soft-
ware engineering on such moderately large multi-purpose code bases would
take place within the context of effective abstractions.26 For example, someone
developing a new integration algorithm should not need to pay any attention
to whether the parallelization is implemented by constructs from a threading li-
brary (like POSIX threads), a compiler-provided threading layer (like OpenMP),
an external message-passing library (like MPI), or remote direct memory access
(like SHMEM). Equally, she/he should not need to know whether the kernels
that compute the forces they are using as inputs are running on any particu-
lar kind of accelerator or CPU. Implementing such abstractions generally costs
some developer time, and some compute time. These are necessary evils if the
software is to be able to change as new hardware, new algorithms or new im-
plementations emerge.
Considerable progress has been made in modularizing some aspects of the
code base to provide effective abstraction layers. For example, once the main MD
iteration loop has begun, the programmer does not need to know whether the
MPI layer is provided by an external library because the computation is taking
place on multiple nodes, or the internal thread-based implementation is work-
ing to parallelize the computation on a single node. Portable abstract atomic
operations have been available as a side-effect of the thread-MPI development.
Integrators receive vectors of positions, velocities and forces without needing
to know the details of the kernels that computed the forces.
The dozens of
non-bonded kernels can make portable SIMD function calls that compile to the
correct hardware operations automatically.
However, the size of the top-level function that implements the loop over time
19

steps has remained at about 1800 code and comment lines since 4.0. It remains
riddled with special-case conditions, comments, and function calls for differ-
ent parallelization conditions, integration algorithms, optimization constructs,
housekeeping for communication and output, and ensemble algorithms. The
function that computes the forces is even worse, now that both the old and new
non-bonded kernel infrastructures are supported! The code complexity is nec-
essary for a general-purpose multi-architecture tool like GROMACS. However,
needing to be aware of dozens of irrelevant possibilities is a heavy barrier to par-
ticipation in the project, because it is very difﬁcult to understand all side effects
of a change.
To address this, we are in the process of a transition from C99 to C++98 for
much of this high-level control code. While we remain alert to the possibility
that HPC compilers will not be as effective at compiling C++98 as they are for
C99, the impact on execution time of most of this code is negligible and the
impact on developer time is considerable.
Our expectation is that the use of virtual function dispatch will eliminate
much of the complexity of understanding conditional code (including switch
statements over enumerations that must be updated in widely scattered parts
of the code), despite a slightly slower implementation of the actual function
call. After all, GROMACS has long used a custom vtable-like implementation
for run-time dispatch of the non-bonded interaction kernels. Objects managing
resources via RAII exploiting compiler-generated destructor calls for doing the
right thing will lead to shorter development times and fewer problems because
developers have to manage fewer things. Templated container types will help
alleviate the burden of manual memory allocation and deallocation. Existing
C++ testing and mocking libraries will simplify the process of developing ade-
quate testing infrastructure, and existing task-parallelism support libraries such
as Intel TBB1 will be beneﬁcial.
It is true that some of these objectives could be met by re-writing in more
objected-oriented C, but the prospect of off-loading some tedious tasks to the
compiler is attractive.
4.2
Best practices in open-source scientiﬁc software devel-
opment
Version control is widely considered necessary for successful software devel-
opment. GROMACS used CVS in its early days and now uses Git (git clone
git://git.gromacs.org/gromacs.git). The ability to trace when behavior changed
and ﬁnd some metadata about why it might have changed is supremely valu-
able.
Coordinating the information about desires of users and developers, known
problems, and progress with current work is an ongoing task that is difﬁcult
with a development team scattered around the world and thousands of users
20

who rarely meet. GROMACS uses the Redmine issue-tracking system3 to discuss
feature development, report and discuss bugs, and to monitor intended and ac-
tual progress towards milestones. Commits in the git repository are expected to
reference Redmine issues where appropriate, which generates automatic HTML
cross-references to save people time ﬁnding information.
Peer review of scientiﬁc research is the accepted gold standard of quality be-
cause of the need for specialist understanding to fully appreciate, value, criticize
and improve the work. Software development on projects like GROMACS is
comparably complex, and our experience has been that peer review has worked
well there. Speciﬁcally, all proposed changes to GROMACS – even from the core
authors – must go through our Gerrit code-review website4, and receive positive
reviews from at least two other developers of suitable experience, before they
can be merged. User- and developer-level documentation must be part of the
same change. Requiring this review to happen before acceptance has eliminated
many problems before they could be felt. It also creates social pressure for peo-
ple to be active in reviewing others’ code, lest they have no karma with which to
get their own proposals reviewed. As features are implemented or bugs ﬁxed,
corresponding Redmine issues are automatically updated. Gerrit also provides
a common venue for developers to share work in progress, either privately or
publicly.
Testing is one of the least favourite activities of programmers, who would
much rather continue being creative in solving new problems. The standard
procedure in software engineering is to deploy continuous integration, where
each new or proposed change is subjected to a range of automatic tests. In the
GROMACS project, we use Jenkins5 to build the project on a wide range of op-
erating systems (MacOS, Windows, ﬂavours of Linux), compilers (GNU, Intel,
Microsoft, clang; and several versions of each), and build conﬁgurations (MPI,
thread-MPI, OpenMP, different kinds of SIMD), and then automatically test the
results for correctness. This immediately ﬁnds problems such as programmers
using POSIX constructs that are not implemented on Windows. Most of our tests
detect regressions, where a change in the code leads to an unintended change
in behavior. Unfortunately, many of these tests are still structured around ex-
ecuting a whole MD process, which makes it difﬁcult to track down where a
problem has occurred, unless the code change is tightly focused. This moti-
vates the discipline of proposing changes that only have one logical effect, and
working towards adding module-level testing. New behaviors are expected to
be integrated alongside tests of that behavior, so that we continue to build upon
the test infrastructure for the future. All tests are required to pass before code
changes can be merged.
Testing regularly for changes in execution speed is an unsolved problem that
3http://redmine.gromacs.org
4http://gerrit.gromacs.org
5http://jenkins.gromacs.org
21

is particularly important for monitoring our exascale software developments. It
is less suited for deployment via continuous integration, because of the quantity
of computation required to test the throughput of code like GROMACS with
proper load-balancing, at-scale, and on a range of hardware and input condi-
tions. It would be good to be able to execute a weekly end-to-end test run that
shows that unplanned performance regressions have not emerged, but we have
not prioritized it yet. Waiting to do these tests until after feature stability is
achieved in the software-development life cycle is not appropriate, because that
requires extra work in identifying the point in time (ie. the git commit) where
the problem was introduced, and the same work identifying the correct way to
manage the situation. This is much better done while the change is fresh in de-
velopers’ minds, so long as the testing procedure is reasonably automatic. Also,
in the gap between commit and testing, a regression may be masked by some
other improvement. More extensive human-based testing before releases should
still be done; but avoiding protracted bug hunts just before releases makes for a
much happier team.
Cross-platform software requires extensive conﬁguration before it can be
built. The system administrator or end user needs to be able to guide what kind
of GROMACS build takes place, and the conﬁguration system needs to verify
that the compiler and machine can satisfy that request. This requires searching
for ways to resolve dependencies, and disclosing to the user what is being done
with what is available. It is important that compilation should not fail when
conﬁguration succeeded, because the end user is generally incapable of diag-
nosing what the problem was. A biochemist attempting to install GROMACS
on their laptop generally does not know that scrolling back through 100 lines of
output from recursive make calls is needed to ﬁnd the original compilation error,
and even then they will generally need to ask someone else what the problem
is and how to resolve it. It is far more efﬁcient for both users and developers to
detect during conﬁguration that compilation will fail, and to provide suggested
solutions and guidance at that time. Accordingly, GROMACS uses the CMake
build system (http://www.cmake.org), primarily for its cross-platform support,
but makes extensive use of its high-level constructs, including sub-projects and
scoped variables.
4.3
Proﬁling
Experience has shown that it is hard to optimize software, especially an HPC
code, based on simple measurements of total execution speed. It is often neces-
sary to have a more ﬁne-grained view of the performance of individual parts of
the code, details of execution on the individual compute units, as well as commu-
nication patterns. There is no value in measuring the improvement in execution
time of a non-bonded kernel if the execution time of the FFTs is dominant!
Standard practice is to use a proﬁling/tracing tool to explore which func-
22

tions or code lines consume important quantities of time, and to focus effort
on those. However, if the measurement is to provide useful information, the
proﬁler should perturb the execution time by a very small amount. This is par-
ticularly challenging with GROMACS because in our case an MD iteration is
typically in the range of a millisecond or less wall clock time around the current
scaling limit, and the functions that are interesting to proﬁle might execute only
for microseconds. Overhead introduced by performance measurement that is
acceptable in other kinds of applications often leads to incorrect conclusions for
GROMACS. Statistical sampling from periodically interrupting the execution to
observe which core is doing which task could work in principle, but (for exam-
ple) Intel’s VTune 3 Ampliﬁer defaults to a 10 ms interval, which does not create
conﬁdence that use of the tool would lead to accurate observations of events
whose duration is a thousand times shorter. Reducing the proﬁling overhead to
an acceptable level while still capturing enough information to be able to easily
interpret the performance measurements has proved challenging. Additionally,
this often required expert knowledge, assistance of the developers of the respec-
tive performance measurement tool. This makes it exceptionally hard to use
in-depth or large-scale proﬁling as part of the regular GROMACS development
workﬂow.
However, we have not been optimizing in the dark; the main mdrun simula-
tion tool has included a built-in tracing-like functionality for many years. This
functionality relies on manual instrumentation of the entire source code-base
(through inlined start/stop timing functions) as well as low-overhead timing
measurements based on processor cycle counters. The great beneﬁt is that the
log output of every GROMACS simulation contains a breakdown of detailed
timing measurements of the different code parts. However, this internal trac-
ing functionality does not reach its full potential because the collected data is
typically displayed and analyzed through time-averages across MPI ranks and
time-steps, often hiding useful details.
To realize more of this potential, we have explored the possibility of more
detailed MPI rank-based statistics, including minimum and maximum execution
times across ranks as well as averages. However, this information is still less
detailed than that from a classical trace and proﬁle visualizer. We are exploring
combining our internal instrumentation with a tracing library. By adding API
calls to various tracing libraries to our instrumentation calls, we can provide
native support for detailed trace-generation in GROMACS just by linking against
a tracing library like Extrae6.
This will make it considerably easier to carry
out performance analysis without the need for expert knowledge on collecting
performance data while avoiding inﬂuencing the program behavior by overhead.
6http://www.bsc.es/computer-sciences/extrae
23

5
Future directions
GROMACS has grown from an in-house simulation code into a large interna-
tional software project, which now also has highly professional developer, test-
ing and proﬁling environments to match it. We believe the code is quite unique
in the extent to which it interacts with the underlying hardware, and while there
are many signiﬁcant challenges remaining this provides a very strong base for
further extreme-scale computing development. However, scientiﬁc software is
rapidly becoming very dependent on deep technical computing expertise: Many
amazingly smart algorithms are becoming irrelevant since they cannot be im-
plemented efﬁciently on modern hardware, and the inherent complexity of this
hardware makes it very difﬁcult even for highly skilled physicists and chemists
to predict what will work. It is similarly not realistic to expect every research
group to afford a resident computer expert, which will likely require both re-
search groups and computing centers to increasingly join efforts to create large
open source community codes where it is realistic to fund multiple full time de-
velopers. In closing, the high performance and extreme-scale computing land-
scape is currently changing faster than it has ever done before. It is a formidable
challenge for software to keep up with this pace, but the potential rewards of
exascale computing are equally large.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the European research Council (258980, BH), the
Swedish e-Science research center, and the EU FP7 CRESTA project (287703).
Computational resources were provided by the Swedish National Infrastructure
for computing (grants SNIC 025/12-32 & 2013-26/24) and the Leibniz Super-
computing Center.
References
[1] Intel Thread Building Blocks, https://www.threadingbuildingblocks.
org
[2] Abraham, M.J., Gready, J.E.: Optimization of parameters for molecular dy-
namics simulation using Smooth Particle-Mesh Ewald in GROMACS 4.5. J.
Comput. Chem. 32(9), 2031–2040 (JUL 15 2011)
[3] Amdahl, G.M.:
Validity of the single processor approach to achiev-
ing large scale computing capabilities. In: Proceedings of the April 18-
20, 1967, Spring Joint Computer Conference. pp. 483–485. AFIPS ’67
(Spring), ACM, New York, NY, USA (1967), http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/
1465482.1465560
24

[4] Anderson, J.A., Lorenz, C.D., Travesset, A.: General purpose molecular
dynamics simulations fully implemented on graphics processing units. J.
Comput. Phys. 227, 5324–5329 (2008)
[5] Andoh, Y., Yoshii, N., Fujimoto, K., Mizutani, K., Kojima, H., Yamada, A.,
Okazaki, S., Kawaguchi, K., Nagao, H., Iwahashi, K., Mizutani, F., Minami,
K., Ichikawa, S.i., Komatsu, H., Ishizuki, S., Takeda, Y., Fukushima, M.:
MODYLAS: A Highly Parallelized General-Purpose Molecular Dynamics
Simulation Program for Large-Scale Systems with Long-Range Forces Cal-
culated by Fast Multipole Method (FMM) and Highly Scalable Fine-Grained
New Parallel Processing Algorithms. Journal of Chemical Theory and Com-
putation 9(7), 3201–3209 (2013), http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/
ct400203a
[6] Arnold, A., Fahrenberger, F., Holm, C., Lenz, O., Bolten, M., Dachsel, H.,
Halver, R., Kabadshow, I., G¨ahler, F., Heber, F., Iseringhausen, J., Hofmann,
M., Pippig, M., Potts, D., Sutmann, G.: Comparison of scalable fast methods
for long-range interactions. Phys. Rev. E 88, 063308 (Dec 2013), http://
link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRevE.88.063308
[7] Bowers, K.J., Dror, R.O., Shaw, D.E.: Overview of neutral territory meth-
ods for the parallel evaluation of pairwise particle interactions. Journal
of Physics: Conference Series 16(1), 300 (2005), http://stacks.iop.org/
1742-6596/16/i=1/a=041
[8] Bowers, K.J., Dror, R.O., Shaw, D.E.: Zonal methods for the parallel execu-
tion of range-limited n-body simulations. J. Comput. Phys. 221(1), 303–329
(Jan 2007), http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jcp.2006.06.014
[9] Brown, W.M., Wang, P., Plimpton, S.J., Tharrington, A.N.: Implementing
molecular dynamics on hybrid high performance computers - short range
forces. Comp. Phys. Comm. 182, 898–911 (2011)
[10] Eastman, P., Pande, V.S.: Efﬁcient nonbonded interactions for molecular dy-
namics on a graphics processing unit. J. Comput. Chem. 31, 1268–72 (2010)
[11] Eleftheriou, M., Moreira, J.E., Fitch, B.G., Germain, R.S.: A volumetric FFT
for BlueGene/L. In: Pinkston, T.M., Prasanna, V.K. (eds.) High Performance
Computing - HiPC 2003, Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 2913, pp.
194–203. Springer Berlin Heidelberg (2003)
[12] Essmann, U., Perera, L., Berkowitz, M.L., Darden, T., Lee, H., Pedersen,
L.G.: A smooth particle mesh Ewald method. J. Chem. Phys. 103(19), 8577–
8593 (1995)
25

[13] Faradjian, A., Elber, R.: Computing time scales from reaction coordinates
by milestoning. J. Chem. Phys. 120, 10880–10889 (2004)
[14] Hess, B., Kutzner, C., van der Spoel, D., Lindahl, E.: GROMACS 4: Algo-
rithms for highly efﬁcient, load-balanced, and scalable molecular simula-
tion. J. Chem. Theory Comput. 4(3), 435–447 (2008)
[15] Humphrey, W., Dalke, A., Schulten, K.: VMD: Visual molecular dynamics.
J. Mol. Graph. 14(1), 33–38 (1996)
[16] Jagode, H.: Fourier transforms for the BlueGene/L communication net-
work. Ph.D. thesis, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK (2005)
[17] P´all, S., Hess, B.:
A ﬂexible algorithm for calculating pair interac-
tions on SIMD architectures. Computer Physics Communications 184(12),
2641 – 2650 (2013), http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0010465513001975
[18] Phillips, J.C., Braun, R., Wang, W., Gumbart, J., Tajkhorshid, E., Villa, E.,
Chipot, C., Skeel, R.D., Kale, L., , Schulten, K.: Scalable molecular dynamics
with NAMD 26, 1781–1802 (2005)
[19] Pronk, S., Larsson, P., Pouya, I., Bowman, G.R., Haque, I.S., Beauchamp,
K., Hess, B., Pande, V.S., Kasson, P.M., Lindahl, E.: Copernicus: A new
paradigm for parallel adaptive molecular dynamics. In: Proceedings of 2011
International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking,
Storage and Analysis. pp. 60:1–60:10. SC ’11, ACM, New York, NY, USA
(2011), http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2063384.2063465
[20] Pronk, S., P´all, S., Schulz, R., Larsson, P., Bjelkmar, P., Apostolov, R.,
Shirts, M.R., Smith, J.C., Kasson, P.M., van der Spoel, D., Hess, B., Lindahl,
E.: GROMACS 4.5: a high-throughput and highly parallel open source
molecular simulation toolkit. Bioinformatics 29(7), 845–854 (2013), http:
//bioinformatics.oxfordjournals.org/content/29/7/845.abstract
[21] Reyes, R., Turner, A., Hess, B.:
Introducing SHMEM into the GRO-
MACS molecular dynamics application:
experience and results. In:
M Weiland, A.J., Johnson, N. (eds.) Proceedings of the 7th Interna-
tional Conference on PGAS Programming Models. The University of Ed-
inburgh (October 2013), http://www.pgas2013.org.uk/sites/default/
files/pgas2013proceedings.pdf
[22] Sch¨utte, C., Winkelmann, S., Hartmann, C.: Optimal control of molecular
dynamics using Markov state models. Math. Program. (Series B) 134, 259–
282 (2012)
26

[23] Shirts, M., Pande, V.S.: Screen savers of the world unite! Science 290(5498),
1903–1904 (2000), http://www.sciencemag.org/content/290/5498/1903.
short
[24] Sugita, Y., Okamoto, Y.: Replica-exchange molecular dynamics method for
protein folding. Chem. Phys. Lett. 314, 141–151 (1999)
[25] Verlet, L.: Computer ”Experiments” on Classical Fluids. I. Thermodynami-
cal Properties of Lennard-Jones Molecules. Phys. Rev. 159, 98–103 (Jul 1967),
http://link.aps.org/doi/10.1103/PhysRev.159.98
[26] Wilson, G., Aruliah, D.A., Brown, C.T., Chue Hong, N.P., Davis, M.,
Guy, R.T., Haddock, S.H.D., Huff, K.D., Mitchell, I.M., Plumbley, M.D.,
Waugh, B., White, E.P., Wilson, P.: Best Practices for Scientiﬁc Comput-
ing. PLoS Biol 12(1), e1001745 (01 2014), http://dx.doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pbio.1001745
[27] Yokota, R., Barba, L.A.: A tuned and scalable fast multipole method as a
preeminent algorithm for exascale systems. International Journal of High
Performance Computing Applications 26(4), 337–346 (2012), http://hpc.
sagepub.com/content/26/4/337.abstract
27