ARTICLE
Received 16 Jul 2014 | Accepted 8 Jan 2015 | Published 4 Feb 2015
Single-pixel imaging by means of Fourier spectrum
acquisition
Zibang Zhang1, Xiao Ma1 & Jingang Zhong1,2
Single-pixel imaging techniques enable to capture a scene without a direct line of sight to the
object, but high-quality imaging has been proven challenging especially in the presence of
noisy environmental illumination. Here we present a single-pixel imaging technique that can
achieve high-quality images by acquiring their Fourier spectrum. We use phase-shifting
sinusoid structured illumination for the spectrum acquisition. Applying inverse Fourier
transform to the obtained spectrum yields the desired image. The proposed technique is
capable of capturing a scene without a direct view of it. Thus, it enables a feasible placement
of detectors, only if the detectors can collect the light signals from the scene. The technique is
also a compressive sampling like approach, so it can reconstruct an image from sub-Nyquist
measurements. We experimentally obtain clear images by utilizing a detector not placed in
direct view of the imaged scene even with noise introduced by environmental illuminations.
DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7225
1 Department of Optoelectronic Engineering, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China. 2 Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Information and Sensing
Technologies of Guangdong Higher Education Institutes, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China. Correspondence and requests for materials should be
addressed to J.Z. (email: tzjg@jnu.edu.cn).
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:6225 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7225 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
1
& 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

A
n optical imaging system generally consists of an
illumination source and a light detection unit. For
conventional imaging techniques, a scene is illuminated
by a uniform light ﬁeld and detected with a pixelated array of
detectors (charge-coupled device camera, complementary metal
oxide semiconductor camera, for example) through some lensing
optical system. The light collected by a detector can be divided
into direct light and indirect light (Supplementary Fig. 1). Direct
light is any light that has not been scattered before falling on the
detector while indirect light refers to light that has been scattered
before falling on the detector. Direct light contributes to an
effective signal, while in most cases indirect light contributes to
noise. Therefore, it is difﬁcult for the conventional techniques to
capture a scene with a small amount of direct light detected (for
instance, objects hidden behind scattering media or around a
non-specular corner) due to the resulting low signal-to-noise
ratio (SNR).
The ﬁrst approach attempted with single-pixel imaging might
have been the ‘ﬂying-spot’ camera patented in 1884 by Paul
Nipkow who proposed the use of a perforated disk (also known as
a Nipkow disk) to modulate a light source for scanning light spots
across a scene1. Although several improved ﬂying-spot cameras
were proposed later, this approach has been out of favour because
of the low SNR. In recent years, a number of novel single-pixel
imaging techniques have been presented. The single-pixel imaging
techniques are often referred to ghost imaging (GI). Conventional
GI2 exploits the quantum nature of light and is performed by using
entangled photon pairs. The reconstruction of an image employs
an iterative algorithm based on probabilistic mathematics. Later
single-pixel imaging techniques that use a classical light source to
exploit
Helmholtz
reciprocity3
have
been
proposed.
These
techniques include GI4–7, computational imaging8–11 and dual
photography1,12,13. These single-pixel techniques can potentially
capture a scene with indirect measurement where detectors
sample the indirect light only. In other words, the detection unit
needs not a direct line of sight to the imaged object. To
achieve
this,
the
key
point
is
to
increase
the
SNR
in
measurement. Several approaches aiming at increasing the SNR
have been proposed, such as differential measurement6,10,11,
illumination
pattern
normalization7,10,11,
frequency-locked
measurement10,11 and so on. However, to our knowledge, no
single-pixel
technique
can
successfully
achieve
high-quality
imaging with indirect measurement so far.
In this paper, we report a single-pixel imaging technique that
can reconstruct high-quality images by acquiring their Fourier
spectrum. From the perspective of its physics nature, the
technique is subject to the Helmholtz reciprocity. It allows
indirect measurements in which a single-pixel detector capture a
scene without directly looking at it. Thus, the detector can be
placed wherever it can collect light signals from the scene, which
is like a radio set that can be placed wherever it can receive the
radio waves emitted by a station. The proposed technique
employs the use of greyscale, analytic, harmonic sinusoid patterns
(the real part of Fourier transform basis), instead of random
speckle or binary basis patterns, for illumination. There are
approaches to super-resolution microscopy with the use of the
sinusoid structured illumination14–16. The proposed technique
acquires the Fourier spectrum of the scene image with the four-
step phase-shifting sinusoid illuminations. The desired image can
be perfectly reconstructed by applying the two-dimensional (2D)
inverse fast Fourier transform (IFT) algorithm. The phase-
shifting illumination approach brings the elimination of noise
that is statically the same. Particularly, when the sampling rate is
far higher or lower than the ﬂashing rate of the environmental
light sources, the approach would largely cancel out the noise
from the environmental illumination. Moreover, the sinusoid
patterns are naturally normalized in intensity. Consequently each
measurement collects half of the total ﬂux on average, which not
only beneﬁts the efﬁciency of the illumination source’s available
energy ﬂux, but also ensures the detector is able to operate in the
linear region with sufﬁcient input light energy. In addition, the
sinusoid patterns can be generated by several means. For
example, a commercial digital projector displays the patterns in
24-bit mode; a programmable digital micromirror device (DMD)
that displays the patterns in binary mode, and the defocusing17 or
the spatial ﬁltering approach16 is employed to make the resulting
patterns sinusoidal; two coherent plane waves intersect at an
angle to form a sinusoid pattern. What is more, the technique
presented here is a compressive sampling4,8–10,12,13 like approach.
It applies measurement in the Fourier domain, where most
natural images are sparse. More importantly, it is known that the
large coefﬁcients are concentrated at the low-frequency region of
the Fourier domain. Thus, the technique is capable of reducing
the number of measurements. In summary, the proposed
technique has advantages of high SNR in indirect measurement
and applicability in the real world.
Results
Experimental setup. The schematic diagram of the proposed
technique is shown in Fig. 1. The scene consisted of a toy and an
enlarged 1951 USAF resolution test pattern printed on a piece of
A4 white paper. The test pattern had a number of features
designed to allow for assessment of the image quality. The four-
step phase-shifting sinusoidal patterns of different spatial fre-
quency with 245  245 pixels were generated by the computer.
The illumination patterns were of 256 greyscale levels and
successively projected by a commercial digital projector. The
illuminated area was 0.16  0.16 m2 in size. We used two single-
pixel detection units to collect the resulting light separately. Each
unit was lensless and not able to directly observe the imaged
scene. The projector switched the illumination patterns every
0.15 s and the detectors sampled synchronically. The scheme of
the technique is also illustrated in Supplementary Movie 1.
Imaging in absence of environmental illumination. Our ﬁrst
goal was to reconstruct a 2D image (245  245 pixels) of the 3-D
scene by using a lensless single-pixel detector without direct
observation. Note that there are no illumination sources except
the projector in this case. A commercial digital projector was used
to illuminate the scene.
As Fig. 1 shows, detector 1, whose photosensitive surface facing
the scene, was covered with a piece of ground glass with a
thickness of 5.1 mm. A part of the light reﬂected from the
surface of the objects in the scene passed through the glass and
became partly scattered. Thus, the light that detector 1 collected
was a mixture of direct and indirect light. Detector 2 was reversely
placed, with its photosensitive surface back to the scene. A piece
of A4 white paper was used as a reﬂecting diffuser. Detector 2
collected the light scattered by the diffuser. Thus, the light that
detector 2 collected could be viewed as only indirect light.
To perfectly reconstruct a 245  245-pixel image, the same
number of Fourier coefﬁcients is required. We used the four-step
phase-shifting
sinusoid
illumination
for
Fourier
spectrum
acquisition. Each Fourier coefﬁcient was obtained with four
measurements. As the Fourier spectrum of a real-valued signal is
conjugate symmetric, half of the coefﬁcients are redundant. Thus,
in our case, the number of measurements for the Fourier
spectrum with a coverage of 100% is 120052. It took over 5 h to
obtain a full-resolution complete frame.
Reconstructed images from detectors 1 and 2 with a spectrum
coverage from 1% to 100% are given in Fig. 2. As the ﬁgure
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7225
2
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:6225 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7225 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

shows, the proposed technique can achieve clear images by
collecting either a mixture of direct and indirect light or only
indirect light. When the number of measurements is in common,
the images from detector 2 appear slightly noisy than those from
detector 1. It is because the light that detector 2 collected was
relatively weak, which results in a lower SNR.
The proposed technique is a compressive sampling like
approach. In general, most information of a natural scene
concentrates on low-frequency components. With the strategy
that the Fourier spectrum acquired in the order from lower to
higher frequencies, the quality of the reconstructed images
improves with a rapid convergence. The scene can be roughly
recognized from the images with only 1% of spectrum coverage.
When spectrum coverage reaches 10%, the quality remarkably
improves. The differences among the images reconstructed
from a spectra with a coverage from 25% (half of Nyquist
measurements) to 100% (double of Nyquist measurements)
are nearly unnoticeable. Since natural images are sparse in the
Fourier
domain,
the
Fourier
spectrum
measurement
can
reconstruct faithful-quality images by performing the sub-
Nyquist measurements.
Helmholtz reciprocity permits the roles interchanged between
an illumination source and a detection unit. Therefore, the ﬁeld of
view of the reconstructed images is determined by the position of
the projector to the scene, while the location of the shades proﬁle
is set by the position of the single-pixel detector.
The proposed technique performs Fourier spectrum measure-
ments to obtain the desired image. Random noise in measure-
ment would equally affect each frequency component in the
spectrum. As a result, the primary noise for the proposed
technique should be the white noise that is characterized by a
constant power spectral density. Increasing the exposure time of
the detector is an effective approach to reduce the white noise,
which achieves a temporal average. In addition, there exists a
periodic noise in the originally reconstructed images in our
experiments. The noise is caused by the discretization introduced
by the digital projector that operates in the 24-bit mode. The
illumination patterns are digitalized by the digital projector,
which leads to several Fourier coefﬁcients with unusually larger
modulus than their neighbours in the spectrum. Fortunately, the
locations of these Fourier coefﬁcients are of regularity so that they
can be picked out with a common spectral mask and reasonably
replaced by their neighbour mean. Figure 3 brieﬂy illustrates the
process of periodic noise reduction by frequency domain ﬁltering
and a detailed illustration is given in Supplementary Methods.
The periodic noise could be avoided by using other aforemen-
tioned sinusoid pattern generation methods.
Imaging in presence of environmental illumination. Environ-
mental illumination is challenging for the existing single-pixel
imaging techniques. Our second goal was to demonstrate the
technique’s ability to eliminate the background noise. We intro-
duced an environmental illumination with ﬂuorescent lamps
ﬂashing at a rate of 100 Hz. The environmental illumination
contributes to the noise that reduces the SNR. Figure 4 shows the
images reconstructed from the different SNRs. The proposed
technique is capable of reconstructing clear images even from a
negative SNR with the employment of phase-shifting illumina-
tions that cancel out the background noise efﬁciently. Such a
property makes the proposed technique practical in use. The SNR
calculations are given in Supplementary Methods.
Discussion
The proposed technique employs the use of sinusoid patterns for
structured illumination. It performs Fourier spectrum measure-
ments to acquire the image information. The illumination patterns
are deterministically represented in mathematics and can be
generated by a few methods. The orthogonality of the patterns
allows the desired image to be perfectly reproduced with a ﬁxed
and ﬁnite number of measurements in the absence of noise. The
number is equal to that of the total pixels on the ﬁnal image.
Moreover, natural images can be sparsely represented in the
Fourier domain. To increase the SNR, the four-step phase-shifting
y
x
z
O
Scene
A4 white paper
Projector
Ground glass
Photodiodes
Detector 2
Detector 1
Illumination party
Detection party
Detection
units
Illumination
patterns
A4 white
paper
Photodiode
(facing the scene)
Photodiode
(back to the scene)
Ground glass
Computer
Digital projector
Scene
20.4 cm
20.4 cm
91.5 cm
–2
–2
–1
1
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
3
4
5
6
Figure 1 | Experimental setup. The digital projector (TOSHIBA Tp-95) illuminated the scene with the four-step phase-shifting sinusoidal structured
light patterns. The detection unit (a photodiode, Hamamatsu S1227-1010BR, driven by an ampliﬁcation circuit) collected the scattered reﬂected light
from the scene and fed the resulting signals to the computer for a computational reconstruction of images. We used two different detection units for
image reconstructions, which were a photodiode covered with a piece of ground glass (detector 1) and a reversely placed photodiode with a piece of
A4 white paper as a reﬂecting diffuser (detector 2). The optical path is on the left top.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7225
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:6225 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7225 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
3
& 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

sinusoid pattern illumination is employed for differential measure-
ments. The four-step phase-shifting sinusoid illumination can
remove the direct current (DC) component but doubles the
number
of
measurement.
Although
one
might
use
other
orthogonal pattern sets to achieve the features depicted above,
the
phase-shifting
sinusoid
patterns
set
has
its
additional
feasibilities including: (1) Various methods are available for
pattern generation. For instance, the sinusoid patterns can be
generated by the interference of two coherent plane waves. It
should be noted that the greyscale sinusoid patterns can also be
generated by the use of a programmable DMD operating in binary
mode. The resulting binary (stripe) patterns can be converted to
greyscale (fringe) by employing the defocusing techniques or the
spatial low-pass ﬁltering. DMDs with binary projection rates of 22
kHz and above are becoming common, which allows up to kilo-
per-second measurements. (2) The N-step phase-shifting sinusoid
illuminations (NZ3) is able to assemble the Fourier spectrum of
the image and eliminate the DC term in measurements. The more
the steps of phase shifts involved, the longer the measurement time
will be. (3) Rapid convergence of image quality in reconstruction is
observed. Since natural images are generally sparse in the Fourier
domain (for example, most information concentrates in the low-
frequency region), the proposed technique obtains the Fourier
spectrum with an increasing spatial frequency (from low to high)
allowing the reconstruction of a recognizable image with a small
number of measurements. (4) Self-error correction can be
achieved. As it is carried out in the frequency domain, the
proposed technique can be assisted with the existing well-
developed frequency-domain processing algorithms for image
enhancements. Incorrect measurements due to noise could be
identiﬁed and even corrected. (5) The proposed technique offers
fast computation along with a small memory requirement. The
image reconstruction process employs 2D IFT algorithm, which
has
a
fast
implementation.
The
illumination
patterns
are
predetermined and need not be stored on a computer.
We have noted that there exist some possible factors
contributing to the additive noise on reconstructed images:
discretization of illumination patterns (quantization of greyscale
Spectrum coverage, S
1
0
Normalized power
spectral density
S = 1%
S = 10%
S = 25%
S = 100%
S = 1%
S = 10%
S = 25%
S = 100%
1
0
Normalized intensity
m = 1,200
m = 12,004
m = 30,012
m = 120,052
m = 1,200
m = 12,004
m = 30,012
m = 120,052
Times of measurement, m
Acquired fourier spectra
From detector 1
From detector 2
Reconstructed images
From detector 1
From detector 2
Figure 2 | Acquired Fourier spectra from detectors 1 and 2 with spectrum coverage from 1 to 100% and corresponding reconstructed images. (a–d)
are the density distributions of Fourier spectrum acquired from detector 1, whereas (e–h) from detector 2. (i–l) are the reconstructed images corresponding
to (a–d) and (m–p) correspond to (e–h), respectively. Note that we show the absolute value of the Fourier spectrum on a logarithm scale to render
them visible. The images are reconstructed by using the 2D discrete IFT algorithm. No post processing has been applied to the reconstructed images.
Scale bar, 2 cm.
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7225
4
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:6225 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7225 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

and position), nonlinear responses of the photodiode, circuit
noise at the ampliﬁer and the photodiode. The noticeable ‘grid’
on
the
images
in
our
experiment
is
introduced
by
the
discretization of the illumination pattern. The quantization of
the patterns’ greyscale levels would violate the normalization of
the image intensity in the case of some spatial frequencies. The
reduction for such periodic noise is introduced in detail in
Supplementary Methods.
The quality of the reconstructed images can be further
improved by increasing the contrast of the illumination patterns
and the SNR of detectors. For full-colour imaging, one can use
three photodiodes covered with spectral ﬁlters to reconstruct the
red, green and blue sub-images. We have experimentally
validated this approach. The scheme and the results are presented
in Supplementary Fig. 5.
However, the proposed technique has two limitations. One is
that it requires an illumination source with spatial resolution in a
direct line of sight of the imaged objects, although the detectors
need not observe the objects directly. The other is that it can only
be used in static measurement so far.
In conclusion, this paper introduces a single-pixel imaging
technique
capable
of
reconstructing
images
from
indirect
measurements in which a single-pixel detector does not need to
directly observe the imaged objects. The indirect measurements
lead to a feasible placement of the detector. The technique can
still work even under environmental illumination. The technique
acquires the Fourier spectrum of the desired image with the use of
a four-step phase-shifting sinusoid illumination. Moreover, the
proposed technique can reproduce a clear image of a natural
scene from sub-Nyquist samples. In terms of computational
efﬁciency, the image reconstruction employs the use of 2D fast
IFT
algorithm
rather
than
any
iterative
or
minimization
algorithms. The analytic Fourier mathematics that the proposed
technique is based on enables perfect image reproductions in
principle. Various approaches to illumination pattern generation
bring feasibilities into practical uses. The technique can be
extended to large ﬁeld-of-view imaging in various wavebands.
Methods
Principle of the proposed technique. The proposed single-pixel imaging tech-
nique is based on the theorem of Fourier transform. It obtains the Fourier spec-
trum of a scene image by illuminating the scene with phase-shifting sinusoidal
structured light patterns and using a detector, which has no spatial resolution, to
collect the resulting light. In our experiment, the four-step phase-shifting sinusoid
illumination was employed for the spectrum acquisition. As we demonstrate below,
the phase-shifting approach can not only assemble the desired Fourier coefﬁcients,
but also effectively eliminate errors that are statically the same. High SNR can
therefore be obtained, which makes the proposed technique able to work with the
sampled indirect light. The ﬁnal image is reconstructed by applying the fast IFT
algorithm to the Fourier spectrum acquired.
The Fourier transform provides a perspective that an image consists of a
weighted sum of harmonic 2D structured light patterns with different frequencies, as
Supplementary Fig. 2 shows. Therefore, it is possible to reconstruct the image if the
weight of each (that is, Fourier coefﬁcient) corresponding frequency is known. Each
weight can be obtained by four measurements, that is, to successively illuminate the
scene with four sinusoid patterns with a phase shift of p/2. The illumination patterns
are greyscale images instead of the commonly used binary ones. In addition, the
patterns have the same global intensity, which omits normalization.
With the illumination P being known, the measurement process refers to the
acquistion of the corresponding Fourier coefﬁcient, C. The coefﬁcients are complex
numbers. As each complex number generally takes 16 b for storage, the proposed
technique just occupies 2 Mb to store the data for a 512  512-pixel image. A 2D
sinusoid pattern is speciﬁed with its spatial frequency (fx,fy) and initial phase, f. It
is given by:
Pf x; y; fx; fy


¼ a þ b  cos 2pfxx þ 2pfyy þ f


;
ð1Þ
where (x,y) represents the 2D Cartesian coordinates in the scene, a is the DC term
equal to the average image intensity and b represents the contrast. By illuminating a
Figure 3 | Illustration of periodic noise reduction. By applying
thresholding to the discrete 2D Fourier spectrum (modulus) image acquired
from detector 1, it yields (a) where the white pixels represent coefﬁcients
with greater modulus than the threshold. (b) Is the spectral mask that
isolates the false coefﬁcients for further correction. The generation of the
mask is depicted in Supplementary Methods in detail. (c) and (d) Are the
reconstructed images with their partial enlargement before and after
periodic noise reduction process, respectively. Comparing c with d, the
visible periodic noise resulted from the discretization of the digital projector
has been effectively eliminated. Scale bar, 2 cm.
SNR = –22.8 dB
SNR = –8.5 dB
SNR = 64.2 dB
Figure 4 | Images with different SNRs. The images are reconstructed from (a) detector 2 with environmental illumination of ﬂuorescent lamps,
(b) detector 1 with environmental illumination of ﬂuorescent lamps and (c) detector 1 without any environmental illumination, respectively. The SNRs
are computed according to the equation (S9). Periodic noise reduction has been applied. Scale bar, 2 cm.
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7225
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:6225 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7225 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
5
& 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.

scene with a pattern, the total intensity of reﬂected light arising from the structured
light source can be expressed as:
Ef fx; fy


¼
Z Z
O
R x; y
ð
ÞPf x; y; fx; fy


dxdy;
ð2Þ
where O represents the illuminated area, R is the distribution of the surface
reﬂectivity of the imaged objects in the scene. The integration in equation (2)
implies that the detectors can collect any kind of light for imaging, despite the light
being a direct light, indirect light or a mixture of both. It is because the effective
light signal is independent on the propagation path, as long as the media in the
scene are linear and static. When a single-pixel detector is used, it can collect a part
of the reﬂected light that reaches its photosensitive surface. Thus, the total
response, Df, can be expressed as:
Df fx; fy


¼ Dn þ kEf fx; fy


;
ð3Þ
where k depends on the size and the location of the detector, Dn represents the
response of environmental illuminations. The four-step phase-shifting approach
allows each complex Fourier coefﬁcient C (fx,fy) to be obtained by four responses
corresponding to the illumination patterns (that is, P0, Pp/2, Pp and P3p/2). These
four patterns are with the same spatial frequency (fx,fy), and a constant phase shift
Dj ¼ p/2 between two adjacent patterns. Applying the following equation can
obtain the proportional Fourier spectrum of R and cancel out the DC term:
D0 fx; fy


 Dp fx; fy




þ j  Dp=2 fx; fy


 D3p=2 fx; fy




¼ 2bk  F R x; y
ð
Þ
f
g;
ð4Þ
where j denotes the imaginary unit and F the Fourier transform. Equation (4) is a
differential measurement for which the DC term is removed efﬁciently. In other
words, the noise caused by environmental illumination can be effectively
eliminated. By applying the IFT to the right hand side of equation (4), it yields:
2bk  R x; y
ð
Þ ¼ F  1
D0 fx; fy


 Dp fx; fy




þ j  Dp=2 fx; fy


 D3p=2 fx; fy






;
ð5Þ
where F  1 denotes the inverse Fourier transform operator. The result of the
inverse transform is the ﬁnal image whose gray values are proportional to the
reﬂectivity R(x,y). A detailed deduction is provided in Supplementary Methods.
References
1. Sen, P. et al. Dual Photography. ACM Trans. Graph. 24, 745–755 (2005).
2. Pittman, T. B. Optical imaging by means of two-photon quantum
entanglement. Phys. Rev. A 52, R3429 (1995).
3. Born, M. & Wolf, E. Principles of optics (Pergamon Press, 1959).
4. Bennink, R. S., Bentley, S. J. & Boyd, R. W. ‘‘Two-Photon’’ coincidence imaging
with a classical source. Phys. Rev. Lett. 89, 113601 (2002).
5. Katz, O., Bromberg, Y. & Siberberg, Y. Compressive ghost imaging. Appl. Phys.
Lett. 95, 131110 (2009).
6. Ferri, F., Magatti, D. L., Lugiato, A. & Gatti, A. Differential ghost imaging. Phys.
Rev. Lett. 104, 253603 (2010).
7. Sun, B., Welsh, S. S., Edgar, M. P., Shapiro, J. H. & Padgett, M. J. Normalized
ghost imaging. Opt. Express. 20, 16892–16901 (2012).
8.
Shapiro, J. H. Computational ghost imaging. Phys. Rev. A 78, 061802 (2008).
9.
Duarte, M. F. et al. Single-pixel imaging via compressive sampling. IEEE Signal
Process. Mag. 25, 83–91 (2008).
10. Sun, B. et al. 3D Computational imaging with single-pixel detectors. Science
340, 844–847 (2013).
11. Welsh, S. et al. Fast full-color computational imaging with single-pixel
detectors. Opt. Express 21, 23068–23074 (2013).
12. Sen, P. & Darabi, S. Compressive dual photography. Comput. Graph. Forum 28,
609–618 (2009).
13. Peers, P. et al. Compressive light transport sensing. ACM Trans. Graph. 28, 3
(2009).
14. Gustafsson, M. G. L. Surpassing the lateral resolution limit by a factor of two
using structured illumination. J. Microsc. 198, 82–87 (2000).
15. Ryu, J., Hong, S. S., Horn, B. K. P., Freeman, D. M. & Mermelstein, M. S.
Multibeam interferometric illumination as the primary source of resolution in
optical microscopy. Appl. Phys. Lett. 88, 171112 (2006).
16. Dan, D. et al. DMD-based LED-illumination super-resolution and optical
sectioning microscopy. Sci. Rep. 3, 1116 (2013).
17. Lei, S. & Zhang, S. Flexible 3-D shape measurement using projector defocusing.
Opt. Lett. 34, 3080–3082 (2009).
Acknowledgements
We thank Q. Peng for useful discussion, P. Qi for assistance in hardware construction,
Z. Liang for assistance in programming, M. Liang for editing the manuscript, and
G. Rhoades and Q. Fang for the linguistic assistance. This work was supported by
National Natural Science Foundation of China under the Grant No. 61475064.
Author contributions
Z.Z. designed the system, performed the experiments, analysed the data and wrote the
manuscript. X.M. performed the experiments, analysed the data and assisted in writing
the manuscript. J.Z. conceived, designed, supervised the study, interpreted the data, and
wrote the manuscript. All authors discussed the results and commented on the
manuscript.
Additional information
Supplementary Information accompanies this paper at http://www.nature.com/
naturecommunications
Competing ﬁnancial interests: The authors declare no competing ﬁnancial interests.
Reprints and permission information is available online at http://npg.nature.com/
reprintsandpermissions/
How to cite this article: Zhang, Z. et al. Single-pixel imaging by means of Fourier
spectrum acquisition. Nat. Commun. 6:6225 doi: 10.1038/ncomms7225 (2015).
ARTICLE
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7225
6
NATURE COMMUNICATIONS | 6:6225 | DOI: 10.1038/ncomms7225 | www.nature.com/naturecommunications
& 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. All rights reserved.