1
Robust Text Detection in Natural Scene Images
Xu-Cheng Yin, Xuwang Yin, Kaizhu Huang, and Hong-Wei Hao
Abstract—Text detection in natural scene images is an important prerequisite for many content-based image analysis tasks. In this
paper, we propose an accurate and robust method for detecting texts in natural scene images. A fast and effective pruning algorithm is
designed to extract Maximally Stable Extremal Regions (MSERs) as character candidates using the strategy of minimizing regularized
variations. Character candidates are grouped into text candidates by the single-link clustering algorithm, where distance weights
and threshold of the clustering algorithm are learned automatically by a novel self-training distance metric learning algorithm. The
posterior probabilities of text candidates corresponding to non-text are estimated with an character classiﬁer; text candidates with high
probabilities are then eliminated and ﬁnally texts are identiﬁed with a text classiﬁer. The proposed system is evaluated on the ICDAR
2011 Robust Reading Competition dataset; the f measure is over 76% and is signiﬁcantly better than the state-of-the-art performance
of 71%. Experimental results on a publicly available multilingual dataset also show that our proposed method can outperform the other
competitive method with the f measure increase of over 9 percent. Finally, we have setup an online demo of our proposed scene text
detection system at “http://kems.ustb.edu.cn/learning/yin/dtext”.
Index Terms—scene text detection, maximally stable extremal regions, single-link clustering, distance metric learning
!
1
INTRODUCTION
T
EXT in images contains valuable information and is
exploited in many content-based image and video
applications, such as content-based web image search,
video information retrieval, mobile based text analysis
and recognition [?], [?], [?], [?], [?]. Due to complex back-
ground, variations of font, size, color and orientation,
text in natural scene images has to be robustly detected
before being recognized or retrieved.
Existing methods for scene text detection can roughly
be categorized into three groups: sliding window based
methods [?], [?], [?], connected component based meth-
ods [?], [?], [?], and hybrid methods [?]. Sliding window
based methods, also called as region based methods,
engage a sliding window to search for possible texts
in the image and then use machine learning techniques
to identify texts. These methods tend to be slow as the
image has to be processed in multiple scales. Connected
component based methods extract character candidates
from images by connected component analysis followed
by grouping character candidates into text; additional
checks may be performed to remove false positives. The
hybrid method presented by Pan et al. [?] exploits a
region detector to detect text candidates and extracts
connected components as character candidates by local
• X.-C. Yin is with the Department of Computer Science and Technology,
School of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of
Science and Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China.
E-mail: xuchengyin@ustb.edu.cn.
• X. Yin is with the Department of Computer Science and Technology, School
of Computer and Communication Engineering, University of Science and
Technology Beijing, Beijing 100083, China.
• K. Huang is with Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University, Suzhou 215123, China.
• H.-W. Hao is with Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Beijing 100190, China.
binarization; non-characters are eliminated with a Con-
ditional Random Fields (CRFs) [?] model, and characters
can ﬁnally be grouped into text. More recently, Maxi-
mally Stable Extremal Region (MSER) based methods,
which actually fall into the family of connected com-
ponent based methods but use MSERs [?] as character
candidates, have become the focus of several recent
projects [?], [?], [?], [?], [?], [?], [?].
Although the MSER based method is the winning
method of the benchmark data, i.e., ICDAR 2011 Robust
Reading Competition [?] and has reported promising
performance, there remains several problems to be ad-
dressed. First, as the MSER algorithm detects a large
number of non-characters, most of the character can-
didates need to be removed before further processing.
The existing methods for MSERs pruning [?], [?], on one
hand, may still have room for further improvement in
terms of the accuracies; on the other hand, they tend to
be slow because of the computation of complex features.
Second, current approaches [?], [?], [?] for text candidates
construction, which can be categorized as rule based and
clustering based methods, work well but are still not
sufﬁcient; rule based methods generally require hand-
tuned parameters, which is time consuming and error
pruning; the clustering based method [?] shows good
performance but it is complicated by incorporating a
second stage processing after minimum spanning tree
clustering.
In this paper, we propose a robust and accurate MSER
based scene text detection method. First, by exploring
the hierarchical structure of MSERs and adopting simple
features, we designed a fast and accurate MSERs pruning
algorithm; the number of character candidates to be
processed is signiﬁcantly reduced with a high accuracy.
Second, we propose a novel self-training distance metric
learning algorithm that can learn distance weights and
arXiv:1301.2628v3  [cs.CV]  2 Jun 2013

2
clustering threshold simultaneously and automatically;
character candidates are clustered into text candidates by
the single-link clustering algorithm using the learned pa-
rameters. Third, we propose to use a character classiﬁer
to estimate the posterior probabilities of text candidates
corresponding to non-text and remove text candidates
with high probabilities. Such elimination helps to train
a more powerful text classiﬁer for identifying text. By
integrating the above ideas, we built an accurate and
robust scene text detection system. The system is eval-
uated on the benchmark ICDAR 2011 Robust Reading
Competition dataset and achieved an f measure of 76%.
To our best knowledge, this result ranks the ﬁrst on
all the reported performance and is much higher the
current best performance of 71%. We also validate our
method on the multilingual (include Chinese and En-
glish) dataset used in [?]. With an f measure of 74.58%,
our system signiﬁcantly outperforms the competitive
method [?] that achieves only 65.2%. An online demo
of our proposed scene text detection system is available
at http://kems.ustb.edu.cn/learning/yin/dtext.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Recent
MSER based scene text detection methods are reviewed
in Section 2. Section 3 describes the proposed scene text
detection method. Section 4 presents the experimental
results of the proposed system on ICDAR 2011 Robust
Reading Competition dataset and a multilingual (include
Chinese and English) dataset. Final remarks are pre-
sented in Section 5.
2
RELATED WORK
As described above, MSER based methods have demon-
strated
very
promising
performance
in
many
real
projects. However, current MSER based methods still
have some key limitations, i.e., they may suffer from
large number of non-characters candidates in detection
and also insufﬁcient text candidates construction al-
gorithms. In this section, we review the MSER based
methods with the focus on these two problems. Other
scene text detection methods can be referred to in some
survey papers [?], [?], [?]. A recently published MSER
based method can be referred to in Shi et al. [?].
The main advantage of MSER based methods over
traditional connected component based methods may
root in the usage of MSERs as character candidates.
Although the MSER algorithm can detect most char-
acters even when the image is in low quality (low
resolution, strong noises, low contrast, etc.), most of
the detected character candidates correspond to non-
characters. Carlos et al. [?] presented a MSERs pruning
algorithm that contains two steps: (1) reduction of linear
segments and (2) hierarchical ﬁltering. The ﬁrst stage
reduces linear segments in the MSER tree into one node
by maximizing the border energy function; the second
stage walks through the tree in a depth-ﬁrst manner and
eliminates nodes by checking them against a cascade
of ﬁlters: size, aspect ratio, complexity, border energy and
texture. Neumann and Matas [?] presented a two stage
algorithm for Extremal Regions (ERs) pruning. In the
ﬁrst stage, a classiﬁer trained from incrementally com-
putable descriptors (area, bounding box, perimeter, Euler
number and horizontal crossing) is used to estimate the
class-conditional probabilities p(r|chracter) of ERs; ERs
corresponding to local maximum of probabilities in the
ER inclusion relation are selected. In the second stage,
ERs passed the ﬁrst stage are classiﬁed as characters and
non-characters using more complex features. As most of
the MSERs correspond to non-characters, the purpose
of using cascading ﬁlters and incrementally computable
descriptors in these above two methods is to deal with
the computational complexity caused by the high false
positive rate.
Another challenge of MSER based methods, or more
generally, CC-based methods and hybrid methods, is
how to group character candidates into text candidates.
The existing methods for text candidates construction
fall into two general approaches: rule-based [?], [?],
[?] and clustering-based methods [?]. Neumann and
Matas [?] grouped character candidates using the text
line constrains, whose basic assumption is that char-
acters in a word can be ﬁtted by one or more top
and bottom lines. Carlos et al. [?] constructed a fully
connected graph over character candidates; they ﬁltered
edges by running a set of tests (edge angle, relative posi-
tion and size difference of adjacent character candidates)
and used the remaining connected subgraphs as text
candidates. Chen et al. [?] pairwised character candidates
as clusters by putting constrains on stroke width and
height difference; they then exploited a straight line to ﬁt
to the centroids of clusters and declared a line as text can-
didate if it connected three or more character candidates.
The clustering-based method presented by Pan et al. [?]
clusters character candidates into a tree using the min-
imum spanning tree algorithm with a learned distance
metric [?]; text candidates are constructed by cutting off
between-text edges with an energy minimization model.
The above rule-based methods generally require hand-
tuned parameters, while the clustering-based method is
complicated by the incorporating of the post-processing
stage, where one has to specify the energy model.
3
ROBUST SCENE TEXT DETECTION
In this paper, by incorporating several key improve-
ments over traditional MSER based methods, we pro-
pose a novel MSER based scene text detection method,
which ﬁnally leads to signiﬁcant performance improve-
ment over the other competitive methods. The structure
of the proposed system, as well as the sample result of
each stage is presented in Figure 1. The proposed scene
text detection method includes the following stages:
1) Character candidates extraction. character candidates
are extracted using the MSER algorithm; most of the
non-characters are reduced by the proposed MSERs
pruning algorithm using the strategy of minimizing

3
Character candidates 
extraction
Text candidates 
construction
Text candidates 
elimination
Text candidates 
classification
Original image
Fig. 1: Flowchart of the proposed system and the corre-
sponding experimental results after each step of a sam-
ple image. Text candidates are labeled by blue bounding
rectangles; character candidates identiﬁed as characters
are colored green, others red.
regularized variations. More details are presented in
Section 3.1.
2) Text candidates construction. distance weights and
threshold are learned simultaneously using the proposed
metric learning algorithm; character candidates are clus-
tered into text candidates by the single-link clustering
algorithm using the learned parameters. More details are
presented in Section 3.2.
3) Text candidates elimination. the posterior probabilities
of text candidates corresponding to non-text are mea-
sured using the character classiﬁer and text candidates
with high probabilities for non-text are removed. More
details are presented in Section 3.3.
4) Text candidates classiﬁcation. text candidates corre-
sponding to true text are identiﬁed by the text classiﬁer.
An AdaBoost classiﬁer is trained to decide whether an
text candidate corresponding to true text or not [?]. As
characters in the same text tend to have similar features,
the uniformity of character candidates’ features are used
as text candidate’s features to train the classiﬁer.
In order to measure the performance of the proposed
system using the ICDAR 2011 competition dataset, text
candidates identiﬁed as text are further partitioned into
words by classifying inner character distances into char-
acter spacings and word spacings using an AdaBoost
classiﬁer [?]. The following features are adopted: spacing
aspect ratio, relative width difference between left and
right neighbors, number of character candidates in the
text candidate.
3.1
Letter Candidates Extraction
3.1.1
Pruning Algorithm Overview
The MSER algorithm is able to detect almost all char-
acters even when the image is in low quality. However,
as shown in Figure 3a, most of the detected character
candidates correspond to non-characters and should be
removed before further processing. Figure 3a also shows
that the detected characters forms a tree, which is quite
useful for designing the pruning algorithm. In real world
situations, as characters cannot be “included” by or “in-
clude” other characters, it is safe to remove children once
the parent is known to be a character, and vice versa. The
parent-children elimination is a safe operation because
characters are preserved after the operation. By reduc-
tion, if the MSER tree is pruned by applying parent-
children elimination operation recursively in a depth-
ﬁrst manner, we are still in safe place and characters are
preserved. As shown in Figure 3e, the above algorithm
will end up with a set of disconnected nodes containing
all the characters. The problem with the above algorithm
is that it is expensive to identify character. Fortunately,
rather than identifying the character, the choice between
parent and children can be made by simply choosing
the one that is more likely to be characters, which can be
estimated by the proposed regularized variation scheme.
Considering different situations in MSER trees, we de-
sign two versions of the parent-children elimination
method, namely the linear reduction and tree accumulation
algorithm. Non-character regions are eliminated by the
linear reduction and tree accumulation algorithm using
the strategy of minimizing regularized variations. Our
experiment on ICDAR 2011 competition training set
shows that more than 80% of character candidates are
eliminated using the proposed pruning algorithm.
In the following sections, we ﬁrst introduce the con-
cept of variation and explain why variations need to
be regularized. Then we introduce the linear reduction
and tree accumulation algorithm. Finally we present the
complexity analysis for the proposed algorithms.
3.1.2
Variation and Its Regularization
According to Matas et al. [?], an “extremal region” is
a connected component of an image whose pixels have
either higher or lower intensity than its outer boundary
pixels [?], [?]. Extremal regions are extracted by applying
a set of increasing intensity levels to the gray scale image.
When the intensity level increases, a new extremal region
is extracted by accumulating pixels of current level and
joining lower level extremal regions [?]; when the top
level is reached, extremal regions of the whole image are
extracted as a rooted tree. The variation of an extremal
region is deﬁned as follows. Let Rl be an extremal region,
B(Rl) = (Rl, Rl+1, ..., Rl+∆) (∆is an parameter) be the
branch of the tree rooted at Rl, the variation (instability)
of Rl is deﬁned as
v(Rl) = |Rl+∆−Rl|
|Rl|
.
(1)

4
An extremal region Rl is a maximally stable extremal
region if its variation is lower than (more stable) its par-
ent Rl−1 and child Rl+1 [?], [?]. Informally, a maximally
stable extremal region is an extremal region whose size
remains virtually unchanged over a range of intensity
levels [?].
As MSERs with lower variations have sharper bor-
ders and are more likely to be characters, one possible
strategy may be used by the parent-children elimina-
tion operation is to select parent or children based on
who have the lowest variation. However, this strategy
alone will not work because MSERs corresponding to
characters may not necessarily have lowest variations.
Consider a very common situation depicted in Figure 2.
The children of the MSER tree in Figure 2a correspond to
characters while the parent of the MSRE tree in Figure 2b
corresponds to character. The “minimize variation” strat-
egy cannot deal with this situation because either parent
or children may have the lowest variations. However,
our experiment shows that this limitation can be easily
ﬁxed by variation regularization, whose basic idea is to
penalize variations of MSERs with too large or too small
aspect ratios. Note that we are not requiring characters to
have the lowest variations globally, a lower variation in
a parent-children relationship sufﬁces for our algorithm.
Let V be the variation and a be the aspect ratio of a
MSER, the aspect ratios of characters are expected to fall
in [amin, amax], the regularized variation is deﬁned as
V =







V −θ1(a −amax)
if a > amax
V −θ2(amin −a)
if a < amin
V
otherwise
,
(2)
where θ1 and θ2 are penalty parameters. Based on ex-
periments on the training dataset, these parameters are
set as θ1 = 0.03, θ2 = 0.08, amax = 1.2 and amin = 0.7.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2: Character correspondence in MSER trees. (a) A
MSER tree whose children corresponds to characters; (b)
a MSER tree whose parent corresponds to character.
Figure 3b shows a MSER tree colored according to
variation. As variation increases, the color changes from
green to yellow then to red. The same tree colored
according to regularized variation is shown in Figure 3c.
The MSER tree in Figure 3c are used in our linear
reduction (result presented in Figure 3d) and tree ac-
cumulation algorithm (result presented in Figure 3e).
Notice that “variation” in the following sections refer
to “regularized variation”.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 3: MSERs pruning. (a) MSER tree of a text segment;
(b) MSERs colored according to variations, as variations
increase, MSERs are colored from green to yellow then
to red; (c) MSERs colored according to regularized vari-
ations; (d) MSER tree after linear reduction; (e) character
candidates after tree accumulation.
3.1.3
Linear Reduction
The linear reduction algorithm is used in situations
where MSERs has only one child. The algorithm chooses
from parent and child the one with the minimum vari-
ation and discards the other.
This procedure is applied across the whole tree recur-
sively. The detailed algorithm is presented in Figure 4.
Given a MSER tree, the procedure returns the root of
the processed tree whose linear segments are reduced.
The procedure works as follows. Given a node t, the
procedure checks the number of children of t; if t has no
children, returns t immediately; if t has only one child,
get the root c of child tree by ﬁrst applying the linear
reduction procedure to the child tree; if t has a lower
variation compared with c, link c’s children to t and
return t; otherwise we return c; if t has more than one
children, process these children using linear reduction
and link the resulting trees to t before returning t.
Figure 3d shows the resulting MSER tree after applying
linear reduction to the tree shown in Figure 3c. Note that
in the resulting tree all linear segments are reduced and
non-leaf nodes always have more than one children.
1: procedure LINEAR-REDUCTION(T)
2:
if nchildren[T] = 0 then
3:
return T
4:
else if nchildren[T] = 1 then
5:
c ←LINEAR-REDUCTION(child[T])
6:
if var[T] ≤var[c] then
7:
link-children(T, children[c])
8:
return T
9:
else
10:
return c
11:
end if
12:
else
▷nchildren[T] ≥2
13:
for each c ∈children[T] do
14:
link-children(T, LINEAR-REDUCTION(c))
15:
end for
16:
return T
17:
end if
18: end procedure
Fig. 4: The linear reduction algorithm.

5
3.1.4
Tree Accumulation
The tree accumulation algorithm is used when MSERs
has more than one child. Given a MSER tree, the proce-
dure returns a set of disconnected nodes. The algorithm
works as follows. For a given node t, tree accumulation
checks the number of t’s children; if t has no children,
return t immediately; if t has more than two children,
create an empty set C and append the result of applying
tree accumulation to t’s children to C; if one of the
nodes in C has a lower variation than t’s variation,
return C, else discard t’s children and return t. Figure 3e
shows the result of applying tree accumulation to the
tree shown in Figure 3d. Note that the ﬁnal result is a
set of disconnected nodes containing all the characters
in the original MSER tree.
1: procedure TREE-ACCUMULATION(T)
2:
if nchildren[T] ≥2 then
3:
C ←∅
4:
for each c ∈children[T] do
5:
C ←C ∪TREE-ACCUMULATION(c)
6:
end for
7:
if var[T] ≤min-var[C] then
8:
discard-children(T)
9:
return T
10:
else
11:
return C
12:
end if
13:
else
▷nchildren[T] = 0
14:
return T
15:
end if
16: end procedure
Fig. 5: The tree accumulation algorithm.
3.1.5
Complexity Analysis
The linear reduction and tree accumulation algorithm
effectively visit each nodes in the MSRE tree and do
simple comparisons and pointer manipulations, thus the
complexity is linear to the number of tree nodes. The
computational complexity of the variation regularization
is mostly due to the calculations of MSERs’ bounding
rectangles, which is up-bounded by the number of pixels
in the image.
3.2
Text Candidates Construction
3.2.1
Text Candidates Construction Algorithm Overview
Text candidates are constructed by clustering character
candidates using the single-link clustering algorithm [?].
Intuitively, single-link clustering produce clusters that
are elongated [?] and thus is particularly suitable for the
text candidates construction task. Single-link clustering
belongs to the family of hierarchical clustering; in hier-
archical clustering, each data point is initially treated as
a singleton cluster and clusters are successively merged
until all points have been merged into a single remaining
cluster. In the case of single-link clustering, the two
clusters whose two closest members have the smallest
distance are merged in each step. A distance threshold
can be speciﬁed such that the clustering progress is
terminated when the distance between nearest clusters
exceeds the threshold. The resulting clusters of single-
link algorithm form a hierarchical cluster tree or cluster
forest if termination threshold is speciﬁed. In the above
algorithm, each data point represent a character candi-
date and top level clusters in the ﬁnal hierarchical cluster
tree (forest) correspond to text candidates.
The problem is of course to determine the distance
function and threshold for the single-link algorithm.
We use the weighted sum of features as the distance
function. Given two data points u, v, let xu,v be the
feature vector characterizing the similarity between u
and v, the distance between u and v is deﬁned as
d(u, v; w) = wT xu,v,
(3)
where w, the feature weight vector together with the
distance threshold, can be learned using the proposed
distance metric learning algorithm.
In the following subsections, we ﬁrst introduce the fea-
ture space xu,v, then detail the proposed metric learning
algorithm and ﬁnally present the empirical analysis on
the proposed algorithm.
3.2.2
Feature Space
The feature vector xu,v is used to describe the similarities
between data points u and v. Let xu, yu be the coordi-
nates of top left corner of u’s bounding rectangle, hu, wu
be the height and width of the bounding rectangle of u,
su be the stroke width of u, c1u, c2u, c3u be the average
three channel color value of u, feature vector xu,v include
the following features:
• Spatial distance
abs(xu + 0.5hu −xv −0.5wu)/ max(wu, wv).
• Width and height differences
abs(wu −wv)/ max(wu, wv),
abs(hu −hv)/ max(hu, hv).
• Top and bottom alignments
arctan(
abs(yu −yv)
abs(xu + 0.5hu −xv −0.5wu)),
arctan(
abs(yu + hu −yv −hv)
abs(xu + 0.5hu −xv −0.5wu)).
• Color difference
p
(c1u −c1v)2 + (c2u −c2v)2 + (c3u −c3v)2.
• Stroke width difference
abs(su −sv)/ max(su, sv).

6
3.2.3
Distance Metric Learning
There are a variety of distance metric learning meth-
ods [?], [?], [?]. More speciﬁcally, many clustering algo-
rithms rely on a good distance metric over the input
space. One task of semi-supervised clustering is to learn
a distance metric that satisﬁes the labels or constrains in
the supervised data given the clustering algorithm [?],
[?], [?]. The strategy of metric learning is to the learn
distance function by minimizing distance between point
pairs in C while maximizing distance between point
pairs in M, where C speciﬁes pairs of points in different
clusters and M speciﬁes pairs of points in the same clus-
ter. In single-link clustering, because clusters are formed
by merging smaller clusters, the ﬁnal resulting clusters
will form a binary hierarchical cluster tree, in which non-
singleton clusters have exactly two direct subclusters. It
is not hard to see that the following property holds for
top level clusters: given the termination threshold ϵ, it
follows that distances between each top level cluster’
subclusters are less or equal to ϵ and distances between
data pairs in different top level clusters are great than ϵ,
in which the distance between clusters is that of the two
closest members in each cluster. This property of single-
link clustering enables us to design a learning algorithm
that can learn the distance function and threshold simul-
taneously.
Given the top level cluster set {Ck}m
k=1, we randomly
initialize feature weights w and set C and M as
C = {(ˆuk, ˆvk) =
arg min
u∈Ck,v∈C−k
d(u, v; w)}m
k=1,
(4)
M = {(u∗
k, v∗
k) = arg min
u∈C1
k,v∈C2
k
d(u, v; w)}m
k=1,
(5)
where C−k is the set of points excluding points in
Ck, C1
k and C2
k are direct subclusters of Ck. Suppose
ϵ is speciﬁed as the single-link clustering termination
threshold. By the deﬁnition of single-link clustering, we
must have
d(u, v; w) > ϵ for all (u, v) ∈C,
(6)
d(u, v; w) ≤ϵ for all (u, v) ∈M.
(7)
The above equations show that C and M can be cor-
responded as the positive and negative sample set of
a classiﬁcation problem, such that feature weights and
threshold can be learned by minimizing the classiﬁcation
error. As we know, the logistic regression loss is the
traditional loss used in classiﬁcation with a high and
stable performance. By adopting the objective function
of logistic regression, we deﬁne the following objective
function
J(θ : C, M) = −1
2m(
X
(u,v)∈C
log(hθ(x′
u,v))
(8)
+
X
(u,v)∈M
log(1 −hθ(x′
u,v))),
where
hθ(x′
u,v) = 1/(1 + exp(−θT x′
u,v)),
(9)
θ =
 
−ϵ
w
!
,
x′
u,v =
 
1
xu,v
!
.
The feature weights w and threshold ϵ can be learned
simultaneously by minimizing the objective function
J(θ : M, C) with respect to current assignment of C and
M
θ∗= arg min
θ
J(θ : C, M)
(10)
Minimization of the above objective function is a typical
nonlinear optimization problem and can be solved by
classic gradient optimization methods [?].
Note that in the above learning scheme, initial values
for w have to be speciﬁed in order to generate set C and
M according to Equation (4) and (5). For this reason, we
design an iterative optimization algorithm in which each
iteration involves two successive steps corresponding
to assignments of C, M and optimization with respect
to C, M. We call our algorithm as “self-training distance
metric learning”. Pseudocode for this learning algorithm
is presented in Figure 6. Given the top level cluster set
{Ck}m
k=1, the learning algorithm ﬁnd an optimized θ such
that the objective function J(θ : C, M) is minimized with
respect to C, M. In this algorithm, initial value for θ is
set before the iteration begins; in the ﬁrst stage of the
iteration M and C are update according to Equation (4)
and (5) with respect to current assignment of θ; in the
second stage, θ is updated by minimizing the objective
function with respect to the current assignment of C and
M. This two-stage optimization is then repeated until
convergence or the maximum number of iterations is
exceeded.
Input: labeled clusters set {Ck}m
k=1
Output: optimized θ such that objective function J is
minimized
Method:
randomly initialize θ
repeat
stage1: update M and C with respect to θ
stage2: θ ←arg minθ J(θ : C, M)
until convergence or reach iteration limitation
Fig. 6: The self-training distance metric learning algo-
rithm.
Similar to most self-training algorithms, convergence
of the proposed algorithm is not guaranteed because the
objective function is not assured to decrease in stage one.
However, self-training algorithms have demonstrated
their success in many applications. In our case, we
ﬁnd that our algorithm can usually generate very good
performance after a very small number of iterations,

7
typically in 5 iterations. This phenomenon will be in-
vestigated in the next subsection.
3.2.4
Empirical Analysis
We perform an empirical analysis on the proposed
distance metric learning algorithm. We labeled in the
ICDAR 2011 competition dataset 466 text candidates
corresponding to true text in the training set, 70% of
which used as training data, 30% as validation data. In
each iteration of the algorithm, cannot-link set C and
must-link set M are updated in step one by generating
cannot-link point pairs and must-link point pairs from
true text candidates in every image in the training
dataset; the objective function are optimized using the
L-BFGS method [?] and the parameters are updated in
stage two. Performance of the learned distance weights
and threshold in step two is evaluated on the validation
dataset in each iteration.
As discussed in the previous section, the algorithm
may or may not converge due to different initial val-
ues of the parameters. Our experiments show that the
learned parameters almost always have a very low error
rate on the validation set after the ﬁrst several iterations
and no major improvement is observed in the continuing
iterations. As a result, whether the algorithm converge
or not has no great impact on the performance of the
learned parameters.
We plot the value of the objective function after stage
one and stage two in each iteration of two instance (cor-
respond to a converged one and not converged one) of
the algorithm in Figure 7a. The corresponding error rates
of the learned parameters on the validation set in each
iteration are plotted in Figure 7b. Notice that value of the
objective function and validation set error rate dropped
immediately after the ﬁrst several iterations. Figure 7b
shows that the learned parameters have different error
rates due to different initial value, which suggests to
run the algorithm several times to get the satisfactory
parameters. The parameters for the single-link clustering
algorithm in our scene text detection system are chosen
based on the performance on the validation set.
3.3
Text Candidates Elimination
Using the text candidates construction algorithm pro-
posed in Section 3.2, our experiment in ICDAR 2011
competition training set shows that only 9% of the text
candidates correspond to true text. As it is hard to train
an effective text classiﬁer using such unbalanced dataset,
most of the non-text candidates need to be removed be-
fore training the classiﬁer. We propose to use a character
classiﬁer to estimate the posterior probabilities of text
candidates corresponding to non-text and remove text
candidates with high probabilities for non-text.
The following features are used to train the character
classiﬁer. Smoothness, deﬁned as the average difference
of adjacent boundary pixels’ gradient directions, stroke
width features, including the average stroke width and
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
objective function value
iterations
not converged
converged
(a)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
validation set error rate
iterations
not converged
converged
(b)
Fig. 7: Objective function value (a) and validation set
error rate of learned parameters (b) after stage one and
stage two in each iteration of two instance of the metric
learning algorithm; the red line corresponds to the not
converged instance and the blue line corresponds to the
converged instance.
stroke width variation, height, width, and aspect ratio.
Characters with small aspect ratios such as “i”, “j” and
“l” are treated as negative samples, as it is very uncom-
mon that some words comprise many small aspect ratio
characters.
Given a text candidate T, let O(m, n; p) be the ob-
servation that there are m (m ∈N, m ≥2) character
candidates in T, of which n (n
∈
N, n
≤
m) are
classiﬁed as non-characters by a character classiﬁer of
precision p (0 < p < 1). The probability of the ob-
servation conditioning on T corresponding to text and
non-text are P(O(m, n; p)|text) = pm−n(1 −p)n and
P(O(m, n; p)|non-text) = (1 −p)m−npn respectively. Let
P(text) and P(non-text) be the prior probability of T
corresponding to text and non-text. By applying Bayes’
rule, the posterior probability of T corresponding to non-
text given the observation is
P(non-text|O(m, n; p)) =
P(O(m, n; p)|non-text)P(non-text)
P(O(m, n; p))
,
(11)
where P(O(m, n; p)) is the probability of the observation
P(O(m, n; p)) = P(O(m, n; p)|text)P(text)
+ P(O(m, n; p)|non-text)P(non-text),
(12)
The candidate region is rejected if
P(non-text|O(m, n; p)) ≥ε,
(13)
where ε is the threshold.
Our experiment shows that text candidates of different
sizes tend to have different probability of being text.
For example, on the ICDAR training set, 1.25% of text
candiates of size two correspond to text, while 30.67% of
text candidates of size seven correspond to text, which
suggests to set different priors for text candidates of
different size. Given a text candidates T of size s, let
Ns be the total number of text candidates of size s,
N ∗
s be the number of text candidates of size s that
correspond to text, we estimate the prior of T being text

8
as Ps(text) = N ∗
s /Ns, and the prior of T being non-text
as Ps(non-text) = 1−Ps(text). These priors are computed
based on statistics on the ICDAR training dataset.
0.9
0.91
0.92
0.93
0.94
0.95
0.96
0.97
0.98
0.99
1
0.98
0.985
0.99
0.995
1
epsilon
precision
recall
F-measure
(a)
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
0.98
0.985
0.99
0.995
1
epsilon
text preserved 
non-text eliminated
text ratio
(b)
Fig. 8: Performance of different ε on the validation set. (a)
Precision, recall and f measure of text classiﬁcation task;
(b) ratio of preserved text samples, ratio of eliminated
non-text samples and ratio of text samples.
To ﬁnd the appreciate ε, we used 70% of ICDAR
training dataset to train the character classiﬁer and text
classiﬁer, the remaining 30% as validation set to test
the performance of different ε. Figure 8a shows the
precision, recall and f measure of text candidates classiﬁ-
cation task on the validation set. As ε increases, text can-
didates are more unlikely to be eliminated, which results
in the increase of recall value. In the scene text detection
task, recall is preferred over precision, until ε = 0.995 is
reached, where a major decrease of f measure occurred,
which can be explained by the sudden decrease of ratio
of text samples (see Figure 8b). Figure 8b shows that at
ε = 0.995, 92.95% of text are preserved, while 95.25% of
non-text are eliminated.
4
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
1
In this section, we presented the experimental results
of the proposed scene text detection method on two
publicly available benchmark datasets, ICDAR 2011 Ro-
bust Reading Competition dataset 2 and the multilingual
dataset 3 provided by Pan et al. [?].
4.1
Experiments
on
ICDAR
2011
Competition
Dataset
The ICDAR 2011 Robust Reading Competition (Chal-
lenge 2: Reading Text in Scene Images) dataset
[?]
is a widely used dataset for benchmarking scene text
detection algorithms. The dataset contains 229 training
images and 255 testing images. The proposed system is
trained on the training set and evaluated on the testing
set.
1. An online demo of the proposed scene text detection system is
available at http://kems.ustb.edu.cn/learning/yin/dtext.
2. The ICDAR 2011 Robust Reading Competition dataset is available
at http://robustreading.opendfki.de/wiki/SceneText.
3. The multilingual dataset is available at http://liama.ia.ac.cn/wiki/
projects:pal:member:yfpan.
It is worth noting that the evaluation scheme of IC-
DAR 2011 competition is not the same as of ICDAR 2003
and ICDAR 2005. The new scheme, the object count/area
scheme proposed by Wolf et al. [?], is more complicated
but offers several enhancements over the old scheme.
Basically, these two scheme use the notation of precision,
recall and f measure that is deﬁned as
recall =
P|G|
i=1 matchG(Gi)
|G|
,
(14)
precision =
P|D|
j=1 matchD(Dj)
|D|
,
(15)
f = 2 recall · precision
recall + precision,
(16)
where G is the set of groundtruth rectangles and D is the
set of detected rectangles. In the old evaluation scheme,
the matching functions are deﬁned as
matchG(Gi) =
max
j=1...|D|
2 · area(Gi ∩Dj)
area(Gi) + area(Dj),
(17)
matchD(Dj) =
max
i=1...|G|
2 · area(Dj ∩Gi)
area(Dj) + area(Gi).
(18)
The above matching functions only consider one-to-
one matches between groundtruth and detected rect-
angles, leaving room for ambiguity between detection
quantity and quality [?]. In the new evaluation scheme,
the matching functions are redesigned considering de-
tection quality and different matching situations (one-
to-one matchings, one-to-many matchings and many-
to-one matchings) between groundtruth rectangles and
detected rectangles, such that the detection quantity and
quality can both be observed using the new evaluation
scheme. The evaluation software DetEval
4 used by
ICDAR 2011 competition is available online and free to
use.
The performance of our system, together with Neu-
mann and Matas’ method [?], a very recent MSER based
method by Shi et al. [?] and some of the top scoring
methods (Kim’s method, Yi’s method, TH-TextLoc sys-
tem and Neumann’s method) from ICDAR 2011 Com-
petition are presented in Table 1. As can be seen from
Table 1, our method produced much better recall, preci-
sion and f measure over other methods on this dataset.
It is worth noting that the ﬁrst four methods in Table 1
are all MSER based methods and Kim’s method is the
winning method of ICDAR 2011 Robust Reading Com-
petition. Apart from the detection quality, the proposed
system offers speed advantage over some of the listed
methods. The average processing speed of the proposed
system on a Linux laptop with Intel (R) Core (TM)2 Duo
2.00GHZ CPU is 0.43s per image. The processing speed
of Shi et al.’s method [?] on a PC with Intel (R) Core
(TM)2 Duo 2.33GHZ CPU is 1.5s per image. The average
processing speed of Neumann and Matas’ method [?] is
4. DetEval is available at http://liris.cnrs.fr/christian.wolf/software/
deteval/index.html.

9
1.8s per image on a “standard PC”. Figure 9 shows some
text detection examples by our system on ICDAR 2011
dataset.
Fig. 9: Text detection examples on the ICDAR 2011
dataset. Detected text by our system are labeled using
red rectangles. Notice the robustness against low con-
trast, complex background and font variations.
TABLE 1: Performance (%) comparison of text detection
algorithms on ICDAR 2011 Robust Reading Competition
dataset.
Methods
Recall
Precision
f
Our Method
68.26
86.29
76.22
Shi et al.’s method [?]
63.1
83.3
71.8
Kim’s Method (not published)
62.47
82.98
71.28
Neumann and Matas [?]
64.7
73.1
68.7
Yi’s Method
58.09
67.22
62.32
TH-TextLoc System
57.68
66.97
61.98
Neumann’s Method
52.54
68.93
59.63
To fully appreciate the beneﬁts of text candidates elim-
ination and the MSERs pruning algorithm, we further
proﬁled the proposed system on this dataset using the
following schemes (see Table 2)
1) Scheme-I, no text candidates elimination per-
formed. As can be seen from Table 2, the absence of
text candidates elimination results in a major decrease in
precision value. The degradation can be explained by the
fact that large number of non-text are passed to the text
candidates classiﬁcation stage without being eliminated.
2) Scheme-II, using default parameter setting [?] for
the MSER extraction algorithm. The MSER extraction
algorithm is controlled by several parameters [?]: ∆
controls how the variation is calculated; maximal varia-
tion v+ excludes too unstable MSERs; minimal diversity
d+ removes duplicate MSERs by measuring the size
difference between a MSER and its parent. As can be
seen from Table 2, compared with our parameter setting
(∆= 1, v+ = 0.5, d+ = 0.1), the default parameter setting
(∆= 5, v+ = 0.25, d+ = 0.2) results in a major decrease in
recall value. The degradation can be explained by two
reasons: (1) the MSER algorithm is not able to detect
some low contrast characters (due to v+), and (2) the
MSER algorithm tends to miss some regions that are
more likely to be characters (due to ∆and d+). Note
that the speed loss (from 0.36 seconds to 0.43 seconds)
is mostly due to the MSER detection algorithm itself.
TABLE 2: Performance (%) of the proposed method due
to different components
Component
Recall
Precision
f
Speed (s)
Overall system
68.26
86.29
76.22
0.43
Scheme-I
65.57
77.49
71.03
0.41
Scheme-II
61.63
85.78
71.72
0.36
4.2
Experiments on Multilingual Dataset
The multilingual (include Chinese and English, see Fig-
ure 10) dataset was initially published by Pan et al. [?]
to evaluate the performance of their scene text detection
system. The training dataset contains 248 images and
the testing dateset contains 239 images. As there are no
apparent spacing between Chinese word, this multilin-
gual dataset only provides groundtruths for text lines.
We hence evaluate the text line detection performance of
our system without further partitioning text into words.
Figure 10 shows some scene text detection examples by
our system on this dataset.
TABLE 3: Performance (%) comparison of text detection
algorithms on the multilingual dataset. Speed of Pan et
al.’s method is proﬁled on a PC with Pentium D 3.4GHz
CPU.
Methods
Recall
Precision
f
Speed (s)
Scheme-III
63.23
79.38
70.39
0.22
Scheme-IV
68.45
82.63
74.58
0.22
Pan et al.’s method [?]
65.9
64.5
65.2
3.11
Fig. 10: Text detection examples on the multilingual
dataset. Detected text by our system are labeled using
red rectangles.
The performance of our system (include Scheme-III
and Scheme-IV) and Pan et al.’s method [?] is presented
in Table 3. The evaluation scheme in ICDAR 2003 com-
petition (see Section 4.1) is used for fair comparison.
The main difference between Scheme-III and Scheme-
IV is that the character classiﬁer in the ﬁrst scheme

10
is trained on the ICDAR 2011 training set while the
character classiﬁer in the second scheme is trained on the
multilingual training set (character features for training
the classiﬁer are the same). The result comparison be-
tween Scheme-III and Scheme-IV in Table 3 shows that
the performance of the proposed system is signiﬁcantly
improved because of the incorporating of the Chinese-
friendly character classiﬁer. The basic implication of this
improvement is that the character classiﬁer has a signif-
icant impact on the performance of the overall system,
which offers another advantage of the proposed system:
the character classiﬁer can be trained on desired dataset
until it is accurate enough and be plugged into the
system and the overall performance will be improved.
Table 3 also shows the advantages of the proposed
method over Pan et al.’s method in detection quality and
speed.
5
CONCLUSION
This paper presents a new MSER based scene text detec-
tion method. Several key improvement over traditional
methods have been proposed. We propose a fast and
accurate MSERs pruning algorithm that enables us to
detect most the characters even when the image is in
low quality. We propose a novel self-training distance
metric learning algorithm that can learn distance weights
and threshold simultaneously; text candidates are con-
structed by clustering character candidates by the single-
link algorithm using the learned parameters. We propose
to use a character classiﬁer to estimate the posterior
probability of text candidate corresponding to non-text
and eliminate text candidates with high probability for
non-text, which helps to build a more powerful text
classiﬁer. By integrating the above ideas, we built a
robust scene text detection system that exhibited supe-
rior performance over state-of-the-art methods on both
the ICDAR 2011 Competition dataset and a multilingual
dataset.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research was partly supported by National Basic
Research Program of China (2012CB316301) and Na-
tional Natural Science Foundation of China (61105018,
61175020).