METHODS
published: 10 April 2015
doi: 10.3389/fninf.2015.00008
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics | www.frontiersin.org
1
April 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 8
Edited by:
Sean L. Hill,
International Neuroinformatics
Coordinating Facility, Sweden
Reviewed by:
Angela R. Laird,
Florida International University, USA
Daniel Marcus,
Washington University in St. Louis,
USA
*Correspondence:
Krzysztof J. Gorgolewski,
Max Planck Research Group for
Neuroanatomy and Connectivity, Max
Planck Institute for Human Cognitive
and Brain Sciences, Stephanstrasse
1a, 04103 Leipzig, Germany
krzysztof.gorgolewski@gmail.com
Received: 13 October 2014
Accepted: 21 March 2015
Published: 10 April 2015
Citation:
Gorgolewski KJ, Varoquaux G, Rivera
G, Schwarz Y, Ghosh SS, Maumet C,
Sochat VV, Nichols TE, Poldrack RA,
Poline J-B, Yarkoni T and Margulies
DS (2015) NeuroVault.org: a
web-based repository for collecting
and sharing unthresholded statistical
maps of the human brain.
Front. Neuroinform. 9:8.
doi: 10.3389/fninf.2015.00008
NeuroVault.org: a web-based
repository for collecting and sharing
unthresholded statistical maps of the
human brain
Krzysztof J. Gorgolewski 1, 2*, Gael Varoquaux 3, Gabriel Rivera 4, Yannick Schwarz 3,
Satrajit S. Ghosh 5, Camille Maumet 6, Vanessa V. Sochat 2, Thomas E. Nichols 7,
Russell A. Poldrack 2, Jean-Baptiste Poline 8, Tal Yarkoni 9 and Daniel S. Margulies 1
1 Max Planck Research Group for Neuroanatomy and Connectivity, Max Planck Institute for Human Cognitive and Brain
Sciences, Leipzig, Germany, 2 Department of Psychology, Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA, 3 INRIA Parietal, Neurospin
Bat 145, CEA, Saclay, Gif sur Yvette, France, 4 InfoCortex UG, Frankfurt am Main, Germany, 5 McGovern Institute for Brain
Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, 6 Warwick Manufacturing Group, University of
Warwick, Coventry, UK, 7 Department of Statistics, University of Warwick, Coventry, UK, 8 Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute,
University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA, 9 Department of Psychology, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA
Here we present NeuroVault—a web based repository that allows researchers to store,
share, visualize, and decode statistical maps of the human brain. NeuroVault is easy to
use and employs modern web technologies to provide informative visualization of data
without the need to install additional software. In addition, it leverages the power of the
Neurosynth database to provide cognitive decoding of deposited maps. The data are
exposed through a public REST API enabling other services and tools to take advantage
of it. NeuroVault is a new resource for researchers interested in conducting meta- and
coactivation analyses.
Keywords: data sharing, statistical parameter mapping (SPM), meta-analysis, repository, database
Introduction
Non-invasive neuroimaging techniques such as MRI and PET have enabled unprecedented insight
into the localization of various functions in the human brain. As the number of studies using such
techniques continues to grow exponentially, the challenge of assessing, summarizing, and condens-
ing their ﬁndings poses ever-greater diﬃculty. Even though a single study can take years to conduct,
cost hundreds of thousands of dollars, and require the eﬀort of dozens of highly trained scientists
and volunteers, the output is usually reduced to an academic article, and the original data are rarely
shared (Poline et al., 2012). Unfortunately, due to the historical legacy of reporting knowledge in
written form (of an academic paper), the ﬁnal documented results consist mostly of subjective
interpretation of data with very little machine-readable information. While the introduction of
common stereotaxic spaces (e.g., Talairach and MNI305) has provided an initial framework for a
standard of reporting activation locations to subsequently enable meta-analyses, there are several
issues with this coordinate-based strategies. First, peak coordinates are not able to fully describe
the 3D shape and extent of a suprathreshold volume on a statistical map. Many papers use ﬁgures
(2D or 3D) to present these statistical maps, but authors must decide which aspects of the 3D data
cube to show. To fully explore all layers of the data one would need to be able to interrogate it in
an interactive fashion. Furthermore, published ﬁgures are not machine-readable, and researchers
that are interested in comparing their own results with published literature are forced to manually

Gorgolewski et al.
NeuroVault.org – a database of statistical maps
reconstruct regions of interest (ROIs) using spheres placed at the
limited reported activation locations.
A second issue is the diﬃculty of putting one’s results in the
context of other studies. The overwhelming number of brain
imaging results published each year makes manual comparison
both unfeasible and prone to bias. There are attempts to auto-
matically aggregate knowledge across large sets of neuroimaging
studies. For example, Neurosynth (Yarkoni et al., 2011) is a meta-
analysis database that collects coordinates of activation foci from
published papers and generates topic maps based on the spatial
distribution of those coordinates. Such maps can aid in interpre-
tation of new results. However, comparing a new result to a set
of topic maps has so far not been implemented in a user-friendly
fashion.
Finally, and most importantly, making meta-analytic infer-
ences using only peak coordinates (or statistically thresholded
maps) is problematic. It is easy to imagine a subthreshold eﬀect
that is consistent across many studies. Such an eﬀect would not
be picked up by existing meta-analysis methods (Laird et al.,
2005; Yarkoni et al., 2011) because it would never be reported in
the tables of peak coordinates. Considering how underpowered
most human neuroscience studies are, this situation is not that
unlikely. Discarding information that is below threshold in this
fashion is akin to not publishing null results (Rosenthal, 1979),
a dangerous practice that creates a publication bias skewing our
perception of accumulated knowledge.
Using fully unthresholded statistical maps instead of solely
peak coordinates would provide a signiﬁcant advance in meta-
analytic power. Coordinate-based meta-analysis (CBMA) meth-
ods show only modest overlap with image-based meta-analysis
(IBMA; meta-analysis based on unthresholded statistical maps)
methods and are less powerful (Salimi-Khorshidi et al., 2009).
However, IBMA methods struggle with access to the data. Peak
coordinates are easier to obtain and share because coordinate
tables are an integral component of traditional neuroimaging
papers, whereas very few papers provide links to unthresholded
statistical maps (usually by an ad hoc means such as the author’s
web site).
NeuroVault.org is an attempt to solve these problems. It is
a web-based repository that makes it easy to deposit and share
statistical maps. It provides attractive visualization and cognitive
decoding of the maps that can improve collaboration eﬀorts and
readability of the results. At the same time, it also provides an API
for methods researchers to download the data, perform powerful
analyses, or build new tools.
Results
In the following section we describe the architecture and features
of NeuroVault and present two example analyses.
Platform
One of the key features of NeuroVault is the ease of uploading
and sharing statistical brain maps. Figure 1 presents a schematic
overview of the platform. After logging in, users can upload
a broad range of neuroimaging images and associated meta-
data. These data are then immediately accessible (subject to
user-controlled privacy settings) via both an interactive HTML-
based interface, and a comprehensive RESTful web API that facil-
itates programmatic interoperability with other resources. In the
following sections, we discuss diﬀerent aspects of the platform.
Image Upload
The NeuroVault upload process emphasizes speed and ease of
use. Users can rely on existing social media accounts (Google
or Facebook) to log in, and can upload individual images, or
entire folders (see Figure 1). Users can arrange their maps into
collections or to group them with tags. Each collection and sta-
tistical image in NeuroVault gets a permanent link (URL) that
can be shared with other researchers or included in papers or
other forms of publication (blogs, tweets, etc...). Users can spec-
ify whether each collection is public or private. The latter have
a unique obfuscated URL that is not discoverable on the Neu-
roVault website, and thus are accessible only by whomever the
owner decides to share the URL with. The option of creating pri-
vate collections gives users freedom to decide who can access
their data, and can facilitate a scenario in which a collection
is shared privately during the pre-publication peer review pro-
cess and then made public upon acceptance of a manuscript.
Using a third-party (such as NeuroVault) to share data that are
part of the peer review process eliminates concerns about the
reviewers’ anonymity. Even though we opted to minimize the
required amount of metadata1 for collections and statistical maps
(to streamline the process) we give users an option to provide
more information to maximize the usability of maps (see Supple-
mentary Tables 1, 2). Most importantly, we provide ability to link
a collection to a paper via a DOI to promote the associated paper
and facilitate meta-analysis.
Data Types
NeuroVault is able to handle a plethora of diﬀerent types of brain
maps as long as they are represented as 3D NIFTI ﬁles in MNI
space. This includes Z or T maps derived from task-based, rest-
ing state fMRI, and PET experiments as well as statistics derived
from analyses of structural data (e.g., Voxel Based Morphometry,
VBM). In addition, results from electroencephalography (EEG)
and magnetoencephalography (MEG) experiments can be used
with NeuroVault as long as they are converted to NIFTI volumes
through source localization (Phillips et al., 2002). NeuroVault can
also handle mask ﬁles (for describing ROIs), label maps (a result
of parcellation studies), posterior probability maps (coming from
Bayesian methods; Woolrich et al., 2004), weight maps (com-
ing from multivariate pattern analysis methods; Haxby, 2012),
and group-level lesion maps (from clinical studies). In addition,
NeuroVault is able to automatically extract some metadata from
SPM.mat ﬁles and FEAT folders if they are uploaded along with
the statistical maps. NeuroVault also supports FSL brain atlas ﬁle
format (NIFTI ﬁle with a side car XML ﬁle). When users upload
such data the parcel labels are exposed through the user interface
1Collections require only name or DOI ﬁelds to be ﬁlled. Statistic maps require
name, map type (T, Z, F, etc...), modality (BOLD-fMRI, diﬀusion, EEG, etc...),
and cognitive paradigm [chosen from the list of Tasks in the Cognitive Atlas (Pol-
drack et al., 2011)] ﬁelds to be entered. For more details see Supplementary Tables
1, 2.
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics | www.frontiersin.org
2
April 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 8

Gorgolewski et al.
NeuroVault.org – a database of statistical maps
FIGURE 1 | Schematic overview of the NeuroVault platform. To begin
working with NeuroVault, users are asked to create an account or log in
using their Facebook or Google account. After login, the user creates a
collection (representing a paper or a study). At this stage, users can
provide a DOI pointing to a paper associated with the collection and/or ﬁll
in a number of ﬁelds describing the study (see Supplementary Table 1 for
details). This additional information is, however, optional. After the
collection is created, users can add images. This can be done
one-by-one or in bulk by uploading whole folders. Again, there is an
option to add more metadata describing the images. The process of
creating a collection and uploading statistical maps to NeuroVault takes
only 5–10 min. When the maps are uploaded, users can start beneﬁting
from permanent link to their results, interactive web-based visualization,
and real-time image decoding.
and the API (the API provides the ability to query atlases by a set
of coordinates or a region name).
User Interface
NeuroVault is designed to provide intuitive, interactive visu-
alization of uploaded images. Each image is assigned its own
unique URL with an embedded JavaScript 2D/3D viewer.
In contrast to traditional, static ﬁgures in published arti-
cles, users can dynamically interact with images—adjusting
statistical
thresholds,
selecting
diﬀerent
color
maps,
and
loading additional brain volumes into the viewer for com-
parison. Using two embedded open-source JavaScript viewers
(Papaya–https://github.com/rii-mango/Papaya and pycortex–
https://github.com/gallantlab/pycortex), users can interrogate
the data both in the volumetric space as well as on the surface (see
Figure 2). Both viewers work inside modern web browsers and
do not require any additional software to be installed. In addition
to the visual representation of the volume, each page also dis-
plays any metadata associated with that image (e.g., experimental
contrast, statistic type, etc...).
Interoperability
A major goal of NeuroVault is to directly interoperate with other
existing web-based neuroimaging resources, ensuring that users
can take advantage of a broad range of computational tools
and resources without additional eﬀort. There are two com-
ponents to this. First, in cases where other relevant resources
implemented a public API, NeuroVault can provide a direct
interface to those resources. For example, at the push of a sin-
gle button, each map deposited in NeuroVault can be near-
instantly “decoded” using Neurosynth (see Figure 3). In the
time of 1–2 s, the uploaded image is analyzed for its spatial
correlation with a subset of the concept-based meta-analysis
maps in the Neurosynth database. The user is then presented
with a ranked, interactive list of maximally similar concepts,
providing a quantitative, interactive way of interpreting indi-
vidual statistical images that is informed by a broader litera-
ture of nearly 10,000 studies. Second, NeuroVault exposes its
own public RESTful web API that provides fully open pro-
grammatic access to all public image collections and enables
direct retrieval and ﬁltering of images and associated meta-
data (see http://neurovault.org/api-docs for detailed description).
This feature allows other researchers to leverage NeuroVault data
in a broad range of desktop and web applications. To maxi-
mize the impact of data stored in NeuroVault the access to the
API is unrestricted, does not require any terms of use agree-
ments, and the data itself is distributed under the CC0 license
(http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0).
Accessibility
Another advantage of depositing statistical maps in NeuroVault
is the increase in longevity and impact of one’s research out-
puts. By providing a free, publicly accessible, centralized repos-
itory of whole-brain images, NeuroVault has the potential to
increase the ﬂow of data between diﬀerent researchers and lab
groups. Maps deposited in NeuroVault can be used by other
researchers to create detailed regions-of-interest for hypothesis-
driven studies or to compare results of replications. However,
one of the most interesting cases of reusing statistical maps
from previous studies is IBMA. Researchers wanting to perform
meta-analyses can obtain the statistical maps from NeuroVault
and perform annotation using various external tools/platforms
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics | www.frontiersin.org
3
April 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 8

Gorgolewski et al.
NeuroVault.org – a database of statistical maps
FIGURE 2 | Visualization options available in NeuroVault. The user can choose to interactively interrogate the images using 2D volumetric view (A), 3D ﬁducial
view (B), 3D inﬂated view (C), or a ﬂattened cortical surface map (D).
such as BrainMap (manual annotation; Laird et al., 2005), Brain-
Spell2 (crowd-sourced annotation; http://brainspell.org), or Neu-
rosynth (automatic annotation; Yarkoni et al., 2011). It is worth
noting that so far meta-analysis in neuroimaging have rarely
been performed based on labels and annotation provided by the
study authors, and thus we feel outsourcing data annotation is
the best current approach. Here we present a proof of concept
meta-analysis based on NeuroVault data collected to date. It gives
a taste of the potential this platform provides for aggregating
knowledge about the human brain.
Meta-Analysis Using the Neurovault Data
At the time of submitting this publication, there were 135 non-
empty public collections (53 of them associated to a publication;
for up to date stats see http://neurovault.org/collections/stats)
comprised of 692 images labeled as Z, T, or F statistics. Out of
these, we removed 14 outliers, and selected 678 maps to perform
proof of concept analyses. The outliers were detected by using
a PCA on all the statistical maps (Fritsch et al., 2012). We found
wrongly labeled images such as brain atlases, cropped images, and
images thresholded at a very high threshold. We performed meta-
analyses using the remaining set of curated images with the goal
of determining whether results could be obtained using a limited
set of unthresholded maps that are similar to results from large
coordinate-based databases. The analyses focused on two aspects:
(i) spatial distribution of activations across all maps (ii) exam-
ple meta analysis of response inhibition. Code for the analyses is
available at https://github.com/NeuroVault/neurovault_analysis.
Spatial Distribution of Activations
The goal of this analysis is to explore the spatial distribution of
activations across all maps in Neurovault in relation to results
2BrainSpell is a web platform that allows many users to annotate neuroimaging
papers and the results described in them using existing ontologies. It is based on the
crowdsourcing principle–anyone is able to contribute their annotations with the
assumption that the eﬀort can be spread across multiple people and the consensus
will maintain high quality.
previously reported in the literature. The analysis aims to quan-
tify the base rate of activation at each voxel across the entire
brain–i.e., to identify regions that are activated more or less often
across diﬀerent tasks.
Using coordinate data from the the Neurosynth database,
we generated a prior activation probability map based on over
300,000 coordinates drawn from nearly 10,000 published stud-
ies. To facilitate fair comparison with the Neurosynth map, we
thresholded each map from NeuroVault at a Z or T value of 3 (F
maps were excluded). This discretization step approximates the
standard Neurosynth procedure of taking discrete peaks reported
in studies and convolving them with 3D spheres. We then gener-
ated an activation frequency map by counting the proportion of
all NeuroVault maps that surpassed the threshold at each voxel.
Figure 4 (middle) shows the NeuroVault frequency map. The
distribution is strikingly non-uniform throughout gray matter.
In particular, the most frequently activated regions include the
frontal part of the insula and dorsal anterior cingulate cortex,
which form a well-known cingulate-insulate control network
associated with salience processing (Seeley et al., 2007) or main-
tenance of task sets (ADD: Dosenbach et al., 2006, Neuron). The
other structures highlighted in Figure 4 are the inferior pari-
etal sulcus—regions sometimes called the “task-positive network”
(Fox et al., 2005)—as well as the occipital lobe, encompassing the
visual cortex. The presence of the latter likely reﬂects the fact that
the majority of experiments rely on visual stimuli. Interestingly,
the networks that are most prominent on this map are largely
related to attention and executive control.
The Neurosynth prior activation map is shown for compar-
ison in Figure 4, top. It displays a similar density of activation,
with visible attentional networks. It is worth noting that other
studies have also reported similar activation density maps (e.g.,
Nelson et al., 2010). However, the visual cortex is much less
present in the Neurosynth map compared to the NeuroVault fre-
quency map. This could potentially be explained by the fact that
results NeuroVault includes many statistical maps from fMRI
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics | www.frontiersin.org
4
April 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 8

Gorgolewski et al.
NeuroVault.org – a database of statistical maps
FIGURE 3 | Results of the Neurosynth decoding of a statistical map obtained through NeuroVault API. Users are able to interactively compare their maps
with Neurosynth topic maps.
FIGURE 4 | Comparison
of
frequency
of
activation
across
human
brain
studies
obtained
using
different
methods.
Top:
Prior
activation
probability
map
obtained
from
coordinate-based
meta-analysis
using
NeuroSynth.
Middle:
Proportion
of
maps
in
NeuroVault
exhibiting
values
of
T
or
Z
higher
than
3.
Bottom:
Mean
of
all
T
and
Z
maps
(also
deposited
in
NeuroVault).
Maps
from
this
ﬁgure
are
available
at
http://neurovault.org/collections/439/.
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics | www.frontiersin.org
5
April 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 8

Gorgolewski et al.
NeuroVault.org – a database of statistical maps
experiments contrasting a single condition with ﬁxation cross
baseline. However, most papers report contrasts between con-
ditions removing the eﬀect of the visual stimuli and thus the
coordinate database will contain fewer activations in the visual
cortex.
We initially thresholded the NeuroVault frequency map in
order to facilitate comparison with conventional coordinate
based approaches (e.g., the Neurosynth map). However, one
important beneﬁt of using unthresholded maps is the retention
of additional information in the form of continuous values at
all voxels. To investigate what one can gain by using unthresh-
olded maps, we calculated a simple average of all T and Z maps
across the entire NeuroVault database (Figure 4, bottom). Unlike
the frequency map, as well as the CBMA, this analysis also cap-
tures the dominant sign of the activation, accumulating power
in regions that may not cross threshold in analyses from indi-
vidual studies (note that doing a principled statistical inference,
e.g., computing a p-value or a posterior from this heterogeneous
collection of maps would require methodological developments
outside of the scope of this article). For example, the average
unthresholded map clearly shows regions that respond, on aver-
age, by deactivating in the experimental condition relative to
the baseline condition (depicted in shades of blue). This pattern
spans the default-mode network (DMN), which was historically
discovered in a similar analysis through observation of consis-
tent decreases in activity across a variety of tasks (Shulman et al.,
1997).
Example Image-Based Meta Analysis Using
Neurovault: Response Inhibition
To demonstrate how NeuroVault can be used for meta-analysis,
we turn to the subject of response inhibition. This cognitive con-
cept involves interrupting a prepared or ongoing response to a
stimuli as a result of being presented with new information (for
review see Verbruggen and Logan, 2008). We began by querying
the NeuroVault API for statistical maps containing “stop signal”
in the task description. This returned 66 maps. We then ﬁltered
our set to maps contrasting “stop” and “go” conditions, which
resulted in eight maps across four studies (see Table 1). Using
the NeuroVault API, we downloaded and visually inspected the
maps. Since all of them contained T statistics, we converted them
to standardized Z maps prior to the analysis. We estimated the
degrees of freedom from the number of participants participat-
ing in each study, and this information was also obtained through
the NeuroVault API. Since some of the studies contained multiple
maps (one study used a test–retest protocol, and one used three
diﬀerent variants of the stop signal task) we created one average
Z map for each study. We then used Stouﬀer’s Z-score method
(Stouﬀer et al., 1949; Lazar et al., 2002) to combine the results
across studies in a ﬁxed-eﬀects meta-analysis (see Figure 5 top)3.
The results show consistent activation across the four studies
in both left and right inferior frontal gyri and anterior insula as
well as left and right parietal cortex. Similar locations have been
3An alternate approach would be to submit all eight Z maps to Stouﬀer’s method,
but this neglects the intra-study correlation; our practical approach averaging each
study’s Zs is conservative but valid. We have presented the results of the analysis of
eight maps here: https://github.com/NeuroVault/neurovault_analysis.
TABLE 1 | Details of the four studies included in the example
meta-analysis.
NeuroVault
collection ID
Number of
“stop – go”
maps
Number of
subjects
References
42
2
15
“Triangulating a Cognitive
Control Network Using
Diffusion-Weighted Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI) and
Functional MRI” (Aron et al.,
2007)
98
1
24
“The generality of
self-control”https://openfmri.
org/dataset/ds000009 (not
published)
413
2
8
“Classiﬁcation learning and
stop-signal (1 year
test–retest)”g6
ghttps://openfmri.
org/dataset/ds000017 (not
published)
423
3
20
“Common Neural Substrates
for Inhibition of Spoken and
Manual Responses” (Xue
et al., 2008)
reported in previous coordinate based meta analyses (Levy and
Wagner, 2011; Swick et al., 2011). In contrast to coordinate based
meta analyses our analysis also found a deactivation in medial
prefrontal cortex. This brain region is one of the hubs of the
default mode network, and has been found to be anticorrelated
with response inhibition performance (Congdon et al., 2010).
This discrepancy is likely caused by the fact that most studies
do not report coordinates of deactivation and thus such patterns
cannot be picked up by coordinate based meta analyses.
To validate our ﬁndings we also compared our results to the
“response inhibition” topic map generated by Neurosynth, which
is based on 151 studies (see Figure 5). The two maps exhibit
remarkable similarity, with the exception of the presence of
deactivations and larger cluster extents in the NeuroVault map–
further validating the notion that an image-based meta analysis
approach compares favorably to the widely accepted coordinate-
based approach (cf. Salimi-Khorshidi et al., 2009). It is worth not-
ing that our analysis yields plausible results despite being limited
to only four studies and a limited number of subjects per study.
Discussion
We present NeuroVault, a web based platform that allows
researchers to store, share, visualize, and decode maps of the
human brain. This new resource can improve how human brain
mapping experiments are presented, disseminated, and reused.
Due to its web-based implementation NeuroVault does not
require any additional software to be installed and thus is very
easy to use.
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics | www.frontiersin.org
6
April 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 8

Gorgolewski et al.
NeuroVault.org – a database of statistical maps
FIGURE 5 | Comparison of image based and coordinate based
meta analysis of response inhibition. Meta analysis based on
unthresholded statistical maps obtained from NeuroVault (top row)
managed to recover the pattern of activation obtained using traditional
methods despite including much fewer studies. NeuroVault map has
been thresholded at z = 6, response inhibition map has been
thresholded at z = 1.77 (the threshold values were chosen for
visualization purposes only, but both are statistically signiﬁcant at
p < 0.05). Unthresholded versions of these maps are available at
http://neurovault.org/collections/439/.
One of the biggest challenges of data sharing platforms is sus-
tainability. Users contributing their data trust that they will be
available over an extended period of time. While we cannot make
any certain claims about the future, we designed the service in
a way to maximize its robustness. NeuroVault is an open source
project (the code is available at https://github.com/NeuroVault/
NeuroVault) that is dependent only on free and open source com-
ponents (web servers, content management systems, databases,
etc...). This means that if the need arises, an individual with min-
imum web administration experience can set up NeuroVault to
run on a new server. Software is not, however, the most impor-
tant part of the project. To preserve the data we are performing
daily oﬀsite backups that are later copied to other locations. The
procedure of restoring the service from scratch using the freely
available code combined with these backups has been heavily
tested. The last component of the service reliability is hardware. It
is worth noting that statistical maps take considerably less space
than other types of data such as raw fMRI datasets. A 500 GB hard
drive (available for $50) can store almost 500,000 statistical maps.
Furthermore, the cost of server maintenance and the connection
to the Internet can easily be leveraged by existing academic insti-
tutions’ infrastructures. In short, we argue that even though no
one is able to guarantee long term availability of NeuroVault, due
to the nature of its design and the type of data it is dealing with,
it is easy and cheap to maintain or host at a new location given
there is enough interest and the service will prove to be useful to
the scientiﬁc community.
NeuroVault is not only a helpful tool for researchers who want
to share, visualize, and decode their maps, it is also a resource
for researchers wanting to perform meta- and coactivation anal-
yses. Thanks to the public RESTful API and the CC0 licensing
of the data there are no restrictions in terms of how and by
whom the data can be used. We hope that this will accelerate
progress in the ﬁeld of human brain imaging and better inte-
grate the growing compendium of resources, as there are many
services that could beneﬁt from interaction with NeuroVault. We
suggest that Neurosynth and BrainMap can boost the power of
their meta-analyses by working with unthresholded maps stored
in NeuroVault instead of peak coordinates extracted from papers.
In our analyses we have showed promising results [replication
of Neurosynth frequency map, DMN deactivation and ICA topic
maps similar to Smith et al. (2009)] even with an initial heteroge-
nous set of few maps. The power of an image based meta-analysis
approach is exempliﬁed by the by the fact that using only a few
100 maps replicated results from much bigger (coordinate-based)
databases (BrainMap and NeuroSynth cover, respectively 2500
and 9000 papers). We are convinced that an increased amount
of data will lead to discovering new organizational principles of
brain function.
The sharing of neuroimaging data can potentially raise ethi-
cal issues related to subject conﬁdentiality (Brakewood and Pol-
drack, 2013). As NeuroVault is mainly focused on group data
analyses, there is little chance that personal information will be
included and lead to ethical issues, but the platform allows sin-
gle subject analysis results to be uploaded. Uploading such data
would require researchers to take extra care not to expose the the
identity of their subjects.
To minimize the amount of eﬀort needed to create a new
collection, the addition of annotated metadata is optional in
NeuroVault. Nevertheless, at the users’ discretion, a rich set of
metadata can be manually included and stored with the sta-
tistical maps. We envision that, in the future, more and more
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics | www.frontiersin.org
7
April 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 8

Gorgolewski et al.
NeuroVault.org – a database of statistical maps
machine-readable information will be shared and these metadata
will be populated automatically to increase the potential re-use
of the datasets hosted at NeuroVault. Current eﬀorts (e.g., the
previously mentioned BrainSpell), can aid the process of annotat-
ing papers (and their corresponding maps) through crowdsourc-
ing. Ideally, machine-readable metadata would be made available
directly by the software packages used to generate the statisti-
cal maps. For example, the NeuroImaging Data Model (NIDM;
Keator et al., 2013) is a metadata standard that could be used to
withstand metadata loss between an analysis and the upload of
the statistical maps into NeuroVault. The NIDM-Results stan-
dard captures not only the statistic map, but also the design
matrix, residuals, group mask, and many other pieces of infor-
mation useful for future analysis. Currently only SPM natively
exports to this ﬁle format, but we have adopted third party scripts
to convert outputs of the FSL analyses (FEAT folders) to NIDM-
Results on the server side and thus capture richer metadata in a
fully automated way, and a solution for AFNI is currently being
implemented. To exemplify the importance of such metadata, we
present a hypothetical study that aims to train a classiﬁer to pre-
dict some outcome from activation maps. It could be the case that
eﬀects are due to metadata variables such as the source, software,
or scanner, and this ﬁnding would only be apparent given that
this information is available.
It is also worth pointing out that NeuroVault is not only
supporting task-based fMRI results. Results from resting state
fMRI, PET, VBM, DWI, and most interestingly source recon-
structed EEG/MEG experiments can be used with the platform
as long as they are NIFTI ﬁles in MNI space. We plan to expand
this to FreeSurfer surfaces, CIFTI ﬁles, and connectomes in the
near future. Historically, aggregating results across modalities has
been diﬃcult, and we hope that this platform can start to improve
upon this situation, by providing one common place for storing
and sharing statistical maps.
NeuroVault is also integrated with the Resource Identiﬁca-
tion Initiative through The Neuroscience Information Frame-
work (NIF, see Gardner et al., 2008 and http://neuinfo.org/).
This interdisciplinary project assigns identiﬁers to resources and
tools used in research that are then included in publications
and later indexed by Google Scholar and PubMed. These iden-
tiﬁers work with the PubMed LinkOut service (http://www.
ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/projects/linkout/) so that links can automati-
cally be made between the tools and publications on web pages
describing either. Assigning these resource identiﬁers to statis-
tical maps, then, would both allow for the creators to track
how the maps are used and grant academically acknowledge
credit (even in the case when the maps come from unpublished
studies).
Limitations and Future Directions
One of the biggest limitations of the NeuroVault database is its
size and the voluntary nature of data contributions. For any meta-
analysis to be meaningful the sample of included studies needs to
be representative. Including only papers that have corresponding
statistical maps in NeuroVault instead of all papers might cre-
ate unpredictable biases (although this bias is most likely to be
toward inclusion of more trustworthy results; see Wicherts et al.,
2011). One-way of dealing with this is to enforce deposition of
statistical maps across all published research. This would be a
drastic move, and some data sharing initiatives in neuroimag-
ing in the past were met with considerable opposition from the
community (Van Horn and Gazzaniga, 2013). Instead we have
reached out to leading journals in the ﬁeld to encourage (but not
require) authors of accepted papers to deposit statistical maps in
NeuroVault. So far, NeuroImage, F1000Research and Frontiers in
Brain Imaging Methods have joined us in the quest of provid-
ing better and more open representation of experimental results.
We hope that with time publishing statistical maps will become
standard practice.
NeuroVault ﬁlls a speciﬁc niche in the neuroinformatics
ecosystem. The main purpose is to collect, store, and share statis-
tical maps. We leave the task of extracting knowledge (tags, labels
terms) out of papers and associating them with the statistical
maps to other platforms BrainSpell, Neurosynth, and BrainMap.
We also do not aspire to provide a platform for performing meta
analyses (neurosynth and BrainMap facilitate this). This decision
is intentional and was made to focus on one speciﬁc task and do it
well. Thus, in the future we want to focus on (i) making the plat-
form more attractive for researchers (so the motivation for data
deposition will increase), (ii) making the data deposition process
easier and automatic extraction of metadata more eﬀective, and
(iii) reaching out to the community to make sharing of statisti-
cal maps a common practice. In terms of the ﬁrst goal we are
working hard on adding new features that will help researchers to
understand and visualize their maps. One of such features (cur-
rently in beta) is map comparison: users will be able to compare
their map with all the other maps deposited in the database and
thus easily ﬁnd experiments with similar imaging results. The
second goal will involve tighter integration with the most pop-
ular software packages (capitalizing on the NIDM-Results stan-
dard). We plan to provide a single click solution for uploading
maps to NeuroVault that will be available within analysis software
such as SPM, FSL, and AFNI. Finally the third goal, probably the
most important, and also the hardest, involves continuous con-
versations with academic journals and conference organizations
such as the OHBM. We hope that by including all of the inter-
ested parties in these conversation we will be able to convince
the community about the pressing need for sharing statistical
maps.
Conclusion
In this work we have described NeuroVault—a web-based repos-
itory that allows researchers to store, share, visualize, and decode
unthresholded statistical maps of the human brain. This project
not only helps individual researchers to disseminate their results
and put them in the context of existing literature, but it also
enables aggregation of data across studies. Through our analyses
we have shown that with only a few hundred statistical maps we
can achieve results comparable to those obtained with thousands
of sets of coordinates. NeuroVault is free and unencumbered
by data use agreements. The data is available and the database
queryable via the web interface and RESTful API. This simple and
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics | www.frontiersin.org
8
April 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 8

Gorgolewski et al.
NeuroVault.org – a database of statistical maps
modern platform opens the door to developing novel methods to
draw inferences from a meta-analytic database.
Acknowledgments
This work was partially funded by the National Institutes of
Health (NIH), R01MH096906 [TY], NSF OCI-1131441 [RP],
International Neuroinformatics Coordinating Facility (INCF)
and the Max Planck Society [KJG, DSM]. We thank the
International Neuroinformatics Coordinating Facility (INCF)
Neuroimaging Data Sharing (Nidash) task force members for
their input during several discussions.
Supplementary Material
The Supplementary Material for this article can be found
online at: http://www.frontiersin.org/journal/10.3389/fninf.2015.
00008/abstract
References
Aron, A. R., Behrens, T. E., Smith, S., Frank, M. J., and Poldrack, R. A. (2007).
Triangulating a cognitive control network using diﬀusion-weighted magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) and functional MRI. J. Neurosci. 27, 3743–3752. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0519-07.2007
Brakewood, B., and Poldrack, R. A. (2013). The ethics of secondary data analysis:
considering the application of Belmont principles to the sharing of neuroimag-
ing data. Neuroimage 82, 671–676. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.02.040
Congdon, E., Mumford, J. A., Cohen, J. R., Galvan, A., Aron, A. R., Xue,
G., et al. (2010). Engagement of large-scale networks is related to indi-
vidual diﬀerences in inhibitory control. Neuroimage 53, 653–663. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.06.062
Dosenbach, N. U. F., Visscher, K. M., Palmer, E. D., Miezin, F. M., Wenger, K. K.,
Kang, H. C., et al. (2006). A core system for the implementation of task sets.
Neuron 50, 799–812. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2006.04.031
Fox, M. D., Snyder, A. Z., Vincent, J. L., Corbetta, M., Van Essen, D. C., and Raichle,
M. E. (2005). The human brain is intrinsically organized into dynamic, anticor-
related functional networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 102, 9673–9678. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0504136102
Fritsch, V., Varoquaux, G., Thyreau, B., Poline, J.-B., and Thirion, B.
(2012). Detecting outliers in high-dimensional neuroimaging datasets with
robust covariance estimators. Med. Image Anal. 16, 1359–1370. doi:
10.1016/j.media.2012.05.002
Gardner, D., Akil, H., Ascoli, G. A., Bowden, D. M., Bug, W., Donohue, D. E., et al.
(2008). The neuroscience information framework: a data and knowledge envi-
ronment for neuroscience. Neuroinformatics 6, 149–160. doi: 10.1007/s12021-
008-9024-z
Haxby, J. V. (2012). Multivariate pattern analysis of fMRI: the early beginnings.
Neuroimage 62, 852–855. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.03.016
Keator, D. B., Helmer, K., Steﬀener, J., Turner, J. A., Van Erp, T. G. M.,
Gadde, S., et al. (2013). Towards structured sharing of raw and derived
neuroimaging data across existing resources. Neuroimage 82, 647–661. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.05.094
Laird, A. R., Lancaster, J. J., and Fox, P. T. (2005). BrainMap. Neuroinformatics 3,
65–77. doi: 10.1385/NI:3:1:065
Lazar, N. A., Luna, B., Sweeney, J. A., and Eddy, W. F. (2002). Combining brains:
a survey of methods for statistical pooling of information. Neuroimage 16,
538–550. doi: 10.1006/nimg.2002.1107
Levy, B. J., and Wagner, A. D. (2011). Cognitive control and right ventrolateral
prefrontal cortex: reﬂexive reorienting, motor inhibition, and action updating.
Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 1224, 40–62. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2011.05958.x
Nelson, S. M., Dosenbach, N. U. F., Cohen, A. L., Wheeler, M. E., Schlaggar, B.
L., and Petersen, S. E. (2010). Role of the anterior insula in task-level control
and focal attention. Brain Struct. Funct. 214, 669–680. doi: 10.1007/s00429-010-
0260-2
Phillips, C., Rugg, M. D., and Friston, K. J. (2002). Anatomically informed basis
functions for EEG source localization: combining functional and anatomical
constraints. Neuroimage 16, 678–695. doi: 10.1006/nimg.2002.1143
Poldrack, R. A., Kittur, A., Kalar, D., Miller, E., Seppa, C., Gil, Y., et al. (2011).
The cognitive atlas: toward a knowledge foundation for cognitive neuroscience.
Front. Neuroinform. 5:17. doi: 10.3389/fninf.2011.00017
Poline, J.-B., Breeze, J. L., Ghosh, S., Gorgolewski, K., Halchenko, Y. O., Hanke, M.,
et al. (2012). Data sharing in neuroimaging research. Front. Neuroinform. 6:9.
doi: 10.3389/fninf.2012.00009
Rosenthal, R. (1979). The ﬁle drawer problem and tolerance for null results.
Psychol. Bull. 86, 638. doi: 10.1037/0033-2909.86.3.638
Salimi-Khorshidi, G., Smith, S. M., Keltner, J. R., Wager, T. D., and Nichols,
T. E. (2009). Meta-analysis of neuroimaging data: a comparison of image-
based and coordinate-based pooling of studies. Neuroimage 45, 810–823. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.12.039
Seeley, W. W., Menon, V., Schatzberg, A. F., Keller, J., Glover, G. H.,
Kenna, H., et al. (2007). Dissociable intrinsic connectivity networks for
salience processing and executive control. J. Neurosci. 27, 2349–2356. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5587-06.2007
Shulman, G. L., Fiez, J. A., Corbetta, M., Buckner, R. L., Miezin, F. M., Raichle, M.
E., et al. (1997). Common blood ﬂow changes across visual tasks: II. Decreases
in cerebral cortex. J. Cogn. Neurosci. 9, 648–663. doi: 10.1162/jocn.1997.9.
5.648
Smith, S. M., Fox, P. T., Miller, K. L., Glahn, D. C., Fox, P. M., Mackay, C.
E., et al. (2009). Correspondence of the brain’s functional architecture dur-
ing activation and rest. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 106, 13040–13045. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0905267106
Stouﬀer, S. A., Suchman, E. A., Devinney, L. C., Star, S. A., and Williams, R. M. Jr.
(1949). The American Soldier: Adjustment During Army Life. (Studies in Social
Psychology in World War II, Vol. 1.). Available online at: http://psycnet.apa.org/
psycinfo/1950-00790-000
Swick, D., Ashley, V., and Turken, U. (2011). Are the neural correlates of stopping
and not going identical? Quantitative meta-analysis of two response inhibition
tasks. Neuroimage 56, 1655–1665. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.02.070
Van
Horn,
J.
D.,
and
Gazzaniga,
M.
S.
(2013).
Why
share
data?
Lessons
learned
from
the
fMRIDC.
Neuroimage
82,
677–682.
doi:
10.1016/j.neuroimage.2012.11.010
Verbruggen, F., and Logan, G. D. (2008). Response inhibition in the stop-signal
paradigm. Trends Cogn. Sci. 12, 418–424. doi: 10.1016/j.tics.2008.07.005
Wicherts, J. M., Bakker, M., and Molenaar, D. (2011). Willingness to share
research data is related to the strength of the evidence and the quality of
reporting of statistical results. PLoS ONE 6:e26828. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.
0026828
Woolrich, M. W., Behrens, T. E. J., Beckmann, C. F., Jenkinson, M., and Smith, S.
M. (2004). Multilevel linear modelling for FMRI group analysis using Bayesian
inference. Neuroimage 21, 1732–1747. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2003.12.023
Xue, G., Aron, A. R., and Poldrack, R. A. (2008). Common neural substrates for
inhibition of spoken and manual responses. Cereb. Cortex 18, 1923–1932. doi:
10.1093/cercor/bhm220
Yarkoni, T., Poldrack, R. A., Nichols, T. E., Van Essen, D. C., and Wager, T. D.
(2011). Large-scale automated synthesis of human functional neuroimaging
data. Nat. Methods 8, 665–670. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.1635
Conﬂict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or ﬁnancial relationships that could be
construed as a potential conﬂict of interest.
Copyright © 2015 Gorgolewski, Varoquaux, Rivera, Schwarz, Ghosh, Maumet,
Sochat, Nichols, Poldrack, Poline, Yarkoni and Margulies. This is an open-access arti-
cle distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC
BY). The use, distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the
original author(s) or licensor are credited and that the original publication in this
journal is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution
or reproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.
Frontiers in Neuroinformatics | www.frontiersin.org
9
April 2015 | Volume 9 | Article 8