c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
1
Unsupervised Deep Feature Extraction
for Remote Sensing Image Classiﬁcation
Adriana Romero, Carlo Gatta and Gustau Camps-Valls, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract
This paper introduces the use of single layer and deep convolutional networks for remote sensing data analysis.
Direct application to multi- and hyper-spectral imagery of supervised (shallow or deep) convolutional networks is
very challenging given the high input data dimensionality and the relatively small amount of available labeled
data. Therefore, we propose the use of greedy layer-wise unsupervised pre-training coupled with a highly efﬁcient
algorithm for unsupervised learning of sparse features. The algorithm is rooted on sparse representations and
enforces both population and lifetime sparsity of the extracted features, simultaneously. We successfully illustrate
the expressive power of the extracted representations in several scenarios: classiﬁcation of aerial scenes, as well as
land-use classiﬁcation in very high resolution (VHR), or land-cover classiﬁcation from multi- and hyper-spectral
images. The proposed algorithm clearly outperforms standard Principal Component Analysis (PCA) and its kernel
counterpart (kPCA), as well as current state-of-the-art algorithms of aerial classiﬁcation, while being extremely
computationally efﬁcient at learning representations of data. Results show that single layer convolutional networks
can extract powerful discriminative features only when the receptive ﬁeld accounts for neighboring pixels, and
are preferred when the classiﬁcation requires high resolution and detailed results. However, deep architectures
signiﬁcantly outperform single layers variants, capturing increasing levels of abstraction and complexity throughout
the feature hierarchy.
Index Terms
Deep convolutional networks, deep learning, sparse features learning, feature extraction, aerial image classiﬁ-
cation, very high resolution (VHR), multispectral images, hyper-spectral image, classiﬁcation, segmentation
I. INTRODUCTION
Earth observation (EO) through remote sensing techniques is a research ﬁeld where a huge variety of
physical signals is measured from instruments on-board space and airborne platforms. A wide diversity
of sensor characteristics is nowadays available, ranging from medium and very high resolution (VHR)
multispectral imagery to hyperspectral images that sample the electromagnetic spectrum with high detail.
These myriad of sensors serve to particularly different objectives, focusing either on obtaining quantitative
measurements and estimations of geo-bio-physical variables, or on the identiﬁcation of materials by the
analysis of the acquired images [1]–[3]. Among all the different products that can be obtained from
the acquired images, classiﬁcation maps1 are perhaps the most relevant ones. The remote sensing image
classiﬁcation problem is very challenging and ubiquitous because land cover and land use maps are
mandatory in multi-temporal studies and constitute useful inputs to other processes.
Despite the high number of advanced, robust and accurate existing classiﬁers [4], the ﬁeld faces very
important challenges:
c⃝2015 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other users, including reprinting/
republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works for resale or redistribution to servers or
lists, or reuse of any copyrighted components of this work in other works. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
Manuscript received November 25, 2015.
A. Romero is with the Dpt. MAIA, Universitat de Barcelona, 08007 Barcelona, Spain. E-mail: adriana.romero@ub.edu
C. Gatta is with the Computer Vision Center, Universitat Aut`onoma de Barcelona, 01873 Barcelona, Spain. E-mail: cgatta@cvc.uab.es
G. Camps-Valls is with the Image Processing Laboratory (IPL), Universitat de Val`encia, Catedr´atico A. Escardino, 46980 Paterna, Val`encia
(Spain). E-mail: gcamps@uv.es, http://isp.uv.es
1In the remote sensing community, the term ‘classiﬁcation’ is often preferred to the term ‘semantic segmentation’. We use the term
‘classiﬁcation’ to classify full images in the ﬁrst application of aerial image classiﬁcation, and to describe the process of attributing each
pixel (or segment) to a single semantic class in subsequent applications.

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
2
1) Complex statistical characteristics of images. The statistical properties of the acquired images place
important difﬁculties for automatic classiﬁers. The analysis of these images turns out to be very
challenging, especially because of the high dimensionality of the pixels, the speciﬁc noise and
uncertainty sources observed, the high spatial and spectral redundancy and collinearity, and their
potentially non-linear nature2. Beyond these well-known data characteristics, we should highlight
that spatial and spectral redundancy also suggest that the acquired signal may be better described
in sparse representation spaces, as recently reported in [4], [6]–[8].
2) High computational problems involved. We are witnessing the advent of a Big Data Era, especially
in remote sensing data processing. The upcoming constellations of satellite sensors will acquire a
large variety of heterogeneous images of different spatial, spectral, angular and temporal resolutions.
In fact, we are witnessing an ever increasing amount of data gathered with current and upcoming EO
satellite missions, from multispectral sensors like Landsat-8 [9], to VHR sensors like WorldView-
III [10], the super-spectral Copernicus’ Sentinel-2 [11] and Sentinel-3 missions [12], as well as
the planned EnMAP [13], HyspIRI [14] and ESA’s candidate FLEX [15] imaging spectrometer
missions. This data ﬂux will require computationally efﬁcient classiﬁcation techniques. The current
state-of-the-art Support Vector Machine (SVM) [16], [17] is not, however, able to cope with more
than some few thousands of labeled data points.
A very convenient way to alleviate the above-mentioned problems is to extract relevant, potentially
useful, non-redundant, non-linear features from images in order to facilitate the subsequent classiﬁcation
step. The extracted features could be fed into a simple, cost-effective (ideally linear) classiﬁer. The
bottleneck would then be the feature learning step. Learning expressive spatial-spectral features from
hyperspectral images in an efﬁcient way is thus of paramount relevance. In addition, and very importantly,
learning such features in an unsupervised fashion has also become extremely relevant given the few labeled
pixels typically available.
A. Background
Given the typically high dimensionality of remote sensing data, feature extraction techniques have been
widely used in the literature to reduce the data dimensionality. While the classical Principal Component
Analysis (PCA) [18] is still one of the most popular choices, a plethora of non-linear dimensionality
reduction methods, manifold learning and dictionary learning algorithms have been introduced in the last
decade.
State-of-the-art manifold learning methods [19] include: local approaches for the description of remote
sensing image manifolds [20]; kernel-based and spectral decompositions that learn mappings optimiz-
ing for maximum variance, correlation, entropy, or minimum noise fraction [21]; neural networks that
generalize PCA to encode non-linear data structures via autoassociative/autoencoding networks [22]; as
well as projection pursuit approaches leading to convenient Gaussian domains [23]. In remote sensing,
autoencoders have been widely used [24]–[27]. However, a number of (critical) free parameters are to be
tuned; regularization is an important issue, which is mainly addressed by limiting the network’s structure
heuristically; and only shallow structures are considered mainly due to the limitations on computational
resources and efﬁciency of the training algorithms. On top of this, very often, autoencoders employ only
the spectral information, and in the best of the cases, spatial information is naively included through
stacking hand-crafted spatial features.
To authors’ knowledge, there is few evidence of the good performance of deep architectures in re-
mote sensing image classiﬁcation: [28] introduces a deep learning algorithm for classiﬁcation of (low-
dimensional) VHR images; [29] explores the robustness of deep networks to noisy class labels for aerial
image classiﬁcation; and [30] introduces hybrid Deep Neural Networks to enable the extraction of variable-
scale features to detect vehicles in satellite images; [31] proposes a hybrid framework based on Stacked
2Factors such as multi-scattering in the acquisition process, heterogeneities at subpixel level, as well as atmospheric and geometric
distortions lead to distinct non-linear feature relations, since pixels lie in high dimensional curved manifolds [4], [5].

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
3
Auto-Encoders for classiﬁcation of hyper-spectral data. Although deep learning methods can cope with the
difﬁculties of non-linear spatial-spectral image analysis, the issues of sparsity in the feature representation
and efﬁciency of training algorithms are not obvious in state-of-the-art frameworks.
In recent years, dictionary learning has emerged as an efﬁcient way to learn sparse image features in un-
supervised settings, which are eventually used for image classiﬁcation and object recognition: discrimina-
tive dictionaries have been proposed for spatial-spectral sparse-representation and image classiﬁcation [32],
sparse kernel networks have been recently introduced for classiﬁcation [33], sparse representations over
learned dictionaries for image pansharpening [34], saliency-based codes for segmentation [35], [36], sparse
bag-of-words codes for automatic target detection [37], and unsupervised learning of sparse features for
aerial image classiﬁcation [38]. These methods describe the input images in sparse representation spaces
but do not take advantage of the high non-linear nature of deep architectures.
Therefore, in the context of remote sensing, unsupervised learning of features in a deep convolutional
neural network architectures seeking sparse representations has not been approached so far.
B. Contributions
In this paper, we aim to address the two main challenges in the ﬁeld of remote sensing data. Therefore,
we introduce the use of deep convolutional networks for remote sensing data analysis [39] trained by
means of an unsupervised learning method seeking sparse feature representations. On one hand, (1) deep
architectures have a highly non-linear nature that is well suited to cope with the difﬁculties of non-linear
spatial-spectral image analysis; (2) convolutional architectures only capture local interactions, making
them well suited when the input share similar statistics at all location, i.e. when there is high redundancy;
(3) sparse features are supposed to be convenient to describe remote sensing images [4], [6]–[8]. On the
other hand, we want to train deep convolutional architectures efﬁciently to alleviate the high computational
problems involved in remote sensing. Given the typically few labeled data, applying unsupervised learning
algorithms to train deep architectures is a paramount aspect of remote sensing.
We propose the combination of greedy layer-wise unsupervised pre-training [40]–[43] coupled with
the highly efﬁcient Enforcing Lifetime and Population Sparsity (EPLS) algorithm [44] for unsupervised
learning of sparse features and show the applicability and potential of the method to extract hierarchical
(i.e. deep) sparse feature representations of remote sensing images. The EPLS seeks a sparse representation
of the input data (remote sensing images) and allows to train systems with large numbers of input channels
efﬁciently (and numerous ﬁlters/parameters), without requiring any meta-parameter tuning. Thus, deep
convolutional networks are trained efﬁciently in an unsupervised greedy layer-wise fashion [40]–[43] using
the EPLS algorithm [44] to learn the network ﬁlters. The learned hierarchical representations of the input
remote sensing images are used for image/pixel classiﬁcation, where lower layers extract low-level features
and higher layers exhibit more abstract and complex representations.
To our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst work dealing with sparse unsupervised deep convolutional networks
in remote sensing data analysis in a systematic way. We want to emphasize the fact that the methodology
presented here is fully unsupervised, which is a different (and more challenging) setting to the common
supervised use of convolutional nets. The main contributions of this paper are
1) Deep Convolutional Architectures trained with EPLS. We exploit the properties of the EPLS and
extend the work in [44] from single to deep architectures, and from classiﬁcation of images to
semantic segmentation of high-dimensional images, which certainly is a more interesting problem
in the ﬁeld of remote sensing image processing.
2) Application of the proposed method to very high resolution (VHR), multispectral (MS) and hyper-
spectral (HS) images. Unlike [44], which only focused on tiny RGB images, we deal with very
high resolution (VHR), multispectral (MS) and hyperspectral (HS) images as well. Moreover, we
analyze the inﬂuence of deep architectures’ meta-parameters on the method’s performance.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the main characteristics of the
proposed algorithm for unsupervised hierarchical (deep) sparse feature extraction: we describe the (deep)

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
4
convolutional neural network architecture, detail the layer-wise pre-training algorithm, and summarize the
unsupervised EPLS algorithm. Section III compares the proposed algorithm to state-of-the-art algorithms
in terms of classiﬁcation accuracy and their expressive power in four different applications: classiﬁcation
of aerial scenes, as well as land-cover classiﬁcation in VHR, multi- and hyper-spectral images. After a
detailed analysis of the results, we end the paper with some concluding remarks and outline of the future
work in Section IV.
II. UNSUPERVISED DEEP FEATURE LEARNING OF REMOTE SENSING IMAGES
This section introduces the concepts and strategies employed to learn deep features for remote sensing.
In II-A we brieﬂy explain the main blocks of a deep convolutional neural network; in II-B we outline
a strategy to learn the ﬁlters of each layer called greedy layer-wise unsupervised pre-training [40], [42],
[43]; ﬁnally, in section II-C we introduce the EPLS algorithm [44], which is the unsupervised learning
strategy employed to learn the network parameters.
A. Deep Convolutional Neural Networks
Deep neural networks are models that capture hierarchical representations of data. These models are
based on the sequential application of a computation “module”, where the output of the previous module
is the input to the next one; these modules are called layers. Each layer provides one representation level.
Layers are parameterized by a set of weights connecting input units to output units and a set of biases.
In the case of Convolutional Neural Networks (CNN), weights are shared locally, i.e. the same weights
are applied at every location of the input. The weights connected to the same output unit form a ﬁlter.
CNN layers consist of: (1) a convolution of the input with a set of learnable ﬁlters to extract local
features; (2) a point-wise non-linearity, e.g. the logistic function, to allow deep architectures to learn
non-linear representations of the input data; and (3) a pooling operator, which aggregates the statistics
of the features at nearby locations, to reduce the computational cost (by reducing the spatial size of
the image), while providing a local translational invariance in the previously extracted features. Fig. 1
shows an example of CNN, with L layers stacked together. The last convolutional layer is followed by a
fully-connected output layer.
Fig. 1. A graphical representation of a deep convolutional architecture.
The operations performed in a single convolutional layer can be summarized as
Ol = poolP(σ(Ol−1 ⋆Wl + bl))
(1)
where Ol−1 is the input feature map to the l-th layer; θl = {Wl, bl} is the set of learnable parameters
(weights and biases) of the layer, σ(·) is the point-wise non-linearity, pool is a subsampling operation, P
is the size of the pooling region3, and the symbol ⋆denotes linear convolution. Note that in the context of
CNN, the convolution is multi-dimensional with each ﬁlter. The input of the ﬁrst layer is the input data,
in this case a multi/hyper-spectral image, i.e. O0 = I, where I ∈ℜR0×C0×N0
h is the input image, R0 and
C0 are its width and height and N 0
h is the number of spectral channels (bands). More generally, the input
3The pooling region is usually square, in this case formed by P × P pixels.

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
5
to a subsequent layer l is a feature map Ol−1 ∈ℜRl−1×Cl−1×Nl−1
h , where Rl−1 and Cl−1 are the width and
height of the l-th layer’s input feature map and N l−1
h
is the number of outputs of the (l −1)-th layer.
CNN architectures have a signiﬁcant number of meta-parameters. The most relevant ones may be: (1)
the number of layers; (2) the number of outputs per layer; (3) the size of the ﬁlters, also called receptive
ﬁeld; and (4) the size and type of spatial pooling.
Another important aspect is how to train such architectures. Deep convolutional networks can be trained
in a supervised fashion, e.g. by means of standard back-propagation [45]–[47], or in an unsupervised
fashion, by means of greedy layer-wise pre-training [40], [42], [43]. Unsupervised greedy layer-wise
pre-training has been successfully used in the literature [40], [42], [43], [48], [49] to train deep CNN.
Supervised methods usually require a large amount of reliable labeled data, which is difﬁcult to obtain
in remote sensing classiﬁcation problems. Therefore, in the case of multi- and hyper-spectral images, it
is preferred to use an unsupervised learning strategy given the typically few available labeled pixels per
class.
B. The greedy layer-wise unsupervised pre-training strategy
Greedy layer-wise unsupervised pre-training [40], [42], [43] is based on the idea that a local (layer-
wise) unsupervised criterion can be applied to pre-train the network’s parameters, allowing the use of
large amounts of unlabeled data. After pre-training, the network’s parameters are set to a potentially good
local minima, from which supervised learning (called ﬁne-tuning) can follow. However, deep networks
have also been trained in a purely unsupervised way, skipping the ﬁne-tuning step [48]. Patch-based
training is the most commonly used approach to learn the convolutional layers’ parameters by means of
unsupervised criteria [50]. It consists in using a set of randomly extracted patches from input images (or
feature maps) to train each layer. After that, the layer weights are applied to each input location to obtain
output convolutional feature maps that will serve as input to the next layer.
Algorithm 1 shows the pseudo-code of a greedy layer-wise unsupervised pre-training strategy, as
introduced in [40], [42], [43]. The algorithm expects as input a set images D0 = {O0
i }∀i and a deep
architecture with L layers. Then, it trains each layer of the deep architecture in a patch-based fashion
and provides as output the parameters of all layers {θ1, θ2, . . . , θL}, i.e. the (pre)-trained deep architecture
with θl = {Wl, bl} and l ∈{1, 2, · · · , L}. For each layer l (line 1), the algorithm extracts N random
patches from the feature maps (or images) in Dl−1 to generate Hl−1 ∈RN×Nl−1
h
(line 2). Each row
of Hl−1 corresponds to a vectorized patch and each column represents an input dimension. After that,
it learns the layer’s parameters θl applying an UnsupervisedCriterion on Hl−1 (line 3). In our case,
the unsupervised criterion is the EPLS algorithm, which is detailed in subsection II-C. Then, the set of
output feature maps Dl = {Ol
i}∀i of the trained layer l is computed from the set of input feature maps
Dl−1 = {Ol−1
i
}∀i by performing feature extraction (see Section II-D for more details) (line 4). The new
set of feature maps Dl is subsequently used to train the next layer. The same procedure is repeated for
each layer until l = L.
Algorithm 1 Greedy layer-wise unsupervised pre-training
Input: D0, L
Output: {θ1, θ2, . . . , θL}, where θl = {Wl, bl}∀l ∈{1, 2, ..., L}
1: for l = 1 →L do
2:
Generate Hl−1 ∈RN×N l−1
h
by randomly extracting N patches from Ol−1
i
∈Dl−1
3:
θl ←UnsupervisedCriterion(Hl−1)
4:
Dl = {Ol
i : FeatureExtraction(Ol−1
i
, θl),
∀Ol−1
i
∈Dl−1} (see Eq. 1)
5: end for
C. Unsupervised learning criteria with sparsity
Sparsity is among the properties of a good feature representation [48], [50]–[53]. Sparsity can be deﬁned
in terms of population sparsity and lifetime sparsity. On one hand, population sparsity ensures simple

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
6
representations of the data by allowing only a small subsets of outputs to be active at the same time [54]. On
the other hand, lifetime sparsity controls the frequency of activation of each output throughout the dataset,
ensuring rare but high activation of each output [54]. State-of-the-art unsupervised learning methods
such as sparse Restricted Boltzmann Machines (RBM) [40], Sparse Auto-Encoders (SAE) [53], Sparse
Coding (SC) [52], Predictive Sparse Decomposition (PSD) [49], Sparse Filtering [48] and Orthogonal
Matching Pursuit (OMP-k) [55] have been successfully used in the literature to extract sparse feature
representations. OMP-k and SC seek population sparsity, whereas SAE seek lifetime sparsity. OMP-k
trains a set of ﬁlters by iteratively selecting an output of the code to be made non-zero in order to minimize
the residual reconstruction error, until at most k outputs have been selected. The method achieves a sparse
representation of the input data in terms of population sparsity. SAE train the set of ﬁlters by minimizing
the reconstruction error while ensuring similar activation statistics through all training samples among
all outputs, thus ensuring a sparse representation of the data in terms of lifetime sparsity. However, the
great majority of these methods have numerous meta-parameters and/or enforce sparsity at the expense
of adding meta-parameters to tune.
In [44], we introduced EPLS, a novel, meta-parameter free, off-the-shelf and simple algorithm for
unsupervised sparse feature learning. The method provides discriminative features that can be very useful
for classiﬁcation as they capture relevant spatial and spectral image features jointly. The method iteratively
builds a sparse target from the output of a layer and optimizes for that speciﬁc target to learn the ﬁlters.
The sparse target is deﬁned such that it ensures both population and lifetime sparsity. Figure 2 summarizes
the steps of the method in [44]. Essentially, given a matrix of input patches to train layer l, Hl−1, we need
to: (1) compute the output of the patches Hl by applying the learned weights and biases to the input, and
subsequently the non-linearity; (2) call the EPLS algorithm to generate a sparse target Tl from the output
of the layer, such that it ensures population and lifetime sparsity; and (3) optimize the parameters of the
layer (weights and biases) by minimizing the L2 norm of the difference between the layer’s output and
the EPLS sparse target:
θl∗= arg min
θl ||Hl −Tl||2
2
(2)
The optimization is performed by means of an out-of-the-box mini-batch Stochastic Gradient Descent
(SGD) with adaptive learning rates [56]. From now on, we will use the superscript b to refer to the data
related to a mini-batch, e.g. the output of a layer Hl ∈RN×Nl
h will now be Hl,b ∈RNb×Nl
h, where
Nb < N is the number of patches in a mini-batch.
Fig. 2. Illustration of how EPLS generates the output target matrix.
Algorithm 2 recapitulates how the EPLS builds the sparse target matrix from the output matrix of a layer.
Let Hl,b be the mini-batch output matrix of a layer l, composed of Nb output vectors of dimensionality
N l
h. Let Tl,b be the sparse target matrix built by the EPLS, with the same dimensions as Hl,b. Starting
with no activation in Tl,b (line 1) and the output of the system Hl,b normalized between [0,1] (line 2), the
algorithm processes a row h of Hl,b at each iteration (line 4). In line 5, the algorithm selects the output
k of the n-th row that has the maximal activation value hj minus an inhibitor aj to be set as one “hot

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
7
code”, thus ensuring population sparsity. The inhibitor aj is initialized to zero. It “counts” the number of
times an output j has been selected, increasing its inhibition progressively by
Nl
h
N until reaching maximal
inhibition, where N is the total number of training patches. This prevents the selection of an output that
has already been activated
N
Nl
h times and, thus ensures lifetime sparsity. In line 6, the k-th element of
the n-th row of the target matrix Tl,b is activated, ensuring population sparsity. In line 7, the inhibitor is
updated and, ﬁnally, in line 9, the complete output target Tl,b is remapped to the active/inactive values of
the corresponding non-linearity. More details on the EPLS algorithm can be found in [44].
Algorithm 2 EPLS [44]
Input: Hl,b, a, N
Output: Tl,b, a
1: Tl,b = 0
2: Hl,b =
Hl,b−min(Hl,b)
max(Hl,b)−min(Hl,b)
3: for n = 1 →Nb do
4:
hj = Hl,b
n,j ∀j ∈{1, 2, . . . , N l
h}
5:
k = arg maxj (hj −aj)
6:
Tl,b
n,k = 1
7:
ak = ak + N l
h
N
8: end for
9: Remap Tl,b to active/inactive values
D. Feature Extraction
After training the parameters of a network, we can proceed to extract feature representations. To do so,
we must choose an encoder to map the input feature map of each layer to its representation, i.e we must
choose the non-linearity to be used after applying the learned ﬁlters to all input locations. A straightforward
choice is the use of a natural encoding, i.e. whichever encoding is associated to the training procedure.
When using EPLS to train networks, the natural encoding is the non-linearity used to compute the output
of each layer. However, different training and encoding strategies can be combined together. Encodings
that lead to sparse representations have proven to be effective in the literature, e.g. soft-threshold encoding
is a popular choice, which involves a tunable meta-parameter to control the desired degree of sparsity
[55].
Moreover, the use of polarity split has shown to further improve the performance of many experiments
[55]. Polarity splitting takes into account the positive and negative components of a code in the following
way:
Ol
+ = poolP(σ(Ol−1 ⋆Wl + bl))
Ol
−= poolP(σ(Ol−1 ⋆(−Wl) + bl))
Ol = [Ol
+, Ol
−],
(3)
where Ol is the concatenation of the positive and negative components of the code. Polarity split results
in doubling the number of outputs and is usually applied to the output layer of the network.
Summarizing, we train deep architectures by means of greedy layer-wise unsupervised pre-training in
conjunction with EPLS and choose a feature encoding strategy for each speciﬁc problem. Initial parameters
are randomly drawn from N(0, 10−8). Each layer is trained for a minimum of 20 epochs and a maximum
of N l
h epochs. If the relative training error decrease between epochs is very small, the training stops. The
mini-batch size is initialized to
N
Nl
h and, as is standard practice, the mini-batch size is doubled every time
the training error between two consecutive epochs increases.

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
8
agric.
planes baseball beach buildingschaparral dense
forest freeway
golf
harbor intersectionmediumhomeparkoverpasspark-lot river runway sparse
tanks
court
Fig. 3. The ground truth dataset contains 100 images for each 21 land-use classes, from which we show four samples per class.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
This section is devoted to illustrate the capabilities of the presented algorithm in different scenarios of
image classiﬁcation and segmentation found in remote sensing. We study relevant issues as the potential
of extracted features for land cover/use classiﬁcation in aerial, VHR, multi- and hyper-spectral images.
We study problems with a wide diversity of input data dimensionality, number of classes and amount of
available labeled data. Finally, we pay attention to particularly relevant issues when training the proposed
method such as the importance of depth and sparsity, the impact of the pooling stages, and the learned
hierarchical representations.
A. Aerial Scene Classiﬁcation
1) Data Collection: We validate the aerial scene classiﬁcation on the UCMerced dataset. The dataset
contains manually extracted images from the USGS National Map Urban Area Imagery collection4.
UCMerced consists of 256×256 color images from 21 aerial scene categories, with resolution one foot
per pixel. The dataset contains highly overlapping classes and has 100 images per class. Figure 3 depicts
some images per land-use class of interest.
2) Experimental setup: We follow the experimental setup described in [38] and randomly select 80
images per class for training and leave the remaining 20 ones for testing. As in [38], we report the mean
accuracy obtained over ﬁve runs.
To validate our method, we follow the experimental pipeline of [38]: (1) Extract random patches from
raw images and normalize them for contrast and brightness; (2) Train a network in a patch-based fashion by
means of an unsupervised criterion, in our case, EPLS with logistic activation; (3) Use the trained network
parameters and an encoding strategy to retrieve sparse representations; (4) Pool the upper-most feature
map into four quadrants via sum-pooling; and (5) Feed the pooled features to a linear SVM classiﬁer.
We tuned the SVM C parameter using 5-fold cross-validation. Following this pipeline, we deﬁne four
experimental settings to highlight the competitiveness of our method in terms of performance.
In the ﬁrst setting, we use the same parameters as [38] and set a receptive ﬁeld of 16 × 16 pixels with
stride 8 pixels to train a single layer network with N 1
h = 1000, for fair comparison. We train our system
on normalized raw image patches by means of EPLS with logistic non-linearity and retrieve the sparse
features by applying the network parameters with natural encoding and polarity split. Features are then
pooled into four quadrants and are fed into a linear SVM classiﬁer. As reported in [44], we achieved a
classiﬁcation performance of 74.34±3.0%, which is signiﬁcantly higher than the 62.7±1.72% reported in
[38] when pairing OMP-1 training with soft-threshold encoding (tuned to achieve maximum performance)
on normalized raw pixels. Note that when considering the result reported in [38] using OMP-1 with its
natural encoding on normalized raw pixels (13.86 ± 1.31%), the results are even more impressive.
In the second setting, we train single layer networks with varying N 1
h. In this case, we use a receptive
ﬁeld of 15×15 pixels with stride 1 pixel. As in the ﬁrst experiment, we train the systems on normalized
raw input image patches by means of EPLS and retrieve the sparse features by applying the network
4http://vision.ucmerced.edu/datasets/landuse.html

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
9
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
68
70
72
74
76
78
80
82
84
86
Accuracy (%)
Number of outputs N l
h
 
 
Our method − single layer
Our method − 2 layers
Our method − 3 layers
Cheriyadat
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
OMP−1 accuracy (%)
EPLS accuracy (%)
 
 
single layer
2 layers
3 layers
Fig. 4. Left: UCMerced accuracy given different number of outputs and different network architectures (best seen in color). Right: Comparison
of EPLS training against OMP-1 for N l
h = 100 on architectures of increasing depth (best seen in color).
parameters and a natural encoding with polarity split. Again, features are sum-pooled into four quadrants
and fed to an SVM. Figure 4 (left) shows the classiﬁcation performance of our single layer approach (solid
red line), compared to the best results reported in [38] (solid green line), for different N 1
h values. As shown
in the ﬁgure, our method outperforms the method in [38] for all N 1
h in terms of average performance in
the 5 runs, while having no training nor encoding meta-parameters to tune. Moreover, [38] requires to
train the single layer network on SIFT features to achieve such performance, whereas we train all our
networks on raw image patches normalized for contrast and brightness, i.e. we do not require any prior
feature extraction.
To strengthen the results, we report the per class users and producers for the second setting single
layer network with N 1
h = 1000 and compare the producer’s accuracy to the best results reported in [38],
[57]. Figure 5 (left) shows the users and producers obtained by our approach. The proposed method
achieves a very high sensitivity and speciﬁcity for most of the classes, in particular for chaparral, harbor,
parking lot and runway. Errors are mainly from scenes with similar spatial structures, such as buildings
and residential areas, for which the database contains three similar subclasses (medium, sparse and dense
residential areas). We also compare in Figure 5 (right) our approach to previously reported results [38],
[57]. The producers’ accuracy is in general favorable for our method: in 14 out of 21 classes, we obtained
better results than in [57], and in 15 out of 21 in [38]. These results encourage the use of the method,
and the exploitation of combined approaches in future research.
In the third setting, we experimented with deep architectures to further exploit the possibilities of our
method. In this case, we used a receptive ﬁeld of 7×7 pixels, with a stride of 1 pixel. We trained deep CNN
composed of two and three layers, respectively. We used 100,000 normalized patches to train each layer of
the network. We applied a non-overlapping max-pooling of 2×2 pixels at each representation layer, except
for the last layer, which divides the output feature map into 4 quadrants and applies sum-pooling for fair
comparison with the single layer architectures. We trained each layer by means of EPLS with a logistic
non-linearity. We applied a linear encoding (i.e. identity activation function) to each middle layer and a
rectiﬁer encoding with polarity split to the last representation layer. The last layer features, once learned,
are fed into a linear SVM. As in the second experimental setting, we trained the same architecture with
varying N l
h. Note that all these deep conﬁgurations are built by stacking layers with the same number of
units. Figure 4 (left) shows the classiﬁcation performance of both the 2-layer CNN (solid blue line) and 3-
layer CNN (solid black line), for different N l
h conﬁgurations. As shown in the ﬁgure, 2-layer CNN improve
the previous single layer results, for all N l
h. The 2-layer CNN with N l
h = 500 ∀l ∈{1, 2} outperforms the
single layer network with N 1
h = 1000, whereas the 2-layer CNN with N l
h = 1000 ∀l ∈{1, 2} achieves
84.53% accuracy, outperforming all previous results. However, when increasing the number of layers to

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
10
Agricultural
Airplane
Baseballdiamond
Beach
Buildings
Chaparral
Denseresidential
Forest
Freeway
Golfcourse
Harbor
Intersection
Mediumresidential
Mobilehomepark
Overpass
Parkinglot
River
Runway
Sparseresidential
Storagetanks
Tenniscourt
Classes
Per class users/producers [%]
 
 
Users
Producers
50
60
70
80
90
100
50
55
60
65
70
75
80
85
90
95
100
Others
Our method
Producers’ accuracy [%]
 
 
Cheridayat, 2014
Yang, 2010
Fig. 5. Results in UCMerced experiment. Left: users and producers per class obtained with the proposed method. Right: comparison of our
method to previous works in the literature in terms of producers (accuracy per class) [38], [57]. We took the results for the best algorithms
in both [57] (their Figure 8, ‘color’ model) and [38] (his Fig. 13, dense SIFT descriptors) (best seen in color).
3, the accuracy starts dropping. We argue whether the UCMerced dataset could beneﬁt from a higher
level of abstraction in its feature representation, given the (high) amount of texture present in its images.
Even if it could beneﬁt from the higher abstraction, the layer-wise pre-training might be too greedy and a
ﬁne-tuning step might be required to achieve better performance as we increase the depth of the network.
Furthermore, the receptive ﬁeld size could be appropriately tuned to improve the results; note that the
image region considered in the 3rd layer is much bigger than the ones considered by the 1st and 2nd
layers. Finally, it is worth noticing that as we increase the number of layers, the number of parameters
increases dramatically and the model becomes more prone to overﬁt.
After highlighting the impact of stacking hierarchical (deep) representations, we designed an experiment
to assess the importance of sparsity to achieve good representations. In order to highlight the relevance of
lifetime sparsity in deep scenarios, we used OMP-1 as a substitute of EPLS and reproduced the experiments
in Figure 4 (left) for N l
h = 100. Figure 4 (right) reports the obtained results. In the case of the single layer
network (red circle), EPLS achieves slightly better results than OMP-1. However, as shown in the Figure,
OMP-1 seems not to be able to take advantage of depth. When adding a second layer to the architecture
(blue circle), OMP-1 experiences a performance drop of 10.38%, whereas ELPS improves its performance
by 5.52%. When adding a third layer to the architecture (green circle), both OMP-1 and EPLS decrease
their performances. OMP-1’s performance drop is particularly dramatic (from 72.90% in the single layer
architecture to 43.14% in the 3-layer architecture). We argue this dramatic performance drop is related to
the OMP-1’s lack of lifetime sparsity, which makes the algorithm suffer from dead outputs (i.e. outputs that
never activate). While increasing the network’s depth, the dead outputs’ effect becomes more signiﬁcant
and impacts the performance of the method. Therefore, enforcing lifetime sparsity is crucial for EPLS to
achieve good performance.
B. Very high resolution (VHR) image classiﬁcation
Very high spatial resolution (VHR) has been one of the major achievements of satellite imagery of
the last decades. Sensors providing sub-metric resolution have been developed and satellites such as
QuickBird, GeoEye-1 or WorldView-3 have been or are about to be launched. These sensors provide
images that are unique in terms of spatial detail and open a wide range of challenges for geospatial
information processing. This application example studies how to extract discriminative features from
VHR imagery in an unsupervised way via the deep CNN proposed here.
1) Data Collection: To do the experiments, we used two VHR images acquired with the Quickbird
instrument. The satellite data were obtained from Quickbird II, which employs a four-band sensor with

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
11
2.4-m spatial resolution for blue, green, red and near-infrared spectral wavelengths and a 0.6-m resolu-
tion panchromatic band ( c⃝2008 Digitalglobe, all rights reserved). Images acquisitions were obtained to
coincide with seasonal base ﬂow conditions and ﬁeld surveys during late summer or early fall periods.
Each image was georeferenced using ﬁeld-collected ground control points that yielded an average root
mean square geolocation error of less than 1.5 m.
The images were acquired over Nayak-Middle Fork (1659×1331×4) of the Flathead River in the Nyack
ﬂood plain bordering Glacier National Park, Montana, and the Kol ﬂood plain (1617×1660×4), during
2008. Both images have been widely used to study and characterize the physical complexity of North
Paciﬁc Rim rivers to assist wild salmon conservation. The labeled land used classes are actually related
to such properties: shallow shore, paraﬂuvial, and orthoﬂuvial salmon habitats types [58], [59].
Fig. 6. RGB composition of the two VHR images considered for classiﬁcation: ‘Nayak - Middle Fork’ (left) and ‘Kol’ (right).
2) Experimental setup: The setting involves an independent feature extraction and classiﬁcation per
image, which is a standard scenario in remote sensing image classiﬁcation. The aim of the experiment
is to assess in two independent images the capabilities of CNN architectures to extract useful features to
capture spectral-spatial structure for habitat classiﬁcation. The experiments are conducted for a varying
number of layers and number of training examples. For the single layer architecture the receptive ﬁeld is
set to 5 × 5 pixels, while for deep architectures the receptive ﬁeld is set to 3 × 3 pixels. In all cases, each
layer has 200 outputs, i.e. N l
h = 200 ∀l. CNN are trained in a layer-wise fashion by means of EPLS with
logistic non-linearity as unsupervised criterion. A non-overlapping max-pooling of size 2 × 2 pixels is
applied to the output of the hidden layers, except for the last representation layer, which does not perform
any pooling operation. We choose a natural encoding without polarity split to map the input of each layer
to its output representation. The output of the last layer is fed to a 1-Nearest Neighbor (1-NN) classiﬁer
with Euclidean distance.
Figure 7 shows the classiﬁcation results in terms of overall accuracy (OA) and kappa statistic for the
two VHR images, as a function of the number of training samples ({0.5%, 1%, 2.5%, 5%, 10%}) and the
number of layers (1–6) considered in the model. Three main conclusions are drawn from the experiments:
1) results are improved with more training samples, as expected; 2) non-linear feature extraction (both
kPCA and CNN) outperform the linear PCA; and 3) the deeper the network, the better the results. We
observed an average gain with a deep CNN of about +10% for the Nayak image and of +20% for the Kol
image in terms of kappa statistic. Results saturate for 6 layers and for more than 5% of training samples
(this issue has been also observed in the hyper-spectral image classiﬁcation problem in the following
sections).
C. Multispectral image classiﬁcation
This experiment is concerned with the challenging problem of cloud screening using multispectral
images.

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
12
PCA kPCA
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
20
40
60
80
100
Layers
Overall accuracy, OA[%]
Nayak − Middle Fork
 
 
0.5%
1%
2.5%
5%
10%
PCA kPCA
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Layers
Kappa
Nayak − Middle Fork
 
 
0.5%
1%
2.5%
5%
10%
PCA kPCA
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
20
40
60
80
100
Layers
Overall accuracy, OA[%]
Kol
 
 
0.5%
1%
2.5%
5%
10%
PCA kPCA
1
2
3
4
5
6
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Layers
Kappa
Kol
 
 
0.5%
1%
2.5%
5%
10%
Fig. 7.
Classiﬁcation results (OA and kappa statistic) in the form of the average ± standard deviation bars over 10 realizations of the
classiﬁcation experiment in two VHR images, as a function of the number of training samples and CNN depth.
1) Data Collection: To do the experiments, we used seven images acquired with the Medium Resolution
Imaging Spectrometer (MERIS) instrument on-board the Environmental Satellite (ENVISAT). In particular,
we used images acquired over Abracos (2004), Ascension Island (2005), Azores (2004), Barcelona (2006),
Capo Verde (2005), Longyearbyen (2006) and Mongu (2003). All images are of size 321×490, and
all 16 channels were used for the feature extraction. The selected images represent different scenarios
extremely useful to validate the performance of the method, including different landscapes; soils covered
by vegetation or bare; and critical cases given the special characteristics of the induced problems: ice and
snow. Note that the images cover different characteristics as well: geographic location, date and season,
type of cloud, and surface types.
2) Experimental setup: Most approaches to tackle the problem of cloud screening rely on neural
networks or kernel machines trained with supervision: they assume the existence of a labeled training
dataset that serves to tune model parameters [60]–[64]. In our approach, more in line of the unsupervised
clustering approach presented in [65], we alternatively test the scheme of unsupervised deep feature
extraction followed by a simple 1-NN classiﬁer with Euclidean distance. The main goal is to attain a fully
unsupervised, meta-parameter free scheme.
The proposed experimental setup allows to assess the expressive power of the extracted features in a
very consistent way. Essentially, the scheme performs an image-fold cross-validation through both features
and samples. Classiﬁcation of pixels in an image needs to learn the features for that particular image: in
our setting, we apply the deep CNN learned from other images without any re-training of the weights or
ﬁlters. For classiﬁcation, the inferred features are fed to the 1-NN classiﬁer. The deep architecture was
designed such that all layers have the same number of outputs, i.e. N l
h = 120 ∀l. We used a receptive ﬁeld

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
13
of size 5 × 5 pixels. We trained the CNN layer-wise by means of EPLS with logistic activation function5,
and incorporated a max-pooling operator of size 2 × 2 after each intermediate representation. We did
not perform any kind of pooling after the last representation layer. We applied natural encoding without
polarity split to extract the features of each layer. We compare the feature extraction performed by the
proposed CNN to the feature extraction performed by PCA and kPCA. For the sake of a fair comparison,
we extracted a ﬁxed number of features in all cases: we set a number of features Nf = 120 for both PCA
and kPCA and used N l
h = 120 ∀l in the CNN case (l = 2 exhibited the best results). For kPCA, we used
an RBF kernel and set the lengthscale parameter to the average distance between all training samples, as
a reasonable estimate (note that the feature extraction is unsupervised, so there are no labels at this stage
to tune kernel parameters). We fed the extracted features to a 1-NN classiﬁer.
3) Expressive and discriminative power: Given the difﬁculty of obtaining labeled training samples
in this problem, we simulate the expressive power of the extracted features using different numbers of
training pixels for classiﬁcation. Figure 8 shows the evolution of two classiﬁcation scores with the number
of training samples: the overall accuracy (OA) and the estimated Cohen’s kappa statistic, κ. Results show
that both measures are consistent (convergence with the number of samples), and no big differences are
observed between OA and κ so the classiﬁcations are, in principle, unbiased. We noted that in general the
proposed CNN performs better than the other feature extractors, especially when few training samples are
used for classiﬁcation. This suggests that the extracted features are more discriminative and rich, which
can be compensated with the information conveyed by using more labeled examples. Interestingly, we
found that tuning the kernel parameter for kPCA becomes very complex; even though we here show the
results for the standard ‘rule of thumb’ of setting the lengthscale to the average distance between points,
we tried different other alternatives but still the simple spectral approach (no feature extraction) yielded
better results than kPCA.
10
1
10
2
50
60
70
80
90
100
# Training samples
Overall accuracy, OA[%]
Spectral
KPCA
CNN
10
1
10
2
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
# Training samples
statistic
Spectral
KPCA
CNN
Fig. 8. Classiﬁcation results (mean and standard deviation) over the seven MS images used as a function of the number of training samples.
4) Visual Validation of the results: Figure 9 shows the classiﬁcation maps obtained with a 1-NN
classiﬁer using the spectral information only, and on top of the extracted features using kPCA and
CNN. In terms of numerical results, CNN clearly outperforms the rest of approaches. In all cases, we
observed an average gain between 5-30% in κ statistic (see e.g. outstanding results on ‘Abracos’, ‘Mongu’
or ‘Longyearbyen’ scenes). It should be also noted that in some particular cases (e.g. ‘Azores’, ‘Capo
Verde’, and ‘Longyearbyen’) CNN does only signiﬁcantly improve the results over kPCA, not the spectral
approach, which is probably due to the low efﬁciency in extracting spatially relevant features over areas
highly affected by clouds over snowy mountains (that lead to non-interesting features), sunglint (as in the
east part of Capo Verde) or very easy images as in the case of compact clouds over sea (Azores scene).
In some other cases with similar conditions (e.g. sunglint in Ascension island) the gain obtained by
the proposed CNN is noticeable (+6% over spectral features and +12% over kPCA), especially because
5We also tried with a linear activation function but the extracted features were less performing.

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
14
Abracos
Spectral, κ=0.57
KPCA, κ=0.50
NNET, κ=0.81
Ascension Island
Spectral, κ=0.26
KPCA, κ=0.21
NNET, κ=0.33
Azores
Spectral, κ=0.93
KPCA, κ=0.83
NNET, κ=0.94
Barcelona
Spectral, κ=0.66
KPCA, κ=0.58
NNET, κ=0.72
Capo Verde
Spectral, κ=0.64
KPCA, κ=0.53
NNET, κ=0.65
Longyearbyen
Spectral, κ=0.73
KPCA, κ=0.51
NNET, κ=0.73
Mongu
Spectral, κ=0.40
KPCA, κ=0.35
NNET, κ=0.58
Fig. 9.
Classiﬁcation maps for the different MERIS images obtained by a 1-NN classiﬁer working with pure spectral information only
(no feature extraction was done, just use the raw spectral signature for classiﬁcation), and the extracted features via kPCA and CNN. The
obtained κ statistic is shown on top of the maps.

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
15
of the high rate of positive detections in the part of the scene not affected by the sunglint. Another
interesting case of study is the Barcelona image in which similar maps are obtained by all methods;
nevertheless CNN yields a lower false alarm rate in compact structures (southern and northern big clouds)
thus demonstrating that the spatial-spectral information has been very well captured. A more dramatic
gain showing this particularity of the method is shown in the Abracos and Mongu scenes, where +30%
and 18-23% average gain is attained by CNN, respectively, thanks to a reduced false alarm rate in clouds
over ﬂat landscapes.
D. Hyperspectral image classiﬁcation
This section illustrates the performance of the proposed method in a challenging hyper-spectral image
classiﬁcation problem. We compare the features extracted by CNN of varying depth to the ones extracted
by PCA and kPCA in terms of expressive power, classiﬁcation accuracy, and robustness to the number
of labeled examples.
RGB Composition
Ground truth
Fig. 10. Color composition (left) and the available reference data (right) for the AVIRIS Indian Pines data set.
1) Data Collection: This battery of experiments are conducted on the well-known AVIRIS Indiana’s
Indian Pines test site acquired in June 1992. A small portion (145×145 pixels) of the original image has
been extensively used as a benchmark image for comparing classiﬁers6. Here, however, we consider the
whole image, which consists of 614 × 2166 pixels and 220 spectral bands, with a spatial resolution of 20
m. This data set represents a very challenging land-cover classiﬁcation scenario.
From the 58 different land-cover classes available in the original ground truth, we discarded 20 classes
since an insufﬁcient number of training samples were available7, and thus, this fact would dismiss the
planned experimental analysis. The background pixels were not considered for classiﬁcation purposes. We
also removed 20 bands that are noisy or covering the region of water absorption, ﬁnally working with
200 spectral bands. See Fig. 10 for a RGB composite and the labeled ground truth of the image.
6ftp://ftp.ecn.purdue.edu/biehl/MultiSpec/92AV3C.lan
7i.e., less than 1000 samples

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
16
(a)
(b)
5
10
20
50
100
200
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Number of features
κ
 
 
PCA, 1x1
PCA, 3x3
PCA, 5x5
KPCA, 1x1
KPCA, 3x3
KPCA, 5x5
NNET, 1x1
NNET, 3x3
NNET, 5x5
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Number of layers
κ
 
 
No max−pooling
Max−pooling
(c)
(d)
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Rate of training samples/class
κ
 
 
L2
L3
L4
L5
L6
L7
100
1100
2100
3100
4100
0%
2%
4%
6%
8%
10%
12%
14%
16%
18%
20%
Fig. 11. Classiﬁcation accuracy estimated with the kappa statistic for (a) several numbers of features, spatial extent of the receptive ﬁelds
(for the single layer network) or the included Gaussian ﬁltered features (for PCA and kPCA) using 30% of data for training; (b) impact of the
number of layers on the networks with and without pooling stages; (c) for different rates of training samples, {1%, 5%, 10%, 20%, 30%, 50%},
with pooling; and (d) percentage of ground truth pixels as a function of labeled region areas (see text for details).
2) Experimental setup: We extract different numbers of features Nf = {5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200} by
means of PCA and kPCA and design CNN architectures of varying depth with the same number of outputs
per layer N l
h = {5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200} ∀l. We evaluate the feature extraction in all scenarios varying the
rates of training samples per class, {1%, 5%, 10%, 20%, 30%, 50%}. For each deep architecture, we chose
different receptive ﬁeld sizes (1 × 1, 3 × 3 or 5 × 5), using the same receptive ﬁeld for all layers, to study
the relevance of spatial information. Moreover, we train the layers both with and without a max-pooling
operation to assess the effect of the downscaling factor. We train CNN in a layer-wise fashion by means
of EPLS with logistic non-linearity. We then use a natural encoding without polarity split to extract the
network’s features. For kPCA, we use an RBF kernel and set the lengthscale parameter to the average
distance between all training samples. In all cases, we feed extracted features to a 1-NN classiﬁer with
Euclidean distance, which is used to measure the performance of each system by means of the estimated
Cohen’s kappa statistic, κ, in an independent test set made of all remaining examples.
3) Expressive and discriminative power: Figure 11(a) shows the κ statistic for several numbers of
extracted features (Nf and N 1
h, respectively) using PCA, kPCA and single layer networks. Both kPCA
and the networks yield poor results when a low number of features are extracted, and drastically improve
their performance for more than 50 features. Single layer networks stick around κ = 0.3 for pixel-wise
classiﬁcation, even with increased number of features. Nevertheless, there is a relevant gain when spatial
information is considered. The best results are obtained for N 1
h = 200 features and 5×5 receptive ﬁelds.
With these encouraging results, we decided to train deeper CNN using 30% of the available training
samples per class and N l
h = 200 output features per layer. Results with and without the max-pooling
operation are shown in Fig. 11(b). Two main conclusions can be drawn: ﬁrst, deeper networks improve

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
17
the accuracy enormously (the 6-layer network reaches the highest accuracy of κ = 0.84), and second,
including the max-pooling operation after each intermediate layer revealed to be extremely beneﬁcial. We
should stress that this result clearly outperforms the previously reported state-of-the-art result (κ = 0.75)
obtained with a SVM on the same experimental setting [66].
4) Robustness w.r.t. number of training labels: Another question to be addressed is the robustness of
the features in terms of number of training examples. Figure 11(c) highlights that using a few supervised
samples to train a deep CNN can provide better results than using far more supervised samples to train
a single layer one. Note, for instance, that the 6-layer network using 5% samples/class outperforms the
best single layer network using 30% of the samples/class.
5) Need and limitation of spatial pooling: Special attention should be devoted to the 7-layer network.
In this case, the accuracy decreases since the potential contribution of an additional layer is strongly
counterbalanced by the heavily reduced spatial resolution of the additional max-pooling. The topmost
layer has no max-pooling since it is used as output. To corroborate this explanation, we created the
histogram in Figure 11(d), which shows the percentage of ground truth pixels as a function of labeled
region areas. As it can also be seen in Figure 10(right), the labeled regions are mainly rectangular with
an average area around 500 pixels. Vertical lines in Figure 11(d) show the theoretical spatial resolution
in the case the output layer is resized using a nearest neighbor interpolation. As it can be observed, when
using 7 layers (L7, green), the resolution is too low to capture regions smaller than 4096 pixels (64×64).
It has to be noted that we perform the upscaling of the output layer by means of a bilinear interpolation;
this explains why, despite the lower spatial resolution, the result using 6 layers is still superior to the one
with 5 layers.
6) Learned features: An important aspect of the proposed deep architectures lies in the fact that they
typically give rise to compact hierarchical representations. The best three features extracted by the networks
according to the mutual information with labels are depicted in Fig. 12 for a subset of the whole image.
It is worth stressing that the deeper we go, the more complicated and abstract features we retrieve, except
for the seventh layer that provides spatially over-regularized features due to the downscaling impact of
the max-pooling stages. Interestingly, it is also observed that, the deeper structures we use, the higher
spatial decorrelation of the best features we obtain.
Fig. 12. Best three features (in rows) according to the mutual information with the labels for the outputs of the different layers 1st to 7th
(in columns) for a subregion of the whole image.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
We introduced deep learning for unsupervised feature extraction of remote sensing images. The proposed
approach consists of using a convolutional neural network trained with an unsupervised algorithm that

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
18
promotes two types of feature sparsity: population and lifetime sparsity. The algorithm trains the network
parameters to learn hierarchical sparse representations of the input images that can be fed to a simple
classiﬁer. We should stress that the unsupervised learning of features is computationally very efﬁcient,
having a computational cost equal to OMP-1 while clearly outperforming it. Furthermore, the feature
extraction stage is meta-parameter free, whereas the classiﬁcation stage involves either one or zero free-
parameters. Note that we applied the linear SVM classiﬁer with one tunable parameter in experiment
Section III-A for fair comparison with the state-of-the-art. We trained deep convolutional networks in a
greedy layer-wise fashion and performed experiments to analyze the inﬂuence of depth and pooling of
such networks on a wide variety of remote sensing images of different spatial and spectral resolutions,
from multi- and hyper-spectral images, to very high geometrical resolution problems.
Results reveal that the trained networks are very effective at encoding spatio-spectral information of
the images. Experiments showed that (1) including spatial information is essential in order to avoid poor
performance in single layer networks; (2) combining high numbers of output features and max-pooling
steps in deep architectures is crucial to achieve excellent results; and (3) adding new layers to the deep
architecture improves the classiﬁcation score substantially, until the repeated max-pooling steps heavily
reduce the features spatial resolution and/or the number of parameters becomes too large, thus inducing
a form of overﬁtting.
Further work is tied to assessing generalization of the encoded features in multi-temporal and multi-
angular image settings, as well as to explore the suitability of the extracted features to perform biophysical
parameter retrieval. Moreover, it would be interesting to analyze the feature’s degree of sparsity required
at each layer to achieve a discriminative system w.r.t. the classiﬁer and adapt the EPLS to train towards the
desired degree of sparsity at each layer. Furthermore, to avoid overﬁtting while increasing the number of
parameters, algorithms such as drop-out [67] could be tested. Finally, since greedy layer-wise pre-training
has shown to require a supervised ﬁnetuning step to make the network parameters more task speciﬁc,
and thus improve the network’s performance, further investigation should be devoted to ﬁnd alternatives
to train deep networks without relying on large amounts of labeled data, or even the more challenging
task of being able to cope with completely unsupervised settings. Given the large amounts of processing
required, algorithms should aim at remaining computationally efﬁcient, especially at training time.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors wish to thank Antonio Plaza from the University of Extremadura, Spain, for kindly
providing the AVIRIS dataset, and Prof. Diane Whited at the University of Montana for the VHR imagery
used in some experiments of this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Liang, Quantitative Remote Sensing of Land Surfaces.
New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2004.
[2] T. M. Lillesand, R. W. Kiefer, and J. Chipman, Remote Sensing and Image Interpretation.
New York: John Wiley & Sons, 2008.
[3] G. Shaw and D. Manolakis, “Signal processing for hyperspectral image exploitation,” IEEE Signal Proc. Magazine, vol. 50, pp. 12–16,
Jan 2002.
[4] G. Camps-Valls, D. Tuia, L. Bruzzone, and J. Atli Benediktsson, “Advances in hyperspectral image classiﬁcation: Earth monitoring
with statistical learning methods,” Signal Processing Magazine, IEEE, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 45–54, Jan 2014.
[5] G. Camps-Valls, D. Tuia, L. G´omez-Chova, S. Jim´enez, and J. Malo, Eds., Remote Sensing Image Processing.
LaPorte, CO, USA:
Morgan & Claypool Publishers, Sept 2011.
[6] R. Willett, M. Duarte, M. Davenport, and R. Baraniuk, “Sparsity and structure in hyperspectral imaging : Sensing, reconstruction, and
target detection,” Signal Processing Magazine, IEEE, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 116–126, Jan 2014.
[7] W.-K. Ma, J. Bioucas-Dias, T.-H. Chan, N. Gillis, P. Gader, A. Plaza, A. Ambikapathi, and C.-Y. Chi, “A signal processing perspective
on hyperspectral unmixing: Insights from remote sensing,” Signal Processing Magazine, IEEE, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 67–81, Jan 2014.
[8] G. Arce, D. Brady, L. Carin, H. Arguello, and D. Kittle, “Compressive coded aperture spectral imaging: An introduction,” Signal
Processing Magazine, IEEE, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 105–115, Jan 2014.
[9] D. Roy, M. Wulder, T. Loveland, W. C.E., R. Allen, M. Anderson, D. Helder, J. Irons, D. Johnson, R. Kennedy, T. Scambos, C. Schaaf,
J. Schott, Y. Sheng, E. Vermote, A. Belward, R. Bindschadler, W. Cohen, F. Gao, J. Hipple, P. Hostert, J. Huntington, C. Justice,
A. Kilic, V. Kovalskyy, Z. Lee, L. Lymburner, J. Masek, J. McCorkel, Y. Shuai, R. Trezza, J. Vogelmann, R. Wynne, and Z. Zhu,
“Landsat-8: Science and product vision for terrestrial global change research,” Remote Sensing of Environment, vol. 145, no. 0, pp.
154 – 172, 2014.

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
19
[10] N. Longbotham, F. Paciﬁci, B. Baugh, and G. Camps-Valls, “Prelaunch assessment of worldview-3 information content,” in Whispers
2014, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2014, pp. 479–486.
[11] M. Drusch, U. Del Bello, S. Carlier, O. Colin, V. Fernandez, F. Gascon, B. Hoersch, C. Isola, P. Laberinti, P. Martimort, A. Meygret,
F. Spoto, O. Sy, F. Marchese, and P. Bargellini, “Sentinel-2: ESA’s Optical High-Resolution Mission for GMES Operational Services,”
Remote Sensing of Environment, vol. 120, pp. 25–36, 2012.
[12] C. Donlon, B. Berruti, A. Buongiorno, M.-H. Ferreira, P. F´em´enias, J. Frerick, P. Goryl, U. Klein, H. Laur, C. Mavrocordatos, J. Nieke,
H. Rebhan, B. Seitz, J. Stroede, and R. Sciarra, “The Global Monitoring for Environment and Security (GMES) Sentinel-3 mission,”
Remote Sensing of Environment, vol. 120, pp. 37–57, 2012.
[13] T. Stufﬂer, C. Kaufmann, S. Hofer, K. Farster, G. Schreier, A. Mueller, A. Eckardt, H. Bach, B. Penn´e, U. Benz, and R. Haydn, “The
EnMAP hyperspectral imager-An advanced optical payload for future applications in Earth observation programmes,” Acta Astronautica,
vol. 61, no. 1-6, pp. 115–120, 2007.
[14] D. Roberts, D. Quattrochi, G. Hulley, S. Hook, and R. Green, “Synergies between VSWIR and TIR data for the urban environment: An
evaluation of the potential for the Hyperspectral Infrared Imager (HyspIRI) Decadal Survey mission,” Remote Sensing of Environment,
vol. 117, pp. 83–101, 2012.
[15] S. Kraft, U. Del Bello, M. Bouvet, M. Drusch, and J. Moreno, “Flex: Esa’s earth explorer 8 candidate mission,” 2012, pp. 7125–7128.
[16] G. Camps-Valls and L. Bruzzone, “Kernel-based methods for hyperspectral image classiﬁcation,” Geoscience and Remote Sensing,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1351–1362, June 2005.
[17] G. Camps-Valls and L. Bruzzone, Eds., Kernel methods for Remote Sensing Data Analysis.
UK: Wiley & Sons, Dec 2009.
[18] I. Jolliffe, Principal component analysis.
Springer, 2002.
[19] J. A. Lee and M. Verleysen, Nonlinear dimensionality reduction.
Springer, 2007.
[20] C. Bachmann, T. Ainsworth, and R. Fusina, “Improved manifold coordinate representations of large-scale hyperspectral scenes,” IEEE
Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 2786–2803, 2006.
[21] J. Arenas-Garc´ıa, K. B. Petersen, G. Camps-Valls, and L. K. Hansen, “Kernel multivariate analysis framework for supervised subspace
learning: A tutorial on linear and kernel multivariate methods,” IEEE Sig. Proc. Mag., vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 16–29, 2013.
[22] G. E. Hinton and R. R. Salakhutdinov, “Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural networks,” Science, vol. 313, no. 5786, pp.
504–507, July 2006.
[23] V. Laparra, G. Camps, and J. Malo, “Iterative gaussianization: from ICA to random rotations,” IEEE Trans. Neur. Nets., vol. 22, no. 4,
pp. 537–549, 2011.
[24] A. Baraldi and F. Parmiggiani, “A neural network for unsupervised categorization of multivalued input patterns: an application to
satellite image clustering,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 305–316, Mar 1995.
[25] S. Ghosh, L. Bruzzone, S. Patra, F. Bovolo, and A. Ghosh, “A context-sensitive technique for unsupervised change detection based on
hopﬁeld-type neural networks,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 778–789, March 2007.
[26] F. Del Frate, G. Licciardi, and R. Duca, “Autoassociative neural networks for features reduction of hyperspectral data,” in Hyperspectral
Image and Signal Processing: Evolution in Remote Sensing, 2009. WHISPERS ’09. First Workshop on, Aug 2009, pp. 1–4.
[27] G. Licciardi, F. Del Frate, and R. Duca, “Feature reduction of hyperspectral data using autoassociative neural networks algorithms,” in
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium,2009 IEEE International,IGARSS 2009, vol. 1, July 2009, pp. I–176–I–179.
[28] C. Vaduva, I. Gavat, and M. Datcu, “Deep learning in very high resolution remote sensing image information mining communication
concept,” in Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO), 2012 Proceedings of the 20th European, Aug 2012, pp. 2506–2510.
[29] V. Mnih and G. Hinton, “Learning to label aerial images from noisy data,” 2012.
[30] X. Chen, S. Xiang, C.-L. Liu, and C.-H. Pan, “Vehicle detection in satellite images by hybrid deep convolutional neural networks,”
IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 11, no. 10, pp. 1797–1801, 2014.
[31] Y. Chen, Z. Lin, X. Zhao, G. Wang, and Y. Gu, “Deep learning-based classiﬁcation of hypersepctral data,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl.
Earth Observ., vol. 7, no. 6, pp. 2094–2107, 2014.
[32] Z. Wang, N. Nasrabadi, and T. Huang, “Spatial-spectral classiﬁcation of hyperspectral images using discriminative dictionary designed
by learning vector quantization,” IEEE Trans. Geosc. Rem. Sens., vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–15, 2013.
[33] S. Yang, H. Jin, M. Wang, Y. Ren, and L. Jiao, “Data-driven compressive sampling and learning sparse coding for hyperspectral image
classiﬁcation,” IEEE Geosc. Rem. Sens. Lett., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 479–483, Feb 2014.
[34] S. Li, H. Yin, and L. Fang, “Remote sensing image fusion via sparse representations over learned dictionaries,” IEEE Trans. Geosc.
Rem. Sens., vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 4779–4789, Sept 2013.
[35] D. Dai and W. Yang, “Satellite image classiﬁcation via two-layer sparse coding with biased image representation,” IEEE Geosc. Rem.
Sens. Lett., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 173–176, Jan 2011.
[36] I. Rigas, G. Economou, and S. Fotopoulos, “Low-level visual saliency with application on aerial imagery,” IEEE Geosc. Rem. Sens.
Lett., vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 1389–1393, Nov 2013.
[37] H. Sun, X. Sun, H. Wang, Y. Li, and X. Li, “Automatic target detection in high-resolution remote sensing images using spatial sparse
coding bag-of-words model,” IEEE Geosc. Rem. Sens. Lett., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 109–113, Jan 2012.
[38] A. Cheriyadat, “Unsupervised feature learning for aerial scene classiﬁcation,” IEEE Trans. Geosc. Rem. Sens., vol. 52, no. 1, pp.
439–451, Jan 2014.
[39] Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haffner, “Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition,” in Intelligent Signal
Processing, S. Haykin and B. Kosko, Eds.
IEEE Press, 2001, pp. 306–351. [Online]. Available: http://www.iro.umontreal.ca/∼lisa/
pointeurs/lecun-01a.pdf
[40] G. E. Hinton, S. Osindero, and Y.-W. Teh, “A fast learning algorithm for deep belief nets,” Neural Computation, vol. 18, no. 7, pp.
1527–1554, July 2006.
[41] Y. Bengio, P. Lamblin, D. Popovici, and H. Larochelle, “Greedy layer-wise training of deep networks,” in NIPS, 2006, pp. 153–160.

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
20
[42] H. Lee, R. Grosse, R. Ranganath, and A. Y. Ng, “Convolutional deep belief networks for scalable unsupervised learning of hierarchical
representations,” in Proceedings of the 26th Annual International Conference on Machine Learning, ser. ICML ’09.
New York, NY,
USA: ACM, 2009, pp. 609–616. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1553374.1553453
[43] J. Masci, U. Meier, D. Cires¸an, and J. Schmidhuber, “Stacked convolutional auto-encoders for hierarchical feature extraction,” in
Proceedings of the 21th International Conference on Artiﬁcial Neural Networks - Volume Part I, ser. ICANN’11.
Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag, 2011, pp. 52–59. [Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=2029556.2029563
[44] A. Romero, P. Radeva, and C. Gatta, “Meta-parameter free unsupervised sparse feature learning,” Accepted to IEEE Transaction on
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. -, pp. –, 2014.
[45] Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, G. Orr, and K. M¨uller, “Efﬁcient backprop,” in Neural Networks: Tricks of the Trade.
Springer Berlin, 1998,
pp. 9–50.
[46] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton, “Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks,” in Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 25, F. Pereira, C. Burges, L. Bottou, and K. Weinberger, Eds., 2012, pp. 1097–1105.
[47] P. Sermanet, D. Eigen, X. Zhang, M. Mathieu, R. Fergus, and Y. LeCun, “Overfeat: Integrated recognition, localization and detection
using convolutional networks,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR2014).
CBLS, April 2014. [Online].
Available: http://openreview.net/document/d332e77d-459a-4af8-b3ed-55ba
[48] J. Ngiam, P. W. Koh, Z. Chen, S. Bhaskar, and A. Y. Ng, “Sparse ﬁltering,” in NIPS, 2011, pp. 1125–1133.
[49] K. Kavukcuoglu, P. Sermanet, Y. Boureau, K. Gregor, M. Mathieu, and Y. LeCun, “Learning convolutional feature hierachies for visual
recognition,” in NIPS, 2010.
[50] Y. Bengio, A. C. Courville, and P. Vincent, “Representation learning: A review and new perspectives,” IEEE TPAMI, vol. 35, no. 8,
pp. 1798–1828, 2013.
[51] D. J. Field, “What is the goal of sensory coding?” Neural Computation, vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 559–601, 1994.
[52] B. Olshausen and D. J. Field, “Sparse coding with an overcomplete basis set: a strategy employed by V1?” Vision Research, vol. 37,
no. 23, pp. 3311–3325, 1997.
[53] M. A. Ranzato, C. Poultney, S. Chopra, and Y. Lecun, “Efﬁcient learning of sparse representations with an energy-based model,” in
NIPS, 2006, pp. 1137–1144.
[54] B. Willmore and D. J. Tolhurst, “Characterizing the sparseness of neural codes.” Network, vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 255–270, 2001.
[55] A. Coates and A. Ng, “The importance of encoding versus training with sparse coding and vector quantization,” in ICML, 2011, pp.
921–928.
[56] T. Schaul, S. Zhang, and Y. LeCun, “No More Pesky Learning Rates,” in ICML, 2013.
[57] Y. Yang and S. Newsam, “Bag-of-visual-words and spatial extensions for land-use classiﬁcation,” in ACM GIS10, San Jose, CA, USA,
2010.
[58] A. C. Hill, T. S. Bansak, B. K. Ellis, and J. A. Stanford, “Merits and limits of ecosystem protection for conserving wild salmon in a
northern coastal british columbia river,” Ecology and Society, vol. 15, no. 2, 2010.
[59] D. C. Whited, J. S. Kimball, M. Lorang, and J. Stanford, “Estimation of juvenile salmon habitat in paciﬁc rim rivers using multiscalar
remote sensing and geospatial analysis,” River Res. Applic., vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 207–220, 2011.
[60] B. Tian, M. Shaikh, M. Azimi-Sadjadi, T. Haar, and D. Reinke, “A study of cloud classiﬁcation with neural networks using spectral
and textural features,” Neural Networks, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 138–151, Jan 1999.
[61] T. McIntire and J. Simpson, “Arctic sea ice, cloud, water, and lead classiﬁcation using neural networks and 1.6- mu;m data,” Geoscience
and Remote Sensing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 1956–1972, Sep 2002.
[62] J. Arriaza, F. Rojas, M. L´opez, and M. Cant´on, “An automatic cloud-masking system using backpro neural nets for avhrr scenes,”
Geoscience and Remote Sensing, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 826–831, April 2003.
[63] L. G´omez-Chova, G. Camps-Valls, L. Bruzzone, and J. Calpe-Maravilla, “Mean map kernel methods for semisupervised cloud
classiﬁcation,” IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 207–220, 2010.
[64] L. G´omez-Chova, G. Camps-Valls, J. Mu˜noz-Mar´ı, and J. Calpe, “Semi-supervised image classiﬁcation with Laplacian support vector
machines,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Lett., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 336–340, 2008.
[65] L. G´omez-Chova, G. Camps-Valls, J. Calpe, L. Guanter, and J. Moreno, “Cloud-screening algorithm for ENVISAT/MERIS multispectral
images,” IEEE Trans. Geosc. Rem. Sens., vol. 45, no. 12, Part 2, pp. 4105–4118, Dec 2007.
[66] F. Garc´ıa-V´ılchez, J. Mu˜noz-Mar´ı and, M. Zortea, I. Blanes, V. Gonz´alez-Ruiz, G. Camps-Valls, A. Plaza, and J. Serra-Sagrist`a and,
“On the impact of lossy compression on hyperspectral image classiﬁcation and unmixing,” IEEE Geosc. Rem. Sens. Lett., vol. 8, no. 2,
pp. 253–257, Mar 2011.
[67] G. E. Hinton, N. Srivastava, A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and R. Salakhutdinov, “Improving neural networks by preventing co-adaptation
of feature detectors,” CoRR, vol. abs/1207.0580, 2012.
Adriana Romero Adriana Romero received the degree in Computer Engineering in 2010 from Universitat Aut`onoma
de Barcelona, and the Master degree in Artiﬁcial Intelligence from Universitat Polit`ecnica de Catalunya in 2012. She is
currently a PhD candidate at Universitat de Barcelona, working on assisting the training of very deep neural networks.
Her main research interests revolve around unsupervised and supervised deep learning and computer vision. More
broadly, she is interested in the process of learning in areas that can deepen the understanding of the human nature,
such as perception.

c⃝2015 IEEE. PUBLISHED IN IEEE. DOI: 10.1109/TGRS.2015.2478379.
21
Carlo Gatta Carlo Gatta obtained the degree in Electronic Engineering in 2001 from the Universit`a degli Studi di
Brescia (Italy). In 2006 he received the Ph.D. in Computer Science at the Universit`a degli Studi di Milano (Italy),
with a thesis on perceptually based color image processing. In September 2007 he joined the Computer Vision Center
at Universitat Automona de Barcelona (UAB) as a postdoc researcher working mainly on medical imaging. He is
member of the Computer Vision Center and the BCN Perceptual Computing Lab. He is currently a senior researcher
at the Computer Vision Center, under the Ramon y Cajal program. His main research interests are image processing,
medical imaging, computer vision, machine learning, contextual learning and unsupervised deep learning.
Gustau Camps-Valls (M’04, SM’07) received a B.Sc. degree in Physics (1996), in Electronics Engineering (1998),
and a Ph.D. degree in Physics (2002) all from the Universitat de Val`encia. He is currently an associate professor
(hab. Full professor) in the Department of Electronics Engineering. His is a research coordinator in the Image and
Signal Processing (ISP) group, http://isp.uv.es. He has been Visiting Researcher at the Remote Sensing Laboratory
(Univ. Trento, Italy) in 2002, the Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics (T¨ubingen, Germany) in 2009,
and as Invited Professor at the Laboratory of Geographic Information Systems of the ´Ecole Polytechnique F´ed´erale
de Lausanne (Lausanne, Switzerland) in 2013. He is interested in the development of machine learning algorithms
for geoscience and remote sensing data analysis. He is an author of 120 journal papers, more than 150 conference
papers, 20 international book chapters, and editor of the books “Kernel methods in bioengineering, signal and image
processing” (IGI, 2007), “Kernel methods for remote sensing data analysis” (Wiley & Sons, 2009), and “Remote Sensing Image Processing”
(MC, 2011). He’s a co-editor of the forthcoming book “Digital Signal Processing with Kernel Methods” (Wiley & sons, 2015). He holds a
Hirsch’s h index h = 40, entered the ISI list of Highly Cited Researchers in 2011, and Thomson Reuters ScienceWatch
R
⃝identiﬁed one of
his papers on kernel-based analysis of hyperspectral images as a Fast Moving Front research. In 2015, he got an ERC consolidator grant
on statistical learning for Earth observation data analysis. He is a referee and Program Committee member of many international journals
and conferences. Since 2007 he is member of the Data Fusion technical committee of the IEEE GRSS, and since 2009 of the Machine
Learning for Signal Processing Technical Committee of the IEEE SPS. He is member of the MTG-IRS Science Team (MIST) of EUMETSAT.
He is Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING LETTERS, and IEEE
GEOSCIENCE AND REMOTE SENSING LETTERS. Visit http://www.uv.es/gcamps for more information.