International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 68– No.13, April 2013 
13 
A Survey of Text Similarity Approaches 
 
Wael H. Gomaa 
Computer Science Department 
Modern Academy for Computer Science & 
Management Technology 
Cairo, Egypt 
 
Aly A. Fahmy 
Computer Science Department 
Faculty of Computers and Information,  
Cairo University 
Cairo, Egypt 
 
ABSTRACT 
Measuring 
the 
similarity 
between 
words, 
sentences, 
paragraphs and documents is an important component in 
various tasks such as information retrieval, document 
clustering, word-sense disambiguation, automatic essay 
scoring, short answer grading, machine translation and text 
summarization. This survey discusses the existing works on 
text 
similarity 
through 
partitioning 
them 
into 
three 
approaches; String-based, Corpus-based and Knowledge-
based similarities. Furthermore, samples of combination 
between these similarities are presented. 
General Terms 
Text Mining, Natural Language Processing. 
Keywords 
Text Similarity, Semantic Similarity, String-Based Similarity, 
Corpus-Based 
Similarity, 
Knowledge-Based 
Similarity. 
 
1. INTRODUCTION 
 
Text similarity measures play an increasingly important role 
in text related research and applications in tasks such as 
information retrieval, text classification, document clustering, 
topic detection, topic tracking, questions generation, question 
answering, essay scoring, short answer scoring, machine 
translation, text summarization and others. Finding similarity 
between words is a fundamental part of text similarity which 
is then used as a primary stage for sentence, paragraph and 
document similarities. Words can be similar in two ways 
lexically and semantically. Words are similar lexically if they 
have a similar character sequence. Words are similar 
semantically if they have the same thing, are opposite of each 
other, used in the same way, used in the same context and one 
is a type of another. Lexical similarity is introduced in this 
survey though different String-Based algorithms, Semantic 
similarity 
is 
introduced 
through 
Corpus-Based 
and 
Knowledge-Based algorithms. String-Based measures operate 
on string sequences and character composition. A string 
metric is a metric that measures similarity or dissimilarity 
(distance) between two text strings for approximate string 
matching or comparison. Corpus-Based similarity is a 
semantic similarity measure that determines the similarity 
between words according to information gained from large 
corpora. Knowledge-Based similarity is a semantic similarity 
measure that determines the degree of similarity between 
words using information derived from semantic networks. The 
most popular for each type will be presented briefly.  
This paper is organized as follows: Section two presents 
String-Based algorithms by partitioning them into two types 
character-based and term-based measures. Sections three and 
four 
introduce 
Corpus-Based 
and 
knowledge-Based 
algorithms respectively. Samples of combinations between 
similarity algorithms are introduced in section five and finally 
section six presents conclusion of the survey. 
 
 
Fig 1: String-Based Similarity Measures 
2. String-Based Similarity 
 
String similarity measures operate on string sequences and 
character composition. A string metric is a metric that 
String_Based 
Character-
Based 
LCS 
Damerau-
Levenshtein 
Jaro 
Jaro-Winkler 
Needleman-
Wunsch 
Smith- 
Waterman 
N-gram
 
Term-Based 
Block 
Distance 
Cosine 
Similarity 
Dice's 
Coefficient 
Euclidean 
Distance 
Jaccard 
Similarity 
Matching 
Coefficient
 
Overlap 
Coefficient 

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 68– No.13, April 2013 
14 
measures similarity or dissimilarity (distance) between two 
text strings for approximate string matching or comparison.  
This survey represents the most popular string similarity 
measures which were implemented in SimMetrics package 
[1]. As shown in figure 1, fourteen algorithms will be 
introduced briefly; Seven of them are character based while 
the other are term-based distance measures. 
 
2.1 Character-Based Similarity Measures 
 
Longest Common SubString (LCS) algorithm considers the 
similarity between two strings is based on the length of 
contiguous chain of characters that exist in both strings. 
Damerau-Levenshtein defines distance between two strings 
by counting the minimum number of operations needed to 
transform one string into the other, where an operation is 
defined as an insertion, deletion, or substitution of a single 
character, or a transposition of two adjacent characters [2, 3]. 
Jaro  is based on the number and order of the common 
characters between two strings; it takes into account typical 
spelling deviations and mainly used in the area of record 
linkage.  [4, 5]. 
Jaro–Winkler is an extension of Jaro distance; it uses 
a prefix scale which gives more favorable ratings to strings 
that match from the beginning for a set prefix length [6]. 
Needleman-Wunsch algorithm is an example of dynamic 
programming, and was the first application of dynamic 
programming to biological sequence comparison. It performs 
a global alignment to find the best alignment over the entire of 
two sequences.  It is suitable when the two sequences are of 
similar length, with a significant degree of similarity 
throughout [7]. 
Smith-Waterman 
is 
another 
example 
of 
dynamic 
programming. It performs  a local alignment to find the best 
alignment over the conserved domain of two sequences. It is 
useful for dissimilar sequences that are suspected to contain 
regions of similarity or similar sequence motifs within their 
larger sequence context [8]. 
N-gram is a sub-sequence of n items from a given sequence 
of text. N-gram similarity algorithms compare the n-grams 
from each character or word in two strings. Distance is 
computed by dividing the number of similar n-grams by 
maximal number of n-grams [9]. 
 
2.2 Term-based Similarity Measures 
 
Block Distance is also known as Manhattan distance, boxcar 
distance, absolute value distance, L1 distance, city block 
distance and Manhattan distance. It computes the distance that 
would be traveled to get from one data point to the other if a 
grid-like path is followed. The Block distance between two 
items is the sum of the differences of their corresponding 
components [10]. 
Cosine similarity is a measure of similarity between two 
vectors of an inner product space that measures the cosine of 
the angle between them.  
Dice’s coefficient is defined as twice the number of common 
terms in the compared strings divided by the total number of 
terms in both strings [11]. 
Euclidean distance or L2 distance is the square root of the 
sum of squared differences between corresponding elements 
of   the two vectors.  
 
 
Jaccard similarity is computed as the number of shared 
terms over the number of all unique terms in both strings [12]. 
Matching Coefficient is a very simple vector based approach 
which simply counts the number of similar terms, 
(dimensions), on which both vectors are non zero.  
Overlap coefficient is similar to the Dice's coefficient, but 
considers two strings a full match if one is a subset of the 
other. 
 
3. Corpus-Based Similarity 
 
Corpus-Based similarity is a semantic similarity measure that 
determines the similarity between words according to 
information gained from large corpora. A Corpus is a large 
collection of written or spoken texts that is used for language 
research. Figure 2 shows the Corpus-Based similarity 
measures. 
Hyperspace Analogue to Language (HAL) [13,14] creates a 
semantic space from word co-occurrences. A word-by-word 
matrix is formed with each matrix element is the strength of 
association between the word represented by the row and the 
word represented by the column. The user of the algorithm 
then has the option to drop out low entropy columns from the 
matrix. As the text is analyzed, a focus word is placed at the 
beginning of a ten word window that records which 
neighboring words are counted as co-occurring. Matrix values 
are accumulated by weighting the co-occurrence inversely 
proportional to the distance from the focus word; closer 
neighboring words are thought to reflect more of the focus 
word's semantics and so are weighted higher. HAL also 
records word-ordering information by treating the co-
occurrence differently based on whether the neighboring word 
appeared before or after the focus word. 
Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA) [15] is the most popular 
technique of Corpus-Based similarity. LSA assumes that 
words that are close in meaning will occur in similar pieces of 
text. A matrix containing word counts per paragraph (rows 
represent unique words and columns represent each 
paragraph) is constructed from a large piece of text and  a 
mathematical 
technique 
which 
called singular 
value 
decomposition (SVD) is used to reduce the number of 
columns while preserving the similarity structure among rows. 
Words are then compared by taking the cosine of the angle 
between the two vectors formed by any two rows.  
Generalized Latent Semantic Analysis (GLSA) [16] is a 
framework for computing semantically motivated term and 
document vectors. It extends the LSA approach by focusing 
on term vectors instead of the dual document-term 
representation. GLSA requires a measure of semantic 
association between terms and a method of dimensionality 
reduction. The GLSA approach can combine any kind of 
similarity measure on the space of terms with any suitable 
method of dimensionality reduction. The traditional term 
document matrix is used in the last step to provide the weights 
in the linear combination of term vectors. 
Explicit Semantic Analysis (ESA) [17] is a measure used to 
compute the semantic relatedness between two arbitrary texts. 
The Wikipedia-Based technique represents terms (or texts) as 
high- dimensional vectors; each vector entry presents the TF-
IDF weight between the term and one Wikipedia article. The 
semantic relatedness between two terms (or texts) is expressed 
by the cosine measure between the corresponding vectors. 

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 68– No.13, April 2013 
15 
 
 
Fig 2: Corpus-Based Similarity Measures 
 
The cross-language 
explicit 
semantic 
analysis 
(CL-
ESA) [18] is a multilingual generalization of ESA. CL-ESA 
exploits a document-aligned multilingual reference collection 
such as Wikipedia to represent a document as a language-
independent concept vector. The relatedness of two 
documents in different languages is assessed by the cosine 
similarity between the corresponding vector representations. 
Pointwise Mutual Information - Information Retrieval  
(PMI-IR) [19] is a method for computing the similarity 
between pairs of words, it uses AltaVista's Advanced Search 
query \ syntax to calculate probabilities. The more often two 
words co-occur near each other on a web page, the higher is 
their PMI-IR similarity score. 
Second-order 
co-occurrence 
pointwise 
mutual 
information (SCO-PMI) 
[20,21] 
is 
a semantic 
similarity measure using pointwise mutual information to sort 
lists of important neighbor words of the two target words from 
a large corpus. The advantage of using SOC-PMI is that it can 
calculate the similarity between two words that do not co-
occur frequently, because they co-occur with the same 
neighboring words. 
Normalized Google Distance (NGD) [22] is a semantic 
similarity measure derived from the number of hits returned 
by the Google search engine for a given set of keywords. 
Keywords with the same or similar meanings in a natural 
language sense tend to be "close" in units of Google distance, 
while words with dissimilar meanings tend to be farther apart. 
Specifically, the Normalized Google Distance between two 
search terms x and y is :  
                                         
                          
 
where M is the total number of web pages searched by 
Google; f(x) and f(y) are the number of hits for search 
terms x and y, respectively; and f(x, y) is the number of web 
pages on which both x and y occur. If the two search 
terms x and y never occur together on the same web page, but 
do occur separately, the normalized Google distance between 
them is infinite. If both terms always occur together, their 
NGD 
is 
zero, 
or 
equivalent 
to 
the 
coefficient 
between x squared and y squared. 
 
Extracting DIStributionally similar words using CO-
occurrences (DISCO) [23, 24] Distributional similarity 
between words assumes that words with similar meaning 
occur in similar context. Large text collections are statistically 
analyzed to get the distributional similarity. DISCO is a 
method that computes distributional similarity between words 
by using a simple context window of size ±3 words for 
counting co-occurrences. When two words are subjected for 
exact similarity DISCO simply retrieves their word vectors 
from the indexed data, and computes the similarity according 
to Lin measure [25]. If the most distributionally similar word 
is required; DISCO returns the second order word vector for 
the given word. DISCO has two main similarity measures 
DISCO1 and DISCO2; DISCO1 computes the first order 
similarity between two input words based on their collocation 
sets. DISCO2 computes the second order similarity between 
two input words based on their sets of distributionally similar 
words. 
 
4. Knowledge-Based Similarity 
 
Knowledge-Based Similarity is one of semantic similarity 
measures that bases on identifying the degree of similarity 
between words using information derived from semantic 
networks [26]. WordNet [27] is the most popular semantic 
network in the area of measuring the Knowledge-Based 
similarity between words; WordNet is a large lexical database 
of English. Nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs are grouped 
into sets of cognitive synonyms (synsets), each expressing a 
distinct concept. Synsets are interlinked by means of 
conceptual-semantic and lexical relations. 
As shown in figure 3, Knowledge-based similarity  measures 
can be divided roughly into two groups: measures of semantic 
similarity and measures of semantic relatedness. Semantically 
similar concepts are deemed to be related on the basis of their 
likeness. Semantic relatedness, on the other hand, is a more 
general notion of relatedness, not specifically tied to the shape 
or form of the concept. In other words, Semantic similarity is 
a kind of relatedness between two words, it covers a broader 
range of relationships between concepts that includes extra 
similarity relations such as is-a-kind-of, is-a-specific-
example-of, is-a-part-of, is-the-opposite-of [28]. 
There are six measures of semantic similarity; three of them 
are based on information content: Resnik (res) [29], Lin (lin) 
[25] and Jiang & Conrath (jcn) [30]. The other three measures 
are based on path length: Leacock & Chodorow (lch) [31], 
Wu & Palmer (wup) [32] and Path Length (path). 
The related value in res measure is equal to the information 
content (IC) of the Least Common Subsumer (most 
informative subsumer). This means that the value will always 
be greater-than or equal-to zero. The upper bound on the 
value is generally quite large and varies depending upon the 
size of the corpus used to determine information content 
values. The lin and jcn measures augment the information 
content of the Least Common Subsumer with the sum of the 
information content of concepts A and B themselves. The lin 
measure scales the information content of the Least Common 
Subsumer by this sum, while jcn takes the difference of this 
sum and the information content of the Least Common 
Subsumer. 
Corpus-Based 
HAL 
LSA 
GLSA 
ESA 
CL-ESA 
PMI-IR 
SOC-PMI
 
NGD 
DISCO 
DISCO1 
DISCO2 

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 68– No.13, April 2013 
16 
 
Fig 3: Knowledge-Based Similarity Measures 
lch measure returns a score denoting how similar two word 
senses are, based on the shortest path that connects the senses  
and the maximum depth of the taxonomy in which the senses 
occur. wup measure returns a score denoting how similar two 
word senses are, based on the depth of the two senses in the 
taxonomy and that of their Least Common Subsumer.   
path measure returns a score denoting how similar two word 
senses are, based on the shortest path that connects the senses 
in the is-a (hypernym/hypnoym) taxonomy. 
 
Furthermore, there are three measures of semantic relatedness: 
St.Onge (hso) [33], Lesk (lesk) [34] and vector pairs (vector) 
[35]. hso measure works by finding lexical chains linking the 
two word senses. There are three classes of relations that are 
considered: extra-strong, strong, and medium-strong. The 
maximum relatedness score is 16. lesk measure works by 
finding overlaps in the glosses of the two synsets. The 
relatedness score is the sum of the squares of the overlap 
lengths. vector measure creates a co–occurrence matrix for 
each word used in the WordNet glosses from a given corpus, 
and then represents each gloss/concept with a vector that is 
the average of these co–occurrence vectors. 
The most popular packages that cover knowledge-based 
similarity measures are WordNet::Similarity1 and Natural 
Language Toolkit (NLTK)2. 
 
5. Hybrid Similarity Measures 
 
Hybrid methods use multiple similarity measures; many 
researches covered this area. Eight semantic similarity 
measures were tested in [26]. Two of these measures were 
corpus-based measures and the other six were knowledge-
based. Firstly, these eight algorithms were evaluated 
separately, then they were combined together. The best 
                                                          
1 http://wn-similarity.sourceforge.net/ 
2 http://nltk.org/ 
performance was achieved using a method that combines 
several similarity metrics into one. 
A method for measuring the semantic similarity between 
sentences or very short texts, based on semantic and word 
order information was presented in [36]. First, semantic 
similarity is derived from a lexical knowledge base and a 
corpus. Second, the proposed method considers the impact of 
word order on sentence meaning. The derived word order 
similarity measures the number of different words as well as 
the number of word pairs in a different order. 
The authors of [37] presented a method and named it 
Semantic Text Similarity (STS). This method determines the 
similarity of two texts from a combination between semantic 
and syntactic information. They considered two mandatory 
functions (string similarity and semantic word similarity) and 
an optional function (common-word order similarity). STS 
method achieved a very good Pearson correlation coefficient 
for 30 sentence pairs of data sets and outperformed the results 
obtained in [36]. 
The authors of [38] presented an approach that combines 
corpus-based semantic relatedness measure over the whole 
sentence along with the knowledge-based semantic similarity 
scores that were obtained for the words falling under the same 
syntactic roles in both sentences. All the scores as features 
were fed to machine learning models, like linear regression, 
and bagging models to obtain a single score giving the degree 
of similarity between sentences. This approach showed a 
significant improvement in calculating the semantic similarity 
between sentences by the combing the knowledge-based 
similarity measure and the corpus-based relatedness measure 
against corpus based measure taken alone. 
A Promising correlation between manual and automatic 
similarity results were achieved in [39] by combining two 
modules. The first module calculates the similarity between 
sentences using N-gram based similarity, and the second 
module calculates the similarity between concepts in the two 
sentences using a concept similarity measure and WordNet.  
A system named UKP with reasonable correlation results was 
introduced in [40], it used a simple log-linear regression 
model based on training data, to combine multiple text 
similarity measures. These measures were String similarity, 
Semantic similarity, Text expansion mechanisms and 
Measures related to structure and style. The UKP final models 
consisted of a log-linear combination of about 20 features, out 
of the possible 300 features implemented. 
 
6. Conclusion 
In this survey three text similarity approaches were discussed; 
String-based, 
Corpus-based 
and 
Knowledge-based 
similarities. String-Based 
measures operate on string 
sequences and character composition. Fourteen algorithms 
were introduced; Seven of them were character based while 
the other are term-based distance measures. Corpus-Based 
similarity is a semantic similarity measure that determines the 
similarity between words according to information gained 
from large corpora. Nine algorithms were explained;  HAL, 
LSA, GLSA, ESA, CL-ESA, PMI-IR, SCO-PMI,  NGD and 
DISCO. Knowledge-Based similarity is one of semantic 
similarity measures that bases on identifying the degree of 
similarity between words using information derived from 
semantic networks. Nine algorithms were introduced; Six of 
them were based on semantic similarity -res, lin, jcn, lch, wup 
and path-  while the other three were based on semantic 
relatedness -hso, lesk and vector-. Some of these algorithms 
were combined together in many researches. Finally  useful 
Knowledge-
Based 
Similarity 
Information 
Content 
res 
lin 
jcn 
Path 
Length 
lch 
wup 
path 
Relatedness 
hso 
lesk 
vector 

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 68– No.13, April 2013 
17 
similarity packages were mentioned such as SimMetrics, 
WordNet::Similarity and NLTK. 
 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] Chapman, S. (2006). SimMetrics : a java & c# .net 
library 
of 
similarity 
metrics, 
http://sourceforge.net/projects/simmetrics/. 
[2] Hall , P. A. V. & Dowling, G. R. (1980) Approximate 
string matching, Comput. Surveys, 12:381-402. 
[3] Peterson, J. L. (1980). Computer programs for detecting 
and correcting spelling errors, Comm. Assoc. Comput. 
Mach., 23:676-687. 
[4] Jaro, M. A. (1989). Advances in record linkage 
methodology as applied to the 1985 census of Tampa 
Florida, Journal of the American Statistical Society, vol. 
84, 406, pp 414-420. 
[5] Jaro, M. A. (1995). Probabilistic linkage of large public 
health data file, Statistics in Medicine 14 (5-7), 491-8. 
[6] Winkler W. E. (1990). String Comparator Metrics and 
Enhanced Decision Rules in the Fellegi-Sunter Model of 
Record Linkage, Proceedings of the Section on Survey 
Research Methods, American Statistical Association,  
354–359. 
[7] Needleman, B. S. & Wunsch, D. C.(1970). A general 
method applicable to the search for similarities in the 
amino acid sequence of two proteins", Journal of 
Molecular Biology 48(3): 443–53. 
[8] Smith, F. T. & Waterman, S. M. (1981). Identification of 
Common  Molecular Subsequences, Journal of Molecular 
Biology 147: 195–197. 
[9] Alberto, B. , Paolo, R., Eneko A. & Gorka L. (2010). 
Plagiarism Detection across Distant Language Pairs, In 
Proceedings of the 23rd International Conference on 
Computational Linguistics, pages 37–45. 
[10] Eugene 
F. 
K. 
(1987).  
Taxicab 
Geometry 
, 
Dover. ISBN 0-486-25202-7. 
[11] Dice, L. (1945). Measures of the amount of ecologic 
association between species. Ecology, 26(3). 
[12] Jaccard, P. (1901). Étude comparative de la distribution 
florale dans une portion des Alpes et des Jura. Bulletin de 
la Société Vaudoise des Sciences Naturelles 37, 547-579. 
[13] Lund, K., Burgess, C. & Atchley, R. A. (1995). Semantic 
and associative priming in a high-dimensional semantic 
space. Cognitive Science Proceedings (LEA), 660-665. 
[14] Lund, K. & Burgess, C. (1996). Producing high-
dimensional 
semantic 
spaces 
from 
lexical 
co-
occurrence. Behavior Research Methods, Instruments & 
Computers, 28(2),203-208. 
[15] Landauer, T.K. & Dumais, S.T. (1997). A solution to 
plato’s problem: The latent semantic analysis theory of 
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge", 
Psychological Review, 104. 
[16] Matveeva, I., Levow, G., Farahat, A. & Royer, C. (2005). 
Generalized 
latent 
semantic 
analysis 
for 
term 
representation. In Proc. of RANLP. 
[17] Gabrilovich E. & Markovitch, S. (2007). Computing 
Semantic Relatedness using Wikipedia-based Explicit 
Semantic Analysis, Proceedings of the 20th International 
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 6–12. 
[18] Martin, P., Benno, S. & Maik, A.(2008). A Wikipedia-
based multilingual retrieval model. Proceedings of the 
30th European Conference on IR Research (ECIR), pp. 
522-530. 
[19] Turney, P. (2001). Mining the web for synonyms: PMI-
IR versus LSA on TOEFL. In Proceedings of the Twelfth 
European Conference on Machine Learning (ECML). 
[20] Islam, A. and Inkpen, D. (2008). Semantic text similarity 
using corpus-based word similarity and string similarity. 
ACM Trans. Knowl. Discov. Data 2, 2 (Jul. 2008), 1–25. 
[21] Islam, A. and Inkpen, D. (2006). Second Order Co-
occurrence PMI for Determining the Semantic Similarity 
of Words, in Proceedings of the International Conference 
on Language Resources and Evaluation (LREC 2006), 
Genoa, Italy, pp. 1033–1038. 
[22] Cilibrasi, R.L. & Vitanyi, P.M.B. (2007). The Google 
Similarity Distance, IEEE Trans. Knowledge and Data 
Engineering, 19:3, 370-383. 
[23] Peter, K. (2009). Experiments on the difference between 
semantic similarity and relatedness. In Proceedings of 
the 17th 
Nordic 
Conference 
on 
Computational 
Linguistics - NODALIDA '09, Odense, Denmark. 
[24] Peter, K. (2009). Experiments on the difference between 
semantic similarity and relatedness. In Proceedings of 
the 17th 
Nordic 
Conference 
on 
Computational 
Linguistics - NODALIDA '09, Odense, Denmark. 
[25] Lin, D. (1998b). Extracting Collocations from Text 
Corpora. In Workshop on Computational Terminology , 
Montreal, Kanada, 57–63. 
[26] Mihalcea, R., Corley, C. & Strapparava, C. (2006). 
Corpus based and knowledge-based measures of text 
semantic similarity. In Proceedings of the American 
Association for Artificial Intelligence.(Boston, MA). 
[27] Miller, G.A., Beckwith, R., Fellbaum, C.D., Gross, D. & 
Miller, K. (1990). WordNet: An online lexical database. 
Int. J. Lexicograph. 3, 4, pp. 235–244. 
[28] Patwardhan,S. , Banerjee, S. & Pedersen ,T.( 2003). 
Using measures of semantic relatedness for word sense 
disambiguation. 
In 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
Fourth 
International Conference on Intelligent Text Processing 
and Computational Linguistics, Mexico City , pp. 241–
257. 
[29] Resnik, R. (1995). Using information content to evaluate 
semantic similarity. In Proceedings of the 14th 
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 
Montreal, Canada. 
[30] Jiang, J. & Conrath, D. (1997). Semantic similarity based 
on corpus statistics and lexical taxonomy. In Proceedings 
of the International Conference on Research in 
Computational Linguistics, Taiwan. 
[31] Leacock, C. & Chodorow, M. (1998). Combining local 
context and WordNet sense similarity for word sense 
identification. In WordNet, An Electronic Lexical 
Database. The MIT Press. 
[32] Wu, Z.& Palmer, M. (1994). Verb semantics and lexical 
selection. In Proceedings of the 32nd Annual Meeting of 

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)  
Volume 68– No.13, April 2013 
18 
the Association for Computational Linguistics, Las 
Cruces, New Mexico. 
[33] Hirst, G. & St-Onge, D. (1998). Lexical chains as 
representations of context for the detection and 
correction of malapropisms. In C. Fellbaum, editor, 
WordNet: An electronic lexical database , pp 305–332. 
MIT Press. 
[34] Banerjee ,S. & Pedersen, T.(2002). An adapted Lesk 
algorithm for word sense disambiguation using WordNet. 
In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on 
Intelligent 
Text 
Processing 
and 
Computational 
Linguistics, , Mexico City, pp 136–145. 
[35] Patwardhan, V.( 2003). Incorporating dictionary and 
corpus information into a context vector measure of 
semantic relatedness. Master’s thesis, University of 
Minnesota, Duluth. 
[36] Li, Y., McLean, D., Bandar, Z., O’Shea, J., & Crockett, 
K. (2006). Sentence similarity based on semantic nets 
and corpus statistics. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge 
and Data Engineering, 18(8), 1138–1149. 
[37] Islam, A., & Inkpen, D. (2008). Semantic text similarity 
using corpus-based word similarity and string similarity. 
ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data, 
2(2), 1–25. 
[38] Nitish, A., Kartik, A. & Paul, B. (2012). DERI&UPM: 
Pushing Corpus Based Relatedness to Similarity: Shared 
Task System Description. First Joint Conference on 
Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM), pages 
643–647, Montreal, Canada, June 7-8, 2012 Association 
for Computational Linguistics. 
[39] Davide, B., Ronan, T., Nathalie A., & Josiane, M. 
(2012), IRIT: Textual Similarity Combining Conceptual 
Similarity with an N-Gram Comparison Method. First 
Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational 
Semantics (*SEM), pages 552–556, Montreal, Canada, 
June 7-8,  2012 Association for Computational 
Linguistics. 
[40] Daniel Bar, Chris Biemann, Iryna Gurevych, and Torsten 
Zesch (2012), UKP: Computing Semantic Textual 
Similarity by Combining Multiple Content Similarity 
Measures. First Joint Conference on Lexical and 
Computational Semantics (*SEM), pages 435–440, 
Montreal, Canada, June 7-8,  2012 Association for 
Computational Linguistics. 
 
AUTHORS PROFILE 
Wael Hasan Gomaa, is currently working as a teacher 
assistant , Computer Science department , Modern Academy 
for Computer Science & Management Technology, Cairo, 
Egypt. He is a Ph.D student, Faculty of Computer and 
Information, Cairo University, Egypt in the field of Automatic 
Assessment under supervision of Prof. Aly Aly Fahmy. He 
received his B.Sc. and Master degrees from Faculty of 
Computers and Information, Helwan University, Egypt. His 
master thesis was entitled  "Text Mining Hybrid Approach for 
Clustered Semantic Analysis". His research interests include 
Natural Language Processing, Artificial Intelligence, Data 
Mining and Text Mining. 
 Prof. Aly Aly Fahmy, is the former Dean of the Faculty of 
Computing and Information, Cairo University and a Professor 
of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, in the 
department of Computer Science. He graduated from the 
Department of Computer Engineering, Technical College with 
honor degree.  He specialized in Mathematical Logic and did 
his research with Dr. Hervey Gallaire, the former vice 
president of Xerox Global. He received a master's degree from 
the National School of Space and Aeronautics ENSAE, 
Toulouse, France, 1976 in the field of Logical Data Base 
systems and then obtained his PhD from the Centre for 
Studies and Research – CERT- DERI, 1979, Toulouse - 
France in the field of Artificial Intelligence. 
He received practical training in the field of Operating 
Systems and Knowledge Based Systems in Germany and the 
United States of America. He participated in several national 
projects including the establishment of the Egyptian 
Universities Network (currently hosted at the Egyptian 
Academy of Scientific Research at the Higher Ministry of 
Education), building Expert Systems in the field of iron and 
steel industry and building Decision Support Systems for 
many national entities. 
Prof. Fahmy’s main research areas are: Data and Text Mining, 
Mathematical 
Logic, 
Computational 
Linguistics, 
Text 
Understanding 
and 
Automatic 
Essay 
Scoring 
and 
Technologies of Man- Machine Interface in Arabic. He 
published many refereed papers and authored the book 
"Decision Support Systems and Intelligent Systems" in 
Arabic. 
He was the Director of the first Center of Excellence in Egypt 
in the field of Data Mining and Computer Modeling (DMCM) 
in the period of 2005-2010. DMCM was a virtual research 
center with more than 40 researchers from universities and 
industry. It was founded by an initiative of Dr. Tarek Kamel, 
Minister of Communications and Information Technology. 
Prof. Aly Fahmy is currently involved in the implementation 
of the exploration project of Master’s and Doctorate theses of 
Cairo University with the supervision of Prof. Dr. Hussein 
Khaled, Vice President of Cairo University for Postgraduate 
Studies and Research. The project aims to assess the practical 
implementation of Cairo University late strategic research 
plan, and to assist in the formulation of the new strategic 
research plan for the coming 2011 - 2015.