1 
Abstract—Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) have enormous 
potential in the public and civil domains. These are particularly 
useful in applications where human lives would otherwise be 
endangered. Multi-UAV systems can collaboratively complete 
missions more efficiently and economically as compared to single 
UAV systems. However, there are many issues to be resolved 
before effective use of UAVs can be made to provide stable and 
reliable context-specific networks. Much of the work carried out in 
the areas of Mobile Ad Hoc Networks (MANETs), and Vehicular 
Ad Hoc Networks (VANETs) does not address the unique 
characteristics of the UAV networks. UAV networks may vary 
from slow dynamic to dynamic; have intermittent links and fluid 
topology. While it is believed that ad hoc mesh network would be 
most suitable for UAV networks yet the architecture of multi-UAV 
networks has been an understudied area. Software Defined 
Networking (SDN) could facilitate flexible deployment and 
management of new services and help reduce cost, increase 
security and availability in networks. Routing demands of UAV 
networks go beyond the needs of MANETS and VANETS. 
Protocols are required that would adapt to high mobility, dynamic 
topology, intermittent links, power constraints and changing link 
quality. UAVs may fail and the network may get partitioned 
making delay and disruption tolerance an important design 
consideration. Limited life of the node and dynamicity of the 
network leads to the requirement of seamless handovers where 
researchers are looking at the work done in the areas of MANETs 
and VANETs, but the jury is still out. As energy supply on UAVs is 
limited, protocols in various layers should contribute towards 
greening of the network. This article surveys the work done 
towards all of these outstanding issues, relating to this new class of 
networks, so as to spur further research in these areas. 
Index Terms—Unmanned Aerial Vehicle, UAV, Multi-UAV 
Networks, ad hoc networks, communication networks, wireless 
mesh networks, software defined network, routing, seamless 
handover, energy efficiency 
I. INTRODUCTION 
A. The growing importance of UAV networks 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) are an emerging 
*Formal corresponding author
The manuscript was submitted on 14th October 2014. 
Lav Gupta is pursuing doctoral program in Computer Science & Engineering 
at Washington University in St Louis, MO 63130 USA (email: 
lavgupta@wustl.edu). 
Raj Jain is Professor of Computer Science & Engineering at Washington 
University in St Louis, MO 63130, USA (email: jain@cse.wustl.edu).  
Gabor Vaszkun is with Ericsson Hungary (email: vaszkun@gmail.com) 
technology that can be harnessed for military, public and civil 
applications. Military use of UAVs is more than 25 years old 
primarily consisting of border surveillance, reconnaissance and 
strike. Public use is by the public agencies such as police, 
public safety and transportation management. UAVs can 
provide timely disaster warnings and assist in speeding up 
rescue and recovery operations when the public communication 
network gets crippled. They can carry medical supplies to areas 
rendered inaccessible. In situations like poisonous gas 
infiltration, wildfires and wild animal tracking UAVs could be 
used to quickly envelope a large area without risking the safety 
of the personnel involved. 
UAVs come 
in various sizes. 
Large 
UAVs 
may 
be 
used 
singly 
in 
missions while 
small ones may 
be 
used 
in 
formations 
or 
swarms. 
The 
latter ones are 
proving to be 
quite useful in 
civilian 
applications. As 
described by Daniel and Wietfeld in [1] they are likely to 
become invaluable inclusions in the operations of police 
departments, fire brigades and other homeland security 
organizations in the near future. Besides, advances in 
electronics and sensor technology have widened the scope of 
UAV network applications [2] to include applications as diverse 
as traffic monitoring, wind estimation and remote sensing [3]. 
In this context it would be relevant to mention that the 
current FAA guidelines allow a government public safety 
agency to operate unmanned aircraft weighing 4.4 pounds or 
less, within the line of sight of the operator; less than 400 feet 
above the ground; during daylight conditions; within Class G 
airspace; and outside of 5 statute miles from any airport, 
heliport, seaplane base, spaceport, or other location. For model 
aircrafts FAA guidance does not address size of the model 
aircraft. The guidelines of Federal Aviation Authority [4] say 
that model aircraft flights should be kept below 400 feet above 
ground level (AGL), should be flown a sufficient distance from 
populated areas and full scale aircraft, and are not for business 
Survey of Important Issues in UAV 
Communication Networks 
 
Lav Gupta*, Senior Member IEEE, Raj Jain, Fellow, IEEE, and Gabor Vaszkun 
At a recent show in Decatur, Illinois, on farming 
applications of small UAVs drew 1400 attendees 
from 33 states and 6 countries. According to Stu 
Ellis, an organizer, “You could spend four to five 
hours walking an 80-acre soybean field,” and noted 
that the same ground could be covered in half an 
hour or less by a drone. However, in its June 2014 
notice, FAA has made it clear that drones that are 
not being used by hobbyists or any commercial use 
must have prior FAA approval. The agency 
specifically mentions farming – along with 
photography and delivery services – as types of 
businesses subject to regulation. Meanwhile, 
Association for Unmanned Vehicles Systems 
International has projected an $82 billion economic 
impact for the period 2015-2025. (Adapted from St 
Louis Post dated 07/27/2014) 
Published in  IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, Volume PP, Issue 99, November 2015

 
2 
purposes. 
B. The challenges of UAV networks 
Promising though it may be, this area is relatively new and 
less explored. There are many issues to resolve before effective 
use of UAVs can be made to provide stable and reliable 
context-specific networks. As we shall see later, while it offers 
the promise of improved capability and capacity, establishing 
and maintaining efficient communications among the UAVs is 
challenging. 
All the constituents of the UAV communication networks 
pose challenging issues that need resolution. Unlike many other 
wireless networks, the topology of UAV networks remains fluid 
with the number of nodes and links changing and also the 
relative positions of the nodes altering. UAVs may move with 
varying speeds depending on the application, this would cause 
the links to be established intermittently. What challenges 
would such a behavior pose? Firstly, some aspects of the 
architectural design would not be intuitive. The fluid topology, 
the vanishing nodes and finicky links would all challenge the 
designer to go beyond the normal ad hoc mesh networks. 
Second, the routing protocol cannot be a simple implementation 
of a proactive or a reactive scheme. The inter-UAV backbone 
has to repeatedly reorganize itself when UAVs fail. In some 
cases the network may get partitioned. The challenge would 
then be to route the packet from a source to a destination while 
optimizing the chosen metric. The third challenge would be to 
maintain users’ sessions by transferring them seamlessly from 
an out of service UAV to an active UAV. Lastly, there need to 
be ways of conserving energy of power starved UAVs for 
increasing the life of the network. In the next section we bring 
out all of these issues in more detail. 
 
C. Motivation and key Issues 
The area of UAV networks is challenging to researchers 
because of the outstanding issues that provide motivation for 
research. In mobile and vehicular networks the nodes join and 
dissociate from the network frequently and, therefore, ad hoc 
networks have been found to be suitable in most situations. In 
addition, for quick and reliable communication between nodes, 
mesh network topology is quite appropriate. Does this apply to 
the UAV networks as well? In UAV networks, the nodes could 
almost be static and hovering over the area of operation or 
scouting around at a rapid pace. Nodes could die out for many 
reasons and may be replaced by new ones. Some similarities 
encourage researchers to explore the applicability of the work 
done for Mobile Ad hoc Networks (MANETs) and Vehicular 
Ad hoc Networks (VANETs), but works in these areas do not 
fully address the unique characteristics of the UAV networks. 
Table I gives important characteristics of MANETs, VANETs 
and UAV networks which bring out similarities and 
dissimilarities among them. We shall characterize UAV 
networks in more depth in section II(C). 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I  
COMPARATIVE DESCRIPTION OF DIFFERENT AD-HOC NETWORKS 
MANET 
VANET 
UAV Networks 
Description 
Mobile wireless nodes 
connect with other 
nodes within 
communication range 
in an ad-hoc manner 
(No centralized infra-
structure required) 
Ad-hoc networks in 
which vehicles are 
the mobile nodes. 
Communication is 
among vehicles and 
between vehicles 
and road side units 
Ad-hoc or 
infrastructure based 
networks of 
airborne nodes. 
Communication 
among UAVs and 
with the control 
station 
Mobility 
Slow. Typical speeds 
2 m/sec. Random 
movement. Varying 
density, higher at 
some popular places 
High-speed, 
typically 20-30 m/s 
on highways, 6-10 
m/s in urban areas. 
Predictable, limited 
by road layout, 
traffic and traffic 
rules 
Speeds from 0 to 
typically as high as 
100 m/s. Movement 
could be in 2 or 3 
dimensions, usually 
controlled 
according to 
mission. 
Topology 
Random, ad-hoc 
Star with roadside 
infrastructure and 
ad-hoc among 
vehicles 
Star with control 
center, ad-hoc/mesh 
among UAVs.  
Topology 
Changes 
Dynamic - nodes join 
and leave 
unpredictably.  
Network prone to 
partitioning.  
More dynamic than 
MANETs. 
Movement linear. 
Partitioning 
common.  
Stationary, slow or 
fast. May be flown 
in controlled 
swarms. Network 
prone to partitioning 
Energy 
Constraints 
Most nodes are battery 
powered so energy 
needs to be conserved.  
Devices may be car 
battery powered or 
own battery 
powered. 
Small UAVs are 
energy constrained. 
Batteries affect 
weight and flying 
time 
Typical use 
cases in 
public and 
civil 
domains 
• Information 
distribution 
(emergencies, 
advertising, 
shopping, events) 
Internet hot spots  
• Traffic & weather 
info, emergency 
warnings, 
location	  based	  
services 
• Infotainment 
• Rescue operations 
• Agriculture-crop 
survey 
• Wildlife search 
• Oil rig surveillance   
 
It can be observed from Table 1 and some of the references 
[3] [123] that there are many aspects of UAV networks that set 
them apart from mobile ad-hoc and vehicular ad-hoc networks. 
The important differences are described here: 
The mobility models, like random walk, that have been used 
to describe the behavior of nodes in mobile ad hoc networks 
and street random walk or Manhattan models for vehicular ad 
hoc networks are not quite suitable for UAV networks. The 
UAVs could move randomly or in organized swarms not only 
in two but also in three dimensions with rapid change in 
position. The vehicular nodes are constrained to travel on roads 
and only in two dimensions.  
Changes in topology could be much more frequent in UAV 
networks. Relative positions of UAVs may change; some 
UAVs may lose all their power and may need to be brought 
down for recharging; UAVs may malfunction and be out of the 
network; the links may form and vanish because of the 
changing positions of the nodes. In many applications density 
of nodes may not be high and the network may partition 
frequently. Vehicular networks have roadside infrastructure to 
support communication among vehicles. The network being 
fluid, the mobile stations that are locked on to a particular UAV 
for communication access would need to be transferred to 

 
3 
another UAV seamlessly, without disrupting user sessions. The 
research community is still trying to figure out the most 
effective routing protocol as well as the seamless handover 
procedure [7]. 
Energy constraints are much greater in small UAV networks. 
While in vehicular networks power could be drawn from the car 
battery which gets charged while the car is in motion. Even the 
mobile ad hoc networks would typically have nodes 
(smartphones, laptops) with power sources that last a few hours. 
Small UAVs may typically have enough power for a flight of 
thirty minutes! On one hand the transmitted signal would be of 
lower power and on the other the links would be intermittent 
owing to power-drained UAVs drifting away or dying. 
Dynamicity of nodes would force the network to organize and 
re-organize frequently. This gives rise to unique routing 
requirements. The routing protocols need to use energy 
efficiently so as to prolong the stability of the UAV network. 
The UAV networks would usually be deployed in dire 
circumstances and the network may get frequently partitioned, 
sometimes for long durations. In such cases traditional solutions 
do not guarantee connectivity. It has been suggested that these 
networks 
be 
made 
delay 
and 
disruption 
tolerant 
by 
incorporating store-carry-forward capabilities. If we presume 
that each node has a global knowledge of the network we could 
apply deterministic protocols but this may not always be a 
correct assumption. On the other hand if we presume random 
behavior of nodes we have to face scalability issues.  
A multi-UAV network, which is fully autonomous, requires a 
robust inter-UAV network with UAVs to cooperate in keeping 
the network organized even in the event of link or node failure. 
The UAV networks would require changes at the MAC and 
network layers, have self-organizing capabilities, be tolerant to 
delays, have a more flexible and automated control through 
SDN and employ energy saving mechanisms at various layers 
[5], [6].  
That these issues need thorough attention is corroborated in a 
well-detailed survey on UAV based flying ad hoc network [3]. 
Authors of this survey have tried to put together many of the 
issues and developments in this area. However, there are issues 
of self-organization, disruption tolerance, SDN control, 
seamless handover and energy efficiency that we believe, 
would be extremely important for building successful UAV 
networks, have not been the foci of the study. Our survey 
attempts to primarily take up these issues to bring out the 
current status and possible directions. 
The organization of rest of the paper is as follows: In Section 
II, we attempt to categorize UAV networks and examine 
important characteristics like topology, control, and client 
server behavior. We also see the important aspects of self-
organization and automated operations through software 
defined networking (SDN) that will help in identifying the work 
required in this area. In Section III, we discuss requirements 
from the routing protocols peculiar to UAV networks and the 
need for disruption tolerant networking. In Section IV, we see 
the importance of seamless handover and the need for new 
research in this area. Finally, in Section V, the protocols used at 
various layers for energy conservation are discussed. 
II. CHARACTERIZING THE UAV NETWORK 
It is important to characterize a network to understand its 
nature, constraints and possibilities. How fast does the topology 
change with time? How frequently does the network get 
partitioned as the nodes fail or move away? How can the 
network life be increased? What type of architecture would be 
more suitable? Does it require self-organizing, self-healing 
capabilities? Which protocols can be run at different layers? 
Does it support addition and removal of nodes dynamically? 
Are the links intermittent and what is their quality? In this 
section we look at the characteristics that forms the common 
thread in various works and the direction in which the research 
is headed. Subsection A contains characteristics of multi-UAV 
systems and their advantages over single UAV systems. 
Subsection B discusses important features that set them apart 
from other ad hoc networks and also distinguishes them from 
each other. Subsection C provides categorization of UAV 
networks based on some of the important characteristics 
discussed. Subsection D brings forth the self-organizing 
behavior of UAV networks. Lastly, Subsection E deals with 
less uncovered aspect of use of SDN for centralizing and 
automating control of UAV networks. 
 
A.  Multi-UAV network 
Early uses of UAV were characterized by use of a single 
large UAV for a task. In these systems the UAV based 
communication network, therefore, consisted of just one aerial 
node and one or more ground nodes. Today most public and 
civil applications can be carried out more efficiently with multi 
UAV systems. In a multi-UAV system, the UAVs are smaller 
and less expensive and work in a coordinated manner. In most 
multi-UAV systems, the communication network, proving 
communication among UAVs and between the UAVs and the 
ground nodes, becomes an important constituent. These UAVs 
can be configured to provide services co-operatively and extend 
the network coverage by acting as relays. The degree of 
mobility of UAVs depends on the application. For instance, in 
providing communication over an earthquake struck area the 
UAVs would hover over the area of operation and the links 
would be slow dynamic. As opposed to this, applications like 
agriculture or forest surveillance require the UAVs to move 
across a large area and links frequently break and reestablish. 
The dynamic nature of the network configuration and links is 
apparent from the fact that the UAVs may go out of service 
periodically due to malfunction or battery drainage. This is true 
also for UAVs that need to hover over an area for relatively 
long periods. New UAVs have to be launched to take their 
places. Sometimes some of the UAVs may be taken out of 
service to conserve power for a more appropriate time. It 
would, therefore, be a requirement that in all such cases the 
links should automatically reconfigure themselves. Though 
advantageous in many respects, multi UAV systems, add 
complexities to the UAV communication network.  
Some of the key advantages of multi-UAV systems are 
reliability and survivability through redundancy. In a multi-
UAV system, failure of a single UAV causes the network to re-

 
4 
organize and maintain communication through other nodes. 
This would not be possible in a single UAV system. However, 
to reap the real benefits of the multiple UAVs working in 
collaboration, the protocols deployed need to take care of the 
issues like changing topology, mobility and power constraints. 
In terms of communication needs, single UAV systems would 
have to maintain links with the control station(s), base stations, 
servers and also provide access functionality. This puts a heavy 
constraint on the limited battery power and bandwidth. In a 
multi-UAV system, only one or two UAVs may connect to 
control and servers and feed the other UAVs. This way most 
UAVs just have to sustain the mesh structure and can easily 
offer access functions for calls, video and data. Multi-UAV 
systems also turn out to be less expensive to acquire, maintain 
and operate than their larger counterparts. As shown through 
their experiments by Mergenthaler et al. in [8], adding more 
UAVs 
to 
the 
network 
can 
relatively 
easily 
extend 
communication umbrella provided by a multi-UAV system. 
Missions are generally completed more speedily, efficiently and 
at lower cost with small UAV systems as compared to a single 
UAV system [9]. In their work on PRoPHET-based routing 
protocol [10] the authors explain how in opportunistic networks 
multi-UAVs find a path even if two end points are not directly 
connected leading to completion of missions. In their work on 
Multi-UAV cooperative search in [11] the authors describe how 
multi-UAV systems complete searches faster and are robust to 
loss of some UAVs. Advantages of multi-UAV networks are 
leading to their increasing use in civilian applications [1]. In 
this paper we focus on the UAV networks that use multiple 
small UAVs to form an unmanned aerial system (UAS). Table 
II gives a comparison of single and multi-UAV systems. 
 
TABLE II 
COMPARISON OF SINGLE AND MULTI UAV SYSTEMS 
FEATURE 
SINGLE UAV 
SYSTEM 
MULTI UAV 
SYSTEM 
Impact of failure 
High, 
mission 
fails 
Low, system 
reconfigures 
Scalability 
Limited 
High 
Survivability 
Poor 
High 
Speed of mission 
Slow 
Fast 
Cost 
Medium 
Low 
Bandwidth 
required 
High 
Medium 
Antenna 
Omni-directional 
Directional 
Complexity of 
control 
Low 
High 
Failure to 
coordinate 
Low 
Present 
 
An issue that is important in the context of multi-UAV 
systems, but not a subject of this study is coordination and 
control for effective task planning with multiple UAVs. An 
efficient algorithm is necessary to maneuver each UAV so that 
the whole system can produce complex, adaptable and flexible 
team behavior. The task-planning problem for UAV networks 
with connectivity constraint involves a number of parameters 
and interaction of dynamic variables. An algorithm has been 
proposed for such a situation [11]. There is also an algorithm 
for distributed intelligent agent systems in which agents 
autonomously coordinate, cooperate, negotiate, make decisions 
and take actions to meet the objectives of a particular task. The 
connectivity constrained problem is NP-hard and a polynomial 
time heuristic has been proposed in the literature [13]. This is a 
challenging field but we would restrict our attention to UAV 
based communication networks. 
 
B.  Features of the UAV networks 
Developing a fully autonomous and cooperative multi-UAV 
system requires robust inter-UAV communication. We do not 
have enough research to say with conviction what design would 
work best. There are a number of aspects of the UAV networks 
that are not precisely defined and a clarification of these would 
help in characterizing the UAV networks: 
 
1) Infrastructure-based or ad hoc? 
 Most of the available literature treats UAV networks as ad 
hoc networks. Research on MANETs and VANETs are often 
cited with reference to UAV networks but they do not 
completely address the unique characteristics of the UAV 
networks. Depending on the application, the UAV network 
could have stationary, slow moving or highly mobile nodes. 
Many applications require UAV nodes to act as base stations in 
the sky to provide communication coverage to an area. Thus, 
unlike MANET and VANET ad hoc networks, the UAV 
networks could behave more like infrastructure-based networks 
for these applications. These would have UAVs communicating 
with each other and also with the control center. Such a network 
would resemble the fixed wireless network with UAVs as base 
stations except that they are aerial. There is, however, a class of 
applications where the nodes would be highly mobile and 
would communicate, cooperate and establish the network 
dynamically in an ad hoc manner. In such a case the topology 
may be determined, and the nodes involved in forwarding data 
decided, dynamically. There are many issues that affect both 
UAV infrastructure based and UAV ad hoc networks. For 
example, replacing nodes by new nodes when they fail or their 
power gets exhausted. 
 
2) Server or client? 
Another point of distinction is whether the node acts as a 
server or a client. In vehicular networks they are usually clients, 
in mobile ad hoc networks most of the time they would be 
clients and may also provide forwarding services to other 
clients’ data. In UAV networks, the UAV nodes are usually 
servers, either routing packets for clients or relaying sensor data 
to control centers. 
 
3) Star or Mesh? 
Architecture 
of 
UAV 
networks 
for 
communication 
applications is an understudied area. The simplest configuration 
is a single UAV connected to a ground based command and 
control center. In a multi-UAV setting, the common topologies 
that can be realized are star, multi-star, mesh and hierarchical 
mesh. In the case of star topology all UAVs would be 
connected directly to one or more ground nodes and all 

 
5 
communication among UAVs would be routed through the 
ground nodes. This may result in blockage of links, higher 
latency and requirement of more expensive high bandwidth 
downlinks. In addition, as the nodes are mobile, steerable 
antennas may be required to keep oriented towards ground node 
[15]. The multi-star topology is quite similar except the UAVs 
would form multiple stars and one node from each group 
connects to the ground station. Figures 1a and 1b shows star 
and multi-star configurations. 
   
Fig. 1a) Star Configuration b) Multi-star Configuration c) Flat Mesh Network 
d) Hierarchical Mesh Network	  
 
Star configurations suffer from high latency as the downlink 
length is longer than inter-UAV distance and all communication 
must pass through the ground control center. Also, if the ground 
center fails there is no inter-UAV communication. In most 
civilian applications, however, normal operation does not 
require communication among UAVs to be routed through the 
ground node. An architecture that supports this would result in 
reduced downlink bandwidth requirement and improved latency 
because of shorter links among UAVs. In case of mesh 
networks the UAVs are interconnected and a small number of 
UAVs may connect to the control center [16]. Figures 1c and 1d 
show flat and hierarchical mesh networks. 
Some authors believe that conventional network technologies 
cannot meet the needs of UAV networks. Related literature 
points to the applicability of mesh networks for civilian 
applications [15, [9]. There are usually multiple links on one or 
more radios, interference between channels, changes in 
transmitted power due to power constrains, changes in number 
of nodes, changes in topology, terrain and weather effects. In ad 
hoc networks the nodes may move away, formations may 
break, and therefore, the links may be intermittent. Wireless 
mesh networks, adapted suitably, may take care of some of 
these problems. To tackle these issues the network has to be 
self-healing with continuous connection and reconfiguration 
around a broken path. 
As compared to star networks, mesh networks are flexible, 
reliable and offer better performance characteristics. In a 
wireless mesh network, nodes are interconnected and can 
usually communicate directly on more than one link. A packet 
can pass through intermediate nodes and find its way from any 
source to any destination in multiple hops. Fully connected 
wireless networks have the advantages of security and 
reliability. Such a network can use routing or flooding 
technique to send messages. The routing protocol should ensure 
delivery of packets from source to destination through 
intermediate nodes. There are multiple routes and the routing 
protocol should select the one that meet the given objectives. 
The routing devices can organize themselves to create an ad hoc 
backbone mesh infrastructure that can carry users’ messages 
over the coverage area through multiple hops. Moreover, they 
can also route packets originated from the command and 
control center and directed to emergency operators or people 
and vice-versa. The control center can process data to extract 
information for the support of decisions during emergency [17]. 
Due to unique features of UAV nodes described above, 
sometimes the existing networks routing algorithms, which 
have been designed for mobile ad hoc networks (MANETs), 
such as BABEL or the Optimized Link-State Routing (OLSR) 
protocol, fail to provide reliable communications [8], [14]. We 
shall provide more details about routing in the next section. The 
major differences between star and mesh networks are given in 
Table III. 
 
TABLE III 
COMPARISON OF STAR AND MESH NETWORKS PROPERTIES	    
Star Network 
Mesh Network 
Point-to-point 
Multi-point to multi-point 
Central control point present 
Infrastructure based may have a control 
center, Ad hoc has no central control 
center 
Infrastructure based 
Infrastructure based or Ad hoc 
Not self configuring 
Self configuring 
Single hop from node to central 
point 
Multi-hop communication 
Devices cannot move freely 
In ad hoc devices are autonomous and 
free to move. In infrastructure based 
movement is restricted around the 
control center 
Links between nodes and central 
points are configured 
Inter node links are intermittent 
Nodes communicated through 
central controller 
Nodes relay traffic for other nodes 
Scalable 
Not scalable  
 
 
4) Delay and Disruptions prone networks 
All wireless mobile networks are prone to link disruptions. 
The UAV networks are no exception. The extent of disruption 
depends on how mobile the UAVs are, the power transmitted, 
inter-UAV distances and extraneous noise. In the applications 
where UAVs provide communication coverage to an area, the 
UAVs are hovering and, therefore, probability of disruptions 
would be low. On the other hand, in applications requiring fast 
UAV mobility, there is a higher likelihood of disruptions. 
Delays in transmitting data could be because of poor link 
quality or because one or more UAV nodes storing the data 
because of end-to-end path not being available. We will see 
more details of this in Section III. 
 
C. 
Categorization of UAV Networks 
We are now ready to categorize the UAV networks. In 
Subsection 2.2 we have seen a number of features that could 
form the basis of this categorization. So how do we categorize 
UAV networks, the applications of which require varying 
UAVs 
Ground Control Center 
(a) 
(b) 
UAVs 
Ground!Control!Center!
(c)!
(d)!

 
6 
degree of node mobility, different network architectures, 
routing and control? In the ultimate analysis it is the 
applications that would be important. Therefore, considering 
distinct applications, and then deciding the properties that 
would needed to make these applications possible, could lead us 
to a generic categorization as given in Table IV.  
Like Internet delivery there are many applications in which 
UAV assisted wireless infrastructure needs to be established for 
providing area wide coverage. Disaster struck areas, remote 
villages or deep sea oil rigs would all require quick deployment 
of a UAV based network that could provide voice, video and 
data services. In these applications the UAVs hover over an 
area and are virtually stationary. These can be considered to be 
cellular towers or wireless access points in the sky. In contrast, 
sensing applications like detection of forest fires or survey of 
crops would require mobile UAVs. There are other 
applications, especially military, where fast moving UAVs 
would be required to make forays into enemy territory. We 
would focus here largely on the first category of applications 
and to some extent on the sensing applications. When UAVs 
 
are used to create wireless communication infrastructure then 
depending on the application, all UAVs could be directly under 
control of the ground control center or they could form a 
wireless mesh network with one or two UAVs communicating 
with the control center.  In these applications the UAVs act as 
servers for routing users’ communication and control 
information. This is distinct, for example, from the cases where 
UAVs carrying sensors are used to collect information or those 
sent out for carrying out attack. In these cases, UAVs act as 
clients. Delay or disruption probability in the Internet delivery 
class of applications is much less as compared to other 
applications because the UAVs are stationary and formations 
are easily coordinated. When a UAV fails, the network would 
be expected to reconfigure and the ongoing sessions would 
have to be seamlessly transferred to other UAVs. In other 
applications where nodes are more dynamic, the links may 
function intermittently and special routing, reconfiguration, and 
disruption handling features may be required. In the following 
sections we shall see in more detail the state of research in these 
areas. 
TABLE IV 
UAV CATEGORIZATION	  
	  
 
 
 
 
Property 
Internet Delivery 
Sensing 
Attack 
Other general applications in 
the category 
Disaster communication, 
Oil exploration 
Remote health 
Reconnaissance, search, 
detecting forest fires, tracking 
wild animals 
War: Multi-UAV attack 
UAV Position during 
communication  
Fixed position 
Slow change, coordinated 
movement 
Frequent change 
Mobility speed of UAV during 
communication 
~0 miles/hour 
<10 miles/hour 
>10 miles/hour 
Network 
Infrastructure based, base 
station in the sky 
Infrastructure based  
Infrastructure based/Infrastructure 
less, Ad-hoc 
Topology 
Star/Mesh  
Mesh 
Mesh 
Control (communication) 
Centralized (position control 
based) 
Centralized ( task control based) 
Distributed (task control based) 
Individuals controlling each UAV 
UAV as Client or Server 
Server (routes 
communication and control) 
Server (when receiving from 
sensors) / client(when carrying 
sensors 
Server (delivering info to 
formations) /client (for attack) 
Routing 
Through server (control from 
central, data through central 
or among UAVs) 
Central or mesh (control from 
central data to central, also data 
among UAVs) 
Mesh routing (control from central, 
data among UAVs) 
 
Delay/disruption (because of 
node and link failures) 
Low probability (p<0.1) 
Medium probability 
(0.1<=p<0.5) 
High probability (p>=0.5) 
Type of Communication 
C=Client, I=Infrastructure 
U2U, U2I, C2U 
U2U (if buffer node), U2I, U2C 
U2I (commands), U2U 
Control( path control, position) 
Remote – position control 
Remote – position control, path 
control 
Remote (less likely) 
Auto (observe, orient, decide, act) 
Path Control – real-time multi UAV 
coordination, collision avoidance 

 
7 
D.  Self-organization in networks 
 
One reason why mesh networks are considered suitable for 
UAV based networks is because of their self-forming and 
reorganization features. Once the nodes have been configured 
and activated they form mesh structure automatically or with 
guidance from the control center. When this happens, the 
network becomes resilient to failure of one or more nodes. 
There is inherent fault tolerance in mesh networks. When a 
node fails, the rest of the nodes reconfigure the network among 
them. By the same token a new node can be easily introduced. 
Support for ad hoc networking, self-forming, self-healing and 
self-organization enhance the performance of wireless mesh 
networks, make them easily deployable and fault tolerant [18] 
[19].  
Studies on self-organization in the context of sensor networks 
and wireless ad hoc networks can help in understanding the 
requirements of UAV networks. Self-organization consists of 
the following steps: When a node fails or a new node appears, 
its neighbor(s) finds out about the available nodes through the 
neighbor discovery process. Changes in the network, in the 
form of removal or addition of devices in the network, cause a 
number of nodes to exchange messages for re-organization. 
This could cause collisions while accessing the medium and 
impact network performance. Medium access control deals with 
control of access to the medium and minimizes errors due to 
collisions. The next step involves establishment of connectivity 
between 
nodes 
during 
self-organization 
through 
local 
connectivity and path establishment. Once the connectivity has 
been established, the service recovery management process 
carries out network disruption avoidance and recovery from 
local failures. Finally, energy management carries out load 
balancing of data forwarding responsibilities in the self-
organized network and also the processes involved in reducing 
energy consumption in the battery operated devices. The goal in 
UAV networks would then be to ensure connectivity of all 
active network nodes so that the mesh network is maintained 
through multi-hop communication to provide best access to the 
users [20]. 
Wireless mesh networks are prone to link failure due to 
interference, mobility or bandwidth demand. This will lead to 
degradation of network performance but can be effectively 
tackled by making the network reconfigurable. The nodes 
monitor their links and any failures trigger the reconfiguration 
process. The autonomous network reconfiguration system 
requires computational overhead and reasonable bandwidth. 
There are times when some of the UAVs could go out of 
service because of battery drain or communication failure. In 
such cases the remaining nodes in the network re-organize and 
re-establish communication. While the beneﬁts of self-
organization are huge and encouraging, challenges in self-
organization are bigger making this an exciting research 
problem [21]. 
 
E. SDN-automating UAV network control 
The UAV networks are limited in communication resources. 
Nodes are non-permanent, connectivity is intermittent and 
channels may be impaired. This translates into utilization 
challenges in planning and allocation of resources. Different 
networks utilize different routing protocols and consequently 
even the nodes that use the same access technology may not 
work in another network because of the differences in higher 
layers of the protocol stack. For instance vehicular networks use 
IEEE 802.11p Wireless Access Vehicular Environment 
(WAVE) to support Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) 
applications. For wireless mesh networks, the IEEE 802.11s 
amendment has been standardized for self-configuring multi-
hop technologies. But in both environments there is no 
consensus on the routing protocols to be used, as well as on 
most of the network management operations to be performed. 
As a consequence, nodes using a particular access technology in 
a network may not operate in another network with same access 
but different higher layer protocols. 
The above problems could be tackled by building in the 
capability of defining the protocol stack in software. This way 
the UAVs could be programmed to flexibly work in different 
environments. However, this is not the only reason why 
software control of the network is desirable. There are a number 
of other requirements arising in case of networks like MANET, 
VANET and UAV networks. They need to support dynamic 
nodes and frequent changes in the topology. Nodes may fail, for 
example, because of battery drainage and need to be replaced 
by new nodes. The links are intermittent and need to be 
accordingly 
dealt 
with. 
SDN 
provides 
a 
way 
to 
programmatically control networks, making it easier to deploy 
and manage new applications and services, as well as tune 
network policy and performance [22], [23]. 
Deployment of SDN has been extensive in fixed 
infrastructure-based 
networks. 
However, 
much 
of 
this 
deployment has been in datacenters, as it was believed that 
SDN was suitable for networks with centralized control and 
wireless ad hoc mesh networks were decentralized. Separation 
of forwarding devices and the controller also raised the concern 
for security, balance of control and flexibility. There are several 
policy issues relating to balance of control and cooperation 
between controllers that need to be addressed. Because of the 
benefits it is expected to provide, increasing interest is being 
shown by the academia and the industry in application of SDN 
in dynamic mobile wireless environments. In networks like 
VANETs, the use of SDN can help in path selection and 
channel selection. This helps in reducing interference, 
improving usage of wireless resources including channels and 
routing in multi-hop mesh networks. Despite increasing interest 
there is no clear and comprehensive understanding of what are 
the advantages of SDN in infrastructure-less wireless 
networking scenarios and how the SDN concept should be 
expanded to suit the characteristics of wireless and mobile 
communications [22], [24]. 
One of the commonly used protocols for implementing SDN 
in wireless networks is OpenFlow. OpenFlow is claimed to 
deliver substantive advantages for mobile and wireless 
networks. It helps in optimizing resource usage in a dynamic 
environment, provides a way to automate operations, allows 
finer level of control and easier implementation of the global 

 
8 
policies and faster introduction of new services [25]. OpenFlow 
protocol separates forwarding, and control functionalities. The 
OpenFlow switches are programmable and contain flow tables 
and protocol for communication with controller(s) [26]. Figure 
2 shows separation of control and forwarding functionalities 
with OpenFlow interface between control and data planes. 
 
	  
Fig. 2: Software Defined Networking elements 
 
Such a network may be formed by mounting the data plane 
or the OpenFlow switches on the UAVs and the control facility 
on a centralized ground controller or distributed control on 
UAVs. The forwarding elements, which are simple OpenFlow 
switches, rather than IP routers, contain the flow tables that are 
manipulated by the controller to set the rules. The actions in the 
flow tables define processing that would be applied to the 
identified set of packets. Actions could be filtering, forwarding 
a particular port, header rewriting etc. Figure 3a shows how the 
centralized control plane base SDN can be implemented in a 
UAV network. 
	    
Fig. 3: a) SDN with centralized control b) SDN with distributed control	  
 
The control plane of the SDN network could be centralized, 
distributed or hybrid. The controller has a global view of the 
network and can effectively route traffic. It updates flow tables 
of the OpenFlow switches with matching criteria and 
processing actions [27]. In the centralized mode, that we saw 
above, the controller, that defines all the actions that wireless 
switches in the UAV take, has been shown to be on the ground. 
It could be air-borne as well. Figure 3b shows distributed 
control of the SDN network. In the distributed control mode the 
control is distributed on all the UAVs and each node controls its 
behavior. In the hybrid mode the controller delegates control of 
packet processing to the local agent and there is control traffic 
between all SDN elements. 
Researchers 
at 
Karlstad 
University, 
Sweden 
have 
demonstrated the feasibility of integration of OpenFlow with 
wireless mesh networks on their KAUMesh testbed on a small 
scale [28]. Simulation by authors in [23] shows the comparison 
of 
SDN-based 
VANET 
routing 
to 
other 
traditional 
MANET/VANET routing protocols, including GPSR, OLSR, 
AODV, and DSDV. They observe that SDN-based routing 
outperforms the other traditional Ad hoc routing protocols in 
terms of packet delivery ratio at various speeds. The major 
reason for this is the aggregated knowledge that the SDN 
controller has. In [29] the authors summarize the current 
situation by saying that SDN offers enhanced configuration, 
improved performance and encourages innovation but it is still 
in infancy and many fundamental issues still remain not fully 
solved. Capabilities of SDN to fulfill various requirements of a 
UAV mesh network are given in Table V. 
 
TABLE V 
UAV COMMUNICATION REQUIREMENTS AND SDN CAPABILITIES 
Feature required in UAV 
SDN capability 
Support for node mobility 
Reconfiguration through orchestration 
mechanism 
Flexible switching and routing 
strategies 
Flexible definition of rules based on 
header or payload for routing data.  
Dealing with unreliable wireless 
links 
Selection of paths and channels 
Greening of network 
Supports switching off devices when 
not in use. Supports data aggregation 
in the network 
Reduce interference 
Can be done through path/channel 
selection   
III. ROUTING 
The UAV networks constituted for various applications may 
vary from slow dynamic to the ones that fly at considerable 
speeds. The nodes may go out of service due to failure or power 
constraints and get replaced by new ones. In green networks, 
radios in the nodes may be automatically switched off for 
power conservations when the load is low. Link disruption may 
frequently occur because of the positions of UAVs and ground 
stations. Additionally, the links could have high bit error rates 
due to interference or natural conditions. The reliability 
requirements from the UAV networks are also diverse. For 
example, while sending earthquake data may require a 100% 
reliable transport protocol, sending pictures and video of the 
earthquake may be done with lower reliability but stricter delay 
and jitter requirements. Bandwidth requirements for voice, data 
and video are different. The UAV networks, therefore, have all 
the requirements of mobile wireless networks and more. Node 
mobility, network partitioning, intermittent links, limited 
resources and varying QoS requirements make routing in UAV 
a challenging research task. Several existing routing protocols 
have been in the zone of consideration of researchers and quite 
a few variations have been proposed. While newer protocols 
attempt to remove some shortcoming of the traditional ones, the 
field is still open. Subsection A discusses the important issues 
that routing protocols need to deal with. Applicability of 
Control'Plane'
OpenFlow'
Packet'
forwarding'
elements''
SDN Controller 
Control plane communication 
(flow rules) 
Data plane communication 
Ground Control Center 
Control plane communication 
(flow rules) 
Data plane communication 
Ground Control Center 

 
9 
various traditional protocols to UAV networks has been 
discussed in Subsection B. Also included in this subsection are 
new variants of these traditional protocols as well as some 
recently proposed UAV specific routing protocols. UAV 
networks are prone to delays and disruptions and Subsection C 
discusses the routing protocols that can be used in such 
situations. 
 
A. Routing issues to be resolved 
In addition to the requirements present in the generic wireless 
mesh networks, e.g., finding the most efficient route, allowing 
the network to scale, controlling latency, ensuring reliability, 
taking care of mobility and ensuring required QoS; routing in 
airborne 
networks 
requires 
location-awareness, 
energy-
awareness, and increased robustness to intermittent links and 
changing topology. Designing the network layer for UAV 
networks is still one of the most challenging tasks [3]. 
There are some papers that have looked into the use of 
existing routing protocols for possible use in airborne networks. 
Although conventional ad hoc routing protocols are designed 
for mobile nodes, they are not necessarily suitable for airborne 
nodes because of varying requirements of dynamicity and link 
interruptions. Therefore, there still exists a need for a routing 
protocol tailored to the particular needs of airborne networks 
that adapts to high mobility, dynamic topology and different 
routing capabilities [30]. Routing protocols try to increase 
delivery ratio, reduce delays and resource consumption. 
Additionally, one has to consider issues related to scalability, 
Loop freedom, energy conservation, and efficient use of 
resources also needs to be resolved [31]. 
 
B. Applicability of existing routing protocols 
A number of routing protocols that have been proposed for 
MANETs try to adapt the proactive, table based, protocols of 
the wired era to ad hoc wireless networks with mobile nodes. 
Many of these and also on-demand or reactive protocols suffer 
from routing overhead problems and consequently have 
scalability and bandwidth issues. Conditional update based 
protocols reduce overheads but location management remains 
an issue in dynamic networks like UAV networks. Some 
protocols that introduce the concept of cluster heads introduce 
performance issues and single point of failure [32]. A survey on 
WMN stationary or mobile nodes, points out that available 
MAC and routing protocols do not have enough scalability and 
the throughput drops significantly as the number of nodes or 
hops increase. It goes on to add that protocol improvement in a 
single layer will not solve all the problems so all existing 
protocols need to be enhanced or replaced by new ones for 
UAV Networks [33]. 
Due to apparent similarity of UAV networks with MANETs 
and VANETs researchers have studied protocols used in those 
environments for possible application in aerial networks. Even 
in these environments the search for more improved protocols 
is on. However, multi-UAV networks may have a number of 
different requirements to take care of e.g. mobility patterns and 
node localization, frequent node removal and addition, 
intermittent link management, power constraints, application 
areas and their QoS requirements. Due to many of these issues 
peculiar to UAV networks, while modifications have been 
proposed to MANET protocols, there is a need to develop new 
routing algorithms to have reliable communication among 
UAVs [7] and from UAVs to the control center(s). We shall 
discuss a number of networking protocols using the following 
well-known classification with a view to see their usefulness for 
UAV Networks: 1) Static protocols 2) Proactive protocols 3) 
On-demand or Reactive protocols, and 4) Hybrid protocols. 
 
1) Static Routing Protocols 
Static protocols have static routing tables, which are 
computed and loaded when the task starts. These tables cannot 
be updated during an operation. Because of this constraint, 
these systems are not fault tolerant or suitable for dynamically 
changing environment. Their applicability to UAV networks is 
limited and is only presented here for academic interest.  
• 
One such protocol is Load Carry and Deliver Routing 
(LCAD) [34] in which the ground node passes the data to a 
UAV, which carries it to the destination. It aims to 
maximize the throughput while increasing security. 
Because of use of a single UAV, data delivery delays are 
longer in LCAD but it achieves higher throughput. LCAD 
can scale its throughput by using multiple UAVs to relay 
the information to multiple destinations. It is possible to 
use this for delay tolerant and latency insensitive bulk data 
transfer. 
• 
Multi Level Hierarchical Routing [MLHR] [7] solves the 
scalability problems faced in large-scale Vehicular 
networks. These networks are normally organized as flat 
structures because of which performance degrades when 
the size increases. Organizing the network as hierarchical 
structure increases size and operation area. Similarly UAV 
networks can be grouped into clusters where only the 
cluster head has connections outside cluster. The cluster 
head disseminates data by broadcasting to other nodes in 
the cluster. In UAV networks frequent change of cluster 
head would impose large over head on the network. Figure 
4 depicts this pictorially. 
 
	  
Fig. 4: Multi-Level Hierarchical Routing in UAV networks 
 
• 
Data Centric Routing: Routing is done based on the 
content of data. This can be used for one-to-many 
Affected Area 
Aﬀected'Area'
CH 
CH 
CH: Cluster Head 

 
10 
transmission in UAV networks when the data is 
requested by a number of nodes, It works well with 
cluster topologies where cluster head is responsible for 
disseminating information to other nodes in the cluster 
[3]. 
 
2) Proactive routing protocols 
Proactive routing protocols (PRP) use tables in their nodes to 
store all the routing information of other nodes or nodes of a 
specific region in the network. The tables need to be updated 
when topology changes. The main advantage of proactive 
routing is that it contains the latest information of the routes. 
But to keep the tables up-to-date a number of messages need to 
be exchanged between nodes. This makes them unsuitable for 
UAV network because of bandwidth constraints. Another issue 
that makes them unsuitable for UAV networks is their slow 
reaction to topology changes causing delays [7]. Two main 
PRPs that have been used in MANETS/VANETS are 
Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR) and Destination-
Sequenced Distance Vector (DSDV) protocols. 
• 
Optimized Link State Routing (OLSR) is currently one of 
the most employed routing algorithms for ad hoc networks. 
Routes to all destinations are determined at startup and then 
maintained by an update process. Nodes exchange topology 
information with other nodes of the network regularly by 
broadcasting the link-state costs of its neighboring nodes to 
other nodes using a flooding strategy. Other nodes update 
their view of the network by choosing the next hop by 
applying shortest path algorithm to all destinations. OLSR 
[124], therefore, tracks network topology. In UAV the node 
location and interconnecting links change rapidly and this 
would cause increased number of control messages to be 
exchanged. Increased overhead of topology control 
messages would lead not only to contention and packet loss 
but would also put a strain on already constrained 
bandwidth of UAV networks. Optimization involves 
selecting some nodes as multipoint relays (MPR), which 
alone forward the control traffic reducing the transmission 
required. MPRs declare link state information to all the 
nodes that selected them as an MPR. MPRs also 
periodically announce to the network that it has 
reachability to all the nodes that selected it as an MPR. 
OLSR link-quality extension can be used to take into 
account the quality of links. The details are given in RFC 
3636 [35] and an evaluation on several metrics in [36]. 
While flooding of control signals is avoided with addition 
of MPRs, recalculation of routes is still an issue with 
limited computing power of UAV nodes. GSR, global state 
routing, is another variation of link state routing that 
provides improvement by restricting update messages only 
between intermediate nodes. The size of update message is 
large and intermediate nodes keep changing in aerial 
networks. This increases both overhead and bandwidth 
required. FSR, fisheye state routing, attempts to reduce 
overhead by more frequent small updates to the closer 
“within fisheye scope” nodes. In networks where the nodes 
are mobile this may introduce inaccuracy. Another 
variation called STAR, source-tree adaptive routing, 
reduces the overheads by making the update dissemination 
conditional rather than periodic. However, it increases 
memory and processing overheads in large and mobile 
networks. DREAM, distance routing effect algorithm for 
mobility, has a different approach, as each node knows its 
geographical coordinates using a GPS. These coordinates 
are periodically exchanged between each node and stored 
in a routing table (called a location table). This consumes 
lesser bandwidth than link state. It is more scalable. 
Frequency of updates can be made proportional to velocity 
of nodes to reduce overhead. The maximum velocity is 
used to calculate the possible distance that the destination 
could move. This process is repeated at each hop with an 
undefined recovery mechanism if there are no one-hop 
neighbors within the wedge [125]. However, the authors in 
[126] have found that the complexity of DREAM does not 
appear to provide benefits over a simple flood. 
 
• 
Destination Sequenced Distance Vector (DSDV) is a table-
driven proactive routing protocol, which mainly uses the 
Bellman–Ford algorithm with small adjustments for ad hoc 
networks. It uses two types of update packets-“full-dump” 
and “incremental”. Whenever the topology of the network 
changes, “incremental-dump” packets are sent. This 
reduces overhead but overhead is still large due to periodic 
updates. DSDV uses sequence numbers to determine 
freshness of the routes and avoid loops. True to the 
characteristics of proactive protocols, this protocol needs 
large network bandwidth for update procedures. Along 
with this the computing and storage burden of a proactive 
protocol puts DSDV at a disadvantage for aerial networks. 
In [127] authors have compared performance of DSDV 
with other protocols. 
• 
BABEL is based on distance-vector routing protocol. It is 
suitable for unstable networks as it limits frequency and 
duration of events such as routing loops and black holes 
during re-convergence. Even when mobility is detected it 
quickly converges to a loop free, not necessarily optimal, 
configuration. BABEL, explained in RFC 6126 [37] has 
provisions for link quality estimation. It can implement 
shortest-path routing or use a metric. One of its downside is 
that it relies on periodic routing table updates and generates 
more traffic than protocols that send updates when the 
network topology changes [32]. In [128] Rosati et al. have 
shown on that based on datagram loss rate and average 
outage time, BABEL fails to deliver in the UAV 
environment. 
• 
Better 
Approach 
to 
Mobile 
Ad 
Hoc 
Network 
(B.A.T.M.A.N.) [38] is a relatively new proactive routing 
protocol for Wireless Ad hoc Mesh Networks that could be 
used in environments like Mobile Ad hoc Networks 
(MANETs). 
The 
protocol 
proactively 
maintains 
information about the existence of all nodes in the mesh 
that 
are 
accessible 
via 
single-hop 
or 
multi-hop 
communication links. For each destination the next hop 
neighbor is identified which is used to communicate with 

 
11 
this destination. B.A.T.M.A.N algorithm only cares about 
the best next-hop for each destination. It does not calculate 
the complete route, which makes a very fast and efficient 
implementation possible. Thus communication links may 
have varying quality in terms of packet loss, data rates, and 
interference. New links may appear and known links 
disappear frequently. B.A.T.M.A.N. considers these 
challenges by doing statistical analysis of protocol packet 
loss and propagation speed and does not depend on state or 
topology information from other nodes. Routing decisions 
are based on the knowledge about the existence or lack of 
information. As nodes continuously broadcast origin 
messages (OGMs); without packet loss, these messages 
would overwhelm the network. The scalability of 
B.A.T.M.A.N. depends on packet loss and thus it is unable 
to operate in reliable wired networks. B.A.T.M.A.N. 
protocol packets contain only a very limited amount of 
information and are therefore very small. If some protocol 
packets are lost, the information about them helps in better 
routing decisions. B.A.T.M.A.N.'s crucial point is the 
decentralization of the knowledge about the best route 
through the network — no single node has all the data. A 
network of collective intelligence is created. This approach 
has shown in practice that it is reliable and loop-free [39]. 
The self-interference caused by data traffic leads to 
oscillations in the network. The batman-adv performs 
better than B.A.T.M.A.N [129]. Comparative studies of 
B.A.T.M.A.N. have shown varying results. Some studies 
show performance of B.A.T.M.A.N. to be same as OLSR. 
When maximum number of nodes with maximum packet 
length scenario is taken, OLSR performed better than 
B.A.T.M.A.N. With mobility factor also OLSR performed 
better than B.A.T.M.A.N.. In bandwidth-limited networks 
all protocols gave similar throughputs but without 
bandwidth restrictions BABEL and B.A.T.M.A.N. perform 
better than OLSR for large number of users (15 or more). 
For small network sizes (5 mesh nodes), the three routing 
protocols behave similarly [40], [41]. In another study with 
a static wireless network of 7x7 grid of nodes, 
B.A.T.M.A.N. 
outperforms 
OLSR 
on 
almost 
all 
performance metrics. In another study B.A.T.M.A.N. 
performed 15% better than OLSR [42].  
 
3) Reactive routing protocols 
Reactive Routing Protocol (RRP) is an on-demand routing 
protocol in which a route between a pair of nodes is stored 
when there is communication between them. RRP is designed 
to overcome the overhead problem of proactive routing 
protocols. Because of on-demand nature, there is no periodic 
messaging making RRP bandwidth efficient. On the other hand, 
the procedure of finding routes can take a long time; therefore, 
high latency may appear during the route finding process. 
Reactive protocols can be of two types: source routing and hop-
by-hop routing. In source routing each data packet carries the 
complete source to destination address so intermediate nodes 
can forward packets based on this information. No periodic 
beaconing is required to maintain connectivity. This does not 
scale well as route failure probability increases with the 
network size and also the header size grows increasing the 
overhead. In hop-by-hop routing, each data packet only carries 
the destination address and the next hop address. Intermediate 
nodes maintain routing table to forward data. The advantage of 
this strategy is that routes are adaptable to the dynamically 
changing environment. The disadvantage of this strategy is that 
each intermediate node must store and maintain routing 
information for each active route and each node may require 
being aware of their surrounding neighbors through the use of 
beaconing messages [8], [32]. Two commonly used RRPs are 
Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) and AODV. 
• 
Dynamic Source Routing (DSR) has been designed mainly 
for multi-hop wireless mesh ad hoc networks of mobile 
nodes. It allows networks to be self-organizing and self-
configuring without the need for any existing network 
infrastructure. DSR works entirely on demand and it scales 
automatically to what is needed to react to changes in the 
routes currently in use. It’s “route discovery” and “route 
maintenance” mechanisms allow nodes to discover and 
maintain routes to arbitrary destinations. It allows selection 
from multiple routes to any destination and this feature can 
be used for applications like load balancing. It guarantees 
loop-free routing [43]. When applied to UAV networks, 
finding a new route with DSR can be cumbersome [44]. 
Each packet has to carry addresses of all nodes from source 
to destination making it unsuitable for large networks and 
also for networks where topology is fluid. 
• 
Ad hoc On Demand Distance Vector (AODV) is a hop-by-
hop reactive routing protocol for mobile ad hoc networks. 
It adjusts well to dynamic link conditions, has low 
processing and memory overhead, low network utilization, 
and determines unicast routes to destinations within the ad 
hoc network [45]. It is similar to DSR but unlike DSR each 
packet has only destination address so overheads are lower. 
The route reply in DSR carries address of every node while 
in AODV only the destination IP address. In AODV, the 
source node (and also other relay nodes) stores the next-
hop information corresponding to each data transmission. 
There is minimal routing traffic in the network since routes 
are built on demand. It has been studied for possible 
adaptation in UAV networks. However, there are delays 
during route construction and link or node failures may 
trigger route discovery that introduces extra delays and 
consumes more bandwidth as the size of the network 
increases. 
The 
throughput 
drops 
dramatically 
as 
intermittent links become more pervasive. The number of 
RREQ messages increases at first, as the route discovery is 
triggered more frequently and after some point starts to 
decrease as network performance is so impacted that even 
RREQ messages can no longer be carried over the network 
[30]. Shirani et al. [139] have proposed a combined routing 
protocol, called the Reactive-Greedy-Reactive (RGR), for 
aerial applications. This protocol combines Greedy 
Geographic Forwarding (GGF) and reactive routing 
mechanisms. The proposed RGR employs location 
information of UAVs as well as reactive end-to-end paths 

 
12 
in the routing process. Simulation results show that RGR 
outperforms existing protocols such as AODV in search 
missions in terms of delay and packet delivery ratio.  
 
A number of researchers have compared various protocols in 
different settings. In one investigation, it has been found that for 
TCP traffic and mobile nodes, in terms of routing overheads, 
DSR outperforms AODV, TORA (discussed later) and OLSR 
as it sends the least amount of routing traffic into the network. 
In terms of throughput, OLSR outperformed other protocols in 
all the scenarios considered [46]. In another investigation effect 
of some modifications in AODV has been studied. AODV has a 
flat structure and has the potential to support dynamic networks. 
To take care of the significant overhead due to frequent 
topology changes and intermittent links, the researchers utilized 
some stable links and limited duplicate flooding during route 
construction. This scenario is possible in UAV networks 
because UAV can hover over a location and form relatively 
stable links with each other. The flat structure of AODV is then 
converted into hierarchical routing structure by segmenting the 
network into clusters. The advantage here is that duplicate route 
requests are limited to certain clusters instead of flooding the 
entire network [30]. 
 
4) Hybrid routing protocols 
By using Hybrid Routing Protocols (HRP), the large latency 
of the initial route discovery process in reactive routing 
protocols can be decreased and the overhead of control 
messages in proactive routing protocols can be reduced. It is 
especially suitable for large networks, and a network is divided 
into a number of zones where intra-zone routing is performed 
with the proactive approach while inter-zone routing is done 
using the reactive approach. Hybrid routing adjusts strategy 
according to network characteristics and is useful for MANETs. 
However, in MANETs and UAV networks dynamic node and 
link behavior makes it difficult to obtain and maintain 
information. This makes adjusting routing strategies hard to 
implement. 
• 
Zone Routing Protocol (ZRP) [47] is based on the concept 
of zones. Zones are formed by sets of nodes within a 
predefined area. In MANETs, the largest part of the whole 
traffic is directed to nearby nodes. Intra-zone routing uses 
proactive approach to maintain routes. The inter-zone 
routing is responsible for sending data packets to outside of 
the zone. It uses reactive approach to maintain routes. 
Knowledge of the routing zone topology is leveraged by 
the ZRP to improve the efficiency of a globally reactive 
route query/reply mechanism. The proactive maintenance 
of routing zones also helps improve the quality of 
discovered routes, by making them more robust to changes 
in network topology. 
Nodes belonging to different subnets must send their 
communication to a subnet that is common to both nodes. 
This may congest parts of the network. The most dominant 
parameter influencing the efficiency of ZRP is the zone 
radius. However, the cost of ZRP is increasing complexity, 
and in the cases where ZRP performs only slightly better 
than the pure protocol components, one can speculate 
whether the cost of added complexity outweighs the 
performance improvement 
• 
Temporarily Ordered Routing Algorithm (TORA) [48] is a 
hybrid distributed routing protocol for multi-hop networks, 
in which routers only maintain information about adjacent 
routers. Its aim is to limit the propagation of control 
message in the highly dynamic mobile computing 
environment, by minimizing the reactions to topological 
changes. It builds and maintains a Directed Acyclic Graph 
(DAG) from the source node to the destination. TORA 
does not use a shortest path solution, and longer routes are 
often used to reduce network overhead. It is preferred for 
quickly finding new routes in case of broken links and for 
increasing adaptability [7]. The basic, underlying algorithm 
is neither distance-vector nor link-state; it is a type of a 
link-reversal algorithm. The protocol builds a loop-free, 
multipath routing structure that is used for forwarding 
traffic to a given destination. Allows a mix of source and 
the destination initiated routing simultaneously for 
different destinations. TORA may produce temporary 
invalid routes. 
5) Geographic 2-dimension and 3-dimension protocols 
A number of routing schemes have been proposed for 2-
dimensional networks that can be modeled using planar 
geometry. Many prominent ones have been described in this 
survey and some have been shown to have good performance 
on metrics like delivery, latency and throughput in simulations. 
Geographic schemes assume knowledge of geographic position 
of the nodes. They assume that the source knows the 
geographic position of the node and sends message to the 
destination co-ordinates without route discovery. The most 
common technique used in geographic routing is greedy 
forwarding in which each node forwards the message to a node 
closest to the destination based only on the local information. A 
situation may arise when the message gets trapped in the local 
minimum and progress stops. The recovery mechanism is 
usually face routing which finds a path to another node, where 
greedy forwarding can be resumed [130]. 
In many applications, it may be more appropriate to model 
UAV networks in 3 dimensions. Some protocols have been 
proposed which, like their 2-dimensional counterparts, use 
greedy routing that attempts to deliver packet to the node 
closest to the destination. But the recovery from local minima 
becomes more challenging, as the faces surrounding the 
network hole now expand in two dimensions, and are much 
harder to capture. They differ mainly in the recovery methods 
when packets get stuck in the local minima [131].  
Greedy-Hull-Greedy (GHG) protocol proposed in [132] 
involves routing on the hull to escape local minima. This is a 3 
dimensional equivalent of routing on the face for 2-dimensional 
protocols. The authors have proposed PUDT (Partial Unit 
Delaunay Triangulation) protocol to divide the network space 
into a number of closed sub-spaces to limit the local recovery 
process.  
In [133] the authors propose a Greedy-Random-Greedy 
(GRG) protocol using which the message is forwarded greedily 

 
13 
until a local minimum is encountered. To come out of local 
minima a randomized recovery algorithm like region-limited 
random walk or random walk on the surface is used. The 
authors present simulation results for following five recovery 
algorithms: random walk on the dual, random walk on the 
surface, random walk on the graph, bounded DFS on a spanning 
tree, and bounded flooding. DFS on the spanning tree has 
shown good performance for sparse networks while random 
walk approaches perform well for denser networks. 
GDSTR (Greedy Distributed Spanning Tree Routing)-3D 
routing scheme described in  [134] uses 2-hop neighbor 
information during greedy forwarding to reduce the likelihood 
of local minima, and aggregates 3D node coordinates using two 
2D convex hulls. They have shown through simulation and 
testbed experiments that GDSTR-3D is able to guarantee packet 
delivery and achieve hop stretch close to 1.  
Lam and Qian contend that GHG assumes a unit-ball graph 
and requires accurate location information, which are both 
unrealistic assumptions [131]. GRG uses random recovery, 
which is inefficient and does not guarantee delivery. The 
authors propose MDT (multi-hop Delaunay triangulation) 
protocol, which provides guaranteed delivery for general 
connectivity graphs in 3 dimensions, efficient forwarding of 
packets from local minima and low routing stretch. The authors 
also provide simulation results that show that MDT provides 
better routing stretch compared to a number of 2-dimensional 
and 3-dimensional protocols. They also show its suitability for 
dynamic topologies with changes in the number of nodes and 
links. 
 
Table VI summarizes many of the routing protocols 
discussed above and their applicability to the UAV 
environment. 
 
C.  Routing in networks prone to delays and disruptions 
According to the Delay Tolerant Networking Research 
Group, the term Delay Tolerant Networking relates to extreme 
and performance-challenged environments where continuous 
end-to-end connectivity cannot be assumed. Initially defined for 
interplanetary communication, it is now concerned with 
interconnecting highly heterogeneous networks together. When 
disaster strikes, and normal communication breaks down, lack 
of information flow could cause delay in rescue and recovery 
operations. In such situations a UAV network with delay 
tolerant features is considered to be one of the most effective 
communication methods [49]. In the absence of these features, 
situations like intermittent links, dynamic network, node 
failures and node replacements could result in breakdown of 
communication. Applications in such cases must tolerate delays 
beyond those introduced by conventional IP forwarding, and 
these networks are referred to as delay/disruption tolerant 
networks.  
In many harsh situations connectivity is intermittent and 
networks get partitioned for long durations. This causes 
transmission delays longer than threshold limits described by 
TCP protocol and packets whose destinations cannot be reached 
are usually dropped, making TCP inefficient. 
 
TABLE VI 
APPLICABILITY OF PROTOCOLS TO UAV NETWORKS 
Protocol type 
Problems in application to UAV networks 
Static 
Fixed tables, not suitable for dynamic topology, does 
not handle changes well, not scalable, higher possibility 
of human errors 
LCAD 
Delivery delays 
MLHR 
CH becomes single point of failure, capacity issues at 
CH 
Data Centric 
Network overload due to query-response. Problems as
in cluster based. 
Proactive 
Large overhead for maintaining tables up-to-date, 
bandwidth constrained networks cannot use them, slow 
reaction to topology changes results in delays 
OLSR, GSR, 
FSR 
Higher overheads, routing loops 
DSDV 
Consumes large network bandwidth, higher overheads, 
periodic updates 
BABEL 
Higher overheads and more bandwidth requirement due
to periodic updates  
B.A.T.M.A.N. 
Depends on packet loss, does not perform well if
network is reliable. 
On-demand or 
reactive 
High latency in route finding. Source routing does not
scale well, for large network overhead may increase
because of large header size. For hop-by-hop
intermediate node must have the routing table. 
DSR 
Complete route address from source to destination,
scaling is a problem, dynamic network is a problem 
AODV 
Lower overhead at the cost of delays during route
construction. Link failure may trigger route discovery-
more delays and higher bandwidth as the size of the 
network increases 
Hybrid 
Hard to implement for dynamic networks 
ZRP 
Inter zone traffic may congest. Radius is an important
factor may be difficult to maintain in UAV networks.
Complexity higher 
TORA 
May produce temporarily invalid results 
Geographic 3D 
GHG 
Requires location information which may become 
unrealistic in many applications 
GRG 
Uses random walk recovery which is inefficient and 
does not guarantee delivery of messages 
GDSTR-3D 
Assumes static topology 
MDT 
None documented   
 
UDP provides no reliable service and cannot “hold and 
forward.” The traditional routing protocols such AODV and 
OLSR also do not work properly during disruptions. In these 
cases, when packets arrive and there are no end-to-end paths for 
their destinations, the packets are simply dropped [50]. While 
traditional solutions do not guarantee connectivity, the protocol 
used in UAV networks should in some way allow buffering and 
forwarding of packets. The existing protocols developed for 
infrastructure based Internet are not able to handle data 
transmission in such networks and new routing protocols and 
algorithms should be developed to handle transmission 
efficiently [57]. In terrestrial networks, with mobile nodes, 
experiments have shown 80% delivery rate in the Disaster 
Information System when delay tolerance features were used 
[49], [52]. 
For UAV networks prone to intermittent links and 
partitioning we would need to build in tolerance to delays and 
disruptions. End-to-end reliability methods like multi-step 

 
14 
request-response, 
acknowledgements 
and 
timed-out 
transmission will not work due to the long delays and 
disconnections in these networks. To achieve tolerance to 
delays and disruptions the architecture has to be based on the 
“store-carry-forward” (SCF) protocol in which a node stores 
and carries the data (often for extended periods) till it can 
duplicate it in one or more nearby node(s). In such a case, the 
node must have adequate buffering capacity to store the data 
until it gets an opportunity to forward it. To be able to deliver 
messages efficiently to their destinations, for each message the 
best node and time to forward data should be known. If a 
message cannot be delivered immediately due to network 
partition, then the nodes chosen to carry the message are those 
that have highest probability of successfully delivering the 
message. In SCF routing the message is moved from source to 
the destination one hop at a time. Selection of the path from 
source to destination depends on whether the topology that 
evolves over time is deterministic or probabilistic. If the nodes 
know nothing about the network states then the best they can do 
is to randomly forward packets to their neighbors [51], [53]. 
Since end-to-end paths are not available in UAV networks, 
traditional routing protocols that assume end-to-end path before 
communication starts fail to deliver. Consequently, many 
researchers have advanced new routing algorithms such as 
Direct Delivery [135], which proposes single copy method for 
intermittently connected networks. Nodes are assigned 
probability of delivery of a packet to the destination. They 
incorporate a hybrid scheme consisting of random and utility-
based strategies. The authors claim that as compared to 
Epidemic method, which essentially involves multiple copies, 
the bandwidth required is less. Epidemic routing involves 
multiple copies to be sent [136]. A controlled replication 
algorithm called Spray and Wait has been proposed in [137].  
 Since UAVs are location aware due to navigational 
requirements, this could be used to perform geographical 
routing if the position of the destination is known. To conserve 
bandwidth and to make it possible to use routing algorithms in 
energy-constrained 
systems, 
viability 
of 
beacon-less 
geographical routing in opportunistic intermittently connected 
mobile networks has been explored. Beacons are regularly 
transmitted special messages that are used by many routing 
algorithms to determine a node’s neighbors. They consume 
bandwidth and energy and the information may not be accurate. 
To apply this to UAV networks, it must be remembered that 
resources at the UAV-nodes such as storage, power and 
bandwidth are limited. The delivery rate is affected by delivery 
distance, number of encounters, network condition and the 
node’s movements. Delivery time is also important and in this 
regard it may be noticed that this architecture is not suitable for 
real-time contents as delays could extend to hours and days. 
Also, a route that is suitable currently may not remain stable for 
long. How long it will remain stable will depend on how fast 
the topology changes. If it is determined that some routes are 
stable then route caching can be employed to avoid unnecessary 
routing protocol exchanges [54]. Some of the schemes use 
knowledge of location of the nodes, others may flood the 
network with packets and yet others may use ‘carrier’ nodes to 
carry data. Let us consider briefly three types of routing 
methods that can be examined for UAV networks: 
 
1. Deterministic routing 
2. Stochastic routing 
a. 
Epidemic routing based approach 
b. Estimation based approach 
c. 
Node movement control based approach 
d. Coding based approach 
3. Social networks based approach 
 
According to Cardei, Liu and Wu [138], routes in networks 
with sporadic node contacts consist of a sequence of time-
dependent communication opportunities, called contacts, during 
which messages are transferred from the source towards the 
destination. Contacts are described by capacity, direction, the 
two endpoints, and temporal properties such as begin/end time, 
and latency. Graphs at different points of time need to be 
overlapped to find an end-to-end path. In UAV networks, the 
contacts of a node keep changing over time, as their duration 
over which they can communicate is limited. With this in view, 
let us now see the suitability of various types of protocols for 
UAV networks. 
 
1) Deterministic Routing 
In deterministic routing methods, we assume that the future 
movement and links are completely known. In the context of 
UAV networks this would be possible in applications where 
UAVs fly in controlled formations or in applications where they 
have to hover over an area. If all the hosts have global 
knowledge of the availability and motion of the other hosts then 
a tree approach can be used for selecting paths. A tree is built 
taking source node as the root and adding child nodes and the 
time associated with these nodes. A final path can be selected 
from the tree by choosing the earliest time to reach the 
destination node. If the characteristic profiles are initially 
unknown to the hosts then they learn these by exchanging the 
available profiles with the neighbors. Paths are selected based 
on this partial knowledge. This method can be improved by 
requiring the hosts to record the paths that past messages have 
taken. The deterministic algorithms presume global knowledge 
of nodes and links in space and time. Handorean et al. present 
the Global Oracular Algorithm [56] where a host has full 
knowledge of characteristic profile of all hosts. The authors in 
[57] provide a survey of such protocols. These methods would, 
therefore, not be appropriate for cases where topology of the 
network changes frequently or availability of nodes and links is 
not certain. The mobility of the nodes does mean that the 
network topology will constantly change and that nodes 
constantly come in contact with new nodes and leave the 
communication range of others. If nodes can estimate likely 
meeting times or meeting frequencies, we have a network with 
predicted contacts [138]. In general, deterministic techniques 
are based on formulating models for time-dependent graphs and 
finding a space-time shortest path in delay prone networks by 
converting the routing problem to classic graph theory or by 
using optimization techniques for end-to-end delivery metrics. 

 
15 
Deterministic routing protocols use single-copy unicast for 
messages in transit and provide good performance with less 
resource usage than stochastic routing techniques. This is true 
in applications where node trajectory is coordinated or can be 
predicted with accuracy, as in interplanetary networking. A 
multigraph is defined where vertices represent the delay tolerant 
nodes and edges describe the time-varying link capacity 
between 
nodes. 
Deterministic 
routing 
mechanisms 
are 
appropriate only for scenarios where networks exhibit 
predictable topologies. 
 
2) Stochastic routing 
This is the case when the network behavior is random and 
unknown. In this situation it becomes important to decide where 
and when to forward the packets. One possible method to route 
messages in such a case is to forward them to any contacts 
within range. The decision could also be based on historical 
data, mobility patterns and other information. The protocols in 
this category maintain a time varying network topology that is 
updated whenever nodes encounter each other. For example, in 
Shortest Expected Path Routing (SEPR) nodes maintain a 
stochastic model of the network. Each node constructs a time 
varying graph comprising nodes they have encountered and 
links that reflect the connection probability between nodes. The 
key limitation of SEPR is that it has poor scalability due to its 
reliance on the Dijkstra’s algorithm which runs in time of the 
order of O(n2), where n is the number of nodes. Moreover, it is 
not suitable for networks with delay tolerant features and high 
node mobility [58]. A routing protocol called Resource 
Allocation Protocol for Intentional Delay Tolerant Networks 
(RAPID) has been proposed that considers network resources 
such as bandwidth and storage when optimizing a given route 
metric. This is especially critical when nodes have resource 
constraints [59].  
In UAV networks with intermittent links and opportunistic 
contacts, routing is challenging since the time when the nodes 
will come in contact and for how long are not known. When the 
contact does happen, it needs to be determined whether the peer 
in contact is likely to take the packet closer to the destination. 
The decision to hand over the packet to the contact depends on, 
besides the probability of the contact taking the packet closer to 
the destination, available buffer spaces in the two nodes and 
relative priority to forward this packet compared to other 
packets the node holds. Additionally, if the nodes have 
information about their location this information can be used to 
advantage. According to [138] in the situation described above, 
the main objective of routing is to maximize the probability of 
delivery at the destination while minimizing the end-to-end 
delay. We will discuss below some of the stochastic protocols 
viz. Epidemic Routing, Spray and Wait, Node movement 
control and Coding based.  
 
a) Epidemic Routing-Based Approach 
This method is used in networks of mobile nodes that are 
mostly disconnected [138]. This is a stochastic, flooding 
protocol. Nodes make a number of copies of messages and 
forward them to other nodes called relays. The relays transfer 
the messages to other nodes when they come in contact with 
them. No prediction is made regarding the link or path 
forwarding probability. In this way, messages are quickly 
distributed through the connected portions of the network. 
However, upon contact with each other nodes exchange only 
the data they do not have in their memory buffer. Hence it is 
robust to node or network failure, guaranteeing that upon 
sufficient number of random exchanges, all nodes will 
eventually receive all messages in minimum amount of time 
[54]. The main issue with epidemic routing is that messages are 
flooded in the whole network to reach just one destination. This 
creates contention for buffer space and transmission time 
Epidemic routing uses node movement to spread messages 
during contacts. With large buffers, long contacts or a low 
network load, epidemic routing is very effective and provides 
minimum delay and high success rate, as messages reach the 
destination on multiple paths. When no information is available 
about the movement of nodes, packets received by a node are 
forwarded to all or some of the node’s neighbors except from 
where it came. 
This approach does not require information about the 
network connectivity. However, it requires large amounts of 
buffer space, bandwidth and power. Spray and wait is a 
variation in which each message has a fixed number of copies 
[137]. With this approach, the source node begins with L copies 
for each message. When a source or relay node with more than 
one copies comes in contact with another node with no copies it 
may transfer all n copies in normal mode or n/2 copies in binary 
mode (Spray phase). So after the contact both nodes have n/2 
copies. With one copy a direct contact with destination is 
required (Wait phase). A message will be physically stored and 
transmitted just once even when a transfer may virtually 
involve multiple copies.  
Approaches using indiscriminate or controlled flooding use 
varying amount of buffer space, bandwidth and power. There 
are variations like Prophet and MaxProp protocols, in which 
data is arranged in order of priority based on some criteria. 
However, these methods deliver good performance in a regular 
movement case. MaxProp protocol puts a priority order on the 
queue of packets. It determines the messages to be transmitted 
or dropped first. The priorities are based on the path likelihoods 
to peers [60] [61]. However, our airborne network topology 
may change without any known pattern. Also, even the random 
walk model may not describe movement of nodes due to 
horizontal as well as vertical motions. In such cases a three-
dimensional architecture may better define the randomly violent 
topological changes and a usable path can be generated in an 
unpredictable moment. 
 In ant colony based routing strategy [140], the authors have 
proposed an exploration-exploitation model for UAV networks 
that is based on ant foraging behavior. Exploration is defined as 
the ability to explore diversified routes while Exploitation is the 
process to focus on a promising group of solutions. In networks 
with frequent partitioning new routes need to be explored and 
every contact opportunity is used to forward the messages. The 
authors have shown that performance comes close to Epidemic 
Routing (which provides an upper bound) in terms of delivery. 

 
16 
b) Estimation Based Approach 
Instead 
of 
forwarding 
messages 
to 
neighbors 
indiscriminately, intermediate nodes estimate the probability of 
each outgoing link eventually reaching the destination. Based 
on this estimation, the intermediate nodes decide whether to 
store the packet and wait for a better chance, or decide when 
and to which node to forward. Variations in this could be 
decisions based on estimation of the next hop forwarding 
probability or decision based on average end-to-end metrics 
such as shortest path or delay [57]. 
A representative routing protocol for networks with delay 
tolerant feature is one that uses delivery estimation. PROPHET, 
(Probabilistic Routing Protocol using History of Encounters and 
Transitivity), in [141] is such a protocol. PROPHET works on 
the realistic premise that node mobility is not truly random. The 
authors assume that nodes in a DTN tend to visit some locations 
more often than others and that node pairs that have had 
repeated contacts in the past are more likely to have contacts in 
the future. 
 
c) Node-Movement-Control Based Approaches 
Nodes could either wait for reconnection opportunity with 
another node passively or seek another node proactively. In the 
reactive case, where the node waits for reconnection, there may 
be long unacceptable transmission delays for some applications. 
In the proactive case, a number of approaches have been 
proposed to control node mobility for reducing delays. In one 
class of methods, trajectories of some nodes are altered to 
improve some system performance metrics like delay [62]. In 
message ferrying approach special ferry nodes carry data either 
on preplanned routes with other nodes coming close to a ferry 
and communicating with it or ferry nodes move randomly and 
other nodes send a service request as a response to which the 
chosen ferry node will come close to the requesting node [63]. 
Using DataMules, nodes that move randomly, have large 
storage capacity and renewable energy source, is another 
method in this category. According to [138], controlled ferrying 
can be used in UAV networks in disaster recovery where UAVs 
can be equipped with communication devices capable of storing 
a large number of messages and can be commanded to follow a 
trajectory that interconnects disconnected partitions.  
 
d) Coding Based Approaches 
The concept of network coding comes from information 
theory and can be applied in routing to further improve system 
throughput. Instead of simply forwarding packets, intermediate 
nodes combine some of the packets received so far and send 
them out as a new single packet to maximize the information 
flow [57]. Erasure coding involves more processing and hence 
requires more power but improve the worst-case delay [142]. 
The basic idea of erasure coding is to encode an original 
message into a large number of coding blocks. Suppose the 
original message contains k blocks. Using erasure coding, the 
message is encoded into n (n > k) blocks such that if k or more 
of the n blocks are received, the original message can be 
successfully decoded. In [143], the authors have shown that 
network coding performs better than probabilistic forwarding in 
disruption prone networks. Erasure coding includes redundant 
data and is useful where retransmission is impractical. One 
aspect to be kept in mind is that in UAV retransmission would 
be a different path with possibly different set of nodes and also 
storage needed for redundant information is limited. 
Hybrid Erasure Coding combines erasure coding and 
aggressive forwarding mechanism to send all packets in 
sequence during node contact. If the node battery has been 
drained or node loses mobility due to fault, it cannot deliver 
data to the destination creating a ‘black hole’ information loss 
problem. HEC solves the black hole problem by using the 
nodes’ contact period efficiently. 
 
3) Social Networks Based Routing 
When mobility of nodes is not totally random and the nodes 
are likely to be present with greater probability in some known 
places then the random mobility model, used in a large number 
of protocols, is not realistic. The nodes that visit these places 
have a contact probability and will have more success in 
delivering bundles. Notion of groups, communities and 
popularity of nodes can also be exploited [31]. However, 
protocols may overuse the popular nodes and performance may 
degrade because of limited capacity of these nodes. The 
expected delay may also increase because of contention. 
Integration of some level of randomness may benefit 
performance. This is relatively a new area and more work needs 
to be done before it can be appropriately exploited [64]. Some 
applications of UAV networks, e.g., providing communication 
over a disaster prone area or communication over an oil drilling 
platform, may provide an environment where this type of 
routing can be applied. 
Table VII gives DTN routing protocols and considerations 
for their application in UAV networks. 
 
IV. SEAMLESS HANDOVER 
The UAV mesh nodes may be stationed over a disaster struck 
area to provide communication services across the target area 
and form a network with slow dynamic links. On the other 
hand, in applications like crop survey, which require a 
sweeping coverage of an area, UAVs may move around at 
required speeds. During a prolonged mission UAVs may 
periodically go out of service as they go out of power or 
develop faults. Their communication interfaces may also be 
shut down to conserve power, or one or more of the UAVs may 
be withdrawn, when less dense network is required. In all these 
cases the network needs to reconfigure and the ongoing voice, 
video or data sessions are required to be handed over to one of 
the working UAVs according to some predefined criteria. 
Handover allows for total continuity of network communication 
with only a minor increase of message latency during the 
handover process [65]. Subsection A elaborates the types of 
handoffs in UAV networks. Applicability of existing handoff 
schemes and new developments that can be used in UAV 
networks are in Subsection B. Subsection C discusses the IEEE 
standard media independent handover. 
 

 
17 
 
TABLE VII 
 DELAY/DISRUPTION PRONE UAV NETWORKS 
DTN Routing 
Algorithm 
Considerations for application in UAV Networks 
Deterministic 
Useful when future availability and location of the 
nodes is known. In some UAV networks topology 
may change frequently and availability of nodes and 
links may not be certain. 
Stochastic 
 
Epidemic based 
Requires large buffer space per node, bandwidth and 
power. For UAV networks it must be noted that 
message delivery time depends on the buffer size. 
Comparatively delay is lower but with high-energy 
expenditure.  
Estimation/Probability/
Statistical 
Random methods work well for small networks but 
for large networks estimation result in large 
overheads. Maintains encounter but no location 
information. Changes in topology, like in UAV 
networks, affect convergence time. Delays are 
moderate 
at 
moderate 
energy 
consumption. 
Complexity is also moderate. Changes in topology 
affect convergence time.  
Node movement based UAVs can be made to follow a given trajectory that 
will connect source and destination nodes in 
partitioned networks. 
Message ferrying 
Location information is maintained. Large storage 
space required in ferries. Delays are high but energy 
expenditure is low. Can work with heterogeneous 
nodes. 
Coding-based 
Builds in redundant information so that retransmission 
is avoided. This aspect may be exploited in UAV 
networks. In UAVs retransmission would require 
finding a new path as disruptions are the norm. 
However, maintaining redundancy and aggressive 
forwarding takes additional bandwidth and buffer 
space. May provide better delivery rates than 
probabilistic in some settings but is inefficient if 
connectivity is good. 
Social Networks 
Applicable when some UAV nodes have ‘more likely’ 
locations. Such nodes must have higher buffer size 
and higher bandwidth links to avoid contention delays 
and losses 
 
A.  Handoffs in UAV networks 
The real advantage of wireless mesh networks become 
apparent when self-organization is coupled with seamless 
handover to provide continuity of service to the users. 
Handover, or handoff as it is commonly called, is common in 
cellular networks, where mobile stations frequently move out of 
the coverage area of one cell tower and into that of a 
neighboring tower. Handovers can be hard or soft. In a hard or 
standard handover, the connection from the old network is 
broken before it is made with the new network. This would 
interrupt all the user sessions currently in progress at the mobile 
node (Figure 5a). 
In case of soft or seamless handover, connection is made 
with the new network before breaking the connections from the 
old network. The original user sessions at the mobile station are 
maintained till the new link is up and handover action migrates 
the session to the new link as shown in Figure 5b. 
 
	  
	  
Fig. 5: a) Hard Handover b) Soft Handover 
 
Besides being hard or soft, handovers can also be classified 
as horizontal and vertical handovers. Horizontal handovers are 
intra-system where the mobile access device moves from one 
access point to another in the same network. In the case of 
vertical handover, the transfer of connection is between two 
networks of different technologies. Figure 6 depicts these two 
types of handovers pictorially. 
 
 
 
Fig. 6: Horizontal and Vertical Handovers 
 
The handovers can also be classified based on whether the 
mobile access device is controlling or assisting in the handover. 
If both the mobile device and the network are involved then we 
have a hybrid handover. These have been studied in the context 
of VANETs and mobile IP networks but not much work is 
available for UAV networks [66]. 
B.  Applicability of Existing Handover Schemes 
Lack of methods for seamless handover in UAVs, make 
people look at the work done in the areas of MANETS and 
VANETs. However, despite the need to provide seamless 
handover in VANETs, there are few studies regarding mobility 
protocols and there are no practical studies on mobility 
protocols 
using 
IEEE 
Wireless 
Access 
in 
Vehicular 
Environments (WAVE) communication [67]. WAVE consists 
of IEEE 802.11p and IEEE 1609.x to provide connectivity 
under the hostile operation conditions of VANET. However, 
Affected Area 
Affected Area 
Out of service 
Old links to out 
of service plane 
broken 
(a) 
Affected Area 
Affected Area 
Out of service 
New links 
made before 
breaking old 
ones 
Old links to out 
of service UAV 
removed 
Out of service 
(b) 
Horizontal Handover 
Vertical Handover 

 
18 
these standards do not address the network mobility issues, 
either inter- or intra-technology. VANETs are characterized by 
the high mobility and speed of nodes, resulting in short 
communication time, frequent changes in network topology and 
network partitioning. As VANETs are a special type of 
MANETs, routing Protocols and IEEE standards used in 
MANETs have also been considered for the VANET 
environment. The literature survey available on vehicular 
communication is very limited and adaptation of the work on 
mobile ad hoc networks [68]. 
The random waypoint (RWP) model, in which mobile node 
movement is considered random, is commonly employed in 
study of MANETs. Due to the highly dynamic characteristics of 
VANETs, network partition or merging can occur frequently, 
which results in the unavailability of existing route or 
availability of better routes. This causes the networks to 
reconfigure and may trigger handovers. The handover latency 
and the packet loss during handover process may cause serious 
degradation of system performance and QoS perceived by the 
users. RWP model is, therefore, considered to be a very poor 
approximation of vehicular mobility. A more accurate and 
realistic vehicular mobility description at both macroscopic and 
microscopic levels is required [69]. The selected model should 
take care of temporal and spatial dependencies and 
geographical restrictions that the nodes would be subjected to. 
Two models that have been used are street random waypoint 
(STRAW) and Manhattan. Furthermore, the scale of VANET 
may vary in a large range and the node density in the network 
may vary dynamically depending on various application 
scenarios. These are important issues and more studies are 
required on designing handover schemes for VANET 
application with a view to decrease handovers and improve 
packet delivery and latency. 
The above-mentioned considerations apply to mobile UAV 
networks as well. The problem is that there are only limited 
studies on efficient seamless handover even in IEEE 802.11-
based WMNs or VANETs [67]. Many traditional mobility 
management protocols, such as Mobile IP version 4 (MIPv4) 
and Mobile IP version 6 (MIPv6) have been applied to provide 
handover support for VANETs and schemes for performance 
enhancement have been proposed. In [150] the authors propose 
Vehicular IP in WAVE framework along with a mobility 
management scheme supported by Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PIMP) 
over WAVE for seamless communication. They propose and 
analytical model that demonstrates better handover performance 
of VIP-WAVE as compared to standard WAVE. In order to 
improve MIPv6 to support the real time handover, Hierarchical 
Mobile IPv6 (HMIPv6) and Fast Mobile IPv6 (FMIPv6) were 
proposed. Inter base-station (BS) transfers of mobile devices 
trigger excessive signaling and reduce throughput. To counter 
this the Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) proposed 
NEMO (network mobility). Although NEMO provides good 
mobility management, it does not work well in vehicular 
network environment [70]. As handover layer 2 and layer 3 
intervention, cross layer designs that reduce packet loss (L2 
function) as well as delay (L3 function) have been proposed. 
In an evaluation of MIPv6 and Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6), 
extended to enable enhanced support for multiple technologies, 
and integrated with a proposed mobility manager that monitors 
and selects the best access technology and network, the results 
show that overall the approach based on PMIPv6 performs 
better than the one based on MIPv6, especially when using 
IEEE 802.11p. Also, the former is capable of performing 
handover between two IEEE 802.11p networks without any 
data loss, even at moderate speeds [73]. The major problem in 
MIPv6 is the handover latency, which is the time required by 
vehicular node to become ready for sending or receiving 
packets post handover [74]. Another issue that is important is 
that MIPv4, MIPv6 and HMIPv6 are designed to handle 
terminal mobility, not for network mobility. NEMO protocol 
was proposed in 2005. The goal of the network mobility 
(NEMO) management is to effectively reduce the complexity of 
handover procedure and keep mobile devices connected to the 
Internet. The handover procedure is executed on the mobile 
device and mobility may cause real time services like mobile 
TV or voice over IP to get disconnected. Many mobility 
management protocols have been proposed but high degree of 
mobility in VANETs forces frequent handover causing 
problems in communication. A more rigorous evaluation of 
performance under various network topology and applications 
is required [66], [70]. 
In case of UAVs seamless handover procedure would involve 
exchange of a sequence of messages between the user mobile 
device and the UAV node that is being taken off service and the 
UAV node to which this user’s session would be transferred. 
The handover procedure results in a transfer of physical layer 
connectivity and state information from one UAV to another 
with respect to the mobile unit in consideration. The theoretical 
framework, similar to that in mobile wireless networks, 
involves network discovery, trigger and execution. In the 
network discovery phase, the mobile station discovers several 
wireless networks on assigned channels and creates a list of 
APs prioritized by the received signal strength. The station may 
listen passively for broadcast service advertisements or actively 
send probes. The decision to trigger transfer is taken based on 
multiple criteria like signal to noise ratio. In the execution 
phase the actual transfer of the sessions to the new access point 
takes place. All contextual information related to the mobile 
user is transferred to the new UAV. Table VIII gives important 
considerations for various protocols. 
 
C. 
Media Independent Handover 
IEEE 802 initially did not support handover between different 
types of networks. They also did not provide triggers to 
accelerate mobile IP based handovers. IEEE has now 
standardized Media independent handover (MIH) services 
through their standard IEEE 802.21 [73]. The key function of 
MIH, known as the Media Independent Handover Function 
(MIHF) is between the layer 2 wireless technologies and IP at 
layer 3 [75]. These services can be used for handovers and 
interoperability 
between 
IEEE-802 
and 
non-IEEE-802 
networks, e.g., cellular, 3GPP, 4G. The networks could be of  
 

 
19 
TABLE VIII 
PROTOCOLS FOR SEAMLESS HANDOVER 
Protocol 
Issues to be considered for UAV networks 
MIPv4 
IP address shortage, weak security mechanism, auto 
configuration of IP [67] 
MIPv6 
Has high handover latency due to signaling overhead, 
packet loss, not scalable, not efficient [71]. 
PMIPv4 
Improves latency but does not ensure seamless handover. 
Performs better than MIPv6, when using IEEE 802.11p. 
As proxy handles signaling the mobile nodes do not need 
any modifications, signaling overheads lesser than 
MIPv4 [67]. 
HMIPv6 
Introduced to reduce signaling between nodes and other 
equipment. It can also reduce handover latency due to 
smaller signaling and shorter path [71] 
FMIPv6 
Improvement over MIPv6. Relies on predictive method 
that is difficult to make accurate for fast and randomly
moving mobile nodes. It is not suitable for real time 
services in fast moving vehicles [71].  
NEMO 
IETF NEMO BS based on MIPv6. It is more effective 
than terminal mobility. It is by itself not sufficient for 
seamless handover, optimization is necessary. Route 
optimization may not be done due to security and 
incompatibility issues. Latency of link layer handover 
and NEMO signaling overhead affect the overall 
performance of mobility management significantly [72]. 
 
the same or different media type, wired or wireless. This 
standard provides link-layer intelligence and other related 
network information to upper layers to optimize handovers 
between heterogeneous networks. It consists of signaling and 
triggers and makes available information from MAC/PHY to 
network and application layers. The standard is a hybrid 
implementation as it supports cooperative use of information 
available with the mobile station and the network. The mobile 
station has information about signal to noise ratios of available 
networks and the network knows about the information about 
access points, mobile stations and the higher layer service 
availability. The handover process can be initiated by 
measurement reports and triggers supplied by the link layers on 
the mobile station. Intra-technology handover, handover policy, 
security, enhancement specific to particular link layer 
technologies, higher layer (3 and above) enhancements are not 
part of this standard. MIH, however, does not provide intra-
technology 
handover, 
handover 
policies, 
security 
and 
enhancements to link layer technologies [76]. Those are 
handled by the respective link layer technologies themselves. 
In case of emergency response systems there are many 
jurisdictions involved. This causes inter-operability issues 
among jurisdictions and brings in inefficiencies in the 
communications. What is required is an architecture that 
provides a common networking platform for heterogeneous 
multi-operator networks, for interoperation in case of cross 
jurisdiction emergencies. Media Independent Handover offers a 
single unified interface to higher layers through technology 
independent primitives. It obtains information from lower 
layers through media specific interfaces.  This allows UAV 
networks to interact with other technologies making it possible 
to use them in an integrated manner [144]. 
In applications like search and rescue or real-time assistance 
to troops in the field, using MIH, UAV networks can bring live 
video feeds in conjunction with other networks, viz., WiFi, 
WiMAX, LTE, etc. However, MIH is a nascent technology that 
has not been widely deployed and evaluated. In order for this to 
work, both mobile devices and the network must implement the 
standard [145]. 
SDN based mechanisms using OpenFlow protocols have 
been proposed for configuring network nodes and establishing 
communication paths. IEEE 802.21 Media Independent 
Handover procedures have been used to optimize handovers in 
heterogeneous wireless environment. It has also been shown 
how SDN can be used to support wireless communication paths 
with dynamic mobility management capabilities provided by 
standards compliant nodes. The combination allows enhanced 
connectivity scenarios; allowing ‘always best’ connectivity 
when multiple handover candidates are available and OpenFlow 
procedures are triggered preemptively in order to avoid traffic 
disruption [77].  
 
V. ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN UAV NETWORKS 
 
There could be two scenarios in UAV networks. First, energy 
for communication equipment as well as for powering the UAV 
comes from the same source or, alternatively, they could be 
from different sources. In either case, energy consumption by 
the communication equipment is substantial and can limit the 
useful flying time and, possibly, the life of the network. The 
important point to note here is that there is a large consumption 
even when there is no transmission or reception, i.e., when the 
wireless interface is idle. Power rating of a typical Wifi 802.11n 
interface, 
in 
non-MIMO 
single 
antennal 
mode, 
is 
1280mA/940mA/820mA/100mA 
under 
Transmission/Reception/idle/sleep modes, respectively [151]. A 
typical small drone may have battery capacity of 5200mAh, 
11.1V. Such a drone draws about 12.5A and gives a flying time 
of about 25 minutes. Communication equipment of the UAV in 
a mesh network normally receives and transmits continuously. 
A quick calculation would show that the flight time would be 
reduced by 16%, of the rated value, if communication 
equipment uses the same battery as the UAV. Together with 
GPS and a couple of sensors, it can easily go beyond 20%. In 
practice, however, the net effect of this could be more severe as 
the battery voltage drops down below l1.1V even before the 
power is fully drained, inhibiting normal function of the UAV.  
Let us now consider the scenario where the communication 
equipment has its own battery, separate from the UAV battery. 
In this case, the battery weight needs to be taken into account in 
the limited payload capacity of the UAV. In a series of 
experiments, the authors of this paper used separate AAA 
batteries to power up the airborne OpenMesh router. The router 
required 8 AAA batteries to provide sufficient voltage to 
operate. Typical alkaline batteries weigh about 11.5g each and 
have capacity of 860mAh. [146]. If the flight is of 25 minute 
duration, with continuous transmission and reception, the 
consumption would be 740mAh. Eight cells would theoretically 
work for about 9 hours but, as the voltage drops, the router 
would stop functioning and has to be brought down for change 
or recharge. In our experiments, fully charged alkaline cells 

 
20 
provided good enough voltage for about 8 hours, enough for as 
many as 19 sorties. Considering the weight of the battery was 
another matter. Eight cells weigh 92g. The dead weight of the 
UAV used is about 1kg and it could carry about 300 grams of 
payload. The batteries constituted about 30% of the payload 
that could be put on the UAV! Reducing the energy 
consumption, therefore, would result in increase in network 
lifetime or increase in useful payload that can be carried. 
Controlling transmission power of nodes, or making some 
nodes go to sleep, when network can operate without them can 
reduce power consumption. Nodes, that are being actively used, 
are carrying traffic or helping proliferate updates required by 
the routing protocol. The nodes that are powered up but not 
carrying traffic, or carrying low traffic, are still consuming 
energy. It is possible to avoid this waste of energy by switching 
off unused network elements dynamically. We shall see a 
number of ways this can be achieved. It must, however be 
mentioned that it is not just at the physical layer that the devices 
can be designed to save energy but also at the data link and 
network layers [78]. At the physical layer the built in power 
save modes of the devices may be exploited. At the data link 
layer avoiding collisions and extending sleep time in power 
save mode (PSM) would be important. At the network layer 
routing for minimizing power consumption may be the criteria. 
The concerns regarding power saving in the UAV networks are 
in some ways similar to that in mobile ad-hoc networks and 
wireless sensor networks. There have been a few research 
efforts to adapt some of the existing energy-aware protocols to 
the UAV networks. There are others that can potentially be 
used in UAV applications but are still to be tried. While there 
could be different ways to classify them, a commonly followed 
approach is to broadly classify them on the basis of the protocol 
layer they operate in. Within that broad classification, we also 
classify them on the basis of energy saving strategy used. The 
area is still developing therefore, rather than being exhaustive, 
we would aim at including the representative protocols that 
have been tried in some for in UAV networks or are potentially 
good candidates. To this end we also present some cross-layer 
considerations for improving energy efficiency. 
It would be pertinent to mention here that the energy 
harvesting or scavenging alternative to power saving has been 
studied in recent times. Energy can be harvested from kinetic, 
thermal and electromagnetic sources.  Creation of two queues, 
one for random energy arrivals and the other for data arrivals 
requires redesigning of transmission algorithms for wireless 
systems including UAV networks. This is in itself an evolving, 
specialized area and has not been made part of this survey. 
 The remaining section is divided as follows: Subsection A 
discusses energy efficient network layer protocols that can be 
used in UAV networks. Subsection B deals with data link layer 
protocols for conserving energy while the physical layer 
mechanisms are given in Subsection C. 
A.  Energy Conservation in the Network Layer 
Energy efficient routing is important for networks with 
energy constraints. Energy efficient protocols typically use one 
of the standard network layer protocols as the underlying 
routing protocol. Many of the MANET protocols have been 
tried but overall the simulation results generalized in favor of 
one or the other. It is not clear which class of protocols would 
work best. Applicability of most of these to different UAV 
network scenarios is still to be proven. We will look here at 
many of the protocols that have been tried in UAV networks, as 
well as the potential candidates. 
There are some well-known ways of building in energy 
conservation functionality into UAV networks. Measuring and 
controlling power utilization or distributing load fairly based on 
some energy metric are the two important ones. Additionally, 
some routing protocols may make some of the nodes to sleep, 
or navigate a low energy path, to avoid waste of energy. The 
protocols discussed are further classified into the following four 
categories: 1) Path selection based 2) Node selection based 3) 
Coordinator based 4) Sleep based. Various proposals for these 
four categories are described below and summarized at the end 
of this subsection. 
1) Path selection based 
 These protocols aim to select paths that minimize total 
source to destination energy requirement. Four protocols in this 
category are discussed below. 
a) EMM-DSR (Extended Max-Min Dynamic Source Routing) 
Protocol: This mechanism maximizes energy efficiency by 
finding the shortest path based on energy. It maintains a good 
end-to-end delay and throughput performance. It extends the 
Max-Min algorithm to maximize throughput, minimize delay 
and maximize energy efficiency. This extension has been 
applied to the existing on-demand dynamic source routing 
protocol (DSR) in the context of mobile ad hoc networks, and 
the resultant version takes the name of EMM-DSR [80]. 
However, in [55], the performance based on end-to-end latency 
of DSR was worst for UAV networks as compared to AODV 
and directional OLSR. 
b) FAR (Flow Augmentation Routing): FAR is a transmission 
power optimization protocol. It assumes a static network and 
finds the optimal routing path for a given source–destination 
pair that minimizes the sum of link costs along the path. The 
cost depends on cost of a unit flow transmission over the link, 
initial and residual energy at the transmitting node. The flow 
augmentation algorithm requires frequent route computations 
and transitions but it selects the shortest cost route each time. 
As pseudo-stability of the topology can only be assumed in a 
small subset of UAV network applications (e.g. communication 
coverage of a remote area), there will be heavy penalty in terms 
of computation of minimum cost link paths when the nodes 
change their relative positions frequently [81]. 
c) The Minimum-energy Routing: Minimum-energy routing 
saves power by choosing paths through a multi-hop ad hoc 
network that minimize the total transmit energy. Distributing 
energy consumption fairly maximizes the network lifetime. In 
this protocol, nodes adjust their transmission power levels and 
select routes to optimize performance. This takes many forms in 
the UAV networks. Topology may be selected by adjusting the 
power such that only immediate neighbors communicate. It is 
possible to set this up in UAV networks except that the 
neighbors may change more frequently. The work on multi-hop 

 
21 
communication is a swarm of UAVs [147] has reported use of 
minimum-energy expenditure multi-hop routing similar to 
ExOR (Extremely Opportunistic Routing). High power hops are 
split into smaller low power hops.  Edge weights represent 
attenuation in the network and Dijkstra’s algorithm is used to 
calculate the shortest (lowest energy) path. ExOR broadcasts 
each packet, choosing a receiver to forward only after learning 
the set of nodes that actually received the packet. ExOR 
operates on batches of packets in order to reduce the 
communication cost of agreement. The source includes in each 
packet a list of candidate forwarders prioritized by closeness to 
the destination. Highest priority node forwards the batch. 
Remaining forwarders forward in order but only packets that 
have not been acknowledged. 
 
d) The Pulse protocol: A pulse, referred to as flood, is 
periodically sent at fixed interval originating from infrastructure 
access nodes and propagating through entire component of the 
network. This pulse updates each node about the nearest pulse 
source and each node tracks best route to the nearest pulse 
source based on some metric. The propagation of the flood 
forms a loop free routing tree rooted at the pulse source. If a 
node needs to send a packet it responds to the pulse with a 
reservation packet. This protocol could suffer from flood 
overlap delays and can result in significant consumption of 
energy [82]. This has been proposed in the context of multi-hop 
fixed infrastructure wireless networks. By analogy it can be 
examined for the infrastructure category of UAV applications. 
 
2) Node Selection based 
 These protocols aim to select nodes that preserve battery life 
of each node or exclude nodes with low energy. Three such 
protocols are discussed below. 
a) Power-Aware Routing: These protocols may minimize 
total power requirement for end-to-end communication or 
preserve battery life of each node. MTPR (Minimum Total 
Transmission Power Routing) and MBCR (Minimum Battery 
Cost Routing) are respectively based on these principles. In 
MTPR, adaptation of transmission power could result in a new 
hidden terminal problem. If this happens then higher number of 
collisions would result in more transmissions resulting in higher 
energy consumption. MBCR only considers the total cost 
function and may include a node with very less energy if all 
other nodes included have high energy. The variation, MMBCR 
(Min-Max Battery Cost Routing) takes into account the 
remaining energy level of individual nodes instead of the total 
energy. The downside is that in the quest to minimize total 
energy it can choose a long path and result in excessive delays 
[90], [118]. A variation has been proposed for wireless 
networks with renewable sources of energy where the node has 
full knowledge of the energy it will have until the next renewal 
point. The proposed algorithm is shown to be asymptotically 
optimal. The proposed routing algorithm uses a composite cost 
metric that includes power for transmission and reception, 
replenishment rate, and residual energy [83]. 
b) LEAR (Localized Energy-Aware Routing): LEAR uses 
DSR but allows a node to determine whether to forward the 
RREQ or not depending on the residual battery power being 
above a decided threshold value. If the residual power is below 
the threshold value, the node drops the message and does not 
participate in relaying packets. The destination node would 
receive a message only when all intermediate nodes along a 
route have good battery levels. If the source node does not 
receive a reply then it resends the message. Intermediate nodes 
lower the threshold to allow forwarding to continue [84]. 
c) DEAR (Distributed Energy-Efficient Ad Hoc Routing) 
protocol: Conventional power aware routing algorithms may 
require additional control packets for gathering information 
such as network topology and residual power. While it is easy 
to obtain such information in proactive routing, in case of on-
demand protocols separate control packets may be required. 
DEAR uses already available RREQ packets to acquire 
necessary information and no extra packets would be required. 
DEAR only requires the average residual battery level of the 
entire network. Nodes with relatively larger battery energy will 
re-broadcast RREQ packets earlier. On-demand routing 
protocols drop duplicate RREQ without re-broadcasting them. 
DEAR can set up route composed of the nodes with relatively 
high battery power. Simulation shows that DEAR prolongs the 
network lifetime and also improves the delivery ratio by 
selecting a more reliable path [85]. 
3) Cluster head or coordinator based 
 In these protocols the predominant property is selection of a 
cluster head or a coordinator that will remain awake while the 
other nodes can sleep to conserve power. These protocols are 
quite suitable for sensor networks. They could be a natural 
choice in multi-level hierarchical UAV networks and in 
situations where multiple UAV networks need to communicate. 
Some examples of such protocols follow: 
 a) CBRP (Cluster Based Routing Protocol): It is an on-
demand routing protocol in which nodes are divided into a 
number of 2-hop diameter clusters. Each cluster has a cluster 
head that acts as a coordinator that communicates with other 
cluster heads. All nodes of a cluster communicate through the 
coordinator. The protocol efficiently minimizes the flooding 
traffic during route discovery and speeds up this process as well 
resulting in significant energy savings [86]. 
 b) Distributed Gateway Selection [122]: In this method, some 
superior nodes in the UAV network are selected as gateways 
whereas other nodes connect to the command center through 
these gateways. As against selection of cluster heads, selection 
of gateways takes into account movement of nodes. They 
propose an adaptive gateway selection algorithm based on 
dynamic network partition. The selection process goes through 
several iterations. The selection is based on stability of two-hop 
neighbors. 
c) GAF (Geographic Adaptive Fidelity) protocol: In GAF 
complete network topology is divided into a grid of fixed sized 
squares. Nodes in two adjacent squares can communicate with 
each other. In each square the node with the highest residual 
energy is selected as the coordinator or master. Only one node 
in each square needs to be aware of the geographical location of 
other nodes in the area and this node may become the 
coordinator. The coordinator keeps on changing within the area. 
Nodes other than the coordinator can sleep without affecting 

 
22 
routing fidelity. The protocol increases the lifetime of the 
network. It is a location based hierarchical protocol in which 
the coordinator does no aggregation [87]. In UAV networks 
nodes would not be stable in a grid. The connected set made out 
of the high energy UAVs in each square cannot persist as nodes 
move in an out. Frequent change of candidates for connected 
set in each square and presence of low energy nodes in some of 
the squares may lead to partitioning of the network. 
d) Span protocol: Span reduces energy consumption without 
reducing connectivity or capacity. It works between the 
network and MAC layers and exploits the power saving feature 
of the MAC layer, i.e., make devices sleep when no data is to 
be transmitted. Each node takes a local decision whether or not 
to be a coordinator for when to wake up or sleep. Coordinators 
stay awake all the time and perform multi-hop routing while 
other nodes can be in power save mode. Each node gets the 
capability of selecting neighbors and assists in altering the 
network topology. The number of links is reduced and the 
nodes still get the advantage of using good QoS links through 
other nodes. In UAV networks the change of coordinators 
forming the backbone network would depend on the changing 
position of UAVs. If a number of UAVs try to become 
coordinators then all but one have to back off. During backoff 
their position may change and some may not remain candidates 
for forming the backbone. The amount of energy saved depends 
on the node density. System lifetime of an 802.11 network in 
power saving mode with Span is a factor of 2 better than 
without it [88].  
4) Sleep based: These protocols conserve energy mainly by 
making as many nodes sleep for as long as possible. Three such 
protocols are described below. 
a) CDS (Connected Dominating Set) protocol: A connected 
dominated node is a set of nodes such that every other node in 
the network is a neighbor of one of these nodes. If the members 
of the CDS set are connected then all other nodes will receive 
the packets. While dominating set is always active, other nodes 
can sleep to save energy [89]. With the help of CDS routing is 
easy and can adapt to topology changes. This protocol allows 
saving energy by selecting CDS nodes on energy metrics and 
also allowing non-CDS nodes to sleep. 
b) CaDet (Clustering and Decision-Tree Based) protocol: 
This protocol uses data-mining techniques and analysis of real 
wireless data by probabilistic location estimation and the 
multiple-decision tree-based approach. These would help in 
identifying the most used access points that will in turn give 
information about the location of the users. These decisions 
help in selecting minimum number of access points to be used, 
thus reducing the power consumption and wake-up time of the 
client [76]. Shi and Luo [148] propose a cluster based routing 
protocol for UAV fleet networks. One of the criteria for 
choosing cluster head is residual energy. The protocol forms 
stable cluster architecture of UAV fleet as the basis and then 
performs route discovery and route maintenance by using the 
geographic location of UAVs. 
c) EAR (Energy Aware Routing) protocol: In the least hops 
methods, with no energy considerations, the shortest path is 
always used and nodes on this path get depleted leading to 
partitioning of the network. In EAR routing and traffic 
engineering decisions are made taking the energy consumption 
of equipment into account even at the cost of sub-optimal paths. 
It may actually lead to multiple sub-optimal low energy paths. 
Energy cost can be used as the only objective or in combination 
with other constraints like QoS. The aim is to completely 
switch-off components that will help to reduce energy 
consumption of the network [90]. A way to achieve this by 
synchronizing transmit and receive times at nodes or by 
minimizing the necessary total received and transmit power 
over a route. In such a scenario, a route with more, but shorter, 
hops can be more energy efficient. In many UAV networks the 
nodes are continuously transmitting and receiving and 
achieving this synchronization would not be difficult [149]. 
 
Important features and energy saving strategy of network 
layer protocols are summarized in Table IX 
 
TABLE IX 
 ENERGY CONSERVATION TECHNIQUES IN NETWORK LAYER 
Protocol 
Features 
Energy Saving 
Strategy 
1. Path selection based 
EMM-DSR 
Maximizes energy efficiency and 
minimizes path length. Maintains 
good end-to-end delay and throughput 
performance. 
Least energy path 
FAR 
Finds minimum cost path based on 
initial, residual and flow of energy.  
Transmit power contro
Min Energy Selects routes that minimize the total 
transmitted 
energy. 
Distributing 
energy 
consumption 
fairly 
can 
maximize the network lifetime.  
Transmit power contro
Pulse 
Nodes connected to infrastructure 
send pulse flood to all the nodes. 
Nodes only remember best route 
pulse source with the lowest metric.  
Least energy path 
2. Node selection based 
 
 
Power 
Aware 
Composite 
cost 
metric 
includes 
transmit and receive power, residual 
energy and replenishment rate. Good 
for renewable energy sources.  
Optimize end-to-end 
power 
LEAR 
A route will be selected if nodes with 
high power available from source to 
destination for sending RREQ 
Conserve energy of 
low residual energy 
nodes 
DEAR 
Only requires the average residual 
battery level of the entire network. 
Nodes with relatively larger battery 
energy 
will 
re-broadcast 
RREQ 
packets earlier. Prolongs network life. 
Use high residual 
battery life routes 
3. Cluster-head or Coordinator based 
 
 
CBRP 
Each cluster head communicates with 
other cluster heads. Nodes maintain 
neighbor 
table. 
The 
protocol 
efficiently minimizes the flooding 
traffic and speeds up this process, 
reduces energy consumption.  
Cluster-based, 
minimize 
flooding 
traffic 
Distributed 
Gateway 
Selection 
Gateways are like cluster heads. 
Selected based on stability 
Only 
gateways 
communicate 
with 
control centers. 
SPAN 
High-energy nodes and those that add 
to 
network 
connectivity 
become 
coordinators. 
Depends 
on 
node 
density for energy savings. 
Use 
only 
high 
energy nodes 
GAF 
Zoning of network. One coordinator 
per zone. Disadvantage is that all 
Coordinator 
stays 
awake 

 
23 
nodes should know their geographical 
positions.  
4. Sleep based 
 
 
CDS 
Important nodes form connected set 
and stay active. All nodes are either 
part of CDS or one hop away.  
Selected nodes stay 
awake 
CaDet 
It is probabilistic location estimation 
and 
multiple-decision 
tree 
based 
approach. Selects minimum number 
of APs to be used.  
Keep nodes awake 
based 
on 
client 
density 
EAR 
Energy efficient routing decisions 
even at the cost of sub-optimal paths. 
Other constraints like QoS may be 
used.  
Low energy paths 
are chosen 
B.  Energy Conservation in the Data Link Layer 
We now discuss the approaches that help conserve energy in 
the data link layer. It is the responsibility of the MAC sublayer 
of the data link Layer to ensure a fair mechanism to share 
access to the medium among nodes. In this process, it can play 
a key role in the maximization of node’s energy efficiency. 
Power-saving mode (PSM) has been defined in 802.11, which 
reduces energy consumption of mobile devices by putting them 
in sleep mode when idle. However, a device in PSM has to be 
woken up to send or receive any packets. Power saving thus 
comes at the cost of delivery delay. IEEE 802.11e defines 
Automatic Power Save Delivery (APSD) [91]. IEEE 802.11n 
has introduced further enhancements to the APSD protocols, 
referred to as power save multi-poll (PSMP) [92]. As in its 
predecessors, there are scheduled (i.e., S-PSMP) and 
unscheduled (i.e., U-PSMP) versions. S-PSMP provides tighter 
control over the AP/station timeline by having the AP define a 
PSMP sequence that includes scheduled times for downlink and 
uplink transmissions. Wastage of energy in the MAC layer is 
mainly because of collisions, overheads, listening for potential 
traffic and overhearing traffic meant for other nodes. Protocols, 
therefore, attempt to remove one or more or these problems. 
Most of the available data link energy conservation approaches 
fall into the following broad categories 1) Duty cycle with 
single radio 2) Duty cycle with dual radio 3) Topology control 
4) Cluster based. Some of the representative protocols in each 
of these categories are described below: 
1) Duty cycle with single radio: These protocols involve use 
of sleep-activity schedules. However, only a single radio is used 
for signaling and data traffic: 
a) S-MAC (Sensor-Medium Access Control): It is one of the 
simple protocols proposed in this category. The node follows 
fixed cycle of sleep and active times. This will consume lesser 
energy than in cases where the node listen all the time when 
idle. The nodes make their own schedules and broadcast them 
to the neighbors. Cluster of nodes that know each other’s 
schedule stay synchronized. It wastes energy handling low 
traffic and this will result in low throughput [93]. 
b) T-MAC (Timeout-MAC): [42] As opposed to fixed 
schedules of S-MAC, this protocol uses adaptable schedules 
based on hearing no activity for a certain period of time. This 
results in improved efficiency over S-MAC [94] 
c) ECR-MAC (Efficient Cognitive Radio): This protocol uses 
multiple forwarders for each node so that multiple paths are 
available to the destination. The first available node is normally 
used, resulting in reduced wait time involved in waiting for a 
particular node to be free [95]. 
d) SOFA (A Sleep-Optimal Fair-Attention scheduler): this 
protocol uses a downlink traffic scheduler on the AP of a 
WLAN, called SOFA, which help its PSM clients to save 
energy by allowing them to sleep more, hence to reduce energy 
consumption. If a client still has pending packets from the 
beacon period but the AP is servicing other clients then this 
client has to remain awake till the last packet scheduled for it in 
the beacon period has been delivered. Therefore, a large portion 
of the client’s energy wastage comes from the access points 
transmitting other clients’ packets before it finishes transmitting 
the client’s last packet to it. SOFA manages to reduce such 
energy wastage by maximizing the total sleep time of all clients 
[96], [78]. 
e) MT-MAC (Multi-hop TDMA Energy-efficient Sleeping 
MAC) Protocol: In order to improve the performance of energy 
efficiency, throughput and delay in WMSN, Multi-hop TDMA 
Energy-efficient Sleeping MAC (MT-MAC) protocol can be 
used. The main idea of MT-MAC is to divide one frame into 
many slots for nodes (primarily sensor) to forward data packets, 
with TDMA scheduling method. As collision and hidden 
terminal problems are considered in the scheduling algorithm, 
so the probability of collision in the network will be reduced 
and the throughput will be increased [97]. 
2) Duty cycle with dual radio: These protocols involve sleep-
activity schedules. They use separate radios for signaling and 
data traffic. 
a) STEM (Sparse Topology and Energy Management): 
STEM has been one of the early CSMA-based MAC protocols 
for sensor networks that scheduled sleep and active periods. 
One of the radios is used to wake up neighboring nodes. This 
radio uses duty cycles. The second radio is used to send data to 
the forwarding node and is always asleep until woken up. As 
waking up involves some delay there is a tradeoff in which 
higher efficiency comes with higher delay [98]. 
b) PTW(Pipeline Tone Wakeup) scheme: This protocol aims 
to take care of the tradeoff between energy efficiency and delay 
present in STEM. It uses techniques to shorten the time taken to 
wake up the nodes for data transfer [99]. 
c) LEEM (The Latency minimized Energy Efficient MAC) 
protocol: This protocol also aims to reduce latency while 
maintaining energy efficiency. The nodes along the path to 
destination are synchronized so that they can be woken up 
sequentially [100]. 
d) PAMAS (Power-aware Multi Access Protocol with 
Signaling): This protocol uses signaling on a separate radio to 
get good throughput and latency for the data. It overhears 
signaling for other nodes and turns off a node’s radio for the 
duration for which the medium will not be available. The 
signaling interface could be left on so that the node listens to 
the signal exchange and can respond fast to the traffic directed 
towards it [101]. 
3) Topology/power control based: These protocols adjust 
transmit power levels to control the connectivity to other nodes 
or select topology by deciding which nodes to keep on: 
a) XTC (eXtreme Topology Control): Neighbors are ranked 

 
24 
for link quality by each node broadcasting at maximum power. 
Each node transmits its ranking results to neighboring nodes. 
Finally, the nodes select the neighbors to be directly connected 
to. The protocol does not need location information [102]. 
b) LFTC(Location Free Topology Control): LFTC protocol 
constructs power-efficient network topology. It also avoids any 
potential collision due to hidden terminal problem. Initially 
each node broadcasts hello message with vicinity table. The 
nodes then adjust their transmission power to communicate 
with direct neighbors. Data collision and hidden terminal 
problems are avoided by choosing appropriate power for data 
and control. This protocol improves over XTC as it has smaller 
hop count and better reliability [103]. 
c) PEM (Power-Efficient MAC) Protocol: PEM enhances the 
network utilization and reduces the energy consumption. The 
stations estimate their distances from the transmitter and obtain 
the interference relations among transmission pairs through a 
three-way handshaking. Transmission is scheduled based on the 
interference relation [104]. 
d) Virtualization of NICs: An obvious way to save energy is 
to switch off some of the wireless nodes during the off-peak 
hours. Of course, some of the locations in the area of interest 
would not be covered. These can be provided connectivity by 
network coverage extension/relaying capability. Not only 
shutting down nodes saves energy, NIC virtualization also 
reduces energy consumption [105]. 
4) Cluster based MAC protocols: These protocols divide 
nodes into groups and select a cluster head or a coordinator for 
inter-area communication and data aggregation. Non-cluster 
nodes can then have power saving sleep schedules: 
a) LEACH (Low-Energy Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy) 
protocol: LEACH is a scheduled MAC protocol with clustered 
topology. It is a hierarchical routing algorithm that combines 
reduction in energy consumption with quality of media access. 
It divides the network topology into clusters and a cluster head 
represents each cluster. The cluster head aggregates data for all 
the nodes in a cluster and provides better performance in terms 
of the lifetime [106]. The independent decision of whether or 
not to become a cluster head may lead to accelerate energy 
drainage for some of the nodes in the network. LEACH-C is a 
centralized scheme, which can improve some of the issues 
related to LEACH. 
b) 
PEGASIS 
(Power-Efficient 
Gathering 
in 
Sensor 
Information Systems): This protocol makes use of cluster heads 
in a different way from LEACH and is an improvement over it. 
Instead of each cluster head communicating with the 
destination, a chain of cluster heads is formed. The chain is 
constructed starting with the node farthest away from the 
destination and finally ending up closest to the destination. 
Then a cluster head is chosen that will perform data 
aggregation. In case of failure of any of the nodes, the chain is 
re-constructed. A new leader is selected randomly during each 
round of data gathering [107].  
Important features and energy saving strategy of the data link 
layer protocols are described in Table X. 
 
C.  Energy conservation in the physical layer 
Physical Layer (PHY) is concerned with the hardware 
implementation, 
connectivity 
to 
neighbors, 
implements 
encoding and signaling and moves the bits over the physical 
medium. For designing energy efficient protocols it is important 
to consider the physical characteristics of the electronics 
involved. Understanding of physical layer is important for 
successful implementation of data-link and network layers. 
High mobility of nodes in UAV networks creates issues for 
physical layer. We will consider these protocols in the 
following four groups: 1) Dynamic voltage control 2) Node 
level power scheduling 3) Choosing minimum subset, and 4) 
Sleep schedules with buffering: 
 
TABLE X 
 ENERGY CONSERVATION TECHNIQUES IN DATA LINK LAYER 
 
Protocol 
Features 
Energy Saving 
Strategy 
1. Duty cycle with single radio 
 
S-MAC 
Nodes have duty cycles. Nodes 
broadcast their schedules to neighbors. 
Consumes less energy than protocols 
that listen all the time.  
Scheduled sleep 
times for nodes 
T-MAC 
Schedules based on activity. Has better 
efficiency than S-MAC 
Adaptable 
schedules of sleep 
times  
ECR-MAC 
Each node has many forwarders. The 
first available is used to reduce wait 
time.  
Reduced wait time 
for forwarding 
data 
SOFA 
Increases sleep time by allowing nodes 
not to wake up when other nodes packets 
are transmitted. 
Sleep more 
MT-MAC 
Divides one frame into many slots for 
sensor nodes to forward data packets. 
Collisions are reduced and network 
throughput will be increased. 
Increased sleep 
time 
2. Duty cycle with dual radio 
 
STEM 
It has scheduled sleep and active period. 
Separate radio for signaling and data. 
The signaling radio has scheduled times 
while data radio sleeps till woken up. 
Higher delay. 
Data radio sleeps 
longer 
PTW 
Takes care of the tradeoff between 
energy efficiency and delay of STEM. 
Shortens the time taken to wake up the 
nodes for data transfer.  
Data radio sleeps 
longer, pipelining 
used to reduce 
delay 
LEEM 
Reduce latency while maintaining 
energy efficiency. Nodes along the path 
to destination are synchronized so that 
they can be woken up sequentially 
Nodes 
synchronized for 
fast wakeup 
PAMAS 
Signaling radio is left on for listening. 
Data radio of a node is switched on 
when it receives packet meant for it. 
Data radio sleeps 
when medium is 
not available 
3. Topology/power control based 
 
XTC 
Each node connects to neighbors based 
on link quality.  
Good quality link 
selection 
LFTC 
Nodes change topology by adjusting 
power. Data collision and hidden 
terminal problems are avoided. Improves 
over XTC on hop count and data 
delivery.  
Transmission 
power control for 
data and control 
PEM 
Stations can estimate their distances 
from the transmitter and obtain the 
interference relation among transmission 
pairs. Stations schedule their 
transmission according to interference 
relation. 
Transmission 
scheduling based 
on interference 
Virtualization Switch off some nodes and provide 
Shutting node and 

 
25 
of NICs 
connectivity to cut off areas by coverage 
extension, relaying. NIC virtualization 
also reduces energy consumption. 
virtualization 
4. Cluster 
based 
 
 
LEACH  
Data aggregation by cluster head. Nodes 
have duty cycles. It is a hierarchical 
routing algorithm that combines 
reduction in energy consumption with 
quality of media access.  
Cluster based, 
nodes 
communicate with 
cluster heads and 
have sleep-activity 
schedules 
PEGASIS 
Divides network into clusters. A path of 
cluster heads is formed and one of them 
is chosen to perform data aggregation.  
Reducing cluster 
heads that perform 
forwarding   
 
The physical layer deals with modulation and signal coding 
and related signal transmission technologies. The extremely 
high mobility nodes of aerial networks make design of the 
physical layer more involved. In case of UAV networks the 
movement is in 3D and in order that data is not lost in data 
communication architectures the physical layer conditions have 
to be well understood and well defined. The 3D networks have 
several 
accentuated 
concerns, 
such 
as, 
variations 
in 
communication distance, direction of the communicating pairs, 
antenna radiation pattern, shad- owing from the UAV and 
onboard electronic equipment, environmental conditions, 
interferences, and jamming [150]. The authors suggest 
mitigating high link loss and variations by spatial and temporal 
diversity. They feel that more research is required in the 
physical layer and antenna propagation for 3D environments. 
 
1) Dynamic voltage control 
 These protocols adjust circuit bias voltage levels, depending 
on the traffic, to optimize energy usage. In this regard as the 
UAV consumes battery power, the battery voltage may drop 
and the UAV may become dysfunctional. However, if the 
router, and other circuits in the payload can fallback to lower 
voltage levels then the flying time of the UAV can be increased. 
The following protocol is an example. 
a) Dynamic Voltage Scaling (DVS): DVS exploits variability 
in processor workload and latency constraints and realizes this 
energy-quality trade-off at the circuit level. When the traffic 
load is low, the bias voltage can be reduced to get 
proportionally quadratic saving in energy [108] 
2) Node level power scheduling 
 These protocols do node level optimizations to achieve 
energy efficiency and enhance network lifetime. In UAV 
controlling the transmission power can control the topology of 
the networks. In the extreme case connectivity can only be 
maintained with single hop neighbors. Communication can then 
take place in a multi-hop manner. The following protocols are 
in this category. 
a) LM-SPT (Local Minimum Shortest Path-Tree): This 
method improves power efficiency by a localized distributed 
power-efficient topology control algorithm. The main idea in 
this approach is to construct an overlay graph topology over the 
wireless mesh such that this topology has the required features 
like increased throughput, increased network lifetime and 
maintained links by varying transmission power at each node. 
The algorithm balances energy efficiency and throughput in 
wireless mesh network without the loss of connectivity. The 
concept of this approach is based on information of the local 
neighborhood that is confined to one hop for calculating the 
minimum power transmission [109]. 
b) Minimum-energy topology: This method generates a 
minimum-energy topology graph G = (V, E) where V represents 
nodes and E represents the links. It has a localized distributed 
topology control which calculates the optimal transmission 
power to maintain connectivity and reduces power to cover 
only nearest neighbors. Energy is saved and lifetime of the 
network also increases [110]. 
c) CPLD (Complex Programmable Logic Devices): CPLDs 
are used with popular application chipsets to reduce standby 
power and minimize the time that key processors need to be 
powered on to detect system events. To minimize power 
consumption in the network, CPLD may be used in the nodes of 
the mesh network, which cuts off the power from the processor 
of the station while it is being idle for some specific time. It can 
detect any beacon frame arriving from the base station and 
switches the power on immediately to the processor without 
wasting any time. Implementation of CPLDs in devices, which 
are part of wireless mesh networks instead of microcontrollers, 
coupled with smart electronic switches may drastically reduce 
the power consumption [115]. 
3) Choosing Minimum Subset 
 These protocols work on the principle of choosing a subset 
of nodes to switch on and keep the other nodes switched off in 
order to save energy. Three examples of protocols in this 
category are as follows. 
a) CNN (Critical Number of Neighbors): CNN refers to the 
minimum number of neighbors that should be maintained by 
each node in the network to be asymptotically connected. This 
approach to maintain connectivity only requires knowledge of 
the network size is required to determine the CNN. This 
information can be easily obtained from a proactive routing 
protocol such as OLSR. Power is controlled for individual 
nodes to maximize power savings and controlling interference 
[111]. 
b) Virtual WLAN: This method proposes a switching scheme 
that aims to power on the minimum number of devices or the 
combination of devices that consume the least energy that can 
jointly provide full coverage and enough capacity. By 
consolidating hardware, some hardware can be put in low-
power mode and energy consumption can be reduced. 
Depending on the type of device, different amounts can be 
saved [112]. 
c) Energy Savings in Wireless Mesh Networks in a Time-
Variable Context: This is an approach to minimize the energy 
in a time varying context by selecting dynamically a subset of 
mesh BSs to switch on considering coverage issues of the 
service area, traffic routing, as well as capacity limitations both 
on the access segment and the wireless backhaul links. To 
achieve the desired objective, the algorithm considers traffic 
demands for a set of time intervals and manages the energy 
consumption of the network with the goal of making it 
proportional to the load [113]. 
4) Sleeping Schedules with Buffering 

 
26 
 These protocols aim to prolong sleep times by buffering 
packets that arrive while a node is inactive. An example is 
discussed here: 
a) SRA (Sleeping and Rate-Adaptation): There are two forms 
of power management schemes that reduce the energy 
consumption of networks. The first puts network interfaces to 
sleep during short idle periods. To make it effective small 
amounts of buffering is introduced for sleeping clients that will 
store the packets to create a long enough gap for the client to 
sleep and save energy. Potential concerns are that buffering will 
add too much delay across the network and that bursts will 
exacerbate loss. The algorithms arrange for routers and 
switches to sleep in a manner that ensures the buffering delay 
penalty is paid only once (not per link) and that routers clear 
bursts so as to not amplify loss noticeably [114]. 
Important features and the energy saving strategy of the 
physical layer protocols are given in Table XI 
 
TABLE XI 
  ENERGY CONSERVATION IN PHYSICAL LAYER 
Protocol 
Features 
Energy 
Saving 
Strategy 
1. Dynamic voltage control 
 
DVS 
Circuit voltage adjusted according to 
processor 
load 
and 
traffic 
latency 
requirements.  
Low voltage (low 
power) 
for 
low 
loads 
2. Node level power scheduling 
 
LM-SPT 
Transmission power is varied at each 
node to get a reduced topology meeting 
the objectives like throughput, network 
lifetime or link quality.  
Control power to 
control topology 
Minimum 
energy 
topology 
Optimal power to maintain connectivity 
with the nearest neighbors used. Energy 
is save and network lifetime increased 
Node 
level 
transmit 
power 
control 
CPLD 
Adaptive power-on time control for 
electronics. CPLD cuts off power when 
node is idle for a specific time. Smart 
electronics 
Device level power 
management 
3. Choosing minimum subset 
 
CNN 
Selects minimum number of neighbors 
for each node for complete connectivity. 
Power is controlled for individual nodes 
to 
maximize 
power 
savings 
and 
controlling 
interference. 
Requires 
knowledge of network size 
Neighbor selection 
and power control 
for each selected 
node. 
Virtual 
WLAN 
Devices that will consume least energy 
and provide the required coverage and 
capacity are powered on. Remaining 
hardware is in low-power mode  
Active 
node 
selection based on 
coverage 
and 
capacity.  
Energy 
saving 
WMN 
Energy consumption is proportional to 
the traffic load. Enough nodes are 
selected in each time interval to meet the 
coverage, capacity and traffic routing 
requirements.  
Traffic 
demand 
based active node 
selection 
4. Sleep schedules with buffering 
 
SRA 
Nodes are allowed to sleep longer by 
storing packets. The packets are then 
forwarded 
in 
bursts 
during 
active 
windows. Burst losses are minimized.  
Increase node sleep 
time with buffers 
and 
managing 
delays 
 
D.  Energy Conservation through Cross-Layer Protocols 
Protocols considered so far work predominantly on solving 
issues relating to one individual protocol layer. The network 
layer protocols deal with path or node selection for maintaining 
connectivity of the entire network. The data link layer protocols 
(specifically the MAC sub-layer protocols) are more involved 
in avoiding collisions and designing duty cycles. The physical 
protocol concerns with device characteristics for voltage and 
power control. Maximizing energy conservation in one layer 
may still give overall inefficient energy conservation across all 
layers. Very little work is available in the area of cross-layer 
protocols in mobile ad hoc network and application of these to 
UAV networks is still an open issue. We discuss here a couple 
of representative work in this area. 
1) MTEC (Minimum Transmission Energy Consumption) 
 Routing protocol with ACW (Adaptive Contention Window): 
To design an energy efficient protocol a number of factors like 
proportion of successful data transmissions, residual energy on 
the nodes and traffic condition on the nodes need to be 
considered. This cross-layer design can decrease the energy 
consumption of data transmissions, but it also prolongs network 
time. MTEC routing protocol works at the network layer and 
takes into account the proportion of successful data 
transmissions, the traffic load of nodes and the number of nodes 
contending for a channel, to find a suitable path. It reduces 
energy consumption and prolong network lifetime. For this it 
finds nodes with sufficient residual energy for successfully 
transmitting all data packets. ACW works at the MAC layer to 
reduce energy consumption and throughput. Based on the 
proportion of successful data transmissions, a node uses an 
ACW to dynamically adjust the back-off time between different 
nodes. It reduces re-transmissions by allowing links with higher 
proportion of successful transmissions to use channel more 
[116]. 
2) CLEEP (Cross Layer Energy Efficient Protocol) 
 The protocol works across physical, MAC and network layers. 
At the physical layer level, this protocol first obtains the 
transmission power required to keep two neighboring nodes 
connected. It maintains a connected neighbor table for each 
node in the network. This information can be utilized by the 
network layer to choose a better routing path for data. The 
protocol then utilizes the routing information to decide the 
sleep-activity pattern of the nodes in the MAC layer for 
maximizing sleep times [117]. 
3) CLE2aR2 (cross-layer energy-efficient and reliable routing 
protocol) 
This has been proposed to find an energy efficient and reliable 
route from the source to the destination. It counters channel 
quality variation and reduces the retransmission cost for 
wireless ad hoc net- works. For each node, cost of relaying data 
from the source to destination is calculated if this node falls in 
the route. This also takes into account retransmission cost in 
terms of energy consumption. The node receiving an RREQ 
also estimates the channel quality based on the received signal 
strength. The node also takes its interference pattern into 
account. With all these calculations CLE2aR2can find a route 
with less energy consumption and high reliability [119].  
 
VI. CONCLUSIONS  
UAV networks are growing in importance and general 

 
27 
interest for civil applications. Providing good inter-UAV 
connectivity and links to the users and any ground station is 
quite challenging. Research relating to mobile ad hoc mesh 
networks is being applied to the UAV networks, but even the 
former is an evolving area. Additionally, a number of features 
like dynamicity of nodes, fluid topology, intermittent links, 
power and bandwidth constraints set UAV networks apart from 
any other that have been researched before. Some researchers 
believe that there is need to re-build everything ground up. This 
includes features in the physical layer, data link layer, network 
layer and the transport layer. Some issues like energy 
conservation and ensuring adequate quality of service require 
cross-layer design. 
In this survey we attempt to focus on research in the areas of 
Routing, seamless handover and energy efficiency. The reason 
to undertake this survey was lack of a survey focusing on these 
issues. In order to effectively process and present the available 
information in correct perspective, it was considered necessary 
to categorize the UAV networks based on a number of 
characteristics. It is important to distinguish between 
infrastructure and ad-hoc UAV networks, applications areas in 
which UAVs act as servers or as clients, star or mesh UAV 
networks and whether the deployment is hardened against 
delays and disruptions. Through this discussion we see how 
despite sharing some characteristics with mobile and vehicular 
ad-hoc networks, UAV networks have their own unique 
properties. Having done this classification, we focus on the 
main issues of routing, seamless handover and energy 
efficiency in UAV networks 
 
Routing has unique requirements - finding the most efficient 
route, allowing the network to scale, controlling latency, 
ensuring reliability, taking care of mobility and ensuring the 
required quality of service. In UAV networks, additional 
requirements of dynamic topology (with node mobility in 2-D 
and 3-D), frequent node addition and removal, robustness to 
intermittent links, bandwidth and energy constraints make the 
design of a suitable protocol one of the most challenging tasks 
[3]. This area is still evolving and we are still to see native 
UAV 
network 
protocols. 
Researchers 
have 
proposed 
modifications to existing protocols to make them workable for 
UAV scenarios. We discuss four categories of protocols and see 
the extent to which they are suitable for UAV networks. Static 
protocols have limited applicability as routing tables are 
manually configured and cannot be changed once the network 
has been launched. Proactive protocols keep up-to-date tables 
but need to exchange a number of messages between the nodes. 
This makes them unsuitable for UAV networks on two counts – 
bandwidth constraints and slow reaction to topology changes 
causing delays. In this category, a well known protocol called 
OLSR would track fast changes in the UAV network at the cost 
of increased overhead of control messages leading to 
contention, packet loss and bandwidth consumption even with 
Multi Point Relays (MPR). Another traditional protocol, 
DSDV, when used in aerial networks, puts a high computing 
and storage burden for maintaining freshness of routes. Newer 
protocols like BABEL and B.A.T.M.A.N have also not found to 
be distinctly superior. In reactive protocols like DSR, finding 
new routes is cumbersome. AODV has been studied for 
possible adaptation in UAV networks but delays in route 
construction triggers route discovery and compounds delays. 
Throughput suffers due to intermittent links. Some adaptations 
like reactive-greedy-reactive (RGR) have been shown to 
perform better. Hybrid protocols present a compromise between 
higher latency of reactive protocols and higher overhead of 
proactive protocols. In some cases like the ZRP protocol, the 
added complexity in the UAV networks may outweigh the 
slight improvement in performance. 
In applications where UAV networks are delay and 
disruption prone and partitioning is the norm rather than 
exception, continuous end-to-end connectivity cannot be 
assumed. The transmission delays increase beyond TCP 
threshold limits and packets are dropped. In such situations a 
UAV network with delay tolerant features is considered to be 
one of the most effective. The architecture would be based on 
store-carry-forward. If the data cannot be delivered immediately 
then the nodes chosen to carry the message are those that have 
highest probability of delivering the message.  Selection of the 
path from source to destination depends on whether the 
topology that evolves over time is deterministic or probabilistic. 
In case of probabilistic topology, messages may be sent through 
flooding (epidemic routing) with large requirement of buffer 
space, bandwidth and power. Variation like Spray and Wait use 
fixed number of copies and reduce resource requirement. 
Controlled ferrying can be used in UAV networks in disaster 
recovery where UAVs can be equipped with communication 
devices capable of storing a large number of messages and can 
be commanded to follow a trajectory that interconnects 
disconnected partitions. Some applications like communication 
service in a remote area or over an oil rig could benefit from 
social network model where nodes remain in some known 
locations. 
Seamless handover allows for total continuity of network 
communication with only a minor increase of message latency 
during the handover process. The handover latency and the 
packet loss during handover process may cause serious 
degradation of system performance and QoS perceived by the 
users. There has been hardly any study on seamless handover in 
the UAV environment and more so using IEEE Wireless 
Access in Vehicular Environments (WAVE) suite of protocols. 
Many mobility management protocols have been proposed but 
high degree of mobility forces frequent handover and problems 
in communication. IEEE has standardized Media Independent 
Handover (MIH) services through their standard IEEE 802.21. 
These services can be used for handovers and interoperability 
between IEEE-802 and non-IEEE-802 networks, e.g., cellular, 
3GPP, 4G.  MIH, however, does not provide intra-technology 
handover, handover policies, security and enhancements to link 
layer technologies. However, MIH is a nascent technology that 
has not been widely deployed and evaluated. 
Energy efficiency is a very important requirement in UAV 
networks. Reducing the energy consumption helps in increase 
in network lifetime and useful payload that can be carried. 
Energy consumption can be reduced through transmission 
power control, load distribution or making nodes sleep. At the 
physical layer transmission power can be reduced to the 

 
28 
minimum required for connectivity. Network layer can use the 
information about connected nodes to route packets. The data 
link layer schedule on/off times of signaling and data carrying 
radios. Cross layer protocols will offer schemes working at two 
or more layers.  
There have been some good studies that have focused on a 
number of issues like applications, protocols and mobility [3], 
[12], [15]. In the present survey we focus on issues relating to 
characterization of UAV networks, routing under constraining 
circumstances, automating control with SDN, seamless 
handovers and greening of UAV networks that have not been 
the focus of the earlier surveys. To the best of knowledge this is 
the first survey that bring forth the current research in these 
areas and their importance in building successful multi UAV 
networks. We expect that this survey would spur more research 
work in these important but understudied areas with open 
research issues. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
K. Daniel, C. Wietfeld, “Using Public Network Infrastructures for UAV 
Remote Sensing in Civilian Security Operations,” Homeland Security 
Affairs, Best Papers from the IEEE Conference on Technologies for 
Homeland Security, Jan 2011, http://www.hsaj.org/?article=0.3.3 Access 
date: Oct 2014 
[2] 
P. B. Bök, Y. Tuchelmann, “Context-Aware QoS Control for Wireless 
Mesh Networks of UAVs,” Proceedings of the International Conference 
on Computer Communications and Networks (ICCCN), Aug 2011, pp. 1–
6 
[3] 
I. Bekmezci, O. K. Sahingoz, S. Temel, “Flying Ad-Hoc Networks 
(FANETs): A survey,” Ad Hoc Networks, 2013, pp. 1254–1270 
[4] 
US 
Department 
of 
Transportation 
Federal 
Aviation 
Authority, 
“Integration of Civil Unmanned Aircraft Systems (UAS) in the National 
Airspace 
System 
(NAS) 
Roadmap,” 
First 
Edition, 
2013, 
http://www.faa.gov/uas/media/uas_roadmap_2013.pdf Access date: Oct 
2014 
[5] 
N. Nandiraju et al., “Wireless Mesh Networks: Current Challenges and 
Future Directions of Web-In-The-Sky,” IEEE Wireless Communications, 
2007, vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 79–89 
[6] 
L. Song Lu, T. Huang, “A summary of key Technologies of Ad hoc 
Networks with UAV Node,” IEEE International Conference on Intelligent 
Computing and Integrated Systems (ICISS), 2010, pp. 944–949 
[7] 
O. K. Sahingoz, “Networking Models in Flying Ad-Hoc Networks 
(FANETs): Concepts and Challenges,” Journal of Intelligent Robotic 
Systems, 2014, vol. 74, no. 1–2, pp. 513–527 
[8] 
S. Morgenthaler, T. Braun, Zhongliang Zhao, T. Staub, M. Anwander, 
“UAVNet: A mobile wireless mesh network using Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicles,” IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2012, pp. 1603–
1608 
[9] 
O. K. Sahingoz, “Mobile networking with UAVs: Opportunities and 
challenges,” International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems 
(ICUAS), 2013, pp. 933–941 
[10] T. K. Huang, C. K. Lee, and L. J. Chen, “PRoPHET+: An adaptive 
PRoPHET-based routing protocol for opportunistic network,” 24th IEEE 
International Conference on Advanced Information Networking and 
Applications (AINA), April 2010, pp. 112–119 
[11] Yanli Yang, M. M. Polycarpou, A. A. Minai, “Multi-UAV Cooperative 
Search Using an Opportunistic Learning Method,” Journal of Dynamic 
Systems, Measurement, and Control, Jan 2007, vol. 129, no. 5,  pp. 716–
728 
[12] Z. Zhao, Torstten Braun, “Topology Control and Mobility Strategy for 
UAV Ad hoc Networks,” Joint ERCIM eMobility and Mobisense 
Workshop, June 2012. 
[13] I. Bekmezci, M. Ermis, S. Kaplan, “Connected Multi UAV Task Planning 
for Flying Ad Hoc Networks,” IEEE International Black Sea Conference 
on Communications and Networking (BlackSeaComm), 2014, pp. 28–32 
[14] S. Rosati, K. Kruzelecki, L. Traynard, B. Rimoldi, “Speed-Aware Routing 
for UAV Ad-Hoc Networks,” IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), 
2013, pp. 1367–1373 
[15] E. W. Frew, T. X. Brown, “Airborne Communication Networks for Small 
Unmanned Aircraft Systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE, 2008, vol. 96, no. 
12, pp. 2008–2027 
[16] Jun Li, Yifeng Zhou, L. Lamont, “Communication Architectures and 
Protocols for Networking Unmanned Aerial Vehicles,” IEEE Globecom 
Workshops, 2013, pp. 1415–1420 
[17] I. Dalmasso, I. Galletti, R. Giuliano, F. Mazzenga, “WiMAX networks for 
emergency management based on UAVs,” IEEE First AESS European 
Conference on Satellite Telecommunications (ESTEL), 2012, pp. 1–6 
[18] F. J. Watkins, R. A. Hinojosa, A. M. Oddershede, “Alternative Wireless 
Network Technology Implementation for Rural Zones,” International 
Journal of Computers, Communications & Control, ISSN 1841–9844 Feb 
2013, vol. 8, no. 1, pp.161–165. 
[19] Y. Wang, Y. J. Zhao, "Fundamental issues in systematic design of 
airborne networks for aviation," IEEE Aerospace Conference, 2006. 
[20] A. P. Athreya, P. Tague, “Network Self-Organization in the Internet of 
Things,” IEEE International Workshop of Internet-of-Things Networking 
and Control (IoT-NC), Jun 2013, pp. 25–33 
[21] P. Sharnya, J. S. Raj, “Self Organizing Wireless Mesh Network,” 
International Journal of Innovation and Applied Studies, ISSN 2028–9324 
Jun 2013, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 486–492 
[22] M. Mendonca, B. N. Astuto, K. Obraczka and T. Turletti, “Software 
Defined Networking for Heterogeneous Networks,” IEEE MMTC E-
Letters, 2013, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 36–39 
[23] I. Ku et al., “Towards Software-Defined VANET: Architecture and 
Services,” 13th Annual Mediterranean Ad Hoc Networking Workshop 
(MED-HOC-NET), 2014, pp. 103–110 
[24] S. Costanzo, L. Galluccio, G. Morabito, S. Palazzo, “Software Defined 
Wireless Networks: Unbridling SDNs,” European Workshop on Software 
Defined Networking (EWSDN), 2012, pp. 1–6 
[25] Open Networking Foundation (ONF), “OpenFlow™-Enabled Mobile and 
Wireless 
Networks,” 
ONF 
Solution 
Brief, 
Sept 
2013, 
https://www.opennetworking.org/images/stories/downloads/sdn-
resources/solution-briefs/sb-wireless-mobile.pdf Access date: Oct 2014 
[26] N. McKeown et al., “OpenFlow: enabling innovation in campus 
networks,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, 2008, 
vol. 38, no. 2 
[27] A. Detti, C. Pisa, S. Salsano, N. Blefari-Melazzi, “Wireless Mesh 
Software Defined Networks (wmSDN),” IEEE 9th International 
Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and 
Communications (WiMob), Oct 2013, pp. 89–95 
[28] P. Dely, A. Kassler, N. Bayer, “Openflow for wireless mesh networks,” 
Proceedings 
of 
20th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Computer 
Communications and Networks (ICCCN),  July–Aug 2011, pp. 1–6 
[29] W. Xia, Y. Wen, C. H. Foh, D. Niyato and H. Xie, “A Survey on 
Software-Defined Networking,” IEEE Communications Surveys & 
Tutorials, 2014(to be published) 
[30] Bo Fu, L. A. DaSilva, “A Mesh in the Sky: A Routing Protocol for 
Airborne Networks,” IEEE Military Communications Conference 
(MILCOM 2007), Oct 2007 , pp. 1 –7 
[31] J. Shen, S. Moh , I. Chung, “Routing Protocols in Delay Tolerant 
Networks: A Comparative Survey,” The 23rd International Technical 
Conference on Circuits/Systems, Computers and Communications (ITC-
CSCC 2008), 2008 
[32] M. Abolhasan, T. Wysocki, E. Dutkiewicz, "A review of routing protocols 
for mobile ad hoc networks," Ad Hoc Networks, Jan 2004, vol. 2, no. 1, 
pp. 1 –22 
[33] F. Akyildiz, X. Wang, W. Wang, “Wireless mesh networks: a survey,” 
Computer Networks, Mar 2005, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 445–487, 
[34] Chen-Mou Cheng, Pai-Hsiang Hsiao, H. T. Kung, D. Vlah, “Maximizing 
Throughput of UAV-Relaying Networks with the Load-Carry-and-Deliver 
Paradigm,” IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference 
(WCNC), Mar 2007, pp. 4417–4424 
[35] T. Clausen, P. Jacquet, “Optimized Link State Routing,” IETF RFC 3626, 
Oct 2003 
[36] Bow-Nan Cheng, S. Moore, "A comparison of MANET routing protocols 
on airborne tactical networks," Military Communications Conference 
(MILCOM), Oct–Nov 2012, pp.1–6 

 
29 
[37] J. Chroboczek, “The Babel Routing Protocol,” IETF RFC 6126, Apr 2011 
[38] A. Neumann, C. Aichele, M. Lindner, S. Wunderlich, “IETF Better 
Approach To Mobile Ad hoc Networking (B.A.T.M.A.N.),” IETF Internet 
Draft draft-wunderlich-openmesh-manet-routing-00, Apr 2008 
[39] D. S. Sandhu, S. Sharma, “Performance Evaluation of BATMAN, DSR, 
OLSR Routing Protocols - A Review,” International Journal of Emerging 
Technology and Advanced Engineering, Jan 2012, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 184–
188 
[40] D. Murray, M. Dixon, T. Koziniec, “An Experimental Comparison of 
Routing Protocols in Multi Hop Ad Hoc Networks,” Australasian 
Telecommunication Networks and Applications Conference, Oct–Nov 
2010, pp. 159–164 
[41] A. Sharma, N. Rajagopalan, “A Comparative Study of B.A.T.M.A.N. and 
OLSR Routing Protocols for MANETs,” International Journal of 
Advanced Trends in Computer Science and Engineering (IJATCSE), 2013, 
vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 13–17, 
[42] D. Johnson, N. Ntlatlapa, C. Aichel, “Simple pragmatic approach to mesh 
routing using BATMAN,” 2nd IFIP International Symposium on Wireless 
Communications and Information Technology in Developing Countries, 
Oct 2008, pp. 1–10 
[43] D. Johnson, Y. Hu, D. Maltz, “The Dynamic Source Routing Protocol 
(DSR) for Mobile Ad Hoc Networks for IPv4,” IETF RFC 4728, Feb 
2007 
[44] T. X. Brown, B. Argrow, C. Dixon, S. Doshi, R. G. Thekkekunel, D. 
Henkel, “Ad hoc UAV ground network (AUGNet),” AIAA 3rd Unmanned 
Unlimited Technical Conference, Sept 2004, pp. 29–39 
[45] C. Perkins, E. Belding-Royer, S. Das, “Ad hoc On-Demand Distance 
Vector (AODV) Routing,” IETF RFC 3561, July 2003 
[46] B. Nyirenda, J. Mwanza, “Performance Evaluation of Routing Protocols 
in Mobile Ad hoc Networks (MANETs),” Blekinge Institute of 
Technology, 
Jan 
2009, 
http://www.bth.se/fou/cuppsats.nsf/all/247e26e7f470cf9fc1257543005b1b
fc/$file/manets_thesis_report.pdf Access date: Oct 2014 
[47] Z. J. Haas, M. R. Pearlman, P. Samar, “The Zone Routing Protocol (ZRP) 
for Ad Hoc Networks,” IETF Internet Draft draft-ietf-manet-zone-zrp-04, 
July 2002 
[48] V. Park, S. Corson, “Temporally-Ordered Routing Algorithm (TORA),” 
IETF Internet Draft draft-ietf-manet-tora-spec-04, July 2001 
[49] N. Uchida, N. Kawamura, N. Williams, K. Takahata, Y. Shibata, 
“Proposal of Delay Tolerant Network with Cognitive Wireless Network 
for Disaster Information Network System,” 27th International Conference 
on Advanced Information Networking and Applications Workshops 
(WAINA), Mar 2013, pp. 249–254 
[50] Ashraf E. Al-Fagih, Hossam S. Hassanein, “Routing Schemes for Delay-
Tolerant Networks-An Applications Perspective,” Technical Report 2012-
588, 
Ph.D. 
Depth 
Paper, 
Dec 
2012, 
http://research.cs.queensu.ca/TechReports/Reports/2012-588.pdf 
Access 
date: Oct 2014 
[51] Jiajia Liu, Xiaohong Jiang, H. Nishiyama, N. Kato, ”A General Model for 
Store-carry-forward Routing Schemes with Multicast in Delay Tolerant 
Networks,” 6th International ICST Conference on Communications and 
Networking in China (CHINACOM), Aug 2011, pp. 494–500 
[52] M. Le, Joon-Sang Park, and M. Gerla, “UAV Assisted Disruption 
Tolerant 
Routing,” 
IEEE 
Military 
Communications 
Conference 
(MILCOM), Oct 2006, pp. 1–5 
[53] Z. Zhang, “Chapter 8 - Routing protocols in Intermittently Connected 
Mobile Ad Hoc Networks and Delay-Tolerant Networks,” Algorithms and 
Protocols for Wireless, Mobile Ad Hoc Networks, Wiley, 2009 
[54] S. Jain, K. Fall, R. Patra, “Routing in Delay Tolerant Network,” ACM 
SIGCOM Computer Communication Review, Oct 2004, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 
145–158 
[55]  A.J. Alshabtat, L. Dong, “Low Latency Routing Algorithm for 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles Ad-Hoc Networks ,” World Academy of 
Science, Engineering and Technology Vol:5, 2011 
[56] R. Handorean, C. Gill, G. C. Roman, “Accommodating Transient 
Connectivity in Ad Hoc and Mobile Settings,” Pervasive Computing, Apr 
2004, vol. 3001, pp. 305–22. 
[57] Zhensheng Zhang, “Routing in intermittently connected mobile ad hoc 
networks and delay tolerant networks: overview and challenges,” IEEE 
communications Surveys & Tutorials, 2006, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 24–37 
[58] Zhenxin Feng, Kwan-Wu Chin, “State-of-the-Art Routing Protocols for 
Delay 
Tolerant 
Networks,” 
Technical 
Report, 
Oct 
2012, 
http://arxiv.org/pdf/1210.0965.pdf, Access date: Oct 2014 
[59] A. Balasubramanian, B. Levine, A. Venkataramani, “DTN Routing as a 
Resource 
Allocation 
Problem,” 
ACM 
SIGCOMM 
Computer 
Communication Review, Oct 2007, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 373–384 
[60] R. Ramanathan, R. Hansen, P. Basu, R. Rosales-Hain, R. Krishnan, 
“Prioritized epidemic Routing for Opportunistic Networks,” ACM 
Proceedings of the 1st International MobiSys Workshop on Mobile 
Opportunistic Networking (MobiOpp), Jun 2007, pp. 62–66 
[61] J. Burgess, B. Gallagher, D. Jensen, B. N. Levine, “MaxProp: Routing for 
Vehicle-Based Disruption-tolerant Networks,” Proceedings of the 25th 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Computer 
Communications  
(INFOCOM), Apr 2006, pp. 1–11 
[62] Q. Li, D. Rus, “Communication in Disconnected Ad Hoc Networks Using 
Message Relay,” Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 2003, 
vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 75–86. 
[63] W. Zhao, M. Ammar, E. Zegura, “A Message Ferrying Approach for Data 
Delivery in Sparse Mobile Ad Hoc Networks,” Proceedings Of the 5th 
ACM International Symposium on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and 
Computing (MobiHoc), 2004, pp. 187–98 
[64] M. R. Schurgot, C. Comaniciu, K. Jaffres-Runser, “Beyond Traditional 
DTN Routing: Social Networks for Opportunistic Communication,“, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, July 2012, vol. 50, no. 7, pp. 155–162 
[65] M. Ohleger, G. G. Xie, J. H. Gibson, “Extending UAV Video 
Dissemination via Seamless Handover: A Proof of Concept Evaluation of 
the IEEE 802.21 Standard,” 46th Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences (HICSS), Jan 2013, pp. 5106–5114 
[66] M. Saini, S. Mann, “Handoff Schemes for Vehicular Ad-Hoc Networks: A 
Survey,” 1st International Conference on Advancement in Electronics & 
Communication Engineering (ICAECE), Mar 2013 
[67] J. Dias, A. Cardote, F. Neves, S. Sargento, A. Oliveira, “Seamless 
Horizontal and Vertical Mobility in VANET,” IEEE Vehicular 
Networking Conference, Nov 2012, pp. 226–233 
[68] H. Tyagi, A. K. Vatsa, “Seamless Handoff through Information Retrieval 
in VANET Using Mobile Agent,” International Journal of Computer 
Science Issues (IJCSI), Jul 2011, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 634–640 
[69] Yibo Yang, Hongling Li, Qiong Huang, “Mobility Management in 
VANET,” 22nd Wireless and Optical Communication Conference 
(WOCC), May 2013, pp. 298–303 
[70] YS. Chen, CS. Hsu, CH. Cheng, “Network Mobility Protocol for 
Vehicular Ad Hoc Networks,” International Journal of  Communication 
Systems,  Mar 2013 
[71] K. Zhu, D. Niyato, P. Wang, E. Hossain, D. I. Kim, “Mobility and hand 
off 
management 
in 
vehicular 
networks: 
a 
survey,”  
Wireless 
Communications and Mobile Computing, 2011, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 459–
476. 
[72] H. Petander, E. Perera, KC. Lan, A. Seneviratne, “Measuring and 
improving the performance of network mobility management in IPv6 
networks,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 2006, 
vol. 24, no. 9, pp. 1671–1681 
[73] IEEE Computer Society, “Part 21: Media Independent Handover 
Services,” 802.21c-2014 IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area 
networks, IEEE Press, 2014 
[74] R. S. Shukla, N. Tyagi, “Global Mobility And Handover Management For 
Heterogeneous Network In VANET,” International Journal of Next-
Generation Networks (IJNGN), Sep 2013, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 23–34 
[75]  J. Stein, “Survey of IEEE 802.21 media independent handover services,” 
Technical 
Report, 
2006, 
http://www.cs.wustl.edu/~jain/cse574-
06/handover.htm Access date: Oct 2014 
[76] K. Taniuchi et al., “IEEE 802.21: Media Independent Handover: Features, 
Applicability, and Realization,” IEEE Communications Magazine, Feb 
2009, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 112–120 
[77] C. Guimaraes, D. Corujo, R. L. Aguiar, F. Silva, and P. Frosi, 
“Empowering Software Defined Wireless Networks Through Media 
Independent Handover Management IEEE Global Communications 
Conference (GLOBECOM), Dec 2013, pp. 2204–2209 
[78] S. Mamechaoui, F. Didi, G. Pujolle “A Survey On Energy Efficiency For 
Wireless Mesh Network,” International Journal of Computer Networks & 
Communications (IJCNC), Mar 2013, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 105–124 
[79] C. Yu, B. Lee and H. Yong Youn, “Energy efficient routing protocols for 
mobile ad hoc networks,” Wireless Communications and Mobile 

 
30 
Computing,  2003, vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 959–973 
[80] B. Bouyedou , M. Feham, F. Didi, H. Labiod, “Improvement of DSR 
Performances in Mobile Ad hoc Networks with Trade-off between Energy 
Efficiency and Path Shortness,” IEEE International Workshop on ITS for 
an Ubiquitous Roads (UBIROADS), Jun 2009 
[81] J-H. Chang, L. Tassiulas, “Energy conserving routing in wireless ad-hoc 
networks,” Proceedings of the 19th Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE 
Computer and Communications Societies (INFOCOM), 2000, vol. 1, pp. 
22–31. 
[82] B. Awerbuch, D. Holmer, H. Rubens, “The Pulse Protocol: Energy 
Efficient Infrastructure Access,” Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Joint 
Conference of the IEEE Computer and Communications Societies 
(INFOCOM), 2004, vol.2, pp. 1467–1478 
[83] L. Lin, N.B. Shroff, R. Srikant, “Asymptotically Optimal Power-Aware 
Routing for Multihop Wireless Networks with Renewable Energy 
Sources,” Proceedings of the 24th Annual Joint Conference of the IEEE 
Computer and Communications Societies  (INFOCOM), 2005, vol. 2, pp. 
1262–1272 
[84] K. Woo, C. Yu, H. Y. Youn, B. Lee, “Non-blocking, localized routing 
algorithm for balanced energy consumption in mobile ad hoc networks,” 
Proceedings of the 9th International Symposium on Modeling, Analysis 
and 
Simulation 
of 
Computer 
and 
Telecommunication 
Systems 
(MASCOTS), 2001, pp. 117–124. 
[85] H. Gil, J. Yoo, J. Lee, “An On-Demand Energy-Efficient Routing 
Algorithm for Wireless Ad Hoc Networks,“ Proceedings of the 2nd 
International Conference on Human Society@Internet (HSI), June 2003, 
pp. 302–311 
[86] C. Bemmoussat, F. Didi, M. Feham, “Efficient Routing Protocol To 
Support QoS In Wireless Mesh Network,” International Journal of 
Wireless & Mobile Networks (IJWMN), Oct 2012, vol. 4, no. 5, pp. 89–
104 
[87] Y. Xu, J. Heidemann, D. Estrin, “Geography-informed energy 
conservation for ad hoc routing,” Proceedings of the 7th Annual 
International Conference on Mobile Computing and Networking 
(MobiCom), 2001, pp. 70–84 
[88] B. Chen, K. Jamieson, H. Balakrishnan, R. Morris, “Span: An Energy-
Efficient Coordination Algorithm for Topology Maintenance in Ad Hoc 
Wireless Networks,” Journal of Wireless Networks, Sep 2002, vol. 8, no. 
5 pp. 481–494 
[89] M. Cardei, M. X. Cheng, X. Cheng, D. Z. Du, “Connected Domination in 
Multihop Ad Hoc Wireless Networks,” Proceedings of the 6th Joint 
Conference on Computer Science and Informatics, Mar 2002, pp. 1–5 
[90] J. C. C. Restrepo, C. G. Gruber, and C. M. Machuca, “Energy profile 
aware routing,” IEEE International Conference on Communications 
Workshops (ICC Workshops), Jun 2009, pp. 1–5 
[91] IEEE Computer Society, “Part 11: Wireless Medium Access Control 
(MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications: Medium Access 
Control (MAC) Quality of Service (QoS) Enhancements,” 802.11e-2005 
IEEE Standard, IEEE Press, 2005. 
[92] IEEE Computer Society, “Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control 
(MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) specifications: Amendment 5: 
Enhancements for Higher Throughput,” 802.11n-2009 IEEE Standard, 
IEEE Press, 2009 
[93] Wei Ye, J. Heidemann, D. Estrin, “Medium access control with 
coordinated adaptive sleeping for wireless sensor networks,” IEEE/ACM 
Transactions on Networking, June 2004, Vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 493–506 
[94] Tijs van Dam, Koen Langendoen, “An adaptive energy-efficient MAC 
protocol for wireless sensor networks,” Proceedings of the 1st 
international conference on Embedded networked sensor systems 
(SenSys), 2003, pp. 171–180 
[95] S. M. Kamruzzaman “An Energy Efficient Multichannel MAC Protocol 
for Cognitive Radio Ad Hoc Networks,” International Journal of 
Communication Networks and Information Security (IJCNIS), Vol. 2, No. 
2, August 2010, pp. 112-119 
[96] Y. Zhou, “Energy-efficient protocols and topologies for sensor and 
personal-area networks,” PhD thesis, Washington State University, 
Pullman, WA, USA, 2007, ISBN: 978-0-549-19359-3 
[97] Q. Fan, J. Fan, J. Li, X. Wang, “A Multi-hop Energy-efficient Sleeping 
MAC Protocol based on TDMA Scheduling for Wireless Mesh Sensor 
Networks,” Journal of Networks, Sep 2012, vol. 7, no. 9, pp. 1355–1361 
[98] Xue Yang, N. F. Vaidya, “A Wakeup Scheme for Sensor Networks: 
Achieving Balance between Energy Saving and End-to-end Delay,“ 
Proceedings of the 10th IEEE Real-Time and Embedded Technology and 
Applications Symposium (RTAS), May 2004, pp. 19–26 
[99] C. Schurgers, V. Tsiatsis, S. Ganeriwal, M. Srivastava, “Optimizing 
Sensor Networks in the Energy-Latency-Density Design Space,” IEEE 
Transactions on Mobile Computing, 2002, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 70–80 
[100] M. Dhanaraj, B. S. Manoj, C. S. R. Murthy, “A New Energy Efficient 
Protocol for Minimizing Multi-Hop Latency in Wireless Sensor 
Networks,” Proceedings of the 3rd IEEE International Conference on 
Pervasive Computing and Communications (PerCom), Mar 2005, pp. 
117–126 
[101] S. Singh, C. S. Raghavendra, “PAMAS – Power aware multi-access 
protocol with signaling for ad hoc networks,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer 
Communication Review, July 1998, vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 5–26 
[102] R. Wattenhofer, A. Zollinger, “XTC: A Practical Topology Control 
Algorithm for Ad-Hoc Networks,” Proceedings of the 18th International 
Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium,  Apr 2004 
[103] Jang-Ping Sheu, Shin-Chih Tu, Chi-Hung Hsu, “Location-Free Topology 
Control Protocol in Wireless Ad Hoc Networks,” IEEE Wireless 
Computer Communications and Networking Conference, Mar 2007, pp. 
66–71 
[104] Kuei-Ping Shih, Chih-Yung Chang, Chien-Min Chou, Szu-Min Chen, “A 
Power Saving MAC Protocol by Increasing Spatial Reuse for IEEE 
802.11 Ad Hoc WLANs”, Proceedings of the 19th International 
Conference on Advanced Information Networking and Applications 
(AINA), Mar 2005, vol. 1, pp. 420–425 
[105] Y. Al-Hazmi, H. de Meer, “Virtualization of 802.11 Interfaces for 
Wireless Mesh Networks,” 8th International Conference on Wireless On-
Demand Network Systems and Services (WONS), Jan 2011. pp. 44–51 
[106] W. R. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, H. Balakrishnan, “Energy-Efficient 
Communication 
Protocol 
for 
Wireless 
Microsensor 
Networks,“ 
Proceedings of the 33rd Annual Hawaii international Conference on 
System Sciences (HICSS), Jan 2000 
[107] H. O. Tan, I. Korpeoglu, “Power efficient data gathering and aggregation 
in wireless sensor networks,” ACM SIGMOD Record, Dec 2003, vol. 32, 
no. 4, pp. 66–71 
[108] Lap-Fai Leung, Chi-ying Tsui , Hu, X.S., “Exploiting dynamic workload 
variation in low energy preemptive task scheduling,” Proceedings of 
Design, Automation and Test in Europe, ISBN: 0-7695-2288-2, 2005 
Vol1 pp. 634-639 
[109] F. O. Aron, A. Kurien, Y. Hamam, “Topology Control Algorithm for 
Effective Power Efficiency and Throughput for Wireless Mesh 
Networks,” 3rd International Conference on Broadband Communications, 
Information Technology & Biomedical Applications, Nov 2008, pp. 89–96 
[110] F. O. Aron, T. O. Olwal, A. Kurien, M. O. Odhiambo, “A Distributed 
Topology Control Algorithm to Conserve Energy in Heterogeneous 
Wireless Mesh Networks,” Proceedings of World Academy of Science, 
Engineering and Technology, July 2008, vol. 30, pp. 530–536 
[111] P. Santi, “Topology Control in Wireless Ad Hoc and Sensor Networks,” 
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), June 2005, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 164–194 
[112] H. Coskun, I. Schieferdecker, Y. Al-Hazmi, “Virtual WLAN: Going 
beyond Virtual Access Points,” Journal of Electronic Communications of 
the EASST (ECEASST), Mar 2009, vol. 17, pp. 1–12 
[113] A. Capone, F.Malandra, B. Sansò, “Energy Savings in Wireless Mesh 
Networks in a Time-Variable Context,” Journal of Mobile Networks and 
Applications, Apr 2012, vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 298–311 
[114] S. Nedevschi, L. Popa, G. Iannaccone, S. Ratnasamy, D. Wetherall, 
“Reducing Network Energy Consumption via Sleeping and Rate-
Adaptation,” Proceedings of the 5th USENIX Symposium on Networked 
Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI), 2008, pp. 323–336 
[115] S. Dey, H. Sarmah, S. Samantray, D. Divakar, S. S. Pathak, “Energy 
Efficiency in Wireless Mesh Networks,” IEEE International Conference 
on Computational Intelligence and Computing Research (ICCIC), Dec 
2010, pp. 1–4 
[116] Chuan-Chi Weng, Ching-Wen Chen, Po-Yueh Chen, Kuei-Chung Chang, 
“Design of an energy-efficient cross-layer protocol for mobile ad hoc 
networks,” IET Communications, May 2013, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 217–228 
[117] Shujuan Liu, Yuebin Bai, Mo Sha, Qingyuan Deng, Depei Qian, “CLEEP: 
A Novel Cross-Layer Energy-Efficient Protocol for Wireless Sensor 
Networks,” 4th International Conference on Wireless Communications, 
Networking and Mobile Computing (WiCOM), Oct 2008, pp. 1–4 

 
31 
[118] S. Sarkar, K. Majumder, “A Survey on Power Aware Routing Protocols 
for Mobile Ad-Hoc Network,” Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Frontiers of Intelligent Computing: Theory and 
Applications (FICTA), 2013 
[119] CLE2aR2: Kuei-Ping Shih, Hung-Chang Chen, Chun-Chih Li and 
Hsiang-I Chen, “A Cross-Layer Energy-Efficient and Reliable Routing 
Protocol 
for 
Wireless 
Ad 
Hoc 
Networks,” 
Computers 
and 
Communications, 2008. ISCC 2008. IEEE Symposium on, 436 – 441 
[120] The 
carbon 
footprint 
of 
ICTs, 
Hopeton 
S 
Dunn,  
http://akgul.bilkent.edu.tr/GISW/gisw2010_en.pdf, GISwatch, APC and 
Hivos, 2010, ISBN 92-95049-96-9 
[121] B. Shah, Kim Ki-Il, “A Survey on Three-Dimensional Wireless Ad Hoc 
and Sensor Networks,” International Journal of Distributed Sensor 
Networks, 2014 
[122] L. Feng, “A Distributed Gateway Selection Algorithm for UAV 
Networks,” IEEE Transactions On Emerging Topics In Computing, 
December, 2014(Current Version March, 2015),pp. 22-33 
[123] Y. Li, M. St-Hilaire, T. Kunz, “Enhancing the RGR Routing Protocol for 
Unmanned Aeronautical Ad-hoc Networks,” Carleton University, Systems 
and Computer Engineering, Technical Report SCE-12-01, August 2012 
[124] S. Balndin et al (Eds.): New2AN/ruSMART 2014, LNCS 8638, Springer 
International Publishing, 2014, pp. 245-252]. 
[125] K. Peters, A. Jabbar, K. Egemen, E.K. Cetinkaya. J.P.G. Sterbenz, “A 
Geographical Routing Protocol for Highly-Dynamic Aeronautical 
Networks,” IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference 
(WCNC), 2011, pp. 492-497. 
[126] T. Camp, J. Bolen, B. Williams, L. Wilcox, W. Navidi, “Performance 
comparison of two location based routing protocols for ad hoc networks,” 
Proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM, 2002, pp. 1678–1687 
[127] I. Turnadereli; I. Bekmezci, “Performance Comparison Of MANET 
Routing Protocols For UAV Ad Hoc Networks,” International Symposium 
on Computing in Science & Engineering, Oct 2013, p169 
[128] S. Rosati S., K. Kru˙zelecki, L. Traynard, B. Rimoldi, “Speed-Aware 
Routing for UAV Ad-Hoc Networks,” Workshop on Wireless and Control 
for Unmanned Autonomous Vehicles, Globecom 2013 
[129] J. Pojda, A. Wolff, M. Sbeiti, C. Wietfeld, “Performance Analysis of 
Mesh Routing Protocols for UAV Swarming Applications,” 8th 
International Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems, 2011  
[130] Bose, P.; Morin, P.; Stojmenovic, I.; Urrutia, J. (1999). "Routing with 
guaranteed delivery in ad hoc wireless networks". Proc. of the 3rd 
international workshop on discrete algorithms and methods for mobile 
computing and communications (DIALM '99). pp. 48–55] 
[131] S.S. Lam, C. Qian, “Geographic Routing in d-dimensional Spaces with 
Guaranteed Delivery and Low Stretch,” SIGMETRICS’11, 2011  
[132] C. Liu, J. Wu, “Efficient Geometric Routing in Three Dimensional Ad 
Hoc Networks,” IEEE INFOCOM, 2751 – 2755 
[133] R. Flurry, R. Wattenhofer, “Randomized 3D Geographic Routing,” The 
27th Conference on Computer Communications, INFOCOM 2008. 
[134] J. Zhou, X. Jiaotong, Y.C.B. Leong, P.S. Sundaramoorthy, “Practical 3D 
Geographic Routing for Wireless Sensor Networks,” Proceedings of the 
8th ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems(SenSys 
’10), 2010 pp. 337-350 
[135] T. Spyropoulos, K. Psounis, C.S. Raghavendra, “Single-copy routing in 
intermittently connected mobile networks,” Proceedings of the IEEE 
Conference on Sensor and Ad Hoc Communications and Networks,” 
SECON,  2004  
[136] A. Vahdat, D. Becker, “Epidemic Routing for Partially-Connected Ad 
Hoc Net-  works,” Technical Report CS-2000-06, Duke University (July 
2000). 
[137] T. Spyropoulos, K. Psounis, C.S. Raghavendra, “Spray and wait: Efficient 
routing in intermittently connected mobile networks,” Proceedings of 
ACM SIGCOMM  Workshop on Delay Tolerant Networking, WDTN, 
2005 
[138] I. Cardei, C. Liu, J. Wu, “Routing In Wireless Networks With Intermittent 
Connectivity” Encyclopaedia of Wireless and Mobile Communications, 
2013 
[139] R. Shirani, M. St-Hilaire, T. Kunz, Y. Zhou, J. Li, L. Lamont, “Combined 
Reactive-Geographic routing for Unmanned Aeronautical Ad-hoc 
Networks,” 8th International Conference on Wireless Communications 
and Mobile Computing (IWCMC), 2012 
[140] X. Li, L. Ci, B. Cheng, C. Tian, M. Yang, R. Wang, F. Xiao (Eds) , “Ant 
Colony Based Routing Strategy in UAV Delay Tolerant Networks,”: 
CWSN 2012, CCIS 334, pp. 191–203 
[141] A. Lindgren, A. Doria, O. Chelen, “Probabilistic routing in intermittently 
connected networks.” SIGMOBILE: Mobile Computing Communications 
Review, volume 7, pages 19–20. ACM Press, July 2003 
[142] E. Ashraf, A.F. Hossam, S. Hassanein,“Routing schemes for DTN-An 
Applications Perspective,” Telecommunications Research Lab (TRL) 
School of Computing Queen's University Kingston, Ontario, Canada 
Technical Report 2012 
[143] J. 
Widmer, 
J.Y. 
LeBoudec, 
“Network 
Coding 
for 
Efficient 
Communication in Extreme Networks,” WDTN, 2005 
[144] V. Visvan, A. Beevi, N. Nasseema, “Efficient Media Independent 
Handover Scheme for Mission-Critical Management,” IOSR Journal of 
Computer Engineering, Volume 7, Issue 5 (Nov-Dec. 2012), PP 10-14 
[145] M. 
Ohlege, G. 
Xie, J.H. 
Gibson, 
“Extending 
UAV 
Video 
Dissemination via Seamless Handover: A Proof of Concept Evaluation of 
the IEEE 802.21 Standard,” 46th Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences, 2013 
[146] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/AAA_battery 
[147] R. Purta, S. Nagrecha, G. Madey, “Multi-hop Communications in a 
Swarm of UAVs,” Proceedings of the Symposium on Agent Directed 
Simulation (ADS'13/SpringSim), 2013).  
[148] N. Shi, X. Luo, “A Novel Cluster-Based Location-Aided Routing 
Protocol for UAV Fleet Networks,” International Journal of Digital 
Content Technology and its Applications (JDCTA) Volume 6, Number18, 
October 2012 
[149] H.C. Christmann, E.N. Johnson, “Design and Implementation of a Self-
configuring Ad-hoc Network for Unmanned Aerial Systems,” AIAA 
Infotech@Aerospace Conference and Exhibit, Rohnert Park, CA, October, 
2007. 
[150] S. Cespedes, N. Lu, X. Shen, “VIP-WAVE: On the Feasibility of IP 
Communications in 802.11p Vehicular Networks,” IEEE Transactions On 
Intelligent Transportation Systems, Vol 14, Issue 1, 2013, PP 82-97 
[151] D. Halperin, B. Greenstein, A. Sheth, D. Wetherall “Demystifying 
802.11n Power Consumption,” Proceedings of the international 
conference on Power aware computing and systems (HotPower’10), 2010 
 
 
Lav Gupta is a senior member of 
IEEE. He received BS degree from Indian 
Institute of Technology, Roorkee, India in 
1978 and MS degree from Indian Institute 
of Technology, Kanpur, India in 1980. He 
is currently pursuing PhD degree in 
Computer Science & Engineering at 
Washington University in St Louis, 
Missouri, USA.  
He has worked for about 15 years in the area of 
telecommunications planning, deployment and regulation. With 
the sector regulatory authority he worked on technology and 
regulation of next generation networks. He has also worked as 
senior teaching faculty of Computer Science and Access 
Network Planning for a number of years in telecommunications 
academies. He is the author of one book, 5 articles and has been 
a speaker at many international seminars. 
He was recipient of best software award from Computer 
Society of India in 1982 and best faculty award at Etisalat 
Academy, UAE in 1998. 
 
 
Raj Jain is a Fellow of IEEE, a Fellow 
of ACM, a Fellow of AAAS. He received 
BS degree in Electrical Engineering from 
APS University in Rewa, India in 1972 and 
MS in Computer Science & Controls from 

 
32 
IISc, Bangalore, India in 1974 and the Ph.D. degree in Applied 
Math/Computer Science from Harvard University in 1978. 
Dr. Jain is currently a Professor of Computer Science & 
Engineering at Washington University in St. Louis. Previously, 
he was one of the Co-founders of Nayna Networks, Inc - a next 
generation telecommunications systems company in San Jose, 
CA. He was a Senior Consulting Engineer at Digital Equipment 
Corporation in Littleton, Mass and then a professor of 
Computer and Information Sciences at Ohio State University in 
Columbus, Ohio. He has 14 patents and has written or edited 12 
books, 16 book chapters, 65+ journal and magazine papers, and 
10e5+ conference papers.   
He is a winner of ACM SIGCOMM Test of Time award, 
CDAC-ACCS Foundation Award 2009, and ranks among the 
top 100 in CiteseerX's list of Most Cited Authors in Computer 
Science.  
 
 
 
Gabor Vaszkun received his BS and 
MS degrees in Computer Science from 
Budapest University of Technology & 
Economics, Budapest, Hungary in 2012 
and 2014 respectively.  
 Mr. Vaszkun is currently working with 
Ericsson Hungary. During 2014 he was a 
Research Scholar in the Department of Computer Science & 
Engineering at Washington University in St. Louis, Missouri, 
USA. He has interned with Ericsson Research for 3 months 
during his Masters program. He is the author of two published 
conference papers. He has also participated in a number of 
Poster 
Sessions 
and 
Demonstrations 
in 
national 
and 
International Conferences. 
 He received Rosztoczy scholarship for the year 2014 to 
pursue his research in USA. He is also a recipient of the 
WorldQuant scholarship awarded to outstanding students to 
pursue higher education in the fields of science and quantitative 
studies.