EDITORIAL
Evolutionary robotics
Evert Haasdijk • Nicolas Bredeche •
Stefano Nolﬁ• A. E. Eiben
Received: 8 July 2014 / Accepted: 16 July 2014 / Published online: 8 August 2014
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2014
Evolutionary robotics combines evolutionary computing
with robotics [1, 2, 4, 7–10]. It is a ﬁeld that ‘‘aims to apply
evolutionary computation techniques to evolve the overall
design or controllers, or both, for real and simulated
autonomous robots’’ [9]. It is a useful approach ‘‘both for
investigating the design space of robotic applications and
for testing scientiﬁc hypotheses of biological mechanisms
and processes’’ [4].
Over the last ﬁfteen years, evolutionary robotics has
developed from the novel ﬁeld described in Nolﬁand
Floreano’s seminal book [7] to a more mature discipline.
Evolutionary robotics is now also used to tackle problems
involving complex dynamical systems, such as swarm
robotics, modular robotics, ﬂying and underwater robotics.
Major research challenges have been identiﬁed and are
currently being investigated by the community, ranging
from the impact of selection pressure to embodied evolu-
tion and lifelong learning.
From the perspective of evolutionary computing, evo-
lutionary robotics is a particular application area that is
different from, say, combinatorial optimisation. Somewhat
oversimplifying, the main challenge in solving optimisa-
tion problems with evolutionary algorithms is the rugged-
ness of the ﬁtness landscape deﬁned by the objective
function. Evolutionary robotics applications face additional
problems: one is the very indirect link between controllable
design details and the target feature(s). Another particular
issue is the great variety of conditions and requirements
under which a solution has to hold. Unlike candidate
solutions in ‘simple’ optimisation, robot phenotypes (con-
troller, morphology, or both) cannot be directly evaluated.
Rather, it is the robot’s behaviour that needs to be observed
and
assessed.
Thus,
regular
evolutionary
computing
implies a three levels of organization: genotype—pheno-
type—ﬁtness, while in evolutionary robotics the process
comprises of four levels of organization: genotype—phe-
notype—behaviour—ﬁtness. Additionally, the behavior
exhibited by a robot is not only the product of the robot
morphology and controller but is the emergent result of the
robot/environmental interactions [6]. Thus, the evaluation
of a candidate solution necessarily require the evaluation of
the behavior that arise by robots that are situated in the
external environment and are allowed to ’’live‘‘ long
enough to experience a large variety of environmental
conditions. Last but not least, desirable robot behaviour is
almost never deﬁned by one single skill (except for pure
research purposes). Consequently, the design of the ﬁtness
function is far from trivial [5].1
E. Haasdijk  A. E. Eiben
VU University Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands
e-mail: e.haasdijk@vu.nl
A. E. Eiben
e-mail: gusz@cs.vu.nl
N. Bredeche (&)
Sorbonne Universite´s, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7222, ISIR,
75005 Paris, France
e-mail: nicolas.bredeche@upmc.fr
N. Bredeche
CNRS, UMR 7222, ISIR, 75005 Paris, France
S. Nolﬁ
Istituto di Scienze e Tecnologie della Cognizione, Consiglio
Nazionale delle Ricerche, Via San Martino della Battaglia 44,
00185 Rome, Italy
e-mail: stefano.nolﬁ@istc.cnr.it
1 Parts of this introduction are based on Eiben [3].
123
Evol. Intel. (2014) 7:69–70
DOI 10.1007/s12065-014-0113-7

Evolutionary Robotics has been (re)gaining momentum
in recent years as evidenced by the programmes of the
conferences GECCO, EvoStar, PPSN, and ALIFE and
initiatives such as a Specialty Section (a journal-in-a-
journal) on Evolutionary Robotics featured in the new
Frontiers journal on Robotics and AI. This special issue on
evolutionary robotics aims to recognise this recent growth
as well as to further encourage the development of the
ﬁeld.
Doncieux and Mouret provide a survey in ‘‘Beyond
Black-Box Optimization: a Review of Selective Pressures
for Evolutionary Robotics’’. The motivational observation
is that Evolutionary Robotics is different from mainstream
Evolutionary Computing in that the selective pressure, and,
in particular, the ﬁtness function, cannot be a pure user-
deﬁned black box. Therefore, selective pressures in evo-
lutionary robotics form a research topic of their own. The
literature is reviewed through a newly introduced taxon-
omy that distinguishes two categories: goal reﬁners, aimed
at changing the deﬁnition of a good solution, and process
helpers, designed to help the search process. The review
shows that many task-agnostic process helpers have been
proposed during the last years, advancing the ﬁeld towards
a fully automated robot behaviour design process.
O’Dowd, Studley, and Winﬁeld report on ‘‘The Dis-
tributed Co-Evolution of an On-Board Simulator and
Controller for Swarm Robot Behaviours’’. They describe a
novel approach to improve the transference between sim-
ulation and reality of controllers that co-evolve with an on-
board simulator without an explicit measurement to com-
pare the two domains. They show that the variation of on-
board simulators across many robots in the swarm can be
competitively exploited. However, the results vary over
different test scenarios. The results indicate that the
approach is sensitive to whether the real behavioural per-
formance of the robot is able to inform on the state real
environment.
The paper ‘‘An evolutionary robotics approach for the
distributed control of satellite formations’’ by Izzo, Simo˜es
and de Croon describes evolutionary robotics techniques in
the context of space applications, in particular decentra-
lised formation ﬂying. They design a control scheme for
the MIT SPHERES robotic platform, currently on board
the International Space Station. The evolutionary method
successfully produces homogeneous controllers that can
plan for the acquisition and maintenance of any triangular
formation with high precision.
The paper ‘‘Simultaneous versus incremental learning of
multiple skills by modular robots’’ by Rossi and Eiben
addresses the question whether it is better to learn multiple
skills simultaneously (all-at-once) or incrementally (one-
by-one). They conduct an experimental study with modular
robots of various shapes and sizes that need to acquire three
different but correlated skills using real-time on-board
evolution as the learning method. The results indicate that
the one-by-one strategy is more efﬁcient and more stable
than the all-at-once strategy.
Interestingly, two of the four papers in this issue employ
on-line evolution where robots adapt in their task envi-
ronment. This contrasts with the more traditional off-line
scheme (optimise ﬁrst, then deploy ﬁxed controllers) pre-
valent in the majority of the current literature. We, the
editors, believe that a largely unused potential exists in on-
line evolution and hope that these two studies will inspire
others to explore and exploit this potential.
It is also interesting to note that two of the four papers
emphasise the importance of selective pressure: why
should selective pressure be considered in any speciﬁc
manner in evolutionary robotics; how should it be formu-
lated and applied?
The contributions highlight that evolutionary robotics
requires more than simply applying regular evolutionary
computation to the robotics domain—it poses particular,
challenging research problems and opportunities. We hope
that this special issue encourages researchers to join or
persevere this lively and interesting area of research.
References
1. Bongard
J
(2013)
Evolutionary
robotics.
Commun
ACM
56(8):74–85
2. Doncieux S, Mouret JB, Bredeche N, Padois V (2011) Evolutionary
robotics: exploring new horizons. In: Doncieux S, Bredeche N,
Mouret JB (eds) New horizons in evolutionary robotics, studies in
computational intelligence, vol 341. Springer, Berlin, pp 3–25
3. Eiben AE (2014) In vivo veritas: towards the evolution of things.
In: Proceedings of parallel problem solving from nature—PPSN
XIII. Lecture notes in computer science, Springer, Berlin
4. Floreano D, Husbands P, NolﬁS (2008) Evolutionary robotics.
In: Siciliano B, Khatib O (eds) Springer handbook of robotics, vol
Part G.61. Springer, Berlin, pp 1423–1451
5. Nelson AL, Barlow GJ, Doitsidis L (2009) Fitness functions in
evolutionary robotics: a survey and analysis. Robot Auton Syst
57(4):345–370. doi:10.1016/j.robot.2008.09.009
6. NolﬁS (2009) Behavior and cognition as a complex adaptive
system: insights from robotic experiments. Philosophy of com-
plex systems, handbook on foundational/philosophical issues for
complex systems in science. Elsevier, Amsterdam
7. NolﬁS, Floreano D (2000) Evolutionary robotics: the biology,
intelligence, and technology of self-organizing machines. MIT
Press, Cambridge
8. Trianni V (2008) Evolutionary swarm robotics—evolving self-
organising behaviours in groups of autonomous robots, studies in
computational intelligence, vol 108. Springer, Berlin
9. Vargas P, Paolo ED, Harvey I, Husbands P (eds) (2014) The
horizons of evolutionary robotics. MIT Press, Cambridge
10. Wang L, Tan K, Chew C (2006) Evolutionary robotics: from
algorithms to implementations.
World Scientiﬁc Series
in
Robotics and Intelligent Systems, vol 28. World Scientiﬁc,
Singapore
70
Evol. Intel. (2014) 7:69–70
123