Data Validation
Mark P.J. van der Loo∗and Edwin de Jonge
Statistics Netherlands
This is the submitted version of the following book chapter: “Van der
Loo, M.P.J. and De Jonge, E. (2020) Data Validation. In Wiley
StatsRef: Statistics Reference Online” which has been published in
ﬁnal form in
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/9781118445112.stat08255.
Abstract
Data validation is the activity where one decides whether or not a
particular data set is ﬁt for a given purpose. Formalizing the require-
ments that drive this decision process allows for unambiguous commu-
nication of the requirements, automation of the decision process, and
opens up ways to maintain and investigate the decision process itself.
The purpose of this article is to formalize the deﬁnition of data vali-
dation and to demonstrate some of the properties that can be derived
from this deﬁnition. In particular, it is shown how a formal view of the
concept permits a classiﬁcation of data quality requirements, allowing
them to be ordered in increasing levels of complexity. Some subtleties
arising from combining possibly many such requirements are pointed
out as well.
Informally, data validation is the activity where one decides whether or
not a particular data set is ﬁt for a given purpose. The decision is based
on testing observed data against prior expectations that a plausible dataset
is assumed to satisfy. Examples of prior expectations range widely. They
include natural limits on variables (weight cannot be negative), restrictions
on combinations of multiple variables (a man cannot be pregnant), combi-
nations of multiple entities (a mother cannot be younger than her child) and
combinations of multiple data sources (import value of country A from coun-
try B must equal the export value of country B to country A). Besides the
strict logical constraints mentioned in the examples, there are often ‘softer’
∗Corresponding author: mplo@cbs.nl
1
arXiv:2012.12028v1  [cs.DB]  21 Dec 2020

constraints based on human experience. For example, one may not expect
a certain economic sector to grow more than 5% in a quarter. Here, the
5% limit does not represent a physical impossibility but rather a limit based
on past experience. Since one must decide in the end whether a data set is
usable for its intended purpose, we treat such assessments on equal footing.
The purpose of this paper is to formalize the deﬁnition of data validation
and to demonstrate some of the properties that can be derived from this
deﬁnition.
In particular, it is shown how a formal view of the concept
permits a classiﬁcation of data validation rules (assertions), allowing them
to be ordered in increasing levels of ‘complexity’. Here, the term ‘complexity’
refers to the amount of diﬀerent types of information necessary to evaluate
a validation rule. A formal deﬁnition also permits development of tools for
automated validation and automated reasoning about data validation (Zio
et al., 2015; Van der Loo and De Jonge, 2018, 2019). Finally, some subtleties
arising from combining validation rules are pointed out.
1
Formal deﬁnition of data validation
Intuitively, a validation activity classiﬁes a dataset as acceptable or not
acceptable. A straightforward formalization is to deﬁne it as a function from
the collection of data sets that could have been observed, to {True, False}.
One only needs to be careful in deﬁning the ‘collection of data sets’, to avoid
a ‘set of all sets’ which recursively holds itself. To avoid such paradoxes, a
data set is deﬁned as a set of key-value pairs, where the keys come from a
ﬁnite set, and the values from some domain.
Deﬁnition 1. A data point is a pair (k, x) ∈K × D, where k is a key,
selected from a ﬁnite set K and x is a value from a domain D.
In applications the identiﬁer k makes the value interpretable as the prop-
erty of a real-world entity or event. The domain D is the set of all possible
values that x can take, and it therefore depends on the circumstances in
which the data is obtained.
As an example, consider an administrative system holding age and job
status of persons. It is assumed that ‘job’ takes values in {"employed", "unemployed"}
and that ‘age’ is an integer. However, if the data entry system performs no
validation on entered data, numbers may end up in the job ﬁeld, and job val-
ues may end up in the age ﬁeld. In an example where the database contains
2

data on two persons identiﬁed as 1 and 2, this gives
K = {1, 2} × {"age", "job"}
D = N ∪{"employed", "unemployed"}.
(1)
This deﬁnition allows for the occurrence of missing values by deﬁning a
special value for them, say ‘NA’ (not available) and adding it to the domain.
Once K and D are ﬁxed it is possible to deﬁne the set of all observable
datasets.
Deﬁnition 2. A dataset is a subset of K × D where every key in K occurs
exactly once.
Another way to interpret this is to say that a data set is a total function
K →D. The set of all observable data sets is denoted DK. In the example,
one possible dataset is
{((1, "age"), 25), ((1, "job"), "unemployed"),
((2, "age"), "employed"), ((2, "job"), 42)}
Observe that the key consists of a person identiﬁer and a variable identiﬁer.
Since type checking is a common part of data validation these deﬁnitions
deliberately leave open the possibility that variables assume a value of the
wrong type.
Data validation can now be formally deﬁned as follows.
Deﬁnition 3. A data validation function is a surjective function
v : DK ↠{False, True}.
A data set d ∈DK for which v(d) = True is said to satisfy v. A data set
for which v(d) = False is said to fail v.
Recall that surjective means that there is at least one d ∈DK for which
v(d) = False and at least one d ∈DK for which v(d) = True. A validation
function has to be surjective to have any meaning as a data validation ac-
tivity. Suppose v′ : DK →{False, True} non-surjective function. If there is
no data set d for which v′(d) = False, then v′ is always true and it does not
validate anything. If, on the other hand, there is no d for which v′(d) = True
then no data set can satisfy v′. In short, a function that is not surjective on
{False, True} does not separate valid from invalid data.
A data validation function is reminiscent of a predicate as deﬁned in ﬁrst-
order logic. Informally, a predicate is a statement about variables that can
3

be True or False. The variables can take values in a predeﬁned set (referred
to as the domain of the predicate). Since validation functions map elements
of DK to {False, True}, it is tempting to equate a validation function as a
predicate over DK. However, the elements of DK are instances of possible
data sets, and validation is based on statements involving variables of a single
observed data set. It is therefore more convenient to adopt the following
deﬁnition.
Deﬁnition 4. A validation rule is a predicate over an instance d ∈DK that
is neither a tautology nor a contradiction.
The elements of DK are suﬃciently similar so that any validation rule
over a particular data set d ∈DK is also a validation rule over another data
set in d′ ∈DK, where the truth value of a validation rule depends on the
chosen data set. This also allows us to interpret a tautology as a predicate
that is True for every element of DK and a contradiction as a predicate that
is False for every element of DK.
The equivalence between an assertion about a data set and a function
classifying possible data sets as valid or invalid instances is a rather obvious
conclusion. The actual value of the above exercise is the strict deﬁnition of
a data point as a key-value pair. As will be shown below, inclusion of the
key permits a useful classiﬁcation of data validation rules.
To demonstrate that many types of validation rules can be expressed in
this framework a few examples based on the example of Equation (1) will
be considered. The following rule states that all ages must be integer.
∀((u, "age"), x) ∈d : x ∈N.
Here, ((u, "age"), x) runs over the person-value pairs where the value is
supposed to represent an age. Similarly, it is possible express a nonnegativity
check on the age variable.
∀((u, "age"), x) ∈d : x ≥0.
In these examples a data set fails a validation rule when not all elements
satisfy a predicate. Such rules are not very informative when it comes to
pinpointing what elements of the data set cause the violation. It is cus-
tomary to perform data validation on a ﬁner level, for example by checking
nonnegativity element by element. Based on the deﬁnitions introduced here
this is done by ﬁxing the key completely.
∀((1, "age"), x) ∈d : x ≥0
∀((2, "age"), x) ∈d : x ≥0.
4

Now consider the cross-variable check that states that employed persons
must be 15 or older.
∀((u, "age"), x), (u, "job"), y) ∈d : y = "employed" ⇒x ≥15,
where ⇒denotes logical implication (if y = "employed" then x ≥15). Fi-
nally, consider the cross-person check that states that we expect the average
age in the data set to be larger then or equal to 5.
P
(u,"age",x)∈d x
P
(u,X,x)∈d δ(X, "age") ≥5,
where δ(X, Y ) = 1 when X = Y and otherwise 0.
In practical applications validation rules are often expressed more di-
rectly in terms of variable names, such as age ≥0. Such expressions are
specializations where one silently assumes extra properties such as that the
rule will be evaluated for the entry for age in every record.
Remark 1.
In Deﬁnition 3, (and also 4) a validation function is deﬁned as
a surjection DK ↠{False, True}. In practical applications it is often useful
to also allow the value NA (not available) for cases where one or more of
the data points necessary for evaluating the validation rule are missing. In
that case the domain D in the Equation (1) must be extended to D ∪{NA}.
See Van der Loo and De Jonge (2019) for an implementation.
Remark 2.
The current formalization of data validation excludes checking
for completeness of the key set: it is assumed by deﬁnition that each data
set in DK is a complete set of key-value pairs where the keys cover all of
K. The above deﬁnitions therefore create a clean distinction between what
is metadata (the keys and their interpretation) and data (key-value pairs).
It is possible to check for uniqueness of variables.
Remark 3.
The formal deﬁnition of data validation rules also allows a
formalization of data validation software tools or domain speciﬁc languages,
such as in Van der Loo and De Jonge (2019).
Remark 4.
In oﬃcial (government) statistics, validation rules are referred
to as edit rules rather than data validation rules. See De Waal et al. (2011)
and references therein.
5

2
Classiﬁcation of validation rules
Validation rules deﬁned by domain experts may be easy for humans to in-
terpret, but can be complex to implement. Take as an example the assertion
‘the average price of a certain type of goods this year, should not diﬀer more
then ten percent from last year’s average’. To evaluate this assertion one
needs to combine prices of multiple goods collected over two time periods.
A practical question is therefore if the ‘complexity of evaluation’, in terms
of the amount of information necessary, can somehow be measured. In this
section a classiﬁcation of data validation rules is derived that naturally leads
to an ordering of validation rules in terms of the variety of information that
is necessary for their evaluation.
One way to measure the amount of information is to look at the pred-
icate deﬁning a data validation rule and to determine how many diﬀerent
(k, x) pairs are needed to evaluate it. This is not very useful for comparing
complexity across diﬀerent data sets that are not from the same DK since
the numbers will depend on the size of the key set K. One measure that
does generalize to diﬀerent DK is the measure ‘does a rule need one, or
several (k, x) to be evaluated?’.
This measure is not very precise, but it can be reﬁned when a key consists
of multiple meaningful parts such as in the running example where the key
consists of the id of a person and the name of a variable. One can then
classify a rule according to two questions: ‘are multiple person id’s necessary
for evaluation?’, and: ‘are multiple variables necessary for evaluation?’. This
gives a four-way classiﬁcation: one where both questions are answered with
‘no’, two where one of the questions is answered with ‘yes’ and one where
both questions are answered with ‘yes’. Although this reﬁnement improves
the accuracy of the classiﬁcation, it only allows for comparing validation
rules over data sets with the exact same key structure. It would therefore be
useful to have a generic key structure that can be reused in many situations.
One such structure can be found by considering in great generality how a
data point is obtained in practice.
A data point usually represents the value of an attribute of an object or
event in the real world: a person, a web site, an e-mail, a radio broadcast, a
country, a sensor, a company, or anything else that has observable attributes.
In what follows, an object or event is referred to as a ‘unit’ for brevity. A
data point is created by observing an attribute X from a unit u of a certain
type U at time τ, as in Figure 1. Using the same reasoning as above, this
yields a 24 = 16-way classiﬁcation of validation rules: for each element U, τ,
u, X a validation rule requires a single or multiple instances to be evaluated.
6

t
x
tu
t′
u
τ
Figure 1:
A unit u of type U exists from tu to t′
u. From tu onward it has
an attribute X with its value x possibly changing over time. At some time
τ this value is observed. The observed value is thus fully characterized by
the quartet (U, τ,u, X).
However, there are some restrictions. Any unit u can only be of one type.
So evaluating a validation rule will never require multiple types and a single
unit. Second, the type of a unit ﬁxes its properties. So a validation rule
will never need a single variable for multiple types. With these restrictions
considered, the number of possible classes of validation rules reduces from
sixteen to ten.
To distinguish the classes the following notation is introduced. For each
element U, τ, u, X assign an s when a validation rule pertains to a single
value of that element and assign an m when a validation rule pertains to
multiple values of that element.
For example, a validation rule of class
sssm needs a single type, a single measurement, a single object and multiple
variables to be evaluated.
The ten possible classes can themselves be grouped into validation levels,
according to whether a class is labeled with no, one, two, three, or four m’s.
A higher validation level indicates that we need a larger variety of informa-
tion in order to evaluate the rule. The classiﬁcation, and their grouping into
validation levels is summarized in Table 1.
Going from level 0 to 4 corresponds to a workﬂow that is common in
practice. One starts with simple tests such as range checks. These are of
level zero since a range check can be performed on a single data point. That
is, one only needs a value that corresponds to a single type, measurement,
unit, and variable. Next, more involved checks are performed, for instance,
involving multiple variables (sssm, e.g. the ratio between two properties
of the same unit must be in a given range), multiple units (ssms, e.g. the
mean of a variable over multiple units must be within a speciﬁed range),
or multiple measurements (smss, e.g. the current value of the property of
7

Table 1: The ten possible classes of validation rules, grouped into ‘valida-
tion levels’. A higher level indicates that a wider variety of information is
necessary to evaluate a validation rule.
Validation level
0
1
2
3
4
ssss
sssm
ssmm
smmm
mmmm
ssms
smsm
msmm
smss
smms
a unit cannot diﬀer too much from a past value of the same property of
the same unit). Going up in level, even more complex rules are found until
rule evaluation involves multiple variables of multiple units of multiple types
measured at multiple instances (mmmm).
This classiﬁcation also has an immediate interpretation for data stored
in a data base that is normalized in the sense of Codd (1970). In such a
data base, records represent units, columns represent variables, and tables
represent types. The ‘time of measurement’ is represented as a variable as
well. The classiﬁcation indicates whether a rule implementation needs to
access multiple records, columns or tables.
3
Properties of validation rule sets
Deﬁnition 4 implies that a validation rule is a predicate over a data set
that is not a tautology nor a contradiction. This means that combining two
validation rules with ∧or ∨does not automatically yield a new validation
rule. Consider for example the rules x ≥0 and x ≤1 (using shorter notation
for brevity). The rule x ≥0∨x ≤1 is a tautology. The rule x ≥0∧x ≤−1 is
a contradiction. In fact, the only operation that is guaranteed to transform
a validation rule into another validation rule is negation.
The fact that validation rules are not closed under conjugation (∧) or
disjunction (∨) has practical consequences. After all, deﬁning a set of vali-
dation rules amounts to conjugating them together into a single rule since
a data set is valid only when all validation rules are satisﬁed. A set of rules
may be such that their conjugation is a contradiction. Such a rule set is
called infeasible. More subtle problems involve unintended consequences,
including partial infeasibility (Bruni and Bianchi, 2012), and introduction
on ﬁxed values or range restrictions.
Other problems involve the intro-
duction of several types of redundancies (Dillig et al., 2010; Paulraj and
8

Sumathi, 2010), which make rule sets both harder to maintain and ham-
per solving problems such as error localization (Bruni, 2005; De Jonge and
Van der Loo, 2019a). In the following, some examples of unintended eﬀects
and redundancies are discussed. The examples shown here are selected from
a more extensive discussion in Van der Loo and De Jonge (2018, Chapter
8). For simplicity of presentation the rules are expressed as simple clauses,
neglecting the key-value pair representation.
Partial inconsistency is (often) an unintended consequence implied by a
pair of rules. For example the rule set
gender = "male" ⇒income > 2000
gender = "male" ⇒income < 1000,
is feasible, but it can only be satisﬁed when gender ̸= "male". Thus, the
combination of rules (unintentionally) excludes an otherwise valid gender
category.
A simple redundancy is introduced when one rule deﬁnes a subset of
valid values with respect to another rule. For example if x ≥0 and x ≥1,
then x ≥0 is redundant with respect to x ≥1. More complex cases arise
in sets with multiple rules. A more subtle redundancy, called ‘nonrelaxing
clause’ occurs in the following situation.
x ≥0 ⇒y ≥0
x ≥0.
Here, the second rule implies that the condition in the ﬁrst rule must always
be true. Hence the rule set can be simpliﬁed to
y ≥0
x ≥0.
Another subtle redundancy, called a ‘nonconstraining clause’ occurs in the
following situation.
x > 0 ⇒y > 0
x < 1 ⇒y > 1
Now, letting x vary from −∞to ∞, the rule set ﬁrst implies that y > 1. As
x becomes positive, the rule set implies that y > 0 until x reaches ∞. In
other words, the rule set implies that y must be positive regardless of x and
9

can therefore be replaced with
y > 0
x < 1 ⇒y > 1
Methods for algorithmically removing such issues and simplifying rule sets
have recently been discussed by Daalmans (2018), and have been imple-
mented by De Jonge and Van der Loo (2019b). In short, the methods are
based on formulating Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) problems and de-
tecting their (non)-convergence after certain manipulations of the rule sets.
General theory and methods for rule manipulation have also been discussed
by Chandru and Hooker (1999) and Hooker (2000) in the context of opti-
mization.
4
Conclusion
Data validation can be formalized equivalently in terms of certain predicates
over a data set or as a surjective Boolean function over a well-deﬁned set
of observable data sets.
It is possible to deﬁne a very general classiﬁca-
tion of validation rules, based on a generic decomposition of the metadata.
Combining validation rules into a set can lead to subtle and unintended
consequences that can be solved in some cases with algorithmic methods.
Related articles
• stat04233
• stat06088
• stat06776
• stat04018
References
Bruni, R. (2005). Error correction for massive datasets. Optimization Meth-
ods and Software 20(2-3), 297–316.
Bruni, R. and G. Bianchi (2012). A formal procedure for ﬁnding contradic-
tions into a set of rules. Applied Mathematical Sciences 6(126), 6253–6271.
10

Chandru, V. and J. Hooker (1999). Optimization methods for logical infer-
ence, Volume 34 of Wiley Series in Discrete Mathematics and Optimiza-
tion). John Wiley & Sons.
Codd, E. F. (1970). A relational model of data for large shared data banks.
Communications of the ACM 13(6), 377–387.
Daalmans, J. (2018). Constraint simpliﬁcation for data editing of numerical
variables. Journal of Oﬃcial Statistics 34(1), 27–39.
De Jonge, E. and M. Van der Loo (2019a). Error Localization. John Wiley
& Sons, Inc. to be published.
De Jonge, E. and M. Van der Loo (2019b). validatetools: Checking and
Simplifying Validation Rule Sets. R package version 0.4.6.
De Waal, T., J. Pannekoek, and S. Scholtus (2011). Handbook of statistical
data editing and imputation. Wiley handbooks in survey methodology.
John Wiley & Sons.
Dillig, I., T. Dillig, and A. Aiken (2010). Small formulas for large programs:
On-line constraint simpliﬁcation in scalable static analysis. In Interna-
tional Static Analysis Symposium, pp. 236–252. Springer.
Hooker, J. (2000). Logic-based methods for optimization: combining opti-
mization and constraint satisfaction, Volume 2 of Wiley Series in Discrete
Mathematics and Optimization. John Wiley & Sons.
Paulraj, S. and P. Sumathi (2010). A comparative study of redundant con-
straints identiﬁcation methods in linear programming problems. Mathe-
matical Problems in Engineering 2010.
Van der Loo, M. and E. De Jonge (2018). Statistical data cleaning with
applications in R. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Van der Loo, M. and E. De Jonge (2019). Data validation infrastructure for
R. Journal of Statistical Software. Accepted for publication.
Zio,
M.
D.,
N.
Fursova,
T.
Gelsema,
S.
Giessing,
U.
Guarnera,
J. Ptrauskiene, L. Q. von Kalben, M. Scanu, K. ten Bosch, M. van der
Loo, and K. Walsdorfe (2015). Methodology for data validation. Technical
Report deliverable of Work Package 2, ESSNet on validation.
11