Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
DOI 10.1007/s10994-013-5363-6
A semantic matching energy function for learning
with multi-relational data
Application to word-sense disambiguation
Antoine Bordes · Xavier Glorot · Jason Weston ·
Yoshua Bengio
Received: 16 May 2012 / Accepted: 18 April 2013 / Published online: 30 May 2013
© The Author(s) 2013
Abstract Large-scale relational learning becomes crucial for handling the huge amounts of
structured data generated daily in many application domains ranging from computational
biology or information retrieval, to natural language processing. In this paper, we present
a new neural network architecture designed to embed multi-relational graphs into a ﬂexi-
ble continuous vector space in which the original data is kept and enhanced. The network
is trained to encode the semantics of these graphs in order to assign high probabilities to
plausible components. We empirically show that it reaches competitive performance in link
prediction on standard datasets from the literature as well as on data from a real-world
knowledge base (WordNet). In addition, we present how our method can be applied to per-
form word-sense disambiguation in a context of open-text semantic parsing, where the goal
is to learn to assign a structured meaning representation to almost any sentence of free text,
demonstrating that it can scale up to tens of thousands of nodes and thousands of types of
relation.
Keywords Neural networks · Multi-relational data · Word-sense disambiguation
Editors: Ronan Collobert and Luke Zettlemoyer.
A. Bordes and X. Glorot contributed equally to this work.
A. Bordes ()
Heudiasyc UMR 7253, Université de Technlogie de Compiègne & CNRS, Compiègne, France
e-mail: antoine.bordes@utc.fr
X. Glorot · Y. Bengio
Université de Montréal, Montréal, QC, Canada
X. Glorot
e-mail: glorotxa@iro.umontreal.ca
Y. Bengio
e-mail: bengioy@iro.umontreal.ca
J. Weston
Google, New York, NY, USA
e-mail: jweston@google.com

234
Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
1 Introduction
Multi-relational data, which refers to graphs whose nodes represent entities and edges cor-
respond to relations that link these entities, plays a pivotal role in many areas such as rec-
ommender systems, the Semantic Web, or computational biology. Relations are modeled
as triplets of the form (subject, relation, object), where a relation either models the rela-
tionship between two entities or between an entity and an attribute value; relations are thus
of several types. Such data sources are equivalently termed multi-relational graphs. They
can also be represented by 3-dimensional tensors, for which each slice represents an adja-
cency matrix for one relation. Multi-relational graphs are popular tools for encoding data
via knowledge bases, semantic networks or any kind of database following the Resource
Description Framework (RDF) format. Hence, they are widely used in the Semantic Web
(Freebase, DBpedia, etc.)1 but also for knowledge management in bioinformatics (GeneOn-
tology, UMLS semantic network, etc.)2 or natural language processing (WordNet),3 to name
a few. Social networks can also be represented using RDF.
In spite of their appealing ability for representing complex data, multi-relational graphs
remain complicated to manipulate for several reasons. First, interactions are of multiple
types and heterogeneous (various frequencies, concerning different subsets of entities, etc.).
In addition, most databases have been built either collaboratively or (partly) automatically.
As a consequence, data is noisy and incomplete: relations can be missing or be invalid, there
can be redundancy among entities because several nodes actually refer to the same concept,
etc. Finally, most multi-relational graphs are of very large dimensions in terms of numbers
of entities and of relation types: Freebase contains more than 20 millions entities, DBpedia
is composed of 1 billion triplets linking around 4 millions entities, GeneOntology contains
more than 350k veriﬁed biological entities, etc. Conveniently represent, summarize or de-
noise this kind of data is now a central challenge in statistical relational learning (Getoor
and Taskar 2007).
In this paper, we propose a new model to learn multi-relational semantics, that is, to
encode multi-relational graphs into representations that capture the inherent complexity in
the data, while seamlessly deﬁning similarities among entities and relations and providing
predictive power. Our work is based on an original energy function, which is trained to
assign low energies (i.e. high probabilities) to plausible triplets of a multi-relational graph.
This energy function, termed semantic matching energy, relies on a compact distributed
representation: all elements (entity and relation type) are represented into the same relatively
low (e.g. 50) dimensional embedding vector space. The embeddings are learnt by a neural
network whose particular architecture and training process force them to encompass the
original data structure. Unlike in previous work, in this model, relation types are modeled
similarly as entities. In this way, entities can also play the role of relation type, as in natural
language for instance, and this requires less parameters when the number of relation types
grows. We show empirically that this model achieves competitive results on benchmark tasks
of link prediction, i.e., generalizing outside of the set of given valid triplets.
We also demonstrate the ﬂexibility and scalability of the semantic matching energy by
applying it for word-sense disambiguation (WSD). The model can successfully be trained
on various heterogeneous data sources (knowledge bases, free text, etc.), containing several
1Respect. available from freebase.com and dbpedia.org.
2Respect. available from geneontology.org and semanticnetwork.nlm.nih.gov.
3Available from wordnet.princeton.edu.

Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
235
thousands of entities and of relation types, to jointly learn representations for words and
for senses (deﬁned as entities of a lexical knowledge base, WordNet). On two different
evaluation test sets, the proposed approach outperforms both previous work for learning
with multi-relational data and standard methods for unsupervised WSD.
To summarize, the main contributions of this paper are threefold:
– an original model for encoding multi-relational data, which represents relation types and
entities in the same way, and is potentially able to scale up to larger numbers of relation
types than previous work;
– a training algorithm based on a ranking objective, which allows to learn on large numbers
of training samples and achieves competitive results on benchmarks of various dimen-
sions;
– an adaptation of the model for word-sense disambiguation, which consists of the ﬁrst
successful direct application of relational embeddings of a knowledge base (WordNet)
for natural language processing.
Note that this paper extends a shorter version (Bordes et al. 2012), which ﬁrst introduced
the model. However, the previous paper was only focused on the application to word-sense
disambiguation, whereas the present paper has a wider scope and considers more problems
involving multi-relational data. New elements are provided: a fresh (and cleaner) form of the
bilinear formulation, new experiments comparing to the state-of-the-art in link prediction,
entity ranking and WSD, a more comprehensive literature review, and more details on the
model formulation and the training procedure. We also provide a link to an open-source
implementation of the code and to the data used in this paper: http://goo.gl/bHWsK.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a review of previous work on learn-
ing with multi-relational data. Section 3 introduces the semantic matching energy function
and Sect. 4 its training procedure. Extensive experimental results are given in Sect. 5. Fi-
nally, the application to WSD is described in Sect. 6 and Sect. 7 concludes and sketches
future work.
2 Previous work
Several methods have been explored to represent and encode multi-relational data, such as
clustering approaches. Hence, Kemp et al. (2006) introduced the Inﬁnite Relational Model,
IRM, a nonparametric Bayesian model whose latent variables are used to discover mean-
ingful partitions among entities and relations. This model provides a great interpretability
of the data but suffers from a poor predictive power. Miller et al. (2009) reﬁned this to al-
low entities to have a mixed cluster membership. Sutskever et al. (2009) proposed another
reﬁnement with the Bayesian Tensor Clustered Factorization model, BCTF, in which the
nonparametric Bayesian framework is coupled with the learning, via collective matrix fac-
torization, of distributed representations for the entities and relation types. Other proposals
have consisted in improving the original model by adding ﬁrst-order formulae with Markov
Logic. Hence, MRC, for Multiple Relation Clustering (Kok and Domingos 2007), performs
clustering of entities through several relation types simultaneously. Singla and Domingos
(2006) presented another model based on Markov logic for the task of entity resolution (i.e.
deciding whether two entities should be merged).
All these methods share the ability of providing an interpretation of the data but are
slow and do not scale to very large databases due to the high cost of inference. Models
based on tensor factorization can be faster and scale to larger data because of their contin-
uous and usually convex optimization. Standard methods like CANDECOMP/PARAFAC

236
Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
(CP) (Harshman and Lundy 1994) or those from (Tucker 1966) have been applied on multi-
relational graphs. Franz et al. (2009) used CP for ranking data from RDF knowledge bases.
Other directions have also been proposed derived from probabilistic matrix factorization for
multi-dimensional data (Chu and Ghahramani 2009) or by adapting dimensionality reduc-
tion techniques such as SVD (Speer et al. 2008; Cambria et al. 2009). Recently, Nickel et al.
(2011) presented RESCAL, an upgrade over previous tensor factorization methods, which
achieves strong predictive accuracies on various problems. RESCAL represents entities by
low dimensional vectors and relation types by low rank matrices, which are learnt using a
collective learning process similar to that of CP, but with some relaxed constraints. It has
achieved the best accuracies on many benchmarks of tensor factorization. RESCAL has been
applied to the knowledge base YAGO (Nickel et al. 2012) and hence showed to scale well
on data with large numbers of entities (few millions). However, RESCAL has never been
tested on data with large numbers of relation types (YAGO has 87 such types).
Some approaches described above (e.g. BCTF, RESCAL) end up with a distributed
representation of the entities and relation types obtained via factorizing or clustering the
original data. A slightly different line of work consists in focusing on learning such rep-
resentations, termed embeddings. This idea of learning embeddings has been success-
ful in natural language processing via the framework of language models (Bengio et al.
2003) where an embedding per word is learnt in an unsupervised fashion: it has been
shown that such representations can store key information about language (mostly syntac-
tic similarities) that helps to improve performance on standard NLP tasks (Bengio 2008;
Collobert et al. 2011). Bordes et al. (2010) adapted a related model to a small hand-crafted
knowledge base and text for language understanding. For multi-relational data, Linear Rela-
tional Embeddings (Paccanaro 2000; Paccanaro and Hinton 2001) learn a mapping from the
entities into a feature-space by imposing the constraint that relations in this feature-space
are modeled by linear operations. In other words, entities are modeled by real-valued vec-
tors and relations by matrices and parameters of both are learnt. This idea has been further
improved in the Structured Embeddings (SE) framework of Bordes et al. (2011).
Our work lies in the same research area, since we also aim at learning distributed rep-
resentations of multi-relational data, and we introduce several novel elements. First, unlike
previous work (including BCTF, RESCAL or SE) we do not represent a relation type differ-
ently than any entity (by a matrix for instance). In our model, a relation type is represented
by a vector (just like other entities) and shares the status and number of parameters of other
entities. This is convenient when the number of such types is large or when they can also
play the role of entities as we illustrate in Sect. 6 on a problem with more than 10k relation
types. Second, we do not use a training process based on tensor reconstruction (as RESCAL)
or on clustering (as BCTF), but on a predictive approach instead. The learning objective is
essentially asking the model to perform link or entity prediction (i.e. ﬁlling an empty spot
in a triple). This leads to an algorithm based on a ranking objective and using stochastic
gradient descent and backpropagation for updating the parameters, which has a low com-
putational complexity per epoch (independent on the number of entities and relation types).
Third, we show that our model is ﬂexible and can be successfully trained via multi-tasking
on several heterogeneous sources. Finally, even if it is not presented in this paper, our ap-
proach could potentially be adapted to learn non-linear representations of multi-relational
data by adding non-linear transfer functions such as tanh or sigmoid to the neural network.
We empirically compare our model with IRM, BCTF, MRC, CP, RESCAL and SE on var-
ious tasks with very different properties in our experiments of Sects. 5 and 6. Even if the
best performing methods from earlier papers differ from one task to another, our proposed
approach is competitive for all of them. The closest counterparts are SE and RESCAL, but

Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
237
as we show experimentally, they are not able to handle large-scale multi-relational data as
we propose, and either break or are outperformed when data dimensions grows (number of
entities and/or of relation types). Note that, while preparing the ﬁnal version of this work,
Jenatton et al. (2012) introduced a method partly inspired by our approach, which achieves
interesting performances.
3 Semantic matching energy function
This section introduces our model designed to embed multi-relational data into fully dis-
tributed representations via a custom energy function.
3.1 Notations
This work considers multi-relational databases as graph models. The data structure is deﬁned
by a set of nodes and a set of links. To each individual node of the graph corresponds an
element of the database, which we term an entity, and each link deﬁnes a relation between
entities. Relations are directed and there are typically several different kinds of relations.
Let C denote the dictionary which includes all entities and relation types, and let R ⊂C be
the subset of entities which are relation types. In the remainder of the paper, a relation is
denoted by a triplet (lhs, rel, rhs), where lhs is the left entity, rhs the right one and rel the
type of relation between them.
3.2 Main ideas
The main ideas behind our semantic matching energy function are the following.
– Named symbolic entities (entities and relation types) are associated with a d-dimensional
vector space, termed the “embedding space”, following previous work in neural language
models (Bengio 2008). The ith entity is assigned a vector Ei ∈Rd. Note that more general
mappings from an entity to its embedding are possible.4
– The semantic matching energy value associated with a particular triplet (lhs, rel, rhs) is
computed by a parametrized function E that starts by mapping all symbols to their em-
beddings and then combines them in a structured fashion. Our model is termed “semantic
matching” because E relies on a matching criterion computed between both sides of the
triplet.
– The energy function E is optimized to be lower for training examples than for other possi-
ble conﬁgurations of symbols. Hence the semantic energy function can distinguish plau-
sible combinations of entities from implausible ones, and can be used, for instance, to
answer questions, e.g. corresponding to a triplet (lhs,rel,?) with a missing rhs, by choos-
ing among the possible entities a rhs with a relatively lower energy. See Lecun et al.
(2006) for a review of energy-based learning.
4For example, if entities are not symbols but structured objects, such as images (Weston et al. 2010), which
have attributes represented in a vector x, then the embedding for entity x could be obtained via a parametrized
function e that maps x to Ex = eθ(x), with θ learned by gradient-based learning and back-propagating the
training criterion into θ.

238
Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
Fig. 1 Semantic matching
energy function. A triple of
entities (lhs,rel,rhs) is ﬁrst
mapped to its embeddings Elhs,
Erel and Erhs. Then Elhs and
Erel are combined using glef t(.)
to output Elhs(rel) (similarly
Erhs(rel) = gright(Erhs,Erel)).
Finally the energy
E((lhs,rel,rhs)) is obtained by
matching Elhs(rel) and Erhs(rel)
with the h(.) function
Our approach is inspired by the framework introduced by Bordes et al. (2011) as well as
by recent work of Bottou (2011). Our main motivation is to conceive a model where enti-
ties and relation types would share the same kind of representation. Embedding all symbols
deﬁning a multi-relational graph into the same space amounts to deleting the usual con-
ceptual difference between entities (lhs and rhs) and relation types. This modeling is more
natural when entities can act as rel as well as lhs or rhs. In Sect. 6, we apply our method to
natural language data, where relation types typically correspond to verbs. Since verbs may
also occur in lhs or rhs, it is reasonable to share the same representation, and this can ease
learning representations of verbs appearing rarely as relation type. Our choice to encode
symbols by vectors helps too by causing the overall number of tunable parameters to learn
to remain low, especially when the cardinality of R grows.
3.3 Neural network parametrization
The energy function E (denoted SME) is encoded using a neural network, whose parallel
architecture is based on the intuition that the relation type should ﬁrst be used to extract
relevant components from each argument’s embedding, and put them in a space where they
can then be compared (see Fig. 1). Hence, pairs (lhs, rel) and (rel, rhs) are ﬁrst combined
separately and then, these semantic combinations are matched.
(1) Each symbol of the input triplet (lhs, rel, rhs) is mapped to its embedding Elhs, Erel and
Erhs ∈Rd.
(2) The embeddings Elhs and Erel respectively associated with the lhs and rel argu-
ments are used to construct a new relation-dependent embedding Elhs(rel) for the lhs
in the context of the relation type represented by Erel, and similarly for the rhs:
Elhs(rel) = glef t(Elhs,Erel) and Erhs(rel) = gright(Erhs,Erel), where glef t and gright are
parametrized functions whose parameters are tuned during training. Even if it remains
low-dimensional, nothing forces the dimension of Elhs(rel) and Erhs(rel), which we de-
note p, to be equal to d, the one of the entity embedding space.
(3) The energy is computed by “matching” the transformed embeddings of the left-hand
side and right-hand side: E((lhs,rel,rhs)) = h(Elhs(rel),Erhs(rel)), where h can be a
simple operator such as a dot product or a more complex function whose parameters
are learnt.

Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
239
With this formulation, E is not able to handle variable-size arguments for lhs or rhs (like
tuples of entities). However, it can be adapted to it by adding a pooling stage between steps
(1) and (2) as we show in Sect. 6.1.
Different types of parametrizations can be used for the g and h functions. We chose to
use a dot product for the output h function because it is simple and has shown to work well
in related work (e.g. in Weston et al. 2010). For the g functions, we studied two options, one
linear and the other bilinear, which lead to two versions of SME detailed below:
– Linear form (denoted SME(linear) in the following), in this case g functions are simply
linear layers:
Elhs(rel) = glef t(Elhs,Erel) = Wl1E⊺
lhs + Wl2E⊺
rel + b⊺
l ,
Erhs(rel) = gright(Erhs,Erel) = Wr1E⊺
rhs + Wr2E⊺
rel + b⊺
r
with Wl1, Wl2, Wr1, Wr2 ∈Rp×d (weights), bl, br ∈Rp (biases) and E⊺denotes the
transpose of E. This leads to the following form for the energy:
E

(lhs,rel,rhs)

= −

Wl1E⊺
lhs + Wl2E⊺
rel + b⊺
l
⊺
Wr1E⊺
rhs + Wr2E⊺
rel + b⊺
r

.
(1)
– Bilinear form (denoted SME(bilinear) in the following), in this case g functions are using
3-modes tensors as core weights:
Elhs(rel) = glef t(Elhs,Erel) =

Wl ¯×3E⊺
rel

E⊺
lhs + b⊺
l ,
Erhs(rel) = gright(Erhs,Erel) =

Wr ¯×3E⊺
rel

E⊺
rhs + b⊺
r
with Wl, Wr ∈Rp×d×d (weights) and bl, br ∈Rp (biases). ¯×3 denotes the n-mode vector-
tensor product along the 3rd mode, which, for U,V ∈Rd and W ∈Rp×d×d, is deﬁned as
(lower cased letters denote vector/tensor elements):
∀i ∈1,...p,

W ¯×3V ⊺
U ⊺
i =
d

j=1
d

k=1
wijkvkuj.
This leads to the following form for the energy:
E

(lhs,rel,rhs)

= −

Wl ¯×3E⊺
rel

E⊺
lhs + b⊺
l
⊺
Wr ¯×3E⊺
rel

E⊺
rhs + b⊺
r

.
(2)
3.4 Discussion
We can notice that Eq. (1), deﬁning the energy for SME(linear), can be re-written as (bias
terms are removed for clarity):
E

(lhs,rel,rhs)

= −Elhs ˜W1E⊺
rhs −Elhs ˜W2E⊺
rel −Erel ˜W3E⊺
rhs −Erel ˜W4E⊺
rel,
with ˜W1 = W ⊺
l1Wr1, ˜W2 = W ⊺
l1Wr2, ˜W3 = W ⊺
l2Wr1 and ˜W4 = W ⊺
l2Wr2 ∈Rd×d. Hence, the en-
ergy can be decomposed into three terms coding for pairs (lhs, rhs), (lhs, rel) and (rel, rhs),
and an additional quadratic term for rel. This shows that SME(linear) actually represents a
triplet as a combination of pairwise interactions (similar to what is captured by bigrams).
Similarly, Eq. (2), deﬁning the energy for SME(bilinear) can be re-written as:
E

(lhs,rel,rhs)

= −Elhs ˜W(rel)E⊺
rhs,

240
Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
with ˜W(rel) = (Wl ¯×3E⊺
rel)⊺(Wr ¯×3E⊺
rel) ∈Rd×d. In this case, the energy is composed of
a single term, which depends on all three entities, with a central role for rel. Hence,
SME(bilinear) represents a triplet through 3-way interactions (similar to what is captured
by a trigram). The choice between a linear or a bilinear form for g leads to a very different
formulation overall.
The trigram formulation can model ternary interactions but requires more parameters.
SME(bilinear) has O(ned + nrd + pd2) parameters while SME(linear) has only O(ned +
nrd + pd), with ne the number of entities (never being a relation type), nr the number of
relation types, d the low-level embedding dimension and p the dimension of the higher-
level relation-dependent representation (with both p and d much smaller than ne and nr).
Still, both formulations can scale up to large numbers of relation types (nr ≫1) without
requiring too many parameters, contrary to previous methods such as RESCAL and SE,
which entail O(ned + nrd2) parameters. This property comes from our original choice of
modeling rel in the same way as lhs and rhs, using vectors. Interestingly, we can remark
that, in Eq. (2), Wl ¯×3E⊺
rel and Wr ¯×3E⊺
rel act as a pair of matrices coding for rel: this can be
seen as a distributed or factorized version of what RESCAL or SE proposed.
4 Training
This section details the training procedure for the semantic matching energy function, SME.
4.1 Training criterion
We are given a training set D containing m triplets x = (xlhs,xrel,xrhs), where
xlhs ∈C, xrel ∈R, and xrhs ∈C. We recall that the energy of a triplet is denoted E(x) =
E(xlhs,xrel,xrhs). Ideally, we would like to perform maximum likelihood over P (x) ∝
e−E(x) but this is intractable. The approach we follow here has already been used suc-
cessfully in ranking settings (Collobert et al. 2011; Weston et al. 2010) and corresponds to
performing two approximations. First, like in pseudo-likelihood we only consider one input
at a time given the others, e.g. lhs given rel and rhs, which makes normalization tractable.
Second, instead of sampling a negative example from the model posterior,5 we use a ranking
criterion (based on uniformly sampling a negative example, in a way that is reminiscent of
Noise Contrastive Estimation (Gutmann and Hyvärinen 2010)).
Intuitively, if one of the elements of a given triplet were missing, then we would like
the model to be able to predict the correct entity. The objective of training is to learn the
semantic energy function E such that it can successfully rank the training samples x below
all other possible triplets:
E(x) < E

(i,xrel,xrhs)

∀i ∈C : (i,xrel,xrhs) /∈D,
(3)
E(x) < E

(xlhs,j,xrhs)

∀j ∈R : (xlhs,k,xrhs) /∈D,
(4)
E(x) < E

(xlhs,xrel,k)

∀k ∈C : (xlhs,xrel,j) /∈D.
(5)
5In an energy-based model such as the Boltzmann machine, the gradient of the negative log-likelihood is
equal to the gradient of the energy of a positive example (observed and valid) minus the expected value of
the gradient of a negative example (sampled from the model). In the case of pseudo-likelihood training one
would consider conditional likelihoods P(xi|x1,...,xi−1,xi+1,...,xd), and only the xi part of the positive
example needs to be resampled for constructing the negative example, using this same posterior.

Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
241
Towards achieving this, the following stochastic criterion is minimized:

x∈D

˜x∼Q(˜x|x)
max

E(x) −E(˜x) + 1,0

(6)
where Q(˜x|x) is a corruption process that transforms a training example x into a corrupted
negative example. Note that max(E(x) −E(˜x) + 1,0) is similar in shape to the negative
log-likelihood −log
e−E(x)
e−E(x)+e−E(˜x) = −logsigmoid(E(˜x) −E(x)), which corresponds to the
probability of sampling x given that only x and ˜x are considered. In the experiments, Q only
changes one of the three members of the triplet (as in a pseudo-likelihood setup), replacing it
by an entity uniformly sampled either from R if the replaced entity is a relation type, or from
C/R otherwise. We do not actually check if the negative example is in D. Note that this is not
necessary because if we have the symmetry Q((˜a,b,c)|(a,b,c)) = Q((a,b,c)|(˜a,b,c))
etc. for all elements of the triplet, and it is true here, then the expected contribution to the
total expected gradient due to cases where ˜x ∈D is 0. This is because if we consider only
the pairs x, ˜x ∈D, the average over D of the gradients ∂E(x)
∂θ
equals the average over D of
the gradients ∂E(˜x)
∂θ , by our symmetry assumption.
4.2 Ranking algorithm
To train the parameters of the energy function E we loop over all of the training data re-
sources and use stochastic gradient descent (Robbins and Monro 1951). That is, we iterate
the following steps:
1. Select a positive training triplet xi = (lhsi,reli,rhsi) at random from D.
2. Select at random resp. constraint (3), (4) or (5).
3. Create a negative triplet ˜x by sampling one entity either from R to replace reli or from
C/R to replace lhsi or rhsi.
4. If E(xi) > E(˜x) −1, make a stochastic gradient step to minimize (6).
5. Enforce the constraint that each embedding is normalized, ∥Ei∥= 1,∀i.
The gradient step requires a learning rate λ. The constant 1 in step 4 is the margin as is
commonly used in many margin-based models such as SVMs (Boser et al. 1992). The nor-
malization in step 5 helps remove scaling freedoms from the model, makes the impact of
the margin actually effective and regularizes the optimization objective, preventing weights
to collapse or diverge.
Each update of the model parameters is carried out by backpropagation. Its computational
complexity is dominated by the cost of the n-mode vector-tensor product for SME(bilinear):
O(pd2), and by the cost of the matrix product for SME(linear): O(pd). Therefore, to per-
form one epoch over D, the bilinear form requires in the order of O(mpd2) operations and
the linear form in the order of O(mpd). Note that this is independent of the number of
entities or relation types.
Matrix E contains the representations of the entities and is learnt via a multi-task learning
procedure (Caruana 1995; Collobert and Weston 2008) because the same embedding matrix
is used for all relation types (each corresponding to a different distribution of entities, i.e.,
a different task). As a result, the embedding of an entity contains factorized information
coming from all the relations in which the entity is involved as lhs, rhs or even rel. For
each entity, the model is forced to learn how an entity interacts with other entities in many
different ways. One can think of the elements ei,j of each embedding vector Ei as learned
attributes for entity i or relation type i. Different tasks may demand different attributes, so

242
Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
that entities that have a common behavior6 in some way will get the same values for some
of their attributes. If the same attributes can be useful for several tasks, then statistical power
is gained through parameter sharing, and transfer of information between tasks can happen,
making the data of some task informative for generalizing properly on another task.
4.3 Implementation details
All the code for the experiments has been implemented in Python and using the Theano
library (Bergstra et al. 2010). Training is carried out using mini-batches (we create 200
mini-batches for each dataset, independent of its size). All hyperparameter values are set
using a validation set. The dimension of the embeddings (d) and the dimension of the out-
put space of g functions (p) are selected among {10,25,100}. There is a different learn-
ing rate for the embedding matrix E and for the parameters of g. It is chosen among
{0.03,0.01,0.003,0.001,0.0003} for E and among {3.,1.,0.3,0.1,0.03} for g. Training
stops using early stopping on the validation set error (or after a maximum of 2,000 epochs).
5 Empirical evaluation
This section proposes an experimental comparison of SME with current state-of-the-art
methods for learning representations of multi-relational data.
5.1 Datasets
In order to evaluate against existing methods, we performed experiments on benchmarks
from the literature. Kinships and UMLS are fully observed, i.e. for each relation type and
each potential pair of entities it has been observed whether the given triplet is valid or not.
They are also sparse, i.e. only a small fraction of triplets are valid. We also illustrate the
properties of our model on Nations and WordNet , which are partially observed: we only
observe some valid triplets in the case of WordNet and some valid or invalid triplets for
Nations. The rest is unknown, that is, missing triplets can be valid or not. And of course,
in that case only a tiny fraction of potential triplets are observed. We describe all datasets
below, with some statistics displayed in Table 1.
Table 1 Statistics of datasets used in our experiments. The top two are fully observed, very sparse i.e. only
a small minority of relations are valid and hence are used in a cross-validation scheme. Only a fraction of
relations are observed in Nations and WordNet
Dataset
Nb. of relation types
Nb. of entities
Nb. of observed relations
% valid relations in obs. ones
UMLS
49
135
893,025
0.76
Kinships
26
104
281,216
3.84
Nations
56
14
11,191
22.9
WordNet
18
40,943
151,442
100
6E.g., appear in semantically similar contexts, i.e., in instances containing the same entities or ones with
close-by values of their embedding.

Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
243
Table 2 Relation types of WordNet used in our experiments
WordNet
_hypernym, _hyponym, _instance_hyponym, _instance_hypernym, _related_form,
_has_part, _part_of, _member_has_part, _member_part_of, _also_see, _attribute,
_synset_domain_region, _synset_domain_usage, _synset_domain_topic, _verb_group,
_member_of_domain_region, _member_of_domain_usage, _member_of_domain_topic
UMLS
This dataset contains data from the Uniﬁed Medical Language System semantic
work gathered by McCray (2003). This consists in a graph with 135 entities and 49 re-
lation types. The entities are high-level concepts like ‘Disease or Syndrome’, ‘Diagnostic
Procedure’, or ‘Mammal’. The relations represent verbs depicting causal inﬂuence between
concepts like ‘affect’ or ‘cause’.
Nations
This dataset groups 14 countries (Brazil, China, Egypt, etc.) with 56 binary
relation types representing interactions among them like ‘economic_aid’, ‘treaties’ or
‘rel_diplomacy’, and 111 features describing each country. See Rummel (1999) for details.
Kinships
Australian tribes are renowned among anthropologists for the complex relational
structure of their kinship systems. This dataset, created by Denham (1973), focuses on the
Alyawarra, a tribe from Central Australia. 104 tribe members were asked to provide kinship
terms for each other. This results in a graph of 104 entities and 26 relation types, each of
them depicting a different kinship term, such as Adiadya or Umbaidya. See Denham (1973)
or Kemp et al. (2006) for more details.
WordNet
This knowledge base is designed to produce intuitively usable dictionary and
thesaurus, and supports automatic text analysis. It encompasses comprehensive knowledge
within its graph structure, whose entities (termed synsets) correspond to senses, and relation
types deﬁne lexical relations between those senses. We considered all the entities that were
connected with the relation types given in Table 2, although we did remove some entities
for which we have too little information: we ﬁltered out the synsets appearing in less that
15 triplets. We obtain a graph with 40,943 synsets and 18 relations types. Examples of
triplets are (_score_NN_1, _hypernym, _evaluation_NN_1) or (_score_NN_2, _has_part,
_musical_notation_NN_1). As WordNet is composed of words with different meanings, we
describe its entities by the concatenation of the word, its part-of-speech tag (‘NN’ for noun,
‘VB’ for verb, ‘JJ’ for adjective and ‘RB’ for adverb) and a digit indicating which sense it
refers to i.e. _score_NN_1 is the entity encoding the ﬁrst meaning of the noun “score”. This
version of WordNet is different from that used in Bordes et al. (2011) because the original
data has been preprocessed differently: this version contains less entities but more relation
types.
5.2 Link prediction
The link prediction task consists in predicting whether two entities should be connected by
a given relation type. This is useful for completing missing values of a graph, forecasting
the behavior of a network, etc. but also to assess the quality of a representation. We evaluate
our model on UMLS, Nations and Kinships, following the setting introduced in Kemp et al.
(2006): data tensors are split in ten folds of valid conﬁgurations using (lhs, rel, rhs) triplets as
statistical units, and experiments are performed by cross-validation. The standard evaluation

244
Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
Table 3 Link prediction.
Comparisons of area under the
precision-recall curve (AUC)
computed in a 10-fold
cross-validation setting between
two versions of SME (this paper)
and previously published
algorithms (SE, RESCAL, CP,
BCTF, MRC, IRM) on UMLS,
Nations and Kinships. Emb. is an
unstructured version of SME.
Best performing methods, with a
signiﬁcant difference with the
rest, are indicated in bold
Method
UMLS
Nations
Kinships
SME(linear)
0.979 ± 0.003
0.777 ± 0.025
0.149 ± 0.003
SME(bilinear)
0.985 ± 0.003
0.865 ± 0.015
0.894 ± 0.011
Emb.
0.035 ± 0.002
0.345 ± 0.025
0.038 ± 0.001
SE
0.983 ± 0.004
0.869 ± 0.016
0.913 ± 0.006
RESCAL
0.98
0.84
0.95
CP
0.95
0.83
0.94
BCTF
0.98
n/a
0.90
MRC
0.98
0.75
0.85
IRM
0.70
0.75
0.66
metric is area under the precision-recall curve (AUC). For our own models, we used one of
the nine training folds for validation. Table 3 presents results of SME along with those of
RESCAL, BCTF, MRC, IRM and CP, which have been extracted from Kemp et al. (2006),
Kok and Domingos (2007), Sutskever et al. (2009), Nickel et al. (2011) and that of SE,
which we computed ourselves. Table 3 also displays performance of an unstructured version
of SME, termed Emb.: in this case, the score of a triplet (lhs, rel, rhs) is simply determined
by the dot product between lhs and rhs embeddings, without any inﬂuence of the relation
type.
The linear formulation of SME is outperformed by SME(bilinear) on all three tasks. The
largest differences for Nations and Kinships indicate that, for these problems, a joint inter-
action between both lhs, rel and rhs is crucial to represent the data well: relations cannot
be simply decomposed as a sum of bigrams. This is particularly true for the complex kin-
ship systems of the Alyawarra. On the contrary, interactions within the UMLS network can
be represented by simply considering the various (entity, entity) and (entity, relation type)
bigrams. Compared to other methods, SME(bilinear) performs similarly to SE, RESCAL,
BCTF and MRC on UMLS and similarly to SE on Nations. It is worth noting than, on Na-
tions, SE and SME(bilinear) perform better by a vast margin. On Kinships, it is outper-
formed by RESCAL and CP: on this dataset with complex ternary interactions, the training
process of these tensor factorization methods, based on reconstruction, seems to be beneﬁ-
cial compared to our predictive approach. Simply representing a relation by a vector might
also be detrimental w.r.t. using matrices, but SME reaches similar performance as SE (using
matrices and a predictive training process). Still, compared to MRC, which is not using a
matrix-based encoding, SME(bilinear) remains highly competitive. As expected, Emb. per-
forms poorly, outlining the crucial inﬂuence of rel for correctly modeling such data.
To summarize, on these 3 benchmarks with moderate sizes, our method is either state-
of-the-art (represented mainly by SE and RESCAL) or very close to it, and can be consid-
ered as the best performing method on average. However, SME is primarily designed for
large-scale conditions and we show in the following that it outperforms RESCAL when the
number of entities increases (in Sect. 5.3) and SE when the number of relation types does
(in Sect. 6.4.1).
5.3 Entity ranking
Performing an evaluation based on link prediction for WordNet is problematic because only
positive triplets are observed. Hence, in this case, there is no negative triplet but only un-
known ones for which it is impossible to state whether they are valid or not. For this setting,

Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
245
Table 4 Entity ranking on
WordNet. Comparisons between
two versions of SME (this paper)
and SE, RESCAL and Emb., an
unstructured version of SME.
Mean/median predicted rank and
precision@10 (p@10, in %) are
computed on the test set. Best
performances are indicated in
bold, worst in italic
Method
Rank (median / mean)
p@10
SME(linear)
5 / 559
6.51
SME(bilinear)
8 / 526
5.47
Emb.
26 / 317
3.51
SE
3 / 1011
6.85
RESCAL
12 / 893
4.76
for which we only have access to positive training and test examples, AUC is not a satis-
fying metric anymore. Hence, we evaluate our model on this data using the ranking setting
proposed in Bordes et al. (2011) and described below, which allows an analysis on positive
samples only.
We measure the mean and median predicted ranks and the prediction@10, computed with
the following procedure. For each test triplet, the left entity is removed and replaced by each
of the entities of the dictionary in turn. Energies of those corrupted triplets are computed by
the model and sorted by ascending order and the rank of the correct synset is stored. This
whole procedure is also repeated when removing the right-hand argument instead. We report
the mean and median of those predicted ranks and the precision@10 (or p@10), which is
the proportion of ranks within 1 and 10, divided by 10. WordNet data was split in training,
validation and test sets with 141,442 observed triplets for training, 5,000 for validation and
5,000 for testing.
Table 4 presents comparative results on the test set, together with the performance of
Emb., SE and RESCAL, which we all computed. No method is able to perform best for all
metrics. SE obtains a low median rank and the best p@10, but has the worst mean rank.
This indicates an instability: SE works very well for most examples but can be terrible in
some cases. In the original paper introducing SE, Bordes et al. (2011) proposed to stack a
Kernel Density Estimator (KDE) on top of the structured embeddings to improve stability.
However, throughout this paper, when we refer to SE, we mean without KDE, because this
makes a fairer comparison. We could also stack KDE on top of SME but this involves a very
expensive extra-cost, that forbids any large-scale ambition. Emb. performs quite well and
reaches the best mean rank indicating that, on WordNet, the inﬂuence of the relation type is
not crucial to get a fair rough estimate of the likely lhs given rhs, and vice-versa. Still, Emb.
does not solve the task of handling multi-relational data, since it simply ignores the relation
types. This seems to be ﬁne on this task, but it was terrible on those of the previous section.
SME is the only method able to perform well for all metrics (while never reaching on
top). In particular, SME(linear) is very close to SE in median rank and p@10 while being
much better in mean rank: it does not seem to suffer from instability issues. It is hard on
WordNet to be accurate on average (low mean rank) and still have a large proportion of
examples very well ranked (low median rank) and SME appears to be the best for this com-
promise. RESCAL performs consistently worse than SME. We tried very hard to make the
code provided by the authors work as well as possible: to behave properly, the model re-
quires large latent dimensions d but this slows it down a lot. Results of Table 4 have been
obtained with d = 2000 and a training time of almost 2 days (compared to around 4 h for
SME).

246
Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
Fig. 2 Entity embeddings. Plots of representations (matrix E), learnt by SME(linear) (top) and SME(bilinear)
(bottom), for 115 countries selected from WordNet and projected in 2D by t-SNE. SME(linear) encoded
geographical similarities within the embeddings
5.4 Entity embeddings
The matrix E factorizes information from all relations in which the entity appears. We pro-
pose here to illustrate the kind of semantics captured by the representations.
We selected 115 entities from WordNet corresponding to countries from all over the
world and to U.S. states. We selected this subset because we know that there exist an under-
lying structure among them. Then, we projected the corresponding embeddings learnt by the
linear and bilinear versions of SME and created 2D plots using t-SNE (van der Maaten and
Hinton 2008). They are given in Fig. 2: a different color is used for each continent; sufﬁxes
depicting POS tag and sense indices have been removed for clarity.
The representations learnt by the linear model seem to nicely reﬂect the geographical
semantics, hence encoding the “part-of” information contained in WordNet: nice clusters
are formed for each continent. To assess more objectively the quality of this plot, Fig. 3
proposes the one obtained for the same entities with the Lesk similarity measure of the

Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
247
Fig. 3 Pairwise similarities. A pairwise similarity matrix of 115 countries from WordNet is computed with
the Lesk measure of Wordnet::Similarity and projected in 2D by t-SNE
WordNet::Similarity package (Banerjee and Pedersen 2002).7 We tried several measures
and chose Lesk because it gave the best result. Comparing both plots tends to indicate that
embeddings learnt by SME(linear) could be used to form a very decent similarity measure
on WordNet. But, the comparison is not fair because the Lesk measure does not only rely on
the WordNet graph but is also improved using glosses (i.e. deﬁnitions). Performing the same
experiment with WordNet::Similarity measures based only on the graph gives much worse
results. SME seems able to nicely capture the multi-relational semantics of the WordNet
graph, without any other source of information.
The picture changes with the representations learnt by the bilinear models: the plot (bot-
tom of Fig. 2) is much harder to interpret and suggests that the interactions occurring in the
SME(bilinear) neural network are more complex, with a more invasive role for the relation
type. This intuition is conﬁrmed by the plots of Fig. 4. They still display t-SNE projections
of representations of the same models for the same entities but not taken at the same level in
the network. In this case, we projected the representations obtained by the embeddings when
combined with the embedding of the relation type _part_of by the glef t function. In other
words, these are plots of Elhs(rel). The top plot corresponds to the linear model and resem-
ble to the one of Fig. 2: as expected, the linear glef t does not have a dramatic effect on the
embedding landscape. The bottom plot, depicting SME(bilinear), is much more interesting
because it shows that what was messy at the root level is much more organized: clusters are
now formed for continents with the one corresponding to U.S. states further apart from the
countries. Embeddings of SME(bilinear) are more interpretable given a relation type. The
bilinear g functions drastically modify the distances within the embedding space depending
on the relation type, as we expect that it should.
This last remark indicates that, by encoding data with SME(bilinear), one can expect
that similarities between two entities existing given one relation (i.e. short distances be-
tween their transformed embeddings) would not automatically translate into a similarity
between them for any relation type. This kind of behavior seems much harder to reproduce
7Freely available from wn-similarity.sourceforge.net.

248
Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
Fig. 4 Entity-relation embeddings. Plots of Elhs(rel) representations, learnt by SME(linear) (top) and
SME(bilinear) (bottom), with 115 countries selected from WordNet as lhs and _part_of as rel, projected
in 2D by t-SNE. SME(linear) and SME(bilinear) encoded geographical similarities at this stage
for SME(linear), where a similarity between entities seems to exist independent of the re-
lation. This could explain the bad performance of this model on Kinships, where correct
associations highly depend on the relation types. Still, drastic relations like antonymy re-
main unlikely to be well encoded by SME(bilinear), this might require to add non-linearities
to the model or to use larger sparse representations (to code for orthogonality among enti-
ties).
6 Application for word-sense disambiguation
We have introduced a new neural network architecture for learning multi-relational seman-
tics. Its stochastic learning process and its distributed representation of entities and relations
allow it to scale to large graphs in terms of nodes and link types. In this section, we illustrate

Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
249
Fig. 5 Open-text semantic parsing on simple sentences. To parse an input sentence (0.), a preprocessing
(lemmatization, POS, chunking, SRL) is ﬁrst performed (1.) to clean data and uncover the MR structure.
Then, to each lemma is assigned a corresponding WordNet synset (2.), hence deﬁning a complete meaning
representation (3.)
these appealing properties by applying our model for learning to carry out all-words word-
sense disambiguation on knowledge extracted from free text with semantic role labeling
(SRL), with a view to performing open-text semantic parsing.
Semantic parsing (Mooney 2004) aims at building systems able to read text and express
its meaning in a formal representation i.e. able to interpret statements expressed in natural
language. The purpose of a semantic parser is to analyze the structure of sentence meaning
and, formally, this consists of mapping a natural language sentence into a logical meaning
representation (MR). Open-text semantic parsing consists of learning to associate a MR to
any kind of natural language.
SME could make an interesting piece of a SRL system, especially for producing MRs
of the following form: relation(subject,object), i.e. relations with subject and object argu-
ments, where each component of the resulting triplet refers to a disambiguated entity, via
the following two-stages process: (1) SRL step predicts the semantic structure, and (2) a
disambiguation step assigns a corresponding entity to each relevant word, so as to minimize
an energy given to the whole input. Even if such a SRL system using SME would not be able
to cover the whole range of sentences and solve the highly complex problem of open-text
semantic parsing, it could make a useful tool. Its process is illustrated in Fig. 5 and detailed
in the next section. Our focus is on the application of SME for Step (2), which is an all-words
WSD step on extracted knowledge.
6.1 Methodology
This section details how SME could be inserted into a simple open-text semantic parsing sys-
tem. In this framework, MRs are simple logical expressions REL(A0,...,An), where REL
is the relation symbol, and A0,...,An are its arguments. Note that several such forms can be
recursively constructed to build more complex structures. The goal is to parse open-domain
raw text so a large set of relation types and arguments should be considered. Hence, Word-
Net is used for deﬁning REL and Ai arguments as proposed in Shi and Mihalcea (2004),
using the version introduced in Sect. 5.1. This results in a dictionary of 70,116 words that
can be mapped to 40,943 possible entities. The simpliﬁed semantic parsing process consists
of two stages.
Step (1): MR structure inference
The ﬁrst stage consists in preprocessing the text and
inferring the structure of the MR. For this stage we use standard approaches, the major
novelty of our work lies in applying SME for step (2).
We use the SENNA software8 (Collobert et al. 2011) to perform part-of-speech (POS)
tagging, chunking, lemmatization9 and SRL. In the following, we call a lemma the concate-
nation of a lemmatized word and a POS tag (such as _score_NN or _accompany_VB). Note
8Freely available from ml.nec-labs.com/senna/.
9Lemmatization is not carried out with SENNA but with the NLTK toolkit (nltk.org) and transforms a word
into its canonical or base form.

250
Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
the absence of an integer sufﬁx, which distinguishes a lemma from a WordNet synset: a
lemma is allowed to be semantically ambiguous. The SRL step consists in assigning a se-
mantic role label to each grammatical argument associated with a verb for each proposition.
As a simpliﬁcation, only sentences that match the template (subject, verb, direct object)
are considered here. Each of the three elements of the template is associated with a tuple
of lemmatized words (i.e. with a multi-word phrase) and SRL is used to structure the sen-
tence into the (lhs = subject, rel = verb, rhs = object) template. The order is not necessarily
subject / verb / direct object in the raw text (e.g. in passive sentences). Clearly, the subject-
verb-object composition causes the resulting MRs to have a straightforward structure (with
a single relation), but this pattern is common and a good choice to test our ideas at scale.
Learning to infer more elaborate grammatical patterns and MR structures is left as future
work: we chose here to focus on handling the large scale of the set of entities.
To summarize, this step starts from a sentence and either rejects it or outputs a triplet of
lemma tuples, one tuple for the subject, one for the relation or verb, and one for the direct
object. To complete our semantic parse (or MR), lemmas must be converted into WordNet
synsets, that is, we still have to perform disambiguation, which takes place in step (2).
Step (2): Detection of MR entities
This second step aims at identifying each semantic
entity expressed in a sentence. Given a relation triplet (lhslem, rellem, rhslem) where each
element of the triplet is associated with a tuple of lemmas, a corresponding triplet (lhssyn,
relsyn, rhssyn) is produced, where the lemmas are replaced by synsets. This step is a form of
all-words WSD in a particular setup, i.e., w.r.t. the logical form of the semantic parse from
Step (1). This can be either straightforward (some lemmas such as _television_program_NN
or _world_war_ii_NN correspond to a single synset) or very challenging (_run_VB can be
mapped to 33 different synsets and _run_NN to 10). Hence, in this proposed framework,
MRs correspond to triplets of synsets (lhssyn, relsyn, rhssyn), which can be reorganized to the
form relsyn(lhssyn, rhssyn), as shown in Fig. 5.
Since the model is structured around triplets, MRs and WordNet relations are cast into
the same scheme. For example, the WordNet relation (_ score_NN_2, _has_part, _musi-
cal_notation_NN_1) ﬁts the same pattern as our MRs, with the relation type _has_part play-
ing the role of the verb, and the same entities being present in WordNet relations and MRs.
The semantic matching energy function is trained to assign energies to triplets of lemmas
and synsets. It is important to notice that such triplets involve a large number of relation
types because any verb (under a lemma or a synset form) can act like it. Hence, our data,
detailed in Sect. 6.2.1, contains more than 16,000 relation types.
The architecture introduced in Sect. 3.3 cannot be applied directly. Indeed, here E must be
able to handle variable-size arguments, since for example there could be multiple lemmas
in the subject part of the sentence. Hence, we add a pooling stage between steps (1) and
(2) (of Sect. 3.3). The embeddings associated with all the symbols (synsets or lemmas)
within the same tuple are aggregated by a pooling function π (we used the mean but other
plausible candidates include the sum, the max, and combinations of several such element-
wise statistics, such as in Hamel et al. (2011)). This re-deﬁnes Elhs, Erel and Erhs as follows:
Elhs = π(Elhs1,Elhs2,...),
Erel = π(Erel1,Erel2,...),
Erhs = π(Erhs1,Erhs2,...),
where lhsj denotes the j-th individual element of the left-hand side tuple, etc.

Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
251
Table 5 Multiple data sources used for learning representations of 37,141 lemmas and 40,943 synsets. “La-
beled” indicates when triplets consist of text lemmas for which the corresponding synsets are known. The
total number of observed training triplets is 3,328,703 and the total number of relation types appearing in
those triplets is around 10,000
Dataset
Train. size
Test size
Labeled
Symbols
WordNet
146,442
5,000
No
synsets
ConceptNet
11,332
0
No
lemmas
Wikipedia
2,146,131
10,000
No
lemmas
Extended WordNet
42,957
5,000
Yes
lemmas + synsets
Unambig. Wikipedia
981,841
0
Yes
lemmas + synsets
We use this slightly modiﬁed semantic matching energy function to solve the WSD step.
We label a triplet of lemmas ((lhslem
1 ,lhslem
2 ,...),(rellem
1 ,...),(rhslem
1 ,...)) with synsets in a
greedy fashion, one lemma at a time. For labeling lhslem
2
for instance, we ﬁx all the remaining
elements of the triplet to their lemma and select the synset leading to the lowest energy:
lhssyn
2
= argminS∈C(syn|lem)E

lhslem
1 ,S,...

,

rellem
1 ,...

,

rhslem
1 ,...

with C(syn|len) the set of allowed synsets to which lhslem
2
can be mapped. We repeat that
for all lemmas. We always use lemmas as context, and never the already assigned synsets.
Future work should investigate more advanced inference schemes, which would probably be
iterative and would gradually reﬁne the estimated set of synsets taking into account their mu-
tual agreement. Nevertheless, this is an efﬁcient process as it only requires the computation
of a small number of energies, equal to the number of senses for a lemma, for each position
of a sentence. However, it requires good representations (i.e. good embedding vectors Ei)
for synsets and lemmas because they are used jointly to perform disambiguation.
6.2 Multi-task training
This section describes how we adapted the training scheme presented in Sect. 4 for learning
embeddings for synsets and lemmas using various data sources.
6.2.1 Multiple data resources
In order to endow the model with as much common-sense knowledge as possible, the fol-
lowing heterogeneous data sources are combined. Their statistics are summarized in Table 5.
On overall, this large-scale complex data groups 78,084 entities (37,141 lemmas and 40,943
synsets) and 9,560 relation types (4,077 encoded by verb synsets, 5,448 by verb lemmas, 18
for WordNet and 17 for ConceptNet) into 3,328,703 observed training triplets (and 20,000
for testing). Note that the actual number of triplets used for training our system is much
larger than that, because we generate negative triplets (by perturbing observed ones) during
the learning phase (see Sect. 6.2.2).
WordNet (WN)
Already described in Sect. 5, this is the main resource, deﬁning the dictio-
nary of 40,943 entities. WordNet contains only relations between synsets. However, the dis-
ambiguation process needs embeddings for synsets and for lemmas. Following Havasi et al.
(2010), we created two other versions of this dataset to leverage WN in order to also learn
lemma embeddings: “Ambiguated” WN and “Bridge” WN. In “Ambiguated” WN synset

252
Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
entities of each triplet are replaced by one of their corresponding lemmas. “Bridge” WN is
designed to teach the model about the connection between synset and lemma embeddings,
thus in its relations the lhs or rhs synset is replaced by a corresponding lemma. Sampling
training examples from WN involves actually sampling from one of its three versions, re-
sulting in a triplet involving synsets, lemmas or both.
ConceptNet
This common-sense knowledge base (Liu and Singh 2004) groups lemmas
or groups of lemmas, which are linked together with rich semantic relations such as
(_kitchen_table_NN, _used_for, _eat_VB _ breakfast_NN). It is based on lemmas and not
synsets, and it does not make distinctions between different senses of a word. Only triplets
containing lemmas from the WN dictionary are kept, to ﬁnally obtain a total of 11,332 train-
ing triplets.
Wikipedia
This resource is simply raw text meant to provide knowledge to the model in
an unsupervised fashion. In this work 50,000 Wikipedia articles were considered, although
many more could be used. Using the protocol of Step (1) of Sect. 6.1, we created a total of
2,146,131 triplets of lemmas. Imperfect training triplets (containing a mix of lemmas and
synsets) are produced by performing the disambiguation step on one of the lemmas. This is
equivalent to MAP (Maximum A Posteriori) training, i.e., we replace an unobserved latent
variable by its mode according to a posterior distribution (i.e. to the minimum of the energy
function, given the observed variables). We have used the 50,000 articles to generate more
than 3M examples.
EXtended WordNet (XWN)
XWN (Harabagiu and Moldovan 2002) is built from Word-
Net glosses, syntactically parsed and with content words semantically linked to WN synsets.
Using the protocol of Step (1) of Sect. 6.1, we processed these sentences and collected
47,957 lemma triplets for which the synset MRs were known. We removed 5,000 of these
examples to use them as an evaluation set for the word-sense disambiguation task. With
the remaining 42,957 examples, we created unambiguous training triplets to help the per-
formance of the disambiguation algorithm: for each lemma in each triplet, a new triplet is
created by replacing the lemma by its true corresponding synset and by keeping the other
members of the triplet in lemma form (to serve as examples of lemma-based context). This
led to a total of 786,105 training triplets, from which 10k were removed for validation.
Unambiguous Wikipedia (Wku)
We added to this training set some triplets extracted from
the Wikipedia corpus which were modiﬁed with the following trick: if one of its lemmas
corresponds unambiguously to a synset, and if this synset maps to other ambiguous lemmas,
we create a new triplet by replacing the unambiguous lemma by an ambiguous one. Hence,
we know the true synset in that ambiguous context. This allowed to create 981,841 additional
triplets with supervision.
6.2.2 Training procedure
The training algorithm described in Sect. 4 was used for all the data sources except XWN
and Wku. In those two cases, positive triplets are composed of lemmas (as context) and of
a disambiguated lemma replaced by its synset. Unlike for Wikipedia, this is labeled data, so
we are certain that this synset is the valid sense. Hence, to increase training efﬁciency and
yield a more discriminant disambiguation, in step 3 of the ranking algorithm with probability
1
2 we either sample randomly from the set of all entities or we sample randomly from the

Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
253
set of remaining candidate synsets corresponding to this disambiguated lemma (i.e. the set
of its other meanings).
During training, we sequentially alternate between all sources, performing an update of
the model parameters with one mini-batch of examples each time. Sizes of mini-batches
differ between sources because we decided to split each source into 50 mini-batches. We
always loop over sources in the same order. Training is stopped after 8,000 epochs on
all sources (or 7 computation days). There is one learning rate for the g functions and
another for the embeddings: their values are set using a grid search, choosing among
{3.,1.,0.3,0.1,0.03,0.01} and {0.03,0.01,0.003,0.001,0.0003,0.0001} respectively. The
model selection criterion is the mean rank from the entity ranking task on the WordNet
validation set. Dimensions of embeddings and of the g output space are equal for these
experiments and set to 50 (i.e. d = p = 50).
6.3 Related work
The application of SME to WSD is related to work on vector-based models of word meaning
(Lund and Burgess 1996; Landauer and Dumais 1997) and neural language models (Bengio
2008; Collobert et al. 2011), in the sense that we learn a vector representation for each lemma
to disambiguate. More precisely, it is connected to models aiming at composing such vec-
tor embeddings for obtaining phrase or context representations (Mitchell and Lapata 2008),
via tensor products (Smolensky 1990) or matrix operations (Paccanaro and Hinton 2001;
Socher et al. 2012). However, besides that many of these methods would not scale to the
problems introduced here, there exist a major difference with our work: we aim at learn-
ing jointly representations for words (lemmas) and senses (synsets), considering structures
within language (via SRL triplets) and within a knowledge base (via WordNet triplets) to-
gether. To the best of our knowledge, this is the ﬁrst attempt of mixing relational embed-
dings of a knowledge base and word embeddings. Note that the original architecture of SME
could be adapted for recursively learning phrase representations as proposed by Socher et al.
(2012) but this is beyond the scope of this paper.
Our approach is also connected to previous work targeting to improve WSD by us-
ing extra-knowledge by either automatically acquiring examples (Martinez et al. 2008) or
by connecting different knowledge bases (Havasi et al. 2010), but uses a totally different
method.
Finally, our ambition towards open-text semantic parsing is related to previous work by
Shi and Mihalcea (2004), who proposed a rule-based system for open-text semantic parsing
using WordNet and FrameNet (Baker et al. 1998) and by Giuglea and Moschitti (2006),
who proposed a model to connect WordNet, VerbNet and PropBank (Kingsbury and Palmer
2002) for semantic parsing using tree kernels. Poon and Domingos (2009, 2010) introduced
a method based on Markov-Logic Networks for unsupervised semantic parsing that can
be also used for information acquisition. However, instead of connecting MRs to an exist-
ing ontology as done here, it constructs a new ontology and does not leverage pre-existing
knowledge.
6.4 Experiments
To assess the performance w.r.t. the multi-task training and the diverse data sources, we
evaluated models trained with several combinations of data sources. WN denotes SME mod-
els trained on WordNet, “Ambiguated” WordNet and “Bridge” WordNet, while ALL denotes
models are trained on all sources.

254
Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
Table 6 Relation type ranking on Wikipedia. Comparisons between two versions of SME (this paper) and
SE. Mean/median predicted rank and precision@10 (p@10, in %) are computed on the test set. Best perfor-
mances are indicated in bold
Method
Rank (median / mean)
p@10
SME(linear)
92 / 267
1.951
SME(bilinear)
97 / 286
1.862
SE
118 / 283
0.882
6.4.1 Entity ranking
We ﬁrst evaluated SME(linear), SME(bilinear), SE and RESCAL in ranking on Wikipedia
(Wk) because this dataset offers a test-bed with many types of relation (5,448). The goal of
the task was to rank the correct rel given a pair of (lhs, rhs), because this is much easier than
ranking lhs or rhs that contain multiple lemmas. All methods has only been trained on the
Wk training set of 2,146,131 observed lemma triplets and evaluated on the corresponding
test set of 10k triplets. Hence, we measure the mean and median predicted ranks and the
prediction@10, computed with the following procedure. For each test triplet, the relation
type is removed and replaced by each of the relation types of the dictionary in turn. Energies
of those corrupted triplets are computed by the model and sorted by ascending order and the
rank of the correct type is stored. Table 6 reports the average and median of those predicted
ranks and the precision@10 (or p@10). Results clearly indicate the advantage of using SME
on data with large numbers of relation types, compared to SE. There is no result for RESCAL
because we have not been able to run it on Wk. This conﬁrms that SME is the method of
choice when dealing with large-scale multi-relational data.
6.4.2 Word-sense disambiguation
Performance on WSD is assessed on two test sets: the XWN test set and a subset of English
All-words WSD task of SensEval-3.10 For the latter, we processed the original data using
the protocol of Step (1) of Sect. 6.1 and obtained a total of 208 words to disambiguate
(out of ≈2000 originally). We compare with results obtained by Emb., which uses the same
embeddings as SME, but without the structure of its energy function. The performance of
SE and of the most frequent sense for a given lemma (MFS) as well as of the standard Lesk
algorithm are also evaluated. MFS frequencies have been obtained from WordNet, which
provides such information (in cntlist ﬁles). We attempted to adapt RESCAL to this task,
but the code took too long to converge with the whole set or even a reduced set of relation
types. We implemented a version of Lesk by following the work of Banerjee and Pedersen
(2002), which performs WSD based on the WordNet::Similarity package. Hence, a triplet
of lemmas is labeled with the triplet of synsets which exhibit the highest cumulated Lesk
similarity measure (according to WordNet::Similarity): this cumulated measure is computed
as the sum of Lesk similarities of all pairs of synsets composing the triplet. Finally, we
report the F1-score of Gamble (Decadt et al. 2004), winner of Senseval-3, on our subset of
its data.11
10More details at www.senseval.org/senseval3.
11A side effect of our preprocessing of SensEval-3 data is that our subset contains mostly frequent words. This
is easier for MFS than for Gamble because Gamble is efﬁcient on rare terms. Hence, Gamble performs worse

Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
255
Table 7 Word-sense
disambiguation results. F1-scores
(in %) of different versions of
SME (linear/bilinear, with
different data sources, combined
with the most frequent sense
(MFS) information or not) are
compared on XWN and a subset
of SensEval-3, with previous
work SE; Emb., the unstructured
version of SME; Lesk, a standard
WSD method; Gamble, the
algorithm that won SensEval-3
on the full test set; and Random,
which chooses uniformly among
allowed synsets. Best performing
methods, with a signiﬁcant
difference, are indicated in bold
Method
XWN
SensEval3
SME(linear)
ALL + MFS
72.3
65.9
ALL
66.0
44.7
WN
31.6
29.3
SME(bilinear)
ALL + MFS
72.1
68.3
ALL
67.1
49.5
WN
29.6
28.4
SE
ALL + MFS
68.9
68.3
ALL
51.9
47.1
Emb.
ALL + MFS
68.7
69.2
ALL
39.2
40.4
Lesk
70.2
50.5
Gamble
n/a
66.4
MFS
67.2
67.8
Random
26.7
29.6
F1 scores are presented in Table 7. The difference between models learnt on ALL and on
WN indicates that the information from Wikipedia, XWN and Wku is crucial (+35 %) and
yields performance equivalent to that of MFS(a strong baseline in WSD) on the XWN test
set. Performance of the model trained on WN alone are roughly equivalent to that of Random.
This conﬁrms that knowledge from WordNet and free text are difﬁcult to combine. Still, it is
interesting to see that SME is able to train on these various sources and to somewhat capture
information from them all. Emb., without the structure taking the relation type into account,
performs very poorly. SE is affected by the large number of relation types: on XWN, it
remains 15 % below SME. It can not learn proper matrix representations (d2 parameters) for
all verbs involved as relation types, especially for the rare ones. SME does not undergo this
problem.
Performance can be greatly improved by combining models trained on the ALL sources
and the MFS score. To do so, we converted the frequency information into an energy by
taking minus the log frequency and used it as an extra energy term. The total energy function
is used for disambiguation. This yields the results denoted by ALL + MFS which achieve
the best results of all the methods tried. On the XWN test set, the difference in performance
between SME(linear) and SME(bilinear) is not statistically signiﬁcant but their gap with Lesk
is (according to a χ2 test at the 0.05 level). For SensEval-3, differences between F1 scores
of SME(linear), SME(bilinear) (with ALL + MFS), Gamble and MFS are not statistically
signiﬁcant (χ2 test—0.05 level). Emb. and SE can also be upgraded using MFS information.
On SensEval-3, this makes them to equal the best performance. However, on XWN (a better
indicator), they remain signiﬁcantly outperformed by SME. Our method seems to be the best
for encoding supportive information to that of MFS: combined with SME, MFS’s F1-score
increases by 5 %.
than during the challenge and seems to be outperformed by MFS. However, performance of both systems are
statistically equivalent.

256
Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
Table 8 Predicted triplets reported by SME(bilinear) trained on all data sources (ALL), by ReVerb and using
the Lesk measure from Wordnet::Similarity
SME(bilinear)
ReVerb
Lesk
lhs
_army_NN_1
army
_army_NN_1
rel
_attack_VB_1
attacked
_attack_VB_1
top ranked rhs
_troop_NN_4
the city
_army_unit_NN_1
_armed_service_NN_1
the village
_army_corps_NN_1
_ship_NN_1
Israel
_invade_VB_1
_territory_NN_1
Poland
_military_unit_NN_1
_military_unit_NN_1
force
_armed_service_NN_1
top ranked lhs
_business_ﬁrm_NN_1
People
_monetary_system_NN_1
_person_NN_1
Players
_money_supply_NN_1
_family_NN_1
Interest
_currency_NN_1
_payoff_NN_3
Work
_monetary_standard_NN_1
_card_game_NN_1
Students
_monetary_resource_NN_1
rel
_earn_VB_1
earn
_earn_VB_1
rhs
_money_NN_1
money
_money_NN_1
6.4.3 WordNet enrichment
WordNet uses a limited number of relation types (18 in our version), and does not consider
most verbs as relations. Thanks to our multi-task training and uniﬁed representation for MRs
and WordNet relations, our model is potentially able to generalize to such relations that do
not exist in WordNet originally.
As illustration, predicted lists of synsets for relation types that do not exist in WordNet
are given in Table 8. We also compare with lists returned by ReVerb (Fader et al. 2011)
(an information extraction tool having extracted information from millions of web pages,12
to be compared with our 50k Wikipedia articles + knowledge bases). Lists from both sys-
tems seem to reﬂect common sense. However, contrary to our system, ReVerb does not
disambiguate different senses of a lemma, and thus it cannot connect its knowledge to an
existing resource to enrich it. We also provide the lists predicted by the Lesk measure of
Wordnet::Similarity, where the score of a WordNet synset is simply deﬁned as the sum of
its similarity measures with both input synsets. The predictions are semantically related but
they do not reﬂect the triplet structure because semantic roles of lhs, rel or rhs do not mean
anything for Lesk.
7 Conclusion
This paper presented SME, a new energy-based model for learning multi-relational seman-
tics. This method encodes multi-relational graphs or tensors into a ﬂexible continuous vector
space in which the original data is stored and enhanced. We empirically showed that SME:
(i) is highly competitive with the state-of-the-art methods for modeling multi-relational data,
12See the online ReVerb demo at http://openie.cs.washington.edu/.

Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
257
(ii) outperforms them in large-scale conditions, (iii) can be successfully trained on graphs
with tens of thousands of entities and thousands of kinds of relation (more than 100k entities,
10k relation types and 3.5M training triplets). This is the only method able to be efﬁcient on
all the different datasets considered in this paper.
In addition, we presented how SME could be applied to perform WSD using a dic-
tionary of more than 70,000 words based on WordNet. Our system, trained on Word-
Net and free text (and other sources), can capture the deep semantics of sentences in
its energy function, which, combined with most frequent sense information, leads to
improvement in disambiguation over standard methods. Future work could explore the
capabilities of such systems further including more general sentence structures, other
semantic tasks, and more evolved grammars, e.g. with FrameNet (Baker et al. 1998;
Coppola and Moschitti 2010).
An interesting extension of the model presented here extends its applicability to domains
where the objects of interest are not all symbolic (i.e., from a ﬁnite set). In that case, one
cannot associate a free parameter (its embedding vector) to each possible object. An example
of such objects are image patches, which are generally described by a “raw” feature vector.
We could learn a mapping from this raw feature space to the embedding space, where the
symbolic objects are mapped (in a similar fashion as WSABIE Weston et al. 2010). Whereas
for discrete object, one can view the object’s embedding as the product of the embedding
matrix by a one-hot vector (with a 1 at the position associated with the object symbol),
for continuous objects, in the linear mapping case, the “embedding matrix” maps the raw
features (richer than one-hot) to the embedding vector. In this way, relations could involve
both discrete and continuous objects. Such extensions are possible because of the ﬂexibility
and scalability, that models based on embeddings like SME or WSABIE offer for dealing
with multimodal inputs.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge Léon Bottou, Ronan Collobert, Nicolas
Usunier, Nicolas Le Roux, Rodolphe Jenatton and Guillaume Obozinski for inspiring discussions. This work
was supported by the French ANR (EVEREST-12-JS02-005-01), the Pascal2 European NoE, the DARPA
Deep Learning Program, NSERC, CIFAR, the Canada Research Chairs, and Compute Canada.
References
Baker, C., Fillmore, C., & Lowe, J. (1998). The Berkeley FrameNet project. In ACL ’98 (pp. 86–90).
Banerjee, S., & Pedersen, T. (2002). An adapted lesk algorithm for word sense disambiguation using wordnet.
In Proceedings of the third international conference on computational linguistics and intelligent text
processing, CICLing ’02 (pp. 136–145). Berlin: Springer.
Bengio, Y. (2008). Neural net language models. Scholarpedia, 3(1), 3881. http://www.scholarpedia.org/
article/Neural_net_language_models.
Bengio, Y., Ducharme, R., Vincent, P., & Jauvin, C. (2003). A neural probabilistic language model. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 3, 1137–1155.
Bergstra, J., Breuleux, O., Bastien, F., Lamblin, P., Pascanu, R., Desjardins, G., Turian, J., Warde-Farley,
D., & Bengio, Y. (2010). Theano: a CPU and GPU math expression compiler. In Proceedings of
the Python for scientiﬁc computing conference (SciPy). http://www.iro.umontreal.ca/~lisa/pointeurs/
theano_scipy2010.pdf, oral Presentation.
Bordes, A., Usunier, N., Collobert, R., & Weston, J. (2010). Towards understanding situated natural lan-
guage. In Proceedings of the 13th international conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and statistics (Vol. 9,
pp. 65–72).
Bordes, A., Weston, J., Collobert, R., & Bengio, Y. (2011). Learning structured embeddings of knowledge
bases. In Proceedings of the 25th conference on artiﬁcial intelligence (AAAI-11), San Francisco, USA.
Bordes, A., Glorot, X., Weston, J., & Bengio, Y. (2012). Joint learning of words and meaning representations
for open-text semantic parsing. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 22, 127–135.

258
Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
Boser, B., Guyon, I., & Vapnik, V. (1992). A training algorithm for optimal margin classiﬁers. In Proceedings
of the ﬁfth annual workshop on computational learning theory (pp. 144–152).
Bottou, L. (2011). From machine learning to machine reasoning. Tech. rep. arXiv:1102.1808.
Cambria, E., Hussain, A., Havasi, C., & Eckl, C. (2009). Affectivespace: blending common sense and affec-
tive knowledge to perform emotive reasoning. In WOMSA at CAEPIA (pp. 32–41).
Caruana, R. (1995). Learning many related tasks at the same time with backpropagation. In G. Tesauro,
D. Touretzky, & T. Leen (Eds.), Advances in neural information processing systems: Vol. 7. NIPS’94
(pp. 657–664). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Chu, W., & Ghahramani, Z. (2009). Probabilistic models for incomplete multi-dimensional arrays. Journal
of Machine Learning Research, 5, 89–96.
Collobert, R., & Weston, J. (2008). A uniﬁed architecture for natural language processing: deep neural net-
works with multitask learning. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on machine learn-
ing.
Collobert, R., Weston, J., Bottou, L., Karlen, M., Kavukcuoglu, K., & Kuksa, P. (2011). Natural language
processing (almost) from scratch. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12, 2493–2537.
Coppola, B., & Moschitti, A. (2010). A general purpose FrameNet-based shallow semantic parser. In Pro-
ceedings of the international conference on language resources and evaluation, LREC’10.
Decadt, B., Hoste, V., Daeleamns, W., & van den Bosh, A. (2004). Gamble, genetic algorithm optimization
of memory-based WSD. In Proceeding of ACL/SIGLEX Senseval-3.
Denham, W. (1973). The detection of patterns in alyawarra nonverbal behavior. PhD thesis, University of
Washington.
Fader, A., Soderland, S., & Etzioni, O. (2011). Identifying relations for open information extraction. In Pro-
ceedings of the conference on empirical methods in natural language processing, association for com-
putational linguistics, EMNLP ’11 (pp. 1535–1545).
Franz, T., Schultz, A., Sizov, S., & Staab, S. (2009). Triplerank: ranking semantic web data by tensor decom-
position. In Proceedings of the 8th international semantic web conference, ISWC ’09 (pp. 213–228).
Getoor, L., & Taskar, B. (2007). Introduction to statistical relational learning (Adaptive computation and
machine learning). Cambridge: MIT Press.
Giuglea, A., & Moschitti, A. (2006). Shallow semantic parsing based on FrameNet, VerbNet and PropBank.
In Proceeding of the 17th European conference on artiﬁcial intelligence (ECAI’06) (pp. 563–567).
Gutmann, M., & Hyvärinen, A. (2010). Noise-contrastive estimation: a new estimation principle for unnor-
malized statistical models. In Proceedings of the international conference on artiﬁcial intelligence and
statistics (AISTATS2010).
Hamel, P., Lemieux, S., Bengio, Y., & Eck, D. (2011). Temporal pooling and multiscale learning for automatic
annotation and ranking of music audio. In Proceedings of the 12th international conference on music
information retrieval (ISMIR11).
Harabagiu, S., & Moldovan, D. (2002). Knowledge processing on extended WordNet. In C. Fellbaum (Ed.),
WordNet: an electronic lexical database and some of its applications (pp. 379–405). Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Harshman, R. A., & Lundy, M. E. (1994). Parafac: parallel factor analysis. Computational Statistics & Data
Analysis, 18(1), 39–72.
Havasi, C., Speer, R., & Pustejovsky, J. (2010). Coarse Word-sense disambiguation using common sense. In
AAAI Fall symposium series.
Jenatton, R., Le Roux, N., Bordes, A., Obozinski, G., et al. (2012). A latent factor model for highly multi-
relational data. In Neural information processing systems, NIPS 2012.
Kemp, C., Tenenbaum, J. B., Grifﬁths, T. L., Yamada, T., & Ueda, N. (2006). Learning systems of concepts
with an inﬁnite relational model. In Proceedings of the 21st national conference on artiﬁcial intelligence,
AAAI’06 (Vol. 1, pp. 381–388). Menlo Park: AAAI Press.
Kingsbury, P., & Palmer, M. (2002). From treebank to PropBank. In Proceedings of the 3rd international
conference on language resources and evaluation.
Kok, S., & Domingos, P. (2007). Statistical predicate invention. In Proceedings of the 24th international
conference on machine learning, ICML ’07 (pp. 433–440). New York: ACM.
Landauer, T., & Dumais, S. (1997). A solution to plato’s problem: the latent semantic analysis theory of
acquisition, induction, and representation of knowledge. Psychological Review, 104(2), 211.
Lecun, Y., Chopra, S., Hadsell, R., Marc’aurelio, R., & Huang, F. (2006). A tutorial on energy-based learn-
ing. In G. Bakir, T. Hofman, B. Schölkopf, A. Smola, & B. Taskar (Eds.), Predicting structured data.
Cambridge: MIT Press.
Liu, H., & Singh, P. (2004). Focusing on conceptnet’s natural language knowledge representation. In Proceed-
ings of the 8th international conference on knowledge-based intelligent information and engineering
systems.

Mach Learn (2014) 94:233–259
259
Lund, K., & Burgess, C. (1996). Producing high-dimensional semantic spaces from lexical co-occurrence.
Behavior Research Methods, 28(2), 203–208.
Martinez, D., de Lacalle, O., & Agirre, E. (2008). On the use of automatically acquired examples for all-nouns
word sense disambiguation. The Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence Research, 33, 79–107.
McCray, A. T. (2003). An upper level ontology for the biomedical domain. Comparative and Functional
Genomics, 4, 80–88.
Miller, K., Grifﬁths, T., & Jordan, M. (2009). Nonparametric latent feature models for link prediction. In
Y. Bengio, D. Schuurmans, J. Lafferty, C. K. I. Williams, & A. Culotta (Eds.), Advances in neural
information processing systems (Vol. 22, pp. 1276–1284).
Mitchell, J., & Lapata, M. (2008). Vector-based models of semantic composition. In Proceedings of ACL-08:
HLT (pp. 236–244).
Mooney, R. (2004). Learning semantic parsers: an important but under-studied problem. In Proceedings of
the 19th AAAI conference on artiﬁcial intelligence
Nickel, M., Tresp, V., & Kriegel, H. P. (2011). A three-way model for collective learning on multi-relational
data. In L. Getoor & T. Scheffer (Eds.), Proceedings of the 28th international conference on machine
learning (ICML-11) (pp. 809–816). New York: ACM.
Nickel, M., Tresp, V., & Kriegel, H. P. (2012). Factorizing yago: scalable machine learning for linked data.
In Proceedings of the 21st international conference on world wide web, WWW ’12 (pp. 271–280).
Paccanaro, A. (2000). Learning distributed representations of concepts from relational data. IEEE Transac-
tions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 13, 200.
Paccanaro, A., & Hinton, G. (2001). Learning distributed representations of concepts using linear relational
embedding. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering, 13, 232–244.
Poon, H., & Domingos, P. (2009). Unsupervised semantic parsing. In Proceedings of the 2009 conference on
empirical methods in natural language processing, Singapore (pp. 1–10).
Poon, H., & Domingos, P. (2010). Unsupervised ontology induction from text. In Proceedings of the 48th
annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics, Uppsala, Sweden (pp. 296–305).
Robbins, H., & Monro, S. (1951). A stochastic approximation method. The Annals of Mathematical Statistics,
22, 400–407.
Rummel, R. J. (1999). Dimensionality of nations project: attributes of nations and behavior of nation dyads.
In ICPSR data ﬁle (pp. 1950–1965).
Shi, L., & Mihalcea, R. (2004). Open text semantic parsing using FrameNet and WordNet. In HLT-NAACL
2004: demonstration papers, Boston, MA, USA (pp. 19–22).
Singla, P., & Domingos, P. (2006). Entity resolution with Markov logic. In Proceedings of the sixth interna-
tional conference on data mining (pp. 572–582). Los Alamitos: IEEE Computer Society.
Smolensky, P. (1990). Tensor product variable binding and the representation of symbolic structures in con-
nectionist systems. Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 46(1), 159–216.
Socher, R., Huval, B., Manning, C. D., & Ng, A. Y. (2012). Semantic compositionality through recursive
matrix-vector spaces. In Proceedings of the 2012 conference on empirical methods in natural language
processing (EMNLP).
Speer, R., Havasi, C., & Lieberman, H. (2008). Analogyspace: reducing the dimensionality of common sense
knowledge. In Proceedings of the 23rd national conference on artiﬁcial intelligence, AAAI’08 (Vol. 1,
pp. 548–553). Menlo Park: AAAI Press.
Sutskever, I., Salakhutdinov, R., & Tenenbaum, J. (2009). Modelling relational data using Bayesian clustered
tensor factorization. In Advances in neural information processing systems (Vol. 22).
Tucker, L. R. (1966). Some mathematical notes on three-mode factor analysis. Psychometrika, 31, 279–311.
van der Maaten, L., & Hinton, G. (2008). Visualizing high-dimensional data using t-sne. Journal of Machine
Learning Research, 9, 2579–2605.
Weston, J., Bengio, S., & Usunier, N. (2010). Large scale image annotation: learning to rank with joint word-
image embeddings. Machine Learning, 81, 21–35.