INTERNATIONAL HIGHER EDUCATION
6
Other Examples
Other countries offer alternatives to American thinking.
In Western Europe, tuition remains low, or in some cases
entirely free. There is still a commitment to the public
good argument. The European experience shows that
modern postindustrial societies can support public
higher education systems and provide access to grow-
ing numbers of students. In Australia, where there has
been a U.S.-style shift to the private good idea, the fund-
ing system is based on a concept of a tax on the earnings
of university graduates—degree holders pay back the
cost of their higher education, over time, based on their
incomes. There is less of an immediate burden on indi-
viduals and a greater degree of equity. These examples
show that there are other ways to think about financing
large higher education systems.
The Logic of the System
The unaffordability of public higher education that the
Lumina Foundation highlights is no surprise. Indeed, it
is a logical and inevitable result of the changes in public
policy of the recent past. To make higher education more
affordable will require another philosophical and ideo-
logical change—one that is unlikely to occur in today’s
political and economic climate.
Perspectives on
Internationalizing Higher
Education
Philip G. Altbach
Philip G. Altbach is J. Donald Monan, S.J. professor of higher educa-
tion and director of the Center for International Higher Education at
Boston College.
I
nternationalization is a major trend in higher educa
tion. It is also a worldwide phenomenon. And it is
widely misunderstood. The aim of this article is to iden-
tify current themes in internationalization and to point
to some of the new sources that will provide useful, al-
beit provocative, perspectives and analyses. It discusses
the books and documents listed at the end.
The elements of globalization in higher education
are widespread and multifaceted. They include flows of
students across borders: it is estimated that more than
1.6 million students now study outside of their home
countries, with more than 547,000 studying in the United
States. International branch and off-shore campuses now
dot the landscape, especially in developing and middle-
income countries. In American colleges and universities,
programs aimed at providing an international
perspective and cross-cultural skills to American
students are increasingly popular. These represent just
a few dimensions of this growing trend. At the same time,
in the United States at least, there is much more rhetoric
than action concerning the internationalization of higher
education.
A conceptual understanding of globalization and
internationalization is needed to make sense of the varied
and complex ways they are affecting higher education
in the United States and worldwide. In broad terms,
globalization refers to trends in higher education that have
cross-national implications. These include mass higher
education; a global marketplace for students, faculty, and
highly educated personnel; and the global reach of the
new Internet-based technologies, among others.
Internationalization refers to the specific policies and
initiatives of countries and individual academic
institutions or systems to deal with global trends.
Examples of internationalization include policies relating
to recruitment of foreign students, collaboration with
academic institutions or systems in other countries, and
the establishment of branch campuses abroad.
Deep inequalities undergird many of the current
trends in globalization and internationalization in higher
education, and they too need to be understood as part
of the picture. A few countries dominate global scientific
systems, the new technologies are owned primarily by
multinational corporations or academic institutions in
the major Western industrialized nations, and the
domination of English creates advantages for the
countries that use English as the medium of instruction
and research. All this means that the developing
countries find themselves dependent on the major
academic superpowers.
Two works provide comparative global perspectives
in international education that are insightful, sensitive
and 
thought-provoking: 
Hans 
de 
Wit’s
Internationalization of Higher Education in the United States
of America and Europe (2002) and Peter Scott’s edited
volume, The Globalization of Higher Education (1998). De
Wit, who until recently was vice president for
international relations at the University of Amsterdam
in the Netherlands, provides a broad historical and
contemporary analysis of internationalization trends in
the United States and Europe. While he argues that there
have always been international elements in higher
education, dating back to the medieval roots of the
university, internationalization has not been the primary
goal of academe. Internationalization, he argues, has had
varied motivations over time: Cold War politics
stimulated many of the American international initiatives
in the post–World War II era—from the rise of area studies
to the National Defense Education Act. In Europe, the

7
major emphasis on internationalization came with the
advent of the European Union and the recognized need to
provide a higher education system that would not only
promote mobility from country to country, but also build
a sense of European consciousness among students.
De Wit and Scott argue that the imperatives of the
market are now driving internationalization trends
worldwide. Universities and academic systems seek to
make themselves attractive to overseas students and to
build links with universities in other countries to enhance
their global reach. This often means teaching in English
in addition to the national language, developing the
means to market higher education programs effectively,
treating intellectual property as a commodity, and
adopting strategies of profit-driven corporations.
The scope of internationalization discussed in these books
is broad-ranging. One area that has grown significantly is
transnational higher education. Examples include offshore and
branch campuses in other countries and collaborative
degree programs with universities and business
enterprises abroad. Distance learning technologies are often
used to deliver part or all of the educational program.
Australia and Britain have been especially active in
establishing transnational programs. More than 140,000
international students were involved in academic
programs under the auspices of British universities
elsewhere in the world. The United States has come
relatively late to transnational education, although
initiatives by, for example, the University of Chicago,
the University of Pennsylvania, and Temple University
to partner with business schools overseas or to develop
their own offshore programs are indications of a growing
trend. Other American for-profit institutions and
organizations are also developing overseas partnerships
and programs, including the purchase of overseas
campuses by Sylvan Learning Systems.
Scott’s edited volume provides discussion of
international trends primarily in Europe, but also in South
Africa and in a comparative context. Several chapters
discuss Britain’s current efforts to internationalize by
increasing the number of overseas students in U.K.
universities, developing relationships with foreign
institutions, and offering British degrees offshore.
The voices discussing internationalization are largely
Western. One exception that offers a perspective on how
developing countries think about these issues is
Internationalization of Indian Higher Education (2001),
edited by K. B. Powar. This book focuses on India but is
also relevant to other developing countries and to the
larger conversation about internationalization. India has
a large academic system, enrolling more than 5.6 million
students. It ranks third among countries sending students to
the United States, with more than 42,000 students studying
abroad. India also receives more than 10,000 students from
abroad, mainly from other developing countries.
A long-standing concern for India has been its “brain
drain.” The majority of Indian students who study in
the United States, for example, do not return home. India
is eager to make its own universities more attractive for
foreign students. As M. Anandakrishnan notes, India is
concerned about the more than 200 foreign academic
programs, enrolling 30,000 students, now operating in
India. With many of its own academic institutions using
English as the main language of instruction and with a
large distance education university (the Indira Gandhi
National Open University), India is in a unique position
among developing countries to be a significant
participant in international higher education. Powar’s
book offers us an in-depth case study of the challenges
and opportunities developing countries face as they
pursue internationalization.
The voices discussing internationalization
are largely Western.
Two important volumes trace the flows of students,
patterns of foreign study, and new initiatives in two key
countries, the United States and Britain. Open Doors:
Report on International Educational Exchange, is published
annually by the Institute of International Education (IIE).
The IIE has been collecting data on international
exchanges for 30 years, and its analyses provide
important insights into trends and patterns. Student
Mobility on the Map: Tertiary Education Interchange in the
Commonwealth on the Threshold of the 21st Century, is not
an annual publication but rather a single survey of
patterns of global student mobility, with an emphasis
on the United Kingdom and the Commonwealth.
International students are now a significant factor
in U.S. higher education. Open Doors reports that more
than a half million foreign students spend more than $11
billion on tuition and living expenses and more than two-
thirds of foreign students receive most of the funding
for their education from personal and family resources.
Relatively few receive scholarships or other support from
American institutions or agencies. This pattern of self-
funding is also the case in Britain, where, as Student
Mobility points out, about 60 percent pay for the bulk of
their studies. The impact of international students on
American higher education is varied. While they
constitute 2.7 percent of undergraduates, foreign
students account for 12 percent of graduate enrollments.
Foreign students are concentrated in a relatively small
number of U.S. colleges and universities.

INTERNATIONAL HIGHER EDUCATION
8
The flows of students overseas move largely from
the developing countries to the industrialized nations.
Just 15 percent of foreign students in the United States
come from Europe. The large majority come from
developing countries—55 percent from Asia (although
Japan ranks number three). China has more than 10
percent of the total number of international students in
the United States. There has been considerable stability
in these patterns over time for the United States. In
Europe, the situation has changed. As the Student
Mobility study points out, there has been considerable
growth in intra-European mobility in such European
Union programs as ERASMUS and SOCRATES. De Wit
discusses these programs and points out that they are
central to the EU’s efforts to build a sense of European
unity and encourage integration in education and in the
labor market. Recently, the EU has pledged to harmonize
degree structures and programs so that it will be easier
for European students to transfer from one university to
another, as is common in the United States.
The three elements of this tectonic shift can
be summarized as public good vs. private
good, high tuition and high aid, and send
the masses to the community colleges.
Both Open Doors and Student Mobility provide
important information about the patterns of international
study. While the United States retains its position as the
major host country for international students, it is losing
its dominance. As both Student Mobility and Scott’s book
show, European and Commonwealth countries have
clear policy goals to enhance internationalization and
improve their competitive position as destinations for
students and as sponsors of international degree
programs. The United States has no such policy and no
national commitment to internationalization.
Despite 
America’s 
lack 
of 
a 
coherent
internationalization policy, there is substantial support,
on campus and off, for international programs in higher
education and for study abroad. Two useful studies,
funded by the Ford Foundation and undertaken by the
American Council on Education (ACE), examine patterns
of internationalization in U.S. higher education, and
attitudes about international issues and campus-based
international programs among high school students and
the general public. These studies are reported by Fred
Hayward and Laura Siaya in Public Experience, Attitudes,
and Knowledge: A Report of Two National Surveys About
International Education (2000). These studies paint a
picture that is surprisingly positive concerning
internationalization strategies for academe, and reflect
a considerable degree of international experience among
Americans. Fifty-five percent of Americans reported that
they had traveled abroad (35 percent of these to Europe
with the largest number to Canada or Mexico). Three-
quarters of college graduates reported foreign travel.
Seventeen percent reported fluency in another language,
and 98 percent of the high school students polled
reported that they had studied a foreign language in
primary or secondary school. The public, as reflected in
the ACE survey, is very supportive of foreign language
instruction in higher education, and even more strongly
favors courses that focus on international issues.
Globalization and internationalization are now
central issues for higher education worldwide. The
resources discussed here provide us with a map to
navigate the trends in international higher education and
the complex relations between academe and society,
nationally and globally. These books deal with key areas
such as foreign student policies, enrollment patterns in the
United States and elsewhere, how the American public
thinks about internationalization, how American higher
education is responding, and finally, approaches to campus
internationalization. American higher education has a long
way to go to come to grips with the internationalization
imperatives of the new millennium. These resources will
help us begin to think about the challenges.
Publications discussed in this article:
Todd M. Davis. (2002). Open Doors: Report on International Edu-
cational Exchange, 2001. New York: Institute of International
Education. 95 pp. $42. (www. opendoorsweb.org)
Hans de Wit. (2002). Internationalization of Higher Education in
the United States of America and Europe: A Historical, Compara-
tive, and Conceptual Analysis. Westport, CT: Greenwood Pub-
lishers. 270 pp. $74.95.
Fred M. Hayward. (2000). Preliminary Status Report 2000: Inter-
nationalization of U.S. Higher Education. Washington, D.C.:
American Council on Education. 38 pp. $15.00.
Fred M. Hayward and Laura M. Siaya. (2001). Public Experi-
ence, Attitudes, and Knowledge: A Report on Two National Surveys
about International Education. Washington, D.C.: American
Council on Education. 63 pp. $ 20.00.
K. B. Powar, ed., Internationalization of Indian Higher Education.
(2001). New Delhi: Association of Indian Universities. 200 pp.
$30, Rs. 350.
Peter Scott, ed. (1998). The Globalization of Higher Education.
Buckingham, U.K.: Open University Press and the Society for
Research Into Higher Education. 134 pp. £19.95.
Student Mobility on the Map: Tertiary Education Interchange in the
Commonwealth on the Threshold of the 21st Century. (2000). Lon-
don: UKCOSA: The Council for International Education, 2000.
86 pp. £20. (<www.ukcosa.org.uk>)
A longer version of this article appears in Change Magazine.