Higher Education Research in Europe
Ulrich Teichler
1
Introduction
Efforts in the past of analysing the situation of higher education research often have
come to similar conclusions. On the one hand, they noted that certain characteristics
tended to be named, which in principle apply everywhere where higher education
research has emerged. On the other hand, they consistently underscored striking
differences that exist between countries (cf. the overviews in Altbach 2002; Teichler
2013c, 2014a).
As regards common characteristics, ﬁrst, we hear, even in countries with rela-
tively impressive activities in this area, that higher education research is a small
ﬁeld of research. In looking at the overall size of higher education systems
worldwide, the important role higher education systems are assumed to play in
society, and the range and magnitude of problems which higher education has to
cope with, we have to conclude that systematic knowledge on higher education is
not held in high esteem even today. Interestingly enough, hardly any ﬁgures are
presented in the respective overviews: even most of those who know the scene well
do not dare to estimate whether there are about 5000 higher education researchers,
about 10,000 or even more all over the world. Altbach (2014) recently estimated
that there at least 6000 higher education researchers worldwide and even more than
12,000, if “institutional researchers” were included. Similarly we might ask: are
there 2000 or somewhat more or substantially more higher education researchers in
Europe?
This caution of estimating the size of the ﬁeld can be explained in part by a
second characteristic. Many scholars undertaking—occasionally or frequently—
research in this domain do not consider themselves to be higher education
researchers. Many of them understand themselves primarily as representatives of a
U. Teichler (&)
International Centre for Higher Education Research, University of Kassel, Kassel, Germany
e-mail: teichler@incher.uni-kassel.de
© The Author(s) 2015
A. Curaj et al. (eds.), The European Higher Education Area,
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-20877-0_50
815

discipline: education, psychology, sociology political science, economics and
business studies, law, history, etc.; higher education is just a thematic area for them,
but not the core element of their academic identity. Moreover, some scholars, who
see their research area as being thematically deﬁned, consider higher education as
important, but not as the prime thematic deﬁnition; for example, those analyzing
research at universities might view themselves as science researchers, and those
addressing graduate employment and work might name themselves labour market
researchers.
Third, higher education is a ﬁeld of expertise with very fuzzy borderlines
between research on the one hand, and on the other consultancy, administrative
oversight, evaluation and other search for evidence. Correspondingly, there is not
always a clear distinction as regards who is primarily a researcher or primarily a
consultant, evaluator, administrator or “reﬂective” policy maker or practitioner. For
example, various academic journals, edited books, etc., on higher education provide
a platform both for scholars and other experts.
Fourth, higher education research is predominantly national in focus or con-
centrates on smaller units within countries, i.e. regions, individual institutions of
higher education or their sub-units, whereby often a strong impact of the national
setting on these regional and institutional cases is taken for granted. Higher edu-
cation research with a world-wide focus or international comparative research on
higher education is by no means frequent. For example, a recent survey even of
internationally visible journals comes to the conclusion that only 11 % of the
articles published in 1992–2011 explicitly compared higher education in at least
two countries (Kosmützky and Krücken 2014).
Fifth, though being altogether relatively small, higher education research can be
understood as a heterogeneous ﬁeld. The individual scholars and other experts,
each, as a rule, cover only a segment: for example, teaching and learning, as well as
staff and students, the higher education system and its societal framework, or
governance and administration of higher education. As the system knowledge, as
well as the theories and methods are different between such segments, one cannot
be surprised to note that a common theoretical framework, a comprehensive
information base and overarching network of communication are called for in vain.
Such generalisations about the characteristics of this ﬁeld, however, have to be
viewed with caution, because higher education research varies substantially across
countries. There are enormous differences in the size of this ﬁeld: In some countries,
higher education research is a relatively strong ﬁeld with a visible institutional basis
(for example in the United States of America and in China); in other countries, we
observe a widely scattered picture of institutions, persons and themes; in other
countries,
ﬁnally,
higher
education
research
is
marginal
or
non-existing.
Disciplinary afﬁliations vary across countries. As will be discussed below, there is
no country in Europe with a visibility and clear institutional basis of higher edu-
cation research in the way it holds true for the U.S. Views might vary, whether one
would be inclined to name higher education research as sizeable and noteworthy in
only two or about half a dozen European countries, or one would name larger
numbers of countries in Europe where higher education research is marginal or
816
U. Teichler

even non-existing. While “higher education” might be the denomination of pro-
fessor positions and of research units, and possibly teaching in some countries, it is
merely a theme among others which individual scholars might address in other
countries. Finally, links between research, policy and practice vary: In some
countries, higher education policy and governance tend to strive for systematic
information as “evidence”, while in other countries systematic information remains
occasionistic.
2
Stages of Development of Higher Education Research
A ﬁrst worldwide account of higher education research was published in the early
1970s by scholars of the Max Planck Institute for Educational Research, Berlin
(Nitsch and Weller 1970–1973). This study showed that it had been a marginal ﬁeld
of research in most countries of the world up to the 1960s. Possibly, the U.S. could
be named at that time as the only country where research in this domain was
sizeable and visible.
Higher education research began to grow in the 1960s and 1970s, notably in
response to two phenomena: the rapid growth of student numbers in many countries
and the student protests in select economically advanced countries. Both triggered
the notion that the traditional characteristics of the university might not ﬁt anymore,
when study ceases to be a privilege for the few and when higher education is
increasingly viewed as highly relevant for the technology, economy, society and
culture in general.
Scholars of various disciplines got interested at that time in analysing higher
education issues. International organisations—notably OECD—undertook sys-
tematic analyses, arranged expert committees and stimulated research projects.
Centres
for
‘teaching
and
learning’
or
‘staff
development’
(also
‘Hochschuldidaktik’, ‘onderzoek van onderwijs’, etc.) were established at various
higher education institutions in many European countries—often with both research
and service functions. Countries such as Sweden inaugurated a national programme
for the promotion of research projects on issues of higher education, while others
established major centres of higher education research outside universities. For
example, the nowadays well known institutes in Europe in this domain were
founded during this period: The Center for Higher Education Policy Studies of the
Twente University (CHEPS) in the Netherlands was founded in 1984, and the
International Centre for Higher Education Research of the University of Kassel
(INCHER-Kassel) in Germany in 1978. Actually, however, systematic studies on
the state of higher education remained scarce during that period as compared to the
current situation.
From the late 1980s to the ﬁrst years of the 21st century, higher education
research became a noticeable ﬁeld of research in many economically advanced as
well as in some other countries, as various publications on the state of higher
education research show. Many factors seemed to be in play: a growing emphasis
Higher Education Research in Europe
817

on evaluation of various kinds, ‘accountability’ and ‘evidence-based policy, a de-
centralisation of power in higher education and thus an increase of key strategic
actors, a professionalization of higher education management, a growing notion of
complexity, a loss of conﬁdence in ﬁrst-hand knowledge on higher education in the
wake of internationalisation and globalisation, etc.
Since about that time, a substantial number of accounts on the situation of higher
education research have been published. Encyclopaedias on higher education as
well explicitly address the state of higher education research (notably Clark and
Neave 1992; see also Forest and Altbach 2006; Tight et al. 2009). Some books
comprised analyses of the worldwide situation of higher education research, the-
matically and institutionally (e.g. Sadlak and Altbach 1997; Teichler and Sadlak
2000). Others focussed on the institutional basis of higher education research
(Altbach et al. 2007; Altbach and Engberg 2000; Rumbley et al. 2014; Schwarz and
Teichler 2000). Again, others addressed the thematic state of higher education and
major ﬁndings—for example with the help of bibliographic analyses (see for
example the books on ‘researching higher education’ by Tight 2003, 2012). Some
overviews focused especially on higher education research in Europe (Frackmann
and Maassen 1992; Neave and Teichler 1989; Sursock and Smidt 2010; Teichler
2005). Some membership organisations of higher education researchers or also of
other experts show the situation of higher education research as experienced
through the activities of these organisations (see Begg 2003; Kehm and Musselin
2013). Some publications comprise essays, partly written by higher education
researchers and partly by administrators, policy makers and practitioners in that
ﬁeld (e.g. Fromment et al. 2006; Gaebel et al. 2008). Finally, there is a magnitude
of books on speciﬁc thematic areas in which the authors and editors, while
focussing on key issues of higher education, implicitly provide a valuable overview
on the state of higher education research as regards these issues (see for example
recently King et al. 2013; Kwiek 2013; Shin and Teichler 2014; Zgaga 2013).
3
Higher Education Research in Europe and Its Visibility
in the English Language
Higher education research has gained momentum over the years in some European
countries. Most of the research in this area is only accessible in the language of the
respective country. Yet, publications in the English language often indicate the
themes, major results and the expertise available in the various European countries.
International and European publications, conferences and expert collaboration in
the framework of intergovernmental organisations in the 1960s and 1970s suggest
that various scholars from the United Kingdom, Ireland, some Nordic countries, the
Netherlands, Germany and a few other European countries had already been active
in this ﬁeld, and that notable research on teaching and learning, curricula etc. had
been established in Eastern European countries. Over the years, scholars from
818
U. Teichler

additional countries became international known, but undoubtedly the communities
of researchers in this ﬁeld continued to differ substantially in size and collaborative
activity by country.
The United Kingdom was the ﬁrst country in Europe where higher education
research became a sizeable ﬁeld. The Society for Research into Higher Education
(SRHE), which is based in the UK, was already founded in 1965. It continues to be
up to the present the largest community of higher education researchers primarily
based in a single European country. SRHE, however, always reached across
national borders. It has active members in Ireland, Australia and Anglo-Saxon
countries, and it made its international ties visible by having always at least one of
its vice-presidents, and altogether ﬁve out or more than 30 ‘fellows’ from
non-English speaking countries (see Table 1).
When the ﬁrst ‘International Encyclopedia of Higher Education’ was edited in
1977 by an U.S. university president (Knowles 1977), 75 % of the authors from
topical essays were from the U.S., 14 % from the UK and Canada—about half each
—as well as 11 % from other countries, among them less than half from other
European countries (see Teichler 1980). Overviews on major publications on higher
education compiled by the U.S. scholar Philip G. Altbach from the late 1970s
onwards (see Altbach 1979), which aimed to look beyond what is available in the
English language, suggest that one could have drawn from a larger pools of higher
education researchers from various countries already at that time.
During the 1970s, two European associations were formed, that aimed at
bringing together persons interested both in higher education research and in higher
education policy and practice. First, the European Association for Research and
Development in Higher Education (EARDHE) had an emphasis on teaching and
learning (see for example Ritter and Kühn 1985); after some years of activities, it
faded away in the 1990s, and its role was taken over by the International
Consortium for Educational Development (ICED), a network founded in 1993 of
more than 20 associations from all over the world, of experts in teaching and
learning in higher education; it publishes the International Journal for Academic
Development (IJAD).
Second, the European Association for Institutional Research (EAIR) was
founded in 1979. Its foundation was inspired by the impressive development of
‘institutional research’ in the U.S., as will be discussed below, and started off as
partner association of the AIR. As ‘institutional research’ of that type had not
become a sizeable phenomenon in Europe, EAIR became an association that pro-
moted the dialogue between higher education researchers and practitioners, notably
in Europe (see Begg 2003). Its journal, Tertiary Education and Management,
published predominantly the major contributions to their annual conferences for a
couple of years (Kehm 2005). EAIR’s broad European base is underscored, for
example, by the fact that it honoured 8 European higher education researchers from
6 countries since the mid-1990s through distinguished memberships, honorary
president positions or awards for outstanding contributions to research, and addi-
tionally three experts from three countries for various contributions to EAIR (see
Table 1).
Higher Education Research in Europe
819

Table 1 Key higher education researchers in Europe
Society for Research into Higher Education (SRHE): Vice-president from non-English speaking
country (currently): Ulrich Teichler (Germany); fellows from non-English speaking countries:
Marianne Bauer (Sweden), Gunnar Handal (Norway), Peter Maassen (the Netherlands and
Norway), Ference Marton (Sweden) and Ulrich Teichler
EAIR: Distinguished memberships, honorary president positions or awards for outstanding
contributions to research in recent two decades: Ron Barnett (UK), Guy Haug (France and
Belgium), Ellen Hazelkorn (Ireland), José-Ginés Mora (Spain), Guy Neave (UK and France),
Michael Shattock (UK), Ulrich Teichler and Mantz Yorke (UK); distinguished membership for
various contribution to EAIR: Kary Hyppönen (Finland), Roddy Begg (UK) and Anita Ax (the
Netherlands)
European authors in B.R. Clark: The Higher Education System (1983): Tony Becher (UK),
Ladislav Cerych (France and Czech Republic) Maurice Kogan (UK), Harold Perkin (UK) and
Gareth Williams (UK)
Frequently cited scholars in the Encyclopedia of Higher Education (Clark and Neave 1992) from
Europe: Guy Neave, Maurice Kogan, Ulrich Teichler, Tony Becher (UK), Gareth Williams,
George Psacharopoulos (Greece), Mark Blaug (UK) and Frans van Vught (the Netherlands)
CHER chairpersons since 1978: Ulrich Teichler, Guy Neave, Jean-Claude Eicher (France),
Oliver Fulton (UK), Alberto Amaral (Portugal), Christine Musselin (France) and Patrick Clancy
(Ireland); secretaries: Frans van Vught, Peter Maasen (both the Netherlands at that time), Jürgen
Enders and Barbara M. Kehm (both Germany at that time) and Pedro N. Teixeira (Portugal)
European higher education researchers frequently named in M. Tight: Researching Higher
Education (2012): Ronald Barnett, Rosemary Deem, Lee Harvey, Peter T. Knight, Michael
Shattock, Malcolm Tight and Mantz Yorke (all UK); Ference Marton and Ulrich Teichler
European higher education researchers frequently named in M. Kwiek: Knowledge Production
in European Universities (2013): Nicolas Barr, John Brennan, Roger Dale, Rosemary Deem,
Maurice Kogan, Hugh Lauder, Guy Neave, David Palfreyman, Peter Scott, Michael Shattock,
Paul Temple, Paul Trowler, Richard Whitley and Gareth Williams (all UK); Alberto Amaral, Ivar
Bleiklie, Andrea Bonaccorsi, Jürgen Enders, Aldo Geuna, Ase Gornitzka, Jeroen Huisman, Ben
Jongbloed, Georg Krücken, Marek Kwiek, Loet Leydesdorff. Peter Maassen, Kerstin Martens,
Christine Musselin, Johan P. Olsen, Carlo Salerno, Bjorn Stensaker, Ulrich Teichler, Pedro
Teixeira, Jussi Välimaa, Frans van Vught and Luc Weber (all other European countries)
Long-standing coordinating editors of higher education journals published in Europe: Guy
Neave, Alec Ross, Maurice Kogan, Noel J. Entwistle, Malcolm Tight, Roddy Begg, Bjorn
Stensaker, Jeroen Huisman, et al.
Award of the Comenius Prize for research achievements upon the occasion of the UNESCO
World Conferences on Higher Education in 1998 to Europeans: Ladislav Cerych and Ulrich
Teichler; European scholars members of scientiﬁc advisory committees of the UNESCO Forum
on Higher Education, Research and Knowledge (2001–2008): Ivar Bleiklie (Norway), Maurice
Kogan, Philippe Laredo (France), Francisco Michavila-Pitarch (Spain), Guy Neave, Baiba Rivza
(Latvia), Helena Sebkova (Czech Republic), Sverker Sorlin (Sweden), Roland G. Sultana (Malta)
and Ulrich Teichler
Members of the Academia Europaea: formerly: Tony Becher (UK) Maurice Kogan (UK);
longstanding members: Peter Scott (UK) and Ulrich Teichler; recent members: Jürgen Enders
(initially Germany, thereafter the Netherlands and UK), Simon Marginson (Australia and UK),
Christine Musselin, Michele Rostan (Italy), Jussi Välimaa (Finland) and Marijk van der Wende
(the Netherlands)
Coordinators of the ESF-sponsored project “Higher Education Looking Forward (HELF)”
(2005–2007): John Brennan (UK), Jürgen Enders, Christine Musselin, Ulrich Teichler and Jussi
Välimaa; coordinators of the project consortia in the framework of the ESF-sponsored “Higher
Education and Social Change in Europe (EuroHESC)”: Ivar Bleiklie, Uwe Schimank
(Germany), Ulrich Teichler and Jussi Välimaa
820
U. Teichler

While some major journals in this domain had been already established earlier in
the U.S., various international journals on higher education in the English lan-
guage are published in Europe since the 1970s: Higher Education (since 1972; now
published by Springer, the Netherlands), a research journal covering the whole
range of higher education research; Studies in Higher Education (since 1976, now
published by Taylor & Francis, UK), a research journal established by SRHE with
emphasis on teaching and learning, curricula, etc., but covering other themes as
well; Higher Education in Europe (1976–2009), published by the European Centre
for Higher Education (CEPES/UNESCO), and since 2011 substituted by the aca-
demic journal European Journal of Higher Education (published by Routledge,
UK); Journal of Higher Education Policy and Management (1978–2012), estab-
lished and published by OECD; Higher Education Policy (since 1988, now pub-
lished by Palgrave Macmillan, UK), established by the International Association of
Universities (IAU); Tertiary Education and Management (since 1995, now pub-
lished by Routledge, UK), established by EAIR. Additionally, the European Journal
of Education (since 1975, now published by Blackwell, UK), coordinated by the
European Institute of Education and Social Policy, France, comprises at least one
thematic issue annually on higher education. Among these journals, the two with an
exclusive academic thrust, i.e. Higher Education and Studies in Higher Education,
had a clear dominance of authors from the U.S., the UK and other Anglo-Saxon
countries, at least up to the 1990s.
When Burton R. Clark—along with Martin Trow one of the two most inﬂuential
international ‘father ﬁgures’ for the development of higher education research in
Europe (see notably Burrage 2010; Clark 1983)—invited in the early 1980s leading
scholars to provide an account of the state of research in this domain worldwide
(see Clark 1984), the majority of scholars were from the U.S. He chose ﬁve
speakers from Europe, among them four from the UK and only one from conti-
nental Europe (see Table 1).
The growth of quantity and quality of higher education research since the 1970s
was reﬂected in the second major encyclopaedia of this ﬁeld, published in the early
1990s. Among the 18 most frequently cited scholars in the Encyclopedia of Higher
Education (Clark and Neave 1992), eight were from Europe—ﬁve from the UK and
three from other European countries.
The foundation of the Consortium of Higher Education Researchers (CHER) in
1988 certainly has contributed to improved communication among researchers and
to growing research collaboration in Europe on matters of higher education, as well
as increased international visibility of European higher education researchers.
CHER aims at being the most visible international association of higher education
researchers. Practically, it has a strong focus on Europe in various respects. More
than three quarters of the members and similarly members of the board have been
from Europe over the years. All chairpersons and secretaries were from Europe, and
all annual conferences were held in Europe. Among the themes addressed in
conferences and certainly in projects triggered two ﬁgure prominently, which are
much more at the heart of higher education researchers in Europe than for example
in the U.S., i.e. comparative research on higher education, as well as macro-system
Higher Education Research in Europe
821

issues of higher education (societal expectations, the overall fabrique of the higher
education system, steering of the higher education system and the role of govern-
ment, etc.), while more research in the U.S. focus on meso-level and micro-level
issues.
CHER brought together higher education researchers from a broad range of
European countries. The seven chairpersons were from ﬁve different countries,
while the ﬁve secretaries came from three countries (see Table 1). Ten or more
members each in 2013 came from the UK, Germany and France, ﬁve and more
from Norway, Portugal, Italy, Finland, the Netherlands and Austria, and smaller
numbers each from more than a dozen other European countries (members from
outside Europe not taken into consideration here). Overviews on participants and
speakers at the CHER conferences over the years show also active involvement of
European scholars from Belgium, Czech Republic, Hungary, Ireland, Poland,
Serbia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland (see Teichler 2013a, b).
Yet, the development of CHER shows as well that higher education research in
Europe continued to be based for a long time on an institutionally relatively weak
basis. CHER relied very much only on four sizeable institutes interested in inter-
national comparison and in macro-issues of higher education: the already above
named CHEPS (the Netherlands) and INCHER-Kassel (Germany), as well as the
Nordic Institute for Studies in Innovation, Research and Education (NIFU) in Oslo
(Norway) and the Centre for Research in Higher Education Policies (CIPES) of the
University of Porto (Portugal). Also, only less than 50 members of CHER are
holders of a professor title in the domain of higher education (according to the
denomination of their professorship or that of their unit) (see Teichler 2013b).
Actually, the relatively small size of the higher education research communities
in the individual European countries was a major reason for the establishment of
supra-national associations such as CHER. Often, the national community was
considered to be too small to ensure a functioning platform of discourse. Even up to
the present, there are only a few national or regional associations of higher edu-
cation researchers in Europe.
Major segments, but certainly not the complete picture of institutions and pro-
grammes mostly active within the respective countries and within the home country
language, became visible in the inventories of higher education research institutions
and of academic master and doctoral programmes of higher education published in
2000, 2006 and 2014. The most recent inventory records 66 research institutions on
higher education in Europe (as compared to 50 in the U.S.), among them 18 in the
UK, one in Ireland and 47 in 20 non-English speaking European countries, as well
as 22 programmes in Europe (as compared to almost 200 in the U.S.), among them
13 in the UK, one in Ireland and 8 in 6 non-English speaking European countries
(Rumbley et al. 2014).
With the growing communication and cooperation among higher education
researchers in Europe, English as the lingua franca gained momentum. From 1993
to 1997, 21 % of the articles in Higher Education, the internationally most visible
and prestigious journal in this domain, were still written by UK authors and only
13 % by authors from other European countries (Maassen 2000). In contrast, 29 %
822
U. Teichler

of the articles published in 2001–2004 were written by authors from other European
countries and only 12 % by UK authors (Teichler 2005); as the journal had sub-
stantially grown in size, however, the absolute number of contributions from the
UK did not decline, but that of the contributions from other European countries
more than quadrupled. In 2010, eventually, 36 % of the articles were from other
European countries and 13 % from the UK (Tight 2012).
Yet, authorships of conference presentations and journal articles, as well as
countries addressed in English-language journals have remained grossly uneven
across those European countries where sizeable higher education research exists.
For example, scholars from the Netherlands and the UK, as well as from Finland,
Germany and Italy comprised more than half of the speakers at CHER meetings
during the ﬁrst ten years (Kehm and Teichler 2013a). The above named overview
on leading journals in the English language showed that the U.S., the UK, Australia
and Canada comprised altogether half of the country cases addressed in compar-
ative articles from 1992 to 2011. While 230 articles report on the UK, only 44
address Germany, 37 the Netherlands, 34 France and 25 Sweden (Kosmützky and
Krücken 2014).
The distribution by country looks more uneven if the analysis of publications is
not based on a few leading journals, but rather on a broader range of English
language-journals with a predominant Anglo-Saxon base. For example, Tight
(2012)—drawing both from international and predominantly Anglo-Saxon publi-
cations—names ﬁve or more publications each of 14 authors, among them seven
from the UK, two from other European countries and ﬁve from other regions of the
world. In contrast, a Polish scholar (Kwiek 2013), summarizing the state of
knowledge on higher education in Europe, names altogether more than 50 higher
education researchers ﬁve times or more in his list of references, among them more
from other European countries (22) than from the UK (14) and from other parts of
the world (17) (see Table 1).
One might add that a different composition by country also shows up if one
looks at the assessments of organisations outside academia. The UNESCO, when
arranging its ﬁrst World Conference on Higher Education in 1998, awarded the
Comenius Prize to one U.S. and two continental European scholars. The Academia
Europaea, co-opting excellent scholars from all disciplines, had or has currently
altogether 10 higher education researchers as members, among them 4 from the UK
and 6 from other European countries (see Table 1).
In Europe, higher education researchers of the United Kingdom and of Ireland
publish mostly in English, and their academic achievements are fully visible in the
English language. Higher education researchers from Finland, the Netherlands,
Norway and Sweden often publish in English; many, but not all major academic
achievements of prominent higher education researchers in those countries are
visible in English. In contrast, more than nine tenth of the important academic
publications on higher education are still published today in the respective native
language in other large European countries, e.g. Germany, France and Italy, in most
Southern European, as well as in Central and Eastern European countries, and one
gets a good overview on the academic achievements of only few higher education
Higher Education Research in Europe
823

researchers from those countries by examining publications in the English
language.
This holds true, even though numerous efforts are made to make research in
those countries more visible to the English-reading audience (see for example
CHEPS et al. 2010; Klemencic 2014; Zgaga 2013). However, one can get a glance
at higher education research in a broader range of European countries with the help
of books with collections of essays, e.g. Festschriften, books based on the annual
conferences of CHER, EAIR, etc. as well as various thematically focussed con-
ferences, comparative projects, etc., because the editors often intend to include
authors from a broad range of countries (see Table 2).
Table 2 Major collections of essays—Contributions to conferences, festschriften, comparative
projects, etc.—Published by European higher education researchers since 2002
Enders, J. and Fulton, O. (eds.) (2002) Higher Education in a Globalising World: International
Trends and Mutual Observations: A Festschrift in Honour of Ulrich Teichler. Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic Publishers
Amaral, A., Meek, V. L. and Larsen, I. M. (eds.) (2003) The Higher Education Managerial
Revolution? Dordrecht: Springer
De Corte, E. (ed.) (2003) Excellence in Higher Education, London: Portland
Williams, G. (ed.) (2003) The Enterprising University: Reform, Excellence and Equity,
Buckingham: SRHE and Open University Press
Sadlak, J. (ed.) (2004) Doctoral Studies and Qualiﬁcations in Europe and the United States:
Status and Prospects. Bucharest: UNESCO-CEPES 2004
Bleiklie, I. and Henkel, M. (eds.) (2005) Governing Knowledge: A Study of Continuity and
Change in Higher Education—A Festschrift in Honour of Maurice Kogan. Dordrecht: Springer
Gornitzka, A., Kogan M. and Amaral, A. (eds.) (2005) Reform and Change in Higher Education:
Analysing Policy Implementation, Dordrecht: Springer
Marton, F., Hounsell, D. and Entwishtle, N. (eds.) (2005) The Experience of Learning:
Implications for Teaching and Studying in Higher Education. Third (internet) edition.
Edinburgh: University of Edinburgh
Krücken, G., Kosmützky, A. and Torka, M. (eds.) (2006) Towards a Multiversity? Universities
between Global Trends and National Traditions. Bielefeld: Transcript
Meyer, J. and Land, R. (eds.) (2006) Overcoming Barriers to Student Understanding: Threshold
Concepts and Troublesome Knowledge, London: Routledge
Teichler, U. (ed.) (2006) The Formative Years of Scholars, London: Portland
Tomusk, V. (ed.) 2006 Creating the European Area of Higher Education: Voices from the
Periphery, Dordrecht: Springer
Cavalli, A. (ed.) (2007) Quality Assessment for Higher Education in Europe, London: Portland
Enders, J. and van Vught, F. (eds.) (2007) Towards a Cartography of Higher Education Policy
Change: A Festschrift in Honour of Guy Neave, Enschede: Center for Higher Education Policy
Studies
Kehm, B. M. (ed.) (2008) Hochschule im Wandel: Die Universität als Forschungsgegenstand.
Festschrift für Ulrich Teichler, Frankfurt a.M. and New York: Campus
(continued)
824
U. Teichler

Table 2 (continued)
Shattock, M. (ed.) (2008) Entrepreneurialism and the Knowledge Economy: Diversiﬁcation and
Organisational Change in European Universities, Maidenhead: McGraw Hill and Open
University Press
Taylor, J., Brites Ferreira, J., de Lourdes Machado, M. and Santiago, R. (eds.) (2008) Non-
University Higher Education in Europe, Dordrecht: Springer
Amaral, A., Neave, G., Musselin, C. and Maassen, P. (eds.) (2009) European Integration and the
Governance of Higher Education and Research, Dordrecht: Springer
Kehm, B. M. and Stensaker, B. (eds.) (2009) University Rankings, Diversity and the Landscape
of Higher Education, Rotterdam and Taipei: Sense
Knust, M. and Hanft, A. (eds.) (2009) Continuing Higher Education and Lifelong Learning: An
International Comparative Study on Structures, Organisation and Provisions, Dordrecht:
Springer
Paradeise, C., Reale, C., Bleiklie, I. and Ferlie, E. (eds.) (2009) University Governance,
Dordrecht: Springer
Sadlak, J., Hüfner, K., Pricopie, R. and Grünberg. L. (eds.) (2009) Topical Contributions and
Outcomes, Bucharest: UNESCO CEPES
Davis, M., Devlin, M. and Tight, M. (eds.) (2010) Interdisciplinary Higher Education:
Perspectives and Practicalities, Bingley: Emerald
Clancy, P. and Dill, D.D. (eds.) (2011) The Research Mission of the University: Policy Reforms
and Institutional Response, Rotterdam and Taipei: Sense
Rostan, M. and Vaira, M. (eds.) (2011) Questioning Excellence in Higher Education, Rotterdam
and Taipei: Sense
Slowey, M. and Schuetze, H. G. (eds.) (2012) Global Perspectives on Higher Education and
Lifelong Learning, Milton Park: Routledge
Vukasovic, M., Maassen, P., Nerland, M, Pinheiro, R., Stensaker, B. and Vaboe, A. (eds.)
(2012). Effects of Higher Education Reforms: Change Dynamics, Rotterdam: Sense
Engwall, L. and Scott, P. (eds.) (2013) Trust in Universities, London: Portland
Blömeke, S. Zlatkin-Troitschanskaia, O., Kuhn, C. and Fege, J. (eds.) (2013) Modeling and
Measuring Competencies in Higher Education: Tasks and Challenges. Rotterdam, Boston and
Taipei: Sense
Karlsen, J. E. and Pritchard, R. (eds.) (2013) Resilient Universities: Confronting Challenges in a
Changing World, Oxford: Peter Lang
Zgaga, P. Teichler, U. and Brennan, J, (eds.) (2013) The Globalisation Challenge for European
Higher Education: Convergence and Diversity, Centres and Peripheries, Frankfurt a. M.: Peter
Lang Edition
Brankovic, J., Klemencic, M., Lazetic, P. and Zgaga, P. (eds.) (2014) Global Challenges, Local
Responses in Higher Education: The Contemporary Issues on National and Comparative
Perspective, Rotterdam: Sense
Goastellec, G. and Picard, F. (eds.) (2014) Higher Education in Societies: A Multi Scale
Perspective, Rotterdam: Sense
Mattei P. (ed.) (2014) University Adaptation in Difﬁcult Economic Times, Oxford: Oxford
University Press
Higher Education Research in Europe
825

4
Higher Education Research not Visible in the Lingua
Franca—The Case of Germany
Germany is taken here as a case for showing the situation of higher education
research in individual European countries. In this large country, a certain size and
magnitude of higher education research is available. In relative terms, i.e. compared
to the size of the population and of the higher education system, higher education
research in Germany is clearly a smaller ﬁeld than for example in Finland and
Norway, but a larger ﬁeld than for example in France or Italy.
It was a marginal ﬁeld in Germany, as in many other countries, up to the 1960s.
In the 1970s, institutionalisation moved in three directions: The establishment of
centres for ‘higher education didactics’ at various higher education institutions,
both in charge of research and service of staff and curriculum development, further
the establishment of sizeable research units on higher education located outside
academia, and ﬁnally a growing thematic area taken up individually by scholars
from various disciplines. In contrast, only a single university in Germany had opted
at that time for the establishment of a sizeable centre focussing on higher education
research (see Goldschmidt et al. 1984; Oehler and Webler 1988; Over 1988).
Interest in systematic knowledge on higher education seems to have grown
further in Germany since the 1990s. Research on higher education expanded
moderately, but changed clearly in structure: There were fewer centres for ‘higher
education didactics’ now, but some other research units within higher education
institutions were established or grew in size.
The authors of a study on the state of higher education research published in
2003 (Gunkel et al. 2003) actually had invited scholars, who had published at least
ﬁve times in this domain (according to a major bibliography) or had been profes-
sionally active for a few years in a unit specialized on higher education research, to
contribute to a directory, if they view themselves as belonging to the category of
higher education researchers. Actually, about 150 persons in Germany identiﬁed
themselves this way. Less than half of them were academics fully specialized on
higher education, and this proportion was even lower within professorial ranks.
Only about 10 % of the publications of these approx. 150 persons, which the
authors had selected as their major ones, were not written in the German language,
but rather mostly in English (cf. also subsequent overviews in Pasternack 2006;
Zimmermann et al. 2008).
In recent years, higher education research has clearly expanded in Germany. One
might estimate the number of scholars, who would identify themselves today as
higher education researchers, as being at least twice as high as a decade ago. Some
new research units and new professorships on higher education have been estab-
lished. The Federal government created a regular scheme for the promotion of
higher education research along its various previously existing modes of support for
individual policy-relevant projects and a few institutions. The Gesellschaft für
Hochschulforschung (GfHf), i.e. the association for higher education research in
German-speaking countries, was established in 2006. A few institutions of higher
826
U. Teichler

education introduced master programmes focussing on higher education or having
it as a sub-area. The number of doctoral candidates and young scholars in the
related disciplines, who opted for higher education as their thematic focus,
increased substantially.
In 2010, a survey was undertaken of the almost 200 persons participating in a
network of young scholars or professionals active in research on higher education.
Most of the respondents were academic staff still working on or having already
completed a doctoral dissertation thematically focussing on higher education. As no
doctoral programme on higher education exists in Germany and as the dissertation
has to ﬁt in the disciplinary structure, more than one third of the dissertations were
allocated to sociology and more than one ﬁfths to economic ﬁelds, while the others
spread over a broad range of disciplines. More than one third reported that their ﬁrst
supervisor and about a quarter that their second supervisor is a professor specialized
on higher education. Most of the junior higher education researchers were junior
academic staff at that time, among them more than a third in a unit within academia
or outside academia that is specialized on higher education research (Steinhardt and
Schneijderberg 2014).
In 2012, a mapping of higher education research in Germany was initiated by
the GfHf. It named less than ten units as the institutionalized core of higher edu-
cation research. First and second, two research centres within universities that are
specialized in this domain: The Internationale Zentrum für Hochschulforschung
(International Centre for Higher Education Research) of the University of Kassel
(INCHER-Kassel), established in 1978, and the Institut für Hochschulforschung
Wittenberg (HoF, Institute for Higher Education Research Wittenberg) at the
University of Halle-Wittenberg, established in 1997 in the wake of the transfor-
mation of an earlier East German research institute. Third and fourth, two research
units on higher education embedded into the educational sciences of the Humboldt
University Berlin and into sociology at Constance University. Fifth and sixth, two
government-linked institutes: Bayerisches Staatsinstitut für Hochschulforschung
and Hochschulplanung (IHF, Bavarian State Institute for Higher Education
Research and Planning), established in 1973 in Munich, and Deutsches Zentrum für
Hochschul- und Wissenschaftsforschung (DZHW, German Institute for Higher
Education and Science Research), founded in 2013 in Hannover and Berlin through
a process of merger of two previous institutes abbreviated as HIS and iFQ.
Three further institutions are viewed to be somewhere between the ‘centre’ and
the
‘periphery’
of
higher
education
research.
Seventh,
the
Centrum
für
Hochschulentwicklung (CHE, Centre for Higher Education Development) in
Gütersloh, established in the early 1990s as a consultancy institution with some
research activities. Eighth, centres for ‘higher education didactics’—with the
Hochschuldidaktisches Zentrum (HDZ) of the Technical University of Dortmund as
the strongest unit. Ninth, units of science research, among them notably the research
group “Science Policy” of the Wissenschaftszentrum Berlin für Sozialforschung
(WZB, Social Science Research Centre Berlin).
In addition, research on higher education is undertaken in a ‘periphery’:
Individual scholars in the respective disciplines (the report only names a relatively
Higher Education Research in Europe
827

short list of professors with a long-term focus on higher education research),
research institutes and units in related ﬁelds, e.g. educational research, and sys-
tematic information gathering within various areas of policy and management (e.g.
higher education evaluation, higher education development and higher education
management), (cf. also various essays on the state of higher education research in
Germany in Pasternack 2014; see the summary of the unpublished report in Winter
2014).
As regards other visible activities, the mapping report pointed out that six master
programmes existed in Germany in the area of higher education and research (in
Speyer, Hannover, Osnabrück, Bielefeld, Hamburg and Oldenburg). Actually, the
only master programme in this domain in Germany taught in English (the MAHE
programme in Kassel) was discontinued in 2013 after six cohorts. Most of the
existing master programmes, however, have a practical emphasis of training for
higher education and research management rather than for higher education
research and science research.
There are a few journals on higher education. They either address concurrently
academics, policy makers and practitioners (e.g. Das Hochschulwesen), or have a
clear
emphasis
on
policy
makers
and
practitioners
(e.g.
Deutsche
Universitätszeitung and Forschung & Lehre), or those having an academic
emphasis are published by single institutes (e.g. Beiträge zur Hochschulforschung
published by IHF).
In looking at the approximately two dozens most highly visible senior higher
education researchers in Germany since the 1960s (see Table 3) we certainly can
state that the majority was or is interested in the state of research worldwide. But the
majority did not see any need to publish in the English language or to be closely
embedded in international networks in order to undertake successfully academically
highly ambitious and practically highly relevant research.
Table 3 Major senior scholars in the domain of higher education research in Germany
‘Nestors’: Dietrich Goldschmidt and Ludwig Huber
Core higher education researchers (mostly with a social science background): Hansgert Peisert,
Christoph Oehler, Ulrich Teichler, Jan-Hendrik Olbertz, Andrä Wolter, Jürgen Enders (Germany,
the Netherlands and UK), Barbara M. Kehm (Germany and UK), Peer Pasternack, Georg
Krücken, Ulrich Wilkesmann and Philipp Pohlenz
Higher education researchers specialized higher education didactics: Sigrid Metz-Göckel,
Carl-Hellmut Wagemann, Johannes Wildt, Margret Bülow-Schramm and Wolff-Dietrich Webler
Coordinators in state-related institutions: Heinz Griesbach, Klaus Schnitzer, Michael
Lesczczensky, Edith Braun, Stefan Lullies and Lydia Hartwig
Representatives of various disciplines: Werner Thieme, George Turner (law), Anke Haft, Rainer
Künzel, Gerd Grözinger, Dieter Timmermann (economic ﬁelds), Uwe Schimank (sociology) and
Peter Lundgren (history)
Scholars predominantly active in consultancy: Detlef Müller-Böling and Frank Ziegele
Science researchers: Peter Weingart, Hans-Dieter Daniel (Germany and Switzerland) and Stefan
Hornbostel
828
U. Teichler

5
Thematic Areas of Higher Education Research
There is no widespread agreement as how to classify higher education research.
Yet, some examples might show that most classiﬁcations opted for are not so far
apart.
In some instances, higher education research is described as an ‘archipelago’, a
‘schism’ or ‘two continents’, i.e. as being divided between two thematic areas and
research approaches: teaching and learning on the one hand, and on the other higher
education policy and organisation (e.g. Horta and Jung 2013; Macfarlane 2012).
Other analyses suggest that there are three major foci of analysis: (1) teaching,
learning, curricula, competences, as well as teachers and learners, i.e. studies rel-
evant for the teaching function of higher education, (2) governance, management,
etc., i.e. studies relevant for decision-making and organisation, and (3) the higher
education system and its societal context.
With a view of the areas of specialisation among higher education researchers, a
classiﬁcation of four ‘spheres of knowledge’ was proposed: (1) quantitative-
structural aspects, (2) knowledge and subject-related aspects, (3) person-related and
teaching and learning-related aspects and (4) aspects of institution, organisation and
governance (Teichler 1996).
In the framework of reviews of publications, a more disaggregated list of themes
tends to be preferred. For example, Tight (2003, 2012) opted for eight themes:
Teaching and learning, course design, the student experience, quality, system
policy, institutional management, academic work, knowledge and research. In an
analysis of 15 English-language journals, he classiﬁed 31 % of the articles pub-
lished in 2010 as addressing course design, 24 % student experience, 13 % aca-
demic work and less than one tenth each of the other themes (Tight 2012).
The journal Research into Higher Education Abstracts, published by SRHE, also
has established a list of eight—partly similar—categories. There were in 2014:
(1) National systems and comparative studies, (2) institutional management,
(3) curriculum design, (4) research, (5) students, (6) staff, (7) contributory studies
and research approaches, (8) teaching learning and assessment. One additional
category employed for a couple of years has been eventually dropped: ﬁnance and
physical resources.
It might be worth as well mentioning in this context the range of themes
addressed in a major historical account of the development of universities in Europe
since 1945 (Rüegg 2011): changing the major themes discussed, patterns of the
higher education system, relations with authority, management and resources,
teachers, admission, education and students, student movements and political
activism, graduation and careers, the various disciplines, and “From the University
in Europe to the Universities of Europe” (Barblan 2011).
The thematic range certainly might look wider, if one paid attention to research
on higher education undertaken in the framework of various disciplines. Actually,
more than 20 “disciplinary perspectives on higher education” were named in the
1992 encyclopeadia: anthropology, comparative education, economics, higher
Higher Education Research in Europe
829

education studies (i.e. the ‘discipline’ in the centre of this article), history, law,
linguistics and rhetorical studies, literature, macrosociology, organization theory,
philosophy, policy analysis, political economy, political science, public adminis-
tration science studies, social psychology and women’s studies (Becher 1992).
According to a review of higher education research in Europe published in the
early years of the 21st century, research in this domain has been quick in taking up
the themes currently discussed publicly. At times, higher education and economic
growth, inequality, students’ views and attitudes, graduate employment, diversiﬁ-
cation, management, evaluation, etc., were highly on the agenda for a few years,
and many research projects shed light on the respective themes (see Teichler 2005).
According to more general categories than the ones presented above, however, a
relatively high degree of continuity in higher education research could be observed
with one exception: an increase of research on internationalisation of higher edu-
cation (see Kehm and Teichler 2007; Teichler 2010b)—a change of research
reﬂecting a change of reality, i.e. an internationalisation trend in higher education
and research (see Scott 2008).
Two recent lists of themes seem to be most suitable to indicate the recent
priorities of higher education researchers. First, an analysis was undertaken of the
themes addressed in 291 articles published in the years 2011 and 2012 in four major
international higher education journals published in Europe (Teixeira 2013).
Though this analysis comprises also articles written by scholars from other regions
of the world, it certainly mirrors by and large the recent thematic priorities of
higher education researchers in Europe:
• 15 % system regulation/government and higher education institutions,
• 17 % institutional analysis, governance, management,
• 17 % quality, evaluation, assessment,
• 5 % funding and economic issues,
• 9 % access, equity,
• 24 % students’ satisfaction, performance and evaluation,
• 14 % academic profession, and
• 12 % other themes.
Second, an analysis was undertaken of the changes of the thematic interests of
members of the Consortium of Higher Education Researchers (Kehm and Teichler
2013a). As already stated above, about three quarters to CHER members are
Europeans. A comparison of statements made by the scholars themselves in the
member directories in 1992 (2.0 themes on average) and 2012 (2.6 themes) shows,
in contrast to be above named observation, a substantial thematic change over time:
• Interest increased most dramatically in Internationalisation, mobility, etc.: from
4 to 24 % within two decades,
• Also, we note a substantial increase of interest—from 27 to 48 %—in
Governance, management and organisation,
• Four areas can be named, where a moderate increase of interest can be observed:
Higher education systems (from 28 to 38 %), Study programmes, teaching and
830
U. Teichler

learning (from 13 to 20 %), Academic profession and work (from 11 to 17 %) as
well as Access, students and graduates (from 18 to 23 %).
• There are ﬁve areas, however, where ﬁgures hardly changed over time or even a
moderate decrease can be observed: Quality, evaluation, etc. (25 % at both
points in time), Knowledge, research and transfer (from 16 to 13 %), Higher
education research, theories, methods, etc. (from 13 to 15 %), Higher education
policies, reforms (from 35 to 28 %), and Funding, resources, etc. (from 13 to
9 %).
Table 4 Major issues addressed by European higher education researchers
The changing composition of power in higher education: The role of governments, external
stakeholders, the market, and institutional management and the academic profession
The consequences of increasing competition mechanisms, market steering, incentive steering,
privatisation, indicator-based policies, ‘commodiﬁcation’
Evaluation: modes, quality and validity, impact, the changing concepts of quality and relevance
Diversity of higher education: ‘World class universities’ and rankings, the proﬁles and
characteristics of individual higher education institutions, pressures for diversiﬁcation versus
‘isomorphism’ and ‘academic drift’, the impact of external demands and internal dynamics on
the overall pattern of the higher education systems
Changes of learning and assessment: emphasis on ‘competences’ and ‘learning outcomes’,
changes of assessment systems, potentials and limit of performance and achievement testing, the
students as targets and as actors in the system of study programmes, teaching and learning
The changing role of research undertaken in universities: application drift, changing balance of
disciplines, links of research to technology transfer and innovation, the changing role of the
humanities and social sciences, etc.
The changing educational and training role of higher education: Consequences of expansion,
dynamic occupational change, between an elite-reproduction, meritocratic and egalitarian
function, challenges of life-long learning, the impact of study conditions and provisions on
graduate employment and work, the links between levels of study programmes and degrees and
the occupational structure
The changing function of higher education: Beyond knowledge production and dissemination,
e.g. “service functions”
Higher education and Europe: convergence of structures, modes of governance and substance of
teaching and research? Increasing similarity of quality or persistent inequality between national
systems? Similarity or differences of the various national and supra-national policy rationales?
The weight of national system persistence, Europeanisation and globalisation, impact of
worldwide developments on higher education in Europe
The effects of higher education policies and reforms approaches—strategies, complexity of
actors, implementation, known and unknown system dynamics, continuity and change, learning
from intended and unintended effects?
Trends of visible internationalisation in higher education—migration, mobility, cross-border
communication and cooperation, change of use of languages, international education,
socialisation towards intercultural understanding, the overall impact of internationalization
The academic profession: changing expectations and pressures, changing status and
self-perception, professionalization and changing tasks, between ‘pursuit of knowledge and
pursuit of revenue’, changing academic careers
Doctoral education: Expansion, changing role for academia and other profession, changing
modes of education, training and independent research work
Higher Education Research in Europe
831

Certainly, one has to bear in mind, and this is visible when these ﬁgures are
compared to those presented in various bibliographic analyses undertaken by Tight
(2003, 2012), that CHER membership only includes a small proportion of higher
education researchers active in the area of teaching, learning, curricula, etc.
A livelier picture of research in Europe can be presented, if one looks at the key
issues of attention and concern. The author of this article, therefore, presents a list
of themes in Table 4, which he observes as frequently discussed in books and
articles published by higher education researchers or having been the focus of
conferences in Europe in recent years.
Altogether, we can conclude that teaching, learning, curricula, competences,
etc. is a long-standing priority area of higher education research in Europe.
Research on governance, management and related themes has some tradition, but
certainly grew over the years. Research on various issues of internationalisation
was a marginal area up to the 1980s and became a priority area in recent years.
Though these three areas play a substantial role in concurrent higher education
research in Europe as far as visible in the English language, one cannot argue that
they have pushed other areas aside. All other themes together comprise clearly more
than half of the research interests expressed and the research activities undertaken.
6
Types of Institutional Bases and Analysts
As already pointed out, it is difﬁcult to establish a map of institutions and persons
involved in higher education research, because the settings are varied and the
borderlines are fuzzy. This is all the more true for Europe, because long traditions
are lacking and the scene varies substantially by country.
As regards the U.S., i.e. the country with a long tradition and an enormous
quantity as far as higher education research is concerned, El-Khawas (2000) per-
ceived a clear pattern of three separate sectors:
• “Research”: Academically-based higher education research is often institu-
tionalised in university units of teaching and research. Most frequently, master
and/or doctoral programmes are the educational core activities, and most of
them are institutionalised in the U.S. within departments/schools of education;
potentials for academic research on higher education, thus, are alimented by
these study programmes. Academics put emphasis on theoretical and method-
ological quality, irrespective whether they favour a pursuit of knowledge for its
own sake or whether societal relevance plays a role in their research activities.
• “Practice”: Many institutions of higher education in the U.S. establish units,
often under the supervision of key managers in the individual university, and
initiate analyses, which are expected to provide action-oriented interpretation of
the ﬁndings and are considered as important feedback for the enhancement of
teaching and learning, research, management, etc.
832
U. Teichler

• “Policy”: Government or other supra-institutional actors (associations of uni-
versities, professional organisations, and various external stakeholders) in the U.
S. have their own information and policy analysis units or sponsor such types of
analyses expected to enrich the plausibility of policy processes through sys-
tematic collection of information, policy-driven interpretations, policy scenarios,
etc.
In looking both at the institutional basis and the character of work, Teichler
(1996) suggested a typology comprising six types of higher education experts:
• The discipline/department-based occasional researchers on higher education:
They consider their departmental and disciplinary colleagues as their relevant
peers. They embark on higher education as one theme of research among others.
They might be strong in theory and methodology, while their research often
lacks in-depth ﬁeld knowledge, and many of them are not interested in the
practical relevance of research.
• The continuous discipline-based higher education researchers: The discipline is
a core element of their identity as well, but they focus—in contrast to the ﬁrst
type—on higher education for a long period or all over their academic life. They
acquire sound ﬁeld knowledge, and some of them might be interested to serve
both academic quality and societal relevance.
• The scholars based in a higher education research institute or unit: Scholars in
such an institution, as other theme-based scholars in theme-based units within or
associated to academic institutions, have to strike a balance between academic
recognition in terms of theoretical and methodological foundation on the one
hand, and in-depth ﬁeld-knowledge and practical relevance on the other hand.
• The applied higher education researchers: Similar to the above named type,
they are predominantly or at least strongly involved in knowledge generation,
for example as ‘institutional researchers’ and ‘policy researchers’, but this might
be linked to practical tasks, e.g. ‘staff development’ or other service or
administrative functions, and their reputation has to be based on the utility of
their knowledge generation.
• The consultants of higher education: They have to draw from all kinds of
systematic knowledge, possibly in part from own activities of knowledge gen-
eration, or practical experience, and to serve on this basis as advisors for policy
makers and practitioners.
• Finally, the reﬂective practitioners: They might be politicians, university lead-
ers, administrators, ‘higher education professionals’ and scholars in others
disciplines, who consider themselves as experts in higher education. Some of
them are actively involved part-time in collecting and systematizing knowledge
on higher education and publishing in this domain, but even if this is not the
case, they are strongly involved—as compared to other practitioners—in
absorbing and ‘digesting’ systematic knowledge.
In an analysis of higher education research in Europe, six institutional settings of
higher education were named (Teichler 2005): (1) Research and practice combined
Higher Education Research in Europe
833

(e.g. centres for ‘staff development’), (2) Institutional research, (3) Research ali-
mented
by
teaching
(e.g.
sub-units
of—for
example
educational—
departments/schools, as often found in the U.S. and in China), (4) Nationally
sponsored research institutes (such as the above named NIFU in Norway and
DZHW in Germany), (5) University-based centres (such as the above named
CHEPS in the Netherlands and INCHER-Kassel in Germany), and (6) sub-units
within research units of a broader thematic or disciplinary framework, established
outside or within higher education institutions (e.g. higher education research
within the Institute de Recherche sur l’Economie de l’Education (IREDU) of the
Université de Bourgogne in Dijon, France, and within the Research Unit for
Sociology of Education (RUSE) of the University of Turku, Finland).
In describing higher education research in Europe more concretely, we might
point out the characteristics in Europe as compared to the above picture provided
for the U.S. Five such characteristics might be named.
First, there are only few master and doctoral programmes on higher education in
Europe (cf. Maassen and Pausits 2013). As a consequence, research in this domain
in Europe hardly is alimented by teaching on higher education. Also, if professor
positions have the thematic focus of higher education at all, hardly any department
or institute has more than a single professorship in charge of this thematic area.
Second, there are only a few European countries where the study of higher
education is predominantly embedded in educational departments or educational
research. This holds true for the UK and Finland, but not for France, Germany and
many other European countries. Instead, research on higher education is linked to
sociology, economics and business study, law, etc. (e.g. CHEPS to public admin-
istration and INCHER-Kassel to sociology).
Third, sizeable units of higher education research are established outside higher
education institutions in some European countries. This holds true, for example, for
the above named NIFU in Norway as well as DZHW and IHF in Germany. In
various instances, additionally, institutes with a broader thematic focus might be in
part involved in higher education research, e.g. educational, labour market and
youth research institutions. These institutions, as a rule, they have a stronger applied
emphasis than research based in academic units of universities.
Fourth, there is hardly any institutional research in Europe in terms of deﬁned
positions and units within the administrative realm of higher education institutions,
with the explicit task of undertaking research aimed at directly serving reﬂection
and practical action. There are a few positions and units of that kind, though, but
more often administrators undertake such activities as part of their job role. In
comparison to the U.S., we observe almost an “absence of any collective under-
standing of the meaning of institutional research” (Taylor et al. 2013) in Europe;
however, some activities in this domain began to spread recently, and the Higher
Educational Institutional Research Network (HEIR), established in 2008, has
members notably in the UK and Ireland. In contrast, analyses undertaken by
practitioners in European higher education, which can be viewed a functionally
equivalent to institutional research, have been also described as more conceptual,
more reﬂective and more varied than in the U.S. and thus, as providing the
834
U. Teichler

opportunity to contribute to more fundamental improvement in higher education
(Klemencic and Brennan 2013).
Fifth, there is a substantially growing involvement of ‘higher education pro-
fessionals’ in activities of more or less systematic information generation on higher
education in Europe. While university administrations as well as governments and
stakeholder organisations in Europe had small numbers of high-level administrators
for a long time as compared to the U.S., we note a dramatic increase of highly
qualiﬁed professionals in many European institutions of higher education in recent
years, who are not academics, but have to have an in-depth understanding of the
core functions of higher education, i.e. teaching and research in the various disci-
plines, in order to function properly in their service or management-support roles
(Kottmann and Enders 2013). Often, they are just called according to their speciﬁc
areas, i.e. quality managers, career ofﬁcers, international ofﬁcers, etc., while
scholars analysing this phenomenon opt for various umbrella terms such as
‘middle-level managers’ or ‘higher education professionals’ (Gornitzka and Larsen
2004; Macfarlane 2011; Meek et al. 2010; Roesser 2004; Schneijderberg and
Merkator 2012; Whitchurch 2009).
A study recently undertaken in Germany shows that the number of higher
education professionals has reached about two-thirds of the number of professor
positions at universities, whereby about one third of these professionals are doctoral
degree holders. Only 7 % report that they are actively undertaking research, but
more than half seem to be involved in ‘monitoring’, ‘evaluation’ and other forms of
systematic information gathering (Merkator and Schneijderberg 2012); one might
assume that systematic information gathering plays even a stronger role among
higher education professionals employed outside higher education institutions, e.g.
in government, umbrella organisations, stakeholder organisations and consultant
agencies.
In sum, there is only a relatively small number of persons in Europe who are
ofﬁcially deﬁned as higher education researchers—either as academics primarily in
charge of higher education as a ﬁeld of research and possibly teaching, or as applied
researchers in institutional settings close to management and policy. Rather, higher
education researchers in Europe are predominantly those who have opted to be
higher education researchers, though they have not any irrefutable—academic or
administratively based—professional mandate of undertaking higher education
research. Thereby, a clear dividing line is often lacking in Europe between higher
education research protected by academic freedom or not being protected that way,
as well as between a basic or applied research function. Altogether, visible higher
education research experiences a growth in Europe, but this trend seems to be small
as compared to the—less clearly visible—growth of other more or less systematic
information collection (statistics, ‘reporting’. ‘monitoring’, ‘evaluation’, creation of
‘indicators’, ‘best practice reports’, etc.) undertaken by higher education profes-
sionals in policy and practice.
Altogether, higher education research in Europe is in a contradictory situation.
On the one hand, it lives in an academic Zeitgeist where the search for academic
recognition as excellent according to pure academic criteria prevails and
Higher Education Research in Europe
835

formalized assessments according to such criteria have become more and more
forceful. As a consequence, for example, several higher education journals have
recently drifted from being a forum for both scholars and reﬂective practitioners,
towards criteria and processes, which signal academic purity and excellence. On the
other hand, higher education research cannot avoid competing for funds and public
recognition with a dramatically increasing number of higher education experts
involved in various kinds of information gathering assumed to provide useful
‘evidence’ for higher policy and practice, and therefore underscores its practical
utility (cf. Teichler 2014a).
7
European Communication and Cooperation Within
Higher Education Research and with Higher Education
Policy and Practice
In examining how higher education researchers communicate and cooperate with
their colleagues across Europe or world-wide, and how higher education research
interacts with policy and practice across borders, we have to bear in mind, as
already pointed out initially, that higher education research tends to have a strong
national emphasis. This reﬂects the fact that—irrespective of the global and uni-
versal elements in higher education—many features of higher education which are
addressed in higher education research, e.g. institutional patterns, governance,
funding, study programmes, and personnel policies, are predominantly shaped on
the national level. As a consequence, the variety of higher education systems across
countries is striking—a fact which justiﬁes the analysis focus on single national
higher education systems and concurrently increases barriers as far as in-depth
comparative analysis is concerned.
Europe, however, has experienced since World War II a chain of supra-national
higher education policies of stimulating the growth of similarities and of increasing
border-crossing interaction in higher education. These policies and their actual
impact on higher education have clearly called for increasing European and inter-
national perspectives in higher research. We might name four waves of European
higher education policies initiated by various supra-national actors (Teichler
2010a):
• First, efforts were made since the 1950s to increase mutual understanding
between the European countries by facilitating student mobility. The Council of
Europe took the lead and later cooperated with UNESCO and the European
Commission in taking care of conventions regarding the recognition of study
(linked to access, temporary student mobility and mobility after graduation)
across European countries.
• Second, a multitude of activities were coordinated notably by OECD since the
1960s to seek for common directions of modernisation of higher education in
the wake of its expansion and its growing relevance for economic development.
836
U. Teichler

For example, efforts of diversifying higher education in Western European
countries were strongly inﬂuenced by these policy initiatives.
• Third, the European Community/Union became a major player of European
higher education policy in the 1980s and 1990s with activities of stimulating
mobility
and
cooperation,
whereby
ERASMUS
support
for
temporary
intra-European student mobility turned out to be the ﬂagship of programmes.
• Fourth, the governments of the individual European countries decided in the late
1990s to strive for system convergence in the framework of what is called the
“Bologna Process”. Concurrently, the European Union advocated a “Lisbon
Process” with the aim of increasing substantially the funding of research and
technology across countries.
The growth of supra-national policy initiatives in Europe could be expected to be
highly important for higher education research, because supra-national actors
tended to be more strongly interested in systematic information collection on higher
education than national policy actors (see Sadlak and Hüfner 2002)—obviously due
to the fact that nobody on the international arena would trust the ﬁrst-hand expe-
riences of the policy makers and practitioners to the extent we still can observe on
national level in many individual European countries. Moreover, supra-national
higher education policy actors tend to advocate ‘evidence-based’ approaches more
strongly than national policy actors, because they have to rely more strongly on the
power of the argument than on political power as such.
As a consequence, many European higher education researchers were already
strongly involved in stock-taking and policy formulation activities, before inter-
national communication between higher education researchers and a comparative
project began to ﬂourish. Actually, one of the motives to establish CHER as an
international forum of higher education researchers was not to meet each other only
under policy objectives at events arranged by international organisations, but also in
settings aimed at enhancing the academic quality of knowledge generation in this
domain (see Teichler 2013b).
Without being able to pinpoint in detail the complexity of speciﬁc trends and
actions at speciﬁc points in time, we can argue that the readiness for a European
dialogue and for cooperation between higher education research and higher
education policy and practise increased visibly since about the 1980s due to:
• a higher density and forcefulness of supra-national policies in higher education,
• a gradual erosion of the formerly widespread belief within the individual
European countries that higher education in their respective country is
‘non-comparable’ and, instead, increasing attention being paid to possible
‘global’ or ‘convergent’ trends of ‘modernization’,
• a growing intra-European interaction in higher education and an increasing
inclination also of researchers in the behavioural and social sciences to com-
municate and cooperate across borders, and
• an increase of funds on the European level for undertaking comparative anal-
yses, as well as analyses of supra-national features in higher education.
Higher Education Research in Europe
837

Organisations such as OECD, UNESCO and the Council of Europe continued or
enlarged ‘think tank’ projects where higher education researchers play a major role
(cf. Scott 2008; see the results of recent projects in Altbach et al. 2009; Meek et al.
2009; OECD 2008, 2009). And the European Union became a highly visible actor
in the communication and cooperation between higher education policy and higher
education research.
A detailed analysis was undertaken in 2004 about EU-funded higher education
research—either initiated by the European Commission or by other political actors
(notably those responsible for the Bologna Process) with ﬁnancial assistance by the
EU, as well as those initiated by higher education researchers (Van der Wende and
Huisman 2004). No corresponding analysis has been undertaken for the subsequent
years. Some major trends and major approaches, though, can be named here, which
are indicative for the situation as a whole.
First, the European Commission itself commissions studies for the purpose of
‘evaluation’ and ‘monitoring’ of the major EU programmes. This has been often
the case as regards ERASMUS, i.e. the largest of the educational support pro-
grammes, where evaluation must be undertaken for the preparation of the decision,
whether the programme is continued, modiﬁed or discontinued after a few years.
Actually, the largest and most ambitious studies of ERASMUS have been under-
taken or led by higher education researchers (CHEPS et al. 2008; Huisman and van
der Wende 2004–2005; Janson et al. 2009; Rosselle and Lentiez 1999; Teichler and
Gordon 2001; Teichler and Maiworm 1997).
Second, there are various modes and channels for the EU to initiate
policy-related analyses or for higher education researchers to apply for ﬁnancial
support of such analyses. For example, higher education researchers from six
European countries have recently collaborated in this framework in a study on
university-industry relationships (Mora et al. 2010).
Third, the European Commission supports some projects in this domain in the
framework of research promotion. While EU research promotion had been conﬁned
to the natural sciences for a long time, social sciences have been eligible for support
since 1995. The ﬁrst major project supported that way was a comparative survey on
graduate employment and work (Schomburg and Teichler 2006; Teichler 2007),
which was followed by a second one ﬁve years later (Allen and van der Velden
2011; see also Mora et al. 2013). A study on internationalisation policies and
activities of various European countries (Huisman and van der Wende 2004–2005)
was also among the ﬁrst ones funded in this framework.
Fourth, the European Commission funded—in coordination with the Bologna
Follow Up-Group (BFUG), i.e. the policy coordinators of the Bologna Process
between the ministerial conferences—various analyses of the reforms linked to the
Bologna Process. Most of these analyses, however, were not open to higher edu-
cation researchers. Rather, the EU asked its own information agency, i.e. EACEA
—Eurydice, and one stakeholder organisation participating in the BFUG, i.e. the
European University Association (EUA), to undertake systematic accounts of the
extent to which the Bologna reform objectives actually were realized (see for
example Eurydice 2010; Sursock and Smidt 2010). In three major recent studies
838
U. Teichler

and publications on the Bologna Process, however, the research activities and the
interpretations of higher education researchers became highly visible:
• The Flemish government initiated—in preparation of the 2009 Leuven confer-
ence—a collection of papers, in which European higher education researchers
commented the developments and possible futures of the Bologna Process—
notably in the areas of governance, quality, mobility and diversity (Kehm et al.
2009).
• In preparation of the 2010 Budapest and Vienna conferences, two research
centres and a consultancy agency undertook a so-called “independent assess-
ment” of the Bologna Process within the ﬁrst ten years (CHEPS et al. 2010).
• In preparation of the 2012 Bucharest conference, many higher education experts
were invited to write analyses on key themes of the Bologna Process. Actually,
more than 50 articles addressed themes such as the principles of the European
Higher Education Area, teaching and learning, quality assurance, mobility,
governance, funding, diversiﬁcation and the future of higher education (Curaj
et al. 2012). According to those responsible, this activity “aimed at bringing the
researchers’ voice into higher education international level policy making”, and
it gave “an unprecedented opportunity for researchers dealing with higher
education matters to interact and contribute to the political process shaping the
European Higher Education Area, as well as national policy agendas” (Deca
2012, p. v). A similar project is underway in 2014.
Altogether, many higher education researchers in Europe got involved in com-
parative analyses or analyses on cross-cutting developments. Some projects were
strongly shaped by the request of those supporting and commissioning the projects,
while others were initiated and strongly reﬂected the researchers’ notions and
intentions. By and large, European higher education researchers seized this state of
affairs as an opportunity to undertake studies that looked across national borders,
and they took for granted that they had to strike a complicated balance in these
projects between academic criteria of theoretical and methodological quality and
objectives of practical relevance, between the notions of practical relevance held by
the higher education researchers and those held by the policy actors funding the
projects, and between the desirable conditions for high-quality projects and actually
prevailing time and ﬁnancial pressures.
Yet, critique is widespread among higher education researcher as regards the
conditions these European projects are exposed to:
• First, the decision-making setting as regards the award of such projects is
viewed by many higher education researchers as creating a disadvantage for
them and an advantage for consulting ﬁrms and external stakeholder
organisations.
• Second, the rules, the administrative surveillance and the ﬁnancial controls of
the projects are viewed as being hypertrophic. These mechanisms on EU level
obviously are far more time-consuming and resource-binding than respective
Higher Education Research in Europe
839

mechanisms regarding projects funded by national governmental agencies or by
national public research promotion systems.
• Third, some projects are viewed as so highly prescribed thematically and
methodologically by the sponsoring or commissioning actors that hardly any
room is left for improvement due to the expertise of those undertaking the study
or due to learning processes in the course of the project.
• Fourth, the policies of supporting such projects are viewed as changing too
quickly and not taking care of continuity. Thus, opportunities of improving the
state of knowledge through regular inquiries are missed, for example repeated
surveys in order to examine change over time—as up to the present they are
only established as regards student life in various European countries (Orr et al.
2011). For instance, the above named surveys of ERASMUS students or
graduate employment and work were suitable to be repeated after a while, but
were not transformed into a regular information system.
• Fifth, a strong ambivalence is felt as regards the interface between research and
policy (see the systematic discussion of this theme in Amaral and Magalhaes
2013; Gornitzka 2013) as regards the use of research ﬁndings. To what extent is
there an openness for surprising and even policy-challenging facts? To what
extent is there interest in a creative dialogue between researchers and actors in
the system as regards the interpretation of ﬁndings? Do analyses have primarily
a symbolic rather than an evaluative value?
Altogether, higher education researchers often consider themselves to be viewed
by policy makers as being just one of many interchangeable experts. Even if an
activity is undertaken from the policy “aimed at bringing the researchers’ voice into
higher education international level policy making”, as reported above, the higher
education researchers conclude that more than half of those invited to raise their
voice are not higher education researchers.
Of course, the higher education researchers know that many policy actors and
practitioners view the higher education researchers critically. Suspicion is wide-
spread that practical relevance is not high on the researchers’ agenda, that they
exaggerate quality standards and that they tend to present their own political pre-
occupations as research ﬁndings, etc. (see also critique named in Scott 2000). There
are reasons on both sides not to consider the interface between research and policy
as being a smooth operation.
One should add, however, that there are some opportunities for collaborative
research of higher education researchers in Europe without the ambivalences of
policy-initiated or policy-funded research. The biggest activity in this domain in
recent years was funded by the European Science Foundation (ESF)—the European
association of the major research promotion agencies in the individual European
countries. In 2006, some higher education researchers applied successfully for the
support of the “Higher Education Looking Forward (HELF)” project: for collab-
oration through conferences and joint writings of analyses on the possible futures of
higher education and the respective future tasks of higher education research (see
Brennan and Teichler 2008). Subsequently, funds were made available for four
840
U. Teichler

consortia of higher education researchers from 2009 to 2012 to conduct research on
“Higher Education and Social Change in Europe (EuroHESC)”. In this biggest
collaborative activity of higher education research in Europe ever undertaken so far,
more than 100 scholars addressed governance of higher education, higher education
and knowledge society, and the academic profession in Europe. Currently, two
books based on these projects (Teichler and Höhle 2013; Kehm and Teichler
2013b; Fumasoli et al. 2015) and many articles are available. Prior experiences in
such international consortia of higher education research suggest that the projects
are likely to last substantially longer than the major funding periods, but that
eventually a multitude of results can be expected (see Teichler 2014b).
8
Concluding Observations
In sum, higher education researchers in Europe experience similar trends on the
European level as on the national level, but even more striking than in their national
arena. Higher education research experiences some growth, somewhat better con-
ditions and somewhat more public attention and recognition. This, however, is
embedded into a much more substantial growth of other higher education experts
involved in some way or other as well in the—more or less systematic—generation
of knowledge and into the expectation that enhanced knowledge on higher edu-
cation has to be visibly useful. There are no simple answers to the questions: to
what extent do these conditions serve the enhancement of higher education
research? And to what extent do these conditions of knowledge generation serve a
desirable future of higher education?
Some years ago, the dominant development trend of higher education research in
Western Europe has been characterized as “From policy advice to self-reﬂection”
(Frackmann 1997). Neither the “ivory tower” nor the mere policy advice are the
dominant aim of higher education researchers, but rather the enrichment of joint
reﬂection of the state of higher education on the part of the higher education
researchers and the higher education policy makers and practitioners.
The chances for improved communication between higher education research
and higher education policy and practice might be viewed as good: policy and
practice actors like to style themselves as strategic and inﬂuential, and researchers
like to style themselves as those who understand the logics and the movements of
higher education. As they both suffer from the complexity of a situation which had
been described as “age of supercomplexity” (Barnett 2000) and “age of uncer-
tainty” (Nowotny et al. 2001), readiness for the search of the unknown ‘truth’ and
‘solution’ might be higher than in the past.
Open Access This chapter is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
Noncommercial License, which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
Higher Education Research in Europe
841

References1
Allen, J., & van der Velden, R. (Eds.). (2011). The ﬂexible professional in the knowledge society:
New challenges for higher education. Dordrecht: Springer.
Altbach, P. G. (1979). Comparative higher education. London: Mansell.
Altbach, P. G. (2002). Research and training in higher education: The state of the art. Higher
Education in Europe, 27(2), 153–168.
Altbach, P. G. (2014). Knowledge for contemporary university: Higher education as a ﬁeld of
study and training. In L. E. Rumbley, P. G. Altbach, D. A. Stanﬁeld, Y. Shimmi, A. de
Gayardon, & R. Y. Chan (Eds.), Higher education: A worldwide inventory of research centers,
academic programs, and journals and publications (3rd ed.). Bonn: Lemmens Media.
Altbach, P. G., & Engberg, D. (Eds.). (2000). Higher education: A worldwide inventory of centers
and programmes. Chestnut Hill, MA: Boston College, Center for International Higher
Education.
Altbach, P. G., Bozeman, L. A., Janashia, N., & Rumbley, L. A. (Eds.). (2007). Higher education:
A worldwide inventory of centers and programmes. Revised Edition. Rotterdam: Sense.
Altbach, P. G., Reisberg, L., & Rumbley, L. A. (2009). Trends in global higher education:
Tracking an academic revolution. Paris: UNESCO.
Amaral, A., & Magalhaes, A. (2013). Higher education research between policy and practice. In B.
M. Kehm & C. Musselin (Eds.), The development of higher education research in Europe: 25
years of CHER (pp. 43–59). Rotterdam, Boston and Taipei: Sense.
Barblan, A. (2011). Epilogue: From the university in Europe to the universities of Europe. In W.
Rüegg (Ed.), A history of the university in Europe (Vol. IV, pp. 550–574)., Universities since
1945 Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Barnett, R. (2000). Realizing the university in an age of supercomplexity. Buckingham: Open
University Press & SRHE.
Becher, R. A. (1992). Disciplinary perspectives on higher education: Introduction. In B. R. Clark
& G. Neave (Eds.), The encyclopedia of higher education (pp. 1763–1776). Oxford: Pergamon
Press.
Begg, R. (Ed.). (2003). The dialogue between higher education research and practice. Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Brennan, J., & Teichler, U. (2008). Special issue: The future of higher education and the future of
higher education research. Higher Education in Europe, 56(3).
Burrage, M. (Ed.). (2010). Martin trow: Twentieth-century higher education, Baltimore. MD:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
CHEPS, INCHER, & ECOTEC. (2008). ERASMUS and quality, openess and internationalisation
in higher education in Europe. Enschede: Twente University, CHEPS.
CHEPS, INCHER, & ECOTEC. (2010). The ﬁrst decade of working on the European higher
education area: The Bologna process independent assessment (Vol. 1). Enschede: Twente
University, CHEPS.
Clark, B. R. (1983). The higher education system: Academic organization in cross-national
perspective. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Clark, B. R. (Ed.). (1984). Perspectives on higher education: Eight disciplinary and comparative
views. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Clark, B. R., & Neave, G. (Eds.). (1992). The encyclopedia of higher education. 4 volumes.
Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Curaj, A., Scott, P., Vlasceanu, L., & Wilson, L. (Eds.). (2012). European higher education at the
crossroads: Between the Bologna Process and National Reforms (Vol. 2). Dordrecht: Springer.
1Cf. also the literature in Table 2.
842
U. Teichler

Deca, L. (2012). Preface. In A. Curaij, P. Scott, L. Vlasceanu, & L. Wilson (Eds.), European
higher education at the crossroads: Between the Bologna Process and National Reforms (1
Ed., pp. v–vi). Dordrecht: Springer.
El-Khawas, E. (2000). Research, policy and practice: Assessing their actual and potential linkages.
In U. Teichler & J. Sadlak (Eds.), Higher education research: Its relationship to policy and
practice (pp. 37–44). Oxford: Pergamon & IAU Press.
Eurydice (Ed.). (2010). Focus on higher education in Europe 2010—The impact of the Bologna
Process. Brussels: Eurydice.
Forest, J. J., & Altbach, P. G. (Eds.). (2006). International handbook of higher education.
Dordrecht: Springer.
Frackmann, E. (1997). Research on higher education in Western Europe: From policy-advice to
self-reﬂection. In J. Sadlak & P. G. Altbach (Eds.), Higher education research at the turn of the
new century (pp. 107–126). New York: UNESCO, Garland.
Frackmann, E., & Maassen, P. (Eds.). (1992). Towards excellence in higher education. Utrecht:
Lemma.
Fromment, E., Kohler, J., Purser, L., & Wilson, L. (Eds.). (2006). EUA Bologna handbook:
Making Bologna work. Berlin: Raabe Academic Publishers.
Fumasoli, T., Goastellec, G., & Kehm, B. K. (Eds.). (2015). Academic work and careers in
Europe: Trends, challenges, perspectives. Cham: Springer.
Gaebel, M., Purser, L., Wächter, B., & Wilson, L. (Eds.). (2008). Internationalisation of European
higher education: An EUA/ACA handbook. Berlin: Dr. Josef Raabe.
Goldschmidt, D., Teichler, U., & Webler, W. D. (Eds.). (1984). Forschungsgegenstand
Hochschule: Überblick und Trendbericht (Higher education as a theme of research:
Overview and trend report). Campus: Frankfurt a.M. and New York.
Gornitzka, A. (2013). The interface between research and policy—A note with potential relevance
for higher education. European Journal of Higher Education, 3(3), 255–264.
Gornitzka, A., & Larsen, M. I. (2004). Towards professionalisation? Restructuring the
administrative work force in universities. Higher Education in Europe, 47(4), 455–471.
Gunkel, S., Freidank, G., & Teichler, U. (Eds.). (2003). Directory der Hochschulforschung:
Personen und Institutionen in Deutschland (Directory of Higher Education Research: Persons
and institutions in Germany). Hochschulrektorenkonferenz (Beiträge zur Hochschulpolitik):
Bonn.
Horta, H., & Jung, J. (2013). Higher education research in Asia: An archipelago, two continents or
merely atomization? Higher Education in Europe, 68(1), 117–134.
Huisman, J., & van der Wende, M. (Eds.). (2004–2005). On cooperation and competition. Bonn:
Lemmens.
Janson, K., Schomburg, H., & Teichler, U. (2009). The professional value of ERASMUS mobility.
Bonn: Lemmens.
Kehm, B. M. (2005). Looking back to look forward: Ten years of TEAM. Tertiary Education and
Management, 11(2), 93–110.
Kehm, B. M., & Musselin, C. (Eds.). (2013). The development of higher education research in
Europe: 25 years of CHER. Rotterdam, Boston and Taipei: Sense.
Kehm, B. M., & Teichler, U. (2007). Research on internationalisation in higher education. Journal
of Study in International Education, 11(3–4), 260–273.
Kehm, B. M., & Teichler, U. (2013a). Organisational strategy and the proﬁle of CHER members.
In B. M. Kehm & C. Musselin (Eds.), The development of higher education research in
Europe: 25 years of CHER (pp. 25–33). Rotterdam, Boston and Taipei: Sense.
Kehm, B. M., & Teichler, U. (Eds.). (2013b). The academic profession in Europe: New tasks and
new challenges. Dordrecht: Springer.
Kehm, B. M., Huisman, J., & Stensaker, B. (Eds.). (2009). The European higher education area:
Perspectives on a moving target. Rotterdam and Taipei: Sense.
King, R., Marginson, S., & Naidoo, R. (Eds.). (2013). The globalization of higher education,
Cheltenham and Northhampton. MA: Edward Elgar.
Higher Education Research in Europe
843

Klemencic, M. (2014). The future of higher education research in Europe. European Journal of
Higher Education, 4(1), 1–5.
Klemencic, M., & Brennan, J. (2013). Institutional research in a European context: A forward
look. European Journal of Higher Education, 3(3), 265–279.
Knowles, A. S. (Ed.). (1977). International encyclopedia of higher education. San Franciso, CA
and London: Jossey-Bass.
Kosmützky, A., & Krücken, G. (2014). Growth or steady state? A bibliometric focus on
international comparative higher education research. Higher Education in Europe, 67(4),
457–472.
Kottmann,
A.,
&
Enders,
J.
(2013).
Die
neuen
Hochschulprofessionellen
in
Europa:
Ausdifferenzierung und Aufgaben im internationalen Vergleich (The new higher education
professionals in Europe: Differentiation and tasks in intrnational comparison). In C.
Schneijderberg, N. Merkator, U. Teichler, & B. M. Kehm (Eds.), Verwaltung war gestern?
Neue Hochschulprofessionen und die Gestaltung von Studium und Lehre (Was Administration
yesterday? New higher education professions and the shaping of learning and teaching)
(pp. 305–333). Frankfurt a. M. and New York: Campus.
Kwiek, M. (2013). Knowledge Production in European Universities. Frankfurt a. M. and New
York: Peter Lang.
Maassen, P. A. M. (2000). Higher Education Research: The Hourglass Structure and its
Implication. In U. Teichler & J. Sadlak (Eds.), Higher Education Research: Its Relationship to
Policy and Practice (pp. 59–67). Oxford: Pergamon & IAU Press.
Maassen, P. A. M., & Pausits, A. (2013). Higher Education Management Programmes in Europe:
From Grass-roots to Sustainable Development and Impact. In B. M. Kehm & C. Musselin
(Eds.), The Development of Higher Education Research in Europe: 25 Years of CHER (pp. 69–
86). Rotterdam, Boston and Taipei: Sense.
Macfarlane, B. (2011). The morphing of academic practice: Unbundling and the rise of the
para-academic. Higher Education Quarterly, 65(1), 59–73.
Macfarlane, B. (2012). The higher education research archipelago. Higher Education Research
and Development, 31(1), 129–131.
Meek, V. L., Teichler, U., & Kearney, M.-L. (Eds.). (2009). Higher Education, Research,
Innovation: Changing Dynamics. Kassel: International Centre for Higher Education Research.
Meek, V. L., Goedegebuure, L., Santiago, R., & Carvalho, T. (Eds.). (2010). The Changing
Dynamics of Higher Education Middle Management. Dordrecht: Springer.
Merkator, N., & Schneijderberg, C. (2012). Hochschulprofessionen – Thematik und quantitative
Bilanz (Higher education professionals – themes and quantitative account). In B. M. Kehm, H.
Schomburg, & U. Teichler (Eds.), Funktionswandel der Universitäten: Differenzierung,
Relevanzsteigerung, Internationalisierung (Functional change of universities: Diversiﬁcation,
increasing relevance, internationalisation) (pp. 412–441). Frankfurt a. M. and New York:
Campus.
Mora, J.-G., Detmer, A., & Vieira, M.-J. (2010). Good Practices in University-Enterprise
Relationships GOODUEP. Valencia: Valencia University of Technology.
Mora, J.-G., Schomburg, H., & Teichler, U. (2013). Empleo y trabajo de los graduados
universitarios: Conclusiones de diferentes estudios (Employment and work of university
gaduates: Results of different studies). Barcelona: Octraedo – ICE.
Neave, G., & Teichler, U. (1989). Research on higher education in Europe (special issue).
European Journal of Education, 24(3).
Nitsch, W., & Weller, W. (1970–1973). Social Science Research on Higher Education and
Universities. The Hague and Paris: Mouton.
Nowotny, H., Scott, P., & Gibbons, M. (2001). Rethinking Science: Knowledge Production in an
Age of Uncertainty. London: Polity Press.
OECD. (2008). Higher Education to 2030 (Vol. 1). Demography, Paris: OECD.
OECD. (2009). Higher Education to 2030 (Vol. 2). Globalisation, Paris: OECD.
Oehler, C., & Webler, W.-D. (Eds.). (1988). Forschungspotentiale sozialwissenschaftlicher
Hochschulforschung: Bundesrepublik Deutschland – Österreich – Schweiz (Research
844
U. Teichler

Potentials of social science-oriented higher education research: Federal Republic of Germany
– Austria – Switzerland). Weinheim: Deutscher Studien Verlag.
Orr, D., Gwosd, C., & Netz, N. (2011). Social and Economic Conditions of Student Life in Europe.
Bielefeld: W. Bertelsmann.
Over, A. (1988). Die deutschsprachige Forschung über Hochschulen in der Bundesrepublik
Deutschland: Eine kommentierte Bibliographie (The German-language research on hihger
education in the Federal Republic of Germany: A bibliography with comments). München:
Saur.
Pasternack, P. (2006). Was ist Hochschulforschung? Eine Erörterung anlässlich der Gründung der
Gesellschaft für Hochschulforschung (What is higher education research? A discussion on the
occasion
of
the
foundation
of
the
Society
for
Higher
Education
Research).
Das
Hochschulwesen, 54(3), 105–112.
Pasternack, P. (Ed.). (2014). Hochschulforschung von innen und seitwärts: Sichtachsen durch ein
Forschungsfeld (Higher education from within and from aside: Perspectives through an
research ﬁeld). Wittenberg: Institut für Hochschulforschung (die hochschule. Journal für
wissenschaft und bildung, 1/2014).
Ritter, U. P., & Kühn, H. P. (1985). Higher Education by the Year 2000. Campus: Frankfurt a. M.
and New York.
Roesser, V. J. (2004). A national study on midlevel leaders in higher education: The unsung
professionals in the academy. Higher Education, 48(3), 317–337.
Rosselle, D., & Lentiez, A. (1999). The ERASMUS Programme 1987–1995: A Qualitative Review,
Looking to the Future …. Lille: Pôle Universitaire Europeénne.
Rüegg, W. (Ed.). (2011). A History of the University in Europe (Vol. 4). Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Rumbley, L. E., Altbach, P. G., Stanﬁeld, D. A., Shimmi, Y., Gayardon, A., & Chan, R. Y. (Eds.).
(2014). Higher Education: A Worldwide Inventory of Research Centers, Academic Programs,
and Journals and Publications (3rd ed.). Bonn: Lemmens Media.
Sadlak, J., & Altbach, P. G. (1997). Higher Education Research at the Turn of the New Century.
Paris: UNESCO; New York: Garland.
Sadlak, J., & Hüfner, K. (2002). International Governmental Organisations and Research on
Higher Education. In J. Enders & O. Fulton (Eds.), Higher Education in a Globalising World
(pp. 87–100). Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Schneijderberg, C., & Merkator, N. (2012). The New Higher Education Professionals. In B.
M. Kehm & U. Teichler (Eds.), The Academic Profession in Europe: New Tasks and New
Challenges (pp. 53–92). Dordrecht: Springer.
Schomburg, H., & Teichler, U. (2006). Higher Education and Graduate Employment in Europe:
Results of Graduate Surveys from Twelve Countries. Dordrecht: Springer.
Schwarz, S., & Teichler, U. (Eds.). (2000). The Institutional Basis of Higher Education Research.
Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Scott, P. (2000). Higher Education Research in the Light of a Dialogue between Policy-makers and
Pracitioners. In Teichler & J. Sadlak (Eds.), Higher Education Research: Its Relationship to
Policy and Practice (pp. 123–148). Oxford: Pergamon & IAU Press.
Scott, P. (2008) The Internationalisation of Higher Education and Research: Purposes and Drivers.
In M. Gaebel, L. Purser, B. Wächter and L. Wilson (Eds.), Internationalisation of European
Higher Education: An EUA/ACA Handbook, Berlin: Dr. Josef Raabe, section A.3.1-1.
Shin, J. C., & Teichler, U. (Eds.). (2014). The Future of the Post-Massiﬁed University at the
Crossroads: Restructuring Systems and Functions. Dordrecht: Springer.
Steinhardt, I., & Schneijderberg, C. (2014). Hochschulforschung als Gemischtwarenladen:
Karrieremöglichkeiten des wissenschaftlichen Nachwuchses in einem heterogenen Feld
(Higher education as a all-sorts-of everything store: Career opportunities of junior academics
in a heteregeneous ﬁeld). In P. Pasternack (Ed.), Hochschulforschung von innen und seitwärts:
Sichtachsen durch ein Forschungsfeld (Higher education from within and from aside:
Perspectives
through
an
research
ﬁeld)
(pp.
63–75).
Wittenberg:
Institut
für
Hochschulforschung (die hochschule. Journal für wissenschaft und bildung, 1/2014).
Higher Education Research in Europe
845

Sursock, A., & Smidt, H. (2010). Trends 2010: A Decade of Change in European Higher
Education. Brussels: European University Association.
Taylor, J., Hanlon, M., & Yorke, M. (2013). The evolution and practice of institutional research.
New Directions for Institutional Research, 157, 59–75.
Teichler, U. (1980). Review. Proceedings of the National Academy of Education, 7, 55–93.
Teichler, U. (1996). Comparative higher education: Potentials and limits. Higher Education, 32(4),
431–465.
Teichler, U. (2005). Research on higher education in Europe. European Journal of Education, 40
(4), 447–469.
Teichler, U. (Ed.). (2007). Careers of university graduates: Views and experiences in comparative
perspectives. Dordrecht: Springer.
Teichler, U. (2010a). Europäisierung der Hochschulpolitik (Europeanization of higher education
policy). In D. Simon, A. Knie, & S. Hornbostel (Eds.), Handbuch Wissenschaftspolitik
(Handbook science policy) (pp. 51–70). Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.
Teichler, U. (Ed.). (2010b). Internationalising higher education: Debates and changes in Europe
(Vol. 263–283). Dordrecht: Springer.
Teichler, U. (2013a). Academically ambitious and relevant higher education research: The legacy
of the Consortium of higher education researchers. European Journal of Higher Education, 3
(3), 242–254.
Teichler, U. (2013b). The initial objectives of CHER to form a professional organisation of higher
education researchers. In B. M. Kehm & C. Musselin (Eds.), The development of higher
education research in Europe: 25 years of CHER. Sense: Rotterdam, Boston and Taipei.
Teichler, U. (2013c). Yôroppa no kôtô kyôiku kenkyû (Higher education research in Europe).
Kôtôkyôikukenkyû (Japanese Journal of Higher Education Research), 16, 123–143.
Teichler, U. (2014a). Higher education research. In International encyclopedia of social and
behavioral sciences (2 ed.). Oxford: Elsevier (forthcoming).
Teichler, U. (2014b). Opportunities and problems of comparative higher education research: The
daily life of research. Higher Education, 67(4), 393–408.
Teichler, U., & Gordon, J. (2001). Mobility and cooperation in education—Recent experiences in
Europe (special issue). European Journal of Education, 36(4).
Teichler, U., & Höhle, E. A. (Eds.). (2013). The work situation of the academic profession in
Europe: Findings of a survey in twelve countries. Dordrecht: Springer.
Teichler, U., & Maiworm, F. (1997). The ERASMUS experience: Major ﬁndings of the ERASMUS
evaluation research project. Luxembourg: Ofﬁce for Ofﬁcial Publications of the European
Communities.
Teichler, U., & Sadlak, J. (Eds.). (2000). Higher education research: Its relationship to policy and
practice. Oxford: Pergamon & IAU Press.
Teixeira, P. N. (2013). Reﬂecting about current trends in higher education reseach: A view from
the journals. In B. M. Kehm & C. Musselin (Eds.), The development of higher education
research in Europe: 25 years of CHER (pp. 103–121). Rotterdam, Boston and Taipei: Sense.
Tight, M. (2003). Researching higher education. Buckingham: SRHE & Open University Press.
Tight, M. (2012). Researching higher education (2nd ed.). Maidenhead: Open University Press
and McGraw-Hill Education.
Tight, M., Mok, K. H., Huisman, J., & Morphew, C. (Eds.). (2009). The Routledage international
handbook of higher education. New York: Routledge.
Van der Wende, M. & Huisman, J. (2004). Review of EU policies and research in higher
education. Policy Synthesis Paper, Enschede: University of Twente, CHEPS.
Whitchurch, C. (2009). The rise of the blsended professional in higher education: A comparison
between the United Kingdom, Australia and the United States. Higher Education, 58(3), 407–
418.
Winter, M. (2014). Topographie der Hochschulforschung in Deutschland (Topography of higher
education research in Germany). In P. Pasternack (Ed.), Hochschulforschung von innen und
seitwärts: Sichtachsen durch ein Forschungsfeld (Higher education from within and from
846
U. Teichler

aside: Perspectives through an research ﬁeld). (pp. 25–49). Wittenberg: Institut für
Hochschulforschung (die hochschule. Journal für wissenschaft und bildung, 1/2014).
Zgaga, P. (2013). Higher education research and higher education policy in South-East Europe.
European Journal of Higher Education, 3(3), 280–294.
Zimmermann, K., Kamphans, M., & Metz-Göckel, S. (Eds.). (2008). Perspektiven der
Hochschulforschung (Perspectives of higher education research). Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für
Sozialwissenschaften.
Higher Education Research in Europe
847