Policy Brief  |  January 2010
 
A ssembly-Line Justice: A Re vie w of Oper ation Stre amline    |    Januar y 2010   
BerkeleyLaw
U N I V E R S I T Y  O F  C A L I F O R N I A
The Chief Justice  
Earl Warren
Institute on Race,
Ethnicity & Diversity
Berkeley Law Center for 
Research and Administration
2850 Telegraph Avenue 
Suite 500
Berkeley, CA   94705
Phone: (510) 642-8568
Fax: (510) 643-7095
www.warreninstitute.org
About the  
Warren Institute
The Chief Justice Earl 
Warren Institute on Race, 
Ethnicity & Diversity  
is a multidisciplinary,  
collaborative venture to 
produce research, 
research-based policy 
prescriptions, and  
curricular innovation  
on issues of racial and 
ethnic justice in California  
and the nation.  
For more information, 
please contact:
Ana Djordjevich 
Development &  
Communications Officer 
(510) 642-4102
1 
Assembly-Line Justice: 
A Review of Operation Streamline
by Joanna Lydgate*
Executive Summary
The current administration is committed to 
combating the drug and weapon trafficking 
and human smuggling at the root of violence 
along the U.S.-Mexico border.1  But a Bush-era 
immigration enforcement program called 
Operation Streamline threatens to undermine 
that effort.  Operation Streamline requires the 
federal criminal prosecution and imprison-
ment of all unlawful border crossers.  The 
program, which mainly targets migrant work-
ers with no criminal history, has caused 
skyrocketing caseloads in many federal district 
courts along the border.  This Warren Institute 
study demonstrates that Operation Streamline 
diverts crucial law enforcement resources away 
from fighting violent crime along the border, 
fails to effectively reduce undocumented immi-
gration, and violates the U.S. Constitution.
The Department of Homeland Security 
(DHS) 
began 
implementing 
Operation 
Streamline along the U.S.-Mexico border in 
2005.  The program has fundamentally trans-
formed DHS’s border enforcement practices. 
Before Operation Streamline began, DHS 
Border Patrol agents voluntarily returned 
first-time border crossers to their home coun-
tries or detained them and formally removed 
them from the United States through the 
civil immigration system.  The U.S. Attorney’s 
Office reserved criminal prosecution for 
migrants with criminal records and for those 
who made repeated attempts to cross the 
border.  Operation Streamline removed that 
prosecutorial discretion, requiring the crimi-
nal prosecution of all undocumented border 
crossers, regardless of their history.
Operation Streamline has generated 
unprecedented caseloads in eight of the 
eleven federal district courts along the bor-
der, straining the resources of judges, U.S. 
attorneys, defense attorneys, U.S. Marshals, 
and court personnel.  The program’s volumi-
nous prosecutions have forced many courts 
to cut procedural corners. Magistrate judges 
conduct en masse hearings, during which as 
many as 80 defendants plead guilty at a time, 
depriving migrants of due process.  Indeed, 
in December 2009, the U.S. Court of Appeals 
for the Ninth Circuit held that Operation 
* The Warren Institute acknowledges the generous support 
of the Evelyn and Walter Haas, Jr. Fund, which has made this 
research possible.  Joanna Lydgate is a William K. Coblentz 
Civil Rights Fellow with the Warren Institute and will gradu-
ate from UC Berkeley School of Law in 2010.  She obtained 
her BA from Yale University in 2003.
1.	
See, e.g., Press Release, U.S. Department of Homeland Secu-
rity, Obama Administration Announces National Strategy to 
Reduce Drug Trafficking and Flow of Bulk Cash and Weapons 
Across Southwest Border (June 5, 2009), available at http://
www.dhs.gov/ynews/releases/pr_1244217118076.shtm; 
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED 
STATES, OFFICE OF NATIONAL DRUG CONTROL POLICY, 
NATIONAL 
SOUTHWEST 
BORDER 
COUNTERNARCOTICS 
STRATEGY (June 2009), available at http://www.whitehouse 
drugpolicy.gov/publications/swb_counternarcotics_strategy09/
swb_counternarcotics_strategy09.pdf.

  
 Januar y 2010    |    A ssembly-Line Justice: A Re vie w of Oper ation Stre amline 
2  
Streamline’s en masse plea hearings in 
Tucson, Arizona violate federal law.2 
By focusing court and law enforce-
ment resources on the prosecution 
of 
first-time 
entrants, 
Operation 
Streamline also diverts attention away 
from fighting drug smuggling, human 
trafficking, and other crimes that 
create border violence. 
To examine Operation Streamline’s 
effects, the Warren Institute observed 
Operation Streamline court proceed-
ings and conducted interviews with 
judges, U.S. attorneys, defense attor-
neys, Border Patrol representatives, 
and immigration lawyers in four bor-
der cities in Texas, New Mexico, and 
Arizona.  This report outlines the 
Warren Institute’s findings.  It con-
cludes that Operation Streamline is 
not an effective means of improving 
border security or reducing undocu-
mented immigration.  Furthermore, 
Operation Streamline has unaccept-
able consequences for the agencies 
tasked with implementing the pro-
gram, for the migrants it targets, and 
for the rule of law in this country.
The administration should there-
fore eliminate Operation Streamline 
and restore U.S. attorneys’ discretion 
to prosecute serious crimes along the 
border.  If the administration seeks 
to punish first-time border crossers, 
it need look no further than the civil 
immigration system.
Background
Between 2002 and 2008, federal 
magistrate judges along the U.S.-
Mexico border saw their misdemeanor 
immigration 
caseloads 
more 
than 
quadruple. Criminal prosecutions of 
petty immigration-related offenses3 
increased by more than 330% in the 
border district courts, from 12,411 
cases4 to 53,697.5  Those caseloads 
continue to rise.6   During the same 
six-year period, felony alien smuggling 
prosecutions in the border courts rose 
at a comparatively sluggish rate,7 and 
drug prosecutions steadily declined 
(see Figure 1).8
2.	 United States v. Roblero-Solis, 588 F.3d 692 (9th Cir. 2009).
3.	 Petty offenses are misdemeanors with a maximum sentence of six months. 
Petty immigration-related offenses are almost exclusively prosecutions under 
8 U.S.C. § 1325 for first-time unlawful entry into the United States.
4.	 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES COURTS, 2002 ANNU-
AL REPORT OF THE DIRECTOR: JUDICIAL BUSINESS OF THE UNITED STATES 
COURTS Supplemental Table M-2: Petty Offense Defendants Disposed of 
by U.S. Magistrate Judges, by Major Offense (2003), available at http://www.
uscourts.gov/judbus2002/appendices/m02sep02.pdf.  The federal districts 
along the U.S-Mexico border are: the Southern District of California, the Dis-
trict of Arizona, the District of New Mexico, the Western District of Texas, and 
the Southern District of Texas.
5.	 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES COURTS, 2008 ANNU-
AL REPORT OF THE DIRECTOR: JUDICIAL BUSINESS OF THE UNITED STATES 
COURTS Supplemental Table M-2: Petty Offense Defendants Disposed of 
by U.S. Magistrate Judges, by Major Offense (2009), available at http://www.
uscourts.gov/judbus2008/appendices/M02Sep08.pdf.  Some of this increase 
in prosecutions may be due to improved reporting by the U.S. Attorney’s Office. 
See, e.g., Spencer S. Hsu, Immigration Prosecutions Hit New High, WASHINGTON 
POST, June 2, 2008.  
6.	 See TRANSACTIONAL RECORDS ACCESS CLEARINGHOUSE, IMMIGRATION 
PROSECUTIONS FOR MARCH 2009 (2009), available at http://trac.syr.edu/ 
tracreports/bulletins/immigration/monthlymar09/fil.  
7.	 Drug prosecutions in the federal district courts along the border decreased 
from 6430 cases commenced in 2002 to 4966 cases commenced in 2008.  See 
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES COURTS, 2002-2008 ANNU-
AL REPORTS OF THE DIRECTOR: JUDICIAL BUSINESS OF THE UNITED STATES 
COURTS Supplemental Table D-3: Cases Commenced, by Major Offense 
and District.   
8.	 Data obtained from TRANSACTIONAL RECORDS ACCESS CLEARINGHOUSE 
using “TRAC Express” tool, searching by lead charge 8 U.S.C. § 1324 for the 
time period 2002 to 2008 for each border district, then adding the results to-
gether (data on file with author).  Alien smuggling prosecutions under 8 U.S.C. 
§ 1324 in the border district courts went from 2208 cases in 2002 to 3900 cases 
in 2008.  Id.
Figure 1  |  Operation Streamline’s Effect: Petty Immigration  
Prosecutions vs. Felony Alien Smuggling Prosecutions in the Border 
District Courts

  
A ssembly-Line Justice: A Re vie w of Oper ation Stre amline    |    Januar y 2010   
Skyrocketing petty immigration 
prosecutions would seem to suggest a 
recent surge of migrants attempting to 
cross the U.S.-Mexico border, but there 
has been no such surge. The Border 
Patrol reports that its apprehensions 
have been declining since 2005.9  Rather, 
the immigration caseload in the border 
courts is largely the result of a set of 
zero-tolerance immigration enforce-
ment  programs.  The first program 
began in Del Rio, Texas, in 2005, 
and DHS has since implemented 
similar programs in: Yuma, Arizona; 
Tucson, Arizona; Las Cruces, New 
Mexico; El Paso, Texas; Laredo, 
Texas; 
McAllen, 
Texas; 
and 
Brownsville, Texas.10 Though these 
zero-tolerance programs have various 
names, they are often referred to in the 
aggregate as “Operation Streamline.” 
And 
though 
they 
take 
slightly 
different forms, they share the same 
mandate: the criminal prosecution of 
all undocumented border crossers, 
even first-time entrants.11
Most Operation Streamline defen-
dants are migrants from Mexico or 
Central America who have no prior 
criminal convictions and who have 
attempted to cross the border in search 
of work or to reunite with family in 
the United States.  First-time offenders 
are prosecuted for misdemeanor ille-
gal entry under 8 U.S.C. § 1325, which 
carries a six-month maximum sen-
tence. Any migrant who has been 
deported in the past and attempts to 
reenter can be charged with felony 
reentry under 8  U.S.C. § 1326, which 
generally carries a two-year maximum 
penalty but can involve up to a 20-year 
maximum if the migrant has a criminal 
record.12  Defense attorneys estimate 
that 99% of Operation Streamline 
3
9.	 NANCY RYTINA AND JOHN SIMANSKI, U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND 
SECURITY, OFFICE OF IMMIGRATION STATISTICS, FACT SHEET, APPREHEN-
SIONS BY THE U.S. BORDER PATROL: 2005-2008 (June 2009), available at 
http://www.dhs.gov/xlibrary/assets/statistics/publications/ois_apprehensions_
fs_2005-2008.pdf.
10.	 See, e.g., Federal Courts Hit Hard by Increased Law Enforcement on Border, THE 
THIRD BRANCH (Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts Office of Public 
Affairs, Washington, DC), July 2008, available at http://www.uscourts.gov/
ttb/2008-07/article02_1.cfm; Press Release, U.S. Department of Homeland 
Security, U.S. Border Patrol Achieves Substantial Results in 2008 (November 
5, 2008), available at http://www.cbp.gov/xp/cgov/newsroom/news_releases/
archives/2008_news_releases/nov_2008/11052008.xml; Telephone Interview 
with Thomas Lindenmuth, Supervisory Assistant Federal Public Defender, 
McAllen, TX (November 17, 2009).
11.	 No Operation Streamline jurisdiction actually prosecutes exactly 100% of 
border apprehensions.  The Border Patrol, as a matter of policy, does not refer 
for prosecution juveniles, parents traveling with minor children, certain per-
sons with health conditions, and others who require prompt return to their 
country of origin for humanitarian reasons.  See, e.g., Telephone Interview with 
Richard Durbin, Criminal Chief, U.S. Attorney’s Office, Western District of 
Texas (April 10, 2009).
12.	 If the defendant’s prior removal occurred after a felony conviction, the 
maximum possible penalty under 8 U.S.C. § 1326 is 10 years in prison.  If the 
prior removal occurred after an aggravated felony conviction as defined by 
8 U.S.C. § 1101(a)(43), the penalty can be up to 20 years.
13.	 See, e.g., Interview with William D. Fry, Supervisory Assistant Federal Public 
Defender, Del Rio, TX (September 1, 2009); Interview with Heather Williams, 
First Assistant Federal Public Defender, Tucson, AZ (September 2, 2009) 
(hereinafter Williams interview); Telephone Interview with Alex Melendez, 
CJA Panel Attorney, El Paso, TX (September 16, 2009).
San Diego
CA-S
Southern District of California (courts in San Diego and El Centro)  
Border Patrol Sectors: San Diego, El Centro
District of Arizona (courts in Tucson and Yuma) 
Border Patrol Sectors: Yuma, Tucson
District of New Mexico (court in Las Cruces) 
Border Patrol Sector: El Paso
Western District of Texas (courts in El Paso, Alpine, and Del Rio) 
Border Patrol Sectors: El Paso, Marfa, Del Rio
Southern District of Texas (courts in Laredo, McAllen, and Brownsville) 
Border Patrol Sectors: Laredo, Rio Grande Valley
  —  Operation Streamline Jurisdiction 
El Centro
Yuma
Tucson
Alpine
Del Rio
Laredo
TX-W
TX-S
Las Cruces
El Paso
NM
AZ
McAllen
Brownsville
San 
Diego
CA-S
Figure 2  |  Federal Judicial Districts Along the U.S.-Mexico Border

  
 Januar y 2010    |    A ssembly-Line Justice: A Re vie w of Oper ation Stre amline 
defendants plead guilty.13 In some loca-
tions, Border Patrol attorneys are 
deputized as special assistant U.S. 
attorneys14 to prosecute Operation 
Streamline cases, though the U.S. 
Attorney’s Office has retained control 
elsewhere. 
While 
each 
criminal 
prosecution is pending, DHS processes 
the migrant for removal from the 
United States.  
The number of daily Operation 
Streamline prosecutions varies by loca-
tion. In Del Rio, Texas, the program 
generates as many as 80 new prosecu-
tions per day.15 In Tucson, Arizona, 
there are 70 daily prosecutions.16 In 
El Paso, Texas, the daily average is 
around 20 prosecutions.17 Because 
most migrants are prosecuted under 
8 U.S.C. § 1325, the misdemeanor 
statute, magistrate judges hear the 
bulk of Operation Streamline cases.18 
The sheer number of defendants 
requires nearly all judges to combine 
the initial appearance, arraignment, 
plea, and sentencing into one en 
masse hearing.19  Many Operation 
Streamline defendants complete the 
entire criminal proceeding – meet-
ing with counsel, making an initial 
appearance, pleading guilty, and 
being sentenced after waiving a pre-
sentence report – in a single day. 
Criminal Justice Act (CJA) Panel 
attorneys20 serve as counsel for the 
majority of defendants and are 
appointed to represent up to 80 
clients in one hearing, which can fore-
close individualized representation. 
Goals of this Report
Operation 
Streamline 
has 
been 
lauded by its designers but criticized 
by many others, including judges, U.S. 
attorneys, and federal public defend-
ers.  To understand how Operation 
Streamline is working, the Warren 
Institute visited four cities where ver-
sions of the program are in place: Del 
Rio, Texas; El Paso, Texas; Las Cruces, 
New Mexico; and Tucson, Arizona. 
The 
Warren 
Institute 
observed 
Operation 
Streamline 
court 
pro-
ceedings in each city and conducted 
numerous in-person and telephone 
interviews with judges, U.S. attorneys, 
defense attorneys, Border Patrol rep-
resentatives, and immigration lawyers 
involved in Operation Streamline’s 
implementation.21
This 
report 
concludes 
that 
Operation Streamline raises significant 
legal and policy concerns even in the 
cities where it has received its most 
careful implementation.  From a policy 
perspective, there are reasons to ques-
tion Operation Streamline’s efficacy. 
Recent reductions in border apprehen-
sions are likely attributable to factors 
4  
14.  See 28 U.S.C. § 543. 
15.	 The number of daily Operation Streamline prosecutions varies in Del 
Rio.  There is currently a cap of 80 prosecutions per day, and Del Rio Mag-
istrate Judge Victor Garcia reports that the court does generally see 80 daily 
prosecutions between January and May, when border crossing rates are at 
their peak.  Interview with Hon. Victor Garcia, U.S. Magistrate Judge, West-
ern District of Texas, Del Rio, TX (September 1, 2009).  During what Judge 
Garcia describes as the “low season,” however, the Operation Streamline 
docket is less busy.  Id.
16.	 See, e.g., Interview with Hon. John M. Roll, Chief Judge, District of 
Arizona, Tucson, AZ (September 2, 2009).
17.	 This rough average was calculated from the caseload statistics of the 
three magistrate judges in El Paso for the months of January 2009, February 
2009, and November 2009.  E-mail from Hon. Richard Mesa, United States 
Magistrate Judge, Western District of Texas, El Paso, TX to Joanna Lydgate 
(December 14, 2009, 2:32:32 PM PST) (on file with author); WESTERN DIS-
TRICT OF TEXAS, MAGISTRATE JUDGE CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS FOR THE 
MONTH OF JANUARY 2009, provided by Magistrate Judge Norbert Garney’s 
courtroom staff (on file with author).
18.	 In many Operation Streamline locations, defendants with prior remov-
als are charged with one count of illegal reentry under 8 U.S.C. § 1326 and a 
second count of illegal entry under 8 U.S.C. § 1325.  Most plead guilty to the 
lesser illegal entry charge.
19.	 The exception to this rule is El Paso, where defendants receive two court 
appearances: an initial appearance, and a plea and sentencing hearing about 
two weeks later.
20.	 The Criminal Justice Act Panel consists of attorneys in private practice 
who are appointed to represent indigent criminal defendants in the United 
States district courts.  See 18 U.S.C. § 3006A.
21.	 In total, the Warren Institute completed 23 in-person and telephone in-
terviews with eight judges, five federal public defenders, four U.S. attorneys, 
three Border Patrol representatives, two CJA Panel attorneys, and two im-
migration lawyers.
Operation Streamline raises significant  
legal and policy concerns even in the cities 
where it has received its most careful  
implementation.

  
A ssembly-Line Justice: A Re vie w of Oper ation Stre amline    |    Januar y 2010   
5 
other than Operation Streamline, and 
the program diverts resources away 
from prosecuting the crimes that cre-
ate violence along the border, such 
as drug smuggling and human traf-
ficking.  Operation Streamline also 
has troubling consequences for the 
border district courts, for the federal 
law enforcement agencies that run 
the program, and for the migrants it 
targets.  The program’s substantial 
cost to taxpayers is another cause for 
concern.  From a legal perspective, 
Operation Streamline’s voluminous 
prosecutions require group proceed-
ings that do not comport with due 
process and a caseload for defense 
attorneys that can result in ineffective 
assistance of counsel.  Where Border 
Patrol attorneys prosecute Operation 
Streamline cases, prosecutorial inde-
pendence may also be compromised.
Policy Concerns
While DHS has promoted Operation 
Streamline as a primary cause of the 
recent decline in apprehensions along 
the U.S.-Mexico border, there are rea-
sons to question DHS’s claim.  What 
is clear, however, is that Operation 
Streamline diverts resources away from 
prosecuting more serious crimes, that 
it has negative consequences for the 
workload of the district courts and for 
the behavior of migrants, and that it is 
a costly program to run.
Questionable deterrent capacity
According to DHS, Border Patrol 
apprehensions have been declin-
ing since 2005, when Operation 
Streamline first began.22 While DHS 
recognized in a June 2009 report that 
this decline “may be due to a num-
ber of factors including declining 
U.S. economic growth,”23  the agency 
has 
consistently 
given 
Operation 
Streamline credit for the reduction 
in apprehensions.24 The agency has 
reported, for example, that during 
the last quarter of 2008, Operation 
Streamline caused apprehensions to 
fall by nearly 70% in Yuma, Arizona, 
by nearly 70% near Del Rio, Texas, 
and by 22% near Laredo, Texas.25 
Yet DHS’s numbers do not tell 
the full story.  The general decline in 
border apprehensions did not begin 
in 2005 – when DHS introduced 
Operation Streamline – but in 2000.26 
Apprehensions reached a decade peak 
in 2000,27 then steadily decreased until 
2003, went up slightly in 2004 and 2005, 
and decreased again until 2008.28  DHS 
points out that between 2005 and 2008, 
apprehensions went down by 465,137, 
or 39%, but they had gone down by 
a very similar rate – 44%, or 744,443 
apprehensions – between 2000 and 
2003, well before Operation Streamline 
began.  The degree to which the 
recent decline in apprehensions can 
be attributed to Operation Streamline 
is therefore highly debatable. 
Indeed, a recent study by the 
Center for Comparative Immigration 
Studies at the University of California, 
San Diego29 suggests other expla-
nations 
for 
the 
fluctuation 
in 
apprehensions.  The UC San Diego 
researchers 
interviewed 
Mexican 
migrants between 2005 and 2009 
and found that the primary factors 
deterring border crossings were the 
increased cost of crossing the border, 
coupled with the current state of the 
U.S. economy.30 Many of the judges 
22.	 RYTINA AND SIMANSKI, supra note 9, at 1 (“The number of apprehensions 
made by the Border Patrol declined for the third year in a row to 724,000 in 
2008 after reaching a mid-decade peak of 1,189,000 in 2005”).
23.  Id. at 2.
24.	 See, e.g., U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Remarks by Homeland 
Security Secretary Michael Chertoff and Attorney General Mukasey at a Brief-
ing on Immigration Enforcement and Border Security Efforts (February 22, 
2008), available at http://www.dhs.gov/xnews/releases/pr_1203722713615.
shtm; Press Release, U.S. Department of Homeland Security, CBP Border 
Patrol Apprehensions Down Along Southern Border (July 7, 2007), available 
at http://www.cbp.gov/xp/cgov/newsroom/news_releases/archives/2007_
news_releases/072007/07072007.xml; Fact Sheet, U.S. Department of 
Homeland Security, Securing America’s Borders CBP 2006 Fiscal Year in 
Review (October 30, 2006), available at http://www.dhs.gov/xnews/releases/
pr_1162226345208.shtm. 
25.	 Hsu, Immigration Prosecutions Hit New High, supra note 5. 
26.	 After FY 2000, apprehensions declined for three years. There were 
1,266,214 apprehensions in FY 2001, 955,310 in FY 2002, and 931,557 in 
FY 2003.  Apprehensions then climbed slightly to 1,160,395 in FY 2004 
and 1,188,977 in FY 2005 before declining again to 1,089,096 in FY 2006; 
876,803 in FY 2007; and 723,840 in FY 2008.  See TRANSACTIONAL RECORDS 
ACCESS CLEARINGHOUSE, REPORT: CONTROLLING THE BORDERS Figure 2: 
National Trends in Apprehensions and Staffing (April 4, 2006); RYTINA AND 
SIMANSKI, supra note 9, at 1-2.
27.	 RYTINA AND SIMANSKI, supra note 9, at 1.
28.	 See supra note 26.
29.	 MEXICAN MIGRATION AND THE U.S. ECONOMIC CRISIS: A TRANSNA-
TIONAL PERSPECTIVE (Wayne A. Cornelius et al. eds., 2010).
30.	 Id. at xii. 

  
 Januar y 2010    |    A ssembly-Line Justice: A Re vie w of Oper ation Stre amline 
and practitioners the Warren Institute 
interviewed in Arizona, New Mexico, 
and Texas also cited the economy as 
the primary cause of the decline in 
apprehensions, and their observations 
are backed up by census data from the 
Mexican government,31 as well as the 
opinions of numerous experts in the 
fields of economics and migration.32 
The U.S. unemployment rate has 
more than doubled since 2000, when 
border apprehensions began falling, 
and as Figure 3 demonstrates, border 
apprehensions have largely tracked 
the U.S. job market since 1991.33
Beyond the U.S. economy’s effect 
on migration patterns, DHS enforce-
ment efforts of a different variety 
may be contributing to lower border 
apprehension rates.  In the same year 
it introduced Operation Streamline, 
DHS implemented the “Secure Border 
Initiative,” which deployed various 
technologies and infrastructure to aid 
6  
31.	 Julia Preston, Mexican Data Show Migration to U.S. in Decline, NEW YORK 
TIMES, May 14, 2009 (citing Mexican census data revealing that “about 
226,000 fewer people emigrated from Mexico to other countries during the 
year that ended in August 2008 than during the previous year, a decline of 
25%.  All but a very small fraction of emigration, both legal and illegal, from 
Mexico is to the United States. . . . Mexican and American researchers say 
that the current decline, which has also been manifested in a decrease in ar-
rests along the border, is largely a result of Mexicans’ deciding to delay illegal 
crossings because of the lack of jobs in the ailing American economy.”).
32.	 See, e.g., Diana Washington Valdez, Officials: Apprehensions dip as U.S. 
economy struggles, EL PASO TIMES, October 20, 2008 (quoting Tom Fullerton, 
professor of economics and finance at the University of Texas at El Paso and 
an expert on the border economy, as saying that “fewer Mexican nationals 
are trying to cross the border because they know the U.S. economic down-
turn has resulted in diminished job prospects”); Christopher Sherman, Third 
Year of Fewer Illegal Immigrants Caught, ASSOCIATED PRESS, June 16, 2009 (quot-
ing Jeffrey Passel, senior demographer at the Pew Hispanic Center, as saying 
that the main reason Mexicans emigrate to the U.S. is for jobs, “and there 
aren’t any”).
33.	 According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the unemployment rate 
was 4.0% in May 2000 and 9.4% in May 2009.  See BUREAU OF LABOR 
STATISTICS, DATABASES, LABOR FORCE STATISTICS FROM THE CUR-
RENT POPULATION SURVEY, available at http://data.bls.gov/PDQ/servlet/
SurveyOutputServlet?series_id=LNS14000000.  See also Catherine Rampell, 
Illegal Immigration as a Job Market Predictor, NEW YORK TIMES, May 15, 2009.
34.	 Graph courtesy of Pia M. Orrenius, senior economist at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas.
Figure 3  |  Apprehensions Versus Detrended Employment, 1991 to 200934 
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics; Department of Homeland Security; Authors’ calculations.
Note: Nonfarm payroll employment is expressed in deviations from long-run trend. Apprehensions are shifted 6 months forward. 
Employment and apprehensions have been seasonally adjusted by the Dallas Fed.

  
A ssembly-Line Justice: A Re vie w of Oper ation Stre amline    |    Januar y 2010   
Border Patrol agents.35 The initiative 
was accompanied by major increases 
in Border Patrol staffing, which 
have nearly doubled the size of the 
Border Patrol since 2001.36 It is impos-
sible to isolate the relative success of 
Operation Streamline as compared 
with these and other recent enforce-
ment efforts.
Finally, federal defenders, judges, 
and immigration attorneys interviewed 
by the Warren Institute questioned 
whether 
migrants 
are 
aware 
of 
Operation Streamline or understand 
how it works.  In at least one sector – 
El Paso – the Border Patrol has tried 
to publicize its zero-tolerance pro-
gram across the border in Mexico.37 
Beyond such direct efforts, DHS insists 
that news of these programs spreads 
among migrants by word of mouth. 
But federal defenders reported that 
many of their clients are caught off 
guard by the criminal prosecution and 
cannot begin to grasp how it will affect 
them in the longer term because they 
do not, at a basic level, understand 
the concept of bars to reentry or 
what it means to be charged with 
a misdemeanor or a felony in the 
United States.38
Defense attorneys also emphasized 
that many of their clients have traveled 
a great distance and spent a good deal 
of money to reach the border.39  Some 
have family members already resid-
ing in the United States with whom 
they wish to reunite.  Others are car-
ing for children, sick family members, 
or aging parents and are unable to 
find work to support those relatives 
in their own country.  These personal 
circumstances can be more powerful 
than any criminal sanction. 
Diverting resources 
Drug-cartel violence along the U.S.-
Mexico border has been on the rise in 
recent years.40 The U.S. Government 
Accountability Office reports that 
drug-related 
murders 
more 
than 
doubled in Mexican border cities 
between 2007 and 2008, reaching 
6,200 deaths.41 The Department of 
Justice has described Mexican drug 
trafficking organizations as “the great-
est organized crime threat to the 
United States.”42
At a time when combating violence 
along the U.S.-Mexico border is a top 
priority for DHS and the Department 
of Justice,43 Operation Streamline is 
7
35.	 U.S. Department of Homeland Security, Secure Border Initiative, 
http://www.cbp.gov/xp/cgov/border_security/sbi/.
36.	 The number of Border Patrol agents nationwide was 9,821 in 2000. 
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES COURTS, REPORT ON 
THE IMPACT ON THE JUDICIARY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES ALONG 
THE SOUTHWEST BORDER: PREPARED FOR THE U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESEN-
TATIVES AND SENATE COMMITTEES ON APPROPRIATIONS 56 (July 2008) 
(on file with author).  It was expected to reach 19,700 by the end of September 
2009.  U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, CBP COULD IMPROVE 
ITS ESTIMATION OF FUNDING NEEDED FOR NEW BORDER PATROL AGENTS 
(June 15, 2009), available at http://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-09-542R. 
There is a strong correlation between increases in Border Patrol personnel 
and increases in immigration prosecutions in the district courts.  ADMINIS-
TRATIVE OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES COURTS, REPORT ON THE IMPACT 
ON THE JUDICIARY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES ALONG THE SOUTH-
WEST BORDER, at 7.
37.	 Interview with Joe Perez, U.S. Customs and Border Protection, Office of 
Public Affairs, El Paso Sector, El Paso, TX (March 26, 2009).
38.	 Telephone Interview with Edgar Holguin, Assistant Federal Public 
Defender, El Paso, TX (March 30, 2009) (hereinafter Holguin interview); 
Interview with Robert Kinney, Supervisory Assistant Federal Public Defender, 
Las Cruces, NM (March 25, 2009) (hereinafter Kinney interview).
39.	 See, e.g., Interview with Richard Bacal, CJA Panel Attorney, Tucson, AZ 
(September 2, 2009) (hereinafter Bacal interview).
40.	 See, e.g., Randal C. Archibold, Mexican Drug Cartel Violence Spills Over, Alarm-
ing U.S., NEW YORK TIMES, March 22, 2009; Mexico Under Siege: The drug war 
at our doorstep, LOS ANGELES TIMES, http://projects.latimes.com/mexico-drug-
war/#/its-a-war.
41.	 U.S. GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE, FIREARMS TRAFFICK-
ING: U.S. EFFORTS TO COMBAT ARMS TRAFFICKING TO MEXICO FACE 
PLANNING AND COORDINATION CHALLENGES 1 (June  2009), available at 
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d09709.pdf.
42.	 U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, NATIONAL DRUG THREAT ASSESS-
MENT 2009 iii (December 2008), available at http://www.justice.gov/ndic/
pubs31/31379/31379p.pdf.
43.	 See supra note 1.
At a time when combating violence along 
the U.S.-Mexico border is a top priority  
for DHS and the Department of Justice,  
Operation Streamline is a wasteful  
expenditure of resources.

  
 Januar y 2010    |    A ssembly-Line Justice: A Re vie w of Oper ation Stre amline 
a wasteful expenditure of resources. 
The program channels law enforce-
ment funding and attention toward 
the apprehension and prosecution of 
low-level offenders, rather than focus-
ing on the crimes that create border 
violence, including human trafficking 
and drug smuggling. As petty immi-
gration prosecutions have increased in 
the border district courts, drug pros-
ecutions have declined (see Figure 1). 
While alien smuggling prosecutions 
have risen somewhat since 2002 when 
charted across all of the border courts, 
they too have been on the decline in 
certain areas, such as the District of 
Arizona (see Figure 4).   
This disturbing trend may result 
from Operation Streamline’s high 
caseloads, which can force U.S. attor-
neys to cut back on prosecuting more 
serious crimes along the border. 
Operation Streamline strips Assistant 
U.S. Attorneys (AUSAs) of discretion 
to prosecute the crimes they deem 
most serious.  As a result, AUSAs have 
lamented their inability to aggressively 
prosecute the criminal organizations 
behind drug smuggling and human 
trafficking because of their immigra-
tion caseloads.  In 2006, for example, 
AUSA Clint Johnson of Las Cruces 
was quoted as saying, “Because of 
the [immigration] caseload, we can’t 
always be as proactive as we’d like to 
be because we’re so busy being reac-
tive. [Drug and human trafficking] 
cases do exist, we do work them up 
the ladder.  To be very honest, would 
I like to spend a lot more time trying 
to work up the ladder to some of these 
organizations?  Most definitely.”45  
Data from the border district courts 
supports this trend; a January 2009 
New York Times article reported that, as 
immigration prosecutions have risen 
over the past five years, white-collar 
prosecutions, weapons prosecutions, 
organized crime prosecutions, pub-
lic corruption prosecutions, and drug 
prosecutions have declined.46  The New 
York Times interviewed Judge George 
Kazen of Laredo, Texas, who expressed 
concern that AUSAs in his district are 
not adequately targeting weapons smug-
glers or violent drug cartels.47 “‘The 
U.S. attorney isn’t bringing me those 
cases,’ he said.  ‘They’re just catching 
foot soldiers coming across the bor-
der. . . . But they will tell you that they 
don’t have the resources to drive it 
and develop a conspiracy case.’”48  The 
article further noted that, as a result of 
8  
44.  	Total prosecutions, 8 U.S.C. § 1324 prosecutions, and 8 U.S.C. § 1325 prose-
cutions obtained from the Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse (TRAC) 
using the “TRAC Express” tool, searching by lead charge 8 U.S.C. § 1325 for the 
District of Arizona for the years 2002 to 2008 (data on file with author).  For 
drug prosecution data, see ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES 
COURTS, 2002-2008 ANNUAL REPORTS OF THE DIRECTOR: JUDICIAL BUSINESS 
OF THE UNITED STATES COURTS Supplemental Table D-3: Cases Commenced, 
by Major Offense and District. 
45.	 Immigration Crisis Tests Federal Courts on Southwest Border, THE THIRD 
BRANCH (Administrative Office of the U.S. Courts Office of Public Affairs, 
Washington, DC), June 2006, available at http://www.uscourts.gov/ttb/ 
06-06/border/index.html.
46.	 Solomon Moore, Push on Immigration Crimes Is Said to Shift Focus, NEW 
YORK TIMES, January 11, 2009.  The article, citing data from TRAC, reports 
that white-collar prosecutions have fallen by 18% over the past five years, 
weapons prosecutions by 19%, organized crime prosecutions by 20%, and 
public corruption prosecutions by 14%.  “Drug prosecutions — the enforce-
ment priority of the Reagan, first Bush and Clinton administrations — have 
declined by 20 percent since 2003.”  Id. 
47	 Id.
48.	 Id. 
Figure 4  |  Snapshot: Operation Streamline’s Effect in Arizona44

  
A ssembly-Line Justice: A Re vie w of Oper ation Stre amline    |    Januar y 2010   
their immigration caseloads, U.S. attor-
neys on the southwest border generally 
“decline to prosecute drug suspects 
with 500 pounds of marijuana or less 
— about $500,000 to $800,000 worth.”49 
This often results in local agencies 
handling those drug prosecutions and 
becoming overwhelmed themselves.50
Effect on the border district courts
Operation 
Streamline’s 
numerous 
prosecutions also exact a significant 
cost from the personnel working in 
the border courts.  A July 2008 report 
by the Administrative Office of the 
U.S. Courts addressed Operation 
Streamline’s impact on the judiciary.51 
The report noted that “recruitment 
and retention” problems in the bor-
der district courts are “exacerbated 
because many employees at border 
locations are experiencing burnout 
due to the nature and sheer volume 
of the work.”52 Judges the Warren 
Institute interviewed echoed those 
concerns.53 The AO report concluded 
that “There are simply not enough 
jail beds, holding cells, courtrooms, 
and related court facilities along the 
border to handle all the cases that the 
government would like to prosecute 
under Operation Streamline II and 
other initiatives.”54
Judge Robert Brack of Las Cruces is 
an example of Operation Streamline’s 
impact on the judiciary.  As a district 
judge,  Judge Brack presides over felony 
reentry prosecutions under 8 U.S.C. 
§ 1326.  He consistently carries one 
of the highest immigration caseloads 
of any district judge in the country; 
in July 2008, ABC News named him 
“America’s busiest judge.”55  In 2008, 
Judge Brack sentenced close to 1,400 
criminal defendants; the national 
average, he says, is around 75.56  
The Transactional Records Access 
Clearinghouse (TRAC) at Syracuse 
University ranked Judge Brack the dis-
trict judge with the highest number 
of immigration criminal cases in both 
March 2008 and March 2009.57  In 
both years, unlawful reentry under 
8 U.S.C § 1326 was the most frequent 
lead charge in his courtroom.58 As a 
result of his disproportionate criminal 
immigration caseload, Judge Brack’s 
civil docket has had to be correspond-
ingly reduced.  He carries about 50% 
of the civil caseload that other district 
judges in New Mexico carry but about 
eight times the criminal caseload.59 
The Las Cruces court has also had to 
transfer other kinds of felony cases to 
make room for its immigration docket; 
in 2007, the court transferred about 
600 felony cases to Albuquerque.60
Operation Streamline can also 
lead to low morale and a lack of train-
ing among U.S. attorneys, by requiring 
AUSAs to focus their energy on low-
level 
immigration 
prosecutions.61 
Carol C. Lam, a former U.S. attorney 
in the Southern District of California, 
has noted that, “If two-thirds of a U.S. 
9
49.	 Id. 
50.	 Id.  See also Dianne Solis, Immigration prosecutions surge under Bush’s watch, 
THE DALLAS MORNING NEWS, January 13, 2009 (quoting former Dallas U.S. 
Attorney Richard Roper as saying, “The practical effect [of a zero-tolerance 
approach to immigration] is it hurts our ability to prosecute white-collar 
fraud.  If we don’t do them in the U.S. attorney’s office they won’t get done 
because they are so labor-intensive.  It is difficult for the local district attor-
ney’s office to handle that.”).
51.	 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES COURTS, REPORT ON 
THE IMPACT ON THE JUDICIARY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES ALONG 
THE SOUTHWEST BORDER, supra note 36.
52.	 Id. at 14-15.
53.	 See, e.g., Interview with Hon. Norbert Garney, Magistrate Judge, Western 
District of Texas, El Paso, TX (March 25, 2009) (hereinafter Garney inter-
view); Interview with Hon. Richard Mesa, Magistrate Judge, Western District 
of Texas, El Paso, TX (March 25, 2009).
54.	 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES COURTS, REPORT ON 
THE IMPACT ON THE JUDICIARY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES ALONG 
THE SOUTHWEST BORDER, supra note 36, at 18.
55.	 Russell Goldman, What’s Clogging the Courts? Ask America’s Busiest Judge, 
ABC NEWS, July 23, 2008, available at http://abcnews.go.com/TheLaw/
story?id=5429227&page=1. 
56.	 Interview with Hon. Robert Brack, U.S. District Judge, District of New 
Mexico, Las Cruces, NM (March 24, 2009) (hereinafter Brack interview). 
57.	 See TRANSACTIONAL RECORDS ACCESS CLEARINGHOUSE, SURGE IN IMMI-
GRATION PROSECUTIONS CONTINUES (2008), available at http://trac.syr.edu/
immigration/reports/188; TRANSACTIONAL RECORDS ACCESS CLEARING-
HOUSE, PROSECUTIONS FOR MARCH 2009, REFERRING AGENCY: IMMIGRATION 
AND CUSTOMS IN HOMELAND SECURITY (2009), available at http://trac.syr.
edu/tracreports/bulletins/hsaa/monthlymar09/fil.  
58.	 “Reentry of deported alien” under 8 U.S.C § 1326 ranked first, followed by 
“Fraud and misuse of visas, permits, and other documents” under 18 U.S.C § 
1546 and “Entry of alien at improper time or place; etc.” under 8 U.S.C § 1325. 
See id. and TRANSACTIONAL RECORDS ACCESS CLEARINGHOUSE, SURGE IN 
IMMIGRATION PROSECUTIONS CONTINUES, supra note 57 at Table 4; TRANS-
ACTIONAL RECORDS ACCESS CLEARINGHOUSE, PROSECUTIONS FOR MARCH 
2009, REFERRING AGENCY: IMMIGRATION AND CUSTOMS IN HOMELAND 
SECURITY, JUDGE: ROBERT C. BRACK (2009) (data on file with author).
59.	 E-mail from Hon. Robert Brack, U.S. District Judge, District of New 
Mexico, Las Cruces, NM to Joanna Lydgate (October 29, 2009, 5:02:05 PM 
PST) (on file with author).
60.	 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES COURTS, REPORT ON 
THE IMPACT ON THE JUDICIARY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES ALONG 
THE SOUTHWEST BORDER, supra note 36, at 27.
61.	 See Solomon Moore, Push on Immigration Crimes Is Said to Shift Focus, 
supra note 46.

  
 Januar y 2010    |    A ssembly-Line Justice: A Re vie w of Oper ation Stre amline 
attorney’s office is handling low-level 
narcotics and immigration crimes, 
young prosecutors may not have the 
opportunity to learn how to do a wire-
tap case, or learn how to deal with 
the grand jury, or how to use money 
laundering statutes or flip witnesses or 
deal with informants and undercover 
investigations.  That’s not good law 
enforcement.”62
Concerns about morale and train-
ing exist for federal public defenders 
along the border as well.  Jon Sands, 
Federal Public Defender for the 
District of Arizona, says his office has 
combated burn-out among its employ-
ees by working with the Tucson 
district court to ensure that a bulk of 
the Operation Streamline cases are 
distributed to the CJA Panel and that 
attorney-client ratios are manageable. 
However, he notes that other Federal 
Public Defender’s offices have not 
been so fortunate.  In border locations 
where the CJA Panel is small, federal 
defenders have to handle most, if 
not all, of the Operation Streamline 
docket.  The repetitive nature and 
high volume of the work can, Mr. 
Sands emphasizes, lead to high turn-
over rates and to difficulty recruiting 
new lawyers.63 
Finally, 
Operation 
Streamline 
has stretched the U.S. Marshals 
Service thin.  Among other things, 
U.S. Marshals are tasked with appre-
hending federal fugitives, protecting 
the federal judiciary, operating the 
Witness Security Program, and trans-
porting federal prisoners.64  A February 
2008 internal report by the Marshals 
Service suggested that the Marshals’ 
immigration workload has made it 
difficult for them to focus on other 
crucial responsibilities.65  According 
to the report, the Marshals are 
“being forced to balance the appre-
hension of child predators and sex 
offenders against the judicial security 
requirements” involved in handling 
immigration detainees.66  
Effect on the behavior of migrants
To the extent that migrants are aware 
of 
Operation 
Streamline’s 
zero-
tolerance zones, as DHS claims, 
several additional concerns arise. 
First, 
Operation 
Streamline 
may 
drive more migrants to use profes-
sional human smugglers (popularly 
known as coyotes), out of a belief 
that coyotes can identify border areas 
where migrants are least likely to be 
apprehended.  Ninety percent of 
the migrants interviewed for the UC 
San Diego Study had hired a coyote for 
their most recent border crossing.67 
Robert Kinney, head of the Las Cruces 
Federal Defender’s Office, says people 
in his community refer to Operation 
Streamline as “a coyote employment 
bill.”68 This increased reliance on 
professional smugglers heightens bor-
der violence69 and may make it more 
difficult for Border Patrol agents to 
apprehend unlawful entrants.  
Second, as Judge Brack and oth-
ers noted, zero-tolerance zones may 
force migrants to attempt to cross 
along stretches of the border that 
are remote and physically hazardous 
and therefore less likely to be heav-
ily manned by Border Patrol agents.70 
This can lead to more migrant deaths 
from 
harsh 
conditions, 
includ-
ing heat exhaustion and drowning. 
According to a recent report by 
Mexico’s National Commission of 
Human Rights and the American 
Civil Liberties Union, border crossing 
deaths have increased in recent years, 
“despite the economic downturn, 
fewer migrant crossings, and a steady 
drop in apprehensions.”71 
Third, 
Operation 
Streamline 
may drive more migrants to attempt 
to enter the United States using false 
10 
62.	 Id.
63.  Telephone Interview with Jon Sands, Federal Public Defender, District of 
Arizona (September 17, 2009) (hereinafter Sands interview).
64.	 Fact Sheet, U.S. Marshals Service, United States Marshals 1 (April 2009), 
available at http://www.usmarshals.gov/duties/factsheets/general-1209.pdf.
65.	 See, e.g., Jeff Bliss, Bush Crackdown on Illegal Aliens Stretches Marshals to Limit, 
BLOOMBERG NEWS, March 12, 2008.  
66.	 Id. 
67. 	MEXICAN MIGRATION AND THE U.S. ECONOMIC CRISIS: A TRANSNA-
TIONAL PERSPECTIVE, supra note 29, at 63.
68.	 Kinney interview, supra note 38.
69.	 See, e.g., Julia Preston, Two Arrested in Attempt to Crash Border, NEW YORK 
TIMES, September 23, 2009 (“[ICE official Michael Unzueta] said that 
violence linked to human smuggling was rising because the business has 
become dominated by well-organized criminal groups in Mexico.”).  
70.	 Brack interview, supra note 56. 
71.	 AMERICAN CIVIL LIBERTIES UNION OF SAN DIEGO AND IMPERIAL 
COUNTIES & MEXICO’S NATIONAL COMMISSION OF HUMAN RIGHTS, 
HUMANITARIAN CRISIS: MIGRANT DEATHS AT THE U.S.-MEXICO BORDER 9 
(October 1, 2009), available at http://www.aclu.org/files/pdfs/immigrants/
humanitariancrisisreport.pdf. 

  
A ssembly-Line Justice: A Re vie w of Oper ation Stre amline    |    Januar y 2010   
identity documents.  Under Operation 
Streamline, being caught in an illegal 
crossing area means definite prosecu-
tion and detention, so taking a chance 
on walking through a border check-
point with false papers may become 
more attractive. Assistant Federal 
Public Defender Edgar Holguin 
reports a “dramatic” rise in cases involv-
ing the use of fraudulent documents in 
El Paso.72  Mr. Holguin’s observation is 
supported by data from TRAC, which 
shows recent nationwide increases in 
prosecutions related to the fraudulent 
use of identity documents.73
Finally, while there is reason to 
question how successful Operation 
Streamline has been at keeping 
undocumented immigrants out of the 
United States, enforcement efforts 
like Operation Streamline appear to 
be effective at keeping undocumented 
immigrants in the United States.74  
The UC San Diego researchers found 
that border enforcement programs 
like Operation Streamline, by mak-
ing it more difficult for migrants to 
enter the United States, prevent them 
from leaving once they have entered, 
which is known as “reduced circular-
ity of migration.”75 The anecdotal 
observations of Mr. Holguin support 
these findings.76 
Cost to taxpayers
Operation Streamline is also costly 
to U.S. taxpayers. While Operation 
Streamline’s budget is not pub-
licly available, a basic review of 
the resources required to run the 
program suggests that its costs are 
likely significant. 
Operation Streamline requires 
increased funding for DHS, to support 
the Border Patrol agents and agency 
attorneys that enable the program. 
DHS’s U.S. Customs and Border Pro-
tection agency alone is set to receive 
$10.1 billion in funding for fiscal year 
2010, more than $3.5 billion of which 
will fund the Border Patrol agents that 
make Operation Streamline possible.77 
Operation Streamline also requires sig-
nificant funding for the district courts, 
U.S. attorneys, federal public defend-
ers, CJA Panel attorneys, U.S. Marshals, 
and the Office of the Federal Detention 
Trustee in each of the federal districts 
along the border. An examination of 
just one of these  agencies’ 2010 fiscal 
year budget requests begins to reveal 
the potential magnitude of Operation 
Streamline’s costs.  
The Department of Justice has 
asked for a funding increase of $231.6 
million for fiscal year 2010 to sup-
port its contributions to immigration 
enforcement along the southwest bor-
der, including Operation Streamline.78 
The DOJ request includes $8.1 million 
to fund new U.S. attorney positions in 
response to the rising caseload along 
the U.S.-Mexico border.  DOJ has also 
requested $144.3 million for the U.S. 
Marshals Service to create 700 new 
positions and construct new court-
house space to “better accommodate 
immigration enforcement initiatives, 
such as DHS’[s] Secure Communities 
and Operation Streamline.”79
11
72. 	Holguin interview, supra note 38.
73. 	For example, prosecutions under 18 U.S.C. § 1028 (fraud and related ac-
tivity – ID documents) in fiscal year 2009 will likely be up 89% from 2004. 
TRANSACTIONAL RECORDS ACCESS CLEARINGHOUSE, TRAC DATA INTER-
PRETER: PROSECUTIONS FOR 2009: LEAD CHARGE: 18 USC 1028 - FRAUD AND 
RELATED ACTIVITY - ID DOCUMENTS (2009)(data on file with author).
74. 	MEXICAN MIGRATION AND THE U.S. ECONOMIC CRISIS: A TRANSNA-
TIONAL PERSPECTIVE, supra note 29, at 56-59.
75. 	Id.
76. 	Holguin interview, supra note 38 (“I think one of the things you’re seeing 
is people leave the U.S. a lot less frequently than they used to.  People would 
return to Mexico two to three times a year, for Christmas, a wedding, a funeral, 
and they would come back.  Now people are foregoing those trips.”). 
77.	 Press Release, United States Congress, Committees on Appropriations, 
FY2010 Conference Summary: Homeland Security Appropriations (Oct. 
7, 2009), available at http://appropriations.house.gov/pdf/Homeland_ 
Security_FY10_Conference.pdf. 
78. 	U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE, FISCAL YEAR 2010 BUDGET REQUEST 1 
(2009), available at  http://www.usdoj.gov/jmd/2010factsheets/pdf/safeguarding- 
our-swb.pdf.  
79. 	Id. at 5.
U.S. Customs and Border Protection is  
set to receive more than $3.5 billion in 2010 
to fund the Border Patrol agents that make  
Operation Streamline possible.

  
 Januar y 2010    |    A ssembly-Line Justice: A Re vie w of Oper ation Stre amline 
An 
example 
of 
Operation 
Streamline’s estimated fiscal impact 
at the district level provides further 
evidence of the program’s expense. 
The Tucson district court processes 70 
Operation Streamline defendants each 
day, and while many migrants receive 
a sentence of time-served, others 
receive sentences as high as 180 days, 
making the average detention period 
approximately 30 days.80  It costs DHS 
approximately $100 per day to detain 
an immigrant,81 which results in a 
cost of about $52.5 million per year to 
detain Operation Streamline defen-
dants in Tucson.82  Roughly $2 million 
of that money is spent on first-time 
entrants who have no prior criminal 
convictions.83 And it costs taxpayers 
at least another $2 million dollars per 
year to compensate the CJA Panel 
attorneys who represent the majority 
of Operation Streamline defendants 
in Tucson.84 
Operation Streamline also exacts a 
cost from state courts and prosecutors, 
who are left to manage the overflow 
of criminal cases that federal pros-
ecutors can no longer handle because 
of their Operation Streamline case-
loads.  In 2001, the “Southwest Border 
Prosecution Initiative” (SWBPI) was 
created to provide grants to border 
region courts experiencing high lev-
els of crime.  Now that Operation 
Streamline 
has 
diverted 
federal 
resources to prosecuting low-level 
immigration 
offenses, 
states 
use 
SWBPI grant money as reimbursement 
for taking the drug and other cases 
that federal courts have declined.85 
In 2009, the SWBPI cost taxpayers 
approximately $31 million.86 
Legal Concerns
Despite their best efforts, it is extremely 
difficult for border jurisdictions to 
implement Operation Streamline with-
out depriving migrants of procedural 
due process and effective assistance of 
counsel.87 The high volume of daily 
prosecutions requires proceedings in 
which dozens of defendants appear 
at once, and not all migrants receive 
timely appearances. As a result, the 
U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth 
Circuit recently found that Operation 
Streamline’s en masse hearings in 
Tucson violate federal law, and more 
than one judge the Warren Institute 
interviewed described the program as 
“assembly-line justice.”88 
Due process
The Chief Judge of the District of 
New Mexico, Martha Vázquez, has 
summarized the due process concerns 
that arise in border districts as immi-
gration caseloads skyrocket:
“The increase in our criminal 
caseload, especially in Las Cruces, has 
caused us to conduct hearings in a way 
that we’ve never had to conduct them 
before, and in a way that other juris-
dictions don’t have to. . . . We have . . . 
up to 90 defendants in a courtroom. 
Our magistrate judges try very hard to 
conduct their hearings in a way that 
is understandable to the defendants. 
But most of our defendants have a first 
or second grade education in their 
80.	 Brady McCombs, Zero tolerance working, says border patrol, ARIZONA DAILY 
STAR, April 6, 2008.  On the day the Warren Institute observed Operation 
Streamline proceedings in Tucson, the average sentence among the defendants 
who pled guilty that day was 31.5 days.     
81.	 Fact Sheet, U.S. Department of Homeland Security, ICE Detention Reform: 
Principles and Next Steps, October 6, 2009, available at http://www.dhs.gov/ 
xlibrary/assets/press_ice_detention_reform_fact_sheet.pdf (noting that the 
cost of detaining an immigrant varies by location but can exceed $100 per day).
82.	 This assumes a detention cost of $100 per migrant per day, with five days of 
Operation Streamline proceedings per week, for 50 weeks each year (account-
ing for about 10 federal holidays).
83.	 One Tucson magistrate judge reports that at least 30 Operation Streamline 
defendants receive a sentence of something other than time-served each day. 
E-mail from Hon. Bernardo Velasco, United States Magistrate Judge, District of 
Arizona, Tucson, AZ to Joanna Lydgate (November 3, 2009, 1:33:35 PM PST) 
(on file with author).  Given that there are 70 prosecutions each day, that leaves 
approximately 40 defendants who are sentenced to time-served.  Time-served in 
Tucson works out to one or two days in detention, unless the migrant is appre-
hended over a weekend, in which case she may spend three or four days in deten-
tion.  Williams interview, supra note 13. This calculation thus assumes an average 
detention period of two days and an average daily detention cost of $100, multi-
plied by 40 defendants each day, five days per week, 50 weeks per year.
84.	 CJA attorneys are paid $110 per hour and typically spend five hours on 
Operation Streamline proceedings in a day.  Approximately 15 CJA attorneys 
participate in the Operation Streamline proceedings each day, five days per 
week.  Bacal interview, supra note 39.  That results in an average weekly cost of 
$41,250 and an annual cost of $2,062,500. 
85.	 See, e.g., U.S. Department of Justice Office of the Inspector General, Audit 
Report: Southwest Border Prosecution Initiative Program (March 2008), available at 
http://www.usdoj.gov/oig/reports/OJP/a0822/final.pdf.
86.	 U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Justice Programs, BJA Programs: 
Southwest Border Prosecution Initiative, available at http://www.ojp.usdoj.gov/
BJA/grant/southwest.html.
87. 	The Due Process Clauses of the Fifth and Fourteenth Amendments pro-
tect undocumented immigrants.  See Zadvydas v. Davis, 533 U.S. 678, 693 (2001) 
(“Once an alien enters the country, the legal circumstance changes, for the Due 
Process Clause applies to all ‘persons’ within the United States, including aliens, 
whether their presence here is lawful, unlawful, temporary, or permanent.”).  
88.	 See, e.g., Garney interview, supra note 53.
12 

  
A ssembly-Line Justice: A Re vie w of Oper ation Stre amline    |    Januar y 2010   
native countries.  Some of them are 
not even able to read in their native 
languages.  And so, we explain to them 
their constitutional rights in a legal 
system entirely foreign to them.”89
Operation 
Streamline 
court 
proceedings tend to conform with 
Chief Judge Vázquez’s description. 
Most defendants receive just one 
court appearance, which serves as an 
arraignment, plea, and sentencing.90 
Defendants are processed in groups, 
with up to 80 defendants arraigned 
each day in Del Rio, 70 in Tucson, and 
an average of 20 in El Paso.91 
A defense attorney may have as 
little as a few minutes (in Del Rio) or 
as much as half an hour (in El Paso 
and Tucson) to meet her Operation 
Streamline client, assess the cli-
ent’s competency, explore potential 
defenses or claims to immigration 
relief (including whether the client 
may face persecution if returned to 
his home country), obtain mitigating 
information, and advise her client 
whether to accept a plea.92 The cli-
ent’s ability to ever legally reside in 
the United States may hang in the bal-
ance during these few minutes, as a 
removal order and a conviction under 
8 U.S.C. §§ 1325 or 1326 can make 
it impossible for a client to later 
obtain 
permanent 
residency 
or 
U.S. citizenship.	
Operation Streamline’s acceler-
ated, en masse hearings also contravene 
Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 
11, which lays out the due process 
requirements a court must satisfy 
before it can accept a defendant’s 
guilty plea.93  The court must, for 
example, address the defendant per-
sonally, make sure he understands the 
constitutional rights he is waiving, and 
89.	 Immigration Crisis Tests Federal Courts on Southwest Border, supra note 45.
90.	 In El Paso, however, Operation Streamline defendants receive two ap-
pearances: an initial appearance within 48 hours of arrest, and a plea and 
sentencing hearing about two weeks later.  
91. 	See supra notes 15-17.
92.	 Oversight Hearing on the Executive Office for United States Attorneys Before 
the Subcommittee on Commercial and Administrative Law of the H. Comm. on the 
Judiciary, 110th Cong. 7 (June 25, 2008) (Amended Written Statement of Heather 
E. Williams, First Assistant Federal Public Defender, District of Arizona, Tucson), 
available at http://judiciary.house.gov/hearings/pdf/Williams080625.pdf.
93.	 See U.S. CONST. AMD. VI; Powell v. Alabama, 287 U.S. 45, 68-69 (1932); 
Brescia v. New Jersey, 417 U.S. 921 (1974). 
A view of the Tucson courtroom where 70 Operation Streamline defendants plead guilty each day.
13

  
 Januar y 2010    |    A ssembly-Line Justice: A Re vie w of Oper ation Stre amline 
determine that his plea is voluntary.94 
Those requirements cannot be met 
in many Operation Streamline plea 
proceedings, during which the judge 
addresses a group of up to 70 or 80 
defendants.95 In December 2009, the 
Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals held 
that Operation Streamline’s group 
hearings in Tucson violate Rule 11 
and that the court “cannot permit this 
rule to be disregarded in the name 
of efficiency.”96  While the Court of 
Appeals’ ruling is a positive develop-
ment, it does not bind jurisdictions 
outside of the Ninth Circuit, and it has 
not hindered Operation Streamline 
in Tucson.  As of the publication of 
this report, Tucson magistrate judges 
are using a variety of different plea 
procedures to comply with the Ninth 
Circuit’s opinion, and while plea 
hearings are taking longer than they 
used to, the court still processes 70 
Operation 
Streamline 
defendants 
each day.97
Some 
Operation 
Streamline 
defendants may also have defenses 
that are not identified because of the 
speed and en masse nature of the pro-
ceedings.  These can include claims to 
immigration relief, such as eligibility 
for asylum, withholding of removal, 
relief under the Convention Against 
Torture, or adjustment of status.  A 
small number of defendants already 
have legal status in the United States 
but are not given the opportunity to 
clarify that status upon arrest.  The 
Federal Public Defender’s offices in 
Tucson, Las Cruces, El Paso, and Del 
Rio all cited examples of U.S. citi-
zens and legal permanent residents 
they have represented in Operation 
Streamline court proceedings.98
Effective assistance of counsel
Another constitutional issue of great 
concern among the judges and 
practitioners the Warren Institute 
interviewed was effective assistance 
of counsel.  While the Federal Public 
Defender (FPD) has built up sig-
nificant institutional knowledge and 
effective triage systems to process 
Operation 
Streamline 
cases, 
CJA 
Panel attorneys represent the majority 
of Operation Streamline defendants. 
Each day, one CJA attorney might 
be assigned to represent as few as six 
defendants (in Tucson), or as many 
as 80 (in Del Rio).99 Given these case-
loads, CJA attorneys – who often lack 
the staff and institutional resources 
of the FPD – do not always have the 
capacity to interview clients individu-
ally.100  Some Operation Streamline 
defendants are called into attorney- 
client meetings in groups, and attorneys 
may not be able to adequately inves-
tigate defenses or negotiate dismissals 
or reduced charges.  As a result, local 
practitioners worry that cases are not 
receiving individualized attention.
94.	 Fed. R. Crim. P. 11(b).
95.	 Operation Streamline defendants enter pleas in groups of up to 70 in 
Tucson and up to 80 in Del Rio.  In El Paso, the groups are much smaller – gen-
erally seven or eight at a time.  E-mail from Hon. Richard Mesa, United States 
Magistrate Judge, Western District of Texas, El Paso, TX to Joanna Lydgate (Sep-
tember 17, 2009, 11:25:29 AM PST) (on file with author).
96. 	United States v. Roblero-Solis, 588 F.3d at 693.
97.	 Telephone Interview with Hon. Bernardo Velasco, United States Magistrate 
Judge, District of Arizona, Tucson, AZ (December 14, 2009).
98. 	The Las Cruces Federal Defender, for example, represented a legal perma-
nent resident prosecuted through Operation Streamline who had lost his green 
card and could not afford the renewal fee.  The client traveled to Mexico and, 
upon return to the United States, was told at a border inspection station that he 
could not enter until he paid the renewal fee.  Unable to pay, he attempted to 
cross the border unlawfully.  When he spotted a Border Patrol truck, the client 
walked up to the truck and asked the agents inside to help him get his green card 
back.  The client was arrested and prosecuted under 8 U.S.C. § 1325.  Kinney 
interview, supra note 38.
99.	
Bacal interview, supra note 99; Telephone Interview with William D. Fry, 
Supervisory Assistant Federal Public Defender, Del Rio, Texas (April 1, 2009) 
(hereinafter Fry telephone interview).
100.	 See, e.g., Fry telephone interview, supra note 99; Holguin interview, 
supra note 38.
14 
In December 2009, the Ninth Circuit  
Court of Appeals held that Operation 
Streamline’s group hearings in Tucson  
violate federal law.

  
A ssembly-Line Justice: A Re vie w of Oper ation Stre amline    |    Januar y 2010   
Group attorney-client meetings 
are also incompatible with an attor-
ney’s duty to engage in confidential 
conversations with her clients.101  As 
the Administrative Office of the U.S. 
Courts has recognized with respect 
to the rising immigration caseload in 
the border district courts, “[a]ttor-
neys representing a large number of 
defendants may be unable to speak to 
them individually or privately before 
rendering advice, especially if they 
do not have sufficient time or space 
to consult with them.”102  In such an 
atmosphere, attorney-client confi-
dentiality concerns abound. 
Even in Tucson, where attorney-
client ratios are relatively low and 
defense attorneys are provided individ-
ual desks in the courtroom to conduct 
client interviews, the head of the 
Federal Defender’s office, when asked 
if she has concerns about Operation 
Streamline defendants receiving effec-
tive assistance, responded, “always.”103 
“The lawyers try their hardest,” she 
explained, “but they have a limited 
amount of time.”104
Prosecutorial independence
Border Patrol attorneys work for DHS. 
In jurisdictions where they are depu-
tized as special assistant U.S. attorneys 
to prosecute the Operation Streamline 
docket, including Tucson and Del Rio, 
prosecutorial independence may not 
be adequately preserved, nor potential 
conflicts of interest sufficiently consid-
ered.  While 28 U.S.C. § 543 authorizes 
the Attorney General to appoint spe-
cial assistant U.S. attorneys “when the 
public interest so requires,” the United 
States Attorneys’ Manual makes clear 
that “[s]uch appointments raise eth-
ics and conflict of interest issues that 
must be addressed.”105  
Some defense attorneys observed 
that Border Patrol attorneys can 
be more difficult to negotiate with 
than U.S. attorneys and that they 
do not function, in practice, as part 
of the U.S. Attorney’s Office, work-
ing largely out of the Border Patrol 
office and receiving little oversight 
from the USAO.  Jon Sands, Federal 
Defender of Arizona, also noted that 
Operation Streamline clients some-
times complain to their lawyers about 
misconduct on the part of a Border 
Patrol agent who arrested or pro-
cessed them, and it can be difficult for 
lawyers in his office to bring such com-
plaints to the Border Patrol attorney, 
who is a co-worker (and often also a 
friend) of the agent in question.106
Operation Streamline jurisdictions 
do not appear to be taking affirmative 
steps to address such ethical and con-
flict-of-interest issues and to ensure 
that Border Patrol attorneys can per-
form their duties with an adequate 
level of independence from DHS and 
with adequate supervision by DOJ.
Delayed initial appearances 
In Del Rio, Texas, there is an addi-
tional problem: Operation Streamline 
defendants are not receiving probable 
cause determinations within 48 hours 
of their warrantless arrests, as the 
Fourth Amendment requires.107  On 
the days the Warren Institute visited 
the Del Rio district court, some defen-
dants had waited as many as 12 days for 
a probable cause determination and 
14 days for an initial appearance.108
This delay likely also violates 
Federal Rule of Criminal Procedure 
5, which mandates that a defendant 
be brought “without unnecessary delay 
before a magistrate judge, or before 
a state or local judicial officer”109 and 
that “a complaint meeting Rule 4(a)’s 
requirement of probable cause . . . be 
promptly filed in the district where the 
offense was allegedly committed.”110 
A two-week delay may not satisfy 
either provision.   
101.	 See, e.g., MODEL RULES OF PROF’L CONDUCT R. 1.6.
102.	 ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES COURTS, REPORT ON 
THE IMPACT ON THE JUDICIARY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT ACTIVITIES ALONG 
THE SOUTHWEST BORDER, supra note 36, at 16.
103.	 Williams interview, supra note 13.
104.	 Id.
105.	 United States Attorneys’ Manual § 3-2.300.
106.	 Sands interview, supra note 63. 
107. 	 See County of Riverside v. McLaughlin, 500 U.S. 44 (1991).
108.	 In Del Rio, a magistrate judge makes the probable cause determination 
in the defendant’s absence, two days before the defendant appears in court for 
the first and only time, enters a plea, and is sentenced.  E-mail from Hon. Alia 
Ludlum, U.S. District Judge, Western District of Texas, Del Rio, TX to Joanna 
Lydgate (September 8, 2009, 11:02:55 AM PST) (on file with author).
109.	 Fed. R. Crim. P. 5(a)(1)(A) (emphasis added).
110. 	 Fed. R. Crim. P. 5(b) (emphasis added).
15

  
 Januar y 2010    |    A ssembly-Line Justice: A Re vie w of Oper ation Stre amline 
16  
FINDINGS
In the final accounting, Operation 
Streamline’s questionable effective-
ness, the strain it has put on border 
district courts, and its constitutional 
problems add up to a wasteful expendi-
ture of our law enforcement resources 
along the border. 
Operation Streamline does not target 
drug traffickers and human smug-
glers but rather migrants who are 
coming to this country in search of 
employment or to reunite with family. 
As Judge Brack has observed, “We’re 
spending a lot of time catching these 
folks when we could concentrate on 
those penetrating our border to do 
us harm.”111  T.J. Bonner, president of 
the National Border Patrol Council, 
shares 
the 
view 
that 
Operation 
Streamline uses resources unwisely. 
“This strategy pretty much has it back-
wards,” he told the Washington Post 
in 2008.112 “It’s going after desperate 
people who are crossing the border in 
search of a better way of life, instead 
of going after employers who are hir-
ing people who have no right to work 
in this country.”113 
Operation 
Streamline 
is 
over-
whelming the border district courts 
and channeling law enforcement 
resources away from prosecuting the 
crimes that create border violence. 
Operation 
Streamline 
also 
bur-
dens state court systems, which are 
left to handle the overflow of cases 
that 
federal 
prosecutors 
must 
decline as a result of their petty immi-
gration caseloads.
Operation Streamline violates the 
Constitution and threatens the rule 
of law in this country.  The pro-
gram’s accelerated, en masse hearings 
result in “assembly-line justice” that 
deprives migrants of procedural due 
process.  Operation Streamline also 
jeopardizes the constitutional rights 
of U.S. citizens.  If border district 
courts are allowed to cut procedural 
corners, that sets a precedent that will 
apply equally to U.S. citizens and non-
citizens, nationwide – a precedent 
the Ninth Circuit recently described 
as “subversive.”114  In the words of 
Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals Judge 
Carolyn King, we “can’t have a rule 
of law for the southwest border that 
is different from the rule of law that 
obtains elsewhere in the country.”115 
Operation Streamline has not been 
proven to reduce border crossings. 
Though border apprehension rates 
have decreased in recent years, that 
reduction is likely attributable to a 
variety of factors, including the down-
turn in the U.S. economy and the 
proliferation of other enforcement 
strategies along the border. 
Recommendations
The administration should replace Operation Streamline with a comprehensive and effective approach to border 
enforcement.  The administration should revert to the longstanding practice of leaving unlawful border crossings 
to the civil immigration system.  Treating first-time unlawful entry as a purely administrative violation allows DHS to 
detain a migrant for a brief period of time, enter a formal order of removal on the migrant’s record, and deport the 
migrant without draining the resources of the district courts, the U.S. Attorney’s Office, the Federal Public Defender, 
or the U.S. Marshals Service.   
The administration should also restore U.S. attorneys’ discretion to initiate prosecutions as they see fit to combat 
crime along the border.  Such discretion allows prosecutors to focus on dangerous criminal enterprises and on those 
border crossers who are apprehended with drugs or weapons, rather than expending scarce resources on migrants 
with no prior criminal history who are coming to this country to work or reunite with family.  
111.	 Russell Goldman, What’s Clogging the Courts? Ask America’s Busiest Judge, 
supra note 55.
112.	 Hsu, Immigration Prosecutions Hit New High, supra note 5.
113. 	 Id. 
114.	 United States v. Roblero-Solis, 588 F.3d at 693.
115.	 CRISIS ON THE BORDER: CASE OVERLOAD 2006 (Administrative Office 
of the U.S. Courts 2006) (available at http://www.uscourts.gov/ttb/2008-07/
images/CrisisOnTheBorder2006.wmv).
116. 	 It is important to note, however, that expedited removal is far from a 
perfect solution. Indeed, as it currently exists, the procedure has received 
widespread criticism and entails potential constitutional violations of its own.