1  
INTERNATIONAL HIGHER EDUCATION, Number 73 Fall 2013 
Pages 2-4 
 
The  Pursuit  of  International  Students  in  a  Commercialized  World  
PHILIP  G.  ALTBACH  and  LIZ  REISBERG  
  
Philip   G.   Altbach   is   Research   Professor   and   director   of   the   Center   for  
International   Higher   Education   at   Boston   College.   E-­‐‑mail:   altbach@bc.edu.   Liz  
Reisberg  is  president  of  Reisberg  &  Associates.  E-­‐‑mail:  reisberg@gmail.com.  
  
Global  student  mobility  creates  big  business.  Approximately  3  million  students  
are  studying  abroad,  contributing  more  than  US$75  billion  to  the  global  economy.  
There  are  multiple  reasons  for  choosing  to  study  abroad,  among  them  a  desire  to  
increase   employability   in   the   home   labor   market,   the   inability   to   find   relevant  
study  opportunities  at  home,  and  the  desire  for  migration.  
The   motivations   of   countries   and   universities   recruiting   international  
students  are  equally  complex  and  increasingly  commercial.  Many  countries  and  
institutions   depend   on   international   student   enrollments   to   balance   academic  
budgets.   In   some   cases   (Australia,   for   example),   government   policy   has  
identified  international  higher  education—including  foreign  study  in  Australia,  
branch  campuses,  and  other  initiatives  as  a  significant  income  stream  for  higher  

  
2  
education.   The   United   Kingdom   similarly   views   international   education   as   a  
source   of   income,   charging   non-­‐‑European   Union   foreign   students   higher   fees.  
Increasingly,  American  universities  also  see  international  education  as  an  income  
stream.  At  least  two  states,  Washington  and  New  York,  are  considering  higher  
tuition  for  international  students.    
Recent   research   shows   that   international   students   constitute   the   large  
majority  of  students  in  some  science,  technology,  engineering,  and  mathematics  
fields  in  a  number  of  key  developed  countries,  including  the  United  States.  Thus,  
a  recent  study  noted  that  more  than  95  percent  of  graduate  students  in  electrical  
engineering   and   computer   science   are   international   students   at   some   key  
American  universities.  Many  American  universities  have  become  dependent  on  
international  students  to  serve  as  graduate  teaching  and  research  assistants.  
  
GETTING  INFORMATION  AND  GUIDANCE  
Traditionally,   when   a   student   wanted   to   study   abroad,   he   or   she   elected   a  
destination   country,   researched   academic   institutions,   locations,   degree  
availability,  and  costs  and  applied  directly  to  an  academic  institution.  In  the  past,  
most   people   seeking   foreign   study   were   looking   for   graduate   or   professional  
qualifications  and  were  typically  from  families  with  some  international  exposure.  
As   long   as   the   numbers   were   modest,   this   informal   system   of   obtaining  

  
3  
information   through   personal   networks   worked   reasonably   well.   Additionally,  
prospective   students   could   acquire   additional   information   and   support   from   a  
number  
of  
government  
and  
university-­‐‑sponsored  
agencies—such  
as,  
EducationUSA,   the   British   Council,   Campus   France,   the   German   Academic  
Exchange  Service  (DAAD),  and  others.  These  organizations  maintain  centers  in  
major  cities  around  the  world  and  provide  objective  information  about  academic  
opportunities  in  the  country  that  sponsors  them.  With  the  rise  of  the  Internet  and  
university   Web   sites,   it   became   easier   to   search   for   universities   directly   from  
their  respective  Web  sites.  
As   numbers   of   mobile   students   have   grown   and   diversified   during   the  
past  decade,  this  independent  approach  to  researching  opportunities  ceased  to  
meet  the  needs  of  less  cosmopolitan  students  and  families  from  the  burgeoning  
middle  classes,  particularly  in  countries  such  as  China  and  India,  who  seek  study  
opportunities  abroad.    
There  are  private  professional  admissions  consultants  in  many  major  cities  
who   provide   advising   services   to   orient   prospective   students   to   appropriate  
opportunities  abroad.  These  consultants  may  also  guide  their  clients  through  the  
unfamiliar   terrain   of   the   admission   process.   The   most   professional   consultants  
develop  a  broad  knowledge  of  overseas  institutions  and  admission  practices  and  
seek   to   match   a   student’s   needs,   academic   abilities,   and   objectives   to   an  

  
4  
appropriate   overseas   destination.   They   receive   a   fee   from   the   student   for   this  
service.   Although   they   may   develop   relationships   with   admissions   officers  
around  the  world,  in  order  to  remain  up  to  date  with  current  information,  there  
are   no   contractual   agreements   with   any   foreign   universities.   Many   of   these  
consultants   belong   to   professional   organizations—such   as,   the   Association   of  
International   Graduate   Admissions   Consultants—to   collect   data,   share  
experience,  and  define  ethical  standards  of  practice.  
  
AGENTS  AND  RECRUITING  SHORTCUTS  
Perhaps  the  largest  and  certainly  the  most  controversial  recent  development  is  
the   emergence   of   agents   and   recruiters   who   work   for   specific   universities   and  
funnel   students   their   institutional   clients.   Agents   and   recruiters   hired   on   a  
commission  basis  have  become  big  business  in  China  and  India,  but  they  exist  
throughout  the  developing  world.  No  one  knows  for  sure  how  many  agents  are  
operating   in   the   world—no   statistics   are   available—and   their   activities   are  
unregulated.  Most  agencies  are  staffed  by  entrepreneurs  who  may  or  may  not  
have  any  knowledge  about  higher  education  in  the  countries  to  which  they  are  
sending  students  other  than  the  information  supplied  by  their  university  clients.  
There  are  a  few  large  agencies  with  international  branch  offices  and  international  
events—such  as  the  International  Development  Programme,  an  Australian-­‐‑based  

  
5  
company  with  operations  worldwide—but  most  are  smaller  shops  with  limited  
staff.  
In  essence,  agents  work  for  a  limited  number  of  universities  where  they  
receive  a  commission  for  each  successful  placement.  The  commission  paid  varies  
but   often   falls   in   the   range   of   15   to   20   percent   of   the   first-­‐‑year   fees—this   can  
amount  to  US$4,000–6,000  or  more.  Obviously  this  is  an  attractive  incentive  for  
agents  to  push  specific  institutions.  Some  US  universities  use  large  numbers  of  
agents.  For  example,  the  University  of  Cincinnati  lists  more  than  120  agents  on  its  
Web  site,  including  46  in  India  alone.  
  
QUESTIONS  RAISED  
However,  no  one  doubts  that  the  task  of  researching  study-­‐‑abroad  opportunities  
is  daunting.  The  question  is  how  to  acquire  the  information  and  support  needed  
and  how  to  recognize  the  risks.  Agents  are  appealing  shortcuts  for  students  as  
well   as   for   universities   that   wish   to   enroll   international   students,   but   using  
agents  present  a  number  of  dilemmas.  
First,  there  is  no  way  to  guarantee  whether  the  institutions  recommended  
by   agents   are   the   best   choices   for   the   student   client.   Frankly,   it   is   difficult   to  
imagine  that  if  agents  earn  their  living  from  commissions  from  institutions  A,  B,  
and   C   that   they   will   recommend   institution   S,   when   it   offers   a   particularly  

  
6  
appropriate  program  for  a  student.  In  fact,  it  is  doubtful  to  imagine  that  the  agent  
will  know  about  programs  other  than  those  at  A,  B,  and  C.  
Further,  it  is  difficult,  if  not  impossible,  to  know  exactly  what  takes  place  
between  the  agent  and  student,  periodic  inspections  not  withstanding.  Anecdotal  
reports  suggest  that  many  agents  “help”  clients  by  doctoring  academic  records,  
writing  essays,  preparing  letters  of  recommendations,  and  providing  other  kinds  
of   dubious   “assistance.”   It   has   been   estimated   that   80   percent   of   applicants  
helped  by  agents  include  faked  credentials.  
In   some   cases,   agents   are   reported   to   charge   both   the   student   and   the  
university,  a  practice  of  questionable  ethics.  
  
WHO  DETERMINES  WHAT  IS  ETHICAL?  
The   American   International   Recruitment   Council   (AIRC),   a   nonprofit  
organization,   was   launched   in   2008   to   represent   the   interests   of   the   agent  
community   and   the   universities   that   employ   them,   and   later   began   to   certify  
agents   that   meet   that   council’s   ethical   standards.   The   process   is   expensive,  
beginning   with   a   US$2,000   nonrefundable   application   fee,   a   US$5,000  
precertification  fee,  and  followed  by  the  travel  costs  of  the  evaluation  team  and  a  
first-­‐‑year  member  fee  of  US$3,000.  Membership  must  be  renewed  annually  at  an  

  
7  
additional   cost   of   US$2–3,000.   This   puts   the   cost   of   certification   beyond   the  
budgets  of  many  smaller  agencies.  
  
One  of  many  concerns  about  AIRC  is  that  this  organization  is  entirely  self-­‐‑
validating;  its  members  are  universities  and  agents  who  benefit  from  the  ethical  
cover  that  certification  provides.  AIRC  was  created  to  validate  the  employment  
of  agents  on  the  supposition  that  ethical  practices  could  be  assured.  There  is  no  
independent  corroboration  of  the  effectiveness  of  the  methodology  or  results.  
  
In   June   2013,   after   two   years   of   study,   the   National   Association   of  
Collegiate   Admissions   Counsel   (NACAC),   the   American   organization   of  
professionals  in  the  field  of  college  and  university  admissions  established  in  1937,  
issued  a  report  on  agents  and  recruiters.  After  considerable  pressure  from  AIRC  
members,  that  document  backed  away  from  a  previous  statement  that  a  NACAC  
member   “could   not”   work   with   agents   to   a   gentler   “should   not”   work   with  
agents.  The  NACAC  national  conference  in  fall  2013  will  consider  the  report.  
  
The   American   Association   of   Collegiate   Registrars   and   Admissions  
Officers   has   also   created   a   task   force   to   consider   professional   standards   for  
recruitments  and  other  activities  related  to  international  activity.  
  
Universities  are  being  asked  to  disclose  that  they  work  with  agents  and  
with   whom   they   work.   This   is,   at   a   minimum,   a   basic   ethical   obligation.   Yet,  
agents  also  need  to  disclose  to  students  and  families  that  they  are  contracted  by  

  
8  
universities,   and   that   they   are   providing   information   to   students   on   behalf   of  
only   those   specific   universities   and   not   pretend   that   they   are   professional  
admissions  consultants,  who  are  described  above.  
  
  
WHAT  CAN  BE  DONE?  
From   our   perspective,   agents   and   recruiters   should   not   be   condoned   in   the  
admissions  process  for  domestic  or  international  students.  Thus,  students  should  
have  a  full  range  of  information  about  the  universities  to  which  they  are  most  
suited  and  when  agents  have  a  vested  interest  in  limiting  options  to  the  small  
number   of   universities   that   pay   commissions.   Further,   the   possibilities   for  
corruption  of  the  admissions  process  seem  great  and  widely  evident.  
  
The  choice  about  where  to  study  overseas  is  an  important  commitment  of  
family   resources   and   student   time.   Students   and   their   families   need   to   take   a  
proactive   role   regardless   of   how   difficult   the   task   and   not   leave   their   fate   to  
agents  or  others  who  might  not  have  their  best  interest  in  mind.  
  
International   student   mobility   reflects   a   mass   phenomenon,   and   a  
multifaceted   approach   is   needed.   Many   are   already   operating   but   need  
strengthening.  

  
9  
• Universities  have  the  responsibility  to  provide  informative,  honest,  user-­‐‑
friendly   Web   sites   with   clear   information   about   academic   programs,  
admissions   procedures,   graduation   requirements,   costs,   and   student  
services.  
• Universities   must   assign   staff   to   respond   individually   to   prospective  
students,  with  information  and  assistance,  during  the  admissions  process.  
This  will  not  be  inexpensive,  but  if  some  of  the  budget  now  on  agents  can  
be  redirected  to  this  task,  the  funds  will  be  well  spent.  
• University  and  other  academic  associations  in  the  receiving  countries  or  
regions   should   provide   Web   sites   with   clear   and   complete   information  
about   academic   systems   and   study   opportunities   open   to   international  
candidates.  
• Governments  must  increase  support  to  education  information  centers  in  
the  primary  sending  countries  to  provide  on-­‐‑site  information  with  well-­‐‑
trained   professional   staff   who   can   offer   workshops   and   guidance   to  
prospective  students.  
• Professional   education   consultants,   who   provide   objective   information  
about   study   opportunities   and   carefully   assess   the   needs   of   potential  
applicants  to  match  them  to  appropriate  academic  programs  without  the  
influence  of  commission,  should  be  distinguished  from  agents.  

  
10 
• Universities   should   discourage   students   and   their   families   from   turning  
decisions  over  to  agents,  much  as  Cornell  University  has  done.  
  
CONCLUSION  
Without  question,  global  student  mobility  is  of  great  importance—for  countries,  
academic  institutions,  and  perhaps  most  crucially  for  individual  students.  Key  to  
this   enterprise   is   ensuring   that   the   student   is   matched   with   the   best   possible  
study  opportunity.