LAW ENFORCEMENT PREPAREDNESS FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF 
INDONESIA’S LAW ON JUVENILE JUSTICE SYSTEM* 
 
 
Dani Krisnawati** 
 
 
Criminal Law Department, Faculty of Law Universitas Gadjah Mada, Yogyakarta 
Jalan Sosio Justicia Nomor 1 Bulaksumur, Sleman, D.I. Yogyakarta 55281 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Paradigmatic changes stipulated in Law Number 11 of 2012 on Juvenile Justice System, including 
regulations concerning restorative justice and diversion require the competency and skills of 
the law enforcement officers. This research identifies measures that have been taken and the existing 
barriers in preparing for the implementation of this Law. The research demonstrates that the readiness 
of the investigators and child prosecutors are merely limited to the outreach of Law Number 11 of 2012, 
whilst knowledge of the court judges only covers the draft Law. The number of officers receiving outreach 
is limited and should be increased. Negative perception on the officers due to the risk of a bribery 
accusation is feared to hamper the implementation of diversion regulation based on a restorative justice. 
Keywords: juvenile, justice, criminal, diversion, outreach. 
 
 
 
 
Intisari 
 
Perubahan paradigmatik yang termuat dalam Undang-Undang Nomor 11 Tahun 2012 tentang Sistem 
Peradilan Pidana Anak, termasuk diantaranya ketentuan mengenai keadilan restoratif dan diversi, 
memerlukan kompetensi dan keahlian aparat penegak hukum. Penelitian ini mengidentifikasi langkah 
yang telah dilakukan dan kendala persiapan implementasi Undang-Undang tersebut. Hasil penelitian 
memperlihatkan bahwa kesiapan penyidik dan penuntut umum anak masih terbatas pada partisipasi 
sosialisasi Undang-Undang Nomor 11 Tahun 2012, sedangkan hakim anak memiliki pengetahuan 
hanya pada Rancangan Undang-Undang. Jumlah aparat yang menerima sosialisasi Undang-Undang 
masih terbatas dan perlu ditingkatkan jumlahnya. Pandangan negatif terhadap aparat karena bisa 
menimbulkan dugaan suap dikhawatirkan menjadi penghambat diterapkannya ketentuan diversi dengan 
pendekatan keadilan restoratif. 
Kata Kunci: anak, peradilan, pidana, diversi, sosialisasi. 
 
 
 
 
Pokok Muatan 
 
A. Background ................................................................................................................................ 
477 
B. Research Methods...................................................................................................................... 
478 
C. Results and Analysis .................................................................................................................. 
479 
1.   The Steps which have been done by Law Enforcement Officers in Conducting the Pro-  
vidence of Juvenile Criminal Justice System ...................................................................... 
479 
2.   Constraints Faced and Efforts Made to Improve the Capacity of Law Enforcement  
Agencies in Meeting Juvenile Criminal Justice System Law.............................................. 
483 
D. Conclusions................................................................................................................................ 
487 
 
*          Research Report Faculty of Law Universitas Gadjah Mada Year 2012. 
**        Correspondence address: danikrisnawati@gmail.com

477 
Krisnawati, Law Enforcement Preparedness for the Implementation of Indonesia’s Law on Juvenile Justice System 
 
A.   Background 
The issue of child protection is very 
fundamental and strategic. From the life of a 
nation and a country’s point of view, children are 
the future of the nation and the successor of the 
nation’s aspiration. Therefore, every child has the 
right to live, grow and develop, participate and 
entitled to have the protection against violence 
and discrimination and civil and freedom rights.1 
It is also defined in Article 28 B, paragraph (2) of 
the 1945 Constitution of the Republic of Indonesia 
that every child has the right to live, grow and 
develop as well as the right to have protection 
from violence and discrimination. 
Based  on  the  above  argument,  children2 
who faced the law have to get special protection, 
particularly legal protection in the judicial system. 
Legal protection must be given so the child has the 
opportunity to learn to be a useful person for him/ 
herself, family, community and country, and is 
able to be active in positive ways to pursue his/her 
life. Literature assessment3 shows that throughout 
the history, children confronted with the law have 
always required different treatment than the adults 
who have broke the law. The reason behind this 
idea is that the mental and physical development 
of children have not been optimized, thus their 
ability  to  act  and  to  be  responsible  is  not  the 
same as adults. Law Number 11 of 2012 about 
Juvenile Justice System is composed to replace 
Law Noumber 3 of 1997 concerning Juvenile 
Court because it seemed no longer suitable with 
the development of law and societal needs since it 
has not provided comprehensive protection to the 
child who faced the law. In the reality, the child 
is positioned as an object and the treatment for 
the child dealing with the law is likely to give the 
child disadvantages. 
Some  of  the  cases  of  children  conflicted 
with law which become national-wide case are 
Raju  case,  the  suspicion  of  gamble  conducted 
by 10 (ten) underage boys’ case in Tangerang, 
and the flip flop case in Palu, Central Sulawesi. 
Most of the children cases Judjements resulted 
in the child being convicted. Usually the law 
enforcers would give ‘wise’ sanctions if the case 
has  been  disputed  with  the  mass  media.  Data 
from  Corrections  General  Directory  on August 
2012 showed us that 96.2% of protégé undergo 
imprisonment. It showed that majority of the 
treatment for children dealing with law is by giving 
them sanctions in the form of imprisonment, and 
also a different direction from children protection 
instruments because the best treatment for them is 
to keep them far away from sanctions, moreover 
imprisonment. 
Based  on  the  above  discussion,  strategic 
and concrete steps should be done in order to 
restructure the juvenile court system in Indonesia. 
It needs paradigm changes in handling children 
conflicted with law. With the enactment of Law 
Number 11 of 2012 about Juvenile Criminal 
Justice System on 30th   of July 2012, the court 
can guarantee the protection for the best interest 
toward the child dealing with law as the nation’s 
successor can be formed. The most basic substance 
in Law Number 11 of 2012 is a national restorative 
justice and diversion which has an intention to 
avoid and keep children from the judicial process 
to prevent stigmatization of children conflicted 
with the law, and the child is expected to be back 
to the social environment aptly. During this time, 
the investigator, public prosecutor or judge has 
yet to set out the approach to restorative justice 
to  children  in  conflict with  the  law. After  the 
emergence of Juvenile Justice Law, there is no 
reason anymore for the law enforcement officers 
not to implement it. 
The Law on Juvenile Justice System itself 
will begin after 2 (two) years counted from the
 
 
1          Description of the Law Number 23 of 2002 about Child Protection State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2002 Nomor109). 
2          In the universal norm, a child is holistic person and therefore possess protected human rights. See Hadi Supeno, 2010, Kriminalisasi Anak 
(Tawaran gagasan Radikal Peradilan Anak Tanpa Pemidanaan), Gramedia Pustaka Utama, Jakarta, p. 27. 
3          UNICEF and Pusat Kajian Kriminologi, 2006-2007, Analisis Situasi Anak yang Berhadapan dengan Hukum di Indonesia, Faculty of 
Social and Political Science, Universitas Indonesia, Jakarta, p. 15.

MIMBAR HUKUM Volume 25, Nomor 3, Oktober 2013, Halaman 477-488 
478 
date of promulgation4   which is on 30th   of July 
2014.  In  principle,  the  juvenile  justice  system 
must  be  implemented  in  the  spirit  of 
restorative  justice,  and  law  enforcers  are 
obligated to fight for diversion in the form of 
seeking the settlement of children cases from the 
criminal justice process to the process outside 
from the criminal justice. Even the threat of 
criminal sanctions such as fines or prison5  exist 
for investigators, prosecutors and the judge who 
deliberately do not implement diversion in the level 
of investigation, prosecution, and examination in 
the District Courts (in cases which the alleged is 
threatened with imprisonment under seven years, 
and is not a repetition of the crime). 
Another crucial issue in the Law on the 
Juvenile Justice System is the boundaries provi- 
sion in child’s penalty responsibility from 12 
(twelve) years old until almost 18 (eighteen) years 
old, while the age boundary for children who can 
be charged for detention are 14 (fourteen) years 
old until almost 18 (eighteen) years of age. 
Besides the obligation for every party to not 
publicly expose the child’s case, this law also 
strictly regulates the procedures and time period 
for arresting, time period of restraining and the 
classification of the type of punishment. This 
shows that the Law on the Juvenile Justice System 
requires the Preparedness from law enforcement 
officers,  investigators,  prosecutors,  and  judges 
as the essential elements in the providence. 
Therefore, the readiness of the law enforcement 
agencies   need   to   be   examined   profoundly, 
because inequality still can be found in the level 
of implementation between what the Constitution 
wants and its reality. This research limits its 
discussion to children comes into conflict with 
the law. Therefore children who became victims 
of a criminal offence, and children who act as the 
witness the crime are not discussed in this study. 
Based on the background as described above, the 
issues examined are: 1) what are the steps that 
have been underfaren by law enforcement officers 
in conducting the providence of the juvenile 
justice law?; 2) what are the obstacles confronted 
and how to improve the law enforcement officers’ 
capacity in conducting the providence of the 
juvenile justice law? 
 
 
B.   Research Methods 
Legal methods used in this study are norma- 
tive  and  empirical  legal  research.6   Judging  by 
their very nature, this legal research is descriptive 
legal  research.7    Materials  of  research  used  in 
this research include secondary data in the form 
of library materials of primary legal materials, 
secondary and tertiary legal materials while 
primary legal materials are obtained directly from 
the subjects of the research. In this study, the data 
was collected through research in libraries (library 
research) and research in the field (field research). 
Library research is meant to get secondary data, 
while field research is aimed at obtaining primary 
data. 
On  library  research  document  study  tools 
will be used. Next on the field research it will be 
used to guide the interview. The techniques used 
is non guided interview in which the interviewer 
already carried an interview guide that contains 
key questions for respondents, yet the existence of 
variations of questions are tailored to the situation 
when it is possible to conduct interviews.8 The data 
and documents obtained from the research library 
and  field  research  were  analysed  qualitatively 
was quantification of existing data. That means 
the data obtained from this research are selected
 
 
 
4          Article 108 Law Number 11 of 2012 about Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 No. 
153, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia No. 5332). 
5 
Article 96 Law Number 11 of 2012 about Juvenile Criminal Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 2011 No. 153, 
Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia No. 5332). 
6          Ronny Hanitijo Soemitro, 1994, Metodologi Penelitian Hukum dan Jurimetri, Ghalia Indonesia, Jakarta, p.52. 
7          Soerjono Soekanto, 1984, Pengantar Penelitian Hukum, UI-Press, Jakarta, p.10. 
8          Ronny Hanitijo Soemitro, 1995, Metodologi Penelitian Hukum, Ghalia Indonesia, Jakarta, p.73.

479 
Krisnawati, Law Enforcement Preparedness for the Implementation of Indonesia’s Law on Juvenile Justice System 
 
according and related to quality and quantity in 
which problems are discussed and developed, 
described and analysed resulting in a conclusion 
to address problems in this research 
 
 
C.   Results and Analysis 
1. The Steps which have been done by Law 
Enforcement Officers in Conducting The 
Providence of Juvenile Criminal Justice 
System 
Children  who  are  dealing  with  the  law 
require special treatment that is different from the 
treatment for adults. The process which begin with 
investigation,  prosecution,  trial,  and  ends  with 
the  verdict  is  so  susceptible  to  discrimination9 
and deprivation of the rights of children, so that 
children conflicted with the law must be protected. 
Various studies on the treatment of children in 
conflict with the law shows a trend of getting 
tough against children, which is considered the 
most appropriate solution is a penalty that is both 
retributive and punitive.10 To actualize this, a good 
preparation  in  both  competence  and  expertise 
from law officers are required. Here’s an overview 
of the results of research and discussion. 
a. Steps  Undertaken  by  the  Investiga- 
tors11 
The justice solution consists of several 
stages. Path to know the existence of a 
criminal offence may be through a complaint, 
report, and caught the in hand. The handling of 
cases of children in the Sleman District Police 
office is immediately directed and managed 
by women and children service unit that is 
structurally under the Head of Investigation 
and Crime Sleman District Police. Based on 
the Regulations of The Chief of Police of 
the Republic of Indonesia No. Pol 10/2007 
on The Organization and the Perkapital 
procedure in the women and Children service 
Unit, the police unit from child investigator 
is under the women and children’s unit, in 
which the police regulations stated that the 
women and children unit is a unit that is in 
charge of providing services, in the form of 
the protection of women and children who 
are victims of crime and the enforcement of 
the law against the perpetrators.12  The scope 
of the task in women and children service 
unit  includes  criminal  acts  against  women 
and children as well as other cases where the 
perpetrators were women and children.13 
Based  on  the  results  of  the  research, 
the women and child service unit in Sleman 
Police is led by a non-commissioned officer, 
and not an officer as set forth in the regula- 
tions of the Republic of Indonesia National 
Police Chief Number Pol 10 of 2007 on The 
Organization and The Procedures of The 
Women and Children Service Unit in Police 
Neighbourhood of the Republic of Indonesia. 
Beside that 9 (nine) of investigators are 
consisting of four (4) women and five (5) 
men in women and children service unit 
Sleman Police, none of which is a children’s 
investigator, but only the investigator in 
charge of defending child in women and 
children Service Unit Police Sleman. 
The data resulted from the research 
portrayed the children cases from the Sleman 
Resort Police handled from year 2011 and 
year 2012. In 2011 from 25 cases written in 
the registry book, there were 15 cases (60%) 
in which all of them were processed further to
 
 
 
9 
Discrimination is the root of exploitation on children. See Savitri Goonesekere, 1998, Children, Law, and Justice a South Asian Perspective, 
UNICEF and Sage Publications, New Delhi, p.140. 
10        UNICEF and Pusat Kajian Kriminologi, Op.cit., p. 56. 
11        The research shows that no child investigators available at Sleman Polices. Investigators assigned to Women and Children Service Unit 
handled the criminal juvenile cases, but they are not child investigator. 
12        Article 1 point 1 Regulation of Chief Police of the Republic of Indonesia, No. Pol. 10/2007 about Organization and Procedure of the 
Women and Children Service Unit in the Police Department Republic of Indonesia. 
13        Article 6 Paragraph (3) Regulation of Chief Police of the Republic of Indonesia, No. Pol. 10/2007 about Organization and Procedure of the 
Women and Children Service Unit in the Police Department Republic of Indonesia.

MIMBAR HUKUM Volume 25, Nomor 3, Oktober 2013, Halaman 477-488 
480 
the office of the Prosecution, meanwhile the 
rest of 10 cases (40%) were solved outside 
the juvenile justice system. As for the year 
2012, from 9 cases written in the book, 6 
cases (66,7%) were processed further to the 
office of the prosecution, and the rest of the 
cases, 3 cases (33,3%) were solved outside 
the justice system. From the data in the year 
2011 and 2012 above we can conclude that 
almost all of the children inspected by the 
Investigators had their process continued to 
the office of the prosecution. 
In the juvenile justice system, inves- 
tigators are the first gate of treating the 
children’s case. The children’s path in justice 
process is determined by the attitude and 
knowledge. In the process of treating a child’s 
case, investigators in women and children 
service unit Sleman Police usually attempted 
to make a settlement between the suspect or 
his family with the victim or his family and 
also involving the village’s officer or the 
RT/RW chief in neighbourhood which the 
investigator is facilitated. 
It is based the discretion authority owned 
by police officer referred to the Law Number 
2 of 2002 on the police of the Republic of 
Indonesia,  namely  in Article  18  Paragraph 
(1), Article 18, paragraph (2), Article 19, 
paragraph (1), and Article 19, paragraph (2). 
Peace efforts and deliberations that have 
become accustomed to Police investigators 
in Sleman Regency are definitely not a prac- 
tice of diversion as set forth in Law, Number 
11 of 2012 about the Cumendari Justice 
System, because there are certain conditions 
for process of diversion by the investigators. 
Based on Law Number 11 of 2012 on 
the Juvenile Justice System there is a new 
obligation that must be carried out by the 
investigator, which is to attempt diversion 
with   restorative   justice   approach   within 
7 (seven) days after the proceeds of 
investigation. The diversion process will be 
executed in at least 30 (thirty) days after the 
commencement of the diversion. From the 
results of research on women and children 
service unit in Sleman Police, the steps have 
been made concerning the readiness of the 
investigators in the enactment of Law No. 
11/2012   about   Juvenile   Criminal   Justice 
System is as follows: 
1) There is 1 (one) investigator who had 
attended the outreach that was held by 
regional  police  DIY regarding  Law 
Number 11 of 2012 about the Criminal 
Juvenile Criminal Justice System on 
the 17th until 19th of September 2012. 
2) There’s been a limited understanding 
about the subject from investigators, 
although by the not deeply ditch who 
had attended the outreach about new 
provisions concerning the treatment 
for children dealing with the law as 
set forth in the Law Number 11 of 
2012 about the Juvenile Criminal 
Justice    System.    Investigators    at 
least  understand  that  at  this  point 
there has been a new legislation i.e. 
Law No. 11/2012 about the Juvenile 
Criminal Justice System which will 
be applied within 2 (two) years time. 
In  addition,  the  investigators  also 
have  understood  even  though  only 
in the form of a general overview 
about the existence of diversion 
provisions with restorative justice 
approaches. Other new provisions 
investigators should understand is the 
existence of sanctions conceived for 
law enforcement agencies who do not 
implement diversion. 
3) Investigators  stated  that  they  were 
ready if in the future the diversion will 
be  implemented,  because  attempts 
for  peace  between  the  suspect  and 
the victim and involve other related 
parties   such   as   local   community

481 
Krisnawati, Law Enforcement Preparedness for the Implementation of Indonesia’s Law on Juvenile Justice System 
 
leaders are already in practice, 
especially in certain criminal acts, 
which seem can be solved peacefully 
before it is decided whether or not the 
case will be continued at the stage of 
investigation or not. However, the 
investigator understanding regarding 
the diversion should be elaborated 
further,   because   diversion   is   not 
only an attempt to reconcile with 
deliberation, but the principle of the 
best interest for the child must be the 
priority. 
4) Investigators do peacekeeping efforts 
in a special room which is available 
in the women and Children unit in 
Sleman Resort Police. 
5) Investigators  conduct  the  detention 
of children, whose placement is 
separated with adult. However its 
placement is not in the Sleman Resort 
Police but in Beran Sector Police. 
6) Investigators     entrusting     children 
whom do not have any family or 
carers to Social Service so that the 
child still feel protected. 
b.    Steps  undertaken  by  the  Children’s 
Prosecutors 
When the investigation has been started 
by investigators in Polres Sleman, Polres 
Sleman investigators will then inform the 
District Attorney’s Chief of Sleman, that 
investigation of a case has been commenced. 
Next the head of District will appoint the 
public  prosecutor  who  handled  the  case.14 
Currently, the public prosecutor who served 
on the District Attorney’s Sleman, are three 
(3) people, where all of them are a woman 
and already married. It is based on 
consideration that married women are more 
confidence in dealing with children with any 
kind of problem.15 So far not every child 
prosecutor in the District Attorney’s Sleman 
had attended the children outreach, and the 
responsible unit is under the public criminal, 
not a criminal unit in the special unit like on 
the police institution that has had a special 
unit which is a unit of women and children 
service.16 
On the other hand, the results showed 
that at this stage of the investigation, the 
child’s  public  prosecutor  may  coordinate 
with the investigators with trying to give 
advice to the investigating authority using 
discretion authority to reconcile the offender 
with the victim, so that the matter can be 
halted  and  did  not  continue  to  the  stage 
of prosecution.17  These efforts are solely 
conducted to provide the best protection for 
the child. Such coordination is carried out 
because when a case has been assigned at the 
stage of the prosecution, the public prosecutor 
had no authority to seek peace between the 
perpetrator and the victim. Based on the 
results of the study revealed that during this 
time the public prosecutor in the Sleman 
District Attorney  indeed  never  did  attempt 
peace so that the matter did not proceed at 
this  stage  of  the  prosecution  case,  though 
the child’s case is considered mild.18  In this 
case the public prosecutor does not have the 
authority except as provided for in Article 
140, paragraph (2) of the Law Nunber  8 of 
1981 on the Law of Criminal Procedure.19 
Hence the public prosecutor does not have 
the authority to reconcile the offender with
 
 
 
14        Interview with Indri Astuti as the Juvenile Prosecutors in the Sleman District Attorney, 14 November 2012. 
15        Interview with Yacob Hendrik as the Head of Children District Attorney in the Sleman District Attorney, 14 November 2012. 
16        Interview with Indri Astuti as the Juvenile Prosecutor in the Sleman District Attorney, 14 November 2012. 
17        Interview with Wahyuning Dyah as the Juvenile Prosecutor in the Sleman District Attorney, 12 December 2012. 
18        Interview with Indri Astuti as the Juvenile Prosecutor in the Sleman District Attorney, 14 November 2012. 
19        In cases where a prosecutor decides to discharge due to insufficient evidence or the event is not a criminal act or discharge before the law, 
a prosecutor reveals those consideration in a decree.

MIMBAR HUKUM Volume 25, Nomor 3, Oktober 2013, Halaman 477-488 
482 
the victim. What always happen in Sleman 
District Attorney are the children’s case 
continued to the examination stage.20 
During this time the public prosecutor 
in the District Attorney’s Sleman, still holds 
that the use of criminal sanctions is the 
ultimate choice in dealing with the children 
case. According to the children cases data 
in Sleman District Attorney, in 2012, of the 
79 cases, the number of children criminal 
offence offenders charged with criminal 
sanctions is up to 78 people (98.8%), while 
only  1  person  (1.2%)  is  being  charged 
with sanctions. It portrays that the majority 
of the public prosecutor conducts the 
prosecution by invoking this type of criminal 
sanctions in the children case, although in 
juvenile criminal justice action sanctions is 
also known.21 
In the Law Number 11 of 2012 about the 
Juvenile Justice System, there is a new task 
for the public children prosecutor which is 
to  seek  diversion.  It  will  not  be  obstacles 
for the public prosecutors in the Sleman 
District  Attorney  if  they  must  implement 
new  terms  regarding  the  diversion, 
although during this time when the docket 
has been delegated to the level of prosecution, 
the public children prosecutor never did 
attempt   peace   in   handling   the   matter 
because  the  child  prosecutor  did  not  have 
the authority.22  Because Law Number 11 of 
2012 on the Juvenile Justice System will be 
enacted, the public prosecutors in the District 
Attorney’s Sleman have made steps to prepare 
themselves to meet the new legislation, which 
are:23 
1) They  have  attended  events  which 
were  the  consultation  on  the  draft 
Law, organized by the Government 
of DIY, along with other relevant 
agencies in the handling of the matter, 
such Social Services and Correctional 
Centre. 
2) 1  (one)  public  children  prosecutor 
in the outreach of Law Number 11 
of 2012 on Juvenile Justice System 
organized  by  the  regional  offices 
of the Ministry of Law and Human 
Rights. 
3) The  public  children  prosecutor  has 
attended forums about communica- 
tion and coordination between law 
enforcement officers who handle 
children’s case in Jogjakarta. The 
public children    prosecutors    also 
coordinate often with investigators 
when handling the children case from 
Sleman Police. 
4) The  public  children  prosecutor  al- 
ready attended many seminar related 
to children’s case, so they could gain 
more knowledge in handling children 
cases. 
5) In  line  with  the  enactment  of  the 
Law Number 11 of 2012 about the 
Juvenile   Criminal   Justice   System, 
the new regulations pursued by the 
law has already been discussed in the 
national meeting of prosecutors of the 
Republic of Indonesia. 
6) The child prosecutors often attempted 
peace when the investigators send The 
Starting of Investigation Notification 
Letter and suggested the victim and 
the suspect to reconcile, and therefor 
light cases are not required to continue 
to the next stage. 
7) At this moment there is a separated 
sub section namely the Other Criminal
 
 
 
20        Interview with Wahyuning Dyah as the Juvenile Prosecutor in the Sleman District Attorney, 12 December 2012. 
21        As stipulated in Article 24 Law Number 3 of 1997 about Juvenile Court (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia of 1997 Number 3). 
22        Interview with Indri Astuti as the Juvenile Prosecutor in the Sleman District Attorney, 14 November 2012. 
23        Interview with Indri Astuti as the Juvenile Prosecutor in the Sleman District Attorney, 14 November 2012.

483 
Krisnawati, Law Enforcement Preparedness for the Implementation of Indonesia’s Law on Juvenile Justice System 
 
sub Section under the coordination of 
General Criminal Offense Section, of 
which one of their task is to handle 
children’  criminal  cases.  However 
this condition is still limited to the 
neighbourhood of the High Judiciary 
of Yogyakarta Special Region. 
c.    Steps  undertaken  by  the  Children 
Judge 
In Sleman Public Court the lawsuit 
devolution letter to the court has been 
addressed to the court’s chief. After the letter 
was be accepted by the registrar, then it would 
be noted in a list (registry) of the lawsuit and 
furthermore would be given to the chief of 
court. Hereinafter, the chief of court would 
be assigned a child’s judge to check the case. 
After it the assigned children’s judge would 
determine the day of hearing for the case 
examination.24 The children judge as the law 
enforcement  officers especially  in  children 
cases in Sleman Public Court have done a 
few steps to prepare themselves to meet new 
provisions in the Juvenile Criminal Justice 
System Law, which are: 
1) 1  (one)  judge  participation  in  the 
outreach but it should be done when 
it was at the draft stage. 
2) Providing a special court room which 
is separated for children court room 
and children waiting room in Sleman 
Public Court so it can help the 
children judge’s performance in his/ 
her work. 
3) The  judge  in  hearing  the  child’s 
case already conducted particular 
provisions  applied  in  Law  Number 
3 of 1997 about Juvenile Court as 
arranged in the Juvenile Criminal 
Justice  System  Law,  such  as  not 
wearing   cassocks   in   examination, 
the hearing is closed for public, and 
the hearing is attended by the child 
with his/her parents or guardian, legal 
counsellor and community supervisor. 
 
 
2. Constraints  Faced  and  Efforts  Made  to 
Improve The Capacity of Law Enforcement 
Agencies in Meeting Juvenile Criminal 
Justice System Law 
a. Obstacles   Faced   and   The   Efforts 
Made to Improve The Capacity of 
Investigators 
Based on the results of the research that 
has been done, investigators encountered 
various obstacles in the introduction of new 
provisions in Law Number 11 of 2012 about 
the Juvenile Criminal Justice System, i.e.:25 
1) No investigator in the Police Special 
Duty of Sleman District Police is 
assigned specially to handle children’ 
case, because children case are 
handled by investigators assigned to 
women and children service unit, but 
they are not children investigators. 
2) The    investigator’s    understanding 
about various new provisions in the 
Juvenile   Criminal   Justice   System 
Law is not yet adequate and equitable 
since the outreach has only been 
executed 1 (one) time with only 1 
(one) investigator at the women and 
children Service Unit in Sleman 
Police attendance which is organized 
by DIY Regional Police. 
3) Investigators   have   less   awareness 
and their own initiative to study and 
understand a new statutory provision 
because  they  contended  that  they 
have to wait for instructions from the 
Police Headquarters of the Republic 
of Indonesia.
 
 
24        Article 152 paragraph (1) Law Number 8 of 1981 about Criminal Law Procedure (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Year 1981 
Number 76, Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 3209). 
25        Interview with Desi Ryan Kristanti as an investigator at the Sleman District Police, 30 October 2012.

MIMBAR HUKUM Volume 25, Nomor 3, Oktober 2013, Halaman 477-488 
484 
4) Chief of Sleman Regency Police did 
not have initiatives for disseminating 
the provisions of the legislation of 
Juvenile Criminal Justice System 
internally in his office because he 
assumed to wait for an instruction 
from the head of the regional police 
of  DIY that  is  part  of  a  command 
system. 
5) For    investigators,    time    to    seek 
diversion is too short i.e. 7 (seven) 
days, so that the victim and her family 
are still in emotional conditions that 
complicate the diversion efforts done 
by investigators. 
6) Investigator done an early evaluation 
after any report or complaint in a 
special room women and children 
Service  Unit,  however  the  room  is 
not set aside for children only, but is 
also used for the examination of child 
victims with adult offenders. 
7) When Law Number 11 of 2012 on 
the   Juvenile   Justice   System   has 
been put in place, while the society 
still need time to understand the 
changes in the legislation related to 
the implementation of diversion and 
restorative justice approaches, the 
investigator is worried negative views 
of society against investigators who 
conducted the diversion will appear, 
for example, deemed to have accepted 
bribe from the crime offender’s 
family. 
The efforts made by the child investi- 
gators related to new provisions in the Law 
Nunber 11 of 2012 on the Juvenile Criminal 
Justice System which will prioritize the 
settlement of children cases when the new 
legislation has been enacted. 
b. Obstacles   Faced   and   The   Efforts 
Made to Enhance The Capacity of The 
Public Children Prosecutor 
Based on the results of the research that 
has been done, the Sleman District Attorney’s 
Sleman 
encountered 
various 
obstacles, 
namely:26 
1) The Juvenile prosecutor understand- 
ing Law No. 11/ 2012 on the Juvenile 
Justice System Should be evenly 
distributed,   because   the   outreach 
was only attended by 1 (one) public 
prosecutor out of 3 (three) public 
children prosecutors in the Sleman 
District Attorney. 
2) Juvenile prosecutors have a lack of 
awareness and initiative to learn and 
understand new Statutory Provision- 
Here, they contended that this is due 
to waiting for instructions from their 
superiors. 
3) The   Juvenile   prosecutor   in   the 
Sleman  District  Attorney  still  hold 
in  view  that  cases  which  bestowed 
in the stage of the application of 
criminal prosecution, criminal penalty 
is  the  ultimate  choice  in  resolving 
the  matter.  This  is  showed  by  the 
year 2012 data which show that only 
1.2%  action  sanctions  prosecutions 
is 
implemented 
by 
the 
public 
prosecutor. 
4) Head  of  Sleman  District  Attorney 
is being passive as in facing the 
enactment of in Law Number 11 of 
2012 on the Juvenile Justice System. 
Internally, 
the 
Sleman 
District 
Attorney, until recently had never held 
on  outreach  programme  discussing 
the  draft  Law  No.  11/2012  on  the 
Juvenile Criminal Justice System, and
 
 
 
 
26        Interview with Indri Astuti as the Juvenile Prosecutor in the Sleman District Attorney, 14 November 2012.

485 
Krisnawati, Law Enforcement Preparedness for the Implementation of Indonesia’s Law on Juvenile Justice System 
 
there is no training that is specifically 
held to increase the capacity of the 
public children prosecutor related to 
the provision in the Law yet. 
5) The    Head    of    Sleman    District 
Attorney   did   not   have   initiatives 
for disseminating the law to the 
prosecutor in internal of the Sleman 
District Attorney, due to assuming 
there should be instructions in ad- 
vance from the Office of General 
Attorney of the Republic of Indo- 
nesia. 
6) In   dealing   with   a   case,   Juvenile 
prosecutors only continue a prose- 
cution based on news of the pro- 
ceedings in the police department. 
Although often seeking peace bet- 
ween the suspect and the victim by way 
of coordinating with investigators, 
when investigators delivered a notice 
of  commencement  of  investigation, 
so at the stage of investigation they 
can be reconciled. 
7) There is no special examination room 
to inspected children cases in Sleman 
District Attorney, so the examination 
is still made in the same room to 
investigate adult offenders. 
8) The District institution performances 
are still viewed negatively, which 
made the public prosecutor in the 
Sleman District Attorney faced with 
a  dilemma,  should  they  implement 
the  provisions  in  the  Law  Number 
11 of 2012, especially the diversion 
provisions. Therefore outreach to the 
community  related  to  provisions  in 
the Law Number 11 of 2012 should 
be held so the society could face of 
the enactment of the law. 
Based on the results of the research 
undertaken, the public prosecutor efforts to 
face the enactment of such laws include:27 
1) Inspired   from   this   research,   the 
prosecutor in the District Attorney’s 
Sleman 
will 
encourage 
internal 
discussions held in Sleman District 
Attorney; 
2) To  face  the  enactment  of  the  Law 
Number 11 of 2012 about Juvenile 
Justice System, the Juvenile prose- 
cutors will simplify the process of 
judicial bureaucracy at the stage of 
pre-trial prosecution. This is done by 
directly meeting the child and have 
regular discussion to complete the 
incomplete docket altogether, so that 
the child’s examination can be done 
rapidly; 
3) Attorney institutions will revise the 
Standard 
Operational    Procedures 
(SOP)  in handling child cases where 
it will be adjusted to the Law Number 
11 of 2012; 
4) To  anticipate  the  enactment  of  this 
law, government regulations is to be 
made with regards to the   diversion 
as mandated by law, where the 
Attorney  General  Office will  make 
a more flexible technical instruction. 
c. Obstacles   Faced   and   the   Efforts 
Made to Improve the Capacity of 
Children Judges 
To face the enactment of the new 
provisions of juvenile criminal justice system 
law related to the steps done as described 
previously, the judge child encountered 
constraints as follows: 
1) Children      judges’     understanding 
related   to   the   provisions   of   the 
new law has not been adequate and
 
 
 
27        Interview with Indri Astuti as Juvenile prosecutor in the Sleman District Attorney, 14 November 2012, and an interview with Tri Subardiman 
as the Assistant of General Crimes, Province Attorney of the Special Region of Yogyakarta, 12 December 2012.

MIMBAR HUKUM Volume 25, Nomor 3, Oktober 2013, Halaman 477-488 
486 
equitable because out of 8 (eight) 
children judges, no one ever attended 
the outreach programmes of juvenile 
justice system. There is only 1 (one) 
children judge who had attend the 
outreach, but only in the form of 
juvenile justice system bill. Thus 
knowledge  of  children  judges  are 
still limited to the understanding of 
the Draft Law on the Juvenile Justice 
System. 
2) Children judge is lack of the initiative 
to learn new statutory provisions, 
although in the judges’ code of ethics 
it  is  asserted  that  the  judge  should 
be professional, should take steps to 
maintain and enhance the knowledge, 
skills and personal qualities to be able 
to  carry  out  judicial  duties  well.28 
3) Based on the code of ethics of judges, 
in order to attempt peace the judge 
must confront both sides of litigants 
in person, appropriately in one of the 
room in the court. In reality to make 
the both parties meet is very difficult, 
because in most cases the victim and 
her/his family are still carried with 
emotions so they are reluctant to agree 
to the peace effort and deliberation. 
4) The Head of Sleman District Attorney 
acted passively   and   waited   for 
instructions from his/her superiors 
regarding the efforts done to welcome 
the enactment of the law. 
5) Judges at Sleman District Court until 
now are still focused on the imposition 
of  criminal  sanctions  for  children 
as the perpetrators of criminal acts. 
The  judge  argued  so,  because  by 
dropping criminal sanctions it given 
more justice especially for victims, 
and provide more legal certainty.29  It 
is shown in data of adjudged children 
cases in Sleman District Court that 
in 2012 there are 26 cases children 
as perpetrators of criminal acts that 
have been adjudged. The verdict of 
giving criminal sanctions is as much 
as 25 cases (96%) whereas decision 
to drop sanctions Act is only 1 case 
(4%). In the meantime, based on the 
recapitulation of children’ case data 
from  the  year  2008  up  to  October 
2012 also showed the same thing, in 
which child offenders are more likely 
to be subjected to criminal sanctions 
more than sanctions action. These data 
indicate that the rights of the children 
have not been fully protected. As one 
of the law enforcement agencies, 
children  judges  must  pay  attention 
to the best interest for the child and 
attempt to maintain the family-like 
atmosphere.30 
6) Examination time in the trial stage that 
is too short will make it difficult for 
judges in conducting an examination 
session, as well as the detention of 
the child offender.31  In which the 
examination in the proceeding is not 
yet  completed  and  terminated  until 
the period of detention, a child can 
be released from custody. It is so 
lucrative because it is advantageous 
that children can be out of detention, 
but on the other hand it is feared the 
children would perform a criminal act 
again.
 
 
28        Quoted from the Collective Decision Head of the Supreme Court and Head of Judiciary Commission Republic Indonesia Number 047/ 
KMA/SKB/IV/2009 and Number 02/SKB/P.KY/IV/2009 about Code of Ethics and Guideline of Proceedings for Judges, p. 10. 
29        Interview with Subachran Hardo Mulyono as the Head of Sleman District Court, 18 October 2012. 
30        Article 18 Law Number 11 of 2012 about Juvenile Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 153 of 2011. 
Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia Number 5332). 
31        Interview with Asep Koswara as a Juvenile Judge at Sleman District Court, 24 October 2012.

487 
Krisnawati, Law Enforcement Preparedness for the Implementation of Indonesia’s Law on Juvenile Justice System 
 
7) Criminalization  against  judges  who 
deliberately made no attempt at 
diversion  as  set  forth  in  the  Law 
No. 11/2012 bothered the judge’s 
independency in doing his/her work. 
8) The    unprepared    society    towards 
the implementation of diversion in 
criminal proceedings. Implementa- 
tion of the diversion might make the 
lawsuit stop (because it has reached 
peace) prior to examination in court. 
This can resulted in the onset of 
negative stigma against children’s 
judges who are appointed to examine 
the case, this can occur because there 
is  no  public’s  understanding  about 
the Ordinance diversion effort under- 
taken at each stage of criminal 
proceedings, so that the community 
argued that the judges had received 
bribes so that the case stalled without 
any inspection in court done. 
Efforts have been made by the children 
judge regarding the new provisions in the 
Law Number 11 of 2012 about the Juvenile 
Criminal  Justice  System  which  is  already 
filed a judicial review to the Constitutional 
Court through the Union of Indonesia’s 
Judges (IKAHI) regarding the provisions of 
penalties for the judge if intentionally not 
attempting diversions. 
 
 
D.   Conclusions 
The  steps  that  have  been  undertaken  by 
law  enforcement  officers in  implementation  of 
the law on the juvenile are nomely as follows 
justice    system:    Firstly,    investigators    and 
the Prosecutors have attended the outreach 
programme  on  the  Law  Number  11  of  2012 
on  the  Juvenile  Justice  System,  however 
Juvenile  judge  who  had  never  participated  in 
the outreach programme Posseses knowledge of 
the draft law only. Thus there is a lack of know- 
ledge in Juvenile judge as their understanding is 
limited on the draft  law. Secondly, investigators 
are used to pursue a settlement between the 
accused and or their family and the victims and 
or  their  family,  and  if  required  with  involving 
local community leaders. The prosecutors often 
arrange a settlement when the investigator send 
a letter for the proceeding of investigation (Surat 
Pemberitahuan Dimulainya Penyidikan (SPDP)), 
and suggest the investigators so that the accused 
and victim could be settled and therefore light 
crimes are not continued to the criminal charge. 
For Juvenile Judges, the attempt for a settlement 
between accused and victim is often difficult to 
implement, although the code of ethics allows the 
practice to take place. 
The  obstacles  faced  by  and  efforts  to  be 
taken to improve the capacity of the enforcement 
officers   toward   the   implementation   of   the 
juvenile criminal justice system: a) The children 
investigators and prosecutors have not all 
understand the new regulation stipulated on the 
Law Number 11 of 2012 on the Juvenile Justice 
System. Only 1 (one) investigator and 1 (one) child 
prosecutor followed the outreach. Understanding 
of Juvenile Judges in the Law is insufficient since 
no Judges received the outreach. Only 1 (one) 
judge  followed  the  outreach,  although  at  the 
Draft Law stage; b) Law enforcement officers 
have a lack of awareness and initiative to learn 
and understand new regulation related with their 
duties, mostly on the absence of superior orders; 
c) Law enforcement officers prefer criminal 
sanctions in the juvenile criminal cases; d) 
Negative public perception toward law enfor- 
cement officers’ performance presents a dilemma 
when considering a diversion with restorative 
justice approach due to the fear of bribe accusation 
from the accused and or their families. 
Child investigators views that they will 
prioritize the juvenile case process when the 
related new regulations stipulated in the Law 
Number  11  of  2012  is  fully  in  force.  In  the 
Sleman District Attorney’s office, understanding 
about  the  Law  is  undertaken  through  internal

MIMBAR HUKUM Volume 25, Nomor 3, Oktober 2013, Halaman 477-488 
488 
discussions and simplifying the bureaucratic 
process at the pre-prosecution stage. The judges 
on the other hand, are promoting a judicial review 
to the Supreme Court through the Association of 
Indonesian Judges (Ikatan Hakim Indonesia) on 
the criminalization of law enforcement officers 
deliberately  not  implementation  diversion  re- 
gulation.
 
 
REFERENCES 
A.   Books 
Goonesekere, Savitri, 1998, Children, Law, and 
Justice a South Asian Perspective, UNICEF 
and Sage Publications, New Delhi. 
Soekanto, Soerjono, 1984, Pengantar Penelitian 
Hukum, UI-Press, Jakarta. 
Soemitro, Ronny Hanitijo, 1994, Metodologi 
Penelitian Hukum dan Jurimetri, Ghalia 
Indonesia, Jakarta. 
                            ,  1995,  Metodologi  Penelitian 
Hukum, Ghalia Indonesia, Jakarta. 
Supeno, Hadi, 2010, Kriminalisasi Anak (Tawaran 
gagasan  Radikal Peradilan Anak Tanpa Pe- 
midanaan), Gramedia Pustaka Utama, Jakarta. 
UNICEF dan Pusat Kajian Kriminologi Fakultas 
Ilmu  Sosial  dan  Ilmu  Politik  Universitas 
Indonesia,    Analisis    Situasi    Anak    yang 
Berhadapan  dengan  Hukum  di  Indonesia, 
UNICEF, Jakarta. 
 
 
B.   Laws and Legal Regulations 
Law Number 8 of 1981 about Criminal Law 
Procedure (State Gazette of the Republic of 
Indonesia Year 1981 Number 76, Supplement 
to State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 
No. 3209). 
Law Number 3 of 1997 about Juvenile Court 
(State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 
Year 1997 Number 3). 
Law Number 23 of 2002 about Child Protection 
State Gazette of the Republic of Indonesia 
Year 2002 Number 109). 
Law Number 11 of 2012 about Juvenile Criminal 
Justice System (State Gazette of the Republic 
of Indonesia   Year   2011   Number   153, 
Supplement to State Gazette of the Republic 
of Indonesia Number 5332). 
Collective Decision Head of the Supreme Court 
and Head of Judiciary Commission Republic 
Indonesia Number 047/KMA/SKB/IV/2009 
and Number 02/SKB/P.KY/IV/2009 about 
Code of Ethics and Guideline of Proceedings 
for Judges. 
Regulation of Chief Police of the Republic of 
Indonesia, Number Pol. 10 of 2007 about 
Organization and Procedure of the Women 
and Children Service Unit in the Police 
Department 
Republic 
of 
Indonesia.