Journal of Educational Leadership in Action 
Journal of Educational Leadership in Action 
Volume 1
Issue 1 
Article 3 
3-2013 
University Presidents' Perspectives of the Knowledge and 
University Presidents' Perspectives of the Knowledge and 
Competencies Needed in 21st Century Higher Education 
Competencies Needed in 21st Century Higher Education 
Leadership 
Leadership 
Sydney Freeman Jr. 
Frances K. Kochan 
Follow this and additional works at: https://digitalcommons.lindenwood.edu/ela 
 Part of the Curriculum and Instruction Commons, Educational Administration and Supervision 
Commons, and the Educational Assessment, Evaluation, and Research Commons 
Recommended Citation 
Recommended Citation 
Freeman, Sydney Jr. and Kochan, Frances K. (2013) "University Presidents' Perspectives of the Knowledge 
and Competencies Needed in 21st Century Higher Education Leadership," Journal of Educational 
Leadership in Action: Vol. 1: Iss. 1, Article 3. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.62608/2164-1102.1089 
Available at: https://digitalcommons.lindenwood.edu/ela/vol1/iss1/3 
This Article is brought to you for free and open access by the Journals at Digital Commons@Lindenwood 
University. It has been accepted for inclusion in Journal of Educational Leadership in Action by an authorized editor 
of Digital Commons@Lindenwood University. For more information, please contact phuffman@lindenwood.edu. 

UNIVERSITY PRESIDENTS’ 
PERSPECTIVES OF THE KNOWLEDGE 
AND COMPETENCIES NEEDED IN 
21ST CENTURY HIGHER EDUCATION 
LEADERSHIP 
by Sydney Freeman, Jr. and Frances K. Kochan 
Abstract  
The purpose of this study was to identify the core knowledge and competencies needed 
for executive leadership in higher education administration as perceived by university 
presidents. Thirteen presidents shared the knowledge and competencies they perceived 
as being essential for an effective presidency. The respondents identified the important 
knowledge areas as: foundational; acquisition of cultural knowledge; and complex 
cognitive. They viewed personal attributes, management, and communications as the 
essential competency areas. The study found that presidents viewed themselves both 
as leaders and as managers. 
Results of this study should be helpful to organizations seeking to develop and/or 
implement degree programs to prepare individuals for the presidency. The results may 
also be helpful to those seeking to provide professional development materials and 
activities to prepare or develop individuals for this role. 
1. Introduction 
Listen to Freeman & Kochan discuss the perceptions of university presidents. 
Higher education programs prepare potential higher education administrators, faculty, 
and policymakers (Wright, 2007). There have been attempts to develop and adopt 
common requirements or core course requirements for the master’s degree within some 
of these programs (ASHE, 2010; CAS, 2006). For example, in 2006, the Council for the 
Advancement of Standards in Higher Education (CAS) adopted a set of student affairs 
master’s level preparation standards. In 2010, the Association for the Study of Higher 
Education’s Council for the Advancement of Higher Education Programs (ASHE) 

adopted a set of guidelines for Higher Education Administration and Leadership 
Preparation Programs at the Master’s Degree Level. However, similar guidelines or 
standards have not been developed for higher education administration or leadership 
doctoral programs (ASHE, 2010). 
Fifty-eight percent of sitting university presidents in United States are over the age of 61 
(ACE, 2012). This has led higher education researchers to predict a surge of 
retirements resulting in a large number of openings for university presidencies across 
the country in the years ahead. In the past 10 years, many searches have turned to 
sitting college presidents as the primary pool of applicants. Due to the age of many 
sitting presidents, that pool may not be as convenient an option in the future (Farrington, 
2008). 
Presidents in higher education come from a variety of backgrounds. Some are from the 
corporate world, some from public service and some from the academic realm. 
However, academic credentials continue to be important when selecting presidents, 
particularly in research institutions. The primary way non–higher education employees 
become president at a research university is that they bring extraordinary 
accomplishments or notoriety (e.g., scholarly or political or management reputations) to 
the university. Examining this issue, Burton (2003) found that generally, becoming a 
president at a research university, especially at a more prestigious institution, is a highly 
structured process and includes issues such as where the doctorate degree was earned 
and where academic and administrative experience was obtained. 
The combination of the pending retirements of presidents and the fact that it appears 
that most university presidencies require some form of a terminal degree makes it 
important to gain information about the knowledge and competencies needed for 
success from the perspective of those already in the position. Such information will 
assist institutions preparing future higher education leaders to assure that their 
programs are well grounded and meet the needs of the presidents of this century. 
2. Purpose of the Study 
The purpose of this study was to identify the core knowledge and competencies needed 
for executive leadership in higher education administration as perceived by university 
presidents. University presidents involved were those who had earned a doctoral 
degree with a specialization in higher education administration and who were leading 
four-year institutions. The research question addressed was, “What are the core 
knowledge and competencies needed for executive leadership in higher education 
administration as perceived by university presidents?” 
It is hoped that the findings will inform the work of higher education program faculty and 
curriculum developers as they seek to prepare students for executive leadership 
positions in higher education. The results should also help administrators, curriculum 

developers, and faculty associated with higher education administrations programs and 
educational leadership institutes to better understand higher education students’ needs. 
THE UNIVERSITY PRESIDENCY 
Since the election of the first American college president in 1640—Henry Dunster of 
Harvard College—the position of president has been one of extreme responsibility and 
high visibility. The university presidency is a position that is very complex and important. 
Luxton (2005) writes, 
By being the chief spokesperson for institutional strategy, the chief executive officer 
gives credibility to agreed (upon) plans. Although other individuals may lead at key 
points in development and implementation of the process, the chief executive officer is 
understood to speak for the whole institution. (p. 12) 
The role of the president is both substantive and symbolic. McLaughlin and Riesman 
(1996) put it succinctly when they wrote that presidents serve as the “living logo” of their 
institutions. Presidents speak and represent multiple constituencies associated with 
their universities. Although presidents are ultimately accountable to the board, they 
generally like to chart their own courses. Dubois (2006) notes, “College presidents are 
an extraordinary group of professionals. They are highly competent and competitive, 
and basically, they want to be left alone” (p. 96). 
The role of the university president may be changing, however. Roach (2000) cites Dr. 
Michael Lomax, president of the United Negro College Fund, who commented, “I think 
that college boards are viewing the job of president more as a CEO than as a pure 
education position” (p. 24). In the same article Roach (2000) cites Dr. George Ayers, 
president of Ayers and Associates, a northern Virginia-based higher education 
management consulting and executive search firm, as saying, “Boards are also seeking 
candidates who have demonstrated that they have fund-raising skills and can win 
assistance for their school from corporations and foundations” (p. 24). These ideas may 
be changing the knowledge, competencies, and skills needed by academics as they 
serve in their presidential roles, making it increasingly important to identify the abilities 
that will be needed for entry-level administrators in this position to assure their future 
success (Kuk, Cobb, & Forrest, 2007). 
COMMUNITY COLLEGE PRESIDENTS 
Although there have been several studies dedicated to the training of leaders through 
higher education programs (Altach, 2010; Altbach, Bozeman, & Janashia, 2007; 
Barnett, 2007; Dressel & Mayhew, 1974; Fife & Goodchild, 1991; Kienle & Loyd, 2005; 
Wang, 2010; Wright & Miller, 2007), there is a lack of literature that addresses the value 
of higher education doctoral programs in preparing university presidents. One study by 
Hammons and Miller (2006) investigated community college presidents’ perceptions of 
their preparation programs and sought suggestions for improvement. Findings indicated 
that although preparation programs were highly regarded by their graduates, they also 

stated that these programs needed to do a better job of interacting with the practitioner 
community and using real-world cases in their instruction. 
STUDENT AFFAIRS LEADERSHIP 
Another body of research that informed this study comes from the area of student 
affairs. Research related to the efficacy of graduate programs in student affairs has 
been conducted since the initial academic preparation programs began at Teachers 
College, Columbia University, in 1913 (Wilson, 2012). During the past 30 years, there 
has been a debate related to which particular coursework has been the most effective in 
transferring knowledge, developing skills, and defining characteristics essential to 
successful practice. One of the studies most pertinent to this research was conducted 
by Sandeen in 1982. This researcher completed a national survey of 219 chief student 
affairs officers to assess, review, and update their perceptions of their graduate 
preparation programs. Sandeen reported that senior student affairs officers thought 
many programs were too oriented toward counseling, and they suggested that 
internship opportunities should be expanded and that more courses in legal issues, 
budgeting, and management needed to be offered. 
Another important study dealing with student affairs program curriculum was conducted 
by Kiem (1991). In a longitudinal study of 47 doctoral, specialist, and master’s 
programs, Kiem found that many programs had fewer faculty and students than their 
counterparts within the same department, fewer programs requiring the master’s thesis, 
and a lack of courses in student personnel. 
The study that most closely aligns with the objectives of this study was conducted by 
Herdlein (2004). This study reviewed the opinions of chief student affairs officers at 50 
colleges/universities regarding the degree to which they believed that student affairs 
graduate programs adequately prepared new professionals. He focused his study on 
three primary categories in higher education curriculum, which included foundational 
studies, professional studies, and supervised practice. He asserted, “Over a period of 
36 years, a variety of studies have addressed issues important to changing conditions in 
the academy including suggestions to move preparation programs from a counseling 
emphasis to include a more administrative and management focus” (p. 56). He further 
noted that this change had been a function of the perceived need for higher education 
programs to develop leaders that master fundamental areas of management such as 
budgeting, leadership, and fundraising. Herdlein concluded that it was unclear whether 
graduate programs in student affairs had been satisfactory in preparing student affairs 
administrators for the rapidly changing environment of higher education. 
Herdlein (2004) provided the following implications for the student affairs profession: (1) 
There is a need for research carefully delineating competencies needed for successful 
practice; (2) Demonstrating competencies and evaluating learning outcomes may call 
for additional methodologies including the use of portfolios and competency-based 
practicum and graduate assistantships; and (3) All of the various knowledge and skill 
sets perceived to be lacking in new professionals need to be addressed in curricular 

offerings, teaching subject matter across the curriculum, and developing ways to 
encourage professional development and life-long learning as an integral part of the 
student affairs profession (p. 69). 
ACE: PATHWAY TO THE PRESIDENCY STUDY 
Although little research has been done on university presidents’ perceptions of the 
important knowledge and competencies required for their jobs and the role of their 
graduate programs in preparing them for their positions, the American Council of 
Education (ACE) has been conducting presidential surveys to gather college 
demographic and other data since 1986. The most recent study was published in 2012 
(ACE, 2012). This appears to be the only comprehensive source of demographic data 
on college and university presidents from all sectors of American higher education 
(ACE, 2012). Questions have been adapted and refined throughout this 25-year period. 
The first survey was administered to describe the backgrounds, career paths, and 
experiences of college and university presidents (ACE, 2012). The most recent study 
used The College President’s Survey to gather information from presidents regarding 
their education, career paths and length of service, as well as personal characteristics 
such as age, marital status, and religious affiliation. Over 1600 individuals responded to 
the survey. Respondents were asked about the importance of 17 competency areas: (1) 
Academic issues (e.g., curriculum changes), (2) Accountability/assessment of student 
learning, (3) Athletics, (4) Budget/financial management, (5) Capital improvement 
projects, (6) Community relations, (7) Crisis management, (8) Enrollment management, 
(9) Entrepreneurial ventures, (10) Faculty issues, (11) Fund raising, (12) Governing 
board relations, (13) Government relations, (14) Media/public relations, (15) Personnel 
issues (excluding faculty), (16) Risk management/legal issues, and (17) Strategic 
planning. These competencies were developed and refined over 20 years through 
interviews and feedback from college and university presidents (ACE, 2012; J. King, 
personal communication, September 4, 2010). 
3. Methods 
Although this was primarily a qualitative study, the population and the initial interview 
questions were derived from the 2007 edition of the ACE study of presidents. The data 
sample selection and data collection and analysis processes used are described in the 
sections that follow. 
PHASE POPULATION AND SAMPLE SELECTION 
The population for this study was derived from the 1,647 college and university 
presidents affiliated with the American Council of Education, as identified on the 
council’s organizational website (American Council of Education, 2010, para. 1). The 
sample was culled by identifying only presidents who served institutions whose name 
included the word “university,” differentiating them from those whose name contained 
the word “college,” and included only presidents who received a degree in higher 

education administration. This selection process was conducted to bring consistency to 
the study sample. This sample selection resulted in a population of 150 presidents. 
These 150 university presidents were solicited via email or phone to participate in the 
study. Of these 150, thirteen presidents agreed to participate. There were several 
reasons presidents were unable to participate, including a lack of time, a lack of interest, 
they were not university presidents, or they did not have a doctoral degree in higher 
education administration. All presidents were actively serving in their position at the time 
of their interviews. Of the thirteen participants, three were females and ten were males. 
Three African American presidents, who serve as the heads of Historically Black 
Universities, participated in the study. All ten of the other presidents were Caucasian 
and served in Predominantly White Universities. Five presidents served private religious 
institutions, and the eight other presidents led public serving institutions. The enrollment 
size of the institutions the presidents served ranged from less than 2,000 to more than 
50,000 students. For purposes of this study, presidents’ names and their institutions 
were replaced with the names of pseudonyms to keep their responses anonymous. 
Table 1 presents detailed information about the characteristics of participating 
presidents. 
DATA COLLECTION PROCESSES 
The findings presented are part of a three-part study examining the academic 
preparation of university presidents. The primary data source for this study was face-to-
face interviews with the presidents. The literature review provided information from 
which ten initial interview questions were developed, piloted, and revised as described 
in the validity section of this manuscript. The same interview protocol was used during 
all the face-to-face interviews. Additional information was gathered from interviewees 
via email correspondence. 
The researcher used the Life History Case Studies (LHCS) approach to gather 
background information about the participants. LHCS is a qualitative approach designed 
to help researchers gather background information about the study participants in order 
to understand the in-depth and comprehensive meanings in their lives (Campbell, 
1999). The researcher initiated this process by gathering curriculum vitas and 
biographical sketches of interviewees prior to the interviews to confirm that the 
interviewers’ description of their backgrounds corroborated with the other data sources. 
The researcher also collected demographic information about gender, ethnicity, 
institutional type, and home institution’s geographic region. 
Seven university presidents were interviewed at the 2010 ACE Annual Meeting in 
Phoenix, AZ on March 6–10, 2010. Interviews took place between the hours of 10:00 
a.m. through 5:00 p.m. Participants met the researcher in a meeting boardroom for the 
interview. The six other interviews were conducted on-site at the participants’ home 
institution presidents’ offices. These interviews lasted for approximately one (1) hour. 
Audio and video equipment were used for data collection purposes. Audiotaping and 
videotaping the interviews enabled the researcher to concentrate on questions asked 

and give his full attention to the interviewee. Copious and detailed notes were also 
taken during the interview. An interview script was used throughout the process. 
Following the initial interview, the researcher reviewed the transcript and tape and 
constructed follow-up interview questions tailored to the individual president. These 
questions sought to clarify statements and assertions made by presidents in the initial 
interview. Follow-up interviews were conducted via email. Both rounds of interviews 
took place over a 5-month period. 
Summary notes were recorded in a journal directly following each interview. The 
presidents’ reactions and comments and preliminary thoughts on the emerging themes 
were recorded in a log as recommended by Miles and Huberman (1984) and Gasman 
(2003). Both what the presidents said (i.e., their words and language) and what was 
unsaid (i.e., body language and long pauses) were considered when logging notes. 
DATA ANALYSIS 
The researcher used multiple data sources to confirm the data results (Yin, 2003). 
Using multiple sources enhanced the study by allowing for structural corroboration. 
Eisner (1998) describes structural corroboration as “the confluence of multiple sources 
of evidence or the recurrence of instances that support a conclusion” (p. 55). The 
sources the researcher used were field notes taken during participant interviews, 
memoing (Strauss & Corbin, 1990; Trochim, 2006) ideas developed during the research 
process, the audio and videotapes used during the interviews, and the email responses 
gathered from the follow-up interviews. 
CONCERNS FOR INTERNAL/EXTERNAL VALIDITY 
The researcher enlisted the expertise of an expert panel of three senior academic 
administrators and faculty to review pilot interview questions in order to gather evidence 
of content validity (Ross & Shannon, 2008). After making revisions based on the expert 
panel’s responses, the researcher conducted field interviews with six academic 
administrators to further refine the questions. The researcher also conducted two focus-
group interviews, which included both higher and adult education faculty and higher 
education administration students who were considered at “ABD” status. Information 
from both of these endeavors was used to finalize the interview questions. 
After concluding the actual interviews with the presidential participants, follow-up email 
interviews were conducted for purposes of member checking and data validation. 
Member checking permitted the presidents to review the notations from the previous 
interview to ensure that they correctly reflected their feelings and responses (Creswell, 
1998; Wolfe, 2010). The second interview process, conducted via email, allowed the 
researcher to conduct additional questioning related to the responses from the initial 
interview. 
CONCERNS FOR RELIABILITY AND GENERALIZABILITY OF RESULTS 

Theory/perspective triangulation is described by Patton (2002) as using multiple lenses 
or theories to interpret the data. This process was completed during the data collection 
stage when the researcher used several conceptual frameworks to inform the data 
collection process, which included Stuver’s (2006) student expectations, Fink’s (2005) 
curriculum design, Hammon and Miller’s (2006) presidential perceptions, and Herdlein’s 
(2004) graduate preparation of new professionals. Those frameworks were used to 
provide a priori codes to inform the analysis process. 
CODING PROCESS 
The researcher compiled a start list of codes to look for in the data from the literature 
review on curriculum development and presidential leadership. There were a total of 80 
a priori codes that were found to be applicable to the study. These codes were 
numbered using recommendations of Miles and Huberman (1994). The start list 
included: skills, knowledge, competency, program characteristics, development, 
curriculum, and professional development. As data were coded, recurring themes not 
included on the start list or in the relevant literature were coded as emerging codes. 
Codes that did not have data attached to them were dropped. 
During the analysis process, the “coding incident to incident” approach advocated by 
Charmaz (2006) was implemented. This process allowed the researcher to compare like 
incidents experienced by different participants, helping to further corroborate ideas 
developed earlier in the coding process. These “axial” codes, which are codes that 
emerge out of the data, helped to solidify the identity of emergent properties. Emergent 
codes were compared to one another to further narrow down the amount of redundant 
codes and create substantive codes. The results of this process allowed for theoretical 
coding, which Charmaz (2006) describes as substantive codes being integrated 
together creating a theory. 
4. Findings 
Presidents identified three primary knowledge areas as essential for success in their 
position. They also identified three competency areas as critical: These are described in 
the sections that follow. 
ESSENTIAL KNOWLEDGE 
In this study knowledge is defined as (1) higher education expertise acquired by a 
person through experience or education; the theoretical and or practical understanding 
of a subject in higher education; (2) what is known in a particular field or in total; or (3) 
facts and information needed for executive leadership in higher education administration 
(Oxford, 2011). Core knowledge areas presidents identified as essential for the 
presidency were: Foundational Knowledge (History of Higher Education and Finance); 

Knowledge Acquisition of Cultural Knowledge (Context and Public Image); and Complex 
Cognitive Knowledge. These are displayed in Table 2. 
FOUNDATIONAL KNOWLEDGE 
The first knowledge area presidents described as being a part of the core knowledge 
needed for executive leadership was foundational knowledge. Foundational knowledge 
is defined in this study as information that enabled presidents to have a basic 
understanding of higher education as a field. The foundational knowledge area was 
comprised of two elements (1) history of higher education, (2) and budgeting/finance. 
History of Higher Education. More than half of the presidents believe that those who 
aspire to senior leadership should have a strong grasp of the history of higher 
education. Emelia Lily, a president of a small public university in the Northeastern 
region of the United States, shared that it is important for those seeking to move into 
senior leadership to be able to understand the history of higher education. She and 
other presidents believe that understanding the history of higher education helps senior 
leaders understand how higher education institutions operate and how they can be 
improved. Among the topics she identified as vital were: 
the history of higher education; understanding how higher education is organized; how it 
works; sometimes how it doesn’t work; and also understanding that you don’t work in 
isolation. in particular, when you work in a system. 
President Levi Carter seconded her sentiments, as he reflected on the importance of 
this knowledge. He shared: 
I have more of a sense of the history of higher education because of my study, more of 
a sense of the people who have come before me in the industry in the history of higher 
education and the contributions that we could all make, but I don’t think I would have 
that perspective without the study of higher education. 
These statements reinforce the findings of Nelson (2008) who posited that presidents 
should understand the foundational concepts of the academy. He wrote: 
Such a duty requires presidents to embrace the creed of the academy and its time-
honored beliefs: freedom of thought and inquiry, freedom of academic expression, 
respect for diverse opinions, commitment to civility, and belief in human equality, 
progress and the tenets of meritocracy. Fundamentally, that means that the creed and 
those beliefs must be understood as the foundation of what it means to be in the 
university (p. A37). 
FINANCE IN HIGHER EDUCATION 
In addition to being in agreement about the value of gaining knowledge of the history of 
higher education, eleven of the respondents shared that being exposed to information 

on budgeting and finance is extremely important. President Peter Johns of Ethanville 
University expressed it best when he shared: 
Certainly there is I think a greater requirement for understanding fiscal management. If 
a person coming into a presidency truly does not understand accounting or how to read 
a balance sheet or understand cash flow they better figure it out pretty fast. There is 
extraordinary pressure to be able to understand and monitor that and you know it’s, I 
mean we’ve got great people here in finance, but my name is on the line, on making 
sure that the financial house is in order. It’s not enough just to be able to say well, I 
know how to hire great people; you’ve got to understand it yourself. 
President Johns also said it well. He shared: 
It is very important that higher education executives, especially presidents, have a 
working knowledge of budgeting and finance in higher education. If presidents do not 
understand finance in higher education they may find themselves in unwanted 
situations. 
President Elijah Alexander emphasized that finance and budgeting are among the most 
important areas a president needs to master. He stated: 
Knowledge of finance and budgeting, I didn’t say the skills, but now just the knowledge 
of finance and budgeting. Those would be skills that I would put high on the list. 
Lucus Jacob, president of Landon State University, remarked that presidents who show 
that they have a good understanding of financial matters within the university 
demonstrate and signal to their administrative colleagues that they are competent 
leaders. He shared: 
You’ve got to have a basic understanding of budgeting and finance so that you can 
have conversations with your business people to make sure that you are in control of 
your resources. 
This emphasis on understanding finance and budgeting for presidents is supported by 
the results of the most recent ACE (2012) study, which found that budgeting was one of 
the top four responsibilities that occupy most of the presidents’ time (Cook, 2012). 
KNOWLEDGE ACQUISITION OF THE CULTURE 
The second knowledge area derived from this study was knowledge acquisition to 
operate properly in the culture of higher education. Knowledge acquisition of the culture 
involves two aspects: the context and public image. 
Knowledge acquisition of culture is defined in this study as higher education leaders 
gaining information that enables them to have a basic understanding of the historical 
and modern context of the field of higher education. President Lucus Jacob provided an 

excellent example of knowledge acquisition when he explained that presidents need to 
have a sharp grasp of the politics that affect higher education. He noted: 
You’ve got to have a basic understanding of the academy and what it’s about and how it 
functions. And you’ve got to have an understanding of politics, because all politics are 
local, and you don’t get away no matter where you go, there’s going to be politics. 
This statement reflects the sentiments of Nelson (2008) in which he posited that it is the 
responsibility of the president to understand the culture of his or her campus 
community. He suggested that not only does a president need to understand the 
campus climate and culture, he or she also has the responsibility for protecting the 
campus from unnecessary fragmentation. He suggested that one approach to avoiding 
this fragmentation is for a president to foster a culture of accountability and 
transparency. President Ryan Wyatt’s thoughts captured this notion when he stated: 
If you are going to be a successful administrator, you need to understand the issues of 
accountability and transparency, how to help people understand the objectives and 
whether or not the objectives have been met and how the objectives are measured and 
I think one would need to have a pretty good understanding of that. 
President Emelia Lily also mentioned this when she said: 
Some of the things I learned in my doctoral program that are helping me to be able to 
see the connections and to see how things may be different, but how things may be the 
same.…I enjoy being a learner and that’s part of the way I’ve approached this 
opportunity. 
UNDERSTANDING PUBLIC IMAGE 
Another area in the cultural arena that presidents believed future higher education 
leaders must be knowledgeable about is the role that their presidencies will play in their 
professional identity. Presidents shared that the presidency is a unique position. The 
president is seen by many as the primary spokesperson and symbol of the university. 
Understanding public image means that you think about this and find ways to deal with 
it. If presidents take this expectation too, far they run the risk of believing that they are 
their position. President Nolan Cooper expressed it this way: 
My job, this is my job, this is not who I am. And when you get presidents who forget who 
they are and assume that they are their job or they are the university, they are in 
trouble. 
Ian Flynn added to the notion that those in a presidency must take themselves 
seriously, but not too seriously because a leader’s flaws are obvious to many, and a 
leader can be blind to them. President Flynn used this analogy to make this point: “I 
think (you need to have) the ability to be able to say, ‘The emperor has no clothes.’” 

Ryan Wyatt expressed the opinion that there is a marked difference between serving as 
a vice president and serving in a presidency in terms of the role and public image. 
Although he had served over fourteen years in three diverse vice presidencies, he found 
that being a president required him to be viewed as a president at all times in public. He 
expressed it this way: 
I suppose that it is also a very public life and I knew that, and I have lived a public life at 
another time in life, but this is one where particularly in my setting where I am at a small 
school in a relatively small town, I am never not the president of the university and it is 
always the case. I talked about that with people, but I don’t think I really understood it 
until I had experienced it. 
Researchers of the college and university presidency recognize that presidents are not 
the only individuals that are impacted by their public image (Siegel, 2011; Pierce, 2011). 
Presidents’ families also live in a “fishbowl.” Siegel (2011) describes the fishbowl effect 
as occurring when “members of the campus community bestow the presidency with 
symbolic attributes, and as a result they keep an observant watch over the behaviors 
and words of the president and as-cribe meaning to many of the things the president 
does and says” (p. 85). 
COMPLEX COGNITIVE THINKING 
The third knowledge area derived from this study is complex cognitive thinking. 
Complex cognitive thinking is defined in this study as the ability of leaders in higher 
education to find the interconnection between divergent ideas and to reflect and 
synthesize that information while being open to emergent ideas. President Lily, along 
with seven other presidents, emphasized the importance of senior leaders in higher 
education developing the ability to reflect after completing a project. This honing of 
knowledge enables presidents to learn from mistakes and integrate their successes in 
future endeavors. Lily shared this insight: 
It is really a skill and ability at wrapping up the knowledge that you have, ok. Taking the 
time to reflect on what it is that you really have accomplished, somebody setting the 
goal, how you implemented the goal or how you achieved the goal, and being able to 
talk about how you did that. Why do I say that, well I think it demonstrates leadership, 
you have to be able to demonstrate that. It also demonstrates perseverance. 
President William James shared that making cognitive connections is important 
because it helps presidents solve complex problems. He stated: 
One thing I learned though is the leader has to look at a problem from multiple lenses 
and if you don’t understand the problem, you’re going to apply perhaps the wrong 
solution to the problem and so that’s what I found most helpful is to be able to develop a 
skill set to analyze critically and effectively what the problem is and then define, through 
consultation with others, the right solution for the right problem. 

Nelson (2009) found that developing cognitive thinking is very important for presidents 
as they are interacting with highly sophisticated and intelligent constituencies. He 
shared, “Presidents have to manage highly politicized environments populated by 
tremendously bright people including faculty, but also trustees, alumni, friends and, not 
least, students (p. 26).” 
ESSENTIAL COMPETENCIES 
In addition to knowledge areas, the presidents identified three essential competencies 
needed to succeed in their positions. In this study, competencies are defined as special 
non-generic skills that apply to a particular sector, job, or field. Areas the presidents 
identified as needed for success in the university presidency are displayed in Table 3. 
The primary core competency areas that presidents identified included: (Personal 
Attributes), Management (Assessment and Accountability, Enrollment Management, 
Fundraising, and Strategic Planning), and Communications (Interpersonal 
Development, Writing to Diverse Audiences and Speaking to Diverse Audiences). 
PERSONAL ATTRIBUTES 
President Ryan Wyatt, along with ten other presidents, expressed their belief that it is 
vitally important that aspiring presidents have a strong sense of who they are. In 
addition, Wyatt shared that one must understand his or her own “gifts and graces” 
before going into a presidency. There are several attributes that presidents in this study 
identified as important. They included (1) developing their own sense of vision, (2) 
humility, (3) empathy, (4) the ability to understand and connect with people, (5) team 
building, (6) the ability to express concepts in everyday language, and (7) work hard. 
Wyatt expressed the importance of these attributes below. 
I think a president has to have the capacity to be a (1) visionary leader and to develop a 
vision that grows organically out of the institution that is a shared vision in which all of 
the constituents feel that they have a stake. It needs to be seen as the university’s 
vision, not as the president’s vision, but the president has to be the person who leads 
the charge in the development of the vision and then in the implementation of the vision. 
Every president brings a unique set of attributes to a presidency. It is therefore 
important for aspiring presidents to strengthen their most positive attributes, including 
the attributes just mentioned. In addition, presidents like Gavin Benjamin believe that 
personal attributes such as teamwork are imperative in the 21st century university 
presidency. He said: 
No one person can be successful by himself. A university president doesn’t do it by 
himself . you have to build the team. So, working with others to put it in the colloquial 
frame is extremely important. Be able to realize that it’s going to take hard work, it’s not 
just a 9 to 5 job and that’s important. 

The personal attributes that presidents demonstrate helps them to navigate what Siegel 
(2011) describes as “multiple, and often competing, interpretations of any number of 
cultural phenomena that exist in the institutional environment. Negotiating the cultural 
environment and bringing together constituent groups that have disparate views, beliefs, 
and behavioral norms are critical” (p. 79). 
MANAGEMENT 
These findings included a diverse cadre of management areas that presidents viewed 
as vital. Presidents identified assessment and accountability of student learning, 
enrollment management, fundraising, and strategic planning as essential competencies 
that aspiring senior leaders should master. 
ASSESSMENT AND ACCOUNTABILITY OF STUDENT LEARNING. 
Close to half of the presidents believe that aspiring presidents need to be prepared in 
the area of student assessment. Dr. Ryan Wyatt expressed it this way: 
If you are going to be a successful administrator, you need to understand the issues of 
accountability and transparency, how to help people understand the objectives and 
whether or not the objectives have been met and how the objectives are measured and 
I think one would need to have pretty good understanding of that. 
Many of the presidents shared that understanding of assessment and accountability 
need not be just relegated to student learning. They shared that the 21st century 
university president will be responsible for making sure that assessment and 
accountability are a part of the culture of every unit within an institution. President 
Joshua Dillan explained it well when he said: 
I think it is critical to assess everything that you are doing.…I think it will be a part of a 
president’s job more than it used to be. And (it is important that) we (presidents) 
compare this to assessing the effectiveness of administrative and operational and 
business things. Faculty are very much not used to doing this on their side and 
struggling to do it and having this requirement mandated all of a sudden does not 
necessarily make it very effective. 
With the rise of tuition by institutions on an almost yearly basis, the expectations of 
regional accrediting agencies, parents, and students have increased, particularly in the 
area of student learning outcomes (Pierce, 2011). Thus, the importance of the president 
having competency in this area, as expressed by the respondents in this study, is 
understandable. 
ENROLLMENT MANAGEMENT 
More than half of the presidents responded that aspiring presidents need to have a 
strong understanding of issues related to enrollment management. Many, such as 

President Joshua Dillan, mentioned that senior leaders who are learning about 
enrollment management must first understand the relationship between “mission and 
market.” 
The biggest piece is understanding. I think how connected missions in market are and 
how you have to have a mission that is both rooted in tradition, but also understand its 
role in a tentative market. So enrollment management systems science has developed 
out of that, you know once you are sort of clear about who you are and how your brand 
is and what you are selling as a whole. 
It appears that presidents need to have a strong understanding of how to tie the mission 
of their universities to their particular markets (i.e. students). If presidents don’t have a 
strong understanding of the role that enrollment plays in managing the university, they 
may place themselves in a bad position. President Lucus Jacob explained: 
At so many places, your prosperity as an institution is depending on your student 
population, particularly in your private institutions where you don’t have state funding. I 
think it’s a very important thing that a president has to put his arms around pretty 
quickly. 
President Levi Carter said most it succinctly when he shared: “I would say you have to 
have knowledge of enrollment.” Bryan J. Cook (2012), director of ACE’s Center for 
Policy Analysis, has suggested that presidents must be able to manage ballooning 
enrollments. This is a phenomenon that has been precipitated because of the decision 
of state and federal governments to draw back on financial support, which has had a 
harmful effect on public higher education institutions in particular (Wooton, 2009; 
Mortenson, 2012). 
FUNDRAISING 
More than half of the presidents shared that an aspiring president needs to be 
competent in the area of fundraising. This corresponds with the 2012 ACE study, which 
listed fundraising as one of the most important competency areas. Nelson (2009) 
stated, “College presidents must raise money and conduct major capital campaigns (p. 
26).” Likewise, Ekman (2010) found that “most presidents will say—having the chance 
to engage influential outsiders in the college and to persuade those outsiders to become 
equally committed to the cause is usually a rewarding experience (p. 63).” President 
Gavin Benjamin of Connor State discussed this issue by saying: 
I think anyone that along the line that knows that they’re going to be in a vice 
presidential or top executive position in a college or university, they are also going to 
have to raise money, even the deans and others. 
Presidents such as Jessica Elliott expressed the importance of presidents retaining a 
strong fundraising staff to assist with cultivating fundraising opportunities: 

It is a specialty (fundraising). I think if you have a very good staff in the fundraising area 
that really can help you. If you have the structure set up, you’re brought in at a unique 
time, when you have to, you know, do “the ask.” 
The data suggested that it is important that the president be the person to ask for the 
larger sums of money from major donors. Several presidents noted that the Council for 
the Advancement and Support of Education’s (CASE) fundraising and philanthropy 
workshops do a great job of exposing presidents to various techniques used to attract 
financial donations from a diverse set of donors. 
STRATEGIC PLANNING 
Six of the presidents expressed the belief that aspiring university presidents needed to 
be prepared in the area of strategic planning. In this study, strategic planning is defined 
as the process in which a higher education institution engages to define its course of 
action to prepare for the future of the institution. William James summed up the general 
response of the respondents by sharing that presidents must understand strategic 
planning because they will be expected to lead in strategizing the future of their 
institution when he said,” the president needs to be the lead visionary and strategist.” 
Ekman (2010) believes that being the chief strategist of the university is one of the best 
perks of the job. He shared, “presidents do have the opportunity to craft, then to act on 
the basis of an idealized vision for the institution—to weave personal values into one’s 
work to an unusual degree.” (p.63) 
President Ryan Wyatt shared that a president needs to know how to put the strategic 
plan into action. This is important because presidents are expected to produce results. 
As Wyatt noted: “You really ought to have an understanding of how to approach 
strategic planning in a college or university setting and how to convert a strategic plan 
into action.” 
COMMUNICATIONS 
Communications was one of the most talked about competency areas discussed by 
presidents in this study. Communication as a competency in this study is defined as the 
effective execution of written or oral communication and the ability to effectively engage 
in interpersonal development. President Elijah Alexander remarked, “communication … 
skills that I would put high on the list of competencies a president must master.” 
President Cooper also emphasized that communicating is central to the work that 
university presidents do. He stated: “I think writing and communicating are skills…all 
those come back to, a central thing, communication. They all come back to the ability to 
communicate effectively.” 
WRITING TO DIVERSE AUDIENCES 
One of the areas of general consensus within the communication competency between 
all participants was the role that writing plays in the career of a president. Presidents 

shared that aspiring presidents need to be prepared to write to multiple audiences, such 
as to an academic audience and to the general public. Several presidents, such as 
Lucus Jacob, shared that presidents should have a grasp of the rudiments of good 
writing. President Jacob expressed it this way: 
In writing, you’ve got to have the ability to be clear, to be concise, to make your point, 
and to do so in a way that engages the person that’s receiving the communication. 
President Nolan Cooper noted that strong writing skills were important because writing 
is one of the primary vehicles by which president’s competence is judged. This is in line 
with Siegel’s (2011) finding that presidents are often expected to communicate through 
written strategic plans and other means to foster cordial and open communication 
between their office and campus constituencies. 
SPEAKING TO DIVERSE AUDIENCES. 
In addition to learning how to write to diverse audiences, six presidents talked about the 
need for aspiring presidents to hone their speaking ability. Nelson (2009) suggests that 
“they must be leaders that…speak eloquently (p. 26).” Dr. Lucus Jacob, president of 
Landon State University, talked of the need to be able to speak in a variety of settings 
and being capable of giving an impromptu speech. He shared: 
If you are going to be an upper level executive administrator, then public speaking is 
going to be a part of what you do on a regular basis. Whether it’s to the rotary club or 
the Kiwanis, I’ve done sermons, you know, I’ve spoken at faculty meetings, you end up 
doing impromptu things from time to time and school presentations. I mean it just 
becomes, it has to become a second nature to what you do. 
President Jessica Elliott emphasized that this competency is not learned overnight. She 
improved her speaking skills over time. 
I think I had developed that to a certain degree because I had leadership 
responsibilities, but, uh, I think because of the responsibilities on this level and I 
improved in that area because sometimes you have to go from one group to the next. 
You have to go through faculty to administrators to a social group and you have to 
adjust your message and I think that’s a technique that I have learned and I have 
improved in over the years. 
President Evelyn Aurora explained that aspiring presidents must not only be prepared to 
give positive, inspiring speeches, they need to be prepared to give tough ones as well. 
She stated, 
You are going to give a lot of speeches, persuasive speeches and informational 
speeches, speeches where you are telling people you are getting ready to cut their 
budgets, and there are so many different ways. 

INTERPERSONAL DEVELOPMENT 
The final communication competency area derived from this study is interpersonal 
development. Interpersonal development is defined in this study as the ability to relate 
and work with diverse individuals. Eleven presidents expressed the belief that 
interpersonal development is an important part of being successful as a leader within 
the academy. Some presidents, such as President Evelyn Aurora, believed that 
participation within professional meetings could assist with the development of this 
competency. President Aurora expressed her experience this way: 
I remember going to these big conferences and you think you would develop these skills 
at parties, but it is almost like a party skill. You come in the room and everybody is in a 
little circle talking and you have to figure out how to get in the circle so you can talk with 
the people, and also how to move from circle to circle and that is an absolute essential 
skill if you go into higher education administration, because when you go to chamber 
meetings, or when you are going to these big business meetings, you have to figure out 
how to get in the circle, because people tend to talk in circles. 
Elijah Alexander added to this conversation by sharing how in practice, presidents need 
to be able to interact with diverse constituencies, because their success and legacy is 
dependent on it. 
I do think in interacting, one of the things that a president has to do is to be able to 
interact, you’ve got to be a person who’s almost on the verge of ministering, you’ve got 
to be persuasive, you’ve got to convince people, you’ve got to, you know, engage and 
be able to convince them and this is the direction that we need to go. 
The president is seen as the “living logo” of the university (Siegel, 2011). Therefore, it is 
important that a president is able to represent the institution favorably among various 
constituencies. Siegel (2011) expresses the importance of presidential interactions in 
this statement: “Whether attending faculty or committee meetings, visiting campus 
functions or athletic events, speaking to student groups, initiating town hall discussions, 
or participating in ceremonies such as graduation or convocation, the presidents felt 
their daily interactions in the campus environment were replete with symbolic gestures” 
(p.85). 
5. Discussion and Implications 
The findings suggest that it is important to those aspiring to a university presidency to 
have foundational knowledge in higher education and to have a mastery of information 
related to the history and finance in higher education. This is an important finding. 
Although most higher education doctoral programs offer courses on topics related to 
these content areas, the results of this study validate their importance, especially as it 
relates to preparation for presidential leadership. 

Results of this study also indicate that the presidents view themselves as both leaders 
and managers. Management skills (assessment/accountability, enrollment 
management, fundraising, strategic planning) were quite clearly identified. Examining 
the findings as a whole, the leadership skills are also present. They appear inherent in 
the language used to describe them. Among these skills and competencies are: 
Knowledge Acquisition of Culture, Complex Cognitive Knowledge, and 
Communications. McLaughlin (2004) shares, 
In a university presidency, leadership is characterized by a focus on the values, 
purposes, and meaning of the institution, both as an affirmation of its raison d’être and 
as a mandate for change. Presidents are expected to connect individuals to the mission 
of the enterprise, to raise sights, and to encourage hopefulness in the future. 
Although leadership and management in the context of a university are closely related 
they are not interchangeable. McLaughlin (2004) shares, 
In their leadership role, college and university presidents are called on to attend to the 
ideas, ideals, and individuals of their institutions. As managers, presidents serve as their 
institution’s chief executive officer…working to align institutional resources—money, 
technology, and personnel—to solve problems or forge new institutional directions. 
As verified in the literature above, both leadership and management are important in the 
role of presidents. 
The results also suggest that aspiring presidents should be able to integrate 
information, especially complex concepts. In addition, prospective presidents should be 
able to acquire knowledge and understand that serving as a university president places 
them as a public figure in the eyes of the academic and larger community. 
Results of the study also suggest that presidents should develop strong interpersonal 
competencies. Thus, presidents should be able to speak to diverse constituencies such 
as local and national media as well as students. The study also alludes to the notion 
that presidents should enhance their personal attributes such as humility and empathy. 
It also appears that they must develop competencies in oral and written communication 
formats to ensure that they are prepared to communicate effectively with diverse 
audiences. 
6. Application of Findings 
While the findings of this study may not be generalizable to all presidents or 
organizational settings, they do provide a perspective that might be helpful to a variety 
of constituencies and groups. In addition to providing meaningful information for 
standing presidents, the insights gleaned might be of value to those in academic senior 
leadership roles who aspire to the presidency, such as provost, other vice presidents, 

and special assistants. They may be able to use the results of this study to identify the 
areas that they need to hone to strengthen a future bid for a university presidential 
position. The identified knowledge and competencies might also be used by boards of 
trustees as a list of areas that they can use to rank the fitness of a presidential 
candidate for their institution. 
The results of this study may also provide executive higher education programs and 
standard higher education doctoral programs with a list of knowledge and competency 
areas to incorporate into their curriculum. They may also want to consider some 
personal skills such as communication and reflective skills as part of the admission 
process. 
One constituency this study may provide particular insights for are non-degree granting 
higher education training agencies. These agencies include organizations such as the 
American Council of Education, Harvard Institute for Educational Management, and 
Kellogg Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs) Leadership Fellows Program. The 
suggestions by these presidents can provide insight into knowledge and competency 
mastery areas that programs can cover during their leadership development sessions. 
Although this study included only university presidents, it would be relevant in the future 
to explore the perspectives of presidents of other types of institutions such as 
community colleges and liberal arts institutions. It might also be meaningful to conduct 
research with university presidents who earned their doctorate in a discipline other than 
education. Likewise, it might be of value to initiate similar studies with a group of 
presidents from a single type of university such as HBCU, Hispanic, for profit, or 
religious. Other studies might address whether differences exist based on the gender or 
ethnicity of the president. A quantitative study, developed using the findings of this 
study, would allow data collection from a larger group of presidents. 
Such studies could confirm or refute whether the perceptions of the knowledge and 
competencies identified by these presidents are viewed in the same manner across a 
wide variety of institutions and groups. This would provide the public with data that 
could be compared with the results of this study and further refine our understanding of 
this important area. 
Another area for future research includes surveying the perspectives of other graduates 
of higher education administration doctoral programs such as those preparing chief 
academic officers, diversity officers, and higher education faculty. Such studies would 
enable these populations an opportunity to provide their perspectives and could provide 
higher education faculty and curriculum developers with data that could assist them in 
enhancing the quality of higher education administration doctoral programs. 
Surprisingly, in this study there was little to no mention by any of the presidents of 
working with or communicating with ethnically diverse constituencies as being of 
importance. Likewise, there was no mention of understanding and using technology as 
an essential knowledge or competency area in the presidency. With the increased 

growth of an ethnically diverse student and alumni base at predominantly White and 
minority serving institutions (Gasman, 2011) and the growing use of technology in this 
global age, it may be advantageous for higher education researchers to engage in 
research to investigate why these two areas, so prominent in our world today, were not 
addressed by these presidents. 
7. Conclusion 
The expectations for university presidents by internal and external constituencies are 
increasing across the United States. These constituencies expect their presidents to 
ensure that issues such as student learning and fundraising are managed. Many 
presidents might find these issues daunting and overwhelming if they were not trained 
and prepared to deal with them. It is vital that potential or aspiring university presidents 
in higher education develop the knowledge and competencies that are needed for their 
success prior to assuming a university presidency. Clearly, more research is needed to 
find out whether the knowledge and competencies identified in this study will adequately 
prepare presidents from other institutional types, but this study provides a useful starting 
point and provides direction for future research on this important topic. 
 

 

 

 

Sydney Freeman, Jr. and Frances K. Kochan 
__________________________________________________________________ 
27
References 
 
Altbach, P. G. (2010). Leadership for world-class universities: Challenges for 
developing countries. New York and London: Routledge. 
Altbach, P. G., Bozeman, L. A., Janashia, N., & Rumbley, L. E. (2007). Higher 
education: A worldwide inventory of centers and programs (Revised Ed.). 
Rotterdam, the Netherlands: SensePublishers. 
Altbach, P., & Engberg, D. (2001). Higher education: A worldwide inventory of 
centers and programs. Phoenix: Oryx Press. 
The American College President: 2012 Edition. (2012). Washington, DC: 
American Council on Education. 
The American College President: 2007 Edition. (2007). Washington, DC: 
American Council on Education. 
The Association for the Study of Higher Education’s (ASHE) Council for the 
Advancement of Higher Education Programs (CAHEP). (2010). A 
commitment to quality: Guidelines for higher education administration 
and leadership preparation programs at the master’s degree level. 
Retrieved from 
http://www.ashe.ws/images/CAHEPLeadershipProgramGuidelines.pdf 
Barnett, N. (2007). Higher education as a field of study at historically black 
colleges and universities. Doctoral dissertation, Ball State University, IN. 
Retrieved from Dissertations & Theses: A&I. (Publication No. AAT 
3288300) 
Burton, V. S., Jr. (2003). Structured pathways to the presidency: Becoming a 
research university president. Doctoral dissertation, University of 
Pennsylvania. Retrieved from Dissertations & Theses: A&I (Publication 
No. AAT 3084874). 
Campbell, M. S. (1999). Using a life history approach to explore the identity of a 
woman diagnosed with alzheimer’s disease: The life of Mary. Master’s 
thesis, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg, 
VA. Retrieved from http://scholar.lib.vt.edu/theses/available/etd-061599-
132826/unrestricted/SEAN3.PDF 
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory. A practical guide through 
qualitative analysis. London: Sage. 
Cook, B. J. (2012-supplement). The American college president: Key findings and 
takeaways. The Presidency, 3-5. 
Creswell, J. W. (1998). Qualitative inquiry and research design choosing among 
five traditions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
Dressel, P. L., & Mayhew, L. B. (1974). Higher education as a field of study. San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 

Universities Presidents’ Perspectives 
__________________________________________________________________ 
28
DuBois, G. (2006). Developing an accountability agenda with college presidents: 
A chancellor’s view. New Directions for Higher Education, 2006(135), 
95–101. 
Eisner, E. W. (1998). The enlightened eye: Qualitative inquiry and the 
enhancement of educational practice. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merrill, 
1998. 
Ekman, R. (September 2010). The joys of the college presidency. University 
Business. pp. 63-64. 
Farrington, E. L. (2008). Strategies to reach gender parity in college presidents. 
Women in Higher Education. Retrieved from 
http://www.whihe.com/printBlog.jsp?id=19251 
Fife, J. D., & Goodchild, L. F. (Eds.). (1991). Administration as a profession. San 
Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass. 
Fink, L. D. (2005). Integrated course design. University of Oklahoma. IDEA Paper 
#42. 
Gasman, M., & Anderson-Thompkins, S. (2003). A renaissance on the eastside: 
Motivating inner-city youth through art. Journal of Education for Students 
Placed at Risk, 8(4), 429–450. 
Hammons, J. O., & Miller, M. T. (2006). Presidential perceptions about graduate-
preparation programs for community colleges. Community College 
Journal of Research and Practice, 30(4), 373–381. 
Herdlein III, R. J. (2004). Survey of chief student affairs officers regarding 
relevance of graduate preparation of new professionals. NASPA Journal, 
42(1), 51–71. 
Keim, M. C. (1991). Student personnel preparation programs: A longitudinal 
study. NASPA Journal, 28(3), 231–242. 
Kienle, A. W., & Loyd, N. L. (2005). Globalization and the emergence of 
supranational organizations: Implications for graduate programs in higher 
education administration. College Student Journal, 39(3), 580–87. 
Kuk, L., Cobb, B., & Forrest, C. S. (2007). Perceptions of competencies of entry-
level practitioners in student affairs. NASPA Journal, 44(4), 664–691. 
Luxton, A. Commissioned by the Department of Education General Conference 
Higher Education Quality Management in Higher Education Management 
Series Number 2. 
McLaughlin, J. B. (1996). Entering the presidency. In J. B. McLaughlin (Ed.), 
Leadership transitions: The new college president. San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass. 
McLaughlin, J. B. (2004). Leadership, management, and governance. New 
Directions for Higher Education, pp. 5–13. 
McLaughlin, J. B., & Riesman, D. (1990). Choosing a college president. Princeton, 
NJ: Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. 
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1984). Qualitative data analysis: A source 

Sydney Freeman, Jr. and Frances K. Kochan 
__________________________________________________________________ 
29
book of new methods. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analysis (2nd ed.). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Mortenson, T. G. (2012) State funding: A race to the bottom. Presidency, 26-29 
Nelson, S. J. (2009). Success and failure in the college presidency. The New 
England Journal of Higher Education. 24(2), 26-27. 
Nelson, S. J. (2008). A college president’s job is to shape a center that holds. 
Chronicle Of Higher Education, 54(30), A37-A38. 
Patton, M. Q. (2002). Qualitative evaluation and research methods (3rd ed.). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc. 
Pierce, S. R. (2011) On Being Presidential: A Guide for College and University 
Leaders. Hoboken, N.J. Jossey-Bass Publishing. 
Roach, R. (2000). Decisions of the head and heart. Black Issues in Higher 
Education, 17(6). 
Ross, M. E., & Shannon, D. M. (2008). Applied quantitative methods in education. 
Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt Publishing Company. 
Sandeen, A. (1982). Professional preparation programs in student personnel 
services in higher education: A national assessment by chief student 
affairs officers. NASPA Journal, 22(1), 51–58. 
Siegel, M. J. (2011) An ethnographic study of new college presidential learning in 
a cultural context. Journal of Academic Administration in Higher 
Education, 7(1) 79-89. 
Strauss, A. L., & Corbin, J. (1990). Basics of qualitative research: Grounded 
theory procedures and techniques. London: Sage. 
Stuver, A. L. (2006). A graduate student’s expectation of graduate education. 
Retrieved from 
www.aps.org/programs/education/upload/StuverCalTec.pdf  
The Council for the Advancement of Standards in Higher Education (CAS). 
(2006). CAS general guidelines. Retrieved from 
http://www.cas.edu/index.php/cas-general-standards/ 
Trochim, W. M. (2006). Levels of measurement. [Online]. Available at: 
http://www.socialresearchmethods.net/kb/measlevl.php 
Wang, X. (2010). Higher education as a field of study in China. Lanham, MD: 
Lexington Books. 
Wilson, M. (2012). Colleges and Universities. Education Encyclopedia. Retrieved 
from http://education.stateuniversity.com/pages/2464/Student-
Services.html 
Wolfe, B. (2010). When being black isn’t enough: Experiences and persistence 
strategies of six African American administrators at a PWI. Ph.D. 
dissertation, Auburn University, United States -- Alabama. Retrieved 
from Dissertations & Theses: A&I. (Publication No. AAT 3446190). 
Wooten, S. (2009). The university presidency: A symbol of change? Retrieved 

Universities Presidents’ Perspectives 
__________________________________________________________________ 
30
from http://www.cavalierdaily.com/2009/09/08/the-university-presidency-
a-symbol-of-change/ 
Wright, D., & Miller, M. (2007). Training higher education policymakers and 
leaders: A graduate perspective. Charlotte, NC: Information Age 
Publishing. 
Wright, D. (2007). Progress in the development of higher education as a 
specialized field of study. In D. Wright & M. Miller (Eds.), Training 
higher education policymakers and leaders: A graduate perspective. 
Charlotte, NC: Information Age Publishing. 
Yin, R. K. (2003). Case study research, design and methods (3rd ed.). Newbury 
Park: Sage Publications.