EDITORIAL
Cliometrica after 10 years: deﬁnition and principles
of cliometric research
Claude Diebolt1
Published online: 24 September 2015
 Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015
‘‘[…] cliometricians have been explaining to their colleagues in history the wonderful usefulness of
economics. It is time they began explaining to their colleagues in economics the wonderful usefulness of
history. […] It is no accident that some of the best minds in economics value it highly. What a pity, then,
that the rest have drifted away.’’
(D. McCloskey, ‘‘Does the Past Have Useful Economics?’’Journal of Economic Literature, 1976, p. 455).
I deﬁne cliometrics as the quantitative projection of social sciences in the past.
Cliometrics is, more precisely, the combination of causal explanations embedded in
(economic) models, with or without counterfactual speculation, in order to screen
the relative importance of various factors, i.e., of forces (in natural sciences)
believed to have been operative in a given historical situation. Assessment of
cliometrics can proceed only if the nature of causal explanation has been resolved.
Is causation only correlation and causal analysis the search for the maximum of
consistency of correlations? Or is causation observed correlations, explained in
terms of forces or mechanisms at work assuring that similar causes must be
followed by similar effects? In response to the cliometric research agenda,
methodology (the study of methods) or the methods themselves employed by a
science or a discipline (here in history and in economics) become central.
Over the last 10 years, Cliometrica, the journal of historical economics and
econometric history, follows the cliometric ambition to understand and to explain
the complexity of economic growth phenomena in two different but related ﬁelds,
history and economics.
& Claude Diebolt
cdiebolt@unistra.fr
1
Founder, Publication Director and Managing Editor of Cliometrica, Strasbourg, France
123
Cliometrica (2016) 10:1–4
DOI 10.1007/s11698-015-0136-z

Cliometrica’s mission is:
•
To avoid the development of economic history and measurement without
economic theory. The journal displays also a clear line between applied
economics and cliometrics. Cliometrics in Cliometrica is history, (economic)
theory and statistics/econometrics.
•
To introduce modern quantitative methods in social sciences. Cliometrics for
history as experimental economics for today? Yes. Economic actors are not
passive: game theory, analytic narratives. Cliometrics as pure mathematics? No.
Cliometrics as physics? Yes. Linking economic theory with observed stylized
facts or ‘‘laws’’ to understand and explain how a/the system worked. Cliometrics
as biology? Yes. Evolutionary perspective. Cliometrics as political philosophy?
Yes. Designing optimal institutions instead of describing the world. Culture and
institutions do matter… history matters!
•
To produce new statistical datasets, i.e., improving the quality and the
controlling of the databases in the tradition of the national institutes of statistics.
•
To use the counterfactual approach. First, to underscore the importance of a
particular causal factor that was operative in the situation under consideration. If
slavery had not existed in the USA, then the Civil War would not have been
fought. Alternatively and through the concept of social savings, if railroads had
not existed in the USA, then the gross national product in 1890 would have been
less than it actually was. Second, to add (rather than to subtract) a particular
causal factor and speculate about the impact which that mentally added factor
might have had. What if Nazi Germany had won World War II?
•
To discuss the multiplicity of erroneous representations in economic history
(path dependence, myths, falsiﬁcations, etc.).
Cliometrica is concerned with the unique, but also with the average. The ultimate
goal, or at least one of its ultimate goals, is to ﬁnd the underlying regularities in the
interaction of economic and social variables, of production and distribution through
time.
Since 2007, the articles published in the journal are the result of the combination
of ‘‘clio’’ (the muse of history) and ‘‘metrics’’ (the art of measurement). The
procedures, concepts, mental rules, postulates, analytical techniques, personal
beliefs, generalizations, etc., implemented in cliometric research became therefore
central to the journal, also because axioms, postulates, premises, assumptions, and
hypothesis were the starting points of most articles, in history to designate the
general frame of reference in order to catch the complexity for a ﬁeld of inquiry, in
economics to designate the statements accepted as true without necessarily
establishing their complete validity.
Deﬁning the papers published in Cliometrica since 10 years is ﬁnally as simple
as remembering again and again the analytical devices or principles now being
employed in cliometrics at the international level.
2
C. Diebolt
123

•
Cliometric research is more and more embedded in economic models. The
models in turn are combined (or not) with counterfactual speculation to assess
the importance of various causal forces observed to operate in a particular
historical setting.
•
The importance of the production of new databases.
•
Quantiﬁcation, statistics and econometrics, may not bring everything to a
certainty, but it can give to many historical debates a perspective that would
otherwise be completely lacking.
Of course, these cliometric principles must face general difﬁculties:
•
The imperfection of surviving data. Data must be built and treated carefully,
with patience and humility. Like other fragments of surviving historical
evidence, data are shot through with biases, mistaken judgments, and errors.
•
The uncertain importance of non-operational causal factors. How to organize
reality into homogeneous sets or entities? Only by abstraction, i.e., only by
ignoring as relevant some of the characteristics of a speciﬁc event? General-
izations are incomplete. The reason is simple. All previous experimental
situations may have included an unknown but relevant cause, and there is no
way to prove that this was not the case. In other words, causal explanation
consists of subsuming speciﬁc facts under generalization. If one of the causes of
World War II was the series of treaties imposed at the end of World War I, does
a complete explanation of World War II have to include the causes of war in
1914 and its end in 1918, the causes of those causes, and so on?
•
The unknown degree of imperfection in any theoretical model resulting from its
neglect of causal factors and its use of assumptions which distort reality.
Cliometrica encourages the methodological debate (not a sterile Methodenstreit),
the use of economic theory, mathematical model building, and the reliance upon
quantiﬁcation to support analytical frameworks with historical data. Moreover,
Cliometrica stresses the use of standard historical knowledge, wie es eigentlich
gewesen ist, to suggest new avenues of research as well as the use of statistical
theory and econometrics to combine models with data into a single consistent
explanation. While the juxtaposition of cross-fertilization of new ideas—emanating
from methodological innovations and from economic theory—form the core of
cliometric research, Cliometrica aims to forge steps ahead to encourage researchers
to devise ever new strategies to reconcile these along the dynamic path of history.
Since its ofﬁcial creation in June 2006 by contract signature in Strasbourg with
the Springer Verlag, the main ambition of Cliometrica is (and remains) in continuity
of Gustav Schmoller’s German Historical School and of Lucien Febvre’s and Marc
Bloch’s Annales School (both also created in Strasbourg, respectively, in 1870–1880
and in 1920–1930), and with the exceptional support of an international editorial
board and of reviewers from all over the world, to close the gap between the
Geisteswissenschaften and the Naturwissenschaften, i.e., to move from the historical
verstehen or understanding side to the economic erkla¨ren or explaining side or,
Cliometrica after 10 years: deﬁnition and principles of…
3
123

much better, mixing both approaches, facts and stylized facts, explaining the
economic experience of the past and understanding the ways in which economic
factors inﬂuence social and political developments, for an increased knowledge of
the past, present, and future economic and social development of developed and
developing economies, for the achievement of a uniﬁed approach of the social
sciences.
The recent publication of the Handbook of Cliometrics1 is another original
illustration of the validity of this belief.
Happy Birthday to Cliometrica!
1 Diebolt C., Haupert M. (Eds.): Handbook of Cliometrics, Springer, Berlin, 2016.
4
C. Diebolt
123