was the commodification and selling of education programs.
The General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) has been
a wake-up call for higher education around the world. Higher
education has traditionally been seen as a “public good” and a
“social responsibility.” Many people see GATS as presenting
new opportunities and benefits, while others see it as introduc-
ing serious risks and positioning higher education as a private
commodity. In addition, there are those who question why the
trade sector needs to impose regulations at all, given that the
education sector has been using its own international agree-
ments and conventions.
Increased Access: Equity or Elitism
While internationalization—more specifically cross-border
education—is seen as a potential to increase access to higher
education, deep concerns have been raised about the equity of
access. Access for whom is the key question: those who can
afford to travel, or those who speak English, or those who can
afford foreign tuition fees whether they stay at home or go
abroad for their foreign credential? The growth in the for-prof-
it sector of international education provision gives fodder to
critics who believe that cross-border education rather than edu-
cation at home is contributing to the perception that interna-
tionalization is only available for financially independent stu-
dents. Furthermore, the small percentage of students actually
participating in short-term study abroad, internships, and
international research projects provides more evidence of the
exclusive nature of internationalization.
Cultural Diversity or Homogenization?
The impact of new forms and types of international academic
mobility on the recognition and promotion of indigenous and
diverse cultures is a subject that evokes strong positions and
sentiments. Many observers believe that modern information
and communications technologies and the movement of peo-
ple, ideas, and culture across national boundaries present new
opportunities to promote a culture and provide more chances
for the fusion and hybridization of culture.
Other people see both the movement and the speed as
alarming. They contend that these same forces are eroding
national cultural identities and that, instead of the creation of
new hybrid cultures, native cultures are being homogenized—
usually interpreted as Westernized. Because education has tra-
ditionally been seen as a vehicle of acculturation, these argu-
ments focus on the issues of the dominance of English as the
language of instruction, irrelevance of curriculum content, and
the standardization of education and its accreditation process-
es.
What Is Next?
These new developments and unintended consequences illus-
trate that nothing unfolds entirely as planned. It is necessary to
stay alert to unexpected twists and turns along the road to
internationalization. With innovation come new opportunities,
successes, as well as threats. It is imperative that the interna-
tional, intercultural, and global dimensions of higher educa-
tion continue to be proactive and innovative, while keeping a
close watch on unanticipated spin-offs and implications. As
internationalization matures through its ages and stages of
growth, a critical eye and strong will are needed to monitor
intended and unintended results—for today and 25 years
hence.
Is Australia Overdependent on
International Students?
Simon Marginson
Simon Marginson is a professor of higher education in the Centre for the
Study of Higher Education, University of Melbourne, Australia. E-mail:
s.marginson@unimelb.edu.au.
A
ustralia has become a byword for the generation of export
revenues by selling education to foreign students. In
2007, 254,414 international students were enrolled in
Australian public universities, 26 percent of all students.
Another 18,685 were in private higher education institutions.
Each year Australia receives about the same number of univer-
sity students from mainland China and Hong Kong combined,
as does the United States. 
The only other country running education as an export busi-
ness on this scale, the United Kingdom enrolls half the share
of international students as in Australia. Education is the third-
largest export sector in Australia—below coal and iron ore but
ahead of tourism, beef, wheat, and manufacturing. It earned
$12 billion in 2007, mostly from the 207,800 students attend-
ing institutions onshore in Australia. There were also 65,299
more in offshore distance education and in branch campuses
of Australian institutions, mostly in East and Southeast Asia.
The Education Export Boom
The growth of international education has been amazing.
Between 1996 and 2007 the number of foreign students mul-
tiplied fivefold, from 53,188 to 273,099. However, this trend
international higher education
internationalization
10
The impact of new forms and types of internation-
al academic mobility on the recognition and pro-
motion of indigenous and diverse cultures is a sub-
ject that evokes strong positions and sentiments. 

does not show that Australia is more popular with foreign stu-
dents than other countries. Market research consistently finds
the United States as the number one destination of choice, fol-
lowed by the United Kingdom. At the doctoral level the United
States continues to draw the lion's share of the highest-achiev-
ing students. Rather, Australia's export boom results from sev-
eral favorable factors, plus the federal government's framing of
the political economy of the national system.
Australia benefits from the global demand for English-lan-
guage-based education systems. The cost of studying in
Australia is cheaper than in the United Kingdom or United
States, despite depreciation of the greenback. Australia is close
to Asia, the largest-source region for foreign students, and has
enjoyed good relations with China for three decades. As in the
United Kingdom and Canada, immigration policy encourages
foreign students to stay after graduation. Australia has devel-
oped very effective marketing and student servicing.
Above all, Australia's export boom is the outcome of supply-
side government policies that drive all Australian universi-
ties—even the research-intensive institutions at the top of the
local market—to raise global student market and thus maxi-
mize national exports.
The international education industry provides 15 percent of
the combined revenues of Australian universities, up to 50 per-
cent in individual universities. International students subsi-
dize not just university facilities and services but part of the
core teaching and research. This support has enabled the
national government to run down its funding of higher educa-
tion. Last year, Education at a Glance—of the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)—showed
that Australia was the only nation to reduce total public spend-
ing on tertiary education from 1995 to 2005, with public fund-
ing per student falling by 28 percent in real terms.
In Australia, tuition levels for domestic students are capped,
while international fees are not—and the total tuition for each
domestic student place, student payments plus government
subsidy, has fallen below unit cost. Universities lose money on
every local student they enroll, while internationals generate a
surplus. At the same time research is not fully funded. Only
two-thirds of the cost of government-funded research projects,
including infrastructure and teaching buyouts, are covered by
research grants. Further, government grants are not fully
indexed for cost inflation. The funding gap between public rev-
enues and the costs of domestic students and research grows
each year.
Thus the economic factors of the remarkable Australian
growth strongly encourage institutions to enroll more interna-
tional students each year. At the same time, fully commercial
English-language and business-training colleges are mush-
rooming, driven especially by immigration-based demand. The
large and growing export industry strengthens Australia's con-
nections with Asia and reduces fiscal costs. This win-win for
government is not so good for the universities.
The problem for the universities is that their state is not as
“healthy” as the export figures suggest. Perversely, the export
industry has been built not on a solid base of quality, but on the
deliberate 
underfunding 
of 
the 
Australian 
system.
Underfunding drives export growth but also empties out qual-
ity.
The Growth of Dilemmas
The negative signs have been revealed of long-term under-
funding in both teaching and research. The rate of participa-
tion of domestic students has not changed much since the
mid-1990s, while international student numbers have grown
so dramatically. Moreover, most OECD countries and East
Asian countries are expanding domestic tertiary participation
in line with the evolution of the knowledge economy. Between
the early 1990s and 2006 the average number of students per
academic faculty in Australia rose from 14 to 20, a sharp dete-
rioration in conditions of teaching and learning.
Australia's research performance, relative to population and
national wealth, is below levels in the United States, the United
Kingdom, and Canada. Australia has 15 universities in the
Shanghai Jiao Tong ranking's top 500, a good performance for
a nation of 20 million. But there are no Australian universities
in the Jiao Tong top 50, where the United States has 36
research universities, the United Kingdom 5, and Canada 2.
One suspects that Australia cannot keep growing its export
industry and emptying out teaching and research capacity at
the same time. Eventually, quality might be seen to deteriorate,
reducing the number (and certainly the quality) of internation-
al students and further driving down systemic resources.
Otherwise, government may begin refunding the domestic
system, in which case international student numbers might
begin to fall.
A recent article in the Chronicle of Higher Education noted
Australia's “dangerous dependence” on education exports. The
danger extends beyond the risks of the global market's sharp
drop and Australian tertiary education's underfinancing (a pos-
sibility, given the slowing down of economic growth in China).
The deeper threat includes the corrosion of educational priori-
ties and intercultural principles that a commercial approach
can engender, when operating on this scale over a generation,
as in Australia.
Australia has not in fact relinquished its educational mis-
sion or the commitment to scholarship and research that is
integral to universities, as sometimes argued by critics of the
commercial approach. In many respects, the culture of
11
international higher education
internationalization
Australia benefits from the global demand for
English-language-based education systems. The
cost of studying in Australia is cheaper than in the
United Kingdom or United States.

Australian universities remains similar to that of North
American and European universities, and good work contin-
ues.
However, university marketing budgets remain very large,
with symptoms of public underfunding everywhere. Australia
has attracted few high-quality foreign doctoral students, and
the aim is to secure revenues rather than to allocate scholar-
ships. The opportunity to develop rich intercultural pedagogies
and curricula has not been taken—given that the policy focus-
es on minimizing the unit cost per international student, to
maximize earnings. Moreover, at the bottom of the hierarchy
there are diploma mills and immigration scams.
In spite of unhealthy signs, Australian policy is unlikely to
change unless and until the volume and quality of internation-
al student demand drop. Then the crunch will come: the
choice of either maintaining export revenues (for example, via
immigration incentives) at the further cost of the quality of stu-
dents, education, and Australia's global reputation; or public
refunding that sustains quality but increases fiscal costs and
halts export growth. 
For-Profit versus Nonprofit
Private Higher Education
Daniel C. Levy
Daniel C. Levy is Distinguished Professor and Director of the Program for
Research on Private Higher Education, State University of New York at
Albany, Albany, NY, USA. E-mail: dlevy@albany.edu.
IHE devotes a column in each issue to a contribution from
PROPHE, the Program for Research on Private Higher
Education, headquartered at the University at Albany. See
http://www.albany.edu/.
W
hile most of the world's private higher education is non-
profit, a major uptick is under way concerning for-profit
higher education. In the United States, for-profits are the fast-
growing segment of higher education and will probably soon
capture a 10th of total enrollment—about one-third of the
country's private higher education overall. Although the US
for-profit share is larger than in most of the world, that seg-
ment is growing in many countries. The potential for growth
of for-profit higher education appears strong in such areas as
adult education, distance education, career education, and for-
eign-domestic partnerships. A few decades back, even non-
profit private higher education was prohibited in much of the
world, whereas today very few countries maintain such a ban.
The extent to which legalization of for-profits will follow suit is
as yet unknown, but growth is unmistakable.
The prominence of for-profit higher education relates not
just to its expansion but also to its relative distinctiveness.
Undeniably, major blurring occurs across all three higher edu-
cation sectors—for-profit, nonprofit private, and public. But
just as scholarship has identified major private (nonprofit) ver-
sus public differences, we can increasingly see for-profit versus
nonprofit differences. Furthermore, most for-profit versus
nonprofit differences likewise reflect the fact that the for-prof-
it sector is particularly distinctive from the public sector.
Not a Distinct Sector
It is not always easy to identify for-profit institutions. The
biggest problem in numerical terms is that many institutions
legally labeled nonprofit are in fact for-profit in practice.
Additionally, some countries neither proscribe nor explicitly
allow the for-profit form, simply not mentioning it in the edu-
cation context. Further ambiguity, however, relates to a wide-
spread misconception about the nature of nonprofit institu-
tions; outside the United States, “private” is often equated with
business or pursuit of financial gains. Yet nonprofits violate no
rules simply by pursuing gain, as long as the gain is not dis-
tributed as profits to owners. Gains reinvested in the institu-
tion, perhaps to cross-subsidize fields or build new ones, are
legitimate within the nonprofit rubric. Illegitimate but com-
mon are other forms of distributing gains, as with expensive
perks for family members who may be listed as part of the
work staff. It was such widespread practice that helped drive
the Brazilian government in the 1990s to permit legal for-prof-
its: better to have tax-paying for-profits than bogus nonprofits.
Blurry boundaries and overlapping realities are hardly
unique to higher education. They are longstanding matters of
great concern in the general literature on nonprofit organiza-
tions and intersectoral differences. Confusion is today com-
pounded as nonprofits commercialize themselves more than
ever. Indeed, as manifested in higher education, even some
public institutions increasingly take commercial routes.
Furthermore, even when clearly identified as for-profit, institu-
tions are often only ambiguously “higher education.” This is
particularly salient with training (as opposed to “education”)
institutions. The former may come under business law, the lat-
ter under education law, with only the former allowed to be,
legally, for-profit while the actual boundaries are slippery.
Finally, domestic partnerships are growing between public uni-
versities and for-profit colleges, sometimes causing ambiguity
international higher education
private higher education
12
The potential for growth of for-profit higher educa-
tion appears strong in such areas as adult educa-
tion, distance education, career education, and for-
eign-domestic partnerships.