Critical Discourse Analysis of Political Speeches: 
A Case Study of Obama's and Rouhani's 
Speeches at UN 
 
Massoud Sharififar 
Kerman Institute of Higher Education, kerman, Iran 
 
Elahe Rahimi 
Kerman Institute of Higher Education, kerman, Iran 
 
Abstract—The aim of this paper is to survey the art of linguistic spin in Obama's and Rouhani's political 
speeches at UN in September 2013 based on Halliday's systematic functional linguistics. The analysis is mainly 
performed through the transitivity system and modality to represent how two presidents' language can 
incorporate both ideology and power in their political speeches. In other words, they can manifest their power, 
capabilities, and policies through language; furthermore, the political implications of these speeches can be 
perceived better by common people. 
 
Index Terms—critical discourse analysis, Halliday's systematic functional linguistics, transitivity, modality, 
political speeches 
 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
A.  Discourse Analysis 
Discourse analysis is a broad field which is related to use of language in context. According to Tistcher (2000, p. 42), 
''discourse is a broad term with different definitions, which 'integrate a whole palette of meanings''. Discourse analysis 
takes into account different theoretical and methodological approaches such as linguistic, anthropology, philosophy, 
psychology and sociology. The nature of language is closely related to the demands that we make on it and the 
functions it has to serve. In the most concrete terms, these functions are specific to a culture. ''The particular form has 
taken by the grammatical system of language is closely related to the social and personal need that language is required 
to serve'' (Halliday, 1978, p. 142). 
One of the important features of DA is to study authentic text and conversations in the social context. The early DA 
has concerned with the internal structure of texts. Halliday's systematic functional linguistics is a new evolution against 
internal structure of texts. According to Halliday (1978), texts should encode both personal and social processes. In 
other words, texts should be generated, comprehended and put into a social context. Discourse analysis is based on 
micro and macro levels. Therefore, both linguistic and social analyses are important. Discourses are interpreted as 
communicative events because discourses between people convey messages beyond that of what is said at directly. 
What is important in such discourse is the social information which is transferred allusively. 
B.  Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA) 
At the end the 1970s, CDA has established as one of the domain of research in discourse studies. It is known as an 
approach that is based on the union of language studies and social theory (Fairclough, 1992). CDA investigates how 
social power is misused and how text and talk represent, procreate, and resist dominance and inequality in the social and 
political context. The most notable figure in this domain is Norman Fairclough, who has developed a three dimensional 
framework for studying discourse. The aim of this framework is to integrate three dimensions into another analysis of 
language text. In other words, it refers to analysis of discourse practice (processes of text production, distribution and 
consumption) and analysis of discourse events. 
The main focus of CDA is public speech, such as political speeches, advertisement, newspaper, official documents 
and so on. CDA' aim is to examine the relationship between the language, ideology, and power; Furthermore, its aims is 
to find out the assessment and exploitation of language dominance through text. 
One of the most important linguistic theories correlated with a critical discourse approach is that of Halliday's 
systematic functional grammar. It is supported by some linguists such as (Chouliaraki and Fairclough 1999, Fairclough, 
1992, 1995 a and b, Kress, 1985) who used it for analyzing the text because systematic functional grammar has a 
significant role in critical interpretation of linguistic expression in various discourses. As a matter of fact, systematic 
functional linguistic (SFG) model has been applied as a tool for analyzing the texts. 
ISSN 1799-2591
Theory and Practice in Language Studies, Vol. 5, No. 2, pp. 343-349, February 2015
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.17507/tpls.0502.14
© 2015 ACADEMY PUBLICATION

II.  THEORETICAL BASES 
Systematic functional grammar (SFG) is developed by M.A.K. Halliday and it is based on grammatical description. It 
says that language is considered as interlocking options or network of systems for creating meaning. Functional 
linguistic foregrounds linguistic choice and functional linguistic that deals with structures which derives from the 
options created by encoding rules. Functional language is a tool for interaction based on this idea that language forms 
are inevitably specified by the functions or uses that they provide (Huzhunglin, 1988, p. 307). 
According to Halliday and Hassan (1989, p. 10), a text, in the general term, is ''language that is functional''; meaning 
written and verbal language which conveys social meaning in a specific and real situation. Indeed, for Halliday the texts 
serve as the study of meaning and use of phrases and words rather than just the union of words and sentences. It takes 
into account two perspectives concurrently such as text as product and text as process. A text is considered as a product 
when it studies the linguistic structures. Simultaneously it is a process in terms of semantic component or encoding the 
meaning. These grammatical systems provide a basis for explaining the meanings of different kinds. 
Halliday's basic idea is that language is established metafunctionally. Therefore, Halliday's functions of language are 
called metafunctions and they have three kinds of semantic units: ideational functions, the interpersonal function, and 
the textual function. 
A.  Ideational Metafunction 
The ideational function refers to those functions that provide a basis for understanding human experience as a kind of 
resource for realizing the ''reality'' (Halliday, 1994). In other words, this function conveys both new information and 
elements are unfamiliar to the listener. The events and experience are represented by this function in both the real and 
intuitive world. Based on Halliday, this function is separated into logical and experiential metafunctions. Logical refers 
to the combination of two or more grammatical units into a more complex one. The experiential function refers to 
grammatical options that allow individuals to create meanings about the world around them and language evolved 
through this process. The analysis of the text based on this ideational function consists of 'transitivity' and ''voice''. 
Huzhunglin (1988, p. 312) states that ''these functions determines the accessible options in meaning as well as specify 
the nature of their structural awareness''. 
Transitivity system represents ideational function in grammar. Transitivity system comprises six processes as follow: 
1) Material processes: Physical action in the real world. 
2) Relational processes: Expressing possession, equivalence, attributes… 
3) Mental processes: Processes of cognition, affection and perception. 
4) Verbal processes: Processes of communication. 
5) Behavioral processes: Hybrid processes== a material + mental process. 
6) Existential: Processes of existing by an empty there in subject position. 
B.  Interpersonal Function 
Based on Huzhuanglin (1988, p. 313), ''the interpersonal function embodies all uses of language to express social and 
personal relations''. This includes the various ways the speaker enters a speech situation and performs a speech act'. 
According to O' Halloran (2006, p. 15), ''The interpersonal metafunction relates to a text's aspects of tenor or 
interactivity''. ''Like field, tenor comprises three component areas: the speaker/writer persona, social distance, and 
relative social status''. ''Social distance and relative social statues are applicable only to spoken texts, although a case 
has been made that these two factors can also apply to written text''. 
The speaker/writer persona is related to attitude, personalization and place of the speaker/writer. This concerns the 
neutral attitudes of speaker and writer by using of positive and negative language. Relative social statues investigate if 
speakers are equal or not. Coffin (2006, p. 22-23) argues that, 
Social distance means how close the speakers are, e.g. how the use of nicknames shows the degree to which they are 
intimate. Relative social statues ask whether they are equal in terms of power and knowledge on a subject, for example, 
the relationship between a mother and child would be considered unequal. Focuses here are on speech acts (e.g. whether 
one person tends to ask questions and the other speaker tends to answer), who chooses the topic, turn management, and 
how capable both speakers are of evaluating the subject. 
Speaker uses language to provide a relationship between himself and hearer. He uses language for informing, 
questioning, greeting, persuading and the like. 
Two terms that are used to express the interpersonal functions are modality and mood. Modality extends between 
extensive positive and extensive negative in social communication. Mood concerns the role that is selected by the 
speaker in a speech situation and the role that is allocated the addressee. (Huzhunglin, 1988) 
C.  Textual Metafunction 
''The textual metafunction relates to mode; the internal organization and communicative nature of a text'' (O'Halloran, 
2006, p. 36). ''This comprises textual interactivity, spontaneity and communicative distance'' (Coffin, 2006, p. 245). The 
factors such as lexical density, grammatical complexity, coordination and the use of nominal groups can determine the 
spontaneity. The communicative distance aims to investigate the text's cohesion regarding how it combines together and 
how it uses the abstract language. 
344
THEORY AND PRACTICE IN LANGUAGE STUDIES
© 2015 ACADEMY PUBLICATION

Coffin (2006) pointed out that the context related to lexical, grammatical and intonational aspects can analyze 
cohesion according to lexical chains, speech register, tonality, tonicity and tone. The lexical factor puts emphasis on 
lexical reiteration and sense relationship. Grammatical aspects consider the role of joining adverbials and the meaning 
repetition that is reflected through elements such as ellipsis, substitution and reference. 
III.  DISCUSSION 
Detail study on sample speeches 
From table 1, Obama's speech includes 5465 words that constitute 581 sentences and 57 paragraphs. Rouhani's 
speech includes 2650 words with 221 sentences and 29 paragraphs. As it is realized from two speeches, Obama has 
used most simple words than Rouhani's. Obama has used colloquial language in order to shorten the distance between 
him and the audience. As well as he refers to different subjects and different characters to extend his speech. As shown, 
Rouhani has used fewer yet more difficult words and his language is formal and it can be related to his first days of 
presidency. 
 
TABLE 1 
STATISTIC OF SAMPLEB SPEECH 
Statistic 
Statistical terms 
Rouhani's speech 
Obama's speech 
2650 
5465 
Words 
221 
581 
Sentences 
29 
57 
Paragraphs 
 
A.  Transitivity Analysis 
Transitivity is a system for explaining the whole clause instead of describing the verb and its object (Thompson, 1996, 
p. 78). According to Halliday a clause consists of three components: process, participant and circumstances. Halliday 
divides these processes into 6 types: material process, mental process, relational process, behavioral process, verbal 
process, and existential process. 
 
TABLE 2. 
TRANSITIVITY IN THE SAMPLE SPEECHES 
Rouhani's speeches 
Obama's speeches 
Process types 
Percentage 
Frequency 
Percentage 
Frequency 
38 
54 
46 
228 
Material 
1 
35 
50 
29 
97 
Relational 
2 
9 
13 
18 
62 
Mental 
3 
1 
2 
0 
1 
Behavioral 
4 
10 
15 
4 
15 
Verbal 
5 
3 
5 
1 
4 
Existential 
6 
 
From table 2, it can be concluded that material process has the first rank with 47% and 38% frequency among other 
processes. Second is relational process with 29% and 35% frequency, followed by mental process 18% and 9%. The 
lowest numbers of processes are behavioral process with 0 and 1%, then existential with 1%and 3% and finally verbal 
process with 4% and 10%. 
1. Material Process 
Material process includes the activities and events that occur in the human's external world (Saragih, 2010, p. 7). 
Material process is process of ''doing'' or ''happening''. There are two participants in this process: 
Actor: The one who does the action. 
Goal: The one who is affected by the action. 
This process applies action words either abstract or concrete. 
 
TABLE 3 
TRANSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF ROUHANI'S SPEECHES (MATERIAL PROCESS) 
Goal 
Process 
Actor 
With chemical weapons, 
situation. Syria's acceptance, 
discourse, the peace, problems 
Played, harpoon, help, vote, defend, 
seeks 
I, we, Iran, those, Iranian 
people, Sadam Hossein.  
 
TABLE 4 
TRANSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF OBAMA'S SPEECH (MATERIAL PROCESS) 
Goal 
Process 
Actor 
Weapons, the Syrian people, settlements, prewar 
statues, moderate opposition, a peaceful 
resolution, Geneva process, all nations, nuclear 
weapons, nations, the issue, this attack, his people, 
beyond conflict. Peaceful. 
Use, give, persuade, return, continue, 
help, move, urge, provide, rebuild, walk, 
develop, reject, resolve, carry out, kill, 
deliver  
I, we, they, our, 
America, United    states, those, UN, 
Syria 
 
THEORY AND PRACTICE IN LANGUAGE STUDIES
345
© 2015 ACADEMY PUBLICATION

Table 3&4 demonstrate that material process indicates government's activities. What presidents have done and will 
do for their people in future. According to table 3 most of the actors in Obama's speech are I, we, America, United 
States that enable us to realize that Obama and his government are action leaders who are against chemical weapons and 
want to do their best to provide a kind of peace among nations. But the number of this process in Rouhani's speech is 
much fewer and most of the actors are I, we, Iran but this does not mean that Rouhani is not an action leader since it 
was the first days of his presidency and also he refers to wise choice of Iranian speech. 
Obama's speech: 
We (Actor) will dismantle (Material process) terrorist networks (Goal) that threaten (material Process) our people 
(Goal). Whenever possible we (Actor) will build (Material Process) the capacity of our partner (Goal), respect 
(Material Process) the sovereignty of nations (Goal) and work (Material Process) to address the root cause of terror 
(Goal). But when it is necessary to defend (Material Process) the United States (Goal) against terrorist attacks, we 
(Actor) will take direct actions (Material Process) and finally we (Actor) will not tolerate (Material Process) the 
development (Goal) or use of weapons of mass destruction so we (Actor) reject (Material Process) the development of 
nuclear weapons (Goal). 
Rouhani's speech: 
The Iranian people, (Actor) in a judiciously sober choice in the recent election, voted (Material Process) for the 
discourse of hope, foresight and prudent moderation (Goal). In foreign policy, the combination of these elements means 
that the Islamic Republic of Iran, (Actor) will act responsibility (Material Process) with regard to regional and 
international security (Goal). 
2. Relational process 
''Relational process is a process of being that through identification, attribution, and possession shows the link among 
entities'' (Saragih, 2010, p. 8). This process is identified by two modes: identifying relational process and attributive 
relational process. Identifying relational process means that one entity is being used to identify another. The verbs that 
are use in such process are (am, is, are, was, were…) become, etc. 
Attributive process means that an entity has some characteristics that ascribed to it' (Halliday, 1994, p. 120). The 
verbs that are used in this process are (look, cost, play, sound, gets, seem…). 
 
TABLE. 5 
TRANSITIVITY ANALYSIS OF OBAMA'S AND ROUHANI'S SPEECHES (RELATIONAL PROCAEE) 
Identifying relational process 
Attributive relational process 
War in Iraq was the dominant issue. 
The dominant issue in Iraq was war. 
The leaders who built united nations were not naïve. 
The Taliban and Al-Qaide are just two examples of such 
catastrophes. 
Two examples of such catastrophes are the Taliban and 
Al-Qaide. 
Intolerance is the predicament of our time 
 
The modes which are established in this process are attributive and identifying. If the process is attributive the 
participants are carrier and attribute and clauses with attributive processes are non-passivisable. According to table 5 
''the leaders'' is carrier and ''naïve'' is attribute. The carrier in this process is treated as real and obvious which is 
represented through was, were, am, and etc. but if the process is identifying the participants are token and value and 
clauses undergo passivisation. According to above table ''war'' is token and ''the dominant issue'' is value. Relational 
process is considered as a process of being which can explain about the relationship between traditional ideals and their 
beliefs that such explanations have a role in showing that president aim is to express his reasons in a natural way which 
is unconsciously accepted and the audience can take the required sacrifice in the speech (Cheng Yumin, 2007). 
3. Mental Process 
This process includes perception, cognition, affection and desire verbs such as know, think, feel, hear, see, like, hate, 
please, and etc. 
Obama's and Rouhani's speech: 
1) I (Sensor) know (Mental Process) that some now criticize the action in Libya as an object lesson. 
2) We (Sensor) have seen (Mental Process) terrorists target innocent civilians in a crowded shopping mall. 
3) They (Sensor) feel (Mental Process) in having no firm place in the community of nations. 
4) I (Sensor) listened (Mental Process) carefully to the statements. 
From above examples there is sensor that feels (emotionally), think and perceive and the phenomenon which is felt 
and thought about. The sense involves in this process expressed by human being or a conscious entity. Human can 
express their inner feeling to arouse the sense of others. For example presidents use the mental verbs such as think, 
know, feel…. to express their opinion, thought, and taste to connect their political beliefs with people expectations. 
B.  Modality Analysis 
One of the important factors that have crucial role in carrying out the interpersonal metafunction is modality which 
represents to what extent the proposition is acceptable. 
1. Modal verbs 
 
346
THEORY AND PRACTICE IN LANGUAGE STUDIES
© 2015 ACADEMY PUBLICATION

TABLE 6 
MODAL VERBS (ZHANG GUOLING, 2006) 
High Politeness 
Median Politeness 
Low Politeness 
 
Must, ought to, need, has/had to 
Will, would, should, shall 
Can, may, could, might, dare 
Positive 
Mustn't, oughtn't, can't, couldn't, 
mayn't, mightn't hasn't/hadn't to 
Won't, wouldn't, shouldn't, isn't/wasn't to. 
Needn't, doesn't/didn't, need to, 
have to 
negative 
 
TABLE 7.  
MODALITY ANALYSIS OF OBAMA'S AND ROUHANI'S SPEECH (MODAL VERBS) 
High politeness 
Median politeness 
Low politeness 
Total number 
Sample 
speech 
%       
No       
% 
No  
% 
No  
54%/0 
30 
1/26% 
69 
98%/0 
54 
5465 
Obama 
0/26% 
7 
1/05% 
28 
22%/0 
6 
2650 
Rouhani 
 
1) It must also be measured by our ability to resolve conflict. 
2) United States will never compromise our commitment to Israel's security. 
3) We can arrive at a framework to manage our differences. 
According to table 7, in both speeches the median politeness has the first rank with 1/26 percent. The most frequently 
adopted modal verb in both speeches is 'will'. The next is 'can' and then 'must'. These two presidents have used 'will' in 
their speeches more than other verbs to show what they will do in future. It demonstrates the president's capability in 
ruling his government with difficulties in future. 
2.Tense  
According to Halliday (1994), the term tense refers to past, present, or future at the moment of speaking. 
 
TABLE 8 
TENSE OF SENTENCES 
Future 
Past 
Present 
Total 
number 
Sample speeches 
Past  
Simple  
Perfect  
Simple  
Perfect  
Simple  
6 
34 
3 
95 
47 
154 
339 
NO 
Obama 
1/76 
10/2 
0/88 
28/2 
13/86 
45/5 
 
% 
1 
14 
1 
16 
18 
44 
94 
NO 
Rouhani 
1/06 
14/89 
1/06 
17/02 
19/14 
47 
 
% 
 
Based on table 8, we can see that simple present in both speeches occurs the most frequency; with an average 
percentage of 45/5 and 47%. Simple past has ranked in the second level with 28/2 and 17/02 percent. Finally future 
tense, with percentage of 10/2 and 14/89, ranks third. It is natural that simple present tense has the most frequency. The 
Presidents are talking in the present situation with the present audience. They are talking about issues that are based on 
facts. They try to focus the attention of people to the current events in their country. They use the simple past to refer to 
the past activities and what they have done in past. For example, in Obama's speeches the use of simple past or past 
perfect represents his activities. He refers to other leader's activities in the past and aware or recalls the people about the 
previous actions have done by president or other characters. Everyone's ambition is to know about future. Simple future 
is used with less frequency in both speeches since individuals cannot express their actions definitely in the future. So 
they cannot make promises about their actions in the future. One of the important features of this tense is that when it is 
uttered by presidents, respected characters, it can arouse people's motivation and hope in order to relate their beliefs to 
future's events. 
3.Personal pronouns 
Li (2002) states that one of the roles of personal pronoun is that it has an interpersonal function in discourse and it 
makes a kind of link between the speaker and the listener in a speech. 
 
TABLE 9. 
PERSONAL PRONOUNS 
Sample speeches 
Personal pronoun 
Rouhani's speech 
Obama's speech 
12 
40 
I (me) 
First person 
16 
93 
We (us) 
3 
1 
You (you) 
Second person 
0 
2 
He (him) 
Third person 
0 
0 
She (her) 
7 
26 
It (it) 
5 
23 
They(them) 
Rouhani's speech 
Obama's speech 
Possessive pronoun 
4 
5 
My (mine) 
9 
44 
Our (ours) 
0 
0 
Your (yours) 
0 
6 
His (his) 
0 
0 
Her (hers) 
1 
10 
Its (its) 
0 
7 
Their (theirs) 
THEORY AND PRACTICE IN LANGUAGE STUDIES
347
© 2015 ACADEMY PUBLICATION

 
The data at able 9 shows that, the first person pronouns (we and I) are used the most in both addressers' speech. In 
Obama's speech 'we' turns up 90 times and in Rouhani's speech it turns up about 16 times. The pronoun 'we' suggests 
two meanings. On one hand it suggests an idea of 'I and you' that shortens the distance between the president and the 
audience and creates a feeling of common purpose. On the other hand, it means 'I and others', which refers to a sense of 
authority by the addresser and his team, who tries to establish the powerful government that the audience expects. 
C.  Textual Analysis 
This metafunction considers the internal organization of a text in order to create a message. The whole text should be 
coherent, organized, accurate and logical to persuade the audience (Wang, 2010). 
Here we take Obama's speech as an example. Obama's inaugural speech includes following information: 
1) Salutation 
2) Introducing UN as an institute to resolve problems. 
3) Explain about different attacks at different places 
4) Refer to Assad regime that uses chemical weapons. 
5) Explain about role of UN and international law in meeting cries for justice 
6) Welcome the influence of all nations that can help bring about a peaceful resolution of Syria's civil war. 
7) America policy toward Middle East and North Africa. 
8) America's diplomatic efforts will focus on two particular issues: Iran's pursuit of nuclear weapons, and the Arab 
Israeli conflict. 
9) America seeks peace and international community among nations. 
IV.  CONCLUSION 
Obama's and Rouhani's speeches are analyzed according to Halliday's systematic functional linguistic. Some features 
of two addressers are revealed as followed. First, Obama has applied a colloquial language, consisting of simple words 
and short sentences that are understandable to different people. But Rouhani has used more difficult words and his 
language is rather hard and formal. That is related to his first days of presidency. Second, regarding transitivity analysis, 
which is based on different processes, both addressers' speeches have included the material processes as a process of 
'doing' and ''happening'' more than other processes. This is especially prevalent in Obama's inaugural speech. It can be 
realized that one of the notable functions of this process regards to president's activities and his government. Including 
what presidents have done and will do in future. Third, from modality metafunction, it can be understood that 
presidents' use of modal verbs shows their firm plan to fulfill the tasks and make their language easy as much as 
possible as well as shortening the distance between the president and the audience. Another role of modal verbs, 
especially the frequent use of 'will' and 'can' in presidents' inaugural speeches, can persuade the audience to have faith in 
the government's ability about the difficulties that their country may confront in the future. 
One of the prominent factors that signalize an addresser's speech is the use of personal pronouns. Obama and 
Rouhani give significant role to personal pronouns such as 'we' to make sense of intimacy with the audience as well as 
follow a common objective. The tense can be another factor that signalizes presidents' political speech. Because it refers 
to present, past and future events as well as activities that demonstrate government's objectives and at the same time 
display the world wide situations that extend from political, cultural, and economical field at present. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Coffin, C. (2006).  English grammar in context. Book 3: Getting practical. En.wikipedia.org: The Open University, 11. 
[2] 
Coffin, C. (2006). English grammar in context. Book 3: Getting practical. En. Wikipedia.org: The Open University, 22-23 
[3] 
Coffin, C. (2006). English grammar in context. Book 3: Getting practical (2006). En.wikipedia. org: The Open University, 245. 
[4] 
Chouliaraki, L. & N, Fairclough (1999). Discourse in late modernity. Edinburgh, UK: Edinburgh University Press. 
[5] 
Fairclough, N. (1992). Discourse and social change. Cambridge, UK: Policy Press. 
[6] 
Fairclough, N. (1995a). Critical discourse analysis. London: Longman. 
[7] 
Fairclough, N. (1995B). Discourse across deciplines: discourse analyzing in researching social change. AILA Review, 12, 3-17. 
[8] 
Halliday, M.A.K. (1978). Language as a social semiotic: The social interpretation of language and meaning. London: Edvard 
Arlond Pess 
[9] 
Halliday, M.A.K & R. Hassan. (1989). Language, context and text: aspects in a social-semiotic perspective. Second Edition. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. Links. Jostor.org/sici?sici=0039-8322(198706)21%3A2%3C353%3ALCATAO%. 
[10] Halliday, M.A.K. (1994). ''Systematic Theory''. In R.E. Asher (ed) Encyclopedia of language and linguistics, Vol 8. Pergamon 
Press. Reprinted in full in Halliday, M.A.K. 2003. On language and linguistics: volume 3 in the collected works of M.A.K. 
Halliday. London: Continuum, 436. 
[11] Hu Zhunglin.(1988). A course of linguistics. Peking: Peking University Press, 307.312-313. 
[12] Kress, G. (1989). Linguistic processes in sociocultural practices. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
[13] O'Halloran, K.A. (ed.) (2006).. English grammar in context, Book 2: Getting inside English. En.wikipedia.org: The Open 
University, 15-22. 
348
THEORY AND PRACTICE IN LANGUAGE STUDIES
© 2015 ACADEMY PUBLICATION

[14] O' Halloran, K.A. (ed.) (2006). English context, book 2: Getting inside English grammar. En.Wikipedia.org: The Open 
University, 36. 
[15] Saragih, A. (2010). Introducing systemic functional grammar of English. Medan: FBS UNIMED (unpublished), 7-8. 
[16] Thompson, G. (1996). Introducing Functional Grammar. Being:  Foreign Language Teaching and Research Press, 78. 
[17] Titscher, S., M. Meyer, R. Wodak,& E. Vetter. (2000). Methods of text and discourse analysis. London: Sage. 
[18] Wang, J. (2010). A critical discourse analysis of Barack Obama's speeches. Journal of language teaching and research. 
Lanzhou: Northwest Normal University. 
[19] Yumin, Ch. (2007). An analysis of style features of inaugural speeches given by American presidents based on the fundamental 
theory of HanLide. From the thesis of a master Tai Yuan science University. 
 
 
 
Massoud Sharififar earned his PhD in linguistics from the science university of Malaysia. She is a Professor in the Department of 
English language at the Bahonar University of Kerman, Iran, where he teaches English language courses at the undergraduate and 
postgraduate levels. His research interests include linguistics, translation, and discourse. He has written some papers in these areas of 
study. He is one of the referees in Iranian Foreign Language Journal. 
 
 
Elahe Rahimi is an MA student in English Language Teaching in the Department of English at the Kerman Institute of Higher 
Education. She is working on her MA thesis which will investigate the critical discourse analysis and its implication in English 
language teaching: a case study of political text. Her research interests include critical discourse analysis and teaching. 
THEORY AND PRACTICE IN LANGUAGE STUDIES
349
© 2015 ACADEMY PUBLICATION