Quaderni
Communication, technologies, pouvoir 
84 | Printemps 2014
La radicalité ouvrière en Europe
Italy and Greece, before and after the crisis:
between mobilization and resistance against
precarity 
Alice Mattoni and Markos Vogiatzoglou
Electronic version
URL: http://journals.openedition.org/quaderni/805
DOI: 10.4000/quaderni.805
ISSN: 2105-2956
Publisher
Les éditions de la Maison des sciences de l’Homme
Printed version
Date of publication: 5 May 2014
Number of pages: 57-71
 
Electronic reference
Alice Mattoni and Markos Vogiatzoglou, « Italy and Greece, before and after the crisis: between
mobilization and resistance against precarity  », Quaderni [Online], 84 | Printemps 2014, Online since 05
May 2016, connection on 02 May 2019. URL : http://journals.openedition.org/quaderni/805  ; DOI :
10.4000/quaderni.805 
Tous droits réservés

QUADERNI N°84 - PRINTEMPS 2014
ITALY AND GREECE, BEFORE AND AFTER THE CRISIS .57
Italy and Greece, 
before and after
 the crisis : 
between 
mobilization 
and resistance 
against precarity
Doctorant,
European University Institute, Florence
Markos
Vogiatzoglou
D o s s i e r
The inancial crisis has provoked rather violent 
changes in the working and living conditions of 
the workers’ population, especially in countries 
that suffer most from its consequences, such as 
the majority of Southern European countries. Yet 
already in the 1990s, the lexibilization of labour 
relations deepened the segmentation of labour 
market bringing along further divisions between 
workers in standard employment and workers in 
nonstandard employment. The latter are not new 
in the history of labour: in fact, early capitalism 
in the 19th century was almost entirely based on 
an extremely lexible and vulnerable workforce1. 
However, a number of working class struggles, 
as well as changes in the capitalist productive 
procedure, contributed to smoothen some aspects 
of the workers’ exploitation. To a certain extent, 
in the aftermath of World War II, labour relations 
were increasingly revolving around full-time 
and open-ended contracts – the  standard form 
of employment in factories as well as in other 
labour market sectors, such as the public services’ 
one2. The structure of the labour market began to 
change again in the 1970s: in a parallel (perhaps 
complementary) way to the dismantling of the 
Fordist-era welfare state3, the labour ield was 
also deregulated through the adoption of new 
forms of work lexibility4.
This process contributed to the emergence of a 
relatively new type of phenomenon – precarity 
– rooted in the labour realm, yet bearing conse-
quences in the whole life of individuals, and 
consequently led to a new kind of social subject: 
the precarious worker. Precarity can be deined 
as the “casualization of everyday life”5 deriving 
from the lexibility imposed in labour relations. 
It is a phenomenon “contextually speciic in 
Chercheuse
European University Institute, Florence
Alice
Mattoni

58. ITALY AND GREECE, BEFORE AND AFTER THE CRISIS
QUADERNI N°84 - PRINTEMPS 2014
contemporary times that emanates primarily from 
labour market experiences”6, putting individuals 
in “a condition of vulnerability relative to contin-
gency and the inability to predict”7. At the same 
time, the weakening of the Fordist era welfare 
state policies led to the shrinking of social protec-
tion for nonstandard employees8. The precarious 
worker, being an atypical dependent employee 
and subjected to lexible labour relations, progres-
sively lacked or had inadequate access to welfare 
state and other forms of social protection.
Due to their living and working conditions, 
precarious workers spoke the language of the 
current economic crisis well before it began to 
hit larger portions of the population, especially 
since usually they lacked access to political insti-
tutional allies, hold scarce economic resources, 
and were even absent from the public debate as 
such9. The multiple marginality of precarious 
workers is well documented in literature10. Their 
particular working and living conditions are con-
sidered as disincentives towards their engagement 
in collective action: mobilizing and organizing for 
precarious workers is indeed a complicated and 
demanding process11, similarly to what happened 
in the case of unemployed who were particularly 
dificult to mobilize, also from the perspective 
of trade unions that experience some structural 
constraints in approaching the unemployed12. 
However, the unemployed did mobilize in several 
European and non-European countries, especially 
during the waves of mass unemployment that 
overwhelmed many countries during the 1930s, 
in the second half of the 1970s and again in the 
1990s13, also at a European transnational level14. 
By analogy, in the past decades, the precarious 
workforce also engaged in various forms of 
collective action and mobilization, in several 
countries around the globe15. Precarity, more-
over, was a rather stable issue during recent anti-
austerity protests in many European countries16. 
In what follows, we engage in a cross-time 
and cross-country comparison of precarious 
workers’ mobilizations. Our work focuses on two 
Southern European countries: Italy and Greece. 
In both cases, precarity has been – and still is – 
a relevant contentious issue around which many 
activist groups mobilize. First, we will discuss
the changing context in which precarious 
workers’ mobilizations took place both in Italy 
and Greece. Second, we will compare preca-
rious workers’ mobilizations in Italy and Greece 
before and after the economic crisis. Finally, 
in the conclusion, we will relect on how the 
changing of contextual conditions and the evolution 
of protests intertwined in both countries, leading 
to changes in the ield of struggle around precarity.
How did we get there? The lexibilization of 
the labour market in Italy and Greece
As we already mentioned above, the post-Fordist 
era of labour relations witnessed significant 
changes in workplace organization, working 
schedules, hiring and dismissal procedures, as 
well as in the domain of employment contracts.
At a legislative level, the lexibilization proce-
dure was gradual and long-lasting in Europe. 
Starting from the late 1970s and based on a 
theoretical analysis of the labour market’s 
“rigidness” as a potential cause of the post-1973 
economic crisis17, various countries began to adopt 
patterns of employment contracts which di-
verted from the typical, open-ended, 9-to-5 

QUADERNI N°84 - PRINTEMPS 2014
ITALY AND GREECE, BEFORE AND AFTER THE CRISIS .59
Fordist-era model. Both Greece and Italy arrived 
late in the game. As Ioannou18 argues, the Greek 
labour relations system followed a static path 
in the post-World War II period, maintaining a 
more-or-less Fordist structure until the early 
1990s. Greece traditionally had a weak industrial 
basis; its labour market coniguration lacked 
the reinement and diversity which one might 
encounter in countries with a more diversiied 
production system. In the post-World War II set-
ting, the vast majority of the Greek workers – at 
least those who did not migrate to Western Europe 
– were being employed either by the (quickly 
expanding) Greek State19, or by small or very 
small companies. The prevalence of open-ended 
contracts, a small, yet relatively steady, rise of the 
workers’ income, and the introduction of some 
collective bargaining tools20 were some of the 
labour market characteristics of the period. With 
regard to Italy, the presence of a strong workers’ 
movement, backed by irm alliances of the union 
confederations and the parliamentary parties21, 
as well as the constitutional provisions22 which, 
in 1970, were integrated and further developed 
in the so-called statuto dei lavoratori (Worker’s 
Statute)23, produced counter-incentives and po-
tentially complicated any abrupt changes in the 
labour market regulation. Yet, the labour market’s 
relative competitiveness discourse during the 
1990s was far too strong for the two countries 
which were struggling with stagnation and less-
than-acceptable macroeconomic performance.
The lexibilization procedure in Italy was dis-
tributed in four different legislative initiatives, 
which were voted and implemented in the decade 
from 1993 to 200324. The provisions included a 
wide array of non-typical employment contracts, 
but not many substantial changes in the work-
ing conditions of the people who were already 
working under open-ended agreements. In 
Greece, the promotion of labour market lexibility 
had preceded the inancial crisis of the 2010s. 
From 1990, the year when part-time employment 
was introduced in the labour relations’ system, 
to 2009, at least eight legislative packages made 
reference to lexible labour and deregulated some 
aspects of the labour market and/or re-regulated 
others in accordance to international standards25.
All these legislative changes had a concrete 
impact on various aspects of the two countries’ 
labour market. According to the OECD, the over-
all level of strictness of employment protection 
had signiicantly decreased in Italy and Greece, 
from 3.06 and 3.46 (out of a maximum of 5 
points) in 2000, respectively, to 2.38 and 2.81 
in 201026. The time span of the introduction and 
use of ixed-term contracts played a key-role in 
the above changes. In Italy, the development was 
more linear: the share of temporary employment 
was around 7% in 1995, almost steadily increasing 
to reach a 12.8% in 201027. In Greece, ixed-term 
contracts represented a 10.5% of total contracts 
in 1995, only slightly increasing to 12% in 2010. 
Yet this situation is rapidly changing, as almost 
two thirds of the contracts signed since 2010 are 
ixed-term, part-time, or both28. With regard to 
part-time contracts, in Italy, the percentage – as 
a portion of total employment – rose from 13.5% 
in 2000 to 17.4% in 2010. In Greece, from 6.4% 
to 10%. Furthermore, data shows an important 
raise of the involuntary part-timers’ percentage in 
Italy during the last decade (from 17% to 32%)29. 
In Greece the change was even more dramatic, as 
from 2000 to 2009 the percentage had only risen 

60. ITALY AND GREECE, BEFORE AND AFTER THE CRISIS
QUADERNI N°84 - PRINTEMPS 2014
from 28% to 32%, to explode during the next 
two years to 50.5% and 57.1%, respectively30. 
Finally, it is important to see how, during the 
same period, wage lexibility has increased in the 
two countries. The degree of wage lexibility in a 
labour market is measured with two indica-
tors: the labour markets’ collective agreement 
coverage and the union density. The higher the 
labour force participation in unions, the higher 
the possibility of union representation in the 
workplace, hence requesting direct collective 
bargaining to take place31. Both Greece and Italy 
presented a rather stable percentage of union 
density from 2000 to 2010, slightly higher than 
the OECD countries’ average32. Yet there are 
significant variations when examining the 
difference between coverage rates of collective 
agreements and the trade union density. The latest 
data available refer to 2005; Greece’s difference 
between union density and collective agreement 
coverage stands at a mere 32%, whilst Italy’s 
difference is 53%33. It would be reasonable to 
assume that the obligatory extension of collec-
tive agreements to all workers of each particular 
sector or region (even if they have not participated 
or were represented in the bargaining process) is 
signiicantly higher in Italy, than in Greece.
In both countries, the labour market lexibili-
zation matched with the non-implementation of 
any serious reform of the welfare state. Rather, 
simple cutting down of beneits and of the bene-
iciaries’ numbers34 occurred. The basic welfare 
state structure remained unchanged despite of the 
rise of precarious workers, leading to a “process 
of dualization”, where “policies increasingly 
differentiate rights, entitlements, and services 
provided to different categories of recipients”35.
Precarious workers’ living conditions 
worsened during the economic crisis: In Greece, 
the violence and intensity of the measures 
imposed after 2010, radically changed the 
contextual framework in which social move-
ment organizations in general, and trade unions 
in particular operated. The sharp increase of 
unemployment – about 1.500.000 people were 
unemployed in 2013, representing the 15% of 
the total population and 28% of the workforce36 
– had a twofold consequence. On the one hand, 
the tools of the traditional industrial dispute 
repertoire, such as strikes, became less effective 
in producing concrete outcomes. On the other 
hand, massive unemployment reinforced the 
need to develop organizational formats which 
would include and facilitate the participation of 
the unemployed. Another relevant change was 
the ongoing humanitarian crisis taking place in 
Greece starting from 2010, that obliged social 
movement organizations to turn their focus on 
socially useful activities that could have a direct 
positive impact on the suffering population. 
Although Italy did not face the same dramatic 
austerity measures, the country was also hit hard 
by the crisis and the ongoing recession. Preca-
rious workers’ organizations had to deal with new 
challenges, as the unemployment rate doubled 
from 6.2% in 2008 to 12.5% in September 201337, 
the youth unemployment reached 35.9% in 2012 
(from 19.4% in December 2007)38 and the nega-
tive GDP growth during the same period39 left 
few hopes for a quick reversal of these negative 
trends. These dynamics and shifts also had an 
impact on the way precarious workers’ mobiliza-
tions developed. In what follows we will discuss 
how the mobilizations changed over the years, 
comparing protests before and after the economic 

QUADERNI N°84 - PRINTEMPS 2014
ITALY AND GREECE, BEFORE AND AFTER THE CRISIS .61
crisis in Italy and Greece.
Continuities and discontinuities in precarious 
workers’ political participation. Mobilization 
before the economic crisis
During the early stage of precarious workers’ 
mobilizations, before the economic crisis, in 
Italy many protests put an emphasis on the need 
to construct and reinforce a common sense of 
belonging amongst precarious workers. The 
importance of constructing common meanings 
on precarity while respecting the differences 
amongst precarious workers was relected in 
the very format of the Mayday Parade against 
precarity, that occurred each year on May 1st in 
Milan from 2001 – when it was still a national 
protest event – to 2004 – when it became a trans-
national day of protest for European precarious 
workers40, and still lasts today though in a dif-
ferent form. Already during the irst editions of 
the Mayday Parade, activist groups who were 
willing to participate in the parade were asked to 
construct their own trucks in order to represent 
their own understandings of precarity. Along the 
same line, the 2004 San Precario direct actions 
in supermarkets, bookshops, theatres and other 
places of consumption also aimed at establishing 
a sense of common belonging between activists 
and customers, on the one side, and activists and 
workers, on the other side41. Even the struggles 
aiming at improving the working conditions in 
a speciic workplace, e.g. the ight of the Precari 
Atesia collective in the call centre Atesia that 
reached its peak in 2005, had strong symbolic 
elements oriented towards the constitution of a 
cohesive and aware political subject42. In short, 
many of the Italian protests occurring from 2001 
to 2006 aimed at breaking the individualization 
of the precarious workers. In this sense, the em-
phasis on the symbolic dimension deeply inter-
twined with the forms of protests that precarious 
workers deployed in Italy, most of which origina-
ted outside the realm of confederate trade unions43.
In Greece, the mobilization was spearheaded 
by grassroots unions operating directly in the 
workplace. This was partly due to the speciic 
characteristics of the Greek trade union system, 
which has only one and a pluralist, in political 
terms, workers’ confederation, offering a rela-
tively high degree of autonomy to grassroots 
union formations (such as productive sector 
and single-corporation ones)44. Contrary to 
the situation of Italian precarious workers, no 
visibility campaigns were initiated by their Greek 
counterparts. The symbolic content that preca-
rious workers built upon in order to organize their 
struggle was linked to the speciic characteristics 
of the grassroots trade unions. And the discourse 
developed was linked to traditional labor claim-
making procedures45. As the Greek precarious 
workers’ unions were operating in a working 
environment composed both by precarious and 
non-precarious employees and which addressed 
an equally mixed audience, the obvious choice 
was to embed the lexible labor-oriented claims 
and demands into the more general setting of 
working class struggles.
This was relected in the contentious repertoire 
developed during this period. The Greek pre-
carious workers’ unions activity could be divided 
into three broad categories. First, the attempt to 
contrast the widespread belief that the new, atypi-
cal workforce could not be unionized, through 

62. ITALY AND GREECE, BEFORE AND AFTER THE CRISIS
QUADERNI N°84 - PRINTEMPS 2014
intensive campaigns to legitimize and conirm 
their presence on the workplace. The Wage 
Earner Technician’s Union (SMT), for instance, 
a union operating in construction, engineering 
and telecommunications’ companies, mostly used 
its resources into organizing “surprise visits” 
in companies and workplaces where no union 
representation had hitherto existed, distributing 
lealets and speaking with the employees. The 
rationale behind this contentious performance 
as Kostas, one of the union’s board members, 
explained, was that they “want[ed] to make 
their presence visible to the workers there. We 
want[ed] both the employer and the employees 
to know that we could return as many times as 
needed, if an issue occurs”46. Second, an attempt 
to introduce elements of what has been coined 
as “social movement unionism”47 by engaging 
in activities usually linked to traditional social 
movement organizations – demonstrations, soli-
darity campaigns, occasionally forms of minor 
political violence, but also collaboration efforts 
with non-labour-related movement organizations. 
This could be attributed to the fact that the new 
unions’ leadership was already well networked 
with the broader Greek movement scene48. As a 
grassroots union member noted, “the initiatives 
launched in precarious labour workplaces, are 
usually led by people who have already traced 
their own path, who are already politicized” 
[Interview with G., 2010]. Finally, the unions’ 
efforts to coordinate amongst themselves aimed 
to increase their actions’ impact inside the work-
places where they were present. In the aftermath 
of the assassination attempt against a migrant 
unionist, in late 2008, the Primary Unions’ 
Coordination assembly was launched in Athens, 
in order to organize the solidarity campaign to 
the injured syndicalist. The founding entities 
were precarious workers’ unions. As time went 
by, the Coordination widened its scope and grew 
in numbers. Similar projects were launched in 
several cities.
Resistance after the economic crisis
As we noted above, the context in which 
precarious workers were embedded changed 
dramatically after the economic crisis hit Italy and 
Greece. The presence of many social movement 
organizations that originated in the early stages 
of precarious workers mobilizations assured some 
extent of continuity to protests developing around 
the issue of precarity, also during the years of the 
economic crisis. The economic crisis brought 
nonetheless with it some relevant transformations 
with regard to the scope of precarious workers 
mobilizations, and the forms of collective action, 
both with regard to contentious performances in 
the strict sense and with regard to other kinds of 
collective actions that did not involve protests.
First, at a more general level, the overall scope 
of mobilizations around precarity shifted under 
different respects. Unlike previous mobilizations 
occurring before the economic crisis, in times of 
austerity measures the main objective was not 
the visibility of precarious workers at a political 
and public level, and the related emergence and 
afirmation of a cohesive political subject, but 
rather the improvement of working and living 
conditions of circumscribed groups of preca-
rious workers. With this regard, struggles around 
precarity strongly signalled the challenges of 
organizing precarious workers with different 
working and living conditions who are employed 

QUADERNI N°84 - PRINTEMPS 2014
ITALY AND GREECE, BEFORE AND AFTER THE CRISIS .63
in the same labour market sector. This change 
matched with transformations related to the 
territorial level of protests. A good example is the 
trajectory of the Euro Mayday Parade, since its 
irst edition in 2001, before the crisis erupted for 
instance, and which continued to be organized 
also in more recent years. Over the years, indeed, 
the parade underwent a downward scale shift: 
from a transnational European protest event that 
connected activist groups from many European 
countries, between 2004 and 2006 in particular49, 
to a national protest strongly linked to the local 
level of Milan, where it was originally launched 
in 2001. Furthermore, during the economic 
crisis, the number of protesters participating in the 
Euro Mayday parade shrank considerably. And, 
at the same time, the national scale became less 
relevant, while local protests seemed to multiply 
within speciic working places and labour sectors.
Second, the mobilizations against precarity 
changed with regard to the protest context in 
which claims were formulated as well as the 
organizational forms on which precarious 
workers’ activism relied. There were, of course, 
some apparent continuities. In Italy, activist 
groups still organized national demonstrations on 
an almost regular basis, as well as regional and 
local demonstrations, in which precarity was still 
a key issue. However, some differences should 
be noted in the context in which demands to ight 
precarity were brought forward. For instance, 
national demonstrations claiming for basic 
income for everyone were organized both before 
and after the economic crisis in Italy. Though, 
during the early national demonstrations, the 
claim for a basic income was explicitly linked 
to the need of recognizing precarious workers 
as a political subject in Italy50. When looking at 
more recent demonstrations, instead, the demand 
for basic income often intertwine with more 
material claims linked to the economic crisis. 
This means that, at the same time, some of the 
instances which were at irst strictly linked to 
precarious workers’ mobilizations are now 
included in more general demonstrations against 
austerity measures. A good example in this case is 
the large national demonstration that took place 
in Rome on October 19th, 2013: about 100.000 
protesters from all over Italy came together 
representing different struggles that crossed the 
country in the past few years and months: in 
particular, those linked to protests against the 
construction of big infrastructures – like the 
high speed train in Val di Susa, to the North of 
Turin, and the occupations of empty buildings to 
reclaim the right to have a house. Signiicantly, the 
opening slogan of the demonstration was “only 
one big endeavour: home and income for 
everyone”.
In Greece, the severe austerity measures led to 
intense strikes, especially in the years 2011-2012 
when more than 30 days of general strike were 
proclaimed by the Greek Trade Union Confede-
ration and several productive sectors engaged into 
multiple-day strikes and production blockades. 
The Precarious Workers’ Unions were present 
in all of these struggles, fostering an impres-
sive presence in the streets of Athens and other 
cities. At the same time, many new unions were 
founded which gathered numerous precarious 
workers, amongst which the Audiovisual Sector 
Technicians’ Union, the union of Dependent 
Employees working under the status of Associates 
and the Union of call center Workers of OTE. 

64. ITALY AND GREECE, BEFORE AND AFTER THE CRISIS
QUADERNI N°84 - PRINTEMPS 2014
Simultaneously, though, experimental forms of 
organizing emerged, promoting a radically diver-
siied set of movement repertoire and levels of 
intervention. The most prominent amongst them 
is the founding of community-based Workers’ 
Clubs in various neighbourhoods of Athens. In a 
similar way to the US experience of the mid-90s51, 
the Workers’ Clubs aimed at extending the labour 
struggle beyond the limits of the workplace. As 
a member of the Nea Smyrni Workers’ Club 
(WCNS) stated: “The Workers’ Club wants to 
become a ‘city union’, which will complement, 
not substitute, the working class unionism inside 
the labour space. At the same time, it shall unite 
in the struggle the workers and the unemployed 
in the ield of the city” [Interview with WCNS, 
2012].
Also in Italy one may ind ongoing experiments, 
such as the Rete dei Redattori Precari (Network 
of Precarious Editors) that began to organize 
early in 2008, independently from existing trade 
unions, to reclaim better working conditions 
and to constitute a representative body able to 
give voice and contractual power to precarious 
editors52. After some months of mobilization 
within and outside the workplaces, the Network 
of Precarious Editors attracted the attention of the 
major Italian confederate trade union (CGIL) and 
of the afiliated union of workers in the commu-
nication sector (SLC). A temporary collaboration 
began between the confederate trade union and 
the network of self-organized precarious workers 
in order to include some demands of the latter in 
the general platform that the CGIL was preparing 
for the negotiations concerning the renewal of the 
national contract of publishing sector workers. In 
the following years, the Network of Precarious 
Editors continued to be active as an aggregator 
of otherwise atomized precarious workers. One 
of its last actions, in 2013, included the naming 
and shaming of Mondadori Editore, a major 
Italian publishing house. Precarious editors asked 
customers to boycott its products, as 50% of its 
workforce was composed of precarious workers53. 
However, these struggles remained isolated and 
activists faced many dificulties in organizing the 
fragmented Mondadori’s precarious workforce54. 
The individualization of labour relations linked 
to precarity is indeed one of the most challen-
ging aspects when trying to organize precarious 
labour, even when mobilizations occur within 
the same workplace. The economic crisis, with 
this respect, made the elaboration of effective 
struggles even more dificult, since precarious 
workers are particularly weak – also in terms of 
social protection – when it comes to negotiate 
their rights.
Third, in comparison with mobilizations that 
occurred before the economic crisis, precarious 
workers broadened the range of their collective 
actions, going to some extent beyond contentious 
performances and focusing on the development 
of services for precarious workers. The objective 
was to construct real alternatives to some of the 
problems that precarious workers face in their 
daily lives, going beyond the mere organization 
of protest actions. In the case of Greece, the harsh 
humanitarian crisis also had a relevant role in 
reshaping their collective actions. The attempt 
to provide services was often supported through 
direct action-style activity, such as the occupa-
tion of buildings. An example is the recent wave 
of theatre occupations in several Italian cities, 
starting from the Teatro Valle in Rome. In this 

QUADERNI N°84 - PRINTEMPS 2014
ITALY AND GREECE, BEFORE AND AFTER THE CRISIS .65
case, a quite contentious performance – the occu-
pation of abandoned buildings – was instrumental 
for precarious workers in the cultural industry, 
attempting at the same time to produce income 
for themselves and to defend a common good 
available to all, cultural production. Another 
relevant example along these lines is the creation 
of common work spaces for precarious freelance 
workers but also those who are temporarily 
unemployed, who do not even have a proper 
work space in the company that employs them as 
“associates”. The activists who manage, beyond 
the logic of proit, these co-working spaces also 
aim at creating connections between otherwise 
isolated precarious freelance workers, reco-
gnizing the importance of sharing the same 
workspace to create mutual trust, to exchange 
experiences and possibly to decide to engage 
in collective action to improve the working and 
living conditions. This is the aim of SUC – Spazio 
Ufficio Condiviso in Milan, born out of the 
collaboration between the Network of Preca-
rious Editors and the Piano Terra, an occupied 
activist space in the Isola neighbourhood. Another 
interesting experience in this direction is Oficine 
Zero. In this case, a factory which shut down in 
2008 was occupied by its 33 former workers. 
The occupation was supported by neighbourhood 
activist groups who assisted the workers in the 
conversion of the factory into a multifunctional 
space which would provide services to the local 
community: a small self-managed student house; 
a co-working space for precarious and autono-
mous workers; and the “chamber for autonomous 
and precarious labour”. As one of the irst oficial 
declarations of Oficine Zero suggests, this expe-
rience combined “[...] mutualism and cooperation 
between those subjects who most suffer from the 
austerity blackmails”55.
Despite that no mutualism tradition exists in 
Greece for social movement organizations to 
draw upon, also in that case the economic crisis 
and the austerity measures led social actors to 
experiment with new forms of solidarity and 
cooperation, moving beyond a more conten-
tious repertoire. Some examples include: the 
“Unemployment Technicians’ Card” issued by 
the Wage earners Technicians’ Union, which 
aimed at providing its unemployed members 
free training courses as well as a set of discounts 
and free access to basic goods. Then, the soup 
kitchens organized by the Workers’ Clubs and 
many other precarious workers’ organizations. 
Another example is the self-organized primary 
health assistance clinics founded by unemployed 
and precarious doctors all over Greece (more 
than 50 were operating in mid-2013), in order to 
provide medical coverage to the huge numbers 
of people who lost access to the oficial Public 
Health System, due to unemployment and/or in-
ability to pay their contributions. Finally, various 
collectives were founded or transformed them-
selves into productive associations, in order to 
produce income for their members and propose 
an alternative development model for Greece. 
Horizontally self-managed restaurants, bars, 
bookstores, agricultural cooperatives, courier 
services, newspapers and magazines sprang up 
all over the country during the years of the crisis; 
the vast majority of the people who populated 
them were precarious workers and/or recently 
unemployed.
Finally, and in a similar way to the Italian case, 
issues related to the space where the contentious 

66. ITALY AND GREECE, BEFORE AND AFTER THE CRISIS
QUADERNI N°84 - PRINTEMPS 2014
activity took place were central to the debate 
developed amongst the precarious workers. 
Occupying one’s workspace, a practice well-
known to precarious activists in the previous 
period56, was further developed as a contentious 
tool, in the sense that it would now include the 
physical space’s recuperation. Experiments such 
as the (similar to the Teatro Valle in Rome) occu-
pied theatre EMPROS in Athens, the founding of 
small cooperatives inside pre-existing squats and 
social centers and, most importantly, the occupied 
factory of VIO.ME. in Thessaloniki, which 
served as an ideal type of how self-organized, 
horizontal workers’ control can be put in prac-
tice, signalled a radical change in the percep-
tion of the usual dilemma, whether precarious 
workers’ activity should focus inside or outside 
the workplace.
The transformations and more recent trajectories 
of precarious workers mobilizations illustrated 
in this section, call for a relection on some key 
questions when it comes to the mobilization of 
workers put in a marginal position within socie-
ties. In particular, in the following conclusive 
section we will bring forward three questions 
which require further theoretical discussion and 
empirical research: the meaning of the work-
place for precarious workers and their struggles; 
the broadening of collective actions in which 
precarious workers engage, beyond mere public 
protests; and, inally, the understanding of what 
unionism means today for precarious workers, in 
times of harsh austerity measures.
Conclusions: Changes and developments in the 
contentious ield around precarity
In this article we discussed the evolution of 
precarious workers’ mobilizations before and 
after the economic crisis in Italy and Greece. Our 
aim was to show how protest involving preca-
rious workers as well as precarity as a contentious 
issue, changed over time in the two countries. 
Although we do not engage in an extensive 
longitudinal comparison, we believe that this 
article already provides some relevant insights 
in what is changing, with regard to mobilization, 
within the most marginalized sectors of the labour 
market. Three points seem to be particularly 
important.
First, it is clear that the late proposals brought 
forward by precarious workers, both in Greece 
and Italy, call for a re-negotiation of what is, 
according to them, the workspace, and how the 
latter relates to their political and syndicalist 
activity, as well as the non-working environment. 
Contrary to the traditional labour unionism, 
where the political activity inside the workplace 
is limited to member recruitment, the precarious 
workers not only expand the array of potential 
actions, but, additionally, propose new spatial 
arrangements regarding income production and 
the development of social relations amongst the, 
otherwise isolated, freelance precarious workers. 
In this context, perhaps the dilemma “inside or 
outside the workplace” is simply irrelevant.
Then, one could identify the passage from a 
repertoire of contention mainly based on protests 
to a broader set of activities that also includes 
less contentious actions, such as the provision 

QUADERNI N°84 - PRINTEMPS 2014
ITALY AND GREECE, BEFORE AND AFTER THE CRISIS .67
of services to precarious workers and, also, a 
revamp on mutualism as a form of resistance to 
the economic crisis. This shift from protest to 
resistance is highlighted by the similarity of the 
dynamics noted in Greece and Italy, despite the 
fact that both their historical background (lack of 
relevant movement experience in Greece) and the 
structural framework (much smoother austerity 
measures in Italy) were signiicantly different.
Finally, the above, as well as the rapid changes 
in the organizational formats utilized by preca-
rious workers to coordinate their struggle (an 
issue which we could not thoroughly examine in 
the limited space of this article), point in the direc-
tion of a third,  perhaps wider-scale, renegotiation 
taking place amongst the precarious workers. In 
the distant 1982, Crouch had deined the trade 
union as “an organization of employees who have 
combined together to improve their returns from 
and conditions at work”57. If this deinition is still 
valid today, then one shall not fail to notice that 
through the combined renovation of the workers 
organizations’ contentious repertoire, organi-
zational format and physical location proposed 
by precarious workers, the question they pose is 
nothing less than what is the content of union-
ism and the unionization procedures today in a 
divided and austerity ridden Europe.
We consider that future research on precarious 
labour should take the above into account, fo-
cusing on longitudinal and comparative projects 
which will highlight the temporal and cross-
national dynamics of the phenomenon. 
Both authors contributed equally to this work. 
However, in compliance with Italian academic 
norms, the authors acknowledge that : Markos 
Vogiatzoglou wrote sections 1, 2.1 and the con-
clusion ; Alice Mattoni wrote the introduction 
and section 2.2. 
The authors thank Lorenzo Zamponi and Yiorgos 
Tsopanakis for the valuable comments on previ-
ous drafts of the present contribution

68. ITALY AND GREECE, BEFORE AND AFTER THE CRISIS
QUADERNI N°84 - PRINTEMPS 2014
1. B. Neilson & N. Rossiter, « Precarity as a 
Political Concept, or, Fordism as Exception », in 
Theory, Culture & Society, 25(7-8), 2008, pp. 51-72. 
doi:10.1177/0263276408097796.
2. S. P. Vallas, « Rethinking Post-Fordism : The 
Meaning of Workplace Flexibility », in Sociological 
Theory, 17(1), 1999, pp. 68-101. doi:10.1111/0735-
2751.00065.
3. J. Delcourt, « Flexibility : A source of new rights 
for workers ? »,  in G. Spyropoulos (Ed.), Trade 
unions today and tomorrow, Maastricht, Presses 
Interuniversitaires Européennes, 1985, pp. 145-166.
4. B. Appay, « Précarisation sociale et restructurations 
productives », in B. Appay & A. Thébaud-Mony 
(Eds.), Précarisation sociale, travail et santé, Paris, 
IRESCO, 1997, pp. 509-554. 
5. D. Carrico, « Precarity and Experimental Subjec-
tion » (2007) Retrieved January 23, 2010, from http://
amormundi.blogspot.com/2007/02/precarity-and-
experimental-subjection.html.
6. L. Waite, « A Place and Space for a Critical Geo-
graphy of Precarity ? », in Geography Compass, 3(1), 
2009, p. 416.
7. N. Ettlinger, « Precarity Unbound », in Alternatives 
: Global, Local, Political, 32(3), 2007, p. 320.  
8. S. Hausermann & H. Schwander, « Varieties of 
Dualization ? Labor Market Segmentation and Insider-
Outsider Divides Across Regimes », in P. Emmenegger 
et al. (Eds.), The Age of Dualization : The Changing 
Face of Inequality in Deindustrializing Societies, 
Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2012, pp. 27-51.
9. A. Mattoni & M. Vogiatzoglou, « Today, We are 
Precarious. Tomorrow, We Will be Unbeatable. Early 
Struggles of Precarious Workers in Italy and Greece », 
in D. Chabanet & F. Royal (Eds.), From Silence to Pro-
test : International Perspectives on Weakly Resourced 
Groups, Farnham, Ashgate (forthcoming).
10. A. Mattoni & M. Vogiatzoglou, op. cit. ; M. Pedaci, 
« The Flexibility Trap : Temporary Jobs and Precarity 
as a Disciplinary Mechanism », in WorkingUSA, 13(2), 
2010, p. 245-262 ; A. L. Kalleberg, « Nonstandard 
Employment Relations and Labour Market Inequa-
lity : Cross National Patterns », in G. Therbon (Ed.), 
Inequalities of the world, London, Verso, 2006, pp. 
136-162. 
11. R. Rizza, « Trasformazioni del lavoro, nuove forme 
di precarizzazione lavorativa e politiche di welfare : 
alcune rilessioni preliminari », in Roberto Rizza (Ed.). 
Politiche del Lavoro e Nuove Forme di Precarizzazione 
Lavorativa, Milano, Franco Angeli, 2000, p. 13-27 ; 
L. Wacquant, Punishing the poor : the neoliberal 
government of social insecurity, Durham, NC, Duke 
University Press, 2009. 
12. J. Faniel, « Trade Unions and the Unemployed : 
Towards a Dialectical Approach », in Interface. A 
Journal for and about Social Movements, 4(2), 2012, 
pp. 130-157.
13. F. F. Piven & R. A. Cloward, Poor People’s 
Movements. Why They Succeed, How They Fail, 
New York, Pantheon Books, 1977; A. Richards, 
« Mobilizing the Powerless : Collective Protest 
Action of the Unemployed in the Interwar Period », 
Estudio/Working Paper 2002/175, February 2002, 
Juan March Institut, Madrid ; S. Baglioni et al., 
« Transcending Marginalization : The Mobilization 
of the Unemployed in France, Germany, and Italy 
in a Comparative Perspective », in Mobilization. 
An International Quarterly, 13(3), September 1, 
2008, pp. 323-335 ; D. della Porta, « Protest on 
Unemployment : Forms and Opportunities », in 
Mobilization. An International Quarterly, 13(3), 
September 1, 2008, pp. 277-295. 
14. D. Chabanet, « Les marches européennes contre 
N
.
O
.
T
.
E
.
S

QUADERNI N°84 - PRINTEMPS 2014
ITALY AND GREECE, BEFORE AND AFTER THE CRISIS .69
le chômage, la précarité et les exclusions », in 
R. Balme, D. Chabanet & V. Wright, L’action collective 
en Europe. Collective Action in Europe, Paris, Presses 
de Sciences Po., 2002, pp. 461-493. 
15. A. Mattoni, Media Practices and Protest Politics. 
How Precarious Workers Mobilise, Farnham, Ashgate, 
2012 ; J. J. Chun, Organizing at the Margins. The Sym-
bolic Politics of Labor in South Korea and the United 
States, Ithaca, NY, Cornell University Press, 2009 ; 
A. Allison, « The Cool Brand, Affective Activism and 
Japanese Youth », in Theory, Culture & Society, 26(2-
3), 2009, pp. 89-111.
16. B. Baumgarten, « Geração à Rasca and beyond : 
Mobilizations in Portugal after 12 March 2011 », in 
Current Sociology, 61(4), 2013, pp. 457-473 ; O. Par-
van, « It all started with a siege : what happened in Italy 
on October 18th and 19th », in through europe (2013) 
Available at: http://th-rough.eu/writers/parvan-eng/
it-all-started-siege-what-happened-italy-october-18th-
and-19th  [Accessed November 09, 2013].
17. J. Atkinson, Flexibility, Uncertainty and Manpower 
Management, Institute of Manpower Studies (Univer-
sity of Sussex), 89, 1984 ; C. Wallace, « Work Flex-
ibility in Eight European countries : A cross-national 
comparison », in Czech Sociological Review, 39(6), 
2003, pp. 773-794.
18. Christos A. Ioannou, « Change and continuity 
in Greek industrial relations : the role of and impact 
on trade unions », in Jeremy Waddington & Reiner 
Hoffmann (Eds.), Trade unions in Europe : facing chal-
lenges and searching for solutions, Brussel, European 
Trade Union Institute, 2000, pp. 277-304.
19. K. Tsoukalas, State, Society and Labour in Post-
War Greece, Athens, Themelio, 1987. 
20. It is important to note that these tools were 
introduced in an oppressive and restrictive political 
environment, imposed by the victorious anti-
communist forces of the Greek Civil War (1946-1949). 
Therefore, it is important to keep in mind that any 
“social contracts” or pacts of the period mentioned 
above would have a priori excluded a signiicant part 
of the Greek workforce – the one associated with the 
civil war losers.
21. G. Bedani, Politics and Ideology in the Italian 
Workers’ Movement, London, Berg Publishers, 1995 
(ch. 7 & 10).  
22. Presidenza del consiglio dei Ministri, La Costi-
tuzione della Repubblica Italiana (2013). governo.it. 
Retrieved May 22, 2013, from http://www.governo.it/
Governo/Costituzione/principi.html
23. The Workers’ statute is the fundamental Italian labor 
legislative text, where, as most authors acknowledge, 
“the workers’ rights are its central concern. The rights 
and duties of unions are irmly conditional on those of 
the workers.” (Bedani, op. cit., p. 165.)
24. L. Gallino, Il lavoro non è una merce. Contro la 
lessibilità, Roma, Laterza, 2007. 
25. E. Milo, The changes in the labor relations’ status 
of state-controlled companies : The case of OTE, Pan-
teion University of Social and Political Sciences, 2009.
26. OECD, OECD. StatExtracts. OECD. Retrieved 
January 30, 2012, from http://stats.oecd.org
27. Ibid. 
28. INE-GSEE, Greek economy and employment - an-
nual report 2011, Athens, 2011. 
29. OECD, op. cit.
30. INE-GSEE, op. cit., p. 241.
31. L. M. Kahn, « Labor Market Policy : A Compara-
tive View on the Costs and Beneits of Labor Market 
Flexibility », in Journal of Policy Analysis and Mana-
gement, 31(1), 2012, pp. 94-110.  
32. OECD, op. cit.
33. OECD, op. cit.
34. G. Bronzini, « Il precariato e la giustizia del lavoro 
», in AA. VV. (Ed.), Gli insubordinati. Viaggio nella 
metropoli del lavoro precario, Roma, Manifestolibri, 

70. ITALY AND GREECE, BEFORE AND AFTER THE CRISIS
QUADERNI N°84 - PRINTEMPS 2014
2002 ; M. Pedaci, op. cit. ; INE-GSEE, op. cit. 
35. P. Emmenegger et al., « How We Grow More Un-
equal », in P. Emmenegger et al. (Eds.), op. cit., p. 10. 
36. OECD, « Population, employment (national con-
cept), employment by industry (domestic concept) : 
Greece », in Quarterly National Accounts, 2013. 
37. K. Györffy, « Italy Unemployment Rate » (Re-
trieved November 14, 2013, from http://www.trading-
economics.com/italy/unemployment-rate). 
38. OECD, OECD.StatExtracts. OECD. Retrieved 
January 30, 2012, from http://stats.oecd.org.
39. N. Fontes, « Italy Growth Rate » (Retrieved No-
vember 14, 2013, from http://www.tradingeconomics.
com/italy/gdp-growth).
40. A. Mattoni, op. cit. ; N. Doerr & A. Mattoni, 
« Public spaces and alternative media networks in 
Europe : The case of the Euro Mayday Parade against 
precarity », in R. Werenskjold, K. Fahlenbrach et 
E. Sivertsen (Eds.), The Revolution Will Not Be 
Televised ? Media and Protest Movements, New 
York, Berghahn Books (forthcoming 2014). 
41. A. Mattoni, « Serpica Naro and the others. The 
social media experience in the Italian precarious work-
ers struggles », in Portal, 5(2), 2008 (Available at: 
http://epress.lib.uts.edu.au/ojs/index.php/portal/issue/
view/35/showToc.) ; M. Tarì & I. Vanni, « On the Life 
and Deeds of San Precario, Patron Saint of Precarious 
Workers and Lives », in The Fibreculture Journal, 5, 
2005 (Available at: http://www.journal.ibreculture.
org/issue5/vanni_tari.html.).
42. A. Mattoni, Media Practices and Protest Politics. 
How Precarious Workers Mobilise, Farnham, Ashgate, 
2012.
43. A. Mattoni, op. cit.
44. J. Kouzis, The characteristics of the Greek Union 
Movement, Athens, Gutenberg, 2007. 
45. A. Mattoni & M. Vogiatzoglou, op. cit.  
46. Quoted in : M. Vogiatzoglou, Precarious Workers’ 
Unions in the Greek Syndicalist Movement, University 
of Crete, 2010, pp. 59-60. 
47. L. Turner, « Introduction : An urban resurgence 
of social unionism », in L. Turner & D. B. Cornield 
(Eds.), Labor in the new urban battlegrounds : Local 
solidarity in a global economy, New York, Cornell 
University Press, 2007, pp. 1-18. 
48. M. Vogiatzoglou, op. cit.
49. N. Doerr & A. Mattoni, op. cit. 
50. A. Mattoni, op. cit.
51. J. Fine, « Community Unions and the Revival of 
the American Labor Movement », in Politics & Society, 
33(1), 2005, pp. 153-199.
52. Redazione Precaria, « Chi siamo », Rete Redattori 
Precari (2008) Available at: http://www.rerepre.org/
index.php?/2008121048/redattori-editoriali-precari/
redattori-editoriali-precari-chi-siamo.html [Accessed 
November 14, 2013].
53. Redattori Sociali, « Apri gli occhi ! Questa cultura 
rende schiavi ! », Rete Redattori Precari Available 
at: http://www.rerepre.org/ [Accessed November 14, 
2013].
54. S. Pazienza, « Fra Quello Dei Nemici Scrivi 
Anche Il Tuo Nome. Redattori Editoriali : Prove Di 
Autorganizzazione », in Quaderni Di San Precario, 
5(1), 2013, p. 116. 
55. Oficine Zero, Pazza Idea - Press Release Oficine 
Zero - June 2013 (transl. by the authors). 
56. See, for example, the 6-months occupation of the 
Altec Telecoms call-center, the 1-week occupation of 
all the Altec ofices in Athens by their workers, the 
blockades of the Wind and Vodafone Telecommuni-
cations’ companies during strikes and the blockades 
of Pizza Hut stores as early as in the beginning of 
the 2000s.  
57. C. Crouch, Trade Unions : The Logic of Collective 
Action, Glascow, Fontana Press, 1982, p. 3.  

QUADERNI N°84 - PRINTEMPS 2014
ITALY AND GREECE, BEFORE AND AFTER THE CRISIS .71
En examinant les formes de mobilisation et de 
résistance contre la précarité en Italie et en Grèce, 
avant et après la crise économique, cet article montre 
comment les mouvements de protestation impliquant 
des travailleurs précaires se sont progressivement 
transformés dans ces pays. D’une part, les actions les 
plus récentes entreprises par les travailleurs précaires 
visent à renégocier les modalités de leurs activités 
syndicales et politiques au sein même de leur espace 
de travail. D’autre part, le répertoire des actions est 
aujourd’hui plus large que dans le dernier cycle des 
mobilisations. Alors que les actions de protestation 
ont longtemps tenu le premier rôle, on assiste en 
effet depuis quelques années au développement 
d’actions moins controversées telles que la fourniture 
de services aux travailleurs précaires et la relance du 
mutualisme pensé comme modalité de résistance à la 
crise économique.
Abstract
This article discusses the forms of resistance and 
mobilization against precarity in Italy and Greece, 
before and after the economic crisis, showing how the 
protests involving precarious workers have undergone 
a gradual transformation in these two countries. On the 
one hand, the most recent actions organized by precari-
ous workers seek to renegotiate the terms of their union 
and political activities within their own workspace. On 
the other hand, the repertoire of actions has become 
larger than in the last cycle of mobilizations which 
was characterized by protest, due to the emergence of 
less controversial set of actions such as the provision 
of services to vulnerable workers and the recovery of 
mutualism thought.
R
. é
. S
. U
. M
. é