Charting African Higher Education—
Perspectives at a Glance
Damtew Teferra
Abstract
Higher education in Africa is undergoing a transformation wrought by 
massive expansion, which has implications for every facet of the sector. 
What makes Africa’s growth unique is that it has seen a “flash flood” 
of growth with consequent implications that range from quality to 
funding, from governance to employment. Ironically, however, despite 
this massive growth, the system still remains the world’s least devel-
oped. This introduction to the International Journal of African Higher 
Education’s inaugural issue is intended to capture the state of higher 
education around the themes featured in this volume, based on recent 
as well as in-press sources.
L’enseignement supérieur en Afrique connaît une transformation pro-
voquée par une expansion massive, qui touche de nombreux aspects de 
ce secteur. Ce qui rend la croissance africaine unique, c’est sa rapidité 
qui engendre des conséquences qui vont de la qualité au finance-
ment, de la gouvernance au recrutement. Ironiquement, malgré cette 
croissance massive, le système reste le moins développé du monde. 
Cette introduction au premier numéro du Journal International sur 
l’Enseignement Supérieur en Afrique a pour objectif de présenter la situ-
ation de l’enseignement supérieur autour de thèmes abordés dans ce 
numéro. Cet article est basé sur des recherches récemment publiées ou 
encore sous presse.
Introduction
A plethora of development players, policy makers, and relevant organ-
isations—from the World Bank to the Organisation for Economic 
Cooperation and Development (OECD), from the African Development 
Bank (AfDB) to the African Union (AU), and from the Association of 
African Universities (AAU) to the Association for the Development of 
Education in Africa (ADEA)—all concur that higher education must be 

teachers, it can enhance the quality of primary and secondary edu-
cation systems and give secondary graduates greater opportunities 
for economic advancement. By training physicians and other health 
workers, it can improve a society’s health, raising productivity at 
work. And by nurturing governance and leadership skills, it can 
provide countries with the talented individuals needed to establish a 
policy environment favourable to growth. Setting up robust and fair 
legal and political institutions and making them a part of a country’s 
fabric is an obvious example of the need for advanced knowledge 
and decision-making skills. But equally demanding in the economic 
sphere is developing a culture of job and business creation. Address-
ing environmental problems and improving security against internal 
and external threats also place a premium on the skills that advanced 
education is best placed to deliver (Bloom, Canning, Chan, & Luca, 
in this issue).
Buoyed by new favourable policies and also pressure from the pre-
tertiary sector, countries have registered huge gains in terms of access 
to higher education. While growth has been universal the region over, 
some countries have shown phenomenal expansion, if not in gross 
enrolment ratio but absolute figures. In Tanzania, student enrolment 
in public and private universities increased from 31,674 in 2003-2004 
to 135,365 in 2010-2011—a 327% increase. At the University of Dar 
es Salaam while applicants grew from 5,325 (in 2002-2003) to 17,287 
(2009-2010), the number of students admitted grew from 2,015 (in 
2002-2003) to 6,952 (2009-2010) (Ishengoma, in press; 2013). In 
Senegal, the enrolment at UCAD grew from 24,780 in 2001 to 74,250 
in 2012 (Sall, in press)—also a more than 300% growth. The figure for 
Uganda is also remarkable. It grew from c. 20,000 in 2001 (Musisi, 
2003) to close to 180,000 in 2011 (Oboko, 2013). In Ethiopia, the abso-
lute growth has been simply breath-taking—from 79,000 in 1991 to 
more than 600,000 students in the higher education system in 2012 
(Ayalew, in press).
Accompanying this encouraging and remarkable growth in numbers, 
however, have been considerable variations in enrolment. According to 
Goolam (in this issue), in 2009, while the overall gross enrolment ratio 
for Sub-Saharan Africa was about 7%, that ratio was as low as 0.5% for 
Malawi, 2.0% for Chad and Eritrea, 2.5% for Central African Republic, 
and 2.7% for Burundi. While these countries show a need for significant 
improvement, other countries showed promisingly higher ratios—for 
example 26% for Mauritius and 15% for Cape Verde, Botswana, and 
South Africa (UIS, 2010; figures rounded up). 
Even with this massive growth, the irony for Africa remains; it needs 
charting african higher education—perspectives at a glance
11
centrally placed in the strategic development plan of nations for a mean-
ingful and sustainable economic development to take hold. African 
higher education has undergone some tumultuous and difficult periods 
of policy development, but the present moment, in the short lifespan 
of Africa’s modern higher education system, may be the continent’s 
second high season.
Whether by design or popular demand, “massification” of higher 
education is the hallmark of the sector in virtually all parts of the world. 
Countries around the world are striving to build their higher education 
systems to meet mounting demand, as is the case in Africa, or as part 
of their strategic development plan, as is the case in the developed and 
emerging countries. Unquestionably, building a strong higher educa-
tion system is not a luxury for which countries can be chastised for 
indulging, but a national imperative that is critical for national develop-
ment and global competitiveness.
What does national development and global competitiveness actu-
ally mean in the context of African higher education development? To 
put it simply and directly, African higher education has never been a 
luxury, despite suffering misrepresentation as such—for the teachers, 
educators, doctors, engineers, economists, accountants, managers, and 
policy analysts for the continent—to mention only a few of the leaders 
any nation needs—must be produced in that institution. It is simply not 
conceivable to contemplate a nation without such crucial expertise in a 
country; and therefore the development of higher education in every 
country, to reiterate, is crucial. 
In the current highly dependent and competitive global socioeco-
nomic environment, producing such expertise in large numbers and 
high grade is vital. In the knowledge society, it is not simply the volume 
of knowledge produced that counts; rather quality and currency of 
knowledge matter tremendously. As a consequence, countries in both 
the developed and the developing world are under heavy pressure to 
cater to that trend.
With the world moving increasingly toward a knowledge economy, 
tertiary education can help economies keep up or catch up with 
more technologically advanced societies. Higher education graduates 
are likely to be more aware of and better able to use new technolo-
gies. They are also more likely to personally develop new tools and 
skills. Their knowledge can also improve the skills and understand-
ing of non-graduate co-workers, while the greater confidence and 
know-how inculcated by advanced schooling may generate entrepre-
neurship, with positive effects on job creation. Tertiary schooling can 
also have indirect benefits for economies. By producing well-trained 
damtew teferra
10

12
13
According to Sifuna (in press) enrolments in the Kenyan public uni-
versities in 2006 showed that female students, as in previous years, 
represented around 30% of the total enrolment. Despite the general 
under-representation of female students, their numbers grew fairly 
steadily in 1990s. In Ethiopia, while the volume of female undergradu-
ate and graduate students increased, the proportion of male students 
is increasing even more rapidly, creating a greater gap between the 
two. The growth trajectory begins with 21.6% (of a total of 67,682) in 
1991 and a percentage increase of 26.7% (of a total of 519,770) to 2012 
for undergraduate students. The graduate picture shows comparable 
figures of growth from 21.2% (of a total of 11,627) in 1991 to 24.6% 
(of a total of 83,651). The staff figure is even more dismal; it has shown 
minimal growth from 6.1% (of a total of 2,503) in 1991 to 9.6% (of a 
total of 20,822) in 2012 (Ayalew, in press). 
Inequity is however not a phenomenon consistent across the 
board—in a few countries such as South Africa, Namibia, Botswana, 
and Mauritius and North African countries, the proportions are at par, 
or even higher, for female numbers. In Botswana the proportion of 
female students stands at 48%; when however the Science, Technology, 
and Engineering figure is excluded, the female figure stands higher at 
52% (Kotecha, 2012). For instance, at the University of KwaZulu-Natal, 
South Africa two-thirds of the students who graduated in 2013 were 
female. Needless to say, such massive disparities in either case, are not 
inherently healthy for society at large. 
The Financing Conundrum
The massive expansion witnessed in the region has not been sup-
ported by appropriate resources—human, financial, and material—with 
major consequence for the quality of the system. To be sure, numerous 
countries have increased their budget for education, including higher 
education, but these resources are not commensurate with the size of 
expansion. 
According to the World Bank (2010), Africa has maintained its public 
investment in higher education over the last 15 years, allocating approxi-
mately 0.78% of its gross domestic product (GDP) and around 20% 
of its current public expenditure on education to this sector. However, 
during this period, the total number of students pursuing higher educa-
tion tripled, climbing from 2.7 million in 1991 to 9.3 million in 2006 
(an annual average increase rate of 16%) to now more than 10 million, 
while public resources allocated to current expenditure in that sector 
only doubled (an annual average increase rate of 6%). The situation is 
even more dire in Africa’s poorest countries, which allocate approxi-
charting african higher education—perspectives at a glance
to do even more if it is to catch up with the rest of the world. This 
need is particularly pressing as knowledge becomes central to devel-
opment and national competitiveness. Standing squarely in the centre 
of that need for knowledge production are universities. The challenge, 
however, is serious: The growth of African higher education, for the 
most part, has not been coupled with the requisite quality demanded 
and expected of higher learning. 
The Equity Picture
Goolam and Darvas et al. (both in this issue) emphatically stress that the 
higher education system in Africa is not only unequal across countries 
and sub-regions, but it is also massively inequitable. The main areas 
of inequities are associated with economic status, gender, and origin 
(urban/ rural). To bring this picture to life, Darvas et al. state:
In 3/4th of the [African] countries, youth from the wealthiest house-
holds occupy over 50% of spaces in tertiary education and youth 
from the top two wealth quintiles occupy nearly 80% of tertiary 
spaces. Individuals from the poorest households are five times less 
likely to have access to tertiary education than individuals from the 
richest households. As a result, the overall Gross Enrolment Ratio 
(GER) in tertiary education is strongly determined by the GER of 
the highest income quintile in most countries. 
As one extreme case, 91.9% of students in Malawi’s higher educa-
tion system come from the highest income bracket while the lowest 
income bracket has less than 1% representation (World Bank, cited in 
Dunga, 2013).
On the gender front, inequity varies considerably by institutional 
ownership (public vs. private), status of institutions (either “flagship” or 
“brand-new”), academic programs, and academic hierarchy. A dispropor-
tionate number of female students are represented in private programs 
in both public and private institutions. They also tend to aggregate more 
in “soft” sciences—in social studies, arts, and humanities. Furthermore, 
at the academic profession, they are represented even less, and their 
numbers dwindle even more at the highest rung of the academic ladder 
and leadership. In Nigeria, a country with one of the much robust higher 
education system in Africa, Bola (in press) documents: “In the 2011/12 
session, the academic staff strength of Ibadan was 1,416, reflecting an 
overall growth rate of 6% over a 20-year period since the correspond-
ing figure in the 1992/93 session was 1,334. Although the proportion of 
female staff grew from 18% to 27.6% over the period, women are very 
much underrepresented in the professoriate, particularly in the fields of 
Technology, Humanities and the Social Sciences.”
damtew teferra

14
ate their resources or even to deploy them strategically. For instance, 
in 2008-2009, Addis Ababa University used only 10% of the US$1 
million budget allocated to research and development. Yigezu (2013) 
attributes this situation to inefficient financial management, poor plan-
ning, feeble institutional capacity, cumbersome bureaucracy, and weak 
institutional autonomy.
The Scope of Internationalisation
The importance of the internationalisation of higher education, in the 
era of the knowledge economy, has been growing by leaps and bounds 
for its anticipated contribution to quality higher education, promotion 
of research, regional/global integration, and fostering human resource 
capacity. The elements of internationalisation—i.e., mobility of schol-
ars and students, regional and international networks, quality regimes 
(accreditation and ranking bodies), curricular reform, research initia-
tives, publication and communication (journals and databases), and 
new forms of educational delivery—pose new challenges, opportuni-
ties, and risks to the higher education system around the world. This 
situation especially prevails in Africa, as the weakest player in the inter-
nationalisation of higher education. 
In terms of mobility, with 194,000 international students, Sub-
Saharan Africa accounted for 8% of the global total. The Sub-Saharan 
countries that sent the most students abroad were Zimbabwe (17,000), 
Nigeria (15,000), Cameroon (15,000), and Kenya (14,000); 51% of these 
students went to Western Europe. Their second most important desti-
nation was Sub-Saharan Africa (21%) followed by North America (20%). 
Nine out of 10 international students who stay in the region go to South 
Africa, especially those from the Southern African countries: Botswana, 
Malawi, Namibia, Swaziland, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. In addition to 
South Africa, Ghana, Egypt, and Uganda have also emerged as impor-
tant recipients of international students, particularly from within Africa 
(UNESCO, 2006; cited in Mulumba et al., 2008). France remains a 
more attractive destination of choice for students from French-speak-
ing African countries.
The movement of African students within the continent is limited. 
The only meaningful regional hub of scholarship for Sub-Saharan 
African students still remains South Africa owing to a number of 
factors: better equipment, higher quality staff, cheaper cost of study, 
more relevant curricula, preferred instructional medium, and better 
chance of return. 
Sehoole and de Wit (in this issue) hold that innovations and alterna-
tive views about internationalisation should not be dominated by the 
charting african higher education—perspectives at a glance
15
mately 0.63% of GDP to higher education, and where the number of 
students quadrupled from 1991 to 2006 while available public resources 
in general only increased by 75% at most.
Darvas et al. also reinforce the conclusion that, while the figures 
have shown growth, allocation by GDP remains distressingly low. This 
funding discrepancy has direct implications on the effect of the massive 
expansion, spreading resources so thin that the services and quality have 
suffered considerably. In one extreme case from Zambia, for instance, 
the universities received only 20% of their projected expenditure from 
the government (Masaiti, 2013).
Africa is facing the dual challenge of expanding access while striv-
ing to raise quality in higher education. Both challenges necessitate 
considerable resources for a sustained period of time (Teferra, 2013). 
According to the World Bank’s (2010) estimate, approximately US$45 
billion (value in 2006) was needed to increase the capacity of institutions 
between 2006 and 2015 to meet the need for public higher education 
as a whole, of which US$20 billion is needed for low-income countries.
One of the other most common patterns in Africa is the poor 
finance base of higher education systems virtually across the board. 
This deplorable condition is well known; but a related issue that has 
received little attention has been the ineffective and inefficient way of 
deploying available resources. Higher education policies implemented 
in Francophone African countries allow universities to admit students 
without reference to minimum quality standards and to allocate a sig-
nificant portion of their budgets to student social support, including 
scholarships, accommodation, catering, transport, and health coverage. 
In Senegal for instance, 70% of the operating budget of universities is 
allocated to student social support, leaving limited resources that can be 
devoted to the maintenance of even minimum quality standards. The 
projected figures for new-student admissions in the coming years will 
further reduce the capacity of universities to assure quality of higher 
education (Juma et al., in this issue; see also Teferra, 2013.)
Another little-addressed marker of waste in resources is the problem 
of haemorrhage through student drop out. In 2006, for instance more 
than 50% of the students who entered the University of Antananarivo, 
Madagascar, dropped out after the first year; for the faculties of medi-
cine and law at that university, the dropout rate for first-year students 
was between 55 and 60% (Randriamahenintsoa, 2013).
In this age of cost-sharing and resource mobilisation, it is still cus-
tomary in many African institutions to return unused budget and 
funds, including self-generated, to the national treasury at the end 
of the financial year, hampering incentives for institutions to gener-
damtew teferra

17
16
traditional hegemony of “Western” concepts and strategies but instead 
require an autonomous and refreshing approach for the emerging 
and developing countries and regions. Two aspects are central in that 
approach: increased regional and South-South cooperation, and more 
attention to strategies that build on the social responsibility and civic 
engagement role of higher education. 
Indeed, the conventional dominance of western concepts and strat-
egies and the effort to boost South-South cooperation are not new 
perspectives in the international higher education arena. But with 
a more assertive and economically stronger South against the back-
ground of the economically ailing North, the possibilities and chances 
of the oft-cited yearning seem to be more likely than ever. 
It is exactly in recognition of these underlying unpopular policies and 
paradigms, which still pervade the 21st century, that the Paris Declara-
tion (2005) and Accra Agenda for Action (2008) were developed to foster 
mutual benefits between all the parties of partnership. The accords 
were founded on five core principles: joint ownership, alignment, 
harmonisation and results, and mutual accountability in development 
cooperation. They are gaining slow but steady traction in shaping the 
development cooperation landscape, including in international higher 
education. Regardless of the effort in describing the inherent ecology 
of the international relationship, the hard fact is that the old institu-
tions, paradigms, and instruments of global engagement have become 
archaic, even dangerous, in ensuring the collective survival of the global 
community (Teferra, 2014).
Quality Control
The conversation on quality and quality regimes (such as quality frame-
work, quality assurance, accreditation, among others) has become more 
prominent and vocal with the expansion of higher education in the 
region and particularly with the proliferation of private providers. These 
developments have been instrumental in the establishment of quality 
control mechanisms in many countries. By 2012, according to Juma, 
Okebukola, and Olusola (in this issue), 21 African countries had legally 
established quality assurance agencies and a dozen other countries were 
at relatively advanced stages in this direction. Though Francophone 
Africa is lagging behind, it partially fills that gap by reliable quality 
assurance mechanisms through voluntary processes of external evalu-
ation by the Conseil Africain et Malgache de l’Enseignement Superieur 
(CAMES, the African and Malagasy Council of Higher Education). The 
Inter University Council for Eastern Africa (IUCEA) is another regional 
body with responsibility for ensuring internationally comparable stan-
damtew teferra
dards in the five partner states of the East African Community: Burundi, 
Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, and Uganda.
One of the most confounding problems of the higher education land-
scape in Africa is the fast decline of higher education quality. Its long list 
of challenges is not unknown; they span from funding to institutional 
leadership, from lack of competent academic staff to poorly prepared 
students. Indeed, with such massive expansion of the system, it may 
not be surprising that the quality of higher education has deteriorated 
precipitously.
The imperatives to improve the quality of higher education thus 
are simply enormous, especially because knowledge production has 
become critical for national development and global competitiveness 
in the 21st century. The challenge for African higher education is not 
thus simply in catching up with the rest of the world in terms of the 
numbers that needed to be produced; rather, of equal importance is the 
quality and currency of knowledge that needs to be generated. It is in 
recognition of these major knowledge shortfalls that a number of ini-
tiatives are being undertaken—from consolidating quality regimes, to 
establishing centres of excellence, supporting post-graduate expansion 
and its consolidation. 
Graduate Education
As the discussion to this point establishes, the encouraging and optimis-
tic expansion has characterised the most recent stage of African higher 
education; but it should be noted that this expansion has occurred 
mainly in undergraduate studies. The expansion in post-graduate 
studies remains dwarfed by comparison. For instance, Ethiopia, which 
has recorded phenomenal enrolment growth that has now surpassed 
600,000 students, includes only 5% graduate students in its system 
(MOE, 2012-2013), a statistic that has huge implications for quality.
According to Hayward and Ncayiyana (in this issue quoting ASSAF, 
2010), figures on graduate enrolment from 19 higher education institu-
tions in Africa between 1997 and 2007 show a total of 169,275 graduate 
students studying for master’s degrees and PhDs, or 6.9% of the total 
enrolment at that time. The data from 2010-2013, though incomplete, 
show an increase of graduate students to a total of 294,339 (now 9.3% 
of the total enrolment at these institutions), an increase of 73.9%. While 
this increase over approximately five years is quite substantial, slightly 
more than half of it (50.2%) is occurring in South Africa. Of this total 
number of graduate students, approximately 20% were studying at the 
PhD level, with 80% at the master’s level. Of those studying for a PhD 
in South Africa, 338 were from other Sub-Saharan African countries in 
charting african higher education—perspectives at a glance

18
19
damtew teferra
massive expansion, which has implications for every facet of the sector.
The larger context is that growth in higher education enrolment is a 
global phenomenon. What makes Africa’s growth unique, however, is 
that it has seen a “flash flood” of growth with consequent implications 
that range from quality to funding, from governance to employment. 
Ironically, however, despite this massive growth, the system still 
remains the world’s least developed. This means that Africa must 
do more in facing the dual and contradictory challenges of increased 
expansion and improved quality. 
Higher education is key and critical to sustainable socio-economic 
development; this recognition has recently taken the sector to an 
unprecedented status at the global level. Thus the expansion, develop-
ment, and consolidation of a higher education system in the region, 
which is at once locally responsive and globally competitive, are not 
simply necessities, but mandatory tasks of tremendous challenge.
References
Ayalew, E. (in press). Addis Ababa University. In D. Teferra (Ed.), Flag-
ship universities in Africa: Achievements, successes, and potentials. 
Durban, South Africa and Boston, Massachusetts, USA: Interna-
tional Network for Higher Education in Africa (INHEA). 
Bola, U. (in press). University of Ibadan. In D. Teferra (Ed.), Flagship 
universities in Africa: Achievements, successes, and potentials. Durban, 
South Africa, and Boston, Massachusetts, USA: International 
Network for Higher Education in Africa (INHEA).
Dunga, H. S. (2013). Financing higher education in Malawi: Prospects, 
challenges, and opportunities. In D. Teferra (Ed.), Funding higher 
education in Sub-Sahara Africa (pp. 184-213). London: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
IAU. International Universities Association. www.iau-aiu.net
Ishengoma, J. (in press). University Dar es Salaam. In D. Teferra (Ed.), 
Flagship universities in Africa: Achievements, successes, and potentials. 
Durban, South Africa, and Boston, Massachusetts, USA: Interna-
tional Network for Higher Education in Africa (INHEA). 
Ishengoma, J. M. (2013). Funding higher education in Tanzania: 
Modalities, challenges, prospects and a proposal for new funding 
modalities. In D. Teferra (Ed.), Funding higher education in Sub-
Sahara Africa (pp. 214-246). London: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Kotecha, P. (2012). A profile of higher education in Southern Africa, Volume 
2: National perspectives. Retrieved on May 10, 2014, from http://
www.sarua.org/files/publications/SARUA%20leadership%20
Dialogue%20Series/SARUA%20Profiles%20of %20HE%20
charting african higher education—perspectives at a glance
2007—an increase from only 86 in 2000. 
Lofty and ambitious—and sometimes unrealistic—plans of African 
countries to expand their graduate programs, especially in science, 
technology, and engineering, are explicit in their higher education 
strategic plans. The wish lists of plans, objectives, activities, and deliv-
erables speak to their deep-seated interest in expanding the state of 
graduate studies and high-end research. Ethiopia, for example, planned 
to produce 5,000 PhDs in 10 years—a very ambitious plan given the 
current state of the higher education system. Now more than halfway 
through the allotted decade, it has not produced a fraction of that 
number. In Nigeria, Ibadan University, the country’s flagship univer-
sity, has produced 5,000 doctoral graduates since it graduated its first 
students in 1952—a total that averages out to 80 a year (Bola, in press).
According to IAU’s (2010) study based on six universities in Sub-
Saharan Africa, the challenges to graduate studies are numerous. For 
example, at the government level there is a lack of national policy on 
or political commitment to research and inadequate capacity to cope 
with the rising demand. At the institutional level, IAU identified a lack 
of coherent research policies and strategies; inadequate infrastructure; 
poor, unreliable, and expensive Internet connectivity; poorly stocked 
libraries and poorly equipped labs; and a shortage of supervisors. 
Without doubt the most critical challenge to graduate program develop-
ment in Africa remains limited resources at the disposal of institutions 
grappling with the massive expansion in enrolments. While money 
may not be the panacea for all the challenges, it most certainly plays a 
critical role in the development of graduate education. 
As one of the strategies to boost graduate education and also develop 
the requisite teaching and research capacity, a number of “centres of 
excellence” are being established in the region by different players. 
These include the African Union’s initiative of the Pan African Uni-
versity as well as those supported by the World Bank and one being 
effected by DAAD. Furthermore, a number of field-specific specialisa-
tions in Africa—in agriculture, economics, and mathematics, among 
others—are being established and/or consolidated.
Conclusion
This introduction to the International Journal of African Higher Educa-
tion’s inaugural issue is intended to capture the state of higher education 
around the themes featured in this volume, based on recent as well as 
in-press sources. Thus, it is not an exhaustive thesis on African higher 
education. Despite this tight focus, one generalisation crosses all fields: 
Higher education in Africa is undergoing a transformation wrought by 

20
21
damtew teferra
charting african higher education—perspectives at a glance
Vol%202.pdf.
Masaiti, G. (2013). Students’ perceptions of financing public universi-
ties in Zambia: Toward a more sustainable and inclusive policy 
strategy. In D. Teferra (Ed.), Funding higher education in Sub-Sahara 
Africa (pp. 296-326). London: Palgrave Macmillan. 
MOE. Annual Report. Ministry of Education, Ethiopia. (2012-2013). 
Mulumba, M. B., Obaje, A., Kobedi, K., & Kishun, R. (2008). Inter-
national student mobility in and out of Africa: Challenges and 
opportunities. In D. Teferra & J. Knight (Eds.), Higher education 
in Africa: The international dimension (pp. 490-514). Boston, Mas-
sachusetts, USA, and Accra, Ghana: CIHE and AAU.
Musisi, N. (2003). Uganda. In D. Teferra & P. G. Altbach (Eds.), African 
Higher Education: An international reference handbook (pp. 611-623). 
Bloomington, Indiana, USA: Indiana University Press. 
Oboko, M. B. (2013). Funding of higher education in Uganda: With 
special emphasis on donors and contribution of national commu-
nities approaches. In D. Teferra (Ed.), Funding higher education in 
Sub-Sahara Africa (pp. 247-275). London: Palgrave Macmillan. 
OECD. Paris Declaration and Accra Agenda for Action. Retrieved on June 
1, 2014, from http://www.oecd.org/dac/effectiveness/parisdeclara-
tionandaccraagendaforactionfullrelateddocumentation.htm.
Randriamahenintsoa, E. (2013). Challenges and opportunities of higher 
education: Funding policies and programs in Madagascar. In D. 
Teferra (Ed.), Funding higher education in Sub-Sahara Africa (pp. 
147-183). London: Palgrave Macmillan. 
Sall, A. (in press). Cheikh Anta Diop University. In D. Teferra (Ed.), 
Flagship universities in Africa: Achievements, successes, and potentials. 
Durban, South Africa, and Boston, Massachusetts, USA: Interna-
tional Network for Higher Education in Africa (INHEA).
Sifuna, D. (in press). University of Nairobi. In D. Teferra (Ed.), Flagship 
universities in Africa: Achievements, successes, and potentials. Durban, 
South Africa, and Boston, Massachusetts, USA: International 
Network for Higher Education in Africa (INHEA).
Teferra, D. 2013. Introduction. In D. Teferra (Ed.), Funding higher educa-
tion in Sub-Sahara Africa (pp. 1-12). London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Teferra, D. (2013). The “soft power” proof of the pudding – Not in the 
branding. University World News, Issue 308. Retrieved on June 
2, 
2014, 
from 
http://www.universityworldnews.com/article.
php?story=20140220125331356.
UIS. UNESCO-Institute of Statistics (2011). Financing education in 
Sub-Saharan Africa: Meeting the challenges of expansion, equity 
and quality. Paris: UNESCO.
World Bank (2010). Financing higher education in Africa. Washington, 
DC: World Bank.
Yigezu, M. (2013). Funding higher education in Ethiopia: Modalities, 
challenges, opportunities, and prospects. In D. Teferra (Ed.), 
Funding higher education in Sub-Sahara Africa (pp. 38-70). London: 
Palgrave Macmillan.