161
Book Reviews
Croatian Economic Survey  :   Vol. 16   :   No. 1   :   April 2014   :   pp. 161-185
New Structural Economics: A Framework for 
Rethinking Development and Policy
Justin Yifu Lin
Washington, DC: World Bank, 2012, pp. 371
ISBN 978-0-8213-8955-3
doi:10.15179/ces.16.1.6
The book entitled New Structural Economics: A Framework for Rethinking 
Development and Policy is a result of the author’s research on New Structural 
Economics (NSE) conducted in the period from 2008 to 2011 while he was the 
Chief Economist and Senior Vice President of the World Bank, as the first person 
from a developing country to hold that position. Within his research program, 
Lin analyzed (individually and in co-authorship) the process of industrialization 
and the causes of lagging growth in developing countries. As such, the book 
represents a significant contribution to the research on economic development, 
with special focus on determinants of economic growth in low-income countries 
which has been at the centre of economic research for a long period of time now. 
Besides the introduction, the book is comprised of the following seven chapters: 
(1) “New Structural Economics: A Framework for Rethinking Development”; 
(2) “The Growth Report and New Structural Economics” (co-authorship with 
Célestin Monga); (3) “Growth Identification and Facilitation: The Role of the 
State in the Dynamics of Structural Change” (co-authorship with Célestin 

162
Book Reviews
Croatian Economic Survey  :   Vol. 16   :   No. 1   :   April 2014   :   pp. 161-185
Monga); (4) “Applying the Growth Identification and Facilitation Framework: 
The Case of Nigeria” (co-authorship with Volker Treichel); (5) “Financial 
Structure and Economic Development” (co-authorship with Lixin Colin Xu); 
(6) “Development Strategy, Institutions and Economic Performance” and (7) 
“Epilogue: The Path to a Golden Age of Industrialization in the Developing 
World”. 
In the introduction, and especially in the first chapter entitled “New Structural 
Economics: A Framework for Rethinking Development”, the author describes 
the evolution of economic thinking in this research area and provides arguments 
in favor of the NSE. He points out that the recent global economic crisis puts 
pressure on the “revision” of previous economic theories developed since Adam 
Smith. Moreover, growth performance of developing countries such as China, 
Brazil, Singapore and India, which did not follow policy recommendations of 
dominant development theories, intensified discussions on the issues of main 
factors behind achieving economic growth. Therefore, as a first step towards 
an insight into the nature and determinants of economic growth, the author 
describes previous theories of development and brings NSE to the centre of this 
debate. 
Specifically, Lin divides the evolution of development theories into three phases 
which he describes as “waves”: (1) structuralist economics that emerged in Latin 
America during the 1940s; (2) a set of neoliberal policies based on neoclassical 
economics, also known as Washington consensus during the 1990s and (3) 
New Structural Economics. In the first phase of development research, a gap 
between countries was explained by structural differences as a result of market 
failures. Furthermore, relying on Keynesianism, economists have advocated 
government intervention and structural reforms as instruments for dealing with 
market imperfections and reducing the gap in development of industrialized and 
developing countries. However, the failure of this approach (especially in Latin 
American countries) prompted the next wave of research which emphasized the 
essential function of markets in allocating resources and providing development 
incentives. This approach, on the other side, ignored structural differences 

163
Book Reviews
Croatian Economic Survey  :   Vol. 16   :   No. 1   :   April 2014   :   pp. 161-185
between countries and expected structural change to happen spontaneously 
in the development process. Despite the fact that the approach of Washington 
Consensus which promoted liberalization, privatization and stabilization, 
was advocated by many international development organizations, it resulted 
in various controversies in terms of growth and employment. As mentioned, 
the countries that have achieved remarkable growth during the 20th century 
did not follow its basic tenets. Therefore, the author highlights that it became 
obvious that insufficient attention was given to the heterogeneity and specific 
characteristics among individual countries. As a result, a third wave of research 
emerged. This line of development theories holds that, although markets should 
be a fundamental mechanism in allocating resources, governments should also 
play a more significant role in coordinating investments and in compensating for 
externalities generated by the first movers in the growth process.
Thus, Lin defines NSE as an attempt to set out this third wave of research, 
postulating that the economic structure is endogenous to the factor endowment 
structure: sustained economic development is driven by changes in factor 
endowments that determine the country’s comparative advantages and thus its 
optimal industrial structure. On the other side, the best way to upgrade a country’s 
endowment structure is to develop industries according to these comparative 
advantages. Specifically, the author summarizes three basic ideas which are at the 
centre of NSE. First, since the economy´s structure of factor endowments evolves 
depending on the level of development, the industrial structure of economy will 
also vary with different development levels. Second, each level of development is a 
point on the continuum from low-income to high-income economy (rather than 
a dichotomy of two development levels). Finally, at each level of development, the 
market is the underlying mechanism for effective resource allocation, while the 
government plays an active role in facilitating structural changes. 
The first chapter includes comments by Anne Krueger, Dani Rodrik and 
Joseph Stiglitz. While Anne Krueger raises the question regarding the ability 
of governments to identify the winners, i.e. industries with latent comparative 
advantage and industry-specific provision of infrastructure (p. 51); Joseph 

164
Book Reviews
Croatian Economic Survey  :   Vol. 16   :   No. 1   :   April 2014   :   pp. 161-185
Stiglitz argues that the government (besides its restrictive role) must also play 
a constructive and catalytic role in promoting entrepreneurship, human capital 
development, technology and innovation (p. 57). In addition, Krueger points 
at the possibility of New Structural Economics becoming just a licence for 
governments to support specific industries and firms. Finally, Rodrik points out 
that Lin actually wants to merge structuralism with the neoclassical economic 
theories and he welcomes this idea. However, regarding Lin´s recommendation 
that today’s industrial policy should be aware of the government failure and focus 
specifically on market failures rather than on vague shortcomings of the private 
sector, Rodrik implies that in practice this is rather complicated to achieve since 
market distortions cannot always be identified, and targeted remedies may not 
always be available (p. 55). 
The second chapter, “The Growth Report and New Structural Economics”, 
describes how NSE builds on previous theories and compares its basic predictions 
with stylized facts of successful countries identified by “The Growth Report: 
Strategies for Sustained Growth and Inclusive Development” (Commission on 
Growth and Development, 2008). This report identified five stylized facts or 
characteristics of high-growth countries. These are the openness to the global 
economy, macroeconomic stability, high saving and investment rates, market 
allocation and governance. In addition, Lin and Monga focus on structural and 
technological change as key elements of the growth strategy, thereby explaining 
the endogeneity and exogeneity issues surrounding the stylized facts. Authors 
also discuss the principle of comparative advantage and the role of government 
in facilitating structural transformation as key aspects of NSE. They argue 
that developing countries that adopt economic policies contradictory to the 
comparative advantages (i.e. comparative-advantage-defying, CAD) are faced 
with greater macroeconomic instability, large budget deficits, financial repression 
etc. On the other hand, countries that implement comparative-advantage-
following (CAF) strategies are more likely to achieve dynamic economic growth. 
These theoretical predictions are also empirically tested by Lin in Chapter 6.

165
Book Reviews
Croatian Economic Survey  :   Vol. 16   :   No. 1   :   April 2014   :   pp. 161-185
In the third chapter entitled “Growth Identification and Facilitation: The Role of 
the State in the Dynamics of Structural Change”, Lin and Monga further describe 
“Growth Identification and Facilitation Framework” (GIFF) as an approach for 
policy-makers to facilitate the implementation of structural changes based on the 
assumptions of NSE. They describe a six-step approach that policy-makers could 
use in the process of identifying industries that are consistent with country´s latent 
comparative advantages. First step is to identify new industries with potential 
comparative advantages in order to identify goods and services that were growth 
drivers in countries with similar endowment structures. Second, if such companies 
already exist in these sectors, it is necessary to remove barriers that impede them 
from becoming the country’s comparative advantage. Furthermore, if there are 
no domestic enterprises in such sectors, policy-makers need to attract FDI from 
similar higher-income countries. The fourth step is related to the provision of 
support to scale up identified industries. Fifth, in developing countries with poor 
infrastructure and unfriendly business environment, the government can invest 
in various economic zones and industrial parks which can reduce transaction 
costs and facilitate industrial development. In the sixth step, the government 
may provide incentives to domestic enterprises or foreign investors which would 
reduce the time and financial costs that companies face. Authors argue that by 
implementing the described approach, governments could play an active role in 
the facilitation of structural transformation and industrial upgrading. Finally, 
authors explain why industrial policy often does not result in expected outcomes, 
and provide arguments against the government’s policy of protecting selected 
companies and industries that actually distort the comparative advantage of 
countries. 
This chapter also includes comments by Dirk Willem te Velde, Suresh 
Tendulkar, Alice Amsen, K.Y. Amoako, Howard Pack and Wonhyuk Lim. Most 
of them agree that the approach offered by Lin and Monga provides important 
implications for industrial development and that it is very close to becoming 
the new growth “recipe”. However, they also raise doubts about the ability of 
countries to implement these recommendations, especially regarding the role of 

166
Book Reviews
Croatian Economic Survey  :   Vol. 16   :   No. 1   :   April 2014   :   pp. 161-185
the state in identifying the specific industries as drivers of growth, as Tendulkar 
emphasized (p. 188). Several issues come at the centre of debate from this aspect. 
First, even if countries would identify the right industries and constraints that 
need to be removed, it is still possible that wrong policy instruments might lead 
to unintended outcomes (te Velde, p. 182). Moreover, selecting industries based 
on the experience of developed benchmark countries is difficult to implement 
since governments should address a wider list of issues, much more complex than 
simply looking at products and services that were drivers of growth in richer 
countries, as emphasized by Pack (p. 199). Finally, some comments also suggest 
that countries that want to accelerate their industrial catch-up should actually 
defy its current comparative advantage to some extent, involving a whole set of 
policies that need to be implemented in order to increase the chances of industrial 
policy success (Amaoko, p. 195). 
The fourth chapter, “Applying the Growth Identification and Facilitation 
Framework: The Case of Nigeria”, illustrates how to apply GIFF (growth 
identification and facilitation framework) in developing countries, using the 
example of Nigeria. Authors (Lin and Trechel) identify benchmark countries 
and choose a number of industries in which Nigeria has potential comparative 
advantage relative to selected countries. They conclude that targeted interventions 
to promote growth should focus on the provision of physical infrastructure, 
improving the business environment, developing the education system, trade 
reform, the provision of tax incentives, access to finance and access to foreign 
exchange. The authors also discuss binding constraints to growth in each of the 
identified industry´s value chains as well as potential mechanisms through which 
governance issues in the implementation of industrial policy could be addressed. 
These mechanisms encompass transparency and accountability, proper definition 
of expected outcomes, limiting the degree of government intervention and 
delegating the identification and selection of industries to external experts.
In the fifth chapter, “Financial Structure and Economic Development”, Lin and 
Xu focus on the issues of financial structure and financial depth. They analyze 
both empirical and theoretical views regarding the effects of financial structure 

167
Book Reviews
Croatian Economic Survey  :   Vol. 16   :   No. 1   :   April 2014   :   pp. 161-185
on economic development, as well as the role that banks and stock markets 
play in countries at different development stages. Specifically, as they point out, 
financial structure varies among countries as well as within countries, depending 
on the different levels of development. Therefore, the authors argue that the 
optimal financial structure of the economy is endogenous to real demand for 
financial services based on industrial structure, which then hinges on country’s 
comparative advantages. Moreover, contrary to previous findings, the authors 
imply that financial structure (and not the depth of financial markets) is crucial 
for economic development. In this line of thinking, they stress that bank 
development (relative to stock market development) has particularly strong and 
significant effects on economic development in poor and institutionally weak 
countries. Finally, authors describe the circumstances under which the actual 
structure of financial markets deviates from its optimal structure that changes 
with each development stage. According to Lin and Xu, this deviation can be 
a result of politics, legal origins or government preferences and beliefs. In turn, 
deviation of a country from its optimal financial structure is related to a loss in 
efficiency and lower income level.
Sixth chapter, “Development Strategy, Institutions and Economic Performance”, 
provides an overview of the results of previous empirical studies which supported 
the assumption that countries following the development strategy based on 
comparative advantages (CAF) achieved better results (in terms of higher growth 
rates, lower economic volatility and lower inequality) than countries that have 
implemented strategies that are contradictory to CAF (i.e. CAD). Based on these 
findings, the author believes that the growth failure of countries results from 
inappropriate development strategies implemented by policy-makers. Lin´s main 
message is that, while in the past governments placed great attention on the 
development of certain capital-intensive industries, it is essential to focus their 
efforts towards upgrading the country’s endowment structure and creating a 
favorable environment for the development sectors aligned with its comparative 
advantages. Therefore, in the second part of this chapter he empirically tested 
the effects of both the CAF and CAD strategies on economic performance, on a 

168
Book Reviews
Croatian Economic Survey  :   Vol. 16   :   No. 1   :   April 2014   :   pp. 161-185
sample of 122 countries in the period from 1962 to 1999. As a proxy variable for 
CAD, the author uses the relative size of capital-intensive production while also 
including a variety of institutional control variables (index of economic freedom, 
the costs of starting a business, ratio of trade dependence etc.). The obtained 
results indicate that the CAD strategy indeed has a statistically significant 
negative effect on growth and leads to an increase in inequality. The author argues 
that the government that adopts a CAD strategy which attempts to encourage 
firms to ignore the existing comparative advantages of the economy in their entry 
(choice) of industry (technology) is responsible for giving firms subsidies in order 
to compensate for losses arising from policy burdens and cannot distinguish 
these losses from operational ones. The firms will then lobby government for 
both ex ante and ex post policy favors. In this case, the economy will be full of 
rent-seeking and unproductive profit-seeking activities which hinder economic 
growth.
In the final chapter, “Epilogue: The Path to a Golden Age of Industrialization 
in the Developing World”, based on the findings from previous chapters, Lin 
concludes that low-income countries should turn their status of latecomers to their 
advantage and implement the six-step procedure described in the third chapter. 
Lin highlights that his belief is based on the potential of developing countries to 
expand their industrial structures. So, what the author offers in this book is one 
of the possible ways of achieving rapid industrialization in low-income countries. 
Accordingly, Lin points out that the golden age of industrialization in developing 
countries is just beginning. 
Although this book represents a significant contribution to the research on 
developing countries’ ability of generating sustainable economic growth, ideas 
presented by the author do not differ much from existing theories and models. 
Moreover, as Rodrik implies in the first chapter (p. 53) of this book, Lin takes the 
best from neoclassical and structuralist approaches, which is why New Structural 
Economics can be viewed as an alternative to already existing recommendations 
and recipes for achieving higher growth rates. For example, as stated by one of 
the commentators in the book (te Velde, p. 181), the approach followed by Lin 

169
Book Reviews
Croatian Economic Survey  :   Vol. 16   :   No. 1   :   April 2014   :   pp. 161-185
complements the growth diagnostics approach developed by Hausmann, Rodrik 
and Velasco (2005), competitiveness analysis approach developed by Porter and 
Schwab (2008) and investment climate analysis approach (World Bank, 2004). 
However, the process of designing and implementing specific policies aimed at 
increasing growth rates is characterized by a high degree of complexity which can 
result in unexpected or unsustainable final outcomes. Therefore, since the author 
assigns a proactive role to government, future research should pay more attention 
to the specific (political and economic) factors that may have a significant impact 
on the government incentives in the implementation of certain policies. These 
aspects could be of great importance for the fulfilment of each of the six steps 
outlined in the fourth chapter. Therefore, the question on the countries’ ability to 
use prescribed “recipes” is reasonable. As it has been shown, the reforms that have 
been implemented in many developing countries during the 1990s did not result 
in the expected outcomes and it became clear that there is no universal model 
for implementation of policies aimed at achieving overall economic progress, 
without taking into consideration heterogeneity between countries. Different 
countries require different approaches, and the efficiency of some of the generally 
accepted recommendations (such as the recommendations encompassed by 
the Washington Consensus) depends on specific circumstances in individual 
countries. Having this in mind, Lin offers potential ways to achieve rapid 
industrialization as growth factor in a specific group of low-income countries. 
In this book readers can find a comprehensive overview of the evolution of 
development theories with the novelty of introducing the New Structural 
Economics into the third wave of this line of research, emphasizing the important 
roles of both market and government in promoting economic development. We 
can conclude that, although the book New Structural Economics. A Framework 
for Rethinking Development and Policy represents an important contribution 
to the debate on the issue of the dynamic economic growth, taking into 
account problems of exogeneity and endogeneity associated with the existing 
growth strategies, it does not offer a finite answer on drivers of growth in low-
income countries. The research is constantly faced with many challenges and 

170
Book Reviews
Croatian Economic Survey  :   Vol. 16   :   No. 1   :   April 2014   :   pp. 161-185
controversies in finding an optimal “policy mix” for achieving sustainable 
economic growth and development. As Bergsten and Williamson (1994: 4) once 
stressed, although there is no set of rules that could provide a kind of manual 
for all countries in all circumstances, any guidelines that result from detailed 
examination of specific processes in individual countries could be helpful to 
policy-makers and economists. Therefore, this book is highly recommended to 
academics, government officials, consultants and all those studying economics as 
an intriguing additional reading.
Literature
Bergsten, C. Fred and John Williamson, 1994, “Introduction” in John 
Williamson, ed., Political Economy of Policy Reform, pp. 1-8, Washington, DC: 
Institute for International Economics.
Commission on Growth and Development, 2008, The Growth Report. Strategies 
for Sustained Growth and Inclusive Development, Washington, DC: World Bank.
Hausmann, Ricardo, Dani Rodrik and Andrés Velasco, 2005, “Growth 
Diagnostics” in Joseph E. Stiglitz and Narcís Serra, eds., The Washington 
Consensus Reconsidered: Towards a New Global Governance, pp. 324-355, Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Porter, Michael and Klaus Schwab, 2008, The Global Competitiveness Report 
2008-2009, Geneva: World Economic Forum.
World Bank, 2004, World Development Report 2005. A Better Investment Climate 
for Everyone, New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Valentina Vučković
The Institute for Development and International Relations