Humanitarian
technology: a critical
research agenda
Kristin Bergtora Sandvik, Maria Gabrielsen Jumbert,
John Karlsrud and Mareile Kaufmann*
Kristin Bergtora Sandvik, S.J.D. Harvard Law School, is a
Senior Researcher at the Peace Research Institute Oslo (PRIO)
and the Director of the Norwegian Centre for Humanitarian
Studies. Her research takes a socio-legal approach to
technology, international law and humanitarian action. Her
work has appeared in, inter alia, Disasters; the International
Journal of Refugee Law; Refugee Survey Quarterly;
Millennium: Journal of International Studies; and the IFRC
World Disasters Report 2013.
Maria Gabrielsen Jumbert, PhD, is Senior Researcher at PRIO,
working on issues related to humanitarianism, surveillance
technologies and international responses to crises. Her work
has appeared in, inter alia, the Journal of Modern African
Studies, Third World Quarterly and the Human Security
Journal.
John Karlsrud, PhD, is Senior Research Fellow at the
Norwegian Institute of International Affairs (NUPI) working on
peacekeeping, peacebuilding and humanitarian issues. His
work has appeared in, inter alia, Conflict, Security and
Development; Disasters; Global Governance; and Global
Responsibility to Protect.
*
This article is based on the 2013 Critical Humanitarian Technology Projects undertaken by PRIO and the
Norwegian Center for Humanitarian Studies. The Research has been funded in part by the Training for
Peace programme at the Norwegian Institute of International Affairs. We are grateful to the anonymous
reviewers, Vincent Bernard and the ICRC, the Norwegian Red Cross, Patrick Meier, Daniel Gilman, Ryan
Burns, Christopher Wilson, Michael Kleinman, Anahi Iaccuci and Nathaniel Raymond. Errors and
omissions remain our own.
International Review of the Red Cross (2014), 96 (893), 219–242.
Scope of the law in armed conflict
doi:10.1017/S1816383114000344
© icrc 2014
219
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Mareile Kaufmann is a doctoral student at PRIO and Hamburg
University. She works on security issues in interconnected,
technologized and digitalized societies with a special focus on
resilience and crisis management. Her work has appeared in
Resilience and Internasjonal Politikk.
Abstract
New technology may offer many opportunities for humanitarian action, but it also
presents a number of challenges. Currently, most of the critical analysis of these
potential challenges takes place in the blogosphere, on tweets and on listservs.
There is a strong need for more scholarly engagement on the subject. This article
offers an agenda for critical inquiry into the emergent field of humanitarian
technology as applied to a broadly defined context of crises, encompassing both
natural disasters and conflict zones, by identifying what technology does to the
humanitarian enterprise, and by reflecting on the key challenges that emerge.
Keywords: humanitarian technology, humanitarian innovation, humanitarian principles, cash cards,
digital food, crisis mapping, crowdsourcing, big data, science and technology studies.
The
humanitarian
enterprise
is
characterized
by
considerable
optimism
regarding the possibility of improving humanitarian action through new, digital
technology.1 The uses of mobile phones, social media platforms, geospatial
technologies and various forms of crowdsourcing have fundamentally altered how
humanitarian crises are detected and addressed, and how information is collected,
analysed, and disseminated. Biometric identification technologies are increasingly
used as tools for emergency support and refugee management. Relief provision is
beginning to shift towards virtual distributions through digital payment systems,
so-called e-transfers or “mobile money.” There are significant expectations
surrounding the humanitarian uses of drones. As broadly acknowledged by
policymakers
and
a
burgeoning
field
of
scholarly
contributions,
these
developments are changing the possibilities for prevention, response and resource
mobilization for humanitarian actors and affected communities alike.
The 2010 Haiti earthquake is commonly seen as the game changer in the
chronicles
of
humanitarian
technology.
Since
then,
the
institutional
and
operational focus has been on leveraging technology to enhance humanitarian
action, ensuring that more formal relationships are established, and improving
the interaction between formal humanitarian organizations such as the United
Nations (UN) Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and
1
Acknowledging that the notion of technology is very broad and that humanitarian action has always been
facilitated by some kind of technology – even as basic as pen and paper – we focus in this article on the
influence of novel, mostly digital and web-based information and communication technologies on the
humanitarian enterprise.
K. B. Sandvik, M. G. Jumbert, J. Karlsrud and M. Kaufmann
220
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

informal volunteer and technological communities.2 The World Disasters Report
2013 by the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies
(IFRC), entitled Focus on Technology and the Future of Humanitarian Action,
and the OCHA report Humanitarianism in the Network Age (HINA), have
contributed to framing these developments as policy issues. Transformation
through technological innovation will also be a key theme at the 2016 World
Humanitarian Summit. Yet, despite the great potential and many positive effects
of technological innovation, it can also compromise the core principles of
humanitarian action and obscure issues of accountability of humanitarian actors
towards beneficiaries. The question of how technological innovation affects
humanitarian action is in need of more critical enquiry. This article offers an
agenda for future research on the emergent field of humanitarian technology as
applied in a broadly defined context of crisis, encompassing both natural disasters
and conflict zones, by identifying what technology does to the humanitarian
enterprise, and by reflecting on the key challenges that emerge. Just as man-made
or natural disasters present different types of challenges to humanitarian action in
general, they may also present different types of challenges in the application of
new technologies. We are aware of this, but seek to highlight in this article some
of the general challenges that may arise, in order to stake out avenues for future
research.
From a scholarly perspective, this is a fast-moving and immature field.
There has been an avalanche of “tech-optimistic” scholarly work, premised on
the belief that adding technology will change things for the better.3 Scholars have
given attention to the opportunities that new technologies offer for making
humanitarian action more effective, and their potential for strengthening local
ownership. It is generally acknowledged that it is not helpful to do gap studies,
such as assessments of discrepancies between policy and technical standards on
the one hand, and implementation on the other (possibly due to the speed of
innovation and local re-contextualization), nor to take a Luddite view of the
technology (it is not going away). Somewhat unusually, but in tandem with the
nature of the subject matter, most critical and theoretical contributions can
be found in exchanges in the blogosphere, on tweets and on listservs.4 As
observed by Ryan Burns, in order to demonstrate its value to intended audiences,
the field of digital humanitarianism is actively – if not explicitly – negotiating its
2
Patrick Meier, “New Information Technologies and Their Impact on the Humanitarian Sector”,
International Review of the Red Cross, Vol. 93, No. 884, 2011, pp. 1239–1263.
3
See e.g. Harvard Humanitarian Initiative, Disaster Relief 2.0: The Future of Information Sharing in
Humanitarian Emergencies, UN Foundation and Vodafone Foundation Technology Partnership,
Washington DC and Berkshire, 2011; Francesco Mancini (ed.), New Technology and the Prevention of
Violence and Conflict, International Peace Institute, New York, April 2013.
4
See, for example, Patrick Meier’s blog, available at: http://irevolution.net/; the Wilson Centre’s Science and
Technology Innovation Program blog, available at: wilsoncommonslab.org; the Advanced Training on
Humanitarian Action blog, available at: http://atha.se/; The Diary of a Crisis Mapper blog, available at:
http://crisismapper.wordpress.com/; and the Global Humanitarian Technology Conference, accessible
through the following email address: GHTC-CONTACTS@LISTSERV.IEEE.ORG.
Humanitarian technology: a critical research agenda
221
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

own knowledge politics, through a privileged position from which it can leverage
competence and authority on data and technology.5
At the same time, there is so far limited critical scholarly engagement
with the humanitarian turn to technology. We suggest that this is problematic for
several reasons: firstly, as most technologies enable the collection and analysis of
data, it needs to be pointed out that algorithms have politics; they are neither
neutral nor natural, and there is a need to bring political contestation to the
fore.6 Another issue concerns the physical presence of technology in the
humanitarian
setting: the
humanitarian community
perceives the
greatest
challenge to be the creation of actionable and credible information that may be
quickly transmitted to, and understood by, vulnerable communities. When
humanitarian actors discuss possible negative outcomes, these are usually
addressed through the recommendation of incremental improvements, along the
lines of “We can do this (more) ethically if we can get more organized, have
better equipment, or develop clearer standards.” Yet such “improvements”
engender
their
own
dynamics:
technology
mediates
and
alters
human
relationships and understandings of protection. The turn to technology also
changes perceptions of what aid is, and what it means to provide it, as reflected
in the often-repeated assertions that “humanitarian information is humanitarian
aid” or “information is a basic need.” Moreover, there is a significant but little
understood political economy aspect to the rise of humanitarian technology: both
the military industry and the surveillance industry are looking for new markets –
and the type of legitimacy that partnership with a humanitarian actor can provide.
Mark Duffield argues that, rather than uncritically embracing “cyber-
humanitarianism”, humanitarian agencies need to understand exactly what they
are buying into.7 Taking such calls for a critical investigation of technology as a
vantage point, the objective of this article is to offer a set of substantive pointers
for a critical humanitarian technology research agenda. To that end, we are
moving from a discussion of what technology does for humanitarian action to
asking what technology does to humanitarian action. We identify humanitarian
space, the generation of new partnerships, shifts in resource distribution,
transformations of human relationships and the emergence of new vulnerabilities
as analytical prisms for exploring this question. Our goal is to analyze and
highlight how critical approaches to technology can inform a more reflective
humanitarian practice, enhancing the humanitarian community’s ability to
grapple with the ongoing transformation of the humanitarian enterprise and its
5
Ryan Burns, “Moments of Closure in the Knowledge Politics of Digital Humanitarianism”, Geoforum,
Vol. 53, 2014, pp. 51–62.
6
Gus Hosein, personal communication, the Critical Humanitarian Technology Project Seminar, PRIO, 28
November 2013; similarly discussed in critical security studies, e.g. in Louise Amoore, “Algorithmic War:
Everyday Geographies on the War on Terror”, Antipode, Vol. 41, No. 1, 2009, pp. 49–69.
7
Mark Duffield, “Disaster-Resilience in the Network Age: Access-Denial and the Rise of Cyber-
Humanitarianism”, DIIS Working Paper No. 23, 2013, available at: http://en.diis.dk/files/publications/
WP2013/WP2013-33_Disaster-resilience-cyber-age_Duffield_web.pdf.
K. B. Sandvik, M. G. Jumbert, J. Karlsrud and M. Kaufmann
222
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

operations, through and by technology. The approach is exploratory and built on
secondary sources, unless otherwise indicated.
For the purposes of clarity, the topical focus of this article is on a specific
slice of the humanitarian technology field, namely humanitarian information and
communication technologies (mirroring the priorities of the IFRC World
Disasters Report); it thus leaves aside other technologies such as biometrics and
humanitarian drones.8 Mobile phones, social media, crisis mapping, big-data
analytics and e-transfers are all tools that can give beneficiaries the opportunity
to take informed decisions in a crisis, give humanitarians better situational
awareness and improve aid delivery. We are interested in the particular social
interactions and practices these technologies allow for. How does technology
create or reshape humanitarian space, power relationships and relief distribution?
How can we make sense of the new possibilities for remoteness that technology
brings to humanitarian action?
The article is divided into two main parts. The first part starts by
providing a description of the hardware and software aspects of the relevant
technologies, and the capabilities they are expected to bring to the field of
humanitarian action. It then examines humanitarian technology as a theoretical
idea,
focusing
on
the
constitutive
relationship
between
technology
and
humanitarianism. The second part considers some of the ways in which
technology
brings
changes
to
the
humanitarian
field.
The
discussion
is
organized into five sections, covering the relationship between technology and
the contested issue of humanitarian space; the generation of new settlements in
terms of generating a new shared understanding of meaning, roles, resource
distribution and rules, such as the growth of public–private partnerships; the
production
of
new
forms
of
distribution
of
resources,
namely
through
e-transfers or so-called “digital food”; the reorganization of the relationships
between
the
“helper”
and
the
“helped”;
and
finally
the
continuous
manufacturing
of
new
vulnerabilities
engendered
by
data
collection
and
processing. In the conclusion, we consider the implications for the “do no
harm” imperative and the humanitarian principles of humanity, impartiality and
neutrality.9 We look at how humanitarian action, as it has evolved from the Red
Cross Movement, is based on the imperative to “do no harm” in the pure
medical sense, but also in the broader sense of acknowledging the impact one
has when intervening in a situation of crisis.10 We reflect on how technologies
introduced in the humanitarian field relate to this imperative, how they affect
the everyday achievement of humanitarian principles and how they alter
practices in the field.
8
For a discussion, see Kristin Bergtora Sandvik and Kjersti Lohne, “The Rise of the Humanitarian Drone”,
Millennium Journal of International Studies, Vol. 43, No. 1, 2014. See also Kristin Bergtora Sandvik and
Maria Gabrielsen Jumbert (eds), The Good Drone, Ashgate, Surrey, forthcoming 2015.
9
Encoded in the Statutes of the Red Cross and Red Crescent movements, and encoded in various UN
General Assembly resolutions, notably UN GA Res. 46/182, 19 December 1991.
10 Mary B. Anderson, Do No Harm: How Aid Can Support Peace or War, Lynne Rienner, Boulder CO, 1999.
Humanitarian technology: a critical research agenda
223
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Technology in crisis situations: towards an idea of humanitarian
technology
The world has entered the age of “big data.” Data is gathered and generated at an
exponential rate, doubling every 20th month: in 2012, the volume of digital
content grew to 2.7 zettabytes (ZB), up 48% from 2011.11 This is a function of a
general digitalization of our lives, since many ordinary actions in everyday life
can now be traced, stored and shared. The trend is no longer limited to the
Western world. An increasing portion of the population in the South, including
countries ravaged by war and conflict, is also stepping into the digital realm. This
means that the amount of data that can be analysed to inform multilateral efforts
for conflict prevention and international security is increasing rapidly and can
thus give a more even and realistic picture of the situation in question.
Even in fragile countries, many people have a cell phone. And while cell
phone ownership is not universal and most cell phones are not smartphones, there
is a rapid spread of 3G networks in developing countries and smartphones are
increasingly affordable as they are priced down to US$40 or less.12 Cell
phone usage enables remote communication, data transfers and establishment of
management procedures, and has the potential to be hugely helpful with respect to
preparedness, response and recovery. Examples include mitigation of the harmful
effects of a crisis by way of providing early warning through text messaging, or
real-time evaluations through SMS feedback from affected people receiving aid. As
the trend towards digitalization of money has reached crisis and disaster zones,
material relief is now increasingly distributed through e-transfers or by SMS.
The data that populations generate through their everyday actions can be
correlated to other information through crowdsourcing, identifying patterns of
resource flows, movement and consumption. Crowdsourcing is a blanket term
covering an array of ways in which many people contribute small amounts of
data to form an aggregated larger dataset, usually via electronic means. In an
aggregated form, such data can provide important insights into humanitarian
needs and the effectiveness of interventions. Many types of data can be collected
and aggregated to give a real-time understanding of developments in a particular
area. Tracking the use of hate speech on social media can highlight areas of
increased tension and potential violence. A sudden growth in remittances
to particular countries or geographical locations can be a sign of greater
vulnerability. Cell phone data can be used to track population movements in case
of violent clashes or natural disasters.13 SMS surveys can be conducted in
11 Business Wire, “IDC Predicts 2012 Will Be the Year of Mobile and Cloud Platform Wars as IT Vendors
Vie for Leadership While the Industry Redefines Itself”, 1 December 2011, available at: www.businesswire.
com/news/home/20111201005201/en/IDC-Predicts-2012-Year-Mobile-Cloud-Platform#.U4uByi-kEy4.
12 Gulveen Aulakh, “Smartphone Rates May Slip Below 2.5k by Year-End”, Economic Times, 19 March 2014,
available at: http://articles.economictimes.indiatimes.com/2014-03-19/news/48366178_1_smartphones-
handset-makers-karbonn-mobiles.
13 Linus Bengtsson et al. “Improved Response to Disasters and Outbreaks by Tracking Population
Movements with Mobile Phone Network Data: A Post-Earthquake Geospatial Study in Haiti”, PLoS
K. B. Sandvik, M. G. Jumbert, J. Karlsrud and M. Kaufmann
224
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

cooperation with cell phone companies to generate input on food insecurity or fear
of violence. During disastrous events, data about the situation of disaster victims
from various information sources, such as texts, e-mails, blog posts and tweets,
can be processed by crisis mappers in order to create layered maps with geo-
referenced information, thus allowing for the detection of focal points that are
not easily identified through other technologies.14
A critical research agenda in this field raises the question of the academic
tools and concepts we use to think about humanitarian technology. As noted by
Duffield, there is a need to contemplate how technology and humanitarian policies
on the ground change together, meaning that work in disciplines such as
anthropology, sociology and geography, as well as history and cultural studies, will
be important – in tandem with a thorough theorization.15 We suggest that while
there has until now been little critical investigation into the use of new technology
in humanitarian assistance, humanitarian studies being in itself a field in the
making, a research agenda for the study of humanitarian technologies can learn a
lot from science and technology studies (STS). With its critical view on
technologies and their social functionalities, STS has significantly contributed to the
understanding
of
what
new
technologies
do
to
both
social
and
power
relationships.16 Today, throughout the humanitarian field, technology enables
specific sets of political and military rationales and projects that must be examined
not for their oft-alleged “newness”, but for the power they represent.17 The
question is: where is power found, what does it look like, and how does it operate?
In our view, there has never been any humanitarianism without
technology.18 Furthermore, technology is not “bad” – but neither is it neutral, or
just passively adopted by society. Technology is not an empty vessel waiting to be
imbued with “humanitarian meaning”; rather, society and technology engage in a
mutually constitutive relationship.19 The construction of technology is subject to
political contestation, and to the realities of professionalism and finance.20
Med, No. 8, Vol. 8, 2011; UN Global Pulse, Characterizing Human Behavior During Floods Through the
Lens of Mobile Phone Activity, 2014, available at: www.unglobalpulse.org/tabasco-floods-CDRs.
14 Anne Nelson and Ivan Sigal with Dean Zambrano, “Media, Information Systems and Communities:
Lessons From Haiti”, (published 21 January 2011), available at: www.knightfoundation.org/media/
uploads/publication_pdfs/KF_Haiti_Report_English.pdf.
15 Mark Duffield, personal communication; Critical Humanitarian Technology Seminar, PRIO, 28
November 2014.
16 Wiebe E. Bijker and John Law, Shaping Technology/Building Society: Studies in Socio-Technical Change,
MIT Press, Cambridge MA, 1992; Donald MacKenzie and Judy Wajcman, The Social Shaping of
Technology, Open University Press, Milton Keynes, 1999; Geoffrey L. Herrera, “Technology and
International Systems”, Millennium: Journal of International Studies, Vol. 32, No. 3, 2003, pp. 559–593;
Stefan Fritsch, “Technology and Global Affairs”, International Studies Perspectives, Vol. 12, No. 1,
2011, pp. 27–45; Daniel R. McCarthy, “Technology and ‘the International’ or: How I Learned to Stop
Worrying and Love Determinism”, Millennium: Journal of International Studies, Vol. 41, No. 3, 2013,
pp. 470–490.
17 D. R. McCarthy, above note 16, pp. 471 and 489.
18 Scholars have long been interested in the use of technology for humanitarian purposes: see Robin
Stephenson and Peter S. Anderson, “Disasters and the Information Technology Revolution”, Disasters,
Vol. 21, No. 4, 1997, pp. 305–334.
19 D. MacKenzie and J.Wajcman, above note 16.
20 G. L. Herrera, above note 16, p. 560; see also W. E. Bijker and J. Law, above note 16.
Humanitarian technology: a critical research agenda
225
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

According to Patrick Vinck, humanitarian technology refers to the use of technology
to improve the quality of prevention, mitigation, preparedness, response, recovery
and rebuilding efforts.21 Acknowledging the support functions that humanitarian
technology can fulfil, but also pointing to the potential challenges of technological
application, we suggest that humanitarian technology is both constituted by and
constitutive of humanitarian practice. Humanitarian technology should be
understood in the context of ideas about functionality and effectiveness – or
perceptions about vulnerability and suffering – underpinning the contemporary
humanitarian agenda.22 New communication technologies are bounded in
relation to other kinds of technology, and in relation to social and cultural
sentiments about the “appropriateness” of particular tools and practices. These
relations in turn infuse the mundane, everyday practices underpinning the
adoption and use of “new” technologies.23
This perspective is particularly significant for an understanding of the
Internet’s role within the global emergency zone, as well as in society at large.
With social media, the long-held notion that the virtual world is a different social
space to the “real world” has mostly given way to the understanding that there is
one social world, which contains both traditional and technologically advanced
modes of communication and sites of social activity.24 Early optimism about the
emancipatory potential of social media in the Arab Spring has been countered by
negative conceptualizations of the Internet as a tool of propaganda used by
armed actors and oppressive governments, as epitomized by Syria. This article
adopts the view that a dichotomy between liberation and control is misleading:
technologies – including
humanitarian
information
and
communication
technologies – in turn shape and limit the prospects for human communication
and interaction in a constantly iterative manner.25
Humanitarian technology: understanding changes and
challenges
Technology and the politics of the humanitarian space
The following five sections will outline a critical agenda by investigating the impact
that the use of technology has on humanitarian space. They will discuss the way in
21 Patrick Vinck, “Humanitarian Technology”, World Disasters Report 2013, International Federation of Red
Cross and Red Crescent Societies, 2013, p. 20, available at: www.ifrc.org/PageFiles/134658/WDR%
202013%20complete.pdf.
22 Because of space constraints, the ways in which humanitarianism shapes technology – for example, by
providing “doing good” legitimacy – will not be discussed further here.
23 Marianne De Laet and Annemarie Mol, “The Zimbabwe Bush Pump: Mechanics of a Fluid Technology”,
Social Studies of Science, Vol. 30, No. 2, 2000, pp. 225–263.
24 Angela Cora Garcia et al., “Ethnographic Approaches to the Internet and Computer-Mediated
Communication”, Journal of Contemporary Ethnography, Vol. 38, No. 1, 2009, pp. 52–84.
25 Ronald Deibert and Rafal Rohozinski, “Liberation vs. Control: The Future of Cyberspace”, Journal of
Democracy, Vol. 21, No. 4, 2010, pp. 43–56.
K. B. Sandvik, M. G. Jumbert, J. Karlsrud and M. Kaufmann
226
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

which technology creates new settlements with respect to how humanitarian work
can legitimately be organized, the effect of technology on the distribution of
resources, the way in which technology is redefining relationships, and the way in
which data collection creates new vulnerabilities.
Discussions about the use of humanitarian technology inevitably fold into
the long-term debate about “humanitarian space”, a concept that remains central to
humanitarian policymaking.26 While the technical definitions of this concept vary, a
common conception of humanitarian space is the ability of agencies to operate freely
and meet humanitarian needs in accordance with the principles of humanitarian
action.27 Over the past decade, as the international community has grappled with
the protection of civilians and relief provision in Afghanistan, the Democratic
Republic of the Congo, Darfur, Iraq, Sri Lanka, and most recently South Sudan
and Syria, there has been a persistent concern that the space for humanitarian
action is shrinking. This is perceived to result both in less access to crisis
settings – with serious consequences for beneficiaries – and a more dangerous
operative environment for humanitarian workers.28 The idea of a shrinking
humanitarian space directly influences views on the role of technology within
such settings. Technology is here mainly perceived as an instrument to allow for
remote management of hard-to-reach areas, for example through the use of SMS
surveys to map basic needs, or reliance on Skype for day-to-day management.
Technology is thus mainly framed in terms of its instrumentality to maintaining
humanitarian access. While this instrumentalist perspective needs to be critically
investigated, it is useful to illuminate a practical challenge: humanitarian actors
operate in environments that are intrinsically dynamic and unstable and that
diverge from the typical environment in which technology is designed, such as
the private sector.29 In the emergency context, the failure rates of sophisticated
technologies are likely to be high.30 Design and manufacturing defects, human
error and human–machine interface problems will shape their implementation,
even with appropriate planning.
Instead of conceptualizing the humanitarian space as one that is shrinking,
but can be saved by technological means, we suggest that the humanitarian space
could be understood as a social arena where various actors (donors, UN agencies,
NGOs, staff, beneficiaries, private sector actors, peacekeepers and other military
26 This section builds on Kristin Bergtora Sandvik, “The Humanitarian Cyber Space: Expanding Frontiers or
Shrinking Space?”, 2014, unpublished manuscript on file with the author.
27 Victoria Metcalfe, Alison Giffen and Samir Elhawary, UN Integration and Humanitarian Space, Overseas
Development Institute, London, 2011; Sarah Collinson, Samir Elhawary, “Humanitarian Space: A Review
of Trends and Issues”, HPG Reports, No. 32, Overseas Development Institute, London, 2012.
28 Humanitarian Outcomes, Aid Worker Security Report 2013: The New Normal: Coping with the
Kidnapping Threat, October 2013, available at: www.humanitarianoutcomes.org/sites/default/files/
HO_AidWorkerSectyReport_2013_0.pdf.
29 IFRC, World Disasters Report 2013, Chapter 7: “Innovation, Evaluation and Diffusion of Humanitarian
Technology”.
30 For examples, see Gus Hosein and Carly Nyst, Aiding Surveillance, Privacy International, October 2013,
available
at:
www.privacyinternational.org/sites/privacyinternational.org/files/file-downloads/aiding_
surveillance.pdf.
Humanitarian technology: a critical research agenda
227
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

actors) negotiate activities and outcomes.31 In our view, the shrinking-space
narrative implicitly builds on the myth of a “Golden Age” of non-political
humanitarianism and unfettered humanitarian access. As observed by Antonio
Donini, the reality has always been characterized by a gap between the aspiration
to a set of ideals and the everyday humanitarian politicking in complex political,
military and legal arenas.32 Technology-driven humanitarian action only has a
limited potential to break free of the pre-existing political constraints that shape
humanitarian access. Humanitarian technology may shelter humanitarianism
from the politics of danger by protecting the physical security of humanitarian
workers, but it will not save humanitarians from dangerous politics, or from
politics in general.33
For example, technology can simultaneously be a medium of violence and
of humanitarian action: historically, the radio has been the most important
humanitarian information technology, but at the same time, violent actors have
leveraged communication technologies to incite violence, promote conflict and
perpetrate crimes. The classic example is the 1994 Rwandan genocide, where the
broadcasts of Radio Télévision Libre des Mille Collines played a significant role in
inciting mass killings. Moreover, in view of the nature of an emergency setting,
any failure to consider the possible secondary effects of applying a specific new
technology can lead to fatal outcomes.
With the rise of digital humanitarianism, areas with limited or non-existent
access to connectivity and digital technologies – risk becoming an invisible part of
the humanitarian space.34 As noted by Patrick Vinck, “the on-the-ground reality
is more often than not one of information poverty, limited mobile coverage and
little or no access to internet for both humanitarians and communities at risk.”35
While one in four people on earth have started using some form of social media
regularly, access is deeply unequal across the global emergency zone.36 Whereas
the digital humanitarian response to Typhoon Yolanda in the Philippines played
a significant role – 71% of the population has a cell phone and 34% a
smartphone – the percentage of the population online in 2014 is 12% in Uganda
and 8% in Pakistan.37 In addition to that, there are also geographically gendered
31 Dorothea Hilhorst and Bram J. Jansen, “Humanitarian Space as Arena: A Perspective on the Everyday
Politics of Aid”, Development and Change, Vol. 41, No. 6, 2010, pp. 1117–1139.
32 Antonio Donini (ed.), The Golden Fleece: Manipulation and Independence in Humanitarian Action,
Kumarian Press, Sterling VA, 2012.
33 Kristin Bergtora Sandvik, “The Risks of Technological Innovation”, in IFRC, above note 29.
34 For an interesting case of a humanitarian organization addressing its own internal digital divide, see the
IFRC’s digital divide initiative, “Technology in the Service of the Most Vulnerable”, 6 July 2011, available
at: www.ifrcmedia.org/blog/technology-in-the-service-of-the-most-vulnerable/.
35 P. Vinck, above note 21, p. 30.
36 eMarketer, “Social Networking Reaches Nearly One in Four Around the World”, 18 June 2013, available
at: www.emarketer.com/Article/Social-Networking-Reaches-Nearly-One-Four-Around-World/1009976.
37 Pew Research Center, Emerging Nations Embrace Internet, Mobile Technology, 13 February 2014, available
at: www.pewglobal.org/2014/02/13/emerging-nations-embrace-internet-mobile-technology/; Neil Dufty,
“A Review of the Value of Social Media in Countrywide Disaster Risk Reduction Public Awareness
Strategies”, paper developed for the HFA Thematic Review and as an input to the Global Assessment
Report on Disaster Risk Reduction 2015 (GAR15), available at: http://works.bepress.com/neil_dufty/34.
K. B. Sandvik, M. G. Jumbert, J. Karlsrud and M. Kaufmann
228
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

differences that create localized digital divides: the technology gap between men and
women is much larger in low-income countries than in high-income countries.38
While humanitarian actors often emphasize the democratizing potential of
information technology in disasters and OCHA proposes that technology
redistributes power,39 the emphasis on big data comes with its own particular
blind spots regarding populations that are overlooked by big data.40 Will
individuals and communities whose life patterns do not generate enough digital
breadcrumbs to make it into the algorithms fall outside the humanitarian space?
These are some of the challenges which are important to take into account when
assessing the use of technology in the humanitarian setting.
Generating new settlements: the example of public–private partnerships
The introduction of new technologies and the unprecedented levels of connectivity
now being seen across the globe will generate new settlements in the structural
division of labour in the humanitarian sector. This changing landscape will
involve new actors and the redistribution of tasks and responsibilities, as well as
evolving understandings of the legitimacy of giving those new actors important
roles in humanitarian action. In this section we will discuss one such important
new development – namely, the proliferation of public–private partnerships,
which in recent years have emerged as a preferred (and donor-encouraged)
humanitarian
strategy
to
reach
stated
goals
of
increased
efficiency
and
accountability.41 The rationale for including the private sector in humanitarian
action is that partners can contribute to humanitarian solutions with different
expertise and resources. Besides that, they own much of the infrastructure on
which information and communication technology is based. For example,
telecom businesses provide text messages, internet and phone services where
there is significant potential for harvesting data and where access to “digital
exhaust” is emerging as a key concern for humanitarian actors.
These relationships are increasingly being institutionalized. The Inter-
Agency
Standing
Committee
(IASC)
Sub-Working
Group
on
Emergency
38 International Telecommunication Union, ICT Facts and Figures: The World in 2013, February 2013,
available
at:
www.itu.int/en/ITU-D/Statistics/Documents/facts/ICTFactsFigures2013-e.pdf;
Alison
Gillwald, Anne Milek and Christoph Stork, “Gender Assessment of ICT Access and Usage in Africa”,
Towards Evidence-Based ICT Policy and Regulation, Vol. 1, Policy Paper 2, 2009; Laura L. Murphy and
Alexandra E. Priebe, “‘My Co-Wife Can Borrow My Mobile Phone!’ Gendered Geographies of Cell
Phone Usage and Significance for Rural Kenyans”, Gender, Technology and Development, Vol. 15, No.
1, 2011, pp. 1–23.
39 OCHA, Humanitarianism in the Network Age (HINA) 2011.
40 Jonas Lerman, “Big Data and its Exclusions”, Stanford Law Review Online, 3 September 2013, available at:
www.stanfordlawreview.org/online/privacy-and-big-data/big-data-and-its-exclusions.
41 Andrea Binder and Jan Martin Witte, “Business Engagement in Humanitarian Relief: Key Trends and
Policy Implications”, Humanitarian Policy Group (HPG) Background Paper, Overseas Development
Institute (ODI), London, June 2007; Jim Drummond and Nicholas Crawford, “Humanitarian Crises,
Emergency Preparedness and Response: The Role of Business and the Private Sector”, HPG Report,
ODI, London, January 2014.
Humanitarian technology: a critical research agenda
229
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Telecommunications, chaired by OCHA, is an open forum to facilitate the
operational use of telecommunications in the service of humanitarian assistance,
and has been meeting since 1994.42 The emergency telecommunications cluster
under the UN cluster system was created in 2005 and is led by the World Food
Programme (WFP). The cluster’s mission is limited to “provid[ing] vital IT and
telecoms services to help humanitarian workers carry out operations efficiently
and effectively.”43 In 2012, WFP and MasterCard announced a global partnership
“that will use digital innovation to help people around the world to break the
cycle of hunger and poverty.”44 In 2013, the Open Humanitarian Alliance came
into existence as an initiative whereby organizations and individuals from
humanitarian response organizations, academic institutions, government agencies
and private sector companies collaborate “to bring the concept of open data into
the humanitarian space by addressing the political, technological and capacity
issues that currently limit information sharing during disaster.”45
Critics have often interpreted the evolution of these types of partnerships as
neoliberal governance strategies, where “the humanitarian ethos is gradually
eroded.”46 Superficially, humanitarians and the private sector appear to share a
set of assumptions about the competence, presence and relevance of the private
sector. This was evidenced by the words of an official of the International
Telecommunications Union, who noted that private sector organizations are “on
the ground” and “often at the heart of the community”; hence, “[c]ooperation
between public and private sectors can be ramped up. This will ensure a more
effective use of emergency response technologies at the international level.”47
Nevertheless, to unpack how technology engenders such new settlements, it is
necessary to be aware of the heterogeneous character of these partnerships within
the humanitarian sector. There is a huge variation in the understanding of what
constitutes a public–private partnership and what the appropriate label for the
work done actually is. In this context, it is necessary to consider that the ability to
call one’s own work “humanitarian action” is a public relations strategy, a way of
carrying out corporate social responsibility, and a commercial strategy aimed at
spearheading access to new markets.
On a deeper level, the disparity is rooted in the fact that affected states,
donor states, beneficiaries, international organizations and market actors all view
42 IASC, Emergency Telecom, available at: www.humanitarianinfo.org/iasc/pageloader.aspx?page=content-
subsidi-common-default&sb=13.
43 ICT Humanitarian Emergency Platform, Emergency Telecommunications Cluster, available at: http://
ictemergency.wfp.org/web/ictepr/emergency-telecommunications-cluster (emphasis added).
44 MasterCard, “MasterCard and the United Nations World Food Programme in Partnership to Deliver
‘Digital Food’”, Press Release, 13 September 2012, available at: http://newsroom.mastercard.com/press-
releases/mastercard-and-the-united-nations-world-food-programme-in-partnership-to-deliver-digital-
food-4/.
45 See www.nethope.org.
46 Thokozani Xaba, “From Public–Private Partnerships to Private–Public Stick ‘Em Ups! NGOism,
Neoliberalism, and Social Development in Post-Apartheid South Africa”, International Social Work, 27
January 2014 (published online before print).
47 Paul Conneally, “What Technologists and Humanitarians Can Achieve Together”, box. 1.1, in IFRC,
above note 29, p. 19.
K. B. Sandvik, M. G. Jumbert, J. Karlsrud and M. Kaufmann
230
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

the state and the overall organization, as well as the objective of humanitarian aid,
differently. Hence, attention must be paid to the ways in which ideology and
idiosyncrasies shape the templates upon which such agreements are encouraged
and entered into, as well as how they play out in practice. According to critics,
these partnerships must be carefully managed, as companies are by their very
nature mainly interested in “brand, employee motivation and doing more
business.”48 The challenge is to flesh out the precise nature of the dilemma. For
example, in the case of e-transfers, it has been pertinently observed that:
Crisis-affected persons are not, in this context, customers of the bank with
whom the implementing agency has partnered, and are not party to the
contracts agreed between the implementing agency and the bank. Banks are
not accountable to humanitarian principles and are likely not used to
working with individuals with little knowledge of the banking system.49
Another dilemma is that victims of disasters are by nature in a vulnerable position,
making them potentially easy targets for private companies’ interests and easy
victims of breaches to their right to privacy, as they may be pressed in emergency
situations to accept things they wouldn’t have otherwise. Furthermore, critics
note that while many of these private companies are powerful global players, even
the largest of them – Apple, Google, Microsoft and Facebook – are under the
influence of government regulations and national security politics.50 This
influences their ability and willingness to protect the data of humanitarian
organizations. Adding to this, many private sector companies are also military
suppliers, and in recent years the humanitarian enterprise has in itself become a
huge market for new surveillance and control technologies.51 This overlap of the
market with both humanitarian and security practices is deeply problematic, as
evidenced by the creation of the new Coalition Against Unlawful Surveillance
Exports,52 which includes Amnesty International, Human Rights Watch and
Privacy International.
So far, the proliferation of partnerships has not spurred the development of
regulatory standards, and there is a dearth of voluntary guidelines, codes of conduct
or principles. There appears to be little consensus on how to structure the dialogue
with private sector companies, how to foreground humanitarian principles and
48 See Luk N. van Wassenhove, academic director of INSEAD Humanitarian Research Group, in How
Applied
Research
Can
Contribute
to
Improvements
in
Future
Humanitarian
Supply
Chains,
CONTRIBUTE workshop, BI Norwegian Business School, 2014, available at: www.noreps.no/PageFiles/
1156/BI,%20210114,%20slides.pdf.
49 Leah Campbell, “Cross-Sector Cash Assistance for Syrian Refugees and Host Communities in Lebanon:
An IRC Programme”, The Cash Learning Partnership, 1 April 2014, available at: www.cashlearning.
org/resources/library/410-cross-sector-cash-assistance-for-syrian-refugees-and-host-communities-in-
lebanon-an-irc-programme.
50 Ronald J. Deibert, Black Code: Inside the Battle for Cyberspace, McClelland & Stewart, Toronto, 2013.
51 See notably the revelations that the NSA bugged humanitarian organizations: “GCHQ and NSA Targeted
Charities, Germans, Israeli PM and EU Chief”, The Guardian, 20 December 2013, available at: www.
theguardian.com/uk-news/2013/dec/20/gchq-targeted-aid-agencies-german-government-eu-commissioner
52 See the Coalition Against Unlawful Surveillance Exports website, available at: www.globalcause.net.
Humanitarian technology: a critical research agenda
231
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

transparency,53 or how to distinguish actors with an interest in corporate
responsibility from those seeing the humanitarian space exclusively as a new
market
opportunity
for
their
products.
Whether
or
not
humanitarian
organizations are aware of such risks, they face a tacit and indirect pressure to
adopt new technologies for “cost-efficiency” and “risk-avoidance” reasons. For
researchers, the problem is also methodological: the lack of standardization and
confidentiality agreements will make such partnerships difficult to scrutinize.
Paving the way to new methods for distributing aid
The notion that “[c]ommunications are an important form of aid, and can be of
equal importance to survivors as food, water and shelter”,54 is a mainstay of the
humanitarian
technology
discourse – and
increasingly
also
of
the
general
humanitarian
discourse.
According
to
the
World
Disasters
Report
2013,
“[s]elf-organization in a digital world affords opportunities unfeasible in the
analogue
past.
Disaster-affected
populations
now
have
greater
access
to
information, and many of their information needs during a crisis can be met by
mobile technologies.”55 In essence, these kinds of statements represent a move to
see value-added information as relief in itself.56
We suggest that attention must be paid not only to how humanitarian
technology impacts on what counts as resources, but also to the distribution of
resources, in terms of who gets what, who gets to distribute, where this happens
and why. In the following section we consider the latter issue in greater depth by
looking at the case of e-transfers, often called “mobile money” or “digital food”
in the humanitarian context. Over the last decade, the international development
community has invested heavily in the so-called financial inclusion agenda,
aiming to make poor people less aid-dependent; this is sometimes labelled
“resilience through asset creation.”57 The underlying assumption is that access to
financial services such as credit and savings will “create sizeable welfare benefits”
as beneficiaries of aid are drawn further into the market economy as customers.58
In tandem with humanitarianism’s general turn to transparency, accountability
and efficiency, the goal of implementing “cost-effective” electronic payment
programs is also to help beneficiaries “save money, improve efficiencies
and prevent fraud.”59 The belief is that cash can “go where people cannot”, and
53 Interview with OCHA official, New York, 11 October 2013.
54 GSMA, “Key Takeaways from the UN Working Group on Emergency Telecommunications”, 17 April
2014, available at: www.gsma.com/mobilefordevelopment/key-takeaways-from-the-un-working-group-
on-emergency-telecommunications.
55 See IFRC, above note 29, Chapter 3, p. 73.
56 This section builds on K. B. Sandvik, above note 26.
57 The World Food Program, Building resilience through asset creation, November 2013, available at: http://
documents.wfp.org/stellent/groups/public/documents/communications/wfp261744.pdf
58 Daniel Radcliffe and Rodger Voorhies, “A Digital Pathway to Financial Inclusion”, 11 December 2012,
available at: http://ssrn.com/abstract=2186926.
59 Tom Groenfeld, “MasterCard Promotes Financial Inclusion with Electronic Payments”, Forbes,
9 September 2013, available at: www.forbes.com/fdc/welcome_mjx.shtml.
K. B. Sandvik, M. G. Jumbert, J. Karlsrud and M. Kaufmann
232
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

provide them with choice. This determinist vision of technology and capital fits with
a key attribute of the humanitarian agenda: it is not redistributive, but focuses on
helping those in need.
The World Food Programme has taken the lead in this development as a
part of its broader strategy to move away from food aid and to improve food
security through cash assets.60 In a Kenyan pilot project, WFP is working with
MasterCard and Equity Bank to implement a “digital food” delivery system
whereby recipients are provided with a debit card linked to a bank account that
holds their allowance. According to WFP, beneficiaries preferred the “digital
food” allowance over food distribution because it provided choice and helped
avoid misuse of cash. It was also found to be 15% cheaper than in-kind food
assistance.61
Nevertheless, challenges abound for the project, including “an unprepared
agent network outside of Port-au-Prince, a lack of mobile network in northern
Uganda, limited bank networks and payment infrastructure in remote areas of
the Philippines and challenges channelling the cash for the transfers in Kenya.”62
In an early phase, WFP Kenya found that network connectivity was not strong
enough to process payments under the initially devised solution. Unstable
network coverage also presented a challenge: in July 2013, for example, Equity
Bank experienced a week of unreliable service due to a crash of the operating
system of its data base.63 Through the early implementation phase, there were
inconsistent and delayed payments (initially, 74% of the recipients did not receive
their payments), resulting in frustrated and confused recipients who sometimes
took on short-term credit to cover the shortage. WFP expressed surprise over
subsequent “recipient behaviour”: when cash did come, the vast majority rushed
to the agent to cash out at the same time, because of lack of trust and because the
programme only covered the cost of one withdrawal fee per payment cycle. This
caused long lines, insufficient agent liquidity, agent frustration and recipient
confusion. Recipients also lacked technical and financial literacy, and did not
always know their PINs or how to enter them.64 Sometimes agents demanded
recipients’ PINs or pressured recipients to buy goods in their outlets. Finally,
many recipients had to travel significant distances to the nearest agents, and
security continued to be an issue.65 Examples of this kind only point to selected
challenges related to the use of technology for the distribution of resources.
60 By 2015, WFP expects almost a third of its assistance to be delivered in the form of cash, vouchers and
“digital food” through smart cards and e-vouchers delivered by short text messages.
61 Consultative Group to Assist the Poor (CGAP), World Bank, Cash for Assets: World Food Programme’s
Exploration of the In-Kind to E-Payments Shift for Food Assistance in Kenya, September 2013, available at:
www.cgap.org/sites/default/files/eG2P_Kenya.pdf.
62 Jamie Zimmerman and Kristy Bohling, “E-Payments in Low-Income Settings: Cutting-Edge or High
Risk?”, CGAP, 12 March 2014, available at: www.cgap.org/blog/e-payments-low-income-settings-
cutting-edge-or-high-risk.
63 CGAP, above note 61.
64 L. Campbell, above note 49.
65 CGAP, above note 61.
Humanitarian technology: a critical research agenda
233
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

However, they illustrate that technology creates dependencies that, when disrupted,
potentially aggravate the crisis situation.
Reorganizing relationships
By allowing for more remote engagement with crisis situations, humanitarian
technology reshapes relationships between individuals and communities in need,
as well as between the individuals and professional groups aiming to provide
relief.66 As discussed above, the notion that the humanitarian space is shrinking
as humanitarian workers are facing a more dangerous operative environment is a
central preoccupation in the politics of contemporary humanitarianism. In the
context of the “war on terror”, the attacks against the UN in Iraq, Afghanistan
and other locations have engendered a long-term trend towards risk avoidance.
At the same time, agencies seek to expand their presence in conflict zones,
pursuant to the logic of the political economy of the humanitarian enterprise: it is
through their ability to “stay and deliver”67 that donors perceive humanitarians’
added value.
This amalgamation of danger and a higher degree of presence has resulted
in an increasing bunkerization of humanitarian actors, involving a progressive
withdrawal of many international aid personnel into fortified aid compounds,
secure offices and residential complexes, alongside restrictive security and travel
protocols.68 This relationship between higher risk and endured presence is
mediated through humanitarian technology. In areas such as Syria, South Sudan
and Somalia, cell phones, social media and big-data analytics play an important
role in allowing humanitarian organizations to continue operating.69 The
expectation is that remote management as a form of “simulating the experience
of proximity”70 will help humanitarians to address the costs to the quality of
assistance, as experienced staff withdraws from the field. The web portal
DisasterReady.org, for example, offers aid workers the ability to:
Share resources and information and access customized online learning
anytime, anywhere in the world. By providing high-quality, accessible
training at no cost, the DisasterReady.org Portal allows aid workers to do
what they do best: save lives, rebuild communities, and restore hope.71
66 This section builds on K. B. Sandvik, above note 26.
67 OCHA, To Stay and Deliver: Good Practice for Humanitarians in Complex Security Environments, OCHA,
New York, 28 February 2011, available at: http://reliefweb.int/report/world/stay-and-deliver-good-
practice-humanitarians-complex-security-environments-enar.
68 Sarah Collinson and Mark Duffield, Paradoxes of Presence: Risk Management and Aid Culture in
Challenging Environments, HPG, ODI, London, March 2013, available at: www.odi.org.uk/sites/odi.org.
uk/files/odi-assets/publications-opinion-files/8428.pdf.
69 Joe Belliveau, “‘Remote management’ in Somalia”, Humanitarian Exchange Magazine, No. 56, January
2013, available at: www.odihpn.org/humanitarian-exchange-magazine/issue-56/remote-management-in-
somalia.
70 S. Collinson and M. Duffield, above note 68.
71 See www.disasterready.org/about.
K. B. Sandvik, M. G. Jumbert, J. Karlsrud and M. Kaufmann
234
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

According to the critics, something more complicated is happening: Duffield
describes remote management as the “distancing tendency” in humanitarian
action. He argues that technology is replacing on-the-ground truth, through
technological innovation, simulation and visualization premised on an “uncritical
technological-determinist vision of simulating the moods, expectations and
actions of remote disaster affected populations.”72
At the same time, remote management signifies a “re-allocation of risk”
towards local organizations and beneficiaries, whereby technology is not only a
management tool but also a vehicle for increased self-reliance as technologies
“also enable communities to quickly transform themselves into first responders”,
access updates about relief operations, give feedback to humanitarian actors and
make complaints. Technology plays a central role as “ever-greater powers of self-
organization and self-management are being demanded of populations.”73 In
remote management, face-to-face encounters disappear, normalizing a disconnect
between aid organizations and their main stakeholders.74 Remote technologies
may also create a situation where both humanitarians and beneficiaries
overestimate the actual degree of beneficiary empowerment and participation
engendered through the use of remote management technologies.75
Parallel to the retreat of traditional humanitarians, technology is also
bringing new actors into remote humanitarian action: we still know little about
how these groups engage with humanitarianism and how their work will shape
the future of humanitarian action. The more critical information infrastructure
there is that can be damaged in a disaster, the more important are the private
sector companies owning that infrastructure. They become a “relief provider” by
dispatching individual employees to mend cell phone towers and re-establish
network access.76 The reliance on remote technologies also brings in invisible
crowds of technical workers de facto contributing to humanitarian action. Here
we borrow an example from Daniel Gilman of OCHA, who observes that a
mobile phone application that allows the direct entry and transmission of user
registration also brings an application developer, a mobile phone or satellite
company, an internet service provider and a data storage company into
the relationship, as well as government regulators – all of these being invisible to
the beneficiary.77
The proliferation of new actors also heightens the risk of duplication of
efforts. In the aftermath of the Haiti earthquake there was a proliferation of new
sites tracking missing persons, hosted by the The New York Times, CNN and
Google, among others. Quickly, it became apparent that these efforts were
“redundant and potentially confusing because they separately tried to solve the
72 M. Duffield, above note 7.
73 Ibid.
74 S. Collinson and M. Duffield, above note 68.
75 K.B. Sandvik, above note 33.
76 A. Nelson and I. Sigal with D. Zambrano, above note 14.
77 Daniel Gilman, “Humanitarianism in the Age of Cyber-Warfare”, presentation, 26 October 2013, Human
Security: Humanitarian Perspectives and Responses Conference, Istanbul, 24–27 October 2013.
Humanitarian technology: a critical research agenda
235
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

same problem, lacked common coding standards and did not share information
with other efforts.”78 They also duplicated the International Committee of the
Red Cross’s (ICRC) traditional efforts to locate missing persons. Similarly, during
the Haiti earthquake, Ushahidi, in conjunction with Tufts University in the
United States, provided a platform for crowdsourcing via the 4636 SMS short
code, and plotted nearly 4,000 distinct events. Confusion ensued when the
Thompson Reuters Foundation began using the same short code for public
service announcements.79
So far, the most attention has been given to the emergence of the remote
volunteering and technological communities (V&TCs) and their practices.
Spurred by technical capacity and low barriers to entry, these groups now play an
increasingly important role in humanitarian contexts – generating, aggregating,
classifying and even analysing data, in parallel to, or sometimes in collaboration
with, more established actors and multilateral initiatives. As a starting point, it is
important to be aware that digital humanitarians are a heterogeneous group, with
different skills, motivations, practices and objectives. So far, most of the scholarly
attention has been given to a relatively small group of actors: the Standby Task
Force (SBTF), Humanitarian OpenStreetMap Team and Crisis Mappers are three
of the most well-known and structured examples of such initiatives, which have
enjoyed formalized relationships with traditional humanitarian actors, processing
and generating information in the support of humanitarian interventions. As a
field, digital humanitarianism is in large part driven by high-profile norm-
entrepreneurs; like any field of practice, digital humanitarianism comes with its
own set of controversies and contestations over what has happened and what
should happen. Critical inquiry must be broadened to discuss the state of critical
debate within the field as such, and to analyse the activities of newer outfits like
MicroMappers, exploring not only how approaches to problem definitions and
problem-solving shift, but why they shift.
While the participation of this new group of remote humanitarians is
frequently described as a “game changer” for humanitarian action, important
issues
pertaining
to
the
participation
of
both
corporate
and
volunteer
humanitarians remain unaddressed. Crowdsourcing is based on the assumption
that the aggregated input of remote participants will produce better knowledge –
but what exactly does a crowd know about a crisis? Available evaluation reports
indicate a mixed picture: the evaluation of the Ushahidi Haiti Project noted “a
marked lack of understanding of operational aspects of emergency response”
among the volunteers.80 As a consequence of this, for example, the SBTF does
not engage or communicate with disaster-affected communities “because that
responsibility is not one that digital volunteers are equipped to manage.”81
78 A. Nelson and I. Sigal with D. Zambrano, above note 14.
79 IFRC, above note 29, p. 168.
80 Nathan Morrow et al., Independent Evaluation of the Ushahidi Haiti Project, Development Information
Systems International, 8 April 2011, p. 25.
81 Patrick Meier, personal communication on file with authors, July 2014.
K. B. Sandvik, M. G. Jumbert, J. Karlsrud and M. Kaufmann
236
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

Moreover, as the digital humanitarian community continues to proliferate,
there are concerns about the professional identity of new actors in the volunteer and
technical communities. Individual volunteers participating in such initiatives are
often less equipped than traditional humanitarian actors to deal with the ethical,
privacy and security issues surrounding their activities. Having taken technical
know-how and a desire to do good as their starting point, V&TCs may not be
familiar with, or care about, key humanitarian principles such as neutrality,
impartiality
and
independence,
and
may
not
have
enough
contextual
understanding to effectively assess the impact of their own work in relation to the
“do no harm” principle. Nor is it clear to what extent V&TCs see themselves as
engaged in humanitarian action and, therefore, as accountable according to the
standards and principles of the humanitarian enterprise. In response, the Digital
Humanitarian Network and OCHA have since actively collaborated on preparing
guidelines
for
cooperation
between
V&TCs
and
formal
humanitarian
organizations,82 and codes of conduct have been developed for organizations like
the SBTF.83 Nevertheless, even though particular situations and challenges can be
addressed by codes of conduct and specific training, these examples illustrate
more broadly that humanitarian technologies change and will continue to change
relationships among people and between people and organizations.
Technologies for humanitarian data collection: new trade-offs and
vulnerabilities
The use of information technology for collecting and processing data in humanitarian
settings engenders well-known dilemmas concerning data responsibility (of course,
paper-based protection also carries these risks). Yet, the special case of the
emergency setting means that these dilemmas must be considered in the light of
context-specific trade-offs. In the following section, we outline what a set of
individual, organizational and systemic trade-offs might look like.
At the individual level, there is a trade-off between increasing the efficiency
of humanitarian action and protecting the privacy of beneficiaries in crises.
Generally, protecting the privacy of vulnerable groups and individuals will require
the allocation of time and resources in order to conduct risk assessments, to
engage and secure informed consent, and to implement informational security
protocols with respect to data collection routines and secure data storage. In
humanitarian contexts, the imperative to act quickly and decisively may often run
82 Luis Capelo, Natalie Chang and Andrej Verity, “Guidance for Collaborating with Volunteer & Technical
Communities”, Digital Humanitarian Network, 2013, available at: http://digitalhumanitarians.com/
collaboration-guidance; Mary E. Milner and Andrej Verity, “Collaborative Innovation in Humanitarian
Affairs: Organization and Governance in the Era of Digital Humanitarianism”, Digital Humanitarian
Network, 2013, available at: https://app.box.com/s/oq2gdcy466j6bpdvzyxt; Annie P. Waldmann, Andrej
Verity and Shadrock Roberts, “Guidance for Collaborating with Formal Humanitarian Organizations”,
Digital Humanitarian Network, 2013, available at: http://digitalhumanitarians.com/collaboration-with-orgs.
83 SBTF,
Code
of
Conduct,
available
at:
https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B8j8PoWWdddLR
Vl0RW9DVDFJSDQ/edit. For an overview of other codes of conduct, see Digital Humanitarian
Network, Code of Conduct, available at: http://digitalhumanitarians.com/content/code-conduct.
Humanitarian technology: a critical research agenda
237
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

counter to more measured actions intended to mitigate informational risks to
privacy and security.
A challenge that complicates the assessment of protection versus efficiency
is confusion about different data categories. A prime example of this is the
conceptualization of “sensitive data” in the humanitarian context and the
definition of corresponding means to protect these data. While generally relating
to the personal data of beneficiaries, data may also include information about
conflict development and violent outbreaks, as well as information or rumours
about planned movements of military or armed groups. Yet, in practice, the
unpredictable dynamics of a humanitarian crisis entail that sensitive data are
hard to define a priori, with respect to both content and structure: information
about who has reported someone else for an offence may suddenly pose a life-
and-death security risk. Additionally, a piece of information may not be sensitive
as such, or not even lead to the identification of anyone, but combined and
merged with other data through triangulation, it may be the piece that gives sense
to a broader set of information and leads to the identification of individuals.
Frequently, however, the problem may be one not of grappling with trade-
offs, but of inadequate planning: Bowcock and Sossouvi note that with respect to
e-transfers, risks to beneficiaries include the use of data for purposes other than
the intended ones, as well as sharing or sale of data to third parties and the
security risk of using mobile phones to convey sensitive data. Even though data
are commonly shared with (broadly defined) partners, donors and local
authorities, little thought seems to guide data disclosure to third parties.
Moreover, exit strategies frequently lack clear plans for data disposal by agencies
or the third parties with whom beneficiary data was shared.84
On the organizational level, considerations have to be made with regard to
financial investments aimed at securing large data volumes vis-à-vis the possibility
of spending those funds on delivering aid. New time-saving technologies can spare
lives, but may be forgone due to high acquisition costs. Securing data at the
operational level also means investment in training staff to be aware of how to
collect and secure data in the field and how to transmit data in a secure manner
to headquarters and partners. Consent of information suppliers is often presumed
when information is provided “actively”, either through social media or dedicated
reporting platforms, bypassing proper consent procedures.
Furthermore, massive collection of data can turn unwitting humanitarian
organizations into intelligence providers,85 damaging their credibility and on-the-
ground operationality.86 Many of the V&TCs are not adequately equipped to
84 Haley Bowcock and Kokoevi Sossouvi, “Playing by the Code: Laying Down Some Rules of Engagement for
the Use of E-transfers in Humanitarian Response”, Human Security: Humanitarian Perspectives and
Responses Conference, Istanbul, 24–27 October 2013.
85 Christopher Wilson, “Constructing Consent: Ethical Challenges to Information Innovation in
Humanitarianism”, Critical Approaches to Humanitarian Technology: Accountability, Decision-
Making and New Actors, academic conference, Norwegian Centre for Humanitarian Studies/Peace
Research Institute of Oslo, Oslo, 28–29 November 2013.
86 For controversial perspectives on the crisis mapping effort for Libya, see R. Burns, above note 5; Steve
Stottlemyre and Sonia Stottlemyre, “Crisis Mapping Intelligence Information During the Libyan Civil
K. B. Sandvik, M. G. Jumbert, J. Karlsrud and M. Kaufmann
238
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

understand the risks involved. Government, militia or private cyber groups have
capabilities that far exceed the security systems of humanitarian actors in the field
as well as those of the V&TCs, and there are already many examples of entire
organizations’ data being “owned” by hostile cyber groups, most often without
the organization’s knowledge.87
On the systemic level, there is a drive to merge data silos and “join up” data
to create more complete pictures of a crisis in real time. While this is in many ways a
positive trend, there is a trade-off between merging organizational data silos to
improve coordination and resource efficiency on the one hand, and the risk of
more data being accessed by hostile actors on the other. Even in the absence of ill
intentions or glaring malpractice, the mere collection of sensitive data creates risk
and possible violations of the imperative to do no harm. Increasingly, codes of
conduct, handbooks and standards of procedure are filling the regulative void.
Crucially, it is not only the type but also the amount of data to be collected that
matters: the emphasis on aggregated data is an important element in the drive to
knowledge-based humanitarian action. There appears to be a tendency of
collecting too much data, according to a “better safe than sorry” logic premised
on the practical difficulties of gathering data in crisis settings. The excess data
collected again infringes on the privacy of those struggling to survive in crises
and disasters. Emergent challenges concerning identity and anonymity also exist
at the systemic level: as humanitarian data is aggregated and made public, the
chances for re-identification of individuals and groups increase at an unknown
rate. This phenomenon, known as the “mosaic effect”, is widely recognized but
little understood. Having been demonstrated in the private sector, there is little
understanding of the dangers that shared anonymous data would create in a
humanitarian context, where data may be limited, but the potential damage of
re-identification would be extreme.88 As pointed out by the 2013 version of the
ICRC protection standards, it is possible to gather less data – or data with less
detail.89
Furthermore, big data and remote sensing capabilities provide an
unprecedented opportunity to access contextual information about pending
and ongoing humanitarian crises. Many notable initiatives such as the UN
Global Pulse project suggest that development of rigorous information
War: An Exploratory Case Study”, Policy & Internet, Vol. 4, No. 3–4, 2012; and Robert Munro,
“Crowdsourcing and the Crisis-Affected Community”, Information Retrieval, Vol. 16, No. 2, 2013, pp.
210–266.
87 John Scott-Railton, Revolutionary Risks: Cyber Technology and Threats in the 2011 Libyan Revolution,
Center on Irregular Warfare and Armed Groups, US Naval War College, Newport RI, 2013; John
Scott-Railton and Morgan Marquis-Boire, A Call to Harm: New Malware Attacks Target the Syrian
Opposition, The Citizen Lab, University of Toronto, 2013; Carly Nyst, “There’s No Good Reason for
Spy Agencies to Snoop on Humanitarian Groups”, Slate, June 2014, available at: www.slate.com/blogs/
future_tense/2014/05/22/nsa_gchq_spying_on_humanitarian_groups_like_unicef_medecins_du_monde.
html.
88 We are grateful to Chris Wilson of the engine room (www.theengineroom.org) for this insight.
89 International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC), Professional Standards for Protection Work Carried Out by
Humanitarian and Human Rights Actors in Armed Conflict and Other Situations of Violence, 2nd ed., ICRC,
Geneva, 2013, available at: www.icrc.org/eng/resources/documents/publication/p0999.htm.
Humanitarian technology: a critical research agenda
239
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

management systems may even lead to feasible mechanisms for forecasting and
preventing crises. Nevertheless, there are important issues to be discussed
concerning the veracity and validity of data. Multiple data transactions and
increased complexity in data structures raise the potential for error in
humanitarian data entry and interpretation, and this raises concerns about the
accuracy and representativeness of data that is used for policy decisions in
highly pressurized situations that demand quick decision-making. Data that are
collected or generated through digital or mobile mechanisms will often pose
additional challenges, especially regarding verification. Though a significant
amount of work is under way to develop software and algorithms for verifying
crowdsourced
or
anonymously
provided
data,
such
tools
are
not
yet
operational or widely available. Understanding the limitations posed to veracity
and validity of humanitarian data is critical in a context where humanitarians
struggle to combine evidence-based approaches with effective and timely
responses.
Conclusion: what is humanitarian about humanitarian
technology?
In this article, we have attempted to map out a research agenda that identifies
humanitarian technology as a field of political contestation. The aim has been to
explore what technology does to the humanitarian context, and how the unique
characteristics
of
the
emergency
context
shape
the
conditions
in
which
technology can operate. By allowing for remote management, humanitarian
technology is contributing to a reconceptualization of the humanitarian space.
At the same time, the turn to technology has engendered a set of new
settlements, most particularly with respect to the emphasis on public–private
partnerships. Humanitarian technology also shapes what counts as resources and
how resources are distributed. Moreover, by allowing for, and exacerbating,
remote management, humanitarian technology reshapes relationships between the
“helper” and the “helped”. The article has also reflected on how humanitarian
data collection, a key element in the drive towards evidence-based humanitarian
action, produces new trade-offs and vulnerabilities.
From these different dynamics and discussions emerges a need for
reflection on the question: what is humanitarian about humanitarian technology?
How does the use of technology for humanitarian practice relate to the moral
underpinnings of the humanitarian enterprise, namely the imperative to do no
harm? How does it relate to the humanitarian principles of humanity,
impartiality and neutrality? We propose that at the heart of a future research
agenda for critical humanitarian studies are questions concerning how new
technologies
introduced
in
the
humanitarian
field
affect
the
everyday
achievement of these principles and how they alter practices in the field. Such
analysis must go beyond any discussion of the costs and benefits of surveillance,
information and data collection devices.
K. B. Sandvik, M. G. Jumbert, J. Karlsrud and M. Kaufmann
240
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

We suggest that new technologies offer new possibilities to better uphold the
humanitarian principles, but may come into conflict with the imperative to do no
harm if the introduction of these new tools is carried out without further reflection
on their impact and a regulating framework. When information is seen both as key
to the provision of aid and as aid in itself, bad data collection processes, inaccurate
data or the loss of beneficiaries’ data can cause significant harm.
The principle of humanity
It is possible to argue that technologies allow for a better achievement of the
principle of humanity in the sense that they allow more people in need to receive
assistance. Yet, over the next few years, the combination of the data available to
humanitarians, and the ways in which technology allows for a parallel immediacy
and remoteness between humanitarians and the field, will impact the way in
which empathy is mobilized, and our understanding of a common humanity.
Since information technology allows for a remoteness from the scene of crisis and
the bunkerization of humanitarians, it potentially strips humanitarian assistance
of its respect for the people in need and a contextual understanding of their
predicament – both of which are the basis for the humanity principle. The
humanity principle more broadly risks being jeopardized if data on people in
need are not managed properly and their right to assistance or their security is
compromised as a consequence.
The principle of neutrality
The (simplistic) understanding of technology as an empty vessel waiting to be
deployed and filled with meaning could pave the way for the argument that the
neutrality principle could be better achieved by technologies, since they may act
and decide more neutrally than humans. This article, however, argues that
technology is neither neutral nor passively adopted in a crisis. Instead,
technologies are used by human beings with different professional and cultural
backgrounds, with varying abilities and idiosyncratic preferences. In the same
sense, the “neutrality” of any information management system is dependent on
the categories and corresponding actions that are entered into it. Furthermore,
technology will never allow for perfect neutrality in the sense of freeing
humanitarians from the politics of the humanitarian space. The introduction of
unknown and novel devices and practices in areas of conflict, where lack of trust
and suspicion often prevail, has the potential to feed into already existing
conflicts. Thus, attention needs to be paid to how the non-neutrality of
communication, mapping and data-gathering technology impinges on the stated
objective of humanitarian neutrality.90
90 James Der Derian, “The Question of Information Technology in International Relations”, Millennium:
Journal of International Studies, Vol. 32, No. 3, 2003, pp. 441–456; Maria Gabrielsen Jumbert,
“Controlling the Mediterranean Space Through Surveillance: The Politics and Discourse of Surveillance
Humanitarian technology: a critical research agenda
241
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press

The principle of impartiality
A prevailing argument is that the impartiality principle is potentially better achieved
with a digitalized information management system, ensuring that everyone
registered receives the aid to which they are entitled. In order to do so, however,
it presupposes that anyone in need is registered, and that humanitarians remain
aware of populations disconnected by digital divides populations remaining
outside of the data collection samples. While humanitarian aid is supposed to be
given impartially and based on need alone, relief distribution through technology,
such as “mobile money”, often requires network coverage, widespread cell phone
ownership, sufficient technical and financial literacy among the beneficiary
population and the ability of humanitarians to make knowledge-based decisions
based
on
big-data
analytics.
Technology
may
enable
a
better
form
of
humanitarian assistance that doesn’t take sides or make distinctions based on
race, gender, age or political convictions, and that favours the most urgent cases.
In sum, this article has argued that the deployment of technology for
humanitarian action is not only a question of the best match between the most
appropriate technology and a specific problem or practice. If that were the case,
the successful deployment of technology within the humanitarian field would
simply become a matter of specialized, end-user-oriented and purpose-fit
innovation – and
solutions
to
humanitarian
challenges
would
likely
be
technology-driven. Instead, this article has shown that the use of novel
technologies brings urgency to all the questions laid out here, whether referring
to the politics of humanitarian space, the creation of new settlements, the
distribution of resources and the definition of relationships, or the way in which
data collection creates new vulnerabilities. Bearing that in mind, we invite the
scholarly
community
and
those
who
implement,
develop
and
invest
in
humanitarian
technologies
to
carefully
evaluate
the
dynamics
that
those
technologies engender.
as an All-encompassing Solution to EU Maritime Border Management Issues”, Espace, Populations,
Sociétés, No. 3, 2012, pp. 35–48.
K. B. Sandvik, M. G. Jumbert, J. Karlsrud and M. Kaufmann
242
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1816383114000344 Published online by Cambridge University Press