78 
 
Global Issues 
 
The WFTU – Hydroponic Stalinism 
 
Dan Gallin, Global Labour Institute 
 
 
 
 
Hydroponics:  A method of growing plants using mineral nutrient solutions, in water, without 
soil. When the required mineral nutrients are introduced into a plant's water supply artificially, 
soil is no longer required for the plant to thrive. 
 
 
After a long lapse, the World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU) is again in the news. 
Experienced observers are wondering if this is not a ‘second coming’1: it certainly looks that way 
in South Africa, where four affiliated unions of the leading confederation, the ITUC-affiliated 
Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU), have affiliated to the WFTU and are 
pressing the Congress itself to follow suit.2 Much of the discussion is framed in terms of a possible 
unity overcoming the last major split in the international trade union movement.  
The Presidential Council (the smaller governing body) of the WFTU met in 
Johannesburg in February 2012 on the invitation of the four WFTU-affiliated COSATU 
member unions. It was addressed by COSATU president Sdumo Dlamini who told the Council 
that ‘we (COSATU) will be entering into a discussion about the type of a relationship we must 
have with the WFTU and how such a relationship can take forward our commitment to achieve 
unity between the WFTU and the ITUC’.3  
The 11th National COSATU Congress last September was addressed by both Sharan 
Burrow, general secretary of the ITUC,4 and by WFTU general secretary George Mavrikos.5 
Faced with strong support within COSATU for an affiliation with the WFTU, and in the 
presence of its general secretary, Burrow struck a conciliatory note. She referred to ‘workers in 
China and Vietnam with who we have a close engagement’, and Cuba, ‘where I am working to 
strengthen our engagement’, blurring the fact that the ITUC has no ‘close engagement’ at all with 
the workers of these three countries but is seeking such an engagement with their State-controlled 
trade union organizations. They are among the few remaining labour structures inherited from 
the Soviet model, which no ITUC affiliate, including COSATU, would ever accept in their own 
country.   
With respect to the WFTU, she explained that, although she deplored the 
‘misinformation and misguided criticism’ of the ITUC, neither she, nor ‘any of her team’, would 
ever criticize the WFTU, because they believed in freedom of association and, whilst unity was 
preferable, pluralism could legitimately emerge from this fundamental workers' right. ‘The last 
thing workers need is unions fighting’ she said, adding: ‘George, my door is always open to 
dialogue and I hope there will be a time when we can unite all the workers in the world’. 
Burrow goes on to say ‘we do have a fundamental difference’. What is it? ‘It is not 
communism or socialism’, because she is ‘a proud woman of the Left’. The ‘fundamental 
difference’ is the attitude to the Arab popular revolutions, in particular in Syria, where the 

79 
 
WFTU (like Russia and China) is supporting the State-controlled labour organization (not unlike 
those of China, Vietnam and Cuba) in a bloody civil war. Burrow ‘hopes there will be a time 
beyond the dictators' club where we can fight together’, and ‘frankly, dialogue never hurts’. 
Is this a discussion between representatives of different, but equally legitimate, tendencies 
in the international labour movement? The ‘historical achievement’ of the merger between the 
ICFTU and WCL was touted as ‘overcoming the divisions of the Cold War’. In fact,  it had done 
no such thing, since the ICFTU and the WCL were pretty much on the same side of the Cold 
War and the WFTU, on the other side of the Cold War, had been left out. Are we now about to 
move towards another ‘historical achievement’? Or, as Bongani Masuku, COSATU's 
International Secretary, put it, coinciding with Sharan Burrow: ‘a unified global trade union 
movement that would unite all the various strands of the international trade union movement 
into a mighty wave’?6 
What has been missing in this discussion has been any awareness that one is dealing here 
with very different organizations. The ITUC is the latest organizational form of the historical 
labour movement which arose in the 19th and 20th centuries, from Marxist, Syndicalist and 
Catholic roots, hardly recognizable today but nonetheless real. Its current policies, such as they 
are, are pathetic in some crucial respects and should be challenged. This does not change the fact 
that its legitimacy derives from the history of self-organization of the working class, in all 
continents, spanning 150 years. 
The origin of the WFTU is very different. In its first version (1945) it was an artificial 
construct based on the requirements of the wartime alliance of the Allied Powers and the USSR. 
None of the issues that had caused the earlier split (1921) between the International Federation 
of Trade Unions (socialist) and the Red International of Labour Unions (communist), had been 
resolved. These involved questions like whether ‘bourgeois democracy’ was preferable to no 
democracy at all, whether unions should be accountable to their members or to a State, and 
whether this State represented some form of socialism or a new class exercising total control over 
society, including the working class, by means of terror (as Karl Kautsky held already in 1929).7  
In the first four years of the WFTU, socialist and communist unions had been locked in a 
struggle over the control of the organization, a struggle which the socialist (and other non-
communist) unions lost, given the massive resources of the Soviet State and the automatic 
majority of its State-controlled unions.   
The beginning of the Cold War simply meant that the political clamp of the war time 
antifascist alliance, that briefly held together organisations with fundamentally opposed views, 
political cultures and practices, had come off, and a split which had existed for the past thirty 
years was no longer papered over. 
In its second version (after 1949, when the non-communist unions had left to found the 
ICFTU) the WFTU remained under the total control of the USSR. Its true function became 
apparent after the split, when it became one of a number of Soviet-controlled international 
organizations, which constituted the political bodyguards of Soviet foreign policy in civil society 
(unions, but also youth, students, women, the peace movement, lawyers, academics and scientists, 
etc.). Had it been anything else, the Yugoslav and Chinese organizations would not have left it 
when their governments declared their independence of the government of the USSR. At that 
point the vast majority of WFTU membership was constituted by the State-controlled labour 
organisations of the USSR and of the other countries of the Soviet bloc. 

80 
 
So, finally, this brings us to the fundamental issue: the class nature of the USSR. Why is it 
fundamental? Because all international trade union structures which were sponsored by the 
USSR, from the Profintern to the WFTU, were tightly controlled by the Party-State and always 
reflected its priorities.  
The Red International of Labour Unions (RILU, also known by its shortened Russian 
name Profintern), founded in 1921 in a period of revolutionary upsurge, was ostensibly intended 
to be an alliance of Communist and revolutionary syndicalist unions. A year later, the syndicalists 
had left to found their own International in Berlin, having witnessed the military crushing of the 
rebellious Kronstadt garrison and the repression against the anarchists and syndicalists in the 
USSR. They realized that their role in the Profintern could only be a subordinate one to the 
Russian Party-State and that no alliance was possible on these terms.8 
Subsequently, the Profintern faithfully followed all gyrations of Soviet policy, from 
revolutionary confrontation in 1920/21 to the ‘United Front from below’ of 1922/23, followed 
by the disastrous ultra-sectarian turn of 1929 where social-democracy (‘social fascism’) was 
declared to be the main enemy, to be followed, from 1934, by the Popular Front policy which 
required an alliance with social-democracy. From 1936 the Profintern, which had become an 
embarrassment to the Soviet leadership, was wound down by successive decisions of the Executive 
Committee of the Comintern (ECCI) and on December 27, 1937 it was finally dissolved. None 
of these policy decisions, including its final dissolution, had any basis in its statutes and none 
were taken by its own governing bodies, but by an external body: the ECCI, itself controlled by 
the Soviet leadership. A public black-out over the entire process served to cover up this reality, so 
much so that the IWW journal wrote in May 1938 of the ‘lost International’, which ‘seems to 
have disappeared without a trace’.9 
Once the Profintern was out of the way, the State-controlled unions of the USSR 
reopened discussions with the International Federation of Trade Unions (IFTU) about  
affiliation, an issue which had come up in various contexts since the 1920s. These discussions 
were cut short by the war, but were followed up and given effect by the creation of the WFTU in 
1945 and the dissolution of the IFTU.  
By 1928 the Stalinization of the USSR was well under way. By the late 1930s, the process 
was complete, after the murder of hundreds of thousands of communists, socialists and 
anarchists, and the destruction of what was left of the Bolshevik party.  
Whatever society had emerged from this process, ‘socialist’ it was not by any recognisable 
definition other than the Stalinists’ own claims, nor did it represent the working class in any way. 
In the USSR a class society of a new type had established itself by means of police terror; and by 
means of military occupation in Eastern Europe after 1945. It was to last until it disintegrated 
and collapsed in the late 1980s, without the working class which it claimed to represent making 
the slightest move in its defense, on the contrary.  
The question then arises: given the total control of the Party-State over the Profintern in 
its last decade, and over the Communist rump of the WFTU after 1949, what class interests did 
these organisations serve? When the USSR sponsored the WFTU, did it do so in the interests of 
the world working class or in the interest of its bureaucratic ruling class? 
Contrary to what Sharan Burrow seems to believe, the fundamental difference between 
herself and Mavrikos is indeed ‘socialism or communism’ and when she declares herself to be a 
‘proud woman of the Left’, seeking common ground with Mavrikos, she is crossing a line which 

81 
 
separates the ‘Left’ of democratic socialism, and of all other independent workers' movements, 
from the ‘Left’ of their assassins. That line was traced in blood.  
But hold on: if Stalinism was the political expression of the bureaucratic ruling class of the 
USSR, and the USSR exists no more, and neither does its ruling class, how can the WFTU 
express the interests of a non-existing ruling class?  
The answer is that Stalinism is not simply the ideology of the vanished (or recycled) 
ruling class of the USSR, it is also the ideology of those elements in the labour movement and 
beyond who aspire to become that kind of ruling class in their own countries, historically in the 
industrialised capitalist countries, but now mostly in the colonial and semi-colonial countries, in a 
later terminology the ‘Third World’, and a still later terminology, the ‘South’.  
The WFTU is today the principal international organisation through which Stalinism 
survives as an ideology. This is due to several factors, in the first place by its composition. 
Although it lost much of its traditional membership when most of the State-controlled labour 
organizations of the Soviet bloc collapsed and transformed themselves into trade unions which 
affiliated to the ITUC, it still retains substantial membership in the remaining Stalinist Party-
States: Vietnam, North Korea, Cuba. China, which is not a member, nevertheless looms large. 
Although the Chinese Party-State has embraced capitalism, the All-China Federation of Trade 
Unions (ACFTU) remains the instrument through which it seeks to maintain control over the 
working class. The WFTU is actively courting the ACFTU, but the increasing struggles of the 
Chinese workers and their growing self-awareness are challenging its role. Before long, the 
ACFTU may have to change, and it is unlikely that at this stage the Chinese Party-State is 
prepared to invest its credibility in an organization such as the WFTU.  
The WFTU has another source of support in the residual political loyalties of its affiliates 
in the global ‘South’. They are essentially two Indian national centres (All India Trade Union 
Congress [AITUC] and Centre of Indian Trade Unions [CITU]), the Confederación General de 
Trabajadores del Peru (CGTP), the Central Obrera Boliviana (COB) and, partially, COSATU.   
What all these affiliations have in common, apart from a long communist history, is that 
they are geographically and culturally far removed at a safe distance (approximately 7000 miles on 
average) from the Soviet bloc, generally unaware or unconcerned about what has happened to 
workers in seventy years in the USSR and in the forty years of Stalinism in Eastern and Central 
Europe.  
In the case of South Africa, there is the added factor of isolation through forty years of 
censorship by the apartheid regime, which suppressed the entry of any left-wing material (this was 
before the Internet), and the added censorship of the SACP, which was able to enforce near total 
ideological hegemony over the South African Left except in the Western Cape.  
Their physical, intellectual and emotional remoteness from really existing Stalinism 
clouds their judgment. They can easily identify with Porfirio Diaz, who ruled Mexico for thirty-
five years in the late 19th and early 20th century, and who sighed: ‘so far from God and so close to 
the United States’, but they are incapable of imagining what the sighs of the people of, for 
example, Finland, Estonia, Poland or Romania might have been, let alone Georgia or the 
Ukraine, or Russia itself.   
Their overriding concerns are, for the Latin Americans, anti-yanquism, and for the South 
Africans, anti-apartheid. The Indians have probably the most principled commitment to 
Stalinism, without relevance to local or regional issues, or other aspects of reality. 

82 
 
It was not difficult for the WFTU to service anti-yanquism or anti-apartheid. There are 
tons of resolutions, declarations and meetings on these issues. In order to create the legend of 
WFTU leadership, the reality had to be suppressed. 
For example, on anti-yanquism, that the real threat that CIA operations represented to 
the labour movement in Latin America in the 1950s and 1960s was exposed and ultimately 
defeated by Trotskyists and independent radicals, without the WFTU or other Communist 
organisations having any part of it, and on the anti-apartheid struggle, that the heavy lifting was 
done by the social-democratic unions in the Nordic countries and the Dutch Trade Union 
Federation FNV, among others, in contrast to the WFTU which contributed little beyond reams 
of declarations.   
But hold on: all this is about the past – hasn't the WFTU reinvented itself? Is it not now 
a free-standing, democratic, radical, anti-capitalist organization? 
In his address to the COSATU congress of 2012 Mavrikos described the WFTU as an 
organisation ‘open to all, as it has always been’ a WFTU ‘democratic, modern, class-oriented, to 
unite all workers on common goals’.10 
In a leaflet published in 2011, the WFTU describes itself as a ‘class-oriented trade union 
movement’ which ‘struggles against capitalism and imperialism for a society without exploitation 
of man by man’.11 It claims 80 million members in 120 countries, which is impossible to verify 
since it does not publish a list of its affiliates and does not respond to inquiries about its 
membership, nor of course about its financial structure.12  
The leaflet then lists ‘basic principles’ which include ‘democratic functioning, elections 
for all bodies at all levels’, to defend ‘the right of every people and every working class to decide 
themselves about their present and their future’, the international coordination of working class 
solidarity inside transnational corporations, the fight against ‘careerism, elitism, bureaucracy’ and 
corruption. Better yet: as a class-oriented trade union organisation, the WFTU ‘reinforces 
criticism, self-criticism  and comradely emulation among leaders and members’. Not only that: ‘it 
struggles for trade union and democratic freedoms’ and it is against ‘state violence, 
authoritarianism and persecution of trade unionists’.  
These are remarkable statements, inasmuch as most address specific failures of the WFTU 
in the past. Is there a ‘new’ WFTU, which, through self-criticism, has learnt something from the 
failures of its hapless predecessors?   
What is true is that the WFTU, at its 15th Congress held in Havana in 2005, introduced 
significant changes: it elected a new general secretary (George Mavrikos) and in January 2006 
moved its secretariat to Athens, from Prague, where it has been inactive for some fifteen years, 
with much of the activity conducted from Havana. Mavrikos is a leader in PAME, the Stalinist 
faction in the Greek Confederation of Labour (GSEE).  
This fact in itself already indicates the limits of a possible ‘renewal’. PAME is controlled 
by the Communist Party of Greece (KKE), which is, of all European Communist Parties, the 
most unreconstructed Stalinist. Because of its sectarianism, it was punished by the Greek Left 
electorate in the elections of June last year, polling 4.5 percent, far behind Syriza, the dominant 
party of the Left, with 26.9 percent, and even behind the largely discredited social-democratic 
PASOK (12.3 percent) and DIMAR (6.3 percent), a smaller socialist party which is also part of 
the current government coalition. 
Unsurprisingly, the claim to be ‘open to all’ is voided by the practice of the organization. 
The attempt to reinvent the WFTU as a revolutionary democratic organization, with a capacity 

83 
 
to attract radical unions outside of the traditional sphere of Stalinist influence13 has not gone very 
far: its main recruit so far has been the Langile Abertzaleen Batzordeak (LAB), a radical 
nationalist Basque trade union confederation, which polled 17.1 percent of the elected works 
council members in the Basque Country in 2008, as against 40.3 percent for ELA/STV, the 
mainstream nationalist trade union federation, 20.1 percent for Comisiones Obreras (CC.OO.) 
and 13.1 percent for the UGT. Jesús Maria Gete Olarra from LAB was designated general 
secretary of the WFTU metal and mining Trade Union International at its re-founding congress 
in 2008, which was held in San Sebastian.  
Neither is there much evidence of an effort to ‘unite all workers on common goals’ when 
it comes to the ITUC or to its affiliates. Speaking on various occasions in recent years, Mavrikos 
and other WFTU representatives have been consistently and aggressively polemical, attacking 
mostly European and North American ITUC affiliates, but also ‘opportunists’ everywhere else.  
At the COSATU International Policy Conference in May 2012, its General Secretary, 
Zwelinzima Vavi, sounded a cautionary note about international affiliation.14 Quoting Lenin 
from ‘Left Wing Communism: An Infantile Disorder’, where Lenin affirms the necessity for 
revolutionaries to work even in ‘reactionary trade unions’ because one ‘must absolutely work 
wherever the masses are to be found’, Vavi warned: ‘It would be a fatal mistake to leave the ranks 
of the majority of workers and isolate ourselves purely on the basis of shared ideological 
foundations and common history’.  
Vavi then went on to say: ‘We must warn against the dangers of conveyor belt union [sic] 
the line must be drawn in order to avoid a repeat of the Soviet experience, where 
trade unions were mere conveyor belts of their so-called revolutionary parties’. 
And finally: ‘We work with militant unions, not yellow or sweetheart unions. Only 
through militant struggles can the working class liberate itself from all forms of oppression and 
exploitation. We do not believe that press statements or boardroom lobbying must replace 
militant action on the ground, because that substitutes workers from being the principal actors 
in 
the 
main 
theatre 
of 
struggle 
into 
becoming 
passive 
followers 
of 
their 
leaders, regardless of the direction pursued and interests being advanced’.   
Mavrikos answered a few months later, in his address to the 11th COSATU congress, in 
September 2012.15 After inviting COSATU to follow its four affiliates into the WFTU to ‘find its 
way back home’, he went on the attack. First denouncing the capitalist class ‘with its agents in 
social-democracy and in the trade unions’ which has ‘managed to divide the workers, …to 
impose reformist leaderships, to impose an opportunistic line and compromise with the class 
enemy and his governments’, Mavrikos explained at some length how workers in Europe and in 
the United States feel about their unions. Not to put too fine a point on it, ‘The level of 
rottenness of some trade unions in Europe and the USA is such, that the workers see no 
difference between the unions and the companies of legal counselling’. 
Stressing the importance of international coordination of struggles, Mavrikos asked and 
answered a rhetorical question: ‘Can those sell-outs, the European trade union leaders, the 
spineless agents of the bourgeoisie in the trade union movement, the corrupted servants of the 
Ministries take upon their shoulders such a heavy duty? No way’! 
Mavrikos could not conclude his speech without explaining what Lenin really meant: 
‘There are some comrades who are using Lenin to hide their true aims. They distort and use some 
parts of his writing while they hide the rest. There is an argument based on what Lenin wrote in 

84 
 
1920 in the known article to the German communists about leftism. Their argument is that 
communists must fight within reactionary unions’. 
They are of course wrong, Mavrikos says, because the context is different (that is a 
‘dogmatic mistake’); secondly, Lenin also said that the masses had to be guided towards 
revolution and the ‘reactionary unions’ have nothing to do with revolution, and thirdly, and most 
importantly, ‘It was Lenin himself [who] invited all the unions around the world to abandon the 
yellow international organization of the day, the International of Amsterdam and join in masses 
the Red Trade Union International (RILU), who [sic] Lenin himself played a pioneer role in its 
foundation’. 
Basically, Mavrikos is doing two things here: he is questioning the integrity of the 
COSATU General Secretary, by suggesting he is ‘hiding his true aims’; secondly, he is 
positioning the WFTU as an alternative to the ITUC, not in any perspective of cooperation, let 
alone unity, but in a perspective of destruction, following the example of Lenin and the 
Profintern – and we know how that turned out.  
In November 2012 Mavrikos was in Copenhagen, addressing a small group of Danish 
trade unionists. The theme of his speech was ‘The Theories about the “Independence and 
Neutrality” of the Trade Unions’.16 
In this speech Mavrikos mainly reserves his venom for the former WFTU affiliates who 
left to join the ITUC: ‘The degeneration of trade union leaderships, such as the one of CGT 
France or CGIL Italy, who were once class-oriented and rooted in the factories and the working 
places, is a result of such a retreat from the historical lessons of the class struggle’. 
The ‘historical experience’ Mavrikos refers to in this speech is entirely imaginary and bears 
no relationship to what actually happened in history, and the CGT and CGIL are of course still 
‘rooted in the factories and working places’, which is one reason why they left the WFTU.  
Then Mavrikos goes on to denounce the ITUC and its affiliates for supporting the war 
against Gadaffi's regime in Libya: ‘The leadership of ITUC, the trade union leaderships of CGT 
France, of CGIL Italy and others like the British TUC, the German DGB, trade unions from 
Netherlands, from Sweden, supported the imperialist war. Why? Their main goal was for the 
bourgeoisie in their own country to win a bigger share from the plundering of the oil, the natural 
gas and other wealth-producing resources of Libya’. 
The main point of the speech, however, is the question whether a ‘class-oriented’ union 
can be neutral (or equidistant) between the WFTU and the ITUC. According to Mavrikos it 
cannot, because ‘The position and the actions of ITUC and its basic organizations at the national 
level prove that they have nothing to do with the real defense of working class interests, even the 
immediate defensive ones, let alone the long-term ones. So, no class-oriented trade union that 
respects its role and its mission, no true trade unionist who wants to remain part of his class, can 
be captured in such a fraudulent dilemma’. 
Consequently, any form of unity or merger are also impossible: ‘The same mistake is done 
by some comrades who propose the unification of WFTU and ITUC! This is as if someone 
would propose the unification of a revolutionary communist party with a social-democratic one, 
or even with an ultra right-wing one. Like someone would try to unite oil with water’. 
Finally: ‘The workers have to realize that WFTU and ITUC have two different historic 
roots, two different strategies, different objectives, different ideologies and theoretical bases. It is 
impossible to unite these two distinct lines, the one promoting the struggle against Capital and 
Imperialism and the one leading to subordination to the objectives of Capital and Imperialism’. 

85 
 
Here we have to agree entirely with Mavrikos, although for opposite reasons. We also 
believe that it is impossible to ‘unite these two distinct lines’ because the WFTU represents 
ineffectual political theater and never will represent anything else, whereas the ITUC is where the 
bulk of the worldwide organized working class lies, and therefore a potential for true class 
resistance, if it ever wakes up, which is a different story. Meanwhile, by all means let's not mix oil 
with water.  
Of course some ‘bureaucrats’ may lose their heads and forge ahead towards unity. Let 
them be warned: any move towards unity would immediately provoke another split: ‘However, if 
we do assume that at some point some bureaucratic leaderships would move forward with such a 
process of artificial welding, it is for sure that the next moment the process for a new 
international class-oriented organization would begin, because its existence is an objective 
necessity’. 
We have here a new version of Third Period Stalinism, led by people detached from 
reality: you show them a blind alley, and they will rush into it.  
The WFTU has been able to gain some traction, especially in South Africa, in 
representing itself as an International of the ‘South’ as opposed to the ITUC dominated by 
unions of the ‘North’. In reality, globalization and deregulation has blurred that distinction: large 
parts of social relations and work processes which are typical for the ‘South’ are now found in the 
‘North’, and enclaves of the ‘North’ are found in the geographical ‘South’. Moreover, a great 
majority of unions of the ‘South’ are now in the ITUC. What holds the WFTU together, is no 
more than a common communist history and a commitment to Stalinism in its most primitive 
form.  
In reality, the ITUC itself has greatly helped the WFTU to raise its profile by leaving an 
enormous empty political space on its Left. The merger between the ICFTU and the WCL was 
acquired by erasing the last vestiges of social-democratic politics that had survived in the ICFTU. 
Not much has remained of what were at one time progressive elements of WCL ideology either, 
leaving a culture of bureaucratic centralism and top-down politics which meshed seamlessly with 
similar tendencies in the ICFTU. The result is that the ITUC today is adrift in a bureaucratic 
bubble, with no recognizable politics at all.  
The de-politization of the leading international trade union organization has deprived the 
workers of the world of a universal and common narrative about society: what it is, and how to 
change it – the democratic socialist narrative which still existed in the pre-World War II 
movement, and which today survives only in some Global Union Federations, and of course in 
many unions at national level. 
Because the international trade union movement is now truly world-wide and spans a far 
greater range of societies and cultures than at any previous time in its history, the loss of a 
universal and common narrative is a critical problem: it weakens international class consciousness 
and abandons political consciousness to widely different perceptions of society, shaped by local or 
regional realities. The present labour movement resembles far too much the blind men in the 
parable trying to find out what an elephant is like and coming up with incompatible answers. 
At the level of international confederations, we are now left with a sheep in sheep's 
clothing, and with a small hyena in wolf's clothing, too large for its size. It is not sure at this point 
that this form of international trade union organization is necessarily the most useful and 
effective.17 Workers all over the world, most of whom have never heard of the ITUC or the 
WFTU, and who couldn’t care less, are organizing and fighting, in many instances creating their 

86 
 
own networks and international coordination. Workers will organize and fight because that is 
what workers do, and they make the road by walking the road to a new labour movement.  
 
 
 
 
NOTES 
 
1. Waterman, P. (2012) ‘The Second Coming of the World Federation of Trade Unions: 
Slouching Towards Bethlehem’?  Available at: http://www.unionbook.org/profiles/blogs/peter-
waterman-the-second-coming-of-the-wftu-updated. (Accessed 16 January 2013). 
 
2.  Mabuza, K. ‘Affiliates Put COSATU Under Pressure’, Sowetan, 10 February 2012. Available 
at: 
 
http://www.sowetanlive.co.za/news/2012/02/10/affiliates-put-cosatu-under-pressure. 
(Accessed 16 January 2013). 
 
3.  Speech Delivered by COSATU President Comrade Sdumo Dlamini to the Sixth Presidential 
Council of the World Federation of Trade Unions (WFTU), NUMSA Media Releases, 9 
February 2012. 
 
4.  Address by Sharan Burrow, General Secretary of the International Trade Union 
Confederation, to the COSATU 11th National Congress, 18 September 2012. Available at: 
http://www.cosatu.org.za/show.php?ID=6526. (Accessed 16 January 2013). 
 
5.  Address by George Mavrikos, ‘It's Time For COSATU To Come Back Home’, COSATU 
11th 
National 
Congress, 
19 
September 
2012. 
Available 
at:  
http://www.cosatu.org.za/docs/sp/2012/sp0918.pdf. (Accessed 16 January 2013). 
 
6.  Masuku, B. (2012) ‘ITUC and ILO: Spaces For Real Change or Illusions of a Dream 
Permanently Deferred’, in: COSATU, The Shopsteward (August/September 2010). Available at: 
http://www.cosatu.org.za/docs/shopsteward/2010/sept.pdf. (Accessed 16 January 2013). 
 
7. Kautsky, K. (1929) ‘Nochmals die Gemeinsamkeit des sozialdemokratischen und des 
kommunistischen Endziels, Tribüne (Prag)‘, Vol. I, Nr. 11, März 1929. Quoted in: Salvadori, M. 
(1990) Karl Kautsky and the Socialist Revolution 1880-1938. Verso.  
 
8.  Tosstorff, R. (2004) Profintern – Die Rote Gewerkschaftsinternationale 1920-1937. Ferdinand 
Schöningh, Paderborn. 
 
9.  Wagner, J. (1938) ‘The Lost International’, in One Big Union Monthly, Nr. 5, May 1938. 
Quoted in Tosstorff, R. (2004) Profintern – Die Rote Gewerkschaftsinternationale, p. 704, note 33. 
Paderborn: Ferdinand Schöningh. 
 
10.  Address by George Mavrikos, 11th COSATU Congress: Speech of WFTU GS, WFTU 
web 
site: 
South 
Africa, 
18 
September 
2012. 
Available 
at:  
http://www.wftucentral.org/?p=5608&language=en. (Accessed 16 January 2013). 

87 
 
 
11.  Available at: http://www.wftucentral.org/wp-content/2011_12_what-is-the-wftu.pdf. 
(Accessed 16 January 2013). 
 
12.  See New Unionism: http://newunionism.wordpress.com/201103/22/wftu. (Accessed 16 
January 2013).   
 
13.  As hoped by a tendency represented, among others, by Jean-Pierre Page, former member 
of the French CGT international department, now in opposition to the CGT leadership. See 
interview by Charles Hoareau in Rouge Midi, 4 March 2006. Available at:  
http://www.rougemidi.org/spip.php?article421. (Accessed 16 January 2013). 
 
14.  COSATU General Secretary, Zwelinzima Vavi's Keynote Address to the COSATU 
International Policy Conference. Available at: http://www.cosatu.org.za/show.php?ID=6134. 
(Accessed 16 January 2013). 
  
15.  As in note 10. 
 
16.  Speech of George Mavrikos, General Secretary of the WFTU, in Copenhagen, Denmark, 
15 November 2012. Available at: http://www.wftucentral.org/?p=5707&language=en. 
(Accessed 16 January 2013). 
 
17.  ‘The ITUC and WFTU are reminiscent of the two political-economic dinosaurs in the old 
Cold War, about whom the anti-nuclear demonstrators of the 1960s said, “Too much armour, 
too little brain. Now they are extinct”. Whilst these two major union bodies are clearly far 
from extinct, we can expect little more from them than that they will continue to slouch 
toward a Bethlehem that remains largely irrelevant to and distant from the majority of union 
members and other working people worldwide’  (Peter Waterman, ‘The Second Coming of the 
World Federation of Trade Unions: Slouching Towards Bethlehem’, see note 1). 
 
  
 
 
Dan Gallin is Chair of the Global Labour Institute (www.global-labour.org). [e-mail: 
gli@iprolink.ch]