GLOCALISING CARE IN THE NORDIC COUNTRIES
An Introduction to the Special Issue
Special Issue Editorial • DOI: 10.2478/v10202-012-0015-7  NJMR • 3(2) • 2013 • 57-62
1Helsinki Collegium for Advanced Studies, University of Helsinki, Finland, 
2Department of Social Research, Unit of Sociology, University of Helsinki, Finland
Sirpa Wrede1*,Lena Näre2
* E-mail: sirpa.wrede@helsinki.fi
This Special Issue examines the position of migrant-background 
care workers in Nordic care work regimes. The issue takes part in 
a research dialogue that is emerging between researchers coming 
from two main fields: migration studies and research on migrants in 
the labour markets, and the scholarship on care work in the context 
of changing welfare-state arrangements in the Nordic countries. 
The special contribution of this Special Issue is to introduce the 
concept of glocalisation which provides an analytical link to the 
two, previously mentioned largely separate strands of literature on 
migrant-background care workers. Deriving from macro-sociological 
debates where it was introduced to emphasise the cultural dynamics 
of globalisation (Robertson 1995, Roudometof 2005), the concept 
here calls attention to the role of globalisation in the changing 
Nordic care regimes, but not as a deterministic force that transforms 
the different local regimes according to one model that reflects 
globalisation. Instead, this cultural interpretation of globalisation calls 
for the need to pay attention both to the role of non-local globalising 
discourses and to the emerging local arrangements in which the 
non-local discourses are interpreted for the specific contexts of 
the local regime. Our aim is not to emphasise the unavoidability of 
convergence or to celebrate divergence. Instead the glocalisation 
argument calls attention to the fact that the characteristics of the 
social embeddedness of care work regimes are not fixed. In this vein, 
we argue that the impact of globalisation on care work regimes may 
be best understood if we consider glocalisation as a dynamic mix 
of convergence and divergence (Saltman 1997). Accordingly, care 
work organisation needs to be examined in specific localities, taking 
into consideration both the travel of ideas and the activities of the 
people with whom they travel, the reshaping of practices and the 
experiences of people affected.
In the following, we approach the issue of migrant-background 
care workers in the context of glocalising care work regimes from 
the perspective of the two research fields mentioned above. The 
two research fields provide two different perspectives about how the 
position of migrant care workers has evolved: one focusing on the 
care work regime and the other focusing on international migration 
and movement of people. The attention lies on how unique historic 
constellations play into the particularities of glocalisation. In the context 
of on-going societal transformations involving neoliberal reforms and 
long-term demographic developments, Nordic care regimes suffer a 
particularly severe deficit of care labour at the same time as the Nordic 
region constitutes an increasingly attractive region in the context of 
global mobilities. In the final part of this introduction we present the 
articles in this issue that describe what happens when new people 
enter a care work regime that is itself undergoing transformation.
1    The neoliberalisation of egalitarian welfare-	
      state contexts
Nordic care work regimes evolved without a preconceived plan in 
the context of what later became known as Nordic welfare states. 
Nordic welfare states grew out of a wide range of social activism 
oriented towards increasing egalitarianism in society. Early 
professionalisation of care work and nursing occurred in this context 
and was influenced by this welfare-state egalitarianism.  Accordingly, 
while the professional projects of welfare service professions 
remained nationally framed and monocultural in their logic, they were 
emancipatory both from a class and from a gender perspective as 
the expanding welfare state policies assigned the emerging women’s 
professions important roles in the provision of key health and social 
services that aimed at greater social equality in society (Dahl & 
Rasmussen 2012, Evertsson 2002, Henriksson 1998). 
The organisation of professional work in the welfare state 
exhibits persisting but de-escalating social inequalities. Parallel 
to the manifest professional projects of middle-class occupations, 
more menial labour opportunities also increased in the context of the 
expanding welfare services. At first this became visible in the context 
57

of health care where the rise of increasingly professionalised nursing 
created a need to complement the health division of labour with 
nursing aides and other types of unlicensed assistive personnel. The 
later rise and expansion of social care services, including day care 
for children, elder care and care for the handicapped, further created 
a steady labour market for care workers. This development of social 
care as knowledge-based work in the context of a welfare state is 
related to, if not entirely explained by, the comparatively early entry 
of women to the labour market occurring in the Nordic context. United 
by social democratic ideologies that emphasised individual social 
rights, all of the Nordic countries launched an array of social policies 
that favoured the formalisation of care and gave rise to complex care 
work regimes that needed and still need a steady and sizable labour 
supply (Kamp & Hvid 2012; Szebehely 2003, Wrede et al. 2008).
From the late 1970s onwards, at slightly different times, political 
debates in the Nordic countries started to critique welfare state 
policies that contributed to the on-going expansion of the public 
sector in general and to the strong position of professional power 
in the organisation of welfare services in particular. The primarily 
market-oriented discourses that problematised the predominant 
state-centred system of welfare-service organisation emerged 
against a backdrop of a global turn to neoliberal politics and 
associated welfare-state reforms (Henriksson & Wrede 2008, Vabø 
2005). Such reform agendas depicted the Nordic welfare states as 
wasteful in their inflexibility and inefficiency resulting from the way 
the welfare services had emerged as a constellation of professional 
turfs that were rigidly defended by professional groups that guarded 
their own interests rather than those of their clients (Henriksson et al. 
2006). These critiques seldom targeted lower-skill care services but 
came to include them by default (Wrede et al. 2008). This Special 
Issue focuses on the type of care work regimes that largely build on 
what is considered lower-skill work. There are distinct features that 
distinguish them from those involving a large proportion of higher-
skill professional groups and in particular doctors. Importantly, as a 
large proportion of them belong to so-called lower-skill occupations 
(Esping-Andersen 1996), care workers when they are publicly 
employed typically work as regular employees with limited or little 
professional control over their work, making them more accessible to 
managerial steering than stronger professional groups (Henriksson 
et al. 2006). 
The neoliberal reforms are not the only forces shaping the 
situation of the care-work workforce in the context of the Nordic 
welfare states. Care work regimes are subject to diverse policies 
involving social welfare programmes, gender equality agendas and 
working life settlements. Historically, approaches to gender equality 
in the labour market, economic constellations and the pace of 
demographic changes in the countries have varied over time and 
between the Nordic countries. For instance, Sweden, Norway and 
Denmark all launched social policies to support women’s part-time 
work, which influenced the dynamic of the care work labour market 
by creating a demand for a larger and more flexible workforce than 
was the case in Finland where full-time care work was the primary 
model (Henriksson & Wrede 2008). On the one hand, women’s 
part-time work supported the demand for care services. On the 
other hand, part-time housewives were a labour pool for the same 
services. However, in the context of expanding services, this labour 
pool soon grew inadequate, and, with the changing patterns of 
women’s employment the care regimes of the three countries grew 
increasingly reliant on migrant-background labour, be it recruited 
directly or from the migrant-background population already in the 
country. Sweden was the first country where the turn to migrant 
recruitment occurred, soon after World War II. In the 1970s and 
the 1980s migrant women were already a sizable group in the care 
work labour market (Knocke 1986). Denmark and Norway followed 
this road from the 1980s onwards. Finland differed from the other 
three countries, being a sending country in a context where most of 
the nurse migration in particular occurred within the Nordic region 
(Bourgeault & Wrede 2008). The Finnish care work regimes only 
started to experience labour shortages in the past ten to fifteen years, 
and the turn to migrant recruitment is thus recent.
Apart from a few studies, the increasing number of migrant-
background care workers received little attention from researchers 
until recently. Concerns related to ethnic relations in care services 
focused on the capacity of care workers to cater for the needs of 
migrant-background care receivers. The focus was on how cultural 
differences (of the care receiver) were taken into account by a care 
system based on the dominant culture. Research on the changes 
in the care work regime focused instead on the impact of neoliberal 
reforms that have sought to make care services more efficient, flexible 
and productive. In addition to the efforts of creating new markets 
around care services the Nordic welfare states have introduced a 
market-oriented New Public Management (NPM) agenda to care 
work organisation that emphasises economic efficiency through 
outsourcing and privatisation as well as through reforms focusing 
on the performance of the public sector in terms of economic 
efficiency and quality (Vabø 2005). Nordic care work scholars have 
been united in their concern for the impact of the reforms on the 
egalitarian care work culture and the quality of care as a social right 
(Dahl & Eriksen 2005, Henriksson & Wrede 2012, Kamp & Hvid 2012, 
Szebehely 2003, Wrede et al. 2008), even though estimations of the 
seriousness of the perceived deterioration of the position of care 
work in the context of welfare services vary. Research comparing 
for instance elder care in the Nordic countries does demonstrate that 
there are important differences between countries when it comes to 
both economic investments and institutional arrangements (Rauch 
2007, Wrede et al. 2008). As the care work regimes in all the Nordic 
countries are being increasingly characterised by the drives for 
efficiency, productivity and flexibility, workforce policies are geared 
towards finding a flexible workforce (Isaksen 2010, Wrede 2010). 
The articles in this Special Issue shed light on the resulting situation 
where care work regimes increasingly rely on migrant care workers, 
both those recruited directly and, in much greater numbers, those 
recruited from migrant-background populations residing in the region. 
Rather than attempting a full-fledged analysis of the neoliberalisation 
processes that have been only superficially outlined above, the focus 
is on shedding light on glocalisation processes, that is, on how global 
discourses become enacted in local contexts.
2    Care as a global commodity
The other strand of research, which this Special Issue draws on, 
is the burgeoning literature on globalisation of care, which is often 
understood as a by-product of the feminisation of migration, i.e. that 
more and more women are migrating. However, women have been 
migrating for labour, family and marriage practically in equal numbers 
to men for the past fifty years. In 1960, female migrants accounted 
for nearly 47 per cent of the migrants (Zlotnik 2005). What has 
changed since the 1980s is that there has been an increased interest 
in the study of migration from a gender perspective. An important 
body of research within this framework has focused on the study 
of female migrants working as domestic workers and caregivers in 
58

private household (Andall 2000; Anderson 2000; Constable 1997; 
Hondagneu-Sotelo 2001; Lutz 2008; Lutz 2011; Näre 2012; Parreñas 
2001). 
Empirically, the bulk of existing research has focused on the 
hierarchical relationships between women as workers and as 
employers – although research has importantly revealed that migrant 
men are also involved in domestic and care work (Kilkey 2010; Näre 
2010; Sarti & Scrinzi 2010) – but this research has also conceptualised 
how care has become a commodity sold globally. According to this 
strand of research, a globalising capitalist economy encompasses 
not only production but also reproduction (Sassen 1998; 2003), 
but due to the nature of care labour which cannot be relocated to 
parts of the world with lower labour costs, the availability of cheap 
labour needs to be ‘brought’ to the particular place where care is 
given (Yeates 2004). The process how care becomes globalised 
has been conceptualised in many ways, as ‘global commodification 
of reproductive labour’ (Anderson 2000); ‘globalising mothering’ 
(Parreñas 2001); ‘transnational motherhood’ (Hondagneu-Sotelo 
and Avila 1997; Lutz 2002), ‘new international division of reproductive 
labour’ (Yeates 2009) and ‘global care chains’ (Hochschild 2000). 
Many of these notions reveal that originally the literature focused 
mainly on child care. The concept that has found the most resonance 
within the research community is ‘global care chain’ coined by Arlie 
Hochshild (2000). Hochschild’s concept is valuable in being easily 
adapted to different forms of care, although in her original definition 
the emphasis is on child care provided by a migrating nanny from 
a ‘sending’ country such as the Philippines in a ‘receiving’ country 
such as the US, who then needs to organise her own childcare 
responsibilities in the country of origin through a combination of paid 
and unpaid care work. The notion of the global care chain then neatly 
grasps the interconnectedness of care work in a globalised world. 
As discussed above, neoliberal restructurings including NPM 
reforms have shaped the care work regimes in the Nordic countries and 
in the global north. Neoliberalism has also changed the preconditions 
of care giving and education in the sending countries, resulting in 
what Sassen (2003) terms ‘survival circuits’ from the global south. As 
Misra et al. (2006: 318) have argued (although keeping in mind that 
migrant care workers are also men as stated above):
 
As states have withdrawn from social care provision, women’s 
care work requirements have intensified. Poorer women migrate 
to provide support for their families, while wealthier families solve 
their care needs through hiring immigrant care workers. Rather 
than states taking responsibility for aiding families, neoliberal 
strategies have led to an international division of care work that 
places the burden for care on the least powerful (immigrant 
women workers).
3    Glocal care chains in the Nordic countries
Since the introduction of the concept of care chains, the notion has 
been revisited and expanded to apply to skilled forms of care work 
and professional workers, especially in nursing (see e.g. Yeates 
2009). Yeates’ (2009) work has been important in making connections 
between the literature on informal forms of care and domestic work 
in private households and research on nurse and health care worker 
mobility (Bach 2003; Connell 2008; Kingma 2006). Moreover, when 
the notion of ‘global care chains’ is applied to the European context, 
the distinction between sending and receiving countries does not 
always apply. For instance, Finland is simultaneously a sending 
country for nurses as well as an active recruiter of migrant nurses. 
Ukrainian domestic workers find work in Poland, which is a source 
country for domestic workers in Italy and in Germany (Kindler 2011; 
Näre 2011). 
Hence, as Williams (2012: 364) points out, global care chains 
in Europe are also regional as well as global, in the sense that 
many migrant workers from the enlarged European Union work in 
other EU countries. This is especially the case for migrants from the 
Eastern European countries, but nowadays these regional migratory 
movements increasingly comprise migrants from the Southern 
European countries that have been hit hard by the economic crisis. 
For instance, in November 2012, a group of Spanish nurses were 
recruited to work in Finland and this recruitment is estimated to 
continue in 2013.
There has been an increasing interest to investigate the emerging 
phenomenon of migrant workers being a response to the labour 
demands of ageing European societies. Research has started to 
focus on the recruitment of migrants to provide elder care, in formal, 
institutional settings and increasingly private care markets, which is 
typically the case for liberal countries such as the UK and Ireland and 
in the informal context of the household typical in Southern Europe 
and in continental countries such as Germany (see e.g. Cangiano et 
al. 2009; Doyle & Timonen 2009; Lutz & Palenga-Möllenbeck 2010; 
Näre 2013a; Shutes & Chiatti 2012; Walsh & O’Shea 2009).
Migration policies and the migration regimes intersect with 
gender and welfare regimes in the wider context of economic 
neoliberalism to create the conditions for the glocalisation of care 
work. What we mean by glocalising care is the interface between 
simultaneously wide-spreading phenomenon connected to globalising 
socioeconomic processes, and a diverging phenomenon which takes 
on particular forms and develops according to the local political and 
economic development, welfare and migration regimes and cultural 
norms governing good care and domesticity. As recent research has 
shown (see e.g. Brennan et al. 2012; Isaksen 2010) and the articles 
in this issue demonstrate glocalisation of care touches not only the 
countries with familistic or liberal welfare states, but also the Nordic 
countries with an egalitarian welfare state tradition. 
This Special Issue includes four articles. The first article by 
Anna Gavanas (2013) examines the current neoliberal processes 
in Sweden and Stockholm: the privatisation, marketisation and 
individualisation of elder care. Gavanas explores the different care 
puzzles that older age people need to negotiate in the care markets 
and how the service and care providers compete for clients in these 
markets. Gavanas argues that many older customers prefer migrant 
workers as they are perceived to be more flexible, inexpensive 
and have certain ‘ethnic characteristics’ marketed by some private 
companies that seek to create ‘ethnic profiles’ to respond to the 
customers’ preferences. 
The existing international literature on the employment of 
migrant workers and globalising care in Nordic countries has usually 
overlooked the case of Finland (see however Laurén & Wrede 2008; 
Nieminen & Henriksson 2008). By publishing two articles on the 
Finnish case, this Special Issue offers an important corrective in 
this regard. Lena Näre’s (2013b) article demonstrates the neoliberal 
processes and global commodification of care by conceptualisation 
of the emerging migrant division of care labour in Finland. Näre 
demonstrates with statistical data that foreign-born workers are over-
represented especially in elder care work and in the city of Helsinki in 
particular. The article also analyses employers’ politics of recognition, 
that is, how Finnish private and public sector employers recognise 
migrants as potential workers. It argues that employers recognise 
59

foreign-born workers as different from the norm of Finnishness 
and characterise migrants as simultaneously ideal workers and as 
suspects. 
The third article in this issue focuses on Norway. Rannveig Dahle 
and Marie Louise Seeberg (2013) analyse how the implementation 
of neoliberal New Public Management doctrines has created 
ethnic hierarchies in the Norwegian health care sector, in hospitals 
and nursing homes. Similar to Näre’s findings, also in Norway, 
Norwegianness understood as an ethnic category as well as a 
language competence, is the norm in health care organisations. 
Hence, non-ethnic Norwegian workers hit the ‘concrete ceiling 
of race’, even though they have good language skills. In addition, 
Dahle and Seeberg argue that in the structural pyramid of the health 
care sector in which nursing homes are at the bottom and somatic 
hospitals at the top, it is the bottom of the sector which due to 
increasing labour shortage is becoming more ethnically diverse than 
the top due to increasing labour shortage. 
The fourth article by Antero Olakivi (2013) focuses on workers 
with migration background in Helsinki. By adopting a discourse-
analytical approach, Olakivi examines how migrant workers in 
a public elder care institution make sense of their work-related 
identities and structural conditions, such as discrimination. The 
article argues that the identity-position of the ‘migrant care worker’ 
is understood as automatically problematic, but that the interviewees 
negotiated alternative, more particular identities related to their 
migration histories. The articulation of particularised identities 
however, unintentionally, leads to an understanding of discrimination 
as a private rather than an institutional matter. 
As a whole, this Special Issue offers an outlook on the on-going 
restructurings and glocalising processes in care and health care 
sectors in the Nordic countries both in the informal setting of the 
household and in the formal, institutional settings of the private and 
the public sector. It is no coincidence that all the articles address the 
elder care sector in particular, although Dahle and Seeberg discuss 
the health care sector, and Näre also provides statistical information 
on the health care sector. Glocal care chains concern especially 
elder care work due to its lower status in the ‘structural pyramid’ of 
health care (Dahle & Seeberg 2013) and generally lower pays and 
poor working conditions, which has made this sector less attractive 
to ‘native’ workers. Although, this issue is not comprehensive as we 
were unable, despite our efforts, to include an article on Denmark (for 
a recent comparative article on Denmark and Sweden see Rostgaard 
and Szebehely 2012), we hope it will serve the purpose of providing 
an overview on the contemporary processes of glocalising care in 
contemporary Nordic countries. 
The articles demonstrate well the glocalising dynamics of 
neoliberal restructurings of public welfare services in the Nordic 
countries.  The implemented New Public Management doctrines 
aim at economic efficiency instead of public good and equality. The 
introduction of a market-logic to care provision has been ensued by 
complex mixes of public and private providers as well as increasing 
efficiency and flexibility demands. The transformed dynamics create 
a demand for flexible workers who are driven by economic necessity 
rather than professional ethos and career-building. In particular, elder 
care is a sector with increasing demand for flexible and necessity-
driven workers due to its lower professional status, lower wages and 
poor working conditions. 
At the same time, the neoliberal structural adjustment projects 
have increased economic and social insecurity by eroding the 
public sector in the global south resulting in increasing health and 
educational costs and decreasing wage levels in middle-class jobs, 
which has fuelled labour migration. The demand for a flexible and 
inexpensive work force in the care sector in the global north and the 
demand for economic and welfare security in the global south are the 
driving forces behind the current forms of global commodification of 
care. The articles in this issue argue that neoliberal restructurings of 
the welfare services and the glocalisation of care with the increasing 
reliance on migrant workers in Nordic countries have resulted in 
migrant divisions of care labour in which workers with immigration 
histories are over-represented in the lower echelons of health care 
professions, especially in elder care. Hierarchies based on ethnicity 
and migrancy are emerging in all three countries in health and social 
care sectors also because health and social care organisations 
are still founded on a monocultural professional logic which does 
not correspond to the demands of increasingly diverse personnel. 
Moreover, in the private care markets, commodification of care can 
result in ‘ethnicity’ becoming a new kind of marketing tool.
However, the articles in this issue also demonstrate that there 
are local responses and adaptations to these global processes, 
which need to be accounted for. The ‘local’ in this issue refers to the 
local of the nation-state, differing migration regimes and histories, 
welfare and tax policies in the three Nordic countries, but also to 
the local-level of particular cities (Stockholm, Helsinki and Oslo) and 
the local of particular institutional settings, the somatic hospital or 
the elder care home. The notion of glocalisation also carries with 
it the possibility of alternative adaptations and resistance to global 
processes. These resistances can happen in the individual level, as 
Olakivi’s article well points out; but especially in the Nordic countries 
where the public sector still has the main responsibility for the 
organisation of welfare and care services, these resistances could 
take place at the local level of the cities and municipalities. We hope 
that this issue will provide food for thought for the rethinking of more 
equitable and just local responses to the global commodification of 
care.
 
Dr. Sirpa Wrede is a Senior Lecturer and a Docent of Sociology at 
the University of Helsinki and a Helsinki Collegium Fellow at Helsinki 
Collegium for Advanced Studies. In addition to research on the impact 
of globalisation on professions and professional work as well as on 
ethnic relations in working life, her research areas include the welfare 
state and welfare-state restructuring. Furthermore, she has written on 
the use of qualitative methods in international comparative research. 
She is also the principal investigator and leader of the Academy 
of Finland project “The Shaping of Occupational Subjectivities of 
Migrant Care Workers: A Multi-Sited Analysis of Glocalising Elderly 
Care” (2011-2015).
Dr. Lena Näre is a Senior Research Fellow and Docent of Sociology at 
the University of Helsinki, Department of Social Research. She joined 
the Discipline of Sociology in 2011 after having been a postdoctoral 
research fellow at the Centre for Research on Ethnic Relations and 
Nationalism, Swedish School of Social Science, University of Helsinki 
and a Visiting Research Fellow at the Sussex Centre for Migration 
Research, University of Sussex. She holds a D.Phil in Migration 
Studies from the University of Sussex and a Ph.D. in Sociology from 
the University of Helsinki. Her research interests include global and 
intersectional inequalities in care work, moral economy, transnational 
practices, home and belonging, ageing, sociological theories of 
migration and ethnographic methods. She is currently working on a 
research project on migrant workers in elderly care in Finland. Her 
recent work has been published in Ethnic and Racial Studies, Journal 
of Ethnic and Migration Studies and Sociology.
60

References
Andall, J 2000, Gender, migration and domestic service. The politics 
of black women in Italy, Ashgate, Aldershot.
Anderson, B 2000, Doing the dirty work? The global politics of 
domestic labour, Zed Books, London.
Bach, S 2003, International migration of health workers: labour and 
social issues, Sectoral Activities Programme Working Paper 
209, International Labour Office, Geneva.
Bourgeault, I & Wrede, S 2008, ‘Caring beyond borders: comparing 
the relationship between work and migration patterns in Canada 
and Finland.’ Special Issue of The Canadian Journal of Public 
Health on “Finding Dignity in Health Care and Health Care 
Work” edited by C. Benoit & H. Hallgrimsdottir. 99 (Supplement 
2), pp. 22-26.
Brennan, D, Cass, B, Himmelweit, S & Szebehely, M 2012, ‘The 
marketization of care: rationales and consequences in Nordic 
and liberal care regimes’, Journal of European Social Policy, vol. 
22, no. 4, pp. 377–391, DOI:10.1177/0958928712449772.
Cangiano, A, Shutes, I, Spencer, S & Leeson, G 2009, Migrant care 
workers in ageing societies: research findings in the United 
Kingdom. University of Oxford, COMPAS.
Connell, J (ed) 2008, The international migration of health care 
workers, Routledge, New York.
Constable, N 1997, Maid to order in Hong Kong. Stories of Filipina 
workers, Cornell University Press, Ithaca.
Dahl, HM & Eriksen, TR 2005, Dilemmas of care in the Nordic welfare 
state: continuity and change, Ashgate, Aldershot.
Dahl, HM & Rasmussen, B 2012, ‘Paradoxes of elderly care: the 
Nordic model’, in Elderly care in transition - management, 
meaning and identity at work. A Scandinavian perspective, 
eds. A Kamp & H Hviid, Copenhagen Business School Press, 
Copenhagen.
Dahle, R & Seeberg, ML 2013, ‘“Does she speak Norwegian?” Ethnic 
dimensions of hierarchy in Norwegian healthcare workplaces’, 
Nordic Journal of Migration Research, vol. 3, no. 2, DOI:10.2478/
v10202-012-0018-4.
Doyle, M & Timonen, V 2009, ‘The different faces of care work: 
understanding the experiences of the multi-cultural care 
workforce’, Ageing and Society, vol. 29, no. 3. pp. 337–350, 
DOI:10.1017/S0144686X08007708.
Gavanas, A 2013, ‘Elderly care puzzles in Stockholm: strategies 
on formal and informal markets’, Nordic Journal of Migration 
Research, vol. 3, no. 2, DOI:10.2478/v10202-012-0016-6.
Esping-Andersen, G 1996, Social foundations of postindustrial 
economies, Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Evertsson, L 2002, Välfärdspolitik och kvinnoryken. Organisation, 
välfärdsstat och professionaliseringens villkor, Umeå universitet, 
Umeå.
Henriksson, L 1998, Naisten terveystyö ja ammatillistumisen 
politiikka, Stakes, Helsinki.
Henriksson, L, Wrede, S & Burau, V 2006, ‘Understanding professional 
projects in welfare service work: revival of old professionalism?’, 
Gender, Work and Organisation, vol. 14, no. 2, pp.174–192.
Henriksson, L & Wrede, S 2008, ‘Care work in the context of a 
transforming welfare state’, in Care work in crisis. Reclaiming 
the Nordic ethos of care, eds. S Wrede, L Henriksson, H Host, 
S Johansson & B Dybbroe, Studentlitteratur, Malmö, pp. 121–
130.
Henriksson, L & Wrede, S 2012, ‘The making of medico-managerial 
care work culture in public home care for the elderly’, in 
Perspectives on care at home for older people, eds. C Ceci, K 
Björnsdóttir & ME Purkis, Routledge, New York, pp. 171–185.
Hochschild, A 2000, ‘Global care chains and Emotional Surplus 
Value’, in On the edge: living with global capitalism, 
eds. W. Hutton & A. Giddens, Jonathan Cape, London, 
	
pp. 130–146.
Hondagneu-Sotelo, P 2001, Domestica: immigrant workers cleaning 
and caring in the shadows of affluence, University of California 
Press, Berkeley.
Hondagneu-Sotelo, P & Avila, E 1997, ‘“I’m here, but I’m 
there” The meanings of Latina transnational motherhood’, 
Gender 
& 
Society, 
vol. 
11, 
no. 
5, 
pp. 
548–571, 
DOI:10.1177/089124397011005003.
Isaksen, LW (ed) 2010, Global care work. Gender and migration in 
Nordic societies, Nordic Academic Press, Lund.
Kamp, A & Hvid, H (eds) 2012, Elderly care in transition – management, 
meaning and identity at work. A Scandinavian perspective. 
Copenhagen Business School Press, Copenhagen.
Kindler, M 2011, A Risky Business?: Ukrainian Migrant Women in 
Warsaw’s Domestic Work Sector. IMISCOE Dissertation Series. 
Amsterdam University Press, Amsterdam. 
Kingma, M 2006, Nurses on the move: migration and the global 
health care economy, ILR press, London.
Knocke, W, 1986, Invandrade kvinnor i lönearhete och fack, 
Arbetslivscentrum, Stockholm.
Laurén, J & Wrede, S 2008, ‘Immigrants in care work: ethnic 
hierarchies and work distribution’, Finnish Journal of Ethnicity 
and Migration, vol.3, no. 3, pp. 20–31.
Lutz, H 2002, ‘At your service madam! The globalization of 
domestic service’, Feminist Review, vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 89–104, 
DOI:10.1057/palgrave/fr/9400004.
Lutz, H (ed) 2008, Migration and domestic work. A European 
perspective on a global theme, Ashgate, Aldershot.
Lutz, H 2011, The new maids. Transnational women and the care 
economy, Zed Books, London.
Lutz, H & Palenga-Möllenbeck, E 2010, ‘Care work migration in 
Germany: semi compliance and complicity’, Social Policy 
and Society, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 419–430, DOI:10.1017/
S1474746410000138.
Misra, J, Woodring, J & Merz, S 2006, ‘The globalization 
of 
care 
work: 
neoliberal 
economic 
restructuring 
and 
migration policy’, Globalizations, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 317–332, 
DOI:10.1080/14747730600870035.
Kilkey, M 2010, ‘Men and domestic work: a missing link in the global 
care chain’, Men and Masculinities, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 126–149, 
DOI:10.1177/1097184X10382884.
Nieminen, S & Henriksson, L 2008, ‘Immigrant nurses in Finland: 
political negotiations on occupational membership’, in Care work 
in crisis. reclaiming the Nordic ethos of care, eds. S Wrede, L 
Henriksson, H Host, S Johansson & B Dybbroe, Studentlitteratur, 
Lund, pp.199–218.
Näre, L 2010, ‘Sri Lankan men working as cleaners and carers: 
negotiating masculinity in Naples’, Men and Masculinities, vol. 
13, no. 1, pp. 65–86, DOI:10.1177/1097184X10382881.
Näre, L 2011 ‘The informal economy of paid domestic work: Ukrainian 
and Polish migrants in Naples’, in Foggy social structures. 
Irregular migration, European labour markets and the welfare 
state, eds. M Bommes & G Sciortino, Amsterdam University 
Press, Amsterdam, pp. 65–87.
61

Näre, L 2012 Moral economies of reproductive labour. An ethnography 
of migrant domestic and care labour in Naples, Italy. SSKH 
Skrifter 33, University of Helsinki Press, Helsinki.
Näre, L 2013a, ‘Migrancy, gender and social class in domestic and 
social care labour in Italy - an intersectional analysis of demand’, 
Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies, vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 601–
623, DOI:10.1080/1369183X.2013.745238.
Näre, L 2013b, ‘‘Ideal workers and suspects: employers’ politics of 
recognition and the migrant division of care labour in Finland’, 
Nordic Journal of Migration Research, vol. 3, no.2, DOI:10.2478/
v10202-012-0017-5.
Olakivi, A 2013 ‘”In case you can speak Finnish, there’s no problem.” 
Reconstructing problematic identity-positions in migrant care 
workers’ organizational discourse’ Nordic Journal of Migration 
Research, vol. 3, no. 2, DOI: 10.2478/v10202-012-0019-3.
Parreñas, RS 2001, Servants of globalization: women, migration and 
domestic work, Stanford University Press, Stanford.
Rauch, D 2007, ‘Is there really a Scandinavian social service 
model? A comparison of childcare and elderly care in six 
European countries’, Acta Sociologica, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 249–
269,DOI:10.1177/0001699307080931.
Robertson, R 1995, ‘Glocalization: time-space and homogeneity-
heterogeneity’, in Global modernities, eds. M Featherstone, S 
Lash & R Robertson, Sage, London, pp. 25–44.
Rostgaard, T & Szebehely, M 2012, ‘Changing policies, changing 
patterns of care: Danish and Swedish home care at the 
crossroads’, European Journal of Ageing, vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 101–
109, DOI:10.1007/s10433-011-0209-1.
Roudometof, 
V 
2005, 
‘Transnationalism, 
cosmpolitanism 
and glocalization’, Current Sociology, vol. 53, no. 1, 
	
pp. 113–135.
Saltman, R 1997, ‘Convergence versus social embeddedness. 
Debating the future direction of health care systems’, European 
Journal of Public Health, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 449–453, DOI:10.1093/
eurpub/7.4.449.
Sarti, R & Scrinzi, F 2010, ‘Introduction to the special issue: men in 
a woman’s job’, Male Domestic Workers, International Migration 
and the Globalization of Care, Men and Masculinities, vol. 13, 
no.1, pp. 4–15, DOI:10.1177/1097184X10382878.
Sassen, S 1998, Globalization and its discontents. Essays on the 
new mobility of people and money, The New Press, New York.
Sassen, S 2003, ‘Global cities and survival circuits’, in Global 
woman. Nannies, maids and sex workers in the new economy, 
eds. B Ehrenreich & AR Hochschild, Granta Books, London, pp. 
254–274.
Shutes, I & Chiatti, C 2012, ‘Migrant labour and the marketization of 
care for older people: the employment of migrant care workers by 
families and service workers’, Journal of European Social Policy, 
vol. 22, no.4, pp. 392–405, DOI:10.1177/0958928712449773.
Szebehely, M (ed) 2003, Hemhjälp i Norden – illustrationer och 
reflektioner, Studentlitteratur, Malmö.
Vabø, M 2005, ‘New public Management i nordisk eldreomsorg – 
hva forskes det på?’, in Äldreomsorgsforskning i Norden. En 
kunskapsöversikt, ed. M Szebehely, TemaNord, Nordiska 
ministerrådet, Copenhagen, p. 508.
Walsh, K & O’Shea, E 2009, The role of migrant care workers in 
ageing societies. Context and experiences in Ireland, ICSG, 
National University of Ireland Galway.
Williams, F & Brennan, D 2012, ‘Care, markets and migration in 
a globalising world: introduction to the special issue’, Journal 
of European Social Policy, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 355–360, 
DOI:10.1177/0958928712449777.
Williams, F 2012, ‘Converging variations in migrant care work in 
Europe’, Journal of European Social Policy, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 
363–376, DOI:10.1177/0958928712449771.
Wrede, S 2010, ‘Nursing: globalisation of a female-gendered 
profession’, in The Palgrave handbook of gender and healthcare, 
eds. E Kuhlmann & E Annandale, Palgrave Macmillan, 
Basingstoke.
Wrede, S, Henriksson, L, Høst, H, Johansson, S & Dybbroe, B (eds) 
2008, Care work in crisis. Reclaiming the Nordic ethos of care, 
Studentlitteratur, Lund.
Yeates, N 2004, ‘A dialogue with “global care chain” analysis: nurse 
migration in the Irish context’, Feminist Review, vol. 77, no. 1, 
pp. 79–95.
Yeates, N 2009, Globalizing care economies and migrant workers. 
Explorations in global care chains, Palgrave Macmillan, 
Basingstoke.
Zlotnik, H 2005, ‘International migration trends since 1980’, in UNFPA 
International migration and the millennium development goals. 
Selected papers of the UNFPA expert group meeting. UNFPA, 
New York, pp. 13–25.
62