A m s t e r d a m  U n i v e r s i t y  P r e s s
Gender, Migration and 
Categorisation
Making Distinctions between Migrants in 
Western Countries, 1945-2010 
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre M. Moloney (.)
research
imiscoe

Gender, Migration and Categorisation

imiscoe
International Migration, Integration and Social Cohesion in Europe
The Imiscoe Research Network unites researchers from some 30 istitutes specialising 
in studies of international migration, integration and social cohesion in Europe. 
What began in 2004 as a Network of Excellence sponsored by the Sixth Framework 
Programme of the European Commission became, as of April 2009, an independent 
self-funding endeavour. Imiscoe promotes integrated, multidisciplinary and globally 
comparative research led by scholars from various branches of the economic and social 
sciences, the humanities and law. The network furthers existing studies and pioneers 
new scholarship on migration and migrant integration. Encouraging innovative lines of 
inquiry key to European policymaking and governance is also a priority.
The Imiscoe-Amsterdam University Press Series makes the network’s findings and 
results available to researchers, policymakers and practitioners, the media and other 
interested stakeholders. High-quality manuscripts are evaluated by external peer 
reviews and the Imiscoe Editorial Committee. The committee comprises the following 
members:
Tiziana Caponio, Department of Political Studies, University of Turin / Forum for 
International and European Research on Immigration (fieri), Turin, Italy
Michael Collyer, Sussex Centre for Migration Research (scmr), University of Sussex, 
United Kingdom
Rosita Fibbi, Swiss Forum for Migration and Population Studies (sfm), University of 
Neuchâtel, Switzerland / Institute of Social Sciences, University of Lausanne
Agata Górny, Centre of Migration Research (cmr) / Faculty of Economic Sciences, 
University of Warsaw, Poland
Albert Kraler, International Centre for Migration Policy Development (icmpd), Vienna, 
Austria
Jorge Malheiros, Centre of Geographical Studies (ceg), University of Lisbon, Portugal
Marco Martiniello, National Fund for Scientific Research (fnrs), Brussels / Center for 
Ethnic and Migration Studies (cedem), University of Liège, Belgium
Eva Østergaard-Nielsen, Department of Political Science, Autonomous University of 
Barcelona, Spain
Marlou Schrover, Institute for History, Leiden University, The Netherlands
Patrick Simon, National Demographic Institute (ined), Paris, France
Imiscoe Policy Briefs and more information on the network can be found at 
www.imiscoe.org.

Gender, Migration and Categorisation
Making Distinctions between Migrants 
in Western Countries, 1945-2010
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre M. Moloney (eds)
 
 
imiscoe Research 
 
Amsterdam University Press

Cover illustration: Hungarian refugees Rozsa and Imre Tölgyesi at home in 
Numansdorp, 1958. Habetler Collection, iisg Amsterdam
Cover design: Studio Jan de Boer bno, Amsterdam
Layout: Hanneke Kossen, Amsterdam
Amsterdam University Press English-language titles are distributed in the us 
and Canada by the University of Chicago Press.
isbn		
978 90 8964 573 9
e-isbn	 978 90 4852 175 3 (pdf)
e-isbn	 978 90 4852 176 0 (ePub)
nur		
741 / 763
© Marlou Schrover and Deirdre M. Moloney / Amsterdam University Press, 
Amsterdam 2013
All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved 
above, no part of this book may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into 
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic, 
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise) without the written per-
mission of both the copyright owners and the authors of the book.

Table of contents
1	 Introduction
	
Making a difference  7
Marlou Schrover and Deirdre Moloney
2	 Refugees and restrictionism
	
Armenian women immigrants to the usa  
	
in the post-World War i era  55
Yael Schacher
3	 New refugees?
	
Manly war resisters prevent an asylum crisis  
	
in the Netherlands, 1968-1973  75
Tycho Walaardt
4	 A gender-blind approach in Canadian refugee processes
	
Mexican female claimants in the new refugee narrative  105
Monica Boyd and Joanne Nowak
5	 Queer asylum
	
us policies and responses to sexual orientation  
	
and transgendered persecution  127
Connie Oxford
6	 Belonging and membership
	
Postcolonial legacies of colonial family law  
	
in Dutch immigration policies  149
Sarah van Walsum, Guno Jones and Susan Legêne
7	 Blood matters
	
Sarkozy’s immigration policies and their gendered impact  175
Catherine Raissiguier

8	 Gender, inequality and integration
	
Swedish policies on migrant incorporation and the position  
	
of migrant women  193
Maja Cederberg
9	 Take off that veil and give me access to your body
	
An analysis of Danish debates about Muslim women’s head  
	
and body covering  215
Rikke Andreassen
10	Multiculturalism, dependent residence status and honour killings
	
Explaining current Dutch intolerance towards ethnic minorities  
	
from a gender perspective (1960-2000)	  231
Marlou Schrover
11	 Conclusion
	
Gender, migration and cross-categorical research  255
Marlou Schrover and Deirdre Moloney
About the authors  265

1  Introduction
Making a difference
Marlou Schrover and Deirdre Moloney
Introduction
All people are equal, according to Thomas Jefferson, but all migrants 
are not. States differentiate explicitly between categories of migrants 
(e.g., colonial, refugee, labour and family), and they differentiate im-
plicitly according to categories of analysis, such as gender, class, religion 
and ethnicity. The relationship between gender and categorisation is 
twofold. In the first place, the ability to move between the categories 
of migrants is different for men and for women. Secondly, ideas about 
gender, together with those from other categories of analysis (e.g., class, 
religion and ethnicity), shape debates in the media and policies, as this 
volume makes clear. The contributions in this volume describe and an-
alyse how in a number of countries – France, the usa, Turkey, Canada, 
Mexico, the Netherlands, Sweden and Denmark – distinctions between 
migrants were made and justified in policies and in public debates. The 
countries examined are similar enough to make valuable comparisons, 
while being sufficiently varied to lead to interesting conclusions. Each 
of the countries has significant and diverse groups of migrant popula-
tions. Several have large groups of migrants from earlier colonial or 
neo-colonial relationships with other societies; and all have developed 
important policies on migration and refugees, at least since the mid 
20th century. Several of the major migrant groups have religious tra-
ditions that differ from those of the majority population, which often 
leads to conflict and controversies about national identities and social 
roles. About half of the countries have encouraged multiculturalism, 
while the other countries have not.
All authors except Schacher examine the period after the Second 
World War. Schacher analyses the Armenian refugee issue in the 1920s, 
pointing out striking continuities with more recent debates. All authors 
focus on gender as the primary analytical category. In the conclusion, 
we make comparisons between the countries and between the catego-

8	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
ries of migrants examined. All authors address the intersection of gen-
der with other categories of analysis.
We have selected our subjects for four major reasons. In the first 
place, (re-)categorisations and processes of (re-)labelling can best be 
studied at nodal points: moments of debate (Laclau & Mouffe 1985). 
It is at such times that boundaries are redrawn or justified. Secondly, 
changes in categorisation typically occur only following longer peri-
ods of debate, or after repeated debate. Debates in the media generally 
lead to policy changes only later (if at all). Thirdly, in order to look at 
how authorities differentiate between categories of migrants (colonial, 
refugee, labour and family) it is necessary to study debates that relate to 
these different categories of migrants holistically rather than to look at 
each in isolation. Lastly, since we want to focus on gender, this is part of 
the debates chosen, preferably in combination with other categories of 
analysis, such as class, ethnicity and religion.
The past six decades have witnessed extensive debates on three 
issues, as we will show in this volume. These are who is a ‘refugee’, who 
is ‘family’ and ‘multiculturalism’. We focus on these debates. Generally 
speaking, scholars, policymakers, politicians and journalists distin-
guish four main categories of migrants: postcolonial migrants, refugees 
or asylum seekers, labour migrants and family migrants (migrants who 
are motivated to cross borders for family reunification or formation). 
In practice, however, these categories are not static or mutually exclu-
sive. Among, for example, the Portuguese migrants who in the 1970s 
came to North-Western Europe as guest workers were people fleeing 
the Salazar regime and the draft for the Mozambique and Angola wars. 
Many Spanish guest workers opposed the Franco regime. They left their 
country for political reasons as much as for economic reasons. Guest 
workers from Morocco left during the so-called ‘years of lead’, the 
repressive regime of King Hassan ii. They were escaping both poverty 
and repression. Turkish guest workers sought to escape the 1970s politi-
cal coups, and ethnic and religious tensions in Eastern Turkey, while 
many Greek guest workers fled the Regime of the Colonels. They pre-
ferred, however, to come within the framework of guest-worker migra-
tion, rather than apply for asylum. This changed after 1975, when labour 
migration was restricted because the guest-worker regime had come 
to an end. Christians and Kurds from Turkey then started to apply for 
asylum. As opportunities for labour migration diminished, refugee 
migration increased, and migration for family reunification and forma-
tion became more important. Categories of migrants are like commu-
nicating vessels: migrants change categories, and the bureaucrats who 
decide on entry or residence might allocate them to different categories. 

introduction	
9
When one route closes, another may open. We analyse when and why 
this happens. Opportunities to use a different route, furthermore, differ 
according to gender. Migrant men, for instance, were more likely than 
migrant women to be accused of ‘misusing’ the possibilities for family 
migration when they moved from the category of labour migrants to 
that of family migrants.
People tend to think in categories because simplification makes the 
social world understandable and manageable (Boyd & Richerson 1987). 
According to Bourdieu (1980), categorisation is a struggle to impose 
definitions of divisions within society and, hence, of making and 
unmaking social groups. Categorisation does not describe social order 
but rather shapes and reshapes power relations, according to Foucault 
(1980). We define categorisation as the grouping of individuals into col-
lective entities that come with rights (or the denial thereof). Authorita-
tive institutions, states above all, use formalised categorisations that are 
artificial (Brubaker, Loveman & Stamatov 2004: 33). Foucault’s (1988, 
1991) notion of governmentality depends on these categorisations 
(Burchell, Gordon & Miller 1991). Governmentality does not refer to 
the government, but to the many heterogeneous and pervasive ways in 
which the conduct of individuals and groups is shaped and directed. 
We define governmentality as practices (mentalities, rationalities and 
techniques) through which subjects are governed, and the techniques 
and strategies by which a society is rendered governable. The discur-
sive mechanisms act as technologies of governance by which groups are 
constituted as a problem in need of a policy response (Gray 2006). Dis-
cursive mechanisms make issues visible so that they can be governed 
(Wiebel 2010: 16). States have the authority to decide who is who and 
to differentiate rights accordingly (Bourdieu 1994). In doing so, they 
create gender differences. Categorisation is used to legitimise differ-
ences within policies and between groups of people. Categorisations 
are constantly renewed with the intention to exclude or deny rights 
(mostly) or to include and grant rights (rarely). Categorisation results 
in debates and a constant redrawing of boundaries; we address these in 
this volume. Scholars, as a rule, tend to follow the categorisations that 
policymakers use. In part, this is the result of the source material that 
is available and organised according to these categorisations. We take 
a different approach. By looking at different categories of migrants we 
analyse how migrants move between categories, how and why policy 
implementers use categories, and how use of these categories differs 
according to gender.
In this volume all authors use similar research methods; we trace 
and analyse public and policy debates in policy documents, parlia-

10	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
mentary papers, non-governmental organisation (ngo) archives, court 
cases and newspaper articles. Policymakers fear public unrest, which as 
a rule means media coverage. Courts and lawyers know that via media 
coverage and political debates individual cases can become precedents. 
We place this public sphere – defined by Habermas (1989) as the theatre 
for deliberation and debating – centre stage in this volume. We trace 
how concepts were introduced and used, how demarcations were made 
and justified, how changes occurred over time, and how these aspects 
differed according to gender. We show that personification was used as 
a strategy to change labels, and the ways in which precedent cases were 
drawn on to force decisions in other cases. By personification, we mean 
that one person – often a woman or a child – is made the figurehead 
of a campaign that aims to change policy and frequently leads to (re-)
categorisation. Personification as a strategy has had different outcomes 
for migrant men and women, as we will show.
This introductory chapter accomplishes two things. First, it provides 
an overview of the literature on gender and migration. It also presents 
an overview of the literature on three themes that have led to exten-
sive public and political debate: refugee migration, family migration 
and multiculturalism. Our overview on these themes is not extensive, 
since Schacher, Walaardt, Boyd & Nowak, and Oxford, in their respec-
tive chapters, provide overviews of the literature on refugee migra-
tion; Raissiguier, Van Walsum, Legêne & Jones, and Oxford do so for 
‘family’; and Cederberg, Andreassen, and Schrover do so for multi- 
culturalism.
There is now a very large literature on gender and migration, and it 
is not possible, or useful, to offer a synthesis of it. There are, obviously, 
many differences between migrant men and women. As a result, there 
is not one unified theory of gender and migration (Donato et al. 2006; 
Sinke 2006). Differences according to gender have been observed, for 
instance, regarding the trajectories that migrants follow, the networks 
they use, the ties that they maintain, their employment niches, and 
the opportunities and restrictions they encounter. Theories have been 
developed that aim to explain all these differences. These theories are 
discussed in the first part of this chapter. We add to this body of the-
ory by focusing on gender, migration and categorisation in the public 
sphere. This is addressed in the second part of this chapter and devel-
oped further in our concluding chapter.
The literature on gender and migration can be grouped into seven 
clusters.

introduction	
11
1	 Most studies on gender and migration are about women and mi-
gration, rather than comparing migrant men and migrant women. 
Women’s roles and femininity are addressed, but men’s roles and 
masculinity rarely are.
2	 The concept of intersectionality was introduced several decades ago 
to emphasise that categories of power and identity – such as class, 
gender and ethnicity – intersect. The concept has been advocated, 
but has rarely been applied empirically.
3	 The literature pays ample attention to the feminisation of migra-
tion, which is presented as a new phenomenon. This occurs without 
offering much proof and without making clear what feminisation 
means.
4	 Some authors address differences between migrant men and women 
when it comes to migration patterns, networks and transnational 
ties.
5	 The literature on gender and migration focuses on the private sphere 
and family, and pays less attention to the work sphere. When the 
work sphere is addressed, much of that literature concentrates on 
domestic servants. Furthermore there is an emphasis on prostitu-
tion and related issues.
6	 There is a rather large literature on gender, citizenship and residency 
status.
7	 In recent years, there has been a shift in the academic literature to-
ward debates about headscarves and veiling which closely follows 
shifts in political and public discourse.
We address these seven points at some length below. Thereafter, we 
introduce the core element of this volume: categorisation, differentia-
tion and defining in relationship to gender and migration. Specifically, 
we present the three issues that we earlier mentioned as having led to 
extensive public and political debates in recent decades. The issue of 
who is a ‘refugee’ is taken up in the main part of this volume by Scha­
cher, by Walaardt, by Boyd & Nowak, and by Oxford. Raissiguier, Van 
Walsum, Legêne & Jones, and Oxford examine who is ‘family’, and 
Cederberg, Andreassen, and Schrover look at debates on ‘difference’ 
within multicultural policy. Here, we suffice to highlight the fact that 
concepts, discourses, strategies, theories and debates travel across time, 
between categories of migrants, across gender boundaries and between 
countries (Said 1982; Bal 2002: 24). We will return to the added theo-
retical value of this point in the concluding chapter. There we also sum-
marise our findings in an explanatory model.

12	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
State of the art: The literature on gender and migration
Sex and gender; masculinity and femininity
Since ‘gender’ has a variety of meanings, it is useful to clarify the term 
before proceeding. ‘Gender’ and ‘sex’ are frequently used as synonyms, 
with a preference for ‘gender’ over ‘sex’ (Haig 2004). ‘Gender’ is used 
when actually ‘women’ are meant (Lenz et al. 2002; Calavita 2006). This 
is confusing. It is therefore helpful to return to 1955, when Money first 
used the term ‘gender’ – which was at that time a grammatical concept 
– as a category of analysis because the concept ‘sex’ was inadequate 
for the description of social identities (Money 1955). ‘Sex’ relates to the 
identification of an individual based on his or her biological endow-
ments and functions. Gender is the constitutive element of social rela-
tionships, and particularly relationships of power, based on perceived 
differences between the sexes (Scott 1986).
Gender is concerned with the ascription of social characteristics 
such as ‘womanly’, ‘manly’, ‘feminine’ and ‘masculine’. It is a normative 
concept, and relates to behaviour that is expected of men or women. 
Theories on gender emphasise the need to look at who has the power to 
define which differences are relevant. Gender roles are internalised and 
institutionalised (in laws and regulations). Gender refers to the con-
struction, organisation and maintenance of masculinity and feminin-
ity. Masculinity and femininity describe the roles that men and women 
are assigned, or assume, and roles that they are expected to perform, 
which affect how gender is institutionalised and embedded in laws 
and regulations. Ideas on this differ per country, and by context, and 
they often change over time. Migrants might adapt and change roles 
depending on whether they are with co-ethnics or others, or when vis-
iting their country of origin. Roles are situational and fluid. Although 
masculinity and femininity, and thus gender are fluid constructions, a 
static male/female binary is implicitly or explicitly used in social life 
and entrenched in laws and policies (Scott 1986; Scott 1988, 1998; Cala-
vita 2006). Gender is a constitutive element of social relationships, 
particularly of relationships of power, based on perceived differences 
between the sexes (Scott 1986: 1067). Characteristics change over time, 
are culturally variable, and are not necessarily linked to the sex of an 
individual (Browne 2007: 1).
Early studies on migration either focused on men or described 
migrants in genderless terms. Models were based on the (heterosexual) 
male experience, and similar mechanisms were assumed to influence 
the migration decisions of both men and women. Women were ‘added’ 

introduction	
13
later, but without applying gender as an analytical category, and hence, 
without systematically explaining differences between migrant men 
and women. Much of the earlier research was descriptive. To compen-
sate for the absence of women in early studies, research on gender and 
migration originally focused on women rather than on gender (Anthias 
& Yuval-Davis 1992; Lutz, Phoenix & Yuval-Davis 1995; Hondagneu-
Sotelo 2000; Anthias & Lazaridis 2000; Knörr & Meier 2000; Sharpe 
200l; Morokvasic, Erel & Shinozaki 2003; Oishi 2005; Donato et al. 
2006; Piper 2007). These studies do contribute to our understanding of 
the gendered nature of migration, but the added value of an approach 
that compares men to women is widely acknowledged (Lenz et al. 2002; 
Morokvasic, Erel & Shinozaki 2003).
Rather surprisingly, the idea still prevails that studies about men 
and migration are not about gender. There was initially little compari-
son between femininity and masculinity. Recent studies, however, do 
examine masculinity and migration (Connell 1993; España-Maram 
2006; McKay 2007; Hansen 2008; Nobil Ahmad 2008; Ryan & Webster 
2008; Nobil Ahmad 2011). Walaardt in this volume looks at how mas-
culinity and migration intersect.
Intersectionality
Gender is still mostly studied in isolation from other constructive ele-
ments of power and equality and also in isolation from other defining 
elements of identity, including social location, opportunity and experi-
ence (e.g., class and ethnicity). In reality, these categories intersect. The 
concept of intersectionality was introduced in the 1960s by the feminist 
movement to emphasise the interaction between categories of analy-
sis (Davis 2008). The term was new, but the awareness that categories 
intersected was not. Hollingshead (1952: 685), for instance, observed 
that ‘horizontal strata’ ‘transect’ with ‘vertical structures’ ‘based upon 
the social values that are attached to occupation, education, place of 
residence in the community, and associations’. They were ‘combined 
into a complicated status system. The vertically differentiating factors 
of race, religion, and ethnic origin, when combined with the horizon-
tally differentiating ones of occupation, education, place of residence 
and so on, produce a social structure that is highly compartmentalized.’ 
Similarly, in her study of women’s organisations in New Haven, Min-
nis (1953) found that women’s organisations were born and existed in 
a complex pattern of interlocking strands of ‘cleavage’: race, religion, 
ethnicity and class. Hacker (1951) saw possibilities for ‘fruitful analysis’ 
if ‘women’s roles’ were studied in combination with class and race.

14	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
Recent literature has emphasised the importance of simultaneously 
studying the multiple dimensions of durable social inequality (for an 
overview of the literature see Schrover & Yeo 2010). The concept of 
intersectionality emphasises that an interaction between power rela-
tions works to include or exclude people (Crenshaw 1989; Tilly 1998; 
McCall 2005; Boris 2005; Phoenix & Pattynama 2006; Sassen 2006; 
Davis 2008). Changes in power, equality (or inequality), and identity 
can thus be explained only when categories of exclusion and inclusion 
are studied together (McCall 2005).
In practice, it has proven difficult to think about two or more cat-
egories simultaneously. Rather than thinking from a cumulative per-
spective, as the theory of intersectionality stipulates, researchers tend 
to think first in terms of hierarchies, and then move towards answering 
questions, such as ‘in this case does gender trump ethnicity’ or vice 
versa. Furthermore, individuals’ identity goes beyond merely their 
class, gender and ethnicity. People can be defined by their sexual ori-
entation, familial role (mother/father, daughter/son, sister/brother), 
religion, nationality, ability/disability and age. Including an increasing 
number of categories, however, makes the concept of intersectional-
ity cumbersome to use (McCall 2005; Boris 2005; Davis 2008). Not all 
differences are similarly important at all times. Which differences are 
(deemed to be) important depends on who is asking the question, as 
well as when and where it is asked. The reply to the question ‘who are 
you?’ differs depending on whether a potential employer or a lover is 
asking it. Identities are fluid, situational and relational. Migrants can 
switch between identities depending on, for instance, whether they are 
at that moment oriented towards the country of origin or settlement 
(Mahler & Pessar 2006). Nevertheless, it is possible to group and ana-
lyse identities and power relations by bracketing time, space and per-
sonal or institutional setting. Gender, class and ethnicity are generally 
accepted as key aspects of identity, and dimensions of durable social 
inequality (Tilly 1998; McCall 2005; Boris 2005; Davis 2008). Yet each 
of these categories are of more or less importance in different contexts. 
As the authors in this volume illustrate, it is possible to identify which 
categories are made important in political and public debates at certain 
points in time. Oxford’s chapter illustrates this for sexuality, and Scha­
cher does so for religion.
Feminisation of migration
Migration researchers and policymakers repeatedly claim that a femi-
nisation of migration has taken place (see, e.g., Wihtol de Wenden 1998; 

introduction	
15
King & Zontini 2000; El-Cherkeh et al. 2004; Kawar 2004; Oso Casas 
& Garson 2005). Authors use phrases like ‘women workers form the 
majority in movements as diverse as those of Cape Verdians to Italy, 
Filipinos to the Middle East and Thais to Japan’ (Castles & Miller 2003: 
7-9, 188). The countries mentioned are not chosen randomly, although 
the phrase ‘as diverse as’ might suggest this. These are the countries in 
which migrant women do outnumber men. Examples of precisely the 
opposite could as easily be given. In 2005 men outnumbered women 
among immigrants in Saudi Arabia (70% men), Cuba (73% men) and 
Bangladesh (86% men). Note that there is a difference between the first 
set of countries, which refers to emigrants from one country, and the 
second set, which speaks on immigrants (presumably from various 
countries) to one country.
In some countries, the number of documented migrant women has 
increased. Data are, however, difficult to interpret. In 1978, Singapore, 
for instance, introduced the Foreign Maids Scheme, which made it pos-
sible for women from the Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand, Burma, Sri 
Lanka, India and Bangladesh to enter Singapore as ‘live-in’ domestic 
workers. As a result, that country’s migrant domestic worker popula-
tion grew from 5,000 in 1978 to 150,000 in 2005 (Human Rights Watch 
2005: 19). This does not necessarily mean that the actual number of 
migrant domestic workers increased. The scheme was introduced to 
counter the exploitation of foreign domestic workers, and registration 
was part of that effort. The data therefore partly reflect an increase in 
the number of documented domestic workers. Women who migrated 
to Singapore as domestic workers prior to 1978 were not registered. 
Women currently make up half of the migrant population in Singa-
pore. There are no data available that allow us to compare the current 
percentage of migrant women with that of the past.
Frequently it remains unclear what authors mean when they use 
the term ‘feminisation’. The term may indicate that women outnumber 
men in migration. Or it might suggest that the number of women now 
equals the number of men, while that was not the case in the past. It 
is also used to refer to (assumed) changes in migration: an increase in 
long-distance migration of women (as opposed to the mostly short-
distance migration that was common in the past), or an increase in the 
number of women who are pioneers or single migrants (as opposed to 
the dependent migrants of the past). Authors generally offer no proof 
of feminisation, but simply observe that women today form about half 
of migrants. They then quickly move on to issues such as migrant wom-
en’s health hazards, the problems of care workers, domestic servants 
and mail order brides, or prostitution, trafficking and illegality (Wihtol 

16	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
de Wenden 1998; Biemann 2002; Hoerder 2002: 517-519; Sassen 2003: 
61; El-Cherkeh et al. 2004: 13; Yamanaka & Piper 2005; Dodson 2008: 
152). As such, the feminisation of migration is linked to problems 
(Ryan 2002; Lepp 2002; Piper 2003; Dannecker 2005; Labadie-Jackson 
2008).
Providing a historical overview of trends in international migration 
is difficult because many countries either lack a system of continuous 
registration of international migration or, if they have such a system, 
they do not process and publish the data. Only a handful of countries 
gather data on the inflow of foreigners (Zlotnik 1998; Jennissen 2004; 
Oso Casas & Garson 2005). Claims about the feminisation of migration 
are based on ambiguous data, weak statistical evidence or no statistics 
at all (Kempadoo & Doezema 1998; Lepp 2002). A lack of data does not 
prevent some authors from claiming that the feminisation of (labour) 
migration has become a well-established fact (Piper 2003: 726). Data 
that are presented are frequently highly selective. Authors write about 
feminisation of migration in Australia, for instance, but produce data 
on the percentage of women among the Asian-born Chinese only (and 
even those do not pass the 60% mark) (Ryan 2002: 96). Authors sug-
gest increases when there are none (Alcalá 2006: 22). Graphs are pre-
sented with y-axes that start at 45% and terminate at 55% to empha-
sise increases (Orbeta & Abrigo 2009: 7 and 11; Donato et al. 2011). 
Data refer to labour migration only, or to the migration from specific 
countries, such as the Philippines. In fact, the Philippine government 
encourages the migration of women, and the percentage of migrant 
women is exceptionally high compared to other countries. Even in the 
Philippines, however, it did not exceed 60% in the period between 1993 
and 2007 (Orbeta & Abrigo 2009: 7 and 11).
The percentages of women and men in migration did change dur-
ing the last century. Fast economic growth in North-Western European 
countries between 1945 and 1975 led to guest-worker migration. Aus-
tria, Belgium, Denmark, Germany, Luxemburg, Sweden and the Neth-
erlands actively recruited guest workers, while Southern European 
countries supplied labour. About 70% of the recruited guest workers 
were men. Eastern European countries recruited guest workers from 
Cuba, Mozambique and Vietnam. About 85% of these were men. Simi-
larly, the us Bracero Program mainly recruited men (Rosas 2011). Ear-
lier, around 1900, Chinese and Asian migrants to the usa and Canada 
were forbidden to bring wives. As a result, some ethnic groups devel-
oped into ‘bachelor societies’, including, for example, Chinese com-
munities in California and Western Canada. These masculinisations of 
migration were not labelled as such at the time, or later.

introduction	
17
The literature on the feminisation of migration presents the migra-
tion of women as new (Schrover 2013). Such novelty both calls for and 
justifies specific measures or policies aimed at migrant women. Yet, it is 
not so much the migration of women that has increased. Rather, there 
has been an increased focus on migrant women. In migration policies 
this heightened focus is used to justify restrictions and controls. In this 
volume, we show how juggling numbers and percentages is a favoured 
strategy in the problematisation of migration.
Migration patterns, networks and ties
The differences in men’s and women’s migration patterns have often 
been explained using the concept of perceived profitability; that is, peo-
ple move if a cost-benefit analysis points to gains (Stark 1991). This idea 
is used in the neo-classical, or push-pull, model and the family strategy 
model (Sjaastad 1962; Stark 1991). These models acknowledge that cal-
culations and consequences of a decision can be different for men and 
women (Brettell 1986). The assumption is that, as a rule, men can earn 
more than women, and it is therefore advantageous to let men migrate. 
When women migrate in equal numbers to men, or in greater num-
bers, this is explained as a family strategy. It is also interpreted from a 
remittance perspective. Women may earn less than men but they might 
send more money home, meaning that it could be more profitable for 
families left behind if they migrate instead of men (Grasmuck & Pessar 
1991; De Jong, Richter & Isarabhakdi 1995; Davis & Winters 2001; Cur-
ran 2012). The problem with these models is that it is difficult to assess 
profitability, because men and women do not have the same (access to) 
resources, the labour market, power, agency, interests, knowledge and 
networks. Those factors affect any cost-benefit analysis migrants might 
make. A decision to migrate is, furthermore, not necessarily a product 
of collectively made, rational, economic calculations. In some cases it 
is an individual decision made outside of and against the wishes of the 
household or family. Fostered within communities of young men, it is 
borne out of a lust for adventure, which is associated with locally en-
trenched masculine ideals (Nobil Ahmad 2008, 2011). Some migrations 
result in the creation of a culture of migration, in which (temporary) 
migration is seen as a standard stage of adult life. In Morocco, for in-
stance, there are villages where migration is so common among men 
that those who do not migrate are ridiculed and equated with children, 
women or the elderly (De Haas & Van Rooij 2010: 45).
There is consensus among scholars of migration that women migrate 
through older, more mature networks than men do (Boyd 1989; Tacoli 

18	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
1995). Migrant men and women have access to different networks, value 
those resources differently, have different exchange opportunities and 
develop different exchange relations (Moch & Fuchs 1993). Networks of 
immigrant men and women are not the same. Furthermore, non-kin 
networks of immigrant men and women seldom overlap (Ross 1983). 
Networks of women tend to be less formalised and less visible than 
those of men. Women are more inclined to form networks than men, 
because networks reduce their feelings of vulnerability (Accampo 1993). 
Immigrant men and women use their networks for different purposes. 
Women make frequent use of weak ties (Moch 2003b). Men move 
through the family network to find work, while women move through 
job networks to find a family (Bertaux-Wiame 1979). Women move and 
live in familial contexts more often than men (Schrover 2003), and they 
developed more kin-based networks. Men develop more non-kin net-
works. While this all may be true, the networks of men and women are 
not that different. Benhabib and Resnik (2009) point out that wom-
en’s networks consist of dependent children, dependent elderly and the 
men they are involved with. They fail to point out that this is also largely 
true for migrant men, whose primary networks are equally formed by 
children, parents and partners.
Men tend to join or establish organisations that are oriented towards 
the country of origin, whereas women favour organisations that are 
aimed at the country of settlement (Jones-Correa 1998). Immigrant 
men experience status loss due to downward social mobility, which 
they compensate for by joining organisations where their (former) sta-
tus is recognised and bolstered. Those immigrant women who did not 
work prior to their migration, but enter the workforce in the new coun-
try, experience a gain in status (ibid.).
The process of cumulative causation has been used to explain the 
migration of women via older networks (Massey 1990). Cumulative 
causation is the process whereby the propensity to migrate grows with 
each additional migrant. Networks and accumulated migrant experi-
ence demonstrate benefits, diminish familial resistance and increase 
security by providing information about and access to labour mar-
ket opportunities. Networks make migration less risky for individu-
als by circulating information among potential migrants. As a result, 
the nature of migration changes over time. The initial high risk, result-
ing from a lack of information, declines when more family and friends 
migrate. Denser networks of migrants provide potential migrants with 
more and increasingly reliable information (DaVanzo 1978; Portes & 
Bach 1985). Tight knit networks, arising from physical and social prox-
imity, make it easier to enforce trust and support (Portes & Sensen-

introduction	
19
brenner 1993). This facilitates the choice to migrate, making migration 
progressively more likely (Massey 1990). Thus, networks are thought 
to play a crucial role in reducing perceived vulnerability (Granovet-
ter 1973; Grasmuck & Pessar 1991; Moch & Fuch 1993; Curran & Saguy 
2001).
This network theory is related to theories on forms of embeddedness 
or modes of incorporation (Stewart 2005). Migrants may compensate 
for their lack of embeddedness or status in one sector – for instance, in 
the labour market – by increasing their embeddedness in another sec-
tor, for instance, by maintaining wide networks (Mahler & Pessar 2001; 
Pessar & Mahler 2003). Differences in how migrant men and women 
maintain ties with their countries of origin are explained by the fact 
that doing kinwork, or caring for the maintenance of family relations, 
is commonly characterised as women’s work – though not only among 
migrants. Furthermore, differences in ties relate to status loss. In coun-
tries with larger numbers of emigrant women, there are discussions 
about the children who are left behind and about so-called transna-
tional mothering (Yeates 2004; Mongaya Hoegsholm 2007; Pajnik & 
Bajt 2012). Rather surprisingly, this debate is not matched by similar 
debates about men who leave their children behind, or use of the con-
cept of transnational fathering (Kraler et al. 2011).
The literature on migration patterns, networks and ties focuses on 
the choices and deliberations of migrants, and less on how states (both 
countries of origin and those of destination) create frameworks in which 
choices are made. The literature follows political categorisations and 
hardly discusses issues of choice or deliberation, strategies, networks and 
ties in the context of refugee migration. According to Boyd & Nowak, 
Schacher, and Walaardt in this volume, these frameworks are impor-
tant, as migrants use strategies, networks and ties in different ways.
The private sphere, prostitution and risk
Research on gender and migration places strong emphasis on family 
and household, suggesting that gender is enclosed in the private sphere. 
The literature on gender and migration reflects political ideas about the 
household as private and the labour market as a political domain (Pal-
mary et al. 2012). Migration of women is mostly described from a fam-
ily perspective (for a recent overview of the literature on family, gender 
and migration see Kraler et al. 2011), while men’s migration is described 
from a labour perspective (Phizacklea 2003). If the migration of women 
is discussed in the context of work, it usually relates to domestic work 
and care (Henshall Momsen 1999; Ehrenreich & Hochschild 2002; 

20	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
George 2005; Moya 2007 gives good overview of the literature). In the 
past, domestic work was important to migrant women, and it remains 
so today. The labour market is strongly segregated by gender and eth-
nicity (Schrover, Van der Leun & Quispel 2007). Migrant women and 
men both tend to cluster in a restricted number of sectors, but migrant 
women cluster in fewer sectors than men. The literature on domestic 
servants is characterised by discussions about restricted rights, poor 
labour conditions, abuse and exploitation (Constable 1997; Anderson 
2000). Much less attention is given to the opportunities that this work 
offers to migrant women. The huge concentration of research has given 
domestic service a greater importance than it has in reality and diverts 
attention away from migrant women’s work in other sectors.
There is an emphasis in the literature on women as trafficking victims 
(Phizacklea 1998; Soderlund 2005; Gould 2010). This literature shows 
great continuity since the 1850s, with its focal points on youth, inno-
cence, whiteness, corruption and foreignness (Doezema 2005; Moloney 
2012). Trafficking is used as a synonym for prostitution, which, in turn, 
is equated with abuse. The migration of women is described in terms of 
hardship and suffering, often dramatised with heart-breaking personal 
stories (Agustín 2003, 2005; Brennan 2004; Haynes 2004; Soderlund 
2005; Outshoorn 2005; Doezema 2005). Recently, scholars have taken 
a critical stance towards this profusion of scholarship about trafficking, 
which is part of what Agustín (2007) calls ‘a rescue industry’. Authors 
have pointed out that claims about the number of trafficked women, are 
based on poor and inadequate research, that all migration of women is 
regarded as trafficking, and that tragic stories are used to mobilise sup-
port for control and restrictions on the mobility of women (Fehér 2000; 
Kapur 2005; Brennan 2008; Wooditch, DuPont-Morales & Hummer 
2009; Deane 2010; Weitzer 2010; Oude Breuil et al. 2011; Brysk 2011; 
Blanchette & Da Silva 2012). Previous scholars have emphasised that 
sex-trafficking discourse, involving innocent victims, violated borders 
and criminality, is part of problematising migration and is used to jus-
tify restrictive migration policies (Berman 2003), but that has not led to 
changes in the literature.
In part, the emphasis on victimhood of migrant women can be 
explained by a policy-driven, sameness-difference dilemma. Basi-
cally this conundrum involves the recognition that migrant women 
may be disadvantaged in comparison to migrant men (e.g., in laws or 
their application), but attempts to address inequalities – by politicians, 
lawyers and pressure groups – tend to backfire (Oxford 2005; Cala-
vita 2006; see also Schrover, Cederberg, and Andreassen in this vol-
ume). It is difficult to escape from a sexualised-victimised image once 

introduction	
21
it has been established (MacLeod & Saraga 1988; Connell 1997; Utas 
2005). The (often unintended) result is that differences between men 
and women are accentuated, and the victimhood of women is empha-
sised. Sexualisation and victimisation have been used to legitimise gov-
ernment policies or the strategies of organisations (including migrant 
organisations and churches) (Connell 1990). Schrover, Cederberg, and 
Andreassen address this point in this volume.
Within this victimhood discourse, women are presented as vul-
nerable. Vulnerability is the subject of an entire field of study, which 
developed several decades ago, initially to explain how and why people 
move in and out of poverty (Beck 1992; Moser 1998; Alwang, Siegel & 
Jørgensen 2001; Bustamante 2002; Hogan & Marandola 2005). Later, 
ideas from the field of vulnerability studies were applied to migration 
research (Waddington & Sabates-Wheeler 2003). Vulnerability is – of 
course – a staple element in the construction of (Western) femininity, 
as is the construction of women as mothers and wives, while men are 
not constructed primarily as vulnerable, or as fathers and husbands. 
Raissiguier and Van Walsum, Legêne & Jones address this point in this 
volume.
In the victimhood discourse, women are portrayed as victims and 
men as perpetrators (Beck 1992; Moser 1998; Alwang, Siegel & Jørgensen 
2001; Hogan & Marandola 2005; Stewart 2005). Since the 1980s, several 
authors have criticised this perspective because it works to disempower 
women and denies them agency (MacLeod & Saraga 1988; Connell 1997; 
Utas 2005). Recent authors have moved beyond the critique and point 
to the functionality of the continued use of that discourse. Some people 
base their identities on victimhood or injury (Brown 1995; Doezema 
2001). That, in turn, results in a politics that seeks protection from the 
state, rather than power and freedom, and ultimately in a politics that 
reaffirms structures of domination. Other people profit from ascrib-
ing a victimhood identity. For instance, in the 1970s white middle-class 
Western women justified their own claims to equality by constructing 
‘third-world women’ as helpless subjects of ‘barbaric traditionalism’. 
The ‘other’ was seen as equal in Christian rhetoric, but not in reality 
(Doezema 2001). Schrover, Cederberg, and Andreassen in this volume 
describe how this has affected policies. If we look at who profits from 
a certain discourse and in what ways – as we do in this volume – we 
can understand how, why and by whom differences between migrant 
men and women were created, maintained and entrenched in laws and 
regulations. This volume discusses why policymakers, as well as certain 
migrants and immigrant organisations, had an interest in making dif-
ferences. Many Western feminists eagerly bought into the construction 

22	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
of ‘third-world women’ as ‘powerless’, ‘exploited’ and ‘sexually harassed’ 
(Mohanty 1988). ‘Third-world women’ were, as a category, automatically 
and necessarily defined as religious, as well as oriented toward the fam-
ily and the domestic sphere. Their victimisation played a role in the con-
struction of a counter identity of ‘Western’ women, who were ev­erything 
that ‘third-world women’ were not (Doezema 2001). Schrover, Boyd & 
Nowak, and Andreassen build on this idea in this volume.
Victimisation can be used as a successful strategy; it is possible to 
claim rights for women by presenting them as victims (see Schacher in 
this volume). The price of this success, however, is that migrant women 
come to be seen as vulnerable and in need of protection. The ‘success-
ful’ use of the victimhood discourse explains a change in migration and 
integration policy that has taken place in the past decades (Roggeband 
& Verloo 2007). In the 1970s, integration policy stressed the rights of 
migrants as distinct from the rest of the people in the receiving soci-
ety. In the 1990s, the diversity framework was replaced by a vulner-
ability framework, which focused on migrant women, as described by 
Schrover, Andreassen, and Cederberg in this volume.
Citizenship and residency
There is a large literature about gender, citizenship and residency (see, 
e.g., Soysal 1994; Ackers 1996; Bredbenner 1998; Kofman et al. 2000; 
Sinha 2006; Lister et al. 2007; Pawley 2008; Benhabib & Resnik 2009; 
Rygiel 2011). There are two systems for delegating citizenship: via birth 
to a citizen (jus sanguinis), as in the case of Germany, for example, or 
via birth on national soil (jus soli), as, for instance, in the usa. While 
these definitions seem straightforward, they are not. Current political 
and public discourse equates citizenship with integration, civil society 
and active societal participation. The conflation of immigrant integra-
tion with citizenship has caused a shift from the state’s control over its 
national borders to control of the borders of society (Schinkel 2008). 
This conflation of controlling borders with controlling society results 
from the definition of citizenship at two levels: the juridical level and 
the discursive level (membership of the nation-state and membership 
of society). People with juridical citizenship can be denied discursive 
citizenship. At the juridical (or formal) level, citizens have rights that 
non-citizens do not share (e.g., voting rights) (Marshall 1950). At the 
juridical level, a sharp distinction is made between citizens and non-
citizens. Discursive (or moral) citizenship relates to being (seen as) part 
of a community or society and being a virtuous citizen (Kennedy 2005). 
In recent decades, the sovereignty of nation-states has eroded because 

introduction	
23
of globalisation and the creation of larger political units such as the 
European Union. Yet, this has not reduced the discursive or moral im-
portance attached to citizenship (Bader 1999). Discursive citizenship is 
a vague and flexible notion (Schinkel 2008). The distinction between 
internal and external borders can be sharp at the discursive level, but it 
is not static and it changes continuously over time.
In many countries, women automatically experienced a change in 
their nationality when they married men with a different nationality 
than their own (though this was not true for men) (Boris 2005; De 
Hart 2006). Many countries introduced so-called ‘marriage rules’ and 
‘derivative citizenship’ in around 1900, consolidating earlier practices. 
Derivative citizenship is based on a gendered conception of belonging. 
Women marrying men outside of their community or nationality are 
often described in sexually disapproving terms, even if they are in a sta-
ble monogamous relationship. That judgement implies that by crossing 
one boundary – that of ethnicity – they also cross a boundary of moral 
acceptability (Stoler 1992, 1995; Breger & Hill 1998).
When countries changed rules regarding derivative citizen-
ship (Studer 2001; De Hart 2006; Volpp 2006) discussions moved to 
dependent residency (Sterett 1997; CÔté, Kérisit & CÔté 2001). In the 
former, women derived citizenship from their husbands, while in the 
latter women derived the right to remain in a country through their 
husbands (although in theory husbands could also derive the right 
to remain through their wives). Discussions on dependent residency 
arose when possibilities for labour migration were reduced (Schrover et 
al. 2008; Schrover & Yeo 2010). Debates about derived citizenship were 
interwoven with those about multiculturalism as Cederberg, Andreas-
sen, and Schrover show in this volume.
Veiling
In recent years there has been an increase in the number of publications 
on headscarves and veils (with many publications coming out of the 
large veil project on values, equality and differences in liberal democ-
racies (Molokotos Liederman 2000; McGoldrick 2006; Brems 2006; 
Winter 2008; Berghahn & Rostock 2009; Lettinga 2011; Rosenberger 
& Sauer 2012). The shift in the academic literature parallels changes in 
public and political debates about headscarves and veils, as reflected in 
the so-called ‘burqa bans’ introduced by countries in which very few 
women actually wear face-covering veils (Herrera & Moors 2003; Jop-
pke 2007; Schrover in this volume). Current political arguments against 
veiling are remarkably similar to those used by British and French colo-

24	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
nial authorities in their attempts to legitimise their colonial rule (Fanon 
1965; Abu-Lughod 2002). Modernising, liberating and emancipating 
Islamic women, by forcing them to unveil, or allowing them to do 
so, was a key aspect of the colonisers’ claim of moral superiority. In a 
similar fashion, the us ‘war against terror’ in Afghanistan was justified 
by emphasising the right of women to discard their burqas (Stabile & 
Kumar 2005; Van Walsum & Spijkerboer 2007; Bush 2010). The British 
and French unveiling campaigns were comparable to the 1927 Soviet 
Hujum, a campaign in Soviet Central Asia in which mass unveiling was 
meant to lead to the social and intellectual liberation of women (Kamp 
2008). That campaign aimed to enforce and legitimise Soviet rule over 
Uzbekistan.
Rather surprisingly, current debates in Turkey run counter to debates 
in Western Europe. The Turkish government first outlawed the wear-
ing of headscarves for women working in the public sector (as teachers, 
lawyers and politicians) in 1924, when Atatürk introduced the secular 
Turkish state (Gökariksel & Mitchell 2005). From the 1980s onwards, 
this ban increasingly led to debates. In Turkey some women harbour 
hopes that future membership in the eu might give Turkish women the 
right to wear headscarves if they wish. This intersects with the paradox-
ical situation in which Western feminists occasionally find themselves. 
While they generally favour women’s choices, they find it very hard to 
view the wearing of headscarves or other veiling as a choice, despite 
what is said by the women who make this choice. They find themselves 
being accused of colonialist paternalism. Furthermore Western femi-
nists find themselves allied with Western populist, right-wing politi-
cians, who in the Western context, do not generally support women’s 
rights (Winter 2006).
The move towards placing headscarves and veils at the centre of 
political debates is part of a shift towards minority integration poli-
cies. Yet, such policies have been labelled a failure in several Euro-
pean countries, which have moved on to issues of religion rather than 
class position, discrimination or socio-economic factors. This renders 
integration a personal choice and removes responsibly from authori-
ties (Roggeband & Verloo 2007; see also Cederberg, Andreassen, and 
Schrover in this volume).
* * *
Overall the large literature on gender and migration reflects certain 
biases with great consistency. Countering some of those unbalances 
is long overdue. In this volume, we move away from attempts to take 

introduction	
25
stock of differences between migrant men and migrant women, and 
from describing migrants or focusing on the private sphere. We look 
instead at political and public debates about categorisation, differentia-
tion, and how and why boundaries have been drawn and redrawn. As 
pointed out earlier, our exploration focuses on three primary fields in 
which this boundary drawing has led to extensive debates: who is a ‘ref-
ugee’ (Schacher, Walaardt, Boyd & Nowak, and Oxford), who is ‘family’ 
(Raissiguier, Van Walsum, Legêne & Jones, and also partly in Oxford), 
and who has the right to be different according to multicultural policy 
(Cederberg, Andreassen, and Schrover). The sections that follow pre-
sent a state of the art on these points.
State of the art and contributions to the literature:  
Defining the true refugee
The 1951 Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees built on ear-
lier, ad hoc policies, including those related to Jewish refugees in the 
1930s and Armenian refugees in 1917. Policies regarding Armenians, de-
scribed by Schacher in this volume, should be viewed in the context of 
more general developments. Since the 1880s, mobility from Europe has 
been affected by us restrictions on migration. us authorities wanted 
to prevent paupers and criminals from arriving by introducing con-
trols and barriers at the borders, as well as in the countries of departure 
(Zolberg 2006). These developments are important for understanding 
how people fleeing the Armenian genocide from 1917 onwards, were 
received in the usa and elsewhere, as Schacher describes. Thirty years 
prior to the 1951 Refugee Convention, policies were not that different, 
nor were the responses to refugee migration, as Schacher illustrates. 
Some Armenian refugees were women travelling alone. As in the case 
of other migrant women travelling alone, this immediately raised sus-
picions regarding their involvement in prostitution and other immoral 
behaviour. Christian relief organisations in Turkey and the usa were 
well aware of this potential stigma and tried to steer clear of cases that 
might disadvantage the whole group of refugees.
Schacher contributes to the literature by emphasising four argu-
ments, each of which recurred in later periods (as described by 
Walaardt, Boyd & Nowak, and Oxford in this volume). First, there was 
a strong fear among decision makers about setting precedents. People 
were allowed to enter if their case could be presented as an exceptional 
one. Armenian refugees were characterised as special, and different 
from the many other people adrift in the same period. Secondly, long 

26	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
before the 1951 definition of a refugee came to be accepted, there was a 
clear idea about who was an ‘honest refugee’. Decision makers involved 
in the Armenian case were as suspicious as later decision makers. They 
feared they would be deceived by ‘non-deserving refugees’, who told 
fabricated stories, masterminded by their (us-based) advocates. Those 
fears were very similar to suspicions in later periods. Thirdly, policies 
phrased in gender-neutral terms, such as a literacy test, had divergent 
consequences for men and women. Women fleeing the Armenian gen-
ocide were, to a large extent, illiterate and were disadvantaged by the 
test. A vague reference in the rulings to religious persecution as the 
grounds for exemption dampened the gender-specific effects in prac-
tice. It further created differences between men and women in how pol-
icies were applied: religion surfaced more frequently in women’s cases. 
Here, there are also clear similarities to later decades: bending the 
rules in cases involving women proved easier than changing the rules 
(Schrover 2009b). In the fourth place, civil servants and others were 
afraid of publicity. Deporting women – especially in the company of 
their children – led to negative publicity, even in this period when com-
munication was slow. Negative publicity could be expected if Chris-
tian women were deported to a Muslim country, where, according to 
newspaper reports, Christians were being systematically discriminated 
against, killed and deported. Women were at risk of being kidnapped 
and raped, as well as being forced to marry a Muslim and convert to 
Islam. Anti-Islam rhetoric, deployed in later decades, was already in 
full force by 1917, and the stereotypes were the same as those used in 
pervasive 1990s flight and recue stories (De Hart 2001).
After the Second World War, feelings of guilt and a sense of failure 
towards Jewish refugees, combined with the geopolitical tensions of the 
Cold War, led to creation of an international refugee policy. This point 
has been addressed extensively in the large literature on refugees and 
asylum seekers (see, amongst others, Grahl-Madsen 1966, 1982-1983a, 
1982-1983b, 1983; Holborn 1975; Takkenberg & Tahbaz 1989; Salomon 
1991; Loescher 1993; Carruthers 2005). At the time there were still many 
displaced persons living in camps in Europe. At the Yalta Conference 
of 1945 it was agreed that displaced persons were to be repatriated to 
their countries of origin, but Western states refused to repatriate some 
of those who came from Eastern Europe during or after the war. The 
continued arrival of Eastern Europeans in the West served as a refuta-
tion of communist governments and their policies.
The 1951 Refugee Convention defined a refugee as follows:

introduction	
27
any person who, owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for 
reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular so-
cial group, or political opinion, exists outside the country of his na-
tionality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to 
that country; or who, not having a nationality and being outside the 
country of his former habitual residence as a result of such events, is 
unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to return to it (art. 1a).
	
The Convention’s drafters conceived of flight motives as political, 
public and collective, rather than as personal and private.
From the 1950s to the 1970s, providing asylum to the victims of 
one’s enemies demonstrated the antagonists’ immoral value system, 
as Zolberg (2006: 18) emphasised. Over the past 50 years, the number 
of antagonists, and evils, has increased, changed and blurred. Politi-
cally, the benefits of a lenient refugee policy have become less obvious. 
That has reduced the willingness to deal with the refugee problem at 
an international level and resulted in a restrictive discourse. While asy-
lum cases are no longer used to prove that capitalism trumps commu-
nism, they now highlight the failure of the newly decolonised, Islamic 
or third-world countries to protect their citizens. They are used to con-
trast a superior (enlightened) West against a failing Rest.
Walaardt, in this volume, adds to the literature by describing the 
arrival in the 1970s in the Netherlands of what he calls the ‘New Ref-
ugees’. They sought asylum after Cold War rhetoric started to wane. 
They came from nato countries (Portugal and the usa) and were flee-
ing right-wing, rather than left-wing regimes. The arrival of the New 
Refugees might have resulted in changes in policy, as they came from 
different countries than the earlier post-war refugees, and they had dif-
ferent claims and different lobby groups. Remarkably, however, policies 
hardly changed. Cold War refugees had been treated with suspicion 
and authorities feared setting precedents and the arrival of numerous 
others (as had earlier been the case for Armenian refugees). New Ref-
ugees encountered the same fears and restrictions. Men fleeing com-
munism and those fleeing from military service in the colonial wars 
were similarly portrayed. Both groups were cast as masculine actors 
who had courageously opposed – in the eyes of many Dutch – detest-
able regimes. Both were cast in the image of protest heroes. Such heroic 
images of male refugees dominated the asylum discourse. Only decades 
later, with the migration of new groups of New Refugees, would public 
attention shift away from men and the hero-refugee and toward women 
and the victim-refugee.

28	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
Differences between men and women refugees or asylum seekers 
have been addressed in the literature. Under certain conditions, women 
are much less likely than men to be granted refugee status (cf. Spijker- 
boer 2000; Calavita 2006). Currently, discussions do not centre on 
whether the grounds are the same, but on whether they should be, and 
whether gender-related violence should be grounds for asylum. Gen-
der or gender-related harm was absent from the 1951 definition as a 
category of persecution. Gender-related violence is understood in cur-
rent discussions as something that affects women alone. If reference 
is made to men, it is to homosexuals (Oxford 2005). It is much more 
common for women than for men to be the victims of sexual violence. 
Those who have been victims of what is called accidental or arbitrary 
rape (which is seen as an unfortunate, but common, part of regular 
warfare) are not regarded as persecuted. Women who were raped in 
order to retrieve information about their families (such as the wherea-
bouts of husbands or sons) were not granted asylum in the past. In 
recent years, there has been a change in asylum policies and laws. In 
the usa, immigrant women can gain asylum by proving they have been 
persecuted on account of female circumcision, honour killings, domes-
tic violence, coercive family planning, forced marriages or repressive 
social norms. This is also true for some European countries, such as 
Germany. Asylum seekers in the usa stand a better chance of having 
their request approved if they mention female circumcisions at the 
hearings rather than explaining their role in a resistance movement. 
Stories about resistance are almost never acknowledged as grounds for 
women’s asylum (while they are for men), whereas the mentioning of 
female circumcision is (Oxford 2005).
The drafters of the 1951 Convention did not conceptualise rape, 
female circumcision, domestic violence, enforced family policies, or 
compulsory veiling in their definition of rights. In fact, they did not 
conceive of women applying for refugee status based on gender issues 
at all. In recent decades, however, women have been granted refugee 
status for each of those reasons (Spijkerboer 2000; Oxford 2005; Cala-
vita 2006). The Convention tried to target states that failed to protect, 
or denied protection to, a minority of their citizens. Today, refugees or 
asylum seekers arrive from states – including Liberia, Angola, Demo-
cratic Republic of the Congo, Somalia and Sierra Leone – where the 
government does not have the power to protect citizens. They come 
from African countries where states do not prevent their populations 
from leaving, as was earlier the case with Eastern European countries. 
Or they come from countries such as Afghanistan, where the state 

introduction	
29
never extended civil rights to half of its citizens, simply because they 
are women.
Women took centre stage in human rights debates and in asylum 
cases for a few years. This volume adds to the literature by looking spe-
cifically at these debates. However, as Boyd & Nowak discuss in this 
volume, this focus on women was not long-lived, nor did it apply to 
all refugee groups in equal proportions. Boyd & Nowak describe the 
Canadian media’s attitudes toward Mexican refugees. Canadians find it 
difficult to comprehend that a democratic country such as Mexico, with 
which Canada maintains economic and political ties, would produce 
refugees. Similarly, European states did not define Portuguese and us 
citizens as refugees, as Walaardt discusses. Women from Islamic coun-
tries more fully embody the victim-refugee image than do Mexican 
Catholic women subject to domestic violence. Mexico is not defined as 
a failed state. Yet, a state may provide protection to some of its citizens, 
but not to all of them. It is precisely this type of failure that shaped the 
1951 Refugee Convention. In Canada there is little awareness that the 
situation for migrant men and women from Mexico might differ, as 
Boyd & Nowak describe. The current media refugee script focuses on 
refugee management and reduction, rather than on refugee protection 
and welcome. The economic costs of accepting what is portrayed as 
increasing numbers of Mexican refugees or asylum seekers have taken 
centre stage in public discussions, pushing aside any discussions of 
political benefits. With potential benefits, the Canadian image of the 
‘true’ refugee also shifted.
Oxford, in this volume, adds to the literature by focusing on homo-
sexual and transgender refugees. Homosexuals have claimed refugee 
status in the usa, based on their membership in a persecuted social 
group, using arguments similar to those used by battered women seek-
ing refuge. Fourteen countries have granted homosexuals political asy-
lum as members of ‘a particular social group’, a key phrase from the 1951 
Convention (Austria, Australia, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, 
Germany, Ireland, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, the 
uk and the usa). The United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees 
has decreed that its policy is to consider those homosexuals who are 
persecuted for their sexual orientation as refugees. For at least a dec-
ade, gay advocacy groups have made immigration one of the fronts on 
which they fight for their agenda. They adopted the rhetoric of the civil 
rights movement (compare McKeown 2008, who shows how the anti-
slavery discourse – as an early form of human rights discourse – played 
a major role in shaping exclusionary us labour migration policies in 
the 19th century). As observed earlier, people travel between countries, 

30	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
and migrants move between categories, but concepts and discourses 
travel as well (Forsdick 2001). Strategies that proved to be successful 
in one context, were copied, adapted and applied in other contexts. 
We see similarities between social movements. Refugee war resisters 
of the 1970s were important to the anti-Vietnam or anti-‘colonial’ war 
movement. Abused migrant women were important to the women’s 
liberation movement in the 1980s (Schrover 2009). Gay asylum seek-
ers were important to the lgbt (lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgen-
dered) movement of the 1990s, as Oxford shows in this volume. Over 
time campaigns became increasingly personalised: personal stories 
and gruelling details were drawn on to strengthen a case. Advocacy 
groups instructed asylum claimants so that they could make a success-
ful appeal, as they had done with Armenians in 1917.
In 2009, some officials in the uk argued that homosexual asylum 
seekers might be able to live safely in their country of origin as long 
as they were ‘discreet’ about their sexual identities. That perspective 
shared similarities with the highly controversial us military ‘Don’t Ask, 
Don’t Tell’ policy. The argument was clearly inspired by fears of large 
numbers of homosexuals seeking refuge in Western countries. If they 
were discreet, officials argued, there would be no well-founded fear 
of persecution. In a 2009 court case this became known as the ‘Anne 
Frank’ principle. Requiring discretion from homosexuals would be the 
same as claiming that Anne Frank would have been safe as long as she 
remained in her annex (Gower 2010). According to Walaardt, in this 
volume, references to the Second World War and the Holocaust are 
strong arguments in refugee claims. In July 2010, a court overturned 
the argument that homosexuals would be safe if they remained dis-
creet. Asylum was granted to homosexuals under the Refugee Con-
vention in order to prevent an individual from suffering persecution. 
Persecution was understood to mean treatment resulting in death, 
torture or imprisonment, sponsored or condoned by the state. Simple 
discriminatory treatment on the grounds of sexual orientation, or the 
risk of family or societal disapproval, did not amount to persecution, a 
court ruled.
As Oxford highlights in this volume, differences at both ends of the 
scale are clear, but most cases fall into a grey, middle ground. Migrants 
must convince immigration officials that they either face persecution 
or fear persecution based on their sexual or gender identity. Immi-
grants are required to prove that they are part of the social group of 
homosexuals. It is not necessary that applicants were open about their 
sexuality or experienced persecution in their countries of origin, but it 
is essential that applicants clearly describe their homosexual identity, 

introduction	
31
and particularly their well-founded fear of persecution because of that 
identity. Homosexuality is constructed very differently in various coun-
tries. Asylum seekers may have had (occasional) same-sex partners, but 
need not necessarily identify as homosexuals, or be identified by others 
as such. However, acknowledging one’s sexual identity is a necessary 
component of gaining asylum.
Schacher, Walaardt, Boyd & Nowak, and Oxford, in this volume, 
offer a new perspective on this topic through their analysis of advocates’ 
organising and executing campaigns on behalf of refugees and asylum 
seekers, and the consequences of those campaigns. Overall, asylum 
regimes place a strong emphasis on exceptionalism. As detailed above, 
all countries fear establishing precedents. As a result, refugee claims are 
more successful when presented as exceptions, and when campaigns 
are highly personalised. Furthermore, there has been a strong tendency 
towards victimisation narratives. Victimisation has been a successful 
strategy for claiming rights. The price of this success, however, is that 
migrants came to be seen as vulnerable and in need of protection by the 
state. Their victimisation played a role in the construction of a counter 
identity of the ‘Western’ advocates, who formed the support groups. It 
explains and shapes the link with the rights movements (women’s rights, 
gay rights). This othering worked as a disadvantage in the long term.
State of the art and contributions to the literature:  
Defining family
When options for labour migration diminished in Western countries, 
beginning in the 1970s, family migration became more important. The 
shift to more restrictive labour migration regimes eventually cumu-
lated in debates about what constitutes a family and who are family 
members. Family migration is usually discussed in relation to labour 
migration. This is surprising since it is also relevant for other catego-
ries of migrants, such as refugees and asylum seekers. Family discourse 
was rooted in human rights discourse, like in the case of refugees. The 
debates were furthermore influenced by decolonisation and adop-
tive practices under colonialism. In the first half of the 20th century, 
in many Asian colonies domestic and international adoptions were a 
widespread but mostly informal practice. The motives of the mothers 
of Asian adoptees were not always altruistic. In the 1930s and again 
the 1950s there were intense debates (mostly within the context of the 
League of Nations or United Nations) about the extent to which adopt-
ing mothers exploited their adopted children, selling them into slavery 

32	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
and prostitution. Colonial authorities fought these practices, legitimis-
ing their authority on the basis of these efforts (Pedersen 2001).
In the 1960s, babies from Korea were adopted in the usa, and shortly 
after, also in Europe. The discourse on these adoptions intertwined 
familial love, child rescuing, anti-communism and us paternalist 
responsibility. Adoptions became part of the justification for us inter-
vention in the region. Adopting Korean babies became the us domes-
tic equivalent of fighting communism in Asia. Korea profited finan-
cially from what became a well-organised adoption industry. Between 
1953 and 2004, 156,000 to 200,000 international adoptions took place 
in Korea. Some 100,000 children went to the usa and about 5,000 to 
Canada, Australia and New Zealand. Europeans adopted almost 50,000 
Korean children (Kim & Carroll 1975; Sarri, Baik & Bombyk 1998; Oh 
2005; Kim 2009; Hübinette & Arvanitakis 2012). This migration was 
unprecedented in nature and scale. Soon other Asian countries started 
to ‘export’ children. Currently China is the largest supplier of children 
for adoption. Between 1991 and 2007, American parents adopted almost 
60,000 Chinese children, 95% of them girls (Cheng 2007). In the litera-
ture on these adoptions, there are no references the Chinese adoption 
cases of the 1930s.
The current adoption practices are widely accepted. This contrasts 
starkly with the distrust that migrant families encounter in Europe 
when they try to bring adopted children or foster children to their new 
country of residence. Both literatures – that on adoption and that on 
family migration (for more references, see Kraler et al. 2011; see also 
Van Walsum, Jones & Legêne in this volume) – are large, but they are 
seldom combined. Migrant families are regarded with suspicion, and 
have to prove that children are biologically theirs. The issue is compli-
cated by the fact that more than 20, mostly Muslim countries in Asia 
and Africa (including Algeria, Egypt, Mauritania, Morocco, Afghani-
stan, Bahrain, Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi 
Arabia, United Arab Emirates and Yemen) do not recognise the insti-
tution of adoption (Indonesia, Tunisia and Turkey do recognise it) 
(United Nations 2009). Migrants from countries in which adoption has 
not been formalised cannot bring as family members those children 
who have been placed in their care.
Within the framework of migration, the family is usually defined 
as a nuclear family. In the early days of European guest-worker migra-
tion, there was some debate about the right of men to bring more than 
one wife, although very few migrant men were actually involved in 
polygamous marriages (Bonjour 2010). Members of the extended fam-
ily (grandparents for instance) were denied the right to migrate within 

introduction	
33
the framework of family reunification, thereby depriving many fami-
lies of existing care arrangements (Grillo 2008). Migrant families also 
found that leaving their biological children behind in the care of others 
for long periods of time led to debates about so-called ‘broken bonds’. 
In some cases the idea that ties had ceased to exist after years of being 
apart resulted in the loss of the rights for children to join their families 
(Benhabib & Resnik 2009: 235; Schrover 2009b).
In the 1980s and 1990s, several Strasbourg international court cases 
revolved around the right to family life (Schrover 2009b). Article 8 of 
the Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental 
Freedoms (adopted by the Council of Europe in 1950) states that chil-
dren have the right to grow up with their families. What was disputed 
in these court cases was the right of children to join their families; the 
parents, it was suggested, had the choice of leaving in order to reunite 
with their children.
Closely related to these debates were cases in which children were 
brought to the country of origin of one parent (mostly the father), 
against the wishes of the other parent (mostly the mother). Betty 
Mahmoody’s book, on which the 1991 film ‘Not Without My Daughter’ 
was based, is emblematic of both the type of stories and the media cov-
erage. Mahmoody’s book, and several others like hers, presented West-
ern women who had married non-Western men as victims, but also as 
survivors who stood up for themselves and their children against alien 
(mostly Islamic) cultures of oppression (De Hart 2001). The parent-
hood rights of women, especially if they were Western, trumped those 
of men, especially if non-Western.
Such situations, as discussed by the authors mentioned above, sug-
gest that the West tried and succeeded in imposing on others its domi-
nant ideas about family, via the regulation of family migration. This 
is only partly true. Van Walsum, Jones & Legêne in this volume show 
that ideas developed in a colonial setting travelled back to the former 
mother country. In the Dutch colony of Suriname, Dutch authorities 
allowed plurality in family formation and marriage. This arose in part 
from the period of slavery, when slaves were not allowed to marry, 
where a child born from an enslaved woman was legally classified as a 
slave (regardless of its paternity), and enslaved parents could not rec-
ognise a child as theirs. It was also in part the result of later migra-
tions of indentured labourers from Asia, who were encouraged to hold 
to their own rules regarding marriage and family formation. The rul-
ing white and Creole elite upheld the ‘nuclear’ family (husband-wife-
children) model, with spouses who married in accordance with civil 
law. Groups that attained or aspired to middle-class status appropri-

34	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
ated this model. Other family systems were allowed to exist alongside 
the nuclear model. Those included Hindu and Islam marriage models, 
the dual marriage structure and the extended family. In some of these 
family systems, the husband-wife-children model was absent. In the 
Creole working-class matrifocal family, for example, mother-child and 
sibling relationships formed the durable and dependable network. They 
could function as the locus for matiwerk relationships: socio-economic 
support networks between women, in which ‘same-sex’ relations could 
occur. Before Suriname’s 1975 independence, ‘parallel’ family systems 
had been enacted in law, for example, in the case of marriage in accord-
ance with Hinduism or Islam. Laws recognised the authority of women 
over their biological children (which is of particular importance for 
matrifocal families), along with the rights of foster children and con-
cubinage.
In debates leading to Suriname’s independence, Dutch authorities 
sought to foster a smooth transition to independence (unlike the tran-
sition of the Dutch East Indies to independent Indonesia, which was 
far from smooth). This, along with the leniency that Dutch authorities 
had demonstrated towards mixing and plurality in the colonial context, 
led to the inclusion of a remarkable article in the final text of the treaty 
between Suriname and the Netherlands. That treaty addressed the 
admission of their respective citizens, effective on 25 November 1975. 
Article 5 allowed for admission of the person with whom a citizen of 
one of the State Parties, legally resident on the territory of the other, ‘has 
a long lasting and exclusive personal relationship’. This rule also applied 
to same-sex relationships. It was the first statutory ruling in Dutch law 
in which persons involved in non-marital relationships were granted 
the same rights as married couples, and it allowed for the migration of 
people involved in same-sex relations. According to Van Walsum, Jones 
& Legêne, in contrast with the assumptions of earlier studies, defini-
tions of family can travel both ways in the migration process. This is 
surprising, since in the colonial context marriages, especially when they 
were regarded as mixed – were looked upon with suspicion, or met with 
disapproval. Rather paradoxically, the disapproval continued, despite 
the redefinition of family, as Van Walsum, Jones & Legêne show.
Earlier literature has emphasised that family migration is frequently 
suspected as being a cover for labour migration, especially when the 
migrating partner is a non-Western man (Grillo 2010). In the uk, offi-
cial policy discriminated mainly against Asian men between the late 
1960s and 1985, when the European Court terminated it. Asian men 
were suspected of seeking entrance to the uk through marriages of con-
venience. The Home Office assumed that men were coming for work 

introduction	
35
and were abusing the arranged marriage system (Lutz 1997b; Kofman 
1999). Current discussions equate marriage migration with arranged 
and forced marriages. Governments have increasingly introduced 
age and income bars to restrict marital migration. Through income 
requirements, family migration is collapsed into economic migration, 
with an emphasis on fraud and misuse, moving it away from debates 
about (human) rights.
Migrating men are often suspected of having economic motives for 
marriage, rather than migrating for love. That is especially the case 
when they come from poor countries, are low skilled and marry non-
migrant women. Thus, ethnicity, class and gender intersect. Denmark, 
the Netherlands and Germany screen prospective marriages with non-
eu spouses in an attempt to discover fictitious marriages, using criteria 
that have been disputed in court (De Hart 2006; Kontos, Haferburg & 
Sacaliuc 2006). Authorities examine age differences between partners 
and their ability to communicate and try to establish how well partners 
know each other. Denmark, Germany, Austria, France, the Nether-
lands and the uk have introduced age restrictions (with minimum ages 
of 18 to 24), housing and income requirements, and tests to be taken 
before migration. Yet, migrants who are well educated, highly skilled 
and wealthy can circumvent the increasingly complicated restrictions 
on family migration.
Recently, the concept of ‘love exiles’ has appeared in debates. That 
term refers to people who migrate to a country where they can marry, 
often because they are prevented from marriage in their country of 
residence (Wieringa 2011). This typically applies to marriages between 
same-sex partners. Differences in laws between neighbouring countries 
lead to another type of love exiles as well. Migrants, who cannot marry 
in the Netherlands, move to Belgium, take up temporary residence, 
marry and after a while move back to the Netherlands. This is called the 
Belgium route. Similarly there is Irish route, which some uk migrants 
use, and a so-called Swedish model, which is used by migrants in Den-
mark. In recent discussions of this type of migration the emphasis has 
shifted from understanding family migration as a spin-off of labour 
migration, to portraying family migration in terms of exile, adopting 
the language of refugee migration.1 The Love Exile Foundation in the 
usa writes, ‘Love Exiles is giving attention to the hidden group of refu-
gees because of lawlessness at home elsewhere “in exile” life’.2 And:
us immigration law effectively forces the couple to leave the country, 
to become ‘love exiles’ and seek refuge abroad. … We can choose to 
leave the us and seek refuge elsewhere. Sadly, many of us have done 

36	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
this, taking our property and skills to benefit the countries where our 
families are recognized. We are the Love Exiles.3
	
By using refugee rhetoric, rather than terms associated with labour 
migration, the organisations and advocates seek to reinforce their plea. 
Raissiguier, in this volume, adds to this literature by examining how 
family life became contested in France. She illustrates that the fam-
ily was defined within racialised paradigms. French national culture, 
not race, was central to debates about French identity. For decades the 
dominant notion was that being French was something that could be 
learned. French peasants had learned to become French in the past, 
and immigrants could do so as well. This ‘open’ national identity did 
not mean that subcultures were respected, or accepted, as was the case 
within a multicultural model (Beriss 2000). Recent changes are strik-
ing because for decades France has prided itself on its ‘French model’ 
of socialising and assimilating via schools, the military, employment 
and workers’ unions. However, as Raissiguier points out, the old French 
model had elements of exclusion, based on ethnicity and gender, within 
its relatively generous and liberal understanding of nation and national-
ity. These exclusionary elements were de-emphasised when ‘the French 
model’ was contrasted with the German one and found ‘generous’ in 
comparison.
Current discussions in France about who is allowed to enter and stay 
are influenced not only by ideas of belonging, but also by changing pos-
sibilities in exercising control (compare to Schrover 2008). Biomedical 
techniques have become important tools for regulating migration. Age 
determination and other technical procedures offer an aura of objec-
tiveness, and simultaneously call into question the trustworthiness of 
migrants and the governments in their countries of origin, as well as 
ideas about, for example, adoption. In the case of contesting family ties, 
discussions are influenced by the new possibilities of genetic testing. 
The 2007 French immigration law introduced dna testing, and thus re-
inscribes ‘blood’ and ‘bloodlines’, into discussions of national belong-
ing. Genetic tests target African immigrants, who are required to prove 
that kin are related by blood. Immigrants in France are expected to 
prove that they are the biological parents of the children they seek 
to bring into the country. That policy denies the fact that 3% to 10% 
of children – migrant and non-migrant alike – are not the biological 
offspring of one or both of their parents (as a result of adoption, in 
vitro fertilisation or adultery). The law that established the dna testing 
policy was combined with a discursive denationalisation of migrants 
and their children who were, according to some, only ‘French by law’, 

introduction	
37
according to Raissiguier. Because of these changes, a social unit that is 
essentially private – family – has become very public and a subject of 
state concern.
In France, ‘family’ has, for migrants, been re-labelled and narrowed 
down to an exclusively biological definition. That redefinition was made 
possible partly by dna testing. Recently, in Norway technical possibil-
ity and distrust have led to dna testing of spouses who are believed 
actually to be siblings (udi 2012). Suspicion leads to testing, and testing 
to more suspicion.
The authors in this volume make a vital contribution to the litera-
ture by showing how, when and why ‘family’ has been redefined. The 
concept is not as static as policymakers would like it to be or as previ-
ous authors have believed it to be. Postcolonial trauma led to a surpris-
ing widening of the concept of family, as Van Walsum, Jones & Legêne 
describe, and new techniques for narrowing it, as Raissiguier points 
out, while in all cases distinctions are made according to class, gender, 
ethnicity, religion and skill level.
State of the art and contributions to the literature:  
Defining difference
Beginning in the 1960s, in numerous countries, including the uk, Swe-
den, Germany, Australia, the Netherlands, the usa and Canada, mul-
ticulturalism emerged as an ideology and a policy for managing the 
cultural diversity that had resulted from migration. There is a large lit-
erature on this (see, e.g., Runblom 1994; Volpp 1996; Moller Okin 1999; 
Shachar 2001-2002; McGoldrick 2005; McKerl 2007: 204-205; Joppke 
2007). Originally, multiculturalism held that there could be equal-
ity, despite difference. Later, this was largely replaced by the idea that 
equality could occur only without difference (Coleman 1996; Kurien 
2004). In all countries, debates about migrant women played a crucial 
role when policies shifted. In this volume, Cederberg, Andreassen, and 
Schrover address changes in policy and in debates, which were similar 
in the three countries described by the respective authors (Sweden, the 
Netherlands and Denmark). Those changes are explained in the cur-
rent literature mostly from a country-specific perspective.
Multiculturalism was introduced as a policy to facilitate integra-
tion, but in practice it often had the reverse effect (Kurien 2004; Leiken 
2005; Engelen 2006: 72). It granted groups the right to make claims for 
(financial) support from the state, based on a conception of groups as 
homogenous, and having unique and innate characteristics (Parkinson 

38	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
1994; Phillips 2003: 517; Uitermark, Rossi & Van Houtum 2005: 624; 
Salaff & Chan 2007: 126; Bhabha 2009: 57). Multiculturalism was mor-
ally and politically acceptable because ethnic minorities were seen as 
actual groups with inherent characteristics (Verkuyten & Brug 2004). 
It demanded the construction of a public ethnic identity (as opposed to 
a private one), and group formation on the basis of perceived cultural 
similarity (Kurien 2004). The struggle for recognition spurred ethnic 
formation, organisation and mobilisation. Crucial to multiculturalism 
is that integration was seen as a group process, which implied subsidies 
for immigrant organisations.
In the 1970s, Sweden was generous, relative to other countries, 
in granting rights to foreign citizens. As Cederberg in this volume 
describes, Sweden’s social democratic ideology, the country’s corpo-
ratist structure and the strong position of trade unions explain this. 
Unions and social democratic governments were concerned about 
workers’ rights and wage-dumping. Therefore, the Swedish govern-
ment granted immigrants rights in the form of employment, social 
welfare and political participation. Immigrant organisations were con-
sidered important and were given state support. Consequently, immi-
grants pursued their cultural and political interests; they also acquired 
the attitudes and skills needed to do so. Multiculturalism in Sweden (as 
elsewhere) implied collective rights for migrants and collective identi-
ties. Gender roles and family relations, which were labelled traditional 
and unequal, were nonetheless seen as ‘authentic’ elements of these 
collective identities. Rather paradoxically, Swedes pride themselves on 
gender equality, and that attitude constitutes an important element of 
Swedish identity. In the early days of multiculturalism, differences were 
introduced, maintained and subsidised. They were problematised only 
decades later.
In the 1980s and 1990s, the Swedish labour market was liberal-
ised and the welfare state dismantled. When unemployment rose – 
among immigrants and non-immigrants alike – retaining minority 
culture came to be seen as hampering migrants’ incorporation into 
majority society, and the cause of problems such as unemployment. 
Demands on immigrants increased, in terms of language and adap-
tation to Swedish norms and values, as was true in other countries. 
The Swedish ‘value dialogue’ targeted patriarchal and oppressive gen-
der relations in ‘other’ – mostly Muslim – communities. Oppression of 
women within Islam emerged as a major issue in Sweden, according to 
Cederberg (this volume). It also became important in other countries 
(Penninx, Münstermann & Entzinger 1998; Kofman 1999). This prob-
lematisation built on ideas about protectionism and Orientalism that 

introduction	
39
were formulated in the 19th century within a colonial context. That 
view portrayed the superior Christian societies as the rescuers and 
liberators of Muslim women from Muslim men (Said 1978; Stabile & 
Kumar 2005). These ideas were integrated into a perspective in which 
European women serve as the standard against which women from 
elsewhere were measured (Lutz 1997b). Muslim women are currently 
viewed, in a number of North-Western European countries, as the 
prototype of migrant women. They are perceived as exploited victims, 
handicapped by their cultures of origin. Islam and Western values are 
presented as incompatible (Korteweg & Yurdakul 2009). Issues such 
as the wearing of headscarves hold centre stage in current integration 
debates (Molokotos Liederman 2000; McGoldrick 2006; Brems 2006). 
The debates are characterised by gross overestimates of the number of 
women wearing headscarves. This discourse – to which some West-
ern feminists and right-wing politicians contribute – uses well-worn 
stereotypes about non-Western women as religious, family-oriented, 
traditional and backward (Mohanty 1988).
After the headscarf debates dissipated (and after new laws had been 
introduced in several European countries), attention moved to the 
wearing of face-covering veils or niqabs. This practice was presented 
as the next step away from European values. The niqab was seen as a 
refusal to integrate, and a security risk, linked to radical Islam and ter-
rorism (Herrera & Moors 2003). Andreassen, in this volume, describes 
the problematisation of veiling in Denmark. Crucial in this debate is 
that niqabs are frequently referred to as burqas. A burqa is the tradi-
tional Afghani garment that covers face and body. In contrast, niqabs 
cover the face, except for the eyes. The use of the inaccurate term is 
not simply a result of ignorance. By using the term burqa, an associa-
tion is made between the wearing of veils and the highly subjugated 
position of Afghani women and other problems plaguing that coun-
try. In Denmark – and in Europe as a whole – very few women wear 
burqas, though some wear niqabs. Their numbers are grossly overesti-
mated and do not warrant widespread political and public controversy, 
as Andreassen shows.
Danish lawmakers’ efforts to ban certain head coverings arose from 
perceptions that Muslim women were oppressed, that Danish law could 
liberate them and that Muslim traditions threatened Danish values. The 
Danish debates present ethnic minority women as victims of a patriar-
chal culture, while ethnically Danish women are presented as liberated 
within an emancipated culture. In Denmark the Conservative Party 
wanted to introduce a ‘burqa ban’, but suggested it without first deter-
mining – as is customary – whether such a ban would violate the consti-

40	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
tution. The Conservative Party realised that the proposal was unlikely 
to pass, but sought to benefit politically from suggesting the legislation. 
In the end the Conservative Party did not propose the ban in parlia-
ment, but the right-wing populist Danish People’s Party planned to. It 
is notable that this party, and others like it elsewhere, argue for such 
bans by claiming that they favour equality and women’s rights. How-
ever, these parties have in the past not voted in favour of laws or pro-
posals aimed at limiting the oppression of women or increasing gender 
equality. They advocate women’s rights and feminism only when it can 
be used as an anti-Muslim tool. In the veiling debates, ‘being Danish’ 
became synonymous with practicing gender equality, despite the fact 
that gender discrimination in Denmark continues to exist. By argu-
ing that others are not practicing gender equality because of veiling, 
anti-veiling policies become a tool for excluding Muslims, especially 
women, from participating equally in Danish society.
Schrover, in this volume, describes developments similar to those 
in Denmark and Sweden. In the Netherlands multiculturalism in part 
builds on older Dutch ideas about ‘living apart together’. This rendered 
multiculturalism acceptable to Dutch society, but also made it blind 
to differences between the older forms of separatism and those related 
to migrants. Within Dutch multicultural policy, immigrant organisa-
tions were subsidised, as was common in many countries. Subsidies 
were granted to a Turkish women’s organisation in the Netherlands as 
well. When ideas about multiculturalism and policies regarding sub-
sidies changed, and many of the subsidies were cut or disappeared, 
the Turkish women’s organisation continued to be subsidised because 
the women were believed to be ‘triple disadvantaged’: as women, as 
migrants and as Muslims. Because the Turkish woman’s organisation 
was one of the few organisations still subsidised, it became the object of 
a hostile takeover. In the case of the Turkish women’s organisation, per-
ceptions of a coherent and unified entity and the belief in an underlying 
essence, along with the search for ‘authentic’ cultural differences and 
public ethnic identities, denied differences within groups and increased 
competition between groups.
In the Netherlands, multiculturalism backfired. It created and 
emphasised differences and led to the problematisation of the position 
of migrants and ethnic minorities, who were believed to be unable to 
adapt because they were fundamentally different. This idea was forti-
fied by several cases, which received widespread media attention. In the 
first place there were campaigns for Turkish women who had a depend-
ent residence status and were to be deported to Turkey after their hus-
bands left them. Turkey was presented as different and backward. Sec-

introduction	
41
ondly, there were cases related to so-called ‘honour killings’. From the 
mid-1970s onwards, crimes of passion among Turks were discussed in 
very different terms than those among non-Turks. Again, the emphasis 
was on fundamental differences, which very much fitted ideas about 
multiculturalism.
Cederberg, Andreassen, and Schrover describe aspects of those 
debates as country specific, but others are shared, despite differ-
ences between the three countries described. In all of the countries, 
the debate about multiculturalism eventually became a debate about 
Islam. Discussions about how migrants were different, or how different 
they should be allowed to be, progressed from subsidies for immigrant 
organisations (which enabled migrants to maintain ‘their culture’) to 
discussions about Swedishness, Dutchness and Danishness. Static ideas 
about migrants’ culture led to static ideas about the dominant culture. 
In all of these countries, gender equality was seen as key to the domi-
nant culture, and as lacking in the immigrants’ own culture. In all three 
countries right-wing parties that had in the past opposed or ignored 
women’s rights came out in support of gender equality when it con-
cerned Muslim migrants.
Final remarks
A concluding chapter at the end of this volume summarises what this 
review and the various chapters that follow it contribute to theory. This 
volume moves away from taking stock of differences, towards examin-
ing the functionality of those differences. We analyse debates, rather 
than describe migrants. Furthermore, we move away from the private 
sphere, and its highly personalised and dramatised stories, towards the 
public sphere, where boundaries are redrawn. We show how the per-
sonalised and dramatised stories, which are part of the private sphere, 
are used in the public sphere. We also analyse how strategies, concepts 
and debates travel across time, between countries, and across and be-
tween categories. Finally, we move away from the over-studied sectors 
of domestic work and prostitution, and the stress on victimisation, fem-
inisation and problematisation. Instead, we analyse why differences are 
emphasised. Much of the academic literature on gender and migration, 
as well as much of the other literature on migration, closely ties in with 
political or policy debates. It takes a strong moral stance, which we try 
to avoid. Many publications present the migration of women as new, as 
well as their alleged problems. By taking a long-term perspective, we 
demonstrate that many current debates are rooted in historical trends. 

42	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
Notes
1	 See www.loveexiles.org/home.htm (accessed 3 September 2012).
2	 See http://madikazemi.blogspot.nl/2004/05/launch-of-love-exiles-group.html 
(accessed 3 September 2012).
3	 See http://loveexiles.wordpress.com/tag/uafa/ (accessed 3 September 2012).
References
Abu-Lughod, L. (2002), ‘Do Muslim women really need saving? Anthropological 
reflections on cultural relativism and its others’, American Anthropologist 104 (3): 
783-790.
Accampo, E. (1993), ‘Gender relations in the city: A response’, French Historical Stud-
ies 18 (1): 50-56.
Ackers, L. (1996), ‘Citizenship, gender, and dependence in the European Union: 
Women and internal migration’, Social Politics 3 (2 & 3): 316-330.
Agustín, L. (2007), Sex at the margins: Migration, labour markets and the rescue indus-
try. London: Zed Books.
Agustín, L. (2005), ‘Migrants in the mistress’s house: Other voices in the “traffick-
ing” debate’, Social Politics: International Studies in Gender, State and Society 12 
(1): 96-117. 
Agustín, L. (2003), ‘A migrant world of services’, Social Politics: International Studies 
in Gender, State and Society 10 (3): 377-396.
Alcalá, M.J. (2006), unfpa state of the world population: A passage to hope. Women 
and international migration. New York: United Nations Population Fund. 
Alwang, J., P.B. Siegel & S.L. Jørgensen (2001), Vulnerability: A view from different 
disciplines. Washington: Social Protection Discussion Paper Series, Social Protec-
tion Unit, Human Development Network, World Bank, no. 0115.
Anderson, B. (2000), Doing the dirty work? The global politics of domestic labour. 
London: Zed Books.
Anthias, F. & N. Yuval-Davis (1992), Racialized boundaries: Race, nation, gender, col-
our and class and the anti-racist struggle. London: Routledge.
Anthias, F.C. & G. Lazaridis (eds) (2000), Gender and migration in Southern Europe: 
Women on the move. Oxford and New York: Berg.
Bader, V.M. (1999), ‘Citizenship of the European Union: Human rights, rights of citi-
zens of the Union and of member states’, Ratio Juris 12 (2): 153-181.
Bal, M. (2002), Travelling concepts in the humanities: A rough guide. London: Univer-
sity of Toronto Press.
Beck, U. (1992), Risk society: Towards a new modernity. London: Sage.
Benhabib, S. & J. Resnik (2009), Migrations and mobilities: Citizenship, borders, and 
gender. New York: New York University Press.
Berghahn, S. & P. Rostock (eds) (2009), Der Stoff, aus dem die Konflikte sind. Debatten 
um das Kopftuch in Deutschland, Österreich und der Schweiz. Bielefeld: Transcript 
Verlag.

introduction	
43
Beriss, D. (2000), ‘Culture-as-race or culture-as-culture: Caribbean ethnicity and the 
ambiguity of cultural identity in French society’, French Politics, Culture and Soci-
ety 18 (3): 18-47.
Berman, J. (2003), ‘(Un)popular strangers and crises (un)bounded: Discourses of 
sex-trafficking, the European political community and the panicked state of the 
modern state’, European Journal of International Relations 9 (1): 37-86.
Bertaux-Wiame, I. (1979), ‘The life history approach to the study of internal migra-
tion’, Oral History 7 (1): 26-32.
Bhabha, F. (2009), ‘Between exclusion and assimilation: Experimentalizing multicul-
turalism’, McGill Law Journal 54 (1): 5445-5490. 
Biemann, U. (2002), ‘Remotely sensed: A topography of the global sex trade’, Feminist 
Review 70 (1): 75-88.
Blanchette, T.G. & A.P. da Silva (2012), ‘On bullshit and the trafficking of women: 
Moral entrepreneurs and the invention of trafficking of persons in Brazil’, Dialecti-
cal Anthropology 36 (1 & 2): 107-125.
Bonjour, S. (2010), Gezin en grens: Beleidsvorming inzake gezinsmigratie in Nederland, 
1955-2005. Amsterdam: Aksant.
Boris, E. (2005), ‘On the importance of naming: Gender, race and the writing of 
policy history’, The Journal of Policy History 17 (1): 72-92.
Boris, E. (1995), ‘The racialized gendered state: Constructions of citizenship in the 
United States’, Social Politics 2 (2): 160-181.
Bourdieu, P. (1994), ‘Rethinking the state: Genesis and structure of the bureaucratic 
field’, Sociological Theory 12 (1): 1-18.
Bourdieu, P. (1980), ‘L’identité et la representation’, Actes de la Recherché en Sciences 
Sociaux 35: 63-72.
Boyd, M. (1989), ‘Family and personal networks in international migration: Recent 
developments and new agendas’, International Migration Review 23 (3): 638-670.
Boyd, R, & P.J. Richerson (1987), ‘The evolution of ethnic markers’, Cultural Anthro-
pology 2 (1987): 65-79.
Bredbenner, C.L. (1998), A nationality of her own: Women, marriage, and the law of 
citizenship. Berkeley and London: University of California Press.
Breger, R. & R. Hill (1998), ‘Preface’, in R. Breger & R. Hill (eds), Cross-cultural mar-
riage: Identity and choice, pp. 1-32. Oxford and New York: Berg.
Brems, E. (2006), ‘Above children’s heads: The headscarf controversy in European 
schools from the perspective of children’s rights’, The International Journal of Chil-
dren’s Rights 14 (2): 119-136.
Brennan, D. (2008), ‘Competing claims of victimhood? Foreign and domestic victims 
of trafficking in the United States’, Sexuality Research & Social Policy 5 (4): 45-61.
Brennan, D. (2004), ‘Women work, men sponge, and everyone gossips’, Anthropologi-
cal Quarterly 77 (7): 705-733.
Brettell, C.B. (1986), Men who migrate, women who wait: Population and history in a 
Portuguese parish. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Brown, W. (1995), States of injury: Power and freedom in late modernity. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Browne, J. (2007), ‘Introduction’, in J. Browne (ed.), The future of gender, pp. 1-15. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

44	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
Brubaker, R., M. Loveman & P. Stamatov (2004), ‘Ethnicity as cognition’, Theory and 
Society 33 (1): 31-64.
Brysk, A. (2011) ‘Sex as slavery? Understanding private wrongs’, Human Rights Review 
12 (3): 259-270.
Burchell, G., C. Gordon & P. Miller (eds) (1991), The Foucault elect: Studies in govern-
mentality. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Bush, G.W. (2010), Decision points. New York: Crown Publishing.
Bustamante, J.A. (2002), ‘Immigrants’ vulnerability as subjects of human rights’, Inter-
national Migration Review 36 (2): 333-354.
Calavita, K. (2006), ‘Gender, migration, and law: Crossing borders and bridging dis-
ciplines’, International Migration Review 40 (1): 104-132.
Carruthers, S.L. (2005), ‘Between camps: Eastern Bloc “escapees” and Cold War bor-
derlands’, American Quarterly. Special issue: Legal borderlands law and the con-
struction of American borders 57 (3): 911-942.
Castles S. & M.J. Miller (2003), The age of migration: International population move-
ments in the modern world. Basingstoke and New York: Guilford Press.
Cheng, E. (2007), ‘Sentimental journey: Transnational adoption from China and 
post-World War ii us liberalism’. PhD dissertation, University of California, San 
Diego.
Coleman, D.L. (1996), ‘Individualizing justice through multiculturalism: The liberals’ 
dilemma’, Columbia Law Review 96 (5): 1093-1167.
Connell, P. (1997), ‘Understanding victimization and agency: Considerations of race, 
class and gender’, Political and Legal Anthropology Review 20 (2): 116-143.
Connell, R.W. (1993), ‘The big picture: Masculinities in recent world history’, Theory 
and Society 22 (5) Special Issue: Masculinities: 597-623.
Connell, R.W. (1990), ‘The state, gender, and sexual politics: Theory and appraisal’, 
Theory and Society 19 (5): 507-544.
Constable, N. (1997), Maid to order in Hong Kong: Stories of Filipina workers. Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press.
Côté, A., M. Kérisit & M. Côté (2001), Sponsorship … for better or for worse: The 
impact of sponsorship on the equality rights of immigrant women. Ottawa: Status 
of Women Canada.
Crenshaw, K. (1989), ‘Demarginalizing the intersection of race and sex: A black femi-
nist critique of antidiscrimination doctrine, feminist theory, and antiracist poli-
tics’, University of Chicago Legal Forum: 139-167.
Curran, S.R. (2012), Shifting boundaries, transforming lives: Globalization, gender and 
family dynamics in Thailand. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Curran, S.R. & A.C. Saguy (2001), ‘Migration and cultural change: A role for gender 
and social networks?’ Journal of International Women’s Studies 2 (3): 54-77.
Dannecker, P. (2005), ‘Transnational migration and the transformation of gender 
relations: The case of Bangladeshi labour migrants’, Current Sociology 53 (4): 655-
674.
DaVanzo, J. (1978), ‘Does unemployment affect migration? Evidence from micro 
data’, Review of Economics and Statistics 60 (4): 504-514.
Davis, B. & P. Winters (2001), ‘Gender, networks and Mexico-us migration’, Journal 
of Development Studies 28 (2): 1-26.

introduction	
45
Davis, K. (2008), ‘Intersectionality as buzzword: A sociology of science perspective 
on what makes a feminist theory successful’, Feminist Theory 9 (1): 67-85.
De Haas, H. (2007), The myth of invasion: Irregular migration from West Africa to 
the Maghreb and the European Union. Oxford: International Migration Institute.
De Haas, H. & A. van Rooij (2010), ‘Migration as emancipation? The impact of inter-
nal and international migration on the position of women left behind in rural 
Morocco’, Oxford Development Studies 38 (1): 43-62.
De Hart, B. (2006), ‘The morality of Maria Toet: Gender, citizenship and the con-
struction of the nation state’, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 32 (1): 49-68.
De Hart, B. (2001), ‘Not without my daughter: On parental abduction, orientalism 
and maternal melodrama’, European Journal of Women’s Studies 8: 51-65.
De Jong, G., K. Richter & P. Isarabhakdi (1995), ‘Gender, values, and intentions to 
move in rural Thailand’, International Migration Review 30 (3): 748-770.
Deane, T. (2010), ‘Cross-border trafficking in Nepal and India: Violating women’s 
rights’, Human Rights Review 11 (4): 491-513.
Dodson, B. (2008), ‘Gender, migration and livelihood: Migrant women in Southern 
Africa’, in N. Piper (ed.), New perspectives on gender and migration: Livelihood, 
rights and entitlements, pp. 137-158. London: Routledge.
Doezema, J. (2005), ‘Now you see her, now you don’t: Sex workers at the un trafficking 
protocol negotiations’, Social Legal Studies 14 (1): 61-89.
Doezema, J. (2001), ‘Ouch! Western feminists’ “wounded attachment” to the “third 
world prostitute’”, Feminist Review 67 (1): 16-38.
Donato, K.M., J.T. Alexander, D.R. Gabaccia & J. Leinonen (2011), ‘Variations in the 
gender composition of immigrant populations: How they matter’, International 
Migration Review 45 (3): 495-526.
Donato, K.M., D.R. Gabaccia, J. Holdaway, M. Manalansan & P.R. Pessar (2006), 
‘A glass half full? Gender in migration studies’, International Migration Review 40 
(1): 3-26.
Ehrenreich, B. & A.R. Hochschild (eds) (2002), Global woman: Nannies, maids and 
sex workers in the new economy. New York: Holt.
El-Cherkeh, T., E. Stirbu, S. Lazaroiu & D. Radu (2004), eu enlargement, migration 
and the trafficking of women: The case of South Eastern Europe. Hamburg: Ham-
burg Institute of International Economics, hwwa Report 247.
Engelen, E. (2006), ‘Towards an explanation of the performance differences of Turks 
in the Netherlands and Germany: The case for a comparative political economy of 
integration’, Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geografie 97 (1): 69-79.
España-Maram, L. (2006), Creating masculinity in Los Angeles’s little Manila: Work-
ing-class Filipinos and popular culture 1920s-1950s. New York: Columbia University 
Press.
Fanon, F. (1965), A dying colonialism. New York: Grove Press.
Fehér, L. (2000), ‘International efforts against trafficking in human beings’, Acta Juri- 
dica Hungarica 41 (3 & 4): 181-198.
Fincher, R. & P. Saunders (eds) (2001), Creating unequal futures? Rethinking poverty, 
inequality and disadvantage. Sydney: Allen & Unwin.
Forsdick, C. (2001), ‘Travelling concepts: Postcolonial approaches to exoticism’, Para-
graph 24 (3): 12-29.

46	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
Foucault, M. (1991), ‘Governmentality’, in G. Burchell, C. Gordon and P. Miller (eds), 
The Foucault effect: Studies in governmentality, pp. 87-104. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Foucault, M. (1988), ‘Politics and reason’, in L. Kritzman (ed.), Politics, philosophy, 
culture: Interviews and other writings, 1977-1984, pp. 57-85. New York: Routledge.
Foucault, M. (1980), Power/knowledge: Selected interviews and other writings, 1972-
1977. 1st ed. New York: Pantheon Books.
George, S.M. (2005), When women come first: Gender and class in transnational 
migration. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Gökariksel, B. & K. Mitchell (2005), ‘Veiling, secularism, and the neoliberal subject: 
National narratives and supranational desires in Turkey and France.’ Global Net-
works: A Journal of Transnational Affairs 5 (2): 147-165.
Gould, C. (2010), ‘The problem of trafficking’, in I.E. Palmary, K. Burman, P. Chantler 
& P. Kiguwa (eds), Gender and migration: Feminist interventions, pp. 31-49. Lon-
don: Zed Books.
Gower, M. (2010), ‘Asylum: Claims based on sexual identity’, Standard Note sn/
ha/5618, 9 July, Home Affairs Section, Library House of Commons (uk).
Grahl-Madsen, A. (1966), ‘The European tradition of asylum and the development of 
refugee law’, Journal of Peace Research 3 (3): 278-289.
Grahl-Madsen, A. (1983), ‘Identifying the world’s refugees’, Annals of the American 
Academy of Political and Social Science 467 (1): 11-23.
Grahl-Madsen, A. (1982-1983a), ‘The League of Nations and the refugees’, awr-Bul-
letin 20-21: 86-96.
Grahl-Madsen, A. (1982-1983b), ‘The special regime of refugees’, awr-Bulletin 20-21: 
159-167.
Granovetter, M.S. (1973), ‘The strength of weak ties’, American Journal of Sociology 
78 (6): 1360-1380
Grasmuck S. & P. Pessar (1991), Two islands: Dominican international migration, 
Berkeley: University of California Press.
Gray, B. (2006) ‘Migrant integration policy: A nationalist fantasy of management and 
control?’, Translocations 13 (1): 121-141.
Grillo, R. (2010), ‘The family at issue: The forced marriage debate in the uk’, in 
A. Kraler, E. Kofman, M. Kohli & C. Schmoll (eds), Gender, generations and the 
family in international migration, pp. 59-74. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University 
Press.
Grillo, R. (ed.) (2008), The family in question: Immigrant and ethnic minorities in 
multicultural Europe. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Habermas, J. (1989), The structural transformation of the public sphere: An inquiry into 
a category of bourgeois society. Cambridge: mit Press.
Hacker, H.M. (1951), ‘Women as a minority group’, Social Forces 30 (1): 60-69.
Haig, D. (2004), ‘The inexorable rise of gender and the decline of sex: Social change 
in academic titles, 1945-2001’, Archives of Sexual Behavior 33 (2): 87-96.
Hansen, P. (2008), ‘Circumcising migration: Gendering return migration among 
Somalilanders’, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 34 (7): 1109-1125.

introduction	
47
Haynes, D.F. (2004), ‘Used, abused, arrested and deported: Extending immigration 
benefits to protect the victims of trafficking and to secure the prosecution of traf-
fickers’, Human Rights Quarterly 26 (2): 221-272. 
Henshall Momsen, J. (ed.) (1999), Gender, migration and domestic service. London: 
Routledge.
Herrera L. & A. Moors (2003), ‘Banning face veiling: The boundaries of liberal educa-
tion’, isim Newsletter 13 (December): 16-17.
Hoerder, D. (2002), Cultures in contact: World migrations in the second millennium. 
Durham: Duke University Press.
Hogan, D.J. & E. Marandola (2005), ‘Towards an interdisciplinary conceptualisation 
of vulnerability’, Population, Space and Place 11: 455-471.
Holborn, L.W. (1975), Refugees: A problem of our time. The work of the United Nations 
High Commissioner for Refugees, 1951-1972. Metuchen: Scarecrow Press.
Hollingshead, A.B. (1952) ‘Trends in social stratification: A case study’, American 
Sociological Review 17 (6): 679-686.
Hondagneu-Sotelo, P. (2000), ‘Feminism and migration’, Annals of the American 
Academy of Political and Social Science 57 (1): 107-120.
Hübinette, T. & J. Arvanitakis (2012), ‘Transracial adoption: The fantasy of the global 
family’, in N. Falkof & O. Cashman-Brown (eds), On whiteness, Critical Issues 
Series 190, pp. 221-233, Oxford: Inter-Disciplinary Press.
Human Rights Watch (2005), Maid to order: Ending abuses against migrant domestic 
workers in Singapore. New York: Human Rights Watch.
Jennissen, R. (2004), Macro-economic determinants of international migration in 
Europe. Groningen: University of Groningen Press.
Jones-Correa, M. (1998), ‘Different paths: Gender, immigration and political partici-
pation’, Immigration Migration Review 32 (2): 326-349.
Joppke, C. (2007), ‘State neutrality and Islamic headscarf laws in France and Ger-
many’, Theory and Society 36 (4): 313-342.
Kamp, M. (2008), The new woman in Uzbekistan: Islam, modernity, and unveiling 
under communism. Seattle: University of Washington Press.
Kapur, R. (2005), Erotic justice: Law and the new politics of postcolonialism. London: 
Glass House.
Kawar, M. (2004), ‘Gender and migration: Why are women more vulnerable?’, in 
Femmes et mouvement: genre, migrations et nouvelle division internationale du tra-
vail, pp. 71-87. Geneva: Colloquium Graduate Institute of Development Studies.
Kempadoo, K. & J. Doezema (eds) (1998), Global sex workers. New York and London: 
Taylor & Francis.
Kennedy, J.C. (2005), De deugden van een gidsland: Burgerschap en democratie in 
Nederland. Amsterdam: Bert Bakker.
Kim, C. & T.G. Carroll (1975), ‘Intercountry adoption of South Korean orphans: A 
lawyer’s guide’, Journal of Family Law 14 (2): 223-253.
Kim, E. (2009), The origins of Korean adoption: Cold war geopolitics and intimate 
diplomacy. us-Korea Institute Working Paper Series wp 09-09. Washington, dc: 
us-Korea Institute.
King, R. & E. Zontini (2000), ‘The role of gender in the South European immigration 
model’, Papers 60: 35-52.

48	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
Knörr, J. & B. Meier (2000), Women and migration: Anthropological perspectives. New 
York: St. Martin’s Press.
Kofman, E. (1999), ‘Female “birds of passage” a decade later: Gender and immigration 
in the European Union’, International Migration Review 33 (2): 269-299.
Kofman, E., A. Phizacklea, P. Raghuram & R. Sales (2000), Gender and international 
migration in Europe: Employment, welfare and politics. London: Routledge.
Kontos, M., U. Haferbur & A.V. Sacaliuc (2006), Mapping of policies affecting female 
migrants and policy analysis: The German case. Working paper no. 1 – wp1. Frank-
furt: Institut für Sozialforschung an der J.W. Goethe Universität Frankfurt. www.
femipol.uni-frankfurt.de/docs/working_papers/wp1/Germany.pdf.
Korteweg, A. & G. Yurdakul (2009), ‘Islam, gender, and immigrant integration: 
Boundary drawing in discourses on honour killing in the Netherlands and Ger-
many’, Ethnic and Racial Studies 32 (2): 218-238.
Kraler, A., E. Kofman, M. Kohli & C. Schmoll (eds) (2011), Gender, generations and 
the family in international migration. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Kurien, P. (2004), ‘Multiculturalism, immigrant religion, and diasporic nationalism: 
The development of an American Hinduism’, Social Problems 51 (3): 362-385.
Labadie-Jackson, G. (2008), ‘Reflections on domestic work and the feminization of 
migration’, Campbell Law Review 31 (1): 67-90.
Laclau, E. & C. Mouffe (1985), Hegemony and socialist strategy: Towards a radical 
democratic practice. London: Verso.
Leiken, R.S. (2005), ‘Europe’s angry Muslims’, Foreign Affairs, 120-135.
Lenz, I., H. Lutz, M. Morokvasic, C. Schöng-Kalender & H. Schwenken (eds) (2002), 
Crossing borders and shifting boundaries, vol. ii: Gender, identities and networks. 
Opladen: Carfax Publishing.
Lepp, A. (2002), ‘Trafficking in women and the feminization of migration: The Cana-
dian context’, Canadian Woman Studies 21/22 (4): 90-99.
Lettinga, D.N. (2011), Framing the hijab: The governance of intersecting religious, ethnic 
and gender differences in France, the Netherlands and Germany. Amsterdam: vu 
University Press.
Lister, R., F. Williams, A. Anttonen, J. Bussenmaker, U. Gerhard, J. Heinen, S. Johans-
son, A. Leira, B. Siim & C. Tobio (2007), Gendering citizenship in Western Europe: 
New challenges for citizenship research in a cross-national context. Bristol: Policy 
Press.
Loescher, G. (1993), Beyond charity: International cooperation and the global refugee 
crisis. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lutz, H. (1997a), ‘The limits of European-ness: Immigrant women in fortress Europe’, 
Feminist Review 57: 93-111.
Lutz, H. (1997b), ‘Cherchez la femme perdue: Kritsche aantekeningen vanuit een gen-
derperspectief’, Migrantenstudies 2: 90-96.
Lutz, H., A. Phoenix & N. Yuval-Davis (eds) (1995), Crossfires: Nationalism, racism 
and gender in Europe. London: Pluto Press.
MacLeod, M. & E. Saraga (1988), ‘Challenging orthodoxy: Towards a feminist theory 
and practice’, Feminist Review 28: 16-55.

introduction	
49
Mahler, S.J. & P.R. Pessar (2006), ‘Gender matters: Ethnographers bring gender 
from the periphery toward the core of migration studies’, International Migration 
Review 40 (1): 27-63.
Mahler, S.J. & P.R. Pessar (2001), ‘Gendered geographies of power: Analyzing gender 
across transnational spaces’, Identities: Global Studies in Culture and Power 7 (4): 
441-459.
Marshall, T.H. (1950), Citizenship and social class and other essays. Cambridge: Uni-
versity of Cambridge Press.
Massey, D.S. (1990), ‘Social structure, household strategies, and the cumulative causa-
tion of migration’, Population Index 56 (1): 3-26.
McCall, L. (2005), ‘The complexity of intersectionality’, Signs: Journal of Women in 
Culture and Society 30 (3): 1771-1800.
McGoldrick, D. (2006), Human rights and religion: The Islamic headscarf debate in 
Europe. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
McGoldrick, D. (2005), ‘Multiculturalism and its discontents’, Human Rights Law 
Review 5 (1): 27-56.
McKay, S.C. (2007), ‘Filipino sea men: Constructing masculinities in an ethnic labour 
niche’, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 33 (4): 617-633.
McKeown, A. (2008), Melancholy order: Asian immigration and the globalization of 
borders. New York: Columbia University Press.
McKerl, M. (2007), ‘Multiculturalism, gender and violence’, Culture and Religion 8 
(2): 187-217.
Minnis, M.S. (1953), ‘Cleavage in women’s organizations: A reflection of the social 
structure of a city’, American Sociological Review 18 (1): 47-53.
Moch, L.P. (2003a), Moving Europeans: Migration in Western Europe since 1650. 
Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Moch, L.P. (2003b), ‘Networks among Bretons? The evidence for Paris, 1875-1925’, 
Continuity and Change 18 (3): 431-455.
Moch, L.P. & R.G. Fuchs (1993), ‘Getting along: Poor women’s networks in nine-
teenth-century Paris’, French Historical Studies 18 (1): 34-49.
Mohanty, C. (1988), ‘Under Western eyes: Feminist scholarship and colonial dis-
courses’, Feminist Review 30: 61-88.
Moller Okin, S. (1999), ‘Is multiculturalism bad for women?’, in J. Cohen, M. Howard 
& M. Nussbaum (eds), Is multiculturalism bad for women, pp. 9-24. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Molokotos Liederman, L. (2000), ‘Religious diversity in schools: The Muslim head-
scarf controversy and beyond’, Social Compass 47 (3): 367-382. 
Moloney, D.M. (2012), National insecurities: Immigrants and us deportation policy 
since 1882. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina.
Money, J. (1955), ‘Hermaphroditism, gender and precocity in hypera-drenocorticism: 
Psychologic findings’, Bulletin of the Johns Hopkins Hospital 96: 253-264.
Mongaya Hoegsholm, F. (ed.) (2007), In de olde worlde: Views of Filipino migrants in 
Europe. Quezon City: Philippine Social Science Council. 
Morokvasic, M., U. Erel & K. Shinozaki (eds) (2003), Gender on the move, crossing 
borders and shifting boundaries, Vol. i. Opladen: Carfax Publishers.

50	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
Moser, C.O.N. (1998), The asset vulnerability framework: Reassessing urban poverty 
reduction strategies. World Development 26 (1): 1-19.
Moya, J.M. (2007), ‘Domestic service in a global perspective: Gender, migration and 
ethnic niches’, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 33 (4): 559-579.
Nobil Ahmad, A. (2011), Masculinity, sexuality and illegal migration: Human smug-
gling from Pakistan to Europe. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Nobil Ahmad, A. (2008), ‘The romantic appeal of illegal migration: Gender mas-
culinity and human smuggling from Pakistan’, in M. Schrover, J. van der Leun, 
L. Lucassen & C. Quispel (eds), Illegal migration and gender in a global and his-
torical perspective, pp. 127-150. imiscoe Research. Amsterdam: Amsterdam Uni-
versity Press.
Oh, A. (2005), ‘A new kind of missionary work: Christians, Christian Americanists, 
and the adoption of Korean GI babies, 1955-1961’, Women’s Studies Quarterly 33 (3 
& 4): 161-188.
Oishi, N. (2005), Women in motion: Globalization, state policies, and labor migration 
in Asia. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Orbeta, A.C., Jr. & M.R.M. Abrigo (2009), ‘Philippine International Labor Migration 
in the Past 30 Years: Trends and Prospects’, Discussion Papers dp 2009-33, Philip-
pine Institute for Development Studies.
Oso Casas, L. & J.P. Garson (2005), The feminisation of international migration: 
Migrant women and labour market diversity and challenges. Brussels: oecd and 
European Commission Seminar. 
Oude Breuil, B.C. & D. Siegel, P. van Reenen, A. Beijer & L. Roos (2011), ‘Human 
trafficking revisited: Legal, enforcement and ethnographic narratives on sex traf-
ficking to Western Europe’, Trends in Organized Crime 14: 30-46.
Outshoorn, J. (2005), ‘The political debates on prostitution and trafficking of women’, 
Social Politics: International Studies in Gender, State and Society 12 (1): 141-155.
Oxford, C.G. (2005), ‘Protectors and victims in the gender regime of asylum’, National 
Women’s Studies Association (nwsa) Journal 17 (3): 18-38.
Pajnik, M. & V. Bajt (2012), ‘Migrant women’s transnationalism: Family patterns and 
policies’, International Migration 50 (5): 153-168.
Palmary, I., E. Burman, K. Chantler & P. Kiguwa (2010), Gender and migration: Femi-
nist interventions. London: Zed Books.
Parkinson, P. (1994), ‘Taking multiculturalism seriously: Marriage law and the rights 
of minorities’, Sydney Law Review 36 (16-4): 473-505.
Pawley, L. (2008), ‘Cultural citizenship’, Sociology Compass 2 (2): 594-608.
Pedersen, S. (2001), ‘The maternalist moment in British colonial policy: The contro-
versy over “child slavery” in Hong Kong 1917-1941’, Past & Present 171 (1): 161-202.
Penninx, R., H. Münstermann & H. Entzinger (eds) (1998), Etnische minderheden en 
de multiculturele samenleving. Groningen: Wolters-Noordhoff.
Pessar, P.R. &. S.J. Mahler (2003), ‘Transnational migration: Bringing gender in’, Inter-
national Migration Review 37 (3): 812-846.
Phillips, A. (2003), ‘When culture means gender: Issues of cultural defence in the 
English courts’, The Modern Law Review 66 (4): 510-531.

introduction	
51
Phizacklea, A. (2003), ‘Transnationalism, gender and global workers’, in M. Morokva-
sic-Müller, U. Erel & K. Shinokazi (eds), Crossing borders and shifting boundaries. 
Vol. i: Gender on the move, pp. 79-101 Opladen: Leske + Budrich.
Phizacklea, A. (1998), ‘Migration and globalization: A feminist perspective’, in K. 
Koser & H. Lutz (eds), The new migration in Europe: Social constructions and social 
realities, pp. 21-38. New York: Macmillan.
Phoenix, A. & P. Pattynama (2006), ‘Intersectionality’, European Journal of Women’s 
Studies 13 (3): 187-192.
Piper, N. (ed.) (2007), New perspectives on gender and migration: Livelihood, rights 
and entitlements. London: Routledge.
Piper, N. (2003), ‘Feminization of labor migration as violence against women: Inter-
national, regional, and local nongovernmental organization responses in Asia’, 
Violence Against Women 9 (6): 723-745.
Portes, A. & R. Bach (1985), Latin journey: Cuban and Mexican immigrants in the 
United States. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Portes, A. & J. Sensenbrenner (1993), ‘Embeddedness and immigration: Notes on 
the social determinants of economic action’, American Journal of Sociology 98 (6): 
1320-1350.
Roggeband, C. & M. Verloo (2007), ‘Dutch women are liberated, migrant women are 
a problem: The evolution of policy frames on gender and migration in the Neth-
erlands, 1995-2005’, Social Policy & Administration 41 (3): 271-288.
Rosas, A.E. (2011), ‘Breaking the silence: Mexican children and women’s confronta-
tion of Bracero family separation, 1942-64’, Gender & History 23 (2): 382-400.
Rosenberger, S. & B. Sauer (2012), Politics, religion, and gender: Framing and regulat-
ing the veil. Abington: Routledge.
Ross, E. (1983), ‘Survival networks: Women’s neighbourhood sharing in London 
before World War One’, History Workshop 15 (1): 4-26.
Runblom, H. (1994), ‘Swedish multiculturalism in a comparative European perspec-
tive’, Sociological Forum 9 (4): 623-640.
Ryan, J. (2002), ‘Chinese women as transnational migrants: Gender and class in 
global migration narratives’, International Migration 40 (2): 93-116.
Ryan, L. & W. Webster (2008), Gendering migration: Masculinity, femininity and eth-
nicity in post-war Britain. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Rygiel, P. (2011), Politique et administration du genre en migration, Mondes atlantiques, 
xixe-xxe siècles. Paris: Publibook.
Said, E. (1982), ‘Traveling theory’, Raritan, A Quarterly Review 1 (3): 41-67.
Said, E. (1978), Orientalism. New York: Vintage Books.
Salaff J. & P. Chan (2007), ‘Competing interests: Toronto’s Chinese immigrant asso-
ciations and the politics of multiculturalism’, Population, Space and Place 13 (2): 
125-140.
Salomon, K. (1991), Refugees in the Cold War: Toward a new international refugee 
regime in the early postwar era. Lund: Lund University Press.
Sarri, R.C., Y. Baik & M. Bombyk (1998), ‘Goal displacement and dependency in 
South Korean-United States intercountry adoption’, Children and Youth Services 
Review 20 (1-2): 87-114.

52	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
Sassen, S. (2006), ‘The repositioning of citizenship and alienage: Emergent subjects 
and spaces for politics’ in Y.M. Bodemann & G. Yurdakul (eds), Migration, citi-
zenship, ethnos: Incorporation regimes in Germany, Western Europe and North 
America, pp. 13-34. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Sassen, S. (2003), ‘The feminization of survival: Alternative global circuits’, in M. 
Morokvasic-Müller, U. Erel & K. Shinokazi (eds), Crossing borders and shifting 
boundaries. Vol. i: Gender on the move, pp. 59-78. Opladen: Leske + Budrich.
Schinkel, W. (2008), ‘The moralisation of citizenship in Dutch integration discourse’, 
Amsterdam Law Forum 1 (1) http://ojs.ubvu.vu.nl/alf/rt/printerFriendly/56/77 
(Accessed July 2012).
Schrover, M. (2013), ‘Feminization and problematization of migration: Europe in the 
nineteenth and twentieth centuries’, in D. Hoerder & A. Kaur (eds), Proletarian 
and gendered mass migrations: A global perspective on continuities and discontinui-
ties from the 19th to the 21st centuries, pp. 103-131. Leiden: Brill.
Schrover, M. (2009a), ‘Differences that make all the difference: Gender, migration 
and vulnerability’, in M. Orly, G. Brunet, V. Barusse De Luca & D. Gauvreau (eds), 
A female demography: Migration, work, fertility, family, pp. 143-168. Bern: Peter 
Lang.
Schrover, M. (2009b), ‘Family in Dutch migration policy, 1945-2005’, The History of 
the Family 14 (2): 191-202.
Schrover, M. (2008), ‘Verschillen die verschil maken: Inleiding op het themanummer 
over gender, migratie en overheidsbeleid in Nederland en België in de periode 
1945-2005’, Tijdschrift voor Sociale en Economische Geschiedenis 5 (1): 3-22.
Schrover, M. (2003), ‘Living together, working together: Concentrations amongst 
German immigrants in the Netherlands in the nineteenth century’, Continuity 
and Change 18 (2): 263-285.
Schrover, M., J. van der Leun, L. Lucassen, & C. Quispel (eds) (2008), Illegal migration 
and gender in a global and historical perspective. imiscoe Research. Amsterdam: 
Amsterdam University Press.
Schrover, M., J. van der Leun & C. Quispel, (2007), ‘Niches, labour market segre-
gation, ethnicity and gender’, Journal of Ethnicity and Migration Studies 33 (4): 
529-540.
Schrover, M. & E.J. Yeo (2010a), ‘Introduction: Moving the focus to the public sphere’, 
in M. Schrover & E.J. Yeo (eds), Gender, migration and the public sphere, 1850-2005, 
pp. 1-13. New York: Routledge.
Schrover, M. & Yeo, E. (eds) (2010b), Gender, migration and the public sphere in inter-
disciplinary perspective 1850-2005. New York: Routledge.
Scott, J.C. (1998), Seeing like a state: How certain schemes to improve the human condi-
tion have failed. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Scott, J.W. (1988), Gender and the politics of history. New York: Columbia University 
Press. 
Scott, J.W. (1986), ‘Gender: A useful category of historical analysis’, American Histori-
cal Review 91 (5): 1053-1075.
Shachar, A. (2001-2002), ‘Two critiques of multiculturalism’, Cardozo Law Review 23 
(1): 253-297.

introduction	
53
Sharpe P. (ed.) (200l), Women, gender and labour migration: Historical and global 
perspectives. London: Routledge.
Sinha, M. (2006), ‘Gender and nation’, in S. Morgan (ed.), The feminist history reader, 
pp. 323-338. Abington: Routledge.
Sinke, S. (2006), ‘Gender and migration: Historical perspectives’, International Migra-
tion Review 40 (1): 82-103.
Sjaastad, L.A. (1962), ‘The costs and returns of human migration’, Journal of Political 
Economy 70 (5): 80-93.
Soderlund, G. (2005), ‘Running from the rescuers: New us crusaders against sex traf-
ficking and the rhetoric of abolition’, National Women’s Studies Association (nwsa) 
Journal 17 (3): 64-87.
Soysal, Y.N. (1994), Limits of citizenship: Migrants and postnational membership in 
Europe. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Spijkerboer, T. (2000), Gender and refugee status. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Stabile, C.A. & D. Kumar (2005), ‘Unveiling imperialism: Media, gender and the war 
on Afghanistan’, Media Culture and Society 27 (5): 765-782.
Stark, O. (1991), The Migration of Labor. Oxford: Blackwell.
Sterett, S. (1997), ‘Domestic violence and immigration in Britain’, Polar 20 (2): 63-69.
Stewart, E. (2005), ‘Exploring the vulnerability of asylum seekers in the uk’, Popula-
tion, Space and Place 11 (9): 499-512.
Stoler, A.L. (1995), Race and the education of desire: Foucault’s history of sexuality and 
the colonial order of things. Durham: Duke University Press.
Stoler, A.L. (1992), ‘Sexual affronts and racial frontiers: European identities and the 
cultural politics of exclusion in colonial Southeast Asia’, Comparative Studies in 
Society and History 34: 540-551.
Studer, B. (2001), ‘Citizenship as contingent national belonging: Married women 
foreigners in twentieth-century Switzerland’, Gender and History 13 (3): 622-654. 
Tacoli, C. (1995), ‘Gender and international survival strategies: A research agenda 
with reference to Filipina labour migrants in Italy’, twpr 17 (2): 199-212.
Takkenberg, A. & C.C. Tahbaz (eds) (1989), The collected travaux préparatoires of the 
1951 Geneva Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees. Volumes i, ii and iii 
(2nd edition). Amsterdam: Dutch Refugee Council.
Tilly, C. (1998), Durable inequality. Berkeley: University of California Press.
udi (2012), Misuse of the right to family reunification: Marriages of convenience and 
false declarations of parenthood. Report to the European Migration Network from 
the Norwegian Contact Point. Oslo: Norwegian Directorate of Immigration.
Uitermark, J., U. Rossi & H. van Houtum (2005), ‘Reinventing multiculturalism: 
Urban citizenship and the negotiation of ethnic diversity in Amsterdam’, Interna-
tional Journal of Urban and Regional Research 29 (3): 622-640.
United Nations (2009), Child adoption: Trends and policies. New York: Department 
of Economic and Social Affairs Population Division, United Nations st/esa/
ser.A/292.
Utas, M. (2005), ‘West-African warscapes. Victimcy, girlfriending, soldiering: Tactic 
agency in a young woman’s social navigation of the Liberian war zone’, Anthropo-
logical Quarterly 78 (2): 403-430.

54	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
Van Walsum, S.K. & T. Spijkerboer (2007), Women and immigration law: New varia-
tions on classical feminist themes. Abington: Routledge.
Verkuyten, M. & P. Brug (2004), ‘Multiculturalism and group status: The role of eth-
nic identification, group essentialism and Protestant ethic’, European Journal of 
Social Psychology 34: 647-661.
Volpp, L. (2006), ‘Divesting citizenship: On Asian American history and the loss of 
citizenship through marriage’, Immigrant and Nationality Law Review 52: 397-476.
Volpp, L. (1996), ‘Talking “culture”: Gender, race, nation, and the politics of multicul-
turalism’, Columbia Law Review 96 (6): 1573-1617. 
Waddington, H., & R. Sabates-Wheeler (2003), How does poverty affect migration 
choice? A Review of Literature. Sussex: Working Paper T3 Institute of Develop-
ment Studies.
Weitzer, R. (2010), ‘The mythology of prostitution: Advocacy research and public 
Policy’, Sexuality Research and Social Policy 7 (1): 15-29.
Wiebel, J.C. (2010), Beyond the border: On rhetoric, us immigration and governmen-
tality, PhD thesis, University of Iowa, http://ir.uiowa.edu/etd/906 (Accessed 18 
May 2013).
Wieringa, S.E. (2011), ‘Portrait of a women’s marriage: Navigating between Lesbopho-
bia and Islamophobia’, Signs 36 (4): 785-793.
Wihtol de Wenden, C. (1998), ‘Young Muslim women in France: Cultural and psy-
chological adjustments’, Political Psychology 19 (1): 133-146.
Winter, B. (2008), Hijab and the Republic: Uncovering the French headscarf debate. 
Syracuse: Syracuse University Press.
Winter, B. (2006), ‘Religion, culture and women’s human rights: Some general politi-
cal and theoretical considerations’, Women’s Studies International Forum 29 (4): 
381-393.
Wooditch, A.C., M.A. DuPont-Morales & D. Hummer (2009), ‘Traffick jam: A policy 
review of the United States’ Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000’, Trends in 
Organized Crime 12 (3): 235-250.
Yamanaka, K. & N. Piper (2005), ‘Feminized migration in East and Southeast Asia: 
Policies, actions and empowerment’, Geneva, United Nations Research Institute 
for Social Development Occasional Paper 11.
Yeates, N. (2004), ‘A dialogue with “global care chain” analysis: Nurse migration in 
the Irish context’, Feminist Review 77 (1): 79-95.
Zlotnik, H. (1998), ‘International migration, 1965-1996: An overview’, Population and 
Development Review 24 (3): 429-468.
Zolberg, A. (2006), A nation by design: Immigration policy in the fashioning of Amer-
ica. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

2  Refugees and restrictionism
Armenian women immigrants to the usa  
in the post-World War i era
Yael Schacher
Introduction
Most scholarship on us refugee and asylum policy focuses on the pe-
riod after the Second World War, though some works briefly mention 
that the 1917 immigration law exempted from the literacy test those 
fleeing from religious persecution. One scholar has claimed this early 
provision was ‘stillborn’, given the passage of increasingly restrictionist 
quota laws in 1921 and 1924 that guaranteed no slots for refugees (Bon 
Tempo 2008: 15). Another scholar categorises the literacy test exemp-
tion as part of a liberal tradition of asylum, which developed in the 
usa as a defence against exclusion and deportation (Price 2009: 52-58). 
But there has been no investigation into what actually happened to a 
population that was supposed to benefit from the literacy test exemp-
tion – Armenian immigrants – to assess how the binary of realities and 
ideals structured the provision of refuge.1
Material and methods
This chapter attempts to provide this ‘on the ground’ story. Its main 
source comprises all discoverable Immigration Bureau cases involv-
ing Armenian immigrants who raised the issue of persecution between 
1917 and 1924. The annual reports of the Commissioner General of Im-
migration do not report the number or persecution claims made, but 
only the number of literacy test exemptions officially granted for this 
reason. Thus, the statistics hide the extensive discussions about per-
secution carried on during admission hearings and between officials, 
though these are evident in the case files. Most of these case files involve 
Armenian women who, after the genocide, for the first time outnum-
bered Armenian male immigrants. Armenian women, too, were much 
more likely to have difficulty passing the literacy test. More than 55% 

56	
Yael Schacher
of the approximately 25,000 Armenian immigrants in the 1920s were 
women.2 In order to follow Armenian women after their arrival and to 
analyse the perspectives of the social workers who handled their cases, 
this chapter also draws on some 150 case files from the international 
institutes of the Young Women’s Christian Association (ywca) from 
the 1920s, the vast majority of which are from the Boston International 
Institute.3
Examining case files helps to fill in gaps in the scholarship on the 
Armenian genocide and responses to it by focusing on gender and 
migration. Historians have illuminated the divergent and varied war-
time experiences of able-bodied Armenian men and women, the for-
mer conscripted, placed in labour battalions, imprisoned and killed 
and the latter deported, raped, converted and taken into Muslim 
homes as servants or wives (Sansarian 1989; Sarafian 2001; Derderian 
2005; Bjornlund 2009). Scholars have noted the importance of us mis-
sionaries in supplying graphic reports of massacres and deportations 
to both consuls and the press (Turkish Atrocities 1998; Moranian 2003). 
Studies have explored the significance of the Orientalist and gendered 
portrayals of ‘ravished’ and ‘tragic’ Armenia as a victim of Muslim bar-
barism and a martyred nation (Torchin 2006; Laycock 2009). Schol-
ars are beginning to write about efforts to recover and care for Arme-
nian women by the allied armies, Armenian volunteers in the French 
legion, the League of Nations, and ethnic and relief organisations (such 
as the American Red Cross, Near East Relief, the Armenian General 
Benevolent Union, and the Armenian National Union) (Shemmassian 
2003, 2006; Watenpaugh 2010). Few have looked carefully, however, at 
the relationship between these ‘rescuers’ and migration. This is partly 
because, in a time of nationalism and restrictionism, the organisa-
tions saw themselves as engaged in projects of ethnic reconstruction 
and were quick to disavow emigration. Indeed, Vartan Malcolm, coun-
sel for the Armenian National Union in Washington, dc, wrote that 
Armenians in America should ‘go back to Armenia’ after the war (Var-
tan Malcolm 1919: 141). Publicity materials for relief organisations hid 
some of the realities of the post-war situation for Armenian women 
that made their migration difficult, especially the prevalence of vene-
real disease. For instance, a promotional June 1919 American Commit-
tee for Armenian and Syrian Relief News Bulletin features a picture of 
a ‘victim of Turkish cruelty’ in the Near East Relief hospital in Aleppo. 
In the original print of this picture, the sign above the woman’s head 
identifies her and the reason she is in the hospital: ‘Aroosiag Muta-
fian, syphilis’. Yet this is not visible in the published version.4 Further-
more publicity materials tried to hide the refusal to abandon children 

refugees and restrictionism	
57
born to them in Muslim homes, children frequently rejected by fel-
low Armenians as ‘the executioners’ progeny’ and disdained by relief 
workers as ‘half casts’ (Tachjian 2009: 75). ‘Recounting the experience 
of enslavement, kidnapping, rape, and sequestration has tended to 
evoke a series of responses ranging from shame to outright denial in 
the Armenian diaspora’, a historian recently noted, adding that ‘res-
cued women … were caught between two patriarchal systems’ and 
abstracted into ‘empty vessels into which anxieties about … national 
honor … could be poured’ (Watenpaugh 2010: 1, 337). As a result, there 
is a ‘lack of information’ on what happened to those Armenian women 
who lived with Muslims during the genocide and then ‘took refuge in 
Armenian communities outside of Turkey’ (Peroomian 2009: 14).5 One 
scholar of the Armenian diaspora wrote insightfully on the benefits and 
drawbacks of picture bride arrangements in facilitating transatlantic 
migration (Kaprielian-Churchill 1993), but few documented the vari-
ous migration strategies and experiences, many of which involved co-
ethnic brokers or commercial middlemen and difficult compromises, 
of Armenian women migrants to the usa. Historians have described 
the obsession of us immigration authorities with discovering incidents 
of trafficking and prostitution (Feldman 1967; Donovan 2006). How-
ever, none have looked at the way the wartime experiences of Arme-
nian women – many of whom were victims of trafficking and turned 
to prostitution – subjected them to increased scrutiny on arrival to 
the usa. Historians of Armenian-Americans have written about the 
ethnic community’s response to nativism by insisting on its whiteness, 
an image that relied in part on disavowing ‘intermingling’ between 
Armenians and Turks and insisting on the respectability of Armenian 
women and their treatment as equals by their menfolk (Craver 2009: 
46). How did this stance influence the reception of Armenian women 
and the handling of intra-ethnic relationships that did not conform to 
these types in the 1920s?
A brief example, by way of introduction, will suffice to show how 
the case files not only deepen our understanding of the legacy of the 
war on the experiences of Armenian women migrants, but also fill in 
what was left out of media depictions that highlighted victimisation 
and redemption.
Perhaps the most famous Armenian woman in the usa after the war 
was Aurora Mardiganian. Her account of the deportations was widely 
read as a book and adapted into a film to publicise and raise money 
for the American organisation Near East Relief. The account, Ravished 
Armenia, sensationalised Turkish sexual violence against Armenian 
women (Mardiganian 1918).6 Its narrative, like much of the newspa-

58	
Yael Schacher
per coverage of the massacres, associates religious persecution with 
sexual degradation by presenting conversion to Islam and entrance 
into a harem as the only alternative to death for Armenian women. It 
also contrasts this with the religious liberty and security found in the 
usa, where there was ‘so little of tragedy … [and] suffering’ (ibid.: 103-
104). But despite its graphic details, the narrative emphasises Aurora’s 
evasions, never detailing her rape or apostasy, allowing her to retain 
an image of pious purity. In the last chapter of the book, she provides 
a rushed account of her trip through Russia to the usa, leaving the 
details of her passport and fare arrangements vague, implying the sup-
port of the American relief organisation and embassy. She rejoiced at 
the welcome and safety symbolised by the Statue of Liberty; the support 
of ‘kindly Americans’ made her ‘as happy as ever I can be’ (ibid.: 201). 
This image of grateful rescued Armenian women migrants was echoed 
in press stories. The Atlanta Constitution (24 January 1920: 7B) ran the 
headline: ‘Her thumb bears red tattoo mark of Moslem slave: Broken 
in health, Armenian girl reaches home of wealthy New York brother – 
Thinks she is in heaven’.7
But Aurora’s official case file reveals a more complicated picture of 
her migration and reception. Five years after she arrived, immigra-
tion authorities learned that Aurora had gained entry into usa as the 
daughter of a naturalised Armenian named Ingian, an arrangement 
made by an Armenian general who paid her passage. Learning of this 
fraud, immigration authorities began to investigate ‘lurid’ allegations 
that Aurora lived out of wedlock with Armenian soldiers after she 
ran away from her Turkish captor, ‘misconduct’ that they believed in 
part because investigators had suspected she was pregnant when she 
first arrived, and she told them she had sexual relations with the Turk 
before she could escape. In investigating her case anew, an inspector 
questioned her closely about the arrangements made to bring her to 
the United States: ‘You were not asked or did not promise to do any-
thing for Mr. Ingian or anyone else – to marry someone or to live with 
someone or to do anything with them or for them?’ In the course of 
their investigation, inspectors also learned that Aurora’s mother had 
died a natural death in 1905, which contradicted the story of the moth-
er’s martyrdom recounted in Ravished Armenia. In pleading her case, 
Aurora’s attorney noted that she was in the midst of a lawsuit against the 
makers of the film to recover salary owed her. In the end, the authori-
ties decided not to attempt to arrest and deport Aurora for ‘moral tur-
pitude’, believing that the deportation would be a ‘grave hardship.’ As 
we shall see, this kind of concession was the best refuge many Arme-
nian survivors could obtain.8

refugees and restrictionism	
59
Persecution, gender, and discretion
During the congressional debates over the literacy test, it was assumed 
that most illiterate women would come as dependents and qualify for 
a general exemption for mothers, wives and daughters. There was little 
acknowledgement of the possibility that women refugees, who had lost 
husbands, parents and children during the war, would migrate alone. 
Moreover, inspectors were given little guidance on how to assess re-
ligious persecution claims. Immigration service rules stipulated only 
that ‘clear and convincing proof of claims of exemption’ be obtained by 
inspectors.9 Thus, the persecution claims by Armenian feme sole, who 
began arriving in increasing numbers in 1920 and 1921, were unfore-
seen and handled on a case by case basis. The case files for those years 
reveal that immigration officials generally refused to acknowledge per-
secution claims of Armenian women, which would set a precedent and 
preclude the collection of fines from steamship companies. Instead, 
they used their discretion to parole or admit women temporarily to 
relatives, friends or fiancés, as cases of ‘extreme hardship’.10 By doing 
this, the authorities avoided challenges to their rulings in court and in 
response to media exposure, public pressure and letters from advocates 
and members of congress.
The questions asked claimants by inspectors reflect several influ-
ences. First, inspectors were influenced by the exemption’s attachment 
to the literacy test to ask about educational opportunities to determine 
persecution. Typically, however, inspectors dismissed claims by attrib-
uting lack of schooling to factors other than official religious discrimi-
nation. Sometimes they attributed it to ‘personal factors’, especially if 
women told of having parents who kept them at home. An inspector 
followed up one such claim with the question, ‘Can you explain why 
some Armenians living in the places where you lived were permitted 
to go to school?’11 Evidence of gender discrimination in educational 
opportunity also facilitated rejection. One woman claimed that the 
Turkish authorities prevented schooling in her village, but allowed the 
boys to go to school for a few weeks in the wintertime. ‘What prevented 
the girls from going to school with the boys?’, the inspector asked. 
She answered, ‘[T]he school was so poor it could only take the boys.’12 
Inspectors tended to see gender discrimination and religious discrimi-
nation as mutually exclusive, rather than to view the former as com-
pounding the latter.
Graphic claims that invoked the Orientalist redemption narrative 
(popularised by Aurora’s tale) were a double-edged sword. The power 
of this narrative meant that if advocates told tales of potential sex-

60	
Yael Schacher
ual risk at the hands of the Turks, illiterate women could sometimes 
gain admission even when they themselves told inspectors that they 
had not suffered religious persecution. In one such case, a deposition 
attesting that a woman ‘alone and an orphan and a Christian’ would 
‘almost certain[ly] … be taken as a white slave by men of other religious 
beliefs’ in her home town convinced Louis Post, Assistant Secretary of 
Labour, that she should be admitted as ‘a religious refugee’ in April 
1920.13 In another case, a woman’s brother petitioned administrators, 
arguing that her initial denial of persecution was a product of feminine 
shame. One of the rehearing examiners believed that ‘her statements 
are borne out by the general knowledge that comes to us through the 
press of the attitude of the Mohammedan toward the Turkish Chris-
tians.’14 On the other hand, when a woman actually told a detailed 
account of the ‘indignities’ of forced conversion and of ‘violation’ by 
a Turk, inspectors were sceptical of the woman’s innocence, especially 
since she was coming to the usa to meet a fiancé she had never seen 
and who paid her passage.15 The prevalence of the Orientalist narra-
tive of persecuted Christianity and harem slaves also meant that more 
restrictionist administrators could dismiss graphic persecution claims 
as scripted, or what they called the ‘stock exemption’ among illiterate 
women coming from the Near East.16 In one case, officials dismissed 
a detailed testimony of beatings and theft as a ‘subterfuge’.17 In another 
case, when an illiterate former ‘inmate of a harem’ was threatened with 
exclusion, protests from women’s clubs, politicians and church lead-
ers horrified at the possibility of sending her back into danger led to 
her admission.18 Without advocates like these, indications of customs 
considered backward and Eastern could lead to exclusion. In one such 
case, an illiterate Armenian woman who arrived with a 15-year-old girl 
she intended as her son’s wife was rebuked by an inspector who told her 
‘under the laws of the United States a child of that age cannot be legally 
married’.19 Arranged marriages were increasingly looked upon as sus-
piciously pragmatic and coercive, and therefore as un-American (Haag 
1999). The inspectors believed that the case of an 18-year-old Armenian 
girl coming from Constantinople to marry a man who paid her uncle 
to bring her over, was testament to the fact that ‘the bringing of girls of 
certain races to the United States for matrimonial and other purposes 
has become a matter of the most sordid commercialism’.20
Immigration authorities also justified their decisions by referring to 
the geopolitical situation in the Near East. When persecution claims 
by illiterate Armenian immigrants became frequent in 1920, the immi-
gration authorities sought guidance from the State Department, which 
provided what it admitted was a ‘not very responsive’ reply:

refugees and restrictionism	
61
The persecution of Christians … was notoriously frequent in the for-
mer Ottoman Empire … one important aim of the readjustments now 
in progress in the Near East is to put an end to these outbreaks. It is 
to be feared, however, that the present era of transition is peculiarly 
favorable to such manifestations throughout the entire region … The 
French are now in military occupation … and it is to be expected that 
as conditions grow more settled under their authority, outbreaks of 
fanaticism will decrease in frequency.21
	
Left to their own devices, immigration authorities consistently dis-
missed persecution claims by asserting that, despite what happened 
during the deportations, Armenian women had not been persecuted 
if they departed from areas under British or French occupation.22 They 
relied on the language of the 1917 law that exempted from the liter-
acy test those coming ‘to avoid religious persecution in the country of 
their last permanent residence, whether such persecution be evidenced 
by overt act or by laws or governmental regulations that discriminate 
against the alien or the race to which he belongs because of his religious 
faith’.23 As the French withdrew from Cilicia in late 1921 and attacks on 
Armenians were reported to the State Department and in the news-
papers, immigration authorities insisted that an excluded family from 
Aintab had nothing to fear, arguing that ‘Turkish violence [against 
Armenians who cooperated with the French] will probably not take 
place until some months have elapsed, for the reason that it is thought 
that the Turks will not wish to bring any political complications until 
they have settled into full control of the territory’.24 By the following 
year, there was a disconnect between requests for refuge by Armenian 
women who claimed that they had suffered and lost everything between 
1915 and 1917 and evaluations of these claims by immigration authori-
ties focused on the feasibility of sending them back in 1922. The dynam-
ics of the Greco-Turkish war seemed to colour the way officials inter-
preted the very different dynamics of earlier events.25 When an illiterate 
Armenian woman arrived in July 1922, an immigration inspector asked 
her if she ‘at any time’ suffered persecution on account of religion. She 
replied that she had been deported, stripped of all of her clothing and 
feared for her life in 1915. The authorities decided that the ‘persecution 
she claims to have suffered was the result of conditions of war’.26
In another case that month, an illiterate Armenian woman told 
immigration authorities that she fled for her life when Turks killed her 
mother and brother and spent the next several years in a British-run 
refugee camp.27 The woman was excluded not only for illiteracy, but 
also because she exceeded the quota for immigrants coming from Tur-

62	
Yael Schacher
key. Indeed, the quota law that went into effect in mid-1921 drastically 
reduced the number of Armenians allowed admission. Single Arme-
nian women who arrived with children had already been tainted by 
suspicions of ‘illegitimacy’. The persecution claim of Bayzan Zilfian 
and her daughter Siranouche, ‘that their relatives and friends have 
been killed by the Turks and the aliens have suffered much during the 
deportation by the Turks’, was ‘not believed’ to ‘represent the correct 
facts’ by the immigration authorities. A March 1921 letter from an Ellis 
Island assistant commissioner insinuating that Siranouche was born 
out of wedlock influenced this view.28 After the passage of the quota 
law, such women were scrutinised even more closely, both by consuls 
issuing scarce visas overseas and by immigration authorities evaluating 
migrants upon arrival. For example, the consul in Aleppo had to use his 
discretion in divvying out visas to one in four Armenians who had rela-
tives in the usa and who were, therefore, in the preferred quota class. 
He decided to reject Satenig Aghajamian for having lived with a Turk.29 
Immigration authorities in the usa looked more askance at the use of 
picture bride arrangements by illiterates, preferring intended husbands 
to go overseas to pick up their brides and then return with them.30 The 
new law and policies led to both an increase in fraudulent marriages 
and suspicions of them. The cases of Almas Najarian and Vartanouche 
Eremian are revealing in this regard. Almas’ husband had died while 
serving in the Ottoman army and her children died during the depor-
tations in 1915. During these deportations a Turkish soldier forced Var-
tanouche to live with him. After the war, Armenian soldiers serving in 
the French army demanded her release. She was pregnant at the time. 
Hearing that she would have trouble entering the usa with a newborn 
illegitimate child, she paid an Armenian man to play her husband. An 
Armenian ‘fixer’ at an emigrant hotel suggested to Vartanouche that she 
exchange passports with Almas, who was illiterate and would be barred 
from entering the us. Almas posed for a new passport picture with the 
Armenian man and with Vartanouche’s child as her own. The plan was 
for Vartanouche to travel alone and for Almas to claim exemption from 
the literacy test because she was coming to join this photo-husband. 
Upon arrival, inspectors denied that Almas legally qualified for a per-
secution exemption to the literacy test based on her claim: ‘my foster-
father did not care to send me to school but wanted me to do all the 
heavy work … the only reason that they deported us was because we 
were Christians and there was no chance of going to school or church’. 
Suspicious of her travelling with a child to join a soldier who left her, 
one of the inspectors asked Almas if she was pregnant and, though 
she denied it, put her through a ‘special medical test’ after the pass-

refugees and restrictionism	
63
port scheme was discovered. As for Vartanouche, given ‘the amount of 
falsification indulged in’, the authorities refused to use their discretion 
to let her in temporarily on bond to her relatives. They asked her if, in 
addition to paying the picture husband, she also had ‘immoral rela-
tions’ with him. Inspectors also asked whether the Turk who compelled 
Vartanouche to live with him during the war had many other women, 
if he ‘outraged’ Vartanouche’s younger sister, and whether Vartanouche 
tried to run away. Vartanouche’s answers seemed to disappoint them. 
Vartanouche said she was the only woman the Turk selected and that 
he supported her and her sister. This sister testified that Vartanouche 
had to leave behind an older child she bore him because the Armenian 
soldiers ‘did not want to take the child away from him’.31
A family connection could help an illiterate Armenian woman 
avoid exclusion in the early 1920s, but admission on this basis typi-
cally implied a position of dependency rather than recognition of 
past persecution or a guarantee of future rights. When Harotune Sel-
vian, a rancher from outside of Fresno, was convicted of violating the 
immigration law for bringing over and selling wives to his neighbours, 
the authorities allowed these wives to stay in the usa, claiming they 
engaged in ‘merely passive deception’.32 Having denied the persecu-
tion claim of an illiterate Armenian widow, the authorities could ‘think 
of no other way’ to legalise her admission than to have her adopt her 
nephew as her son, thereby exempting her from the literacy test as an 
aged parent of a us resident.33 In congressional discussion about Arme-
nian refugees, saving womenfolk overshadowed concern for stateless-
ness. Here is an exchange between Charles Vickrey, General Secretary 
of Near East Relief, and Congressman John Kleczka, Republican repre-
sentative from Wisconsin:
Kleczka: Do you not think that … if any relief is accorded, it ought to 
be accorded to those who have no government at all to protect them? 
… [D]o you not think that those who have no government and no-
body to care for them should receive first attention? 
Vickrey: I should say so. All through this law there is the supposi-
tion that the person to whom the applicant [i.e., the refugee over-
seas] would primarily look is the son or the brother who has come to 
America, established his citizenship, perhaps acquired a fortune, and 
who would like to give a home to his mothers and sisters.34 
	
Later in the decade, immigration officials refused to adjust to per-
manent admission status a woman they let in temporarily outside of the 

64	
Yael Schacher
quota, even though she could no longer be deported, having lived in 
the usa for more than five years and being unable to secure a passport 
from Turkish authorities, who did not permit the return of Armenians. 
Thus, despite the appeals of ywca social workers, Agniv Kurdian, who 
had been living in the usa since late 1922, remained, in 1927, unable to 
naturalise or to reunite with her husband in Istanbul.35
Ethnicity, respectability and refuge
ywca social workers began their work with Armenian women in Tur-
key, where they made an exception to their usual policy of not working 
with ‘fallen girls’ by establishing rescue homes and a migration service. 
One worker explained that, without guidance, those Armenian women 
who had been taken by the Turks would remain morally tainted, ‘dis-
couraged with life’ and ‘hardened in their ways and low in their ideals’. 
They might, because prices were high in comparison with wages, ‘get 
in with powder and paint’ and turn to prostitution.36 At a home run in 
collaboration with Near East Relief in Harput, ywca workers worried 
about the ‘Turk babies’ their wards brought with them and instituted a 
policy of keeping women a month before giving them material for new 
clothes because ‘some tried to run away after a few days to return to 
the Turks’.37 Work and marriage to Armenians seemed the best way to 
save such women. At one rescue home, Armenian women learned how 
to weave and sew and helped one girl, about to be married, prepare 
her trousseau.38 Frequently, marriages were to men in the diaspora and 
involved migration. In its migration work, the ywca believed itself to 
be responsible, among other things, for warning migrants about un-
scrupulous brokers and ticket agents as well as the risk of exclusion.39 
In early 1922, the State Department turned to ywca representatives in 
Constantinople to help track down Armenians who had been rejected 
by the immigration authorities.40 The ywca’s report on these returned 
immigrants helped discount as ‘false propaganda’ the claims that perse-
cution awaited excluded Armenians.41 Collaboration with this investi-
gation hinted at the overseas ywca’s future attempts to professionalise 
its international migration service and to promote restored us relations 
with Turkey. This led to some conflict with the ywca’s us-based divi-
sion, which worked primarily with Armenian immigrants.
By the 1920s, the ywca’s Department of Immigration and Foreign 
Communities had established international institutes in various us cit-
ies. These institutes employed Armenian-American social workers or 
‘nationality workers’ to help locate refugee relatives abroad and help 

refugees and restrictionism	
65
them ‘adjust’ on arrival. The institutes saw themselves as serving not 
just women, but the entire ethnic community, and relied on male reli-
gious and business leaders in the communities for support. Interna-
tional institutes emphasised the importance of nationality, which in its 
celebratory form fostered folk festivals and cultural appreciation, but it 
also resonated with the ethnic essentialism of the 1920s and the basis 
of the immigration quotas.42 An emphasis on nationality as a positive 
source of sociological and psychological cohesiveness43 also led work-
ers to attribute economic and family problems to mixed marriages, 
rather than to gender discrimination.44 The Armenian-American social 
workers were well-educated, middle-class women, and many were sin-
gle. This did not translate into support for the dissolution of arranged 
marriages or the pursuit of professional ambition by their female immi-
grant clients. In one case, a client was discouraged from defying ‘the 
customs and conventions of the nationality group’ and from attempt-
ing to ‘accomplish things practically outside of her means’.45 This con-
descension was sometimes mirrored by clients, who referred to social 
workers as unfortunate ‘eksik etek’ (which literally translates as ‘short 
skirt’ and idiomatically disparaged intellectual, unmarried women) and 
turned to male co-ethnics – frequently, lawyers, steamship agents, or 
church and benevolent society leaders – for help with remittances and 
migration arrangements.46
Armenian-American social workers strove to portray Armenian 
families in the best possible light, which was not always easy. Because 
many Armenian women married men they barely knew in order to get 
into the country, problems inevitably arose. Though frequently called 
upon, international institute social workers tried not to serve as wit-
nesses in divorce cases, so as not to seem to take sides between man 
and wife, rather than representing the ethnic community as a whole.47 
The social workers also worked closely with the immigration authori-
ties, mostly helping to facilitate admission and to legalise the status of 
their clients or as interpreters. It was the general policy of the ywca not 
to ‘take any action which might be interpreted as … trying to influence 
the government to set aside the laws on behalf of migrants’. Aghavnie 
Yeghenian and Olympia Yeranian, Armenian-American ywca social 
workers, helped to secure entry for their friends and siblings and acted 
as advocates in their personal capacities in some cases. But they con-
sistently condemned outright fraud, like the use of false names and the 
claiming of false familial relationships.48 This was sometimes a hard 
balancing act. In one case, immigration authorities treated three newly 
arrived Armenian girls poorly on the assumption that they were lying 
about their supposed father. According to the immigration commis-

66	
Yael Schacher
sioner, Armenians were ‘very affectionate and devoted to their children’ 
and the man claiming to be the father had not visited the detention 
centre often enough. The fact that he could not do so without risking 
his job was not the commissioner’s concern. Yeranian and Yeghenian 
wanted to help the girls, who had suffered through deportations, servi-
tude in a Turkish home and years in several Near East Relief orphanages 
before coming to the usa. They said the girls behaved like ‘real ladies 
and never did anything they should not do’ while in detention. But the 
two social workers agreed that they could not help if the man was in 
fact the uncle and not the father of the girls.49 Cases involving Arme-
nian women who were not as compliant and modest as these were even 
more challenging for the social workers because they had little support 
from the ethnic community. One such Armenian woman, though pit-
ied because she was orphaned during the war, was deemed a disgrace 
because she lived an ‘indecent’ life. Though the woman shunned con-
tact with Yeranian, Armenian community leaders expected her to take 
responsibility for marrying the woman off, sending her to a school of 
correction or getting her out of town.50
For Armenian-American social workers, ethnic allegiances com-
pounded already mixed motives towards rescue, objectivity and social 
control.51 Yeghenian and Yeranian were positioned between the world 
of their clients and that of us social welfare professionals with mis-
sionary backgrounds. Educated in us schools in the Ottoman Empire, 
they left there in response to the war. By the late 1920s, Yeghenian had 
become head of the ywca’s Department of Immigration and began to 
see the reclamation difficulties of the Armenian community as a prod-
uct of restrictive immigration laws that prevented family unification 
among the foreign born more generally.52 Yet throughout the decade, 
Yeghenian remained the point person for Armenian migration cases 
handled by the various international institutes. Cases that involved 
women who had been living in Turkish homes since the war put Yeghe-
nian in touch with the Armenian prelacy, relief organisations, mission-
aries and consuls and forced her to make difficult accommodations. In 
one case, restrictive Turkish emigration and us immigration laws and a 
daughter’s attachment to her Turkish life (especially her Muslim faith), 
made uniting her with her mother in the us impossible.53 In another 
case, Yeghenian helped a woman obtain a divorce because she had been 
forced to live with a Turk and felt that the three children she had borne 
him would not be accepted by her husband in the usa.54
The allegiances and values of social workers were put to the test 
when one of their clients, Yeranouhie Ananian, was threatened with 
deportation from the usa. Yeranouhie spent the war years in a German 

refugees and restrictionism	
67
orphanage in Harput. After the war, she moved to a us-funded Near 
East Relief orphanage in Beirut until it closed down and she was sent to 
live in Marseilles. Prevented by the quota law from coming directly to 
the usa, Yeranouhie travelled to Mexico and then Cuba. A man named 
Maroukian, a us citizen, travelled from Providence, Rhode Island to 
Cuba and he and Yeranouhie married. The couple came to the usa, 
and Yeranouhie filed for divorce. Immigration authorities learned that 
Maroukian had been paid by a non-naturalised Armenian, the brother 
of Yeranouhie’s old friend, to bring Yeranouhie into the country, as only 
the wives of citizens were exempt from the quota. The authorities also 
learned that she was pregnant. To deport Yeranouhie on the grounds 
that she had entered the country for an immoral purpose, the immi-
gration authorities needed evidence that she had sexual relations with 
both men. They subpoenaed an Armenian-American social worker 
from the Rhode Island international institute who reluctantly testified 
that Yeranouhie told her that the baby she was carrying was her friend’s 
brother’s. ‘As an Armenian woman’, the social worker wrote Yeranian:
I have interest in Mrs. Maroukian to help her any way we can, but … I 
believe that anything you could do for her would reflect more against 
your work with the Armenian community then it could help her. The 
Armenian community feels that the whole case has done the Armeni-
ans generally so much harm … if the immigration authorities had not 
acted so strict on this case perhaps others would try the same thing.
	
Maroukian told Yeranian that she only consented to marry under 
false pretences because she had such a miserable life during the war 
in Turkey and that she had decided to do anything to get out of the 
orphanage and into the usa.
After Yeranouhie’s son John, was born, she ‘begged’ to leave him in 
the usa, but the immigration authorities ‘advised’ her that she should 
not be separated from her child. While she and John were on their way 
to Ellis Island for deportation, Yeranian wrote to Yeghenian that she felt 
‘very sorry for the poor woman, who has to bear the burden of her sin, 
as well as that of two men who are really responsible for her misfortune’. 
Yeghenian was concerned too, but focused more on professionalism 
and advocacy. She wrote to Yeranian that this case provided ‘invalu-
able experience in cases of this kind … of help to other Institutes’ and 
was ‘illustrative of the terrible human tangles involved in our restrictive 
law’. Indeed, Yeranouhie’s deportation proved complicated. Because 
Turkish authorities would not allow the return of Armenians, she was 
sent to Cuba, but the Cuban authorities refused to admit unaccompa-

68	
Yael Schacher
nied married women without their husband’s consent and anyone who 
had a passport indicating that they were deported for ‘immoral pur-
poses’ since that implied involvement with prostitution.
While Maroukian was in detention in Cuba, the secretary of the 
Anglo-American Association there forwarded to Yeghenian a copy 
of a strongly worded letter of protest he sent to the us immigration 
authorities. The letter pointed out that while the authorities treated the 
‘white slavers’ like barely tainted orphan rescuers, they had turned Yer-
anouhie into a refugee once more, she having no country to return to, 
and they had pushed for the deportation of her us-born child, ignoring 
his citizenship rights. Yeghenian found this protest ‘splendid’ because, 
she admitted, ‘the sordid circumstances of the case were so appalling’ 
that ‘it did not occur’ to her to try and prevent the deportation. Thus, 
the problem of statelessness had been overshadowed by other concerns. 
Yerahounie eventually managed to get a transit visa through France, 
where she had a hard time. ‘Dear sister’, Yerahounie wrote to Yera-
nian from Marseilles, ‘We neither have a bed to sleep in nor dishes and 
spoon to eat food … Our people have changed a lot … they do not even 
want the baby in the house, nor me either.’ After some difficulties, Yera-
nouhie obtained an identification card so that she could stay in France. 
In order to work to support herself, she had to put John in an orphan-
age not so different from the one that she had grown up in.55
Yeranouhie Maroukian’s deportation was indeed a test case in that 
it affected the way international institute social workers handled other 
cases. In 1928, an Armenian woman came to the international institute 
seeking protection from the man she was living with. He was an Arme-
nian she had taken up with during the war, after the death of her parents, 
to avoid being given in marriage to a Turk. The couple were never offi-
cially married, though they claimed to be when they entered the usa, 
so Yeghenian and Yeranian were worried that if the woman brought 
her case to court, the immigration authorities might issue a warrant for 
her deportation.56 Another case involved a woman whose pregnancy 
seemed to precede her marriage in Cuba; she had been shunned by her 
husband but kept shut-in by her husband’s family since her arrival in 
the usa. Yeranian advised against any court action because of the threat 
of deportation or any publicity because of the ‘bad effect it would have 
on the standing of the Armenians in the community’.57
Yeranian thought it best to keep Yeranouhie Maroukian’s ‘whole 
story’ out of the public eye 12 years after her deportation. By that time, 
this strategy did not primarily preserve the good image of Armenian 
immigrants, but rather shored up the image of the usa as a generous 
nation of refuge. On 30 January 1940, the New York Herald Tribune ran 

refugees and restrictionism	
69
a glowing story on John Maroukian, ‘12 Years Away, Boy, 13, Returns to 
Be American’. It is worth quoting the story at length to understand how 
myths are made:
John Maroukian, a native of Boston, arrived Wednesday on the liner 
Siboney … He was one of the many repatriates from France aboard 
the vessel … His first stroke of good fortune after the ship docked was 
in meeting Miss Olympia Yeranian … Immigration officials notified 
Miss Yeranian that the boy was aboard the ship. His name was famil-
iar to her, and she recalled that last September the State Department 
had asked her to testify to the boy’s American citizenship. Somehow 
the State Department had learned that thirteen years ago Miss Yera-
nian, then a social worker in Boston, had helped the boy’s mother 
fight against poverty and desertion. John’s father, an American citizen 
of Armenian birth, died soon after the baby was born. Mrs. Marouk-
ian was married again, this time to Simeon Moussouyan. They went 
to France, taking John along and making their home at Marseilles. 
Moussouyan, an Armenian, served in the French army against the 
Nazis … When John’s mother heard that the State Department was re-
patriating Americans in France she agreed that her boy should come 
here if he wanted to. A boy scout, John arrived with a blanket slung 
across his shoulders and his few belongings packed neatly in a small 
satchel and a paper parcel … With Miss Yeranian as interpreter, he 
said yesterday he did not have enough to eat in France … He brought 
ration cards along, thinking they would be necessary somewhere 
along the line … Visitors yesterday found John a sociable boy, ready to 
smile or play checkers. He is thin, his cheeks are pale, but given a few 
more dinners of corned beef and cabbage, such as he had yesterday, 
there is every reason to believe, Miss Yeranian said, that eventually he 
will realize his ambition of being able to send for his family.
Conclusion
This chapter analysed the motives and methods of Armenian migrants, 
social workers and government authorities as revealed in cases found 
in the archives of the us Immigration and Naturalization Service and 
the international institutes of the ywca. We paid particular attention 
to examinations at ports of entry and to practices of control. In doing 
so, we documented the significance of gender in the ideological under-
pinnings of refugee advocacy, while narrating a history that prefigures 
contemporary gendered disparities and discourses in asylum cases.

70	
Yael Schacher
Discretion and deportation have only recently gained the attention 
of historians of immigration to the usa (Kanstroom 2007, 2010). This 
chapter demonstrated gender to be crucial in order to understand the 
experience of Armenians who came to the United States after World 
War i. As we saw, Armenian women immigrants achieved a kind of 
de facto refugee status, not unlike that in the Netherlands discussed 
by Walaardt in this volume. The case files of the international institute 
highlight the relationship between the state, ethnicity and advocacy, 
which continues to shape the refugee experience – as also underscored 
by Connie Oxford’s chapter in this volume. Armenian-American social 
workers, who were eager to promote the respectability of the Arme-
nian community, opposed the harsh impact of immigration laws but 
accommodated them in practice. Immigration authorities and social 
workers responded to realities they shunned – to sexual violence and 
gender discrimination, illegitimacy and statelessness, desperation and 
deception – with a restrictionism and exceptionalism, which underlie 
American refugee policy.
Notes
1	 For evidence that Armenians were one of the populations that legislators intended 
to exempt with this provision, see Congressional Record 31 July 1914, 51: 2704; 31 
December 1914, 52: 785; 24 March 1916, 53: 4799; 25 March 1916, 53: 4869; and 13 
December 1916, 54: 267.
2	 For data on Armenian men and women admitted and taking the literacy test, see 
tables 3 and 15 in Minasian (1961).
3	 The author thanks Elizabeth Haven Hawley and Dan Necas at the Immigration 
History Research Centre, University of Minnesota, for permission to use Interna-
tional Institute files. Thanks to Marian Smith and Zack Wilske at the us Citizen-
ship and Immigration Services history office for help in locating case files in the 
Immigration and Naturalization Service (ins) records at the National Archives. 
The names of clients in the closed case files of the International Institute have 
been disguised.
4	 The original print is number 204 in the Near East Relief Collection, Aga Kahn 
Division, Fine Arts Library, Harvard University. On the prevalence of venereal 
disease, see Richards (1923): 21.
5	 Jackson (2010) noted similar silences about the experiences of women in accounts 
of Sudanese displacement in the late 20th century.
6	 This is reprinted, along with stills and other materials from the film, in Ravished 
Armenia and the Story of Aurora Mardriganian, compiled by Anthony Slide.
7	 See also ‘“Y” Envoy adopts waif: Armenian boy, found beside track, to have 
American home,’ New York Tribune, 30 May 1921, 16.

refugees and restrictionism	
71
8	 ins case files 55227/244 and 54290/493, rg 85, Entry 9, National Archives and 
Record Administration, Washington, dc. All ins case files hereafter cited come 
from this record group at the National Archives.
9	 Immigration laws: Rules of May 1, 1917 (Washington, dc: Government Printing 
Office, 1917), 40.
10	 See, for example, ins case files 55190/ 561 and 55375/518.
11	 ins file 55190/561.
12	 ins file 55866/172.
13	 ins file 54766-627. 
14	 ins file 54766/974.
15	 ins file 54766/777.
16	 ins file 54766/952.
17	 ins case 54766/966.
18	 ins case 54766/777.
19	 ins case 54999/363.
20	ins case 55180/434.
21	 Letter of Bainbridge Colby to Secretary of Labor, 2 September 1920, 150.676/37, 
Visa Division, Correspondence Related to Immigration, 1910-39, General Records 
of the Department of State, rg 59, nara.
22	 ins case files 54766/771, 55018/351, 55190/572.
23	 Section 3 of 39 Stat. 877.
24	 ins case file 55021/24. For State Department reports, see file 860J.4016 in Records 
of the Department of State Relating to Internal Affairs of Armenia, 1910-1929, 
microfilm T1192, nara.
25	 According to Bloxham (2006: 31), ‘The Armenian genocide was a one-sided 
destruction of a largely defenceless community … the dynamics were slightly dif-
ferent in many of the events of 1917-1923, and markedly so in the Greco-Turkish 
war. The latter episodes, in all their bloody complexity, would … be a vital factor 
in retrospectively shaping external perceptions of the 1915-1916 genocide.’
26	 ins case 55255/210.
27	 ins case 55255/350.
28	 ins case 54999/166.
29	 Correspondence of the American Consulate in Aleppo, Syria, Class 811.1, 1923, 
Volume 93, rg 84, nara.
30	 See opposition to admitting illiterate women to intended husbands in case 
55175/735 (September 1921), and case 55236/45 (November 1922).
31	 ins cases 55018/371 and 55018/392.
32	 ins case 55063/51.
33	 ins case 54866/638.
34	 Hearings on H. R. 13269, Admission of Near East Refugees, 67th Congress, 4th 
session, 15, 16, and 19 December 1922, 86.
35	 ins case 55301/361.
36	 Letter from Margaret White to Sarah Lyon, 15 April 1919, folder 4, reel 63, ywca of 
the u.s.a. Records, Sophia Smith Collection, Smith College, Northampton, Mass 
(hereafter, ywca Smith).

72	
Yael Schacher
37	 Report of the Oversees Committee of War Work Council, 149-50, folder 5, box 
707, ywca Smith.
38	 Report of Margaret White for October 1919, folder 4, reel 63, ywca Smith.
39	 The migration service in Constantinople published a pamphlet entitled ‘Take 
Thought Before Migrating to the usa’ to inform migrants of the quota laws. 
Folder on Migration Work, reel 64, ywca Smith.
40	Relevant correspondence between the chair of the House Committee on Immi-
gration, the State Department, and Consular and ywca personnel in Turkey can 
be found in file 860J.4016/113-158, Records of the Department of State Relating 
to Internal Affairs of Armenia, 1910-1929, T1192, reel 5, National Records and 
Archives Service, General Services Administration, 1975.
41	 Letter from Ruth Larned to Mary Hurlbutt, 2 February 1922, folder 2, Migration 
Work, reel 64, ywca Smith.
42	 ‘The International Institute’s approach is on the basis of a respect for, and a recog-
nition of, natural social cohesiveness of the nationality consciousness.’ December 
1929 report, Folder: Reports 1910-1934, Immigration, reel 100, ywca Smith.
43	 ‘We believe that the nationality sense is naturally a dominant factor for any for-
eigner… Work for the individual is inseparable from an interest in and cultivation 
of the nationality community that circumscribes her life. A foreign community is 
a psychological unity.’ Edith Terry Bremer, International Institute: Re-Analysis of 
our Foundations, in Confidential Proceedings of the Conference of International 
Institutes, Washington, dc, 14-16 May 1924, folder 6, Reel 100, ywca Smith.
44	Derm. case, International Institute of Boston, Closed Case files, box 1, Immigra-
tion History Research Center, University of Minnesota (hereafter ihrc).
45	 Arz. case, International Institute of Boston, Closed Case files, box 1, ihrc.
46	Case 699, International Institute of Boston, Closed Case files, box 16, ihrc.
47	 Bohh. case, International Institute of Boston, Closed Case files, box 1, ihrc.
48	 In ins case 55270/565 Yeghenian appealed to the authorities to admit her sister; in 
case 617, box 15, International Institute Boston, ihrc, Yeranian acted in her capac-
ity as a ‘private individual’, but then closed the case when she found out the client 
used a false name.
49	Case 216, International Institute Boston, Closed Case files, box 12, ihrc.
50	 Case 503, International Institute Boston, Closed Case files, box 14, ihrc.
51	 For insight into the mixed motives of social workers in the 1920s, see D. Walkow-
itz (1990) and R. Kunzel (1993).
52	 In April 1927, Yeghenian authored a ywca report on the family of the foreign 
born under restrictive immigration that highlighted 100 cases of separated fam-
ilies from the records of different International Institutes. Twenty-three of the 
cases involved Armenian families and the rest involved families of other nation-
alities.
53	 Case 502, International Institute of Boston, Closed Case files, box 14, ihrc.
54	 Ku. case, International Institute of Connecticut, Closed Case files, box 5, ihrc.
55	 Case File 576, box 15, International Institute of Boston, ihrc and ins case 
55611/376.
56	 Case 750, box 16, International Institute Boston, ihrc.
57	 Case 732, box 16, International Institute Boston, ihrc.

refugees and restrictionism	
73
References
Bloxham, D. (2006), ‘Roots of American genocide denial: Near Eastern geopolitics 
and the interwar Armenian question’, Journal of Genocide Research 8 (1): 27-49.
Bon Tempo, C.J. (2008), Americans at the gate: The United States and refugees during 
the Cold War. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bjornlund, M. (2009), ‘“A fate worse than dying”: Sexual violence during the Arme-
nian genocide’, in D. Herzog (ed.), Brutality and desire: War and sexuality in 
Europe’s twentieth century, pp. 16-58. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.
Craver, E. (2009), ‘On the boundary of white: The Cartozian naturalization case and 
the Armenians, 1923-1925’, Journal of American Ethnic History 28 (2) (Winter): 
30-56.
Derderian, K. (2005), ‘Common fate, different experience: Gender-specific aspects 
of the Armenian genocide, 1915-1917’, Holocaust and Genocide Studies 19 (1): 1-25.
Donovan, B. (2006), White slave crusades: Race, gender and anti-vice activism, 1887-
1917. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Feldman, E. (1967), ‘Prostitution and the alien woman and the progressive imagina-
tion, 1910-1915’, American Quarterly 19 (2) (Summer): 192-206. 
Haag, P. (1999), Consent: Sexual rights and the transformation of American liberalism. 
Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press.
Jackson, L. (2010), ‘Where are the girls? War displacement and the notion of home 
among Sudanese refugee children’, in M. Schrover & E.J. Yeo (eds), Gender, migra-
tion and the public sphere in interdisciplinary perspective 1850-2005, pp. 160-178. 
New York: Taylor and Francis/Routledge.
Kanstroom. D. (2010), ‘Loving humanity while accepting real people’, in D. Hollen-
bach (ed.), Driven from home: Protecting the rights of forced migrants, pp. 115-145. 
Washington, dc: Georgetown University Press.
Kanstroom, D. (2007), Deportation nation: Outsiders in American history. Cam-
bridge: Harvard University Press.
Kaprielian-Churchill, I. (1993), ‘Armenian refugee women: The picture brides, 1920-
1930’, Journal of American Ethnic History 12 (3) (Spring): 3-29.
Kunzel, R.G. (1993), Fallen women, problem girls: Unmarried mothers and the profes-
sionalization of social work, 1890-1945. New Haven and London: Yale University 
Press. 
Laycock, J. (2009), Imagining Armenia: Orientalism, ambiguity, and intervention. New 
York and Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Mardiganian, A. (1918), Ravished Armenia: the story of Aurora Mardiganian, the 
Christian girl, who lived through the great massacres. New York: Kingfield Press.
Minasian, E. (1961), ‘They came from Ararat: The exodus of the Armenian people to 
the United States’. PhD thesis, University of California, Berkeley.
Moranian, S.E. (2003), ‘Armenian genocide and American missionary relief efforts’, 
in J. Winter (ed.), America and the Armenian genocide of 1915, pp. 185-213. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Peroomian, R. (2009), ‘Women and the Armenian genocide: The victim, the living 
martyr’, in S. Totten (ed.), Plight and fate of women during and following genocide, 
pp. 7-24. New Brunswick: Transaction.

74	
Yael Schacher
Price, M. (2009), Rethinking asylum: History, purpose, and limits. Cambridge and 
New York: Cambridge University Press.
Richards, G.L. (1923), Medicalwork of the Near East Relief. New York: Near East Relief.
Sarafian, A. (2001), ‘The absorption of Armenian women and children into Muslim 
households as a structural component of the Armenian genocide’, in O. Bartov 
& P. Mack (eds), In God’s name: Genocide and religion in the twentieth century, 
pp. 209-221. New York and Oxford: Berghahn Books.
Sansarian, E. (1989), ‘Gender distinction in the genocide process: A preliminary study 
of the Armenian case’, Holocaust and Genocide Studies 4 (4): 449-461.
Shemmassian, V.L. (2003), ‘The League of Nations and the reclamation of Armenian 
genocide survivors’, in R. Hovannisian (ed.), Looking backward, moving forward, 
pp. 81-112. New Brunswick: Transaction.
Shemmassian, V.L. (2006), ‘The reclamation of captive Armenian genocide survivors 
in Syria and Lebanon at the end of World War i’, Journal for the Society of Arme-
nian Studies 15: 113-140.
Tachjian, V. (2009), ‘Gender, nationalism, exclusion: The reintegration process of 
female survivors of the Armenian genocide’, Nations and Nationalism 15 (1): 60-80.
Turkish Atrocities: Statements of American missionaries on the destruction of Chris-
tian communities in Ottoman Turkey, 1915-1917 (1998), compiled by J. Barton. Ann 
Arbor: Gomidas Institute.
Torchin, L. (2006), ‘Ravished Armenia: Visual media, humanitarian advocacy, and 
the formation of witnessing publics’, American Anthropologist 108 (1) (March): 
214-220.
Walkowitz, D. (1990), ‘The making of a feminine professional identity: Social workers 
in the 1920s’, American Historical Review 95 (4) 1051-1075.
Watenpaugh, K.D. (2010), ‘The League of Nations’ rescue of Armenian genocide sur-
vivors and the making of modern humanitarianism, 1920-1927’, American Histori-
cal Review 115 (5) (December): 1315-1339.

3  New refugees?
Manly war resisters prevent an asylum crisis  
in the Netherlands, 1968-1973
Tycho Walaardt
Introduction: Two types of heroes
In the late 1960s and early 1970s, a few hundred Portuguese war re-
sisters and an American deserter sought refuge in the Netherlands. 
These ‘New Refugees’ (Cohen & Joly 1989: 6) were the first substantial 
group of asylum seekers to flee from non-communist countries to the 
Netherlands since the beginning of the post-Second World War era. 
Their arrival was part of a broader phenomenon: after the late 1960s the 
number of asylum applicants increased, and their countries of origin 
and their reasons for fleeing diversified (Paludan 1981: 69; Hoeksma 
1987: 98; Gallagher 1989; Bronkhorst 1990: 44). This chapter describes 
the responses of Dutch authorities and powerful lobby groups to their 
arrival. Large numbers of people applied for asylum, but their social 
backgrounds, countries of origin, as well as their motives, had shifted. 
This, in turn, might have led to a moral panic in Dutch society and sub-
sequent changes in refugee policy. In reality it did not.
According to some scholars, the arrival of the New Refugees led to 
departures from earlier post-war refugee asylum policies (Van Esterik 
1998: 120). These New Refugees were less successful than the anticom-
munists had been in Western asylum procedures (Bronkhorst 1990: 
140; Van Esterik 1998: 120). Authorities viewed the New Refugees with 
suspicion, because they were not the ‘enemies of our enemies’, as the 
anticommunists had been (Zolberg 2006: 18). Portuguese war resist-
ers were rarely granted refugee status, but they were seldom forced to 
leave the Netherlands. Fewer than 3% of the Portuguese refugees were 
denied residence permits from 1968 to 1973. This number contradicts 
the image of a restrictive policy. Dutch authorities chose a pragmatic 
solution: New Refugees were granted residence permits, but denied 
refugee status.
Before 1970, most asylum seekers were characterised as anticom-
munists. The 1950s refugee was depicted as a heroic male figure fight-

76	
Tycho Walaardt
ing against the terrors of communism (Carruthers 2005). A political 
activist, he was a member of his country’s intelligentsia, and an asset 
to Western society. Defectors played a crucial role in anticommunist 
propaganda. Anticommunists did not arrive in large numbers, except 
following the 1956 Hungarian Uprising and the 1968 Prague Spring. 
But those who managed to cross the Iron Curtain are believed to have 
been warmly welcomed. In reality, their welcome was not particularly 
friendly (Walaardt 2009, 2012). Poles were suspected of espionage and 
interned in the Netherlands for months. Those who had, prior to their 
arrival in the Netherlands, lived in Belgium or Germany were deported 
there. Many Eastern European communists were granted residence 
permits rather than refugee status.
The war resisters’ profile contrasted with the image of the Cold War 
refugee. This chapter illustrates how the popular image of a refugee 
changed when the New Refugees replaced the Cold War refugees. Both 
groups consisted mainly of men. The anticommunists were replaced 
by men who had stood up against the brutalities of colonial wars. New 
Refugees were not fleeing left-wing dictatorships, but rather escaping 
from right-wing regimes. These young men fled because they refused to 
fight in Africa or Vietnam. This ‘entirely new category of asylum seek-
ers’ posed challenges to Western European states (Loescher 2001: 179). 
Although their numbers were not large, they appeared prominently in 
public and political discussions.
In the 1960s, thousands of young Portuguese men were shipped to 
Africa to fight colonial wars in Angola and Mozambique. Some tried 
to avoid conscription, while others fled the battlefront. In April 1974, 
80,000 Portuguese men trying to avoid the draft lived abroad, mainly 
in France (Van Krieken 1976: 265). In a number of European countries, 
student support groups were established to assist these Portuguese war 
resisters. In Sweden, for instance, Portuguese deserters’ committees 
were formed in Lund, Stockholm and Uppsala (Sellström 2002: 84). 
This was an era of mass protest and of the rise of leftist youth move-
ments in many countries, including the Netherlands (Jansse de Jonge, 
Prakken & De Roos 1983: 113) Activist groups used the New Refugees 
to attract publicity to their protests against the brutalities of the Por-
tuguese army in Africa. During this period left-wing political parties 
were part of the opposition and used the war resisters to show disap-
proval of the conservative – mainly Christian – government.
In this period, economic growth in the Netherlands slowed to a 
standstill. As a result, the recruitment of guest workers, including the 
Portuguese, ended. In 1971, 3,400 Portuguese men remained in the 
Netherlands (Lindo 1988: 20). The reception of the Portuguese war 

new refugees?	
77
resisters was influenced by the earlier recruitment of Portuguese guest 
workers. If the war resisters failed to obtain refugee status, they switched 
roles and were categorised as guest workers. Ministry of Justice officials 
acknowledged that there were two categories, but found it hard to dis-
tinguish between them.1
Asylum crisis, gender and masculinity
Scholars of refugee policy have argued that changes in asylum policy 
are caused by changes in the identities and composition of asylum 
seekers (Freeman 1992: 1162; Alink 2006). As a result, authorities panic 
and react by issuing new policies, because the newcomers constitute 
unprecedented challenges to the legal machinery. In many European 
countries, asylum processes evolved from relative stability in the mid 
to late 1980s, into a phase of institutional crisis (Alink, Boin & ’t Hart 
2001: 287). Freeman argues that beginning in the late 1980s authorities 
became more focused on ‘tough talk than tough action’ (Freeman 1992: 
1161-1162). When scholars discuss ‘the asylum crisis’, they refer to differ-
ent periods. Some date the crisis to the 1970s, while others point to the 
mid-1980s and others still to 2000 (Cohen & Joly 1989: 6; Boswell 2000: 
559; Alink, Boin & ’t Hart 2001: 291). Most scholars, however, situate 
the asylum crisis as one that began between the fall of the Berlin Wall 
and the liberation of Eastern Europe (Freeman 1992: 1155). According 
to Boswell (2000: 559) an asylum crisis was caused by a combination 
of three factors: a large number of asylum seekers, an economic down-
turn, and the impact of globalisation on identity and state legitimacy. 
Another factor that contributed to the crisis was that the New Refugees 
were culturally and ethnically different from their hosts. Newcomers 
lacked kin and potential support groups in the country where they ap-
plied for asylum (Stein 1981: 330). Finally, asylum seekers had higher 
profiles, both because of their larger numbers and because the media 
and governments placed them in the spotlight (Cohen & Joly 1989: 8). 
For example, in 2002 asylum seekers were ‘viewed almost exclusively 
in crisis terms within uk (and European) media’ (White 2002: 1056).
All of these elements to some degree existed before the arrival of 
the New Refugees. Clearly, one might anticipate that an asylum crisis 
would occur in the early 1970s, but that situation did not materialise. 
The absence of crisis can be explained by gender aspects and the social 
connection that the New Refugees shared with Dutch society. While a 
large body of literature on gender and asylum exists, there is relatively 
little historical research on differences between men and women in 

78	
Tycho Walaardt
asylum cases. Most of that literature assumes that the starting position 
of men and women in Western asylum procedures differs (Van Baalen 
1997; Bhabha 2004; Van Wetten et al. 2001; Valji, De la Hunt & Moffett 
2003; Mascini & Van Bochove 2007). Authors state that women are less 
likely to be recognised as refugees, because they are less involved in vis-
ible political activities (Spijkerboer 1994: 5; Valji, De la Hunt & Moffett 
2003: 61; Leiss & Boesjes 2004; Montgomery & Foldspang 2005: 454-
467). Women’s activities occur in the private sphere and are therefore 
regarded as non-political (Crawley 2000). The 1951 Refugee Conven-
tion is cited as the reason behind their deprived position in Western 
asylum procedures, because it implicitly assumes refugees to be men 
(Greatbatch 1989: 518; Kelly 1993; Macklin 1999; Bhabha 2004; Bloch, 
Galvin & Harrell-Bond 2000; Kneebone 2005; Oxford 2005; Calavita 
2006).
Scholars have analysed the effects of ideologies about women’s roles 
on migration and integration, but there is little research on masculinity 
(but see McKay 2007; Nobil Ahmad 2008). In the literature on mas-
culinity, a distinction is made between violent masculinity and heroic 
masculinity; the latter is characterised by political struggle, rather than 
by the physical violence that typifies the former (Unterhalter 2000). 
Both Cold War refugees and war resisters were ascribed heroic mas-
culinity. This is less surprising in the first case than in the second. War 
resisters were negatively portrayed by their opponents as ‘fools’ and 
‘faggots’ – labels which implied that their manhood was in question 
(Thorne 1975: 183). If it were true that the army made boys into men, as 
many believed, war resisters were stuck in permanent boyhood. The us 
war-resister movement countered this image by emphasising the mas-
culinity of the war resisters. The war-resistance mystique they created 
served to minimise the passive (‘feminine’) connotations of non-vio-
lence by shifting the focus to activism and collective agency (Ziemann 
2008). This made it possible to construct the war resisters as vulnerable 
and in need of support,2 while maintaining and bolstering the mascu-
line interpretation of a refugee (Connell 1993: 601).
In the Netherlands, war resisters were portrayed as young intellectu-
als and idealists belonging to the middle and higher echelons of Portu-
guese society. They were welcomed. That dynamic was also true for us 
war resisters in Canada (Churchill 2004). The sudden arrival of the new 
asylum seekers might have caused an asylum crisis, but their reputation 
for manly heroism worked in their favour. The masculine image of the 
1950s refugee was reinforced by the New Refugees. Those factors, and 
their connection to Dutch leftist youth groups, prevented an asylum 
crisis.

new refugees?	
79
The Dutch asylum procedure
People who arrived in the Netherlands as refugees were required to re-
port to a local Dutch police station and request asylum and residence 
permits. If a refugee claim was seen as potentially successful, the police 
referred the case to the Ministry of Justice. The Geneva Convention was 
incorporated into the Dutch Aliens Act. Refugees were those with a 
well-founded fear of persecution because of their political opinion, na-
tionality, race or religion, or because they belonged to a particular so-
cial group, who physically located outside their countries of origin and 
could not re-avail themselves of the protection of their home countries. 
The 1967 Protocol of New York extended the cut-off date of the Refugee 
Convention. Individuals fleeing persecution after 1951 were now also 
eligible for refugee status.
In 1970, the Dutch government issued special guidelines to address 
the situation of Portuguese war resisters.3 When a Portuguese applicant 
fulfilled three conditions, an ordinary residence permit was issued, but 
refugee status was not granted. The applicant needed to have political 
motives for his draft evasion and must have arrived in the Netherlands 
within one month after leaving Portugal. Portuguese citizens who had 
stayed in a safe country after they left Portugal were not admitted, oth-
erwise ‘we’ll get all the Portuguese staying in France’, one civil serv-
ant said.4 Thirdly, a Portuguese asylum seeker had to find housing and 
needed to submit an employment contract. Six months after the issu-
ance of the permit, the case of the Portuguese citizen was evaluated. 
Only in case of gross misconduct was the permit not renewed. In sum, 
the Dutch authorities acknowledged that the Portuguese had valid rea-
sons not to return to their country, but felt that they did not meet the 
definition of a refugee. The permit could be compared to a de facto ref-
ugee status (Paludan 1981: 71). Desertion was not accepted as grounds 
for refugee status, but the non-refoulement principle was observed, as 
the Geneva Convention forbade repatriation to a country where perse-
cution could be possible.
With the residence permit a Portuguese citizen could apply for a 
mandate declaration from the United Nations High Commissioner for 
Refugees (unhcr). A unhcr representative issued such declarations 
to individuals who fulfilled the criteria of the Refugee Convention. The 
representative conducted eligibility assessments with asylum seekers. 
Draft evasion was not sufficient. The unhcr issued mandate declara-
tions only to those Portuguese who were involved in oppositional activ-
ities. A residence permit was a prerequisite for obtaining a mandate 
declaration. The Ministry of Justice also had to approve the issuance of 

80	
Tycho Walaardt
a mandate declaration (Van Krieken 1976: 126). The Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs opposed issuing these declarations to Portuguese, so as not to 
offend the authorities in Portugal – a nato ally.
Very few asylum seekers were granted refugee status. Between 1967 
and 1972 more than 2,100 people requested asylum, but just three indi-
viduals were admitted as refugees based on the Dutch aliens’ law, whilst 
more than 1,200 asylum seekers obtained a mandate declaration.5 
The authorities were reluctant to issue asylum seekers refugee status, 
because they feared that an unbreakable tie with the Netherlands would 
thus be created. It was almost impossible to deport persons with refu-
gee status. Only those who had stayed for years in the Netherlands, and 
proved that they had adjusted and assimilated, were admitted as refu-
gees. Mandate declarations were less problematic, because no ties with 
the Netherlands were created, just with the unhcr (Duynstee 1972: 49).
In the late 1960s and early 1970s, the number of asylum seekers was 
low, especially compared to the 1990s, but it did rise. Between June 1968 
and June 1970, 1,203 people applied for asylum. Most of them (938) came 
from Czechoslovakia and all were admitted on a prima facie basis fol-
lowing the Prague Spring. The others came from Portugal (97), Poland 
(49), Hungary (32), Yugoslavia (18), Romania (13), Nigeria (10), Greece 
(6), South Africa (4), East Germany (4), Russia (3) and other coun-
tries (25). Of those, 995 were accepted, 68 migrated to another country, 
13 left or disappeared, 10 cases were still pending in 1970 and only 21 
(2%) were rejected.6 Between 1968 and 1974, 600 to 800 Portuguese war 
deserters came to the Netherlands (Bronkhorst 1990: 44).7 While all 
applied for residence permits and refugee status, only 17 were granted a 
mandate declaration.8 Just three were deported. This figure exemplifies 
perfectly the intended outcome of asylum requests.
Three groups of actors influenced the outcomes of asylum requests. 
First, there was the decision-making body. Employees of local aliens’ 
offices received asylum seekers and interviewed them. They sent their 
interview notes, including a recommendation, to the Ministry of Jus-
tice. The Minister of Justice and civil servants from the Aliens Depart-
ment and Border Protection assessed the asylum seekers’ cases. The 
Minister of Foreign Affairs collected data on the countries of origin 
and approved or denied the claim of each application. The Minister of 
Social Affairs protected the labour market.
Lobby groups formed the second group of actors. The Angola Com-
mittee was the most influential of these, and had provided legal coun-
sel to Portuguese since 1968. According to the Ministry of Justice, this 
Committee recruited Portuguese in Paris with the prospect of higher 
wages. A civil servant grumbled that members of this Committee 

new refugees?	
81
had stronger political opinions than the Portuguese themselves. They 
looked after their clients ‘like fathers’.9 The Committee accused other 
refugee organisations of being traditional in assisting only asylum seek-
ers from behind the Iron Curtain. A director of a left-wing group stated 
that the older groups were staffed by those who were afraid of the long-
haired Portuguese.10
The third group consisted of people who became involved in the lives 
of the Portuguese. Friends, relatives, employers and concerned Dutch 
citizens challenged the outcomes of New Refugee asylum requests. Par-
ticularly important were leftist parliamentarians and senators, who fre-
quently asked questions in parliament.
Materials and methods
This chapter analyses who influenced the asylum procedure, how they 
influenced the outcomes of asylum requests and how Dutch authorities 
dealt with the arrival of the New Refugees. It discusses at length the 
case of the most famous asylum seeker in the Netherlands: the Ameri-
can Ralph Waver.
The main source for this research is Ministry of Justice archives. The 
analysis is based on 23 individual case files of asylum seekers. Case files 
document who were involved in the asylum procedure (the actors), and 
why they believed the Netherlands should or should not offer asylum, 
in other words, their arguments. Case files contain policy documents, 
internal memos and letters from refugee support groups and others. In 
addition, 45 policy documents from the ministries of Foreign Affairs 
and Justice were used. Analysis of policy files traces policy changes and 
debates between the officials and their departments, and with external 
actors. The analysis also draws on newspaper articles.
The arguments used in letters and memos are analysed according 
to the principles of frame-analysis. ‘Frames’ are a series of claims tied 
together in a more or less coherent way. Frames are used to define and 
diagnose problems, to present moral judgements, and sometimes to 
offer solutions (Entman 1993: 52). The function of framing is to select, 
highlight or obscure repeating elements in pleas. Frames shows who 
or what was defined as a problem, by whom and why (Schrover 2009: 
192). Recently, scholars have used frame analysis to look for the social 
construction of asylum seekers in media coverage and political debates 
(D’Haenens & De Lange 2001; Van Gorp 2002; Lynn & Lea 2003; Nick-
els 2007: 41-48). In the asylum procedure, seven types of arguments 
were used. Table 3.1 lists the seven types and the solutions that logically 
followed from them.

82	
Tycho Walaardt
table 3.1	 The seven frames actors used in the Dutch asylum procedure
  Frame
Argument
Solution
1.	 Persecution
Asylum seeker  
  feared persecution
Clear persecution → admitted
2.	 Criticising  
	
the asylum  
	
procedure
Right to fair treatment
Absence of fair treatment → admitted
Principles of equality  
  or precedent
Fear of precedent → rejected
Unequal treatment → admitted
Stay in a safe country
Stay in safe third country → rejected
Asylum policies  
  of other countries
Keep pace with other countries → admitted  
  or rejected
Duration of  
  asylum procedure
Longer stay → admitted
3.	 Credibility
Credibility issues
Credible claim → admitted
Incredible claim → rejected
4.	Humanitarian
Solidarity, humanity &  
  Christian traditions
Admitted
Tradition of hospitality
Admitted
5.	 Politics
Condemnation country  
  of origin
Condemning policy of country of origin → 
Admitted or rejected
Diplomatic relations
Maintaining diplomatic relations → rejected
6.	Benefits and  
	
threats 
Issues of the  
  Dutch society
High unemployment, overpopulation,  
reduced economic growth → rejected
Fear of public unrest
Strong support within Dutch society → admitted
Images and  
  vulnerability of group
Vulnerable image of the group → admitted
Negative image of the group → rejected
7.	 Individual  
	
characteristics
Working capabilities 
Useful on the labour market → admitted
Character of individual
Sympathetic → admitted
Family situation
Single → admitted
Persecution frame
The key phrase of the 1951 Refugee Convention is a well-founded fear 
of persecution. Those who pleaded in favour of admission argued that 
the New Refugees feared persecution, while those who opposed admis-
sion denied this. Actors defined fear of persecution in various ways. 
The Minister of Justice argued that the Portuguese fled due to a feeling 
of uneasiness and therefore did not meet the definition of a conven-
tion refugee.11 He claimed that Portuguese war resisters faced severe 
consequences, but that their experiences differed from those of Cold 
War refugees. Fear of persecution was a ‘serious controversy between a 

new refugees?	
83
person and his government, followed by intimidation and repression’. A 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs official added that in order to meet the defi-
nition of refugee, an applicant had to actively oppose the Portuguese 
regime.12 Refugee support groups argued that desertion was a political 
deed. Deserters opposed a colonial regime and feared persecution due 
to their political opinions.13
Officials of the Ministry of Justice, the unhcr and the Ministry of For-
eign Affairs discussed in a meeting whether a Portuguese man, known 
as P., was a refugee. The first two agencies argued that he was, because 
he had an objective fear of persecution.14 According to the unhcr, P. 
feared persecution because he rejected the Portuguese regime. He was 
not an adventurer. Fear of persecution does not require literally ‘feel-
ing a bayonet in the back’. Fear might result from having a deviating 
political opinion, according to the unhcr. A Ministry of Justice official 
added that P., the son of a wealthy businessman, might have paid his 
way out of military service. That P. did not leave for economic reasons 
made him more credible. The Ministry of Foreign Affairs representative 
argued that P. would be prosecuted, but not persecuted, in Portugal. 
P. would be penalised for desertion, but not for his political opinions. 
Interestingly, Foreign Affairs won the argument and P. received a resi-
dence permit. The arguments in this frame show that actors disputed 
whether or not the New Refugees feared persecution. It was almost 
impossible for Portuguese asylum seekers to be recognised as refugees.
Criticising-the-asylum-procedure frame
Refugee support groups criticised the Dutch asylum procedure. unhcr, 
for example, argued that it was too lengthy, that police work was poor 
and that interviews were incomplete.15 They complained that interview-
ers paid attention solely to the labour market. Some actors accused lo-
cal aliens’ services officials of deterring Portuguese from requesting 
asylum by encouraging them to settle for a residence permit.16 Appar-
ently, the Portuguese were told that their situation was not bad, and that 
Dutch young men also had to serve.17
A frequent complaint was the absence of an independent appeals 
process.18 Aliens had the right to appeal at the Aliens Advice Commit-
tee (acv), but this committee was limited to a consultative role and was 
composed of former civil servants. The Minister of Justice responded to 
this criticism by arguing that he followed the committee’s advice, even 
when unfavourable to him. Not everybody was admitted, but an ‘awful 
lot’ were, he said.19

84	
Tycho Walaardt
Parliamentarians, refugee support groups and journalists often 
compared the New Refugees with Cold War refugees. They concluded 
that the first group had fewer chances than the latter, and their pleas 
stressed the similarities. Actors explained that both groups had fled 
from totalitarian regimes and were in need of asylum. Some social-
ist politicians claimed that Portuguese motives were unjustly regarded 
as non-political, while those of Czechoslovakians were regarded as 
political.20 They questioned whether the dictatorial regime in Portu-
gal was less dangerous than a communist one. The Minister of Justice 
responded that when a Czech citizen applied for asylum, all appear-
ances were in his favour, while the odds were against a Portuguese. He 
denied that he favoured those fleeing communism, arguing that Por-
tuguese were admitted, albeit not as refugees. The Minister of Justice 
added that he had no reason to believe that Portuguese or Czechs were 
nicer people.
Civil servants said that the New Refugees and anticommunists were 
not equal. Ministry of Justice officials feared creating a precedent, just 
as immigration officials did in the 1920s (see Schacher in this volume). 
In one case file, a civil servant noted that if this Portuguese man were 
granted refugee status, it would serve as an open invitation to every 
Portuguese. If this man was granted refugee status, he added, strict 
secrecy was needed.21 Another civil servant warned that more toler-
ant asylum policies would lead to more asylum seekers.22 One edito-
rial stated that the Netherlands’ admission policies should be similar to 
those of nearby countries.23
Actors criticised the Ministry of Justice for threatening to deport 
those Portuguese who had spent more than a month in France before 
arriving in the Netherlands. This was the case for three Portuguese 
men. They claimed that French authorities were deporting many young 
Portuguese following a treaty agreement between France and Portugal. 
They added that the Portuguese secret service (the pide) was active 
in France, so that those asylum applications should not have been 
denied.24
Refugee support groups stressed that the New Refugees deserved to 
stay, because authorities took too long to assess their cases. The Minister 
of Justice yielded to the pressure to issue permits to 20 Portuguese who 
had endured a long bureaucratic delay.25 A civil servant blamed that on 
understaffing.26 The Minister agreed that the procedure was too long, 
but argued that that ‘lots of time’ was needed to determine whether the 
applicant was serious and trustworthy.27 Deporting a rejected asylum 
seeker became more complicated, according to the unhcr, in cases 
where applicants had established personal ties in the Netherlands.28

new refugees?	
85
Credibility frame
According to Kagan (2003: 384-386) credibility issues were the most 
common reason for rejection of asylum requests. The unhcr stressed 
that in a short and serious procedure the asylum requests of ‘nine or ten 
out of ten’ New Refugees had to be rejected.29 That guideline shows the 
obstacles faced by Portuguese asylum seekers.
Credibility issues arose in many cases. In one case a Portuguese 
claimed to be a member of the resistance, while research showed that 
he was not.30 One civil servant argued that many Portuguese migrated 
to the Netherlands for economic reasons. He believed that they sought 
to profit from the Dutch welfare system, noting that many left Portugal 
prior to being drafted.31
Civil servants believed that the Angola Committee in the Nether-
lands ‘imported’ Portuguese from France and instructed them to claim 
that they could not serve for political reasons.32 The Minister of Justice 
argued that it was difficult to establish whether a desertion was genu-
inely politically motivated.33 In a document relating to the Portuguese 
‘B.’, a civil servant wrote, ‘his statements were all standard’.34 B. had first 
claimed that he wanted to work in the Netherlands. Only after his claim 
was rejected did he state his strong opposition to the colonial war. But, 
the civil servant concluded, because of pressure from a parliamentar-
ian, he should ‘for reasons of process efficiency’ be issued a residence 
permit. Despite credibility concerns, B. was ultimately admitted.
Humanitarian frame
Refugee support groups urged the Minister of Justice to apply humani-
tarian and lenient policies to all asylum seekers. One refugee support 
group argued that there existed sufficient humanitarian grounds to ad-
mit the Portuguese A. A civil servant said that while A.’s refusal to serve 
and his political activities did not amount to a fear of persecution, he 
should still receive a residence permit on humanitarian grounds.35
Actors appealed to the Minister of Justice to honour the age-old 
Dutch tradition of hospitality to political exiles.36 A parliamentarian 
referred to ‘our very old views about equality and justice [which] forced 
us to be generous towards individuals that came from totalitarian 
states’.37 The editor of one newspaper disputed this reputation of hospi-
tality, citing the long and bureaucratic procedures that the New Refu-
gees had to endure.38 He stated that asylum seekers were interrogated 
numerous times and the secret service initiated investigations of them. 

86	
Tycho Walaardt
In the end, he concluded, few were granted refugee status. In 1972, dur-
ing a colloquium, the question of the Dutch reputation for hospitality 
was discussed.39 Participants concluded that while Dutch authorities 
proudly referred to their generous, humane and lenient asylum poli-
cies, such generosity was limited to the issuing of residence permits. A 
remarkable aspect of the hospitality argument is the frequent reference 
to the failed policies of the Dutch authorities toward Jewish refugees 
from Germany in the late 1930s. According to one editorial, the New 
Refugees were welcomed exactly like the Jews in the late 1930s.40
Political frame
Ministry of Foreign Affairs officials worried about diplomatic relations 
with nato countries. Granting refugee status to Portuguese would of-
fend a nato ally, they feared, by implying that Portugal persecuted its 
citizens (Doesschate 1993: 146). nato countries were, by definition, 
democratic and therefore honoured civil rights, civil servants and poli-
ticians believed.41 Another official wondered how the Dutch would 
have responded if Portuguese authorities had granted asylum to Dutch 
deserters during its 1940s colonial war in the Dutch East Indies.42
The 1967 Ministry of Justice yearbook stated that a Portuguese man 
had been offered asylum. The Portuguese chargé d’affaires was shocked 
at this information, asked for his name and questioned why he had 
been granted asylum.43 The Dutch Minister of Foreign Affairs was also 
surprised that the man was granted asylum, because normally ‘we are 
very reluctant’ to grant refugee status, especially to citizens of ‘our 
allies’. In fact, the man was not offered refugee status: the term ‘asylum’ 
had been used incorrectly. He had received a residence permit, based 
largely on his work record. His refusal to serve had not influenced the 
decision.44
Left-wing parliamentarians, concerned Dutch citizens and refu-
gee support groups condemned Portugal’s brutal wars in Africa. They 
asserted that those who opposed these wars had to be welcomed. In 
1973, the Angola Committee expressed its concern when it discovered 
that three Portuguese men who had been repatriated by the Dutch 
authorities were arrested at Lisbon airport. Two of them were imme-
diately handed over to the military police.45 According to the Commit-
tee, by deporting Portuguese, Dutch authorities were, in essence, sup-
porting violence against Angolans. A Dutch man expressed bitter dis-
appointment at the treatment of the Portuguese war resisters, because 
Portuguese soldiers had a reputation for brutality in the colonies.46 

new refugees?	
87
Therefore, Portugal’s foreign policies justified granting refugee status to 
all Portuguese war resisters.
Benefits-and-threats frame
According to a senior-level civil servant, the Netherlands’ ‘absorption 
capacity’ was limited because of population density, rising unemploy-
ment and housing shortages. Not all Portuguese could stay.47 The Min-
ister of Social Affairs favoured a strict interpretation of the Refugee 
Convention, arguing that granting residence permits after an asylum 
application had failed, jeopardised the guest-worker recruitment sys-
tem.48
Several memos characterised Portuguese deserters as bad workers.49 
That reputation was particularly problematic, because obtaining a resi-
dence permit required an employment contract. A civil servant noted 
several cases of Portuguese who had asked for social security support 
after they had been fired due to wilful absenteeism.50 Even worse was 
their association with criminality. Authorities linked the Portuguese 
with drug abuse and drug dealing, and therefore a threat to Dutch soci-
ety. The Amsterdam police blamed them for a resurgence of pick pock-
eting.51 However, research on criminality among Portuguese shows no 
alarming statistics. Of the 460 Portuguese who had applied for asylum 
only 30 had been charged, most of them with minor offences.52
In contrast, refugee support groups depicted the Portuguese as vul-
nerable. They did not speak Dutch and did not have the right contacts.53 
They were young, confused and disorientated, and therefore they 
deserved support.54 One parliamentarian noted that undoubtedly some 
Portuguese came to work, but for most of these young ‘fellows’ leaving 
their country was a huge and emotional step.55 Support was thus gener-
ated by stressing the vulnerability of these young men.
Public influence is evident in the case files of the New Refugees. One 
official explained that the ‘noise made by those groups in the cases of 
Portuguese deserters was disproportional to its importance’.56 One Por-
tuguese man, V., was allowed to stay because of ‘leftist youth’ protests, 
another memo stated.57 To yet another official, the Dutch asylum poli-
cies were unclear, except when the Angola Committee or parliamentar-
ians intervened; in such cases leniency was shown.58 One official added, 
the ‘louder parliamentarians shouted, the more deserters were admit-
ted’.59 In the case of a Portuguese couple, the Minister of Justice yielded 
after he received telegrams with death threats and a coffin and after 
questions were asked in parliament.60 These cases reveal that the Minis-

88	
Tycho Walaardt
try of Justice relented when lobbied by the Angola Committee (see also 
Doesschate 1993: 202).
One case file shows that the Angola Committee helped a Portu-
guese man to enter the Netherlands and hid him for two months. They 
finally brought him to the police, escorted by journalists, a lawyer and 
a member of parliament. The following day his story appeared in the 
media.61 An Angola Committee member claimed that this public dis-
play made it impossible for R. to return to his country. He added that 
if R. had approached the police immediately after his arrival, he would 
have been deported. The Minister of Justice told this parliamentarian 
that hiding a Portuguese refugee was a blemish on democratic society. 
A similar case concerned the arrival of two Portuguese men who had 
lived in France before arriving in the Netherlands. The men claimed 
that they faced death if they returned to France. To the authorities it 
was not clear what threat the men feared in France: ‘Murder? Kidnap-
ping?’62 A civil servant said that while he was used to hearing exagger-
ated statements, it was insulting to think that he would be convinced 
by them. The Angola Committee justified its behaviour by explaining 
that success was guaranteed, because authorities feared negative pub-
licity. In the end, the two were allowed to stay, despite having first gone 
to France. The Ministry of Justice chose to avoid public unrest, so it 
searched for quiet solutions, rather than imposing restrictive policies.63
Individual-characteristics frame
The last frame focuses on personal characteristics of asylum seekers. 
The New Refugees’ employment records and age influenced the out-
come of their asylum applications. Critics argued that just as welders 
and soccer players would be granted admission, so too would drug us-
ers, if they qualified.64 One of the three requirements for the Portuguese 
to obtain de facto refugee status was an employment contract. Accord-
ing to a civil servant, the Portuguese asylum seekers V. and S. were a 
fraction of all ‘the aliens that stayed in the Netherlands’. The two were 
admitted, because they seemed to be genuine labourers and not ‘quasi-
intellectuals’.65 One 53-year-old Portuguese man was denied asylum 
based on his age, despite his employer’s support. According to the Min-
istry of Justice, his presence in the Netherlands was not vital.66 This was 
an economic argument that had nothing to do with his asylum request.
* * *

new refugees?	
89
In general, Portuguese asylum seekers benefited from the fact that they 
could switch roles to that of guest worker. Most were allowed to stay, 
albeit not as refugees. This is similar to the Armenian women’s claims of 
persecution (Schacher in this volume). They were denied refugee status 
by us officials, but were allowed to stay because of ‘extreme hardship’. 
Civil servants feared creating a precedent and offending a nato ally. 
The authorities sought to minimise the influence of the media, because 
such attention tipped the balance in a refugee’s favour. Support groups 
used the Portuguese in their protests against colonial wars. They made 
claims on traditional hospitality, used strong tropes, including compar-
isons to the fate of Jewish refugees in the 1930s, and emphasised the 
vulnerability of the asylum seekers.
The case of Ralph Waver
Now that we have a clearer view of the strategies that actors used in the 
Portuguese war resisters’ cases, we use frame analysis to examine the 
case of Ralph Waver, the American war resister. He became an anti- 
Vietnam protest symbol (Van Eekert, Hellema & Van Heteren 1986; Van 
der Maar 2007),67 and his case influenced refugee law (Van Krieken 
1976; Maarseveen 1972: 930). His case file contains many letters writ-
ten by action groups and ‘ordinary Dutch’ who sought to influence the 
Ministry of Justice decision. Waver arrived in the Netherlands on 26 
June 1970, when he deserted the ms Marias, a nato fleet ship. Waver 
was married and had two children. He was born into a conservative 
family, and he proudly referred to himself as its ‘black sheep’.68 In 1967 
he voluntarily joined the military, motivated by the salary and the fact 
that by joining the Atlantic fleet he would avoid being sent to Vietnam. 
From 1970, he tried to leave the army legally, but claimed that his su-
pervisors hindered him from obtaining a military exemption (Van der 
Maar 2007: 151). Waver justified his desertion by pointing to the oppres-
sive military politics of the usa. He became alienated from his country 
and opposed the pervasive racial discrimination on board.69
One month after his desertion, Waver moved to Sweden because his 
lawyer told him that his chances for asylum were higher there. Sweden 
did not belong to nato, and was not obliged to extradite American 
deserters. Swedish officials had, however, handed over some deserters 
to American authorities. Waver decided to return to the Netherlands 
and apply for a residence permit. Accompanied by two socialist par-
liamentarians and his lawyer, he went to the Ministry of Justice. Waver 
learnt that he should not be too optimistic. Afterwards, a highly posi-

90	
Tycho Walaardt
tioned civil servant spoke briefly to the two parliamentarians. Accord-
ing to them, Waver was promised a residence permit if he fulfilled five 
conditions: he was not to publicise his case; he was to remain outside of 
Amsterdam (so as not to convince other Americans to leave the mili-
tary), he was to find work, he was not to request refugee status, and 
finally, his statements had to be found credible. According to his law-
yer, Waver never intended to become a martyr, and he felt no qualms 
about not being granted refugee status.70 Waver fulfilled all conditions 
and applied for a residence permit at the aliens’ police in the town of 
Haarlem, where he had found work in a warehouse.
Waver’s case was not ideal for an anti-war publicity campaign. He 
had entered the military service voluntarily and was not at risk of being 
sent to Vietnam. So, why did his case become so widely celebrated? 
First, Waver was a charismatic person, and appeared sympathetic. Sec-
ondly, Waver gave the anti-Vietnam movement a much-needed face 
(Van der Maar 2007: 158-159). Thirdly, his case made it possible to pro-
test against the way the conservative Dutch government dealt with 
aliens. Hospitality became the centre of the discussion. Unlike the Por-
tuguese, Waver did not obtain de facto refugee status. If he had received 
a residence permit nobody could argue that the Dutch authorities were 
slavishly obeying the usa. The main concern was that if Waver were 
admitted, other Americans would follow his example. Fear increased 
within the administration after a parliamentarian called Waver’s situ-
ation a test case.
The legal procedures
One civil servant doubted Waver’s motives and felt that his flight was 
economically motivated.71 His supervisor feared that the Vietnam anti-
war movement would use him to attract other Americans to the anti-
war cause. He decided to reject Waver’s application, because he was not 
a genuine conscientious objector, despite the uproar a rejection would 
cause.72 There was no threat that he would be sent to Vietnam, he said, 
adding that it was inappropriate to admit a citizen of a nato ally.73 Wa-
ver was asked to leave the Netherlands voluntarily. To the Minister of 
Justice it was ‘clear that Mr. Waver did not belong in our country’, but he 
was worried that the press would portray him as a deserter for reasons 
of principle.74 In the official rejection letter, just one reason was pro-
vided for the rejection: his ‘absence of ties with the Netherlands’.
Waver and his lawyer were shocked when they received the rejec-
tion.75 They organised a well-attended press conference and told the 

new refugees?	
91
public that the Ministry of Justice had broken its promise. The lawyer 
protested against the new, improvable condition: ‘ties with the Nether-
lands’. The us authorities could not remain quiet. On 5 May 1971 they 
requested Waver’s extradition. Shortly afterwards, Waver was arrested. 
At that point, popular support for Waver increased. Many local refugee 
support groups were formed, for example, in the small town of Soest. 
This group presented a petition to the authorities and organised a well-
attended discussion regarding Waver’s extradition.76
An examining judge was called upon to determine whether extra-
dition was justified.77 The defence argued that Waver returned to the 
Netherlands from Sweden not because of his desertion, but because 
he sought a residence permit. The defence added that Waver was no 
longer a member of the us military and therefore he could not be extra-
dited. The judge argued that these arguments needed clarification and 
forbade Waver’s extradition. During his hearing Waver asked to be 
granted refugee status, since he feared persecution in his country of 
origin due to his political opinions. The Ministry of Justice disregarded 
that request and decided to extradite Waver, because it argued that his 
stay in Sweden had not rendered him ineligible for extradition.78 us 
officials maintained that Waver had not been discharged from military 
service. Finally, they argued, Waver was not a refugee, because the us 
authorities would not persecute him.
Following the decision against him, Waver’s lawyer started summary 
proceedings. Two weeks later, the judge forbade the Dutch authorities 
from expelling Waver for a period of six months, stating that he was 
unable to decide a complicated juridical matter on such short notice.79 
The question for the judge was what should prevail: the Geneva Con-
vention or the extradition request. In June 1971 the acv reviewed the 
rejection of a residence permit and debated whether Waver met the 
refugee status criteria. The committee advised that Waver was not a 
refugee, because his penalty in the usa would be the same if he had 
deserted for non-political reasons.80 The Ministry of Justice rejected his 
application for refugee status and a residence permit.
Waver had the right of appeal at the Council of State. Waver’s law-
yer argued that Waver was guilty of a civil offence, but that the penalty 
was inhumane because of his political opinions. The Council of State 
suggested that after balancing ‘all subjective and objective arguments’ 
Waver had a well-founded fear of persecution in his country.81 This 
conclusion amazed the authorities, since there was no objective well-
founded fear of persecution. Officials anticipated that the ruling would 
lead to the arrival of more deserters, and that whenever an applicant 
characterised his motives for flight as political, he would be granted 

92	
Tycho Walaardt
refugee status. By extension, hijackers and bank robbers would now be 
eligible for refugee status.82
The Dutch legal system allowed the submission of a ‘memorandum 
of objections’ against the Council of State conclusion. Authorities felt 
that the Council of State would not deny Waver refugee status if threat-
ened with expulsion. First, the authorities granted him a residence per-
mit in December 1970.83 Secondly, us authorities had to withdraw their 
request for extradition.84 The Dutch ambassador in Washington, dc, 
informed the us authorities that deportation of Waver would cause 
unrest in the Netherlands and might harm the alliance.85 us officials 
subsequently revoked their request.86 They accepted the argument that 
if Waver were granted refugee status, future us deserters would claim 
refugee status as well.
In the memorandum of objections the authorities argued that Waver 
faced prosecution in the usa, but that he would receive his penalty in 
a well-functioning state. The Council of State ignored the contents of 
the memorandum, because the Dutch authorities ignored that ‘Waver, 
on the one hand, had to fulfil his military obligations, but, on the other 
hand, was convinced that he no longer could be part of an army that, 
in the name of freedom and democracy, committed war crimes’.87 The 
Ministry of Justice ignored the recommendation of the Council of 
State,88 though it was highly unusual and controversial to do so. The 
rejection letter argued that country of origin information showed that 
Waver did not fear persecution in the usa.89
Frames, results
Three archives contained a total of 63 letters, telegrams and petitions 
from refugee support groups and individuals. All but one opposed 
Waver’s extradition.90 Some letters were short, such as one that stated 
simply, ‘Waver stay, nato away’. Another was a four-page typed plea.91 
Table 3.2 presents the most common arguments. Some letters con-
tained several arguments. Some British residents argued that Waver 
would be jailed for many years because of his political views and that 
his extradition violated the well-known Dutch tradition of hospital-
ity.92 Not surprisingly, none of the actors referred to Waver’s stay in 
Sweden or the fear of creating a precedent.

new refugees?	
93
table 3.2	 Frames as used in 63 letters
  Frame
Argument
Number of 
references
1.	 Persecution
Persecution
27
2.	 Asylum procedure
Right to fair procedure
14
Stay in a safe third country
0
Asylum policies of other countries
0
Principles of equality 
15
3.	 Credibility
Credibility issues
4
4.	Morality
Duration of asylum procedure
2
Solidarity, humanity and Christianity
23
Tradition of hospitality
28
Reference to what happened with the Jews  
  in the late 1930s
11
 5.	Politics
Condemnation of country of origin
10
Diplomatic relations
13
6.	Benefits and threats  
	
to Dutch society
Issues of Dutch society
2
Fear of public unrest
4
Images and vulnerability of group  
  of asylum seekers
3
7.	 Individual  
	
characteristics
Working capabilities
2
Character of individual
13
Family situation
2
	
Twenty-seven actors assured the Ministry of Justice that Waver 
would face persecution in the usa and years of imprisonment. They 
bolstered their claims with references to treaties. One person empha-
sised that Article 14 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
stated that all persons had the right to seek and enjoy asylum.93 A group 
of lawyers stressed the unlawfulness of an extradition, because Waver 
was a refugee under the 1951 Refugee Convention.94 The only person 
who supported the authorities’ position was a former parliamentar-
ian. Extradition was justified, he believed. To avoid a sense of injustice 
among Dutch citizens, he suggested that Waver be allowed to migrate 
to a country of his choice.95
Fourteen actors felt that Waver did not get a fair hearing, because 
he had not exhausted all legal remedies and his case had not (yet) been 
heard in the highest court.96 Others accused the authorities of being too 
bureaucratic and unable to interpret facts in a humanitarian way. Fif-

94	
Tycho Walaardt
teen people argued that asylum seekers from nato countries stood no 
chance, while Hungarians and Czechoslovakians were readily accepted. 
East Europeans were met with excessive friendliness and ‘only had to 
say the word asylum and “you” [the Minister of Justice] came to their 
aid’, one letter writer stated.
Twenty-three actors stressed that there were sufficient humanitar-
ian considerations to block Waver’s extradition.97 Those who shared 
commonalities with Waver were most likely to offer that argument. 
More than 2,000 citizens of Haarlem – the town where Waver found 
refuge – submitted a petition stating that humanity should always be 
given primacy.98 A group of conscientious objectors (who opposed the 
Dutch draft) expressed their solidarity and advocated strongly to grant 
him political asylum.99 Three writers emphasised the Christian roots 
of Dutch society and reminded the Ministry of Justice that it would 
not render the Last Judgement. Some Christian members of govern-
ment experienced personal attacks, accusing them of ignoring their 
Christian principles. A Christian government should present a Chris-
tian solution to those who struggled for peace and ‘holy’ justice.100 One 
actor claimed he had attended school with the state secretary. He spec-
ulated that because the latter had underperformed and been bullied by 
classmates in his youth, he was now trying to act tough.101
Table 3.2 shows that most actors made reference to the Dutch tra-
dition of hospitality and offering a safe haven to political exiles. In a 
newspaper advertisement, 300 Dutch celebrities urged the Dutch 
administration not to dispense with the tradition that had been so gen-
erously applied to Hungarians and Czechs.102 There were 11 references 
to the Second World War, especially to the hostile treatment of Jews 
at the Dutch border in the late 1930s.103 The Jews were true refugees 
– like Waver – and we must remember what happened to them, these 
letter writers emphasised. Many writers declared that Americans had 
committed war crimes, like the Germans and Japanese. Those opposing 
such acts should be welcomed.
Ten persons condemned the aggressive us foreign policy in Viet-
nam. One man claimed that he did not want to stay in a country that 
preferred to sacrifice the life of Waver rather than to see the angry face 
of Nixon.104 He cursed those Dutch officials who placed a higher pri-
ority on us diplomatic relations than on showing a human face. One 
political party accused the Dutch administration of being lackeys of the 
us.105 Waver was a hero, who felt that he had to desert to stop the war. 
Students gathered in front of the courthouse shouting and holding ban-
ners stating, ‘The Ministry of Justice proposes, the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs disposes’ and ‘nato is a crime, desertion a blessing’.106

new refugees?	
95
Fear of public unrest was decisive. When us officials revoked their 
request for extradition, they cited the controversy the case had caused 
in the Netherlands as the reason. Some letter writers threatened mass 
protest if Waver were handed over to the usa.107 Many wondered why 
Waver’s case was problematic, given the large numbers of migrant 
workers.108 One action group hoped that Waver could change the 
Dutch mentality. By giving lectures, he could enlighten Dutch society 
about repression elsewhere in the world.109
Waver’s personality was discussed in 13 letters. Amnesty Inter-
national argued that Waver’s strong personality was not sufficiently 
brought out during his asylum case.110 Waver made many personal sac-
rifices; he had, for example, lost contact with his father, wife and chil-
dren. One person argued that he was a lovely young man, who had 
earned respect for his struggle for human rights.111
Frame analysis indicates that the Dutch public believed that Waver 
should not be extradited because he feared persecution in the usa, 
based on his political views, and that the Dutch should uphold the tra-
dition of hospitality. Again, just as in the Portuguese situation, public 
influence was decisive. Many actors referred to the principles of equal-
ity and objected to the obedience of the Dutch to the usa.
The Ministry of Justice’s reply
Most letter writers received standard replies from the Minister of Jus-
tice and were informed that after considering all evidence and legal ar-
guments, Waver had to be extradited, because he could not be granted 
refugee status.112 Some actors received a personal reply. A group of 
Quakers was told that the well-known Dutch hospitality could not be 
extended in this case, because the Netherlands was one of the most 
densely populated countries in the world and itself wrestled with issues 
including housing shortages and unemployment.113 The Dutch had to 
realise that people were uprooted throughout the world, but that the 
‘absorption capacity’ was limited. Students were told that Waver’s ex-
tradition was not tantamount to supporting the Vietnam War because 
Waver served on the Atlantic fleet.114 Another man was told that the 
Dutch authorities were tolerant towards many immigrants, especially 
towards the Portuguese.115 Indeed, in the recent past ‘we were a welcom-
ing country, but now we need to mark time’. Dutch authorities were en-
raged when actors referred to what happened to German Jews. Waver’s 
case was very different because, unlike Jews, he had access to legal sup-
port and did not fear persecution in his country.

96	
Tycho Walaardt
Conclusion
Scholars often make a distinction between the Cold War refugees, who 
were welcomed by the Dutch authorities, and the New Refugees of the 
late 1960s and early 1970s, who were not. An asylum crisis could have 
resulted from that difference, but it did not occur. Dutch authorities 
and lobbyists felt that they were encountering a new phenomenon, but 
the ways that Dutch authorities treated asylum seekers hardly changed. 
They stretched the margins of the existing system to accommodate the 
newcomers. While the New Refugees were not granted official refugee 
status, they benefited from de facto refugee status, and avoided depor-
tation to Portugal, where they claimed to fear persecution. An asylum 
crisis was averted because New Refugees were portrayed in such a way 
that they did not differ significantly from the Old Refugees. They were 
not as culturally and ethnically distinct from the Dutch as the asylum 
seekers of the 1980s would be. The refugees remained manly heroes, 
like the ones who came before. The New Refugees further benefited 
from connections with Dutch youth. To the dismay of authorities, the 
Portuguese and Waver became popular figures. Early 1970s activists 
used the heroism of the New Refugees to protest against the wars in 
Africa and Vietnam. Public sentiment forced authorities to continue 
their old policies.
Frame analysis indicates that the Portuguese were admitted largely 
because of their economic qualifications, rather than their experiences 
in Portugal. While Dutch authorities denied that they were persecuted, 
they allowed them to remain because they could switch roles to those of 
the Portuguese guest workers. As long as they remained self-support-
ing, and caused no problems, they were not deported. Rejections were 
exceptional, as was also true during the Cold War (Walaardt 2009). 
The authorities yielded to the public’s arguments that the Dutch should 
maintain the tradition of hospitability and that the Portuguese were not 
given the same rights as Cold War refugees. If, in an exceptional case, 
an asylum seeker faced deportation, public pressure almost guaranteed 
that a residence permit would be granted in the end.
Men fleeing communism and those fleeing from colonial wars were 
portrayed similarly. Both groups were portrayed as masculine, with the 
courage to oppose what were, from the Dutch perspective, detestable 
regimes. Both groups were characterised as protest heroes. The New 
Refugees were not as different from prior groups as was commonly 
believed; this defused a potential crisis. They arrived from different 
countries, and had new claims and lobby groups, but they were strik-
ingly similar to past asylum seekers. Heroic images of male refugees 

new refugees?	
97
continued to dominate the asylum discourse. In the Netherlands, it 
would take another decade and several other groups of New Refugees 
before attention shifted to female asylum seekers.
Notes
1	 The National Archive, Archive of the Immigration and Naturalization Service 
and its Predecessors (hereafter ‘na’) 5.023.5027, inventory number (hereafter ‘inv. 
no.’) 1415, Report of meeting at the Ministry of Justice, 28 May 1970.
2	 ‘Situatie van Portugese vluchtelingen in Nederland’, Angola Bulletin 11 (1) (1972/ 
1973) 8.
3	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1442, memo of permanent under-secretary of the Ministry 
of Justice, subject: guidelines to deal with Portuguese asylum seekers, reference: 
1132 19 May 1970.
4	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1453, memo of head of Department of Aliens Cases and 
Border Protection of the Ministry of Justice (hereafter ac & bp), subject Portu-
guese deserters, no reference, 11 February 1971.
5	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1589, article of Dutch lawyer submitted for revision to the 
Dutch authorities 16 August 1973.
6	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1415, memo of civil servant of ac & bp, subject: asylum 
policies, no reference, 17 April 1970.
7	 ‘Actie voor Portugese vluchtelingen’, Angola Bulletin 12 (3) (1974) 5.
8	 ‘Situatie van Portugese vluchtelingen in Nederland’, Angola Bulletin 11 (1) (1972/ 
1973) 8.
9	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1436, memo of head of ac & bp, subject: Portuguese, refer-
ence: ajz 3104/E-1971 (11 February 1971).
10	 ‘Hebben we nog een trui liggen voor de onvervalste vluchteling?’, Trouw 12 Sep-
tember 1992.
11	 Parliamentary proceedings, 1968-1969, statements of Minister of Justice (22 April 
1969) 2666-2668.
12	 Archive of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (hereafter fa) 1965-1974, inv. no. 15016, 
notes in margins on letter of Department of International Affairs of Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs, subject: refugees, reference 141.351 (no date).
13	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1443, letter of head of University Asylum Fund, subject: 
admission of Portuguese asylum seekers (8 January 1973).
14	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1443, report of meeting between the Ministry of Jus-
tice, Dutch Foundation for Refugee Aid (hereafter nfv) and Foreign Affairs (12 
August 1970); bz 1965-1974, inv. no. 5016, memo of Head of Department of Gen-
eral Affairs of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (hereafter ga), subject: granting of 
a refugee status, reference: 60/70 (12 August 1970).
15	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1443, letter of representative of the unhcr, subject: Portu-
guese, reference: ho/73/10 (13 February 1973).
16	 Sorber (1971), ‘Nederland, Portugal en Zuidelijk Afrika: Een greep uit het werk 
van het Angola Comité’, Wending 26 April, 125; ‘Studiedag lost weinig vragen op: 
Vluchtelingenrecht is nog erg onduidelijk’, Trouw 12 June 1972.

98	
Tycho Walaardt
17	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1443, remark of a socialist parliamentarian during radio 
broadcast, 2 June 1973.
18	 Parliamentary proceedings, 1969-1970, questions of Christian parliamentarian 
Wttewaall van Stoetwegen (chu) D21-D22 (23 April 1970).
19	 Parliamentary proceedings, 1969-1970, juridical commission, D22-D28 (23 April 
1969).
20	na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1425, petition of Socialist Party Amsterdam, no reference 
(8 May 1972).
21	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1425, unknown author (unknown date 1969).
22	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1455, memo of civil servant of ac & bp, subject: new asy-
lum procedure, reference: ajz 3104/E-1971 (17 September 1973).
23	 ‘Hoe gastvrij is Nederland?’, Haagse Post 20 January 1968.
24	 na, 5.023.5028.9621, memo of head of ac & bp, subject: deportation of Portu-
guese, reference: 59/43814 (31 August 1971).
25	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1443, report meeting between Ministries of Justice and 
Social Affairs (14 February 1973).
26	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1455, memo of head of ac & bp, subject: Portuguese refu-
gees, reference: ajz 3104/E (17 September 1973).
27	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1443, memo of head of ac & bp, subject: questions of repre-
sentative of University Asylum Fund (Hereafter uaf), reference: ajz 3104/E-1971 
(15 February 1973).
28	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1443, letter of the representative of the unhcr, subject: 
Portuguese, reference: ho/73/10 (13 February 1973).
29	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1443, letter of the representative of the unhcr, subject: 
Portuguese, reference: ho/73/10 (13 February 1973).
30	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1443, memo of Attorney-general Amsterdam, subject: 
asylum requests of Portuguese, reference: 7022 1 February 1973); ‘Hoe gastvrij is 
Nederland?’, Haagse Post 20 January 1968.
31	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1436, memo of head of ac & bp, subject: Portuguese, refer-
ence: ajz 3104/E-1971 (11 February 1971).
32	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1116, memo of civil servant of ac & bp, subject: Egyptian 
deserter S., reference: 2240/E1236 (2 December 1969).
33	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1412, reply of Minister of Justice to nfv reference: ajz 
3104/E-1971- I 19 February 1970); parliamentary proceedings, 1969-1970, D22-
D28 (23 April 1969).
34	 na, 5.023.5028.9533, remarks on the memo of head of ac & bp, reference: 49/ 
423345 (25 October 1971).
35	 na, 5.023.5028.40, memo of head of ac & bp, subject: A., reference 743.26.0002 
(10 April 1974).
36	 Fort example: parliamentary proceedings 1969-1970, remarks of Democratic Par-
liamentarian Goudsmit (D66), D25 (23 April 1969).
37	 Parliamentary proceedings 1969-1970, question of Socialist Singer.
38	 ‘Hoe gastvrij is Nederland?’, Haagse Post 20 January 1968.
39	 ‘Is Nederland werkelijk zo gastvrij in het opnemen van vluchtelingen?’, nrc Han-
delsblad 9 June 1972.

new refugees?	
99
40	I. Cornelissen, ‘Ralph Waver wil in Nederland blijven: Amerikaanse deserteur 
loopt stuk’, Vrij Nederland 27 March 1971.
41	 fa 1965-1974, inv. no. 5016, response of Minister of Justice to Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, subject: costs of asylum procedure, reference: ajz 2699/E-1627 (104/1968).
42	 fa 1965-1974, inv. no. 5016, memo of civil servant of ga, subject: asylum requests, 
reference: 699 (2 October 1967).
43	 fa 1965-1974, inv. no. 5016, memo of head of ga, subject: asylum requests, refer-
ence: 697 (26 September 1967).
44	fa 1965-1974, inv. no. 5016, memo of head of ga, subject: asylum request (5 
October 1967); fa 1965-1974, inv. no. 5016, memo of head of ga, subject: asylum 
requests, reference: 139/67 (16 October 1967).
45	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 645, letter of Angola Committee, no reference (3 July 1973).
46	na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 645, letter of R. (16 July 1973).
47	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1456, memo of permanent under-secretary of the Ministry 
of Justice to parliament (30 November 1973).
48	 na, 5.023.5028.9533, police of Amsterdam, reference: 141/71 (10 February 1971).
49	na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1436, memo of Department of Special Statuses of the Min-
istry of Justice, reference ajz 3104/W-1971-vi (31 October 1969); na, 5.023.5027, 
inv. no. 1443, memo of ac & bp, subject: Portuguese, reference: 3104/E – 1971 (4 
December 1969).
50	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1436, memo of head of ac & bp, subject: Portuguese, refer-
ence ajz 3104/E-1971 (11 February 1971).
51	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1443, memo of attorney-general Amsterdam: subject: Por-
tuguese, reference: 7022 (1 February 1973).
52	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1449, memo of head of ac & bp, no subject, no reference 
(13 February 1973.
53	 Parliamentary Proceedings 1969-1970, questions of Christian parliamentarian 
Wttewaall van Stoetwegen D21-D22 (23 April 1970).
54	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1443, letter of representative of uaf (8 January 1973).
55	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1443, radio broadcast, 2 June 1973.
56	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1412, remarks of vice permanent under-secretary to repre-
sentative of the nfv, reference: ajz 3104/E-1971- I (19 February 1970).
57	 na, 5.023.5023.9621, remarks in margin of memo of head of ac & bp, reference: 
59/438141 (7 July 1971).
58	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1415, memo of head of ac & bp, subject: Portuguese, no 
reference (6 October 1969).
59	 fa 1965-1974, inv. no. 5016, memo of civil servant ga, subject: Angola Committee 
and Portuguese deserters, reference: 1002 (16 December 1969); memo of head of 
ga, subject: Angola Committee and Portuguese deserters, reference: 136/69 (24 
December 1969).
60	na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1436, memo of official of ac & bp, reference: ajz 3104/1971-
vi (10 December 1970).
61	 Trouw 6 December 1990, remarks of vice permanent under-secretary of Ministry 
of Justice.
62	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1329, memo of permanent under-secretary of Ministry of 
Justice, subject: arrival of Portuguese, reference: 59/328314/5 (14 April 1969).

100	
Tycho Walaardt
63	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 1329, memo of permanent under-secretary of Ministry of 
Justice, subject: admission of two Portuguese (24 April 1969).
64	‘Studieconferentie Utrecht’, De Volkskrant 10 June 1972.
65	 na, 5.023.5028.9621, memo of permanent under-secretary of the Ministry of Jus-
tice, subject: Portuguese, reference: 1371 (12 October 1971).
66	na, 5.023.5028.9543, police report, The Hague (24 March 1972).
67	 Broadcasting organisation vpro, ovt, 4 and 11 February 2007, The Case Waver.
68	vpro, ovt, 4 February 2007. The Case Waver 1, remarks by Ralph Waver.
69	fa 1965-1974, inv. no. 15016, plea note at Council of State, reference: 7015 (1971) 
(1 November 1971).
70	vpro, ovt, 11 February 2007, The Case Waver 2.
71	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 643, memo of civil servant of ac & bp, subject: Waver, no 
reference (unknown date December 1970).
72	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 643, memo of head of ac & bp, subject: Waver, reference: 
59/415593 – A (10 December 1970).
73	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 643, memo of permanent under-secretary of Ministry of 
Justice, no subject, reference: 1242 (18 January 1971) and remarks Minister of Jus-
tice.
74	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 643, memo of Minister of Justice, no subject, reference: 
4345 p/w (20 January 1970).
75	 vpro, ovt, 11 February 2007, The Case Waver.
76	 ‘Ook in Soest actie tegen uitlevering Ralph Waver’, Soester Courant 11 June 1971; ‘Is 
Ralph Waver deserteur of politiek vluchteling?’, Soester Courant 19 November 1971.
77	 Minister of Justice, 3091, report examining judge Haarlem, reference; A – 
1354/1971 (1 June 1971).
78	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 643, decision of permanent under-secretary of Ministry of 
Justice of the Ministry of Justice, subject: extradition of Waver, reference: 325/271 
(10 June 1971).
79	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 643, report summary proceedings, reference: 71/212 (14 
June 1971).
80	fa 1965-1974, inv. no. 15014, memo of head ga, subject: Waver, reference: 29/71 (24 
June 1971).
81	 fa 1965-1974, inv. no. 15016, report Council of State, subject: Waver, reference: 
7015 (30 November 1971).
82	 fa 1965-1974, inv. no. 15016, memo of head of ga, subject: Waver, reference: 71/71 
(2 December 1971).
83	 Waver still lives in the Netherlands and never returned to the us. He lost con-
tact with all his relatives. vpro Radio, The track back, the case Waver (11 Febru-
ary 2007) www.vpro.nl/programma/vrijegeluiden/afleveringen/31489819/items/ 
33167467.
84	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 643, report of meeting between the ministers of Foreign 
Affairs and Justice (1970).
85	 fa 1965-1974, inv. no. 15016, memo of Minister of Foreign Affairs, subject: extradi-
tion request of Waver, reference: 13846 (2 December 1971).
86	fa 1965-1974, inv. no. 15016, us Embassy, The Hague, to Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs, confidential, number 58 (27 December 1971).

new refugees?	
101
87	 fa 1965-1974, inv. no. 15016, Council of State, reference 7017 (1971)/206 (5 June 1972).
88	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 644, memo of permanent under-secretary of Ministry of 
Justice, subject: Waver, reference: ajz 3687/c 741 (23 June 1972).
89	 fa 1965-1974, inv. no. 15016, memo of head of ga, subject: Waver, reference: 90/72 
(22 August 1972).
90	Letters were found in the archive of the Ministry of Justice, inventory numbers 
3086 and 3088 and in the National Archive: na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 643.
91	 Archive of Ministry of Justice, inv. no. 3086, letter of G. (no date) and letter of Z. 
(11/6).
92	 Archive of Ministry of Justice, inv. no. 3086, letter of British residents in the Neth-
erlands (8 June 1971).
93	 Archive of the Ministry of Justice, letter of B. (13 June 1971).
94	Archive of Ministry of Justice, inv. no. 3086, telegram of lawyers and attorneys of 
four Dutch towns (4 June 1971).
95	 Archive of Ministry of Justice, inv. no. 3086, telegram of former parliamentarian 
K. (12 June 1971).
96	Archive of Ministry of Justice, inv. no. 3086, letter of Dutch Youth Community (14 
June 1971); letter of Humanist Society (14 June 1971).
97	 Archive of Ministry of Justice, inv. no. 3088, petition of 300 students (23 Novem-
ber 1971).
98	 Archive of Ministry of Justice, inv. no. 3088, petition of Regional Council of 
Churches (25 November 1971).
99	Archive of Ministry of Justice, inv. no. 3086, telegram Conscientious Objectors 
Eindhoven (12 June 1971).
100	Archive of Ministry of Justice, inv. no. 3086, letter of B. (13 June 1971); letter of 
citizens of Haarlem (13 June 1971).
101	 Archive of Ministry of Justice, inv. no. 3086, letter of citizens of Bloemendaal (13 
June 1971).
102	Archive of Ministry of Justice, inv. no. 3086, petition of 300 Dutch citizens (no 
date).
103	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 643, letter of R. (21 October 1971).
104	Archive of Ministry of Justice, inv. no. 3086, letter of D. (12 June 1971).
105	 Archive of Ministry of Justice, inv. no. 3086, petition of Pacifist-Socialist Party, 
Department The Hague (15 June 1971).
106	Archive of Ministry of Justice, inv. no. 3086, news item (11/6) ‘Protest at Sum-
mary Proceedings Ralph Waver’.
107	Archive of Ministry of Justice, inv. no. 3086, letter of Z. (11 June 1971).
108	Archive of Ministry of Justice, inv. no. 3086, letter of J.-G. (12 June 1971).
109	na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 643, petition of Centre for Development Aid and Third 
World Aid Shop (October 1971).
110	 Archive of Ministry of Justice, inv. no. 3086, letter of Amnesty International 
(14 June 1971).
111	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 643, letter from K. (12 November 1971).
112	 Ministry of Justice 3086, standard reply of permanent under-secretary of Minis-
try of Justice (11 June 1971).

102	
Tycho Walaardt
113	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 643, reply from the permanent under-secretary of Minis-
try of Justice to the Quakers (30 November 1971).
114	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 643, reply from the permanent under-secretary of Minis-
try of Justice to petition of students (30 November 1971).
115	 na, 5.023.5027, inv. no. 643, reply from the permanent under-secretary of Minis-
try of Justice to R. (21 October 1971).
References
Alink, F.B. (2006), Crisis als kans? Over de relatie tussen crises en hervormingen in het 
vreemdelingenbeleid van Nederland en Duitsland. Amsterdam: Vosius Press uva 
& Amsterdam University Press.
Alink, F., A. Boin & P. ’t Hart (2001), ‘Institutional crises and reforms in policy sec-
tors: The case of asylum policy in Europe’, Journal of European Public Policy 8 (2): 
286-306.
Baalen, A. van (1997), ‘Asiel in wonderland: De patriarchalisering van vluchtelingen’, 
Tijdschrift voor vrouwenstudies 18 (4): 418-432.
Bhabha, J. (2004), ‘Demography and rights: Women, children and access to asylum’, 
International Journal of Refugee Law 16 (2): 227-243.
Bloch, A., T. Galvin & B. Harrell-Bond (2000), ‘Refugee women in Europe: Some 
aspects of the legal and policy dimensions’, International Migration 38 (2): 169-188.
Boswell, C. (2000), ‘European values and the asylum crisis’, International Affairs 76 
(3): 537-557.
Bronkhorst, D. (1990), Een tijd van komen: De geschiedenis van vluchtelingen in Ne-
derland. Amsterdam: Jan Mets.
Calavita, K. (2006), ‘Gender, migration, and law: Crossing borders and bridging dis-
ciplines’, International Migration Review 40 (1): 104-132.
Carruthers, S.L. (2005), ‘Between camps: Eastern Bloc ‘escapees’ and Cold War bor-
derlands’, American Quarterly 57 (3): 911-942.
Churchill, D.S. (2004), ‘An ambiguous welcome: Vietnam draft resistance, the Cana-
dian state, and Cold War containment’, Social History 37 (73): 1-26.
Cohen, R. & D. Joly (1989), ‘Introduction: The “new refugees” of Europe’, in D. Joly 
& R. Cohen (eds), Reluctant hosts: Europe and its refugees, pp. 5-18. Aldershot: 
Avebury/Gower Publishing Group.
Connell, R.W. (1993), ‘The big picture: Masculinities in recent world history’, Theory 
and Society 22 (5) Special Issue: Masculinities (October): 597-623.
Crawley, H. (2000), ‘Gender, persecution and the concept of politics in the asylum 
determination process’, Forced Migration Review 9: 17-20.
D’Haenens, L. & M. de Lange (2001), ‘Framing of asylum seekers in Dutch regional 
newspapers’, Media, Culture & Society 23: 847-860.
Doesschate, J.W. (1993), Asielbeleid en belangen: Het Nederlandse toelatingsbeleid ten 
aanzien van vluchtelingen in de jaren 1968-1982. Hilversum: Verloren.
Duynstee, F.J.F.M. (1972), ‘Het Nederlandse vreemdelingenrecht’, in W. Riphagen, 
F.J.F.M. Duynstee & J.H. Smeets, De vreemdeling in Nederland, pp. 36-53. Deven-
ter: Kluwer.

new refugees?	
103
Eekert, P. van, D. Hellema & A. van Heteren (1986), Johnson moordenaar! De kwestie 
Vietnam in de Nederlandse politiek, 1965-1975. Amsterdam: Mets.
Entman, R.M. (1993), ‘Framing: Toward clarification of a fractured paradigm’, Journal 
of Communication 43 (4): 51-58.
Esterik, C. van (1998), Het zout der aarde, uaf 1948-1998: Vijftig jaar hulp aan vluch-
teling-studenten. Amsterdam: Bert Bakker.
Freeman, G. (1992), ‘Migration policy and politics in the receiving states’, Interna-
tional Migration Review 26 (4): 1144-1167.
Gallagher, D. (1989), ‘The evolution of the international refugee system’, International 
Migration Review 23 (3): 579-598.
Gorp, B. van (2002), ‘Werken aan de werkelijkheid: Een casestudie over de Inplanting 
van een asielcentrum’, Tijdschrift voor Sociologie 23 (3/4): 325-342.
Greatbatch, J. (1989), ‘The gender difference: Feminist critiques of refugee discourse’, 
International Journal of Refugee Law 1 (4): 518-527. 
Hoeksma, J. (1987), ‘Vluchtelingen in het Europa van de Burger: Asiel zoeken in Eu-
ropa’, Justitiële Verkenningen 13 (8): 98-121.
Jansse de Jonge, H., T. Prakken & T. de Roos (1983), ‘Action and law in the Nether-
lands’, Contemporary Crises 7 (2): 113-133.
Kagan, M. (2003), ‘Is truth is the eyes of the beholder? Objective credibility assess-
ments in refugee status determination’, Georgetown Immigration Law Journal 17 
(3): 367-415.
Kelly, N. (1993), ‘Gender-related persecution: Assessing the asylum claims of women’, 
Cornell International Law Journal 26: 625-674.
Kneebone, S. (2005), ‘Women within the refugee construct: “Exclusionary inclusion” 
in policy and practice – the Australian experience’, International Journal of Refugee 
Law 17 (1): 7-42.
Krieken, P.J. van (1976), Deserteurs, dienstweigeraars en asielrecht. Assen: Van Gorcum.
Leiss, A. & R. Boesjes (2004), ‘Women, children and access to asylum’, International 
Journal of Refugee Law 16 (2): 227-243. 
Lindo, F. (1988), Zuideuropeanen in Nederland (Portugezen, Spanjaarden, Italianen, 
Grieken en Joegoslaven). Rijswijk: Ministerie van Cultuur, Recreatie en Maat-
schappelijk Werk.
Loescher, G. (2001), The unhcr and world politics: A perilous path. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Lynn, N. & S. Lea (2003), ‘“A phantom menace and the new Apartheid”: The social 
construction of asylum-seekers in the United Kingdom’, Discourse & Society 14: 
425-452.
Maar, R. van der (2007), Welterusten, mijnheer de president: Nederland en de Vietna-
moorlog 1965-1973. Utrecht: Boom.
Maarseveen, H.Th.J.F. van (1972), ‘Ralph Waver: Vreemdeling of vluchteling?’, Neder-
lands Juristenblad: 33-38.
Macklin, A. (1999), ‘A comparative analysis of the Canadian, us, and Australian direc-
tives on gender persecution and refugee status’, in D. Indra (ed.), Engendering 
forced migration: Theory and practice, pp. 272-307. Oxford: Berghahn Books.
Mascini, P. & M. van Bochove (2007), ‘Gender en asiel: “Zelfstandige” mannen en 
“Afhankelijke” vrouwen’, Sociologie 3 (1): 111-130.

104	
Tycho Walaardt
McKay, S.C. (2007), ‘Filipino sea men: Constructing masculinities in an ethnic labour 
niche’, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 33 (4) (May): 617-633.
Montgomery, E. & A. Foldspang (2005), ‘Predictors of the authorities’ decision to 
grant asylum in Denmark’, Journal of Refugee Studies 18 (4): 454-467.
Nickels, H.C. (2007), ‘Framing asylum discourse in Luxembourg’, Journal of Refugee 
Studies 20 (1): 37-59.
Nobil Ahmad, A. (2008), ‘The romantic appeal of illegal migration: Gender mas-
culinity and human smuggling from Pakistan’, in M. Schrover, J. van der Leun, 
L. Lucassen & C. Quispel (eds), Illegal migration and gender in a global and histori-
cal perspective, pp. 127-150. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Oxford, C.G. (2005), ‘Protectors and victims in the gender regime of asylum’, nwsa 
Journal 17 (3): 18-38.
Paludan, A. (1981), ‘Refugees in Europe’, International Migration Review 15 (1): 60-73. 
Schrover, M. (2009), ‘Family in Dutch migration policy, 1945-2005’, History of the 
Family 14: 191-202.
Sellström, T. (2002), Sweden and national liberation in Southern Africa. Vol ii. Solidar-
ity and assistance 1970-1994. Stockholm: The Nordic Africa Institute.
Sorber, J. (1971), ‘Nederland, Portugal en Zuidelijk Afrika: Een greep uit het werk van 
het Angola Comité’, Wending 26 (April): 125.
Spijkerboer, T. (1994), Asylum seekers: A comparative study concerning policy and 
jurisprudence in the Netherlands, Germany, France, the United Kingdom, also deal-
ing summarily with Belgium and Canada. Amsterdam: Dutch Refugee Council.
Stein, B.N. (1981), ‘The refugee experience: Defining the parameters of a field study’, 
International Migration Review 15 (1 & 2): 320-330.
Thorne, B. (1975), ‘Women in the draft resistance movement: A case study of sex roles 
and social movements’, Sex Roles 1 (2): 179-195.
Unterhalter, E. (2000), ‘The work of the nation: Heroic masculinity in South African 
autobiographical writing of the anti-apartheid struggle’, The European Journal of 
Development Research 12 (2): 157-178.
Valji, N., L.A. de la Hunt & J.H. Moffett (2003), ‘Where are the women? Gender dis-
crimination in refugee policies and practises’, Agenda 55: 61-72.
Walaardt, T. (2009), ‘Het paard van Troje: Het verlenen van asiel door Nederland in de 
periode 1945-1955’, Tijdschrift voor Sociale en Economische Geschiedenis 6 (2): 63-93.
Walaardt, T. (2012), Geruisloos inwilligen: Argumentatie en speelruimte in de Neder-
landse asielprocedure, 1945-1994. Hilversum: Verloren.
Wetten J. van, C.J.H. Bijleveld, F. Heide & N. Dijkhoff (2001), ‘Female asylum seekers 
in the Netherlands’, International Migration 39 (3): 85-98.
White, A. (2002), ‘Geographies of asylum, legal knowledge and legal practices’, Politi-
cal Geography 21: 1055-1073.
Ziemann, B. (2008), ‘The code of protest: Images of peace in the West German peace 
movements, 1945-1990’, Contemporary European History 17 (2): 237-261.
Zolberg, A.R. (2006), A nation by design: Immigration policy in the fashioning of 
America. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

4  A gender-blind approach  
in Canadian refugee processes
Mexican female claimants in the new refugee narrative
Monica Boyd and Joanne Nowak
Introduction
Women refugees have long faced barriers to the refugee process. How-
ever, in the 1990s a number of countries adopted a formal set of gender 
guidelines to assist them in taking gender issues into account in refugee 
adjudications. Consequently, many women successfully obtained refu-
gee status by claiming gender-based persecution. Additionally, gender-
related abuses were incorporated into the larger refugee narrative em-
phasising political and humanitarian concerns. Focusing on the recent 
influx of Mexican refugees to Canada, this chapter argues that today’s 
refugee narrative has moved away from a gender-inclusive approach, 
and reverted to the traditional gender-blind perspective. Using a fram-
ing analysis of more than 100 articles in the Canadian media, this chap-
ter traces this shift and the conditions that influenced it, as well as the 
implications for refugee women.
Women have long been overrepresented in refugee flows, but under-
represented in refugee claims in the industrialised countries (Foote 
1996; Boyd 1999). This pattern has numerous explanations. One stresses 
the tendency of women to remain near their countries of origin (in 
neighbouring countries); a second emphasises the delayed migration 
of women, who follow their spouses or male relatives through family 
migration once the former have made refugee claims abroad (Mascini 
& Van Bochove 2009). This chapter moves beyond the individual level 
by focusing on how the migration of female refugees may be influenced 
by institutional actors, particularly the media, within countries of set-
tlement.
During the 1990s, select states, including Canada, addressed the 
gendered nature of the refugee process, specifically through the devel-
opment of formal gender guidelines to be used in the refugee claimant 
adjudication process. At the urging of the United Nations, Canada was 
the first country to officially adopt these guidelines in 1993. Success in 

106	
Monica Boyd & Joanne Nowak
addressing gendered differences is manifest in Canadian refugee data 
(Mawani 1993). In 1986, roughly 7,800 women refugees obtained per-
manent resident status, while in 2010 this number increased to nearly 
12,100.1 Numerous Immigration and Refugee Board (irb) cases in Can-
ada cite gender-related persecution as the main reason why claimants 
are allowed to remain. The strategy has been so successful that refu-
gee scholars have described this pattern of refugee adjudication as fol-
lowing a ‘good women, bad men’ script. Where gender-related claims 
made by women are seen as valid reasons for asylum claimants, the 
claims of male refugees are often associated with economic motiva-
tions and therefore viewed as invalid or bogus (Boyd 1999; Mascini & 
Van Bochove 2009). Mexican female claimants have been especially 
successful in their use of the Canadian Gender Guidelines in gender-
related persecution claims.2 However, notwithstanding this improve-
ment in women’s status, the number of male refugee claimants, as well 
as the number of men granted permanent residence to Canada as refu-
gees, has been higher than corresponding numbers for women every 
year for the past 25 years.3 It seems that women’s success is late in com-
ing, and limited in its scope. The gains were also relatively short lived, 
as recent economic and political developments have re-scripted the ref-
ugee narrative from one that considers the needs and vulnerabilities of 
women, to a largely genderless story.4
The discussion in this chapter can be situated within the larger lit-
erature that focuses on political and economic factors that influence 
refugee policies and narratives, especially foreign policy interests and 
domestic special interest groups (Mitchell 1989; Zolberg 1999; Spijk-
erboer 2000; Cornelius & Rosenblum 2005) (for other examples, see 
the chapters in this volume by Walaardt, Schacher, and Oxford). In 
this chapter, we focus on the gendered aspects of the refugee narrative, 
examining the conditions under which a focus on gender issues recedes 
into the background in refugee processes. We argue that the traditional 
refugee story in the Canadian media has been re-scripted by new geo-
politics between ‘democratic’ countries in the post-Cold War era, the 
recent large-scale influx of Mexican refugee claimants to Canada, as 
well as the costs of this influx to Canadian taxpayers and the refugee 
system. The narrative has shifted from providing protection to refu-
gees from failed states (using a gender-inclusive approach), to manag-
ing and reducing refugees from democratic countries (using a gender-
neutral approach). This shift in the narrative has the strong potential of 
limiting the ability of refugee women to access the refugee process and 
to have successful resolutions of their claims. This chapter begins by 
examining how and why the refugee narrative has changed. It then dis-

a gender-blind approach in canadian refugee processes	
107
cusses the implications of these changes for female refugee claimants, 
particularly Mexican women.5
Literature review: The historical development  
of the gendered refugee narrative
The traditional refugee narrative emerged in the 1950s within the his-
torical and political context of the post-Second World War period. A 
key element of this narrative was the creation of a formal international 
refugee definition, put forward in Article 1 of the 1951 United Nations 
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees. That convention states 
that a refugee is a person who ‘owing to a well-founded fear of being 
persecuted for reasons of race, religion, nationality, membership of a 
particular social group or political opinion, is outside the country of 
his nationality and is unable, or owing to such fear, is unwilling to avail 
himself of the protection of that country’. This definition of a refugee 
draws attention to violations committed directly by the state against 
individuals (Connors 1997). Critics have observed that this focus on the 
actions of the state and the violation of civil and political rights places 
a disproportionate emphasis on public, rather than private, forms of 
persecution.
The lack of attention to persecution in private settings dispropor-
tionately impacts women, since gender roles and stratification con-
strain women in many societies to the private sphere, while men are 
the main actors in the public arena. Gender scholars and advocates 
note that the un definition of refugee privileges the recognition of refu-
gee status for men relative to women, suggesting that forms of perse-
cution experienced by women in more private settings are less likely 
to be recognised as grounds for persecution. Such forms include rape, 
dowry-related burnings, forced marriages, female genital mutilation 
and domestic violence (Foote 1996; Boyd 1999). In some situations, 
the state could be the agent denying basic human rights, or it may fail 
to offer protection to certain groups, even though such protection is 
within its capacity (Connors 1997; Boyd 1999).
Critics also note with some concern the procedures whereby per-
secution is established. Assessing accounts of harmful acts involves 
understanding the conditions within the country or state from which 
the person has fled, as well as understanding the consequences should 
the person return. Yet country descriptions usually emphasise the pub-
lic sphere, not the private sphere. Country-specific information may 
be genderless, rather than illuminating gender inequalities. In either 

108	
Monica Boyd & Joanne Nowak
case, women might find it difficult to argue that their victimisation is 
based on one or more grounds found in the refugee definition. Rather 
than being viewed as violations of human rights, their experiences may 
be perceived by the courts, the public and the media, as private acts 
inflicted by other individuals (Connors 1997; unhcr 1997; Boyd 1999). 
Furthermore, Inlender (2009) argues that the likelihood of success with 
gender claims is complicated by the difficulty of proving that acts tra-
ditionally seen as private matters (within the family sphere) are in fact 
government sanctioned, whether implicitly or tacitly.
Over time, these issues have led to three modifications in the refugee 
narrative. First, violence against women (particularly sexual violence) 
emerged as a key concern (unhcr 1995). Second, the discussion broad-
ened to include forms of gender-based persecution, such as female 
genital mutilation and other harmful practices, as well as domestic 
violence where no community or legal state protection is provided 
(unhcr 1997). Third, governments developed tools to increase adjudi-
cators’ awareness of how persecution is mediated by gender. One such 
tool is the Gender Guidelines, implemented in Canada in 1993. Similar 
procedures were adopted later by the usa and Australia. The Cana-
dian guidelines present ways for adjudicators to be gender sensitive 
when considering persecution grounds and special efforts to be made 
in the refugee determination process, such as having female interview-
ers (Foote 1996). In sum, the emphasis on gender-related abuses, along 
with the promise of state protection by refugee adjudicators and gov-
ernments in the 1990s, resulted in the creation of a more gender-inclu-
sive refugee narrative (Mascini & Van Bochove 2009).
The demise of the (gendered) refugee narrative
The emphasis on providing protection to female refugees which cul-
minated in the development of the Gender Guidelines in the 1990s, is 
currently receding into the background – even in the very country that 
launched the guidelines onto the global stage. Challenges to a relatively 
friendly female refugee narrative existed earlier through concerns about 
the general costs of refugees, and the legitimacy of female refugee claim-
ants.6 Recently these critiques have been made on a more regular basis, 
leading to a noticeable shift in foci, assumptions and values promoted 
in the refugee narrative. Support can in fact be found for the claim that 
the move from the Cold War to the neo-liberal period, as well as the 
recent increase in the number of refugees (and in costs) to Canada, has 
shifted the refugee narrative. Instead of a focus on providing protection 

a gender-blind approach in canadian refugee processes	
109
to refugees from failed states using a gender-inclusive approach (that 
takes gender-based persecution into account), the emphasis is increas-
ingly on managing and reducing refugees from partner democratic 
countries, using a gender-blind approach. However, a gender-blind ap-
proach cannot be equated with gender neutrality in outcomes. Gender 
stratification and hierarchies of power in countries of origin and coun-
tries of settlement can produce immigration practices and regulations 
that not are gender-specific in their terms of reference, but which often 
have gender-specific impacts (Boyd 1989, 1995; Boyd & Pikkov 2008).
Case study: Mexican migration to Canada
Mexican refugees have been coming to Canada for decades. However, 
there has been a significant increase in the number of refugee claimants 
from this country. In fact, there has been a fivefold increase in the past 
ten years. In December 2001, 3,600 refugee claimants from Mexico rep-
resented 3.2% of all claimants present in Canada. By December 2005, 
more than 8,000 claimants were from Mexico, with the number rising 
to nearly 16,000 in 2010. As a result, Mexican claimants constituted 8% 
and 16% of the entire refugee claimant population in 2005 and 2010, 
respectively.7 Concomitantly, there was a noticeable increase in female 
Mexican claimants. In 2000, they represented just under 4% of the total 
female refugee claimant population in Canada, but in 2007 the num-
ber had risen to more than 17%.8 While several factors could explain 
why women are fleeing Mexico, the level of gender-related violence 
in the country is an important push factor. More than 130,000 cases 
of domestic violence are reported in Mexico each year.9 In terms of 
state protection, roughly half of the female respondents who identified 
themselves as victims of violence in a 2003 Mexican national study did 
not seek assistance, while nearly 80% of those who did seek assistance 
relied primarily on family and friends rather than the police.10
Yet Mexico continues to be described as a safe and democratic 
state by the Canadian media and government. In fact, the government 
recently took a powerful symbolic step in this regard by requiring visas 
from Mexicans entering Canada in a bid to separate the ‘few’ legiti-
mate refugee claimants from those abusing the refugee process.11 Con-
sequently, the gender-related concerns of Mexican women appear to 
have receded into the background in the current refugee narrative. But 
Mexican refugees have not disappeared, and Mexican women refugee 
claimants currently represent the largest group of female claimants in 
Canada.12 How can we explain this altered narrative, given the plight of 
women refugee claimants?

110	
Monica Boyd & Joanne Nowak
Materials and methods
We answer this question using reports that appeared in major Cana-
dian newspapers with nationwide or province-wide circulation, such 
as the National Post, the Globe and Mail, the Toronto Star, the Ottawa 
Citizen and the Montreal Gazette, as well as local newspapers, such as 
the Edmonton Journal and the Windsor Star. We also examined blogs 
on immigration issues. The objective of this selection was twofold. The 
first aim was to cover a broad spectrum of newspapers discussing refu-
gee issues at both the national and local levels, thus providing a com-
prehensive picture of the Canadian press. The second aim was to ac-
knowledge the increasing importance of the electronic media as a dis-
seminator of news and culture.
From these newspapers and blogs, we selected articles and editorials 
that discussed topics related to gender and Mexican refugees, the Cana-
dian refugee system, domestic violence, bogus (or economic) refugees, 
democratic states and safe states between 1990 and 2009. These general 
topics were developed into specific codes, and analysed in terms of the 
narratives and portrayals of Mexican refugee claimants to Canada, with 
a focus on female claimants.
Framing theory guided the analysis. Using media reports, we identi-
fied frames (or narratives) within media articles to provide an organ-
ising structure for understanding key issues, phenomena and groups 
(Snow et al. 1986; Olausson 2009; Seijio 2009). As Pan and Kosicki 
(1993) point out, identifying these media frames enables scholars to 
tease out the analytical and conceptual schemata provided to the pub-
lic through which events, phenomena and people are given mean-
ing (additional discussion of frame analysis appears in the chapter by 
Walaardt in this volume). These dominant frames are often taken for 
granted. Thus, to better understand the particular meanings, assump-
tions and values promoted by these seemingly neutral frames, we must 
deconstruct and critique them. Further, since the frames shape what 
is presented as common sense, they are intimately related to issues of 
power. An analysis of frames in the media therefore also considers the 
dominant economic, political and cultural forces at play.
Critical discourse analysis (cda) provides a complementary tech-
nique in this analysis. It is used to identify implicit values and assump-
tions, taking a constructionist approach to discourses and narratives 
in the media and connecting these to dominant actors and forces in 
society (McGrath 2009).13 cda thus assists in uncovering the interests, 
values and assumptions of refugee narratives.

a gender-blind approach in canadian refugee processes	
111
The objective of the research presented in this chapter is threefold. 
It first identifies the dominant frames that are used in the media and 
shape the public’s views and understandings of Mexican refugee claim-
ants. It then notes the political and economic forces behind these par-
ticular frames and examines the conditions under which shifts in refu-
gee frames (or narratives) take place.
Findings
The results of our analysis indicate a move away from a gender-inclu-
sive approach that seeks to provide protection to refugees, to a gender-
neutral approach that emphasises managing refugees from democratic 
countries. The portrayal of Mexican women refugees in the media, or 
rather the lack thereof, is an integral component of this shift. For in-
stance, among more than 100 articles and editorials discussing the large 
influx of Mexican refugee claimants to Canada, roughly 10% refer to 
women or gender in the title. Mexican claimants are consistently de-
scribed as a homogeneous group, as the following headlines demon-
strate: ‘Flood of Mexican refugees shows poor border controls’14 and 
‘9,000 ordinary people flee Mexican drug war’.15 In these examples, the 
script takes on a gender-blind or gender-neutral tone that neglects con-
sideration of the gender-related issues of female claimants.
In terms of content, only a minority of the articles reporting on 
Mexican refugees meaningfully focus on the issues faced by Mexican 
women, their refugee experiences or the types of claims they advance. 
The mismatch between the genderless refugee narratives and reality 
is underscored by refugee experts’ descriptions of the most common 
types of claims: ‘Over the past six years, most Mexican claims have 
involved threats or brutal physical attacks related to narco-traffick-
ers, violent domestic abuse and homophobia’16 and ‘Women who flee 
domestic violence make up many of the claims. Amnesty International, 
the un and Human Rights Watch all document the lack of protection 
for such women’.17
Thus, while gender issues remain prevalent in actual refugee claims, 
they have receded into the background in the media’s refugee narra-
tives. How did this shift in narrative occur? We posit three main condi-
tions: a shift in the geopolitical relationships influencing refugee pro-
cesses, a significant increase in refugee claimants from certain coun-
tries of origin, and economic decline in the countries of settlement.

112	
Monica Boyd & Joanne Nowak
Conditions underlying the shift in the refugee narrative
New geopolitical relationships in refugee processes
The attitudes of states towards refugee admissions have shifted over the 
past several decades, leading to a significant change in the dominant 
refugee narrative articulated in the media. Political interests during the 
Cold War played a key role in shaping refugee admissions and helping to 
write the larger refugee narrative. Specifically, refugees from communist 
countries were welcomed in the West in a bid to highlight their desire 
to live in a democratic, Western country rather than a communist one 
(Zucker & Zucker 1987; Zolberg 1999). As a bonus, the political interests 
of the countries of settlement and the humanitarian needs of these refu-
gees tended to coincide. Consequently, the dominant refugee narrative 
emphasised during the Cold War period was one of providing protection 
to political and humanitarian refugees from failed (or backward) states.
Now, two decades after the end of the Cold War, geopolitical relation-
ships have changed. The world is no longer divided into clear ideologi-
cal camps, a situation in which governments stood to benefit from leni-
ent refugee policies. Consequently, there is less willingness to become 
heavily involved in refugee issues. The broad emphasis has shifted from 
conflicts based on politico-ideological regimes, to allegiances based 
on economic ties and political-economic regimes.18 More specifically, 
states have moved away from refugee protection towards refugee man-
agement and reduction. These changes are reflected in the refugee nar-
rative. Media no longer discuss politico-ideological differences between 
countries of origin and settlement, but talk of cultivating ties between 
economically like-minded countries. For instance, several articles dis-
cussing Mexican refugees’ attempts to cross the border emphasise Mex-
ico’s status as Canada’s ‘trading partner’. Labelling a trading partner as 
an unstable state that cannot protect its citizens is an economically risky 
move. The following quotations connect Canada’s reluctance to wel-
come Mexican refugees to the political and economic ties between the 
party countries of the North American Free Trade Agreement (nafta):
Canada’s Conservative government, however, has been treading softly 
in their dealings with Mexico about these cases – afraid, no doubt, 
of the political and economic fall-out that may occur by alienating a 
nafta partner.19
Many view Mexico as a tourist destination, a democratic country that 
is also our partner in trade with nafta, says Gozlan [immigration 
lawyer].20

a gender-blind approach in canadian refugee processes	
113
	
These strong economic interests work against providing refugee 
protection, and they work towards refugee management from coun-
tries with whom Canada has trading ties.
As suggested elsewhere (Olausson 2009), the polity and the media 
are intimately connected. Thus, media frames usually reflect dominant 
political interests. In this case, changing geopolitical interests are shift-
ing the refugee narrative away from protection and humanitarianism 
and toward refugee reduction. This cautious or reluctant approach 
towards refugees is even more salient when the refugee claimants are 
from countries deemed ‘democratic’. Under such conditions, the Cana-
dian government and the media rely on the assumption that since Mex-
ico is a democratic country, it protects its citizens. But immigration 
lawyers and refugee advocates issue the following warnings:
The principal reasoning behind these kinds of rejections is because 
the irb says the claimant has to show state protection is not available 
to the claimant. The onus is higher on them to show that protection is 
not available the more democratic a country is, says Michael Tilleard, 
past chair of the Canadian Bar Association’s immigration and citizen-
ship section for northern Alberta. Often the irb decisions will say 
Mexico is a democracy, or even a fledgling democracy, so you should 
have recourse to state protection if you’re living in a democratic state.21
Dench [Executive Director of the Canadian Council for Refugees] 
also warns about Kenney’s position that claimants who come from 
so-called ‘democratic’ countries can’t be legitimate refugees.22
	
Newspapers often describe Mexico as a democratic country and 
contrast it with failed states, such as Somalia, as the following quotation 
illustrates: ‘Compare Mexico’s low numbers with countries like Soma-
lia, which last year had 74 Calgary applications and an acceptance rate 
of 100 per cent’.23 Through such juxtapositions, the papers imply that 
refugee claimants from the former are necessarily false claimants. More 
specifically, these ‘bogus refugees’ are described as economic refugees 
trying to exploit Canada’s labour market illegally or escape from their 
domestic drug violence problems, rather than remain within their own 
legitimate and democratic country:
In another ‘big racket,’ Argentines are travelling to the U.S. because 
they don’t need a visa. They then present themselves to Canada as 
refugees, live in hotels and dine on welfare money. After they finish 
their two- or three-month Canadian holiday, he says, many simply 

114	
Monica Boyd & Joanne Nowak
return home. A percentage of Mexican refugee claimants reportedly 
also take similar vacations here.24
	
Although there is a significant level of crime and drug violence in 
Mexico, the media frames democratic countries such as Mexico as safe 
countries that protect their citizens and do not produce refugee claim-
ants. This democratic country narrative constructs Mexican refugees 
as unworthy, limiting their ability to be portrayed as legitimate refu-
gees. This public narrative is also reflected in the longstanding ‘deserv-
ing and undeserving refugee’ discourse within the academic literature, 
the former being associated with the minority of (Mexican in this case) 
asylum seekers granted Convention status and the latter reserved for 
the majority who do not obtain this status (Sales 2002; Mascini & Van 
Bochove 2009).
The influence of the ‘deserving versus undeserving refugee’ narra-
tive (compare Schacher and Walaardt in this volume) can be seen in the 
views among the Canadian public on Mexican refugees as expressed 
in editorials and letters to newspapers. While Mexico’s poor economic 
conditions and drug violence conjure up some sympathy, most respond-
ents comment that these are not valid criteria for refugee claimants and 
that Canada cannot be a haven for all people in need:
A lot of Windsorites have voiced their opinion on the Mexican refu-
gee situation, both negative and positive responses, but the bottom 
line doesn’t change. I am all for the best for all human beings, but we 
cannot save everyone.25
I sympathize for their economic plight but their problems are not 
Canada’s to solve. Canada has its own poverty issues to deal with and 
much of it is generated by an out of control immigration system. The 
economic poverty of Mexicans is Mexico’s responsibility.26
	
The emphasis on the democratic – and therefore safe – Mexican 
state is especially meaningful for women, as it contains the potential 
to remove gender considerations from the claimant process. Assuming 
that a democratic country provides protection to its citizens overlooks 
the possibility that such a state can be patriarchal and neglect to pro-
vide equal protection to all residents. In the case of women in Mexico, a 
number of organisations document a persistently high rate of domestic 
violence against women with little or no police protection provided.27 
According to the 2003 National Survey on Household Relationship 
Dynamics, roughly 10% of Mexican women report being physically 

a gender-blind approach in canadian refugee processes	
115
abused, and nearly 37% reported emotional abuse. These numbers are 
likely even higher, since they only represent those women who are will-
ing to report such violence (Frias Martinez 2009). Numerous reports 
document instances where Mexican women have gone to the authori-
ties and reported domestic violence and received no protection.28 In 
fact, the Mexican researcher Teresa Doring found that 80% of women 
killed by husbands or boyfriends had asked police for help from one to 
five years beforehand.29
According to the United Nations’ definition, a convention refugee 
must be a person with a well-founded fear of persecution based on race, 
religion, nationality, political opinion or membership in a particular 
social group. Furthermore, that person must demonstrate that his gov-
ernment is unable, or unwilling, to provide protection from this perse-
cution.30 Writers suggest that Mexican women experiencing domestic 
violence meet this definition given that (1) they belong to a particular 
social group (i.e., women) being persecuted (i.e., abused) as a result 
of their membership in this group, (2) this persecution is pervasive, 
and (3) their government appears unable, or unwilling, to provide pro-
tection (from domestic violence). That last is evidenced by the lack of 
police protection and failure to prosecute perpetrators of domestic vio-
lence in Mexico (Teran 1999).31
Nevertheless, the Canadian media’s discussion of Mexican refugees 
utilises a gender-blind script that emphasises drug violence and human 
smuggling as the main factors pushing Mexicans to seek refuge in other 
countries, glossing over the experiences of domestic violence that drive 
many women to seek asylum. Consider, for example, the following gen-
derless narratives:
Everything is related to the climb of violence in Mexico. Some of them 
have received direct threats for different reasons – because they were 
caught in the middle of drug cartels when they are trying to control 
an area, or they saw a crime or corruption, you name it [Martinez, 
Toronto’s fcj Refugee Centre].32
Hundreds of Mexican refugee claimants are entering Canada every 
month due to spiralling drug cartel violence and the presence of scam 
artists promising refuge in Canada, experts say.33
	
In articles such as these, Mexican refugees are discussed as a mono-
lithic, homogenous group.
These media accounts indicate that a dividing line is being drawn 
between democratic countries that do not (or cannot) produce refugees 

116	
Monica Boyd & Joanne Nowak
on the one hand and conflict-ridden countries without functional gov-
ernment, such as Somalia, on the other. However, this framing of coun-
tries of origin relies on a traditional understanding of refugees based on 
public persecution; that is, fleeing war or conflict or a lack of political 
governance or state apparatus. It ignores the advances in the refugee 
discourse of the 1990s, underscoring persecution in the private realm, 
even with a functional government and general public safety. The fram-
ing overlooks the fact that a state can be both patriarchal and demo-
cratic – in other words, providing protection to its citizens generally – 
but not meet the specific needs of women. The earlier narrative, which 
focused on providing asylum for ideological purposes using a gender-
inclusive approach, has thus shifted to one that emphasises maintain-
ing good economic and political ties with governments deemed ‘demo-
cratic’ using a gender-blind approach.
Dramatic increase in refugee claimants
Another key condition influencing today’s refugee narrative is the dra-
matic increase in refugee claimants to Canada from specific countries 
of origin, such as the previously noted fivefold increase in the number 
of Mexican refugee claimants in the past decade.34 The perceived inten-
sity of this influx is heightened by the media’s use of metaphors related 
to contagion and flooding of these allegedly ‘bogus’ refugees (the em-
phasis is ours in the following):
The nafta partner has been the top source country for refugee claims 
in Canada since 2005. It was also the top source country for refugee 
claims in Alberta for 2007 and 2008, dwarfing the number of claims 
from other top source countries such as Colombia, Somalia, and Zim-
babwe.35
A sudden flood of Mexican refugee claimants pouring into Windsor 
has left local officials scrambling and raised fears about how many 
more may be on their way.36
Mexicans pour into Canada from us: Agencies brace for thousands 
more at border.37
Mexicans are flooding into Canada and claiming refugee status. Why 
is it happening, and what can we do to stop it?38

a gender-blind approach in canadian refugee processes	
117
	
This rhetorical technique has also been used in describing other ref-
ugee inflows, such as the sudden increase of Tamil asylum seekers to 
the Netherlands in the 1980s (Van Dijk 1988). The result is often a por-
trayal of asylum seekers as a threat to the integrity of Canadian system. 
Moreover, these images create a distance between the influx of new asy-
lum seekers (as a separate Other) and Canadian society.
Economic decline in the country of settlement
A final key condition influencing the development of the current refu-
gee narrative is economic decline in the country of settlement. The eco-
nomic costs (rather than political benefits) of accepting refugees are of-
ten centre stage in public discussions. This economic focus is prevalent 
in media discussions at both the national and local levels. The former 
highlights the overall costs to the Canadian taxpayer. For instance, the 
National Post estimated the cost of maintaining one refugee as approxi-
mately $10,000 to $12,000 per year on taxpayers.39 While much analy-
sis has focused on the development of refugee narratives at the macro 
level (i.e., within international institutions, national governments and 
national newspapers), local actors and institutions also shape portray-
als of refugees amongst the Canadian public. As the following texts il-
lustrate, municipal newspapers and news media emphasise the costs 
of Mexican refugees in local services and resources, making the issue 
more personal and threatening to local residents:
Municipal agencies dealing with the sudden influx of mainly Mexican 
refugee applicants are renting out hotel rooms and bracing for pre-
dicted thousands more to come … We are not able to deal with this 
potential crisis locally.40
Francis [the mayor of Windsor] has written the federal and provincial 
governments asking for funding to help cover the cost of keeping the 
refugees housed while they wait for their refugee claims to be heard. 
Last week, he said it had so far cost the city $230,000, about 20 per 
cent of the annual budget for shelters. Windsor’s unemployment rate 
is currently pushing 10 per cent, making the influx of jobless refugees 
the last thing its economy needed.41
	
This emphasis on the unmanageable costs created by the influx of 
Mexican refugees reinforces the legitimacy of the narrative’s call to 
manage the growing number of refugees.42 In the following, Mexican 

118	
Monica Boyd & Joanne Nowak
female claimants are specifically discussed, but in reference to the cost 
of their migration and their children:
Last week, he said it had so far put up 50 families, some with up to 
nine children, at four city hotels. The bills, including those for meals, 
are being sent to the city’s social services department.43
To complicate things further, one of the 200 people in Windsor re-
cently gave birth to a child, and another woman has one on the way. 
Both children will have claims to Canadian citizenship, and strengthen 
the residency case of the mothers involved.44
	
In sum, the new refugee narrative emphasises refugee costs rather 
than claims. Although both men and women are targeted, women refu-
gee claimants are uniquely disadvantaged; their experiences and claims 
risk being relegated to the background, while their costs as mothers and 
women are brought to the foreground. As a result, they are particularly 
marginalised in the refugee narrative that appears in the media.
Discussion
The Canadian media refugee script through 2009 focused on refugee 
management and reduction, rather than refugee protection and wel-
come. In today’s geopolitical situation, the economic costs of accepting 
(what seems to be an increasing number of) Mexican refugees have 
taken centre stage, pushing aside any extensive discussion of political 
benefits. Although the influence of international relations on asylum 
processes is not new (Spijkerboer 2000), this latest shift in the refu-
gee agenda towards economics is relatively new. The shift in the refu-
gee narrative has had a significant impact on the public legitimacy of 
all Mexican refugees, but its effects on women have been particularly 
damaging. Very few of the articles we looked at mentioned the refugee 
intentions or experiences of Mexican women. Instead, the dominant 
script portrays Mexican refugees as one homogeneous group, while 
downplaying the legitimacy of claimants from ‘democratic’ countries.
This framing of Mexican refugees, however, does not consider 
that states deemed democratic and safe for their general citizenry are 
not necessarily assessed in terms of the safety they provide to spe-
cific groups, such as women in the private sphere (Markard 2007). As 
Oxford notes in her chapter in this volume, the state can fail to protect 
its citizens in a multiplicity of ways. Second, the current gender-blind 

a gender-blind approach in canadian refugee processes	
119
script may result in disproportionately negative legal and policy impli-
cations for Mexican women. For instance, the Federal Court of Canada 
recently overturned several Immigration and Refugee Board decisions 
involving domestic violence refugee claims by Mexican women.45 One 
could therefore argue that the narrow and homogeneous portrayal of 
Mexican refugees in the media may be influencing refugee adjudica-
tors’ understanding of female Mexican refugee experiences. More 
broadly, there is a danger that today’s gender-blind refugee script has 
(or will) become the standard among the public and officials working 
in the refugee system, with little regard for the diversity (and legiti-
macy) of claims within this large refugee group.
The Canadian government recently implemented a visa requirement 
for entry of Mexicans. The justification for this policy shift expressed by 
government officials in the media relies heavily on a new refugee nar-
rative, which frames Mexico as a democratic country that can protect 
its citizens and does not produce refugees. The Canadian Minister of 
Citizenship and Immigration has made a number of media announce-
ments like the following:
Instead, he [Citizenship and Immigration Minister Jason Kenney] 
says he has been told of widespread abuse of the system by relatively 
well-off Mexicans who take one-way flights to Canada and stay in the 
country until they are kicked out. He said unscrupulous immigration 
consultants in Mexico and the u.s. are coaching people on how to 
make a refugee claim in Canada. ‘I’m simply saying that as a matter 
of policy we need to do a better job of expediting the processing of 
false claims, as most other democratic countries do,’ Kenney said in 
an interview Friday.
In a speech to the Canadian Council for Refugees in Toronto in No-
vember, Mr. Kenney raised the possibility of a two-tier system where 
applicants from what he called ‘liberal democracies’ like Mexico, Brit-
ain and the Czech Republic are treated differently than those from 
conflict zones or totalitarian societies … Mr. Kenney also said that a 
90 per cent rejection rate of claims made by Mexicans at Canada’s Im-
migration and Refugee Board ‘would suggest wide scale and almost 
systematic abuse.’46
	
The implications of this policy decision on Mexican claimants’ 
access to the refuge process are clear: there were virtually no asylum 
claims from Mexican nationals in the first two weeks after the imposi-
tion of the travel visas.47 Further, five features of the application for a 

120	
Monica Boyd & Joanne Nowak
visitor’s visa suggest that the class and gender impacts of this process 
may be the greatest for women seeking to quickly remove themselves 
from a state that cannot or will not protect them. The requirements 
include (1) obtaining a visa, which requires access to funds in order to 
pay the application fee of Can. $75 for a sole applicant seeking a single 
entry and $400 for a family; (2) an interview may be required, held at 
the Mexico City visa office; (3) a valid travel document (such as a pass-
port) is required for the applicant and for each family member on the 
application; (4) two photographs of the applicant and of each accompa-
nying family member must be included in the application, the photos 
must be less than six months old and they must conform to specifica-
tions regarding head poses and size; and finally (5) despite a processing 
rate of 90% within two days from the Canadian visa office in Mexico 
City, documents must be submitted and returned via mail unless the 
applicant can appear in person. Use of mail or courier services length-
ens the time needed to obtain a visa and raises concerns that valuable 
documents may be stolen in transit.48 The gender- and class-related dif-
ficulties produced by these visa procedures are readily evident when 
one considers the economic situation of most Mexican women com-
pared to men (women earned roughly 22% less than men in the 1990s) 
(Brown, Pagan & Rodriguez-Oreggia 1999), and the fact that the need 
to flee quickly will seldom allow obtainment of passports, photos and 
pre-issued visas. Indeed, the requirement for documents risks creating 
a paradox: documents are needed to enter Canada but if documents 
are available, refugee claimant adjudicators could interpret a woman’s 
claim as premeditated. While premeditated flight by itself is not syn-
onymous with a fraudulent use of the claimant process, the possibility 
remains that having documents would be interpreted as such.
Conclusion
This chapter outlined a significant shift in the refugee narrative articu-
lated in the Canadian media, from one focused on providing protection 
to refugees from failed states (using a gender-inclusive approach), to 
the management and reduction of refugees from democratic countries 
(using a gender-neutral approach). We underlined three main condi-
tions that have contributed to this shift narrative: changing geopoliti-
cal relationships influencing refugee processes, a significant increase 
in numbers of refugee claimants from certain countries of origin (in 
this case, Mexico), and economic slowdown in the countries of settle-
ment (in this case, Canada). This shift is prevalent not only in North 

a gender-blind approach in canadian refugee processes	
121
America. Similar trends have been found by scholars studying changes 
in the European refugee regime, suggesting that broad shifts are taking 
place in the refugee narrative in a number of regions (Keely and Stan-
ton 1994).
As a result of these shifts, the benefits that governments stand to gain 
from granting asylum are now less clear than in the Cold-War era. Spe-
cifically, economic (rather than political) concerns have come to domi-
nate the refugee agenda. This shift has conceptual and practical con-
sequences. In terms of the former, the focus on refugee management 
and reduction from democratic countries – rather than the provision 
of protection to refugees – provokes a default negative attitude towards 
refugee claimants. Moreover, the gender-neutral approach overlooks 
the possibility that a democratic country can also be patriarchal, and 
therefore neglect to provide equal protection to all of its citizens. This 
chapter acknowledges that some Mexican claimants applying for refu-
gee status may not have valid claims. Nonetheless, the picture painted 
in the media overlooks the heterogeneity of those seeking refuge. Given 
that Mexican women continue to face high levels of domestic abuse and 
other gender-related exploitation, this gender-blind approach to the ref-
ugee system reverses past gains and signals a significant weakening of 
Canada’s leadership in promoting women’s rights in refugee processes.
Notes
1	 Citizenship and Immigration Canada, ‘Facts and figures 2010’.
2	 Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada. rpd ma-07954, 3 October 2002; crdd 
va0-01624 et al., Forsey, Clague, 8 March 2001; crdd A95-01027, A95-01028, 
Blackburn, Gaboury (6 March 1997).
3	 Citizenship and Immigration Canada, ‘Facts and figures 2010’.
4	 For the purposes of this chapter, the refugee narrative refers to media discussions 
of the following: refugees, refugee claims, the impact of refugees on countries of 
origin and countries of settlement, as well as refugee policies.
5	 Although the authors recognise the intersections of gender, class and ethnicity in 
media depictions of refugees, we focus on the first in order to highlight the shift 
in the gendered aspect of the refugee narrative in particular.
6	 Barbara Amiel, ‘The female refugee: A fraudulent concept’, Macleans 106: 13 (1993) 
9-10; Donna Jacobs, ‘Bill C-11 “deeply flawed”: Ex-immigration official’, Ottawa 
Citizen 1 November 2001.
7	 Nicholas Keung, ‘Mexican refugee requests’, Toronto Star 5 August 2007; Citizen-
ship and Immigration Canada, ‘Backgrounder: The visa requirement for Mexico’, 
13 July 2009.
8	 Citizenship and Immigration Canada, ‘Facts and figures 2012 – immigration over-
view: Permanent and temporary residents’, 26 February 2012, http://www.cic.

122	
Monica Boyd & Joanne Nowak
gc.ca/english/resources/statistics/facts2010/index.asp. Citizenship and Immigra-
tion Canada, ‘Facts and figures 2007 – immigration overview: Permanent and 
temporary residents’, 12 November 2008, http://www.cic.gc.ca/english/resources/
statistics/facts2007/temporary/30.asp (accessed 27 July 2009). More recent data 
for 2008-2010 does not include information by sex.
9	 Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, ‘Mexico: State protection’, May 2005, 
http://www.fcjrefugeecentre.org/docs/Archives/State per cent 20 Protection-2.
htm (accessed 4 September 2009).
10	 Ibid.
11	 Citizenship and Immigration Canada, ‘News release – Canada imposes a visa on 
Mexico’, 13 July 2009, www.cic.gc.ca/english/department/media/releases/2009/ 
2009-07-13.asp.
12	 Citizenship and Immigration Canada, ‘Facts and figures 2007’.
13	 Citizenship and Immigration Canada, ‘Facts and figures 2007’.
14	 Wayne Ewen, ‘Flood of Mexican refugees shows poor border controls’, Star-Phoe-
nix, 2 October 2007.
15	 Marina Jiménez, ‘9,000 ordinary people flee Mexican drug war’, Globe and Mail, 
20 October 2008.
16	 Peter Showler, ‘The bogus refugee myth’, Ottawa Citizen 12 August 2009. Peter 
Showler is the director of the Refugee Forum at the Human Research and Educa-
tion Centre, University of Ottawa.
17	 Maureen Silcoff, ‘Seeking refuge from Mexico’, Globe and Mail, 7 February 2009. 
Silcoff is a former member of the refugee board.
18	 While we highlight economic concerns as gaining ascendancy in the refugee 
agenda, others suggest that geopolitical and cultural axes also play a key role in 
shaping the credibility and portrayal of (women) asylum claimants today. For 
more on this, see Spijkerboer (2000).
19	 John Intini, ‘Guns in the sun: Escalating violence may be making Mexican vaca-
tions too risky’, Macleans, 4 June 2007. 
20	Samatha Sarra, ‘New hearing for rejected Mexican’, Xtra, 16 April 2008.
21	 Alexandra Zabjek, ‘Local family wins refuge from Mexico’s drug wars’, Edmonton 
Journal, 3 March 2009.
22	 Dale Smith, ‘British queer activist warns Canada of ‘rigged’ asylum system’, Xtra, 
5 August 2009.
23	 Valerie Fortney, ‘Desire for a better life lures Mexicans to Alberta’, Calgary Herald, 
24 March 2009.
24	 Donna Jacobs, ‘Bill C-11 “deeply flawed”: Ex-immigration official’, Ottawa Citizen, 
1 November 2001.
25	 Diane Renaud, ‘Be compassionate but we must draw the line’, Windsor Star, 
13 October 2007.
26	 Canadian Immigration Reform Blog, ‘Mexican “refugees” strain Windsor’s social 
services’, 20 September 2007, http://canadianimmigrationreform.blogspot.com/ 
2007/09/mexican-immigrants-strain-windsors.html.
27	 Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, ‘Mexico: State protection’; Amnesty 
International, ‘Protection law fails Mexican women’, 30 January 2009, www.
amnesty.org/en/news-and-updates/news/protection-law-fails-mexican-
women-20090130 (accessed 6 September 2009).

a gender-blind approach in canadian refugee processes	
123
28	 We do not discount the possibility that some Mexican men are physically abused 
by their (female) partners. However, the majority of studies in this area emphasise 
the disproportionate number of women being abused by their male partners. We 
therefore focus on the latter.
29	 Lesley Ciarula Taylor, ‘Protest highlights plight of refugee claimants’, Toronto Star, 
3 October 2008.
30	 Citizenship and Immigration Canada, ‘Resettlement from outside Canada: Con-
vention refugees abroad class’, 31 March 2007, www.cic.gc.ca/english/refugees/
outside/convention.asp (Accessed 5 September 2009).
31	 Chris McGreal, ‘Obama moves to grant political asylum to women who suffer 
domestic abuse’, Guardian, 24 July 2009, http://www.guardian.co.uk/world/2009/
jul/24/obama-women-abuse-political-asylum-us (accessed 14 February 2010).
32	 ‘Canada ignoring refugees from Mexican violence: Advocates’, Canadian Press, 28 
March 2009.
33	 Giuseppe Valiante, ‘Mexican refugees seek haven in Canada’, National Post, 25 
June 2009.
34	 Keung, ‘Mexican refugee requests’.
35	 Alexandra Zabjek, ‘Local family wins refuge from Mexico’s drug wars’, Edmonton 
Journal, 3 March 2009.
36	 Jessica Rafuse, ‘Windsor braces for refugee tide’, Globe and Mail, 22 September 
2007.
37	 Sarah Sacheli and Roberta Pennington, ‘Mexicans pour into Canada from us: 
Agencies brace for thousands more at border’, Windsor Star, 18 September 2007.
38	 Chris Selley, ‘Mexicans are flooding into Canada and claiming refugee status: 
Why is it happening, and what can we do to stop it?’ Macleans, 4 October 2007.
39	 James Bissett, ‘Stop bogus refugees before they get in’, National Post, 27 September 
2007.
40	D. Schmidt, ‘Refugees pose “potential crisis”’, Windsor Star, 19 September 2007.
41	 ‘Day promises “consequences” for illegal refugees’, ctv News, 28 September 2007.
42	 Despite the trend in the local and national newspapers to negatively describe 
these refugees (and their costs), there were a few articles that highlighted the 
potentially legitimate humanitarian claims of these refugee claimants. See Bonnie 
Drago, ‘Treat Mexican refugees as you’d like to be treated’, Windsor Star, 4 Octo-
ber 2007, p. A9. Nevertheless, articles using this tone were few and far between.
43	 Adrian Humphreys, ‘Illegal migrants lured to Canada’, National Post, 20 Septem-
ber 2007.
44	‘Mexicans invade Canada, Canadians invade the us’, Law is Cool Blog, 22 Septem-
ber 2007.
45	 Jiménez, ‘9,000 “ordinary people” flee Mexican drug war’.
46	Steven Edwards, ‘Spike in Canada refugee claims shows “systemic abuse” Kenney 
charges’, Financial Post, 24 March 2009.
47	 Raphael Alexander, ‘Jason Kenney is doing a great job’, National Post, 30 July 2009, 
http://network.nationalpost.com/np/blogs/fullcomment/archive/2009/07/30/
raphael-alexander-jason-kenney-is-doing-a-great-job.aspx (Accessed 4 Septem-
ber 2009).
48	 Personal conversation with a researcher living in Mexico, 5 October 2009.

124	
Monica Boyd & Joanne Nowak
References
Boyd, M. (1999), ‘Gender, refugee status and permanent settlement’, Gender Issues 
17 (1): 5-25.
Boyd, M. (1989), Migrant women in Canada: Profiles and policies. Report prepared 
for Monitoring Panel on Migrant Women, Organization for Economic Co-oper-
ation and Development, Directorate for Social Affairs, Manpower and Education 
(1987). Ottawa: Employment and Immigration Canada, Public Affairs Inquiries 
and Distribution.
Boyd, M. & D. Pikkov (2008), ‘Finding a place in stratified structures: Migrant women 
in North America’, in N. Piper (ed.), New perspectives on gender and migration: 
Livelihoods, rights, and entitlements, pp. 19-58. London: Routledge.
Brown, C., J.A. Pagan & E. Rodriguez-Oreggia (1999), ‘Occupational attainment and 
gender earnings differentials in Mexico’, Industrial & Labor Relations Review 53 
(1): 123-135.
Citizenship and Immigration Canada (2009a), ‘Facts and figures 2008, Immigration 
overview: Permanent and temporary residents. Canada – permanent residents 
by gender and category, 1984 to 2008’, 25 August 2009, www.cic.gc.ca/english/
resources/statistics/facts2008/permanent/01.asp (Accessed 10 September 2009).
Citizenship and Immigration Canada (2009b), ‘News release – Canada imposes a 
visa on Mexico’, 13 July, www.cic.gc.ca/english/department/media/releases/2009/ 
2009-07-13.asp.
Citizenship and Immigration Canada (2008), ‘Facts and figures 2007, Immigration 
overview: Permanent and temporary residents’, 12 November.
Citizenship and Immigration Canada (2007), ‘Resettlement from outside Canada: 
convention refugees abroad class’, 31 March.
Connors, J. (1997), ‘Legal aspects of women as a particular social group’, International 
Journal of Refugee Law 9: 159-164.
Cornelius, W. & M. Rosenblum (2005), ‘Immigration and politics’, Annual Review of 
Political Science 8: 99-119.
Dijk, T.A. van (1988), ‘Semantics of a press panic: The Tamil “invasion”’, European 
Journal of Communication 3: 167-188.
Foote, V. (1996), ‘Refugee women and Canadian policy: Gaining ground?’, Canadian 
Woman Studies 16 (3): 65-68.
Frias Martinez, S. (2009), Gender, the state and patriarchy: Partner violence in 
Mexico. PhD dissertation, University of Texas, Austin.
Inlender, T. (2009), ‘Status quo or sixth ground? Adjudicating gender asylum claims’, 
in S. Benhabib & J. Resnik (eds), Migration and mobilities: Citizenship, borders and 
gender, pp. 356-380. New York: New York University Press.
Keely, C. & S. Stanton (1994), ‘Responses of industrial countries to asylum-seekers’, 
Journal of International Affairs 47 (2): 399-417.
Markard, N. (2007), ‘Gendered violence in “new wars”‘, in T. Spijkerboer & S. van 
Walsum (eds), Women and immigration law: New variations on classical feminist 
themes, pp. 67-85. New York: Routledge-Cavendish.

a gender-blind approach in canadian refugee processes	
125
Mascini, P. & M. van Bochove (2009), ‘Gender stereotyping in the Dutch asylum 
procedure: “Independent” men versus “dependent” women’, International Migra-
tion Review 43 (1): 112-133.
Mawani, N. (1993), ‘The factual and legal legitimacy of addressing gender issues’, Ref-
uge 13 (4): 7-10.
McGrath, R. (2009), ‘A discourse analysis of Australian local government recreation 
and sport plans provision for people with disabilities’, Public Management Review 
11 (4): 477-497.
Mitchell, C. (1989), ‘International migration, international relations and foreign pol-
icy’, International Migration Review 23 (3): 681-708.
Olausson, U. (2009), ‘Global warming – global responsibility? Media frames of col-
lective action and scientific certainty’, Public Understanding of Science 18: 421-436.
Pan, Z. & G.M. Kosicki (1993), ‘Framing analysis: An approach to news discourse’, 
Political Communication 10: 55-75. 
Sales, R. (2002), ‘The deserving and the undeserving? Refugees, asylum seekers and 
welfare in Britain’, Critical Social Policy 22 (3): 456-478.
Seijio, F. (2009), ‘Who framed the forest fire? State framing and peasant counter-
framing of anthropogenic forest fires in Spain since 1940’, Journal of Environmen-
tal Policy & Planning 11 (2): 103-128. 
Snow, D., B. Rochford Jr., S. Worden & R. Benford (1986), ‘Frame alignment pro-
cesses, micromobilization, and movement participation’, American Sociological 
Review 51 (4): 464-481.
Spijkerboer, T. (2000), Gender and refugee status. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Teran, L. (1999), ‘Barriers to protection at home and abroad: Mexican victims of 
domestic violence and the violence against women act’, Boston University Interna-
tional Law Journal 1: 1-78.
unhcr (1995), ‘Sexual violence against refugees: Guidelines on prevention and 
response’, Geneva: Office of the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.
unhcr, Executive Committee of the High Commissioner’s Programme (1997), ‘Pro-
gress report on refugee women and unhcr’s framework for implementation of 
the Beijing platform for action’, Standing Committee 9th Meeting’, 15 August, 
ec/47/sc/crp.47.
unhcr (1997), ‘Gender-related persecution: An analysis of recent trends’, Interna-
tional Journal of Refugees 9: 79-113.
Zolberg, A.R. (1999), ‘Matters of state: Theorizing immigration policy’, in C. Hirsch- 
man, P. Kasinitz & J. DeWind (eds), The handbook of international migration: The 
American experience, pp. 71-93. New York: Russell Sage.
Zucker, N.L. & N. Flink Zucker (1987), The guarded gate: The reality of American 
refugee policy. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.


5  Queer asylum
us policies and responses to sexual orientation  
and transgendered persecution
Connie Oxford
Introduction
This chapter examines us asylum laws (both legislative and case law) 
and policies regarding sexual orientation and transgendered persecu-
tion. It addresses the gendered nature of us asylum laws and policies 
towards lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgendered (lgbt) migrants, pay-
ing particular attention to the claims of gay men and transgendered 
women. Queer asylum seekers face particular obstacles in immigrant 
advocacy communities, and the current laws and policies have impli-
cations for what constitutes queer identity. Sexual and family violence 
has emerged as the dominant narrative in asylum declarations by gay 
men and transgendered women. The chapter argues that queer asylum 
is gendered in that laws and policies seemingly facilitate gay men and 
transgendered women’s claims.
Scholars have only recently begun to explore the ways in which sex-
uality organises migration (Alexander 1994; Espín 1997; Luibhéid 2002, 
2005; Rand 2005; Manalansan 2006). While migration studies have a 
long and rich history, their focus on the nation-state as the primary 
category of analysis has often ignored the gendered and sexualised 
bodies of those who cross borders. Sexuality studies, a comparatively 
newer field of inquiry, took up the task of applying its ideas about sex 
and gender to migration only during the last two decades.1 This turn 
in migration scholarship may be explained, in part, by two significant 
changes: the growth of sexuality studies as a lens for understanding 
social phenomena and the emergence of queer subjects as legitimate 
mobile bodies recognised by the state. ‘Legitimate mobile bodies’ refers 
to the emergence of laws and policies that facilitate movement across 
national borders for a range of gendered and sexualised people.
This chapter’s contribution to the emerging literature on sexuality 
and migration studies lies in its examination of us asylum laws and 
policies regarding sexual orientation and transgendered persecution. 

128	
Connie Oxford
Following the work of Martin F. Manalansan IV, it situates queer in a 
larger intersectional framework, one of gender and nation in particular, 
but it uses the term as an ‘anti-normative signifier’ as well (Manalansan 
2006: 225). Therefore, queer refers to a range of gendered and sexual 
identities, such as lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgendered, that do not 
fit neatly into the heteronormative schema of masculinity, femininity 
and heterosexuality.2
The discussion relies on the notion of gender as a social relationship 
between femininity and masculinity. It entails an analysis of the ways in 
which gender and sexuality are constitutive of one another, rather than 
solely comparing the claims of ‘women’ and ‘men’, such as migration 
studies that reproduce heteronormative ideas about mobile bodies (see 
Manalansan 2006 for a critique of this literature). Although a range of 
gendered and sexualised bodies are discussed, the focus in particular 
is on asylum claims by gay men and transgendered women. I argue 
that these claims emerge as hegemonic narratives of queer persecution, 
particularly amongst legal precedent cases in the usa. This accounts for 
the apparent gender unevenness of the examples showcased through-
out the chapter.
This chapter argues three points regarding queer asylum seekers. 
The first two illuminate the tension of being ‘out’, or open about one’s 
sexual or gender identity. First, lgbt immigrants face obstacles spe-
cific to their status as sexual minorities because of homophobia and 
transphobia in their own immigrant communities. Second, the process 
of seeking asylum for queer immigrants requires that the applicant be 
open about her or his sexual or gender identity, in order to convince 
an immigration official that one has been persecuted or fears persecu-
tion based on that identity. Third, the dominant narrative of queer per-
secution for gay men and transgendered women is one of sexual and 
family violence, making the content of these claims similar to those of 
gender-based asylum claims espoused by women. Moreover, queer asy-
lum is gendered in that the passage of laws and policies hailed as victo-
ries by immigrants and their advocates seems to facilitate gay men and 
transgendered women’s asylum claims, rather than those of all lgbt 
migrants. This chapter highlights the ways in which men too are gen-
dered (Donaldson et al. 2009). As discussed by Walaardt, in this vol-
ume, with regard to male war resisters, expectations about masculinity 
are embedded in immigration policies and immigrant practices.
This chapter first outlines the key pieces of legislation and judi-
cial cases that have shaped queer immigration in the usa. It then dis-
cusses the implementation of queer asylum, drawing on ethnographic 
research with asylum seekers and their advocates.

queer asylum	
129
Queer immigration law in the usa
Until the end of the 20th century, us immigration laws and policies 
adversely affected sexual minorities. us lawmakers crafted immigra-
tion laws using language that pathologised homosexuals as mentally ill 
in an effort to restrict queer migrants. The term ‘homosexuality’ never 
explicitly entered the us immigration lexicon. Rather, prohibition of 
immigrants based on sexual orientation was disguised in language that 
denied entrance to queer migrants due to their lack of conformity to 
normative displays of gender and sexuality. The practice of formally 
excluding queer migrants can be traced to the 1917 Immigration Act, 
which made immigrants whom the state deemed ‘constitutional psy-
chopathic inferiors’ as well as those with ‘abnormal sexual instincts’ ex-
cludable from entering or remaining in the country (Luibhéid 2002; 
Somerville 2005).
In 1952, the McCarran-Walter Act changed the language of exclusion 
only slightly to target those with ‘psychopathic personalities’ as a vet-
ting technique for immigration officials. In 1950, two years prior to the 
passage of the McCarran-Walter Act, a Senate Committee of the Judici-
ary report suggested that ‘classes of mental defects [who are excluda-
ble] should be enlarged to include homosexuals and other sex perverts’, 
making explicit the intentions of who would be excluded (Luibhéid 
2005: 77-78). The Immigration and Nationality Act of 1965 included the 
most comprehensive changes in us immigration law at the time of its 
passage. Yet it maintained the spirit of excluding queer migrants as the 
language of the Act described them as ‘sexual deviants’ (ibid.: 75-91).
One consequence of these laws was to give immigration officials the 
authority to deny entry into the usa and prevent naturalisation to us 
citizenry of any immigrant whom the state deemed sexually abnormal 
or deviant.3 Two examples illuminate key differences in how these laws 
were applied to show the effects of class and race as well as gender and 
sexuality on whether immigrants were admitted into the usa.
In her study of the Ellis Island port of entry, Rand (2005) discusses 
Frank Woodhull, a Canadian citizen who, although biologically female 
and named Mary Johnson at birth, routinely dressed in men’s clothing, 
went by the name Frank, and passed as a man. Upon arrival at Ellis 
Island on 4 October 1908, Woodhull admitted that he was a woman 
dressed as a man only when forced to disrobe for inspection.4 Wood-
hull explained that he did so in order to do men’s work that gave him a 
life of ‘independence and freedom’ (ibid.: 79). Although Woodhull was 
subjected to a medical examination and brief detention at Ellis Island, 
he was released and allowed to remain in the usa.

130	
Connie Oxford
Luibhéid (2005) documents how the Immigration and Naturaliza-
tion Service (ins), the agency charged with controlling immigrant pop-
ulations, used surveillance techniques governed by heteronormative 
assumptions about gender and sexuality to exclude immigrants from 
entering the usa.5 Luibhéid details the story of Sara Harb Quiroz, a 
Mexican national who was detained at the El Paso, Texas, port of entry 
on 6 January 1960. According to transcripts from the ins inspector, 
Quiroz was stopped because she was wearing trousers and a shirt and 
‘her hair was cut shorter than most women’s’ (ibid.: xiii). While there 
is no evidence that Quiroz was indeed a lesbian, she was repatriated to 
Mexico.
As these examples demonstrate, immigration officials did not uni-
formly equate gender non-conformity with homosexuality during 
exclusionary time periods. Moreover, they indicate that race and class 
may have subjugated gender and sexual location for Woodhull and 
Quiroz in ultimately determining admittance into the usa. Woodhull 
lived as a man – a white Canadian man who possessed the economic 
means to support himself. This made him less suspect as a potential 
public charge by immigration officials than Quiroz, who may have been 
repatriated not only for being suspected as a lesbian, but also because 
she was a woman of colour.
Two precedent-setting cases that changed immigration law
It was not until the passage of the Immigration Act of 1990 that Con-
gress lifted the ‘sexual deviants’ admission criterion, formally opening 
the gates of the usa to queer immigrants. After nearly a century of ex-
plicit language that prohibited the entrance of homosexual immigrants, 
just three years later, in 1993, Marcelo Tenorio, a gay man from Brazil, 
became the first person in the usa to be granted asylum based on sex-
ual orientation by an immigration judge. One year later, Ariel da Silva, a 
gay man from Mexico, was granted asylum by the ins (Randazzo 2005). 
While these cases mark a significant milestone in us immigration his-
tory, they affected only Tenorio and Da Silva and were not precedent 
cases. Precedent cases are distinct because they are models whose prin-
ciples may be applied to other cases for applicants with similar circum-
stances. In the usa, judicial cases set a precedent only when they were 
published, and neither Tenorio nor Da Silva’s cases were published.6
Two precedent cases did affect the gendered and sexualised land-
scape of queer asylum. The first queer asylum case that was published, 
and therefore set a precedent for future lgbt asylum seekers, was Mat-
ter of Toboso-Alfonso v. ins.7 Fidel Armando Toboso-Alfonso was a 

queer asylum	
131
Cuban national who gained entry into the usa in June 1980 as part of 
the Mariel boatlift.8 During his immigration hearing, Toboso-Alfonso 
testified that he was part of a registry of known homosexuals main-
tained by the Cuban authorities and was required to appear before 
them every few months. During these visits, he was subjected to physi-
cal exams and questioned about his sexual activities and was often 
detained for days for no apparent reason other than to be harassed 
for being gay. The immigration judge granted Toboso-Alfonso a with-
holding of deportation based on his membership in the social group of 
homosexuals, but he was denied asylum because of his criminal record 
in the usa (he had been convicted of possession of cocaine). Granting 
a withholding allows an immigrant to remain in the country without 
being deported. Unlike a grant of asylum, which allows immigrants the 
opportunity to apply for legal permanent residence one year after their 
approval and eventually for citizenship, a withholding offers no status 
advancement. Nor does a withholding allow immigrants the option of 
petitioning for relatives.
The ins appealed the decision, in part, because of Toboso-Alfonso’s 
criminal record, but also because it did not believe that his experiences 
amounted to persecution, and they did not accept homosexuals as a 
social group as defined by the us Refugee Act of 1980. This Act is based 
on the 1951 United Nations Refugee Convention, which outlines five 
grounds of persecution: race, religion, nationality, political opinion and 
membership in a social group. The ins argued that ‘socially deviated 
behaviour’ does not constitute a social group.9 In 1990, the immigra-
tion judge’s findings were upheld by the Board of Immigration Appeals 
(bia), the appellate board for all immigration courts in the usa. In 
1994, Attorney General Janet Reno ordered the bia to publish Matter of 
Toboso-Alfonso v. ins.
Once the Toboso-Alfonso case was published it set a precedent, pav-
ing the way for other immigrants to gain asylum if they too were per-
secuted for being homosexual. Although Toboso-Alfonso was granted 
the immigration status of withholding rather than asylum, his case 
codified homosexuals as a social group for the purposes of immigrants 
seeking asylum in the usa. This signalled a turn in us immigration his-
tory, as it for the first time rejected the exclusion queer migrants and 
recognised and made possible a way for them to enter and remain law-
fully in the usa.
A second significant case for queer migrants is Hernandez-Montiel v. 
ins. This Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals case was published in 2000.10 
Hernandez-Montiel v. ins paved the way for transgendered women to 
gain asylum. I refer to Hernandez-Montiel as ‘her’ and ‘she’ even though 

132	
Connie Oxford
she was born male, but I retain the masculine pronoun ‘he’ when quot-
ing others. Geovanni Hernandez-Montiel, a Mexican national, was 
aware of her attraction to boys at an early age and dressed in girls and 
women’s clothing before she reached adolescence. Hernandez-Montiel 
had a fraught home and school life because of her perceived sexual ori-
entation, and she was threatened by a classmate’s father for ‘perverting 
his son’. She was eventually asked to leave home after her expulsion 
from school due to her sexual orientation. After being raped by police 
officers and hospitalised for injuries from an attack by a group of men, 
Hernandez-Montiel’s sister arranged for her to enter into a counselling 
programme to ‘cure’ her of her sexual orientation by cutting her hair 
and fingernails and discontinuing her hormone regimen (Cox 2001).
During her immigration hearing, an expert witness testified that in 
Mexico ‘gay men with female sexual identities’ are at greater risk of per-
secution than gay men who are ‘male acting homosexuals’ (Cox 2001: 
191). The judge denied Hernandez-Montiel’s claim, arguing that her 
identity was not ‘immutable because he was able to change his appear-
ance from male to female and vice-versa’ (ibid.: 191). The Ninth Circuit 
Court of Appeals overturned the judge’s rejection, asserting that gay 
men with female sexual identities constitute a social group.11 Soon after, 
The New York Times published a story with a headline that reinforced 
the idea that Hernandez-Montiel’s claim was about behaviour that one 
could control, rather than identity: ‘Court Rules Cross-Dresser Can 
Stay in the us on Asylum Claim’.12 While as a precedent case, the ruling 
would had vast implications for transgendered women fleeing persecu-
tion, the gendered language in the case made it particularly relevant for 
protecting transgendered claimants who were born male and wish to 
dress and act like women and not those born female who express their 
gendered identities in masculine ways. Although the term ‘transgen-
der’ was not used by Hernandez-Montiel, by the immigration judge or 
by the appellate judges of the Ninth Circuit, immigrant advocates later 
capitalised on the language of ‘gay men with female sexual identities’ as 
a basis for transgendered migrants to make claims.
The significance of these cases is that they recognise both homo-
sexuals and transgendered women (albeit masked in the language of 
‘gay men with female sexual identities’) as a social group. This is one of 
the five grounds on which immigrants may rely upon as the reason for 
their persecution or fear of persecution in order to gain asylum. While 
the usa was obligated to admit asylum seekers who feared persecution 
because of their membership in a particular social group since the pas-
sage of the 1980 Refugee Act, acceptance of homosexuals and transgen-
dered people as a social group for the purpose of asylum was only rec-

queer asylum	
133
ognised in 1994 and 2000, respectively, with the publication of Matter 
of Toboso-Alfonso and Hernandez-Montiel v. ins.
Other nation-states that are signatories to the 1951 United Nations 
Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees too must admit asylum 
seekers who have been persecuted or fear persecution based on their 
membership in a social group. Yet only a handful of countries that are 
signatories to the Refugee Convention have admitted asylum seekers 
based on sexual orientation. As of October 2008, only 19 countries had 
granted asylum to homosexual immigrants (Austria, Australia, Bel-
gium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, 
Italy, Latvia, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Thai-
land, the uk and the usa).13 The fact that so few countries have accepted 
queer asylum seekers is in part because nation-states that have signed 
the Refugee Convention decide who may gain asylum and under what 
circumstances. Moreover, as sexual minorities gain rights in their own 
countries, seeking asylum may become more difficult.14
Together, Matter of Toboso-Alfonso and Hernandez-Montiel v. ins 
dramatically altered the sexual and gendered terrain of immigration 
law in the usa. Soon after these cases were published a number of other 
precedent cases emerged from the us Circuit Court of Appeals that have 
allowed asylum based on sexual orientation and transgendered iden-
tity. Immigration Equality, the largest non-governmental organisation 
(ngo) working to end discrimination against lgbt and hiv (human 
immunodeficiency virus) positive immigrants in the usa, maintains a 
list of current cases on its website.15 Of the 30 precedent asylum cases 
that are currently listed, only one involves a lesbian. The remaining 29 
were brought forward by gay men, transgendered women or asylum 
seekers who are hiv positive. The only precedent asylum case involving 
a lesbian is Pitcherskaia v. ins..16 No precedent cases to date have been 
brought forward by transgendered men or bisexual men or women. 
There is a dearth of information about bisexual asylum claims in gen-
eral, in part, because there are so few of them (Rehaag 2009).
Because precedent cases stem from asylum claims that were initially 
denied by immigration judges or asylum officers it is difficult to know 
whether there are so few precedent cases involving lesbians, bisexu-
als and transgendered men because their claims are more likely to be 
granted by immigration officials, if there are fewer lesbians, bisexuals 
and transgendered men seeking asylum than gay men and transgen-
dered women, or possibly both. Yet this systematic absence of claims 
by certain gendered asylum seekers may have the unintended effect of 
exacerbating an androcentric asylum process, albeit in the name of pro-
gress for those transcending traditional sexual and gender boundaries. 

134	
Connie Oxford
Marriage and hiv status:  
New forms of exclusion for queer immigrants
Although asylum emerged as a means to enter and remain legally in 
the usa, asylum laws alone hardly abolished discrimination against 
queer migrants. Marriage and hiv status became two new means of 
excluding sexual minorities. In 1996, the Defence of Marriage Act de-
fined marriage as a union between a man and a woman. Its application 
in immigration law is aimed at same-sex partners rather than homo-
sexual individuals by discriminating against bi-national couples. Same-
sex couples with mixed citizenship statuses are greatly disadvantaged. 
Unlike heterosexual partners who have the option of adjusting their 
spouse’s immigration status, same-sex couples cannot petition for their 
non-citizen partner because the federal government does not recognise 
same-sex marriages.
While us law was path-breaking for queer immigrants regarding 
asylum, it has hardly been so regarding other forms of immigration, 
especially family reunification. According to a report issued by Human 
Rights Watch and Immigration Equality (2006), ‘Family Unvalued: 
Discrimination, Denial, and the Fate of Binational Same-Sex Couples 
under u.s. Law’, 19 countries allow various forms of queer immigra-
tion that include but are not limited to asylum (Australia, Belgium, 
Brazil, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Iceland, Israel, 
the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, 
Sweden, Switzerland and the uk).17 Of these countries, Belgium, Can-
ada, the Netherlands, Norway, South Africa, Spain and Sweden, have 
also legalised same-sex marriage. Conversely, sexual minorities who 
are in a relationship with a us citizen and seek to immigrate to the 
usa are disadvantaged because of how us immigration law defines a 
family. Since 1965, family reunification has been the bedrock of immi-
gration law. Yet family is limited to immediate relatives (spouses, chil-
dren, parents and siblings) and is defined by heteronormative notions 
of marriage. This affects same-sex partners, as well as immediate family 
members, such as children, who otherwise would be allowed to immi-
grate to the usa. ‘Family Unvalued’ details how these legal constraints 
lead to family separation for these couples. One means of rectifying this 
problem is the Uniting American Families Act, introduced in February 
2009. If the us Congress passes this Act, us citizens in same-sex bi-
national couples will be eligible to sponsor their partners and children 
of their partners so that they may immigrate legally to the usa.18
Strictures on family unification take many forms across the globe. 
As Catherine Raissiguier argues in her chapter in this volume, France 

queer asylum	
135
has implemented physical proof of ‘blood’ relatives in its immigration 
policies.
Although the us federal government does not recognise same-sex 
marriage, five us states had legalised same-sex marriage as of January 
2010: Connecticut, Iowa, Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Ver-
mont. Same-sex couples who reside in these states may take advantage 
of state and local resources that are available to married couples, but 
they cannot receive federal resources or benefits, even if they live in a 
state that recognises same-sex marriage.
No data are available on lgbt immigrants in the usa because no 
immigration office collects it.19 However, according to the 2000 census, 
there were 35,820 bi-national couples in the country. Of these, 58% are 
lesbian couples and 42% are homosexual men. Nearly half (46%) are 
raising children.20 These are national data and are not available by state. 
Therefore, while queer bi-national couples may be more likely to settle 
in states that recognise same-sex marriage, it is impossible to substanti-
ate this claim with the available data.
In addition to exclusionary practices regarding marriage, queer 
immigrants have been prohibited from entering and remaining in the 
usa if they are hiv positive. Beginning in 1987, immigrants testing posi-
tive for the hiv virus were excludable on the grounds of contributing to 
a public health crisis. While this law includes anyone who is hiv posi-
tive, regardless of their gender and sexual identity, it particularly affects 
homosexual men, as they are amongst the populations most affected by 
the virus. For asylum seekers, the significance of their hiv status is that 
they must prove that being hiv positive has resulted in persecution. 
Unfortunately, lack of access to health care is not a basis for an asylum 
claim.21 hiv positive immigrants in other nations too have faced dis-
crimination and even deportation, most notably in the uk (Hitchings 
2004). Unlike the struggle for equality for same-sex bi-national cou-
ples, which continues today, the ban on hiv positive immigrants was 
effectively overturned on 2 November 2009.22
Queer identity and persecution
This section draws on interviews, asylum applications and asylum prep-
aration manuals to show the ways in which queer asylum is organised 
in the usa. The focus is on three themes. The first two, homophobia 
and transphobia in immigrant advocacy networks and queer identity as 
a social group, scrutinise how being ‘out’ can impede or facilitate queer 
migrants’ ability to gain asylum. The third theme, queer persecution, 

136	
Connie Oxford
underscores the pervasiveness of sexual and family violence against gay 
men and transgendered women.
Although it is certainly arguable that immigrants come to the usa 
from all regions of the world, they hardly come in equal numbers by 
nationality or region. The usa’s proximity to Mexico, Central and 
South America and the Caribbean explains, in part, why there may be 
higher concentrations of queer asylum seekers from these geographic 
areas. For example, 15 of the 30 precedent cases listed on Immigra-
tion Equality’s website relate to immigrants from Mexico, Costa Rica, 
El Salvador, Guatemala, Peru, Cuba and Haiti. The demographics of 
immigrant communities also vary by location within a country. In Los 
Angeles, California, where much of the research presented here was 
done, there is a higher concentration of immigrants from Mexico and 
Central America. The examples cited are asylum claims by gay men and 
transgendered women from Mexico, Honduras and Guatemala. Since 
the Department of Homeland Security does not maintain data on lgbt 
asylum claims (neither did its predecessor, the ins), it is impossible to 
know exactly how many lgbt immigrants seek asylum or how many 
claims were granted or denied.
Materials and methods
The research presented here is based on interviews with asylum seek-
ers, immigration attorneys and human rights organisation employees, 
in addition to asylum applications. The research was done in Los An-
geles, San Francisco and New York City in 2001-2003 and 2009. All 
interviewee names are pseudonyms.
In Los Angeles from 2001 to 2003, I interviewed immigration attor-
neys at the Central American Resource Center (carecen), an immi-
grants’ rights organisation established in 1983 through grassroots activ-
ism by Salvadoran refugees, and the Gay and Lesbian Center, which 
since 1996 has offered a range of services to the lgbt community, 
including legal assistance and referrals for immigrants. The four asylum 
applications discussed in this chapter were procured from carecen.
In 2002, I met with a programme director at the International Gay 
and Lesbian Human Rights Commission (iclhrc) in San Francisco. 
This human rights organisation was set up in 1990 and was the first to 
systematically document human rights violations against sexual minor-
ities and people living with hiv and aids worldwide. iclhrc’s asylum 
documentation programme issued country reports of violations and 
made them available for inclusion in asylum applications from 1993 to 
1997. In 2009, I interviewed an attorney at Immigration Equality (for-

queer asylum	
137
merly known as the Lesbian and Gay Immigration Rights Task Force) 
in New York City. Founded in 1996, this is the largest ngo working to 
end discrimination against lgbt and hiv positive immigrants in the 
usa.
Homophobia and transphobia in immigrant advocacy 
networks
It is not uncommon for migrants to leave one country for another be-
cause they have been persecuted or fear that they will be persecuted, 
and yet to be unaware that they are eligible for asylum when they ar-
rive in the destination country.23 Seeking asylum is a daunting task for 
anyone. For queer migrants, becoming aware that they are eligible for 
asylum and learning how to apply is particularly difficult because they 
often face homophobia and transphobia from immigrant advocates. 
Many immigrants learn about the possibility to apply for asylum in 
their own national, racial and religious communities. If members of 
these communities do not circulate stories of queer persecution as rea-
son for asylum, queer migrants might never learn that they are eligible 
for asylum through traditional support networks. During an interview, 
Rafael, an employee of iclhrc, said that ‘queer immigrants often have 
difficulty getting support for being gay in their own immigrant com-
munities’.24
Unfortunately, the homophobia and transphobia that is pervasive 
in some immigrant communities also extends to advocates, such as 
attorneys and service providers. Immigrant advocates may be sym-
pathetic to stories of persecution based on one’s ethnicity or religion, 
but not be open to hearing about harm based on gender and sexual 
identity. Attorneys and service providers often approach asylum from 
a heteronormative position such that they never explore persecution 
for being queer (or just being queer) as a conduit for gaining asylum. 
Heteronormative understandings of identity maintain ignorance of 
lgbt people and their plight by those who are often otherwise pro-
active in helping immigrants gain asylum. Moreover, some immigrant 
service providers know that asylum based on sexual orientation or gen-
der identity is available but refuse to work with clients who have these 
types of claims. 
According to Gloria, a paralegal at carecen, a psychiatrist who 
evaluated many of their clients was ‘uncomfortable’ with transgendered 
cases, and her calendar was suddenly full when Gloria called seek-
ing help with transgendered clients.25 Marcos, an attorney who works 
with carecen, revealed during our interview that organisations that 

138	
Connie Oxford
provide mental health assistance for sexual minorities are unfamiliar 
with asylum and cannot complete the assessment required for asylum 
applications.26 According to Marcos, organisations that provide mental 
health services for asylum seekers are often homophobic and nearly 
always transphobic, making them incapable or unwilling to assess per-
secution based on sexual orientation or gender identity. Conversely, 
organisations that offer support services for queer clients are typically 
unfamiliar with the needs of queer immigrants, including asylum seek-
ers. Establishment of the Immigration Law Project at the Los Angeles 
Gay and Lesbian Center created networking opportunities for queer 
asylum seekers.27 However, many asylum seekers still suffer the reper-
cussions of gaps in the services offered as they are shuffled amongst 
organisations.28
Homophobia spills over into the realm of human rights movements 
and organisations. Part of the difficulty in situating persecution against 
queers as a human rights abuse has been the struggle to convince main-
stream human rights organisations that queers are a group deserving of 
protection. According to Rafael, iclhrc was ‘formed in 1990 to prove to 
Amnesty International that there were human rights violations against 
sexual minorities’. Many human rights organisations, such as Amnesty 
International and Human Rights Watch, now routinely issue reports 
on abuses against lgbt populations, but they have not always done 
so. iclhrc’s asylum documentation programme marshalled informa-
tion on human rights abuses against lgbt individuals long before the 
mainstream human rights organisations did so.29 According to Rafael, 
as recently as 2001, ngo networks in the usa tried to prevent iclhrc 
from meeting with United Nations officials about hiv because ‘we sup-
port homosexuals’.
As these examples show, lgbt immigrants face obstacles specific to 
their status as sexual minorities due to homophobia and transphobia in 
their own immigrant communities. Consequently, queer immigrants 
often never learn about asylum. Even if they do discover that they are 
eligible they may face additional barriers for gaining asylum, as immi-
grant advocates may be either oblivious to the notion that people are 
persecuted for being queer or refuse to work with lgbt clients.
Queer identity as a social group
Homophobia and transphobia amongst immigrant advocates can dis-
courage asylum seekers from being open about their sexual or gender 
identity. Such reluctance can ultimately discourage them from seeking 
asylum. Conversely, even if migrants are able to locate supportive ad-

queer asylum	
139
vocates, being ‘out’ about one’s sexual or gender identity is compulsory 
in order to gain asylum. Being out is mandatory because queer asylum 
seekers must convince an immigration official that they were perse-
cuted or fear persecution based on their membership in the category of 
‘homosexual’ or ‘gay men with female sexual identities’, language codi-
fied in the cases of Matter of Toboso-Alfonso and Hernandez-Montiel 
v. ins.
Applying for asylum entails completing an I-589 asylum application, 
a declaration that details why one is requesting asylum. Applicants 
must then marshal evidence, such as letters from doctors and mental 
health practitioners attesting to physical signs of bodily torture or con-
ditions such as post-traumatic stress disorder (ptsd). Asylum seekers 
whose application is filed by an immigration attorney and who seek the 
support of other immigrant advocates must tell their story repeatedly 
until a legally convincing narrative of persecution is ready for review by 
an immigration official. In the usa, after one is granted an interview, 
asylum seekers must tell their story again to either an asylum officer or 
an immigration judge. A fundamental component of gaining asylum is 
expressing verbally why one fears returning to her or his country. All 
asylum seekers are subjected to this process.
For queer migrants, sexuality is at the forefront of their narrative 
of persecution. Most queer immigrant advocates stress that it is par-
amount for attorneys, service providers and most importantly immi-
gration officials, to think of homosexuality and transgenderedness as 
part of one’s identity, rather than as behaviour that one can change – as 
implied in The New York Times headline mentioned earlier. This is an 
important feature of gaining asylum because immigrants must prove 
that they are part of the homosexual and transgender social group. Yet 
this strategic move on the part of immigrant advocates may reproduce 
an essentialised notion of identity in order to prove that it is immutable 
(Hanna 2005).
For example, the Midwest Human Rights Partnership for Sexual 
Orientation and the Lesbian and Gay Immigration Rights Task Force 
issued a handbook for immigrants and their advocates (McClure, 
Nugent & Soloway 2000). The handbook distinguishes sexual identity 
based on one’s geographic location: 
[W]hile it is not necessary that the applicant was ‘out’ or experienced 
persecution in the country of origin, it is essential that the applicant 
clearly describe his/her homosexual identity, and his/her particular 
well-founded fear of persecution because of this identity (McClure, 
Nugent & Soloway 2000: 12).

140	
Connie Oxford
	
This statement captures the sentiment of immigrant advocates who 
recognise that immigrants may have same-sex partners but not neces-
sarily identify as homosexual. According to Elisabeth, an attorney with 
Immigration Equality in New York City, ‘for people in countries where 
there is not a gay rights movement, their sexuality is defined by who 
they have sex with; sexual orientation is incomprehensible’.30 Elisabeth’s 
understanding of sexual behaviour and identity reinforces the advo-
cacy handbook’s notion that asylum seekers do not necessarily arrive in 
the usa with a sense of their own identity. Yet it is precisely the embrac-
ing of one’s sexual identity that is a necessary component to gain asy-
lum.
One aspect of being out for asylum seekers is offering proof that 
they are queer. Elisabeth explained how immigrants do this: ‘In many 
of our cases we can prove someone’s sexual orientation if someone has 
a partner or someone is willing to provide an affidavit for them. It is 
a more difficult issue for people who are not openly gay or have not 
had a significant relationship.’ Therefore, unlike other forms of iden-
tity that nearly all asylum seekers must prove, such as their national-
ity or religion, queer migrants’ identity is only made visible when one 
has entered into a sexual relationship. However, gay men and transgen-
dered women asylum seekers articulate their sexual and gendered iden-
tities in ways that underscore gender non-conformity and early child-
hood persecutory acts as those that formed their sexual identities.
In four of the asylum declarations of gay men and transgendered 
women discussed here, the claimants’ earliest experiences with sexual 
identity were circumscribed by being ‘outed’ by relatives and classmates, 
not for being homosexual per se but instead for being effeminate.31 The 
following vignettes are from the written asylum declarations of Carlos, 
Ernesto, Hector and Marlina (who was born male but was transition-
ing to female at the time she submitted her asylum application). While 
their declarations are nearly identical, each is quoted to emphasise the 
inextricable link between ideals of masculinity and heteronormative 
expectations for boys and men in Mexico and Central America:32
Since I looked effeminate, many of the kids at school used to tease me 
and call me names like hueco [fag]. Three of my cousins used to harass 
me constantly about my effeminate mannerisms. My stepfather used 
to shout and yell crude names at me because I was effeminate. (Carlos, 
an immigrant from Guatemala)
When I was about seven years old my brothers and my school com-
panions began to reject me, calling me faggot and telling me that I had 

queer asylum	
141
to get into fist fights in order to prove that I was a man. I was thin and 
small and effeminate and was teased and beaten up by other school 
children. My brothers told me that I looked like a faggot and that I had 
to do things like play football and work in the field to act like a man. 
(Ernesto, a Mexican asylum seeker)
When I was a little boy I always wanted to dress in my mother’s clothes 
and shoes. I always wanted to play with dolls. Even as a little boy, I was 
perceived as effeminate. I was always much more interested in playing 
with the other girls than with the boys. My brothers and family mem-
bers often called me faggot and other derogatory names. (Hector, an 
asylum seeker from Mexico)
Although I was not attracted to girls, I liked playing and doing girl 
things. I would rather jump rope with the girls than play soccer with 
the boys. I would play with dolls and when we played house, I al-
ways wanted to be the mother. The boys would harass me and call 
me names such as maricon [sissy] and culero [faggot]. (Marlina, a 
transgendered woman from Honduras)
	
In these examples, sexual identity followed gender non-conformity. 
Moreover, sexual identity was created through the means of persecu-
tory acts, such as taunting, beatings and sexual violence. The process 
of seeking asylum for queer immigrants requires that the applicant be 
open about her or his sexual and gender identity. When queer migrants 
do locate sympathetic advocates, they are required to identify as either 
‘homosexual’ or as ‘gay men with female identities’ in order to qualify 
for asylum.
The similarity of these narratives may be explained by the fact 
that they were all represented by the same attorney at carecen. As 
Walaardt points out, in this volume, conformity across asylum seekers’ 
narratives can be traced to specific actors, such as immigrant advocates, 
who elicit such stories in order to secure a grant of asylum (see also 
Oxford 2005, 2008).
Queer persecution
In the declarations of Carlos, Ernesto, Felix, and Marlina, sexual vio-
lence and family violence emerge as dominant narratives of persecu-
tion for gay men and transgendered women.33 Carlos and Ernesto trace 
their experiences of persecution to sexual violence by neighbours and 
family members. Carlos said that at the age of twelve he inquired about 

142	
Connie Oxford
how ‘homosexuals have sexual relations’ to his neighbour, a trusted 
friend. He described his neighbour’s response:
[He] grabbed a mop I was using to clean the floor and he asked me 
if I would like him to rape me with the wooden part of the mop. He 
threw me on the bed and pulled my pants down. Before he raped me, 
he told me that since I was a fag I deserved what he was going to do to 
me. While he was raping me, I cried and I begged him to stop. He told 
me to stop crying because he knew I was enjoying the rape because I 
was a maricon.
	
Carlos continued his declaration by relating several instances of 
being raped by his neighbour, as well as by a friend of the neighbour. 
Ernesto dated his first sexual assault to the age of ten when he was ‘sex-
ually abused’ by his cousin:
My cousin told me that we should pretend that we were cows, and 
walk on all fours. He told me I should pull down my pants. He said 
that he was going to play the part of the bull. I didn’t think anything 
because I didn’t know about sex. The next thing I knew he was pen-
etrating me. I began to cry. I was bleeding. He threatened me and told 
me that if I told anyone he would tell them that I had asked him to 
do it.
	
Ernesto also described his being raped by other cousins through-
out his childhood. According to their declarations, unlike Carlos and 
Ernesto, Felix and Marlina were not raped. Instead, they were beaten 
repeatedly by family members for being perceived as gay. Felix was 
beaten throughout his childhood by his mother and brothers. After 
commenting to his male teacher that he ‘liked his eyes’, at the age of 
eleven, Felix arrived home to discover that the teacher had told his 
mother what he had said:
When I got home, my mother began to hit me with a belt and with a 
spoon. My nose began to bleed. My brother said that he did not want 
to have a homosexual for a brother. He hit me and kicked me. My 
mother watched and she did nothing to stop him.
	
Felix continued his declaration, describing when he was older a 
police beating of himself and his boyfriend, who died three days later 
in the hospital. Marlina first experienced family violence at the age of 
eleven:

queer asylum	
143
One day I was outside on the patio when my older brother said that he 
was tired of people saying that I have a fag for a brother. He punched 
me in the face and began to beat me. When my mother arrived, my 
brother told her that I was gay and my mother said that she did not 
want a queer for a son. She grabbed me by the hair and hit my head 
against the wall.
	
Marlina escaped from her family soon after and lived with a neigh-
bour until she left for the usa 12 years later.
These four asylum seekers share a narrative that traces their expe-
riences of persecution to childhood and identifies family members, 
classmates and neighbours as persecutors.34 Unlike the claims of most 
male asylum seekers, gay men and transgendered women divulge being 
raped or beaten by family members for being perceived as gay or effem-
inate. As discussed by Boyd and Nowak in this volume, personal vio-
lence perpetrated by family members is a hallmark of refugee women’s 
experiences, both creating women’s migration flows and accounting for 
their experiences during flight.
These examples further underline the emphasis in asylum claims on 
producing a convincing narrative adorned with horrific details rather 
than the failure of the state to provide protection. The latter, however, 
according to the Refugee Convention, is the core of an asylum claim. 
This manoeuvre by immigrant advocates obscures the multiplicity of 
ways that the state fails in this regard. States may be the agent of per-
secution (as in the case of Toboso-Alfonso where he was required to 
register with the government) or states may be unwilling or unable to 
protect their citizens from the persecution of others, such as the famil-
ial violence endured by the asylum seekers discussed in this section.
Conclusion
The introduction raised the idea that gender and sexuality are consti-
tutive of one another rather than merely additive components of one’s 
identity. Sexual orientation and transgender asylum complicate this 
notion further in two ways that contribute to migration studies.
First, narratives of persecution by gay men and transgendered 
women are similar to women’s claims in that sexual and family vio-
lence is common across their stories of harm. The dominant narrative 
of queer persecution for gay men and transgendered women is one of 
sexual and family violence, making the content of these claims similar 
to those of gender-based asylum claims espoused by women. This is a 

144	
Connie Oxford
valuable finding for future research on asylum, as familial and sexual 
violence is shown not to be relegated solely to women’s experiences of 
persecution.
Second, the findings suggest that persecuted queers follow a similar 
androcentric path to that forged by heterosexual asylum seekers. This 
is not because the claims are made by men, but because they are made 
by those whose experiences of persecution are inextricably linked to 
gender non-conformity regarding ideals of masculinity. The examples 
highlighted in this chapter may lead one to think that only those born 
biologically male (even if some eschew this essentialised gendered 
identity and consider themselves transgendered women) constitute 
queer subjects deserving of asylum in the usa.
While lesbians, bisexual women and men, and transgendered men 
may gain asylum based on their membership in the social group of 
homosexuals, current precedent cases are dominated by stories of queer 
immigrants being persecuted vis-à-vis normative ideas of masculinity, 
simultaneously entailing non-conformist displays of femininity that are 
both gendered and sexualised. The absence of asylum claims by lesbi-
ans and transgendered men may contribute to the invisibility of narra-
tives of persecution based on a lack of conformity to normative ideals 
of femininity that too would include non-conformist performances of 
masculinity that are also both gendered and sexualised. In this sense, 
queer asylum is perhaps following the same trajectory as other forms of 
migration with a new twist. Similar to ‘women’ following ‘men’ in both 
actual migration movements and studies of migration, in many ways, 
masculine subjects seem to be at the forefront of queer asylum. Yet they 
are very different masculine subjects from their heterosexual counter-
parts because their border crossers lay bare the ways in which mascu-
linity and femininity can simultaneously organise migration, revealing 
how queer asylum is as gendered as it is sexualised.
Notes
1	 While studies of sexuality existed prior to Foucault’s work, the 1984 English lan-
guage publication of The History of Sexuality laid the groundwork for a plethora 
of scholarship on sexuality (Foucault 1984). Butler (1990) and Sedgwick (1990) 
too have greatly influenced studies of sexuality.
2	 See Halberstam (2005) and Currah, Juang & Price (2006) for a discussion of the 
use of the term queer as it applies to transgendered people.
3	 Exclusionary immigration laws were hardly specific to homosexuals during this 
time. Beginning in the late 19th century and continuing through today, us immi-
gration law has been characterised by restrictive policies (Gerstle 2004).

queer asylum	
145
4	 In keeping with Rand’s analysis, which denaturalises gender, I too refer to Wood-
hull as ‘he’.
5	 In 1933, the Immigration and Naturalization Service (ins) was created. It was 
originally located under the Department of Labour, but moved to the Depart-
ment of Justice in 1940. On 1 March 2003, the ins was divided into three agen-
cies – the us Citizenship and Immigration Services (cis), the us Immigration 
and Custom Enforcement (ice), and the Bureau of Customs and Border Pro-
tection (cbp). It then moved from the Department of Justice to the newly cre-
ated Department of Homeland Security. I refer to the federal office that oversees 
immigration as the ins until its dissolution in March 2003.
6	 This applies to all published cases in the usa and is not specific to immigration 
law.
7	 Matter of Toboso-Alfonso 20 i&n Dec. 819 (bia 1994).
8	 In 1980, approximately 125,000 Cuban nationals left Cuba for the usa via the 
Mariel boat harbour. This mass immigration is known as the Mariel boatlift.
9	 Matter of Toboso-Alfonso.
10	 Hernandez-Montiel v. ins, 225 F.3d 1088 (9th Cir. 2000).
11	 See O’Dwyer (2008) for a discussion of the variation in us asylum cases by cir-
cuit regarding sexual orientation claims. For a more general discussion of asylum 
claims by all circuits see Ramji-Nogales, Schoenholtz & Schrag (2009).
12	 D. Stout, ‘Court Rules Cross-Dresser Can Stay in the us on Asylum Claim’, New 
York Times, 26 August 2000, p. 14.
13	 See Swetha Sridharan, ‘The Difficulties of us Asylum Claims Based on Sexual 
Orientation’, MigrationInformationSource www.migrationinformation.org/Fea-
ture/display. cfm?id=700 (accessed 31 January 2010). See also Millbank (2008) 
and Millbank (2009) for an in-depth analysis of how sexual orientation claims are 
adjudicated in Australia and the uk.
14	 Ceci Connolly, ‘As Latin Nations Treat Gays Better Asylum is Elusive’, Washington 
Post, 12 August 2008 www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2008/ 
AR2008081102038.html (accessed on 31 January 2010).
15	 www.immigrationequality.org/manual_template.php?id=1066 (accessed on 18 
October 2009).
16	 A 9th Circuit Court of Appeals case that was published in 1997. Pitcherskaia v. 
ins, 118 F.3d 641 (9th Cir. 1997).
17	 See appendix B of Human Rights Watch and Immigration Equality (2006).
18	 See appendix A of Human Rights Watch and Immigration Equality (2006).
19	 See appendix C of Human Rights Watch and Immigration Equality (2006).
20	See appendix C of Human Rights Watch and Immigration Equality (2006). These 
data are based on the 5% Public Use Microdata Sample (pums), a random sample 
of households.
21	 See www.immigrationequality.org.
22	 J. Preston, ‘Obama Lifts a Ban on Entry into us by hiv-Positive People’, New York 
Times, 30 October 2009 http://topics.nytimes.com/topics/reference/timestopics/
people/p/julia_preston/index.html (accessed 31 October 2009).
23	 Since the passage of the Illegal Immigration Reform and Responsibility Act of 
1996 asylum seekers must file their applications within one year.

146	
Connie Oxford
24	 Rafael (San Francisco, California, 17 November 2002). Interview conducted by 
Connie Oxford. Interview tape on file with author.
25	 Gloria (Los Angeles, California, 6 August 2002). Interview conducted by Connie 
Oxford. Interview tape on file with author.
26	 Marcos (Los Angeles, California, 9 December 2002). Interview conducted by 
Connie Oxford. Interview tape on file with author.
27	 John (Los Angeles, California, 26 September 2002). Interview conducted by Con-
nie Oxford. Interview tape on file with author.
28	 Elizabeth, an attorney with Immigration Equality, articulated that the Lesbian, 
Gay, Bisexual, and Transgender Community Center in New York City was famil-
iar with the needs of queer migrants and that, although it did not offer immi-
gration services, its staff referred immigrants to Immigration Equality. Elisabeth. 
(New York City, 9 July 2009). Interview conducted by Connie Oxford. Interview 
tape on file with author. See Heller (2009) for a discussion of how social workers 
can help queer asylum seekers.
29	 International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights Commission. Transgender Issues 
#1, 1989-1995 (San Francisco, 1995). International Gay and Lesbian Human Rights 
Commission. Lesbian Packet (San Francisco, 2001).
30	 Elisabeth (New York City, 9 July 2009). Interview conducted by Connie Oxford. 
Interview tape on file with author.
31	 These examples are two gay men from Mexico, one gay man from Guatemala, and 
one transgendered woman from Honduras.
32	 Masculinity is hardly uniform across the globe. See Gutmann (1996) for a discus-
sion of the multiplicity of meanings of masculinity in a culture that is known for 
hegemonic views of masculinity commonly referred to as machismo.
33	 I limit my discussion to sexual violence as the basis of an asylum claim. Transgen-
dered migrants face sexual violence in the usa as well. See Solomon (2005) on the 
case a transgendered woman raped by guards in an ins detention facility.
34	 See Ramirez (2003) for further examples of how gay Latino men experience per-
secution.
References
Alexander, M.J. (1994), ‘Not just (any) body can be a citizen: The politics of law, 
sexuality, and postcoloniality in Trinidad and Tobago and the Bahamas’, Feminist 
Review 48: 5-23.
Butler, J. (1990), Gender trouble: Feminism and the subversion of identity. New York 
and London: Routledge.
Cox, J. (2001), ‘Redefining gender: Hernandez-Montiel v. ins’, Houston Journal of 
International Law 24 (1): 188-207.
Currah, P., R.M. Juang & S.P. Minter (eds) (2006), Transgender rights. Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Donaldson, M. et al. (eds) (2009), Migrant men: Critical studies of masculinities and 
the migration experience. New York: Routledge.

queer asylum	
147
Espín. O. (1997), Latina realities: Essays on healing, migration, and sexuality. Boulder: 
Westview Press.
Foucault, M. (1984), The history of sexuality: An introduction. Volume i. New York: 
Pantheon.
Gerstle, G. (2004), ‘The immigrant as threat to American security: A historical per-
spective’, in J. Tirman (ed.), The maze of fear: Security and migration after 9/11, 
pp. 87-108. New York: The New Press.
Gutmann, M. (1996), The meanings of macho: Being a man in Mexico City. Berkeley: 
University of California Press.
Halberstam, J. (2005), In a queer time and place: Transgender bodies, subcultural lives. 
New York: New York University Press.
Hanna, F. (2005), ‘Punishing masculinity in gay asylum claims’, Yale Law Journal, 
114: 913-920.
Heller, P. (2009), ‘Challenges facing lbgt asylum-seekers: The role of social work 
in correcting oppressive immigration processes’, Journal of Gay & Lesbian Social 
Services 21: 294-308.
Hitchings, E. (2004), ‘Insufficiently inhuman: Removing aids patients from the uk’, 
Journal of Social Welfare and Family Law 26 (3): 281-288.
Human Rights Watch and Immigration Equality (2006), ‘Family unvalued: Discrimi-
nation, denial, and the fate of binational same-sex couples under u.s. law’. New 
York: Human Rights Watch and Immigration Equality.
Luibhéid, E. (2005), Queer migrations: Sexuality, us citizenship, and border crossings. 
Minneapolis and London: University of Minnesota Press.
Luibhéid, E. (2002), Entry denied: Controlling sexuality at the border. Minneapolis and 
London: University of Minnesota Press.
Manalansan iv, M.F. (2006), ‘Queer intersections: Sexuality and gender in migration 
studies’, International Migration Review 40: 224-249.
McClure, H., C. Nugent & L. Soloway (2000), ‘The midwest human rights partner-
ship for sexual orientation and the lesbian and gay immigration rights task force’, 
Preparing sexual orientation-based asylum claims: A handbook for advocates and 
asylum seekers (2nd Edition). Chicago: Heartland Alliance for Human Needs and 
Human Rights.
Millbank, J. (2009), ‘From discretion to disbelief: Recent trends in refugee determi-
nations on the basis of sexual orientation in Australia and the United Kingdom’, 
International Journal of Human Rights 13 (2/3): 391-414.
Millbank, J. (2008), ‘A preoccupation with perversion: The British response to refugee 
claims on the basis of sexual orientation, 1989-2003’, Feminist Legal Studies 16 (2): 
141-167.
O’Dwyer, P. (2008), ‘A well-founded fear of having my sexual orientation asylum 
claim heard in the wrong court’, New York Law School Law Review 52: 185-212.
Oxford, C. (2005), ‘Protectors and victims in the gender regime of asylum’, National 
Women’s Studies Association Journal 17: 18-38.
Ramirez, L.A.P. (2003), ‘Immigration and trauma: A study with Latino gay men asy-
lum seekers’. PhD thesis, Wright Institute Graduate School of Psychology.

148	
Connie Oxford
Ramji-Nogales, J., A.I. Schoenholtz & P.G. Schrag (2009), Refugee roulette: Disparities 
in asylum adjudication and proposals for reform. New York: New York University 
Press.
Rand, E.R. (2005), The Ellis Island snow globe. Durham: Duke University Press.
Randazzo, T.J. (2005), ‘Social and legal barriers: Sexual orientation and asylum in the 
United States’, in E. Luibhéid & L. Cantu Jr. (eds), Queer migrations: Sexuality, us 
citizenship, and border crossings, pp. 30-60. Minneapolis and London: University 
of Minnesota Press.
Rehaag, S. (2009), ‘Bisexuals need not apply: A comparative appraisal of refugee law 
and policy in Canada, the United States, and Australia’, The International Journal 
of Human Rights 13 (2-3): 415-436.
Sedgwick, E.F. (1990), Epistemology of the closet. Berkeley and Los Angeles: University 
of California Press.
Somerville, S.B. (2005), ‘Sexual aliens and the racialized state: A queer reading of the 
1952 us immigration and nationality act’, in E. Luibhéid & L. Cantu Jr. (eds), Queer 
migrations: Sexuality, us citizenship, and border crossings, pp. 75-91. Minneapolis 
and London: University of Minnesota Press.
Solomon, A. (2005), ‘Trans/migrant: Christina Madrazo’s all-American story’, in 
E. Luibhéid & L. Cantu Jr. (eds), Queer migrations: Sexuality, us citizenship, and 
border crossings, pp. 3-29. Minneapolis and London: University of Minnesota Press.

6  Belonging and membership
Postcolonial legacies of colonial family law  
in Dutch immigration policies
Sarah van Walsum, Guno Jones and Susan Legêne
Introduction 
In recent years, the Netherlands drew international attention by be-
ing the first country to require that family unification migrants pass 
a language and integration test in their countries of origin before be-
ing admitted into the Netherlands.1 Member of Parliament Rita Ver-
donk (vvd), who in 2006-2007 would become the Dutch Minister for 
Immigration and Integration Affairs, in 2005 defended these policies 
in parliament by linking threats to the stability of Dutch society with 
assumed differences between Dutch norms regarding family relations 
and sexuality and those of ‘non-Western’ migrants:
[F]ailed integration can lead to marginalisation and segregation as a 
result of which people can turn their back on society and fall back on 
antiquated norms and values, making them susceptible to the influ-
ence of a small group inclined to extremism and terrorism … Ongo-
ing radicalisation implies a real risk that non-integrated migrants will 
take an anti-Western stance and will assail fundamental values and 
norms generally accepted in Western society such as equality of men 
and women, non-discrimination of homosexuals and freedom of ex-
pression.2
	
In the context of a debate concerning family migration from ‘non-
Western’ nations, Verdonk’s message was clear. Unless family migrants 
could be screened for ‘proper’ norms, values and skills before being 
granted entry, they posed a threat to the Dutch nation. Migrants’ 
norms and values are represented as archaic and backwards, whereas 
the Netherlands, as a ‘Western society’, is deemed a place where eman-
cipation is complete. Opponents dubbed this aspect of Dutch family 
migration policies as racist, because the Dutch language and integra-
tion test requirement applied only to people originating from the less 

150	
Sarah van Walsum, Guno Jones & Susan Legêne
industrially developed nations of Africa, Asia and South America. 
Human Rights Watch, in a 2008 report, qualified the Dutch policies as 
‘discrimination in the name of integration’ (Human Rights Watch 2008; 
cf. Terlouw 2005; Groenendijk 2011; De Vries 2011, 2012). In more gen-
eral terms, Dutch family migration policies have been compared to the 
racist policies that distinguished the rulers from the ruled in the former 
colony of the Dutch East Indies (De Hart 2003). Other authors have 
argued that the racial divides of the colonial past are part of the geneal-
ogy of current European modes of exclusion (Stoler 1995, 2011; Balibar 
2004; Legêne 2011).
This chapter investigates the legacy of colonial discourses and prac-
tices in current discussions of belonging and practices of exclusion in 
the Netherlands, with a special focus on their gendered dimensions. 
Nonetheless, depicting the present as an automatic sequel to a past rac-
ist order in overseas colonial states and society is too simple a rheto-
ric for two reasons. First, jumping from the colonial era to the pre-
sent day ignores post-Second World War society in the Netherlands. 
Yet this was an era of significant developments in which colonialism 
and racism were contested and sexual morality thoroughly changed. 
An important achievement of that period is the constitutional princi-
ple of equal treatment, which states that everyone in the Netherlands 
should be free from discrimination, regardless of race, creed or eth-
nic background. In 1983, this article replaced the original first clause, 
which since 1815 had served to define the territory of the Netherlands. 
The new non-discrimination clause thus changed the legal focus from 
indicating where the constitution was effective (it had not been effec-
tive for the colonial subjects in the overseas colonies) to to whom it 
applied: to anyone living in the Netherlands. The clause thus reflects 
changing views in Dutch society and in the international legal order 
(Legêne 2011: 245-247). We are well aware that formal equality is a nec-
essary, but not a sufficient, condition for equal treatment in a broader 
sense. For successive post-war Dutch governments, it was not always 
easy to live up to the enacted ideal of equality regardless of ‘race’ or ‘eth-
nicity’. This is demonstrated, for instance, by political discourses and 
restrictive policies concerning the right of free migration of overseas 
Dutch citizens from the former Dutch East Indies (in the 1950s) and 
West Indies (from the 1970s onwards) (Schuster 1999; Jones 2007). In 
that sense, colonialism certainly left its ‘postcolonial’ marks. However, 
depicting the present as an automatic sequel to the colonial past risks 
undermining the attention and activism needed for this constitutional 
principle of non-discrimination to survive as a vital element of Dutch 
politics, law and society.3 It further ignores the impact of the sexual 

belonging and membership	
151
revolution, which ousted marriage as the sole legitimate site of sexu-
ality while rejecting, or at least challenging, the hierarchies between 
genders and generations that were laid down by Dutch family law of the 
pre-war period. If we wish to gain insight into current Dutch exclusion-
ary immigration discourse and practices by tracing its genealogy back 
to the colonial past, we have to take these post-Second World War nor-
mative shifts into account.
In addition to focusing on recent changes within Dutch politics, law 
and society, we must more closely analyse the legacies of colonial rac-
ism and their gendered dimensions as such. What do we know about 
‘Dutch’ overseas colonial citizenship regimes, both within the Dutch 
East Indies and in Suriname? How do we assess the plural legal sys-
tems in which these were based? And, what legacies can we find in 
contemporary immigration law? The overall picture seems clear. Stoler 
has argued that the racist regime of the former Dutch East Indies was 
grounded in assumptions concerning biologically determined differ-
ences deemed relevant to the quality of citizenship (Stoler 1995). Cribb 
(2010) states that, in a legal sense, this regime ‘blurred’ colonial plural-
ism and multiculturalism, ruling its subjects in ways that essentialised 
cultural differences, respected religious autonomy, recognised plural 
family law, and patronised specific communities within the archipelago. 
Establishing and maintaining cultural and racial distinctions within a 
plural legal order depended on the regulation of biological and cultural 
reproduction through the control of sexuality. The gendered and racist 
nature of this regime protected European men’s privileges, as men and 
as Europeans. They were the ones who determined whether the chil-
dren of their ‘native’ concubines could acquire the European status and 
full Dutch citizenship, while a marriage between a ‘native’ man and a 
European woman resulted in her losing the privileged status of Euro-
pean – not in his gaining it (De Hart 2003; Stoler 1995). Cribb (2010) 
concludes that legal pluralism and multiculturalism, at least in their 
colonial manifestation, amounted to a refusal by the Dutch to share 
their political morality with their subjects in the Indonesian archipel-
ago. In addition, legal pluralism in a colonial context amounted to a 
refusal by the ruling colonial class to share its political and socio-eco-
nomic privileges – such as senior positions in the colonial bureaucracy 
– with the ‘native subjects’ (Heijs 1991, 1994; Somers 2005; Jones 2007).4
Cribb, Stoler and others have analysed the effects of these Dutch 
colonial exclusive and gendered notions of citizenship in colonial and 
postcolonial Indonesian society. For our discussion it is relevant to 
investigate whether these citizenship regimes also influenced citizen-
ship elsewhere: both in the colonies of Suriname and the Netherlands 

152	
Sarah van Walsum, Guno Jones & Susan Legêne
Antilles, or in the Netherlands, and with respect to citizens who, in the 
process of decolonisation, were trapped between a former colonial and 
a new Dutch citizenship. Colonial family law turned out to produce 
various racial and gendered excluding effects for those who wanted to 
obtain Dutch citizenship and migrate to the Netherlands, both from 
Indonesia after 1945 and from Suriname and the Netherlands Antil-
les after 1954. But we argue here that the postcolonial paradigmatic 
shift away from the overseas racist mode of exclusion of the colonial 
period in the 1970s also created new including effects relevant for any-
one living in the Netherlands. We discuss how both the decolonisation 
of Suriname and the sexual revolution in the Netherlands challenged 
Dutch immigration and family law based on a Western Christian sex-
ual morality and its related institutions, like marriage and heteronor-
mativity. As sexual norms became more contested, it became more 
difficult for the Dutch state to justify the exclusion of (postcolonial) 
migrants from its territory on the grounds of their ‘non-European’ sex-
ual behaviour. At the same time, as the moral dominance of Western 
Christian norms became less self-evident in the (former) colonial pow-
ers, other normative orders acquired more legitimacy and could also 
serve to inspire those who, in what once had been the superior colonial 
metropole, were struggling to imagine and establish a new sexual order. 
While Verdonk (as quoted in the introduction to this chapter) in 
2005 suggested that the liberal, egalitarian and secular morality of cur-
rent Western European (and specifically Dutch) society is inherent to 
those societies, our argument is that she ignores how, in the Nether-
lands, as probably in other Western European countries, the paradig-
matic shift towards this new sexual order was also the result of a two-way 
decolonisation process. Decolonisation, and the immigration questions 
that came with it, helped make Dutch society receptive to normative 
orders that, only a few decades before, had been labelled within the 
Dutch overseas racial colonial order as ‘non-European’, backwards and 
morally reprehensible.
Materials and methods
We focus our argument on the dynamic interaction between Suri-
name’s decolonisation, Dutch postcolonial migration and integration 
policies, and changes in Dutch family law. Our contention is that co-
lonial history is important to understand recent migration policies in 
the Netherlands, both as a gendered history of segregation, exclusion 
and hetero­normativity and as a history of legal pluralism and inclu-

belonging and membership	
153
sion. Family law, used within the colonial setting to regulate ‘belong-
ing’, has played a key role in this history. It formed a normative sys-
tem for regulating ­legitimate family bonds, and hence for establishing 
a person’s ­legal status. Given that, from 1892 on, Dutch nationality was 
determined through the jus sanguinis principle, family law came to 
form part of the system for determining formal citizenship. However, 
grounded in culturally and religiously informed assumptions concern-
ing gender norms and sexuality, family law also could serve to estab-
lish substantive cultural norms of citizenship (Stoler 1995; Van Walsum 
2008). In the current postcolonial context, family law similarly inter-
acts with migration law, and thus plays a role in both formally and cul-
turally determining who is included and excluded from residence in 
the Netherlands (Van Walsum 2008).
A telling example of this dynamic interaction between family and 
migration law was provided in the 1980s by the Berrehab case (echr, 21 
June 1988, application 10730/84). Abdellah Berrehab, a man of Moroc-
can nationality, had been admitted to the Netherlands on the grounds 
of his marriage to a Dutch woman, but had lost his residence permit 
two years later following a divorce. By then, he and his former wife had 
had a daughter, Rebecca. Although no longer living with his former 
wife, Berrehab devoted four days a week to his daughter’s care. None-
theless, the Dutch state refused to extend his residence permit, claim-
ing that he and his daughter did not share family life. The European 
Court of Human Rights (echr) did not agree, and ruled that the Dutch 
state had violated the right to respect for family life of both father and 
daughter. Berrehab became a landmark case, not just in migration law, 
but also – perhaps even more so – in family law. By establishing that 
co-habitation is not a necessary prerequisite for family life, this case 
formed an important element in a series of later court judgements, 
both national and international, developing the concept of the right to 
respect for family life. This case law ultimately led to legislative reforms 
introduced in the 1990s that radically changed the nature of Dutch fam-
ily law (Holtrust 1993; Loenen 2003).
This chapter focuses on the dynamic interaction between family law, 
immigration law and discourses of national belonging from the colo-
nial past. Its methodology is grounded in the cross-disciplinary col-
laboration of its three authors, based in family migration law (Van Wal-
sum), historical anthropology (Jones) and political history (Legêne). 
The overarching research question of this volume concerns implicitly 
gendered rules, explicit sexual norms, and the changes in migration 
policy in an era (1917-2010) that saw the heyday of imperialism, decolo-
nisation, massive migration moments, the end of empires and estab-

154	
Sarah van Walsum, Guno Jones & Susan Legêne
lishment of ‘single nations in a single territory’, together with the emer-
gence of a global sphere of international justice (Cooper 2005; Stuur-
man 2010). In addition to this volume’s other chapters in which coloni-
alism and decolonisation is not an issue, this chapter widens the scope 
of gender, sexuality and migration policy, by explicitly suggesting, with 
the example of the Netherlands, a legal-historical continuity between 
European colonialism and contemporary European immigration pol-
icies. The colonial history is especially instructive for understanding 
how pluralism in family norms and law and the associated differences 
in the regulation of gender relations and sexuality have interacted with 
regimes of inclusion and exclusion in the past. Awareness of these his-
torical dynamics enriches our understanding of both political and legal 
discourses in the ex-colonial metropolis of today.
An international comparison of colonial legacies in postcolonial 
citizenship regimes in Europe should emphasise two aspects: colo-
nial cross-overs and legal continuities. Both are vital to understanding 
recent migration policy issues. By cross-overs we mean, for instance, 
how the development of legal pluralism in the Dutch East Indies, after 
the introduction of the 1892 laws that revised Dutch nationality law 
and established various categories of colonial subjects, was ‘applied’ in 
Suriname in the first decades of the 20th century, and how experiences 
with Dutch citizenship for immigrants from Indonesia between 1950 
and 1958 influenced provisions for Surinamese immigrants to the Neth-
erlands after 1975. Such cross-overs and legal continuities must have 
existed within each of the other European empires, as well as between 
these empires in the broader European context, as suggested by Balibar 
(2004). Our focus is on the Dutch case, by tracing transnational legal 
continuities in the development of Dutch family law after Surinamese 
independence. Sources for this approach are, next to secondary litera-
ture, primary sources like legislative texts, published court judgements 
in migration law cases5 and Dutch parliamentary proceedings.
With respect to the secondary sources, this implies that we also 
address current debates on Dutch ‘depillarisation’, or the secularisation 
process and the loosening of the confessional or ideological bonds that 
after 1945 were dominant in Dutch civil society (Kennedy 1995; Vuysje 
1997; Van Dam 2011).6 We argue that the impact of decolonisation 
should be analysed more thoroughly within the fragmentation of this 
pillarised society. The Treaty of 1975 concerning the admission of Suri-
namese nationals to the Netherlands, following Suriname’s independ-
ence, provided for the admission of unmarried partners, both hetero-
sexual and homosexual, at the request of the Surinamese and in recog-
nition of the plurality of conjugal norms prevalent in the former colony 

belonging and membership	
155
(Van Walsum 2008). Van Walsum has claimed that these treaty provi-
sions – the first statutory regulations to acknowledge the legitimacy of 
(homosexual) non-marital relations – helped to pave the way for fur-
ther reform in Dutch family migration policy, and that these reforms in 
turn formed a point of reference in legal debates that preceded reforms 
of Dutch family law. In another historical study of Dutch family migra-
tion policies in the post-Second World War period, Bonjour (2009) 
refutes this claim. In her view the reverse was the case: the Netherlands 
had been prepared to admit the unmarried (homosexual) partners of 
Surinamese residents thanks to emancipatory processes that had taken 
place within the Netherlands. We would like to re-examine this issue 
and its relationship to depillarisation, not because we want to prove 
Van Walsum right and Bonjour wrong. In the contemporary context of 
the Netherlands in which government policy’s claim to a higher moral 
ground in the realm of sexuality once more serves to justify the exclu-
sion of the putatively morally backward, we believe that it is important 
to critically examine the historical validity of that claim. Approaching 
decolonisation as a two-way process enriches our analysis of the para-
digmatic shift in Dutch family law that has taken place since the 1970s, 
a shift that cannot just be explained as a result of the fragmentation of 
Dutch pillarised society.
Colonial cross-overs between East and West:  
The normative Surinamese landscape
In describing the Surinamese normative landscape in terms of family 
regulations prior to decolonisation, a periodisation of Surinamese state 
formation is needed. Until 25 November 1975, when the country be-
came independent, Suriname was part of the Kingdom of the Nether-
lands. In the preceding period, political milestones had been the con-
servative Staatsregeling of 1936 that abandoned the word ‘colony’, but 
continued colonial bonds and contained many regulations that were 
contradictory to the Dutch Constitution, and the more liberal Statuut 
of 1954 allowing Suriname an autonomous status within the Kingdom 
of the Netherlands (Buiskool 1954: 17-41). After 1901, the Dutch govern-
ment and colonial legislators, which differed in their degrees of interac-
tion with Dutch legal systems, also worked on family law regulations 
that would serve the plural society of Suriname, while also accounting 
for the legacies of the past colonial organisation of plantation labour. 
The Dutch colonial authorities, via family law and socio-cultural re-
gimes in general, were the dominant ‘actors’ in creating the Surinamese 

156	
Sarah van Walsum, Guno Jones & Susan Legêne
plural society and the ethnic divisions therein. Colonial socio-cultural 
regimes, the subsequent regimes of labour by enslaved and indentured 
workers on the plantations, the support for small farming in the dis-
tricts, and finally the emergence of male wage labour for (multina-
tional) companies that exploited natural resources far away from the 
urban centres of Suriname, all had a deep and lasting influence on the 
organisation of social and family life in the colony.7
In the 19th century the regime of plantation slavery had an impact on 
the marital status of the enslaved African plantation workers. Despite 
the critique of Christian missionaries like the Hernhutters, enslaved 
Africans were not allowed to marry; a child born from an enslaved 
woman was legally classified as a slave, and the enslaved parents could 
not recognise the child as theirs. The protection of family life was 
socially weak and legally non-existent, since the enslaved were legally 
not ‘persons’ but ‘goods’. In a number of cases, European fathers made 
possible the manumission of both the enslaved mothers and their chil-
dren (Van Lier 1977). But enslaved mothers of a child whose biological 
father was a European, conceived in any form of enforced or voluntary 
intercourse and relationship, remained highly dependent on paternal 
decisions concerning the future of the child. The racist colonial regime 
of African slave labour had accommodated various forms of intimate 
relationships between people, many of whom had adopted Christian-
ity as (a part of) their beliefs, who were none the less denied access to 
a decent family life.
Runaway Maroons, who since the 18th century had organised their 
communities with (almost) no involvement from colonial authorities, 
as well as Amerindian Surinamese, developed their own norms and 
customs that the authorities only after the Staatsregeling of 1936 tried 
to integrate into a common legal framework. Chinese, Hindustani and 
Javanese indentured labourers had since the middle of the 19th century 
been recruited in order to replace enslaved workers. They became large 
groups in Suriname. Most of these plantation labour immigrants in the 
early 20th century had become small farmers or middle-class entrepre-
neurs. Many were Muslim, Hindu or adherents of Confucianism, and 
hence initially did not adhere to the dominant Christian family norms. 
Containing those groups that did not share ‘Western’ values had been 
an argument for the conservative character of the 1936 Staatsregeling 
(Buiskool 1954: 27).
Pluralist marital law that would allow for differences with respect to 
especially Hindu and Muslim beliefs and customs was much-discussed 
from the beginning of the 20th century. Special provisions concerning 
marriages of Hindustani and Javanese were drawn up in 1907, but legal 

belonging and membership	
157
unity remained the guiding principle in Suriname (Van Lier 1977: 144). 
Cultural and legal pluralism that would acknowledge all different pop-
ulation groups, while still favouring (Dutch) Western and Christianity-
based family law, turned out to be a very complicated legal issue. Its 
contested implementation in Suriname was partly based on the exam-
ple from the Dutch East Indies. Colonial family law in the Dutch East 
Indies had been an experiment with legal pluralism, which acknowl-
edged adat and sharia combined with an affirmation of strict citizen-
ship distinctions. The population in the Dutch East Indies was legally 
classified in three distinct groups: Europeans and those decreed equal 
to Europeans, foreign Orientals, and indigenous people. Qua nation-
ality status, the population of the Dutch East Indies was classified as 
Dutch citizens (all of whom were also Europeans) and Dutch subjects 
(most of whom belonged to the category of indigenous people or for-
eign Orientals) from 1892 and 1910 onwards. As mentioned before, this 
legal order implied unequal career patterns for people in different cat-
egories.
The legal pluralism of the colonial Dutch East Indies was adapted 
in Surinamese society from 1937 onwards. However, the context was 
essentially different. In the Dutch East Indies, 300,000 Europeans ruled 
over 20 million indigenous persons in 1940. Suriname was a small set-
tlement colony with population groups that, except for the community 
of Amerindian Surinamese, had been brought from Africa and Asia 
to Suriname under colonial labour regimes of slavery or indentured 
labour. The migration histories, the cultural and religious backgrounds 
of the various population groups, and their history of forced or inden-
tured labour in the colony, made family law a complicated issue. More­
over, against the backdrop of the dominant cultural policies in Suri-
name at the time, legal pluralism with regard to family law became a 
contested issue. From 1863 to 1933, the colonial legal regimes and poli-
cies with regard to culture, language, education and family had been 
aimed at assimilation. The Koloniale Staten, the colonial representa-
tive body consisting of members of the influential local political elite, 
supported Dutch colonial policies. Assimilation policy, which after 
emancipation in 1863 was initially targeted at the formerly enslaved, 
was subsequently also directed at the indentured labourers who came 
from China, the Dutch East Indies and British India (Van Lier 1977; 
Ramsoedh 1995; Marshall 2003). The aim of these policies was, as Gov-
ernor A.A.L. Rutgers stated in 1922, ‘to re-melt the entire population, 
white, brown, black or yellow, regardless if they are Europeans, Ameri-
cans, Africans or Asians, into one single language and culture commu-
nity within one legal framework, even in the case of matrimonial law 

158	
Sarah van Walsum, Guno Jones & Susan Legêne
and law of succession’. This policy was very different from that in the 
Dutch East Indies, which aimed to separate groups rather than to meld 
them into one. The Dutch colonial authorities were well aware of this 
difference. The Minister of Colonies J.C. Koningsberger in 1928 stated 
explicitly that ‘preservation of language, morals and customs’ was the 
aim in the Dutch East Indies, whereas ‘the fusion of all races, including 
the Javanese, into one Dutch language and culture community’ was the 
goal of colonial policies in Suriname (Van Lier 1977: 143).
The administration of Governor G.C. Kielstra (1933-1944) signalled 
a paradigmatic shift away from assimilation policies (Ramsoedh 1995). 
Before Kielstra became governor in Suriname, he held senior posi-
tions in the Dutch East Indies. Around 1914, as the Deputy Advisor 
for Administrative Affairs of the Outer Provinces (of the Dutch East 
Indies) he had been involved in the legal description in Christian by-
laws for Toba Batak Christians, of customary or adat law concerning 
marriage and family arrangements (Van Bemmelen 2012: ch. 10). His 
relocation in 1933 from the Dutch East Indies to the West Indies meant 
a partial transposition of colonial policies from one colony to the other. 
Inspired by the regime of legal pluralism in the Dutch East Indies, Kiel-
stra wanted to introduce ‘Asian marital law’, the establishment of sep-
arate villages and separate schools for the ‘Asian’ part of the popula-
tion, in accordance with the Dutch East Indies model (Van Lier 1977: 
143-146, cf. Van Walsum 2000: 29-37). He met fierce opposition from 
the representative body, which after 1936 was called the Staten and by 
then was dominated by members of the local ‘white, Jewish and Creole 
elite’. These representatives8 favoured the continuation of equal treat-
ment (rechtseenheid) and assimilation, and criticised Kielstra’s policies, 
which they compared with ‘apartheid’, as an obstruction of national 
unity. Kielstra, backed by Minister of Colonies Ch.J.I.M. Welter, used 
the special powers granted to him by the conservative Staatsregeling of 
1936 to disregard the local representatives and enact his ‘Asian marital 
law’ in 1937.
As previously mentioned, legal pluralism in the Dutch East Indies 
before 1942 did not allow for the development of universal and shared 
notions of citizenship (Cribb 2010). This had an immediate impact on 
individual entitlements to, and exclusion from, Dutch citizenship after 
1949, when the Dutch East Indies became independent Indonesia. In 
terms of migration options, the legal pluralism in colonial family law 
prior to Indonesian independence limited entitlements for migration to 
the Netherlands, whereas Indonesian society after 1950 established an 
exclusive Indonesian national citizenship that did not allow for cultural 
pluralism (Willems 2001: 112). The arrival of postcolonial immigrants 

belonging and membership	
159
from the former Dutch East Indies did not directly impact Dutch fam-
ily law. On the contrary, meeting the dominant norms of family life 
formed an important criterion to admitting immigrants from the col-
onies (Ringeling 1978; Willems 2001: 57-61, 105-111; Bosma 2009). In 
Suriname, however, legal pluralism with respect to family law between 
1936 and 1975, and notably after 1954, when Suriname was an autono-
mous part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, developed not only in 
interaction with Dutch legal reform, but also within an international 
context of an emerging sphere of global justice based on human rights 
(Stuurman 2010: 475).
Regardless of existing law, Surinamese society had allowed for cul-
tural and legal pluralism in family regulations, based on the accept-
ance of Muslim and Hindu private life, as well as the awareness that 
during the nation’s history many had been forced to live in enslave-
ment. Between 1954 and 1975, the social legacies of this past, both for 
descendants of Afro-Surinamese and for Chinese, Hindustani and 
Javanese immigrants, were hardly discussed in terms of this history. 
Dutch perspectives on Surinamese nation-state formation were domi-
nant in schools, in churches and in court. However, in society, cultural 
pluralism allowed for a family life that was not restricted to Western 
Christian values. To be sure, during colonial times the model of the 
‘nuclear’ family (husband-wife-children), consisting of spouses mar-
ried in accordance with civil law (Burgerlijke Stand) had been very 
influential among the Creole and Jewish elite and turned into ‘the most 
frequent model in families, across ethnic groups that have attained or 
aspire to middle-class status’, as observed by Wekker (2001: 187). At 
the same time, other family systems existed in parallel to the ‘West-
ern style nuclear family’, such as the marriages according to Hindu-
ism and Islamic faith mentioned above, the ‘dual marriage structure’ 
and ‘the extended family’ (ibid.). In some of these ‘alternative’ family 
systems, the husband-wife-children unit is absent. This is the case, for 
instance, in ‘the Creole working-class matrifocal family’, in which ‘the 
mother-child and sibling relationships form the durable and depend-
able network in which an individual is embedded’ (ibid.: 188). Matri-
focal families can function as the locus for ‘matiwerk’ relationships: 
socio-economic support networks between women, in which ‘same-
sex’ relations can occur. Before Suriname’s independence in 1975, a sig-
nificant number of these ‘parallel’ family systems had been enacted in 
law, as in the case of marriage in accordance with Hinduism or Islam, 
laws recognising the authority of women over their biological children 
(which is of particular importance for matrifocal families), laws con-

160	
Sarah van Walsum, Guno Jones & Susan Legêne
cerning the rights of foster children, and laws concerning concubinage 
(Oedayrajsingh & Ahmad Ali 1989).
Conjugality and family migration policy in the negotiation  
of Suriname’s secession
In the early 1970s, against the backdrop of worldwide decolonisation, 
the relationship between the Netherlands and its remaining colonies 
(Suriname and the Dutch Antilles) became a topic of parliamentary 
debate. This issue was connected to discussions on the regulation of 
immigration from Suriname to the Netherlands, which was increas-
ing. The map of the world had changed dramatically. Former colonies, 
now a category of independent nations known as developing countries, 
played a role in East-West and North-South relationships. The us civil 
rights movement and protests against the war in Vietnam added ur-
gency to anti-racism and anti-imperialism movements. In 1971, young 
Dutch lawyers and activists supported the American draft resister 
Ralph Waver in his claim to political asylum in the Netherlands, mark-
ing a renewal of professional support for migrants and refugees seeking 
admission to this country (Reurs & Stronks 2011: 15-29; Walaardt 2012; 
Walaardt in this volume).
Initial support had been given by nassi (Nationale Actie Steunt 
Spijtoptanten in Indonesië), a volunteer advisory group founded by 
Tjalie Robinson and others in 1960, for postcolonial visa applicants who 
belonged to the ‘last’ thousands of people in Indonesia who opted for 
Indonesian citizenship and later regretted that choice (Willems 2001: 
162; Bibo 2011). Their cases had been closed by the time that Ralph 
Waver applied for political asylum, in a context of increasing unem-
ployment following the oil crisis. Following rising immigration from 
Suriname, racist violence within the Netherlands became a public issue. 
The year 1971 also saw the founding of the extreme right-wing party the 
Nederlandse Volks Unie (nvu) (Schuster 1999: 130), the first (and only) 
anti-immigrant party in the Netherlands in the post-Second World 
War period that anti-racist groups succeeded in having convicted for 
promoting racist ideas (Tinnemans 1994: 134-135).
In this polarising context, the debate concerning Suriname’s decolo-
nisation not only reflected anti-colonial sentiment, but also concerns 
over immigration control. As long as Suriname remained part of the 
Kingdom of the Netherlands, the Dutch government could not exclude 
Surinamese inhabitants without discriminating between Dutch sub-
jects. Once Suriname was independent, its inhabitants would be for-

belonging and membership	
161
eigners, and the Dutch government could legitimately refuse their 
admission (Jones 2007). Meanwhile, family migration became a politi-
cal issue connected to labour migrants from the Mediterranean. The 
centre-left cabinet, elected into power in May 1973 under the leader-
ship of the socialist J. den Uyl appeared to struggle to reconcile both 
postcolonial and labour migration control with progressive aspirations 
(Bosma 2009). During a debate with parliament on the issue of labour 
migration, the cabinet put forward its position as follows:
Seen from the perspective of the migrant worker himself and from 
the culture to which he belongs … it would be unreasonable to refuse 
entry to family members with whom he feels closely bound and for 
whom he feels responsible … The government is of the opinion that 
– also for moral reasons – it would be unjust to pursue a restrictive 
policy regarding the admission of family members to stay with for-
eign workers who, after all, have served the Dutch interest by coming 
here.9
	
On the other hand, taking the culture of migrant workers into 
account, raised issues of control:
Another aspect of family reunification regards applications made, in 
the case of polygamous marriages, for the admission of more than one 
wife or of children born out of another marriage than the children 
who have already been admitted. A similar problem arises when for-
eign workers request the admission of children born out of wedlock. 
The list of possible requests that can be made on the basis of family re-
unification is by no means exhaustive. In practice, we are confronted 
with even more variations.10
	
It is against this background that the terms concerning family reuni-
fication following Suriname’s secession would be negotiated. In 1972, a 
special committee on Koninkrijkszaken (the relations within the King-
dom of the Netherlands) was established to address the constitutional 
relationship between the Netherlands and its former colony Suriname, 
and to consider alternative regulations in terms of nationality and 
migration law that could serve to limit the number of persons leaving 
Suriname for the Netherlands. By then, secession had become an issue 
of political debate both in Suriname and the Netherlands. Dutch insist-
ence on regulations for migration from Suriname to the Netherlands 
was to play a major role in the process that would eventually lead to 
Suriname’s independence in 1975 (Jones 2007: 229-234).

162	
Sarah van Walsum, Guno Jones & Susan Legêne
Reminiscent of the painful and violent secession of the Dutch East 
Indies, Den Uyl and his cabinet were determined to have Suriname’s 
independence form a model chapter in the history of decolonisation 
(Willemsen 1988: 130-131). In determining who was to belong to which 
nation, the racially neutral criterion of territory was adhered to, rather 
than the more suspect one of genealogy, which had been the determin-
ing factor following Indonesia’s secession in 1949 and had turned out 
to be highly debatable and at times also embarrassing for those who 
apparently had believed in a strictly segregated colonial society (Ringe-
ling 1978; Van Walsum 2008; Bibo 2010). Anyone who had been born 
in Suriname and was living there on 25 November 1975, the date of Suri-
name’s independence, acquired Surinamese nationality. Dutch nation-
als from Suriname, who were resident in the Netherlands on that same 
date, could keep their Dutch nationality, regardless of parentage or ‘cul-
tural orientation’ (Heijs 1991: 35-36).
While the ruling left-wing government in the Netherlands saw it as 
its historical mission to grant Suriname its independence, in Suriname 
itself secession was contested. To win support, Surinamese politicians 
had to negotiate guarantees that future Surinamese citizens would con-
tinue to have easy access to the Netherlands. During negotiations with 
the Dutch government, Surinamese representatives strove for a gen-
erous regime of admission that would account for family norms that 
were believed to be characteristic of Surinamese society, including 
non-marital familial relationships (Jones 2007: 252-254). The final text 
of the treaty between Suriname and the Netherlands concerning the 
admission of their respective citizens, which became effective as of 25 
November 1975, did in fact include a provision, Article 5, allowing for 
the admission of the person with whom a citizen of one of the state par-
ties, legally resident on the territory of the other, ‘has a long lasting and 
exclusive personal relationship’. This article also applied to same-sex 
relationships (Ahmed Ali 1979: 17). This was a significant achievement 
when we consider that only a decade before, in the wake of Indonesia’s 
secession, Dutch authorities were still being advised by social workers 
stationed in Indonesia, to refuse ‘repatriation’ to persons of Indonesian 
nationality who lived in cohabitation or had illegitimate children. Such 
practices were considered to be indicative of an ‘oriental orientation’ 
that rendered assimilation to Dutch society unlikely (Ringeling 1978: 
127). Verton, who worked for the Dutch immigration authorities in the 
1960s, reported that if the authorities saw reason to suspect that a for-
eigner guest worker was engaged in a non-marital sexual relationship 
with a Dutch woman, this could lead to deportation on the grounds 
that public order was being threatened (Verton 1971: 45). As late as 1970, 

belonging and membership	
163
the Dutch Council of State ruled that a Turkish worker who had started 
a relationship with his Dutch landlady, while not having to leave the 
country, could be required to leave his lover’s home.11
Swart, in a commentary on the Dutch immigration law of 1965 (pub-
lished in 1978), remarks that Article 5 of the Dutch-Surinamese treaty 
concerning the admission of their respective citizens is the first statu-
tory ruling in Dutch law in which persons involved in a non-marital 
relationship are granted the same rights as married couples. He points 
out that, by then, Dutch citizens were being enabled by Dutch family 
migration policies to bring over foreign non-marital partners, but only 
on the basis of decisions taken by officials with discretionary powers, 
or following litigation. These were, however, exceptional cases, where 
marriage was not an option and where the relationship was clearly of a 
long-lasting nature (Adema & Freezer 1975: 169-170).
In Swart’s view, the statutory regulation for Surinamese citizens of a 
claim to family reunification with a non-marital partner, had to be seen 
against the background of the specific family norms that prevailed in 
Suriname at the time (Swart 1978: 411). This view is supported by infor-
mation provided by Deputy Minister of Justice H.J. Zeevalking to the 
Dutch parliament in October 1975, one month before the treaty was to 
become effective (Jones 2007: 254).
Not everyone agrees with that interpretation. Bonjour (2009: 134), 
for instance, defends the position that the provision in the Dutch-
Surinamese treaty allowing for admission of non-marital partners was 
prompted less by family norms prevalent in Suriname at the time, and 
more by normative shifts that had, by then, taken place in the Nether-
lands. These, she claims, had led to changes in Dutch migration pol-
icy, and it would have been problematic to impose a more restrictive 
regime upon former citizens coming from Suriname. It was not Suri-
namese norms ‘imported’ via migration law that served as a trigger for 
normative change in the Netherlands. Rather, normative changes in the 
Netherlands explain why Surinamese norms could be accommodated 
in Dutch migration law. Bonjour (ibid.) bases this interpretation on the 
account of Dutch politician J.F. Glastra van Loon (himself born in the 
Dutch East Indies) of his experiences as Deputy Minister of Justice in 
the Den Uyl cabinet between June 1973 and May 1975. He published his 
account one year after being forced to resign after conflicts with civil 
servants in his department (Glastra van Loon 1976). In his memoirs he 
describes how, during his first encounter with the civil servants respon-
sible for immigration, he put forward his position on family migration 
policies which, among other things, would enable unmarried foreign-
ers, whether heterosexual or homosexual, to stay in the Netherlands as 

164	
Sarah van Walsum, Guno Jones & Susan Legêne
the partner of a Dutch citizen. That statement, he writes, caused a con-
siderable stir in the department, which is understandable given that, 
until then, non-marital sex had been a grounds for withdrawing resi-
dence rights, not granting them.
Glastra van Loon went further than proposing that extra-marital sex 
(whether heterosexual or homosexual) should no longer lead to loss of 
residence rights and deportation. His intention was that it should serve 
as acceptable grounds for admission. Bonjour’s (2009: 121) sources 
indicate that the civil servants of the immigration department accepted 
this proposal, but with some reservation. Dutch case law indicates 
that the change in policy was indeed implemented, but in a restric-
tive fashion. Residence permits were refused to applicants who could 
not meet income requirements.12 In effect, this meant that they could 
only reside with their non-marital partner if they were in possession 
of a work permit. By then however, given rising unemployment, work 
permits were generally being refused to foreign workers who had not 
been officially recruited. As a result, the right to admission on the basis 
of a non-marital relationship remained illusionary. By contrast, foreign 
men married to Dutch women were granted work permits so that they 
could live up to their responsibilities as breadwinners.13 In a decision 
of 7 July 1975, the Dutch Council of State advised that since foreigners 
could be admitted on the grounds of either a marital or a non-marital 
relationship with a Dutch woman, they should also be equally entitled 
to a work permit allowing them to fulfil their duties as a breadwinner, 
regardless of whether they had been officially recruited.14 The case law 
referred to above refers only to foreign men living together with Dutch 
women. The lack of published case law concerning the reverse situa-
tion (i.e., a foreign woman living together with a Dutch man), suggests 
these cases were either less frequent or that foreign women experienced 
fewer problems in acquiring a residence permit solely on the grounds 
of their relationship with a Dutch man.
A further indication of the reluctance to implement this new policy, 
is the fact that an official letter presenting it to the head of the Dutch 
Immigration Department was only posted on the date of the above 
quoted decision by the Dutch Council of State, two years after Glastra 
van Loon had announced it, and after he had already left the Minis-
try. Furthermore, the letter only refers to the unmarried partners of 
Dutch citizens, not to those of legally resident foreign nationals, while 
the above quoted case law suggests that the new policy was only being 
applied to the partners of Dutch women. In this light, it is understand-
able that the Surinamese delegates negotiating the terms of the seces-
sion treaties were not convinced that the existing Dutch policies allow-

belonging and membership	
165
ing for the admission of foreigners on the grounds of a non-marital 
relationship would suffice to meet the needs of the future citizens of 
Suriname, and insisted on the statutory norms which were, in the end, 
granted (Bonjour 2009: 131).
Following the secession treaties with Suriname, Dutch family migra-
tion policies were modified in 1978 to allow for the admission of the 
non-marital partners of persons with refugee status15 and in 1980 to 
allow for the admission of the non-marital partners of migrants with 
permanent residence status.16 It is not evident, however, that these 
reforms were solely prompted by increasingly progressive family norms 
in the Netherlands, rather than by the relative openness, characteristic 
of this period, to the normative pluralism that international and post-
colonial immigration implied and also needed in order to work out in a 
proper way. The reverse could equally be argued, namely, that the open-
ness to normative pluralism in the era of decolonisation helped achieve 
reform in Dutch family law.
Challenging the institution of marriage in the context  
of multiculturalism
Thus, in the mid 1970s and nearly ten years before the Netherlands 
launched its ethnic minorities policy, Dutch politicians and policymak-
ers had accepted the assumption that opening the Netherlands to family 
migrants from the so-called developing countries, meant opening Dutch 
society to normative pluralism. As Bonjour (2009) rightly observes, the 
1960s and 1970s also marked a period of cultural revolution in the Neth-
erlands. The dominance of religious institutions over family life came to 
be hotly contested. There was no new normative consensus concerning 
the merits of the ‘permissive society’, but Dutch family norms in this pe-
riod were contested. Once the religious institutions in the Netherlands 
started to loosen their grip on family norms, a Pandora’s Box of conflict-
ing interests and desires opened. After decades of religious tutelage and 
sectarianism, there was a strong thirst for personal autonomy and nor-
mative freedom. Adolescents sought sexual autonomy and release from 
parental control; women sought freedom from male dominance and a 
larger say over the upbringing of their children; men sought more sexual 
freedom and release from the lifelong responsibility of having to pro-
vide financial support for dependent family members. Adolescents and 
women claimed the right to independent shelter and financial security; 
men insisted on maintaining ties with their children, regardless of the 
state of their relationship with the mother (Van Walsum 2008: 25-67).

166	
Sarah van Walsum, Guno Jones & Susan Legêne
Against this background of contestation, excluding migrants on the 
grounds that they did not conform to dominant Dutch norms became 
problematic. Next to an increased openness to normative pluralism 
outside of the Netherlands, there was therefore also a growing hesita-
tion – embarrassment even – in applying Christian morality as a mech-
anism of inclusion and exclusion. Ringeling (1978: 127), for example, 
observes that, shortly before the programme allowing for the repatria-
tion of ‘socially Dutch’ Indonesians ended in 1963, immigration offi-
cials no longer followed social workers’ recommendations to exclude 
candidates on the grounds of co-habitation or promiscuity. And, as 
mentioned earlier, by the early 1970s legally resident migrants were no 
longer threatened with loss of status and deportation after having been 
involved in an extra-marital relationship.
Contrary to Bonjour’s (2009) argument, however, non-marital rela-
tions were still far from entrenched in Dutch law. Against the back-
ground of moral ferment, the major political parties in the Netherlands 
at the time – the Christian Democrats rooted in the confessional poli-
tics of the past, and the Dutch Labour Party under the leadership of 
Den Uyl – persisted until well into the 1980s in staunchly defending the 
institution of the family as the keystone of Dutch society. For the Chris-
tian Democrats, the family formed the source of altruism that fuelled 
civil society; for the socialists the family served as a metaphor for 
national solidarity (Bussemaker 1993: 134). It would take nearly three 
decades for the dust to settle and a new consensus to be reached on the 
issue of family norms.
While successive Dutch cabinets continued to promote the institu-
tion of marriage, its libertarian opponents rallied forces to claim rights 
for alternative forms of family life. Interestingly, in pleading their case 
for regulating co-habitation and other alternatives to marriage, lawyers 
referred to both the changes taking place in Dutch migration law and 
the normative pluralism that migration implied. The acceptance, in the 
1970s, of the validity of alternative normative systems – however lim-
ited and brief it may have been – added new impulses to campaigns for 
the reform of Dutch family law.
In 1974, the Dutch civil lawyer A.M. van de Wiel compiled an inven-
tory of Dutch laws and policies that took co-habitation into account. 
These were very few. The still unpublished migration law policy change 
initiated in 1973 by Glastra van Loon was one of only two policy meas-
ures effective on a national level that granted a positive claim on the 
basis of co-habitation. The few other rules found all related to dimin-
ished claims to alimony or welfare benefits, on the grounds of co-
habitation (Van de Wiel 1974). In response, J.M. Polak, law professor 

belonging and membership	
167
and later a member of the Dutch Council of State (Raad van State), 
called for more regulation, although he conceded that the Nether-
lands was a country ‘with a rich assortment of lifestyles and convic-
tions’, which public authorities would have to take into account (Polak 
1974). As demands for change increased, Van de Wiel again provided 
an overview of the existing regulations, now to inform debate on pos-
sible reform. Interestingly, his conclusion – based largely on case law 
on family migration – was that no regulation of non-marital relations 
could do justice to the variety of conjugal arrangements that this con-
cept covered. Rather than regulate an alternative to marriage, he rec-
ommended a more flexible regulation of marriage itself: ‘It will become 
increasingly clear that the pattern of human relationships is too varied 
to be caught in a single legal concept’ (Van de Wiel 1979: 116).
Five years later, the authoritative Dutch legal journal Het Nederlands 
Juristenblad (njb), published a manifesto against the legal institution of 
marriage, written by Professor H. van Maarseveen and two other law-
yers: D. Verlegh and S. Korthuis (Verlegh, Van Maarseveen & Korthuis 
1984). By then, the Dutch Constitution had been thoroughly revised, 
including the non-discrimination clause in Article 1. In their mani-
festo, the three authors expressed their objections to the constrictions 
imposed by the Dutch state, through the institution of marriage, upon 
an individual’s private affairs. They pointed to the vast variety of con-
ceivable conjugal relations: heterosexual, homosexual, bisexual or non-
sexual; monogamous, bigamous, polygamous; temporary or perma-
nent or somewhere in between; living together or living apart. Because 
a broad array of legal arrangements, from tax benefits to housing per-
mits to social security took marriage as their point of reference, people 
were more or less forced, in their eyes, to choose this particular form 
of family life. The authors drew parallels between normative pluralism 
in the intimate sphere and religious freedom and cultural pluralism in 
general, pointing out that the Netherlands had become a multicultural 
society in which a variety of family norms had found a home. By then, 
Dutch government had launched an ethnic minorities policy indeed, 
grounded in the principle of cultural diversity (see Schrover in this vol-
ume). Verlegh, Van Maarseveen and Korthuis argued that Dutch civil 
law, in maintaining the institution of heterosexual and monogamous 
marriage, privileged the normative order of one religion (Christian-
ity) over others, thus violating fundamental principles of freedom of 
religion, freedom of conscience, privacy and non-discrimination. They 
warned, ‘The government will run into problems since ethnic minori-
ties can now claim acknowledgement of alternative conjugal arrange-
ments on religious grounds’ (Verlegh, Van Maarseveen & Korthuis 

168	
Sarah van Walsum, Guno Jones & Susan Legêne
1984: 859). The authors were apparently unaware of the fact that in 
another part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands, Suriname, this had 
already been the case since the 1950s.
Conclusion: Changing family law and contemporary debates  
on immigration policies with respect to Muslims
In the fall of 2009, two decades after Abdellah Berrehab contributed to 
a further reform of Dutch family law by claiming his right to family life 
with his daughter, even though he did not adhere to the dominant fam-
ily norms of the time, a Dutch policy document on family migration 
was published. That document proposed preventing any cross-border 
form of conjugality that fell short of what was explicitly advanced as the 
official Dutch norm, based on ‘the mutually and equally shared respon-
sibility of partners for each other and for their children’:
The Dutch legal order does not allow for violent forms of parenting, 
nor for polygamy or marriages contracted under force. All couples 
are treated equally, regardless of whether or not they are composed of 
persons of the same or different sexes.17
	
Concerning cross-border unions, this policy document warned that 
these may be ‘concluded under force, and this is unacceptable’:
A forced marriage can indicate honour-related violence; polygamy 
and marriages between cousins can, in turn, indicate an involuntary 
union or fraud. Estimates are that roughly 25% of people in the Neth-
erlands of Turkish and Moroccan origin marries within the family. 
Not only are the children of migrants in the Netherlands being pres-
sured into marrying a cousin from their country of origin so as to help 
him or her acquire a residence permit; such marriages also result in 
spouses being forced into providing care to the extended family.
	
Consequently, any request for family reunification that ‘does not 
concern an already long established relationship, but rather appears to 
be the result of “matchmaking”, with or without the consent of those 
involved (such as arranged child marriages), should be critically exam-
ined by the state. This requires more than controlling for fraudulent 
marriages.’18
The recommended measures not only target the migrating partners 
or spouses (depicted as ‘dependent and uneducated women’), but also 

belonging and membership	
169
the partner or spouse in the Netherlands who, remarkably, is consist-
ently assumed to be heterosexual, male and – generally – of ‘non-West-
ern’ origin. To the extent that this document acknowledges that men of 
ethnically Dutch origin also engage in relationships with ‘non-Western’ 
women, it assumes they do so because they want a woman who is less 
emancipated, more compliant, subservient and ‘willing to provide sex-
ual services’ than a woman raised in the Netherlands. As such, these 
men are accused of displaying an attitude that ‘does not coincide with 
the Dutch premise of equality within marriage’. Implicitly, like their 
‘non-Western’ countrymen, they are disqualified as proper Dutch citi-
zens.
In the economic and political climate of the first decade of the 21st 
century, norms concerning family relations and sexuality are again 
being mobilised to physically exclude specific categories of migrants 
from legal residence within Dutch territory, while symbolically exclud-
ing specific categories among the legally resident population (including 
Dutch nationals) from substantive citizenship. Ideas about what con-
stitutes family life travel between countries and have travelled between 
colonies and metropolis. The reforms leading to the current codifica-
tion of family law in the Netherlands were preceded by an openness to 
a normative pluralism. This included forms of family life that, at the 
time, were more common and more widely accepted and legally framed 
in late colonial societies now referred to as ‘non-Western’ or develop-
ing countries. Immigrants from the Dutch East Indies with its huge 
Muslim population, and from Suriname, with its complex history of 
legal pluralism after 1936, rooted in a long history of forced immigra-
tion and labour, inspired struggles to legitimate other than dominant 
forms of (nuclear) family life. Through treaty negotiations or litigation, 
those with ‘non-Western’ backgrounds were actively involved in real-
ising these normative changes. Ironically, they (whether as members 
of other Muslim populations, or of postcolonial immigrant communi-
ties), were portrayed in official documents as a threat to the new nor-
mative order in the Netherlands, which in different roles they them-
selves helped to create.
Conservative political and policy rhetoric suggests that emancipa-
tion is a one-way street, starting in ‘the West’ and leading to ‘the rest’. 
Our analysis suggests that the emancipatory changes that occurred in 
Dutch family law during the second half of the 20th century arose from 
cross-border and cross-cultural interaction between ‘the West’ and 
‘the rest’, based on a dynamic colonial relationship that reaches back 
into the 19th century. Taking ‘the West’ seriously, implies the need for 
a European comparative approach to the impact of the various colo-

170	
Sarah van Walsum, Guno Jones & Susan Legêne
nial citizenship regimes on postcolonial immigration policies, both 
national and at a European level. We see more when we approach the 
road to emancipation, which is implicitly connected to the intention 
of immigrants to apply for citizenship in Europe, as a two-way street, 
or, maybe even a roundabout, if we apply this metaphor to the cross-
overs between Indonesia, Suriname and the Netherlands in the colonial 
era and in the aftermath of decolonisation. The Dutch and their immi-
grants have walked that road before. We propose to explore it again.
Notes
1	 Wet Inburgering Buitenland, Staatsblad 2006: 26 & 75. This legislation was made 
effective as of 15 March 2006.
2	 Proceedings Lower House session 2004-2005, 29 700, no. 6: 46-47. These and 
other quotes from Dutch sources have been translated by the authors of this chap-
ter.
3	 There is at present in the Netherlands, no research programme that focuses on 
legal instruments against racism.
4	 Proceedings Lower House, session 1892-1893: 156-158.
5	 Unless otherwise indicated, the cases quoted have been published in the annual 
overview of Dutch migration case law, Rechtspraak Vreemdelingenrecht (rv).
6	 We thank the organisers of the Amsterdam conference on Dutch 20th century 
history Uitsluitend emancipatie (Excusively emancipation, 14-15 October 2011) for 
the opportunity to discuss drafts of this chapter in a panel session on decolonisa-
tion and migration.
7	 Inspired by postcolonial theory, we consciously opt for the term ‘enslaved’ instead 
of ‘slaves’, since the latter term (slaves) naturalises the condition and the identity 
of the people concerned, whereas the former (enslaved) represents their condi-
tion as a result of colonial policy.
8	 Christian Hindustani representatives, like Clemens Biswamitre, opposed the pol-
icies of Kielstra as well.
9	 Proceedings Lower House, session 1973-1974, 10 503, no. 9-10: 16.
10	 	Proceedings Lower House, session 1973-1974, 10 503, no. 9-10: 16.
11	 kb 4 March 1970, no. 99, rv 1970/2.
12	 kb 30 August 1974 no. 65, rv 1974/19; kb 29 March 1974 no. 83, rv 1974/7.
13	 kb 13 August 1974, rv 1974/18.
14	 kb 7 July 1975, no. 45, rv 1975: 18.
15	 Comment by Rb Alkmaar 18 July 1978, rv 1978/57.
16	 Comment by abrvs 2 March 1981, rv 1981/11.
17	 Proceedings Lower House, session 2009-2010, 32 175, no. 1: 6.
18	 Proceedings Lower House, session 2009-2010, 32 175, no. 1: 7-8.

belonging and membership	
171
References
Adema, W.H. & H. Freezer (eds) (1975), Rechtwijzer voor de vrouw. Utrecht: A.W. 
Bruna & Zoon.
Ahmad Ali, H. (1979), Een handleiding over toelating – verblijf – vestiging van Su-
rinaamse staatsburgers in Nederland: De hoofdregels van de Toescheidingsover-
eenkomst nationaliteiten; afschaffing visumplicht tussen Suriname en de Benelux. 
Utrecht: Stichting Landelijke Federatie van Welzijnsorganisaties voor Surinamers.
Balibar, E. (2004), We, the people of Europe? Reflections on transnational citizenship. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Bibo, A. (2011), ‘Een tijd van spijt: Een verkenning van de postkoloniale geschiedenis, 
intersectionele verhoudingen en categorieën en criteria van het “spijtoptantenbe-
leid” in Nederland (1957-1965)’. Master’s thesis, vu University Amsterdam.
Bonjour, S. (2009), Grens en gezin: Beleidsvorming inzake gezinsmigratie in Nederland, 
1955-2005. Amsterdam: Aksant.
Bosma, U. (2009), Terug uit de koloniën: Zestig jaar postkoloniale migranten en hun 
organisaties. Amsterdam: Bert Bakker.
Buiskool, J.A.E. (1954), De staatsinstellingen van Suriname in de hoofdzaken mede 
vergeleken met die van Nederland en de Nederlandse Antillen. The Hague: Martinus 
Nijhoff.
Bussemaker, J. (1993), Betwiste zelfstandigheid: Individualisering, sekse en verzorgings-
staat. Amsterdam: Socialistiese Uitgeverij Amsterdam.
Cooper, F. (2005), Colonialism in question: Theory, knowledge, history. Berkeley, Los 
Angeles, London: University of California Press.
Cribb, R. (2010), ‘Pluralism and Dutch colonial policy in Indonesia’. Paper prepared 
for the 21st International Congress of Historical Sciences, Amsterdam, 22-28 
August.
De Hart, B. (2003), Onbezonnen vrouwen: Gemengde relaties in het nationaliteitsrecht 
en het vreemdelingenrecht. Amsterdam: Aksant.
De Vries, K.M. (2012), ‘The Dutch act on integration abroad: A case of racial or eth-
nic discrimination?’, in S. Morano-Foadi & M. Malena (eds), Integration for third 
country nationals in the eu: The challenge of equality, pp. 324-345. Cheltenham: 
Edward Elgar.
De Vries, K.M. (2011), Integration at the border: The Dutch act on integration abroad 
in relation to international immigration law. PhD dissertation. vu University 
Amsterdam.
Glastra van Loon, J.F. (1976), Kanalen graven. Baarn: In den Toren.
Groenendijk, K. (2011), ‘Pre-departure integration strategies in the European Union: 
Integration or immigration policy?’, European Journal of Migration and Law 13 
(1): 1-30.
Heijs, E. (1994), ‘De Nederlandse nationaliteit van Indische Nederlanders: Een histo-
rische terugblik’, in W. Willems & L. Lucassen (eds), Het onbekende vaderland: De 
repatriëring van Indische Nederlanders, pp. 58-66. The Hague: sdu.
Heijs, E. (1991), ‘Nederlanderschap in de Nederlandse koloniën: Regulering van im-
migratie vanuit de koloniën door nationaliteitsbeleid in Nederland’, Recht der 
Werkelijkheid 12 (2): 21-42.

172	
Sarah van Walsum, Guno Jones & Susan Legêne
Holtrust, N. (1993), Aan moeders knie: De juridische afstammingsrelatie tussen moeder 
en kind. Nijmegen: Ars Aequi Libri.
Human Rights Watch (2008), The Netherlands: Discrimination in the name of Integra-
tion. New York: Human Rights Watch.
Jones, G. (2007), Tussen onderdanen, rijksgenoten en Nederlanders: Nederlandse poli-
tici over burgers uit Oost & West en Nederland 1945-2005. Amsterdam: Rozenberg 
Publishers. 
Kennedy, J.C. (1995), Nieuw Babylon in aanbouw: Nederland in de jaren zestig. Am-
sterdam & Meppel: Boom.
Legêne, S. (2011), ‘Waar blijft de kritiek? Canon tussen politiek, wetenschap en cul-
tuur’, in M. Grever, I. de Haan, D. Hondius & S. Legêne (eds), Grenzeloze gelijkheid: 
Historische vertogen over cultuurverschil, pp. 238-254. Amsterdam: Bert Bakker. 
Loenen, T. (2003), ‘Zorg(e)loze toekomst voor de vrouw in het familierecht’, Nemesis 
5/6: 115-122.
Marshall, E. (2003), Ontstaan en ontwikkeling van het Surinaams nationalisme: Natie-
vorming als opgave. Delft: Eburon.
Oedayrajsingh Varma, E.G. & H.A. Ahmad Ali (1989), Surinaams familierecht. 
Utrecht: Nederlands Centrum Buitenlanders.
Polak, J.M. (1974), ‘Een administratiefrechtelijke benadering van het huwelijk en 
andere twee-relaties,’ in M. Beuckens-Vries et al. (eds), Twee mensen en het recht, 
pp. 79-85. Zwolle: Tjeenk Willink.
Ramsoedh, H. (1995), ‘De Nederlandse assimilatiepolitiek in Suriname tussen 1863 en 
1945’, in L. Gobardhan, M. Hassankhan & J. Egger (eds), De erfenis van de slavernij, 
pp. 114-133. Paramaribo: Anton de Kom Universiteit.
Reurs, M. & M. Stronks (2011), Pioniers in het vreemdelingenrecht. The Hague/Utrecht: 
sdu/forum.
Ringeling, A.B. (1978), Beleidsvrijheid van ambtenaren: Het spijtoptantenprobleem als 
illustratie van de activiteiten van ambtenaren bij de uitvoering van beleid. Alphen 
aan de Rijn: Samson.
Schuster, J. (1999), Poortwachters over immigranten: Het debat over immigratie in het 
naoorlogse Groot-Britannië en Nederland. Amsterdam: Het Spinhuis.
Somers, J.A. (2005), Nederlands-Indië: Staatkundige ontwikkelingen binnen een kolo-
niale relatie. Zutphen: Walburg Pers.
Stoler, A.L. (2011), ‘Colonial aphasia: Race and disabled histories in France’, Public 
Culture 23 (1): 121-157.
Stoler, A.L. (1995), Race and the education of desire: Foucault’s history of sexuality and 
the colonial order of things. Durham: Duke University Press.
Stuurman, S. (2010), De uitvinding van de mensheid: Korte wereldgeschiedenis van het 
denken over gelijkheid en cultuurverschil. Amsterdam: Bert Bakker.
Swart, A.H.J. (1978), De toelating en uitzetting van vreemdelingen. Deventer: Kluwer.
Terlouw, A. (2005), ‘Discriminatie op grond van nationaliteit: Algemene aanbeve-
ling 30 van het Committee on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination en haar 
betekenis voor Nederland’, njcm Bulletin 30 (1): 119-127.
Tinnemans, W. (1994), Een gouden armband: Een geschiedenis van Mediterrane im-
migranten in Nederland (1945-1994). Utrecht: Nederlands Centrum Buitenlanders.

belonging and membership	
173
Van Bemmelen, S.T. (2012), Good customs, bad customs in North Sumatra: Toba 
Batak, missionaries and colonial officials negotiate the patrilineal order (1861-1942). 
PhD dissertation, vu University Amsterdam.
Van Dam, P. (2011), Staat van verzuiling: Over een Nederlandse mythe. Amsterdam: 
Wereldbibliotheek.
Van Lier, R. (1977), Samenleving in een grensgebied: Een sociaal-historische studie van 
Suriname. Amsterdam: S. Emmering.
Van de Wiel, A.M. (1974), Samenleven buiten huwelijk: Over het juridisch lot van con-
cubine en concubijn in binnen- en buitenland. Deventer: Kluwer.
Van de Wiel, A.M. (1979), ‘De relatie in het recht – enkele actualia’, njb 54 (6): 109-116.
Van Walsum, S.K. (2008), The family and the nation: Dutch family migration policies in 
the context of changing family norms. Newcastle upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars 
Publishing.
Van Walsum, S.K. (2000), De schaduw van de grens: Het Nederlandse vreemdelin-
genrecht en de sociale zekerheid van Javaanse Surinamers. Gouda: Gouda Quint.
Verlegh, D., H. van Maarseveen & S. Korthuis (1984), ‘Het huwelijk de rechtsorde uit’, 
njb 59 (28): 857-861.
Verton, P.C. (1971), ‘Vreemdelingenbeleid op de weegschaal: deel 2’. Intermediair 45.
Vuysje, H. (1997), Correct: Weldenkend Nederland in de jaren zestig. Amsterdam: 
Contact.
Walaardt, T. (2012), Geruisloos inwilligen: Argumentatie en speelruimte in de Neder-
landse asielprocedure, 1945-1994. Hilversum: Verloren.
Wekker, G. (2001), ‘Of mimic men and unruly women: Family, sexuality and gender’, 
in R. Hoefte & P. Meel (eds), Twentieth century Suriname: Continuities and discon-
tinuities in a new world society, pp. 174-197. Leiden: kitlv Press.
Willems, W. (2001), De uittocht uit Indië 1945-1995. Amsterdam: Bert Bakker.
Willemsen, G. (1988), ‘Sociaal-democratie, kolonialisme en dekolonisatie: Suriname 
1900-1975’, in M. Hisschemöller (ed.), Een bleek bolwerk: Racisme en politieke stra-
tegie, pp. 119-136. Amsterdam: Pegasus.


7  Blood matters
Sarkozy’s immigration policies and their gendered impact
Catherine Raissiguier
In some countries, like Senegal, Ivory Coast, the two Congos, Togo, Madagascar 
and the Comoro Islands, 30% to 80% of family documents are fraudulent.
Dans certains pays, comme le Sénégal, la Côte d’Ivoire, les deux Congo, le Togo, 
Madagascar ou les Comores, de 30 % à 80% des actes d’états civils sont frauduleux.1
– Adrien Gouteyron
Introduction
The quote that opens this chapter is from a Senate report published in 
June 2007. Part of a larger study on the administration of visa applica-
tions in French consulates, the report urges consulate agents to focus on 
the review of visa applications, outsourcing non-essential tasks to the 
private sector (en externalisant au secteur privé les tâches annexes). It 
also recommends that a common work culture be promoted across the 
various agencies in charge of controlling immigration in France. The 
average processing cost for a visa application is €35, concludes Goutey-
ron, while the average cost for the deportation of an illegal immigrant 
can reach €1,800. By suggesting that a streamlined and more efficient 
processing of visa applications would result in a higher rejection rate 
and savings in the long term, the report clearly places the management 
of visa applications within the broad politics of immigration control 
urged by the Sarkozy administration. Nicolas Sarkozy campaigned on 
a political platform that called for the tightening of immigration poli-
cies and promotion of ‘chosen’ migration (immigration choisie), which 
favours economic migration over family reunification. The 2007 immi-
gration law made good on both promises.
The passage above was drawn from a section of the report titled 
‘Document Fraud: An Endemic Problem’ (La fraude documentaire, 
un phénomène endémique) and has been widely quoted to justify and 
legitimise the use of genetic testing in the context of immigration. By 

176	
Catherine Raissiguier
documenting that some countries are prone to produce fraudulent and 
unreliable civil documents – in this case, African countries that were 
part of France’s former colonial empire – Gouteyron provided the argu-
ment that would enable French legislators to target certain immigrants 
and ‘offer’ them differential treatment in the visa application process.
This chapter analyses the 2007 immigration law and its introduc-
tion of dna testing as a move toward the re-inscription of ‘blood’ and 
‘bloodlines’ into discussions of national belonging in France. This move 
is neither new nor exceptional within the French republican tradi-
tion. However, it is troubling at a time of intensified anti-immigrant 
sentiment and the normalisation of radical right nationalist agendas 
throughout Europe. For this reason, it is worthy of closer scrutiny. 
This chapter’s analysis of the 2007 law brings to light striking features 
of French politics of immigration since the mid-1970s. These features 
include the contestation of jus soli as a determinant of national belong-
ing and inclusion and the particular importance given to families and 
familial linkages in accessing rights of entry and sojourn in France. 
Both should not simply be seen as new developments threatening a 
generous and inclusive French republican tradition in matters of immi-
grants’ rights. Instead, they should be understood as a re-articulation of 
existing exclusionary threads within that tradition. Rather than view-
ing these features as aberrations within the French Republic, this chap-
ter presents them as troubling elements that have, in fact, existed within 
that tradition since its inception (Raissiguier 2010).
The goal of this chapter is threefold. First, it places the 2007 law 
within the context of a growing contestation, since the mid-1980s, of 
the principle of jus soli (citizenship determined by place of birth). It 
then looks at the law’s dna provision in relation to the tightening of 
family reunification procedures during the same period. Finally, by 
looking at some of the narratives (both textual and visual) that emerged 
around the law, a brief discussion is provided of changing meanings, in 
France, of the notions of family and familial linkages.
Materials and methods
The investigation presented here is based on close readings of legal, po-
litical and cultural discourses that preceded and accompanied the in-
troduction of dna testing for immigration vetting purposes in France. 
More specifically, narratives are analysed for their gendered meanings 
and for the ways in which they intersect with discursive processes of ra-
cialisation and othering. The argument put forward is that the gradual 

blood matters	
177
tightening of immigration policies not only adds to the vulnerability of 
immigrant women and the children who depend on them, but it also 
advances deployment of racialised thinking in France. In the process, 
the radical potential of French republican ideals may become compro-
mised through the discursive and material construction and treatment 
of subjects who only have access to sub-standard rights and who expe-
rience various forms of discrimination on a daily basis.
Jus soli, dna and the question of origins
This chapter takes issue with political (and scholarly) narratives that 
expound and promote the idea of a French (republican) exception, in 
which France – for reasons of history, ideology, demography and mili-
tary ambition – developed a generous and egalitarian tradition of immi-
grants’ rights and national membership. Such narratives point out that 
the French nation has constructed itself around a foundational ideal 
that privileges political will, cultural unity and universalism. ‘One be-
comes French through the learning of a language, through the learning 
of a culture, through the will to participate in the economic and political 
life’ (Schnapper 1991: 63). Equipped with a rather liberal national legisla-
tion, a tight linkage between nationality and citizenship, and a strongly 
assimilationist culture, France managed to successfully take foreigners 
and their children into the fold. Analysts emphasising the unique power 
of inclusion of ‘the French model’ argue that secular institutions such as 
schools, the military, employment and workers’ unions have functioned 
(at least until recently) as the socialising and assimilating tools for for-
mer groups of foreigners and their children (Schnapper 1989: 99-109). 
Periodic outbursts of violence and the erosion of regional and ethnic 
traditions are necessary evils, which must be accepted to reap the ben-
efits of integration, particularly social mobility and meritocracy. The 
automatic link between nationality and citizenship (much touted as the 
hallmark of the French republican tradition), however, was not present 
for French women until 1944 and never in place for France’s colonial 
subjects.2 Both groups, in fact, were nationals without citizenship.
Other narratives tell a slightly more nuanced story in which French 
nationality has been established since the 17th century around a com-
plex set of criteria: place of birth (jus soli), bloodline (jus sanguinis), 
marital status and duration of residence within the national bounda-
ries (Weil 1996). Prior to the French Revolution, jus soli was the domi-
nant criterion for acquisition of French nationality, and it has remained 
so for most of France’s modern history (Brubaker 1993; Weil 1996). 

178	
Catherine Raissiguier
Nationality laws were reformed in 1851, 1889 and 1927 to automatically 
incorporate ‘third generation’ and then ‘second generation’ immigrants 
into the nation and to ease processes of naturalisation. These measures 
were implemented to make long-term foreign residents accountable 
to the French state and to deter the emergence of national separatist 
activities among immigrant communities (Brubaker 1993; Weil 1996). 
They were also intended to augment the numbers of French workers 
and nationals and to increase the pool of army recruits (Brubaker 1993). 
Inclusion of foreign populations, via ‘generous’ nationality and natu-
ralisation laws, was not accomplished, however, without resistance, and 
political resentment was often expressed through xenophobic and anti-
immigration rhetoric. The law of 1889, for instance, was supported by 
representatives of French industry, with a vital need for workers, by 
elected officials from industrial areas seeking to stop foreign competi-
tion, and by those in the military who wanted to rebuild a powerful 
army. Those opposing the change were the defenders of the French race 
and identity, who were heavily recruited from the French aristocracy.
Xenophobic and anti-immigrant feelings also emerged at the turn 
of the century, in the inter-war period, and in the more recent con-
text of the rise of the National Front Party.3 Each time, ideologues and 
politicians questioned the ability of some foreigners and their children 
to assimilate into French culture. Each time they challenged processes 
that would turn them into French citizens (Schor 1985; Krulic 1988). 
These sentiments affected Jews at the end of the 19th century, when 
immigration from Eastern Europe nearly doubled their numbers in 
France. They targeted Belgians, Italians and Poles in the 1880s and in 
the 1930s, when these immigrant groups were perceived as a threat 
to the full employment of French nationals. More recently they have 
focused on North and sub-Saharan Africans in the context of postco-
lonial immigration, global restructuring and the formation of Europe.
Weil (1996) traces the development of French immigration politics 
to the 1930s, arguing that, with the exception of the Vichy government 
and the National Front Party today, the French have always refused to 
accept the logic of a hierarchy of ethnicities. Weil also suggests, how-
ever, that there have been great discrepancies between l’état de droit 
(the laws of the state) and l’état acteur (the practices of the state). Even 
though Weil sees basic egalitarian (republican) principles underlying 
the French politics of immigration, he cannot but note that the actual 
means of implementing these principles are often lacking. As a result, 
in highly charged political contexts, the effects of French immigration 
laws rarely meet their stated objectives. Instead, they often produce 
exclusionary practices and differential treatments.

blood matters	
179
Based on a comparative analysis of France and Germany, Brubaker 
(1992, 1993) stresses the historico-political character of the French 
notion of citizenship and nationality. Brubaker does acknowledge, 
however, the existence of a vital counter-hegemonic ethno-cultural dis-
course at the turn of the century, in the inter-war period, and since 
the mid-1980s. He argues that this ethno-cultural understanding of the 
nation has never, with the exception of the Vichy regime, determined 
the French politics of citizenship (Brubaker 1993: 23).
Thus, the French Republic has had elements of exclusion based on 
ethnicity within its relatively generous and liberal understanding of 
nation and nationality. These exclusionary elements, according to the 
French historian Noiriel, tend to be de-emphasised because ‘the French 
model’ is traditionally contrast to the German one and found ‘gener-
ous’ in comparison. Noiriel (1991) argues that, since the first major 
law on nationality in 1889, there has always been, in France, a politi-
cal current willing to deny certain actors the right to acquire French 
citizenship: ‘Since Michelet, in the face of what has often been said, the 
republican reflection on nationality has therefore been haunted by the 
question of origins.’4 The 1993 reform of the nationality code with the 
Méhaignerie Act, inscribes itself and can only be understood in rela-
tion to that current. The Méhaignerie Act, among other things, stipu-
lated that children born in France of foreign parents had to request 
French nationality instead of accessing it automatically through jus 
soli.5 The Méhaignerie Act must be seen as the result of a decade-long 
political campaign launched by the extreme right (but from early on 
embraced by the republican right). It challenged, starting in the mid-
1980s, the ease with which one could become French and contested the 
precedence of jus soli in nationality law (Brubaker 1997; Feldblum 1999; 
Groupe d’Information 2000; Weil 2002).
The contention here is that the immigration law of 2007, like the 
Méhaignerie Act of 1993, must be placed in relation to an ethno-cul-
tural current within the French republican tradition. Indeed, with its 
vote on 23 October 2007, the French Parliament codified genetic test-
ing for immigration vetting purposes into law. The law, promulgated 
on 20 November 2007, is often referred to as the Hortefeux law. Brice 
­Hortefeux was the Minister of Immigration in the Sarkozy government. 
The Senate vote was 185 yes, and 136 no, and in the National Assem-
bly 282 yes and 235 no. Socialists voted unanimously against the bill. 
Under the Hortefeux law, dna tests may be used by immigration can-
didates to prove a blood relation with a French person or a legal resi-
dent when applying for a long-term visa (over three months) under 
the legal provision of family reunification. Immigration visas for family 

180	
Catherine Raissiguier
reunifications involving children are rather few: 23,000 visas per year 
are granted for family reunification (9,000 of those go to children). 
Popular opinion was divided on the issue. A poll published in Octo-
ber in Le Parisien indicated that 49% of those surveyed supported the 
dna measure compared to 43% who considered it to be ‘contrary to the 
values of the Republic’.6 Opposition to the law, especially its dna test-
ing amendment, has been strong among scientists, scholars and civil 
society. More than 300,000 persons, of all political sensibilities, signed 
the petition ‘Hands off my dna’ (Touche pas à mon adn).7 (The slogan 
paraphrases that of the 1984 French anti-racism ngo called ‘sos Rac-
ism’, Touche pas à mon pote or ‘Hands off my pal’.) Thousands of others 
expressed their outrage and opposition to the bill in large demonstra-
tions on 20 October 2007. Even members of the Sarkozy government, 
former French ministers from across the French political spectrum, 
and African leaders voiced their concern about the Hortefeux immi-
gration law. Fadela Amara, who became Secretary of State in the Min-
istry of Urban Affairs in 2007, called the dna amendment ‘disgusting’ 
and threatened to resign over it. Bernard Kouchner, foreign minister 
under Sarkozy, also expressed concerns. Edouard Balladur, Jean-Pierre 
Raffarin and Dominique de Villepin – former prime ministers on the 
right – as well as Lionel Jospin, Pierre Mauroy, Michel Rocard and Lau-
rent Fabius – former prime ministers on the left – came out publicly 
against the amendment. Aimé Césaire, the poet, Alpha Oumar Konare, 
the president of the African Union, and Senegalese President Abdou-
laye Wade also spoke against the dna provision.
The National Assembly nonetheless adopted the law on 19 Septem-
ber 2007. It was then sent to be examined by the Senate. In response to 
mounting criticism against the bill, a bicameral commission – made 
up of seven representatives from the Senate and the Assembly (com-
mission mixte paritaire) – met and introduced modifications to the 
dna testing provision. The commission mandated that the dna tests 
should be voluntary and paid for by the French government (the origi-
nal amendment demanded that applicants pay for the tests); the blood 
relation should be checked only against the mother’s dna (this modifi-
cation was introduced to avoid unexpected revelations about the actual 
biological composition of the family); the need for the test should be 
authorised by a civil court; and informed consent should be mandatory 
from all concerned persons. Finally, the genetic testing provision in the 
new immigration law was to be implemented as a pilot to be revisited 
after 2009.
Following those modifications, the bill was voted into law in Octo-
ber 2007. The French Constitutional Council ruled that the Hortefeux 

blood matters	
181
law was in conformance with the French constitution. Several observ-
ers noted that the modifications diluted the major substantive pro-
visions of the bill. Despite the changes and the softening of its most 
radical elements, the Hortefeux law challenged both the equality and 
the human dignity principles that France claims to expound. Because 
dna testing was to be proposed only when documents were believed 
to have been forged and when consular agents doubted the validity of 
the documents produced, applicants from certain countries would be 
especially affected by the measure. As pointed out at the beginning of 
the chapter, Adrien Gouteryon’s report provided the rationalisation for 
this differential treatment of visa applicants. By maintaining the possi-
bility of genetic testing for one specific group of individuals (Africans), 
the Hortefeux law established a symbolic demarcation between French 
nationals and foreigners and between different immigrant groups. In 
October 2007, the National Consultative Ethics Committee declared 
that an ‘inscription in the law of a biological identification reserved 
only for foreigners’ stands ‘in contradiction to the spirit of French 
law’. In a context of increased anti-immigrant sentiment and height-
ened securitisation, such a symbolic ranking was feared to fuel exist-
ing racialised thinking and practices in France. Selective genetic testing 
wrote racialised discriminatory practices into French law in order to 
control immigration.8
La haute autorité de lutte contre les discriminations et pour l’éga-
lité (halde) – an independent administrative unit created by law in 
December 2004 to fight against discriminatory practices and promote 
equality in France – did find the Hortefeux law discriminatory. In addi-
tion, halde noted that several of its provisions violated international 
agreements signed by France. In particular, it declared the Hortefeux 
law in violation of the un Convention on the Rights of the Child.9 It also 
found that the law infringed on an individual’s right to privacy and was, 
therefore, a violation of the European Convention on Human Rights.
In September 2009, the Minister of Immigration, Eric Besson, 
declared that he would not sign the application decree for the Hort-
efeux law. Besson argued that the law could not be implemented by the 
French state for a variety of material and ethical reasons: ‘Our consu-
lates are not equipped to run these tests, therefore the procedure would 
have to take place outside’, he explained, underscoring the potential 
threats to the privacy of the individuals tested.10 For now, dna testing 
for the purpose of family reunification is no longer on the French hori-
zon. However, as indicated by recent debates about a French national 
identity and the place of Islamic scarves and burqas in France, the issues 
raised by the near adoption of the provision are still very much present.

182	
Catherine Raissiguier
dna testing, family reunification and gendered precarisation
The dna testing amendment was initially introduced by the Union for 
a Popular Movement (ump) deputy Thierry Mariani. ‘When serious 
doubt on the authenticity of the family relation’ has been raised, dip-
lomatic and consular agents can offer the ‘opportunity’ to the visa ap-
plicant to request the comparison at their own expense of ‘their genetic 
prints in order to verify the declared biological parentage’.11 Critics of 
the bill, and of the Mariani amendment in particular, argued that ge-
netic testing should not be used to verify family links. Parentage, they 
remind us, cannot be reduced to blood relations. Socialist opponents, 
in particular, argued that the bill sets a dangerous political precedent. 
By using genetics rather than human rights principles, the Hortefeux 
law, they argued, contradicts the very foundations of the French Re-
public by using blood as the determining factor of who gets to belong 
in France. ‘This law violates the fundamental principles of the Republic 
which do not define family and affiliation by biology’, said Socialist dep-
uty Arnaud Montebourg. Montebourg also warned that the bill would 
‘create very serious grounds for discrimination’ and bring France into 
a system of ‘biocontrol of individuals’ where ‘genetics will be used as a 
tool of the administrative police’.12
Opponents of the Hortefeux bill also pointed out that, in France, 
juridical parentage is not the same as biological relations. A heterosex-
ual married woman, for instance, may be inseminated with the sperm 
of an unrelated male donor, and that child will be considered her and 
her husband’s legal child. A child adopted by a heterosexual family is 
legally affiliated with the adoptive parents. Finally, the man who ‘rec-
ognises’ a child within a heterosexual family is not always the child’s 
biological father. Indeed, genetic research today clearly documents that 
declared (and hence juridical) parentage does not always coincide with 
biological lineage.13 As reported in the daily Le Monde newspaper:
In the past 20 years, advances in genetic research have allowed dem-
onstration that illegitimate children are far more numerous that once 
imagined. According to the scientific journal The Lancet, at least 2.7% 
of birth certificates are ‘false’, in that they do not match the child’s bio-
logical parents. Researchers who study genetic disease transmission 
across generations say they have to exclude 5% to 10% of their samples 
precisely because of such lineage disparities.14
	
France has forbidden open dna testing in part because of the 
porous quality of family borders and ‘lineage’. The proposed amend-

blood matters	
183
ment, hence, violates the French civil code, which forbids the use of 
genetic prints in establishing parentage unless requested by a magis-
trate. It also violates the provisions of a recent law on bioethics adopted 
in August 2004, which stipulates that identification by dna testing can 
be conducted only in the context of medical or scientific research. As 
originally proposed by Mariani, genetic testing for family reunification 
would have to be conducted under an exception (dérogation) to Article 
16 of the French Civil Code.15 It is interesting to note here that such legal 
restrictions in French law have generated a clandestine European mar-
ket for dna tests, with French residents using the internet to access dna 
tests in less restrictive countries (e.g., Switzerland, Belgium, Spain).
Brice Hortefeux and other supporters of the bill argue for the value 
and validity of genetic testing for family reunification vetting purposes, 
pointing out that France is hardly an innovator.16 Indeed, 12 European 
countries, including the uk, use it already. Detractors of the bill counter 
that these countries have not passed the rigorous legislation on bioge-
netics that France has, and that in many of them the practice is excep-
tional.17 The introduction of genetic testing for family reunification 
then needs to be placed against the backdrop of tighter border controls 
within the construction of a ‘fortress Europe’.
The increasingly restrictive immigration measures that have marked 
the last four decades in France (and in the rest of Europe) have been 
accompanied by a general understanding that immigrants are here to 
stay. As a result, along with tighter immigration laws, policies that facil-
itate and help processes of integration of already existing immigrant 
communities have been put in place. Indeed, all countries in Europe 
guarantee the long-term settlement and integration of legal immigrants 
and deny entry to new immigrant workers with low-level qualifications 
from third-world countries, but they authorise the legal entry of family 
members (Weil 1995).
In the specific context of France, the Hortefeux law illustrates a steady 
movement, since the mid-1970s, toward stricter regulations on family 
reunification. Here, it must be noted that France’s politics of immigra-
tion have been shaped – at least partially – by the recurring issue of its 
uniquely slow demographic growth (Spengler 1979; Ronsin 1980). It is 
against this historical background that questions of matrimony, repro-
duction and descent (and women’s role within them) become central to 
national debates on immigration, nationality and citizenship.
After the Second World War, during three decades of unprecedented 
economic growth, French governments facilitated the entry and set-
tlement of European immigrants (first from Germany and Italy and 
later from Spain and Portugal) and their families. During the first few 

184	
Catherine Raissiguier
years after the war, European immigrants were entitled to financial 
help when they settled with their families. Despite the National Office 
of Immigration’s efforts, family settlement was hampered by post-war 
housing shortages and marked discrepancies between official immigra-
tion policies and on-the-ground recruitment practices.
The number of entries through formal family reunification proce-
dures remained low until 1957. Following implementation of régula-
risation sur place in 1960, which allowed family members to change 
their status after they had settled in France even if they had entered the 
country illegally, family reunification numbers began to increase. Fam-
ily reunification policies were designed with the idea that men (as wage 
earners) migrate first and women (as housewives) follow. In turn, they 
have affected women and children in specific and unique ways.
In July 1974, France closed its borders to labour immigration. Since 
then, the vast majority of legal entries have occurred through family 
reunification. Because most immigrant women entered the French 
territory through family reunification, their immigration, citizenship, 
income-generating power and social benefits are connected to the sta-
tus of a male family member. In other words, it is the legal status of a 
husband or father that determines a woman’s legal status. The severing 
of familial and marital relationships can put immigrant women and 
their daughters in a legal bind vis-à-vis the French state and relegate 
them to illegality. Legal scholars, grassroots immigrant women’s organ-
isations and international agencies have underscored and deplored this 
constructed legal dependence and vulnerability of immigrant women 
(Rahal-Sidhoum 1987; Rude-Antoine 1996; Scales-Trent 1999; on the 
perverse effects of feminist campaigns against the dependent status of 
marriage migrants, see Schrover in this volume).
In the mid-1970s, against the backdrop of an international eco-
nomic crisis and alarming rates of unemployment, family immigration 
in France was suspended, re-authorised, recognised as a basic human 
right, curtailed and allowed again under certain conditions (Raissi-
guier 2007). Short-term measures restricting the employment of for-
eign workers’ wives and children had emerged in the mid-1970s and 
continued until the election of François Mitterrand in 1981. Therefore, 
policies that let women in but denied them the right to be gainfully 
employed reinforced immigrant women’s dependence on men. Histori-
cally, then, legal texts on family reunification, and the ways in which 
they were applied, created a framework in which immigrant women 
have lacked legal and economic autonomy. This problem lingers today 
in spite of fundamental changes introduced by the immigration law of 
17 July 1984.

blood matters	
185
Before 1984, spouses and children entering the country through 
family reunification were granted a residency permit that mentioned 
their status as ‘family members’ and did not include the right to seek 
employment. Residency and work permits were separate documents. 
Family members who wished to work for a wage needed to request a 
work permit once they could document that they had secured a job. The 
law of 1984 established two types of sojourn or work permits: a tempo-
rary sojourn permit (for varied lengths of time that cannot exceed one 
year) and a residency permit valid for ten years. Both permits entitle 
the recipient to work legally. Since 1984, family members entering the 
country through the family reunification procedures obtain the same 
permit as the resident member; renewal is automatic for those who 
obtain a ten-year residency permit. For those who receive a temporary 
permit, renewal is tied to their ability to provide for themselves should 
the familial link be severed.
The immigration law of 24 August 1993 restricted the conditions 
of entry and sojourn for immigrants and tightened the conditions for 
family reunification. Immigrants filing a family reunification request 
on behalf of family members now had to document at least two years 
(instead of one) of legal sojourn in France, and their ability to meet 
appropriate housing and resources requirements. The 1993 law fur-
thermore demanded that family reunification occur in one step. Immi-
grants were prohibited from bringing family members incrementally 
over time, as their social standing improves and they become better able 
to meet the necessary housing and income requirements. The Pasqua 
laws of 1993 prohibited the entry of polygamous families into France 
through family reunification (only one wife and her children can be 
brought into the country through the procedure). It also prohibited the 
renewal of residency permits of foreigners in polygamous situations.
The 1993 law increased the legal vulnerability of immigrant women. 
It made legal family reunification harder to achieve and stipulated 
that, in the case of divorce or estrangement within a year of the issu-
ance of residency papers, the papers could be withdrawn for the for-
eign spouse. If women are determined to be in violation of immigra-
tion law, they can be deported to their country of origin. Mothers of 
French children are protected from such deportations under French 
law, but as undocumented migrants, they are unable to work legally or 
to claim and receive certain social and health benefits. Since the passage 
of the 1993 law, accessing the right to family reunification has become 
complicated, expensive and time-consuming. As a result, for many, this 
form of legal immigration is no longer within reach. In this context, 
many have become undocumented, swelling the numbers of the French 

186	
Catherine Raissiguier
sans-papiers. Sans-papiers, which literally means ‘without papers’, have 
organised since the mid-1990s against this constructed illegality (clan-
destinisation) and for their collective regularisation (Raissiguier 2010).
In spite of improvements, the 1998 Chevènement law did little to 
diminish the dependence of women on their spouse’s legal status. The 
law introduced the notion of ‘familial and private life’ as one of the cri-
teria that would be taken into account for legalising undocumented 
immigrants. Theoretically, the law opened up the notion of ‘family’ to 
include bonds outside those of matrimony, such as common law mar-
riage (concubinage) and civil unions of straight and gay couples. Polyg-
amous family members who entered the country prior to 1993 can have 
their residency papers renewed, as long as they document that they are 
no longer bound by a polygamous union and are no longer cohabitat-
ing. This specific measure has put some women in extremely vulnerable 
positions, especially given the limited availability of affordable housing.
This brief analysis of family reunification in France since the mid-
1970s documents a steady trend towards the tightening of these provi-
sions, despite France’s recognition that the right to live with one’s fam-
ily is indeed a basic human right. It also illustrates the ways in which 
immigration laws often put women and the children who depend on 
them in vulnerable and precarious situation.
Reconfiguring French families and France as family through 
‘blood’ metaphors
While the human rights weaknesses and the racist effects of the new 
law have been discussed at great length in France, little attention has 
been directed towards the gender and sexual implications of a law that, 
after all, focuses on blood, bloodlines and descent. It is also important 
to note the rise of a dominant discourse in France that systematically 
links certain immigrant youths to violence and insecurity.18 French 
sociologist Muchielli traces the emergence of the insecurity thread in 
French media to the early 1990s. Needless to say, the mantra that links 
insecurity and immigration has paved the way for the rise of the politi-
cal right in France and, within it, the successful rise to power of Sarkozy 
(Muchielli 2001). This discourse was spread by a handful of ‘experts’ 
and media pundits and has now become common sense across the po-
litical spectrum. Indeed, according to Muchielli, by the mid-1990s both 
the political right and the left ‘appeared to have accepted that many 
of the problems [of insecurity and allegedly increasing violence] were 
due to unresolved issues of cultural difference and social alienation.’19 

blood matters	
187
In particular, Xavier Raufer and Alain Bauer were regularly featured 
in various media outlets (especially the right-leaning newspaper Le Fi-
garo). They emerged as key architects of a discourse of fear and hatred 
that has great currency in France today.20
This last section of this chapter looks at the often-overlooked subtext 
of the immigration and insecurity discourse that underwrites the dna 
provision of the Hortefeux law. Directly following the social unrest and 
violent outbursts in the fall of 2005, Sarkozy (then Minister of the Inte-
rior) and other right-wing voices blamed polygamous families for the 
violent behaviour of African male youths from the banlieues. Sarkozy 
himself declared to the French weekly L’Express that the youths respon-
sible for the urban violence were ‘French by law’ but that ‘polygamy 
and the [lack of] acculturation of a certain number of families [made] 
it more difficult to integrate a French youth of African descent than 
a French youth of another descent’. Bernard Accoyer (who is also 
known for his homophobic comments during the pacte civil de soli-
darité debates), then the president of the ump group in the National 
Assembly, declared on the French radio station rtl that polygamy ‘was 
certainly one of the causes’ of the social trouble. Polygamy, he added, 
‘is the incapacity to provide the education necessary to an organised 
society; a society with norms’. Finally, linking the 2005 urban riots with 
family reunification gone wild, he stated, ‘For us to be able to integrate 
them [the male youths], we need to keep their numbers below our inte-
gration threshold’21 (compare this with the term ‘absorption capacity’ 
used by Dutch politicians, see Walaardt in this volume).
Here the spectre of polygamy and of different family structures 
is conjured up to racialise a particular group of immigrants and to 
demonise a group of French youths. African mothers (and fathers) 
are set apart in their incapacity to acculturate and, as a result, to reign 
in their violent sons. The particular and dangerous violence of these 
young men is also constructed through the discourse of the abused 
woman and the over-controlled sister within Muslim and North Afri-
can immigrant communities. Fadela Amara and her organisation Ni 
Putes Ni Soumises have unfortunately greatly contributed to this very 
problematic construction.22
The discourse of blood is a discourse about kinship and family, but 
it is also about sexuality and gender. The impulse to exclude certain 
families from the French nation can also be traced in the debates sur-
rounding French civil unions and more specifically what the French 
call homoparentalité (the capacity for queers to become parents, in par-
ticular through artificial insemination and adoption). The parliamen-
tary debates that preceded the passage of the pacte civil de solidarité 

188	
Catherine Raissiguier
or French civil union clearly demonstrate strong attachment to hetero­
normative family structures within republican France. For this chap-
ter’s purpose, I simply briefly engage an interesting visual narrative that 
connects dna testing, the Hortefeux law and queer politics in France. 
As noted in Michael Petrelis’ blog, in September 2007, both the liberal 
San Francisco Chronicle and the conservative Washington Times ran 
similar stories about the Hortefeux bill and the opposition it encoun-
tered in France.23 Both newspapers used images of an act up Paris pro-
test against the Hortefeux bill without covering either the demonstra-
tion or the specific demands made by the French queer organisation. 
On his blog, Petrelis commends the act up Paris activists, but does not 
provide any analysis of this peculiar visual illustration of French anti-
dna law demonstrations by us media. The act up protest focused on 
the plight of immigrants suffering from hiv/aids, although this was 
not addressed in either of the newspaper articles. act up Paris activ-
ists were agitating to render visible the plight of queer immigrants, who 
will have to live alone if family reunification policy continues to be 
tightened and who face deportation under the politics of deportation 
quotas deployed under the Sarkozy regime.
Queers in France, like certain immigrants, are often imagined out-
side of national boundaries. This is particularly true when it comes to 
discussions of marriage, family and parenthood. Writing about an ear-
lier immigration law, Eric Fassin, commented in Le Monde:
Indeed, to limit family reunification while casting systematic doubt 
on mixed marriages, as the law of 2006 does on the control of the 
validity of marriages, is to define the immigrant without family, but 
also the family without the immigrant. In other words, when the right 
of blood takes over, it is not only that the Other is being racialised: 
the law slowly reinvents France as a national family; it tends to invent 
French nationals by descent (Français de souche).24
	
Building on Fassin’s analysis, I would add that when the right of 
blood takes over, the law defines the immigrant and the queer without 
family, but also the family (and the nation) without the immigrant and 
the queer.
Current discussions of immigration in France are replete with sen-
sational narratives about gender and sexuality. The wearing of Islamic 
scarves, polygamy, forced marriages, female genital cutting and the 
sexual victimisation of young Muslim women, for instance, receive 
intense and recurring attention in the French media (compare Ced-
erberg, Andreassen and Schrover in this volume). The impact of these 

blood matters	
189
narratives within French culture, however, has elicited little scholarly 
attention. Yet sex and gender constitute important threads within anti-
immigrant discourses that present Africans and Muslims as undesir-
able immigrants in France. Nor is the deployment of sex and gender 
new within discussions of national identity, immigration and racial 
or ethnic communities. The fact that victimised women and girls and 
violent men are conjured up to capture the cultural distance between 
the French and their postcolonial others must, therefore, be read as a 
redeployment of distant and yet singularly familiar discourses about 
the fatherland (la patrie), the nation and the Republic.
Conclusion
Because of the polemics generated by the dna testing provision of the 
Hortefeux law, other problematic aspects of the law came under scru-
tiny. Particularly concerning was that the law called for an evaluation 
of the French language skills of visa applicants. It also asked host im-
migrant families to sign a contract stipulating specific conditions of 
hosting and integration (contrat d’accueil et intégration). Furthermore, 
it required sponsoring families to demonstrate that they earned at least 
the minimum wage (133% of the minimum wage for families of six or 
more). On the positive side, the new law instituted unlimited sojourn 
and residency permits for legal immigrants renewing their ten-year 
permit.
In addition to dna testing, the law introduced the use of biometrics 
for would-be immigrants. Article 62 of the law required that foreigners 
voluntarily returning home (with financial support of the French state), 
have their photograph and digital fingerprints taken and stored. This 
provision was introduced with the aim to fight fraud and make it more 
difficult for these individuals to make their way back into France. Both 
the increased use of biometrics and the introduction of dna testing in 
the Hortefeux law make sense within the broad immigration control 
logic and generalised suspicion toward certain foreigners promulgated 
by Senator Gouteyron, whose report opened this essay.
The Hortefeux law is not unique. It is simply the French flavour of a 
broader European trend in immigration policy (compare Van Walsum, 
Jones & Legêne in this volume). An eu administrative memorandum 
requesting the tightening of family reunification policies, for instance, 
was issued in 2003. The memorandum stipulates that it is appropriate 
to demand that immigrants joining family members respect national 
‘norms’ and demonstrate a working knowledge of the language of the 

190	
Catherine Raissiguier
host country. There has also been a levelling of asylum policies across 
Europe. The introduction of dna testing (even if voluntary) in France 
is simply another piece of the larger European politics of dissuasion of 
family (and humanitarian) immigration in favour of economic immi-
gration. Sarkozy implemented those policies first during his tenure as 
Minister of the Interior and later as president of the French Republic.
This chapter discussed the Hortefeux immigration law in relation to 
the growing contestation of the principle of jus soli and the tightening 
of family reunification procedures in France. The gradual tightening 
of immigration policies since the mid-1970s has had specific gendered 
effects on immigrant women and the children who depend on them. 
It has added to the precarisation and the clandestinisation of many of 
them. By introducing the tracing of affiliation through ‘blood’ for some 
immigrants, the 2007 immigration law inscribed differential treatment 
of people into French immigration policy. It also anchored a movement 
toward the racialisation of certain immigrant communities through 
the discursive construction of some immigrants as unable to assimilate 
into the French cauldron. Finally, it built on and deepened racist and 
heteronormative understandings of the ‘family’ in France.
Notes
1	 All translations from French to English are mine unless indicated otherwise. 
Adrien Gouteyron is a senator and a member of the Union pour un Mouvement 
Populaire (ump). A. Gouteyron, Trouver une issue au casse-tête des visas, Rapport 
d’information No 353 de M. Adrien Gouteryon, fait au nom de la commission des 
finances, du contrôle budgétaire et des comptes économiques de la Nation (27 June 
2007). www.senat.fr/notice-rapport/2006/r06-353-notice.html (accessed on 22 
March 2010).
2	 For a detailed discussion of citizenship and nationality in the context of ‘French 
Algeria’ see Stora (1992); Wihtol de Wenden (1994: 41-59).
3	 An extreme-right nationalist political party founded by Jean-Marie Le Pen in 
1972. Once in the margins of the French political spectrum, it is now a force to 
be reckoned with, as demonstrated by Le Pen’s strong showing in the 2002 presi-
dential election. The National Front’s continued success can be seen in the 2010 
regional election results.
4	 Germany has granted nationality (until 2000) on the basis of jus sanguini.
5	 The requirement that these youths request the French nationality was abrogated 
by the Guigou law of 1998.
6	 Cited in Agence Presse, ‘French Parliament Approves dna Immigration Bill,’ 
France24, 24 October 2007, www.france24.com (accessed 15 October 2009).
7	 For the petition and the list of those who signed it, see www.touchepasamonadn.
com (accessed 23 March 2010).

blood matters	
191
8	 For an interesting ngo intervention on this topic, see Médecins du Monde, 
‘Pauvreté-immigration’ Le Monde (25 October 2007).
9	 Article 2 provides for the obligation of states to respect and ensure the rights set 
forth in the Convention to each child within their jurisdiction without discrimi-
nation of any kind.
10	 Damien Bouhours, Le Petit Journal, 16 September 2009.
11	 Anne Chemin and Laetita Van Eeckhout, ‘Tests adn pour certains candidats 
à l’immigration: Des tests génétiques pour le regroupement familial, Le Monde, 
14 September 2007.
12	 Agence Presse, ‘French Parliament Approves dna Immigration Bill’.
13	 Axel Kahn and Didier Sicard, ‘Filiation et regroupement familial,’ Le Monde, 
17 September 2007.
14	 Chemin and Van Eeckhout, ‘Tests adn.’
15	 Chemin and Van Eeckhout, ‘Tests adn.’
16	 See Brice Hortefeux ‘Nous avons apporté six garanties supplémentaires aux tests 
adn’, Le Monde, 10 October 2007.
17	 See Digital Civil Rights in Europe, ‘Update on dna and biometrics in French 
immigration law’, Digi-Gram, 5.20 (24 October 2007). It is important to note here 
that immigration dna test results are required for most visa applications involv-
ing family who immigrate to the usa.
18	 See Pam Moore, ‘Media demonization, “la fabrique de la haine” and Le Figaro’. 
http://wjfms.ncl.ac.uk/MooresWJ.htm (Accessed 25 March 2010).
19	 Moores, ‘Media demonization’.
20	Muchielli has challenged the claims, the methodology and even the academic 
credentials of these so-called experts who published the best-seller Violences et 
insécurités urbaines (Paris 1998).
21	 Bernard Accoyer, ‘Le Sénat a adopté le projet de loi sur la `maîtrise de l’immigra-
tion’’ Le Monde, 5 October 2008.
22	 See Catherine Raissiguier, ‘Muslim women in France: Impossible subjects?’ 
Darkmatter (2008) www.darkmatter101.org/site/2008/05/02/muslim-women-in-
france-impossible-subjects.
23	 The San Francisco Chronicle’s story (‘France seeks to enforce deportation quo-
tas for illegal aliens’) appeared on Saturday 22 September 2007. The Washing-
ton Times ran its story (‘Anti-illegals bills sparks uproar in France’) on Thursday, 
20 September 2007. Both articles and the images that accompany them can be 
accessed online through links on Petrelis’ blog: http://mpetrelis.blogspot.com/
search?q=act+up+paris.
24	 Eric Fassin, ‘Statistiques de la discorde,’ Le Monde, 6 October 2007.
References
Brubaker, R. (1997), Citoyenneté et nationalité en France et en Allemagne. Paris: 
Belin.

192	
Catherine Raissiguier
Brubaker, R. (1993), ‘De l’immigré au citoyen: Comment le jus soli s’est imposé en 
France, à la fin du xixe siècle’, Actes de la recherche en Sciences Sociales 99 (Sep-
tembre): 3-26.
Brubaker, R. (1992), Citizenship and nationhood in France and Germany. Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press.
Feldblum, M. (1999), Reconstructing citizenship: The politics of nationality reform and 
immigration in contemporary France. Albany: suny Press.
Groupe d’information et de soutien des immigrés (2000), Guide de la nationalité 
française. Paris: Syros.
Krulic, J. (1988), ‘L’immigration et l’identité de la France, mythes et réalités’, Pouvoirs 
47: 31-43.
Noiriel, G. (1991), La tyrannie du national: Le droit d’asile en Europe, 1793-1993. Paris: 
Calmann-Levy (Collection Les temps qui courent).
Rahal-Sidhoum, S. (1987), Eléments d’analyse de statut socio-juridique des femmes 
immigrées en vue d’un statut pour l’autonomie des femmes immigrées en France. 
Paris: Convention cfi/fndva.
Raissiguier, C. (2010), Reinventing the Republic: Gender, immigration and citizenship 
in France. Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Raissiguier, C. (2007), ‘French immigration laws: The sans-papières’ perspectives’, in 
T. Spijkerboer & S. van Walsum (eds), Women and immigration law in Europe: 
New variations of feminist themes, pp. 204-222. Abington and New York: Glass 
House Publishers.
Ronsin, F. (1980), La Grève des ventres: Propagande néo-malthusienne et baisse de la 
natalité française (xixe-xxe siècles). Paris: Aubier Montaigne.
Rude-Antoine, E. (1996), ‘Des épouses soumises à des régimes particuliers’, Migrants- 
Formation 105: 45-61.
Scales-Trent, J. (1999), ‘African women in France: Citizenship, family, and work’, 
Brooklyn Journal of International Law xxiv (3): 705-737.
Schnapper, D. (1991), La France de l’intégration: Sociologie en 1990. Paris: Gallimard.
Schnapper, D. (1989), ‘La France de l’intégration and “Un pays d’immigration qui 
s’ignore”’, Le Genre Humain (February): 99-109.
Schor, R. (1985), L’opinion française et les étrangers. 1919-1939. Paris: Publications de 
la Sorbonne.
Spengler, J. (1979), France faces depopulation. Durham: Duke University Press.
Stora, B. (1992), Aide-Mémoire de l’immigration Algérienne: Chronologie, bibliography. 
Paris: L’Hartmattan.
Weil, P. (2002), Qu’est-ce qu’un Français? Histoire de la nationalité française depuis la 
révolution. Paris: Gallimard.
Weil, P. (1996), ‘Nationalities and citizenships: The lessons of the French experience 
for Germany and Europe’, in D. Cesarani & M. Fulbrook (eds), Citizenship, Nation-
ality & Migration in Europe, pp. 74-87. London: Routledge.
Weil, P. (1995), ‘L’Europe a-t-elle une politique de l’immigration?’, Working Paper 105. 
Barcelona: Institut d’Études Politiques.
Wihtol de Wenden, C. (1994), ‘Le cas français’, in B. Faiga, C. Wihtol de Wenden & 
K. Leggewie (eds), De l’immigration à l’intégration en Allemagne, pp. 41-59. Paris: 
Cerf.

8  Gender, inequality and integration
Swedish policies on migrant incorporation  
and the position of migrant women
Maja Cederberg
Introduction: Gender, migration and policy effects
As feminist migration scholars have highlighted, in contrast to gen-
der-blind conceptions of migration, women have formed, and continue 
to form, a significant part of migratory flows. Furthermore, the con-
ditions that structure migrants’ options, positions and experiences in 
both sending and receiving countries are gendered (see, e.g., Phizack-
lea 1983; Morokvasic 1984; Kofman 1999; Kofman et al. 2000). Cultural 
constraints, in particular, related to dominant ideas about male and fe-
male roles in the private and public spheres are underpinned by, and 
help to reproduce, gendered power relations and inequalities. These af-
fect the nature and extent of men’s and women’s economic, social and 
political participation in sending countries and imply differences in 
their experiences and resources held, in turn impacting upon the mi-
gration and settlement process. Furthermore, while there are tenden-
cies to emphasise the (gendered) cultural baggage that migrants bring 
with them to Western ‘host’ societies, gender inequalities in the West 
also continue to shape the position and experience of both migrant and 
non-migrant women.
Lack of attention to gender differences has meant that migration 
and migrant incorporation policies in receiving countries have often 
not considered their potentially gendered effects, particularly ways in 
which policies may disadvantage women. Migration research has shown 
that policies regarding asylum, labour migration and family migration 
have set different conditions for the migration and settlement of men 
and women (see, e.g., Boyd 1999; Kofman 1999, 2004, 2005, 2007; Kon-
tos 2009; Piper 2006). The pitfalls of a universal, ‘gender-neutral’, con-
ception of rights have also been underscored in feminist literature on 
citizenship. This literature has illustrated, amongst other things, that 
gendered (and racialised) individuals have different levels of access to 
rights and privileges, and they are differently able to enjoy, in practice, 

194	
Maja Cederberg
the rights they are granted on paper (see, e.g., Pateman 1988; Boris 1995; 
Siim 2000; Lister 2003; Yuval-Davis 1997).
This chapter considers the effects of Swedish policies regarding 
migrant incorporation on the position of migrant women. The term 
‘incorporation’ is used to refer to the range of policies that are designed 
to facilitate migrants’ settlement in the host society. Although the term 
‘integration’ is often generically used to refer to such policies, in this 
chapter that term is used only in reference to policies that themselves 
use the term, in order to emphasise the particular values and assump-
tions involved. The chapter starts with a historical overview of Swedish 
policy on migrant incorporation. It then discusses the gendered effects 
of different policy approaches in two key dimensions: the cultural and 
the socio-economic.
In regard to the cultural dimension, the chapter examines the shift 
we have seen from a focus on cultural group rights towards a more 
individual approach emphasising the need for ‘integration’ and social 
cohesion. The gendered aspects and potential effects of different policy 
approaches are considered, as well as the debates that have surrounded 
them. Insofar as ‘other’ gender roles and relations are used to represent 
cultural difference and ‘authenticity’, this has had particular implica-
tions for migrant women, whose imagined difference has been used to 
both defend and question policies promoting cultural diversity. When 
it comes to the second dimension, the socio-economic one, the focus 
is on rights and opportunities related to employment and social wel-
fare. While some policies target newcomers, most affect the broader 
labour market and welfare policy areas. Here, the shift has entailed 
greater labour market deregulation and an increasingly restricted wel-
fare regime. Because such policies have been introduced in the context 
of a labour market and society that is divided along lines of both gender 
and ethnicity (as well as class), their impacts have been felt, in particu-
lar, by groups that were already in a disadvantaged position, including 
certain groups of migrant women.
Materials and methods
The chapter draws on two main sources: an analysis of Swedish poli-
cies on migrant incorporation undertaken as part of a research pro-
ject on racism and ethnic discrimination in Sweden (Cederberg 2006), 
and the Swedish component of the eu-funded project FeMiPol, on the 
integration process of female migrants in selected European countries 
(Kontos 2009). Aside from an analysis of policy changes since the mid-

gender, inequality and integration	
195
1970s, both research projects included expert interviews (e.g., with pol-
icymakers, civil servants, and ngo and trade union representatives), 
and biographical narrative interviews with refugees from Somalia and 
Bosnia (Cederberg 2006) and with migrant women from a range of 
countries outside of Europe (Kontos 2009). Also used were policy doc-
uments and official reports, as well as secondary sources (including em-
pirical research) in which different policies and policy approaches are 
evaluated or assessed.
From group rights to individual responsibility:  
A brief history of Swedish policy on migrant incorporation
In 1975, Sweden adopted its first policy concerned particularly with 
migrant incorporation. It was based on the three principles of equal-
ity, freedom of choice and partnership.1 The goal of equality had been 
established earlier by the 1968 immigration policy, which emphasised 
the importance of equal rights and opportunities for migrants and non-
migrants in the labour market and in wider society. The 1975 policy 
asserted the possibility of retaining one’s cultural heritage as a precon-
dition for such equality (as proposed in the literature on cultural rec-
ognition and cultural citizenship rights, see, e.g., Taylor 1994; Kymlicka 
1995). In turn, freedom of choice was said to refer precisely to the in-
dividual’s right to choose whether ‘to retain and develop their original 
cultural and linguistic identity’.2 Finally, partnership implied coopera-
tion and mutual solidarity between the majority Swedish population 
and different migrant groups. In short, the initial policy emphasised the 
equal rights of migrants and non-migrants, including cultural rights. 
It developed in a context in which the majority of migrants were la-
bour migrants, and it was strongly related to social democratic ideol-
ogy, together with the corporatist structure and, particularly, the strong 
position of the trade unions (Ålund & Schierup 1991; Soininen 1999; 
Schierup, Hansen & Castles 2006).
Although the three principles of the 1975 policy were retained for 
some time, and while policy documents continue to emphasise equal-
ity and diversity as the basis for migrant incorporation, a number of 
changes were made over time. These relate to both migrant-specific 
policies and to other policies that impact on migrants. By the mid-
1980s, some limits were introduced to the freedom to choose one’s cul-
tural identity, which at this point, it was emphasised, had to be con-
tained within the limits of the core laws, norms and values of Sweden3 
(Borevi 2002, 2004). The context is significant, and in policy docu-

196	
Maja Cederberg
ments from the 1980s and early 1990s the changing nature of immigra-
tion is emphasised in arguments for revising the initial policy.4 In the 
1970s, migrants came primarily from other Nordic countries, Eastern 
and Southern Europe and Turkey, while more recent migrants arrived 
from South America, Asia, the Middle East and Africa. Furthermore, 
there was a shift from labour migrants to refugees and family migrants. 
Against this backdrop, both greater cultural differences and the major-
ity population’s fear of difference were put forward in support of a more 
limited ‘freedom of choice’.5 However, the policy documents present 
this less as a change and more as a clarification, due to the fact that the 
1975 policy had failed to specify the types of claims that could be made 
under the ‘freedom of choice’ banner, and more problematic claims had 
been made to cultural rights (that were less amenable to Swedish norms 
and values) than had been envisaged by the policy.
Although policy was gradually transformed in the 1980s, an explicit 
shift took place in the 1990s, when the government stated that it had 
made a mistake in emphasising difference and opting for migrant-spe-
cific policies. It proposed instead that the future would be one of inte-
gration. A 1997/1998 policy document, ‘Sweden, the Future and Diver-
sity: From Immigrant Policy to Integration Policy’,6 signalled a change 
from a targeted to a general approach to migrant incorporation, and 
also from an emphasis on groups to individual rights and responsibili-
ties (Geddes 2003: 118-122). This was the point at which the immigra-
tion and integration policy areas were separated. The shift was meant 
to imply that aside from some specific measures to support newcom-
ers after their arrival, integration policy would be aimed at society as a 
whole. Hence, the term integration here is conceived as different from 
assimilation (denounced since the 1975 policy). The idea was not that 
‘they’ should integrate into ‘our’ society, but that society should be re-
shaped to suit the needs of all of its members: in other words, in a pro-
cess of mutual accommodation.7
Despite taking a step back from the previous, more wholehearted, 
endorsement of cultural diversity, the 1997/1998 document, nonethe-
less, underlines the value of such diversity. Another core feature was 
its emphasis on ethnic equality, particularly in the labour market. 
Although the principle of equality had long been central in Swedish 
policy, concerns had arisen about increasingly high levels of unem-
ployment amongst migrants. Discrimination was also attracting fur-
ther attention. Key measures proposed to solve these problems were 
improvement of the system for validating foreign qualifications, upgrad-
ing the complementary education system for cases where training was 
needed to acquire a license to practice in Sweden, and expanded pro-

gender, inequality and integration	
197
tection against discrimination. Finally, emphasis was placed on what 
had in fact already been an important feature of Swedish policy in this 
area, namely, the idea that the general employment and social welfare 
policy framework should provide a broad basis for equality and inte-
gration.8 As such, in order to assess different approaches to migrant 
incorporation, we need to go beyond migrant-specific policy, and take 
into account broader developments, in particular, regarding the labour 
market, employment and social welfare.
During the 1980s, the renowned Swedish social model, character-
ised by a universal welfare policy, corporatism and centralised wage 
bargaining, as well as the political and ideological dominance of social 
democracy, started to be revised. The Swedish government sought to 
give the market more rein while to some extent cutting back on welfare 
provisions. These changes were part of a shifting political-economic 
scenario in Sweden, in step with wider global trends and, particularly, 
their expression in the European context. The economic crisis of the 
early 1990s hastened these trends, including labour market deregula-
tion and moves towards a less comprehensive welfare regime (Soininen 
1999; Schierup, Hansen & Castles 2006).
It is important to note here that during the same period, a number 
of structural changes took place in the Swedish labour market, as part 
of the transformation from an industrial to a ‘post-industrial’ economy. 
This implied a need for different (and, to some extent, higher-level) 
skills, which significantly impacted migrants who had come to work 
in the industrial sector when it was in need of labour. It also affected 
more recently arrived migrants, as the changing nature of the labour 
market meant that it was much more difficult for them to get ‘a foot 
in’ (the changing nature of immigration flows also played a role here, 
which will be discussed later in this chapter). The increased importance 
of ‘Sweden-specific’ skills were amongst the factors affecting migrants’ 
labour market entry, as well as the rise of informal recruitment prac-
tices, in which a greater role was played by social contacts and networks 
(Bevelander & Lundh 2007; Behtoui 2008; Behtoui & Neergard 2010; 
Cederberg 2012). Aside from the industrial sector, jobs had been lost in 
the public sector too, which impacted women in particular (Bevelander 
1999, 2005; De los Reyes 2000; Integrationsverket 2006; Schierup, 
Hansen & Castles 2006).
This broader social and political-economic context accounted for 
much of the focus of the 1997/1998 integration policy. Exclusion and 
segregation along ethnic lines was seen as a growing problem, but the 
government was anxious to counteract simplistic solutions to complex 
problems, especially in the form of the far-right, anti-immigrant sen-

198	
Maja Cederberg
timent that had flourished in the early 1990s (Borevi 1998). However, 
notwithstanding its strong emphasis on mutual accommodation and 
combating discrimination, the 1997/1998 policy was criticised ten years 
later by an enquiry into the position of migrants and ethnic minority 
groups in various societal areas. That enquiry found that despite the 
strong focus on equality and anti-discrimination, too little had been 
done to tackle structural forms of discrimination and inequality (sou 
2006: 79).
If 1997/1998 was an important moment in Swedish policy on migrant 
incorporation, the next took place ten years later, after the social demo-
crats lost power to a centre-right coalition in 2006. The new coalition 
parties had been critical of the social democrats’ integration policy in 
the opposition,9 and they introduced what was presented as a major 
policy shift. This was signalled not least by closing down the Swedish 
Integration Board, which had been established by the previous gov-
ernment in 2000. A central feature of the centre-right government’s 
approach to migrant incorporation has been a strong focus on employ-
ment as the key to wider social integration. Emphasis is on increas-
ing migrants’ ability to utilise their existing skills and qualifications in 
the labour market and on speeding up newcomers’ entrance in paid 
employment. Another central feature concerns language and culture, 
particularly migrants learning the Swedish language, combined with 
the promotion of social cohesion through a shared set of norms and 
values.10
In fact, employment has been seen as a fundamental basis for 
migrant incorporation since the emergence of such policies in Swe-
den. This is underscored not least by the emphasis long placed on eth-
nic equality in the labour market. But if the idea that employment is 
central is not in itself new, the particular approach taken by the current 
government is distinct, along with the political-economic context in 
which the idea is now being implemented. Concerning the language 
and culture component, neither the expectation that migrants learn 
the language nor the argument for shared norms and values is particu-
larly new. However, the broader discourse within which the current 
policy is situated is to some extent distinct in that there is greater focus 
on demands and (individual) responsibilities. In short, the transfor-
mation of both the socio-economic and cultural aspects of migrant 
incorporation and related policies must be understood in relation to 
the wider shift towards a neo-liberal approach and discourse (Schierup 
& Ålund 2011).

gender, inequality and integration	
199
From multiculturalism to social cohesion and the (persistent) 
gendered production of cultural difference
As noted, the 1975 policy was based on principles of equality and co-
operation, along with granting newcomers the right to retain their cul-
tural distinctiveness. Moreover, the corporatist tradition in Sweden in-
fluenced the shape of early migrant incorporation policies, and social 
identities were initially conceived largely in terms of collective expe-
riences (Ålund & Schierup 1991, 1993). This corresponded well to the 
multiculturalist principle of giving rights and voices to different na-
tional and ethnic groups, enabling those to reproduce and represent 
themselves. One particular expression of this concerns the importance 
granted to migrant associations. These were seen as playing a key role 
in relation to the ‘freedom of choice’ principle, but also as channels 
through which particular interests could be expressed and represented 
(Borevi 2004). Multiculturalism in the Swedish case thus implied col-
lective and representative rights for migrants, to be exercised through 
their national and ethnic groups (Schierup, Hansen & Castles 2006). It 
is, however, worth noting that a simultaneous ‘Swedishisation’ process 
took place through the conditions set for associations applying for state 
funding (Ålund & Schierup 1991).
The policy of leaving minority groups alone to arrange their own, 
‘traditional’ intra-familial and community relations with limited inter-
ference from the majority society was the target of much critique. 
The underlying conception of ‘cultures’ as bounded and fixed entities, 
which Schrover (2010) refers to as ‘cultural freezing’, was challenged, 
and potentially damaging effects on less powerful members of ethnic 
minority groups were highlighted. The gendered implications, in par-
ticular, have been emphasised, in relation also to the fact that what was 
often regarded as ‘authentic’ about cultures were gender roles and fam-
ily relations. Furthermore, the idea of representing migrants’ interests 
through ethnic associations was problematised, by asking who speaks 
for whom and whose voice is silenced in the process, with again, the 
gendered effects emphasised (Anthias & Yuval-Davis 1992; Yuval-Davis 
1997). In the Swedish debate on multiculturalism, some have argued 
that the principle of cultural group rights has implied the exclusion 
of migrant women from the wider policy of gender equality on which 
Sweden prides itself (Daragahi 2002; see also De los Reyes et al. 2003).
While the gendered implications are significant, they do not affect 
migrant or ethnic minority women uniformly. Individuals are differently 
positioned within migrant and ethnic communities, depending not only 
on gender but also on their social class and other factors that play a part 

200	
Maja Cederberg
in shaping intra-group relations and hierarchies. Furthermore, there are 
differences between (and within) ethnic minority groups both in regard 
to their cultural traditions and practices, and in terms of how they are 
positioned within wider society. That latter, in turn, sets the conditions 
for the ‘integration’ prospects of individual migrants, but it also impacts 
upon intra-group relations and dynamics. De los Reyes (2003) relates 
an account of young immigrant girls in Sweden who are at risk of being 
exposed to what is commonly referred to as ‘honour culture’. Gendered 
violence and other oppressive cultural practices within minority groups 
must be considered in the context of a segregated and discriminatory 
society, where intercultural exchanges are limited and where the pow-
erlessness of individuals in the majority society may result in particular 
expressions of power within minority communities. Such an approach 
helps to counterbalance arguments that tend to culturalise such social 
problems (as discussed by Ålund 1999; Ålund & Schierup 1991). In this 
chapter, by contrast, they are regarded as complex outcomes of ethnic 
discrimination, inequality and segregation, in combination with par-
ticular intra-group relations and practices.
Gender oppression within minority communities and the ten-
dency to accept or to turn a blind eye to it forms one important line 
of criticism of multiculturalism. Another has to do with the further 
obstacles to gender and ethnic equality posed by particular represen-
tations that have accompanied accounts of cultural pluralism. Repre-
sentations of ‘other’ women and gender relations are especially note-
worthy in the case of Sweden, where the discourse on gender equal-
ity forms an important part of a Swedish ‘imagined community’, and 
as such provides ‘a basis for drawing and marking borders not only 
towards other countries, but also towards the immigrant population in 
Sweden’ (Molina & De los Reyes 2003: 306, my translation). The pro-
duction of a dichotomy between a (gender-equal) Swedish ‘self’ and 
a (gender-oppressed) minority ‘other’ is facilitated by the tendency to 
homogenise and generalise about ‘others’. This is part of the bounded 
conception of ‘cultures’ noted earlier, in relation to which elements of 
difference and resistance are marginalised (Ålund 1991, 1999). Regard-
ing representations of migrant women, in particular, the popular image 
portrays them as isolated, passive and as victims of ‘patriarchal cul-
tures’ (Brune 1998, 2003).
This arguably has impacted the incorporation of migrant women 
into the Swedish labour market. The policy of equality from 1968 to 
1975 did not prohibit development of an ethnically (and gender) seg-
mented labour market (Schierup & Paulsson 1994). Migrant women 
have, in fact, been disproportionately represented in jobs associated 

gender, inequality and integration	
201
with lower skill levels, poorer pay and less social status (Knocke 1986, 
1994, 1999, 2001). Research points towards a range of factors under-
lying their position, including differences in human capital, structural 
features of the Swedish labour market, and ethnic and gender discrimi-
nation (Bevelander 1999, 2005; De los Reyes 2000, 2007; scb 2009; 
Schierup, Hansen & Castles 2006; sou 2006: 59, 2006: 60). With regard 
to that last, Knocke (1994, 1999) argues that the popular image of ‘the 
immigrant woman’ as passive, oppressed and uneducated has played a 
significant role in shaping migrant women’s labour market incorpora-
tion.
Thus far, this chapter has argued that there are two key gendered 
effects of multicultural policies. First, the ‘leave them alone’ policy 
implied by multiculturalism may have contributed to the reproduction 
of unequal gender relations. Second, a gendered conception of ‘other-
ness’ that has accompanied multiculturalism, in particular, gendered 
imagery that forms part of stereotyped representations of ‘other’ cul-
tures, may have impacted on the lives and opportunities of migrant 
women. Importantly, these effects may not automatically disappear 
with a shift away from multiculturalism as a policy approach. In regard 
to the first, I have emphasised the importance of not reducing all gen-
dered effects of ethnic boundary-making to multicultural policies per 
se, but to also consider factors such as ethnic discrimination and segre-
gation. As to the latter, the gendered production of difference appears 
fairly consistent over time: whether it is used to promote ethnic diver-
sity or to warn against the oppressive and divisive effects of too much 
diversity, representations of ‘other’ women continue to play a central 
role in Swedish ‘integration’ policy, as we shall see.
With regard to the gradual transformation of the cultural dimension 
of migrant incorporation policies, representations of gender roles and 
family relations in ‘other’ cultures have been important. In the mid-
1980s, when a need was proposed to specify the boundaries of the ‘free-
dom of choice’ principle, cultural differences in approaches to the rights 
of women and children were highlighted.11 As part of the move from a 
promotion of minority ethnic groups and practices to individuals’ inte-
gration into the majority society (in 1997/1998), examples underscored 
as potentially damaging to individuals were similarly gendered: tradi-
tional roles prohibiting women from accessing paid work, along with 
gendered violence and oppression.
In recent years, much of the debate about gender and ‘integration’ 
has centred on particular cultural practices often associated with Islam 
and Muslim communities, including female genital mutilation, forced 
marriages and ‘honour culture’. That last became an important political 

202	
Maja Cederberg
issue in the early 2000s, following two ‘honour murders’ that received 
abundant mass media coverage. Among the policy proposals made at 
that time was a citizenship test, though this faced much criticism from 
the government at the time and was not introduced. However, much 
of the surrounding discourse continued to influence the debates, as 
well as the policy approach adopted by the Liberal Party, which led the 
early 2000s debate from the opposition and since 2006 has played a key 
role in forming policies in government. Indeed, gender has become an 
important feature of integration policy, through the emphasis is on the 
risks posed to women by insufficient cultural integration of (certain) 
migrant and minority ethnic groups. As such, the discourse has argu-
ably developed in a manner that not only regards migrant women as 
‘other’ to Swedish (and more broadly to Western) culture and society, 
but also increasingly as women in need of protection, similar to the 
victimhood discourse on migrant women in the Netherlands discussed 
by Schrover (2009).12
In turn, the debate about gender-oppressive practices in ‘other’ 
cultures forms an important backdrop to the current focus on social 
cohesion. A notable initiative is the ‘Basic Value Dialogue’ which was 
introduced in 2008 with the aim of overcoming some supposedly fun-
damental differences in values and practices existing within Swedish 
society. Respect for democratic values, human rights and gender equal-
ity, on one hand, and work against discrimination and intolerance, 
on the other, form the core of the initiative. The ‘dialogue’ aspect is 
emphasised, meaning that it is intended as a conversation rather than 
the imposition of one set of values over another.13 The Swedish version 
of ‘social cohesion’ policy thus differs from those in countries that have 
adopted a more direct assimilatory approach, making it clear whose 
values should dominate a cohesive society (the civic integration tests 
introduced in countries like the Netherlands, Germany and the uk 
are good examples of this). However, the change in policy direction 
is nonetheless significant. Although the policy documents themselves 
tend to avoid too many direct examples of the kinds of values and prac-
tices that might be regarded as less acceptable in the future cohesive 
society, these are rather clear in the surrounding political debate. For 
instance, the Swedish Minister for Integration and Equality made head-
lines by taking a hard line on young women wearing a veil, which she 
proposed to ban, and on female genital mutilation, for which she sug-
gested compulsory testing. In relation to the debate on honour-related 
oppression and violence, a key measure proposed was the ‘Basic Value 
Dialogue’ itself.

gender, inequality and integration	
203
As the discourse and policy have moved towards less difference and 
more cohesion, they have also increased emphasis on demands on and 
responsibilities of individuals. We see this not least in the transforma-
tion of the policy regarding language acquisition – the so-called ‘Swed-
ish for Immigrants’ course – in relation to which stricter rules have 
been introduced. Having found that migrants often take years to com-
plete the course (and fearing a potential abuse of the compensatory sys-
tem attached to it), the government has introduced a time limit, along 
with a national test. Furthermore, a bonus has been introduced as an 
incentive for swiftly and successfully completing the course.14 While 
regarded as key to the process of cultural integration, language skills 
have also been increasingly emphasised in relation to migrants’ labour 
market integration, as discussed in the following section.
From equality to flexibility:  
The centrality of employment in a changing context
Equality in employment and in the wider society was a core principle 
of the 1968 and 1975 policies. Hence, emphasis was put on adapting 
general frameworks by considering specific conditions facing different 
social groups, and especially, dealing with any factors limiting new-
comers’ access to rights and benefits.15 Measures included improved 
access to translation services and a restructuring of the public pension 
system to ensure some degree of access for newcomers. Social dem-
ocratic ideology and corporatist structures have long underlied the 
strong equality focus. More broadly, the aim of full employment was a 
cornerstone of social democratic policy and regarded as a precondition 
for an integrated society with a strong welfare state (Schierup, Hansen 
& Castles 2006).
Though employment equality was a key focus of early migrant incor-
poration policy, the issue of unemployed migrants did not feature sig-
nificantly, as the majority of migrants at the time had come to fill gaps 
in the workforce. However, this was soon to change, due to shifts in 
the labour market as well as the changing nature of immigration flows. 
Following those changes, migrants began to experience exclusion from 
the labour market. Some lost their jobs due to structural transforma-
tions, and newer arrivals found it difficult to get a foot in. This then 
became a significant issue on the policy agenda. Although the central 
role played by the general policy framework in resolving the problem of 
unemployed migrants was emphasised in both the mid-1980s and the 
mid-1990s, it was also suggested that targeted measures were needed to 

204	
Maja Cederberg
compensate for the additional disadvantage experienced by migrants 
compared to non-migrants in accessing employment.16
Aside from the increased cultural and ethnic diversity discussed pre-
viously, another effect of the change in immigration flows was a much 
greater variety in educational and skill levels amongst immigrants in 
Sweden. The migrant population became increasingly polarised in this 
regard, including people with limited education and work experience, 
as well as those with very high levels of qualifications (Nelander, Acchi-
ardo & Goding 2004; Cederberg & Anthias 2006). The arrival of people 
with high educational levels led to an emphasis on proper validation 
of foreign qualifications, combined with the provision of complemen-
tary education. This policy was strengthened as frequent mismatches 
were identified between migrants’ skills and the jobs they did (along 
with unemployment amongst highly-educated migrants). This was pre-
sented as a waste of valuable resources.17 The government also empha-
sised the importance of helping migrants with lower levels of skills to 
enter the Swedish labour market. One general measure put in place to 
raise educational levels amongst less-educated groups, including new-
comers, was ‘The Knowledge Lift’, which involved basic and further 
education. Migrant-specific measures included intensified activities in 
immigrant-dense neighbourhoods, as well as a range of work experi-
ence programmes designed to introduce newcomers to Swedish work-
places.18
Despite the explicit aim of the 1997/1998 ‘integration’ policy to target 
society as a whole and not just migrants, the enquiry mentioned ear-
lier (sou 2006: 79) suggested that rather than contributing to an equal 
and integrated society, the policies had contributed to an ‘us’ versus 
‘them’ mindset, while insufficiently dealing with structural inequali-
ties and discrimination. Discrepancies between the policies themselves 
and their implementation was one issue raised by the integration board 
(Integrationsverket 2004, 2005). Another problem concerned uneven 
implementation across different groups, and especially, gender ine-
qualities found when examining how policies had been implemented 
in practice. For example, women were found to have had less access to 
work experience programmes than men. This was particularly the case 
for women with lower levels of education. In the expert interviews for 
the FeMiPol project, one person suggested that this might have been 
the result of certain (gendered) assumptions operating within the insti-
tutions that were there to help facilitate migrants’ ‘integration’ (Ceder-
berg & Anthias 2006).19
To understand the impact of policy on the socio-economic dimen-
sion of migrant incorporation, we need to look beyond migrant-spe-

gender, inequality and integration	
205
cific policy and consider the general policy framework surrounding the 
labour market and welfare state. Earlier, this chapter described some 
of the main changes that took place over time in regard to the labour 
market, employment and social welfare. Although the move towards a 
more flexible labour market and a more restricted welfare regime had 
a longer history than the current government, the speed of this transi-
tion increased after the new government came into power in 2006. The 
Conservative Moderate Party, the largest party in the coalition, pre-
sented itself as the ‘new labour party’, suggesting that the welfare sys-
tems in place under social democratic governments had gone too far in 
supporting people outside of work and they had done too little to pro-
vide incentives for labour market integration and reintegration.
Measures introduced to achieve the goal of full employment 
included tax cuts for wage earners and a tightening of the social insur-
ance system with regard to both unemployment and illness. Stricter 
conditions were introduced, with more limited compensation provided 
and increased cost of participating in the unemployment insurance 
scheme. The general idea was to increase incentives for people to work. 
In terms of labour demand, measures included reducing worker costs 
for employers and expanding options for employing people on fixed-
term contracts. Both of these measures are regarded as advantageous 
for people currently outside of the labour market, as it enables them to 
more easily get a ‘foot in’.20 The active labour market measures that had 
played an important role in the social democratic policy vision, such as 
providing training opportunities for people out of employment, do not 
feature as much in the current approach. Since 2006, Sweden has seen a 
decline in such measures, with the focus instead primarily on matching 
people’s skills and qualifications with existing job opportunities, coach-
ing and increasing demands on job-seeking activities – all centred on 
the aim of swiftly getting unemployed people (back) into work21 (for a 
critical discussion see Syrén 2010).
In regard to migrant-specific policies in this area, the current gov-
ernment has retained the view of the previous government, that despite 
the commitment to general rather than targeted policies, additional 
measures are needed to support newcomers in the initial period after 
their arrival in Sweden. It has therefore introduced some labour mar-
ket measures aimed at newcomers in particular. One of these is called 
‘step-in jobs’. These jobs are subsidised by the government and tied to 
participation in the ‘Swedish for Immigrants’ language course. They are 
intended to stimulate employers to hire more people and to get new-
comers into the Swedish labour market as soon as possible.22 In line 
with the general policy emphasis on coaching and job-seeking activi-

206	
Maja Cederberg
ties, another measure introduced is the ‘development plan’ designed for 
each newcomer. Aside from language training and further educational 
activities, these plans include a survey of the individual’s previous qual-
ifications and employment experience, and various forms of support 
designed to facilitate employment entry provided by private actors to 
which the public labour agency has subcontracted the work.23
While some of these policies target migrants specifically, as we have 
seen, most are general policies aimed at the population as a whole. 
As such, their impact is felt across the board. Though policies do not 
affect everyone uniformly, they do have differential impacts on differ-
ent groups, given that they are introduced in the context of a society 
and labour market that is divided along lines of gender, ethnicity and 
class and where (gendered, racialised and classed) individuals have dif-
ferent access to rights and opportunities. For example, increased flexi-
bilisation of the labour market and the work force has different impacts 
on the different groups (Cook 1998). Those who are in a weaker posi-
tion in the labour market and socio-economically tend to be more 
strongly affected by, for example, employment instability and the eco-
nomic insecurity that follows from it. In turn, those effects are exac-
erbated by a less generous welfare regime, as the protection available 
for those outside of employment for the short or longer term is less 
accessible to certain groups. The changes to the social insurance sys-
tem discussed earlier are a case in point. They imply reduced access for 
some groups (those who do not fulfil certain criteria, such as employ-
ment continuity, and those who have opted out of the unemployment 
insurance scheme due to its increased cost). For those who are eligible, 
more limited compensation is available. In short, groups that display a 
more marginal position in the Swedish labour market are more likely to 
experience the negative effects of the changes. Amongst those groups 
are young people, women and non-European migrants (Jonsson & 
Wallette 2001; Cederberg & Anthias 2006; Mulinari 2006; Nelander, 
Acchiardo & Goding 2004; Schierup, Hansen & Castles 2006; Larsson 
2009; Schierup & Ålund 2011).
In the case of migrant women, and especially women from non-
European countries, statistics show that over time, they have become 
particularly prone to exclusion from the labour market. As already 
noted, this is the result of a variety of factors, including their qualifica-
tions and structural changes in the Swedish labour market that have 
made it more difficult for migrants to find a place therein, but also eth-
nic and gender discrimination. Aside from being severely affected by 
unemployment, migrant women from outside of Europe exhibit dis-
proportionately high levels of temporary employment (Jonsson & Wal-

gender, inequality and integration	
207
lette 2001; Nelander, Acchiardo & Goding 2004; De los Reyes 2007; scb 
2009).24
The government asserts that it is precisely the groups that hold a 
weaker position in the labour market that will benefit from the meas-
ures introduced, in the sense that they will be more easily incorpo-
rated. However, we must ask what this might mean in the longer term. 
Research evaluating the government’s labour market policy since 2006 
already suggests that the situation of vulnerable individuals and groups, 
including migrants, has not improved, and that gender inequalities per-
sist both within the migrant population and within society more widely 
(Syrén 2010). It is too early to know the long-term consequences of all 
these policy changes, but it seems important to consider some potential 
implications.
In times when the ability to be flexible is a great asset to employers, 
who need to respond to changing demands and economic fluctuations, 
could the increased leeway given to employers to dictate the terms and 
conditions of employment function to exacerbate rather than to solve 
the problem of exclusion? After all, a growing segment of the popula-
tion may come to experience a permanent instability and insecurity as a 
result of their temporary employment position. Furthermore, in such a 
scenario, increased restrictions on welfare and greater demands put on 
job seekers to enter any employment are likely to further limit employ-
ees’ bargaining power in relation to employers. In a discussion about 
migrant incorporation, what needs to be considered is the influence of 
labour market and socio-economic insecurities on migrants’ lives and 
integration prospects. These policies and structures have implications 
not only in terms of limited employment opportunities and vulnerabil-
ity to unemployment (as well as the reproduction of structural inequal-
ities in the labour market), but also in terms of people’s ability to plan 
for the future and develop a sense of stability and security (Nelander, 
Acchiardo & Goding 2004; Integrationsverket 2006; Mulinari 2006; 
Anthias et al. 2009).
Conclusion
This chapter considered the gendered effects of Swedish policies on 
migrant incorporation, focusing on two dimensions: the cultural and 
the socio-economic. In regard to the cultural dimension, it traced the 
policy shift from cultural group rights to an emphasis on the indi-
vidual and the promotion of social cohesion. Despite some important 
changes, the gendered dimensions of the policies and the surround-

208	
Maja Cederberg
ing debates have remained significant over time. The multicultural ap-
proach was found to be problematic from a gendered perspective for 
two reasons. First it provides for insufficient consideration of internal 
differences and power relations within migrant and ethnic minority 
groups. Second, it may contribute to ‘other’ gender roles and relations 
– represented through images of migrant women – being regarded as 
the ‘authentic core’ which should be protected and reproduced. Fur-
thermore, despite official commitment to cultural pluralism and ethnic 
diversity, policies have in reality been closely bound up with social hi-
erarchies, processes of inclusion and exclusion, and a general tendency 
to regard migrant or minority groups as ‘other’ to the majority Swed-
ish society. While this has implications for all members of minority 
groups, the gendered effects have been emphasised precisely because 
of the centrality of women to the representation of ethnic groups and 
boundaries.
Regarding the shift away from the multicultural approach, the fact 
that ‘other’ women are used as markers of cultural difference contin-
ues to have negative implications for migrant women, whose lives and 
opportunities remain constrained by stereotypes – despite concerns 
about the welfare of migrant women being prominent in the discourse. 
Furthermore, despite the common tendency to culturalise gendered 
violence and oppression within minority groups, this chapter empha-
sised the importance of considering the structural context of such prac-
tices, and thus not to ‘blame’ multicultural policies for their existence, 
nor to assume that abolishment of multiculturalism will automatically 
cause such practices to disappear. In other words, the issue is not merely 
one of allowing more or less cultural difference. It also involves improv-
ing the structural conditions under which migrants are supposed to 
‘integrate’, and in particular, building a more inclusive, equal and less 
discriminatory labour market and society.
In regard to the socio-economic dimension of migrant incorpora-
tion policies, this chapter focused in particular on rights and oppor-
tunities in the areas of employment and social welfare. It underscored 
that although employment has been regarded as central to migrant 
incorporation throughout the history of Swedish policy in this area, the 
wider context in which this idea has been introduced has changed over 
time, as have the details of how it has been implemented. Although pre-
vious policies centred on workers’ rights and equality did not prohibit 
the development of gender and ethnic divisions in the Swedish labour 
market (in part due to the ‘othering’ practices just discussed), accelerat-
ing deregulation and a more restricted welfare regime impacts particu-
larly negatively groups that already occupy the margins of the labour 

gender, inequality and integration	
209
market. Migrants – especially those from non-European countries and 
women – are disproportionately located in those margins.
It therefore seems important to go beyond the anti-exclusion rhetoric 
of the current government and consider the actual effects, or potential 
effects, of policies that set out to ‘include’. As those policies are in part 
designed to provide less security and protection for workers in order to 
‘encourage’ entry into employment, they do not appear to improve the 
structural conditions referred to above. Furthermore, to the extent that 
women migrants are particularly exposed to such lack of security and 
protection, the policies risk reproducing or even reinforcing the disad-
vantage that they experience. As such, the current approach appears 
problematic when considered from the perspective of the long-term 
‘integration’ of migrant women, not only in the labour market, but also 
in society more widely, where economic stability and security play an 
important role.
Notes
1	 Proposition 1975:26 Regeringens proposition om riktlinjer för invandrings – och 
minoritetspolitiken m.m.
2	 Proposition 1975:26 Regeringens proposition om riktlinjer för invandrings – och 
minoritetspolitiken m.m., 15, my translation.
3	 Proposition 1985/86:98 Om invandrarpolitiken.
4	 Proposition 1985/86:98 Om invandrarpolitiken; Proposition 1990/91:195 Om 
aktiv flyktings- och immigrationspolitik m.m; sou 1984:58. Invandrar – och 
minoritetspolitiken. Stockholm: Allmänna förlaget.
5	 Proposition 1985/86:98 Om invandrarpolitiken; Proposition 1990/91:195 Om 
aktiv flyktings- och immigrationspolitik m.m.
6	 Proposition 1997/98:16 Sverige, framtiden och mångfalden – från invandrarpoli-
tik till integrationspolitik.
7	 Proposition 1997/98:16 Sverige, framtiden och mångfalden – från invandrarpoli-
tik till integrationspolitik.
8	 Proposition 1997/98:16 Sverige, framtiden och mångfalden – från invandrarpoli-
tik till integrationspolitik.
9	 In particular, see the ‘Exclusion Maps’ produced by the Liberal Party to empha-
sise the growing problem of social and labour market exclusion and the alleged 
failure of the Social Democrats’ integration policy, e.g., Folkpartiet (2004).
10	 Skrivelse 2008/09:24 Egenmakt mot utanförskap – regeringens strategi för inte-
gration; Proposition 2008/09:1:13 Förslag till statsbudget för 2010. Integration 
och jämställdhet. Utgiftsområde; Proposition 2009/10:60 Nyanlända invandrares 
arbetsmarknadsetablering – egenansvar med professionellt stöd.
11	 Proposition 1985/86:98 Om invandrarpolitiken.

210	
Maja Cederberg
12	 See also Spivak (1993) and Mohanty (1988) on the gendered production of differ-
ence in colonial discourse.
13	 Skrivelse 2009/10:106 Dialog om samhällets värdegrund.
14	 Proposition 2009/10:188 Nationell sfi-bonus.
15	 Proposition 1975:26 Regeringens proposition om riktlinjer för invandrings- och 
minoritetspolitiken m.m.
16	 Proposition 1985/86:98 Om invandrarpolitiken; Proposition 1997/98:16 Sverige, 
framtiden och mångfalden – från invandrarpolitik till integrationspolitik.
17	 Proposition 1997/98:16 Sverige, framtiden och mångfalden – från invandrarpoli-
tik till integrationspolitik; Integrationsverket (2006).
18	 Proposition 1997/98:16 Sverige, framtiden och mångfalden – från invandrarpoli-
tik till integrationspolitik.
19	 See Schierenbeck (2004) for an interesting discussion of the role of ‘front-line 
bureaucrats’ in meetings between migrants and Swedish public institutions.
20	Proposition 2006/07:89 Ytterligare reformer inom arbetsmarknadspolitiken, 
m.m; Swedish Government Offices (2008) The Swedish Reform Programme for 
Growth and Employment 2008-2010; Skrivelse 2008/09:24 Egenmakt mot utan-
förskap – regeringens strategi för integration.
21	 Proposition 2009/10:60 Nyanlända invandrares arbetsmarknadsetablering – ege-
nansvar med professionellt stöd.
22	 Proposition 2008/09:1:13 Förslag till statsbudget för 2010. Integration och jäm-
ställdhet. Utgiftsområde 13.
23	 sou 2008:58 Egenansvar – med professionellt stöd. Stockholm: Fritzes.
24	 Skrivelse 2008/09:24 Egenmakt mot utanförskap – regeringens strategi för inte-
gration.
References
Ålund, A. (1999), ‘Feminism, multiculturalism, essentialism’, in N. Yuval-Davis & 
P. Werbner (eds), Women, citizenship and difference, pp. 147-162. London & New 
York: Zed Books.
Ålund, A. (1991), Lilla Juga. Helsingborg: Carlsson.
Ålund, A. & C.U. Schierup (1993), ‘The thorny road to Europe: Swedish immigrant 
policy in transition’, in J. Wrench & J. Solomos (eds), Racism and migration in 
Western Europe, pp. 99-115. Oxford: Berg Publishers.
Ålund, A. & C.U. Schierup (1991), Paradoxes of multiculturalism. Aldershot: Aves-
bury.
Anthias, F., M. Cederberg, T. Barber & R. Ayres (2009), ‘Welfare regimes, labour 
market policies, and the experiences of female migrants’, in M. Kontos (ed.), 
Integration of female immigrants in labour market and society: A comparative 
analysis, pp. 15-21. Frankfurt Am Main: Institute of Social Research at the Goethe 
Institute.
Anthias, F. & N. Yuval-Davis (1992), Racialised boundaries: Race, nation, gender, col-
our and class and the anti-racist struggle. London: Routledge.

gender, inequality and integration	
211
Behtoui, A. (2008), ‘Informal recruitment methods and disadvantages of immigrants 
in the Swedish labour market’, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 34 (3): 411-
430.
Behtoui, A. & A. Neergaard (2010), ‘Social capital and wage disadvantages among 
immigrant workers’, Work, Employment and Society 24 (4): 761-779.
Bevelander, P. (2005), ‘The employment status of immigrant women: The case of Swe-
den’, International Migration Review 39 (1): 173-202.
Bevelander, P. (1999), ‘The employment integration of immigrants in Sweden’, Journal 
of Ethnic and Migration Studies 25 (3): 445-469.
Bevelander, P. & C. Lundh (2007), ‘Employment integration of refugees: The influ-
ence of local factors on refugee job opportunities in Sweden’, iza Discussion Paper 
2551. Bonn: Institute for the Study of Labor.
Borevi, K. (2004), ‘Den svenska diskursen om staten, integrationen och föreningsli-
vet’, in Föreningsliv, makt och integration, pp. 31-65. Governmental Report ds 49.
Borevi, K. (2002), Välfärdsstaten i det mångkulturella samhället. PhD dissertation, 
Uppsala University.
Borevi, K. (1998), ‘Svensk invandrarpolitik under (om)formulering’, Politica 30 (2): 
168-182.
Boris, E. (1995), ‘The racialized gendered state: Constructions of citizenship in the 
United States’, Social Politics 2 (2): 160-181.
Boyd, M. (1999), ‘Gender, refugee status and permanent settlement’, Gender Issues 
17 (1): 5-25.
Brune, Y. (2003), ‘“Invandrare” i mediearkivets typgalleri’, in P. de los Reyes, I. Molina 
& D. Mulinari (eds), Maktens (o)lika förklädnader: kön, klass och etnicitet i det 
postkoloniala Sverige, pp. 150-181. Stockholm: Atlas.
Brune, Y. (1998), Mörk magi i vita medier. Stockholm: Carlssons.
Cederberg, M. (2012), ‘Migrant networks and beyond: Exploring the value of the 
notion of social capital for making sense of ethnic inequalities’, Acta Sociologica 
55 (1): 59-72.
Cederberg, M. (2006), Everyday racism in Malmö, Sweden: The experiences of Bos-
nians and Somalis, PhD thesis, Nottingham Trent University.
Cederberg, M. & F. Anthias (2006), ‘National report: Key informants’ interviews – the 
Swedish case’, Report WP 2, FeMiPol Project. www.femipol.uni-frankfurt.de/docs/
working_papers/wp2/Sweden.pdf.
Cook, J. (1998), ‘Flexible employment: Implications for gender and citizenship in the 
European Union’, New Political Economy 3 (2): 261-277.
Daragahi, H. (2002), ‘“Hedersmodets” anatomi. Om integrationspolitik, kultur 
och kvinnors rättigheter’, in Törnrosalandet. Om tillhörighet och utanförskap. 
Norrköping: Integrationsverket.
De los Reyes, P. (2007), Etnisk diskriminering i Arbetslivet: Kunskapsläge och kun-
skapsbehov. Stockholm: Swedish Trade Union Confederation.
De los Reyes, P. (2003), Patriarkala enklaver eller ingenmansland? Våld, hot och kon-
troll mot unga kvinnor i Sverige. Norrköping: Integrationsverket.
De los Reyes, P. (2000), ‘Folkhemmets paradoxer: Genus och etnicitet i den svenska 
modellen’, Kvinnovetenskaplig tidskrift 2: 27-47.

212	
Maja Cederberg
De los Reyes, P., I. Molina & D. Mulinari (2003), Maktens (o)lika förklädnader: Kön, 
klass och etnicitet i det postkoloniala Sverige. Stockholm: atlas Förlag.
Folkpartiet (2004), Utanförskapets karta: En kartläggning över utanförskapet i Sverige. 
Stockholm: Folkpartiet.
Geddes, A. (2003), The politics of migration and immigration in Europe. London: Sage.
Integrationsverket (2006), Rapport Integration 2005.Norrköping: Integrationsverket.
Integrationsverket (2005), Introduktion för nyanlända invandrare – enkätundersök-
ning 2004, Integrationsverkets rapportserie 2005: 01.
Integrationsverket (2004), Integration var god dröj, Integrationsverkets rapportserie 
2004: 01.
Jonsson, A. & M. Wallette (2001), ‘Är utländska medborgare segmenterade mot aty-
piska arbeten?’, Arbetsmarknad & Arbetsliv 7 (3): 153-168.
Knocke, W. (2001), ‘Att vara kvinna och invandrare i det svenska arbetslivet’ in 
L. Gonäs, G. Lindgren & C. Bildt (eds), Könssegregering i Arbetslivet, pp. 25-36. 
Stockholm: Arbetslivsinstitutet.
Knocke, W. (1999), ‘The labour market for immigrant women in Sweden: Marginal-
ised women in low-valued jobs’, in J. Wrench, A. Rea & N. Ouali (eds), Migrants, 
ethnic minorities and the labour market: Integration and exclusion in Europe, pp. 
108-131. London: Macmillan.
Knocke, W. (1994), ‘Kön, etnicitet och teknisk utveckling’, in C.U. Schierup & S. Paul-
son (eds), Arbetets etniska delning: Studier från en svensk bilindustri. Stockholm: 
Carlsson.
Knocke, W. (1986), Invandrade kvinnor i lönearbete och fack. Forskningsrapport nr 53. 
Stockholm: Arbetslivscentrum.
Kofman, E. (2007), ‘The knowledge economy, gender and stratified migrations’, Stud-
ies in Social Justice 1 (2): 122-135.
Kofman, E. (2005), ‘Gendered migrations, livelihoods and entitlements in European 
welfare regimes’, unrisd Working Paper. Geneva: United Nations Research Insti-
tute for Social Development
Kofman, E. (2004), ‘Gendered global migrations: Diversity and stratification’, Inter-
national Feminist Journal of Politics 6 (4): 642-664.
Kofman, E. (1999), ‘Female “birds of passage” a decade later: Gender and immigration 
in the European Union’, International Migration Review 33 (2) (Summer): 269-299.
Kofman, E., A. Phizacklea, P. Raghuram & R. Sales (2000), Gender and international 
migration in Europe: Employment, welfare and politics. London: Routledge.
Kontos, M. (ed.) (2009), Integration of female immigrants in labour market and soci-
ety: A comparative analysis. Frankfurt Am Main: Institute of Social Research at 
the Goethe Institute.
Kymlicka, W. (1995), Multicultural citizenship. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Larsson, M. (2009), Anställningsformer år 2009: Fast och tidsbegränsat anställda efter 
klass och kön år 1990-2009. Stockholm: Landsorganisationen.
Lister, R. (2003), Citizenship: Feminist perspectives. New York: New York University 
Press.
Mohanty, C. (1988), ‘Under Western eyes: Feminist scholarship and colonial dis-
courses’, Feminist Review 30 (August): 61-88.

gender, inequality and integration	
213
Molina, I. & P. de los Reyes (2002), ‘Kalla mörkret natt! Kön, klass och ras/etnicitet 
i det postkoloniala Sverige’, in P. De los Reyes, I. Molina & D. Mulinari (eds), 
Maktens (o)lika förklädnader. Kön, klass & etnicitet i det postkoloniala Sverige, 
pp. 295-317. Stockholm: Atlas
Morokvasic, M. (1984), ‘Birds of passage are also women’, International Labour Review 
18 (4): 886-907.
Mulinari, P. (2006), ‘Den andra arbetskraften: Exotisering och rasism på arbetsplat-
sen’, in sou 2006:59 Arbetslivets (o)synliga murar. Stockholm: Fritzes.
Nelander, S., M. Acchiardo & I. Goding (2004), Integration 2004: Fakta och kunskap, 
Stockholm: Swedish Trade Union Confederation.
Pateman, C. (1988), The sexual contract. Palo Alto: Stanford University Press.
Phizacklea, A. (ed.) (1983), One way ticket. Routledge: London.
Piper, N. (2006), ‘Gendering the politics of migration’, International Migration Review 
40 (1): 133-164.
scb (2009), Integration: Utrikes födda på arbetsmarknaden. Stockholm: Statistics 
Sweden.
Schierenbeck, I. (2004), ‘En Välfärdsstat för alla? Frontlinjebyråkrater och invan-
drarklienter’ in sou 2004:49 Engagemang, mångfald och integration. Stockholm: 
Fritzes.
Schierup, C.U. & A. Ålund (2011), ‘The end of Swedish exceptionalism? Citizenship, 
neoliberalism and the politics of exclusion’, Race & Class 53: 45-64.
Schierup, C.U., P. Hansen & S. Castles (2006), Migration, citizenship, and the Euro-
pean welfare state: A European dilemma. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Schierup, C.U. & S. Paulsson (1994), Arbetets etniska delning. Studier från en svensk 
bilindustri. Stockholm: Carlssons Bokförlag.
Schrover, M. (2010), ‘Pillarization, multiculturalism and cultural freezing’, bmgn/ 
lchr 125 (2-3): 329-354.
Schrover, M. (2009), ‘Family in Dutch migration policy 1945-2005’, The History of the 
Family 14: 191-202.
Siim, B. (2000), Gender and citizenship: Politics and agency in France, Britain and 
Denmark. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Soininen, M. (1999), ‘The “Swedish model” as an institutional framework for immi-
grant membership rights’, Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 25 (4): 685-702.
sou (2008: 58), Egenansvar: Med professionellt stöd. Stockholm: Fritzes.
sou (2006: 79), Integrationens svarta bok: Agenda för jämlikhet och social samman-
hållning. Slutbetänkande av Utredningen om makt, integration och strukturell 
diskriminering. Stockholm: Fritzes.
sou (2006: 60), På tröskeln till lönearbete: Diskriminering, exkludering och under-
ordning av personer med utländsk bakgrund. Rapport av Utredningen om makt, 
integration och strukturell diskriminering. Stockholm: Fritzes.
sou (2006: 59), Arbetslivets (o)synliga murar. Rapport av Utredningen om makt, inte-
gration och strukturell diskriminering. Stockholm: Fritzes.
sou (1984: 58), Invandrar- och minoritetspolitiken. Stockholm: Allmänna förlaget.
Spivak, G. (1993), ‘Can the subaltern speak?’, in P. Williams (ed.), Colonial discourse 
and post-colonial theory, pp. 66-111. Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf.

214	
Maja Cederberg
Syrén, M. (2010), Vad har hänt med den aktiva arbetsmarknadspolitiken? Stockholm: 
Swedish Trade Union Confederation.
Taylor, C. (1994), Multiculturalism and the politics of recognition. Princeton: Princeton 
University Press.
Yuval-Davis, N. (1997), Gender and nation. London: Sage.

9  Take off that veil and give me access  
to your body
An analysis of Danish debates  
about Muslim women’s head and body covering
Rikke Andreassen
Introduction
This chapter analyses two Danish debates about Muslim women’s head 
and body covering. One of these debates focuses on a 2007 prohibi-
tion of fully-veiled women from working in the Danish public sector; 
the other involves a 2009 proposal to outlaw full veiling (burqas and 
niqabs) in Denmark. These debates function as a window to a broader 
understanding of how categories of race and ethnicity, gender, sexu-
ality, religion and nationality are constructed. The chapter shows that 
these debates have played important roles in excluding Muslims from 
the Danish community, and that within them, gender, gender equal-
ity and sexual liberty became hostages in nationalist constructs of the 
Danish nation as white.
Materials and methods
Over the past decade, Muslim women’s head and body covering has 
been an integral part of Danish debates about migrants and integration. 
Most debates have been about the ‘hijab’, the headscarf that covers the 
hair and shoulders and represents the most prevalent type of headwear 
among Danish Muslims. Recently the debate has changed from a focus 
on hijabs to an emphasis on niqabs and burqas, which are the veils that 
fully cover a woman’s face and body (Siim & Andreassen 2010). Most 
Nordic research on veiling has concentrated on the hijab.
This chapter expands on previous research and sheds light on recent 
debates about full facial veiling. The sources for the analyses are mainly 
media representations of debates (on television, in newspapers and on 
websites), especially politicians’ utterances in these debates. Based on 
the theoretical foundation of social constructivism (Foucault 1990: 93 
ff; Butler 1999: 43 f.) and intersectionality (Crenshaw 1991), the meth-

216	
Rikke Andreassen
odological approach is a combination of discourse analysis (Laclau & 
Mouffe 1985) and frame analysis (Verloo & Lombardo 2007). Media 
reports on these debates function as a window to a broader under-
standing of how categories of race and ethnicity, gender, sexuality and 
nationality are constructed and contested. The study analyses how 
these constructions play into minorities’ inclusions or exclusions in the 
national community. As the chapter will demonstrate, the two cases 
studied imply a demand that women be physically accessible in order 
to receive citizenship rights and to be included in the national com-
munity. It argues that debates about veiling are not simply about ‘white 
men wanting to save brown women from brown men’, as Spivak (1993) 
put it, even though that is at play. Debates about and representations of 
veiled Muslim women also contribute to the construction of the Danish 
nation as racially and ethnically white.
The stereotype of the ‘oppressed migrant woman’
To fully understand the significance of debates about veiling, it is ben-
eficial to examine how Muslim women have been represented dur-
ing previous decades in Denmark. For the majority of Danes, the 
media constitute the main source of information about racial and 
ethnic minorities (Andreassen 2005: 5). The term ‘racial and ethnic 
minorities’ refers to migrants and their descendants of colour or of 
a non-Danish ethnicity. This chapter underscores the racial aspect of 
migration and integration by explicitly referring to the raciality of mi-
grants and their descendants instead of simply referring to migrants 
and their descendants as ‘ethnic’, as most researchers do. Analyses of 
the Danish news media have shown that communications about ra-
cial and ethnic minorities have been replete with negative stereotypes 
(Andreassen 2007). Since the 1970s, one dominant stereotype has 
been the ‘oppressed migrant woman’. This stereotype is constructed 
via stories about female racial and ethnic minorities as victims of do-
mestic violence, arranged and forced marriages, and honour killings. 
The news media often explain these oppressions with reference to mi-
grants’ culture or to Islam. In other words, women are being oppressed 
because of their culture or religion, and the men who oppress them 
are characterised as typical representatives of their culture or religion. 
This differs from the news reports of domestic violence and murders 
committed by Christian, ethnically Danish men. Here, the men are 
not described as representatives of Danish culture or of Christianity; 
rather they are presented as individuals for whom something has gone 

take off that veil and give me access to your body	
217
wrong. In the 1990s, stereotypes about the oppressed migrant woman 
gained a new feature; namely, her portrayal as veiled. Numerous news 
reports, especially during the 2000s, focused on female Muslim mi-
grants’ and their descendants’ headscarves and veils. Many of these 
stories involved veiled women and employment. The news media have 
primarily presented headscarves and veils as oppressive to women. An 
integrated part of the news media’s construction of female racial and 
ethnic minorities as oppressed is a parallel construction of ethnically 
Danish women as liberated. Most news stories compare these minor-
ity women directly or indirectly to ethnically Danish women. Since 
racial and ethnic minority women are presented as oppressed and as 
victims of a patriarchal culture, the ethnically Danish women, who are 
presented in binary opposition to the minority women, appear as lib-
erated and as living in a female emancipated culture (Andreassen 2005: 
124 ff., 2007: 28 ff.).
These news stories leave television viewers and newspaper readers 
with the impression that the racial and ethnic minority population and 
the ethnically Danish majority population are each others’ opposites 
and live very different lives. In other words, the news is reported in an 
‘us’ versus ‘them’ way. In the news stories, racial and ethnic minorities, 
as well as ethnic Danes, are presented as a homogenous group, and the 
news seldom differentiates between the minorities’ different national, 
racial, ethnic and religious affiliations or their citizenship status.
Veiling and employment
During the spring of 2007, the debate about veiled women and employ-
ment took a new turn. The debate began when the alderperson from 
Odense, the third largest city in Denmark, Jane Jegind, of the right-
wing Liberal Party (Venstre), and the vice major, Alex Ahrendsen, of 
the right-wing, populist Danish People’s Party (Dansk folkeparti), an-
nounced that the municipality would not give financial support to fully 
veiled day-care providers. In Denmark, municipalities cover 75% of 
private day-care expenses. The introduction to a prime-time news clip 
aired by the Danish public service station DR described the situation:
Can one be covered like this, in a burqa, when one is working as a 
day-care provider? That question has cause a stir among the munici-
pality politicians in Odense. The City Counsel’s Children and Youth 
Alderperson will prevent a burqa-covered Muslim woman from be-
ing a day care provider. The then Minister of Family Affairs, Carina 

218	
Rikke Andreassen
Christensen, supports her [the alderperson] and is working towards a 
ban [of burqa-dressed day care providers].1
	
The leader of the Office for Space and Capacity Management of the 
Centre for Children and Youth in Copenhagen, Jan Dehn, also spoke 
in the news clip. He explained why he believes that day-care providers 
should not be veiled:
Pedagogically, one needs to relate to children. And the child needs to 
be able to mimic happiness, sadness, worry, fear, pleasure. That can, 
among others, be read in the face, and that is why we [the Copenha-
gen municipality] have chosen to say that it is not compatible with the 
work of a day care provider to wear a burqa.2
	
The Odense day-care controversy quickly spread to other munici-
palities and cities. A few days later, the municipalities of Copenhagen, 
Frederiksberg (part of greater Copenhagen), Aarhus (the second larg-
est city in Denmark) and Odense proclaimed that they did not want 
veiled women as employees in the public sector. They would there-
fore revoke social welfare benefits (bistandshjælp) of women in bur-
qas, because the women’s way of dressing was interpreted as preventing 
their availability to enter the workforce. According to news reports, ‘If 
she is unemployed because she insists on her burqa, then she has in 
reality resigned from the labour market. And then she and her sisters 
can lose social welfare benefits.’3 Interviews were broadcast of munici-
pal politicians representing the right-wing liberal party and the social 
democrats, who stated that veiled women did not want to be active par-
ticipants on the labour market. Gert Bjerregaard, alderperson for Social 
Affairs in Aarhus municipality, representing the liberals, argued, ‘If one 
is at the labour market’s disposal, then one needs to send a signal that 
one wishes to enter the labour market, and one does not do that if one 
is covered and wearing a burqa.’4
A majority of journalists and politicians refer to full facial cover-
ing as a ‘burqa’. Burqa is, however, the term for a traditional Afghani 
piece of clothing that covers the face and body. In Denmark, very few 
women wear burqas, although some wear niqabs (the piece of clothing 
that covers the face except for a narrow opening in front of the eyes). 
Journalists and politicians are likely actually referring to niqabs when 
they speak about ‘burqas’, as it makes little sense to legislate the wearing 
of burqas when there are virtually no burqas in the Danish cityscape. 
This confusion of terms illustrates politicians’ and journalists’ lack of 
knowledge about veiling.

take off that veil and give me access to your body	
219
In the media, no journalists questioned the politicians’ claim that 
it is the individual woman’s responsibility whether she is employed or 
not. Neither did any journalist suggest that one reason for veiled wom-
en’s unemployment could be that some employers may discriminate 
against veiled women. Instead journalists, like the politicians, blamed 
the women for their lack of employment. This is an illustration of the 
so-called ‘blame the victim’ rhetoric.
Similar to the municipalities’ demand that their employees should 
not be covered, the then Minister of Employment, Claus Hjort Fred-
eriksen, representing the liberals, argued that all women working in 
state or municipal jobs must show their faces and shake hands with 
men. A news clip about the handshake requirement opened with foot-
age of Claus Hjort Frederiksen happily shaking hands with a woman 
news reporter.5 After this he said, ‘Public employees are not allowed to 
discriminate between men and women. Therefore all employees need to 
greet men and women similarly, and in this country we greet by shak-
ing hands with one another … We are demanding just three things: 
that we can see who you are; that one does not discriminate between 
men and women; and then of course we can make demands for social 
security reasons.’6 The social democrats’ spokesperson on integration 
issues, Henrik Sass Larsen, argued that there can be variation in the 
demand for handshakes: ‘In situations where we as citizens meet the 
service in the public sector, it is fair to demand that we can see who we 
are talking to. And I also think it is very fair that people shake hands. 
But in all other job situations, it must be the individual workplace that 
decides the rules.’7
It is interesting that it is the liberal party that wants to dictate 
national rules for clothing and behaviour, and the social democrats, 
who would leave clothing and behaviour regulations to the individual 
workplace. This illustrates that in debates where race and ethnicity, reli-
gion, gender and nationality intersect, traditional political viewpoints 
and divisions seem to disappear. Traditionally, the liberals have argued 
that employers and employees should decide working rules and regula-
tions among themselves, whereas the social democrats have argued that 
rules and regulations ought to be centralised. The traditional division 
between right-wing (the liberals) and left-wing (the social democrats) 
in relation to the labour market is subverted in discussions about Mus-
lim women’s veils.
Interestingly no complaints have emerged about publicly employed 
women wearing burqas or niqabs. And no problems have been docu-
mented with publicly employed women refusing to shake hands. There-
fore, the Danish public witnessed a series of debates and discussions 

220	
Rikke Andreassen
about Muslim women’s wearing of veils and refusal to shake hands, 
even though it was never an actual problem. Similarly, in December 
2007, intense debate and discussions followed a decision by the high 
school Egaa Gymnasium in Aarhus to ban students from dressing in 
burqas, despite the fact no student had actually worn a burqa or niqab 
at the school.
Women must be physically available in order  
to gain citizenship rights
Applying feminist analysis, one can interpret the demand for women to 
remove full body covering and be willing to shake hands as a demand 
for accessibility. Women have to be physically accessible in order to be 
full members of Danish society and to be included in the Danish wel-
fare system. The municipal politician as responsible for taking social 
benefits away from fully veiled women, the liberal Gert Bjerregaard, 
argued, ‘We do not think it promotes integration to wear a burqa in 
situations where one is about to enter the labour market. To me it is 
about being open and accessible, and one does not signal that [open-
ness and accessibility] with a burqa.’8 Apparently, it is not possible for 
a woman to be part of Danish society if she cannot be seen or touched. 
This means that a woman can only be a fully included member of Dan-
ish society and the welfare system if she is bodily available for the male 
gaze and the male touch.
Quite literally the politician Søren Espersen, representing the Dan-
ish People’s Party, argued against veiling because he wants to gaze at 
women. He said, ‘I want to be allowed to see Muslim women’s nice 
breasts.’9 This comment was uttered in a debate about multiculturalism, 
which Espersen, along with his party, argues against. Apparently, one 
of the benefits of the monocultural ethnically Danish society is, accord-
ing to Espersen, the free access to (viewing) women’s bodies (see also 
Thuesen 2009).
No burqas allowed
The prohibition of full facial coverage among public employees was fol-
lowed by a suggestion of a complete burqa ban in 2009. The ban was 
a vital aspect of the Conservative Party’s integration initiative ‘Demo-
cratic Integration.’10 The then conservative spokesperson on integration 
issues, Naser Khader, launched the initiative with the comment, ‘We 

take off that veil and give me access to your body	
221
do not want to see burqas in Denmark. We simply cannot accept that 
some of our citizens are covering their face.’11 This prohibition was not 
targeted at a specific group of veiled women, (e.g., women in public em-
ployment), but at all covered women. Fully veiled women were not to 
be allowed anywhere in Denmark. The ‘Democratic Integration’ initia-
tive states, ‘We do not like clothing that signals oppression, as the burqa 
does. We will work towards a prohibition against burqas.’12 Originally, 
Khader argued that burqas should be prohibited even in people’s pri-
vate homes: ‘If we were to allow people to wear burqas in their own 
backyard then we would have to allow many exceptions [from the pro-
hibition]. Therefore we need to be consistent and argue that the burqa 
does not belong in Denmark.’ However, it was never the party’s official 
policy to prohibit burqas in all private spheres; officially the proposed 
prohibition aimed at prohibiting burqas in all Danish public spaces.13 
As with the previous prohibition of ‘burqas’ in the public sector, this 
prohibition was mainly targeted against niqabs, which mistakenly were 
named burqas. The Danish People’s Party and the social democrats sup-
ported the prohibition, whereas the other governing party, the liberals, 
opposed it. As a compromise, the government (made up of both liber-
als and conservatives) decided to appoint a ‘burqa committee’, to map 
the burqa situation in Denmark. The committee delivered its report in 
2009, concluding that just 100 to 200 women were fully covered (wear-
ing niqabs or burqas) in Denmark (Thuesen 2009).
The proposed prohibition of burqas is a serious encroachment on 
people’s privacy, as well as on the right to freedom of religion. A gen-
eral prohibition of burqas and niqabs would likely violate the Danish 
Constitution, which guarantees freedom of religion (paragraph 67) and 
prohibits religious discrimination (paragraph 70). It would also violate 
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, as this similarly guarantees 
freedom of religion (article 18) and prohibits discrimination (article 7). 
In the end, the conservatives never proposed their burqa ban in parlia-
ment, both because liberals were against it and because legal advisors 
told them that such ban would violate constitutional rights. Tradition-
ally, a political party checks with its legal advisors to determine if a 
proposal is legal before proposing it. Therefore, one can question why 
this procedure was not followed in the burqa case; one reason could be 
that members of the Conservative Party knew that the proposal could 
not pass but wanted the publicity gained from suggesting it. The Dan-
ish People’s Party, which initially supported the ban, and whose mem-
bers are known as the most Islam-critical in the Danish Parliament, 
will now propose the burqa ban in parliament. The social democrats, 
who similarly supported the ban initially, ended up arguing in favour 

222	
Rikke Andreassen
of a general ban, while arguing against voting for such a ban: ‘We still 
find that burqas are a violation of women and we initially found that a 
ban was a good idea. But all experts that we have spoken to, tell us that 
such ban most likely would violate the Constitution. And we have to 
accept that.’ Henrik Sass Larsen, who was the social democrats’ political 
spokesperson at the time, adds, ‘I understand the Danish People’s Par-
ty’s intention [of proposing the ban in parliament], which I sympathise 
with.’14 In order words, the social democrats would ban full veiling if it 
was legally possible to do so.
Gender equality as a hostage in a nationalist struggle
All parties in favour of a burqa ban argue against veiling because they 
consider it oppressive to women. At the same time they hold veiled 
women themselves responsible for their supposed oppression. In these 
debates, Muslim women and their clothing or veils become not only 
the symbol of the oppression but also its essence. The solution to end 
the oppression is the removal of their clothing and a forced bodily 
integration onto the unveiled Danish society. The debates are illustra-
tive of a ‘blame the victim’ rhetoric; the women are blamed for their 
own oppression. Veiled women are held responsible for their religious 
community’s supposed female oppression. This implies a perception 
of women as the bodily reproducers of the community (Lutz, Phoe-
nix & Yuval-Davis 1995: 9). Veiled women mark with their bodies 
the imagined separation between an imagined Danish (liberated fe-
male) community and an imagined Muslim (oppressed female) com-
munity.
During the previous decade’s debates about headscarves, one of 
the dominant arguments against hijabs was the perception that head-
scarves are oppressive to women. A remark by Peter Skaarup, the vice-
president of Danish People’s Party, is illustrative of politicians’ argu-
ments against veiling:
In Denmark, we have experienced a change in our society during the 
previous 20, 30, 40 years, where women and men have become equal, 
and according to Danish norms it is discriminatory to wear a veil. The 
fact that women must hide their sexuality, cover their hair, that is, in 
a Danish context, an expression of a devaluation of the woman … 
and that is what we have fought against with our struggle for gender 
equality, and therefore the veil is a problem for our society … We have 
been fighting for this women’s emancipation and gender equality … 

take off that veil and give me access to your body	
223
The right thing is therefore to ban the veil and live accordingly to our 
customs here in Denmark.15
	
Skaarup represents a growing number of white, Christian male pol-
iticians who recently became very engaged in debates about Muslim 
women’s rights and Islam as a religion that oppresses women. These 
politicians did not previously participate in feminist struggles, nor 
did they express feminist views. But when arguing against veiling, 
they inscribe themselves into the historical women’s struggle. Skaarup 
argues, ‘[W]e have fought against [discrimination] with our struggle 
for gender equality … We have been fighting for this women’s eman-
cipation and gender equality.’ In so doing, he presents himself and his 
party as active participants in women’s emancipation over the previous 
decades. This is not historically accurate. The Danish People’s Party has 
not voted in favour of laws or proposals aimed at limiting the oppres-
sion of women or at increasing gender equality in Denmark. Neither 
has the Danish People’s Party’s predecessor, the Progressive Party. Gen-
erally these politicians were not involved in women’s rights before they 
became engaged in debates about veiling. Therefore they seem to speak 
in favour of women’s rights and feminism when feminism can be used 
as an anti-Muslim tool. For these politicians, arguments about gen-
Ill. 9.1  Danish Muslim women demonstrate for the right to veil. The sign says, ‘The 
headscarf is my choice, my right, my freedom’. The man in the picture is the liberal 
­Bertel Haarder, who was Minister of Integration at the time. Photo: Freddy Hagen

224	
Rikke Andreassen
der and gender equality seem to be used to support their anti-Muslim 
and anti-immigrant agendas. Such politicians, and the initiatives they 
represent (e.g., a burqa ban), commonly presume that gender equality 
already exists in Denmark. They present Danes as living in a society 
with gender equality, ignoring the numerous remaining gender ine-
qualities, such as lack of equal pay, lack of women in leadership posi-
tions, lack of women in politics and domestic violence.
These politicians’ rhetoric and claims about Islam as a religion that 
is oppressive to women and about Danish Muslim women as living 
gender-oppressed lives illustrate what Spivak (1993) has called ‘white 
men wanting to save brown women from brown men’. But in the Dan-
ish situation, it is not only white men who want to save brown women, 
but also brown men, including conservative spokesperson Khader, 
who is of Syrian origin. I have argued elsewhere that Khader’s attack 
on veiled women is a way for him to demonstrate whiteness and Dan-
ishness; hence, his exclusion of veiled women from the Danish com-
munity becomes his own way into the Danish community (Andreas-
sen 2010a). Common among these Danish men (white and brown) is 
their wish to save brown women (i.e., veiled women), without includ-
ing their voices in their politics and without listening to their reasons 
for veiling.
Frantz Fanon (1965: 63) has described the Algerian war of inde-
pendence (1954-1962) as a French struggle aimed at ‘unveiling Algeria’. 
Fanon (ibid.: 46 f) argued that ‘it was the colonist’s frenzy to unveil 
the Algerian woman, it was his gamble on winning the battle of the 
veil’, because unveiling would imply ‘bring[ing] this [Algerian] woman 
within his reach, to make her a possible object of possession’ (ibid.: 
44). This seems to parallel Danish politicians’ attempts to unveil Dan-
ish Muslim women in order to liberate them from supposed oppression 
and in order for the women to be fully – bodily accessible – subjects in 
the Danish nation. Indeed, to be a fully integrated subject in the Dan-
ish nation and to receive full citizenship rights, one must unveil and 
become an object of possession for these men’s gaze and touch.
The Danish political battle against veiling is about gender, but in 
the battle gender and gender equality became hostages in a national-
ist struggle. This struggle is not as much about gender equality as it is 
about excluding certain people, Muslim migrants and their descend-
ants, from the Danish community. Among the ways that the struggle 
is being played out is by presenting ethnically Danish, white, Chris-
tian culture as positive and liberated through a negative stereotypical 
presentation of the ‘other’, the Muslim, coloured culture as oppressive 
to women. It is interesting to note how gendered crimes like domestic 

take off that veil and give me access to your body	
225
violence, honour killings and forced marriages are vocalised in debates 
about racial and ethnic minorities while the same gendered crimes 
are made invisible in relation to migration policies, as documented by 
Boyd & Nowak in this volume. Both situations (visibility in debates 
about multiculturalism and invisibility in migration policies) result in 
minority women’s exclusion.
White sexual liberation and the colour of homophobia
This national struggle is not only taking place in the arena of gender 
and minority women but also in debates about sexual minorities. Since 
2001, when the Copenhagen Gay (lgtb) Pride Parade was attacked 
by a small group of men of Middle Eastern origin, Danish media and 
politicians have tended to associate discrimination of sexual minorities 
with racial minorities, and especially with Muslim racial minorities. 
The attack took place in Noerrebro, where there is a high concentration 
of racial and ethnic minorities among its residents. The leader of the 
Danish People’s Party, Pia Kjærsgaard, wrote the following about the 
Noerrebro attack:
Today Noerrebro has changed … The tolerance is gone. And one of 
the main reasons is because Noerrebro has become a Muslim enclave. 
And where Islam goes in, tolerance goes out … Last summer, a pro-
cession called Gay Pride was harmed. It is gays and lesbians in a fes-
tive manifestation. It is a little wild but rather harmless. But the Mus-
lim brotherhood out there did not think so – and the homosexuals 
had to run the gauntlet … We [the Danish People’s Party] will work 
towards getting Noerrebro back. So the tolerance and broad-minded-
ness again can exist [there].16
	
According to Kjærsgaard, homophobia in Denmark is a result of 
recent (Muslim) immigration.
For the first time in Danish history, a young Muslim woman with a 
hijab, Asmaa Abdol-Hamid, ran for a seat in parliament in 2007. Dur-
ing the election, Abdol-Hamid was repeatedly asked by Danish jour-
nalists about her attitudes towards gender equality and homosexuality. 
She answered repeatedly that she is a feminist and in favour of gen-
der equality and sexual minorities’ rights. Despite this, the news media 
continuously treated Abdol-Hamid as if she was against gender equal-
ity and as if she disliked homosexuals and opposed giving them equal 
rights.17

226	
Rikke Andreassen
Homosexuality and sexual minorities’ rights have never been domi-
nating issues in Danish elections. But they apparently became a hot 
topic with a hijab-wearing Muslim candidate running for office. The 
hijab seems to convey notions of homophobia and gender oppression; 
notions that stick so strongly that they seem impossible to get rid of 
verbally (Ahmed 2004: 44 f.). None of the ethnically Danish candidates 
were questioned about their support – or lack of support – for gender 
equality or sexual minorities’ rights during the 2007 election campaign. 
No candidates with headscarves or veils ran for office during the 2011 
election.
Similar to the debates about veiling, where gender equality becomes 
constructed as a national Danish value, sexual liberty and tolerance 
towards sexual minorities are framed as integrated features of Dan-
ish society, and ethnic Danes are presented as tolerant towards sex-
ual minorities. Hence, homophobia and discrimination against sexual 
minorities become features of the racially and religiously diverse soci-
ety.
In Kjærsgaard’s representation, (white) homosexuals come to rep-
resent Denmark, and an attack on them is therefore an attack on the 
nation. In this racialised narrative, harming the white gay or lesbian 
body equates with harming the whole nation. Often homosexuals have 
been excluded from the national community and have had limited citi-
zenship rights and welfare state rights (Richardson 1998). Historically, 
homosexuals have been framed as ‘the other’, against which main-
stream heterosexual society has constructed itself. In recent Danish 
narratives, the homosexuals’ race appears to dominate at the expense 
of their sexuality. The whiteness of the homosexual body compensates 
for the alienation of the minority sexuality. In these debates, Danish 
nationality is constructed around an inclusion of the white homosex-
ual against the exclusion of the potential homophobic person of colour. 
Raissiguier’s chapter in this volume, as well as that of Oxford, correctly 
indicate that nations tolerant of homosexuality and homosexual family 
formations might be more inclusive in their family migration politics. 
However, as these Danish narratives show, inclusion of national sex-
ual minorities does not necessarily lead to inclusive attitudes towards 
migrants and their descendants, as tolerance towards sexual minorities 
might mirror an exclusion of migrants and their descendants, since 
inclusion is accompanied by the national, white understanding of sex-
ual freedom.
When arguments of gender and sexual equality are used to present 
Islam and Muslim migrants and their descendants as homophobic and 
oppressive to women (i.e., less democratic and civilised than ethnic 

take off that veil and give me access to your body	
227
Danes), they do more than influence the construction of a prejudiced 
and racist political climate. They also contribute to a racialised under-
standing of gender, sexuality and gender equality. In the debates, gender 
equality and sexual tolerance are constructed as white, Christian and 
ethnically Danish values. In Denmark, there is a linguistic difference 
between ‘being Danish’ and ‘holding Danish citizenship’. Consequently, 
migrants and their descendants do not become Danish by obtaining 
citizenship. In these debates, ‘being Danish’ is synonymous with prac-
ticing gender equality and being liberal towards sexual minorities – 
despite the fact that there is gender discrimination and homophobia 
in Danish society. The argument that others are not practicing equality, 
for instance due to the wearing of a Muslim veil, becomes a tool for 
excluding veiled women, and Muslims in general, from participating in 
the national Danish community. In the political rhetoric, the discourse 
of gender and sexual equality becomes a mechanism of in- and exclu-
sion.
Conclusion: Maintaining power structures
Scott (1999: 42) has argued that gender is a relation of power, defining 
it as ‘a constitutive element of social relationship based on perceived 
differences between the sexes, and … [as] a primary way of signifying 
power’. I would like to expand her argument by suggesting that in the 
political debates about veiling gender plays a part in constructions of 
power, not only between men and women, but also between the white 
majority population and the minority population of colour. Scott (1999: 
45) has argued that ‘gender is a primary field within which or by means 
of which power is articulated’. This is particularly true if we expand 
the argument to gender’s intersections with race and ethnicity and with 
religion, as a primary field in which power is articulated. In the de-
bates about veiling, gender intersects with race and ethnicity and with 
religion, in particular, through the constructed binary oppositions be-
tween the veiled, oppressed minority women and the non-veiled, liber-
ated, white, majority ethnic Danish women. Power is articulated and 
constituted at different levels within the fields of gender, race and eth-
nicity, and religion. It is ascribed and constituted via the utterances that 
privilege ‘Danish culture’ over ‘migrant minorities’ and ‘Islamic culture’. 
But power is also inscribed more ingeniously, by maintaining the he-
gemonic discourse that there is gender equality among the ethnically 
Danish population and that this gender equality involves free accessi-
bility to the female body.

228	
Rikke Andreassen
Ill. 9.2  Europeans demonstrate against the European Union at the 2001 eu Summit in 
Gothenburg. In front of the demonstration is a woman of colour with her own demon-
stration against the exclusion of minorities in Europe. Photo: Spacecampaign
Notes
1	 dr1 prime-time news programme tv-Avisen 2 May 2007.
2	 dr1 prime-time news programme tv-Avisen 2 May 2007.
3	 dr1 prime-time news programme tv-Avisen 5 May 2007.
4	 dr1 prime-time news programme tv-Avisen 5 May 2007.
5	 dr1 prime-time news programme tv-Avisen 4 May 2007.
6	 dr1 prime-time news programme tv-Avisen 4 May 2007.
7	 dr1 prime-time news programme tv-Avisen 4 May 2007.
8	 Søren Nielsen, ‘Kontanthjælp taget fra to kvinder’, Politiken, 9 May 2007, see 
http://politiken.dk/indland/article301320.ece.
9	 Søren Espersen, dr2 Deadline, 28 September 2008.
10	 ‘Demokratisk integration’, Konservativt folkeparti, 18 August 2009, www.kon-
servative.dk/nytogdebat/nyheder/august/sider/integrationsudspil.aspx.
11	 ‘K kræver forbud mod burka’, Politiken, 17 August 2009.
12	 ‘Demokratisk integration’, Konservativt folkeparti, 18 August 2009, www.kon-
servative.dk/nytogdebat/nyheder/august/sider/integrationsudspil.aspx.
13	 Troels Evold Widding & Signe Højgaard Nielsen, ‘JP hjalp Naser Khader i burka-
sag’, Journalisten, 15 September 2009, www.journalisten.dk/jp-hjalp-naser-khader- 
i-burka-sag.
14	 Christian Lehmann, ‘Socialdemokraterne skifter mening om burkaforbud’, Infor-
mation, 6 September 2009.

take off that veil and give me access to your body	
229
15	 Peter Skaarup, dr P1 Morgen, 23 May 2006.
16	 Pia Kjærsgaard, ‘Giv os Nørrebro tilbage’, Pias ugebrev, 23 November 2003.
17	 For a longer analysis of the media’s treatment of Abdol-Hamid, see Andreassen 
(2007: 146 ff.) and Andreassen (2010).
References
Ahmed, S. (2004), The cultural politics of emotion. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University 
Press.
Andreassen, R. (2010a), ‘Burka og bryster: Debatter om tørklæder, tilgængelighed, 
ligestilling og nationaliteti’, in I. Degn & K.M. Soeholm (eds), Tilsløring og demo-
krati i en globaliseret verden, pp. 80-95. Aarhus: Aarhus Universitetsforlag.
Andreassen, R. (2010b), ‘Sing a song but stay out of politics: Two cases of representa-
tions of racial/ethnic minorities in the Danish media’, in K. Nikunen & E. Eide 
(eds), Media in motion: Cultural complexity and migration in the Nordic region, 
pp. 163-181. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Andreassen, R. (2007), Der er et yndigt land: Medier, minoriteter og danskhed. Copen-
hagen: Tiderne Skifter.
Andreassen, R. (2005), The mass media’s construction of gender, race, sexuality and 
nationality: An analysis of the Danish news media’s communication about visible 
minorities from 1971 to 2004. PhD dissertation, University of Toronto, Canada.
Butler, J. (1999), Gender trouble: Feminism and the subversion of identity. New York: 
Routledge.
Crenshaw, K. (1991), ‘Mapping the margins: Intersectionality, identity politics and 
violence against women of color’, Kvinder, køn og forskning 2-3 (2): 7-20.
Fanon, F. (1965), A dying colonialism. New York: Grove Press.
Foucault, M. (1990), The history of sexuality: An introduction. Vol. 1. New York: Vin-
tage Books.
Laclau, E. & C. Mouffe (1985), Hegemony and socialist strategy: Towards a radical 
democratic practice. London: Verso.
Lutz, H., A. Phoenix & N. Yuval-Davis (eds) (1995), Crossfires: Nationalism, racism 
and gender in Europe. London: Pluto Press.
Richardson, R. (1998), ‘Sexuality and citizenship’, Sociology 32: 83-100.
Scott, J.W. (1999), Gender and the politics of history. New York: Columbia University 
Press.
Siim, B. & R. Andreassen (2010), ‘Debatter og reguleringer af muslimske tørklæder: 
Populisme og symboler’, Politik 13 (4): 15-24.
Spivak, G. (1993), ‘Can the subaltern speak?’, in P. Williams & L. Chrisman (eds), 
Colonial discourse and post-colonial theory, pp. 66-111. Hemel Hempstead: Har-
vester Wheatsheaf.
Thuesen, I. (2009), Rapport om brugen af niqab og burqa. Copenhagen: University 
of Copenhagen.
Verloo, M. & E. Lombardo (2007), ‘Contested gender equality and policy variety in 
Europe: Introducing a critical frame analysis approach’, in M. Verloo (ed.), Mul-
tiple meanings of gender equality: A critical frame analysis of gender politics in 
Europe. New York: cps Books, Central European University Press.


10  Multiculturalism, dependent residence 
status and honour killings
Explaining current Dutch intolerance towards ethnic  
minorities from a gender perspective (1960-2000)
Marlou Schrover
Introduction
This chapter analyses how issues pertaining to the Turkish minority in 
the Netherlands have been framed in parliamentary discussions and in 
newspapers (see also Schrover 2011).1 It focuses, in particular, on three 
issues that dominated debates between the 1960s and the 2000s. The is-
sues are described here separately, but they are very much related. They 
occurred more or less in parallel and influenced one another. The first 
was the multicultural policy in the Netherlands, which included provi-
sions for granting subsidies to Turkish organisations. Dutch multicul-
tural policy thus stimulated and subsidised differences. In the 1980s, 
ideas about multiculturalism changed, and organisations lost most of 
their subsidies. One exception was a Turkish women’s organisation. 
However, that organisation’s exceptional position led to a coup which 
heralded its end. Second was the large-scale publicity campaigns con-
ducted to prevent the deportation of Turkish women with a depend-
ent residence status after they had been left or divorced by their hus-
bands. There was a strong emphasis in the campaigns on the risks these 
women faced, within the Netherlands and after their return to Turkey. 
Third was the so-called ‘honour killings’. Before the 1970s, Turkish men 
and women, like Dutch men and women and others, were occasion-
ally involved in crimes of passion and related violence. Until the 1970s, 
however, these were never framed as honour killings. In the 1970s, 
newspapers systematically specified whether a perpetrator or a victim 
was Turkish and ran headlines like, ‘Turk kills man’, ‘Turk shoots man’, 
or ‘Jealous Turk kills girlfriend’. In the mid-1970s, the term ‘honour kill-
ing’ entered debates after experts had used this notion to explain and 
predict violence among Turks in the Netherlands. The leading question 
of this chapter is how and why the problematisation of these three is-
sues occurred.

232	
Marlou Schrover
Materials and methods
Problematisation is the process in which actors (academics, politicians 
and journalists) analyse a situation, define it as a problem, expand it 
by attaching issues to it, finally suggesting a solution (Foucault 1984: 
388-389). Problematisation always serves a purpose. In earlier research 
I showed how problematisation, via an emphasis on the vulnerability 
of migrant women, enabled rules to be bent without changing them 
(Schrover 2009a, 2010a, 2011).
This chapter uses records of parliamentary debates and newspaper 
articles to analyse the discourse on the issues mentioned above and, 
more specifically, nodal points within it. In general, nodal points appear 
in the process of articulation and give a discourse stability and coher-
ence (Laclau & Mouffe 1985: 105; Hoving, Dibbits & Schrover 2005). 
A nodal point is a point in a discourse at which another meaning is 
defined (De Cillia, Reisigl & Wodak 1999: 157). In this chapter, the three 
focal issues are regarded as nodal points. Apart from the nodal points, 
there are routine combinations, for instance, of fairness on the one hand 
and firmness on the other (Van Dijk 1988, 1989, 1992: 92; Prins 2002). 
Nodal points and routine combinations form the intersection between 
discourse analysis and frame analysis. Within text, packets of organised 
knowledge, called ‘frames’, ‘scripts’ or ‘topoi’, are commonly used. These 
packets, referred to here as ‘frames’ for the sake of brevity, are determi-
nants of the inferences necessary to understand sentence connections 
(Van Dijk 1983: 30; Entman 1996: 77-78). Frames support an argument 
without constituting it. They make text ‘recognisable’ and make it pos-
sible to omit information, because it is an inherent part of a packet of 
knowledge (Scheufele 1999; Van Gorp 2005; Matthes & Kohring 2008). 
Frames play a role in the process of problematisation via what is called 
the ‘tactical linkage’ of issue areas (such as, e.g., trade, climate, safety or 
migration), which are clustered in negotiations as ‘areas of joint gain’ 
(Rhodes 1997; Betts 2006).
The sections below analyse how in political debates and newspaper 
articles issues were linked and groups of arguments were clustered. 
The materials drawn on in this chapter come from three main sources: 
parliamentary debates, newspaper articles and archives of immi-
grant organisations. Newspaper articles were collected from all major 
national newspapers and a large number of regional newspapers in 
the Netherlands.2 The main immigrant organisation archive used was 
that of the Turkish women’s organisation Hollanda Türkiyeli Kadinlar 
Birligi (htkb).3

multiculturalism, dependent residence and honour killings	
233
Multiculturalism and a Turkish women’s organisation
Multicultural policy, as it was introduced in a number of Western coun-
tries in the 1960s, stimulated individuals to organise into groups on 
the basis of perceived cultural similarity. The struggle for recognition 
by organisations within this policy spurred ethnic group formation, 
organisation and mobilisation. Ethnic brokers worked to obtain rec-
ognition by making cultures or cultural difference visible. Since rec-
ognition claims were based on the supposed uniqueness of a group’s 
culture, institutionalisation of multiculturalism led to an overemphasis 
on differences between groups, underplaying diversity within groups. 
Because of assumptions about group homogeneity, Dutch authorities 
encouraged the formation of representative bodies for migrants per 
country of origin. This not only denied differences within groups, but 
it also increased competition between groups, which tried to legitimise 
the claim that they spoke on behalf of the ‘community’ and thus quali-
fied for funding. In the long run, these policies led to ‘cultural freezing’ 
– that is, static ideas about the identity of minority groups and about 
the Dutch majority society. This denied the fluidity of ethnicity, and 
the fact that ethnicity can be differently experienced within communi-
ties along lines of age, gender and class; while it also ignored the influ-
ence of state policies, geopolitical constellations and economic change 
(Volpp 1996: 1588-1589, 1592; Schrover 2010a).
Okin (1999) has shown that multiculturalism can have negative 
consequences for immigrant or minority women, since an emphasis 
on authentic identity and traditional values often implies restricted 
rights for women. Bhadha (2009: 57) demonstrates that a paradox of 
multicultural vulnerability may be created when the result of what is 
meant to be the empowering of groups through multiculturalism pol-
icies leads to entrenchment of oppressive elements of cultural tradi-
tions, placing women in a worse position than they would be without 
group recognition within multiculturalism. Okin’s point of view has 
been criticised because it promotes stereotypical views of non-West-
ern women. Gender subordination is constructed as integral only to 
non-Western cultures (Lutz 1997; McKerl 2007: 198). Non-Western cul-
tures are presented as sexist, frozen and static (Volpp 2001: 1185; McKerl 
2007: 204-205). Western representations of the East serve not only to 
define those who are the objects of the Orientalising gaze, but also the 
West, which is defined through its opposition to the Rest. The West is 
defined as modern, democratic and progressive; the Rest are seen as 
primitive, barbaric and despotic. This representation always serves a 
purpose. Around 1900, for instance, British suffragettes used the image 

234	
Marlou Schrover
of the ‘victimised sisters’ in India to bolster their own claims. The vic-
timised sisters symbolised what the suffragettes did not wish to be: 
immobile, secluded in the home and without rights (Volpp 2001: 1195). 
In the 1970s, white middle-class Western women justified their claims 
to equality by constructing non-Western women as helpless subjects of 
barbaric traditionalism. The ‘other’ was seen as equal only in Christian 
rhetoric, but never in reality (Doezema 2001: 30).
In the Netherlands, multicultural policy underwent major shifts 
over time.4 Three sets of ideas lay at the basis of the policy. In the first 
place, a model for living apart together had been developed in a 19th 
century Dutch colonial context: no conversions, no assimilation, but a 
pacified segregated coexistence (Snouck Hurgronje 1916; see also the 
chapter by Van Walsum, Jones & Legêne in this volume). Secondly, 
there was the consociational model of conflict regulation, known as 
pillarisation, which characterised Dutch society from the end of the 
19th century onwards. Pillarisation linked political parties, civic asso-
ciations and a wide range of organisations, and immerged individuals 
in their own (religious) group from the cradle to the grave. A num-
ber of groups within Dutch society – most importantly the Catholics, 
which in the 19th century constituted about half of the population, but 
encountered obstacles in the political and social domains – achieved 
emancipation via this form of segregation. The model of ‘living apart 
together’ of (denominational) groups dominated Dutch society well 
into the 1960s. Within it, group rights were granted, for instance, to 
Orthodox Protestants who were exempted from obligatory inocula-
tions, taxes, insurance and conscription. In the 1960s, the idea of pil-
larisation gradually lost ground, but its institutional infrastructure sur-
vived. It went on to structure the organisation of the new migrants, 
who came from the 1960s, by ethnicity and religion rather than by class. 
Provisions dating from the time of pillarisation made it possible, for 
instance, for migrants to set up their own schools, subsidised by the 
Dutch government (Schrover 2010b).
Ideas derived from pillarisation made multicultural policies accept-
able to the Dutch public, but the initial idea behind multiculturalism 
was not emancipation via segregation, but to facilitate an easy return of 
guest workers to their countries of origin (Rijkschroeff, Duyvendak & 
Pels 2003: 27). A multicultural policy was pursued because it enforced 
the idea of guest-worker migration as temporary migration. It allowed 
migrants to function in the Netherlands, while making a return easy. To 
facilitate a return, it was believed essential that migrants preserved their 
language, cultural identities and internal group structures (Scholten 
2007: 78; Obdeijn & Schrover 2008). Authorities felt that there was no 

multiculturalism, dependent residence and honour killings	
235
need to encourage or facilitate integration (Rijkschroeff, Duyvendak 
& Pels 2003: 22).5 The government maintained this idea long after it 
had become clear that not all guest workers would return, because this 
made it possible to legitimise continuation of guest-worker recruitment 
(Bonjour 2008: 11).
Within the multicultural policy, integration was seen as a group pro-
cess. This led to subsidies for immigrant organisations.6 Dutch govern-
ment policy strongly influenced the number of organisations that were 
established, their nature, goals and continuity (Penninx & Schrover 
2001). Most of the immigrant organisations that were formed were 
men’s organisations. There were a few immigrant women’s organisa-
tions, of which the Turkish htkb (Hollanda Türkiyeli Kadinlar Birligi) 
was the most important. Turkish women in the Netherlands set it up in 
1974.7 It ceased to exist in 1995, but the local Amsterdam branch con-
tinued under a slightly different name (atkb). htkb was a spin-off of 
htib, an organisation composed of left-wing Turkish men in the Neth-
erlands and which had been set up some years earlier.8 Nihat Karaman 
ran the men’s organisation, and his wife, Maviye Karaman Ince, ran the 
women’s organisation (Onderwater 2008; Robert 2009). In 1988, Nihat 
Karaman was shot dead in front of his house. According to some, the 
murder was politically motivated, while others attributed it to problems 
in the private relational sphere.
htib and htkb were, especially in their early years, left-wing and 
strongly orientated towards Turkey. The htkb saw itself as an organisa-
tion fighting a class struggle or fighting racism, and less as an organisa-
tion fighting for women’s rights. Dutch women’s organisations, for their 
part, rarely emphasised what united immigrant and non-immigrant 
women. Instead, they focused on what they believed divided them. 
They did little to include immigrant women in their organisations and 
activities. To the non-migrant women’s organisations, migrant women 
were either invisible or they were victims.9
At its height, the htkb had about 600 members and branch organi-
sations in seven Dutch cities.10 htkb had a support group of Dutch 
women volunteers, as was customary for many Turkish organisations 
(and those of other minorities) at the time. In the 1980s, the Dutch 
government decided to specifically target women’s immigrant organi-
sations, of which it felt there were too few. A special programme, vem,11 
was set up to encourage and support immigrant women to organise. 
vem ran as a programme between 1982 and 1990. Immigrant women 
were believed to be doubly disadvantaged because they were women 
and migrants (or triply disadvantaged if they were also Muslims). 
Women could ask for subsidies for a place where they could meet 

236	
Marlou Schrover
‘safely’ without men being present. Most initiatives within the vem 
programme came from non-migrant women; only some were joint 
initiatives of migrant and non-migrant women. Turkish and Moroc-
can women’s organisations took very few initiatives. Migrant women 
tried to gain more influence through creation of new organisations, but 
they met with opposition from various sides. In the first place, Dutch 
women within the immigrant or joint organisations refused to give 
up their positions. Secondly, subsidisers at the local level did not trust 
Turkish or Moroccan women when they applied for subsidies without 
the support of Dutch women, and their requests were turned down 
more often than those of Dutch women within joint organisations. The 
Dutch women knew the institutions better, they had a better under-
standing of how to draft a proposal, and they knew the jargon. As a 
result, the organisations that were created were hybrid in nature. On 
several occasions, it was pointed out that the organisations of, or for, 
migrant women, which were successful in getting subsidies, were artifi-
cial organisations (Bilgin et al. 1988).12
htkb provided Dutch language classes, sewing classes and pro-
grammes aimed at teaching Turkish women how to ride a bicycle or 
swim. htkb worked together with other immigrant women’s organisa-
tions. In 1980, the Dutch Women’s Movement (nvb) took the initia-
tive to organise some of the immigrant women’s groups under a joint 
umbrella organisation. Immigrant women’s organisations found this 
initiative patronising.13 The Amsterdam municipal authorities, how-
ever, subsidised joint initiatives. Via subsidies, Dutch authorities forced 
Turkish migrants to organise as Turks, and not as Kurds, left-wing or 
right-wing Turks, as workers, or as Muslims. When subsidies for all 
organisations were reduced, tensions increased amongst the rather 
artificially created organisations.14 Subsidies for initiatives that had 
to do with immigrant women continued.15 In 1993, this led to a coup 
at the general meeting of the htkb. A group of 50 women joined the 
organisation at the meeting, two of them stood as candidates for the 
board, and they were chosen by the other new members. An emotional 
meeting followed. At one point the board called in the assistance of the 
police because of the threatening presence of Turkish men outside of 
the building. The parties went to court in order to settle their dispute. 
This heralded the end of the organisation. The story of htkb illustrates 
the role of government subsidies in shaping organisations and their 
goals. Turkish women were first made dependent on non-Turkish vol-
unteers. Subsidies disempowered rather than empowered them. Even-
tually the end of the subsidies led to violence and conflict, and the end 
of the organisation.

multiculturalism, dependent residence and honour killings	
237
Women from a repressive culture
I have described the issue of dependent residence status at some length 
elsewhere (Schrover 2009b, 2010a) and will therefore summarise it here 
only briefly. Dependent residency was an issue not only in the Nether-
lands, but also in other Western countries (Sterett 1997; Côté, Kérisit & 
Côté 2001). The issue arose when in 1975 recruitment of guest workers 
came to an end. Labour migration was replaced by migration in the 
context of family formation and reunification (Bonjour 2008). Since the 
guest workers had been mostly men (Wentholt 1967; Chotkowski 2000; 
Obdeijn & Schrover 2008), it was mostly women who came within the 
framework of family reunification. In theory, men who joined their 
wives could also get dependent residence permits, but since most guest 
workers had been men, in practice it was mostly women who obtained 
permits that depended on the residency status of their husbands. De-
pendent residency thus became a women’s issue. Dependent residency 
meant that a woman could be deported if she left her husband (or was 
left by her husband) within the waiting period of three years after her 
arrival in the Netherlands. Dutch women’s organisations took up the 
issue, expanding the framework within which the matter of the waiting 
period was discussed. Stories about women started with an emphasis 
on the goal of the campaigns – reduction of the waiting period – but 
continued as stories about abuse and domestic violence, and about per-
secution in women’s countries of origin. Other issues were linked as 
well, such as forced or arranged marriages of young girls.16 The linkages 
made the problem all the more urgent.
From 1979 onwards, Dutch women’s organisations (mostly consist-
ing of non-immigrant, white, middle-class women) agitated against 
dependent residency. Their campaigns personified the issue. Women 
who epitomised the matter were singled out. Dutch women’s organi-
sations sought out women as figureheads for their media campaigns 
in shelters for abused and maltreated women. Other organisations had 
followed similar principles to find the figureheads used in campaigns 
described by Schacher, Oxford, and Walaardt in this volume. The shel-
ters were willing to cooperate because they did not receive state sup-
port for foreign women who had left or had been left by their husbands 
within the three-year period. Since the number of foreign women in 
the shelters had increased – at the time of the campaigns they made up 
half of the residents17 – a solution to the problem of the waiting period 
would also solve the precarious financial situation of the shelters.18
All of the women selected for the media campaigns were Turkish. 
This choice of cases made the matter both a women’s issue and an issue 

238	
Marlou Schrover
about the repression of women within Islam. In their campaigns, Dutch 
women’s organisations reproduced 19th-century stereotypes about 
Islam and about women’s dependency within it. Rather surprisingly, 
Dutch newspapers however, at this time seldom used the word ‘Islam’, 
but only the word ‘religion’. Emphasis was on the backwardness of Turk-
ish society.19 Women who were divorced would not be able to survive 
in Turkish society, according to newspapers.20 The women were said 
to have shamed and dishonoured their families.21 Their (former) hus-
bands and family members were likely to take revenge on the women if 
they were forced to return to Turkey, the newspapers wrote.22 The argu-
ments and stereotypes used echoed those described by Schacher in this 
volume for refugees from Turkey decades earlier.
Women’s organisations presented three cases of individual women 
in quick succession. The first woman who was chosen for the cam-
paign got a permit to stay on humanitarian grounds shortly after the 
start of the campaign.23 Since no change in policy had been achieved, 
the women’s organisations presented a second case of a woman who 
was maltreated by her husband and twice ended up in hospital. All 
Dutch newspapers reported on her situation.24 Turkish women sub-
mitted a petition to the government signed by 2,656 people. Fearing 
a similar ‘success’ to that in the first case, the women’s organisations 
added a third case.25
In Dutch parliament questions were raised about the number of 
women encountering such problems, the number of women with a 
dependent residence status in shelters, and the number of women threat-
ened with deportation. Rather surprisingly, the State Secretary of Justice 
could not answer any of these questions; data were not available and 
the activists did not provide them.26 In response to the question about 
how many women were affected, newspapers provided information 
about the total numbers of Turkish and Moroccan women in the Neth-
erlands,27 implying that all of them were likely to get into this situation. 
The shelters used general quantifiers (‘many’ women).28 The State Secre-
tary of Justice emphasised that women who were in this position would 
be allowed to stay on humanitarian grounds. There was no need for a 
change of law, she stressed. The length of the waiting period had been 
chosen to discourage marriages of convenience. One member of parlia-
ment asked if this was a Turkish or Turkish-Moroccan problem, rather 
than a problem that applied to all migrant women. The answer was no; 
the women in the shelters were definitely not all Turkish or Moroccan. 
The fact that this question was raised illustrates the strong association 
that by then had developed between the issue of dependency and being 
Turkish.29 Throughout the campaigns, Turkish women in the Nether-

multiculturalism, dependent residence and honour killings	
239
lands were presented as dependent and vulnerable, and Turkish society 
was portrayed as extremely backward. A Turkish women’s organisation 
in the Netherlands pointed out that the association between a depend-
ent residence status and violence could negatively influence the image 
of foreign (or Turkish) women, and this would, in the long run, be to 
the detriment of women. A Turkish social worker later said, ‘There were 
many Dutch volunteers, but it was all very patronising. I was invited to 
speak [at a meeting of Dutch women] about Turkish women. I immedi-
ately noticed that they thought all Turkish women were backward and 
pathetic. They wanted to hold on to that image’ (Tinnemans 1994: 182). 
Dutch women’s organisations pushed forward with their campaigns 
along the lines criticised by Turkish women.
In 1983, there was a change in policy; women still had to be mar-
ried at least three years, but they only needed one year of residency in 
the Netherlands before they could apply for an independent residence 
permit. The policy change was announced by the Secretary of State at 
the end of a conference on sexual violence against women and girls, 
thus linking dependent residence status, the vulnerable position of 
migrant women, and violence.30 In two of the three cases presented by 
the campaigners, the women did not meet the criteria of the new law. 
Therefore, even under the new law they would not have been allowed to 
stay. For them personally the change of law was of little relevance since 
they had already been allowed to stay on humanitarian grounds. On a 
general level, and combined with the fact that it was never clear from 
the beginning how many women were disadvantaged by the old law, 
this makes the success of the campaigns questionable. It did, however, 
strongly present Turkish culture as backward, which in the long run 
disadvantaged Turkish women in the Netherlands.
Honour killings
Introduction of the term ‘honour killings’ was preceded by newspaper 
reports in 1972 about severe riots in Rotterdam, which the Dutch news-
papers labelled ‘race riots’ (Schrover 2011).31 The riots started over a 
housing issue and lasted seven days. Underlying the conflict was Dutch 
government policy regarding family reunification. Guest workers were 
only allowed to bring their families if they had suitable housing. Since 
rental homes were very difficult to get, Turkish guest workers bought 
cheap houses in rundown neighbourhoods. Turks also bought houses, 
which they converted to boarding houses for their fellow countrymen. 
The riots started when a Turkish homeowner tried to evict a Dutch 

240	
Marlou Schrover
woman with three young children. Dutch neighbours protested, and 
Dutch rioters cruised the neighbourhood and smashed the windows 
of the homes of Turks. Their furniture was thrown onto the street and 
set on fire.32 Turkish families were forced to flee. A Turk stabbed several 
Dutch people in self-defence. They had to be treated in hospital. The 
Dutch rioters complained that Turks were taking over the neighbour-
hood. They expanded the issue by adding that Turks were harassing 
Dutch girls, some of whom were no older than 12 or 13. Two Dutch 
girls were harmed by the Dutch rioters because they were friendly with 
Turks. The police were photographed standing by idly during the riots, 
while laughing and doing little to protect Turks. Police, however, did 
block street entrances to make sure Turks in the neighbourhood did 
not get support from Turks from elsewhere.33 Turkish women and chil-
dren turned to the Turkish consulate for support and advice. The con-
sul and the Turkish minister of foreign affairs intervened, calling upon 
the Dutch government to protect the Turks and their property.
Newspapers described the Turks efforts to organise to defend them-
selves and their calls for support. Turkish thugs, according to one of 
the papers, armed with guns planned to take revenge.34 One Turk was 
quoted as saying he would behead the whole neighbourhood. Turks 
who had fled to the roofs of their houses threw roof tiles onto riot-
ers several floors below them.35 Four Turks were arrested, as well as 
about 60 Dutch rioters.36 Dutch groups, which came out in support 
of the Turks, stated that the young Dutch rioters did know what they 
were getting themselves into. The Turks were hard to restrain, they said. 
Despite the support group’s efforts, they might very well become vio-
lent and might cut the rioters into seven pieces.37 Newspaper articles 
supported this view; Turkish women and children had left the neigh-
bourhood, but Turkish men hid in backrooms, listened to the muffled 
thuds of stones landing in their front rooms, the scattering of glass and 
the splintering of wood, and waited to crack the skull of every Dutch 
guy who dared climb the stairs.38
Overall the tone in the newspapers was one of surprise and outrage 
at the eruption of violence and racial hatred. But the articles also fed 
an atmosphere of fear. Shortly after the outbreak of the riots, a Turkish 
man stood to allow a young Dutch woman to sit on a packed train. The 
woman misunderstood his intentions and started to scream. Somebody 
pulled the emergency chain, forcing the train to stop, and the chival-
rous Turk was arrested.39
The effect of reports about the riots was twofold. In the first place, 
a possible violent nature of the Turks was emphasised. This idea was 
reinforced by endless reports in the Dutch newspapers about Turkish 

multiculturalism, dependent residence and honour killings	
241
atrocities against Greeks in Cyprus in 1974, and reports about riots in 
the Netherlands in 1976. Those riots had started after a Turkish man 
stabbed a Dutch man to death at a fair. During the 1976 riots an extrem-
ist right-wing party – the Nederlandse Volks-Unie – started a racist 
campaign. Secondly, there was the surprising nature of the riots. Brit-
ish, French and Turkish newspapers reported on the Dutch race riots. 
They were quoted at length in Dutch newspapers. The foreign papers 
expressed surprise that this could happen in a nation like the Nether-
lands, which was known for its tolerance and hospitality to foreigners.40 
Dutch newspapers tried to explain the eruption of violence. The Dutch 
were perhaps not the hospitable or tolerant people they believed them-
selves to be, according to the papers, but there were also too many Turks 
and too many Turkish boarding houses in poor neighbourhoods.41 In 
offering this explanation, the papers implicitly shifted part of the blame 
away from the Dutch to the Turks. ‘Too many’ implied ‘too different’. 
The emphasis on cultural difference was perfectly consistent with the 
ideas of multicultural policy. It was also consistent with how the issue 
of honour killings developed.
Generally, culture is invoked to explain forms of violence against 
immigrant or minority women, while it is not similarly invoked to 
explain forms of violence that affect non-migrant or non-minority 
women. In the usa, for instance, the media framed the murder of an 
Indian woman within an assumed old Indian tradition of dowry mur-
ders, rather than presenting the murder as a response to domestic vio-
lence common in the usa (Volpp 2001: 1187). In the case of honour kill-
ings, violence is allegedly used to restore the honour of the family. The 
murderer is believed to be chosen by the family at a family conference, 
after which he plans his murder (which makes it premeditated murder 
and not manslaughter); he turns himself in after the murder and does 
not show remorse (Siesling 2006: 24). The assumption is that honour-
related violence is tolerated or excused by the members of the family or 
community.
In the case of honour killings, perpetrators availed of a so-called 
‘cultural defence’ (Siesling 2006 103-126). Cultural defence was seldom 
used in practice, but it did have a strong influence in public and politi-
cal discourse. Cultural defence is not a doctrine in Dutch law (nor in us 
law) (Siesling 2006: 66; Korteweg & Yurdakul 2009). Cultural defence 
implies recognition that customs or mores might differ between coun-
tries (or cultures) and that an accused may be aware of differences, but 
not able to comply with the rules of the country of settlement because 
of an internalisation of the mores of the country of origin or pressure 
from a community in the country of settlement. The accused is seen as 

242	
Marlou Schrover
having no free will and as not accountable for his actions (diminished 
responsibility). Attorneys seek sentencing in line with the personal 
characteristics of the defendant (as in the case of mentally handicapped 
or children, who cannot be held responsible for their actions). The 
defence is similar to the battered woman syndrome defence, in which 
it is claimed that women are not accountable for killing their husbands 
after they suffered years of maltreatment. Culture, however, is different 
from mental state or age. Cultural cases move the responsibility away 
from the individual, but also from society. The behaviour of migrants 
results from their culture (which is presented as static), and that is not 
something the country of settlement can remedy.
In cultural defence cases there is an emphasis on shame; men are 
assumed to have killed their daughters, wives or sisters because the 
women shamed the family with their assumed loose moral behaviour. 
The culture of the country of origin of the perpetrator (or his forefa-
thers) is contrasted with the more individualistic societies in which he 
lives and which are believed to care less about honour and shame. In 
the discourse, a distinction is made between backward cultures (often 
called ‘traditional’) and modern cultures. Both are seen as static. Rather 
surprisingly, little reference is made to the connection between the need 
to avenge shame on an individual level and the absence of strong cen-
tral government or that individual-level revenge in the form of feuds 
and duels was common in European countries from the Middles Ages 
until the 19th century (Le Vaque-Manty 2006). Avenging shame is pre-
sented only as part of the traditions of non-European countries.
Authors have pointed out that advocating use of the cultural defence 
is problematic because it focuses on the rights of the defendant and 
fails to protect the victims and the public at large. The argument that 
‘his culture made him do it’ does little to deter others from commit-
ting the same act or even to deter the defendant himself from repeating 
his offence. Nor does it assure victims and other potential victims that 
society is willing to protect them or to punish the defendant for the 
harm done by his act (Lambelet Coleman 1996: 1136).
Non-migrant women in the Netherlands are also killed by their 
husbands, brothers and fathers because of shame or jealousy, but these 
murders are never discussed in the same way as the so-called honour 
killings. In 1959, a Dutch man avenged his sister, according to Dutch 
papers, by killing a man who had slapped her in the face.42 Generally 
when a Dutch man kills his wife, sister or daughter, it is described as a 
crime of passion or a family tragedy. Furthermore, in the Netherlands 
(and Germany) honour killings are characterised as a Turkish issue, 
while in the uk they tend to be associated with the Pakistani commu-

multiculturalism, dependent residence and honour killings	
243
nity. Honour killings were reported in Greece in the late 1960s (Safilios-
Rothschild 1969), but murders among Greeks in the Netherlands were 
not explained from that perspective.
In the 1970s, before the term ‘honour killing’ was introduced, there 
were murders in which the perpetrator was Turkish and which took 
place in the relational sphere.43 In some cases newspapers used the 
word ‘honour’, but not the term ‘honour killing’. Some cases had char-
acteristics which later might have been described as ‘honour killing’. In 
1972, a 14-year-old Turkish boy shot and killed a 36-year-old Turkish 
man. The boy lived with his father, mother and brothers. According 
to the police, the man was probably the lover of the boy’s mother.44 In 
1973, the public prosecutor in a murder case said that a Turkish drama 
should be regarded from a Turkish perspective. A Turkish woman had 
killed her Turkish lover. According to the public prosecutor the Turk-
ish husband should have killed both his wife and her lover, according to 
Turkish ‘adat’.45 The Turkish man was a coward, the public prosecutor 
was quoted as saying in a newspaper. Rather than killing his wife and 
her lover himself, he had provided his wife with a gun so she could kill 
her lover, save her honour and prove her loyalty to her husband. The 
whole affair was called a guest-worker drama, not an honour killing.46 
In 1975, a Turkish man fatally shot a compatriot, who he believed had 
raped his wife. The killer declared he had done so to save his honour 
as a man.47 The public prosecutor declared this argument to be absurd 
and false.48 Shortly afterwards, a 18-year-old boy fatally shot his uncle, 
who had knocked his mother unconscious and tried to take his younger 
siblings away.49 The conflict within the family had started the previous 
year, when the father had gone to Turkey to find a bride for his son. 
He had returned with a 16-year-old girl, whom the son regarded as his 
wife from then on. The father had, however, started an affair with the 
girl. According to the public prosecutor, his wife and his son had been 
shamed by these events. The father had gone to Turkey with this young 
woman, and some time later had summoned his son to join him there. 
When the boy refused, his father and uncle threatened to kill him. At 
this point, the court called upon a lawyer from the Turkish consulate 
in the Netherlands who was an expert in Turkish common law. The 
expert explained that the family came from Eastern Turkey, were vio-
lence occurred when honour was impugned. The boy, who became the 
head of the family after his father’s departure, was bound to protect his 
mother and younger siblings. The expert referred to a Turkish proverb, 
which said that soiled honour could only be restored by blood. The pub-
lic prosecutor did not accept this defence.50 One month later, a Turkish 
man shot and killed his 13-year-old daughter.51 A year later, a Turkish 

244	
Marlou Schrover
woman killed a Turkish man who had followed her by car while she 
walked to the post office. He had tried to convince her to come with 
him. When she refused and he persisted, she shot him.52 Shortly after-
wards a Turkish man shot his wife, who was planning to leave him;53 a 
young Turkish man died after a fight for an unknown reason;54 and a 
Turkish woman shot her husband dead in the street, because she sus-
pected him of having an affair.55
Newspapers, as rule, do not report every murder. Overall the num-
ber of murders in this period was about 1 per 100,000 people per year 
(Leistra & Nieuwbeerta 2003: 21). With a Turkish population of about 
100,000 (or 150,000 if children born of Turkish parents in the Nether-
lands are also included), the percentage was slightly higher than aver-
age in the 1970s. Precise statements are difficult to make, because there 
is no registration according to ethnic group, and murder rates are influ-
enced by the demographic profile of a group. The chance of becoming 
either a victim or a perpetrator are higher for the age group 18 to 45, and 
this group was larger among Turks than among the Dutch population 
as a whole. Newspapers in this period did not compare crime statistics 
of Turks and non-Turks, but detailed reporting and standard reference 
to the ethnic background of victims and perpetrators emphasised the 
idea that there was something specific about the murders that called for 
an explanation.
The term ‘honour killing’ was first used in the Netherlands in 1976 
when a Turkish boy killed the man who had raped his sister (Ferwerda 
& Van Leiden 2005). In 1977, a Turkish man was convicted of man-
slaughter. He had killed another Turkish man to avenge the repeated 
rape of his 13-year-old daughter. The girl had given birth to a child, 
thus shaming the family. She would have no other future than work 
as a prostitute, the father declared in court.56 In 1978, a Turkish man 
smashed the skull of his heavily pregnant wife with a cognac bottle. The 
murder followed marital problems, because the wife refused to obey 
the Koran, especially regarding subservience, newspapers wrote.57 In 
1979, a boy was convicted of murdering his half-sister. His motives were 
never revealed in court, but he did refer to family honour, which had 
been violated. The judge was not convinced by this cultural defence 
(Siesling 2006: 200). That same year, a Turkish woman and mother 
of four was convicted and sentenced to seven years of imprisonment 
for killing a distant cousin. He had raped her a few years before and 
spread gossip about her in the Turkish community. The public pros-
ecutor demanded a severe sentence, precisely because he did see this 
as honour killing and wanted to deter those with similar plans.58 A few 
days later, two Turkish brothers killed their brother-in-law because he 

multiculturalism, dependent residence and honour killings	
245
maltreated their sister, his wife. According to the newspapers this was 
an honour killing.59 A public prosecutor declared that cases of honour 
killings were likely to increase in the Netherlands. He based this state-
ment, according to Dutch newspapers, on a Dutch academic study by 
A.H. Nauta. Nauta was of the opinion that the recent killings were the 
tip of the iceberg.60 The study related to Turkey, but was used to explain 
murders in the Netherlands.
In 1985, there was a murder during a wedding party whereby refer-
ence was made to shame and honour. In all of these cases the perpe-
trators were Turkish. All murders received a lot of publicity. A strong 
association developed between the phenomenon and migrants from 
Islamic countries. In 1999, a Turkish woman was killed by her husband, 
in the presence of her children. The husband suspected her of adultery. 
The attorney asked that his client be charged with manslaughter, rather 
than with premeditated murder, because of his cultural background. 
The judge called the case revolting, particularly because the defendant 
showed no remorse. Rather than reducing his punishment on cultural 
grounds, the judge decided to increase the sentence in order to set an 
example to Dutch society and the Turkish community within it (Sies-
ling 2006: 202). Two other cases followed. In 2003, a Turkish girl was 
shot by her father, and in 2004, a woman of Turkish origin was killed 
by her husband. She had fled to a shelter but her husband had managed 
to find her. The judges did not consider these cases honour killings, 
but in public and political debates the murders were presented as such, 
and demonstrations were held and political measures were called for, 
although it is not clear what the measures should be.
Overall over the past three decades, six court cases were heard in 
which honour killings played a role. In one case (1999) that fact led 
the judge to increase the sentence by five additional years. In two cases 
(2003 and 2004), the judge did view the cases as honour killings. In the 
three early cases (1976, 1979 and 1985) it is not clear whether the men-
tion of honour had any influence on the outcome of the trial, positive 
or negative. However, repeated use of the term in the press and parlia-
mentary debates and the intense public attention that all cases received 
created the impression that honour killings occurred frequently within 
the Dutch-Turkish community.
It is unclear how many cases of honour killings or honour-related 
violence there have been in the Netherlands. The same is true for other 
countries (Kurkiala 2003). There are two reasons for this. In the first 
place, the term is used to cover a wide array of ‘crimes’. There is no regis-
tration of honour-related violence by the police, social services or wom-
en’s shelters. Neither is there consensus about what constitutes honour-

246	
Marlou Schrover
related violence. Secondly, there is no clarity about numbers because 
judges may use the term honour-related violence, when the perpetrator 
or attorney does not. Or a perpetrator or attorney may use the term, but 
the judge may not acknowledge it. The media frequently refer to crimes 
as ‘honour-related’ when neither the perpetrator and attorney nor the 
judge does so. The result is a gross overestimation of numbers.
The subject of honour killings is very much part of recent Dutch 
public debates. Stories and studies about honour killings only briefly 
acknowledge that it is unclear how many honour killings actually take 
place. Reports use vague quantifiers, such as ‘many’, ‘often’ and ‘fre-
quent’, to emphasise that they are common, and they include detailed 
descriptions of older cases from other countries (mostly Germany). 
That obscures the fact that these acts did not take place in the Neth-
erlands or that they occurred years ago. The definition of what is an 
honour killing is currently stretched beyond useful. Honour killings are 
redefined as honour-related violence, or the physical or physiological 
violence that stems from a collective mentality and which is a response 
to (the risk of) the violation of the honour of women, of which the 
outside world has knowledge or is likely to acquire knowledge. Some 
researchers stretch the definition so that it includes murder, and also 
domestic violence, verbal threats, abductions, (extreme) control of men 
over the mobility of women or girls, forced or arranged marriages, and 
women being forced into a traditional women’s role. Suicides by women 
and girls are sometimes described as honour-related violence, because 
the women and girls are believed to have been pushed into suicide by 
male family members (Bakker 2003).
In 2007, 107 Imams in Turkish mosques in the Netherlands spoke 
out against honour killings. Their collective stance received wide media 
coverage. Honour killings are discussed frequently by the media and in 
parliament. In recent years, numerous books have appeared in the Neth-
erlands about honour killings (Van Eck 2001; Hilterman 2001; Simsek 
2006; Van der Zee 2006; Ermers 2007; Özer 2007; Vreeswijk 2008). The 
press currently labels any violent crime involving men or women of 
Turkish origin as honour-related. When, in August 2009, a woman who 
worked at a day-care centre in Amsterdam was murdered, all newspa-
pers wrote about it as an honour killing.61 The only reason it was clas-
sified as such was that she was of Turkish origin as was the perpetrator.

multiculturalism, dependent residence and honour killings	
247
Conclusion
This chapter described, on the basis of an analysis of immigrant or-
ganisation archives, parliamentary debates and newspaper articles, 
three parallel and interwoven issues: changing ideas about multicul-
turalism, campaigns against dependent resident status and honour kill-
ings. Multicultural policy was initially shaped by assumptions about 
the temporariness of guest-worker migration. Underlying ideas were 
acceptable because of ideas about living apart together, which had char-
acterised Dutch society until the 1960s. Some groups were targeted by 
multicultural policy more than other groups. As a result, these groups 
were more strongly subjected to processes of othering. The most disad-
vantaged groups could profit more from their supposed victimisation 
via subsidies in the short run, but they found it difficult to shed that 
victimhood identity in the long run. Subsidies shaped how migrants 
presented themselves as communities, led to quests for authenticity, 
emphasised differences between migrants and non-migrants, and stim-
ulated organisation on the basis of ethnicity. The portrayal of migrant 
or minority women – especially lower-class, Muslim women – was im-
portant in securing and continuing government subsidies. Reduction 
of subsidies for organisations that did not specifically target women 
made the Turkish htkb the target of a hostile take-over, which sig-
nalled its end, and drove other organisations to push women’s issues 
even more to the foreground. Gender was crucial to how multicultural 
policy worked out. Fossilisation of ideas and of initiatives – symbolised 
by the endless subsidies for swimming and cycling lessons for Turk-
ish women, which came to be ridiculed by the radical right – fed the 
opposition to multiculturalism. Because multiculturalism and racism 
are both based on essentialist ideas, the shift from one to the other is 
not surprising. The campaigns against dependent resident status, like 
multicultural policy, endlessly emphasised victimhood, difference and 
backwardness of Turks and Turkish society. In addition, intense atten-
tion to so-called ‘honour killings’, in the first place, created the idea that 
they were very common among Turks, and secondly that honour kill-
ings were something very different than Dutch family dramas or crimes 
of passion. This solidified the othering and static ideas about culture 
that had resulted from multicultural policies and the campaigns against 
dependent residence status.
The radical right could easily appropriate gender equality, because of 
the essentialist assumptions underlying multicultural policy and rheto-
ric that for decades had constructed migrants or minorities as collectiv-
ist, authoritarian, patriarchal and honour-bound (compare Akkerman 

248	
Marlou Schrover
& Hagelund 2007; Roggeband & Verloo 2007). The radical right did 
not have to prove that immigrant women – especially Muslim women 
– were oppressed. This had, after all, been the justification for decades 
of Dutch government subsidies and intervention.
This chapter showed that the purpose of the problematisation of 
what were seen as Turkish issues in the Netherlands shifted over time. 
Initially the aim was to generate support for the Turkish migrants. Oth-
ering was the outcome. This othering later served to substantiate claims 
that there were unsolvable problems, and this fed into anti-immigrant 
and racist discourse. This chapter showed how labelling moved from 
one discourse to another. Multiculturalism, dependent resident status 
and honour killings were nodal points in the debates. These points, on 
which discussions focused, were connected to one other in mutually 
reinforcing debates.
Notes
1	 The chapter is part of my nwo Vici project (277-53-002).
2	 My student assistant Daan Loeff helped me to collect the newspaper articles. I 
thank him for his work.
3	 International Institute for Social History (Amsterdam), Archive Hollanda Tür-
kiyeli Kadinlar Birligi 1974-1995 10815458_ead. The archival research was done in 
part by my master’s student Jerney Robert, whom I thank here for her work.
4	 Proceedings Lower House, session 2003-2004, 28 689, nos. 8-9 Onderzoek inte-
gratiebeleid (Eindverslag van de commissie Blok).
5	 Proceedings Lower House, session 2003-2004, 28 689, no. 12, p. 137.
6	 Proceedings Lower House, session 2003-2004, 28 689, no. 12: Onderzoek Inte-
gratiebeleid, Onderzoeksrapport, Aanvullend bronnenonderzoek Verwey-Jonker 
Instituut, 79.
7	 Internationaal Institute Social History (Amsterdam) Archive: Hollanda Türkiyeli 
Kadinlar Birligi 1974-1995 10815458 ead.
8	 Hollanda Türkiyeli Isçiler Birligi.
9	 The same relationship between non-migrant and migrant women’s organisations 
has been found in other countries (Scuzzarello 2008: 16).
10	 Amsterdam, Rotterdam, Leiden, Nijmegen, The Hague, and Utrecht and a more 
or less independent branch in Eindhoven (Eindhoven Türkiyeli Kadınlar Birliği).
11	 vem stands for Vrouwen en Minderhedenbeleid (Women and Minority Policy).
12	 Proceedings Lower House, session 2003-2004, 28 689, no. 12, p. 184.
13	 iisg, htkb, map 241, Stukken betreffende congres Buitenlandse Vrouwen, notu-
len werkgroep Buitenlandse Vrouwen, 27-09-1981. iisg, htkb, folio 242, Stukken 
betreffende het Congres van Buitenlandse Vrouwen in Nederland. 1980, notulen 
van discussiegroep Nederlandse vrouwen.
14	 	De Volkskrant, 21 April 1995, p. 6.
15	 	Proceedings Lower House, session 2003-2004, 28 689, no. 12, p. 253.

multiculturalism, dependent residence and honour killings	
249
16	 	nrc, 24 September 1980, p. 3.
17	 De Volkskrant, 7 June 1983.
18	 Trouw, 24 September 1980, p. 10.
19	 Het Vrije Volk, 24 April 1982.
20		Trouw, 24 September 1980, p. 10; nrc, 24 September 1980, p. 3.
21	 Trouw, 10 March 1980, p. 9; Het Parool, 13 August 1981.
22	 De Volkskrant, 17 September 1981, p. 7.
23	 Proceedings Lower House, session 1981, appendix, p. 573.
24	 See, e.g., Het Vrije Volk, 21 May 1982, Het Parool, 21 May 1982, nrc, 21 May 1982.
25	 	Het Parool, 12 July 1982.
26	 	Proceedings Lower House, session 1980-1981, 16102, no. 9, pp. 1-6.
27	 	Trouw, 10 March 1981, p. 9.
28	 	nrc, 10 March 1981, p. 3.
29	 Proceedings Lower House, session 1980-1981, 16102, no. 9, pp. 1-6.
30	 Algemeen Dagblad, 9 June 1982.
31	 Het Vaderland, 18 August 1972, p. 1, Trouw, 18 August 1972, p. 1.
32	 nrc, 11 August 1972, p. 12.
33	 Het Vaderland, 11 August 1972.
34	 De Telegraaf, 12 August 1972, p. 1.
35	 Het Vrije Volk, 10 August 1972, p. 1; Het Vaderland, 11 August 1972, p. 6.
36	 nrc, 10 August 1972, p. 2.
37	 Leeuwarder Courant, 14 August 1972, p. 19; Nieuwsblad van het Noorden, 14 
August 1972, p. 2.
38	 De Groene Amsterdammer, 15-22 August 1972, p. 2.
39	 De Telegraaf, 16 August 1972, p. 5.
40	The Times, 12 August 1972; articles in Turkish papers were quoted in Het Vader-
land 15 August 1972, p. 5.
41	 Het Vaderland, 12 August 1972, p. 3.
42	 Leeuwarder Courant, 18 August 1959.
43	 Zierikzeesche Nieuwsbode, 16 April 1964, p. 5; Het Parool, 4 June 1969, p. 1; Vrije 
Volk, 4 June 1969, p. 1; Zierikzeesche Nieuwsbode, 5 June 1969, p. 7; Zierikzeesche 
Nieuwsbode, 12 November 1979, p. 2; Zierikzeesche Nieuwsbode 8 June 1972, p. 7; 
Nieuwsblad van het Noorden, 28 June 1972, p. 2; Nieuwsblad van het Noorden, 
27 July 1972, p. 5; Nieuwsblad van het Noorden, 28 November 1972, p. 1; Nieuwsblad 
van het Noorden, 7 February 1973, p. 3; Nieuwsblad van het Noorden, 27 February 
1973, p. 3; Leidse Courant, 25 October 1975.
44	Leidse Courant, 25 October 1972; Zierikzeesche Nieuwsbode, 26 October 1972.
45	 Adat is a Malayan word for tradition and was used in the Dutch East Indies as 
the word for traditional law. The Dutch were familiar with the word. The Turkish 
equivalent is adet.
46	Nieuwsblad van het Noorden, 29 August 1973, p. 3.
47	 Nieuwsblad van het Noorden, 21 May 1975, p. 3.
48	 Nieuwsblad van het Noorden, 3 June 1975, p. 1.
49	Leeuwarder Courant, 28 July 1975; Parool, 28 July 1975, p. 1.
50	 Parool, 1 November 1975, p. 4.
51	 Leeuwarder Courant, 26 August 1975.

250	
Marlou Schrover
52	 Nieuwsblad van het Noorden, 17 November 1976, p. 3.
53	 Leeuwarder Courant, 28 February 1977.
54	 Nieuwsblad van het Noorden, 14 March 1977, p. 11.
55	 Nieuwsblad van het Noorden, 16 December 1977, p. 17.
56	 Leeuwarder Courant, 17 November 1977.
57	 Leeuwarder Courant, 11 July 1978; Nieuwsblad van het Noorden, 11 July 1978, p. 7.
58	 Nieuwsblad van het Noorden, 6 April 1979, p. 3.
59	 De Telegraaf, 17 April 1979, p. 3.
60	Leeuwarder Courant, 17 August 1979.
61	 Algemeen Dagblad, 12 August 2009.
References
Akkerman, T. & A. Hagelund (2007), ‘“Women and children first!” Anti-immigration 
parties and gender in Norway and the Netherlands’, Patterns of Prejudice 41 (2): 
197-214.
Bakker, H. (2003), Eerwraak in Nederland: Een quickscan van de stand van zaken 
Utrecht: TransAct.
Betts, A. (2006), Conceptualising interconnections in global governance: The case of 
refugee protection, Oxford: rsc Working Paper 38.
Bhabha, F. (2009), ‘Between exclusion and assimilation: Experimentalizing multicul-
turalism’, McGill Law Journal 54: 45-90.
Bilgin, S., A. Kouwenhoven, R. Latumahina & J. Westhoek (1988), Met één hand kan 
je niet klappen: Een onderzoek naar organisaties van vrouwen uit etnische minder-
heidsgroepen in Nederland. Utrecht & Leiden: Rijksuniversiteit Leiden, Centrum 
door Onderzoek Maatschappelijke Tegenstellingen.
Bonjour, S. (2008), ‘Ambtelijke onmin rond gezinnen van gastarbeiders: Beleidsvor-
ming inzake gezinsmigratie in Nederland, 1955-1970’, Tijdschrift voor Sociale en 
Economische Geschiedenis 5 (1): 101-127.
Chotkowski, M.B. (2000), ‘“Baby’s kunnen we niet huisvesten, moeder en kind willen 
we niet scheiden”: De rekrutering door Nederland van vrouwelijke arbeidskrach-
ten uit Joegoslavië, 1966-1979’, Tijdschrift voor Sociale Geschiedenis 26 (1): 76-103.
Cillia, R. de, M. Reisigl & R. Wodak (1999), ‘The discursive construction of national 
identities’, Discourse & Society 10: 149-173.
Côté, A., M. Kérisit & M. Côté (2001), Sponsorship … for better or for worse: The 
impact of sponsorship on the equality rights of immigrant women. Ottawa: Status 
of Women Canada.
Dijk, T.A. van (1992), ‘Discourse and the denial of racism’, Discourse & Society 3: 
87-118.
Dijk, T.A. van (1989), ‘Race, riots and the press: An analysis of editorials in the British 
press about the 1985 disorders’, Gazette 43: 229-253.
Dijk, T.A. van (1988), ‘The Tamil panic in the press’, in T.A. van Dijk (ed.), News 
analysis: Case studies of international and national news in the press, pp. 215-254. 
Hillsdale: Lawrence Erlbaum.

multiculturalism, dependent residence and honour killings	
251
Dijk, T.A. van (1983), Minderheden in de media: Een analyse van de berichtgeving 
over etnische minderheden in de dagbladpers. Amsterdam: Socialistische Uitgeverij 
Amsterdam.
Doezema, J. (2001), ‘Ouch! Western feminists’ “wounded attachment” to the “third 
world prostitute”’. Feminist Review 67 (Spring): 16-38. 
Eck, C. van (2001), ‘Door bloed gezuiverd: Eerwraak bij Turken in Nederland’. PhD 
thesis, University of Amsterdam.
Entman, R.M. (1996), ‘Reporting environmental policy debate: The real media biases’, 
Harvard International Journal of Press/Politics 1 (3): 77-92.
Ermers, R. (2007), Eer en eerwraak: Definitie en analyse. Amsterdam: Bulaaq.
Ferwerda, H.B. & I. van Leiden (2005), Eerwraak of eergerelateerd geweld? Naar een 
werkdefinitie. The Hague: Ministery of Justice.
Foucault, M. (1984), ‘Polemics, politics and problematisations: An interview with 
Michel Foucault’, in P. Rabinow (ed.), The Foucault Reader, pp. 381-390. London: 
Pantheon Books.
Gorp, B. van (2005), ‘Where is the frame? Victims and intruders in the Belgian press 
coverage of the asylum issue’, European Journal of Communication 20 (4): 485-508.
Hilterman, K. (2001), Eerwraak. Houten: Van Holkema & Warendorf.
Hoving, I., H. Dibbits & M. Schrover (eds) (2005), Veranderingen van het alledaagse. 
Cultuur en migratie in Nederland. Den Haag: sdu.
Korteweg, A. & G. Yurdakul (2009), ‘Islam, gender, and immigrant integration: 
Boundary drawing in discourses on honour killing in the Netherlands and Ger-
many’, Ethnic and Racial Studies: 32 (2): 218-238.
Kurkiala, M. (2003), ‘Interpreting honour killings: The story of Fadime Sahindal 
(1975-2002) in the Swedish press’, Anthropology Today 19 (1) (February): 6-7.
Laclau, E. & C. Mouffe (1985), Hegemony and socialist strategy. London: Verso.
Lambelet Coleman, D. (1996), ‘Individualizing justice through multiculturalism: The 
liberals’ dilemma’, Columbia Law Review 96 (5) (June): 1093-1167.
Leistra, G. & P. Nieuwbeerta (2003), Moord en doodslag in Nederland (1992-2001). 
Amsterdam: Prometheus.
Le Vaque-Manty, M. (2006), ‘Dueling for equality: Masculine honor and the modern 
politics of dignity’, Political Theory 34 (6): 715-740.
Lutz, H. (1997), ‘The limits of European-ness: Immigrant women in fortress Europe’, 
Feminist Review 57, Citizenship: Pushing the Boundaries (Autumn): 93-111.
Matthes, J. & M. Kohring (2008), ‘The content analysis of media frames: Toward 
improving reliability and validity’, Journal of Communication 58: 258-279.
McKerl, M. (2007), ‘Multiculturalism, gender and violence’, Culture and Religion 8 
(2): 187-217.
Obdeijn, H., & M. Schrover (2008), Komen en gaan: Immigratie en emigratie in 
Nederland vanaf 1550. Amsterdam: Bert Bakker.
Okin, S. Moller (1999), ‘Is multiculturalism bad for women?’, in J. Cohen, M. Howard 
& M. Nussbaum (eds), Is multiculturalism bad for women? pp. 9-24. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press.
Onderwater, P. (2008), ‘Wij zijn geen “zielige vrouwtjes”! Een onderzoek naar de hou-
ding van de Turkse vrouwenbeweging in Nederland ten opzichte van het sekse- 
debat tussen 1970-2008’. Master’s thesis, Utrecht University. 

252	
Marlou Schrover
Özer, N. (2007), Hatice: Een Turks drama. Amsterdam: Bulaaq.
Penninx, R. & M. Schrover (2001), Bastion of bindmiddel: Organisaties van immigran-
ten in historisch perspectief. Amsterdam: Institute for Migration & Ethnic Studies.
Prins, B. (2002), ‘The nerve to break taboos: New realism in the Dutch discourse on 
multiculturalism’, jlmi/rlmi 3 (3 & 4): 363-379.
Rhodes, R.A.W. (1997), Understanding governance: Policy networks, governance, 
reflexivity and accountability. Buckingham: Open University Press.
Rijkschroeff, R., J.W. Duyvendak & T. Pels (2003), Bronnenonderzoek integratiebeleid. 
Utrecht: Verwey-Jonker Instituut.
Robert, J. (2009), ‘De opkomst en ondergang van Hollanda Türkiyeli Kadinlar Birligi 
(Turkse vrouwenvereniging in Nederland) 1974-1995: Ruim dertig jaar strijd om 
mondigheid! Waar ging het mis?’ Master’s thesis, Leiden University.
Roggeband, C. & M. Verloo (2007), ‘Dutch women are liberated, migrant women are 
a problem: The evolution of policy frames on gender and migration in the Neth-
erlands, 1995-2005,’ Social Policy & Administration 41 (3) (June): 271-288.
Safilios-Rothschild, C. (1969), ‘“Honour” crimes in contemporary Greece’, The British 
Journal of Sociology 20 (2) (June): 205-218.
Scheufele, D.A. (1999), ‘Framing as a theory of media effects’, Journal of Communica-
tion 49 (1): 103-122.
Scholten, P. (2007), Constructing immigrant policies, research-policy relations and 
immigrant integration in the Netherlands (1970-2004). Arnhem: University of 
Twente.
Schrover, M. (2011), Om de meisjes, voor de meisjes: Een historisch perspectief op pro-
blematisering en bagatellisering van onderwerpen die te maken hebben met migratie 
en integratie. Leiden: Leiden University. 
Schrover, M. (2010a), ‘Why make a difference? Migration policy and making dif-
ferences between migrant men and women (the Netherlands 1945-2005)’, in 
M. Schrover & E.J. Yeo (eds), Gender, migration and the public sphere, 1850-2005, 
pp. 76-96. New York: Routledge.
Schrover, M. (2010b), ‘Pillarization, multiculturalism and cultural freezing, Dutch 
migration history and the enforcement of essentialist ideas’, bmgn/lchr 125 (2/3): 
329-354.
Schrover, M. (2009a), ‘Differences that make all the difference: Gender, migration 
and vulnerability’, in M. Orly, G. Brunet, V. Barusse De Luca, & D. Gauvreau 
(eds), A Female demography: Migration, work, fertility, family, pp. 143-168. Bern: 
Peter Lang.
Schrover, M. (2009b), ‘Family in Dutch migration policy 1945-2005’, The History of 
the Family 14: 191-202.
Schrover, M. &. E.J. Yeo (2010), ‘Introduction: Moving the focus to the public sphere’, 
in M. Schrover, & E.J. Yeo (eds), Gender, migration and the public sphere in inter-
disciplinary perspective 1850-2005, pp. 1-13. New York: Routledge. 
Siesling, M. (2006), Multiculturaliteit en verdediging in strafzaken: Een onderzoek 
naar de manieren waarop in het Nederlandse strafrecht ruimte wordt gevonden 
voor het verwerken van de culturele achtergrond van de verdachte. Utrecht: Boom.

multiculturalism, dependent residence and honour killings	
253
Simsek, J. (2006), Alle ogen op haar gericht, eerwraak: Traditioneel geweld tegen Turkse 
vrouwen en meisjes: een handleiding voor hulpverleners. Utrecht: Inspraakorgaan 
Turken in Nederland (iot). 
Snouck Hurgronje, C. (1916), Mohammedanism: Lectures on its origin, its religious and 
political growth, and its present state. Leiden: Project Gutenberg.
Sterett, S. (1997), ‘Domestic violence and immigration in Britain’, Polar 20 (2): 63-69.
Scuzzarello, S. (2008), ‘National security versus moral responsibility: an analysis of 
integration programs in Malmö, Sweden’, Social Politics 15 (1): 5-31.
Tinnemans, W. (1994), Een gouden armband: Een geschiedenis van Mediterrane im-
migranten in Nederland (1945-1994). Utrecht: Nederlands Centrum Buitenlanders.
Volpp, L. (2001), ‘Feminism versus multiculturalism’, Columbia Law Review 101: 1181-
1218.
Volpp, L. (1996), ‘Talking “culture”: Gender, race, nation, and the politics of multicul-
turalism’, Columbia Law Review 96: 1573-1617.
Vreeswijk, H. (2008), Eerwraak. Antwerpen: Manteau.
Wentholt, R. (1967), Buitenlandse gastarbeiders in Nederland. Leiden: Spruyt.
Zee, R. van der (2006), Eerwraak in Nederland. Antwerpen/Amsterdam: Houtekiet.


11  Conclusion
Gender, migration and cross-categorical research
Marlou Schrover and Deirdre Moloney
States differentiate explicitly between categories of migrants (e.g., colo-
nial, refugee, labour and family) and implicitly according to categories 
of analysis, such as gender, class, religion and ethnicity. This volume 
focused on this dual relationship between gender and categorisation. 
Categories of migrants are like communicating vessels: migrants can 
and do change categories. We analysed how, when and why this hap-
pens, and how this differs according to gender, as well as to class and 
ethnicity. Defining (the true refugee, the family member or difference) 
is directly related to enumerating migrants. Numbers (real or inflated) 
are vital to justify measures or new policies. Categorisation is not only 
important for allocating or withholding rights, but also for substantiat-
ing claims, particularly the claim that there is a problem. The numbers 
game plays out differently for migrant men and women: men are a risk, 
women are at risk.
In the introductory chapter, we summarised the large literature on 
gender and migration. With this volume, we have added to that litera-
ture in six significant ways.
In the first place, we moved away from taking stock of differences, 
and from the over-studied sectors of domestic work and prostitution, 
with their stress on victimisation, feminisation and problematisation. 
We explained the functionality of making differences.
Secondly, we focused on the public sphere (political debates and 
media coverage), where boundaries are redrawn, rather than on the 
private sphere, and we showed that issues move between both spheres.
Third, we illustrated not only that class and ethnicity intersect with 
gender, but that religion does so as well. Christian support groups advo-
cated for their co-religionists, and as part of that strategy emphasised 
that Christian women were at risk of being harmed by Muslim men. 
The aim of anti-veiling campaigns was partly to protect Muslim women 
from repression by Muslim men. What is labelled a crime of passion 
when it involves non-migrants becomes a culturally-based honour kill-

256	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
ing when it involves Islamic migrants. The intersection between class 
and gender is often strongest as part of problematising ‘their’ poverty 
as ‘our’ problem. Poor men applying for asylum are more likely to be 
suspected of not being ‘true’ refugees than poor women. Poor men are 
also more likely to be suspected of being labour migrants who are abus-
ing family migration policies.
Fourth, we illustrated differences in the labelling of countries of ori-
gin of migrants. Some are more easily declared to be failing states than 
others. Possibilities for labelling are influenced by economic, political 
and postcolonial dependencies. The outcome for migrants from these 
countries differs according to gender, as well as to religion, class and 
sexuality.
In the fifth place, we emphasised the importance of looking at 
both men and women, as well as both femininity and masculinity. As 
Walaardt indicates in his chapter on the Netherlands, some asylum 
seekers sought to substitute masculinity for femininity in employing 
victimhood discourse. Advocates and lobbyists simultaneously and 
successfully redefined roles, so that asylum seekers could be heroes and 
victims at the same time. In some countries – Morocco, for instance 
– migration has become a rite of passage from boyhood to manhood. 
Those who do not manage to migrate remain in perpetual boyhood. 
That principle does not apply to women. In fact, the opposite is true. 
Women migrants are viewed as girls, long past the age of girlhood, 
and married migrant women are grouped alongside children into one 
broad category of dependents, which suggests they are economically 
unproductive.
Finally, we demonstrated how understanding the way that women 
and men crossing borders contributes to our understanding of citizen-
ship and rights, as well as definitions of family, social welfare and reli-
gion in a transnational context. We challenged much of the existing lit-
erature on gender and migration by proposing that the typical binaries 
reflected in the scholarship, such as labour migrant and refugee, the 
West and the Rest, public and private spheres, equality versus differ-
ence, democratic versus authoritarian, deserving and non-deserving, 
and men and women, intersect more than these simple dichotomies 
suggest. Scholars should not uncritically reproduce dichotomies that 
are used in the public sphere. Furthermore, we brought out a dilemma: 
emphasising difference works to gain attention and rights in the short 
run, but it creates disadvantages in the long run. An alterity discourse 
can be useful to policymakers and lobbyists, but it disadvantages 
migrants in the long run, and that, too, often differs by gender.

conclusion	
257
Contribution to theory: Introducing the transferral model
In our introductory chapter we pointed out that since there are many 
differences between migrant men and migrant women, there is not one 
theory that adequately explains all aspects of the relationship between 
gender and migration. We offered a large number of theories related 
to gender and migration. With this volume we contribute to theory 
by explaining when and why categorisation changed and when, how 
and why differences according to gender (as well as other categories of 
analysis) have been labelled, detected or deemed important within the 
public sphere.
Refugees and asylum seekers, family migrants, postcolonial migrants 
and labour migrants are not mutually exclusive categories, although 
policymakers tend to regard them as such. In practice, migrants can 
and do move between these categories.
figure 11.1  Migrants can and do move between the different categories
	
We emphasised the ability of men and women to move between 
categories of migrant. We further analysed how ideas about gender 
intersect with other categories of analysis (such as ethnicity, religion 
and class) to shape debates in the media and politics. We focused on 
three areas of continued intense debate, in which at least differences 
according to gender were deemed important and which relate to dif-
ferent categories of migrants. These three areas are who is a ‘refugee’, 
who is ‘family’, and ‘multiculturalism’. These questions are frequently 
seen as separate. We showed that they are not. We described and ana-
lysed distinctions made between categories of migrants in France, the 
usa, Canada, the Netherlands, Sweden and Denmark, and how politi-
cal debates justified these distinctions.
Scholars tend to appropriate the categorisation framework used by 
policymakers and reproduced by politicians and journalists. In this 
volume we sought to move away from that perspective, and its moral 
overtones, by examining the ways in which migrants and policies move 
Asylum seeker
Family migrant
Colonial migrant
Labour migrant

258	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
between and across categories. Categories such as gender, class and 
ethnicity intersect, but not all categorisations are equally important in 
all contexts or at all times. We aimed to explain when and why dif-
ferences were labelled, detected or deemed important. New categories 
were introduced to emphasise the novelty of a phenomenon, and to 
thus establish the need for new policies. To label phenomena (migra-
tions, policies or debates) as new and different is part of the process of 
problematisation.
Policymakers, as a rule, seek to interpret categories of migrants nar-
rowly and to exclude people who do not fit their definitions. In con-
trast, support groups tend to stretch categories and generate sympathy 
for those who seem to be inhumanly harmed by the government’s rig-
our. Categorisation is not static, but it is frequently presented as such 
because such a representation eases governmentability. We pointed 
out similarities over time and between countries. Schacher described 
the case of Armenian refugees in the usa. The strategy used there was 
similar to the strategies pursued by Canadian advocates on behalf of 
Mexican refugees, as described by Boyd & Nowak, and for homosexual 
refugees in the usa, as described by Oxford. As illustrated by Schacher, 
Walaardt, and Oxford, state policies, and the policies of advocates, 
ngos and lobbyists, continuously interacted, influenced and shaped 
one another. As Schacher discussed, many Armenian-American social 
workers in the usa, eager to promote the respectability of the Arme-
nian community, opposed the harsh impact of immigration laws. But 
they nonetheless accommodated them in practice.
Our emphasis on categorisation highlights when, where and why 
analytical categories were absent. Gender was, for instance, initially not 
understood as relevant in refugee policy, as Walaardt showed for the 
Netherlands, Boyd & Nowak demonstrated for Canada, and Oxford for 
the usa. In fact, in 1951, when the Refugee Convention was drafted, 
there was little awareness that women could be refugees. Refugees were 
assumed to be men and masculine. Only later did women appear on the 
scene. Only then could refugees – both men and women – be viewed as 
feminine and vulnerable. Homosexual men have recently become more 
visible as potential refugees, but as Oxford indicates, lesbian women 
almost never claim asylum in the usa. Advocates often aim to make 
categories of migrants visible, although they need not be new. There 
is a thin line that separates visibility from categorisation. Changes in 
migration patterns influence visibilities, but high-profile court cases 
can do so as well, such as that of the caregiver and father Abdellah Ber-
rehab described by Van Walsum, Jones & Legêne for the Netherlands. 
Possibilities for visibility differ according to gender.

conclusion	
259
Categorisations apply to migrants, but also to their countries of 
origin. Categorising democratic countries as failing states proved dif-
ficult, as described by Walaardt for Portugal and the usa, and by Boyd 
& Novak for Mexico, and this influenced the chances of migrants from 
these countries for gaining asylum. The difficulty of categorising cer-
tain states as failing states results not only from a lack of information, 
but also from a lack of potential political gains. The benefits that West-
ern governments stood to obtain from granting asylum were no longer 
clear after the end of the Cold War, as indicated by Boyd & Novak and 
by Walaardt. The discourse of political gains was replaced by a dis-
course focusing on economic costs, and threats to society were defined 
in both cultural and safety terms. This is true for all countries described 
in this volume. Perceptions of costs, gains and threats differed accord-
ing to gender. Men are more often portrayed as useful to the labour 
market, but also as (political) threats to society.
Categorisation, furthermore, relates to ideas about what belongs in 
the private sphere and what in the public sphere. Rather surprisingly, 
highly personalised and dramatised stories from the private sphere – 
mostly about women – were found to be instrumental in redrawing 
boundaries in the public sphere. This was true for the Armenian refu-
gees in the usa, for Muslim migrants in the Netherlands, Denmark 
and Sweden, and for Mexican migrants in Canada, as well as for homo-
sexual migrants in the usa. At the same time, however, when authori-
ties could successfully relegate an issue to the private sphere they could 
justify keeping it outside of the public sphere, and refrain from intro-
ducing new policies or changing existing policy. For instance, the dom-
inant narrative of ‘queer’ persecution for gay men and transgendered 
women is one of sexual family violence, as Oxford discusses for the 
usa. That which is categorised as ‘private violence’ – violence within 
the family sphere – is regarded as something that occurs in all societies. 
As a result, such incidents are defined as outside the realm of an asy-
lum claim. Asylum claims lose power if persecution can be redefined as 
maltreatment or classified as belonging to the private sphere.
In the case of family migration, the opposite occurs. Very private 
aspects of family life – biological parenthood – have been made part 
of public debates and formal testing. Furthermore, the connotations 
of categorisations can change. ‘French by law’ was a legal category, but 
Sarkozy used it to categorise those who were ‘not really French’ and 
associated it with Islam, non-integration, polygamy and, by extension, 
illegality, as Raissiguier showed.
We described the efforts of supporters and lobbyists to create prec-
edents, while authorities emphasised uniqueness. Among authorities, 

260	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
there was a universal fear of establishing precedents. This was true for 
all countries studied, as well as for all categories of migrants. Refugee 
claims were more successful when presented as exceptions, though 
they had to be transformed into precedent cases to advance the overall 
cause of a migrant group. We emphasised the strong tendency towards 
victimisation narratives in seeking to find the ‘true’ refugee (whether in 
the Netherlands, in the usa or in Canada), as well as in claiming rights 
to family migration and in defending selective exceptionalism within 
multiculturalism (in the Netherlands, Sweden and Denmark).
Personification was one of the main strategies used by lobbyists, as 
we discussed. Strategies and their success differed according to gender. 
Personal stories and gruelling details were invoked to strengthen the 
claims of Armenians and homosexuals in the usa, Mexicans in Can-
ada, and Muslim women in the Netherlands, Sweden and Denmark. 
Advocacy groups instructed asylum claimants so that they could make 
a successful appeal. The strategy worked in favour of the migrants in 
the short run, but led to victimisation in the long run. It also holds true 
for migrant women within a multiculturalism framework, as shown for 
the Netherlands, Sweden and Denmark. Victimisation was a success-
ful strategy for claiming rights, but the price of this success was that 
migrants came to be seen as vulnerable and in need of protection by 
the state, especially if they were women. More importantly, they came 
to be regarded as fundamentally different. It proved difficult to escape a 
victimhood identity. Victimisation played a role in the construction of 
a counter-identity of the ‘Western’ advocates who formed the support 
groups. This othering worked as a disadvantage in the long term by lim-
iting economic and political roles for migrant women and men. Advo-
cates invoked strong tropes, such as those that referred to the Second 
World War or the Holocaust, as discussed by Walaardt for refugees in 
the Netherlands, and by Oxford for the usa, fully aware that overuse of 
such tropes risked ultimately diminishing the power of the argument. 
But use of the tropes was effective in the short run, and thus attractive. 
We demonstrated that discourses are reproduced and copied 
between categories of migrants, and between countries. Indeed, dis-
courses travel. They shift from anti-colonial and civil rights movements, 
to family rights, refugee rights and gay rights movements. For the first 
time, the authors in this volume provide specific empirical evidence 
on how and why strategies have travelled, and how gender has influ-
enced the transferral of those strategies. The evidence presented indi-
cates how, in very different circumstances and with very different goals, 
many the same strategies were deployed. We highlighted the passage of 
discourses and concepts across time and space (between countries) and 

conclusion	
261
between categories of migrants. In the process, migrants could and did 
switch roles and move from one category to another (e.g., from asylum 
seeker to labour migrant).
We introduce here what we call the transferral model to summarise 
and explain categorisation in relation to gender, class and ethnicity, 
based on the evidence in the preceding chapters (Figure 11.2). Five fac-
tors constitute the model.
figure 11.2  Transferral model: Factors that explain the relationship between  
	
categorisation and gender, class and ethnicity
• Characteristics of the immigrant population (size of the group gender, class,  
	 ethnicity, religion, number, skill, sex ratio and country of origin)
• Economic situation, geopolitical situation, perceptions of gain and costs,  
	 urgency and reciprocity (between countries)
• Credibility, rights attached to ‘equality’
• Recognisability, perceptions of ‘sameness’
• Migrants’ rights discourse combined with other emancipatory goals
	
The first factor is the characteristics of the migrants, as these deter-
mined whether migrants could switch between categories. Foremost 
among these are their gender, ethnicity, class, the sex ratio within the 
group, the numbers of migrants, their countries of origin, and their 
religion.
Secondly, categorisations and therefore migration policies depended 
on particular economic situations and geopolitical circumstances (such 
as the end of the Cold War). High unemployment rates removed one 
avenue for switching categories. Perceptions regarding costs and gains 
(political, economic and security) influence possibilities for relabelling. 
Perceptions of costs and gains are influenced by linkage possibilities: 
Can marriage fraud be linked to migrant illegality? Can migrant ille-
gality be linked to security threat? Urgency is important for relabelling. 
Cases that relate to women (and children) can be presented as more 
urgent (from the perspective of a need to save those involved). Such cir-
cumstances render it easier to change labels and categorisations, and for 
migrants to move across and between categories. Lawmakers, policy- 
makers, politicians, journalists and lobbyists are often influenced by 
what occurs in other countries. Since policymakers, as a rule, look to 
neighbouring countries in order to synchronise polities and prevent 

262	
Marlou Schrover & Deirdre Moloney
migrants from ‘shopping’ for rights, they also study the arguments and 
strategies used elsewhere. They adapt and adopt these when useful or 
possible, while immigrant support organisations do the same. Leniency 
(or rumours about leniency) in one country work as a magnet (some 
fear), and restrictions divert migrants away from a country (some 
hope). Policymakers respond to what they believe will be the conse-
quences of their decisions on the policies of and practices in neigh-
bouring countries (reciprocity). Criticism about the relative leniency 
or stringency of policies in neighbouring countries is only valid and 
effective if it is matched by policies in one’s own country.
Thirdly, whether discourses can effectively travel from one cate-
gory of migrants to another is influenced by credibility, we argue here. 
Credibility plays an important role in refugee cases. Questions about 
whether a person is a true refugee or whether democratic countries 
(such as Mexico, or nato partners, including the usa and Portugal) 
can even produce refugees, are central to the implementation of ref-
ugee policy. The question ‘is this a man or a woman?’ illustrates the 
problem of credibility: who is asking, who is answering and why is the 
question being asked? Credibility questions are also important to other 
categories of migrants, not simply asylum seekers: Is this person really 
migrating for love and marriage, and not for work? Can wearing a veil 
ever be a choice? Is this a real marriage, a real child, a real spouse? 
Is this migrant willing and capable of adapting? The answers to these 
questions differ according to gender, as well as to sexuality, age, class, 
skill, countries of origin, age and religion. If it can be proven that peo-
ple are not what they claim to be – a true refugee, a family member, a 
spouse, or potentially a Dutch, Danish, Swedish or French citizen – 
rights can be denied accordingly. Multiculturalism had to be declared 
a failure and had to be attached to all sorts of behaviour, labelled devi-
ant, strange and culturally-determined, in order to exclude migrants 
and deny their children rights. This happened in each of the countries 
examined in this volume. When equality comes with many rights, as 
is true for most Western countries, it is important to set high barriers 
for access to that ‘equality’. Important to the discourse is how ‘we’ profit 
from believing or denying claims. A smooth transition from colonial-
ism to postcolonialism, the recruitment of suitable workers, the claim 
to moral superiority, or the opportunity to pitch the enlightened West 
against a backward Rest, can be sufficient to change categorisations, as 
we showed.
In the fourth place, strategies, concepts and debates travel across 
time, between countries and across and between categories of migrants 
when new categorisation is built on old categorisations. That process 

conclusion	
263
makes new categorisations acceptable. Recognisability, we argue, is a 
factor that stimulates and enables the transfer of ideas and policies. 
Transfers between categories, between countries and over time can 
only take place if those who are instrumental to these transfers believe 
that the situations, or the migrants, are ‘the same’. Debates about mul-
ticulturalism are much more closely related to debates about who is a 
refugee and who is family, than might be apparent at first glance, or has 
been suggested in earlier literature. As in the quest for the ‘true’ refugee 
and ‘true’ family members, multiculturalism takes an essentialist view. 
Static ideas about culture legitimise categorisations. Since equality – or 
sameness – comes with rights, it is important to prove difference, as was 
done in multiculturalism, or fraud, as was key in debates about refugees 
or family members. The shared essentialist basis makes it possible for 
discourses to travel.
Lastly, similar archetypes figure in many of these debates. The ‘eksik 
etek’ – the ‘short skirted’, intellectual, unmarried us women, who came 
out in support of the Armenian refugees, as described by Schacher, were 
similar to the Dutch women who supported Turkish women decades 
later, as Schrover described. The people who supported gay rights, also 
came out in support of refugee rights in several of the countries exam-
ined. Strategies that proved to be successful in one context were copied, 
adapted and applied in other contexts. This was especially true if they 
could serve a multiple cause: advocating immigrants’ rights combined 
with non-migrant emancipatory goals. The refugee war resisters of the 
1970s, as described by Walaardt, were important in the anti-Vietnam or 
anti-‘colonial’ war movement. Gay refugees were important to the lgbt 
movement of the 1990s.
The testing and use of this transferral model in new contexts pro-
vides ample scope for future advances in the field.


About the authors
Rikke Andreassen is a researcher, teacher and consultant in the fields of 
media, discrimination and equality, addressing racial and ethnic and gen-
der equality issues. She earned her PhD from University of Toronto, Can-
ada in 2005 and is an associate professor at Roskilde University, Denmark. 
Andreassen has participated in various public debates about immigration 
and gender and published a number of articles as well as the books Mennes-
keudstilling: Fremvisninger af eksotiske mennesker i Zoolgisk Have og Tivoli 
(2011) and Der er et yndigt land: Medier, minoritieter og danskhed (2007). 
She was part of the eu project veil (2006-2009), which focuses on Euro-
pean debates and legislation concerning head and body coverings of Muslim 
women (www.veil-project.eu). She is the coordinator of the Nordic Nord-
forsk-funded network TheoryNord on re-developing international theories 
of media and migration in a Nordic context (2011-2013).
Monica Boyd joined the University of Toronto in 2001 as a professor of soci-
ology. She holds the Canada Research Chair in Immigration, Inequality 
and Public Policy. She is an associate editor of the International Migration 
Review and a member of the editorial board of the American Sociological 
Review. Her current research projects are on immigrant inequality in the 
labour force with a continuing focus on immigrant women, the migration of 
high-skilled labour and related re-accreditation difficulties, and the socio-
economic achievements of the children of immigrants. Among her recent 
publications are ‘Finding a place in stratified structures: Migrant women in 
North America’ (with Deanna Pikkov), in Nicole Piper (ed.), New Perspecti-
ves on Gender and Migration: Livelihoods, Rights, and Entitlements (London 
Routledge 2008); ‘Falling out of safety nets or saved by family fies? Poverty 
among Elderly immigrants in Canada’ (with Lisa Kaida), Canadian Journal 
on Aging 30: 1 (2011); ‘Social networks and international migration’ (with 
Joanne Nowak) in Marco Martiniello and Jan Rath (eds), An Introduction to 
International Migration Studies: European Perspectives (Amsterdam Univer-
sity Press 2012).

266	
Gender, Migration and Categorisation
Maja Cederberg is a senior lecturer in sociology in the Department of Social 
Sciences at Oxford Brookes University, where she previously worked as a 
post-doctoral researcher. Her research interests are in international migra-
tion, gender, ethnicity, ‘race’ and racism, and social inequalities. Other 
related interests include work and employment, labour market and welfare 
policies, social theory and qualitative research methods. Maja Cederberg’s 
work is published in the journals Sociology, Acta Sociologica, the Journal of 
Ethnic and Migration Studies and Studi Emigrazione/Migration Studies.
Guno Jones is a researcher at the vu University Amsterdam, specialised in 
post-Second World War political discourses on migration, citizenship and 
belonging of ‘postcolonial citizens’ (in particular, in the Netherlands, Bel-
gium and the uk) and in memory and remembrance of the Second World 
War and of Dutch transatlantic slavery. His recent publications include 
‘Dutch politicians: The Dutch nation and the dynamics of postcolonial citi-
zenship’, in Ulbe Bosma (ed.), Post-colonial Immigrants and Identity Forma-
tions in the Netherlands (Amsterdam University Press 2012) and ‘De Slaver-
nij is onze geschiedenis (niet): Over de discursieve strijd om de betekenis 
van de ntr-televisieserie De Slavernij. (‘Slavery is (not) our history: On the 
public debate and divergent meanings of the ntr television series Slavery’)’ 
bmgn Low Countries Historical Review 127: 4 (2012).
Deirdre M. Moloney is Director of Fellowships Advising at Princeton Uni-
versity. She is the author of National Insecurities: Immigrants and us Depor-
tation Policy since 1882 (University of North Carolina Press, 2012), Ameri-
can Catholic Lay Groups and Transatlantic Social Reform in the Progressive 
Era (University of North Carolina Press, 2002) and ‘Women, sexual moral-
ity, and economic dependency in early deportation policy’ in the Journal of 
Women’s History. Her recent research was supported by a fellowship at the 
Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars in Washington, dc.
Joanne Nowak is a doctoral candidate in sociology at the University of 
Toronto. Her research interests include the intersection between interna-
tional migration and development, gender and migration issues, (im)migra-
tion policy, as well as the politics of migration. She is the co-author with 
Monica Boyd of ‘Social networks and international migration’, in Marco 
Martiniello and Jan Rath (eds), An Introduction to International Migration 
Studies: European Perspectives (Amsterdam University Press, 2012).
Connie Oxford is an assistant professor of gender and women’s studies at the 
State University of New York, Plattsburgh. She received her PhD in sociol-
ogy and a doctoral women’s studies certificate from the University of Pitts-

About the authors	
267
burgh in 2006. She is working on an ethnographic study of gender-based 
asylum claims titled Fleeing Gendered Harm: Seeking Asylum in America. 
That manuscript is based on her dissertation fieldwork in Los Angeles and 
was supported by fellowships and grants from the National Science Founda-
tion, the Social Science Research Council International Migration Program, 
and the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation. She is currently doing supplemen-
tal research for this project in New York City. Amongst her publications are 
‘Protectors and victims in the gender regime of asylum’, which appeared 
in the National Women’s Studies Association Journal, ‘Acts of resistance in 
asylum seekers’ persecution narratives’, in Immigrant Rights in the Shadows 
of United States Citizenship, and ‘Changing the research question: Lessons 
from qualitative research’, in Research Methods Choices in Interdisciplinary 
Contexts.
Catherine Raissiguier teaches women’s and gender studies at New Jersey City 
University. She is the author Becoming Women/Becoming Workers: Identity 
Formation in a French High School (suny Press, 1994) and Re-Inventing the 
Republic: Gender, Migration, and Citizenship in France (Stanford University 
Press, 2010). Her current research looks at various processes of border for-
mation in France and the new forms of citizenship politics they elicit.
Yael Schacher teaches American Studies at the University of Connecticut. 
She recently completed her doctoral dissertation, ‘Exceptions to exclusion: 
The prehistory of asylum in the United States, 1880-1980’, in Harvard’s His-
tory of American Civilization Program. She served on the editorial board of 
A New Literary History of America (Cambridge, ma: Harvard University 
Press, 2009) and was a research assistant for Harvard’s digital archives on 
immigration to the United States (http://ocp.hul.harvard.edu/immigra-
tion/).
Marlou Schrover is a professor of migration history and social differences at 
Leiden University. She recently concluded a large (nwo vici) project on gen-
der and migration. Recent publications include Illegal Migration and Gender 
in a Global and Historical Perspective (Amsterdam University Press, 2008) 
(with Joanne van der Leun, Leo Lucassen and Chris Quispel), Komen en 
Gaan: Immigratie en Emigratie in Nederland vanaf 1550 (Bert Bakker, 2008) 
(with Herman Obdeijn), and Gender, Migration and the Public Sphere 1850-
2005 (Routledge, 2010) (with Eileen Janes Yeo).
Tycho Walaardt is a researcher at the Economic and Social History Depart-
ment of Leiden University. After graduating in 2000, he worked for the 
Dutch Immigration and Naturalisation Service and the United Nations High 

268	
Gender, Migration and Categorisation
Commissioner for Refugees in Ghana and Eritrea. His main fields of interest 
relate to the immigration and the selection of immigrants. He has published 
a number of articles on the Dutch asylum procedure and the arguments 
and actors that were decisive in them. Recent publications include ‘The 
good old days of the Cold War: Arguments used to admit or reject asylum 
seekers in the Netherlands, 1957-1967’, Continuity and Change 26: 2 (2011); 
‘Patience and perseverance: The asylum procedure of Tamils and Iranians 
in the Netherlands in the mid-1980s’, Tijdschrift voor Sociale en Economische 
Geschiedenis 8: 3 (2011); and ‘From heroes to vulnerable victims: Labelling 
Christian Turks as genuine refugees in the 1970s’, Ethnic and Racial Studies 
(forthcoming, 2013). His dissertation ‘Geruisloos inwilligen: Argumentatie 
en speelruimte in de Nederlandse asielprocedure, 1945-1994’ (Silently giving 
in: Arguments and margins in the Dutch asylum procedure, 1945-1994) was 
published by Verloren in 2012.
Sarah van Walsum is a professor of migration law and family ties at the vu 
University Amsterdam. Her main fields of interest are migration law, gen-
der and migration law, family migration policies, migrant domestic work-
ers, transnational ties and migration law. She is author of The Famiy and the 
Nation: Dutch Family Migration Policies in the Context of Changing Family 
Norms (Cambridge Scholars Publishing, 2008).

Other IMISCOE Research titles
Birgit Glorius, Izabela Grabowska-Lusinska and Aimee Kuvik (eds)
Mobility in Transition: Migration Patterns after eu Enlargement
2013 isbn 978 90 8964 392 6
Joan Font and Mónica Méndez (eds)
Surveying Ethnic Minorities and Immigrant Populations: Methodological 
Challenges and Research Strategies
2013 isbn 978 90 8964 543 2
Marek Okólski (ed.)
European Immigrations: Trends, Structures and Policy Implications
2012 isbn 978 90 8964 457 2
Ulbe Bosma (ed.)
Post-Colonial Immigrants and Identity Formations in the Netherlands
2012 isbn 978 90 8964 454 1
Christina Boswell and Gianni D’Amato (eds)
Immigration and Social Systems: Collected Essays of Michael Bommes
2012 isbn 978 90 8964 453 4
Maurice Crul, Jens Schneider and Frans Lelie (eds)
The European Second Generation Compared: Does the Integration Context Matter?
2012 isbn 978 90 8964 443 5
Bram Lancee
Immigrant Performance in the Labour Market: Bonding and Bridging Social 
Capital
2012 isbn 978 90 8964 357 5
Julie Vullnetari
Albania on the Move: Links between Internal and International Migration
2012 isbn 978 90 8964 355 1
Blanca Garcés-Mascareñas
State Regulation of Labour Migration in Malaysia and Spain: Markets, Citizenship 
and Rights
2012 isbn 978 90 8964 286 8
Albert Kraler, Eleonore Kofman, Martin Kohli and Camille Schmoll (eds)
Gender, Generations and the Family in International Migration
2012 isbn 978 90 8964 285 1

Giovanna Zincone, Rinus Penninx and Maren Borkert (eds)
Migration Policymaking in Europe: The Dynamics of Actors and Contexts in Past 
and Present
2011 isbn 978 90 8964 370 4
Michael Bommes and Giuseppe Sciortino (eds)
Foggy Social Structures: Irregular Migration, European Labour Markets and the 
Welfare State
2011 isbn 978 90 8964 341 4
Peter Scholten
Framing Immigrant Integration: Dutch Research-Policy Dialogues in Comparative 
Perspective
2011 isbn 978 90 8964 284 4
Liza Mügge
Beyond Dutch Borders: Transnational Politics among Colonial Migrants, Guest 
Workers and the Second Generation
2010 isbn 978 90 8964 244 8
Rainer Bauböck and Thomas Faist (eds)
Diaspora and Transnationalism: Concepts, Theories and Methods
2010 isbn 978 90 8964 238 7
Cédric Audebert and Mohamed Kamel Dorai (eds)
Migration in a Globalised World: New Research Issues and Prospects
2010 isbn 978 90 8964 157 1
Richard Black, Godfried Engbersen, Marek Okólski and Cristina Pantîru (eds)
A Continent Moving West? EU Enlargement and Labour Migration from Central 
and Eastern Europe
2010 isbn 978 90 8964 156 4
Charles Westin, José Bastos, Janine Dahinden and Pedro Góis (eds)
Identity Processes and Dynamics in Multi-Ethnic Europe
2010 isbn 978 90 8964 046 8
Rainer Bauböck, Bernhard Perchinig and Wiebke Sievers (eds)
Citizenship Policies in the New Europe: Expanded and Updated Edition
2009 isbn 978 90 8964 108 3
Gianluca P. Parolin
Citizenship in the Arab World: Kin, Religion and Nation-State
2009 isbn 978 90 8964 045 1

Maurice Crul and Liesbeth Heering (eds)
The Position of the Turkish and Moroccan Second Generation in Amsterdam and 
Rotterdam: The ties Study in the Netherlands
2008 isbn 978 90 8964 061 1
Marlou Schrover, Joanne van der Leun, Leo Lucassen and Chris Quispel (eds)
Illegal Migration and Gender in a Global and Historical Perspective
2008 isbn 978 90 8964 047 5
Corrado Bonifazi, Marek Okólski, Jeannette Schoorl and Patrick Simon (eds)
International Migration in Europe: New Trends and New Methods of Analysis
2008 isbn 978 90 5356 894 1
Ralph Grillo (ed.)
The Family in Question: Immigrant and Ethnic Minorities in Multicultural Europe
2008 isbn 978 90 5356 869 9
Holger Kolb and Henrik Egbert (eds)
Migrants and Markets: Perspectives from Economics and the Other Social Sciences
2008 isbn 978 90 5356 684 8
Veit Bader
Secularism or Democracy? Associational Governance of Religious Diversity
2007 isbn 978 90 5356 999 3
Rainer Bauböck, Bernhard Perchinig and Wiebke Sievers (eds)
Citizenship Policies in the New Europe
2007 isbn 978 90 5356 922 1
Rainer Bauböck, Eva Ersbøll, Kees Groenendijk and Harald Waldrauch (eds)
Acquisition and Loss of Nationality: Policies and Trends in 15 European Countries
Volume 1: Comparative Analyses
2006 isbn 978 90 5356 920 7
Volume 2: Country Analyses
2006 isbn 978 90 5356 921 4
Leo Lucassen, David Feldman and Jochen Oltmer (eds)
Paths of Integration: Migrants in Western Europe (1880-2004)
2006 isbn 978 90 5356 883 5
Rinus Penninx, Maria Berger and Karen Kraal (eds)
The Dynamics of International Migration and Settlement in Europe: A State of the 
Art
2006 isbn 978 90 5356 866 8

IMISCOE Textbooks
Marco Martiniello and Jan Rath (eds)
An Introduction to International Migration Studies: European Perspectives (Vol. 2)
2012 isbn 978 90 8964 456 5
Marco Martiniello and Jan Rath (eds)
Selected Studies in International Migration and Immigrant Incorporation (Vol. 1)
2010 isbn 978 90 8964 160 1