The Profession
doi:10.1017/S1049096514001140
© American Political Science Association, 2014
840   PS • October 2014
R
esearch on political conﬂ ict can beneﬁ t immensely 
from ﬁ eldwork. However, the Institutional Review 
Board (IRB) process can be daunting and, at times, 
is an impediment to such research (Carpenter 2012). 
IRBs have profound impact on the regulation of all 
research that involves “human subjects” (Marshall 2003, 270). The 
general purpose of an IRB—that is, protection of human subjects 
and promotion of ethical research—is well justiﬁ ed. However, the 
IRBs often become overzealous in their assessment of potential 
risks. They shut down research projects due to “perceived” rather 
than “actual” risks. The normative standards enforced by IRBs at 
US institutions are largely drawn from psychological sciences and 
are based on addressing problems faced by medical practitioners 
(Carapico 2006; Carpenter 2012). This perspective and oversight 
is inadequate for oﬀ ering guidance to nonmedical ﬁ eld research 
involving communities and societies that are located overseas 
and conﬂ ict ridden. When these borrowed protocols are applied 
to nonmedical ﬁ elds, the scrutiny process for ﬁ eld research in 
social sciences becomes lengthy and can result in a negative 
outcome. The process discourages scholars to continue this type 
of research in the future and inculcates a detrimental divide 
between academic research and the ethical-review process. 
I experienced this divide while conducting my ﬁ eld research in 
India to study the Maoist conﬂ ict.
The purpose of my ﬁ eld research was to determine why civil-
ians support or do not support the left radicals, or Maoists. Thus, 
ABSTRACT
my initial research proposal included plans to interview civilians 
in both the urban and the rural areas of Eastern India. The Maoist 
conﬂ ict in India is not a new one but there has been a resurgence 
of the conﬂ ict since 2000. Since 2004, the Maoist conﬂ ict has been 
responsible for 10,000 deaths and has displaced another 150,000 
people (Hoelscher, Miklian, and Vadlamannati 2012). The violence 
is sporadic and has aﬀ ected primarily Central Indian regions. I chose 
to conduct my ﬁ eld research in Eastern India because of my famil-
iarity with the region and the feasibility of actual access because 
the Maoist conﬂ ict resembled a low-intensity conﬂ ict in this area. 
In addition to civilians, I wanted to interview government oﬃ  cials 
involved in the counterinsurgency. The problem arose with “civilians”; 
the IRB was skeptical about the “perceived” risks associated in com-
municating with this segment of the population. Another problem 
was related to the method of attaining informed consent from civil-
ians. Although I proposed the method of oral consent (i.e., most of 
the rural population in Eastern India is illiterate), the IRB would 
approve only written consent. When I revised the proposal to include 
written consent in vernacular language, the IRB was still skeptical 
about the risks involved and suggested that I exclude “civilians” 
as subjects. In my ﬁ nal revised proposal, I deleted civilians and 
included only government oﬃ  cials as my subjects. This most cer-
tainly changed the nature of my research. Nevertheless, it prompted 
me to think about future possibilities and the problems related to 
academic research of this nature, which escalates in the context of 
international ﬁ eld research.
Scholars in anthropology, sociology, political science, and crimi-
nology agree that there are fundamental problems in the IRB process 
when it is applied to international ﬁ eld research in the social sciences. 
Institutional Review Board and 
International Field Research in 
Conﬂ ict Zones
Srobana Bhattacharya, Georgia Southern University
Research on political conﬂ ict can beneﬁ t immensely from ﬁ eldwork. However, the 
Institutional Review Board (IRB) process is elaborate and daunting that discourages rather 
than encourages this type of research. Existing policies often are insensitive to the many 
uncertainties related to ﬁ eld research abroad, especially in conﬂ ict zones. Three reasons for 
this are identiﬁ ed in this article. First, the federal regulations to protect human subjects 
of social science research are most suitable for biomedical sciences. Second, there is huge gap 
between “procedural ethics” and “ethics in practice.” Third, there is a lack of communication 
or dialogue between researchers and IRBs. After discussing these reasons, I oﬀ er the following 
suggestions: bridging the gap between the researcher and the IRB; reducing delays in the IRB 
approval and revision process; encouraging collaboration and dialogue among researchers; 
and advocating a proactive stance by academic associations.
Srobana Bhattacharya is an assistant professor in the department of political science at 
Georgia Southern University. She can be reached at sbhattacharya@georgiasouthern.edu.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1049096514001140 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PS • October 2014   841 
After assessing their common concerns and based on my own expe-
rience related to my research project on the Maoist conﬂ ict in India, 
I identiﬁ ed three major problems in the IRB process relative to ﬁ eld 
research. First, the complex network of federal regulations that are 
developed to protect human subjects of social science research are 
most suitable for the biomedical sciences and experimental research. 
The regulations are ﬂ awed when applied to the social sciences because 
they are borrowed from the biomedical sciences (Cassell 1980). This 
is especially true with regard to informed consent. Second, a huge 
gap exists between “procedural ethics,” as termed by Guillemin and 
Gillam (2004), and “ethics in practice.” Third, there is a lack of com-
munication or dialogue between researchers and the IRBs.
In this article, I analyze these problems and oﬀ er suggestions 
that may help to create a platform for understanding the IRB 
process in general and its application to international ﬁ eld research in 
particular. Furthermore, the goal of this discussion is to reassess the 
ethical-review process so that it encourages rather than discourages 
ﬁ eld research overseas.
PROTECTION OF HUMAN SUBJECTS IN BIOMEDICAL 
RESEARCH AND INTERNATIONAL FIELDWORK
The normative standards by IRBs at US institutions are drawn 
primarily from the psychological sciences and are based on 
addressing problems faced by medical practitioners (Carapico 
2006; Carpenter 2012). Cassell (1980) correctly pointed out that 
relationships between those who study and those who are stud-
ied are not ﬁ xed but instead vary with the type of research. The 
context and location of the research are important factors that 
aﬀ ect the relationship between the researcher and those who 
are studied. Anthropologists and other social scientists often 
are concerned about how the IRBs apply an inappropriate 
level of scrutiny to minimal-risk research in which investiga-
tors use methods such as surveys, structured and unstructured 
interviews, ethnographic participant observation, oral histo-
ries, and analysis of existing datasets (Marshall 2003). At the 
other end of the spectrum are certain research topics—for exam-
ple, political conﬂ ict, especially terrorism—that by their very 
nature raise questions from the human-research perspectives 
(Dolnik 2011). Some of the existing regulations related to 
obtaining informed consent are practically impossible to fulﬁ ll 
when conducting research on topics such as terrorism. There is 
a twofold problem: (1) the sensitivity of the issue, and (2) the 
geographical location. For my proposed ﬁ eldwork on the Maoist 
conﬂ ict in India, as mentioned previously, I had to make sev-
eral revisions and delete certain segments of the population to 
be interviewed. Despite my background and thorough knowl-
edge of the regional language and culture, the IRB did not allow 
me to conduct interviews with the local population. The local 
population was critical to my research, which analyzed levels 
of civilian support for insurgent groups. Even after multiple 
submissions and presentations of my revised documents and 
restating my knowledge of the area and my acquaintances there, 
the IRB did not allow me to continue with my original project. 
Part of this rigidity was because existing regulations do not fully 
apply to international ﬁ eld research. Also, I found a general 
lack of knowledge among the IRB members about the local and 
regional cultures in Eastern India. As stated by Dolnik (2011), 
members of the IRB committees are rarely active researchers, 
and there is an almost “unoﬃ  cial” norm of identifying prob-
lems with any proposal; this naturally has a perverse eﬀ ect when 
applied to proposals on political conﬂ ict set overseas. Two of the 
major areas of concern are informed consent and assessment of 
risk. I use my speciﬁ c case and experience with the IRB to illus-
trate common concerns and not to generalize. In many cases, 
IRBs reach diﬀ erent conclusions about similar studies (Stark 
2012); therefore, it is not fair to conclude that all studies of this 
nature are assessed similarly.
In international ﬁ eld research, the sociocultural and political 
atmosphere is completely diﬀ erent than in the United States. The 
population to be studied can be illiterate or uneducated. The subjects 
often lack adequate knowledge to understand the entire content of 
the research, and they are intimidated by written documents that 
require a signature. This can lead to an initial mistrust between 
the researcher and those who would be studied. In ethnographic 
ﬁ eld research involving indirect observation, individual informed 
consent would be unrealistic (Marshall 2003). Many IRBs apply 
ethical-research principles rather mechanically following protocols 
that are applicable to medical research or studies that include clinical 
trials. A foreign country with active conﬂ ict, weak institutions, and 
corruption presents a diﬀ erent reality. These changing contexts 
should be considered to redefine protocols for international 
ﬁ eldwork. In the international context, it is important to develop 
culturally meaningful approaches to obtain informed consent. 
Obtaining consent should be a process—a series of interactions 
that familiarizes the subject with the researcher to understand the 
concept of consent (Marshall 2006). The pros and cons of using 
consent forms in these areas should be evaluated. When necessary, 
the provision of oral consent should be discussed. Kass and Hyder 
(2001) mentioned from personal experience that informed consent 
during their own research was seen as culturally insensitive but 
was accepted mechanically to satisfy the funding agency and 
government regulations.1 Hyder and Wali (2006) surveyed more 
than 200 researchers involved in international studies and found 
that 40% did not use written consent.2
The protocols as presented by the IRBs make the process of 
obtaining informed consent the foremost concern for ethical research. 
However, research ethics does not end after obtaining consent forms. 
There is a lack of concern about how these consents are obtained. 
In foreign cultures and dangerous political conditions, obtaining 
signatures on consent forms is diﬃ  cult. Subjects, especially women, 
often undergo emotional stress before signing a document that is 
not understood. In patriarchal societies, women have little choice 
and their choices often are voiced through their father or husband. 
The review process should be sensitive to these cultural variations, 
assessing research protocols based on the particular sociocultural 
and political context.
Despite my background and thorough knowledge of the regional language and culture, the IRB 
did not allow me to conduct interviews with the local population.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1049096514001140 Published online by Cambridge University Press

842   PS • October 2014
The Profession: Institutional Review Board and International Field Research in Conflict Zones
“PROCEDURAL ETHICS” AND “ETHICS IN PRACTICE”
Regulations to protect human subjects of social science research are a 
set of rules, procedures, and ethical standards that aim to protect the 
dignity and rights of individuals who are involved in research. It follows 
naturally that preexisting conditions and environments in which the 
individuals reside and communication procedures with which they 
are most familiar are recognized and protected. However, no such 
attempt is made by the IRBs. The ethical process becomes simply a 
set of rules that must be implemented. The adherence to and approval 
of the protocols do not safeguard ethical judgment; the protocols 
cannot anticipate the various dilemmas other than informed-consent 
and data-security issues that arise during research in conﬂ ict zones 
(Wood 2006). During the review process for my research, I eventually 
learned—as did many others in the profession—that the fundamental 
function of the process is not to protect human subjects but rather to 
protect universities from malpractice suits (Carpenter 2012).3
Guillemin and Gillam (2004) pointed out that procedural ethics alone 
cannot provide all that is needed for dealing with ethically important 
moments in qualitative research. Procedural ethics is one-dimensional, 
emphasizing the set of rules and their application more than an actual 
assessment of ethical reality. In this sense, procedural ethics becomes 
simply a set of technicalities. Ethics in practice, conversely, has two levels: 
(1) recognizing the set of ethical rules, and (2) implementing them in 
the context of ethical reality. Procedural ethics emphasizes the 
importance of individual ethics along with the set of rules. There often 
is a divide between “procedural ethics” and “ethics in practice.” How-
ever, Guillemin and Gillam (2004) indicated a process that bridges 
the gap between procedural ethics and ethics in practice: that is, 
reﬂ exivity. McGraw, Zvonkovic, and Walker deﬁ ned reﬂ exivity as a 
process whereby researchers place themselves and their practices under 
scrutiny, acknowledging the ethical dilemmas that permeate the research 
process and impinge on the creation of knowledge (2000, 68). Indeed, 
reﬂ exivity goes a long way in understanding and evaluating the 
ethical purpose of the research being conducted. However, Guillemin 
and Gillam (2004) placed the entire onus on the researcher. The IRB 
also should be an active part of this reﬂ exive process. The institution 
must share equal and, in some cases, greater responsibility in being 
reﬂ exive about “how” individuals should be involved in research, 
especially in politically vulnerable areas across the world.
COMMUNICATION GAP BETWEEN THE RESEARCHER 
AND THE IRB
One of the main problems in the ethical-review process is the lack of 
communication and dialogue between the researcher and the IRB. To 
increase my understanding of the process, I communicated with IRB 
members even before I started writing the proposal. I asked questions 
and sought guidelines. However, other than the reiteration of stan-
dard protocols, I learned little from these interactions. After the ini-
tial rejection of my proposal, I met in person with the committee chair 
to discuss the prospect of my research and revisions to my proposal. 
During the conversation, the feasibility of the research was ques-
tioned and, on several occasions, I had to repeat the justiﬁ cation for 
my topic. Although my experience is speciﬁ c to only one institution, 
it raises questions about ethics in the context of the researcher and 
the research. There is evidence of researchers who are able to con-
duct ﬁ eld research on sensitive topics internationally. This evidence 
indicates that IRBs vary, but it also should oﬀ er insights to successful 
completion of research that can serve as a model.
My research analyzed civilian support for the Maoist rebel groups 
in India. To collect data, I needed interviews and oral histories from 
civilians residing in the peripheries of Maoist-aﬀ ected areas. I had 
deﬁ nite advantages in conducting this research because I am Indi-
an and I resided in the same location for several years. Also, I had 
acquaintances in the government and police departments, who con-
veyed their interest in providing security for me; they also helped 
me in the initial selection of areas (i.e., predominantly low-conﬂ ict 
zones). Despite having these resources and regularly updating the IRB 
and sharing information about them, I could not conduct my initial 
research project. However, it was diﬃ  cult to convey this to the IRB 
about my research project, and it continually failed to acknowledge 
my expertise in the area of study and my knowledge of the geographi-
cal location. After several revisions, I could include only government 
oﬃ  cials as my interviewees. I spent several painstaking hours carefully 
selecting speciﬁ c government oﬃ  cials for my interviews. In addition 
to government documents and newspaper archives, I expanded my 
secondary-document analysis to include rare journal entries from 
ex-activists and Maoist prisoners. I also communicated with sev-
eral scholars who had prior ﬁ eld-research experience abroad in con-
ﬂ ict zones and similar locations; most of them quickly understood 
the issues and warned me about the IRB process. A few shared their 
approved research protocols with me to demonstrate that research in 
conﬂ ict zones, riskier than the location I chose, was indeed possible.4 
Subsequently, I shared these protocols with the IRB, but this did 
not immediately help facilitate the approval process of my research.
The communication gap between the researcher and the IRB should 
not be a reason to impede social science research. The IRBs should 
expand their ethical concerns to include the issue of a communication 
gap between the researcher and the committee. The communication 
gap is heightened by the fact that few committee members have actual 
knowledge about several geographical areas chosen for ﬁ eldwork. Also, 
they do not have adequate information about particular topics and they 
apply general rules to evaluate a research proposal.
ASSESSING INTERNATIONAL FIELD RESEARCH
Unlike experimental research, ﬁ eld-research design is concerned 
with access to settings, people, and research-relevant documents. 
For this reason, it often requires amending the research design to 
accommodate sudden changes and/or unavailability of certain peo-
ple (Yanow and Schwartz-Shea 2008). Not many ethnographers 
start with speciﬁ c hypotheses that later will be systematically tested. 
As a primary data-gathering technique, ethnographers often rely 
on the relationships that they have established with potential sub-
jects (Bosk and de Vries 2004).
International ﬁ eld research is fraught with uncertainties that are 
speciﬁ c to a region and the sociopolitical context within the region. 
This leads to signiﬁ cant diﬀ erences between experimental research 
Unlike experimental research, ﬁ eld-research design is concerned with access to settings, people, 
and research-relevant documents.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1049096514001140 Published online by Cambridge University Press

PS • October 2014   843 
and ﬁ eld research. The diﬀ erences have implications for three of 
the fundamental IRB processes: informed consent, understand-
ing potential harms and risks, and conﬁ dentiality. For instance, 
observation of public behavior as a part of ethnographic research 
does not necessarily require informed consent (Marshall 2003).5 
Furthermore, for various reasons, ethnographers cannot particu-
larly inform the subjects of the risks and beneﬁ ts of cooperating. 
In developing countries, the mere mention of beneﬁ ts—especially 
in rural areas—is related to monetary incentives. After a researcher 
convinces the subjects that there are no ﬁ nancial beneﬁ ts for them 
or their families, there is general disappointment.6 This behavioral 
shift can have a direct impact on further communication with the 
researcher. Also, discussing the risks from an academic perspective 
is too diﬃ  cult for the subjects to understand. Before delving into 
directed questions related to the research, the process of explaining 
risk and beneﬁ ts may deter the subjects from establishing a rapport 
with the researcher. In addition, it is diﬃ  cult to specify risks because 
the ﬁ ndings are not known (Bosk and de Vries, 2004).
In many non-Western countries, the concept of ethical review 
for the social sciences is relatively unexplored and few mechanisms 
are in place to oversee or approve any proposed ﬁ eld research. At 
times, IRBs in the United States propose that a researcher obtain a 
“go-ahead” from the country where the research will be conducted. In 
nonmedical ﬁ elds, this approval from the foreign country is almost 
impossible. The administrative setup varies among countries, which 
often is ignored by IRBs. These uncertainties are real problems that 
must be discussed at length. Instead, IRBs are more concerned with 
“the procedural and bureaucratic” (Bosk and de Vries 2004, 260).
Indeed, there are serious ethical dilemmas when conducting research 
in international regions that have either a history of conﬂ ict or an 
ongoing conﬂ ict. Does this automatically lead to the conclusion that all 
ethnographic research in conﬂ ict areas is to be abandoned? “Fieldwork 
is possible even in the most dangerous contexts” (Sluka 1995, 293). 
Fortunately, several researchers have successfully completed ﬁ eld 
research in conﬂ ict zones; however, almost all of them raise concerns 
about the IRB process. Again, the fundamental issue in conducting 
research in conﬂ ict zones is related to uncertainties and heightened 
by the possible occurrence of violence. This issue can be resolved in 
the following ways: careful selection of the location (i.e., not all areas 
are equally violence prone), careful selection of subjects, choice of 
questions to be asked, and method of observation. Another aspect 
is the breadth of knowledge of the researchers and their academic, 
professional, or family ties to the region to be studied—all of which 
helped in my research on Maoist conﬂ ict in Eastern India.
RECOMMENDATIONS
The tensions in the IRB process cannot be resolved by a single set of 
actions (Fujii 2012). I recommend a multilayered course of action in 
which both the researcher and the IRB members engage actively to 
encourage ethnographic ﬁ eld research in general and international 
ﬁ eld research involving challenging topics in particular. This research 
is important to learn about causes and consequences of complex issues 
(e.g., political conﬂ ict). These recommendations are not restricted to 
ethnographic ﬁ eld research in conﬂ ict zones but rather ﬁ eld research 
in general. They include (1) bridging the gap between the researcher 
and IRB members, (2) reducing delays in the IRB approval and revision 
process, (3) encouraging collaboration and dialogue among research-
ers, and (4) advocating a proactive stance by academic associations.
Bridging the Gap between the Researcher and IRB 
Members
Many scholars have voiced the demand for a more informed IRB 
(Bosk and deVries 2004; Marshall 2003). These studies focused on 
the following issues: encouraging and improving studies on how 
IRB works; increasing the participation of social scientists and 
anthropologists in IRBs; and educating IRB members. In addition, 
I recommend a dialogue and a series of interactions between IRB 
members and researchers. These interactions should occur in three 
phases: before submission of the protocol, during the research 
process, and after the research is completed. This will help the IRB 
to understand the full scope of the research, with speciﬁ c focus on the 
actual experiences of the researcher in the ﬁ eld and the outcome of 
the research. This will be beneﬁ cial in an IRB’s assessment of similar 
future research projects. Furthermore, these processes will raise an 
IRB’s awareness of the many “actual” challenges and successes 
encountered during ﬁ eld studies.
Reducing Delays in the IRB Approval and Revision Process
Delays occur when IRB approval stalls the onset of a project (Bosk and 
de Vries 2004). The lengthy process of original submission, revisions, 
further objections, and subsequent resubmission is a frustrating 
experience for many ﬁ eld researchers. In addition, research topics that 
are considered potentially risky (e.g., political conﬂ ict, violence against 
women, and criminal behavior) in many cases require a separate 
process. This type of research is categorized as Type III, which requires 
lengthy committee meetings. In many institutions, these meetings are 
scheduled either once a month or fortnightly. Invariably, the research 
protocols need revisions, but each resubmission becomes a month-
long case or, if a researcher is fortunate, perhaps two weeks. Also, 
multiple revisions are required to obtain ﬁ nal approval. In comparison, 
the approval process for research topics that are not potentially risky 
typically is fairly rapid. For sensitive topics, institutions should plan 
to implement faster appeals mechanisms. Again, for these issues, 
institutions should assign members who are either familiar with the 
type of research or have experience in the topics.
Encouraging Collaboration and Dialogue among 
Researchers
Few scholars have mentioned the possibility of collaboration between 
and among qualitative researchers with regard to ameliorating 
the IRB process and ﬁ eld research in general. This type of collabo-
ration has tremendous potential. Field researchers should share 
Few scholars have mentioned the possibility of collaboration between and among qualitative 
researchers with regard to ameliorating the IRB process and ﬁ eld research in general. This type 
of collaboration has tremendous potential.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1049096514001140 Published online by Cambridge University Press

844   PS • October 2014
The Profession: Institutional Review Board and International Field Research in Conflict Zones
their experiences with the IRB process to help identify common 
problems. Furthermore, IRBs can issue guidelines for designing 
research protocols. This collaboration is especially important for 
international ﬁ eld research in conﬂ ict zones. Researchers with 
substantial experience in this type of ﬁ eld research can share infor-
mation about the IRB process. In addition, they can discuss their 
actual research experience with those who are planning interna-
tional travel to conduct similar research in the same or a nearby 
location. This will provide an encouraging academic environment 
for sharing problems as well as successes, which is pertinent for 
creating a constructive research environment. There are several 
listservs for qualitative researchers, and this network can include 
one based on international ﬁ eld research.
Advocating a Proactive Stance by Academic Associations
Yanow and Schwartz-Shea (2008) discuss speciﬁ c political associa-
tions (e.g., APSA) that are actively involved in IRB policy reforms. 
Furthermore, they speciﬁ cally state APSA’s need to collaborate 
with other organizations within the Consortium of Social Science 
Associations to work together and provide informational and 
educational services for both IRB members and researchers. This 
is instrumental for improving the existing process. Furthermore, 
other academic organizations related to the humanities and the 
liberal arts should be involved in the process as well. To encourage 
field research in political conflict, the International Studies 
Association, Women in Conﬂ ict Studies, and Peace Science Society 
should conduct workshops and symposia during annual meetings. 
Furthermore, these associations provide an excellent platform for 
researchers to share their experiences and discuss future projects. 
The purpose of these collaborations across associations should be 
both policy- and academic-oriented, with the aim of improving 
IRB policies and developing appropriate regulatory policies that 
encourage rather than discourage ﬁ eld research. Q
N O T E S
1. Kass and Hyder (2001) had this experience in Latin America with those of 
limited reading ability. This segment of the population was hesitant about 
signing documents. I had a similar experience during my ﬁ eld research at a tea 
plantation in rural Eastern India.
2. In the survey, Hyder and Wali (2006) found that scientiﬁ c and medical researchers 
were more likely to use written consent, whereas nonmedical researchers used 
written consent only when the subjects were highly literate.
3. During the review process of my ﬁ eld research, I communicated with several 
social scientists. All of them reiterated the fact that the fundamental aim of an 
IRB is to protect a university from malpractice suits. They further mentioned 
that it is almost impossible to obtain IRB approval for projects that involve 
research in conflict zones. These scholars also shared concerns about lack 
of training and knowledge among IRB members to assess conditions for 
international ﬁ eld research.
4. I particularly want to mention the role of Women in Conﬂ ict Studies in helping 
me locate researchers who have conducted ﬁ eld research abroad. I eventually 
communicated with Dara K. Cohen, who shared the protocol for her research 
conducted in Sierra Leone.
5. In fact, Marshall (2003) considers the feasibility of consent in this setting to be 
unrealistic. She agrees, however, that there is a need for informed consent in 
certain situations involving direct observation of group activities (e.g., nurses in 
a hospital setting).
6. Fujji (2012) mentions that subjects often acknowledge that they understand 
there will be no payment but still may count on beneﬁ ts yet to come. In Rwanda, 
she interviewed prisoners in 2004. Many of the prisoners, knowing that there 
will be no ﬁ nancial beneﬁ ts, continue to ask for her help in legal matters.
R E F E R E N C E S
Bosk, Charles L., and Raymond G. de Vries. 2004. “Bureaucracies of Mass Deception: 
Institutional Review Boards and the Ethics of Ethnographic Research.” The 
Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 595 (1): 249–63.
Carapico, Sheila. 2006. “No Easy Answers: The Ethics of Field Research in the Arab 
World.” PS: Political Science and Politics 39 (3): 429–31.
Carpenter, Charli. 2012. “You Talk of Terrible Things So Matter-of-Factly in This 
Language of Science: Constructing Human Rights in the Academy.” Perspectives 
on Politics 10 (2): 363–83.
Cassell, Joan. 1980. “Ethical Principles for Conducting Fieldwork.” American 
Anthropologist 82 (1): 28–41.
Dolnik, Adam. 2011. “Conducting Field Research on Terrorism: A Brief Primer.” 
Perspectives on Terrorism 5 (2): 3–36.
Fujii, Lee Ann. 2012. “Research Ethics 101: Dilemmas and Responsibilities.” 
PS: Political Science and Politics 45 (4): 717–23.
Guillemin, Marilys, and Lynn Gillam. 2004. “Ethics, Reﬂ exivity, and ‘Ethically 
Important Moments’ in Research.” Qualitative Inquiry 10 (2): 261–80.
Hoelscher, Kristian, Jason Miklian, and K. C. Vadlamannati. 2012. “Hearts and 
Mines: A District Level Analysis of the Maoist Conﬂ ict in India.” International 
Studies Review 15 (2): 141–60.
Hyder, Adnan A., and Salman A. Wali. 2006. “Informed Consent and Collaborative 
Research: Perspectives from the Developing world.” Developing World Bioethics 
6 (1): 33–40.
Kass, Nancy E., and Adnan Ali Hyder. 2001. “Attitudes and Experiences of U.S. 
and Developing Country Investigators Regarding U.S. Human Subjects 
Regulations.” In Ethical and Policy Issues in International Research: Clinical 
Trials in Developing Countries, Vols. I and II. Bethesda, MD: National Bioethics 
Advisory Commission, B-1-220.
Marshall, Patricia A. 2003. “Human Subjects Protections, Institutional Review 
Boards, and Cultural Anthropological Research.” Anthropological Quarterly 
76 (2): 269–85.
———. 2006. “Informed Consent in International Health Research.” Journal of 
Empirical Research on Human Research Ethics 1 (1): 25–42.
McGraw, Lori A., Anisa M. Zvonkovic, and Alexis J. Walker. 2000. “Studying 
Postmodern Families: A Feminist Analysis of Ethical Tensions in Work and 
Family Research.” Journal of Marriage and Family 62 (1): 68–77.
Sluka, Jeﬀ rey A. 1995. “Reﬂ ection on Managing Danger in Fieldwork: Dangerous 
Anthropology in Belfast.” In Fieldwork under Fire: Contemporary Studies of 
Violence and Survival, ed. Carolyn Nordstorm and Antonius C. G. M. Robben, 
276–94. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Stark, Laura. 2012. Behind Closed Doors: IRBs and the Making of Ethical Research. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Wood, Elisabeth Jean. 2006. “The Ethical Challenges of Field Research in Conﬂ ict 
Zones.” Qualitative Sociology 29 (3): 373–86.
Yanow, Dvora, and Peregrine Schwartz-Shea. 2008. “Reforming Institutional Review 
Board Policy: Issues in Implementation and Field Research.” PS: Political Science 
and Politics 41 (3): 483–94.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1049096514001140 Published online by Cambridge University Press