LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES, Issue 198, Vol. 41 No. 5, September 2014, 75–93
DOI: 10.1177/0094582X14544108
© 2014 Latin American Perspectives
75
Brazil’s Cooperation with Sub-Saharan Africa  
in the Rural Sector
The International Circulation of Instruments of Public Policy
by
Carolina Milhorance de Castro
South-South cooperation is grounded in the idea that partners from the developing 
world are well placed to propose solutions inspired by their own experiences. A study of 
the dynamics of the circulation of instruments of public policy framed in the agricultural 
sector between Brazil and Sub-Saharan Africa under the Lula administration (2003–
2010) reveals that political entrepreneurs play a key role in the early transfer stages of this 
process and that a technical logic of policy transfer through South-South cooperation may 
pose important challenges to the later stages of reception and adaptation. A notion of 
complementarity between agribusiness and family farming that reflects recent govern-
mental discourse has been influential in the formulation of initiatives.
A cooperação sul-com-sul se baseia na ideia de que os parceiros do mesmo mundo se 
situam bem para propor soluções inspiradas pela sua própria experiência. Um estudo da 
dinâmica de como se difundam os instrumentos das políticas públicas adotadas no setor 
agrícola entre o Brasil e os paises da África sub-saariana dos tempos da administraçõ do 
Presidente Lula (2003–2010) revela que os empresários públicas tiveram um papel chave 
nas etapas iniciais deste processo e que uma lógica técnica da transferència das políticas 
para tal cooperação sul-com-sul pode apresentar desafios importantes às etapas subsequen-
tes da recepção e adaptação. Uma noção de que pode existir uma complementaridade entre 
os agronegócios e a agricultura familial—algo que se nota atualmente no discurso gover-
namental—estaba influencial em formular os iniciativos.
Keywords:	 South-South cooperation, Brazil, Africa, Agriculture, Standardization
Interest in the emerging economies in the African continent has contributed 
to the continent’s ongoing economic and social transformation through diver-
sification of trade, investment and partnerships, and new forms of develop-
ment cooperation (OECD et al., 2011). South-South cooperation, which since 
the mid-twentieth century has been consolidated as a strategy for the integra-
tion of the developing world, relies on the idea that partners from the develop-
ing and emerging world are familiar with development challenges and therefore 
well placed to propose solutions based on their own experiences. Brazilian 
engagement in Sub-Saharan Africa, particularly in the agricultural and rural 
sector, follows this reasoning, and instruments of the country’s public policies 
tend to be transferred to African states through cooperation projects. Agriculture 
544108 LAPXXX10.1177/0094582X14544108Latin American PerspectivesCastro / Brazil’s Cooperation With Sub-Saharan Africa
research-article2014
Carolina Milhorance de Castro is a Ph.D candidate in political sciences at the University of Brasília 
(UnB) and the French Center for Agriculture and Development (CIRAD)

76    LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
has been identified by Brazilian and African governments as a priority sector 
for this exchange. Brazil has become an agricultural power, an exporter of many 
raw materials and biofuel, and has shown great progress in implementation of 
policies relevant to food security. Its agricultural model—characterized by pub-
lic policies supporting both family farming and export-oriented industrial agri-
culture—allows cooperation initiatives in both segments of the sector.
The diffusion, transposition, and convergence of public policies have been 
the objects of policy transfer studies (Delpeuch, 2008; Dolowitz and Marsh, 
1996). These studies, mostly proposed as a heuristic framework (Benson and 
Jordan, 2011; Dolowitz and Marsh, 2012; Evans and Davies, 2002), have until 
recently focused on a subset of developed Western countries, particularly in 
Europe, with little attention being paid to the experiences of developing coun-
tries (Macaulay, 2007; Marsh and Sharman, 2009). The export of Brazilian agri-
cultural policy instruments and the rationale behind it have been little examined 
(Perch et al., 2012), as has the notion of transfer’s relying on similar physical 
and development conditions that is characteristic of South-South cooperation 
and prominent in Brazil-Africa cooperation. The mechanisms that forge trans-
national ties and open the way for the transfer of practices and institutions 
across borders also remain unclear. The study of these mechanisms involves 
examining the influence of actors and the establishment of configurations in 
the promotion of policy transfer (Ancelovici and Jenson, 2012).
The aim of this article is therefore to address the dynamics of cooperation 
and policy transfer in the agricultural sector between Brazil and Sub-Saharan 
Africa through an examination of the institutional construction of Brazilian 
cooperation policy under the Lula administration (2003–2010). The research 
focuses on the mechanisms of the early stages of the trajectory of transfer, con-
ceptualized by Ancelovici and Jenson (2012) as the “standardization process” 
and dedicated to the selection of local practices and their translation into 
exportable abstractions. Drawing upon the public policy literature and upon 
firsthand data collected in various Brazilian public and private institutions,1 
the article intends to demonstrate that political entrepreneurs located at the 
intersections of state and nonstate networks play a key role in the standardiza-
tion process. Furthermore, it will suggest that a technical or “unproblematic” 
view of policy sharing through South-South cooperation may pose important 
challenges to the later stages of reception and adaptation. It will also attempt 
to assess the influence of the Brazilian dual agricultural model on the formula-
tion of cooperation initiatives and shed light on the possibility of generalizing 
Brazilian agricultural and rural policies.
Brazil’s new drive for africa: trade, political dialogue, 
and “structuring cooperation”
Despite many convergences in terms of interests, Brazilian policy for Africa 
has been characterized by discontinuous impulses. The current period, inaugu-
rated by President Luis Inácio Lula da Silva in 2003, has been identified as the 
third wave of contemporary Brazilian relations with Africa (Hirst, 2010). These 
relations are promoted on the grounds of historical, racial, and sociocultural 

Milhorance de Castro / BRAZIL’S COOPERATION WITH SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA    77
identity, representing the main referent of Brazilian South-South cooperation. 
Political discourse stresses the intention to settle a historical debt, but this effort 
has also been motivated by the possibility of acquiring prestige and influence by 
forming political coalitions among countries of the global South (Hirst, 2010).
Brazil-Africa relations have largely reflected the continent’s postcolonial 
relations, although the influence of traditional aid partners is still relevant 
(OECD et al., 2011). Although emerging economies have been assembled into 
economic and political groups, their development strategies and foreign policy 
continue to be individual, differing with the sector, the type of goods traded, 
the technologies involved, and the underlying funding models (CSIS, 2010). 
Brazil, which benefited from substantial international aid in the postwar period, 
launched a platform for trade and cooperation with less developed countries 
in the 1960s based on the idea that the traditional aid system would be unable 
to meet the challenges of development (Vaz and Inoue, 2007). In confronting 
the problems of modernity and multiple dimensions of poverty, Brazil avoids 
terms such as “donor” and “beneficiary,” preferring the concept of “horizontal 
cooperation” (Rowlands, 2008).
In the 1960s, Brazil’s “independent foreign policy” advocated nonautomatic 
alignment with the cold war powers and the fight against underdevelopment. 
This drive represented the first wave of Brazilian engagement in Africa, illus-
trated by the opening of embassies in independent countries (Ghana, Nigeria, 
and Senegal) and political support for colonial liberation movements. A new 
strategy, described as the second wave, was employed during the détente of the 
cold war. Since then Brazil has chosen the path of an ecumenical and respon-
sible pragmatism, strengthening its relations with African and communist 
countries. Consequently, this movement has been followed by a rupture of 
Brazil-Portugal relations. On the economic front, several companies have been 
involved, and between 1972 and 1981 the proportion of trade with Africa 
increased from 3 percent to 9 percent of Brazil’s total trade (Hirst, 2010). This 
cooperation lost momentum in the subsequent decades. Following the creation 
of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries, the aforementioned 
cooperation was reinforced in 1996, and efforts were largely concentrated in 
these countries.
The third wave of Brazil-Africa relations has benefited from greater financial 
resources and political effort. For instance, technical cooperation initiatives 
increased by 250 percent from 2008 to 2009 (MRE/ABC, 2011), although data 
on the resources employed are imprecise. In fact, Brazilian cooperation policy 
gained notoriety under the Lula administration. Based on a South-South coop-
eration strategy, some of its foundations were the 1995 Bandung Conference 
and the 1978 and 1997 action plans of Buenos Aires and San José, which pro-
moted horizontal forms of cooperation and the symbolic replacement of the 
expression “technical assistance” by “technical cooperation.”
Technical cooperation is one of the main instruments of these Brazilian ini-
tiatives, endorsed as a means to increase training and employment of local 
labor (MRE/ABC, 2011). These initiatives, termed “structuring cooperation,” 
combine human resources and institutional development (Buss and Ferreira, 
2010). Importantly, the country adopts a holistic approach to international 
cooperation in which trade and investment are seen as legitimate and effective 

78    LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
means of development (Haibin, 2010). However, this approach, as reiterated by 
President Lula himself (IPEA/ABC, 2010), is a model under construction.
Accordingly, Brazil has built trust and recognition in the South without 
alienating the North. Its expertise in the fight against hunger and poverty has 
attracted the interest of developing countries. At the same time, its commit-
ment to multilateralism combined with the shared values of some traditional 
donors and the interest these donors show in maintaining strategic relations 
with this emerging economy make the country a potential partner for triangu-
lar cooperation. This strategy represents a step toward multilateral and affir-
mative action (Lopes, 2008). One cannot, however, ignore the political facet of 
South-South cooperation, one of the main objectives of which is to reform the 
international order and the economic system by strengthening bilateral rela-
tions and establishing coalitions in the multilateral arena (Pino, 2009).
Political relations have diversified beyond the Portuguese-speaking coun-
tries. In all, 19 Brazilian embassies were opened, and President Lula participated 
in 10 missions to the continent (in 23 countries), always accompanied by repre-
sentatives of the private sector. An office of the Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa 
Agropecuária (Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation—EMBRAPA) has 
been established in Accra, Ghana. Foreign trade and the participation of Brazilian 
companies have also intensified in the past decade. Trade multiplied six times 
between 2000 and 2008 (from US$4.2 billion to US$25.9 billion), and, despite an 
inflection in 2009 as a consequence of the global financial crisis (Ncube, Lufumpa, 
and Vencatachellum, 2011), 2010 witnessed an increase in trade (US$20 billion) 
(OECD et al., 2011). Brazil is the only developing country with which the African 
continent has a large surplus (OECD et al., 2011).
In addition to the Ministry of Foreign Affairs, the Banco Nacional de 
Desenvolvimento Econômico e Social (National Bank for Economic and Social 
Development—BNDES) has a key role in promoting the presence of Brazilian 
capital on the continent. Incentives for Brazilian companies exporting to Africa 
reached R$477 million in 2008 and R$649 million in 2009 (PDP, 2010). There are 
no official data regarding foreign direct investment, but it is estimated at US$10 
billion in 2009 (Ncube et. al, 2011).
The recent strengthening of Brazilian engagement in Africa reflects, in a 
large part, the country’s own development model, combining a dynamic pri-
vate sector with support from the BNDES and other public institutions. Policy 
dialogue, technical cooperation, investment, and trade represent complemen-
tary dimensions of Brazil’s new drive for Africa.
The Intermediate State
The inclusion of the social agenda as a major topic of Brazilian foreign policy 
under the Lula administration was one of the first and most important innova-
tions. In the context of South-South cooperation, this drive may be understood 
in terms of the country’s aspiration to what one might call an intermediate 
international role (Lima and Hirst, 2006). Brazil has demonstrated the intention 
to expand its roles and responsibilities in regional politics, Third World agen-
das, and multilateral institutions (Lima and Hirst, 2006). Although there is no 

Milhorance de Castro / BRAZIL’S COOPERATION WITH SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA    79
agreement on a definition of an intermediate state, it generally includes at least 
one of the following factors: material capabilities, self-perception, regional 
influence, and recognition by other states (Lima, 2005; Marques, 2005; Soule-
Kohndou, 2010). The category may in fact translate two international identities, 
one related to the world of politics and defined by Keohane (1969) as a system-
affecting state and the other related to global economics and defined as an 
emerging market. The former includes countries that have relatively limited 
resources and capabilities in comparison with those of the great powers but 
show an assertive international profile and make use of multilateral arenas. The 
latter are large countries on the periphery that have implemented neoliberal 
reforms and whose macroeconomic credibility and stability are highly valued 
in a globalized world. According to Lima (2005), intermediate states, including 
Brazil, combine the two international roles of system-affecting state and great 
emerging market.
Aspects less tangible than material capabilities such as diplomatic tradition, 
historical factors, ideological influence, and relational dimensions are consid-
ered equally important in ensuring that a country will play a role in interna-
tional relations (Lima, 2005; Soule-Kohndou, 2010). In this context, Brazil’s 
international image as intermediate state also relies on its capacity for persua-
sion and its credibility, a form of soft power2 (Lima, 2005). Lima (2005) shows 
that the source of the credibility of a country’s foreign policy in different his-
torical periods leads to different patterns of conduct in the search for interna-
tional recognition (e.g., strategic alignment with the United States, 
internationalism, or globalism). Its credibility under the Lula administration is 
related to aspects such as democratic stability, economic growth, and the ability 
to act as a model in terms of social policies.
As Inoue and Vaz (2012) suggest, Brazilian cooperation is not completely 
divorced from national, subnational, or sectoral interests or from its broader 
foreign policy objectives and power shifts in the international system.
Agriculture At The Center Of Brazil-Africa  
Development Cooperation
International Recognition Of Public Policies
Brazil has prominently augmented its agricultural production over the past 
decade, a result achieved with lower subsidies compared with OECD countries 
(Economist, 2010). At the same time, the policies adopted by the Lula adminis-
tration have had a pronounced impact on food security outcomes, enabling the 
achievement of the relevant United Nations Millennium Development Goals 
five years before the deadline (IPEA/ABC, 2010). EMBRAPA has been the pro-
tagonist of a major technological breakthrough that has enabled the expansion 
of the agricultural frontier into previously unexplored areas and an increase in 
productivity. This performance has been linked to the development of new 
technologies and crops adapted to different soil types, the modernization of 
agricultural equipment, and consequent productivity gains. Thus the country 
has shown significant progress in large-scale export agriculture as well as 
small-scale family farming.

80    LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
At the same time, many African countries are net food and energy importers, 
and agriculture remains the main source of employment and export revenue, 
representing 30 percent of the gross domestic product of Sub-Saharan Africa 
(World Bank/IPEA, 2011). In 2003, the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture 
Development Program was launched in the framework of the African Union 
with the aim of integrating cooperation initiatives and investment. Policy 
debate in preceding decades had focused on market liberalization and opposi-
tion to export subsidies. This debate was replaced in the 2000s with an empha-
sis on the internal dimensions of development, in which agricultural investment 
and policy again had priority on the agenda after years of structural adjustment 
and the dismantling of the state. In this context and in a situation of food crisis, 
Brazilian and African governments have identified agriculture as a priority 
area for exchange during the meeting held in Brasilia among Brazilian and 
African ministers of agriculture in 2010.
The selection of a former Brazilian minister, Graziano da Silva, as head of the 
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) was an important outcome of the 
country’s strategy of assertion in international institutions. It also initiated a 
discussion of the organization’s role in supporting the formulation of public 
policies, and, according to Silva, the potential for Brazilian cooperation in agri-
culture is also expressed in these terms (Opera Mundi, 2011). Therefore, the 
recent spate of cooperation in agriculture is directly linked to international 
expectations in the context of the food crisis and the return of agriculture to the 
center of the development debate, as well as to an assertive Brazilian effort in 
promoting its agricultural experience internationally.
Brazil’s Dual Agricultural Sector
The modernization of Brazilian agriculture was launched in the 1950s. The 
development of an agro-industrial complex depended on government incen-
tives, particularly rural credit and fiscal incentives (Teixeira, 2005). The role of 
the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and Supply was critical, and the forma-
tion of EMBRAPA allowed the development and transfer of appropriate tech-
nologies to different regions and soil and climatic conditions within the country. 
From an economic point of view, the modernization of agriculture has contrib-
uted to an increase in productivity and exports, as well as to regional integra-
tion in a national context. However, from a social and environmental point of 
view, modern inputs and equipment have aggravated environmental degrada-
tion and contributed to the rise of unemployment in rural zones (so-called con-
servative modernization) (Teixeira, 2005). Agribusiness helped achieve 
macroeconomic control and a positive balance of payments during the eco-
nomic stagnation of the 1980s. Policies regarding the exchange rate for exports, 
minimum prices for agricultural products, and technological development for 
an increase in productivity have helped develop agriculture in a macroeco-
nomic environment that was hostile both domestic and externally.
Social movements and farming groups were strengthened after the end of 
the military regime in the late 1980s. Land occupation claims for agrarian reform 
and demands for credit programs specific to small farmers became frequent. In 
this context, family farming emerged as a “concept-synthesis” featuring an 

Milhorance de Castro / BRAZIL’S COOPERATION WITH SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA    81
entire rural sector (Porto and Siqueira, 1997), and it gained political space when 
conservative modernization failed in social terms (Bianchini, 2005). The 
National Family Farming Program was the first government program aimed at 
family farming and represented the legitimization of the concept by the 
Brazilian state (Schneider, 2003). This program was followed by the creation of 
the Ministry of Agrarian Development.
Several writers (Delgado, 2010; Sabourin, 2007; Schneider, 2003) argue that 
the organization of social actors and their recognition by the state led to a gen-
eral conception of the presence of “two agricultures”: capitalist agriculture and 
small peasant production. The creation of the Ministry of Agrarian Development 
and the implementation of the Programa de Fortalecimento da Agricultura 
Familiar (National Family Farming Program—PRONAF) helped to crystallize 
this representation. This dichotomy in the perception of the Brazilian agrarian 
sector has also been legitimized by other public policies: the Rural Assurance 
Program ensures resources for commercial agriculture at the expense of family 
farming, which is directly assisted by PRONAF. Nevertheless, this controversy 
has contaminated the debate over a policy adapted to the diversity of family 
farmers in Brazil (Sabourin, 2007).
During the Lula administration, the amount of resources allocated to family 
farming more than tripled, as did the number of farmers benefiting from credit 
(Delgado, 2010). Additionally, there has been a deeper institutionalization of 
political mechanisms through the adoption of new legal instruments. The 
importance of agribusiness in the Brazilian economy and politics, however, 
given its strategic role in the balance of payments and despite fundamental 
changes in foreign policy, remains unchanged, and agribusiness continues to 
set the agenda for trade negotiations (Machado, 2009). Since 2005, export policy 
and international negotiations have been carried out by the Ministry of 
Agriculture, Livestock, and Supply. The creation of sectorial chambers within 
this ministry has contributed to assembling private-sector representatives 
around the formulation of agricultural public policy.
In recent times, governmental efforts have been directed toward promoting 
a political strategy of “peaceful coexistence” between the two agricultural 
models (Christoffoli, 2007). President Lula has reaffirmed in several speeches 
that family farming can coexist with agribusiness (in Brasília September 30, 
2005, and July 24, 2006, and in Maringá September 23, 2010), including the fol-
lowing speech in Cape Verde (Silva, 2010, my free translation):
Brazil is an African partner. . . . Our soils, our climates, and our genetic resources 
also bring us together. The Brazilian cerrado, where dynamic agriculture and 
livestock are developed, shows strong similarities with the African savannah. 
In many countries of the continent, including that of ECOWAS [Economic 
Commission of West African States], we are able to reproduce the Brazilian 
agricultural revolution. We have converted unproductive lands into fertile 
agricultural areas, thanks to a combination of applied agrarian research and a 
set of public policies. We have produced a harmonious coexistence of a modern 
entrepreneurial agriculture and a robust family farming sector. Small-scale 
farmers’ production accounts for 10 percent of our GDP. It creates millions of 
jobs and provides 70 percent of the food we consume in Brazil. It increases 
revenue in rural areas and multiplies its effects in consumption.

82    LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
The “coexistence” of family farming and agribusiness is to rely on a legal 
framework and public policies supporting two agricultures (food production 
and production of commodities for export). In this context, the family farming 
sector has also been characterized as “modern,” “efficient,” and “the food pro-
ducer for the country” (Picolotto, 2006). Several studies show that the National 
Family Farming Program, under individual credits or subsidies for collectively 
owned equipment, has mostly benefited capital-intensive farming and farming 
connected with the banking network, particularly in the Southern region 
(Abramovay and Piketty, 2005; Abramovay and Veiga, 1999; Carneiro, 1997; 
IBASE, 1999; Sabourin, 2007). Change has also been observed in the implemen-
tation of the More Food Program, which supports both large cooperatives and 
industrial family farms. Other programs, such as the Food Acquisition Program, 
have contributed to the integration of public actions aimed at intersectorality. 
This program is coordinated by a group of ministries and combines mecha-
nisms of support for agricultural production with differentiated prices for fam-
ily farmers. Simultaneously, the More Food Program focuses on multiple 
dimensions of the agrifood chain. Finally, the 2003 creation of the National 
Food and Nutritional Security Council has ensured greater visibility to the dis-
tinctive demands of family farming.
The Institutional Framework Of Brazilian Cooperation
Policy transfer is now common currency in political studies and public pol-
icy analysis, and research in this field has arguably entered a more mature 
phase. Recent works have engaged with the role of political structures in shap-
ing transfer, for example, in more multilevel institutional settings (Benson and 
Jordan, 2011). In the early 1990s James Rosenau (1990) had already suggested 
that only multilevel theory seemed capable of coping with the puzzles posed 
by the “turbulence” roiling the actors and structures of world politics, acknowl-
edging the complexities of the current scene. Rosenau’s frequent theme has 
been the challenge of achieving governance along the domestic-foreign frontier 
(Rosenau, 1997). He highlights the need for analysis of the way the dynamics 
of fragmentation are fostering new structures and processes, arguing that the 
combination of internal and external dynamics generates “simultaneous ten-
dencies toward globalization and localization, toward more extensive integra-
tion across national boundaries and more pervasive fragmentation within 
national boundaries, toward a relocation of authority ‘outward’ to transna-
tional entities and ‘inward’ to subnational groups” (Rosenau, 1990: 350). Brazil 
is driven by a complex set of actors and forces in providing international devel-
opment cooperation. A closer look at the actors involved, the underlying pro-
cess, and the ideational aspects of Brazilian cooperation may provide a broader 
understanding of the interests and features of a political enterprise that is cur-
rently characterized by segmentation and multipolarity.
In addition to the Brazilian Cooperation Agency, several institutions partici-
pate in the agricultural agenda: the Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock, and 
Supply, the Ministry of Agrarian Development, the Ministry of Social 
Development and Fight against Hunger, the Ministry of Education, EMBRAPA, 
the National Supply Company, the Agency for Technical Assistance and Rural 

Milhorance de Castro / BRAZIL’S COOPERATION WITH SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA    83
Extension, and the National Rural Education Service. Public universities are 
involved in designing some of the initiatives, and some nongovernmental 
organizations are attempting to monitor the implementation of these initia-
tives. The Ministry of Development, Industry, and Foreign Trade encourages 
trade missions, export financing, and investment in Africa while contributing 
to a convergence of interests between the public and the private sector (Hirst, 
2010).
EMBRAPA has a unique role in this arrangement, and until 2008 it under-
wrote the formulation and implementation of approximately 95 percent of 
Brazilian cooperation initiatives in agriculture (Magalhães, 2008). EMBRAPA-
Africa aims to provide African countries with Brazilian technologies, concen-
trating on partnerships with international organizations and response to 
private-sector demands and the requests of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. The 
office also assists African entrepreneurs interested in Brazilian technologies as 
well as Brazilian entrepreneurs seeking an African foray. Therefore, the institu-
tion contributes to the agreements signed between African governments and 
Brazil as the facilitator of foreign policy in the agricultural sector. Technology 
transfer may still be associated with the creation of markets for machinery, 
equipment, and supplies.
There is also concern regarding the structuring of programs economically 
capable of engaging the African private sector and creating business opportu-
nities. Feasibility studies of biofuel production conducted by the BNDES 
develop business plans based on this notion. The same perspective is perceived 
in projects implemented in Mozambique and Mali. Brazilian private-sector 
engagement is encouraged not only by export credits and partnerships with 
EMBRAPA-Africa but also through the Ministry of Foreign Affairs. Thus, while 
Brazilian cooperative efforts are essentially government-driven, private actors 
play an important role.
At the same time, direct participation by the civil society in cooperation proj-
ects remains relatively weak. One of the few examples is the project coordi-
nated by the Brazilian Institute of Social and Economic Analysis aimed at the 
establishment of community seed banks and the use of native seeds in Southern 
Africa. Even so, several organizations have been monitoring Brazilian-led proj-
ects on the African continent under transnational networks. They bring 
together, for instance, Mozambican, Brazilian, and Japanese institutions and 
social movements, shedding light on critical aspects of the agricultural project 
(ProSavana) in the Nacala Corridor in Mozambique. Other initiatives, such as 
the Civil Society Forum of the Community of Portuguese-speaking Countries 
and the network led by Brazilian Association of NGOs, advocate for the estab-
lishment of a mechanism for monitoring and evaluating cooperation policy. 
Decentralized cooperation initiatives such as the Decentralized South-South 
Technical Cooperation Program could be cited as an example.4
Brazilian foreign policy is a result of coalitions of domestic and interna-
tional actors with various degrees of influence. In this context, some of the 
characteristics of this period are the gradual pluralization of actors and the 
politicization of foreign policy (Hirst, Lima, and Pinheiro, 2010). Studies of 
the international circulation of public policy have also highlighted state frag-
mentation. Infrastate actors have asymmetric resources and are not necessarily 

84    LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
involved in all stages of the transfer process. These actors generally have the 
autonomy to lead international cooperation initiatives in their sector accord-
ing to their own conceptions of the “general interest” (Slaughter, 2002). 
However, a particular category of actors is central in these studies: those who 
mobilize in favor of the generalization of a policy or model, providing infor-
mation and persuading the political and administrative decision makers. 
Ancelovici and Jenson (2012) emphasize the importance of political agents in 
the process of converting ideas and practices into local “standard models,” 
what they call the “standardization process.”
Until recently, Brazilian cooperation in agriculture took place almost exclu-
sively through EMBRAPA. These initiatives consisted of knowledge and tech-
nology transfer in the fields that enabled Brazil to become a major producer 
and exporter of agricultural products. However, with the recent engagement of 
the Ministry of Agrarian Development and the introduction of programs 
geared to family farming into the portfolio of projects, the content of coopera-
tion has been amended. The Brazil-Africa dialogue has also contributed to the 
reinforcement of the role of this ministry.
The Internationalization Of Agricultural Policy
The intervention instrument that Brazilian officials call the “structuring of 
projects” has been conceived from a long-term perspective. Given the economic 
and territorial disparities between Brazil and some African countries, these 
projects are implemented in partnership with regional organizations envision-
ing the creation of economies of scale (Goes, Patriota, and Tiburcio, 2010; World 
Bank/IPEA, 2011). The US$5.26 million Cotton Four Project aims to support the 
development of the cotton sector in Benin, Burkina Faso, Chad, and Mali. In 
Senegal a US$2.4 million project aims to support the development of nation-
wide rice cultivation. In addition to structuring projects, Brazil implements 
initiatives concentrating on training for agricultural research and on public 
policies such as the distribution of agricultural products. Three large projects 
coordinated by EMBRAPA in Mozambique include adapting Brazilian agricul-
tural varieties and technologies, reinforcing research institutions, and building 
capacity (ProSavana, Plataforma, and ProAlimentos). They promote trilateral 
cooperation engaging the U.S. Agency for International Development and the 
Japan International Cooperation Agency.
The Food Acquisition Program brings together a series of pilot projects in an 
effort to create institutional markets for family farmers in different African 
macroregions. This program is implemented in collaboration with the FAO and 
the World Food Program. The More Food Program is a financing mechanism 
for purchasing Brazilian agricultural machinery and equipment. The Chamber 
of Foreign Trade has approved a credit line of US$640 million to finance exports 
(World Bank/IPEA, 2011), coupled with technical cooperation activities. The 
private sector is also cautiously increasing its presence on African soil. The 
recent joint venture between Brazil’s Pinesso and Sudan’s Agadi, focusing on 
the production of cotton and soybeans in Sudan, is an example, and another is 
the BNDES’s funding of an ethanol plant in Angola and a recently opened 

Milhorance de Castro / BRAZIL’S COOPERATION WITH SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA    85
office in South Africa. Furthermore, the Brazil-Africa Agricultural Innovation 
Marketplace brings together African and Brazilian experts in cooperative agri-
cultural projects on the basis of a trilateral arrangement in which US$3 million 
has already been invested. Some of these initiatives are taking place on home 
turf. For instance, staff training initiatives, whether in the Center for Research 
and Training in Tropical Agriculture or the University of Luso-Afro-Brazilian 
Integration, are located in the semiarid Brazilian Northeast.
Brazil’s public policies in agriculture are actually the result of a historical 
dispute between two different views of development. The Lula administration 
has endeavored to create an institutional environment that communicates the 
idea of peaceful coexistence of agribusiness and family farming. It was there-
fore the notion of complementarity that was chosen to guide Brazilian interven-
tion on African soil, rather than the institutional dichotomy or the dual model. 
This strategy does not necessarily reflect the diversity of the political debate in 
Brazil but represents the Presidency’s recent synthesis of that debate.
The ProSavana Program is supposedly aimed at increasing food security by 
increasing the productivity of smallholders while augmenting exportable sur-
plus through technical assistance to agribusinesses. It is based on a dual strat-
egy of promoting, within the same institutional and programmatic framework, 
small/medium-sized farmers and large agribusinesses oriented to interna-
tional markets. This initiative has been associated with the improvement of 
transportation infrastructure (the construction of highways in the Nacala 
Corridor by the Brazilian mining company Vale). The More Food Program goes 
beyond specific training initiatives to focus on the formulation of public policy 
and has been associated with technical and economic cooperation. This project 
also incorporates the equipment and agricultural inputs industry, as well as 
technical cooperation for the production phase. The Food Acquisition Program 
combines production and marketing tools and focuses simultaneously on mul-
tiple dimensions of the agrifood chain. The program ensures the demand for 
and distribution of the agricultural products of family farmers.
In fact, the agricultural model being exported is not a stable model in 
Brazilian society. It is the source of multiple disputes over public policy, finan-
cial support, and symbolic value. But cooperation initiatives tend to reproduce 
policies of support for family farming without reducing the importance of agri-
business. Therefore, the latter retains its legitimacy as an instrument of national 
development, and this contributes to the persistence of agribusiness as one of 
the major beneficiaries of Brazilian public policy. Until recently, cooperation 
initiatives concentrated on technical cooperation aimed at the development of 
a modern agricultural sector capable of producing exportable surpluses. Only 
after the 2008 food crisis were Brazilian family farming programs included in 
the cooperation portfolio.
The Standardization Of Public Policies
South-South cooperation is based on the similarities of partners in an effort 
to simplify and increase the effectiveness of adaptation of technological and 
political solutions. The preliminary stage of a policy transfer is identified as the 

86    LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
conversion of local ideas and practices into a “standard model.” The configura-
tion of this model before its diffusion into other environments is considered an 
important step, given that not all ideas and practices become standards. The 
decision to promote one policy or institution rather than another depends on a 
political effort in which certain actors acquire the authority to represent a stand-
ard model. This concept often implies a replacement of local practices with 
widely accepted standards and norms, involving a process of reinterpretation 
to enable cooperation among different actors (Ancelovici and Jenson, 2012). 
Actors characterized as “transfer entrepreneurs” or “transfer agents” invest 
and mobilize for the generalization of policies or models that they consider 
deserving of dissemination. Ancelovici and Jenson (2012) identify three poten-
tially robust mechanisms as central to the process of standardization: certifica-
tion, disembedding, and framing.3 This process highlights the way in which 
ideas and practices are identified in their milieu by policy makers, NGOs, and 
international actors and then shaped as a generic construct that can be exported 
to another environment.
Tilly and Tarrow (2008) say that certification occurs when an external author-
ity recognizes a political actor and his claims. It is assumed, therefore, that one 
actor is able to certify another, but this may also mean legitimization of a num-
ber of practices. In the Brazilian case, the performance of agriculture over the 
past decade has been clearly recognized, ensuring international legitimacy, but 
the political effort of the Lula administration has had a significant influence on 
the certification of Brazilian programs and technologies by international actors 
such as the United Nations Development Program, the FAO, and the African 
governments themselves. Brazil achieved the UN’s millennial goals with 
regard to food security ahead of the deadline through effective policy making. 
Diplomatic efforts at disseminating the results of these policies and promoting 
them as potential South-South cooperation lesson-learning instruments, presi-
dential discourses during official visits, and collaboration with those interna-
tional organizations have made the Brazilian experience very popular. 
Furthermore, Graziano da Silva’s election as head of the FAO is testimony to 
the international and African recognition of his policies.
Subsequently, in order to become an object of international transfer the pub-
lic policies selected by transfer agents and certified by international actors go 
through a process of disembedding. This process requires prior political and cog-
nitive effort (Ancelovici and Jenson, 2012) and involves the “decontextualiza-
tion” of certain practices, ideas, or institutions—their separation from their 
social, cultural, economic, and historical settings—to reduce potential obstacles 
to transposition. Agribusiness has been one of the greatest beneficiaries of rural 
credits and public policies in Brazil, contributing not only to control over the 
balance of payments but also to rural unemployment, social exclusion, and 
environmental impacts. These issues have not been clearly addressed by coop-
eration initiatives. The notion of complementarity between agribusiness and 
family farming also contributes to the decontextualization of programs, reduc-
ing possible obstacles to EMBRAPA initiatives and criticisms with regard to the 
international interests of Brazilian agribusiness. Nonetheless, it is worth recall-
ing that peaceful coexistence is also the basis of Brazil’s own political efforts 
and discourse even though it overlooks persistent domestic conflict.

Milhorance de Castro / BRAZIL’S COOPERATION WITH SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA    87
Similarly, political agents are critical to the process of converting ideas and 
practices into standard models capable of being transferred. In this context, the 
mechanism of political framing refers to defining problems, simplifying situa-
tions and experiences, and proposing solutions. Thus, agents of Brazilian coop-
eration frame and showcase selected initiatives as instruments of rural 
development and poverty reduction and identify African countries as partners 
rather than beneficiaries. In a historic moment of affirmation of post-neoliberal 
policies and a highlight of South-South cooperation, the adoption of the prin-
ciples used by Brazilian diplomacy (demand-driven, no conditionalities, 
respect for autonomy, nonintervention, horizontal collaboration) seems appro-
priate (Ancelovici and Jenson, 2012). Furthermore, the programs that are pri-
oritized for implementation in African countries promote the notion of 
productive and entrepreneurial family farming. This follows the reframing of 
assistance policies for family farming and their replacement by the idea of 
modern intersectoral policies.
Challenges Of The International Circulation  
Of Policy Instruments
This article has focused on the first stages of policy transfer rather than aim-
ing to analyze the implications of this process for the importing environments. 
Nevertheless, some of its challenges can already be acknowledged. Similarities 
are the center of political discourse promoting Brazil-Africa cooperation. As 
Cabral (2011) argues, it is credible that agro-climatic similarities with some 
African countries simplify the exchange of experiences in the agricultural field. 
Shared language with Portuguese-speaking countries may facilitate these 
exchanges. However, the similarities between Brazil and African countries are 
sometimes overestimated, failing to account for the limited influence of African 
descendants on Brazilian political institutions. Certain instances also oversim-
plify the particularities of some African contexts. The construction of a national 
identity founded on mestizaje and “racial democracy” discourse (see Freyre, 
1933) FREYRE, Gilberto [1933] (1971). Casa-Grande e senzala. Rio de Janeiro: 
Aguilar. posed a major challenge to Brazilian racial movement. And, despite the 
historical ties, the society’s information about Africa is questionable.
Cabral (2011) discusses the “transferability” of state–civil-society dynamics, 
arguing that the idea that the Brazilian public policies are easily transferable to 
the African context follows a technical logic that does not take into account the 
social trajectory of these policies. Dowbor (2011) argues that a bridge has been 
built between the universe of intellectuals and that of the administration and 
the private sector in Brazil. However, a number of measures, such as feasibility 
studies and coordination with African national and regional agricultural plans 
and the recent engagement of civil society members with the Food Acquisition 
Program, contribute to smooth adaptation. Some project officers (in the Ministry 
of Social Development and EMBRAPA) draw attention to the fact that Brazil is 
aiming to share its experience with specific instruments of public policy and 
not entire national programs.

88    LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
Dolowitz and Marsh (1996) have pointed to the importance of accounting 
for the way in which problems are socially constructed and suggested that 
this intersubjectivity might determine the source of potential solutions. 
Benson and Jordan (2011) point to the existence of a study of transfer in more 
constructivist terms. Thus a sociological institutional perspective could be 
instructive in explaining the international transfer and adoption of Brazilian 
public policies.
There are also other issues regarding the selection of experiences to be trans-
ferred. The development of the cerrado region in Brazil is, for instance, consid-
ered a great success in technological and economic terms. However, social 
movements emphasize its social and environmental impacts, and these are 
issues that should be recognized and critically addressed. Sharing the Brazilian 
biofuel experience is also questionable when it comes to adaptation, since the 
development of this sector relied on a strong governmental strategy of stimu-
lus, solid legal frameworks, pricing regulations, and public financing of agri-
cultural production. Thus the possible development of this sector in African 
countries must take these structural aspects into account.
EMBRAPA-Mozambique describes its technology transfer policy as follows: 
“The focus is on the institutions as well as the local scientific community” 
(interview, March 28, 2012). Diplomats argue for a real knowledge transfer in 
which partners are able to replicate the knowledge acquired in a similar context 
of limitations. At the same time, an organizational transfer such as institutional 
strengthening of Mozambique’s Institute of Agricultural Research by EMBRAPA 
is innovative in that it removes, adjusts, or renews components of the original 
model (Westney, 1987).
These aspects should be addressed by further analysis that details the pro-
cess of adaptation of shared policies. Other aspects that could be clarified by 
further analysis include the idea of establishing a “policy market” in which 
international cooperation is not necessarily unidirectional. This could support 
a circulatory conception of policies, based on the co-construction of ideas and 
instruments in multiple arenas.
Conclusion
South-South cooperation is based on the idea that partner countries are 
well placed to propose solutions inspired by their own experiences. In the 
first phase, Brazilian cooperation initiatives in agriculture are focused on 
EMBRAPA’s training and transfer of technological solutions to increase pro-
ductivity under similar soil and climatic conditions. Recently, assistance in 
the formulation of public policies on family farming has also been incorpo-
rated. Another striking feature of some cooperation initiatives is their con-
cern for commercial aspects. Although Brazilian engagement in Africa seems 
dependent on governmental efforts, the dynamics of public-private partner-
ships in Brazilian agricultural policies are reproduced in cooperation strat-
egy. Thus the transfer of technology and public policies and the engagement 
of the private sector are important aspects of future Brazil-Africa relations in 
agriculture.

Milhorance de Castro / BRAZIL’S COOPERATION WITH SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA    89
These initiatives follow an overall discourse of complementarity between agri-
business and family farming. Cooperation policy also underlines governmental 
efforts to create a national institutional environment that will promote the 
peaceful coexistence of this duality. In spite of Brazil’s historical and institu-
tional dichotomy in the agricultural sector, it is the notion of complementarity 
that has been endorsed in high-level public policy dialogue with Africa. 
Brazilian diplomacy has repeatedly stressed this aspect, and some of the pro-
grams implemented on the African continent support both small/medium-
sized farmers and large agribusiness oriented to international markets. 
However, the Brazilian civil society actors that are increasingly participating 
in foreign policy debates often point to this contradiction in the country’s 
international engagement.
Brazilian cooperation is driven by a complex set of actors, forces, and moti-
vations. The decision to undertake it was made by Lula and his diplomatic 
corps. The concept of standardization contributes to an understanding of the 
process of identification and transformation of those policies into exportable 
practices and of the role of transfer agents. Public policies that have been dis-
embedded from their original environment and framed as modern intersec-
toral policies for entrepreneurial agriculture and as instruments of South-South 
lesson-learning are subsequently legitimized by international actors and orga-
nizations. Indeed, the choice of an example of policy transfer in South-South 
cooperation has been useful in problematizing the political aspect and the 
discursive smoothness of a transfer between developing and emerging coun-
tries. This process has been important in asserting Brazilian soft power and the 
country’s self- and international recognition as an intermediate state. This per-
spective in terms of power imbalances is not incompatible with that of mutual 
gains and cooperation.
More empirical research is needed to gauge the impact of this policy in the 
field, and more analysis of the processes and implications of this policy transfer 
will be necessary to clarify the role of African actors in the construction of 
demand for cooperation with Brazil. This could shed light on the circulatory 
aspect of policy transfer, assuming that the purpose of transfer is not necessar-
ily an authentic reproduction of original models but the development of a con-
certed response to a specific political problem. In this sense, concerns about 
uninformed or even inappropriate transfer should be evaluated, along with the 
role of endogenous innovation. The innovations and possible transformations 
provided by political and economic relations between Brazil and Africa should 
be the object of further analysis.
 New state and private actors are likely to transform both the mechanisms of 
the international development cooperation system and the process of formulat-
ing national policies.
Notes
1. Interviews and/or semistructured questionnaires with 50 persons from Brazilian public 
institutions, Brazilian embassies in Africa, private-sector associations, and nongovernmental 
organizations.
2. Soft power can be understood as the ability to seduce other actors by the legitimacy of one’s 
policies and the values they endorse (see Nye, 2004).

90    LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
3. The Family Farming Law (No. 11.326/2006), the Food and Nutritional Security Law (No. 
11.346/2006), and the Technical Assistance Law (No.12.188/2010).
4. ”Programa de Cooperação Sul-Sul divulga resultado da segunda chamada” http://www4.
planalto.gov.br/saf-projetos.
References
Abramovay, Ricardo and Marie Gabrielle Piketty 
2005 “Politique de crédit du programme d’appui à l’agriculture familiale (Pronaf): résultats et 
limites de l’expérience brésilienne dans les années 1990.” Cahiers Agricultures 1 (14): 25–29.
Abramovay, Ricardo and José Eli da Veiga 
1999 Novas instituições para o desenvolvimento rural: O caso do Programa de Fortalecimento da 
Agricultura Familiar (PRONAF). Brasília: FIPE/IPEA Nacional.
Ancelovici, M. and J. Jenson 
2012 “La standardisation et les mécanismes du transfert transnational.” Gouvernement et Action 
Publique 1: 37–58.
Antoniazzi, L. 
2012 “Brasil e África parceiros no desenvolvimento agrícola sustentável.” February 27. http://
www.redeagro.org.br/artigo-desenvolvimento-rural/619-brasil-e-africa-parceiros-
no-desenvolvimento-agricola-sustentavel (accessed May 2012).
AT (Ateliers de la Terre) 
2012 “L’Afrique: fer de lance de l’innovation durable?” April 29. http://www.planetworkshops.
org/fr/post/129/l-afrique-fer-de-lance-de-l-innovation-durable.html (accessed May 2012).
Benson, D. and A. Jordan 
2011 “What have we learned from policy transfer research? Dolowitz and Marsh revisited.” 
Political Studies Review 9: 366–378.
Bianchini, V. 
2005 “Políticas diferenciadas para a agricultura familia: em busca do desenvolvimento rural 
sustentável.” Cadernos do CEAM 5: 81–98.
Buss, P. M. and J. R. Ferreira 
2010 “Health diplomacy and South-South cooperation: the experiences of UNASUR Salud and 
CPLP’s Strategic Plan for Cooperation In Health.” Revista Eletrônica de Comunicação, Informação 
e Inovaçãp em Saude 4: 99–110.
Cabral, L. 
2011 Cooperação Brasil-África para o desenvolvimento: Caracterização, tendências e desafios. Rio de 
Janeiro: Cindes.
Carneiro, Maria José 
1997 “Política pública e agricultura familiar: uma leitura do PRONAF.” Estudos Sociedade e 
Agricultura 8: 70–82.
Christoffoli, P. 
2007 “A evolução recente da questão agrária e os limites das políticas públicas do governo Lula 
para o meio rural,” pp. 113–154 in Faculdade de Direito, Programa de Pós Graduação em 
Direito da UFPR, Estudos de direito cooperativo e cidadania. Curitiba: UFPR.
CSIS (Center for Strategic and International Studies) 
2010 Key Players in Global Health: How Brazil, Russia, India, China, and South Africa Are Influencing 
the Game. Washington, DC: CSIS.
Delgado, N. G. 
2010 “Agronegócio e agricultura familiar no Brasil: desafios para uma transformação 
democrática no meio rural.” Paper presented to the Conference on Dynamics of Rural 
Transformation in Emerging Economies, New Delhi, April 14–16.
Delpeuch, T. 
2008 L’analyse des transferts internationaux de politiques publiques: Un état de l’art. Sciences Po 
Questions de Recherche 27.
Dolowitz, D. and D. Marsh 
1996 “Who learns what from whom: a review of the policy transfer literature.” Political Studies 
44: 343–357.
2012 “The future of policy transfer research.” Political Studies Review 10: 339–345.

Milhorance de Castro / BRAZIL’S COOPERATION WITH SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA    91
Dowbor, L. 
2011 “Intellectuals in a network: a new generation faces the challenges of development.” Latin 
American Perspectives 38: 78–98.
Economist 
2010 “Brazilian agriculture: the miracle of the cerrado.” http://www.economist.com/
node/16886442 (accessed August 28, 2012).
Evans, M. and J. Davies 
2002 “Understanding policy transfer: a multi-level, multi-disciplinary perspective.” Public 
Administration 77: 361–385.
Freyre, Gilberto 
1933 Casa-grande & senzala. Rio de Janeiro: Maia y Schmidt.
Goes, F., T. C. Patriota, and J. Tiburcio 
2010 “Considerações sobre o potencial e os desafios de uma parceria Brasil-África para o 
desenvolvimento rural.” Boletim de Economia e Políticas Internacional 53: 183–192.
Haibin, N. 
2010 “Emerging global partnership: Brazil and China.” Revista Brasileira de Política Internacional 
53: 183–192.
Hirst, M. 
2010 As relações Brasil-África em ritmo de cooperação Sul-Sul. Rio de Janeiro: CEBRI.
Hirst, M., M. R. Lima, and L. Pinheiro 
2010 “A política externa brasileira em tempos de novos horizontes e desafios.” Nueva Sociedad, 
22–41.
IBASE (Instituto Brasileiro de Análises Sociais e Econômicas) 
1999 Avaliação dos programas de geração de emprego e renda. Democracia Viva, special edition.
Inoue, C. Y. and A. C. Vaz 
2012 “Brazil as ‘Southern donor’: beyond hierarchy and national interests in development 
cooperation?” Cambridge Review of International Affairs 25: 507–534.
IPEA/ABC (Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada/Agência Brasileira de Cooperação)
2010 Cooperação brasileiro para o desenvolvimento internacional 2005–2009. Brasília: IPEA/ABC.
Keohane, R. 
1969 “Lilliputian’s dilemmas: small states in international politics.” International Organization 
23 (2).
Lima, M. R. 
2005 “A política externa brasileira e os desafios da cooperação Sul-Sul.” Revista Brasileira de 
Política Internacional 48 (1): 24–59.
Lima, M. R. and M. Hirst 
2006 “Brazil as an intermediate state and regional power: action, choice, and responsibilities.” 
International Affairs 82: 21–40.
Lopes, L. 
2008 A cooperação técnica entre países em desenvolvimento da Agência Brasileira de Cooperação: O 
Brasil como doador. São Paulo: UNESP/UNICAMP/PUC-SP.
Macaulay, F. 
2007 “Justice-sector and human rights reform under the Cardoso government.” Latin American 
Perspectives 34 (5): 26–42.
Machado, A. P. C. 
2009 A formulação da política comercial externa agrícola: Condicionantes internacionais e domésticos 
da transformação institucional do MAPA. Brasilia: Universidade de Brasília.
Magalhães, B. P. 
2008 Política externa do Brasil lem agricultura: O papel da EMBRAPA na cooperaç0πo técnica. Brasília: 
Universidade de Brasília, Instituto de Ciências Políticas e Relações Internacionais.
Marques, S. F. 
2005 “A imagem internacional do Brasil no governo Cardoso (1995–2002): uma leitura con-
strutivista do conceito de potência média.” Master’s thesis, Pontificia Universidade Católica 
do Rio de Janeiro. http://www.maxwell.lambda.ele.puc-rio.br/Busca_etds.php?strSecao=res
ultadoandnrSeq=6509@1 Acessed May 2012.
Marsh, D. and L. C. Sharman 
2009 “Policy diffusion and policy transfer.” Policy Studies 30: 269–288.
2011 A cooperação técnica do Brasil para a África. Brasília: MRE.

92    LATIN AMERICAN PERSPECTIVES
Ncube, M.,  Lufumpa, C., and D. Vencatachellum 
2011 “Brazil’s economic engagement with Africa.” Africa Economic Brief 2 (5).
Nye, J. 
2004 Soft Power: The Means to Success in World Politics. New York: Public Affairs.
OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development), AfDB (African Development 
Bank), UNECA (United Nations Economic Commission for Africa), and UNDP (United Nations 
Development Program) 
2011 African Economic Outlook 2011: Africa and Its Emerging Partners. Paris: OECD.
Opera Mundi 
2011 “Eleição de Graziano é vitória da política externa do Brasil, diz embaixador.” June 26. 
http://operamundi.uol.com.br/conteudo/noticias/13041/eleicao+de+graziano+e+vitoria+d
a+politica+externa+do+brasil+diz+embaixador.shtml (accessed May 2012).
PDP (Política de Desenvolvimento Produtivo) 
2010 Programa integração com a África: Relatório de acompanhamento de execução da agenda de ação. 
Brasília: PDP.
Perch, L., A. Bahalim, L. Cabral, and A. Shankland (eds.). 
2012 The Role of South-South Cooperation in Inclusive and Sustainable Agricultural Development. 
Poverty in Focus 24. Brasília: International Policy Centre for Inclusive Growth.
Picolotto, E. L. 
2006 Sem medo de ser feliz na agricultura familiar: O caso do movimento de agricultores em 
Constantina-RS. Santa Maria: Universidade Federal de Santa Maria.
Pino, B. A. 
2009 Cooperación Sur-Sur: Innovació y transformación en la cooperación internacional. (accessed 
May 2012).
Porto, M. S. G. and D. E. A. Siqueira 
1997 “A pequena produção no Brasil: entre os conceitos teóricos e as categorias empíricas,” pp. 
25–49 in M. S. G. Porto (ed.), Politizando a tecnologia no campo brasileiro: Dimensões e olhares. Rio 
de Janeiro: Relume Dumara.
Rosenau, J. N. 
1990 “Justifying jailbreaks: the limits of contemporary concepts and methods,” pp. 21–44 in 
Turbulence in World Politics: A Theory of Change and Continuity. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press.
Rowlands, D. 
2008 Emerging Donors in International Development Assistance: A Synthesis Report. Ottawa: IDRC/
CRDI.
Sabourin, E. 
2007 “Que política pública para a agricultura familiar no segundo governo Lula?” Sociedade e 
Estado 22: 715–751.
Schneider, S. 
2003 “Teoria social, agricultura familiar e pluriatividade.” Revista Brasileira de Ciências Sociais 
18 (51): 99–122.
Silva, Luiz Inácio Lula da 
2010 “Discurso do Presidente da República, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, durante sesão de abertura 
da Cúpula Brasil–Comunidade Econômica dos Estados da África Ocidental (Cedeao), Ilha do Sal, 
Cabo Verde, 03/07/2010.” http://www.itamaraty.gov.br/divulg/documentacao-diplomatica/
publicacoes/resenha-de-politica-exterior-do-brasil/resenhas/resenha-107 (accessed May 2012).
Slaughter, A. M. 
2002 “Breaking out: The proliferation of actors in the international system,” pp. 12–35 in Y. 
Dezalay and G. Bryant (eds.), Global Prescription: The Production, Exportation, and Importation of 
a New Legal Orthodoxy. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
Soule-Kohndou, F. A. 
2010 Puissances émergentes et multilateralisme: Le cas de l’Afrique du Sud (1999–2008). Paris: 
L’Harmattan.
Teixeira, J. D. 
2005 “Modernização da agricultura no Brasil: impactos econômicos, sociais e ambientais.” 
Revista Eletrônica da Associação dos Geógrafos Brasileiros, Seção Três Lagoas 2 (2): 21–43.

Milhorance de Castro / BRAZIL’S COOPERATION WITH SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA    93
Tilly, C. and S. Tarrow 
2008 Politique(s) du conflit: De la grève à la révolution. Paris: Presses de Sciences Po.
Vaz, A. C. and C. Y. A. Inoue 
2007 Les économies émergentes et l’aide au développement international: Le cas du Brésil. http://www.
idrc.ca/FR/Documents/cas-du-bresil.pdf (accessed May 2012).
Westney, E. 
1987 Imitation and Innovation: The Transfer of Western Organizational Patterns ot Meiji Japan. 
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
World Bank/IPEA (Instituto de Pesquisa Econômica Aplicada) 
2011 Brasil e África Subsaariana: Parceria Sul-Sul para o crescimento. Brasília: IPEA.