Urbani izziv, volume 25, supplement, 2014 (special issue) 
S24
DOI: 10.5379/urbani-izziv-en-2014-25-supplement-002 
 
Re-Spatializing development: Reflections from South 
Africa’s recent re-engagement with planning for Special 
Economic Zones 
 
Etienne L. Nel  
Christian M. Rogerson 
 
Etienne L. Nel, University of Otago, Department of Geography, Humanities Division, New Zealand and 
University of Johannesburg, Faculty of Management, School of Tourism & Hospitality, South Africa 
(Etienne.nel@otago.ac.nz) 
 
Christian M. Rogerson, University of Johannesburg, Faculty of Management, School of Tourism & Hospitality, 
South Africa (crogerson@uj.ac.za) 
 
 
Abstract 
In 2014 the South African government formally sanctioned the establishment of Special Economic Zones (SEZs) 
in that country. The importance attached to SEZs reflects a clear return to spatially-based economic interventions 
following the recognition of the persistence of deep-rooted structural and spatial inequalities in the country. This 
paper discusses South Africa’s past and present involvement in processes of spatial economic development and 
how the SEZ concept has emerged. The potential of SEZs is assessed relative to local experience with the lack-
lustre performance of what were termed Industrial Development Zones (IDZs) since 2001. While re-engagement 
with issues of how to address ‘uneven geographical development’ is clearly significant, it would be difficult to 
argue that SEZs will achieve guaranteed success. 
 
Keywords: Special Economic Zone, Industrial Development Zone, South Africa, spatial planning, regional 
development 
 
 
Introduction 
In many parts of the world there is a defined move to re-spatialise development planning 
and associated economic interventions. The passage of the Localism Act in the UK, the work 
of the Cities Alliance, continued effort put into the European Regional Development Fund, 
the considerable interest in Chinese spatial interventions and the theoretical outputs on New 
Regionalism and New Localism serve as testimony to this re-emerging international interest 
(Markey, 2011; Evans et al., 2013). This focus is driven by the perceived need to promote 
economic development, particularly in ‘lagging regions’, post the 2008 global economic 
crisis, and the fundamental recognition that geographical space is economically ‘uneven’ 
(Harvey, 2006) requiring spatially focussed but locally unique interventions. As Pallares-
Barbera et al. (2012: S8) argue “spatially uneven development in a globalizing world is an 
important phenomenon driven by its fast dynamics and its manifestation across a wide range 
of economic agendas and its regional challenges”. In response, as the New Regionalism 
approach argues, the failure to achieve regional convergence within countries and limitations 
on the capacity and success of nationally driven development, are encouraging an emphasis 
on localised solutions and spatial planning interventions uniquely targeted to address local 
development needs and challenges (Markey, 2011; Rogerson, 2009). It is argued that such 
interventions “offer opportunities to address the complexities of territorial planning and 
mobilize the strategic competitive advantages of place-based assets within a globalized 
economy” (Markey, 2011: 2). One intervention which is being looked at with renewed 

 
Urbani izziv, volume 25, supplement, 2014 (special issue) 
S25
interest is that of Special Economic Zones (SEZs), which though having a mixed track record 
internationally are often regarded as a vehicle to potentially help catalyse development, 
particularly in lagging regions (Farole, 2011) especially if tailored to meet local needs and 
utilise local resources and capacity. SEZs have become a key feature on the development 
agenda in sub-Saharan Africa in recent years, not least because of the support which China is 
providing to such zones which it is currently establishing in the continent (Brautigam, 2011). 
In South Africa, spatial development planning is experiencing something of a revival after 
over two decades in which its potential was largely downplayed (Robbins, 2008; Oranje, 
2010; Rogerson, 2014). As apartheid was based on the principle of spatial separation of 
people on racial grounds and associated differentiated spatial support, particularly for the 
various nominated black racial reserves, the post-apartheid government, understandably, was 
reluctant to continue a policy of spatial and regional development interventions which, de 
facto, may have been seen as supporting ‘separate development’ on racial grounds (Robbins, 
2008). Economic intervention was, as a result, largely spatially neutrally after 1994, 
occasionally seeking to support market based development in the most economically 
advantaged areas, such as through the National Spatial Development Plan (The Presidency, 
2006). The most significant spatial intervention was the support provided for a series of 
Industrial Development Zones (IDZs), only four of which were operational by 2014 and 
which, according to recent assessments, including those of the government, have not lived up 
to expectations. In recent years however, there has been a marked revival of interest in the 
persistent nature of spatial inequalities in the country (Nel & Rogerson, 2009), as a result of 
the recognition that, “spatial inequalities have proven to be the most stubborn legacy of 
Apartheid, both reflecting and reinforcing wider social inequities. When people are kept apart, 
the scope for social integration is reduced” (Turok, 2010: 267). Key responses in this regard 
include the identification of the need to address the legacy of apartheid spatial planning and 
promote rural development in particular, in order to achieve the government’s target of 5 
million jobs in terms of the New Growth Path (Department of Economic Development, 2011). 
In addition the National Development Plan has indicated the need to develop a vision to 
respond to spatial distortions, and to promote spatial resilience and equality (National 
Planning Commission, 2011). In direct response a range of spatial economic interventions are 
currently being experimented with, one of the most prominent are current efforts to introduce 
Spatial Economic Zones (SEZs) (Nel & Rogerson, 2013). 
In May 2014, the South African government passed a Special Economic Zone (SEZ) Act 
(RSA, 2014) which potentially heralds a new era of spatial planning and intervention in the 
economy. Given the mixed experience of SEZs globally (Farole, 2011; McCallum, 2011; 
Anwar, 2014) the apparent faith being accorded to SEZs in South Africa is interesting to 
observe and important to reflect on with respect to their potential for contributing to the 
potential future wellbeing of South Africa’s lagging regions. Arguably, in line with the 
revival of spatial planning, the introduction of SEZs is an attempt to help address the 
country’s challenge of persistent ‘uneven’ economic development and to revive the 
established, but lacklustre Industrial Development Zones (IDZs) which have been in existence 
for over a decade. This article reflects on the nature and persistence of spatial inequality in 
South Africa, before moving on to look at past and present endeavours to address these 
challenges, placing particular emphasis on current government approaches, and the thinking 
behind SEZs. The paper concludes with an assessment of their potential and of international 
evidence and local considerations which may impact on their future application and success. 
 
Spatial Inequality in South Africa 
While differences in the economic performance of different regions and localities in any 
national space economy are inevitable, in the case of South Africa, a legacy of generations of 

 
Urbani izziv, volume 25, supplement, 2014 (special issue) 
S26
conscious marginalization and under-development of those regions historically zoned for the 
exclusive residence by black people, overlays the inevitable structural disadvantage 
experienced in such primarily rural areas. Despite the post-1994 government’s endeavours to 
create broad-based development, growth, beyond welfare provision, has clearly not occurred 
in the impoverished rural areas and former racial reserves – the Homelands. Deep-rooted 
urban-rural inequalities persist in South Africa. In 2008, even though 42% of the national 
population lived in rural areas, those areas only generated 16% of the national GVA, 
compared with the 6 primary metropolitan cores which housed 38% of the population and 
generated 70% of the GVA (DTI, 2012a).  
 
 
Figure 1: South Africa’s Priority District Municipalities. 
 
The persistence of spatial inequality has become politically contentious as indicated in the 
emphasis placed on promoting rural development in the New Growth Path (NGP) and in the 
formation of two new government ministries, those of Rural Development and Economic 
Development which are mandated to address issues of rural underdevelopment and economic 
inequality (Rogerson, 2014). In pursuance of these plans and through parallel endeavours to 
invest in infrastructure through the National Infrastructure Plan, a series of 23 priority District 
Municipalities have been identified as requiring focussed assistance and support (see Figure 
1). It is important to observe that these district municipalities contain the majority of the 
former Homelands and their designation is a reflection of the failure to date of state 
interventions to address uneven regional development and the political desire to address what 
is such an evident spatial and economic backlog. While interventions are generally still being 
formalised, with SEZs being the first intervention of what may be a suite of new strategies, it 
is important to first reflect on South Africa’s history of regional development, and the later 
experimentation with IDZs before moving on to consider SEZs, which are clearly one of the 

 
Urbani izziv, volume 25, supplement, 2014 (special issue) 
S27
most significant of the spatial interventions which the state is now about to roll out in South 
Africa, some of which, as will be discussed below are likely to be sited in the priority district 
municipalities. 
 
Spatial Economic Planning and Development in South Africa 
Spatial economic planning in South Africa has had a strong presence in the country since 
World War Two, albeit that its motivations and achievements have often been questionable. 
Commencing in the 1950s and then expended over subsequent decades, what was then known 
as the Regional Industrial Development Programme witnessed the establishment of some 80 
‘growth points’ across the country in which investing manufacturing firms benefitted from 
available infrastructure and a generous range of incentives (Tomlinson & Addelson, 1987). 
The overlap between the siting of most of the growth points in or near the former Homelands 
reflected the reality that the policy was based on a racialised conceptualization of space, 
leading to investment in areas which had little chance of experiencing catalytic growth. The 
programme was suspended in 1991 and evaluations undertaken at the time indicated that there 
had been only very few tangible benefits derived from the programme. Amongst the reasons 
cited were the politically driven nature of the programme, the poor linkage development with 
the host economy, the failure to create permanent economic nodes and the costly nature of the 
intervention (Nel, 1999). 
In the immediate post-apartheid era, Export Processing Zones (EPZs) were briefly 
considered as an alternate form of development interventions which was regarded as having 
the potential to both boost export-led growth and develop the host economy. Concerns, 
particularly over labour abuses in other countries, meant that there was strong union 
opposition to the plan, and nothing materialised. In the late 1990s two explicit spatial 
development interventions were introduced, Spatial Development Initiatives (SDIs) which 
were based on a “corridor” development approach and Industrial Development Zones (IDZs) 
which, like EPZs are sited near an international transport node and are specialised zones for 
export orientated manufacturing (Jourdan, 1998; Rogerson, 1999, 2002). SDIs enjoyed mixed 
success, with the most well-known, the Maputo Corridor helping to improve transport links to 
the port city of Maputo in Mozambique (Rogerson, 2001). IDZs in the meantime have not all 
been developed, the largest, Coega has yet to reach its envisaged potential, while smaller 
ones, such as East London seem to have attracted in some degree of investment (CDE, 2012). 
Given that IDZs share many similarities with the SEZ concept, it is pertinent to pay some 
attention to the possible reasons for their limited success to date, which will be undertaken in 
a subsequent section. 
A more recent, and critical stance to spatial planning came in 2002 when the government 
released its National Spatial Development Programme which identified the ‘growth potential’ 
of different parts of the country and argued that core investment should be focussed only in 
the areas of greatest growth potential. An updated version of the document was released four 
years later (The Presidency, 2006). Naturally this aroused political concerns about the fate of 
the less favoured regions and the plan which had come from President Mbeki’s office was 
effectively shelved (Oranje & Merrifield, 2010). 
A key concern for the post-apartheid government is how best to try and attain election 
promises of both mass job creation and international economic integration. In 1996 the 
Growth Employment and Reconstruction (GEAR) policy indicated the government’s 
commitment to the pursuit of economic orthodoxy and export-led growth (Marais, 2001). 
Despite a long-term commitment to amongst other activities, support for IDZs, cluster 
development and export focussed growth, the economy has remained relatively sluggish and 
has not created the envisaged number of employment opportunities. In 2011 the Department 
of Trade and Industry (DTI, 2011a) expressed concern about the underperformance of the 

 
Urbani izziv, volume 25, supplement, 2014 (special issue) 
S28
South African economy relative to the global and emerging economies. In its Medium Term 
Strategic Plan the DTI (2011b) identified both falling levels of employment and 
manufacturing value adding as key concerns, particularly given that the manufacturing sector 
is regarded as one that can absorb low skilled labour. It is within this context that SEZs are 
being implemented, namely as a potential way to help to create more jobs and improve the 
value of manufacturing and exports in particular. 
The emerging debate about SEZs follows on from the complex history of spatial 
intervention in the country which has been marked by political interference and mediocre 
success (Nel & Rogerson, 2009). If SEZs are to be implemented and to succeed it can be 
argued that South African planners and the business community need to take cognizance of 
the international experience which SEZs have enjoyed (Farole, 2011, CDE, 2012). The failure 
rate seems to be high, and there are clear factors which seem to account for their mixed level 
of success. In addition, the degree to which an SEZ does not remain an isolated enclave, but is 
incorporated into the host economy is clearly of critical importance. 
 
Formalizing SEZs in South Africa 
 
In pursuance of its goal of establishing SEZs, the Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) 
produced an SEZ Bill in 2011, which was approved by cabinet in 2012 (RSA, 2011; DTI, 
2012b). The DTI defined an SEZ as a “geographical designated area of the country set aside 
for specifically targeted economic activities which are then supported through special 
arrangements and support systems which are different from those which apply to the rest of 
the country” (DTI, 2012b: 1). The DTI argued that they are tools to promote long-term 
economic and industrial development, to attract in local and foreign investment, to encourage 
infrastructure creation and to support targeted industries. In addition the DTI claims that they 
have learnt from international experience and from the modest performance of IDZs in the 
country which were poorly funded and planned and hence, by implication, DTI now believes 
they have developed a better product. 
 
Efforts to establish SEZs are closely linked to South Africa’s re-industralization goal and 
also link with the current (fifth) Industrial Policy Action Plan (IPAP 5) which seeks to 
promote the beneficiation of minerals and natural resources (DTI, 2014). It is argued that 
“such zones would bring mainstream economic activity to poor and isolated parts of South 
Africa by leveraging the commercial potential of a particular region. This will include 
industry clustering and targeted development” (Buthelezi, 2013: 17). The association between 
regional development i.e. spatial interventions and industrialization is clear in government 
documentation, with the Department of Trade and Industry (2014) stating that “SEZs … (are) 
key contributors to economic development. They are growth engines towards government's 
strategic objectives of industrialisation, regional development and employment creation”. 
 
In May 2014, the South African parliament passed Act No. 16 of 2014 – The Special 
Economic Zones Act, both formalizing and legalizing the strategy (RSA, 2014). The Act 
argues for a focus on “new sources of competitiveness that lie in innovation and productivity, 
with an entrenched base in skills, infrastructure and efficient, responsive state action” (RSA, 
2014: 2). Within this context SEZs are seen as key drivers of industrial and economic growth, 
which through specific support mechanism, special infrastructure and incentives will 
encourage foreign direct investment, extend export promotion, encourage labour absorbing 
employment and promote industrial growth. The Act defines SEZs as “an economic 
development tool to promote national economic growth and exports by using support 
measures in order to attract targeted foreign and domestic investments and technology” (RSA, 
2014: 8). Importantly, while the government has separately identified a series of potential 
SEZs, the Act also allows government agencies, municipalities and public-private 
partnerships acting alone or independently to apply to the government to designate an SEZ. 

 
Urbani izziv, volume 25, supplement, 2014 (special issue) 
S29
The Act provides for different categories of SEZs to be established, these include: free ports, 
free trade zones, industrial development zones and sector development zones. Interestingly 
the Act specifies that that the pre-existing but poorly achieving IDZs will be designated as 
SEZs (RSA, 2014). 
 
 
Figure 2: Proposed Special Economic Zones 
 
 
Prior to the passage of the Act and the actual designation of zones, but in anticipation of 
its approval the government allocated R 2.3 billion (approx. US $ 240 million) to support 
SEZs in the 2012 budget (CDE, 2012). In addition, during 2013 the National Treasury 
proposed a reduction in the corporate tax for firms setting up in designated SEZs to 15% 
(Buthelezi, 2013). In 2013 a total of 10 SEZs were designated (Buthelezi, 2013). Unlike the 
IDZs which were all set up as major port facilities adjacent to international ports, there has 
clearly been an attempt to scatter the points more evenly across the country in both areas of 
higher gross value added and in some of the more impoverished parts of the country (Figure 
2). A particular sectoral focus for each zone is identified which seeks to build on regional 
economic strengths and to give focus to proposed development, no doubt in sympathy with 
the concept of the clustering of like activities. The designated zones are as follows: Tubatse 
(platinum mining), Musina (petro-chemicals, agro-processing and logistics), Nkomati (agro-
processing), Rustenburg (platinum mining), Atlantis (renewable energy), Upington (solar 
power), Wild Coast (agro-processing), Dube trade port, Durban (agro-processing), Harrismith 
(agro-processing and logistics) and Nasrec in Johannesburg (industrial).  
 
It is significant to observe the overlap between half of these 10 zones and the priority 
districts as indicated in Figure 1 (i.e the former Homelands). This indicates the importance 
attached to developing the impoverished parts of the country, compared with the IDZ focus 
on points of international connectivity. This reality raises the question of what will need to be 

 
Urbani izziv, volume 25, supplement, 2014 (special issue) 
S30
undertaken to ensure the success of such zones in areas which suffer from structural 
disadvantages such as a low skills base, poor infrastructure, poor economic linkages and 
potential. In addition, a range of additional challenges can be identified: 
1) The extent to which the zones be internationally competitive as compared with other 
zones globally. Arguably, the 15% corporate tax reduction will scarcely allow for 
competition with better incentivized zones in Asia (Farole, 2011). 
2) The policy documents do not demonstrate how South African zones will differ from 
those in other parts of the world in terms of identifying their clear comparative and 
competitive edge. 
 
Assessing the Potential of SEZs in South Africa: Lessons from South Africa’s IDZs and 
Internationally 
 
The Industrial Development Zones (IDZs), which have been in existence over a decade, 
starting with Coega near Port Elizabeth in 2001 (Tang, 2008) and which share apparent 
similarities with the SEZ concept can be used as a point of comparison with the proposed 
SEZs to help assess the potential for SEZs to succeed. Despite initial enthusiasm regarding 
the role which IDZs might play in the South African space economy – only three were 
established, all at major port facilities – Coega (near Port Elizabeth), East London and 
Richards Bay, while a fourth, Saldanha Bay, also sited at a port was launched in 2013. 
Despite the relatively long track record of the first two IDZs, it is evident that their 
performance can be regarded, at best, as modest (Zarenda, 2012; Nel & Rogerson, 2013). 
 
Recent independent and government evaluations of IDZs have indicated the nature and 
causes of their limited success (McCallum 2011; CDE, 2012). According to a Department of 
Trade and Industry review by 2007 only 40 investors had set up in the three IDZs operational 
at that stage, investing some R11.8bn, whilst government investment had come to R5.5bn 
(CDE, 2012). In addition, whilst the Coega IDZ had received R3bn of investment in 
infrastructure, there were only 21 investors and only 2800 jobs (although some 27 000 short 
term/construction jobs had been generated) had been created (CDE, 2012). The East London 
zone had precipitated the creation of 1400 jobs (in addition to approximately 4000 short 
term/construction jobs), and the investment of R 1,5bn with 90% of firms being linked to the 
city’s automobile factory, many having relocated there from elsewhere in the country. The 
Richard’s Bay IDZ had only one investor who had created 300 jobs and invested R 650 mn. 
An overall assessment must be that the performance of South Africa’s IDZ programme is 
modest and falls short of the expectations of all stakeholders (Nel & Rogerson, 2013). 
 
During February 2014 the Minister of Trade and Industry argued that IDZs had 
underperformed because of their weak governance, poor incentives, poor stakeholder 
engagement and a spatial bias in terms of their location on the coast (South Africa Info, 
2014). Additional reasons cited for the poor performance of IDZs include: 
• The absence of special incentives for zone investors, making them unattractive to 
investors 
• The absence of a comprehensive policy framework and strategic planning and 
guidance 
• Weak governance arrangements, and poor coordination of government agencies 
• Exclusive government ownership and management – with no private sector 
involvement which differs from international practice (South Africa Info, 2014). 
 
 
According to McCallum (2011) while the IDZs do offer tax holidays and VAT exemption, 
the fact that they are not exempt from social regulation was a concern for potential investors. 
He argued that ‘the strategy has failed to produce notable gains to attract sufficient investors’ 
and that IDZs face an identity crisis being “caught between market-driven and Keynesian 

 
Urbani izziv, volume 25, supplement, 2014 (special issue) 
S31
redistributive logistics” (McCallum, 2011: 15). Given the apparent similarities between IDZs 
and SEZs it is debatable whether a new ‘title’ will ensure success.  
 
IDZs and SEZs Compared 
 
While the government and analysts have been critical of the success of the IDZ 
programme, which generated a total of only 42 investments in three zones (southafrica.info, 
2014), it is important to establish if the proposed SEZs will differ significantly from the IDZs, 
especially given that IDZs have now, de facto, become a sub-category of SEZs, and, by 
implication, to try and gauge if they might enjoy better prospects for success.  
According to the government an IDZ is “a purpose built industrial estate linked to an 
international air or sea port, which might contain one or multiple Customs Controlled Areas 
(CCA) tailored for manufacturing and storage of goods to boost beneficiation, investment, 
economic growth and, most importantly, the development of skills and employment in these 
regions” (SARS, 2014). As highlighted above an SEZ is defined in South Africa as a 
“geographical designated area of the country set aside for specifically targeted economic 
activities which are then supported through special arrangements and support systems which 
are different from those which apply to the rest of the country” (DTI, 2012b: 1). Key 
differences appear to be two. First, that IDZs focus on an international port versus the more 
open locations of an SEZ, as indicated in the list of currently designated sites. Second, that the 
IDZs primarily exhibit an industrial focus as compared with the more general focus on SEZs 
(though this may be slightly at odds with the suggested link between SEZs and DTI latest 
Industrial Policy Action Plan, see DTI, 2014). 
 
In terms of incentives, IDZ incentives have included exemption from VAT and import 
duties, access to Customs Controlled Areas, depreciation allowances, and a limited tax 
holiday (Tang, 2008; SARS, 2014). Proposed SEZ incentives include a 15% corporate tax 
rate (Buthelezi, 2013), the scope to design support measures as deemed appropriate for any 
zone (RSA, 2014), a building allowances (still to be specified), an employment incentive (still 
be specified), access to Customs Controlled Areas and a tax allowance (still to be specified) 
(DTI, 2014). Overall, although the SEZ incentives seemingly have yet to be fully spelled out, 
the lowering of the applicable tax rate, the employment incentive and the scope to design 
additional support, suggest that SEZ firms will be better assisted and that employment 
generation is a more explicit focus. While there is, in theory, scope to now establish zones 
away from the port cities, it is not clear how customs exemptions will be managed in 
locations distant from a ‘port of entry’. Several issues raised as concerns above, including by 
the Minister, do not seem to be addressed as yet in the SEZ documentation. Most notably 
these include how to ensure better governance and stakeholder involvement, how to ensure 
that national government does not dominate the process, and how to ensure better 
coordination of activities. In addition it would be difficult to argue that a comprehensive 
policy framework, of which SEZs are a part, has been formulated. 
 
Positive aspects of the process of designating the first round of SEZs include the scope to 
operate away from the core or coastal nodes, the identified sectoral foci of many of the 
proposed SEZs (such as on platinum related activities), which has scope, in theory, to 
encourage the clustering of economic activity and the apparent focus on both local and 
foreign investment and employment creation. What is not dealt with is how establishing zones 
would not lead to the relocation of existing South African firms to benefit from the incentives, 
such as took place under the previous administration, prior to 1994, leading to a ‘zero-sum 
game’ (Nel, 1999) and has been noted in the case of the current IDZs. Additional concerns 
regarding the more isolated sites include: how are the structural disadvantages of operating in 
remote, under-resourced, low skilled and isolated locations to be overcome such as the Wild 
Coast. The experience of the earlier SDIs which had similar sectoral foci is reminiscent of this 

 
Urbani izziv, volume 25, supplement, 2014 (special issue) 
S32
challenge (Bek et al., 2004). In addition, down-streaming and clustering of activity while a 
noble ideal, is often difficult to attain as indicated by the limited clustering which has 
occurred around the Richard’s Bay aluminium plants and the stainless steel mill at 
Middleburg, raising questions about the viability of some of the mineral related nodes (Nel et 
al., 2007). 
 
International Evidence 
 
The reality that there are over 3500 economic zones globally (including SEZs) and the 
fact that they have now been operating for over three decades in China provides a valuable 
international yardstick against which the potential success of South African zones can be 
compared and evaluated. This is an important consideration both academically and in policy 
terms given the reality that there are marked differences in the performance and ‘success’ of 
SEZs globally (Jain, 2008), with those in Africa being regarded as underperforming (Jauch, 
2002; Farole, 2011). 
 
Positive aspects associated with SEZs include their potential to leverage in FDI, to assist 
economies to globalize, facilitation of technology imports and job creation and improvements 
in infrastructure (Aggarawal, 2007; Yeung et al., 2009; Wang, 2010; Brautigam, 2011). 
Negative aspects include, concerns over what are frequently poor working and labour 
conditions, limited spill-over effects and linkages outside of the zones, their promotion of 
uneven development, the cost of the incentives to the host country and unequal level of 
integration into the global economy which they are based on (Brun et al., 2002; Aggarawal, 
2007; Jain, 2008; Palit, 2009; Anwar, 2014). 
 
China’s adoption of SEZs is often regarded as one of the key mechanisms which 
facilitated rapid economic growth and global market entry (Farole, 2011). However, one must 
not ignore the reality that policy has evolved in the country as has the location of zones, in 
response to global integration, shifting developmental and policy needs and broader level 
reform (Yeung et al., 2009; Zarenda, 2012). This clearly indicates the need to have an open 
and flexible approach in the planning, operation and evolution of SEZs and to relate SEZs 
directly to broader processes and policies of economic reform and change and not to treat 
them as stand-alone entities.  
 
Conclusion 
 
This analysis represents a modest contribution to debates around spatially uneven 
development, a phenomenon which “has always captured the interest of economic 
geographers” (Pallares-Barbera et al., 2012: S2). Currently, the South African government is 
clearly concerned about how it can address deep-seated geographical unevenness in the 
country. In this regard it is both realistic and important to observe the conscious effort on the 
part of government to come to terms with spatial inequalities and to try and find appropriate 
spatial interventions which can both address developmental backlogs and promote economic 
growth (Department of Economic Development, 2011; RSA, 2014). Within this context SEZs 
have become the most recent spatial tool which the government is placing its faith in. While it 
is apparent that policy makers have sought to address the short-comings of the IDZs and to 
put in place an intervention which is more attractive to investors, has an employment creation 
focus and seeks to focus growth in both growing and lagging regions, it is apparent that 
success cannot be assured.As the preceding analysis demonstrates, many of the fundamental 
challenges which IDZs experienced have not yet been addressed through the SEZ policy. In 
addition, there is little indication that SEZs are part of a clearly defined national economic 
strategy and process of change and reform as was the case in China (Zarenda, 2012). Unless a 
comprehensive, multi-faceted spatial strategy is conceptualised which allows for a range of 
interventions and targeted support it is difficult to envisage that the SEZs will make a more 

 
Urbani izziv, volume 25, supplement, 2014 (special issue) 
S33
substantive differences in the most impoverished areas than pre-1994 spatial interventions 
did.  
 
International evidence reveals that many SEZs underperform and fail to generate the 
envisaged returns. Indeed, Jauch (2002) commented with respect to SEZs in Africa that they 
held little prospect of solving the socio-economic problems of the region. While one does not 
want to prejudge the potential of SEZs in South Africa, if the experience of the notionally 
better-sited IDZs is to be improved upon, one would hope to see a significant shift from a 
policy focus to strategic planning since as Farole (2011, 263) cautions “SEZs can be 
expensive and risky projects, the margin for error is small, and successful zones take time to 
develop”. Further monitoring of the unfolding SEZ programme in South Africa is an 
important research challenge for the country’s urban and regional scholars.  
  
Acknowledgements 
 
Wendy Job of University of Johannesburg is thanked for preparing the accompanying 
maps. Financial support from University of Johannesburg is acknowledged. The research for 
this paper was undertaken during 2014 when Etienne Nel was a Visiting Professor at 
University of Johannesburg. 
 
References 
Aggarawal, A. (2007) Impact of Special Economic Zones on Employment, Poverty and 
Human Development. New Delhi, Indian Council for Research on International Economic 
Relations. 
Anwar, M. A. (2014) New modes of industrial manufacturing: India’s experience with special 
economic zones. Bulletin of Geography: Socio-Economic Series, 24, pp. 7-25. 
Bek, D., Binns, J.A. & Nel, E.L. (2004) ‘Catching the development train’; Perspectives on 
‘top-down’ and ‘bottom-up’ development in post-apartheid South Africa. Progress in 
Development Studies, 4 (1), pp. 22-46. 
Brautigam, D. (2011) African Shenzhen: China’s special economic zones in Africa. Journal 
of Modern African Studies, 49(1), pp. 27-54. 
Brun, J.F., Combers, J.L. & Renard, M.K. (2002) Are there spillover effects between coastal 
and non-coastal regions in China. China Economic Review, 13 (2-3), pp. 161-169. 
Buthelezi, N. (2013) Industrial Hubs. Engineering News, 21 June, pp.16-17. 
CDE (2012) Roundtable Special Economic Zones: Lessons for South Africa from 
International Evidence and Local Experience, CDE Roundtable No. 19, CDE, 
Johannesburg 
Department of Economic Development (2011) New Growth Path. Pretoria, Department of 
Economic Development. 
Department of Trade and Industry (DTI) (2011a) Industrial Policy Action Plan: 2011/12-
2013/14. Pretoria, DTI. 
DTI (2011b) Medium-Term Strategic Plan: 2011-2014. Pretoria, DTI. 
DTI (2012a) Draft Regional Industrial Development Programme. Pretoria: DTI. 
DTI (2012b) Special Economic Zones Policy and Bill. Pretoria, DTI. 
DTI (2014) Industrial Development Financial Assistance (Incentives). Available at: 
https://www.thedti.gov.za/financial_assistance/financial_incentive.jsp?id=59&subthemeid
=25 (Accessed 20 July 2014). 
Evans, M., Marsh, D. & Stoker, G. (2013) Understanding localism, Policy Studies, 34 (4), pp. 
401-407. 
Farole, T. (2011) Special Economic Zones in Africa: Comparing Performance and Learning 
from the Global Experience. Washington, The World Bank.  
Harvey, D. (2006) Spaces of Global Capitalism. London, Verso. 

 
Urbani izziv, volume 25, supplement, 2014 (special issue) 
S34
Jain, P. (2008) Special Economic Zone: A boon for Indian Economy. Available at: 
www.legalserviceindia.com/article/1251-Special-Economic-Zone.html 
(accessed 
12 
September 2011). 
Jauch, H. (2002) Export Processing Zones and the quest for sustainable development: A 
Southern African Perspective. Environment and Urbanization, 14 (1), pp. 101-113. 
Jourdan, P. (1998) Spatial Development Initiatives – the official view. Development Southern 
Africa, 15 (8), pp.717-725.  
McCallum, J. K. (2011) Export Processing Zones: Comparative data from China, Honduras, 
Nicaragua and South Africa. Geneva, International Labour Organization, Dialogue 
Working Paper No. 21. 
Marais, H. (2001) South Africa: Limits to Growth. London, Zed. 
Markey, S. (2011) A Primer of New Regionalism. Ottawa, Canadian Regional Development. 
National Planning Commission (2011) National Development Plan. Pretoria, The Presidency. 
Nel, E. (1999) Regional and Local Development in South Africa. Aldershot, Ashgate. 
Nel, E. & Rogerson, C.M. (2009) Re-thinking spatial inequalities in South Africa: Lessons 
from international experience. Urban Forum, 20 (2), pp.141-155. 
Nel, E. & Rogerson, C.M. (2013) Special Economic Zones in South Africa: Reflections from 
international debates. Urban Forum, 24 (3), pp.205-217. 
Nel, E., Hill, T. & Goodenough, C. (2007) Multi-stakeholder driven Local Economic 
Development: Reflections from the experience of Richards Bay and uMhlatuze 
Municipality. Urban Forum, 18 (2), pp.31-47. 
Oranje, M. (2010) Post-apartheid national spatial development planning in South Africa – A 
brief history. European Spatial Research and Policy, 17(2), pp.55-70. 
Oranje, M. & Merrifield, A. (2010) National Spatial Development Planning in South Africa: 
1930-2010. Town and Regional Planning, 56, 29-45. 
Palit, A. (2009) Growth of Special Economic Zones (SEZs) in India: Issues and perspectives. 
Journal of Infrastructural Development, 1 (2), pp.133-152. 
Pallares-Barbera, M., Suau-Sanchez, P., Le Heron, R. & Fromhold-Eisebith, M. (2012) 
Globalizing economic spaces, uneven development and regional challenges, Urbani izziv, 
23 (Supplement 2), pp.2-10. 
RSA (Republic of South Africa) (2011) Special Economic Zones Bill, 2011. Pretoria: 
Government Printer. 
RSA, (2014). Act No. 16 of 2014: Special Economic Zones Act (2014) Government Gazette, 
Vol. 587, No. 37664, Cape Town. 
Robbins, G. (2008) Reflecting on South Africa’s post-apartheid experience with spatially 
informed economic development programmes. Pretoria, Trade and Industrial Policy 
Strategies Report. 
Rogerson, C.M. (1999) Planning Spatial Development Initiatives: South Africa’s Industrial 
Development Zones. Urban Forum, 10 (2), pp. 259-273. 
Rogerson, C.M. (2001) Spatial Development Initiatives in Southern Africa: The Maputo 
Development Corridor, Tijdschrift voor Economische en Sociale Geografie, 92, pp. 324-346. 
Rogerson, C.M. (2002) Spatial Development Initiatives in South Africa: Elements, evolution 
and evaluation. Geography, 87 (1), pp. 238-243. 
Rogerson, C.M. (2009) The turn to ‘new regionalism’: South African reflections. Urban Forum, 
20, pp. 111-140. 
Rogerson, C.M. (2014) Reframing place-based development in South Africa: The example of 
local economic development. Bulletin of Geography: Socio-Economic Series, 24, pp.203-
218. 

 
Urbani izziv, volume 25, supplement, 2014 (special issue) 
S35
South Africa Info. (2014) SEZs to support industrialization, 20/2/2014. Available at: 
www.southafrica.info/business/economy/policies/sez-200214.htm 
(accessed 
20 
July 
2014). 
South African Revenue Service (2014) Industrial Development Zones. Available at: 
http://www.sars.gov.za/clientsegment/customs/Pages/Industrial-Development-Zones-
(IDZs).aspx (accessed 20 July). 
Tang, V. (2008) Zoning in on South Africa’s IDZs. TIPS Annual Forum, Pretoria, Trade and 
Industrial Policy Strategies. 
The Presidency (2006) The National Spatial Development Perspective. Pretoria, The 
Presidency. 
Tomlinson, R. & Addleson, M. (1987) Regional Restructuring under Apartheid: Urban and 
Regional Policies in Contemporary South Africa. Johannesburg, Ravan Press. 
Turok, I. (2010) South Africa’s challenge of shared prosperity, Local Economy, 25(4), pp. 
265-278. 
Wang, J. (2010) The Economic Impact of Special Economic Zones: Evidence from Chinese 
Municipalities. Unpublished paper, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, 
Hong Kong. 
Yeung, Y., Lee J, & Kee, G. (2009) China’s Special Economic Zones at 30. Eurasian 
Geography and Economics, 50, pp. 222-240. 
Zarenda, H. (2012) Special missing zones in South Africa’s policy on special economic zones. 
Stellenbosch, Tralac Trade Brief S12TB04/2012.