Educational Mobility of  
Second-Generation Turks
I M I S C O E  R E S E A R C H
Philipp Schnell
Cross-National Perspectives


Educational Mobility of Second-Generation Turks

IMISCOE
International Migration, Integration and Social Cohesion in Europe
The IMISCOE Research Network unites researchers from some 30 institutes specialising in 
studies of international migration, integration and social cohesion in Europe. What began 
in 2004 as a Network of Excellence sponsored by the Sixth Framework Programme of the 
European Commission became, as of April 2009, an independent self-funding endeavour. 
IMISCOE promotes integrated, multidisciplinary and globally comparative research led 
by scholars from various branches of the economic and social sciences, the humanities and 
law. The network furthers existing studies and pioneers new scholarship on migration and 
migrant integration. Encouraging innovative lines of inquiry key to European policymaking 
and governance is also a priority.
The IMISCOE-Amsterdam University Press Series makes the network’s findings and results 
available to researchers, policymakers and practitioners, the media and other interested 
stakeholders. High-quality manuscripts are evaluated by external peer reviews and the 
IMISCOE Editorial Committee. The committee comprises the following members:
Tiziana Caponio, Department of Political Studies, University of Turin / Forum for International 
and European Research on Immigration (FIERI), Turin, Italy
Michael Collyer, Sussex Centre for Migration Research (SCMR), University of Sussex, United 
Kingdom
Rosita Fibbi, Swiss Forum for Migration and Population Studies (SFM), University of Neuchâtel, 
Switzerland / Institute of Social Sciences, University of Lausanne
Agata Górny, Centre of Migration Research (CMR) / Faculty of Economic Sciences, University 
of Warsaw, Poland
Albert Kraler, International Centre for Migration Policy Development (ICMPD), Vienna, Austria
Jean-Michel Lafleur, Center for Ethnic and Migration Studies (CEDEM), University of Liège, 
Belgium
Jorge Malheiros, Centre of Geographical Studies (CEG), University of Lisbon, Portugal
Eva Østergaard-Nielsen, Department of Political Science, Autonomous University of Barcelona, 
Spain
Marlou Schrover, Institute for History, Leiden University, The Netherlands
Patrick Simon, National Demographic Institute (INED), Paris, France
IMISCOE Policy Briefs and more information on the network can be found at www.imiscoe.org.

Educational Mobility of Second-
Generation Turks
Cross-National Perspectives
Philipp Schnell
IMISCOE Research
Amsterdam University Press

Published with the support of the Austrian Science Fund (FWF): PUB 179-V22.
Cover illustration: iStock.
Cover design: Coördesign, Leiden
Typesetting: Crius Group, Hulshout
Amsterdam University Press English-language titles are distributed in the US and Canada by 
the University of Chicago Press.
ISBN	
978 90 8964 651 4
e-ISBN	
978 90 4852 318 4 (pdf)
e-ISBN	
978 90 4852 479 2 (e-Pub)
NUR	
747
© Philipp Schnell / Amsterdam University Press, Amsterdam 2014
All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of 
this book may be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise) 
without the written permission of both the copyright owners and the authors of the book.

	
Table of Contents
Acknowledgements
 15
1	 The Educational Mobility of the European Second Generation
 19
A Three-Country Comparison
1.1	 Introduction
 19
1.2	 Ethnic educational inequalities: A theoretical framework
 20
1.3	 Research questions and design
 27
1.4	 Structure of the book
 37
2	 The Worlds of Turkish Fathers and Mothers
 41
2.1	 Introduction
 41
2.2	 Periods of Turkish immigration to Austria, France 
and Sweden
 41
2.3	 Policy responses by the three receiving countries
 48
2.3.1	
Austria
 49
2.3.2	 France
 50
2.3.3	
Sweden
 51
2.4	 Turkish immigrants in five urban destinations
 52
2.5	 Comparing the relative positions of the parental 
generation across five cities
 60
2.6	 Conclusion
 67
3	 An Initial Look at Education Outcomes
 71
3.1	 Introduction
 71
3.2	 Education levels reached by young adults in Austria, 
France and Sweden
 71
3.3	 Accounting for compositional differences
 80
3.4	 Inter-generational educational mobility
 83
3.5	 Conclusion
 86
4	 Behind the Scenes: The Family Examined
 89
4.1	 Introduction
 89
4.2	 Parental involvement as social capital
 90
4.3	 Older siblings’ involvement as social capital
 106
4.4	 Do Turkish families muster more family support for 
education?
 111
4.5	 Conclusion
 116

5	 Beyond the Family: Peers and Teachers
 119
5.1	 Introduction
 119
5.2	 Social relationships with peers and teachers
 119
5.3	 Peer group characteristics of the Turkish second generation  123
5.4	 Student-teacher relationships among the Turkish second 
generation
 128
5.5	 Peers and teachers as mediating actors in processes of 
educational attainment
 130
5.6	 Differences between the comparison group and second-
generation Turks
 136
5.7	 Conclusion
 140
6	 Navigating the System
 143
6.1	 Introduction
 143
6.2	 Education pathways compared – the perspective on 
institutional arrangements
 144
6.2.1	
France
 144
6.2.2	 Sweden
 149
6.2.3	 Austria
 154
6.3	 Conclusion
 162
7	 Interactions between Individual-level and Institutional-level 
Factors
 165
7.1	 Introduction
 165
7.2	 What causes inequalities in education careers within 
systems?
 166
7.2.1	
France
 169
7.2.2	 Sweden
 176
7.2.3	
Austria
 179
7.3	 The relevance of educational resources for mobility in 
education
 186
7.4	 Conclusion
 194
8	 Explaining Cross-national Differences in Educational Mobility
 199
8.1	 Introduction
 199
8.2	 Cross-national and cross-city differences in educational 
mobility
 202
8.3	 Explaining differences in educational mobility
 204
8.4	 Interactions between individual-level and institutional-
level factors
 211

	
Appendix
 219
PART A	
Survey samples, response rates and weights
 221
1	
The TIES survey in Austria, France and Sweden
 221
2	
Comparing the TIES survey with reference data
 226
PART B	
Measurement, analysis strategies and additional outcomes
 233
2	
The Worlds of Turkish Fathers and Mothers
 233
3	
An Initial Look at Education Outcomes
 234
4	
Behind the Scenes: The Family Examined
 239
5	
Beyond the Family: Peers and Teachers
 247
6	
Navigating the System
 250
7	
Interactions between Individual-level and Institutional-
level Factors
 251
Bibliography
 257
Other IMISCOE Research titles
 273


	
List of Figures and Tables
Figures
Figure 2.1	 Region of origin of the parental generation, by city
 55
Figure 2.2	 Percentage distribution of job status in quartiles of the 
ISEI index, parental generation, by city (%)
 63
Figure 2.3	 The parental generation’s host country language 
ability, by city (%)
 64
Figure 3.1	 Differences in education outcomes before (‘gross’) and 
after (‘net’) controlling for parents’ education levels, by 
city (odds ratios)
 79
Figure 3.2	 Long-range upward mobility in second-generation 
Turks, by city (%)
 85
Figure 4.1	 Mean and percentage distribution of the main 
indicators of parental support, by city
 93
Figure 4.2	 Predicted probability of leaving school early for 
second-generation Turks, by city and parental support 
index
 102
Figure 4.3	 Predicted probability of achieving a post-secondary/
tertiary education for second-generation Turks, by city 
and parental support index
 105
Figure 4.4	 Mean and percentage distribution of the main 
indicators of sibling support, by city
 106
Figure 4.5	 Predicted probability of leaving school early for 
second-generation Turks, by city and sibling support 
index
 110
Figure 4.6	 Predicted probability of achieving post-secondary/
tertiary education for second-generation Turks, by city 
and sibling support index
 111
Figure 5.1	 Perceived importance of peers in supporting studies
 124
Figure 5.2	 Mean and percentage distribution of the main 
indicators of student-teacher relationships, by city
 129
Figure 6.1	 Outflow rates for France (Paris and Strasbourg), by 
group (%)
 147
Figure 6.2	 Outflow rates for Sweden (Stockholm), by group (%)
 152
Figure 6.3	 Outflow rates for the comparison group in Austria 
(Vienna and Linz) (%)
 158

10
Educational Mobility of Second-Generation Turks 
Figure 6.4	 Outflow rates for the Turkish second generation in 
Austria (Vienna and Linz) (%)
 159
Figure 7.1	 Predicted probability of continuing in the academically 
orientated tracks at different transition points for the 
Turkish second generation and the comparison group 
in France
 175
Figure 7.2	 Predicted probability of continuing in the academically 
orientated tracks at different transition points for the 
Turkish second generation and the comparison group 
in Sweden
 179
Figure 7.3	 Predicted probability of continuing in the academically 
orientated tracks at different transition points for the 
Turkish second generation and the comparison group 
in Austria
 185
Tables
Table 1.1	
The main structural characteristics of education 
systems in Sweden, France and Austria
 30
Table 1.2	
Total numbers per group and per city in Austria, 
France and Sweden
 33
Table 1.3	
Age and gender distribution according to group and city
 34
Table 1.4	
Levels of comparison conducted in this study
 36
Table 2.1	
Numbers of Turkish citizens in Austria, France and 
Sweden in 1973, 1982, 1990 and 2006
 47
Table 2.2	 Years of immigration of the parental generation, by city 
(%)
 54
Table 2.3	
Provinces of origin of the parental generation 
according to degree of development, by city (%)
 57
Table 2.4	 Ethnic and religious composition of the parental 
generation, by city (%)
 59
Table 2.5	
Lowest and highest levels of education among the 
Turkish parental generation, by city (%)
 61
Table 2.6	 Family structure of the parental generation, by city (%)
 66
Table 2.7	
Schematic summary of the relative position of the 
first-generation Turks, by city
 68
Table 3.1	
Education levels of second-generation Turks and the 
comparison group, by city (%)
 73
Table 3.2	
Parents’ levels of education, by group and city (%)
 77
Table 3.3	
Ordered logistic regression of education levels (odds ratios) 82

List of Figures and Tables
11
Table 3.4	 Inter-generational educational mobility of the Turkish 
second generation, by city (%)
 84
Table 4.1	
Parental involvement measures in the TIES survey
 92
Table 4.2	 Correlations between the dimensions of parental 
support and family characteristics
 96
Table 4.3	
Early school leaving and achieving post-secondary/
tertiary education, by group and city (%)
 99
Table 4.4	 Binomial logistic regression of leaving school early for 
second-generation Turks (odds ratios)
 101
Table 4.5	 Binomial logistic regression of achieving post-
secondary/tertiary education for second-generation 
Turks (odds ratios)
 104
Table 4.6	 Correlations between the dimensions of sibling 
support and family characteristics
 108
Table 4.7	
Importance of parental and sibling support during 
compulsory school, by group and city
 112
Table 4.8	 Binomial logistic regression of achieving post-
secondary/tertiary education (odds ratios)
 114
Table 4.9	 Interaction effects of family support and the second 
generation (odds ratios)
 115
Table 5.1	
Ethnic composition of ‘street’ and ‘school’ peer groups, 
by city (%)
 125
Table 5.2	 Correlations between the ethnic composition of peer 
groups and perceived school segregation
 126
Table 5.3	
Peers without a diploma, by city (%)
 127
Table 5.4	 Binomial logistic regression of achieving post-
secondary/tertiary education for second-generation 
Turks controlled for peer characteristics and student-
teacher relationships (odds ratios and % change in odds)  133
Table 5.5	
Binomial logistic regression of achieving post-
secondary/tertiary education for second-generation 
Turks, controlled for peer characteristics, student-
teacher relationships and parents’ education and 
support (odds ratios and % change in odds)
 134
Table 5.6	 Peer group and teacher characteristics for the 
comparison group and second-generation Turks, by 
city (means; %)
 137
Table 5.7	
Significant findings on achieving post-secondary/
tertiary education for both groups (odds ratios and % 
change in odds)
 139

12
Educational Mobility of Second-Generation Turks 
Table 6.1	
Pre-school attendance in Paris and Strasbourg, by 
group (% and age)
 145
Table 6.2	 Typology of education pathways in Paris and 
Strasbourg, by group and city (%)
 150
Table 6.3	
Pre-school attendance in Stockholm, by group (% and 
years)
 151
Table 6.4	 Typology of education pathways in Stockholm, by 
group (%)
 153
Table 6.5	 Pre-school attendance in Vienna and Linz, by group (% 
and age)
 155
Table 6.6	 Typology of education pathways in Vienna and Linz, by 
group and city (%)
 161
Table 6.7	
Favourable and unfavourable conditions and practices 
for upward mobility in education
 164
Table 7.1	
Analytical strategy for analysing education pathways 
 167
Table 7.2	
Multinomial logistic regression of track chosen in 
upper-secondary education in France (odds ratios)
 170
Table 7.3	
Binomial logistic models of continuing in post-
secondary/tertiary education in France (odds ratios)
 173
Table 7.4	
Binomial logistic regression predicting track placement 
at the transition to upper-secondary and tertiary 
education in Sweden (odds ratios)
 177
Table 7.5	
Binomial logistic regression predicting track placement 
at the first transition to lower-secondary education in 
Austria (odds ratios)
 180
Table 7.6	
Conditional multinomial logistic regression predicting 
track placement at the transition to upper-secondary 
education in Austria (odds ratios)
 182
Table 7.7	
Binomial logistic regression predicting the transition 
into tertiary education in Austria (odds ratios)
 184
Table 7.8	
Main education routes for second-generation Turks in 
Austria, France and Sweden 
 187
Table 7.9	
Overview of individual-level factors (independent 
variables)
 189
Table 7.10	 Schematic overview of significant correlations 
between individual-level factors and education 
pathways for second-generation Turks in Austria, 
France and Sweden 
 191
Table A1	
Main characteristics of the TIES samples in Austria, 
France and Sweden
 224

List of Figures and Tables
13
Table A2	
Educational attainment and selected occupations 
of the Turkish first generation compared: Austrian 
Census and TIES samples in Vienna and Linz (%)
 228
Table A3	
Educational attainment of the Turkish second 
generation (aged 20-26 years) compared: LiZW and 
TIES samples in Vienna and Linz (%)
 229
Table A4	
Educational attainment of the Turkish first generation 
compared: Family History Survey and TIES samples in 
Paris and Strasbourg (%)
 231
Table A5	
Educational attainment of the Turkish second 
generation compared: TeO Survey and TIES samples in 
Paris and Strasbourg (%)
 232
Table A6	
Three main reasons for migration from Turkey, fathers 
(%) (Chapter 2, Section 2.4)
 233
Table A7	
Three main reasons for migration from Turkey, 
mothers (%) (Chapter 2, Section 2.4)
 233
Table A8	
Respondents still in school, by city and group (%) 
(Chapter 3, Section 3.1)
 234
Table A9	
EDU Codes classification for Austria, Sweden and 
France (Chapter 3, Section 3.1)
 234
Table A10	 Descriptive outcomes of main independent variables 
(mean, standard deviation) – second-generation Turks 
by city (Chapter 3, Section 3.3)
 237
Table A11	 Ordered logistic regression on education level 
(Chapter 3, Section 3.3)
 238
Table A12	 Descriptive outcomes of independent variables, by 
group and city (Chapter 4, Section 4.2)
 241
Table A13	 Binomial logistic regression of leaving school early for 
second-generation Turks (odds ratios) – sibling support, 
by country (Chapter 4, Section 4.3)
 244
Table A14	 Binomial logistic regression of achieving post-
secondary/tertiary education for second-generation 
Turks (odds ratios) – sibling support, by country 
(Section 4.3)
 246
Table A15	 Characteristics of education pathways in Vienna and 
Linz, by group (%) 
 250
Table A16	 Characteristics of education pathways in Paris and 
Strasbourg, by group (%) 
 251
Table A17	 Classification of education routes as a dependent 
variable for Section 7.3 
 252

14
Educational Mobility of Second-Generation Turks 
Table A18	 Multinomial logistic regression predicting education 
pathways, second-generation Turks in Austria (odds 
ratios)
 253
Table A19	 Multinomial logistic regression predicting education 
pathways, second-generation Turks in France (odds 
ratios)
 254
Table A20	 Multinomial logistic regression predicting education 
pathways, second-generation Turks in Sweden (odds 
ratios)
 255

	
Acknowledgements
On the journey that writing this book has been for me, I have benefited 
greatly from the support and encouragement of family, friends, teachers 
and colleagues. I was lucky to meet so many kind and helpful people on 
this journey that it would be impossible to mention them all in this short 
text. Even so, I would like to thank, by name, those who were essential to 
the writing of this book.
The journey began with Barbara Herzog-Punzenberger who trusted in 
me enough to select me as an ‘early-stage researcher’ for the international 
TIES project (The Integration of the European Second Generation), which 
brought about my move to Vienna. Without Barbara, I would not have 
written this book. She has always been an enthusiastic and encouraging 
colleague, and working with her has been a great pleasure. My work in 
general, and this book in particular, have gained greatly from her support, 
her unflagging interest and her astute critique. I am extremely fortunate 
that my participation in TIES was just the beginning of a long and fruitful 
alliance.
It was through Barbara that I met my PhD supervisors, Rinus Penninx 
and Maurice Crul. I say with deep gratitude that I could not have imagined 
better supervisors. They trusted in me and my work from the beginning, and 
kept me motivated right up to today. Our regular meetings in Amsterdam 
were always inspiring and stimulating – and they were always there to 
set me on the right track whenever I found myself floundering in detail. 
Through them, I learned how to focus on the broader picture. Their good 
advice, support and friendship have been invaluable to me on this path, 
and I hope our collaboration will last for many years to come.
Starting my PhD as a member of the TIES network made the first three 
years of my dissertation very enjoyable. It also allowed me to develop my 
research skills and reflect on my own project through the critical feedback I 
received. I would like to thank all the senior and junior academics involved 
in this project for their engagement, infectious enthusiasm and stimulat-
ing input. Their excellent feedback, insight and advice during intensive 
discussions at project meetings all contributed to the writing of this book. 
In particular, I would like to thank Ana Raquel Matias, Elif Keskiner and 
Frans Lelie. Ana Raquel made me feel at home in Paris and Amsterdam, and 
I appreciate all the moments we shared. It’s a great feeling to know that this 
bond will last. Elif was (and still is) helpful in so many important ways that 
it’s hard to list them all here. Her home in Amsterdam was always open to 

16
Educational Mobility of Second-Generation Turks 
me and her constructive comments improved my work greatly. Frans also 
deserves a very special place in these acknowledgements for her inspiring 
observations, warmth and support in its broad sense.
Many thanks also go to the people who assisted me during my research 
visits to Paris and Amsterdam. I spent almost six months at the Institut 
National D’Études Démographiques (INED) in Paris in 2008 and four months 
at the Institute for Migration and Ethnic Studies (IMES) at the University of 
Amsterdam in 2009. Special thanks go to my ‘host’ in Paris, Patrick Simon, 
for believing in my project and for being so helpful. IMES was always a 
pleasant and stimulating place to work, and I want to thank each and every 
one of my colleagues for their constructive feedback and for making me feel 
welcome in the IMES family.
Large parts of this book were written at my ‘host institute’ – the Austrian 
Academy of Sciences (ÖAW). Here, I would like to thank, first of all, Heinz 
Fassmann, the director of the Institute of Urban and Regional Research, 
for his interest and belief in my project. My deepest thanks go to Wiebke 
Sievers. From the very first day I joined the academy, her door was open 
to me. Without her, things would have been very different. I am infinitely 
grateful for the motivating and inspiring discussions we had over coffee and 
lunch and I am very fortunate to still work with and learn from Wiebke. 
I am indebted to Josef Kohlbacher and Ursula Reeger for their trust in my 
work and for introducing me to the field of urban studies. I really hope to 
have the chance to learn even more from them in future collaborations.
After completing my PhD thesis, I received invaluable feedback and 
suggestions from my PhD defence committee members: Hans Vermeulen, 
Hermann van De Werfhorst, Metin Alkan, Rosa Aparicio-Gómez and Sabine 
Severiens. Their insight helped me to improve the manuscript significantly. 
Moreover, I am extremely thankful to John Mollenkopf for his critical re-
marks on an earlier version of the manuscript, and to the three anonymous 
reviewers for their constructive feedback and helpful suggestions.
I finished the last lines of this book while working with Rosita Fibbi at the 
Swiss Forum for Migration and Population Studies (SFM) at the University 
of Neuchâtel. Rosita’s suggestions about some of the chapters helped me 
to think over my arguments and to improve them significantly. She also 
supported me in many other important ways, and I can say in all sincerity 
that I am extremely grateful for her endless encouragement.
Writing a book in a language that is not one’s own is always a challenge. 
But I was extremely lucky to work with Adrienne Cullen who edited and 
proofread my manuscript. Adrienne made the text more lively, and her 

Acknowledgements
17
valuable suggestions and additional comments truly enriched the final text. 
It was such a stimulating process and I am very thankful to her.
The completion of this book would not have been possible without fund-
ing. I am grateful to the following institutions for enabling the research 
presented in this book: the European Community Framework’s Marie 
Curie Fellowship Programme (2007-2010); the Institute for Migration and 
Ethnic Studies (IMES) at the University of Amsterdam (2010-2011); and the 
Dynamics of Citizenship and Culture programme group at the Amsterdam 
Institute for Social Science Research (AISSR) (2010-2012).
Finally, my deepest debts are to my family and friends. Special thanks go 
to my parents, Bruno and Marlies Schnell, who never stopped encouraging 
me to do something that I really liked; and my sister, Christina, who was 
with me every day even though we live far apart. I am very lucky to have so 
many great friends spread across many places in Europe. I want to thank 
all of them for being with me every step of the way. I am thinking above 
all of Alejandro, Andrea, Bastian, Boris, Davide, Dirk, Florian, Julia, Lukas, 
Nina, Olli, Philip, Raquel and Sandra.
Last but not least, more than my deepest gratitude goes to my wife Sema. 
We shared almost all moments of this journey together, and I can hardly 
express how great a fortune this has been for me. These past five years 
would not have been what they were without you.
Vienna, February 2014


1	
The Educational Mobility of the 
European Second Generation
A Three-Country Comparison
1.1	
Introduction
Children of post-war immigrants are leaving school and entering the labour 
market in increasing numbers in most of the countries of north-west Europe. 
Their achievements and the opportunities available to them in those coun-
tries are often regarded as the ‘litmus test’ not just for integration, but for the 
success or failure of policies in this field (Penninx 2003: 2). The experiences 
of these children may provide a clearer indication of the long-term prospects 
for integration into society than do the experiences of the first generation, 
their parents. Those who arrived in Europe during the post-war period were 
mainly recruited as cheap labour and may have had difficulties in adjusting 
because of the ‘negative entry effect’ (Reitz & Somerville 2004: 386) that 
arises from issues such as a lack of language proficiency, lack of academic 
qualifications, or structural barriers in the labour market. Therefore, the 
difficulties experienced by the second generation may be a truer reflection 
of whether or not there are real, long-term structural problems with the 
integration process. At the same time, the difficulties they face may also 
give a more accurate picture of the unequal opportunities than did the 
difficulties experienced by their immigrant parents.
The key arena in which to examine the integration of immigrant youth 
is educational achievement and attainment (Thomson & Crul 2007; Crul 
& Vermeulen 2006; Zhou 1999). The educational attainment of second-
generation immigrant students in Europe’s knowledge-based societies is 
an important determinant of their subsequent life chances – their occupa-
tional and economic attainment as well as their general well-being. School 
qualifications and university degrees are often regarded as entry tickets 
to specific positions in the labour market. And although the relationship 
between school certificates and labour market attainment is by no means 
straightforward, the likelihood of achieving certain positions is increased 
significantly by formal qualifications, especially in a European context 
(Allmendinger 1989a).
Investigating the educational disadvantages faced by the descendants of 
immigrants in Europe comes with a number of methodological problems. 

20
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
There are no official estimates of the size of the second-generation popula-
tion in most European countries (Crul & Vermeulen 2003; EFFNATIS 2003; 
Heath, Rothon & Kilpi 2008). As well as that, it is very difficult to identify 
members of the second generation in the available data sources. While some 
countries provide detailed information on the country of origin of the second 
generation’s parents (Sweden, for example), other countries explicitly prohibit 
questions about race or ethnicity in official statistics (France, for example). A 
further problem occurs as a result of differing definitions of second genera-
tions in various national studies. Some studies include those born in the 
destination country, both of whose parents were born abroad. Others include 
those with one parent born abroad, while a third group even includes the 
children of immigrants who migrated before the start of compulsory educa-
tion. But regardless of these methodological caveats, fairly stable patterns 
have been documented by various national studies. Children of immigrants 
whose parents originate in less-developed non-European countries are pre-
dominantly found to perform below their respective majority groups (see 
Kristen & Granato 2004; Phalet, Deboosere & Bastiaenssen 2007).
The most disadvantaged group are the children of Turkish immigrants, 
one of the largest immigrant groups in north-west Europe (Crul & Vermeu-
len 2003, 2006). There appears to be a relatively high level of disadvantage 
experienced by second-generation Turks during compulsory schooling, in 
parallel with a higher tendency to drop out or repeat grades, lower school 
attainment rates, and generally lower levels of access to higher education 
(Dustmann, Frattini & Lanzara 2012; Heath et al. 2008). Although these 
patterns are evident in most European countries, first comparative studies 
point towards remarkable differences in the size of these disadvantages for 
second-generation groups across the various countries.
Even though studies and reports on the educational disadvantage 
between second-generation Turks and the majority of students in their 
countries continue to be published, the discussion about why the educa-
tional success of second-generation Turks is greater in some countries than 
in others is still lagging substantially behind.
1.2	
Ethnic educational inequalities: A theoretical framework
Individual-level determinants and mechanisms
In the sociology of education, three main groups have been identified 
as influencing the educational success of students: families, peers and 

The Educational Mobility of the European Second Generation
21
teachers. Beginning with families, parents have attracted the most atten-
tion. They are central to the socialisation process and have the strongest 
impact on their children’s education outcomes. In other words, the family 
of origin of a student is one of the most important factors in explaining that 
student’s attainment and success. Over the last four decades, the sociology 
of education has tended to focus primarily on social class inequalities in 
educational attainment and has brought forward two strands of explana-
tion: structure and culture. Both perspectives are frequently examined 
using capital-investment or resource-investment models in an attempt to 
explain the educational inequalities among different groups in different 
countries.
Structural explanations ‘tend to focus on the different costs and benefits 
facing families, in particular the inequalities in material resources’ (Heath 
& Brinbaum 2007: 291). According to the social class perspective, the cost 
of continuing in higher education is greater for children from working class 
backgrounds than for children from non-working class backgrounds. This 
structural perspective focuses on the availability of the material resources 
associated with social class status, such as financial means, living condi-
tions, access to extra-curricular training, the ability to pay for private 
tutoring and access to desegregated schools (Nauck 2011a, b). The structural 
perspective thus focuses on what the sociologist Pierre Bourdieu (1983, 1986; 
Bourdieu & Passeron 1979) has labelled ‘economic capital within families 
as mediating resource’.
Socio-cultural explanations tend to draw on a variety of indicators, such 
as schooling aspirations, familiarity with Western culture, and parents’ 
ability to help their children with school homework (Ogbu 1997). These 
types of resource – often defined as ‘social capital’ or ‘cultural capital’ and 
transmitted from parents to children – underline the issue of social repro-
duction and the relationship between social classes and groups (Bourdieu 
& Passeron 1979).
Capital-investment or resource-investment models are frequently ap-
plied to explain educational inequalities. If resources and different forms 
of capital are unequally distributed, educational inequalities will appear. 
Given that educationally relevant resources and forms of capital are highly 
correlated with the parents’ social class, both perspectives have attracted 
much attention in the sociology of education, specifically in terms of 
explaining educational inequalities.
Structural and cultural explanations have also been applied to explain 
ethnic educational inequalities (Brinbaum & Cebolla Boado 2007; Diefen-
bach 2004a, b; Marks 2005). Given the disadvantaged position of the first 

22
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
generation of immigrants in European labour markets, and their position 
predominantly in the lower social strata, there has been particular emphasis 
on the structural approach as a means of explaining the educationally disad-
vantaged position of the second generation (Crul & Holdaway 2009; Heath & 
Brinbaum 2007; Heath et al. 2008; Phalet et al. 2007; Van de Werfhorst & Van 
Tubergen 2007). Because parental social class has a considerable influence 
on a child’s educational attainment (through the transmission of resources), 
structural arguments primarily attribute differences in educational at-
tainment and achievement between immigrant origin and non-minority 
children to parental socio-economic status. Therefore, parental education 
and family income are probably the best indicators for explaining different 
outcomes (Kao & Thompson 2003: 431). This line of argument also traces the 
structural position of immigrant groups in different countries, examining 
when they arrived, the skills first-generation immigrants brought with 
them, and the fit between those skills and their ability to fulfil certain 
needs in local economies.
What motivates current debates is the question of how to describe the 
remaining variation in education outcomes, net of the socio-economic 
differences in the families of origin. Additional mechanisms beyond 
socio-economic background are needed to account for the remaining 
disparities in the educational achievement of the Turkish second-
generation. Some scholars blame – or credit – cognitive factors, such as 
lack of fluency in the majority language or parents’ missing information 
about the education system (Esser 2006; Kristen 2005). Others look at 
other structural characteristics such as the quality of external family 
networks. In particular, previous studies on the children of immigrants 
in the United States have revealed that outside family networks provide 
additional resources which can sometimes help to overcome disadvan-
tage (Gándara, O´Hara & Gutiérrez 2004; Gibson, Gándara & Koyama 
2004; Kao 2001; Stanton-Salazar 2001, 2004). Specifically, close friends 
and teachers have been recognised as significant agents in promoting 
the upward mobility of immigrant descendants, often because they 
can provide access to educational resources that the second-generation 
lack in their own homes. At the same time, these networks, relations 
and characteristics are also correlated with parents’ socio-economic 
backgrounds and vary according to origin groups in countries (Kao & 
Thompson 2003: 432). So potentially, the absence of these networks may 
serve as an additional determinant in explaining the disadvantaged 
position of minority-origin children in general, and second-generation 
Turks in particular.

The Educational Mobility of the European Second Generation
23
Institutional-level determinants and mechanisms
Most studies investigating differences in educational attainment and overall 
achievement of groups of second-generation immigrants are conducted in 
individual countries. As stated previously, having considered structural 
explanations such as social class origin, the debate about different outcomes 
often starts to focus on questions of ‘culture’ and group attributes (such 
as work ethics, attitudes, habits and beliefs) that are more or less related 
to the socio-economic structure of the country of origin (Van Niekerk 
2000: 4). In these single-country studies, immigrants and their children 
are confronted with broadly similar socio-economic conditions, while the 
opportunity structure of the host country is equitable. In these national 
studies, variations in important institutional elements, such as the local 
education system, are ‘held constant’ and are only studied in terms of their 
differing effects on children from a range of ethnic or social origins. Those 
studies automatically place the focus on the groups and consider structure 
and culture as the most logical explanation as to why different origin groups 
don’t experience the same outcomes.
But do these explanations help us to understand variations in educational 
achievement by the children of immigrants across a range of countries? 
And more precisely, how can the disparity in the educational success of 
second-generation Turks across Europe be explained? Over the past two 
decades, some scholars have argued that differences in national and local 
contexts may contribute to the explanation of diverse outcomes by the 
children of immigrants, given the very different institutional and political 
arrangements across Europe. European countries are geographically close 
to each other but are often structured very differently and thus may provide 
different ‘contexts of reception’.
Some international comparative studies of immigrants and their de-
scendants look at the role of national integration policies as well as the role 
of citizenship regulations and their underlying nationhood concepts, and 
suggest how these affect integration (see Brubaker 1992; Joppke 1999). Much 
of that scholarly literature categorises national models of integration ac-
cording to the threefold typology of citizenship regimes proposed by Castles 
and Miller (1993): differential exclusion, assimilation and multiculturalism 
(see also Greenfield 1998; Kleger & D’Amato 1995; Weldon 2006). National 
integration policies based on national norms, citizenship regulations and 
values shape the interaction between the host society and immigrants and 
also affect the socio-economic position of immigrants and their children. 
However, this assumption has been criticised on several grounds: first, 

24
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
nation states consist of complex societal and political structures, includ-
ing considerable internal heterogeneity. Integration policies vary greatly 
from region to region – especially in federal states – and often cannot be 
fused into clear national models. From this point of view, the influence of 
governmental integration policies, which in some cases tends to be rhetori-
cal anyway, should not be overrated (Muus 2003; Vermeulen & Penninx 
2001). Second, ideal types over-emphasise both internal homogeneity and 
consistency over time. In reality, patterns, at least in some fields of politics, 
are highly unstable and change frequently. Finally, differences in countries’ 
social and political contexts may be important when explaining social and 
cultural belonging or varying patterns of identity on the part of the children 
of immigrants, but they are less useful for explaining the socio-economic 
attainment of those children, or their educational achievement (see Alba 
2005: 40-41).
Instead of concentrating on the impact that integration regime models 
have on the position of the second-generation across various countries, a 
number of scholars have emphasised the structures and workings of specific 
national institutions that affect the integration of immigrants and their 
children. Thomas Faist’s study (1995) was among the first to highlight how 
important national institutional arrangements in the education system and 
local labour market structure were in explaining variations in outcomes 
between the children of Turkish immigrants in Germany and young people 
of Mexican origin in the United States. A second prominent example is the 
book, Warmth of the Welcome, by Jeffrey Reitz (1998; see also Reitz 2002) in 
which he points to the effects that different national institutional settings 
have on the socio-economic integration of immigrants and their children in 
Australia, Canada and the United States. Crul, along with various colleagues 
(Crul & Schneider 2010; Thomson & Crul 2007; Crul & Vermeulen 2003, 
2006), have recently argued that this institutional approach might be of 
substantial value in explaining variations in the position of the second 
generation in different European countries. Instead of explaining why some 
origin groups underperform in comparison with the majority group in their 
respective countries, they concentrate instead on how the institutional 
arrangements in various countries shape and create opportunities for the 
children of immigrants. In other words, the emphasis is less on the ‘structure 
and culture of immigrant communities’, and more on how institutional 
arrangements across different European countries influence the social 
mobility of the children of immigrants.
Applying this ‘institutional approach’ to the field of education, and using 
it as a framework within which to understand variations in the perfor-

The Educational Mobility of the European Second Generation
25
mance of children of Turkish origin across different European countries, 
the institutional arrangements of those countries’ education systems 
become central (Crul & Vermeulen 2003, 2006). These differ greatly from 
one country to another. They vary in a number of respects: the nature of 
the education received by young adolescents, the paths they choose during 
their school careers and the circumstances that affect their subsequent 
chances of success in the labour market.
There has been a good deal of interest in classifying education systems 
in a comparative way according to measurements relevant to a student’s 
achievement. The number of measurements varies according to the range 
of theoretical applications and their purposes (for detailed reviews, see 
Allmendinger 1989a, b; Crul & Vermeulen 2003; Hannan, Smyth & McCoy 
1999a; b; Van de Werfhorst & Mijs 2010). Among all of those, two measure-
ments have been emphasised as being of major importance: one, (external) 
differentiation in school types and tracks in secondary and tertiary educa-
tion, and two, nationwide standardisation of the education system. Both 
differentiation and standardisation are related to selection and allocation 
processes in and between schools (Van de Werfhorst & Mijs 2010: 408). 
Standardisation refers to the degree to which national governments define 
a standardised curriculum and nationwide rules (including what is taught 
in schools and what level should be achieved at each grade). Furthermore, 
it describes the standardisation of examinations as well as the regulation 
of financial and human resources for schools. Differentiation relates to 
institutional settings and arrangements in secondary and tertiary education 
(Shavit, Yaish & Bar-Haim 2007). A highly differentiated system has clearly 
stratified kinds of schools whose curricula are defined as high, middle and 
low. These differences vary according to the programmes and tracks offered 
to students and their various degrees of access to higher education. Recent 
research has identified three major institutional arrangements within the 
differentiation dimension in which European education systems differ 
(Breen & Buchmann 2002; Crul & Vermeulen 2003; Hannan et al. 1999b; 
Kerckhoff 2001; Shavit & Müller 1998):
a.	 Quantity of education: measured by a number of criteria, including 
entry age (for both pre-school and compulsory education), entitlement 
to pre-school places, the number of years of compulsory schooling, the 
maximum number of years of schooling, the number of years of education 
students typically obtain and the total number of hours students are 
educated in school (half-time or full-time training systems).
b.	Track differentiation (or the tracking nature of the education system) 
refers to the extent to which students are streamed into separate cur-

26
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
ricular tracks and even into separate types of school. In the early stages 
of compulsory education, national education systems essentially act 
as sorting machines for the labour market (Kerckhoff 2001). They track 
children into different ability streams, classes or even schools that have 
different degrees of emphasis on either academic or practical knowledge. 
Two basic ideas guide the tracking process: first, preparing students for 
the appropriate section of the labour market; and second, ensuring the 
homogeneity of children’s skills in each class. Most European education 
systems are comprehensive in lower-secondary school, while in upper-
secondary school, the degree of differentiation into tracks increases 
(Shavit & Müller 1998). Exceptions are dual-system countries, in which 
lower-secondary levels are already differentiated.
c.	 In addition to track differentiation, the degree of permeability defines 
the potential for moving between tracks. If tracks and courses are based 
in different institutions (e.g. work-based versus school-based), stronger 
boundaries prevent movement between levels (Arum, Gamoran & 
Shavit 2007; Kerckhoff 2001). Track differentiation in some countries 
is dependent on final examinations (pupil achievement tests), which 
usually take place at the end of each track and determine the degree of 
permeability.
In the sociology of education and in ethnic studies (particularly in re-
cent studies), the differentiation dimension has attracted considerable 
attention, specifically the discussion about whether, and to what extent, 
the institutional elements of education systems have an impact on the 
comparative equality of educational opportunities. In particular, track 
differentiation (early versus delayed tracking) has been brought forward as 
a major explanation for cross-national differences. Scholars in the sociology 
of education have hypothesised that early selection is associated with 
greater social class inequalities (Breen & Buchmann 2002; Breen & Jonsson 
2005); and Crul and associates have found that early selection leads to 
greater disadvantages for the second generation, among them children of 
Turkish origin (Crul & Vermeulen 2003, 2006). Similarly, differences in the 
quantity of education, in particular the age of entering pre-school, have 
been highlighted as important institutional variations. Taken together, 
these studies tend to indicate that institutional arrangements in education 
are closely correlated with the level of education the second generation 
– including the children of Turkish immigrants – is able to reach (Crul & 
Schneider 2010).

The Educational Mobility of the European Second Generation
27
1.3	
Research questions and design
Puzzles and lacunae
Despite growing interest in whether some north-west European countries 
are better than others at providing institutional arrangements that are 
favourable to the educational success of children of immigrants, and 
second-generation Turks in particular, there seems to be no empirical or 
theoretical consensus on this question.
Some scholars at the intersection of sociology of education and ethnic 
studies have argued that the institutional arrangements of education sys-
tems explain, to a large extent, the outcomes for children of immigrants, and 
their findings tend to support this statement (Alba, Sloan & Sperling 2011; 
Crul & Holdaway 2009; Crul & Schneider 2009a, 2010; Herzog-Punzenberger 
2006). Crul and colleagues, in particular, provided some comparative results 
that indicate that generic variations in institutional arrangements – such as 
early selection and both school and pre-school entry age – lead to greater 
disadvantages in education for second-generation Turks (Crul & Schneider 
2009a; Crul & Vermeulen 2003). However, as noted by Heath and colleagues, 
how large the differences actually are in the educational success of the 
Turkish second generation in different European countries is, as yet, not 
at all clear (Heath et al. 2008: 228).
Not all studies are inclined to support the suggestion that ‘differences 
in institutional arrangements matter’, because this pattern is not evident 
in all comparative studies (De Heus & Dronkers 2010; Hanushek 2006; 
Levels & Dronkers 2008; Levels, Dronkers & Kraaykamp 2008; Rothon, 
Heath & Lessard-Phillips 2009). Using data from the large-scale assessment 
study, PISA (Programme for International Students’ Achievement), and 
investigating differences in performance at school, Levels and Dronkers 
(2008) show that ‘western Asians’ – including many Turks – experience 
similar educational disadvantages right across Western Europe. Thus, they 
are inclined to deny the institutional arrangement argument (Levels & 
Dronkers 2008: 1422), showing instead that all European countries provide 
similarly unfavourable environments for the education of ‘western Asians’, 
irrespective of the structure of their education systems. However, it is pos-
sible that this broad definition of the region of origin may cause imprecise 
calculations.
Overall, systematic research that examines whether some north-west 
European countries provide more favourable institutional settings for 
educational success than others is ‘at a rather early stage’ (Heath et al. 2008: 

28
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
217). Furthermore, the size of the actual differences between countries is 
not yet clear. More standardised analysis is needed in order to understand 
variations in the educational success of second-generation Turks across 
various countries. Available research focuses primarily on the achievement 
differences between second-generation Turks and the majority group in 
those countries. The remaining studies that concentrate on cross-national 
variations often pay less attention to the role played by (or variations in the 
institutional arrangements of) education systems. And if they do look at 
those systems, they often reach conflicting results and leave both empirical 
lacunae and unsolved puzzles.
Aims and central research questions
The aim of this book is to investigate differences in the education outcomes 
of second-generation Turks in three north-western European countries: 
Austria, France and Sweden. It also aims to analyse those differences by 
examining potential explanatory factors at the individual and institutional 
level, as well as the interactions between those factors. ‘Interactions’ are 
defined as the interplay between the institutional arrangements of educa-
tion systems and various individual and group-related resources that are 
relevant for navigating successfully through those systems. On the basis 
of the comments and assumptions described in the previous section, the 
central research questions can be formulated as follows: How great are the 
actual differences between countries in terms of the educational mobility 
of second-generation Turks, and to what extent can those disparities be 
explained by variations in the institutional arrangements of those countries’ 
education systems, or by the specific characteristics of pupils, their families 
and their non-family networks? What are the interactions between factors at 
the individual level and in terms of institutional arrangements, and how far 
do these interactions serve as an explanation for cross-national differences 
in educational mobility for second-generation Turks?
Research design
This study was developed and conducted within the framework of an 
international project called The Integration of the European Second Gen-
eration (TIES). TIES is a collaborative and comparative research project 
that looks at the circumstances of children of immigrants from Turkey, 
the former Yugoslavia, and Morocco in fifteen cities in eight Western 
European countries. The participating countries are Austria, Belgium, 

The Educational Mobility of the European Second Generation
29
France, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden and Switzerland. The 
term ‘second generation’ refers to children of immigrants who were born in 
the country of immigration. The aim of the project is to provide empirically 
grounded research into integration processes in several different domains 
(for example, education, labour market position, the family structure and 
ethnic and religious identity). To achieve this goal, the TIES project carried 
out the first systematic survey of second-generation Turks, former Yugoslavs 
and Moroccans, based on a common questionnaire used across the eight 
participating countries. The TIES survey forms the empirical foundation of 
this study (see below under Data for more details about the survey).
Out of the eight participating countries, three countries – Austria, 
France and Sweden – have been selected as ‘cases’ for comparison. The 
selection procedure is justified as follows: in order to investigate whether 
the institutional arrangements of education systems matter in terms of 
explaining cross-national variations in the education outcomes of second-
generation Turks, I applied a ‘diverse case study design’ (Gerring 2007, 
2008; Seawright & Gerring 2008). A basic condition of such a framework 
for comparison is that a minimum of two countries are selected which are 
likely to represent diverse cases characterised by important variations in 
relevant aspects.
With respect to the structure of the education system, which is a major 
aspect of this study, Austria and Sweden have been selected from the pool of 
available countries in this first phase as suitable ‘cases’ for my comparison. 
Sweden has a comprehensive education system with late selection and 
full-day teaching. In contrast, Austria can be described as a country with 
a non-comprehensive system, early selection and half-day teaching. Thus, 
the two countries represent diverse and polar cases in this cross-national 
comparison, defined by large variations in the broad outlines of their educa-
tion systems. The diverse case study design I have applied is particularly 
useful when examining the argument that institutional arrangements of 
education systems may ‘make a difference.’ Previous studies were rather 
limited in evaluating this hypothesis because they compared countries 
that exhibit less institutional variation in their education systems (see, for 
example, Rothon et al. 2009). Finally, France has been selected as a third 
case for this comparison. Although its education system is comprehensive 
and resembles the structure of the Swedish system, a number of national 
studies have revealed that France has high-stakes testing at the end of com-
pulsory education, as well as selectivity across subjects in upper-secondary 
education, leading to what I call a ‘selective comprehensive system’, making 
France an interesting contrasting case.

30
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
Table 1.1 summarises the main characteristics of the education systems 
of the three countries, based on the theoretical classification outlined 
earlier. It shows the main institutional characteristics along the three sub-
dimensions of differentiation for Sweden, Austria and France.
To begin with the quantity of education, all French and Swedish children 
are considered to be entitled to a pre-school place, which is not the case in 
Austria. In those two countries, childcare has long been an integral part 
of the welfare state and of most families’ everyday lives. French children 
enter pre-school at the age of three, on average, while the entrance age 
is four in Austria and Sweden. All three countries provide a compulsory 
schooling phase aimed at securing the basic skills young students need in 
order to survive in society. Students in France and Austria start at the age 
of six, while Swedes enter primary school around age seven. Compulsory 
education lasts for nine to ten years in all three countries.
Table 1.1  The main structural characteristics of education systems in Sweden, France 
and Austria
Differentiation
Sweden
France
Austria
Quantity of education
Age at entrance (pre-school)
four
three
four
Age at entrance (compulsory)
seven
six 
six
Years of compulsory schooling
nine
ten
nine
Time of (first) selection
delayed
delayed
early
Track differentiation
Lower-secondary level
low
low
high
Upper-secondary level
moderate
moderate
high
Tertiary level
diversified
diversified
binary
Permeability (mobility between tracks)
high
low
high
Source: Author’s own compilation, based on Eurydice (2002, 2006a, b,c)
Differences in the institutional structures of the education systems are 
most evident when we look at tracking and the time of first selection. As 
shown in table 1.1, tracking and first selection have already appeared in 
lower-secondary education in Austria. Students are streamed into more and 
less academically orientated tracks at the age of ten (AHS-Unterstufe and 
Hauptschule, respectively). By contrast, students in France and Sweden fol-

The Educational Mobility of the European Second Generation
31
low the same integrated track until the age of fifteen. Their first streaming 
into academic and vocational tracks appears in upper-secondary education 
at the age of fifteen or sixteen. The Austrian upper-secondary education 
level consists of one academically orientated and four separate vocational 
and training paths (VET), with varying content and credentials. Among 
them is the apprenticeship path, which trains young adolescents for various 
professions (four days in a business and one day in school). In France and 
Sweden, tracks become most diversified in post-secondary and tertiary 
education by offering a variety of university-level and specialised post-
secondary tracks. In recent decades, both systems have moved to highly 
stratified systems of tertiary mass education in which specialisation for the 
labour market takes place. This contrasts with the Austrian education sys-
tem in which students follow quite distinct school types in lower-secondary 
and upper-secondary education. Only the academically orientated schools 
(AHS-Oberstufe and BHS) provide access to tertiary education in Austria. 
The high degree of early stratification leads to a generally lower attendance 
rate in the tertiary education sector when compared with other European 
education systems, such as those of Sweden and France.
Overall, the research design applied in this study allows the outcomes 
for second-generation Turks in tracked education systems to be contrasted 
with those in comprehensive education systems (Austria versus Sweden and 
France). It also allows the findings from countries with similar institutional 
education arrangements (Sweden and France) to be compared. At the same 
time, all three countries share the fact that the majority of the Turkish 
community migrated for work or family reasons and that they represent a 
substantial proportion of each country’s (former) labour migrants. Although 
this study is accompanied by the classic small-number (small-N) problem at 
the country level (Coppedge 1999; Lieberson 1991), it allows a systematically 
conducted, standardised, in-depth analysis of the role played by national 
institutional arrangements, as well as their interactions with individual-
level factors. This will allow light to be shed on the uncertainty of various 
explanations that seek to clarify cross-national variations in the success of 
second-generation Turks at school.
Data
Data that can be used to investigate research questions about the educational 
position of the Turkish second generation in a cross-national comparison has 
been scarce in Europe up to now. Most of the studies conducted in the field 
use either national representative surveys or comparative data sets, such as 

32
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
micro-census data, population register data or the European Social Survey. 
These data sources have different definitions of ‘second generation’, small 
sample sizes for children of immigrants in general, and further, provide 
limited information about education outcomes, relevant details on the family 
of origin or the experiences of second-generation Turks in school (Kalter 
2008). Over the past decade, a second wave of publications appeared in 
the field of education and ethnic studies using international large-scale 
assessment surveys, such as the Programme for International Student As-
sessment Study (PISA), Trends in International Mathematics and Science 
Study (TIMSS) or Progress in International Reading Literacy Study (PIRLS) 
(see De Heus & Dronkers 2010; Levels et al. 2008; Marks 2005; Schneeweis 
& Winter-Ebmer 2007). These surveys assess educational achievements 
in reading, mathematics and the sciences for students of different ages. 
Although these data sets contain an enormous amount of information on 
the respondents, their families and schools, they often lack information on 
the country of origin of the students’ parents – information which is needed 
in order to classify origin groups.1 Thus, the drawback of these studies is that 
they classify second-generation students of various origin groups in one 
‘category’ across countries, which leads to imprecise analysis of the actual 
position of specific groups, such as second-generation Turks, across countries.
This study overcomes the previously described data limitations by mak-
ing use of the international TIES survey, a collection of data about the 
children of immigrants from Turkey (as well as from former Yugoslavia and 
Morocco) in fifteen European cities in eight countries, which was carried 
out between 2007 and 2008 (Crul & Heering 2008; Crul & Schneider 2010; 
Crul, Zhou, Lee, Schnell & Keskiner 2012). The participating countries and 
cities were Austria (Vienna and Linz), Belgium (Brussels and Antwerp), 
France (Paris and Strasbourg), Germany (Frankfurt and Berlin), Spain 
(Madrid and Barcelona), Sweden (Stockholm), Switzerland (Zürich and 
Basel) and the Netherlands (Amsterdam and Rotterdam). The full data set 
brings together almost 10,000 respondents. The term ‘second generation’ 
refers to children of immigrants who have at least one parent born outside 
the survey country (in this case, born in Turkey), but who were themselves 
born in the survey country and have had their entire education there. At the 
time of the interviews, the respondents were between 18 and 35 years old.2
1	
It should be noted here, however, that some of the participating countries collect information 
on the country of origin of the students’ parents, which makes analysis across origin groups 
possible.
2	
For details on the survey implementation and related information, see Appendix A.

The Educational Mobility of the European Second Generation
33
Table 1.2  Total numbers per group and per city in Austria, France and Sweden
 
 
Second-generation Turks
Comparison group
Austria
Vienna
252
250
Linz
206
234
France
Paris
248
174
Strasbourg
252
177
Sweden
Stockholm
251
250
Total 
 
1209
1085
Source: TIES 2007-2008
Because immigration is primarily an urban phenomenon, the survey was 
carried out in cities rather than in rural areas or small towns in the three 
countries this study concentrates on. The cities in question are Paris and 
Strasbourg in France, Vienna and Linz in Austria, and Stockholm in Swe-
den. In all three countries, only the Turkish sample of second-generation 
adolescents was used for comparison.
In each of the five cities surveyed, there was a comparison group3 whose 
parents were both born in the survey country. In these three countries and 
five cities, the survey was carried out by research teams from the Austrian 
Academy of Sciences (Austria), the National Institute for Demographic 
Studies (France) and the Centre for Research into International Migration 
and Ethnic Relations (Sweden). Although all three national research teams 
aimed to achieve a common target of N = 250 per group and city for the TIES 
survey, not all the teams could achieve the targeted size for each group (see 
Appendix A for further details). Table 1.2 provides a detailed overview of 
the final sample sizes per city and per group. Taken together, the empirical 
analyses presented throughout this study are based on a total sample of 
2,294 respondents.
3	
Within this study, I use the term ‘comparison group’ instead of the frequently applied label 
‘natives’ for two reasons: First, second-generation Turks are, by definition, native born and a 
great majority holds the nationality of the country of their birth (Crul & Heering 2008: 20). 
Secondly, although the comparison group is defined as having both parents born within the 
survey country, some of them might be of mixed ethnic background themselves. This group 
could theoretically include third-generation immigrants, which is why the term ‘comparison 
group’ does more justice.

34
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
Table 1.3  Age and gender distribution according to group and city
 
 
 
Group
2nd generation Turks
Comparison group
 
 
 
 
Men
Women
Men
Women
Austria
Vienna
Gender 
distribution 
in %
43.3
56.6
53.2
46.8
Age (mean)
in years
23.4
23.4
26.9
24.6
std dev.
4.7
4.2
5.0
5.1
N.
143
109
133
117
Linz
Gender 
distribution
in %
49.5
50.5
40.2
59.8
Age (mean)
in years
24.6
24.5
25.2
25.3
std dev.
5.0
5.2
5.1
5.1
N.
102
104
94
140
France
Paris
Gender 
distribution
in %
48.8
51.2
47.1
52.9
Age (mean)
in years
22.3
23.0
27.4
26.4
std dev.
4.2
4.5
5.5
4.9
N.
121
127
82
92
Strasbourg
Gender 
distribution
in %
38.5
61.5
45.7
54.2
Age (mean)
in years
24.3
24.6
25.5
26.8
std dev.
4.6
4.9
5.3
5.3
N.
97
155
81
96
Sweden Stockholm
Gender 
distribution
in %
49.4
50.6
49.2
50.8
Age (mean)
in years
25.7
25.7
27.9
28.1
std dev.
4.7
4.4
5.2
5.1
N.
124
127
123
127
Source: TIES 2007-2008
Notes: 2nd generation Turks=Second-generation Turks. std dev.=Standard deviation. N.=number.
Table 1.3 shows the gender and age distribution of second-generation Turks 
and the comparison group across the three countries and five cities based on 
the TIES survey. In Strasbourg and Vienna, slightly more male respondents 
of Turkish origin took part in the survey. In Linz, there were more male 
participants in the comparison group. Samples from the other cities showed 
an almost equal gender distribution. A second point that can be gleaned 

The Educational Mobility of the European Second Generation
35
from table 1.3 is that second-generation Turks are, on average, one or two 
years younger than the comparison group in each survey city. Moreover, the 
standard deviations in age distribution are on average smaller for second-
generation Turks, indicating less variety in the age range. The age differences 
are particularly high in the French capital, Paris, where children of Turkish 
immigrants are the youngest in the whole sample (mean age between 22 
and 23). That generally younger age of the second-generation Turks may 
have led to a situation where higher numbers of students were still enrolled 
in school at the time of the interviews.
The TIES data set is very useful for the purposes of this study because it 
is the first comparative survey across Europe that was designed to study 
a wide range of characteristics as well as the situation of Turkish second-
generation youngsters from a comparative perspective by applying the 
same survey questionnaires across all participating countries. To be more 
precise, it contains standardised education outcomes, such as the highest 
obtained education level and the rate of early school leaving, which, among 
other factors, will serve as dependent variables in this study.
A second advantage of this data set is the richness of family-related 
information. The survey contains a wide range of questions related to 
the migration histories of Turkish fathers and mothers (for instance, the 
reasons why they migrated, the date when they migrated and the regions 
they came from), their situations in the receiving countries (their levels of 
education, employment situation, labour market participation and so on), 
along with information on the structural characteristics of their families, 
such as family size and type of household. Thirdly, several survey items have 
been included to capture family involvement during the education careers 
of the respondents. This information will allow the investigation of family 
involvement strategies and the different levels of social capital in Turkish 
families. The TIES survey even goes a step further than the information that’s 
usually available on family support and involvement in other surveys by 
providing information on older and younger siblings and their perceived roles 
in supporting the respondents in school. Outside the family context, external 
agents such as peers and teachers are evaluated by the interviewees in terms 
of their role during the students’ education. Taken together, the information 
listed above allows the investigation of a wide range of individual-level 
factors in the educational attainment process across the three countries.
The TIES survey is also particularly useful for a fourth reason: although it 
has a cross-sectional design, retrieving information at the specific time of the 
interview, an event-orientated observation design was used to prevent ‘single 
point’ or ‘snapshot’ data collection. Information was gained retrospectively 

36
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
via self-reported autobiographical statements, and aspects of individuals’ life 
courses were included in the survey. Evidence from life-course literature has 
shown that the past is an indispensable factor in understanding the present. 
Such a survey design provides an adequate opportunity for the study of influ-
ences at different levels and over time (Mayer & Brandon Tuma 1987; Mayer 
& Brückner 1989). This design allows the portrayal of education pathways 
from the first stage to the last stage in the system, and the examination of 
important transition points between education stages or processes of selection 
and differentiation. Thus, in this study, the limitations of previous studies can 
be overcome by both investigating education outcomes and by introducing 
processes and trajectories at different stages of the education career. Using 
the TIES data and implementing the ‘pathways perspective’, distinctions 
between success and failure will become more nuanced – which is crucial 
when evaluating the position of second-generation Turks from a comparative 
perspective (Crul & Schneider 2010; Schneider & Crul 2012). Thus, the TIES 
data allows the carrying out of a cross-national comparison by examining 
both the individual-level and the institutional-level factors that contribute 
to explaining the variations in outcome for second-generation Turks.
Levels of comparison
Two levels of comparison are included in this study, both of which contribute 
to the overall explanation of cross-national variations in education outcomes 
(table 1. 4). The outcomes of the Turkish second generation will be compared 
with the comparison group in the various cities and countries. The estimated 
differences between the two will then be compared across countries. This type 
of comparison can be referred to as the relative comparison. Comparing ‘in-
country achievement gaps’ across countries and cities allows an examination 
of the degree of equal opportunity provided by different education systems.
Table 1.4  Levels of comparison conducted in this study
 
Unit of comparison
In-city/
in-country 
comparison
Cross- city/
cross-country 
comparison
a)
Outcomes of second-generation Turks compared 
to the comparison group in each city/country
X
X
b)
Outcomes of second-generation Turks across 
cities/countries 
X
Source: Author’s own compilation

The Educational Mobility of the European Second Generation
37
The second level of comparison, absolute comparison, is in line with the 
methodological approach suggested by Crul and Schneider (2010) in their 
‘integration context theory’: comparing the education outcomes and path-
ways of second-generation Turks across countries and cities. Comparing the 
opportunities of the ‘same origin group’ across countries will shed light on 
how variations in national institutions, such as education systems, account 
for differences in outcome.
While the two levels of comparison just described are designed to 
investigate patterns of cross-national variation in the education outcomes 
of second-generation Turks, the data allows the inclusion of a third level of 
comparison. TIES conducted the survey in two cities per country, at least in 
France and Austria. The majority of the Turkish community in each of the 
three countries resides in the cities where the survey was carried out, and 
so they do indeed reflect the life chances and positions of the great majority 
of second-generation Turks in these countries. The study design is of great 
advantage for cross-national comparisons for the following reasons: where 
outcomes, patterns and mechanisms are shown to remain equal in both of 
the survey cities, evidence of country-specific trends has been found. On 
the other hand, where findings diverge between cities, it indicates that 
national education systems may work differently in local settings – an 
important dimension that is frequently ignored by cross-national studies.
1.4	
Structure of the book
The final section of this introductory chapter describes the outline of the 
book. Chapter 2 sets the groundwork by describing the migration histories 
of Turkish families in the three destination countries under consideration. 
It also asks to what extent first-generation Turks faced similar conditions 
when they settled in the respective cities when starting out on their new 
lives. The aim of this chapter is to provide detailed portraits of the ‘families 
of origin’ of second-generation Turks across the countries and cities. The 
underlying question for this chapter is as follows: Do second-generation 
Turks have similar starting positions across different countries when first 
entering school?
Chapter 3 then moves on to the Turkish second generation themselves, 
providing a first glimpse of education outcomes at the aggregated level. It 
asks to what extent the outcomes of the Turkish second generation differ 
in and across countries, and to what extent these variations can be ac-
counted for by the levels of education and the socio-economic position 

38
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
of their parents. Three different perspectives of comparison are applied 
to scrutinise the first trends of educational mobility experienced by the 
Turkish second generation. The highest level attained by second-generation 
Turks will be compared with their comparison group in each country and 
city. At the same time, the strength of the association between education 
outcomes and the parents’ levels of education will also be examined. The 
second comparison conducted in this chapter compares the education 
outcomes of second-generation Turks across countries and cities, and asks 
whether different outcomes can be explained by compositional variations 
in the Turkish first generation. Finally, by comparing outcomes across the 
generations, the last section of this chapter examines whether second-
generation Turks have made inter-generational progress.
Chapter 4 examines the extent to which the educational attainment 
of second-generation Turks is associated with family involvement. It in-
vestigates systematically parental involvement strategies and patterns of 
support by parents and older siblings in Turkish families. After documenting 
carefully whether, and to what extent, family support in the school-related 
activities of children is associated with the composition of families across 
countries, significant influences on education outcomes are explored 
through multivariate analysis. This chapter concludes by comparing in-
volvement and support patterns between Turkish and non-Turkish families 
in the three countries.
Chapter 5 sets out to explore networks outside the family, and relation-
ships with peers and teachers. More precisely, it investigates whether peer 
group characteristics and teacher support differ from country to country, 
and whether second-generation Turks are more reliant on these ‘outside-
family’ networks than are the comparison groups within and across coun-
tries. And it asks if agents outside the family, such as peers and teachers, 
play a significant role in the educational attainment of second-generation 
Turks in Austria, France and Sweden.
Taken together, chapters 3, 4 and 5 investigate individual-level factors and 
their associations with education outcomes, such as the highest educational 
attainment level or the proportion of early school leavers. These individual-
level factors have been examined within given education systems, and 
without considering the formal characteristics of those education systems. 
Chapter 6 changes perspective by moving away from individual-level ex-
planations and by addressing the extent to which the institutional arrange-
ments of education systems shape education pathways, and may contribute 
to the explanation of unequal outcomes between second-generation Turks 
and the comparison group. I describe how groups make choices in favour 

The Educational Mobility of the European Second Generation
39
of certain education options, and how these decisions are pre-determined 
by given opportunities, which, in turn, are defined by structural configu-
rations and institutional arrangements. In this chapter, not only do the 
explanatory variables change from individual to institutional ones, but the 
dependent variables also change from education outcomes to education 
pathways. In less abstract terms, this chapter describes in a comparative 
way the trajectories students take through education systems to their final 
diplomas, and how the structural settings of these education systems influ-
ence the academic attainment of second-generation Turks.
The two different perspectives (individual-level and institutional-level) 
are brought together in chapter 7. In this part of the study, interactions 
between individual-level and institutional-level factors are considered 
throughout the entire education career of second-generation Turks. I ex-
amine how the options that allow individuals and groups to achieve certain 
levels of education are affected by the institutional arrangements of educa-
tion systems, and how these options interact with individual resources in 
the three settings. This chapter is organised in two main sections. The first 
part looks at the explanation of group differences within systems by looking 
into the three countries separately and exploring the differentiation process 
between the two compared groups in those countries. The second part of 
the chapter explores interactions between institutional and individual-
level characteristics for second-generation Turks in Austria, France and 
Sweden, by exploring the role of internal and external family ties and the 
related resources that are needed for second-generation Turks to navigate 
successfully through those systems.
Chapter 8 is the concluding chapter. It revisits the central questions of 
this study and brings together the ideas outlined in the theoretical sections, 
as well as the empirical results. This final chapter also ‘weights’ the factors 
that have been found to be of importance for explaining variations in the 
educational success of the Turkish second generation across countries. The 
study concludes with final remarks on the divergent patterns of educational 
mobility displayed by children of Turkish immigrants in Austria, France 
and Sweden.


2	
The Worlds of Turkish Fathers and 
Mothers
2.1	
Introduction
The story of the Turkish second generation begins with their parents’ jour-
neys to Europe. Their mothers and fathers left Turkey for various reasons, 
from different provinces, through different channels, and over a wide time 
span. They arrived in various European countries where they faced a wide 
variety of circumstances as they settled in neighbourhoods, entered the 
labour market, started families, and started to put a shape to their lives. This 
chapter asks to what extent the opportunities available to first-generation 
Turks varied according to their ‘sending state’ and their receiving cities 
and countries, and to what extent this led to diverse starting positions for 
the second generation. It provides a comparative overview of the main im-
migration periods from Turkey into the three receiving countries: Austria, 
France and Sweden. The first part of this chapter assesses the causes of 
migration pressure in the sending state, Turkey, and briefly describes the 
main periods of migration to Austria, France and Sweden. The second part 
turns to the situation of Turkish fathers and mothers in the five cities in 
the three countries being compared. Under a number of selected headings, 
commonalities and differences are explored in the conditions the parents’ 
generation faced upon arrival. This chapter lays the foundations for what 
follows by providing detailed insights into the families of origin of the 
Turkish second generation.
2.2	
Periods of Turkish immigration to Austria, France and 
Sweden
The economic boom in Austria, France and Sweden: 1950-1964
From the late 1940s, all three countries experienced economic growth and 
development as their national economies recovered from the Second World 
War. As with elsewhere in Western Europe, Austria, France and Sweden 
soon faced labour shortages in specific industrial sectors, with demand for 
workers outstripping supply. In Austria and France, shortages of manpower 
were most acute in sectors such as construction, textiles and cleaning, while 

42
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
Sweden was experiencing an export boom. As a result, unemployment rates 
fell in the mid-1950s, and the recruitment of unskilled labour became central 
to the economies of the three countries.
Similar to other European states, such as Germany and the Netherlands, 
all three countries started to attract foreign workers to support their na-
tional economies. The Swedish government co-operated with trade unions 
and employers to recruit foreign workers, primarily from Finland, as early as 
the 1950s. Soon afterwards, the first bilateral agreements were reached with 
non-Nordic countries, namely Italy and Greece (Kjeldstadli 2007). At the 
same time, France explicitly recognised immigration in order to secure and 
re-establish economic recovery (Ogden 1991, 1995). The French authorities 
started to organise the inflow of foreign workers mainly from Spain and 
Italy. However, immigration from these countries proceeded more slowly 
than expected, and France gave citizens of their ex-colonies, Tunisia and 
Algeria, unrestricted entry after their independence (Seifert 1997).1 The first 
phase of foreign labour recruitment in Austria started later than in France 
and Sweden: in 1961, the Austrian authorities, trade unions and other social 
partners signed the first agreement to recruit a maximum of 47,000 foreign 
workers (Kraler & Sohler 2005; Volf & Bauböck 2001; Wimmer 1986b). That 
number was not reached, however, until bilateral agreements with the 
sending states were signed at the end of the 1960s (Bauböck & Perchinig 
2006; Matuschek 1985; Parnreiter 1994).
During this period, labourers from Turkey were relatively few in number 
compared to the inflow from southern Europe. The small-sized inflow of 
Turkish migrants who entered Austria, France and Sweden between the 
mid-1950s and the mid-1960s was organised directly by employers and in-
dustrialists whose contacts recruited workers on behalf of their companies, 
primarily in the west of Turkey (Abadan-Unat 1976, 1995; Karakasoglu 2007). 
For example, a construction company in Austria initiated the recruitment 
of Turkish workers via its own networks from the province of Adapazari 
in western Turkey. Out of a small town of just 3,000 inhabitants, around 
1,000 workers were recruited for a factory near Vienna in 1964 (Muradoglu 
& Ongan 2004). Similar stories are reported from France and Sweden. 
Companies in the Paris region recruited workers from the Turkish textile 
industry through networks in the western parts of Turkey (Kastoryano 
1990), while Swedish employers from the Stockholm area organised migrant 
labour via tourist passports, from Kulu, a small city in the Konya region in 
the early 1960s (Bayram, Nyquist, Thorburn & Bilgel 2009; Lundström 1991).
1	
Entry for citizens of former French colonies was restricted again in 1969.

The Worlds of Turkish Fathers and Mothers
43
Recruitment agreements with Turkey: 1964-1974
Turkish immigration to Austria, France and Sweden gained importance in 
quantitative terms after 1964 when all three countries reached nearly full 
employment, which triggered large-scale recruitment of foreign workers 
from Turkey. The main period of Turkish immigration to the three countries 
started with the signing of the bilateral recruitment agreement. Austria and 
Turkey signed this agreement in 1964, three years after Germany signed the 
first such agreement in Europe. France signed one year later, in 1965 (Bloch 
2007; Fassmann & Münz 1996). The Swedish national labour organisation 
founded recruitment agencies in Italy, Greece and Serbia in the mid-1960s 
before signing a bilateral agreement with Turkey in 1967 (Westin 2006). All 
three agreements were based on what was called the ‘rotation principle’, 
which defined the nature of labour migration as temporary. After a defined 
number of years, Turkish workers were supposed to return to their country 
of origin and be replaced by new manpower.2 During this period, the Turkish 
state explicitly favoured a rotation system so that unskilled and/or rural 
Turkish migrants would return from Europe with newly acquired skills, 
self-confidence and some savings, and would contribute to the economic 
and social development of the country thereafter.
But why was Turkey becoming a major sending country? The causes of 
migration pressure in Turkey were numerous. At a time when western Euro-
pean countries were facing rapid economic growth, Turkey was confronted 
with a growing population and the Turkish authorities encouraged the 
emigration of workers to Europe in order to ease pressure on the national 
labour market (Hecker 2006). However, as shown extensively by Akgündüz 
(2008: 55ff), the disparities between population and economic growth, un-
employment and poverty, were not great enough to explain the ‘push factors’ 
for migratory movements from Turkey. He lists two additional important 
factors that interacted with the above-mentioned demographic and socio-
economic factors: ‘First, the Republic of Turkey’s own Westernisation policy, 
perception of and new type linkages with the West and the subsequent 
impact of these on urban-modernised youngsters, in particular. Second, 
the role of previous migrations; that is, the impact of German (-speaking) 
refugee academics to Turkey and the migration of high-level professionals 
and students from Turkey to the West’ (Akgündüz 2008: 82-83).
2	
The terminology used in these agreements – guest workers or foreign workers – also signalled 
the basic premise that they would only stay temporarily (Fassmann 2009: 28).

44
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
While Austria and France attracted only a few hundred Turkish workers 
in the first years after signing the bilateral agreements, the numbers of 
Turkish arrivals topped 10,000 per year at the peak of the recruitment phase 
at the beginning of the 1970s.3 In Sweden, the inflow of Turkish workers 
was very modest compared to the number of other foreign labourers from 
Greece, Italy and Serbia. In fact, the recruitment agreement between Swe-
den and Turkey did not change the migration process (E.M. Sund 2004). 
While Austria and France received most Turkish workers through the 
regulated outward system organised by the Turkish employment service 
(IIBK), labour migration to Sweden continued as a self-organised process, 
as in the pre-agreement years (Lundberg & Svanberg 1991; Lundström 1991).
By the beginning of the 1970s, Turkish workers formed one of the largest 
groups of foreigners in Austria (Wimmer 1986a). They made up around 8 
per cent of the total foreign population. By contrast, the majority of guest 
workers in France still came from North Africa and the south of Europe 
(Wihtol de Wenden 1994), while immigrants in Sweden originated primarily 
from Finland, Italy, Greece and Serbia (Westin 2006). The Turkish inflow to 
Europe during this period was predominantly male. Female migration from 
Turkey increased for the first time in the early 1970s, when many women 
started to register to leave the country with their husbands (Akgündüz 
2008: 111).
Increasing outflows from rural areas in the late 1960s
The majority of the Turkish population coming to the West before 1965 origi-
nated from the most developed and modern urban areas of western Turkey, 
and did not come from the low ranks of the socio-economic hierarchy. They 
were comparatively highly skilled and rarely unemployed before leaving the 
country (Akgündüz 2008). That Turks from urbanised regions in the western 
parts were more open to migration and left the country for western Europe 
in higher numbers before 1965 may be explained by the fact that they were 
‘better off’ before migrating, and this reduced the risks and costs associated 
with the migration process. In order to counterbalance the outflows of 
urbanites and skilled workers, and to improve rural development in Turkey, 
3	
Compared to Austria, the increase of Turkish inflows was slightly delayed in France. After 
signing the bilateral agreement in 1965, the inflow of Turkish workers to France did not grow 
substantially. Some Turkish workers found their way to France via Germany during this period. 
As a consequence of the low total inflow of Turkish workers to France, state authorities stopped 
demanding labour from Turkey until 1969 (Irtis-Dabbagh 2003; Kastoryano 1986). After resuming 
the contract, immigration from Turkey increased rapidly from 1970 onwards.

The Worlds of Turkish Fathers and Mothers
45
the authorities restricted the emigration of skilled workers and established a 
quota for rural areas from 1966 onwards. Around 30 per cent of the workers 
sent to the West after 1966 were recruited in rural regions of Turkey.
At the same time, the willingness of Turkish citizens to leave their home 
country increased. Turkey was facing rapid population growth, and jobs in 
the West became more attractive because of the wage and social security 
systems there. A second important factor in the increasing willingness to 
leave Turkey was that earlier emigrants reported back in positive terms and 
appeared to have fared well. They presented ‘wealth’ during home visits 
and became role models for family and kin members, friends and former 
neighbours. Finally, the financial and psychological costs of the migration 
process were reduced at the end of the 1960s. Most workers who left Turkey 
in the late 1960s already had social contacts and networks in the destina-
tion states. These social networks determined the selection, location and 
composition of Turkish workers in the three receiving countries (Akgündüz 
2008; Karakasoglu 2007; Wilpert 1992). In this sense, social networks paved 
the way for chain migration, especially from rural areas after 1965.4
The recruitment stop and family reunification: 1974-1985
The recruitment period found its peak in 1973 when rising oil prices 
dampened the economic boom throughout Europe. A fight for jobs began, 
and trade unions responded in the first instance by protecting indigenous 
workers. As a consequence of the crisis and the ensuing economic depres-
sion, the demand for unskilled labour declined, which led to a halt in the 
recruitment of foreign workers (including those from Turkey) in many 
European countries. Austria banned the recruitment of new workers in 
1973 and was followed by France and Sweden in 1974. This also implied that 
many Turkish workers already residing in France, Sweden and Austria had 
to return to Turkey since their work permits were not renewed. Official data 
on return migration to Turkey after 1974 is almost non-existent, but, as a rule 
of thumb, one in three Turkish labourers returned from the West to Turkey 
in the period after recruitment ended (Akgündüz 2008). In line with these 
figures, the foreign workforce in Austria, Sweden and France markedly 
4	
It further explains why some regions within Turkey had higher rates of out migration 
compared to others and serves as an explanation for the frequently observed clusters of Turkish 
villagers in specific areas and neighbourhoods in the receiving countries. Many studies on 
Turkish immigrants in Western European countries have documented common regional areas 
from the homeland among Turks in Western Europe (Wilpert 1992), such as for example the 
aforementioned ‘Kulu community’ based in the Stockholm area (Lundström 1991).

46
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
decreased after 1974. In Austria, the recruitment ban was accompanied 
by a re-entry barrier for foreign workers and restrictions on tourist visas, 
which made it more difficult for labour migrants to return once they had 
left the country (Volf & Bauböck 2001).5
The halt to the recruitment of Turkish workers and the restrictions in 
some European countries changed the character of Turkish immigration to 
the three countries. Although labour immigration stopped, family members 
could still join established Turkish immigrants who decided to stay in the 
receiving countries. This led to growing family reunification and a rapid in-
crease in the number of Turkish family members in many western European 
countries in the years after 1974. Permanent settlement began. In Austria and 
France, the stocks of Turkish male immigrants declined rapidly between 1973 
and 1981, while the number of Turkish women increased (Bauböck 1986; De 
Tapia 2009). The increase in family reunification was particularly pronounced 
in France, where the arrival of the first waves of guest workers coincided with 
the end of the labour recruitment programmes (De Tapia 2006).
While family reunification was of major importance for Turkish citizens 
in Austria and France in the second half of the 1970s, the equivalent num-
bers remained small for Sweden. But in the same period, Sweden received 
two waves of Turkish refugees. The first wave arrived in the mid-1970s. 
An orthodox Christian minority (also known as Syriani and Assyrians) in 
Turkey and Lebanon fled their homeland and sought asylum in Sweden 
on the grounds of religious persecution after the first military coup in 1971 
(Westin 2003). In the late 1970s and early 1980s, the ‘Kurdish crisis’ boosted 
Turkish immigration to Sweden. Turkish Kurds, fleeing from repression 
and persecution in the south-eastern parts of Turkey and the urban areas 
around Istanbul and Ankara, found their way to Sweden in large numbers 
as political refugees (Ahmad 2003; Turan 1984). Austria and France were 
not on the list of major destination countries for these Turkish refugees as a 
result of their restricted entry policies in the early years of the 1980s, which 
were a consequence of the ending of recruitment.
One fact emerges very clearly from this preview: while Austria and 
France attracted primarily Turkish workers and their families between 
the mid-1960s and mid-1980s, the number of Turkish ‘guest workers’ in 
Sweden remained comparably small. In addition, unlike France and Austria, 
Sweden received significant numbers of Turkish refugees at the end of the 
1970s and beginning of the 1980s.
5	
Consequently, the foreign-born workforce in Austria was reduced by approximately 40 per 
cent between 1973 and 1975 (Kraler & Sohler 2005).

The Worlds of Turkish Fathers and Mothers
47
Table 2.1  Numbers of Turkish citizens in Austria, France and Sweden in 1973, 1982, 
1990 and 2006
Year
Austria
France
Sweden
 
Absolute numbers 
1973
a
16,423
50,200
5,601
1982
 
62,367
121,212
20,342
1990
 
104,130
168,000
25,475
2006
113,068
223,637
35,853
 
% of the total population*
1973
a
0.2
0.1
0.1
1982
 
0.8
0.2
0.2
1990
 
1.4
0.3
0.3
2006
1.4
0.4
0.4
 
% of the foreign-born population*
1973
a
7.8
1.3
1.4
1982
 
20.2
3.0
5.0
1990
 
24.0
4.0
5.3
2006
14.1
6.4
7.5
Sources: Austria=Statistics Austria (1971-1990 based on census data, 2006 based on population 
register) 
France=INSEE (1973-1990 based on census data, 2006=census annual survey) 
Sweden: Statistics Sweden (register data) 
Notes: a=Numbers for Austria from 1971, numbers for Sweden from 1975. *=Author’s own calcula-
tions, based on total numbers from sources cited above.
Table 2.1 supplements these findings with a quantitative perspective. It 
shows stock statistics for Turks living in Austria, France and Sweden, as well 
as the share they represented of the total and foreign population at four 
selected points in time.6 The first three reported years show the distribution 
within the time span of the main immigration periods outlined so far, 
while the last row shows the latest available statistics. In absolute terms, of 
the three countries compared, France attracted by far the largest number 
of Turks up to 1990. However, the ranking changes when we consider the 
share of Turks among immigrants in the three countries: in Austria, Turks 
represented the biggest immigrant community from the mid-1970s until the 
6	
The selection of the presented time points is based on the availability of comparable census 
data. France carried out the fewest census surveys and therefore served as a point of reference. 
As a result of methodological differences, such as the definition of the ‘immigrant population’ 
(e.g. by nationality or place of birth), census data are not strictly comparable across countries 
(see Fassmann 2009; Kraler & Reichel 2010 for detailed discussions). Nevertheless, they provide 
national trends in the growth and size of the Turkish population within each country.

48
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
late 1990s, while in France and Sweden, they constituted only around 4 per 
cent to 5 per cent of the total immigrant population over the same period.
In 2006, 35,800 and 113,000 Turkish citizens were registered as living 
in Sweden and Austria respectively, while the last French census counted 
223,600 Turkish citizens residing in France. We have to bear in mind that 
these figures do not include those who hold the citizenship of their receiving 
country. Especially in Austria, the number of naturalised citizens among 
Turkish immigrants has risen constantly since the late 1980s. Moreover, 
children born in these countries are also excluded from these statistics 
(except if they hold Turkish citizenship).
For children of Turkish origin, there are no official, census-based statistics 
available in any of the three countries. According to estimates for 1998 
presented by Goldscheider and colleagues, nearly 26,000 children of Turkish-
born parents were growing up in Sweden that year (Goldscheider, Bernhardt 
& Goldscheider 2008: 227; see Westin 2003 for similar numbers). In France, 
results from the most recent nationwide survey (the Family History Survey, 
1999) counted a total of 119,495 children of Turkish parents, of whom 86.6 per 
cent (103.483) were born there (Kirszbaum, Brinbaum & Simon 2009: 9). The 
first language of parents, former citizenship, or place of birth, is missing in 
the latest Austrian census data from 2001, making it difficult to estimate the 
size of the Turkish second generation who were born as Austrian citizens and 
are children of Turkish immigrants (Herzog-Punzenberger 2003b: 1126). In 
2010, Statistics Austria published official population statistics differentiated 
by ‘migration background’ (both parents born abroad, child born in Aus-
tria). According to their estimates, 99,100 people have a Turkish migration 
background (Statistik Österreich 2010).
2.3	
Policy responses by the three receiving countries
This section describes how the receiving countries responded to immigra-
tion waves by implementing policies designed to regulate immigration 
and control the living conditions of all migrants after the recruitment halt 
of 1973. These policies framed the conditions under which the Turkish 
parental generation lived in the three countries compared. In some cases, 
they imposed barriers, such as strict residence-permit regulations, while in 
other cases they opened up opportunities such as complete access to welfare 
benefits. These policies not only shaped the living situations of Turkish 
fathers and mothers, they also defined the context and political climate in 
which the second generation grew up and entered the education system.

The Worlds of Turkish Fathers and Mothers
49
2.3.1	
Austria
As described at the beginning of this chapter, the Austrian authorities 
designed their foreign labour recruitment system using the principle of 
rotation and return. Following this principle, integration was not part of 
the design since permanent settlement of migrants was never envisaged. 
After ending the recruitment of foreign workers in 1973, a ban on foreign 
labourers came into effect, and new laws were implemented to restrict 
immigration. From 1975 onwards, migration to Austria and the employment 
of foreign workers was regulated (and restricted) by the foreign employment 
law and the law governing alien nationals. The framework design of these 
laws, regulating the entry, residence and employment of foreign nationals, 
remained in place until 1990. Up to this date, immigration policy was purely 
conceived as labour market policy and continued to rest on the assumption 
of the temporary nature of the presence of guest workers (Perchinig & 
König 2003). Unemployment, minor criminal offences or deviant behaviour 
could lead to the termination of a residence permit and expulsion (Kraler & 
Sohler 2005: 9). This resulted in a high degree of insecurity among foreign 
nationals, including Turkish workers and their families. The integration of 
foreign workers and their family members was barely on the agenda before 
the mid-1990s.
By 1990, a major shift had begun towards immigration control as part of 
migration policy. With the collapse of Yugoslavia, a new influx of refugees 
and immigrants reached Austria. Austrian politicians responded by imple-
menting restrictive migration and immigration laws. Additional levels of 
control were added to the laws in order to restrict entry, while long-term 
migrants, such as former Turkish guest workers and their families, still often 
found themselves in precarious (legal) situations. Even if these reforms 
were designed to restrict new immigration, the new residence permit 
regulations also had an impact on long-term resident families who did not 
hold long-term residence permits. Additionally, the laws of 1992 and 1993 
introduced annual immigration quotas, including a maximum number 
of people allowed to enter for family reunification, which was set at a low 
level and led to stagnation in the inflow of family members (Jawhari 2000; 
Münz, Zuser & Kytir 2003). By 1997, however, the integration of long-term 
foreign residents, such as Turkish families, had taken its place on the politi-
cal agenda. The reform of the ‘Aliens Act’ addressed prior deficiencies by 
introducing for the first time a stepwise residence stabilisation process for 
long-term foreign residents. This included protection from expulsion for 
third-country nationals (including Turkish citizens) who had been living in 

50
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
Austria for more than five years. The integration packet was complemented 
by easier retention of work permits for immigrants. Since 2002, a number 
of laws governing the legal framework for migration have been reformed 
and supplemented by further control instruments, such as the obligation to 
attend German language courses for those who arrived after 1998 (Kraler 
2011; Kraler & Sohler 2005: 10-11; Nowotny 2007; Vogel 2007).
2.3.2	
France
Similar to Austria, France recruited guest workers in Turkey on the 
basis of the rotation principle, which did not conceive of foreigners as 
future French citizens. Nor did the French authorities implement any 
programmes to improve the situation of foreign workers in France before 
1974. With the oil crisis in 1973-1974, a new state secretariat for immigra-
tion was established to suspend further recruitment of foreign workers 
(Aden 2004). With the beginning of the family reunification trend, and 
the rapidly increasing influx of family members from Turkey and the 
south of Europe, new questions about immigration and integration ap-
peared on the French political agenda. On the one hand, foreign workers 
themselves demanded equal treatment in the workplace and in society. 
As a result, the first foreign workers’ representatives were appointed in 
firms, followed by union representatives for foreign workers in 1975. One 
year later, the links between immigrants and their home countries were 
officially recognised by transferring the responsibility for teaching the 
languages and cultures of those countries in French schools to teachers 
from the countries themselves (Wihtol de Wenden 1994: 70; 2011). However, 
the French state also tried to regulate increasing family reunification 
and placed further bans on new recruitment. Permanent residence was 
hampered by new policies that linked residence and employment: now, 
once foreign guest workers, such as Turks, lost their jobs, their residence 
permits would not be renewed.
In 1977, following the lead of West Germany, France offered a ‘return 
home’ payment for guest workers willing to leave. As in Germany, the over-
whelming majority of former guest workers refused the offer (Lebon 1979, 
cited in Ogden 1995). The trend towards new restrictions continued with the 
Bonnet Law in 1980, which introduced further tightening of entry require-
ments and periods of residence for foreigners. Those restrictive state policies 
were suspended from 1981 up to 1986 when, under the Socialist Party, equal 
treatment of foreigners and French nationals was re-emphasised. New laws 
reaffirmed the right to family reunification and freedom of association for 

The Worlds of Turkish Fathers and Mothers
51
foreigners.7 In the mid-1980s, the link between employment and residence 
was abolished, and a ten-year residence card was established which fostered 
access to middle-class professions for some former guest workers (Wihtol 
de Wenden 1994: 73). Around 1990, a new High Council of Immigration and 
a Muslim representative structure were installed. And finally, in the same 
year, the French state started to promote local integration of immigrants 
living in neglected neighbourhoods. In the following years, much of the 
public debate shifted to the organisational structure of Islam in France and 
the legality of religious symbols (first and foremost Islamic headscarves) in 
public domains. In 2004, this debate resulted in new legislation banning all 
religious symbols from public schools as a manifestation of the separation 
of church and state (Silberman & Fournier 2007; Wihtol de Wenden 2011).
2.3.3	
Sweden
In contrast to France and Austria, the Swedish authorities started to discuss 
the consequences of immigration – for Sweden but also for immigrants 
themselves – quite early. As a result, Sweden began to implement an im-
migration policy at the start of the 1970s. Since the Swedish government 
co-operated closely with trade unions, they agreed that wage differentials 
should be prohibited, and that guest workers should enjoy the same rights 
as Swedes. The Swedish state ensured social security entitlements to all 
foreign-born workers from the beginning. This was a major difference 
from most other western European countries that recruited foreign labour, 
including Austria and France. In fact, Sweden had already turned away from 
the classic guest worker, rotation system before stopping foreign labour 
recruitment in 1974. Swedish immigration policy was based on the idea 
that all inhabitants living in Sweden, and not only Swedish citizens, were 
covered by the welfare system. Moreover, the Swedish government treated 
guest workers as future citizens. By 1973, a right to Swedish language courses 
for immigrants had been established. Language courses could be taken 
during the working day and were offered and paid for by employers. Two 
years later (1975), and shortly after the end of recruitment, Sweden published 
its Immigration and Minority Policy. It consisted of three pillars (Hammar 
2004): first, ‘equality of social rights and equal opportunities’ in line with 
the traditional idea of the Swedish welfare state. Second, ‘freedom of choice’ 
which translated into special treatment policies and programmes, such as 
language training for mothers, further education classes and courses for 
7	
In addition, the expulsion of illegal immigrants was stopped.

52
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
immigrant children in the mother language in pre-schools and primary 
schools. The last of the three pillars was named ‘partnership’ and previewed 
what was expected to become active participation by immigrants at all 
levels of governance in Swedish society (Harzig 2004; Westin 2003). In 
order to improve the ‘partnership’ pillar, voting rights for immigrants were 
introduced in 1976. This model of immigration and minority policy, with its 
three main pillars, constituted the basis of Swedish immigration policy for 
almost three decades. Over time, it was slightly modified by three reforms: 
after the influx of refugees at the beginning of the 1980s, the Swedish parlia-
ment decided that refugees should settle in different cities across Sweden 
(‘the whole country strategy’). By 2001, dual citizenship for immigrants was 
allowed by the Swedish state (Bernitz & Bernitz Lokranz 2006). Then, in 
2003, a new law was passed outlawing discrimination of any kind, including 
unfair treatment in terms of ethnicity or religion (Benito 2005).
Taken together, the implementation of state policies in the three receiv-
ing countries indicates some remarkable differences between Sweden on 
the one hand, and Austria and France on the other. Austria and France 
recruited immigrants on the basis of the rotation principle, treating them 
as non-permanent (or guest) workers who were certainly not seen as future 
citizens. Having ended the recruitment of labourers from Turkey in 1973, 
Austria followed a rather strict political approach to reducing immigration, 
while the legal situation for former guest workers such as Turkish immi-
grants remained precarious until the mid-1990s. Residence permits were 
linked to employment status for a long time, while specific programmes 
to improve the rights and living conditions of immigrants in Austria were 
virtually non-existent. In the French context, integration arrangements for 
foreign-born immigrants and their families were implemented from the 
early-1980s on, but re-assessed later (Wihtol de Wenden 2011). By contrast, 
Sweden granted immigrants political and social welfare rights from almost 
the start of organised recruitment. It treated foreign immigrants as future 
citizens and specific programmes were put in place from the start of the 
1970s to improve the quality of their lives (see further Herzog-Punzenberger, 
Vera-Laruccea, Fibbi, DeSipio & Mollenkopf 2012).
2.4	
Turkish immigrants in five urban destinations
So far, the focus of this chapter has been on Turkish immigration at the 
national level. But in all three countries, migrants from Turkey settled 
primarily in cities. In Sweden, more than 85 per cent currently reside in 

The Worlds of Turkish Fathers and Mothers
53
the ten biggest industrial cities in the country, while more than half the 
entire Turkish population resides in the Greater Stockholm metropolitan 
area (Westin 2003: 993). In France, Turkish immigrants settled in the capital 
and in the Alsace-Lorraine and Rhone-Alpes regions and became highly 
concentrated in urban settings (Irtis-Dabbagh 2003), such as Paris and 
Strasbourg. In Austria, the majority of Turkish immigrants reside in the 
capital city, Vienna, followed by cities in the Vorarlberg and Upper Austria 
regions (Gümüsoglu, Batur, Kalayci & Baraz 2009). That is why the TIES 
study was conducted in the main receiving cities instead of in countries 
(Crul, Schneider & Lelie 2012). This section briefly describes the main im-
migration trends in the five cities under consideration: Stockholm, Paris, 
Strasbourg, Linz and Vienna. Here I will draw on information from the TIES 
survey, since representative comparable data from secondary sources at a 
local level is not available for the five cities.8
As is to be expected, the general patterns of Turkish immigration to cities 
do not differ much from the overall trend outlined up to now. The majority 
of Turkish fathers migrated between 1965 and 1974, while from the mid-1970s 
onwards, Turkish female migration to the receiving cities increased in the 
period of family reunification (see table 2.2). The years of immigration to 
the five cities are in line with the periods when the main reasons to leave 
Turkey were most compelling: around eight out of ten Turkish fathers left 
their home country between 1965 and 1975 in order to work in Vienna, 
Linz, Strasbourg or Paris (see Appendix B for detailed tables). By contrast, 
in the case of Stockholm, only one father in three came for reasons of work. 
Thus, the number of fathers coming to Stockholm during the recruitment 
period (1965-1973) for work reasons was only half the number coming to the 
selected receiving cities in France and Austria. Around 20 per cent of the 
fathers residing in the Stockholm metropolitan area today came as asylum 
seekers, predominantly in the late-1970s and early-1980s. The overwhelming 
majority of Turkish mothers who migrated to the five receiving cities came 
for family reasons, mainly family reunification or marriage.
8	
Using the TIES data for this purpose does not come without its limitations. The information 
on the parental generation presented here is based on the interviews conducted with their 
children and is not gathered directly from their parents. Some of the respondents did not know 
or refused to answer biographical questions about their parents. Thus, the analysis presented 
here is not always based on the whole sample.

54
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
Table 2.2  Years of immigration of the parental generation, by city (%)
Austria 
France
Sweden 
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
 
Father
Mother 
Father
Mother 
Father
Mother 
Father
Mother 
Father
Mother 
Before 1970
15.9
11.9
20.0
11.8
19.5
11.1
20.7
7.8
24.7
9.4
1970-1974
24.9
20.0
31.5
21.5
58.6
25.9
38.1
39.4
25.6
32.7
1975-1979
26.5
26.5
23.6
34.0
10.9
35.2
27.0
37.5
30.7
39.0
1980-1985
24.9
30.8
12.7
18.1
8.6
24.1
12.7
10.6
14.4
15.7
After 1985
7.9
10.8
12.1
14.6
2.3
3.7
1.6
4.8
4.7
3.1
N.
189
185
165
144
63
54
128
104
215
223
Source: TIES 2007-2008

The Worlds of Turkish Fathers and Mothers
55
Figure 2.1  Region of origin of the parental generation, by city
Source: TIES survey 2007-2008 
Note: Regions of origin in Turkey (from left to right; top to bottom): Marmara, Black Sea; Aegean, 
Central Anatolia, East Anatolia; Mediterranean and Southeast Anatolia.
Figure 2.1 displays the regions of origin of Turkish parents living in the 
five cities under comparison. The shading in the maps indicates the main 
regions of origin for both cities taken together in the cases of France and 

56
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
Austria,9 while the triangles show the absolute numbers for each city in the 
country. For example, in the Austrian case, between 30 per cent and 45 per 
cent of all Turkish fathers and mothers originate from Central Anatolia. 
Turning to city differences between Linz and Vienna, we find that slightly 
more Turks from Central Anatolia found their way to Vienna than to Linz. 
More generally, the great majority of fathers and mothers in all three receiv-
ing countries originate from Central Anatolia. But the maps also show clear 
differences between the compared countries and cities: while Austria and 
France attracted Turkish immigrants from almost all over Turkey, three 
main sending areas can be found for Sweden – Marmara, Central Anatolia 
and South-East Anatolia. Once we turn to differences between cities within 
countries, significant variations can be seen between Paris and Strasbourg 
in France, while they remain small between the two Austrian cities. Turkish 
parents living in Strasbourg originate more often from Central Anatolia 
and the Black Sea region, while Turks living in the Paris region today came 
more often from the western regions, such as Marmara and the Aegean.
Parents originating from the western parts of Turkey (Marmara and the 
Aegean region) most often came from smaller cities or towns, while the 
overwhelming majority from the middle and eastern parts of Turkey grew 
up in small towns or villages (Lessard-Phillips & Ross 2012: 91). Within the 
broad classification of regions-of-origin, some provinces were already more 
developed and modernised than others. Table 2.3 shows the provinces of origin 
of the parental generation classified according to their degree of development 
during the years 1965 to 1973. The development index was calculated by the 
Turkish State Institute of Statistics for each province in Turkey, and considered 
a wide range of indicators, such as the proportion of the population that was 
urban, the literacy rate, the number of university and high school graduates, 
income tax paid per capita, average number of workers per workplace and the 
proportions of agrarian workers and industrial labourers in the total workforce. 
The distribution of the index ranges from 19 for the province of Adiyaman to a 
maximum of 288 for Istanbul (index scores taken from Akgündüz 2008: 219).
The results in table 2.3 indicate clear city differences: two-thirds of parents 
migrated to Vienna from minimally developed or moderately developed 
provinces. The proportion is different in Linz, with almost half of the fathers 
coming from more highly developed areas, such as Istanbul, Izmir and Ankara. 
In other words, while Figure 2.1 indicated no clear differences in terms of 
regions of origin among the Turkish first generation in Linz and Vienna, 
variations appear in these regions when it comes to the degree of development 
9	
In the Swedish case, the calculation is based on Stockholm only.

The Worlds of Turkish Fathers and Mothers
57
Table 2.3  Provinces of origin of the parental generation according to degree of development, by city (%)
 
Vienna
Linz
Paris 
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Father
Mother
Father
Mother
Father
Mother
Father
Mother
Father
Mother
Highly developed provinces
19.9
15.7
47.9
39.6
28.9
26.6
17.2
18.2
18.9
20.8
Moderately developed provinces
25.9
24.2
21.9
26.2
29.4
32.6
22.4
25.0
5.6
5.6
Minimally developed provinces
54.2
60.1
30.1
34.2
41.7
40.8
60.4
56.8
75.5
73.6
N. 
236
223
169
149
235
218
232
222
233
231
Source: TIES survey 2007-2008 
Note: For simplicity, the development index of the province of origin has been summarised as high (288-101), moderate (100-60) and minimal (59-19).

58
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
of the provinces. Similar dissimilarities exist in France between the two 
survey cities: the majority of the Turkish community in Strasbourg originates 
in minimally developed or moderately developed provinces in their home 
country, while in Paris at least one out of three had been living in a more highly 
developed province. The latter finding is in line with the results indicated in 
Figure 2.1, since a great number of Turkish parents came from the western 
regions of Turkey, which are considered to be more developed provinces. 
In the case of Turkish parents who migrated to Stockholm, there is a clear 
polarisation: around seven out of ten parents came from minimally developed 
provinces, which are mainly concentrated in Central Anatolia, and just 20 
per cent or so originate from more highly developed areas. The majority of 
parents from highly developed provinces came from south-east Anatolia or 
Marmara and migrated to Stockholm at the end of the 1970s as asylum seekers.
Finally, the different regions of origin, migration reasons and migration 
periods are reflected in the ethnic and religious composition of Turkish 
fathers and mothers living in the five destinations today.10 As shown in 
table 2.4, the great majority of the Turkish parents in the two French and 
two Austrian cities belong to the Islamic majority group Sunnites and 
do not classify themselves as a specific ethnic origin group. The slightly 
higher share of Kurds in Linz may be explained by the greater number of 
fathers and mothers who came from bigger metropolitan areas. Although 
the main region of origin for Kurds was (and is) South-east Anatolia, Kurdish 
communities are also found in cities such as Istanbul and Ankara.
Turning to the ethnic and religious composition of the Turkish com-
munity in Stockholm, a greater level of diversity is evident, shaped by 
the different migration periods and reasons. The high share of parents 
originating from South-east Anatolia, who immigrated around 1980 for 
asylum reasons, often belong to the Suryoye and Kurdish minority groups 
from Turkey. The higher share of Suryoye minority members is also reflected 
in the breakdown of religious denominations, with more than 20 per cent 
Christians. The second biggest group of Turkish immigrants in Stockholm 
are parents who came for reasons of work from the regions of Central 
Anatolia and who are predominantly Sunnites.11
The overall trends presented so far show two clear results: first, the periods 
of immigration and reasons for migrating are in line with the overall picture 
10	 The information was gathered by asking their children about the language and the religion 
in which they were raised by their parents.
11	
A number of second-generation Turks reported that they were raised without any religion. 
Those numbers usually reflect processes of secularisation in the receiving countries and are 
therefore not discussed in this section.

The Worlds of Turkish Fathers and Mothers
59
that was painted in the first part of this chapter. The main push factors for the 
parental generation towards the cities of Austria and France were work reasons 
for men and family reasons for women. Second, the differences between the 
communities in the cities under discussion here may be explained by three 
factors: the recruitment channels, the demands of local industry, and the 
period in which the recruitment took place. The textile and clothing industries 
in Paris and the Ile-de France region directly recruited Turkish guest workers 
primarily from urban regions in the western provinces of Turkey (Kastoryano 
1986), which resulted in a higher share of Turkish immigrants from more devel-
oped Turkish provinces moving to live in the Paris area. The main industrial 
sectors in the Alsace region around Strasbourg consisted of the construction 
industry and steel and wood manufacturers. These industries primarily re-
cruited unskilled workers from the often less developed countryside through 
the official channels of the Turkish employment service in the early 1970s. A 
similar trend can be seen in Vienna at that time, where the construction and 
metal industries recruited Turkish workers from Central Anatolia and the 
Black Sea region (Wimmer 1986a). And the metal and steel industry in Linz 
had been booming since the beginning of the 1960s, which led to a growing 
demand for cheap foreign labour (Stadtler 1990), including Turkish workers.
Table 2.4  Ethnic and religious composition of the parental generation, by city (%)
Austria 
France 
Sweden 
 
Vienna 
Linz 
Paris 
Strasbourg
Stockholm 
Ethnic Composition
Turks
(not differentiated)
94.7
86.0
94.7
97.1
63.4
Kurds
3.7
12.0
3.6
2.9
13.5
Suryoyes
1.2
1.5
0.4
0.0
14.3
Armenians
0.4
0.5
1.3
0.0
0.8
N.
246
200
230
226
231
Religious Composition
Without religion
4.0
15.4
24.6
17.2
34.6
Christian
2.0
2.5
2.1
0.4
23.7
Sunnites
85.6
59.9
53.7
70.0
38.6
Alevi
4.4
16.7
5.7
4.8
2.9*
Other (Shia, etc.)
4.0
5.5
13.9
7.6
N.
252
206
244
250
241
Source: TIES survey 2007-2008 
Note: *=No further differentiation between subgroups was possible.

60
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
As mentioned above, over 20 per cent of the fathers arrived in Linz before 
1970. During that time, the Turkish employment service was recruiting its 
workers in the western parts of Turkey, which explains the high share of 
Turkish parents originating from more developed provinces, such as the 
Marmara region. Finally, in Stockholm, the great majority of the Turkish 
community is composed of parents who migrated for work reasons from 
Central Anatolia, a region with primarily minimally developed provinces. 
But compared to the Austrian and French cities, Stockholm also received 
a sizeable proportion of Turkish asylum seekers who fled from the more 
developed areas in the west and south-east of Turkey. This is a distinctive 
feature of Turkish immigration that does not feature as strongly in the other 
four cities of comparison.
This section has described the migration histories of Turkish fathers 
and mothers. It has primarily examined why, when and from where these 
parents migrated to the West. The different migration periods, reasons and 
regions-of-origin are accompanied by varying sets of resources that might 
lead to dissimilar starting situations for the children within and across 
receiving countries and cities. But, as argued above, the starting positions of 
the Turkish second generation is shaped not only by the migration histories 
of their parents but also by the varying circumstances their parents faced 
upon arrival in the receiving countries and cities. The next section looks 
into these conditions in greater detail.
2.5	
Comparing the relative positions of the parental 
generation across five cities
This final section compares the conditions encountered by the Turkish 
parental generation across the five cities under consideration. The aim is to 
describe the circumstances in which the second generation’s parents found 
themselves in each city after migrating. The focus is on five main aspects: 
educational attainment, labour market participation, language ability, 
family structure and residential concentration. It looks at opportunities 
and barriers faced by the first generation after migrating to the cities. It 
asks whether those conditions were shaped by their migration history and/
or the policies of the receiving countries and cities. And it also examines 
the first generation’s variations in circumstances and resources from city 
to city.

The Worlds of Turkish Fathers and Mothers
61
Educational attainment
The most important factor in explaining the social mobility of the second 
generation is family background (Kasinitz, Mollenkopf, Waters & Holdaway 
2008; Perlmann 1988; Vermeulen 2000), particularly the level of education 
of the parents. Beginning with the educational attainment of the parental 
generation, table 2.5 shows that many of the Turkish parents across the 
five cities have either no education at all or only primary-level education. 
As one might expect, most of the fathers and mothers with little or no 
education migrated at an early age to seek work – many had not completed 
lower-secondary school before they left Turkey. Table 2.5 also shows the 
highest education category at the end of the education spectrum, i.e., post-
secondary and tertiary education. The proportion of high achievers in the 
parental generation varies clearly from city to city. Two out of ten Turkish 
fathers and mothers in Stockholm are highly educated. Although some 
fathers and mothers in Vienna, Linz and Paris have high levels of education, 
Turks in Stockholm clearly outperform their counterparts. The group with 
the lowest level of education is in Strasbourg.
Table 2.5  Lowest and highest levels of education among the Turkish parental 
generation, by city (%)
 
No 
education
Primary 
education
Post-secondary 
education
Austria 
Vienna
Father
2.8
28.3
11.7
Mother 
8.2
48.2
4.5
Linz
Father
3.5
29.7
22.1
Mother 
12.2
35.5
10.7
France
Paris
Father
2.5
41.1
14.8
Mother 
7.6
43.2
9.8
Strasbourg
Father
2.1
52.5
4.6
Mother 
18.3
48.8
2.4
Sweden 
Stockholm
Father
5.6
38.5
20.4
Mother 
16.3
35.0
18.3
Source: TIES survey 2007-2008
A number of factors explain why there is such a variation in the level of edu-
cation from city to city. Two factors turn out to be of particular importance: 
first, parents who came from more developed (and often urban) areas in 
Turkey had good qualifications before migrating. This is especially the case 

62
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
for Turkish fathers in Linz, the parental generation in Paris, and parents 
who came to Stockholm seeking asylum.
Second, some Turkish fathers and mothers attended further education 
programmes in the host cities. In Stockholm, around 30 per cent gained 
their highest education level in the host city. The share of parents who 
attended further education programmes in the Austrian cities is only half 
that of Stockholm, while it is below 5 per cent for parents in the French 
cities. Hence, a substantial part of the cross-city variation in the education 
levels of the Turkish parental generation can be accounted for by varying 
participation rates and additional training across cities and countries. 
Sweden has a long tradition of devoting large resources to adult educa-
tion and labour market programmes, and the high proportion of Turkish 
fathers and mothers with Swedish diplomas reflects the efficiency of the 
‘freedom of choice’ pillar of the integration policy programme implemented 
in the mid-1970s – which included special education programmes aimed 
at awarding additional qualifications.
Labour market participation
As described earlier in this chapter, most of the fathers migrated to one of 
the five cities for work reasons. As we might expect, the great majority of the 
fathers worked in the local labour market while their children were growing 
up. The rate of participation in the workforce for fathers was around 80 per 
cent to 90 per cent across all five cities. Most of the Turkish families were 
single-earner households where mothers frequently stayed at home. The 
overall labour market participation rate for mothers was around 35 per cent. 
One exception can be seen in Sweden, where over 60 per cent of mothers 
were employed when their children were aged fifteen. That comparably 
high participation rate among mothers is in line with the generally high 
employment rate among females in Sweden.
Previous studies have indicated that the Turkish first generation is often 
concentrated in certain occupations and industries. Especially in Austria 
and France, where Turks were recruited for specific industrial sectors, they 
are usually blue-collar workers.

The Worlds of Turkish Fathers and Mothers
63
Figure 2.2  Percentage distribution of job status in quartiles of the ISEI index, 
parental generation, by city (%)
25.8
32.6
27.6
21.7
25.3
17.4
55.6
71.1
46.8
39.6
30.6
5.8
25.0
26.3
18.5
29.9
22.5
14.0
22.0
2.6
14.4
25.3
10.4
7.6
20.1
21.7
26.2
15.6
23.7
7.8
22.1
25.0
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
Father
Mother
Father
Mother
Father
Mother
Father
Mother
Father
Mother
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg Stockholm
1st Quartile
2nd Quartile
3rd Quartile
4th Quartile
41.3
22.4
34.2
34.5
45.0
18.1
6.7
17.2
Source: TIES survey 2007-2008
To gain insight into where the parental generation stood in the labour mar-
ket, the standardised International Socio-Economic Index on Occupational 
Status (ISEI) is used to describe the socio-economic status of occupations 
across countries (Ganzeboom & Treiman 1996). The ISEI scores for Turkish 
fathers and mothers in the five cities when their children were fifteen years 
old are displayed in Figure 2.2.
The first quartile (black bar) summarises the lowest quarter of the ISEI 
index, which consists primarily of unskilled labourers. At the other end of 
the scale, the white bar represents the highest quarter on the index. The 
percentage share of the parental generation within each quarter is also 
shown. The position of the Turkish parental generation in the occupational 
hierarchy shows three major trends: first, Turkish fathers and mothers 
in the Austrian cities and in Paris are primarily working in unskilled 
and blue-collar jobs (black and dark grey bar). Second, in Strasbourg, the 
percentage of parents working in jobs of very low prestige is the highest 
of all five cities. Almost half the fathers and around 70 per cent of the 
mothers who work are employed in low-prestige jobs. At the same time, 
around a quarter of the Turkish fathers are employed in jobs with very 
prestigious occupations. Third, the strongest polarisation can be found 

64
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
in Stockholm, where almost half of the parents work in jobs that have a 
low or medium level of prestige, while a substantial proportion of fathers 
and mothers have entered the upper part of the labour market, third and 
fourth quartiles taken together.
Language ability
In addition to the levels of education and occupational backgrounds 
of the parents, a third important factor, and one regularly highlighted, 
is familiarity with the language of the host country. Turning to this 
issue, we have to be cautious in interpreting the results because they are 
reported by the parents’ children. Nevertheless, one clear trend emerges 
when considering the outcomes for this issue: the ability of the Turkish 
parents’ generation to speak the national language varies widely across 
cities.
Figure 2.3  The parental generation’s host country language ability, by city (%)
19.5
38.4
15.9
19.8
29.9
52.3
34.9
57.2
4.4
11.8
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Father
Mother
Father
Mother
Father
Mother
Father
Mother
Father
Mother
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Austria
France
Sweden
%
Speaks the host country's language just a little bit, or not at all
Source: TIES survey 2007-2008
Turks in the French cities face the greatest disadvantages. One father in 
three, and more than every second mother, does not speak French well 
or even reasonably well. Interestingly, Turkish fathers and mothers in 
Stockholm seem to have a good knowledge of Swedish, since the rate of 
non-Swedish speakers is below 8 per cent (both parents taken together). 

The Worlds of Turkish Fathers and Mothers
65
As stated earlier in this chapter, a substantial part of the Swedish integra-
tion policy of the early 1970s focused on improving the language skills 
of immigrants. The Turkish first generation in Stockholm seems to have 
benefited from these programmes, as they show remarkable Swedish 
language skills. By contrast, the Turkish first generation in the Austrian 
cities show mixed results in terms of German language skills. On average, 
one in five of the parents, both fathers and mothers, speaks little or no 
German.
Family structure
Family structure is a highly relevant factor here, since schooling decisions, 
strategies and problems are most often discussed in the family home. Grow-
ing up in a nuclear family, with both parents available at home, probably 
benefits a child in terms of school support, help with homework and other 
related activities, compared with children from one-parent households. 
Of equal importance is the total number of children the parents have to 
care for. The larger the family, the greater the responsibility for the parents 
and the greater the financial means needed for schooling. Table 2.6 shows 
that the Turkish parents in the five compared cities have formed quite 
similar types of households and families. Overall, clear commonalities are 
found within the parental generation across cities with respect to living 
in married-couple families. On average, 90 per cent of the Turkish fathers 
and mothers are married and live in two-parent households. A second 
similarity can be observed when considering the family size. The average 
Turkish family has three or four children. However, when zooming into 
the Turkish communities in the cities, internal variations in family size 
are found, as indicated by the standard deviations in the mean number of 
children. The internal variety is especially high among the Turkish first 
generation in Strasbourg and Stockholm, in which around 15 per cent have 
six or more children.
When considering family networks as an indication of the wider fam-
ily structure, the great majority of the Turkish fathers and mothers have 
relatives living in the same city. As discussed earlier in this chapter, social 
networks determined the selection, location and composition of Turkish 
workers in the receiving countries, and the findings presented here denote 
patterns of chain migration through family ties among the Turkish parental 
generation in all five destination cities. The only significant exception is 
found in the Turkish community in Paris, where fewer than 50 per cent of 
Turkish families have relatives in the same city.

66
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
Table 2.6  Family structure of the parental generation, by city (%)
Austria 
France 
Sweden 
 
Vienna 
Linz 
Paris 
Strasbourg Stockholm 
Two-parent household (%)
93.2
93.0
95.2
92.4
87.7
Mixed parentage (%)1
4.0
12.6
8.0
7.8
– 
No. of children (%)
1
4.0
1.5
6.5
4.9
0.0
2
16.0
28.4
28.2
7.1
11.0
3
30.1
40.2
37.5
32.5
22.1
4
24.9
18.6
19.0
25.4
35.7
5
17.3
6.9
6.0
15.5
15.1
6 or more
7.7
4.4
2.8
14.7
16.1
Mean no. of children (standard deviation)
3.6
3.1
3.0
4.0
4.2
(1.4)
(1.1)
(1.3)
(1.8)
(1.6)
Have relatives living in the same city (%)
91.9
86.6
41.7
80.6
94.4
Source: TIES survey 2007-2008 
Note: 1=Only one parent originated from Turkey.
Residential concentrations
A final dimension to portraying the conditions of fathers and mothers 
across the five cities is residential concentration. Where immigrants settle 
is influenced by a number of factors, such as their financial resources, their 
networks in the city and its neighbourhoods, and discrimination in housing 
markets, including in the form of specific housing policies. Residential 
concentration is of particular importance since it puts children at an im-
mediate advantage or disadvantage, especially in terms of local schools.
In general, the residential segregation of immigrants is comparably low 
in the Austrian cities, moderate in Paris and Strasbourg, while Stockholm 
is often to be found in the upper quarter of reported segregation indices 
(compare Koopmans 2010; Musterd 2005). Turning to the geographical pat-
terns of residence for the Turkish communities in the five cities, Turks in 
Stockholm are quite concentrated in larger housing estates along the main 
highways stretching south-west and north-west from the city centre. They 
are most numerous in Rinkeby and Fittja, followed by the districts of Tensta 
and Botkyrka (Murdie & Borgegard 1998). Compared to other immigrant 
groups in Stockholm, Turks are more likely to reside in own-group densities 
(Andersson 2007) although these are often dispersed over many estates.

The Worlds of Turkish Fathers and Mothers
67
The majority of the Turkish parents in the Viennese TIES survey set-
tled in the working class districts of Favoriten, Brigittenau, Meidling and 
Simmering. In all four main districts, immigrants made up (and still do) 
a substantial part of the local population. On average over the last 25 
years, Turkish citizens have accounted for 15 per cent to 20 per cent of the 
population in these districts.12 The picture is more mixed if we turn to the 
residential patterns of the Turkish parents in Linz. The industrial areas of St. 
Peter, Franckviertel and Hafenviertel, as well as the area around Wankmül-
lerhofviertel, were the main districts of settlement. All four areas can be 
characterised as lower-income districts with higher rates of unemployment 
and higher proportions of blue-collar workers. However, a noticeable share 
of Turkish parents also settled in the more prosperous and less-segregated 
neighbourhoods of Altstadtviertel and Kaplanhofviertel.
Mixed results are also found for the Turkish first generation in the French 
cities. The majority of Turkish families in Strasbourg settled in the northern 
outskirts in districts such as Bischheim, Hoenheim and Schiltigheim. All 
three neighbourhoods are economically disadvantaged areas with rates 
of unemployment above average for the city and a substantial share of 
blue-collar workers. Moreover, all three areas host a substantial part of 
Strasbourg’s immigrant population. At the same time, around a quarter 
settled in the better-off, inner city districts of Strasbourg. When finally 
turning to France’s capital city, Paris, the Turkish parental generation set-
tled primarily in four départements: the three outlying areas of Hauts-de-
Seine, Val de Marne and Seine-Saint Denis, and in some neighbourhoods 
(arrondissements) of the inner city as well. Paris is the city with the strongest 
polarisation in terms of settlement of the Turkish first generation. The 
suburb Seine-Saint Denis in which a great majority of the Turkish families 
settled can be described as an area with a large share of immigrants, a 
relatively high unemployment rate and a population with a low socio-
economic profile. At the same time, part of the Parisian Turkish community 
also started to settle in the inner city neighbourhood of L’Entrepôt, which, 
generally speaking, can be characterised as a better-off neighbourhood.
2.6	
Conclusion
This chapter has discussed the main time periods in which Turkish im-
migrants arrived in Austria, France and Sweden. Turkish immigration into 
12	 The numbers reported here were made available by the city of Vienna.

68
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
these three countries, and the five cities of Vienna, Linz, Paris, Strasbourg 
and Stockholm, shows a number of important commonalities that legiti-
mise a comparison of the children of Turkish immigrants across the cities 
and countries. The great majority of Turkish fathers and mothers in all 
five receiving cities migrated for work and family reasons – and many 
had little or no education when they arrived. First-generation Turks are 
also predominantly found in the lower strata of the local labour markets. 
Household composition, family size and residential concentration are very 
similar across the five cities.
In these general commonalities, a number of differences have been high-
lighted in this chapter which should be kept in mind for further analysis. 
Table 2.7 summarises these differences in terms of the relative position of 
the parents’ generation in each city, along with the main factors that affect 
that position. This schematic presentation is based on the findings presented 
for the Turkish first generation in the second part of this chapter. The left 
column in table 2.7 lists the main factors, while the degree of advantage or 
disadvantage is indicated as advantaged (+), mixed (m) and disadvantaged (-).
Table 2.7  Schematic summary of the relative position of the first-generation Turks, 
by city
Austria 
France 
Sweden 
 
Vienna 
Linz 
Paris 
Strasbourg
Stockholm 
Parents’ education
– 
m
m
–
+ 
Parents’ employment
m
m
m
–
m
Class heterogeneity 
–
–
+
–
+
Parents’ language ability
m
m
–
–
+
Family structure 
m
m
m
m
m
Residential concentration
–
–
m
–
–
Notes: m=mixed, +=advantaged, – =disadvantaged.
The fathers and mothers who migrated from Turkey to the Austrian cities 
of Vienna and Linz show a rather mixed picture in terms of their relative 
position. While the majority came with few educational credentials and 
from minimally developed regions, some had attended further education 
and possessed above-average levels of education. Nevertheless, most of 
the fathers and mothers found themselves in the lower part of the labour 
market hierarchy, partially indicating processes of ‘de-qualification’ among 
the better-educated Turkish first generation. Results revealed that some 
lacked familiarity with the German language.

The Worlds of Turkish Fathers and Mothers
69
Turks in Strasbourg faced the most disadvantaged position of all the cit-
ies. Their education level was overwhelmingly low; they were in low-prestige 
jobs; they struggled with the French language; and they lived primarily in 
low-income neighbourhoods. By contrast, parents of the Turkish second 
generation in Paris originate, in equal share, from highly developed as 
well as relatively undeveloped provinces of Turkey. The overall standard of 
education is low, with half the parents having reached just primary school 
level. Despite this, their labour market participation is quite variable: 
around 25 per cent are employed as unskilled workers in very low-prestige 
jobs. At the same time, the same proportion (25 per cent) has made it to the 
top quarter of the Parisian labour market.
Turkish immigrants residing in Stockholm show a high degree of hetero-
geneity within their group. On the one hand, the largest group in the Turkish 
first generation has a low to average education level and faces barriers in the 
local labour market since they are primarily concentrated at the bottom end 
of the market hierarchy. On the other hand, there is a small group of fathers 
and mothers with relatively high levels of education and high employment 
rates at the upper end of the labour market hierarchy. Most of them have 
good Swedish language skills. In addition, having both the father and the 
mother participating in the labour force means more substantial financial 
resources for these families.
Although there are a number of differences within the general com-
monalities, table 2.7 indicates that the relative socio-economic position 
(the parents’ levels of education and employment status) of the Turkish 
communities can be described as low to average in all five cities. One 
conclusion emerges from the results presented in this chapter: the children 
of Turkish immigrants have grown up with limited opportunities in all 
the countries and cities compared, and those opportunities are shaped by 
the position of their parents in the larger social and economic structure of 
each city. One of the most important questions arising from this chapter 
is the extent to which the chances, outcomes and (more generally) the 
degree of social mobility of the second generation are affected by these 
poor circumstances. What are the chances of the Turkish second generation 
from low-income families in the various cities being able to beat the odds 
against stagnation or even downward mobility? In the following chapters 
I will move from the world of the Turkish fathers and mothers to the heart 
of this book: the position and the degree of educational mobility of the 
second generation itself. The next chapter serves as a first step in this 
direction by providing a first glimpse of the education outcomes of the 
second generation.


3	
An Initial Look at Education Outcomes
3.1	
Introduction
This chapter provides an initial glance at the education outcomes at the 
aggregated level in and across Austria, France and Sweden. The aim is to 
draw an initial picture of how the Turkish second generation is positioned 
in terms of their education and how mobile they are based on the empirical 
material. Three perspectives are included:
Firstly, the levels of education attained by the Turkish second generation 
will be explored in relation to the respective comparison groups by asking 
whether equality of outcomes can be observed between the two groups in 
each individual country. Special attention will be given to parents’ educa-
tion backgrounds in explaining potential differences in education outcomes 
between the two compared groups.
Secondly, the levels of education attained by the Turkish second gen-
eration in each of the three countries will be compared. Variations in the 
outcomes of the second generation will be examined to see whether they are 
attributable to compositional differences in the Turkish parental generation 
(see chapter 2). The aim of this procedure is to explore whether children of 
Turkish immigrants who come from similar family homes achieve similar 
outcomes growing up in different countries and cities.
Finally, the extent to which the Turkish second generation demonstrates 
inter-generational progress is included as a third perspective on outcomes. 
This will be done by exploring the degree to which second-generation Turks 
move beyond the levels of education reached by their parents.
All three perspectives outline the position of second-generation Turks 
– in terms of their levels of education – in a comparative way. This first 
glimpse of education outcomes with these three comparison perspectives 
not only shows the education mobility processes of second-generation Turks, 
but also raises the question of whether the formation of patterns of ethnic 
inequality become evident across countries (D’Addio 2007; Rumbaut 2008).
3.2	
Education levels reached by young adults in Austria, 
France and Sweden
This section explores the education levels reached by second-generation 
Turks in relation to the comparison group in each city and country by 

72
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
focusing on whether there is equality of outcomes between the two groups. 
In the sociology of education, ‘educational positioning’ is usually assessed 
by using the highest diploma of the target population (the highest level 
of education attained) as the reference for comparisons across countries. 
However, as mentioned earlier in the introduction to this book, many of the 
Turkish second generation we interviewed were still enrolled in school.1 This 
is especially true of second-generation Turks in France, where more than 
every second respondent was still enrolled in some sort of education at the 
time they were interviewed. So following the ‘traditional’ measurement of 
educational attainment by looking at their highest diploma would blur the 
picture and underestimate the current situation. The dependent variable 
for this chapter is therefore the education level of the respondents. This is 
defined as a combination of the highest obtained diploma for those who 
have already left school and the current level of education for those still in 
school. This allows a clearer comparison to be made between the second 
generation in Austria, France and Sweden.
How school outcomes differ between the groups
Table 3.1 shows the distribution of education levels for second-generation 
Turks and their comparison group in all five cities. Education levels are 
displayed using the ‘Edu codes’ classification scheme, which ranges from 
the lowest (primary education) to the highest (tertiary education) in each 
country (see Crul, Schnell, Herzog-Punzenberger, Wilmes, Slootman & 
Aparicio-Gomez 2012, and Appendix B table A9).
Turning to the results for Austria, the Turkish second generation more fre-
quently leaves school with only a compulsory education certificate (primary 
and lower-secondary education together) compared to the comparison 
group. About one-third of the Turkish second generation in Austria obtains 
an apprenticeship certificate or similar as their highest education level. 
Moreover, they are significantly over-represented in the vocational track, 
with a difference of 10 per cent between them and the comparison group 
in Vienna and a 15 per cent difference in Linz.
1	
An overview of the total number of respondents who are still enrolled in school is given in 
Appendix B, table A8.

An Initial Look at Education Outcomes
73
Table 3.1  Education levels of second-generation Turks and the comparison group, by city (%)
Austria 
France
Sweden 
 
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
 
 
2nd GT
CG
2nd GT
CG
2nd GT
CG
2nd GT
CG
2nd GT
CG
Primary education
Primary (and special) education 
4.0
0.8
3.9
1.7
3.6
1.2
6.8
0.6
0.0
0.0
Lower-secondary 
education
Vocational track
21.0
7.6
13.1
3.9
–
–
–
–
– 
– 
Integrated track
–
–
–
–
4.8
2.3
13.1
1.7
9.2
3.6
Academic track 
4.8
5.6
2.4
3.0
–
–
–
–
– 
– 
Post lower-
secondary and 
upper-secondary 
education
Apprenticeship and similar
33.7
24.8
35.4
21.8
14.5
11.5
29.0
10.7
–
–
Post lower-secondary orientation
1.6
2.0
1.5
2.1
–
–
–
–
– 
– 
Higher vocational orientation
10.3
9.6
14.6
17.1
12.5
9.8
15.5
10.7
27.1
20.0
Academic orientation
10.3
14.0
6.3
17.1
6.9
5.2
4.8
5.1
29.5
14.4
Post upper-
secondary and 
tertiary education
Higher post-secondary and tertiary 
Vocational
4.0
7.6
6.8
6.8
18.2
11.5
13.9
10.7
16.3
15.2
University and similar
10.3
28.0
16.0
26.5
39.5
58.6
17.1
60.5
17.9
46.8
 
N.
252
250
206
234
248
174
252
177
251
250
Group differences within city:
***
***
**
***
***
City differences: CG
**
n.s.
n.a.
City differences: 2nd GT
n.s.
***
n.a.
Source: TIES survey 2007-2008 
Notes: Column percentages total 100% within cities. Levels of significance:* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. ns=Not significant. 2GT=Second generation Turks. 
CG=Comparison group. n.a.=Not applicable. -(dash)=track not available in the education system.

74
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
Turning to the upper end of the education spectrum, post-secondary and 
tertiary education, the figures indicate that the comparison group is clearly 
out-performing second-generation Turks in both Austrian cities. Students 
from the comparison group more frequently achieve an academic or higher 
vocational level in upper-secondary education, which allows them to con-
tinue in post-secondary education. The distribution of the education levels 
of second-generation Turks examined here is predominantly in line with 
previous studies on educational attainment conducted in Austria (Gümü-
soglu et al. 2009; Herzog-Punzenberger 2003b, 2007; Herzog-Punzenberger 
& Unterwurzacher 2009; Unterwurzacher 2007; Weiss 2007a; Weiss & Un-
terwurzacher 2007).
In addition to these general national trends, city-to-city differences 
can be seen in Austria as well. Second-generation Turks in Linz are less 
represented in the academic track in upper-secondary education but more 
often found in the higher vocational track. Apart from these differences, the 
overall educational distribution of second-generation Turks between Linz 
and Vienna shows similar outcomes, while the chi-squared test (see bottom 
of table 3.1) indicates significant variations between the comparison groups 
in the two cities. The latter is most evident when considering the propor-
tion of students leaving school at the end of their compulsory education. 
In Vienna, 14 per cent do not continue after lower-secondary education, 
compared with 8.6 per cent in Linz.
The results for the French cities are displayed in the middle columns of 
table 3.1. Overall, the descriptive outcomes highlight three major findings. 
Firstly, the overall education levels of each group, and therefore the general 
student population, is far higher in France than in Austria. This country-
specific feature is in line with official statistics on the distribution of educa-
tional attainment (Eurostat 2010). In the mid-1980s, education reforms were 
introduced in France in order to increase the number of people holding the 
baccalauréat, or ‘bacc’ (Duru-Bellat & Kieffer 2001; Kieffer 2008). In upper-
secondary education, higher vocational and academically orientated schools 
(lycées) enable students to obtain the ‘bacc’. Recent studies have shown that 
these reforms made the ‘bacc’ the education norm in France, and that the 
requirements of the labour market have shifted into the post-secondary 
and tertiary education sector (Brauns, Steinmann, Kieffer & Marry 1999; 
Duru-Bellat & Kieffer 2008; Duru-Bellat, Kieffer & Fournier-Maerelli 1997). 
Consequently, the French education system has moved to a mass system of 
post-secondary and tertiary education over the past three decades.
Secondly, figures for France indicate that Turkish second-generation 
students are more often at the lower end of the education spectrum than 

An Initial Look at Education Outcomes
75
their peers in the comparison group, and they fall behind in post-secondary 
and tertiary education. They leave school after compulsory education 
(primary and lower-secondary education) in higher numbers, while the 
difference in post-secondary and tertiary education amounts to around 
26 per cent when both cities are taken together. This gap between the two 
groups in post-secondary and tertiary education mirrors previous findings 
for the educational attainment of second-generation Turks in France, which 
showed a gap of almost the same size (Kirszbaum et al. 2009: 26). In addi-
tion, the overall distribution of education levels presented in table 3.1 also 
resembles the results for the educational attainment of second-generation 
Turks from a recent survey of children of immigrants in France (Brinbaum, 
Moguérou & Primon 2010).
Finally, variations in the distribution of education levels can be seen 
between second-generation Turks in Strasbourg and Paris. In Strasbourg, 
children of Turkish immigrants are more likely to attend vocational 
schools (for apprenticeships and similar), and consequently advance 
less frequently beyond upper-secondary education. When considering 
post-secondary and tertiary education, the Turkish second generation 
in Paris achieves this level almost twice as often as their counterparts in 
Strasbourg.
The last two columns on the right side of table 3.1 show the results for 
Stockholm. At a first glance, the overall distribution of the education levels 
resembles that of France. The Swedish education system also consists of a 
comprehensive system and a post-secondary and tertiary sector in which job 
specialisation takes place. Consequently, the great majority of students are 
situated on the upper end of the education ladder. Nevertheless, significant 
group differences in education levels are recognizable. Second-generation 
Turks are twice as likely as comparison group students to leave Swedish 
schools after compulsory education. This finding is in line with the results 
for the educational attainment of children of Turkish immigrants in Sweden 
(Jonsson & Rudolphi 2008). Moving on to the top end of the education ladder, 
the gap between the two compared groups amounts to nearly 30 per cent 
in favour of the comparison group.
Associations with the parents’ levels of education
How can the differences in education outcomes reported above between 
the Turkish second generation and their comparison group be explained? Of 
course, a detailed determination of multiple potential explanatory factors 
goes beyond the scope of this first overview and frames the tasks of the 

76
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
forthcoming chapters. However, this section considers one of the most 
important factors that might explain quite a few of the differences: the 
parents’ levels of education.
The link between social origin (including level of education) and the edu-
cational attainment of children has been identified as the major explanation 
for the disadvantaged position of the children of immigrants – including the 
Turkish second generation – in education in Europe (Alba, Handl & Müller 
1994; Crul & Holdaway 2009; Heath & Brinbaum 2007; Heath et al. 2008; 
Kalter, Granato & Kristen 2007; Rothon et al. 2009; Vallet & Caille 1996). 
Previous studies demonstrate that the Turkish second generation in Europe 
often comes from less-advantaged social and education backgrounds (Crul 
& Vermeulen 2003; Crul et al. 2012; Dustmann et al. 2012, compare also 
chapter 2). It is therefore possible that many of the differences between 
the comparison group and second-generation Turks can be explained by 
differences in their parents’ education backgrounds.2
The measurement of parental education is based on the parent with 
the highest qualifications and consists of five categories: primary or 
below, lower-secondary, upper-secondary, post-secondary, and tertiary 
education. The distribution of the parental education levels is displayed in 
table 3.2. The first point to note is that the education levels of the Turkish 
parents is significantly lower than that of the comparison group across 
countries. As indicated in chapter 2, the great majority of Turkish fathers 
and mothers migrated at an early age for work reasons, and were equipped 
with little or no experience of education. The proportion of less-educated 
parents (primary at best) is highest among Turkish fathers and mothers 
living in Strasbourg. Stockholm has the highest share of well-educated 
parents (compare chapter 2). This is partially the result of additional train-
ing programmes in Sweden and the substantial group of Turkish refugees 
who obtained higher education credentials when they arrived. Overall, 
second-generation Turks living in all three countries come from families 
with lower levels of education. It is also worth noting that the education 
levels of parents in the comparison group vary from country to country. 
Sweden and France show higher proportions of post-secondary (or higher) 
diploma-holders, while the majority of fathers and mothers in the Austrian 
comparison group mostly achieve upper-secondary level.
2	
The levels of education attained by parents is used rather than social class since they were 
highly correlated and the former is perhaps more relevant to my concerns.

An Initial Look at Education Outcomes
77
Table 3.2  Parents’ levels of education, by group and city (%)
Primary 
or below
Lower-
secondary
Upper-
secondary
Post- 
secondary
Tertiary
N.
Austria
Vienna
2nd Gen Turks
27.4
37.7
21.4
10.3
3.2
250
Comparison group
3.8
11.2
52.0
11.6
21.4
252
Linz
2nd Gen Turks
29.1
25.7
22.3
12.2
10.7
206
Comparison group
2.9
5.6
60.3
10.7
20.5
234
France
Paris
2nd Gen Turks
34.3
25.8
23.4
4.0
12.5
248
Comparison group
2.3
6.9
44.3
21.8
24.7
174
Strasbourg
2nd Gen Turks
46.4
28.6
20.2
1.6
3.2
252
Comparison group
1.0
6.2
43.5
32.2
17.1
177
Sweden
Stockholm
2nd Gen Turks
33.1
23.5
14.3
11.5
17.6
251
Comparison group
2.0
12.0
28.0
7.8
50.2
250
Source: TIES 2007-2008
The next step in this book will be to check for statistical differences between 
groups, showing each individual respondent’s education background. This 
will include an examination of how many of these differences can be ac-
counted for by differences in levels of education. Given the diverse overall 
education profiles of the student population across the three countries, 
the education outcomes of the respondents (dependent variable) will be 
reduced further and standardised into four broad categories: (1) primary and 
lower-secondary (compulsory education), (2) apprenticeships and similar, 
(3) upper-secondary, and (4) tertiary education. Gaps in education will be 
presented in odds ratios, which are a useful measure for assessing relative 
performance since they are independent of the overall achievement (Rothon 
et al. 2009: 1422).
The advantage that’s gained by using a relative measure such as odds 
ratios rather than a conventional measure (such as the percentage complet-

78
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
ing a certain level of education) is important since it is not the absolute 
level of education that matters but whether second-generation Turks have 
more or fewer opportunities than the comparison group with whom they 
compete in schools, and, later on, in the labour market of each city. Having 
highly educated parents might be an advantage in countries such as Austria 
where fewer pupils have more highly educated backgrounds, whereas in 
countries such as France the overall level of educational attainment is 
higher and more frequently distributed in the population.
To facilitate interpretation, any gaps in education between groups are 
illustrated in figure 3.1. Values above 1 indicate better chances of achieving 
the education level in question among second-generation Turks than the 
comparison group. Values below one indicate fewer chances. An exact value 
of one for both groups would be a sign of equal opportunity. In short, the 
higher any bar is from 1, the bigger the education gap will be between the 
two compared groups. Results are presented before (‘gross’: black bars) and 
after checking for parents’ levels of education (‘net’: grey bars). The aim of 
this strategy is twofold: to examine the education gaps independent of the 
overall achievement, and to explore whether these gaps are biggest at the 
lowest and highest ends of the education spectrum in all three countries 
(black bars). In all three countries, second-generation Turks are, on average, 
more than two and a half times more likely to finish school with, at best, 
a certificate from compulsory school. And, at the top end of the education 
spectrum, the chances of completing their education with a post-secondary 
or tertiary qualification are (on average) only half as big for the Turkish 
second generation as for the comparison group. In line with the descriptive 
findings in table 3.1, the greatest variety between cities is found in upper-
secondary education. In the two French cities and in Vienna, significant 
differences between the compared groups are absent, while the Turkish 
second generation in Stockholm significantly outperforms the comparison 
group.

An Initial Look at Education Outcomes
79
Figure 3.1  Differences in education outcomes before (‘gross’) and after (‘net’) 
controlling for parents’ education levels, by city (odds ratios)
0,0
0,5
1,0
1,5
2,0
2,5
3,0
3,5
4,0
4,5
5,0
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Upper-secondary
Apprenticeship and alike
Primary and lower-secondary
Tertiary education
Odds ratio
Gross
Net
***
**
***
**
**
**
**
**
**
***
**
***
***
***
**
**
**
**
***
***
***
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Levels of significance:* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. Net differences (grey bars) are 
controlled for parents’ levels of education.

80
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
Do these differences in education levels persist once the parental education 
level is ‘held constant’? The grey bars show the odds ratios for second-genera-
tion Turks relative to the comparison group after checking for parents’ levels 
of education. One conclusion emerges clearly from the grey bars displayed in 
figure 3.1: the differences in levels of education between the two groups can, 
to a great extent, be explained by their parents’ levels of education. Especially 
at the lower end of the spectrum, significant differences mostly vanish after 
checking for parents’ levels of education. This pattern of explaining the 
education gap in the lower education categories appears to be common in 
all cities except Strasbourg, where the gap persists significantly.
It is also worth noting that in post-secondary and tertiary education, over-
representation of the comparison group remains significant in Stockholm, 
Strasbourg and Vienna. The differences between the odds ratios before and 
after checking for parents’ levels of education do not decrease substantially 
at the upper end of the education spectrum. Considering the ‘ranking’ of 
the five cities, the patterns do not change much between the gross and net 
differences. Overall, differences in education levels seem to be smallest in 
Paris and Stockholm on the one hand and biggest in the Austrian cities on 
the other hand, while Strasbourg is located in between. The results in figure 
3.1 provide a first glimpse of the size and strength of the influence of parents’ 
education in the three countries. Parents’ education levels account for most 
of the differences observed in the Austrian and French cities (compare black 
and grey bars), while in Sweden they account for slightly less.
3.3	
Accounting for compositional differences
Understanding and interpreting the differences in education outcomes for 
the Turkish second generation across countries is a complex matter. Why 
are children of Turkish immigrants predominantly achieving lower levels 
of education in Austria compared to their age-mates of Turkish origin in 
France and Sweden (compare table 3.1 and figure 3.1)?
‘Origins shape destinies’ writes Rumbaut (1999: 187) and hints at the 
contribution that compositional differences in the first generation can make 
in explaining education disparities among the second generation. These 
differences in education and occupational composition are often related 
to immigrant selectivity (Feliciano 2005a, 2005b), and this line of argument 
is frequently applied when comparing the outcomes of children of diverse 
ethnic origin groups in one single country (e.g. Haller, Portes & Lynch 2011; 
Heath et al. 2008; Portes & Rumbaut 2001). Although the methodological 

An Initial Look at Education Outcomes
81
approach applied in this study is different in that it compares children of 
the same origin group (Turks) across countries, compositional differences 
may play a role as well. The great majority of Turkish fathers in all three 
countries migrated for work reasons while mothers overwhelmingly fol-
lowed to reunify families, and both parents frequently had few educational 
qualifications at their disposal. Nevertheless, some degree of heterogeneity 
within the Turkish communities has been observed as well in chapter 2 – 
especially across the three compared countries. Variations have been found 
in terms of the reasons for migration, time of arrival and regions of origin.
Compositional differences are related not only to the migration histories 
of Turkish fathers and mothers, but were shaped and reinforced by the con-
ditions immigrants faced upon arrival in their receiving countries and cities. 
Reitz (1998, 2002; Reitz & Somerville 2004) has called the consequences 
of these varying conditions on children of immigrants ‘indirect effects of 
host society institutions’. Host society institutions, such as national and 
local labour markets, may affect the Turkish second generation indirectly 
through their parents’ experiences, and may serve as an explanation for 
some of the differences in their outcomes across countries. For example, 
Turkish fathers and mothers in Stockholm have been found to obtain, on 
average, higher-prestige jobs and more host-country education credentials 
than Turkish immigrants in France and Austria – which may later translate 
into better financial circumstances, more educationally relevant resources 
and a deeper knowledge of the workings of the national education system. 
In other words, the varying range of conditions Turkish families faced on 
arrival may have affected the socio-economic position of the first generation 
and therefore ‘indirectly’ the family lives and circumstances in which the 
Turkish second generation grew up.
This section explores whether the differences in the education outcomes 
of second-generation Turks across cities remain significant once those 
outcomes are adjusted for compositional differences in the Turkish first 
generation. Only if significant education disparities exist after controlling 
for these family-related characteristics is further analysis justified in order 
to assess the direct impact of other relevant factors which may explain 
cross-national differences.
Table 3.3 shows the results of a multivariate analysis (ordered logistic 
regression). The dependent variable is the education level of the Turkish sec-
ond generation, coded as lower-secondary at the most (1), upper-secondary 
and apprenticeship (2), and post-secondary/tertiary education (3). Model 1 
displays the differences in education outcomes among second-generation 
Turks across cities expressed in odds ratios. The estimates in Model 1 have 

82
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
already been tested for the socio-demographic characteristics (age and 
gender) of the second generation and whether or not the respondents are 
still enrolled in school. The results of Model 1 resemble the descriptive pat-
terns observed in table 3.1. The odds of achieving a higher level of education 
are around three and four times higher in Stockholm and Paris respectively 
than in Vienna. The odds of second-generation Turks in Strasbourg achiev-
ing a higher level of education are lower than in Paris or Stockholm, but 
still significantly higher than for second-generation Turks in Vienna. The 
non-significant coefficient for Linz indicates similar opportunities for 
second-generation Turks in both Austrian cities.
Table 3.3  Ordered logistic regression of education levels (odds ratios)
Model 1
Model 2
Model 3
Controlled for:
Socio- 
demographic
characteristics
Family  
background
characteristics
Migration- 
related
factors
Ref: Vienna
Linz
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Paris
4.14 ***
4.17 ***
3.51 ***
Strasbourg
1.64 ***
1.67 ***
1.66 *
Stockholm
2.99 ***
2.49 ***
2.21 ***
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nagelkerke’s R2
0.32
0.36
0.37
N.
1209  
1184  
1181  
Source: TIES 2007, 2008 
Notes: Ordered logistic regression on educational level of the second generation. Dependent vari-
able: lower secondary at the most (1), upper-secondary and apprenticeship (2) and post-secondary/
tertiary education (3). Model specifications and distribution of the independent variables are given 
in Appendix B. Levels of significance:* p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. n.s.=Not significant.
In a second step (Model 2), a number of independent variables has been 
introduced in order to explore whether differences in outcomes between 
the Turkish second generation across cities can be related to composition 
differences in the parents’ generation. These independent variables are: 
the education levels of the parents, whether at least one parent attended 
school in the survey country, whether both parents were employed when 
the respondent was 15, family size and parents’ language ability in German, 

An Initial Look at Education Outcomes
83
French or Swedish. The differences we have already observed between the 
reference group, second-generation Turks in Vienna, and second-generation 
Turks in Stockholm, are slightly reduced, while they remain identical in the 
French cities. In other words, even after testing for compositional differ-
ences in the first generation, variations in the outcomes for their children 
across countries and cities remain significant.
Finally, migration-related variables for the parents have been added to 
the model. These variables are also taken from chapter 2 and include the 
length of time parents have resided in the survey city, whether the parents 
originate from a highly developed area of Turkey, and whether or not fathers 
migrated primarily for reasons of work. The advantaged position of the 
Turkish second generation in Paris and Stockholm is slightly reduced when 
holding these variables constant, but the overall differences in attempts to 
achieve a higher level of education do not disappear.
The main conclusion to be drawn from table 3.3 is that second-generation 
Turks in France and Sweden are still significantly more likely to achieve a 
higher level of education than the second generation in Austria, even after 
testing statistically for compositional differences in the parental genera-
tion. Further, Reitz (1998, 2002) has argued that country institutions exert 
an indirect effect on the position of the second generation, and this may 
explain some of the cross-national variations. The analysis presented in 
this section indicates, however, that after applying controls, differences in 
the education outcomes of the Turkish second generation remain highly 
significant across cities and countries.
3.4	
Inter-generational educational mobility
So far, the education outcomes of second-generation Turks have been 
examined in relation to the comparison group (Section 3.2) and across 
countries (Section 3.3). The last comparative perspective of this first glimpse 
at education outcomes investigates inter-generational mobility between the 
Turkish first and second generations. A large body of work has shown that 
opportunities for children of immigrants become most evident by examining 
their degree of inter-generational mobility (De Broucker & Underwood 1998; 
Loury 2005; Portes & Rumbaut 2001; Platt 2005; Rumbaut 2004, 2008). Greater 
levels of inter-generational mobility can be read as indicators of greater 
openness and a weaker link between the parents’ levels of education and 
advantageous outcomes for their children. Further, the inter-generational 
mobility approach also indicates whether or not children of Turkish im-

84
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
migrants improve their educational distribution. This section builds on the 
work cited above by asking how patterns of educational attainment among 
young adults of Turkish origin compare to those of their parents. In order 
to assess whether the Turkish second generation made some progress in 
relation to the first generation, a mobility index has been created. Following 
the procedures applied by Rumbaut (2008) to measure inter-generational 
mobility, the education outcomes of the second generation have been coded 
into the same categories as the parents’ education levels (see table 3.2). 
Second-generation offspring who obtained the same levels of education as 
their parents are labelled ‘immobile’, while those found to be either above 
or below their parents’ levels are classified as ‘upward movers’ or ‘downward 
movers’ respectively.3 From this perspective, the general trend of mobility 
between the generations is of interest, rather than looking only at actual 
achieved levels of education. Parents of mixed parentage and those who 
achieved their highest educational credentials in the schools of the host 
country have been excluded from the analysis in order to avoid distortions. 
The results of the mobility patterns are given in table 3.4.
Table 3.4  Inter-generational educational mobility of the Turkish second generation, 
by city (%)
Downward 
movers
Immobile
Upward  
movers 
 
↓
↔
↑
N.
Austria
 
Vienna
14.4
28.4
57.2
215
Linz
14.0
27.4
58.6
157
France 
Paris
7.1
18.9
74.0
227
Strasbourg
4.3
23.4
72.3
231
Sweden
 
Stockholm
2.8
9.9
87.3
141
Source: TIES 2007-2008
3	
In recent decades, scholars of social stratification research have developed a wide range 
of mobility measures for examining inter-generational mobility. These are mainly based on 
multivariate log linear models (for reviews and applications, see Breen 2004a, 2004b; Lucas 
2001). These multivariate mobility tables have been developed for analysing large-scale surveys. 
The data demands make it unfeasible to apply them within this study, given the relatively small 
N. Within this section, results on the absolute rather than the relative degree of mobility are 
presented by using descriptive measures of inter-generational mobility.

An Initial Look at Education Outcomes
85
At first glance, a predominantly upward trend in education mobility from the 
first generation to the second can be seen in all three countries. To begin with, 
in Sweden almost nine out of ten children of Turkish origin achieve a higher 
level of education than their parents, while only about 3 per cent perform 
below the level of their parents. In France, more than 70 per cent are upward 
movers. The picture in the Austrian cities is more diverse. There, only slightly 
more than one child in two moves beyond the level of his parents, and almost 
every third child achieves a level of education similar to that of his parents. The 
number of downward movers is also highest in Austria with around 14 per cent 
in each of the cities. It is worth noting that the results from the two French cit-
ies, Paris and Strasbourg, differ in terms of both downward movers and those 
who remained educationally immobile. In Strasbourg, more second-generation 
Turks move beyond or achieve the same level as their parents when compared 
to their counterparts in Paris. The lower levels of downward mobility are 
not surprising given the relatively low education level of the Turkish first 
generation in Strasbourg (see table 3.2 and compare with chapter 2).
Figure 3.2  Long-range upward mobility in second-generation Turks, by city (%)
9.3
11.5
30.2
21.6
29.8
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Austria
France
Sweden
%
Source: TIES 2007-2008
Taken as a whole, the findings of the inter-generational educational mobility 
index point in a similar direction to the results presented in the previous 
sections. In Austria, the educational opportunities for second-generation 
Turks seem to be blocked in comparison with either France or Sweden, 

86
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
suggesting greater meritocracies in the latter. These results become even 
more pronounced when investigating ‘long-range upward mobility’. These 
are upward movers who leap over at least one education category (Breen 
2004b). For example, second-generation Turks whose parents had at least 
a lower-secondary level of education, and who achieved post-secondary 
education themselves, would be labelled as ‘long-range upward movers’. 
Figure 3.2 displays the distribution of long-range upward mobility within 
the three countries and five cities. Not surprisingly, the overall mobil-
ity trend observed in table 3.4 remains in figure 3.2 as well: long-range 
upward mobility is two to three times more common in France and Sweden 
than in Austria. Around 30 per cent of students from the Turkish second 
generation in Paris and Stockholm move at least two levels beyond their 
parents. The average rate in the Austrian cities is around 10 per cent, while 
second-generation Turks in Strasbourg are in between, comprising around 
20 per cent long-range upward movers. This latter finding underscores 
especially the dissimilar patterns between the French cities. The Turkish 
second generation in Strasbourg has had a predominantly upward journey 
because the educational attainment of the first generation was particularly 
low. At the same time, the number of children who climb far higher than 
the level of their parents is lower in Strasbourg than in Paris.
3.5	
Conclusion
This chapter provided a first glimpse of education outcomes at the ag-
gregated level by applying three levels of comparison: the Turkish second 
generation with the comparison group within countries, with second-
generation Turks across countries, and between generations.
To begin with the latter, there has been substantial inter-generational 
progress by the Turkish second generation as measured descriptively 
relative to the parental generation. In comparison with their parents, 
the overwhelming majority of the children showed some progress in the 
education sphere, but at very different rates. The Turkish second genera-
tion in Sweden, and to a lesser extent in France, displayed exceptional 
achievement. By comparison, the achievements of the second generation 
in Austria were moderate. So, the predominantly upward trend in mobility 
in relation to the parental generation across the countries is a success 
story, but it should also be regarded with caution because the majority of 
Turkish parents migrated to these various countries equipped with very 
little experience of education.

An Initial Look at Education Outcomes
87
Turning to the relative comparison within countries and cities, the find-
ings indicate significant differences in the distribution of education levels 
between the compared groups. On average, the differences between the 
comparison group and second-generation Turks are most pronounced at the 
lowest and the highest ends of the education ladder in all three countries. To 
a substantial degree, the disadvantaged position of second-generation Turks 
within countries can be related to parents’ levels of education since children 
of Turkish origin are more likely to come from less-educated families. This 
makes it difficult to climb the education ladder. Nevertheless, significant 
disadvantages did not always vanish after testing statistically for parents’ 
levels of education.
This first glance at the outcomes provided a third perspective by com-
paring the education levels of second-generation Turks across cities. The 
fact that second-generation Turks in France and Sweden outperform their 
counterparts in Austria could not be explained by the compositional differ-
ences in the first generation, which were detected in chapter 2. Even after 
testing for a wide range of composition-related and migration-related factors 
in the parental generation, the odds of the second generation achieving a 
similar education level in Vienna and Linz were still significantly lower 
than in either of the French cities or in Stockholm.4
These provisional results raise a number of questions that will pave the 
way for the forthcoming chapters. The first question concerns the poorer 
achievements of second-generation Turks in relation to the comparison 
groups in all three countries. Although parents’ levels of education played 
a substantial role in explaining parts of the disadvantaged position of the 
Turkish second generation, the specific mechanisms through which parents’ 
education correlates with children’s learning and education outcomes still 
remain elusive. Other individual and group-related factors that affect the 
schooling outcomes of second-generation Turks should be considered. For 
example, more information is needed about the availability of educational 
resources in families, as well as outside the family home. In addition to these 
individual-level explanations, there appears to be a number of institutional 
factors at play as well. In order to investigate, education pathways have to 
be examined. Focusing on school careers will provide detailed insights into 
the mechanisms at work between the institutional arrangements of schools 
and individual characteristics at different stages. The following chapters 
4	
All three levels of comparison have been tested for gender differences as well, but no 
significant variations have been found between males and females.

88
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks 
will give, step by step, a more detailed examination of the explanatory 
factors by looking at the issues raised above.
The next chapter will look at the specific mechanisms through which 
parents’ education levels correlate with children’s learning and achieve-
ment. More precisely, it focuses on the availability of educational resources 
in Turkish families, as well as their aspirations for education and their 
involvement strategies.

4	
Behind the Scenes: The Family 
Examined
4.1	
Introduction
As seen in chapter 3, the educational success of the Turkish second generation 
depends not only on the cognitive ability, motivation and aspirations of the 
children, but also to a large extent on the educational, social and economic 
resources available in their families. The education level of the parents in 
particular is one of the most important characteristics in the family context. 
This finding is in line with most of the international research on immigrant 
youth and schooling outcomes (Crul & Holdaway 2009; Heath & Brinbaum 
2007; Portes & Rumbaut 1996; Zhou 1997). However, there are a number of 
scholars who claim that parental socio-economic status is not all that counts. 
There is also a view that the most important factor in explaining the trans-
mission of resources is the quality of ties between generations (Allmendinger, 
Ebner & Nikolai 2007; Horvat, Weininger & Lareau 2003). Young adolescents 
will not benefit from the help of their parents if the relationship between 
them is weak or if parents are not engaged in their school activities. This 
chapter explores the involvement strategies and patterns of support provided 
by Turkish families in Austria, France and Sweden. Central to this analysis 
is research that has shown that children of immigrants benefit from such 
involvement and that parents are crucial in determining their children’s 
experiences and academic success (Kao 2004; Kim 2002; Turney & Kao 2009).
Most previous research, however, stems from national studies that 
provide some evidence that the effectiveness of involvement varies across 
different origin groups (Kao 1995; Mc Neal 1999), while studies looking 
systematically at parental involvement and possible variations within the 
same origin group across countries don’t exist so far. Moreover, most of the 
studies are too narrowly framed, investigating only parental influences. 
Especially in immigrant families, it is often the older siblings who act as 
role models and provide their younger brothers and sisters with informa-
tion and support, making them as effective as parents (Crul 2000a: 240). 
Older siblings can act as intermediaries between younger children and 
their schools. Their own schooling experiences can also be a major source 
of support. In this chapter, I aim to extend the discussion about family 
influences on education outcomes by investigating the role of parents and 
older siblings in a cross-national comparison.

90
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
This chapter asks to what extent the educational success and attain-
ment of second-generation Turks is associated with family influence in 
the three compared countries. To answer this question, the next section 
starts by classifying the main aspects of parental support and involvement. 
It further provides a short overview of how these aspects are measured in 
the empirical part of this chapter. The subsequent sections then examine 
the impact of parental involvement and support on education outcomes for 
second-generation Turks in the three compared countries. Afterwards, the 
discussion moves to the issue of siblings’ influence on education outcomes, 
before the family involvement of Turkish and non-Turkish families are 
compared. The main findings are summarised in the conclusion.
4.2	
Parental involvement as social capital
Parents’ involvement in their children’s schooling is most often conceptu-
alised as a form of social capital (Turney & Kao 2009: 258, see also McNeal 
1999). Social capital is understood as a set of networks and connections in 
which actors secure benefits and resources by virtue of membership and 
contacts (Portes 1998). Parent-child relationships are networks in which 
children benefit from parental involvement in their education through 
a number of different mechanisms (Domina 2005; Nauck 2011b; Nauck & 
Kohlmann 1998; Turney & Kao 2009):
First, parents’ involvement with schools can show children that edu-
cation is valued and of importance for the family, which may ultimately 
translate into greater appreciation of education on the part of the children 
themselves. Parental involvement also provides parents with a means of 
social control through directly controlling the time their children spend 
on homework. Additionally, they get to know other parents and teachers 
with whom they discuss their children’s performances. Lastly, involved 
parents are privy to substantially more information about their children.
Through these mechanisms, parental involvement has a lasting influ-
ence on the performance of their children at school, and most researchers 
have found that higher levels of parental influence leads to significant 
advantages (Faas, Benson & Kaestle 2013; Keith, Keith, Quirk, Sperduto, 
Santillo & Killings 1998; Melby, Conger, Fang, Wickrama & Conger 2008). 
Parent-school involvement and inter-generational closeness have been 
found to be positively related to the education outcomes of children of 
immigrants, benefitting measures such as average grades or tests scores 
(Kao & Rutherford 2007). Other studies suggest a more diverse variety of 

Behind the Scenes: The Family Examined
91
effects. McNeal (1999) reports that good family relationships have posi-
tive effects on certain types of behaviour by the second generation, such 
as truancy. However, they have less of an effect in terms of educational 
attainment or the number of children who stay on at school. Yet others 
claim that parental support and involvement have beneficial results for 
some immigrant adolescents but don’t translate into the same benefits for 
others (Kao & Rutherford 2007; Sun 1998).
Dimensions of parental involvement
Since parental involvement is a multidimensional construct (Domina 2005; 
Turney & Kao 2009), the various aspects of parental influence need to 
be classified into a number of broad dimensions. The three dimensions 
outlined here are partially derived from James Coleman’s concept of social 
capital (Coleman 1988; Morgan & Sørensen 1999) and have been further 
developed and applied in studies of parental influence on the educational 
performance of immigrant youth (Kao 2004; Kao & Tienda 1995; Lauglo 
2000; McNeal 1999; Sun 1998).
The first dimension is parental control and it comprises the constructive 
engagement of parents with the school-related activities of their children. 
It includes issues such as whether parents control the time children spend 
doing homework, whether they know their children’s friends and whether 
they discuss school experiences with their children. Parental control is one 
important way in which parents can communicate their expectations to 
their children.
The second dimension describes the concrete and practical involve-
ment of parents in school-related activities. Help with homework, frequent 
contact with teachers and voluntary participation in school activities can 
be labelled parental participation (Lauglo 2000).
In the TIES survey, two indicators are available per dimension (see table 
4.1). To begin with, parental control is captured in two survey items asking 
(1) ‘whether parents control the time their child spends on homework’ and 
(2) ‘whether they talked with them about school or studies’. In order to 
measure what Lauglo (2000) has labelled participation, survey information 
on (1) whether parents helped with homework and (2) how frequently they 
met their children’s teachers is considered. Each of the four variables had 
five answer categories ranging from ‘never’ to ‘often’.1
1	
For a detailed measurement description of these items and their descriptive outcomes, see 
Appendix B.

92
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
As well as these indicators that are derived from social capital 
literature, a fifth variable on the perceived importance of parents in 
supporting their child with his or her studies (5) is included, in order 
to provide information on the quality of ties between generations in 
the educational attainment process. This variable serves as the third 
dimension of parental influence.
Table 4.1  Parental involvement measures in the TIES survey
Dimension 
Measurement within the TIES survey
Perceived importance of parents
Parents were important in supporting the child with his 
or her studies
Parental control
Parents controlled the time the child spent on homework 
Parents talked with the child about school and studies
Parental participation
Frequency with which parents helped with homework
Frequency with which parents met with or talked to 
teachers
The prevalence of those dimensions for second-generation Turks in the five 
cities under consideration is displayed in figure 4.1. The black bars show 
the percentage distribution of the highest categories ‘regularly’ and ‘often’, 
while the black diamond represents the mean value on the five-point scale 
for second-generation Turks. In order to facilitate interpretation, I generated 
an additional ‘parental support index’ which comprises the four items 
making up the behavioural dimension (participation and control). All the 
items presented below and used in this chapter are treated as continuous 
variables ranging from low (1) to high (5) involvement.
The findings in figure 4.1 show that the level of support provided by 
Turkish families for their children varies across the three countries and 
five cities. The great majority of second-generation Turks did not receive 
much support from their parents in school-related matters. The most 
frequent type of support is talking about school, while concrete help 
with homework remains rare among Turkish families in all countries. 
Considering the parental support index (right side of figure 4.1), which 
includes all four items to do with control and participation, a clear rank-
ing can be seen across countries: Turkish parents living in Austria spent 
much more time supporting their children in school-related activities 
than did Turkish families in France or Sweden (means compared). On 
average, Turkish fathers and mothers in the Austrian cities supported 
their children frequently in their school activities. By contrast, the great 
majority of second-generation Turks in Sweden did not get, nor did they 

Behind the Scenes: The Family Examined
93
need, any support from their parents. The results for France are in the 
centre, between Austria and Sweden.
Nevertheless, it is worth noting that when considering each parental 
control and participation item separately, variations in the general ranking 
and across cities are sometimes apparent. These differences are most pro-
nounced when it comes to controlling the time children spent on homework. 
This is most common among Turkish parents in Linz, followed by those in 
the two French cities, and then by Vienna and Stockholm.
The perceived importance of parents is highest by far in Paris. Almost 
every second child of Turkish immigrants reported that his or her parents 
were important to their studies. In the Austrian cities and in Strasbourg, 
the equivalent proportion was around one out of four. In Stockholm, parents 
seemed to have little importance in supporting their children’s studies. 
This finding is also reflected in almost all other aspects of parental sup-
port, indicating that Turkish parents in Sweden are least involved in their 
children’s education.
Figure 4.1  Mean and percentage distribution of the main indicators of parental 
support, by city
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
1 Importance of
parents
2a Controlled
homework
2b Talk about 
school
3a Help with
homework
3b Contact with
teachers
Overall parental
support index (2a
to 3b)
Mean
% Often/regularly
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Bars indicate the percentage distributions of the combined answer categories ‘regularly’ 
and ‘often’. Diamonds show the mean value of each group on the total scale (ranging from 1 to 5) 
of each indicator.

94
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Associations between parental involvement and family characteristics
In order to understand the varying levels of parental support and engage-
ment among Turkish families in the education-related activities of their 
children, correlations with the families’ composition will be examined. 
Several studies in the sociology of education, and in the area of child 
development, have underlined the strong association between parental 
involvement and family composition and structure (Dornbusch 1989; 
Dornbusch, Ritter, Leiderman, Roberts & Fraleigh 1987; Keefe, Padilla 
& Carlos 1979). To begin with, parents’ involvement in their children’s 
schooling is shaped by the resources and opportunities that parents have. 
Among these resources, parents’ own educational attainment and their 
socio-economic status have been shown to be positively associated with 
parents’ involvement in schools. Parents who have attained more in their 
own education are often found to be more frequently involved in their 
children’s schooling than parents with fewer educational qualifications 
(Crosnoe 2001). In addition, family structure seems to matter. The basic 
assumption is derived from the resource dilution theory (Downey 1995, 
2001) that suggests that the presence of siblings may have a negative impact 
on parental involvement. Both aspects outlined here are highly relevant 
to immigrant families. There are also two immigrant-specific aspects 
that have been found to be positively associated with the involvement of 
immigrant parents: the length of time parents have spent in the receiving 
country and their ability to speak the language of the receiving country 
(Turney & Kao 2009).
In chapter 2, I explored compositional differences in Turkish families 
across the five compared cities and found systematic variations in a number 
of selected aspects. In this section I will scrutinise whether, and to what 
extent, the degree of parental support provided by Turkish parents is as-
sociated with their levels of education, their host-country language abilities, 
the length of time they have resided in the host country, and family size. 
These indicators reflect differences in barriers to parental involvement 
across the three countries and five cities. Table 4.2 shows the correlation 
matrix for parental involvement and support indicators along with these 
family characteristics.
Parental support and the education levels of the parents
In general, the first results to note from table 4.2 are the highly significant 
and positive correlations between the parental support index and par-

Behind the Scenes: The Family Examined
95
ents’ levels of education. The higher the education levels of the parents, 
the more often they are able to support their children in school-related 
activities. This is the overall case in the three countries and in all five 
cities. In addition to this general trend, differences in the strength of as-
sociation can be seen when exploring the associations for each indicator 
separately. To begin with, in Austria, all measures of parental support 
provided by Turkish parents are highly associated with the fathers’ and 
mothers’ levels of education. This is not the case in France and Sweden, 
where concrete patterns of support seem to be related to the education 
levels of mothers rather than those of fathers. The estimated correlations 
between the parental support items are strongest in the Austrian cities, 
Linz and Vienna (ranging between 0.20 and 0.40), medium in the French 
cities (on average between 0.20 and 0.30) and lowest in Stockholm (below 
0.20).
Two additional points are worth highlighting: first, the perceived impor-
tance of the parents is significantly associated with the parents’ levels of 
education only in the Austrian cities. Second, in Stockholm, the frequency 
of meetings with the children’s teachers is not dependent on the education 
levels of the parents. Fathers and mothers with few educational credentials 
spend the same amount of time meeting with and talking to teachers as 
highly educated parents do.
Parental support and parents’ ability to speak the host country’s 
language
Previous studies revealed that parental support in school-related activities is 
highly dependent on the national language aptitude of the parents. Without 
obtaining language skills, Turkish fathers and mothers may face difficulties 
interacting with teachers and, as a result, may not be able to provide help 
with their children’s homework. The estimated correlations in table 4.2 
underline these previous findings for Austria, but do so to a lesser extent 
for France and Sweden. The better the language skills of the parents, the 
more often they are able to support their children (see correlations with 
the parental support index). The association between the parental support 
index and the national language ability of the parents is not, however, 
significant in the French cities. This finding is remarkable given that the 
lowest rate of ‘reasonable’ national language skills amongst Turkish fathers 
and mothers has been observed in France (see chapter 2).

96
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Parental support and length of time parents have spent in the receiving 
country
Parents who have lived longer in their receiving countries do not necessarily 
provide more support for their children than those who arrived more re-
cently. The initial argument that over the course of time parents were likely 
to gain information that could be beneficial in supporting their children 
in school-related activities turns out not to be tenable.
Table 4.2  Correlations between the dimensions of parental support and family 
characteristics
 
Father’s 
education 
back-
ground 
Mother’s 
education 
back-
ground
Parents’
host-
language 
ability 
Length of 
residence 
in host 
country 
Family 
size
Austria 
Vienna
Importance of parents 
0.18
*
0.16
*
0.32
***
n.s.
n.s.
Homework control
0.30
***
0.20
*
0.31
***
n.s.
n.s.
Talk about school
0.29
***
0.19
*
0.29
***
n.s.
n.s.
Help with homework
0.32
***
0.25
***
0.34
***
n.s.
-0.14
*
Contact with teachers 
0.27
***
ns
0.20
*
n.s.
n.s.
Parental support index 
0.35
***
0.21
***
0.33
***
n.s.
n.s.
Linz 
Importance of parents 
0.30
***
0.30
***
0.37
***
n.s.
n.s.
Homework control
0.29
***
0.27
***
0.37
***
n.s.
n.s.
Talk about school
0.35
***
0.33
***
0.38
***
n.s.
n.s.
Help with homework
0.32
***
0.38
***
0.41
***
n.s.
-0.13
*
Contact with teachers 
0.37
***
0.40
***
0.35
***
n.s.
-0.15
*
Parental support index 
0.39
***
0.40
***
0.45
***
n.s.
-0.17
*
France 
Paris
Importance of parents 
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Homework control
0.16
*
0.25
*
0.21
*
n.s.
n.s.
Talk about school
ns
0.16
*
0.22
*
n.s.
n.s.
Help with homework
0.28
***
0.31
***
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Contact with teachers 
ns
0.16
*
n.s.
n.s.
-0.20
*
Parental support index 
0.20
*
0.30
***
n.s.
n.s.
-0.16
*

Behind the Scenes: The Family Examined
97
 
Father’s 
education 
back-
ground 
Mother’s 
education 
back-
ground
Parents’
host-
language 
ability 
Length of 
residence 
in host 
country 
Family 
size
Strasbourg
Importance of parents 
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Homework control
0.16
*
0.20
*
0.18
*
n.s.
n.s.
Talk about school
0.21
*
0.24
*
0.21
*
n.s.
-0.22
*
Help with homework
0.24
***
0.29
***
n.s.
n.s.
-0.17
*
Contact with teachers 
0.16
*
0.26
***
n.s.
n.s.
-0.12
*
Parental support index 
0.24
***
0.32
***
n.s.
 
n.s.
-0.19
*
Sweden
Stockholm
Importance of parents 
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Homework control
n.s.
n.s.
0.13
*
n.s.
n.s.
Talk about school
0.17
*
0.24
***
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Help with homework
0.25
***
0.18
*
0.30
***
n.s.
-0.16
*
Contact with teachers 
n.s.
n.s.
0.14
*
n.s.
-0.15
*
Parental support index 
0.19
*
0.18
*
0.27
***
n.s.
-0.18
*
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Significance level: * p<0.05; *** p< 0.001. n.s.=Correlation not significant.
Parental support and family size
In line with findings from previous studies, negative correlations can be 
found between family size and the level of support provided by parents, 
especially in terms of practical support such as help with homework. When 
pro-scholastic resources have to be distributed among a large number of 
children in large families, the level of support per child seems to decline. 
Outliers in this respect are Turkish families in Vienna, where only help 
with homework was negatively correlated with family size. Furthermore, 
family size has a negative impact on contact with teachers in all cities except 
Vienna. Compared to the importance of parents’ education level, however, 
the strength of the correlations is lower.
Overall, the level of parental support provided by Turkish fathers and 
mothers is shaped by family composition and family characteristics in all 
three countries. This holds especially true for the associations between the 
dimension of support and the parents’ own levels of education. Clearly, the 
higher the education level of the parents, the more often they help their 
children in school activities. When comparing the strength of the estimated 
correlations for each dimension per explanatory variable, it appears that 

98
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
parental involvement and engagement is more strongly affected by family 
characteristics in Austria than in the French and Swedish cities. The next 
section looks at the concrete impact of parental support on the education 
outcomes of the Turkish second generation.
Parental influences on the education outcomes of second-generation 
Turks
How are parental influences and types of support associated with the 
performance of the Turkish second generation at school in the three 
countries? In this section, multivariate regression analysis is used to 
explore those associations. As a result of institutional differences in the 
education systems in Austria, France and Sweden, education credentials 
vary and are hard to compare (for a discussion, see chapter 3). For this 
reason, a slightly different strategy has been employed here to overcome 
difficulties in comparing education outcomes. This has been done by con-
centrating on early school leavers on the one hand, and on high achievers 
on the other, as the main dependent variables. The high achievers category 
comprises students who have already achieved or are currently studying 
at post-secondary or tertiary level, and the early school-leavers category 
is made up of students who stopped their education after lower-secondary 
school (OECD 2005: 36). From this point on, ‘leaving school early’ and 
‘achieving a post-secondary/tertiary level’ will serve as the dependent 
variables for education outcomes in this section. Both variables have 
been proven to be highly comparable across countries and cities (Crul et 
al. 2012; OECD 2005). There is a potential advantage to using these two 
education outcomes as dependent variables. All questions about family 
influences and support were asked in relation to the period of compulsory 
education when the Turkish second generation was aged between twelve 
and fifteen. Estimating the impact that family influences have on leav-
ing school early (directly after compulsory education), we can explore 
the effects on an event occurring immediately after the time period in 
which parental support had taken place. Examining the role of family 
influences on high achievers – the second dependent variable – allowed 
the exploration of their effects on long-term education outcome. Enter-
ing any type of post-secondary education happens, on average, two to 
three years after compulsory education ends, and is therefore after the 
time when the survey asked about parental support. Looking at entering 
post-secondary education (high achievers) helps to determine whether 
parental involvement in children’s education in the most crucial time 

Behind the Scenes: The Family Examined
99
period is linked to academic or behavioural success at a later stage in 
their education careers.
Table 4.3 reports the descriptive distributions of early school leavers 
and high achievers in the five cities. In line with the findings discussed in 
chapter 3, the proportion of high-achievers is highest in Paris and Stock-
holm, followed by Strasbourg and then the Austrian cities. However, in 
Paris and Stockholm, only around 9 per cent leave school early, while the 
group of early school leavers in Vienna is almost three times as high. Linz 
and Strasbourg share the same number of early school leavers, at around 
19 per cent.
Table 4.3  Early school leaving and achieving post-secondary/tertiary education, by 
group and city (%)
Austria
France
Sweden
 
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Early school leaver
29.7
19.4
9.0
19.0
9.2
High achiever
14.3
22.8
57.7
31.0
47.4
Source: TIES 2007-2008
Binomial logistic regression2 is used in order to explore the impact that 
parental support has on whether second-generation Turks leave school early 
or become high-achievers. Both dependent variables are dummy variables 
set to 1, where the final outcome was early school leaving or achieving a 
post-secondary/tertiary level of education. In total, up to three models of 
increasing complexity have been employed. The first model (M1) included 
all parental involvement indicators as separate measures. The second step 
(M2) tested for the parents’ levels of education, and their host-country 
language ability was added to the analysis in order to explore whether 
patterns of parental support remained statistically significant, even after 
checking for family background characteristics. The final model (M3) drops 
all separate indicators of parental involvement and instead includes the 
combined parents support index. The aim is to provide a general picture 
of whether parental support, measured as a combination of all separate 
items, exerts any influence on education outcomes. All models are further 
controlled for age, gender and city (e.g. Vienna versus Linz).
2	
Please refer to Appendix B for details on model specifications and robustness checks.

100
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Early school leaving and parental involvement
Table 4.4 displays the results for early school leaving by second-generation 
Turks in the three countries. The first point to take away from these estimates 
is that more frequent discussions between parents and their children about 
their schooling reduces the odds of being an early school leaver in Austria 
and France. Further, this type of parental control remains significant once 
we also test for parents’ levels of education and their language ability (M2). 
In other words, children who had more frequent exchanges about their 
school activities with their parents were less likely to drop out of school after 
compulsory education, irrespective of the parents’ levels of education or 
language skills. On the other hand, parental involvement by Turkish fathers 
and mothers seems not to affect this education outcome significantly. With 
respect to parents’ education levels, the estimates presented in table 4.4 
verify the patterns already observed in chapter 3: the level of education 
of the parents remains an important determinant of schooling success. 
At the same time, its magnitude and significance vary across countries. 
Second-generation Turks are most dependent on their parents’ education 
backgrounds in Austria, followed by France and then Sweden. Controlling 
for parents’ education levels further explains the city differences in early 
school-leaving among second-generation Turks in Vienna and Linz.
In chapters 2 and 3, we saw that Turkish parents in Linz had higher 
education profiles than Turkish parents in Vienna, which seems to ex-
plain the lower rate of early school leavers among the second generation 
in Linz. In France, city differences remain significant even after adjusting 
the estimates for differences in parents’ education levels and schooling 
involvement, with the Turkish second generation in Paris still being half as 
likely to leave school early as their age-mates in Strasbourg.3
The last model (M3) provides a more general picture of the role played by 
parental support in early school leaving by summing up all four separate 
support items in one index. The results reveal that in Austria, parental 
support reduces the odds of being an early school leaver significantly – but 
this is not the case in France or Sweden. Thus, it is not only the education 
levels of the parents and the available resources that matter in Austria, but 
also the amount of time and the level of support that is provided by the 
3	
Additionally, interaction terms between all indicators of parental support and the capital 
city (Vienna/Paris) have been included in a separate model (not shown). None of the interaction 
terms was statistically significant, indicating that the results presented in table 4.4 (and in table 
4.5) are similar for second-generation Turks in each survey city.

Behind the Scenes: The Family Examined
101
parents to prevent their children from leaving school early. When turning 
to the results for France and Sweden, the parental support index cannot be 
found to have had any significant impact. In other words, whether Turkish 
families support their children frequently or not does not significantly 
affect the odds of them leaving school early in Sweden and France, once 
all the measures are taken as a whole. The varying importance of parental 
involvement in the school-related activities of second-generation Turks 
Table 4.4  Binomial logistic regression of leaving school early for second-generation 
Turks (odds ratios)
Austria
France
Sweden
 
M1
M2
M3
M1
M2
M3
M1
M2
M3
Importance of 
parents
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
 
 
Homework control
n.s.
n.s.
–
n.s. 
n.s. 
–
n.s.
n.s.
–
 
 
Talk about school
0.70*
0.73*
–
0.63** 0.64**
–
n.s.
n.s.
–
(0.11)
(0.11)
 
(0.10)
(0.10)
 
Help with 
homework
n.s.
n.s.
–
n.s.
n.s.
–
n.s.
n.s.
–
 
 
Contact with 
teachers
n.s.
n.s.
–
n.s.
n.s. 
–
n.s.
n.s.
–
 
 
Parental support 
index
– 
0.67**
– 
n.s.
–
n.s.
(0.09)
 
Parents’ 
education level
0.64***
(0.08)
0.63***
(0.08)
0.66**
(0.11)
0.66**
(0.11)
0.71*
(0.18)
0.71*
(0.19)
 
 
Parents’ host-
country language 
ability
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
 
 
Capital city 
1.72*
n.s.
n.s.
0.38** 0.42**
0.50*
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
 
(0.41)
 
 
(0.11)
(0.13)
(0.14)
 
 
 
R2 
0.11
0.17
0.15
0.11
0.14
0.11
0.07
0.09
0.08
N.
458
458
458
498
498
499
251
251
251
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Levels of significance: * p<0.05; **p< 0.01; *** p< 0.001. n.s.=variable included in regression, 
but results are not significant. n.a.=Not applicable. All models are controlled for age and gender.

102
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
becomes even more pronounced once the chances of leaving school early 
are displayed in relation to levels of parental support.
Figure 4.2 shows, per city, the predicted probability of leaving school 
early along the parental support index for parents with the same levels 
of education (lower-secondary). In Austria, as support from their parents 
increases, the chances that students will leave school early declines sharply. 
The predicted probability of being an early school leaver in France and 
Sweden is relatively small, independent of the support provided by parents, 
and almost detached from parental involvement.
Figure 4.2  Predicted probability of leaving school early for second-generation 
Turks, by city and parental support index
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Low
Parental support index
High
Linz
Vienna
Strasbourg
Paris
Stockholm
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Note: Parents’ education level is set to ‘lower-secondary education’ while all other independent 
variables are set to mean.

Behind the Scenes: The Family Examined
103
High achievers and parental involvement
When turning to the highest end of the education spectrum, becoming a 
high achiever, the results from binomial logistic regression for children of 
Turkish origin show similar trends. To begin with, entering a level beyond 
upper-secondary education seems to be unrelated to any type of parental 
involvement in Sweden. The only significant driver for being a high achiever 
is clearly the education level of parents. In Austria, children with parents 
who talked frequently with them about school showed increased odds 
of being high achievers. More precisely, with an increase of one unit on 
the ‘talking about school’ scale (for example, from ‘frequently’ to ‘often’) 
children’s odds of entering post-secondary level double. So, as with the 
findings for leaving school early, talking about school remains important 
for second-generation Turks in Austria, even after controlling for parents’ 
education levels.
How frequently school is talked about is also an important aspect when 
becoming a high-achiever in France, although it’s less important in France 
than in Austria. Also, the more second-generation Turks considered their 
parents as important in their schooling activities, the higher became the 
odds of their reaching the top of the education ladder. Both indicators 
remain significant, even after considering parents’ levels of education. 
Surprisingly, after testing for parents’ education levels and the aptitude of 
parents in the French language, helping with homework becomes signifi-
cant. The more parents had to help their children, the smaller their odds of 
becoming high achievers. Finally, city differences remain highly significant 
in favour of Paris. The odds of being a high achiever are one-and-a-half times 
higher here than in Strasbourg. Model 3 in table 4.5 shows the results for 
the combined index of parental support. Taking all types of involvement 
together reveals a strong and positive association for second-generation 
Turks in Austria but not in France or Sweden.

104
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Table 4.5  Binomial logistic regression of achieving post-secondary/tertiary 
education for second-generation Turks (odds ratios)
Austria
France
Sweden
 
M1
M2
M3
M1
M2
M3
M1
M2
M3
Importance of 
parents
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
1.29**
(0.10)
1.27**
(0.11)
1.26**
(0.10)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
 
 
Homework 
control
n.s.
n.s.
–
n.s.
n.s.
–
n.s.
n.s.
–
 
 
Talk about school
2.19***
2.19***
–
1.32*
1.32*
–
n.s.
n.s.
–
(0.42)
(0.42)
(0.15)
(0.15)
 
Help with 
homework
n.s.
n.s.
–
n.s.
0.74**
(0.08)
–
n.s.
n.s.
–
 
 
Contact with 
teachers
n.s.
n.s.
–
n.s.
n.s.
–
n.s.
n.s.
–
 
 
Parental support 
index
– 
1.62**
(0.27)
 
–
n.s.
–
n.s.
 
 
Parents’ educa-
tion levels
1.40**
(0.18)
1.37*
(0.17)
 
1.37**
(0.13)
1.32**
(0.12)
1.18*
(0.11)
1.16*
(0.10)
 
 
Parents’ host-
country language 
ability
n.s.
n.s.
 
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
 
 
City (Capital)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
3.07*** 2.91*** 2.45***
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
 
 
 
 
(0.63)
(0.61)
(0.49)
 
 
 
R2
0.16
0.19
0.12
0.15
0.20
0.16
0.11
0.14
0.11
N.
458
458
458
498
498
498
251
251
251
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Levels of significance: * p<0.05; **p< 0.01; *** p< 0.001. n.s.=Variable included in regression, 
but results are not significant. n.a.=Not applicable. All models are controlled for age and gender.
As displayed in figure 4.3, the predicted probability of second-generation 
Turks in Austria climbing the education ladder to the highest level without 
any parental support was below 10 per cent. The more support these children 
got at home, the sharper the increase in their chances of reaching the upper 
rungs of the ladder. In contrast to the trends in Austria, but similar to 
findings in figure 4.2, parental support does not play an extraordinary role 
in Paris, Strasbourg, or Stockholm.

Behind the Scenes: The Family Examined
105
Figure 4.3  Predicted probability of achieving a post-secondary/tertiary education 
for second-generation Turks, by city and parental support index
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Low
Parental support index
High
Linz
Vienna
Strasbourg
Paris
Stockholm
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Note: Parents’ education level is set to ‘lower-secondary education’ while all other independent 
variables are set to mean.
Although not statistically significant, by displaying the predicted prob-
ability of achieving a post-secondary/tertiary level of education, a slight 
‘reverse effect’ in terms of the effect of parental support can be seen in 
France and Sweden. Second-generation Turks in the French cities and in 
Stockholm have a reduced probability of achieving the highest levels of 
education when there are increased levels of parental support. The results 
displayed in figure 4.3 indicate that in the French and Swedish education 
systems, Turkish parents provide support when their child is not performing 
well at school.

106
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
4.3	
Older siblings’ involvement as social capital
While family involvement has been a substantial focus in social capital 
theory and in the sociology of education, literature on the role played 
by particularly older siblings, in supporting younger family members 
is scarce. In this section, I aim to overcome this limitation by arguing 
that siblings’ involvement in the schooling of their younger brothers and 
sisters can be conceptualised as an important form of social capital as 
well because the mechanisms are similar to those of parental involve-
ment. Older siblings can play a crucial role in the socialisation process by 
acting as a positive or negative role model by promoting forms of control 
within the family, or by providing additional concrete support through 
participation.
Figure 4.4  Mean and percentage distribution of the main indicators of sibling 
support, by city
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
1 Importance of siblings
2 Helping with homework
3 Talking about school
Overall sibling support index 
(2 & 3)
Mean
% Often/regularly
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Note: Bars indicate the percentage distributions of the combined answer categories ‘regularly’ and 
‘often’. Diamonds show the mean value of each group on the total scale (ranging from 1 to 5) of each 
indicator.
The empirical dimensions of ‘sibling involvement’ used in this section, 
including measures of sibling control and participation, are similar to 
those used for parental involvement. In addition, a third measure is added, 
the perceived importance of siblings. All three measures are five-point 

Behind the Scenes: The Family Examined
107
scales ranging from low (1) to high (5). The descriptive outcomes of these 
three dimensions are displayed in figure 4.4.4 The degree to which siblings 
are perceived as being of importance in supporting the Turkish second 
generation with their studies reveals that they have been evaluated as 
important persons for second-generation Turks in the Austrian cities, 
followed by Stockholm and the French cities (left side of figure 4.4). It is 
important to note that significant variations exist between Vienna and 
Linz.
Turning to participation, measured as the frequency with which siblings 
helped with homework, we again find this pattern in the two Austrian 
cities more often than in France or Sweden. It is worth noting that second-
generation Turks in Stockholm were only very infrequently supported in 
their homework by their older siblings. Similar to the outcomes for parental 
involvement, talking about schooling as a form of family control is the most 
common type of support. But on average, the ranking of cities and countries 
according to the frequency with which parents and children talk about 
school remains, as does the ranking that measures the frequency of help 
with homework. Interestingly, the results for older siblings’ control and 
participation resemble the findings and rankings for the same parental 
indicators. The last measure (right side of figure 4.4) shows the sum of the 
siblings’ control and participation as a mean index in order to provide a 
general picture of sibling support.
In his qualitative investigations into the importance of older siblings 
in terms of the school results achieved by children of immigrants in the 
Netherlands, Crul (2000a, b) has shown that it is often the older siblings 
who provide their younger brothers and sisters with relevant informa-
tion on and support in school activities, especially when parents do not 
possess the means to support their children in their studies. The findings 
of the correlation matrix in table 4.6 partially support this argument for 
second-generation Turks in France and Sweden. Here, the more parents are 
involved in their children`s school activities, the less important are their 
older siblings (right column of table 4.6, negative correlations). At the same 
time, the concrete involvement of older siblings is not related to parental 
support. The strongest polarisation between countries can be seen when we 
consider the strength and direction of the correlation between parents’ and 
older siblings’ involvement in Austria, where the results are the diametric 
opposite. They show that the more parents are involved, the higher the 
engagement and support provided by the older siblings as well.
4	
The descriptive analysis is limited to respondents with older siblings.

108
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Table 4.6  Correlations between the dimensions of sibling support and family 
characteristics
Family size
Parental support index
Austria 
Vienna
Importance of siblings 
0.31 ***
0.13 *
Help with homework
0.25 ***
0.18 ***
Talk about school
0.28 ***
0.24 ***
Sibling support index 
0.27 ***
0.21 ***
Linz
Importance of siblings 
0.21 *
0.20 ***
Help with homework
0.24 *
0.24 ***
Talk about school
0.16 *
0.26 ***
Sibling support index 
0.21 *
0.26 ***
France 
Paris
Importance of siblings 
0.15 *
-0.23 ***
Help with homework
0.21 *
n.s.
Talk about school
0.25 ***
n.s.
Sibling support index 
0.25 *
n.s.
Strasbourg
Importance of siblings 
0.12 *
-0.28 ***
Help with homework
0.13 *
n.s.
Talk about school
0.18 *
n.s.
Sibling support index 
0.17 *
n.s.  
Sweden
Stockholm
Importance of siblings 
n.s.
-0.13 *
Help with homework
0.21 *
n.s.
Talk about school
n.s.
n.s.
Sibling support index 
0.18 *
n.s.  
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Levels of significance: * p<0.05; *** p< 0.001. n.s.=Correlation not significant.

Behind the Scenes: The Family Examined
109
The results we saw in table 4.2 make clear that involvement by Turkish 
parents in their children’s schooling in Austria is highly dependent on the 
education level and the ability of those parents to speak the host country’s 
language. Taking these together, it seems there is a stronger link between 
the family characteristics and school involvement of second-generation 
Turks in Austria.
Table 4.6 shows that in all countries, the amount of support provided 
by older siblings increases with family size. Downey (1995) stated that the 
presence of siblings may be negatively related to parental involvement, 
and this has been proven in table 4.2 as well. But the results presented 
here indicate that there seems to be a shift of responsibility towards older 
siblings when there is an increase in family size (table 4.6). At the same 
time, the larger the family size, the higher the likelihood of having older 
siblings who can provide school support.
Older siblings’ involvement and education outcomes
How is the support of older siblings related to early school-leaving and high 
achievement? Does older siblings’ involvement in school-related activities 
exert any influence beyond that of parental involvement on the education 
outcomes of the Turkish second generation? In order to answer these ques-
tions, I will proceed with a similar methodological approach to the one I 
used for parental involvement. Applying binomial logistic regression on 
both early school leaving and the likelihood of achieving post-secondary 
level, the siblings’ support items are included stepwise. Model 2 sets out 
the total number of older siblings and shows whether those older siblings 
left school without a diploma. This is done in order explore whether there 
are significant effects from sibling involvement, and whether those effects 
are related to the number of siblings and/or to their levels of education. In 
a last step, parents’ education level, parental support and language ability 
are added as control variables.5
Overall, the results of the regression estimates indicate similar patterns 
to those of parental involvement. In Austria, increased support from older 
siblings significantly reduces the odds of being an early school leaver beyond 
the effects of parental support or parents’ education levels. However, it 
increases the chance of becoming a high achiever (results are presented in 
5	
Respondents without older siblings were now set to ‘no support’. I re-estimated all regression 
models for those having older siblings only obtaining very similar results. In order to avoid small 
case numbers, those without older siblings were included in the analysis as described before.

110
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Appendix B). In other words, the success in education of second-generation 
Turks in the Austrian education system is highly dependent on the educa-
tion levels of their parents, and the degree of involvement and support by 
parents and older siblings. By contrast, and in line with the findings on 
parental involvement, older siblings’ support is not significantly associated 
with the two dependent variables in France and Sweden. The effects of 
sibling support on early school-leaving and on achieving a post-secondary/
tertiary education level are displayed as predicted probabilities in figure 
4.5 and figure 4.6.
Figure 4.5  Predicted probability of leaving school early for second-generation 
Turks, by city and sibling support index
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Low
Sibling
support
index
High
Linz
Vienna
Strasbourg
Paris
Stockholm
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Note: Parents’ education level is set to ‘lower-secondary education’ while all other independent 
variables are set to mean. Full models are presented in Appendix B.

Behind the Scenes: The Family Examined
111
Figure 4.6  Predicted probability of achieving post-secondary/tertiary education for 
second-generation Turks, by city and sibling support index
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Low
Sibling
support
 index
High
Linz
Vienna
Strasbourg
Paris
Stockholm
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Note: Parents’ education level is set to ‘lower-secondary education’ while all other independent 
variables are set to mean. Full models are presented in Appendix B.
4.4	
Do Turkish families muster more family support for 
education?
The discussion now moves on to the question of whether Turkish parents 
engage more or less in the school-related activities of their children than 
parents of the comparison group. Many studies have shown that because 
of their need to build new lives in their receiving countries, immigrant 
families frequently see education as an investment in their children as 
individuals, as well as in the entire family (Lauglo 2000; Nauck 1997; Suárez 
Orozco 1991). Immigrant parents often possess high levels of educational 
aspiration and have high expectations of their children. These, in turn, may 
translate into higher levels of parental support, which effectively transmit 
their ambitions to their children (Brinbaum & Cebolla Boado 2007; Kao 
2004; Zhou & Bankston 1998). At the same time, immigrant parents may 

112
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
want to be engaged in their children’s school activities but may be limited 
in their ability to do so because of challenges such as lack of information. 
This section asks whether more involvement and more frequent parental 
support lead to greater chances of educational success for second-generation 
Turks compared to the comparison group.
Table 4.7  Importance of parental and sibling support during compulsory school, by 
group and city
 
Austria 
France
Sweden
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm 
 
2 GT CG
2 GT
CG
2 GT
CG
2 GT
CG
2 GT
CG
Full sample 
PSI
3.0 
2.9 n.s.
3.2
2.9 **
2.9
3.3 ***
2.8
3.4
***
2.5
2.5
n.s.
SSI 
2.1
1.5 ***
2.4
1.7
***
1.9
1.7
n.s.
2.3
1.6
***
2.1
1.7
***
Only parents with lower-secondary education or below
PSI
2.8
2.9 n.s.
2.8
2.5 n.s.
2.8
3.0
n.s.
2.6
3.2
*
2.4
2.3
n.s.
SSI
2.1
1.9
n.s.
2.3
2.0 n.s.
1.9
1.8
n.s.
2.4
2.0
n.s.
2.4
2.2
n.s.
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: PSI=Parental support index. SSI=Sibling support index. Levels of significance (t-test, 
two-sided): group means are statistically significant on * p<0.05 level; **p< 0.01 level; *** p< 0.001 
level. n.s.=Results are not significant. 2GT=Second-generation Turks. CG=Comparison group.
Table 4.7 takes a first look at this question by summarising the descriptive 
outcomes among second-generation Turks and the comparison group. For 
the sake of brevity, the two additional support indices (parents and older 
siblings) are considered. The first two columns show the mean results for 
each group, per city, for the full sample of the TIES survey. The lower part 
of table 4.7 tests whether differences in the involvement of parents and 
older siblings can be attributed to differences in parents’ education levels, 
by displaying the results for respondents of similar education backgrounds.
Overall, the mean level of parental support is relatively equal among 
families in all three countries. Means, in terms of the parental support scale, 
range between 2.5 (sometimes) and 3 (regularly). Significant variations 
between parents can be observed in the French cities, with parents of the 
comparison group showing on average slightly higher levels of support. 
Significant group differences also appear in Linz. But contrary to the French 

Behind the Scenes: The Family Examined
113
cities, in Linz Turkish parents are more involved in the school activities of 
their children than non-Turkish parents.
Parental support is less common in families with lower levels of education 
(presented at the bottom of table 4.7). The average support drops for parents 
of the comparison group as well as for Turkish parents once we hold the 
parents’ education levels constant in all cities. Most importantly, once the 
results are adjusted for differences in the education backgrounds of parents, 
the significant variations in parental support in Linz and Paris disappear. 
The only significant difference remains among parents in Strasbourg, with 
Turkish parents providing significantly less support than parents of the 
comparison group. In all other cities, parental support does not vary among 
less-educated parents.
Once we turn to the involvement of siblings, clear group differences 
emerge. On average, second-generation Turks receive more support from 
their older siblings than the comparison group (with the exception of 
families in Paris). The lower incidence of support patterns in the families 
of the comparison group seem to be related to the education levels of the 
parents. Once we compare older siblings’ involvement and support in the 
school activities of second-generation Turks whose parents have low levels 
of education, significant differences disappear in all five survey cities. 
Moreover, the average frequency of the support provided increases in 
families with less-educated parents. Older brothers and sisters become 
important for younger students, irrespective of their migrant background, 
when their parents do not possess high levels of education and when they 
lack the resources or the information to support their children.
Table 4.8 shows the results of a binomial logistic regression of achieving 
a post-secondary/tertiary education level.6 It includes parental support 
and older sibling support indices, looks at the perceived importance of 
the family members in question, and has the parents’ education levels as a 
control variable.7 Results for Austria indicate that more frequent parental 
involvement and support significantly increases the odds of becoming a 
high achiever. The more parents are able to participate in and control the 
school activities of their children, the higher the children’s chances of being 
successful in the Austrian education system. This finding holds constant 
regardless of the results of testing for the education levels of the parents. In 
6	
The number of early school leavers among the comparison group in France and Sweden 
(compare with Chapter 3) is too small to conduct a meaningful analysis.
7	
Parents’ ability in the national language (for example, German in Austria) had to be removed 
from the models since it was not asked of the comparison group.

114
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
other words, parental involvement is an important factor for educational 
success in Austria regardless of parents’ education backgrounds. Moreover, 
parents seem to be crucial to the educational attainment process since the 
older siblings’ involvement index is not significant.
Table 4.8  Binomial logistic regression of achieving post-secondary/tertiary 
education (odds ratios)
 
Austria
France
Sweden
Second-generation Turks
0.68*
n.s.
n.s.
 
(0.13)
 
 
Importance of parents
n.s.
1.26**
n.s.
 
 
(0.09)
Parental support index
1.70*
n.s.
n.s.
 
(0.21)
 
 
Importance of siblings
n.s. 
n.s.
n.s.
 
 
 
 
Older sibling support index
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
 
 
 
 
Parent’s education level
1.80***
1.62***
1.23*
 
(0.14)
(0.12)
(0.09)
Capital city 
n.s. 
1.67***
n.a.
 
 
(0.26)
 
R2
0.17
0.22
0.16
N.
929
847
475
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Levels of significance: * p<0.05; **p< 0.01; *** p< 0.001. n.s.=Variable included in regression, 
but results are not significant. n.a.=not applicable. All models are controlled for age and gender. 
Capital city refers to Vienna in Austria and Paris in France.
The findings also reveal that second-generation Turks in Austria remain 
significantly less likely to achieve a post-secondary/tertiary level of educa-
tion, even after statistically controlling for family involvement and parents’ 
levels of education. This is not the case in France, where group differences 
are not significant once we test for the parents’ education backgrounds and 
for family involvement. In line with previous findings for second-generation 
Turks, the chances of achieving a post-secondary/tertiary education level 
increase in line with greater frequency of perceived importance of the role 
of parents in school activities. Turning finally to the findings for Stockholm, 
none of the measures for family involvement have a significant effect on 
being a high achiever. The only significant influence is parents’ levels of edu-
cation. The higher the parents’ levels of education, the greater the chances 
of their children climbing to the top of the education ladder. Comparing 

Behind the Scenes: The Family Examined
115
the size of this indicator across countries, however, shows that students are 
least dependent on the education backgrounds of their parents in Sweden 
and most dependent in Austria.
But do these identified patterns differ between second-generation 
Turks and their comparison groups? The regression models in table 4.8 
were used to test for differential effects through interaction between 
the parental and older siblings’ support index and second-generation 
Turks. Table 4.9 shows the results of these interaction terms. A significant 
and positive result indicates that the variable under consideration is of 
greater importance for second-generation Turks than for the comparison 
group. Table 4.9 shows that no significant differential effects for second-
generation Turks in France or Sweden can be observed. Thus, the insig-
nificant role played by parental and older sibling involvement in children 
becoming high achievers that was observed in table 4.8 applies equally 
to both groups and therefore to the whole student population in France 
and Sweden.
Table 4.9  Interaction effects of family support and the second generation (odds 
ratios)
Austria
France
Sweden
Parental support X second-generation Turks
1.41*
(0.22)
n.s.
n.s.
Sibling support X second-generation Turks
1.26*
(0.17)
n.s.
n.s.
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Models in this table are the same as those in previous models (see table 22) and estimates 
are based on the same sample. Levels of significance: * p<0.05; **p< 0.01; *** p< 0.001.
Contrary to what holds true for France and Sweden, the effects of the 
involvement of the Turkish second generation’s parents and older siblings 
are significant and positive in Austria, indicating that both types of involve-
ment are of greater importance for second-generation Turks than for the 
comparison group. For example, parental support and involvement seems 
to be positively related to educational success for students in the Austrian 
education system (table 4.8). But second-generation Turks seem even more 
dependent on the frequency of support and involvement provided by their 
parents. Interestingly, while the overall model presented in table 4.8 did not 
indicate that older siblings’ involvement had a significant impact, the terms 
of the interaction made it clear that support provided by older brothers 

116
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
and sisters is a major driver of educational success for second-generation 
Turks in Austria.
4.5	
Conclusion
This chapter has looked behind the scenes by exploring patterns of involve-
ment and support in the school-related activities of Turkish families in 
Austria, Sweden and France. It has further examined how these involvement 
patterns are related to family composition, and how different types of 
support are linked to the education outcomes of second-generation Turks 
across different countries. Additionally, this chapter has focused not only on 
the role played by parents but has broadened that perspective by including 
the involvement of older siblings as a form of family social capital.
A number of key findings have emerged. Firstly, the frequency of parental 
involvement by Turkish parents varies from country to country. On average, 
it is most frequent in Austria, followed by France, and is least frequent in 
Sweden. At the same time, parental involvement is most dependent on certain 
compositional family factors in Austria. For example, the higher the levels of 
education of the parents, or the better their language skills in German, the 
more frequently they support their children in their schooling. Although 
some of these factors significantly influence parental involvement in Sweden 
and France as well, the magnitudes were greatest in the Austrian cities.
When turning to the relationship between education outcomes and 
parental involvement, a similar ranking can be observed across countries. 
The educational success of second-generation Turks in Austria is much more 
dependent on various forms of support provided by their parents when 
compared to their counterparts in France and Sweden. More precisely, the 
more time parents spend with their children discussing their studies, the 
higher the chances are that their children will continue with their school-
ing to the top of the education system. This finding remains significant 
even after controlling for parents’ education backgrounds. In other words, 
parental involvement does increase the odds of not leaving school early and 
of becoming a high achiever, irrespective of the parents’ levels of education. 
Talking about school has been found to be of importance in both education 
outcomes in France as well. In sharp contrast to these findings, parental 
support does not play a significant role in the educational attainment of 
second-generation Turks in Sweden, either in terms of not leaving school 
early or in terms of becoming a high achiever.

Behind the Scenes: The Family Examined
117
Talking to their children about their studies is the most common type 
of parental involvement. It’s one way in which parents can communicate 
their expectations to their children, which also seems to translate into 
better school results. Parental participation, the second aspect of parental 
involvement, was found overwhelmingly to be not significantly related to 
school results.
Examining the role of older siblings’ involvement in the school activities 
of their younger brothers and sisters, it emerged that in Sweden and France 
the importance of older siblings for second-generation Turks increased when 
parental support was scarce. These results are in line with the findings of 
Crul (2000a, b) for immigrant families in the Netherlands. Older siblings 
seem to become a source of support when their parents are less involved in 
schooling. In contrast with France and Sweden, findings for Austria indicate 
high and positive correlations between parental and sibling involvement. 
Most importantly, the educational success of second-generation Turks in 
Austria is dependent on the extra support they receive from older siblings 
– beyond parental involvement and education background. No such signifi-
cant effects were observed for sibling support in either France or Sweden.
Taken together, the results show that the educational success of second-
generation Turks in Austria is highly dependent on the support provided by 
the family. At the same time, only those Turkish fathers and mothers who 
are equipped with higher educational credentials and advanced skills in 
the German language are able to support their children – and that is still 
a minority in the Turkish community (see chapter 2).
But the results of the last section revealed that the ‘pressure on the 
family’ to support their children is not per se a characteristic of Turkish 
families but rather a specific aspect of the Austrian education system. When 
looked at in relation to the comparison group, it was revealed that family 
involvement and support is an important aspect of the Austrian education 
system for all groups, while it is almost absent in France and Sweden. At 
the same time, results show that second-generation Turks are still more 
reliant on educational support from their parents than are the children of 
the comparison group.
A few features of my measurements should be kept in mind when 
interpreting these findings. Firstly, the information about family support 
was drawn directly from the respondents, and so it is possible that their 
reports of parents’ and older siblings’ involvement were subject to a social 
desirability effect in that they may have over-reported their involvement. 
However, there is no evidence that second-generation Turks would be more 
likely to over-report their families’ involvement than would the comparison 

118
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
group. Secondly, the available survey items on involvement do not capture 
all of the potential ways in which parents or older siblings may be involved 
in school-related activities. However, regardless of these limitations, cross-
country variations remain very strong and point towards country-specific 
trends.
Even without considering the institutional arrangements of the three 
education systems at this stage of the analysis, the findings of this chapter 
already point towards one major structural variation in those systems: as 
explained in the introduction to this book, one major distinction between 
the three education systems is the half-day school system in Austria, and 
full-time education in France and Sweden. Keeping this institutional dif-
ference in mind helps us to understand the extraordinary importance of 
family support for the school careers of young adolescents in Austria, as well 
as its relative non-significance in France and Sweden. The family becomes 
the main focal point of an education system which delegates learning and 
homework to the family home. In this context, the success of students 
is highly dependent on the actual help provided and the time families 
spend with their children or brothers and sisters. By contrast, in the case 
of systems like those in France and Sweden, which offer full-time educa-
tion and supervised homework tutorials in schools, the role of additional 
help provided by parents at home becomes important once their children 
face difficulties and need extra help in addition to the support on offer in 
schools. Again, even without taking the structural characteristics of the 
education systems per se into account, the results of this chapter already 
provide a first glance at interactions between institutional arrangements 
and individual-level factors.
Chapter 3 and chapter 4 have focused solely on individual-level charac-
teristics related to the family of origin and the resources they have available. 
But previous studies found that children of immigrants who do not possess 
high levels of support at home develop strategies and establish networks 
outside the family in order to access resources that are not available within 
their families. Specifically, close friends and teachers have been recognised 
as significant agents in strengthening the upward mobility of immigrant 
children at school. Chapter 5 examines the role of networks outside the 
family in the educational attainment of second-generation Turks in various 
settings.

5	
Beyond the Family: Peers and Teachers
5.1	
Introduction
When explaining the educational success of the children of immigrants, the 
greatest attention has been paid to the characteristics of their families of 
origin. Previous studies of the second generation in the United States have 
revealed, however, that outside-family networks can provide additional 
resources which can help to overcome their often disadvantaged position 
at school (Gándara et al. 2004; Gibson et al. 2004; Kao 2001; Stanton-Salazar 
2001, 2004, 2011). Specifically, close friends and teachers have been recognised 
as significant agents in strengthening the upward mobility of immigrant 
children. Up to now, no systematic research has been conducted in Europe 
on the role of networks outside the family for second-generation Turks. This 
chapter aims to fill that gap. It analyses two types of social relationship: (1) 
the role of peer groups and (2) the role of teachers, by describing the strength 
of these relationships and the impact they have on education outcomes.
This chapter raises the question of whether relationships with peers and 
teachers provide, in addition to the family of origin, support for the educa-
tional success of the Turkish second generation in Austria, France and Sweden. 
It further asks whether second-generation Turks are more reliant in some 
countries than in others on non-family resources to negotiate their way effec-
tively through the education system with the aim of successfully completing 
their schooling. To answer these questions, the next section summarises the 
theoretical conclusions of previous studies of peers and teachers as mediating 
actors in the process of educational attainment. Subsequent sections then 
examine the role that outside-family networks play in the education outcomes 
of second-generation Turks empirically and from a comparative perspective.
5.2	
Social relationships with peers and teachers
The role of peer groups
Research into the role of peers has long demonstrated that age-mates 
and close friends play a crucial role in influencing adolescents’ behaviour 
and cognitive processes, such as academic engagement and achievement 
(Campbell 1980; Duncan, Boisjoly & Harris 2001). Young adolescents spend 
much more time with age-mates and peers than they do with anyone else. 

120
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
They meet their closest friends at school or during leisure time to exchange 
information about common experiences in daily life. The relative influence 
of peer groups and the mechanisms through which they operate to affect 
education outcomes are threefold (Kao 2001):
1	
The relative importance of peers versus parents in determining 
education outcomes
Adolescence is marked by increasing social interaction with friends at the 
expense of family, and peers are commonly seen as being almost as important 
to adolescents as their families (Raley 2004). This is particularly the case for 
school experiences because learning does not happen in a vacuum but rather 
in the context of interaction with friends, classmates and age-mates. The sig-
nificant impact of social interaction with peers in the educational attainment 
process for immigrant youth has been intensively shown in qualitative studies 
into Mexican descendants in the United States (Gibson et al. 2004; Raley 2004; 
Stanton-Salazar 2004). The major finding of these studies is that close friends 
are important for children of immigrants because they give them access to 
alternative resources and information that foster educational attainment. 
Compared to native-born students, the immigrant second generation has to 
rely more on peer contact in the educational achievement process because of a 
lack of pro-scholastic networks and embedded resources in their own families.
2	
Specific mechanisms of peer influence
Since students often rely on the ascribed and achieved characteristics of 
their peers, their schooling decisions and educational attainment are to a 
large extent shaped by the educational behaviour and values of their peers. 
These can promote educational achievement by providing information 
about successful strategies or reinforcing study norms. Previous empirical 
studies have shown that friends’ behaviour and orientation in issues to do 
with education often persists after testing for additional socio-economic 
characteristics of peer groups, and therefore it has a substantial effect on 
school achievements (for a review, see Kao 2001). Best friends are usually 
perceived as trustworthy, and young adolescents are therefore likely to 
believe their advice about the advantages or disadvantages of attending 
school (Hallinan & Williams 1990). Peer influence on education behaviour 
varies in terms of intensity and direction. Peers can be a support or they 
can be a major source of distraction (Gándara et al. 2004). A prime example 
of the negative effects of friends is the share of peers who drop out or leave 
school without any diploma at all. A large body of studies has demonstrated 
that growing up in a peer group with a large number of school dropouts has a 

Beyond the Family: Peers and Teachers
121
strongly negative impact on a young person’s view of the value of education, 
as well as on the motivation of the person in question.
3	
Peer group influences that stem from friends’ similarities
Students choose peers who have similar outlooks, and that is why there 
has been a vigorous debate among education researchers about the relative 
importance of selection versus socialisation in accounting for peer effects on 
education outcomes. Several scholars claim that peer effects found empiri-
cally in many studies result from school and early family socialisation rather 
than from peer socialisation itself (Brown 1990; Hallinan & Williams 1990). 
Additionally, it has been claimed that peer groups tend to be homogeneous 
in background characteristics and education behaviour (Brown 1990), and 
that peer effects stem primarily from peer selection from within similar 
socio-economic backgrounds. Although there is a disagreement about the 
degree of influence, there is little doubt that selection and actual influence 
contribute to what are often referred to as ‘peer effects’. Or, as Kao (2001: 
439) puts it: ‘Even the most pro-selection researchers will admit that some 
peer socialisation must occur’.
Beyond the selection concerns of education studies, ethnicity researchers 
have been concerned to establish how the content of peer group norms is 
affected by minority status. Previous studies have shown that the positive 
peer effect varies for immigrant youth according to the ethnic composition 
of their closest friends. This is a result of their varying access to different 
networks (Stanton-Salazar 2001, 2004). Most research demonstrates that 
peer contact with adolescents that belong to the majority ethnic group is 
primarily what is needed to overcome disadvantaged positions because they 
give access to resources and information that are embedded in networks 
that are often associated with a higher socio-economic class (Esser 1990, 
2001). One example might be the accumulation of knowledge about the 
workings of the education system in general, and about the diverse op-
portunities it provides. Since most of the immigrant parents did not have 
experience of the host countries’ school systems, they are likely to be limited 
in the advice they can give to their own children (Kristen 2005). Therefore, 
it is often their closest friends and peers that children of immigrants rely on.
The ethnic composition of peer groups depends on what opportunities 
exist to build relationships with peers. The relative size of ethnic origin 
groups in schools shapes opportunities for inter-ethnic contact. This idea 
goes back to Blau’s opportunity theory (Blau 1977a, b), which says that 
individuals prefer to associate with their own group, and that the relative 
group size in certain settings determines the likelihood of making contact 

122
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
with other group members. According to Blau, an increase in the number 
of group members will also increase the number of opportunities for 
individual members to satisfy their preferences for same-group contacts 
(Blau 1977a). The majority of previous studies on immigrant adolescents 
confirmed Blau’s theory by demonstrating that the relative size of ethnic 
origin groups in school environments provides opportunities for inter-racial 
contacts (Cebolla Boado 2007; Kao & Joyner 2004).
Student-teacher relationships
Student-teacher relationships play a crucial role in daily interpersonal social 
relations and can be seen as the second key dimension of outside-family ties 
(Crosnoe, Johnson-Krikpatrick & Elder 2004). In addition to being at home or 
‘hanging out’ with peers, young adolescents attend classes and spend most of 
their time in schools where they are in regular contact with their teachers. 
It has been proved, however, that student-teacher relationships vary across 
populations and origin groups (Bronfenbrenner & Morris 1998). Often based 
on deep-rooted experiences of discrimination, minority families frequently 
keep their distance from the education system and its agents. This social 
distance and scepticism on the part of parents is often transmitted to their 
descendants, and affects the network orientation of their children towards 
teachers (Lareau & Horvat 1999). However, even if relationships between 
students and teachers are characterised more often than not by distance, the 
significant impact of student-teacher relationships on the educational success 
of the second generation has been demonstrated in a number of studies. The 
significant role of student-teacher relationships can be described on two levels:
Firstly, teachers generally serve as mentors, role models, advocates and 
feedback and advice givers. They can provide moral support for almost all 
students in the classroom. Previous studies have shown that strong student-
teacher relationships are especially important for migrant youth: based on 
a study of second-generation Mexicans in the United States, Stanton Salazar 
(2001) has provided evidence of second-generation Mexican students overcom-
ing alienation or feelings of disconnection through intense relationships with 
their teachers, which in turn had a positive effect on their education careers.
Secondly, apart from motivation dynamics and direct pay-offs, teach-
ers play a central role as a result of their ability to place young people in 
resource-rich social networks (Stanton-Salazar 1997). They have the capacity 
to negotiate (directly or indirectly) institutional resources and opportunities 
such as information about school programmes, academic tutoring, admis-
sions and career decision-making. Similar to studies of peer group networks, 

Beyond the Family: Peers and Teachers
123
previous research shows that social ties with teachers are more important 
for children of immigrants than for their indigenous counterparts. Because 
of their often structurally disadvantaged position, they are more dependent 
on institutional agents from outside the family for various forms of support.
Up to now, this section has discussed the theoretical conclusions for edu-
cational success drawn by mainly US researchers examining two significant 
types of outside-family ties: peer groups and student-teacher relationships. 
Their findings set out the starting point of this chapter. In the following 
sections, the role of both types of relationship in the education outcomes of 
second-generation Turks will be explored from a comparative perspective. 
In what follows, the patterns of relationship between second-generation 
Turks and their peers and teachers will first be explored descriptively in the 
five cities and three countries. In a second step, the impact that these non-
family agents have on the education outcomes will be examined empirically 
by looking at descendants of immigrants. Finally, by focusing on differences 
between groups, this chapter investigates whether the role played by peers 
and teachers in the educational attainment process works in a similar way 
for the comparison group as for second-generation Turks.
5.3	
Peer group characteristics of the Turkish second generation
Perceived importance of peers
As stated above, Kao (2001) described three mechanisms through which 
peer groups might operate to affect education outcomes. The first one is 
the perceived importance of peers in determining education outcomes. In 
the TIES survey, which the present study uses, the following indicator is 
available: ‘Peers were of importance in supporting me with my studies or 
school work when I was in secondary school’. This item had five answer 
categories ranging from (1) ‘not important at all’ to (5) ‘very important’.1 
Figure 5.1 displays the outcomes of this indicator for second-generation 
Turks in the five cities under consideration. The black bars show the percent-
age distribution of the highest categories ‘important’ and ‘very important’, 
while the black diamond represent the mean value on the five-point scale. In 
the Austrian cities, second-generation Turks evaluate their peers as ‘rather 
important’ (mean values of 3.5 to 4), while their counterparts in Sweden as-
sess their peers on average as ‘somewhat important’ (mean value close to 3) 
1	
For details on how all variables are used in this chapter, see Appendix B.

124
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
in supporting them with their studies or school work. The least importance 
is in the French cities, where the majority of second-generation Turks rate 
their peers as ‘somewhat unimportant’ in schooling.
The descriptive results for the perceived importance of peers in support-
ing the schooling of second-generation Turks confirm previous findings for 
the second generation in that peers are regarded as being just as important 
as their families. The mean values in figure 5.1 resemble those for the per-
ceived importance of fathers and mothers in supporting their studies or 
school work in France, while peers are perceived as even more important 
than parents in Austria and Sweden (compare the findings of figure 5.1 
with outcomes presented in figure 4.1 in chapter 4).
Figure 5.1  Perceived importance of peers in supporting studies
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Vienna
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Mean
% Important / very important
Linz
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Bars indicate the percentage distributions of the combined answer categories ‘important’ 
and ‘very important’. Diamonds show the mean value of each group on the total scale (ranging 
from 1 to 5).
Ethnic composition of peer groups
A second aspect when exploring the characteristics of peer groups in rela-
tion to children of immigrants is the ethnic composition of those peer 
groups. Ream and Rumberger (2008) claim that students can participate 
in separate ‘street’ and ‘school’ peer networks. The former describes best 
friends with whom they meet during leisure time after school, while the lat-
ter describes peers composed of mates at school. Both types of peer (as well 

Beyond the Family: Peers and Teachers
125
as their ethnic composition) have been found to be of importance for the 
education outcomes of children of immigrants (Ream & Rumberger 2008), 
although some empirical studies show that best friends outside school are 
more influential than the overall school peer group (Vaquera & Kao 2008).
The ethnic composition of the closest circle of three best friends at the age 
of fifteen is shown in the upper part of table 5.1. The three best friends of the 
largest proportion of the Turkish second generation in all three countries were 
all of Turkish origin; and the number of second generation Turks whose three 
best friends were all of non-Turkish origin was comparatively small, looked at 
across all countries and cities. Nevertheless, in addition to these general trends, 
differences can be seen from city to city. Second-generation Turks in Vienna 
and Stockholm show the highest degree of homogeneity (number of co-ethnic 
friends) in their closest peer group. Here, slightly more than every second 
student of Turkish origin reports a homogeneous peer group. By contrast, 
second-generation Turks growing up in Linz and in the French cities show 
rather more heterogeneous compositions in their peer groups. The proportion 
of fifteen-year-olds who have two-thirds of non-Turkish origin friends in 
their group of three best friends is almost as big (around 20 per cent to 30 per 
cent). The overall differences between cities in the ethnic composition of best 
friends are only statistically significant between the Austrian cities. It is worth 
noting, however, that the ‘all non-Turkish’ peer group of best friends among 
second-generation Turks in Paris is almost twice as big as that in Strasbourg.
Table 5.1  Ethnic composition of ‘street’ and ‘school’ peer groups, by city (%)
Austria
France
Sweden
 
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm 
Ethnic composition of best friends
All three best friends of Turkish 
origin 
50.4
34
35.3
37.8
50.6
1 native-born friend
35.2
31.5
28.3
32.1
19.7
2 native-born friends 
11.9
26.2
19.8
20.9
20.8
All three best friends of native origin
2.5
8.3
16.6
9.2
8.9
Ethnic composition: friends in school
None of native origin
7.8
3.4
3.3
3.2
9.8
Very few of native origin
15.9
25.9
27.4
17.3
21.3
Some of native origin
27.4
34.2
35.9
30.9
22.5
Many of native origin
28.6
23.4
22.8
28.9
22.1
Most of native origin
20.4
13.2
10.6
19.7
24.3
Source: TIES 2007-2008

126
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Turning to the ethnic composition of social networks in schools (lower part 
of table 5.1) a rather diverse picture can be found. In all cities, more than 70 
per cent state that they have at least ‘some’ native-born friends in school. 
Comparing the outcomes of the two types of peer group circles, it turns 
out that there is a stronger in-group orientation among second-generation 
Turks in the closest circle of best friends across all cities, while contacts in 
school peer groups are rather heterogeneous in their composition. As shown 
in table 5.2, a significant correlation between the ethnic make-up of both 
peer group circles exists in all cities, indicating some overlap between the 
two peer groups. In other words, the more second-generation Turks join 
non-co-ethnic peer groups in schools, the higher the share of non-co-ethnics 
among their three best friends. This correlation is particularly high in Paris.
Table 5.2  Correlations between the ethnic composition of peer groups and 
perceived school segregation
Austria
France
Sweden
 
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg Stockholm 
Correlations between… a
Number of native-origin friends in 
school and ethnic composition of 
best friends 
0.42***
0.42***
0.62***
0.47***
0.47***
Number of native-origin friends 
in school and perceived ethnic 
segregation in secondary school
-0.26**
-0.41*** -0.34***
-0.22**
-0.36***
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: a=Pearson’s correlation. Levels of significance: **=p<0.01***=p<0.001.
The opportunity to enter non-co-ethnic peer networks in schools and to 
establish ties to non-immigrant school mates may be determined by the 
relative size of the number of ethnic minority students in schools and 
classrooms. The lower the ethnic segregation in secondary schools, the 
higher the chances of establishing friendships with non-minority students. 
The last row of table 5.2 shows the correlation between the self-evaluation 
of ethnic segregation2 in secondary school by the Turkish second-generation 
themselves, and the actual number of non-immigrant friends in the school 
peer network. All the correlations examined here run in the expected 
2	
The TIES survey asked on a five-point Likert scale about how many children of immigrant 
origin were there at the secondary school. Answer categories were ‘hardly any’, ‘around 25 per 
cent’, ‘around half’, ‘around 75 per cent’ and ‘almost all’.

Beyond the Family: Peers and Teachers
127
manner, with high numbers of immigrant children in a secondary school 
reducing the likelihood of having high numbers of non-immigrant friends 
in the school peer group. Nevertheless, the associations are rather moderate 
across all cities, indicating that the ethnic make-up of the ‘school’ peer 
groups is only slightly affected by ethnic segregation in school.
Education behaviour and orientation of peers
The third mechanism through which peers may operate to affect education 
outcomes is their education behaviour and orientation. The share of peers 
who drop out or leave school without a diploma at all is frequently used as 
a measure for the possible negative impact of friends’ education behaviour. 
Growing up in a peer group with a high number of school dropouts might 
have a strong negative impact on the value placed on education or on the 
motivational dynamics of the person (Gándara et al. 2004). Having friends 
who dropped out of school is particularly common in France (see table 5.3).
Table 5.3  Peers without a diploma, by city (%)
Austria
France
Sweden
 
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm 
Having peers without a diploma
34.5
38.8
50.4
61.9
34.6
Having peers without a diploma
All or at least 2 out of 3 best 
friends are of Turkish origin
39.5
44.4
51.8
62.6
42.5
1 or no best friends are of Turkish 
origin
33.4
28.2
49.7
60.3
15.7
Source: TIES 2007-2008
More than 60 per cent of the Turkish second generation in Strasbourg had peers 
in their close circle of friends who dropped out while at secondary school. The 
percentage in Paris was lower, with every second child of Turkish parents hav-
ing had low-achieving peers in their circle of friends at the age of fifteen. There 
was a slightly lower percentage for second-generation Turks in Stockholm (42.5 
per cent). By contrast, second-generation Turks in the Austrian cities grow up 
with peer networks that have a substantially lower share of school dropouts: 
38.8 per cent in Linz had close friends who did not finish secondary school 
with a diploma, and 34.5 per cent in Vienna had friends who quit school early.

128
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Although there may be differences in how ‘peers without a diploma’ 
are defined and perceived across countries, the assumed negative effect 
of their education behaviour (dropping out of school) is expected to work 
in similar ways in all three countries, irrespective of those definitions and 
perceptions. Moreover, I expect the results of the following analysis to be 
unbiased because they were conducted for each country separately, which 
prevents problems with comparison.
The lower part of table 5.3 provides additional analysis of how dropping 
out is related to the ethnic composition of the three best friends. The results 
for the Austrian capital, Vienna, and the French cities reveal that the number 
of dropout peers is not substantially higher if the circle of close friends is 
predominantly made up of co-ethnics. A slightly different picture appears in 
Linz and Stockholm, where second-generation Turks who have a high number 
of friends of Turkish origin also have a high number of dropout friends.
5.4	
Student-teacher relationships among the Turkish second 
generation
Teachers have been recognised as significant agents in the educational 
attainment of children of immigrants. In the empirical investigation for this 
book, student-teacher relationships are captured through the answers to 
three survey questions. Firstly, in order to explore perceived relationships, 
the focus is on whether second-generation Turks generally got along well 
with most of their teachers. Secondly, information has been included on 
whether they received extra help from their teachers when they needed it. 
Finally, there is an examination of whether they think their teachers really 
listened to them. All three questions measure slightly different aspects of 
their relationships with their teachers: while the first item describes the 
student-teacher relationship in more general terms, the other two questions 
provide additional information on the actual openness of teachers and the 
support they provide. Additionally, there is an investigation of whether 
teachers were perceived as important in helping with school activities.
Satisfaction, openness, additional support and perceived importance
Figure 5.2 displays the descriptive outcomes of the four indicators for 
student-teacher relationships. The black bars show the percentage distribu-
tion of the category ‘totally agree’, while the black diamonds show the mean 
value on a five-point scale ranging from (1) ‘totally disagree’ to (5) ‘totally 

Beyond the Family: Peers and Teachers
129
agree’. At first glance, the overall subjective appraisal of student-teacher 
relationships by the Turkish second generation in all five cities is marked by 
a relatively high degree of satisfaction. The average values on the ‘teachers’ 
support items’ (Items 1 to 3 in figure 5.2) are not below 3.5 for any of the 
groups in the countries and cities compared. The highest agreement on all 
three student-teacher relationship questions is found in Sweden, followed 
by Austria and then France, while results between cities in France and 
Austria are not significant. Statistical tests further indicate that the three 
items were positively correlated in all five cities (correlates between r >0.40 
and r <0.60 not shown). For example, increased frequency of extra help 
received from teachers in school increases the satisfaction with teachers. 
In Sweden and Austria, teachers are on average considered as ‘important’ 
in supporting studies and homework during secondary school (mean values 
around 4.0), while the Turkish second generation in the French cities, Paris 
and Strasbourg, rate them as ‘somewhat important’ (average values around 
3). In addition to these general commonalities, some differences are worth 
highlighting. Second-generation Turks in Sweden report the highest level of 
satisfaction as well as the highest levels of practical support and openness 
on the part of their teachers across all five cities.
Figure 5.2  Mean and percentage distribution of the main indicators of student-
teacher relationships, by city
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
2 Got along well with teachers
3 Extra help from teachers
4 Perceived importance
Mean
% Totally agree (indicators 1-3) / % Very important / important 
(indicator 4)
1 Most teachers listened
Source: TIES 2007-2008

130
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Gender differences in student-teacher relationships
Some studies stress gender differences in student-teacher relationships, 
with girls showing greater social distance from, and weaker relationships 
with, their teachers. In terms of second-generation Turks in the Netherlands, 
Pásztor (2010) shows that females are frequently under-advised by teachers 
about the transition to higher education, and that girls are often aware of 
that difference in treatment by teachers – so this may be reflected in the 
subjective evaluation of student-teacher relationships as well. However, 
across all four student-teacher measures used in this chapter, no gender 
differences could be found. Boys and girls assessed their relationships with 
teachers almost equally.
5.5	
Peers and teachers as mediating actors in processes of 
educational attainment
While previous studies on the second generation in the United States 
revealed that ‘significant others’ – such as peers and teachers – are me-
diating actors in the processes of educational attainment, there is little 
systematic research into their significance for second-generation Turks 
in Europe. This section aims to go some way to redress this shortfall by 
examining empirically the significance of peers and teachers for educa-
tional attainment.
As a measure of educational attainment, I will look at whether second-
generation Turks attend, or complete, the highest schooling track (post-
secondary/tertiary education) in each country. This dichotomous variable 
has served already as a dependent variable in chapter 4, and has been 
found to be highly comparable across the three countries (see table 4.3 
in chapter 4 for descriptive outcomes)3. I examine the strength of peer 
group characteristics and student-teacher relationships on achieving 
a post-secondary/tertiary level of education by using binomial logistic 
regression in each country. Estimates are made using three models, 
each of increasing complexity. As ‘peer group’ measures, the first model 
3	
Because of some missing values on the independent variables of interest in Sweden, I could 
not conduct empirical analysis on leaving school early as a second indicator. Recall from the 
previous chapter that the total number of early school leavers in Sweden was already small 
before the loss of cases due to missing values. Therefore I concentrate on ‘high achievers’ in this 
chapter.

Beyond the Family: Peers and Teachers
131
(M1) includes the perceived importance of peers in schooling issues, the 
number of native peers in school, the ethnic composition of the three 
best friends4 and whether second-generation Turks had peers who left 
school without a diploma during secondary school. In a second step (M2), 
the perceived importance of teachers has been added as an indicator 
measuring teachers’ support. Given the high correlation between the 
student-teacher indicators (‘teacher listened’, ‘extra help’ and ‘get along’), 
I combined these three items as an index labelled ‘teachers’ support’ and 
introduced this variable as a continuous measure into the analysis (see 
Appendix B for further methodological information). Table 5.4 presents 
the figures and outcomes of these two steps. A last model (M3), which 
includes further tests for parents’ levels of education and the support 
they provide for their children in school activities, is presented and 
discussed afterwards in an effort to discover whether peers and teachers 
are important mediating actors beyond the family of origin (see chapter 4 
for measurement details of these variables). Findings of this analysis are 
displayed separately in table 5.5. All three statistical models are further 
controlled for age, gender and city of residence in Austria and France (with 
the capital cities being the reference category). Given that the majority of 
the relevant variables are continuous ones, and their effects are compared 
to the influence of dummy variables (such as having peers without a 
diploma), the percentage change in the odds (%) is presented in addition 
to the odds ratios (Exp [B]).
In Austria, the ethnic composition of ‘school’ and ‘street’ peer groups 
seems to matter most (M1), while the perceived importance of peers does 
not significantly increase the odds of becoming a high achiever. In other 
words, second-generation Turks who are embedded in peer networks that 
consist overwhelmingly of non-co-ethnic friends have a higher chance of 
climbing to the top of the education ladder. Interestingly, the magnitude 
of the ethnic composition of the three best friends (peer diversity variable 
in M1) is larger than for the number of native friends in school. With an 
increase of one unit on the best friends’ peer diversity scale, the odds of 
achieving a post-secondary/tertiary education rise by around 90 per cent, 
compared to 53 per cent for the ‘school peer group’. When inserting the 
perceived importance of teachers and the teachers’ support index in a 
second step (M2), the strength of the significant peer group characteristics 
is slightly reduced but still remains significant. Similar to the findings for 
4	
Coded as a continuous variable ranging from 0 (all three best friends are of Turkish origin) 
up to 1 (all three best friends are non-co-ethnics). See Appendix B for further details.

132
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
peers, the perceived importance of teachers is found not to be a signifi-
cant driver of educational success. Instead, the actual teachers’ support 
increases the odds of entering or achieving post-secondary/tertiary educa-
tion, and is of greater importance than the peer group characteristics.
When turning to the findings for second-generation Turks in France, only 
the number of native friends in school increases the odds of becoming a high 
achiever (M1). The size and positive effect of this variable is almost unaf-
fected when teacher information is inserted into the second model (M2). 
Teacher support increases second-generation Turks’ chances of entering 
post-secondary/tertiary education, while the perceived importance remains 
insignificant. The number of native peers in schools and teacher-student 
relationships seem to be of equal importance for achieving the highest 
education level in the French education system.
Finally, the numbers displayed for Sweden indicate that only the 
perceived importance of teachers is significantly correlated with high 
achievement, while all other peer-group and teacher-student relationship 
items are non-significant. This is in contrast with the findings for Austria 
and France, where the effect of the perceived importance of teachers is 
significant but negatively associated with becoming a high achiever. With 
an increase of one unit in the perception of teachers’ importance, the odds 
of entering or achieving post-secondary/tertiary education decrease by 
around 27 per cent (see M2, right column).
In additional analysis (not shown), it was tested whether the results 
of the second model (M2) in all three countries remained significant 
once the findings are controlled for (perceived) school segregation. As 
shown earlier, the peer group compositions are correlated with the ethnic 
school segregation. In all three countries, the direction and strength of 
the significant indicators were unaltered when controlling for school 
segregation, while the control variable itself was not significant. Thus, 
the importance of the ethnic composition of peer circles in schools seems 
to matter in Austria and France irrespective of the size of the immigrant 
student population in schools. It is further worth noting that there was 
also testing for interaction effects between the city of residence and the 
peer and teacher variables. This was done because the descriptive findings 
hinted at some variation in the independent variables that might cause 
different outcomes for second-generation Turks in different cities in Austria 
and France (for example, for second-generation Turks in Linz but not in 
Vienna). None of these interaction terms was significant, indicating that 
the outcomes presented in table 5.14 describe country-specific patterns 
for the Turkish second generation.

Beyond the Family: Peers and Teachers
133
Table 5.4  Binomial logistic regression of achieving post-secondary/tertiary education for second-generation Turks controlled for peer 
characteristics and student-teacher relationships (odds ratios and % change in odds)
Austria 
France
Sweden
M1
M2
M1
 
M2
 
M1
 
M2
 
 
Exp(B)
% 
change
Exp(B)
% 
change
Exp(B)
% 
change
Exp(B)
% 
change
Exp(B)
% 
change
Exp(B)
% 
change
Perceived importance of peers
n.s.
n.s.
n.s. 
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
 
No. of native peers in school
1.52**
53.0
1.44*
44.8
1.43**
43.8
1.42**
42.1
n.s.
n.s.
 
(0.27)
(0.26)
(0.18)
(0.18)
 
 
Peer group diversity (best 
friends)
1.85**
(0.38)
90.8
1.72**
(0.37)
73.7
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
 
 
 
 
Peers without a diploma
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
 
 
 
 
Perceived importance of 
teachers
n.s.
 
n.s.
 
0.73*
(0.11)
-26.8
 
 
 
Teacher support
1.76**
76.5
 
1.41**
41.5
 
n.s.
 
(0.32)
 
(0.16)
 
 
N. 
413
411
480
479
233
233
 
R2
0.17
 
0.20
 
0.16
 
0.20
 
0.11
 
0.14
 
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. All continuous variables have been standardised before entering the regression analysis. Levels of significance: * p<0.05; **p< 0.01; 
*** p< 0.001. n.s.=Variable included in regression, but results are not significant. All models are controlled for age, gender and city of residence (Austria and France).

134
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Beyond the family: Peer group influences
The main aim of this chapter is to explore the significance of peers and 
teachers as mediating actors in the educational attainment process beyond 
the influence of the family of origin. Thus, in a last empirical model (M3), 
the strength, direction and significance of the findings of Model 2 was 
estimated, but controlled for parents’ education levels and for parental 
support in schooling. The results of these estimates are presented in 
table 5.5.
Table 5.5  Binomial logistic regression of achieving post-secondary/tertiary 
education for second-generation Turks, controlled for peer characteristics, 
student-teacher relationships and parents’ education and support (odds 
ratios and % change in odds)
Austria 
France
Sweden
M3
M3
M3
 
Exp(B)
%
Exp(B)
%
Exp(B)
%
Importance of peers
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
No. of native peers in school
n.s.
1.40*
(0.19)
40.7
n.s.
Peer group diversity (best 
friends)
1.62*
(0.35)
61.1
n.s.
n.s.
Peers without a diploma
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Importance of teachers
n.s.
n.s.
0.73*
(0.11)
-26.6
Teacher support index
1.72**
(0.32)
72.1
1.37**
(0.15)
37.1
n.s.
N.
410
479
233
R2
0.23
0.22
0.14
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. All continuous variables have been standardised before en-
tering the regression analysis. Levels of significance: * p<0.05; **p< 0.01; *** p< 0.001. n.s.=Variable 
included in regression, but results are not significant. All models are controlled for age, gender, 
city of residence (Austria and France), parents’ education levels and level of support.
The first point to take away from table 5.5 is that in Austria, the significant 
effect of the number of native peers in schools disappears once parents’ 
education levels and education support from parents are held constant 
(compare to Model 2 in table 5.4), while the ethnic composition of the 
three best friends (peer group diversity) is still significantly related to 

Beyond the Family: Peers and Teachers
135
achieving a post-secondary/tertiary level of education. For each additional 
best friend of Austrian origin, the odds of being a ‘high achiever’ increase 
by around 61 per cent. In France, significant effects can be seen for the 
number of native peers in the school peer network but not for the peer 
circle outside school. Or, to describe the outcomes in the words of Ream 
and Rumberger (2008), in Austria, the ethnic composition of ‘street’ peer 
networks matter while in France ‘school’ peer groups play a significant 
role in the process of educational attainment beyond the parental home. 
The results in Sweden are very much to the contrary, none of the peer 
group characteristics affect the odds of entering tertiary education for 
the Turkish second generation, beyond parents’ levels of education and 
schooling support.
Beyond the family: Student-teacher relationships
The results of the two teacher-related ‘indicators’ are shown in the lower 
part of table 5.5. While increasing the perceived importance of teach-
ers does not affect the odds for second-generation Turks in France and 
Austria to achieve an education level above upper-secondary, the estimates 
reveal a negative outcome for second-generation Turks in Sweden even 
after testing for parents’ education levels and schooling support. With 
increased levels of perceived importance, the odds of reaching the top 
of the education spectrum decrease by almost 27 per cent, holding all 
other variables constant. At the same time, the teacher support index 
does not exert a significant effect when parents’ education and parental 
support are held constant. By contrast, the odds of making it to the top of 
the education ladder in Austria and France increase with rising support 
provided by teachers. Teachers seem to be important mediating actors 
in the processes of educational attainment in the French and Austrian 
cities for second-generation Turks beyond the family home. Comparing 
the size of the teacher support measure between the two countries and its 
impact on the odds of being a high achiever shows that second-generation 
Turks in Austria are more affected than counterparts in France. With an 
increase of one unit in the teacher support scale, the odds of entering 
or achieving post-secondary/tertiary level rise by around 72 per cent in 
Austria. The percentage changes in the odds are almost twice as high as 
for second-generation Turks in Austria as for France, and remain equally 
strong in both countries even after controlling for parents’ education and 
parental support.

136
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
5.6	
Differences between the comparison group and second-
generation Turks
The previous section examined the impact that the main variables of inter-
est had on the Turkish second generation in the compared countries. This 
section now turns to the question of whether these findings are specific 
to second-generation Turks or whether they apply equally to all students 
within given education systems. This will be examined in a two-step 
process: first, by exploring the descriptive differences in the main vari-
ables of interest between the compared groups in each city. Then, using 
multivariate analysis, their roles in the educational attainment process will 
be examined for both the comparison group and for the Turkish second 
generation.
Table 5.6 displays the descriptive results of the key independent variables 
broken down by group and by city. Beginning with peers who left school 
without a diploma, significant group differences can be observed in all 
cities. The number of friends with uncompleted school careers is much 
larger for second-generation Turks than for the comparison group. The 
group variations are particularly high in France and Sweden.
The next two rows in table 5.6 provide information on the ethnic com-
position of the two circles of friends. Since both variables are measured 
according to a scale, the means of measurement are displayed. The ethnic 
composition scale for friends in schools ranges from zero (no native-born 
friends) to four (most friends are native-born). Across all cities, second-
generation Turks indicate a rather mixed composition of peer groups in 
schools. Most of them stated in our interviews that they had ‘some’ native-
born friends in secondary school (represented by a mean of around 2 on 
this scale).
By contrast with the Turkish second generation, the comparison group 
describes their friendships at school as rather homogeneous in all five 
cities. This is especially the case for the comparison group in Stockholm 
and Linz, who are on average close to having almost all of their school 
friends of native origin.
The homogeneity of peer groups among the comparison group be-
comes even more pronounced when focusing on the ethnic composition 
of the three best friends. Across all cities except Paris, the mean for 
the comparison group is higher than 0.8 (remember that a score of 1 
indicates that all three best friends are of native-born origin). The most 
homogeneous composition of peer groups can be found for comparison 
group members in Linz, while the most heterogeneous peer network 

Beyond the Family: Peers and Teachers
137
Table 5.6  Peer group and teacher characteristics for the comparison group and second-generation Turks, by city (means; %)
Austria
France
Sweden
Metric of variable
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm 
 
(Min; Max)
CG
2GT
CG
2GT
CG
2GT
CG
2GT
CG
2GT
Having peers without a diploma (%) 1=Yes, 0=No
22.4
34.5***
14.5
38.8***
35.6
50.4***
37.2
61.9***
29.2
51.7***
 
 
 
 
Friends of national origin in school
0=None
4=All
3.56
2.38***
3.81
2.17***
3.05
2.10***
3.47
2.45***
3.80
2.30***
 
 
 
 
Peer group diversity scale (best 
friends)
0=All Turkish
1=All native
0.86
0.22***
0.94
0.26***
0.73
0.39***
0.85
0.36***
0.84
0.28***
 
 
 
 
Perceived importance of peers
1=Not important 
5=Very important
3.18
3.37
3.03
3.74***
2.26
2.61**
2.36
2.36
3.18
3.22
 
 
 
 
Teacher support scale
0=None
5=Very high
3.72
3.85
3.82
3.85
3.71
3.86
3.81
3.79
4.34
4.24
 
 
 
 
Perceived importance of teachers
1=Not important; 
5=Very important
2.65
3.72***
2.65
3.67***
3.05
3.16
2.98
2.99
3.65
3.77
Source: TIES Survey 2007-2008 
Notes: CG=Comparison group. 2GT=Second-generation Turks. Levels of significance for group differences: *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, *p<0.05 (two-tailed t-test for continuous 
variables; chi2 for binary variable).

138
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
appears among the comparison group in Paris. We have to bear in mind, 
however, that the total size of the immigrant population in the city shapes 
the opportunities to establish inter-ethnic friendships among different 
groups. While Paris is a multicultural metropolis with a highly diversified 
population, Linz is the smallest city in this comparison group, with the 
lowest percentage of immigrants in relation to the total population (see 
also chapter 2).
Peers are generally perceived as more important in school activities in 
Austria and Sweden compared to France, which reflects the patterns seen 
in figure 5.1. Significant group variations appear only in Linz and Paris, 
with children of Turkish parents evaluating their peers to be of greater 
importance than is the case within the comparison group.
The greatest commonalities between groups within as well as across 
cities are found when turning to the issue of support from teachers. On 
average, both groups in all cities experience great levels of support (all 
mean values are close to four on a five-point scale), although the average 
approval is slightly higher in Sweden than in the two other countries. The 
general level of satisfaction with teachers is also reflected in the overall 
high levels of the perceived importance of teachers – which only varies 
in the Austrian cities, where second-generation Turks attributed greater 
importance to teachers in their schooling than did their comparison group.
The second aim of this section is to explore whether peer-group char-
acteristics and student-teacher relationships work in similar ways for 
both groups in given education systems. From a methodological point of 
view, this was estimated using similar regression analyses to those used 
in the previous section, but this time a ‘dummy’ variable was included for 
second-generation Turks in the binomial logistic regression. The findings 
are summarised in table 5.7.
The analyses revealed that, when pooling the survey groups within one 
model, only one indicator per country significantly increases the odds of 
achieving or entering the post-secondary/tertiary level beyond the significant 
drivers of parents’ education levels and support (compare chapter 4). In Aus-
tria and France, support from teachers has been found to increase the odds 
of students entering the highest end of the education system. In Austria, for 
each additional level of support provided by teachers, the odds of becoming 
a high achiever increase by around 74 per cent, when all other variables are 
held constant. The percentage change in the odds is considerably lower, 
though still significant, in France (45.8 per cent), while it has not been found 
to cause any significant increase in Sweden. The non-significant interaction 
terms between second-generation Turks and teacher support indicates that 

Beyond the Family: Peers and Teachers
139
the patterns explored in Austria and France apply equally strongly to both 
groups.
Table 5.7  Significant findings on achieving post-secondary/tertiary education for 
both groups (odds ratios and % change in odds)
 
Austria
France
Sweden
Variable
Teacher support 
index
Teacher support 
index
Perceived impor-
tance of teachers
Odds ratio
1.73***
1.45**
0.77*
(0.20)
(0.16)
(0.09)
% change
73.7
45.8
- 39.0
Interaction
with second-
generation Turks
n.s.
n.s.
n.s. 
R2 (full model)
0.22
0.27
0.26
N.
871
817
471
Source: TIES Survey 2007-2008 
Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. All continuous variables have been standardised before 
entering the regression analysis. Levels of significance: * p<0.05; **p< 0.01; *** p< 0.001. All models 
are controlled for group, age, gender, city of residence (Austria and France), parental educational 
levels and parental schooling support.
In the previous analysis of second-generation Turks in Sweden, a negative 
correlation was found between the perceived importance of teachers in 
students’ schooling and achieving a post-secondary/tertiary level of educa-
tion (See table 5.5). The analysis in this section reveals that this negative 
trend applies to all students in the Swedish education system. With a change 
in perceived importance – for example, from ‘somewhat important’ to 
‘important’ – the odds decrease by 39 per cent for each group.5
Given that only the teacher variables exert a significant impact on 
becoming a high achiever, this further indicates that the findings for the 
ethnic composition of peers observed in the previous section are specific 
mechanisms and mediating actors in the educational attainment process of 
second-generation Turks in Austria and France, but not for the comparison 
group.
5	
Recall from chapter 4 that significant group differences in entering post-secondary/tertiary 
education in France and Sweden were fully explained by family-related factors (parents’ educa-
tion levels and parental support). The persisting differences observed for Austria (see table 4.8) 
did not change substantially by controlling for peer-group characteristics and teacher support.

140
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
5.7	
Conclusion
This chapter has examined peers and teachers as mediating actors in the 
process of educational attainment. It has asked whether peers and teachers 
contribute significantly, beyond the significant role of the family, to the 
success of second-generation Turks in given education systems.
The results of this chapter show that closest friends and peers are per-
ceived as relatively important in second-generation Turks’ schooling in all 
three countries. On a descriptive level, they are evaluated as being just as 
important as family members. When examining the significant influence of 
the perceived importance of peers on educational attainment, the expected 
positive link was not found, once parents’ education levels and parental 
support were held constant. In other words, even if peers and best friends 
are perceived as important to second-generation Turks in terms of studying 
and helping with homework, they are less central than parents to the process 
of educational attainment. Instead, what seems to matter in Austria and 
France, though not in Sweden, is the ethnic composition of their peers.
Having a high share of Austrian friends in the closest circle of best friends 
improves the chance of navigating successfully through the education 
system right to its highest level. This is more effective than either parents’ 
education levels or parental support. This finding is in line with results 
provided by Baysu and Phalet (2012), who used the Belgian TIES survey in 
the city of Antwerp and found that second-generation Turks with higher 
numbers of ‘inter-group contacts’ were significantly more likely to stay 
on in academic tracks and less likely to drop out of secondary education.
In France, a similar finding emerges for the ‘school’ peer group of second-
generation Turks. The more they are surrounded by native-born French 
students in their secondary schools, the greater their likelihood of moving 
beyond upper-secondary education. These findings seem to be in line with 
previous findings for second-generation Mexican immigrants in the United 
States. As documented by Stanton-Salazar (2004, 2011) and Gibson et al. 
(2004), peers and closest friends often serve as important agents through 
whom children of immigrants can access resources and information that 
are not available in their own families. Acquiring such information – for 
instance, knowledge of the diverse opportunities provided by education 
– becomes more likely when there is a greater degree of interchange with 
non-immigrant students whose parents, older siblings and friends have 
already taken part in the education system.
Although these findings have been observed in education systems, 
they already point towards major institutional differences between these 

Beyond the Family: Peers and Teachers
141
systems. Because Austrian schools are operating on a half-day basis at the 
lower-secondary level, major decisions about schooling are delegated to the 
family home and to the time after school (as seen in chapter 4). Therefore, 
it is not surprising that best friends with whom students spend time during 
the afternoons seem to matter in Austria, while the impact of peers in school 
is minor. In the French full-day education system, the ethnic composition 
of peers in schools seems to matter for the success of second-generation 
Turks, while in the Swedish case it’s not significant. Being surrounded by 
non-immigrant peers in school might be of greater importance at the end 
of compulsory education in France, at the point where students are selected 
for the next stage of the education system. The ‘orientation process’ is the 
link between compulsory and non-compulsory education, and it is at this 
point that students and their parents express their preferences for their 
future education. They are required to make decisions that presuppose a 
substantial knowledge of the French education system’s upper-secondary 
level. If parents do not possess this knowledge, peers whose parents or 
older siblings have already gained this experience become crucial sources 
of information. This type of selective moment does not exist in the Swedish 
system, which may explain the non-significant findings for peers. These 
findings and their possible interconnections with structural features of the 
various education systems need further investigation and will be examined 
in the forthcoming chapters.
In the theoretical section presented at the start of this chapter, the argu-
ment was framed that friends’ education behaviour and orientation could 
be a specific mechanism of peer influence since young adolescents often 
rely on the ascribed characteristics of their peers. Here, I followed previ-
ous studies, using available data on students surrounded by peers who’d 
dropped out of school as a measure of possible distraction from schooling. 
The results revealed no significant relationship between having dropout 
peers in one’s closest circle of friends and becoming a high achiever, holding 
family characteristics constant.
Apart from the significant role of peer groups, many studies have sug-
gested that teachers play a crucial role in daily interpersonal social relations, 
and that they become key actors when it comes to the issue of the success 
of children of immigrants in education. My analysis confirmed the impor-
tance of the teachers’ roles in both Austria and France: Teacher support is 
positively correlated with higher achievement by second-generation Turks, 
which makes teachers important mediating actors in the process of edu-
cational attainment. But, as shown in the second part of this chapter, this 
applies to all students. With increasing levels of teacher support, students 

142
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
in both groups showed improved chances of reaching the highest rungs of 
the education ladder. This finding is in line with evidence from other studies 
that showed the generally positive relationship between having supportive 
teachers and students’ engagement at school.
Surprisingly, the results for Sweden are the opposite. Support from teach-
ers did not significantly increase the chances of students in the Swedish 
education system achieving the post-secondary/tertiary level of education. 
Instead, students in both survey groups who perceived their teachers as 
of great importance for schooling and help with homework were actually 
low achievers and were consequently less likely to become high-achievers.
Comparing the size of my outcomes for second-generation Turks across 
the three countries, I can see a ranking similar to that which already ap-
peared in the context of family factors in the previous chapters. The peer 
group and teacher effects were strongest in Austria, and lowest in Sweden, 
with France falling in between the two. In other words, the educational 
attainment of children of Turkish origin in Austria is more reliant on in-
formation and support from outside family actors than for their age-mates 
in Sweden.
We have to bear in mind that the role of outside-family agents in the 
educational attainment process of second-generation Turks was explored 
without considering structural differences in the education systems. There 
may be variations in the importance of peers and teachers for students in 
different tracks. For example, students following the academic track might 
have fewer peers who left school without a diploma because the overall 
dropout rate in academic tracks is lower than in vocational tracks. In a 
system in which much educational success is influenced by the knowledge 
and general educational experience of peers, students in academic tracks 
may be less at risk. A similar line of argument may apply to the significance 
of student-teacher relationships. Teachers become of importance in specific 
contexts and at different points in time in education pathways.
These questions bring us to the starting point for the next chapters. 
Chapter 6 looks at structural differences in the education systems. It moves 
away from individual-level explanations by describing how groups make 
choices for certain education-related reasons and how those choices are 
predetermined by the opportunities that are available, which in turn are 
defined by structural configuration of the education systems.

6	
Navigating the System
6.1	
Introduction
Previous chapters explored the relevance of individual characteristics in the 
schooling achievements of second-generation Turks both within and across 
countries. Cross-national differences in the importance of resources inside 
and outside the family home have been examined. All of these analytical 
steps have been conducted ‘within given education systems’ and without 
considering variations in the formal characteristics of education systems. 
These institutional variables had not yet been considered at the point 
where the attainment differences of the Turkish second generation and 
the comparison group were explained.
This chapter addresses the extent to which the institutional arrange-
ments of national education systems shape education pathways, help or 
hinder equal opportunities in education and therefore go a long way towards 
explaining unequal outcomes between the groups in each system – espe-
cially country-to-country differences.
To answer this question, the next section examines how institu-
tional arrangements shape the education pathways and opportunities 
of students in Austria, France and Sweden. It looks at each of the three 
countries separately. Each ‘country portrait’ starts by describing the 
flow through the education system. The purpose of this is to provide 
an overall picture of the outflow rates from one education level to the 
other and to highlight the most important transition points in each 
system, giving a vertical perspective. Significant variations between 
cities, if they are observed, are reported in these sections. The aim of this 
empirical analysis is to carry out a descriptive examination of whether 
types of differentiation have an impact on the education pathways of 
second-generation Turks and the comparison group, possibly resulting 
in unequal outcomes.
The final section evaluates the favourable and unfavourable institu-
tional arrangements for educational mobility derived from the analysis. 
The chapter concludes with an exploration of the mechanisms and relevant 
structural characteristics that help to explain group differences in educa-
tion pathways across the three countries.

144
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
6.2	
Education pathways compared – the perspective on 
institutional arrangements
6.2.1	
France
The flow through the system
Pre-school is the most common start for children’s education in France. 
The pre-school level (école maternelle) is optional and free for all children 
between the ages of two and six. École maternelle can be seen as an inte-
gral part of the French education system and admits children from the 
age of two, depending on the number of places available and the decisions 
taken by their parents. Most children in France enter pre-school at the age 
of three (European Commission 2006b). The findings for attending école 
maternelle in our survey confirm this pattern: almost all children went 
to the public école maternelle, and over 95 per cent of our respondents 
in each group were enrolled in pre-school by the time they turned four 
years old. Although the majority of pupils enter école maternelle at the 
age of three, the number of early starters (two-year-olds) is twice as high 
among the comparison group as among the Turkish second generation 
(see table 6.1).
Children are expected to start primary education (école élémentaire) 
at the age of six. This elementary school marks the beginning of the com-
pulsory system in France. The average length of stay in école élémentaire is 
five years. After leaving primary school, pupils move on to the second stage 
of compulsory education, called collège. Those who are not following the 
integrated mainstream track often attend special streams, such as general 
and vocational sections (SEGPA) for pupils with learning difficulties. These 
streams are integrated into the collèges. As shown in figure 6.1, the percent-
age of young students who enter SEGPA is below 4 per cent and does not 
significantly differ between the two compared groups.
The most important decision point takes place at the end of compulsory 
schooling at the age of fifteen or sixteen. The last stage of collège becomes 
the crucial phase for students. It links compulsory and non-compulsory 
education, and is called the ‘orientation process.’ Firstly, parents express 
their preferences for their child’s education. Based on this information and 
the grades of the final education certificate (brevet des collèges), teachers 
and officials from the school division (class council) evaluate each student’s 
chances of success if the parents’ preferences are followed. Finally, the 
schools recommend which students are assigned to academic or vocational 
lycées for the next education level.

Navigating the System
145
Table 6.1  Pre-school attendance in Paris and Strasbourg, by group (% and age)
Paris
Strasbourg 
   
 
Comparison 
group
Second-
generation 
Turks
Comparison 
group
Second-
generation 
Turks
 
Pre-school
Attended
100.0
97.9
100.0
98.8
Attended for 
more than 
one year 
94.3
98.4
96.6
98.4
Mean age 
at entry
3
3
3
3
< age 3
13.8
4.5
9.0
2.4
= age 3
77.6
83.1
81.9
92.0
   
> age 3
8.6
12.4
9.1
5.6
**
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Note: Levels of significance: *<0.05; **<0.01; ***<0.001.
After receiving advice during the course guidance or ‘orientation’ process, 
pupils move on to lycées with either an academic or vocational orientation. 
As displayed by the outflow chart, the most common route for students in 
the comparison group is entry to the academic lycée. Around 80 per cent of 
the comparison group went on to an academic lycée, while only 50 per cent of 
second-generation Turks did. Students who enrol in an academic lycée have 
to decide after the first year whether they will attend lycée général or lycée 
technologique. The former is perceived as higher in terms of status, while 
the latter is generally less valued (Brinbaum & Cebolla Boado 2007: 449). 
The decision on which track to take is based on the information previously 
considered by the class council. Both tracks lead to the baccalauréat diploma 
(‘bacc’), which provides the entrance ticket to higher education. Significant 
group differences appear at this decision-point, with second-generation 
Turks showing higher numbers streaming to the technical type of lycée.1
Students who do not enter the academic track in upper-secondary educa-
tion move on to vocational lycées. These schools combine general education 
with specific technical knowledge to prepare pupils for entry into the labour 
market (for industry or the services sector, for example). Students are trained 
over two years to obtain the Certificat d’Aptitude Professionnelle (CAP) or 
the Brevet d’Études Professionnelles (BEP).
1	
Male and female students do not differ at this decision point.

146
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
BEP-holders can attend an additional two-year course to obtain the brevet 
professionnel (the professional baccalauréat), which provides them with 
more general skills and hence a greater capacity to adapt to the labour mar-
ket. This vocational baccalauréat (baccalauréat professionnel or ‘bacc prof’) 
was established during the education reforms of 1985 in order to increase 
the number of people in France who hold a baccalauréat (Kieffer 2008: 108). 
The increase in the number of baccalauréat holders in the mid-1980s was 
primarily due to this type of baccalauréat (MEN 2005, cited in Kieffer 2008: 
108). The bacc prof certificate allows students on the vocational path to enter 
higher education as well. As displayed in figure 6.1, a substantial number 
of pupils in both groups choose this special vocational track primarily to 
enter university rather than post-secondary technical or higher vocational 
schools.
The main route into post-secondary/tertiary education in France is 
through the lycée. Among those who successfully obtained the baccalauréat 
from the general or technical lycée, only around 6 per cent of the comparison 
group did not continue any further with education. The percentage of school 
leavers at this second transition point is almost twice as high among the 
Turkish second generation (around 11 per cent). The most common destina-
tions for both groups are universities. The most common destination for the 
Turkish second generation are the tertiary vocational schools, DUT/BTS. 
Comparison groups in Paris and Strasbourg continue more frequently on 
to the professional vocational tracks.
Dissimilarities between the two French cities appear at the end of 
compulsory education (see table A16 in Appendix B). In Paris, around 70 
per cent continue in the academically orientated track (lycée), while the 
continuation rate is around fifteen percentage points lower in Strasbourg 
(55 per cent). The comparison group does not differ significantly between 
Paris and Strasbourg. Among them, 85 per cent who leave collège enter 
the academically orientated lycée. Of the second-generation Turks who 
enter the academic track, the majority stay in the more prestigious bacc 
general track. Nevertheless, significant city differences appear at this point 
between Paris and Strasbourg: Around three-quarters decide to continue 
in the general track in Paris, and in Strasbourg, slightly more than 47 per 
cent enter the less prestigious lycée technologique. The entrance ticket to 
tertiary education is the baccalauréat diploma obtained through the lycée 
or in the vocational BEP-professional school. In Paris, around 80 per cent 
of the comparison group continue in some type of tertiary education after 
completing upper-secondary education, compared with 76 per cent of 
Turkish second-generation students. In Strasbourg, only one in every two 

Navigating the System
147
Figure 6.1  Outflow rates for France (Paris and Strasbourg), by group (%)
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Underlined percentages refer to the comparison group; figures not underlined indicate outflow rates for second-generation Turks. Outflow rates are calculated as a 
ratio of students who entered point 2 to all the students who successfully left point 1, and so on.

148
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Turkish second-generation students moves beyond the upper-secondary 
level. The lower continuation rate into any type of tertiary education in 
Strasbourg also translates into a significant gap of around 35 per cent when 
compared with the comparison group.
A typology of education pathways in France
The focus on the flow through the French education system, as well the 
exploration of related educational elements, allows us to construct a 
typology of education pathways. School careers in France start early, 
at age three on average, and usually involve primary education and the 
integrated track in lower-secondary education (collège). Afterwards, 
pathways start to divide into tracks with differing final destinations. 
The most crucial moment in the French education system is therefore the 
first transition point after compulsory education. At this stage, students 
are sorted into different tracks that shape their subsequent education 
paths and lead to a variety of education routes. Table 6.2 summarises 
the education pathways in the French system and shows their percent-
age distribution between the two compared groups across Paris and 
Strasbourg.
Up to seven distinct education routes can be distinguished. The first 
route represents a ‘straight path’ from collège via lycée to the more prestig-
ious tertiary institutions such as universities and professional vocational 
schools. This is the route most commonly taken by the comparison group 
in both Strasbourg and Paris (over 50 per cent in both cities; No. 1 and No. 
2 in table 6.2 taken together). Probably as a result of their place on the 
lower academic track at the transition into upper-secondary education, 
only around 16 per cent of the Turkish second generation in Strasbourg 
followed the ‘straight academic’ route, compared to 34 per cent of their 
counterparts in Paris (the total of first two pathways in table 6.2). The 
second most common pathway is similar to the straight academic route but 
differs in the final destination. This ‘academic-vocational’ route (No. 3 in 
table 6.2) ends in non-university vocational tracks, such as DUT and BTS. 
In Paris, 20.6 per cent of second-generation Turks take this route, compared 
to 12.3 per cent in Strasbourg.
Access to the post-secondary/tertiary level via the additional two-year 
vocational class to obtain the bacc professionel is significantly more often 
used by the Turkish second generation (No. 4 in table 6.2). This ‘entrance 
through the back door’ was used by around 8 per cent of the Turkish sec-
ond generation in Strasbourg and Paris (all post-secondary/tertiary level 
destinations taken together). Among the comparison group, entrance to 

Navigating the System
149
the post-secondary level via the vocational tracks is less common (below 
3 per cent).
The remaining three education routes describe education careers 
that end either immediately after compulsory education at the age of 
fifteen or after upper-secondary education. The higher number of second-
generation Turks in Paris, and especially in Strasbourg, who choose the 
CAP/BEP vocational track after lower-secondary education leads to 
a higher representation of the Turkish second generation in the short 
vocational route.
6.2.2	
Sweden
The flow through the system
Similar to the education system in France, Sweden provides public pre-
school (förskola) for all pupils. It was introduced in the 1970s. Since the 
start of the 1990s, when responsibility was shifted from social services 
to the school system, municipalities have been obliged to provide pre-
school places for all children (Halldén 2008). Pre-school services comprise 
open pre-schools (lekskola), registered child-minding (dagmamma) and 
after-school recreation centres (fritidsheim). Taken as a whole, the Swedish 
pre-school system offers full-day care for children whose parents work or 
study. Pupils in Sweden can enter pre-school from the age of one, while 
the average starting age is around three. As displayed in table 6.3, the 
numbers using pre-school services and sending their children to förskola 
before they turned age three do not differ significantly between Turkish 
and non-Turkish parents.
At the age of six, all pupils enter compulsory education (grundskolan) 
which takes nine years. Students make their first choice about the next stage 
of their education at the end of grundskolan when they are usually around 
sixteen (see figure 6.2). The next level covers three years of upper-secondary 
education. Since the beginning of the 1970s, upper-secondary education 
(gymnasium) has contained three tracks, consisting of a three-year 
academic programme, two-year continuation programmes and two-year 
vocational programmes.2 The vocational streams allow students to enter 
tertiary education as well (Ekström 2002, cited from Halldén 2008).
2	
Because of the small numbers, the two vocationally orientated tracks had to be combined 
into one in the following analyses.

150
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Table 6.2  Typology of education pathways in Paris and Strasbourg, by group and city (%)
Label 
Tracks 
% Distribution
 
 
Paris
Strasbourg
 
 
start
→
end
CG
2GT
CG
2GT
1
Straight academic route – 1
Collège
Lycée (Bacc Général)
University or Prof. Voc. 
36.2
24.6
36.1
9.9
2
Straight academic route – 2
Collège
Lycée (Bacc Technol.)
University or Prof. Voc. 
23.6
9.7
17.0
6.4
Straight academic route – 1+2
Collège
Lycée (Bacc Général or Technol.)
University or Prof. Voc. 
59.8
34.3
53.1
16.3
3
Academic-tertiary (lower) 
vocational
Collège
Lycée (Bacc Général or Technol.)
Vocational Post-Sec (BTS/DUT)
13.2
20.6
15.8
12.3
4
Upward vocational route
Collège
CAP/ BEP Prof.
Any Tertiary
1.2
7.7
2.8
8.3
5
Short academic route
Collège
Lycée (Bacc Général or Technol.)
stop
9.8
10.1
10.7
11.9
6
Short vocational route
Collège
BEP/CAP
stop
12.5
19.8
10.2
41.7
7
Minimum education route
(early school leavers) 
Collège
stop
 
3.5
5.5
7.2
9.5
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: CG=Comparison group. 2GT=Second-generation Turks.

Navigating the System
151
Table 6.3  Pre-school attendance in Stockholm, by group (% and years)
Stockholm
 
 
Comparison  
Group
Second 
Generation Turks
 
Pre-school
Attended
88.2
92.8
Attended more than 
one year 
74.2
86.8
**
Mean age at 
entry
4
3
**
< age 3
30.1
43.7
= age 3
19.1
14.7
 
> age 3
50.8
41.6
 
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Note: Levels of significance: *<0.05; **<0.01; ***<0.001.
At the start of the 1990s, the vocational tracks were reformed and turned into 
three years of education. This reform was intended to reduce the number of 
discrepancies between academic and vocational upper-secondary school 
programmes, and to increase the continuation rates from vocational schools 
to tertiary education (Halldén 2008: 256). Almost all students in Sweden con-
tinue with some sort of upper-secondary education (K. Sund 2007). Figure 6.2 
shows the outflow rates for second-generation Turks and their comparison 
group in Stockholm. At the first transition point, between grundskolan and 
upper-secondary education, only 3.6 per cent of the comparison group and 
just over 5 per cent of the Turkish second generation drop out of school. 
Overall, slightly more than 50 per cent of students move on to the academic 
track at age fifteen or sixteen, while around 40 per cent opt for the vocational 
streams. The Turkish second generation does not differ significantly from 
the comparison group in terms of continuation rates at this stage.
The Swedish tertiary education system consists of two broad groups of 
institutions: universities and post-secondary vocational schools (summa-
rised as ‘non-university’ in figure 6.2). The latter provide training courses in 
work-related areas. At the second transition point between upper-secondary 
and tertiary education, significant group differences emerge. First, the 
Turkish second generation is much more likely to leave education after 
gymnasium, irrespective of the track they followed before. Second, they 
enter university less often than the comparison group when they originate 
from the academic track in upper-secondary education. Third, Turkish 
second-generation students who go to vocational gymnasium are only half 
as likely to enter university (33 per cent versus around 17 per cent).

152
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Figure 6.2  Outflow rates for Sweden (Stockholm), by group (%)
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Underlined percentages refer to the comparison group; figures not underlined indicate outflow rates for second-generation Turks. Outflow rates are  calculated as a 
ratio of students who entered point 2 to all the students who successfully left point 1, and so on.

Navigating the System
153
A typology of education pathways in Sweden
Based on the detailed descriptions of education careers presented above, a 
typology of pathways has been created. Seven distinct education routes can 
be distinguished, based on the outflow chart presented at the start of this 
section. Similar to the French education system, school careers in Sweden 
start early with pre-school and are followed as one integrated track. First 
decisions between tracks are taken after leaving grundskola and before 
starting upper-secondary education. The second most important point in 
the Swedish education system is the transition that links upper-secondary 
and tertiary education.
Table 6.4  Typology of education pathways in Stockholm, by group (%)
Label 
Tracks 
% Distribution
 
 
start
→
end
CG
2 GT
1 Straight academic 
route
Lower-secondary 
(Grundskola)
Academic 
upper- sec
University
33.6
20.7
 
 
2 Academic–vocational
Lower-secondary 
(Grundskola)
Academic 
upper sec
Voc 
post-sec
16.0
18.3
 
 
3 Vocational upward 
route 1
Lower-secondary 
(Grundskola)
Voc upper-sec
Voc 
post-sec
4.4
6.3
 
 
4 Vocational upward 
route 2
Lower-secondary 
(Grundskola)
Voc upper-sec
University
16.0
10.5
 
 
5 Short academic route
Lower-secondary 
(Grundskola)
Academic-
upper sec
stop
7.2
10.4
 
 
6 Short vocational route Lower-secondary 
(Grundskola)
Voc. upper-
sec
stop
19.6
28.3
 
 
7 Minimum education 
route (Early school 
leavers)
Lower-secondary 
(Grundskola)
stop
 
3.2
5.5
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: CG=Comparison group. 2GT=Second-generation Turks. Voc.=Vocational. upper-sec=Upper-
secondary education.
The most common route among the comparison group is the straight aca-
demic route (No. 1, table 6.4). Around one-third of the comparison group 
leaves grundskola for the academic gymnasium and continues at university, 

154
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
while only one-fifth of the Turkish second generation accompanies the 
comparison group on this path.
Attending vocational school in upper-secondary education does allow 
students to enter tertiary education as well. But as Halldén points out, 
universities and post-secondary institutions tend to set higher demands for 
admission than just a general qualification obtained from vocational school 
(Halldén 2008: 256). This, in practice, reduces the possibility of continuing 
into higher education. Entering any type of post-secondary/tertiary educa-
tion via the vocational gymnasium route is overall slightly more common 
among the comparison group in Stockholm (20.4 per cent) than among the 
Turkish second generation (16.8 per cent) (vocational upward routes 1 and 
2 taken together, see table 6.4).
The next two education pathways classify careers that stop after gym-
nasium. Second-generation Turks are more likely to stop their education 
after completing either the vocational or the academic track in gymnasium 
(see also figure 6.2).
The least common route in Sweden is to leave school at the end of com-
pulsory education. Slightly more than 5 per cent of second-generation Turks 
end their education after grundskolan, compared to around 3 per cent for 
the comparison group. As outlined earlier, most students in Sweden move 
on to upper-secondary education in its various forms (K. Sund 2007).
6.2.3	
Austria
The flow through the system
Pre-primary education in Austria usually takes place in kindergarten, 
which is not considered part of the education system (European Commis-
sion 2006a). It therefore has the character of early childcare rather than 
of early education. Kindergartens are run by local authorities or private 
organisations. In principle, children can go to kindergarten from the age of 
three, while the average starting age is four. Pre-school attendance varies 
considerably between second-generation Turks and the comparison group 
in Vienna and Linz. In both cities, Turkish parents made less frequent use 
of kindergarten facilities. Just fewer than 60 per cent of Turkish second-
generation students in Vienna and 75 per cent in Linz had their first experi-
ences of education in kindergarten. The majority of those started later than 
age four, which consequently led to a shorter overall stay in kindergarten 
(see table 6.5).

Navigating the System
155
Table 6.5  Pre-school attendance in Vienna and Linz, by group (% and age)
Vienna
Linz
 
 
 
Compari-
son group
Second-
generation 
Turks
 
Comparison 
group
Second-
generation 
Turks
 
Pre-school
Attended
80.8
57.5
***
87.2
75.2
**
Attended for 
more than 
one year 
82.8
63.5
***
86.7
80.5
Mean age at entry
4
4.5
***
4
4
< age 4
42.1
11.0
43.1
34.8
= age 4
33.2
38.6
26.0
35.5
 
 
> age 4
24.7
50.4
***
29.1
29.7
 
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Note: Levels of significance: *<0.05; **<0.01; ***<0.001.
Compulsory education in Austria starts at the age of six in primary school 
and lasts four years. Most primary schools (Volksschulen) operate on a 
half-day basis. Volksschule are the only common track in Austria where 
pupils from different social and ethnic backgrounds learn together and 
are prepared for their subsequent education. Primary schools have specific 
catchment areas, which means that a high proportion of pupils live in the 
same neighbourhoods.
At the age of ten, pupils in Austria are streamed into two separate types 
of school in lower-secondary education: the Hauptschule (vocationally ori-
entated) and the Allgemeinbildende höhere Schule-Unterstufe (academically 
orientated). Hauptschule is the lower tier of lower-secondary education 
and is open to everybody after primary school. By contrast, the academic 
track prepares students to continue to the next academic level, which in 
turn leads to the Matura, the highest certificate of general education in 
Austria. Admission to one of those tracks depends on marks at the end of 
primary school as well as on recommendations from teachers. The head of 
a lower-secondary school decides whether a child is enrolled at the school. 
Almost 70 per cent of the descendants of Turkish immigrants are streamed 
into the Hauptschule track compared with 40 per cent of the comparison 

156
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
group (see figure 6.3 and figure 6.4).3 This pattern holds for both survey 
cities. Lower-secondary education lasts for four years. Since compulsory 
school in Austria is up to age fifteen, students from Hauptschule have to 
attend a one-year preparatory class (Polytechnikum) before leaving to join 
the apprenticeship system. This path is travelled by almost every second 
student in each group who were streamed into Hauptschule. Some students 
do not enter the apprenticeship system but rather continue in the vocational 
school BMS (Berufsbildende Mittlere Schule). This type of school offers full-
time vocational training without work experience, and seems to be less 
selective for students from Turkish families (11.2 per cent compared to 5.5 
per cent for the comparison group).
Intra-secondary permeability at the end of lower-secondary education 
offers students of the Hauptschule the opportunity to continue in academi-
cally orientated upper-secondary tracks (depending, of course, on getting 
the required marks). Comparing the percentage of students in each group 
who use this option reveals that the Turkish second generation uses this 
upward mobility route less frequently than the comparison group. More 
precisely, the comparison group in both cities is twice as likely to use the 
upward path from Hauptschule to the academic tracks in upper-secondary 
education (around 35 per cent in Vienna and 45 per cent in Linz for the 
comparison group). The majority of upward movers enter the academically 
orientated BHS (Berufsbildende Höhere Schule).
Young adults who were streamed into the academic track in lower-
secondary education predominantly move on to the second academic level 
(AHS-Oberstufe). Over 80 per cent of AHS-Unterstufe students in both cities 
and in both groups continue on the academic path in the second academic 
cycle (AHS-Oberstufe or BHS). Among the remaining 20 per cent who decide 
in favour of a vocational school, students of the comparison group are 
more likely to opt for the apprenticeship system, while second-generation 
Turks more frequently choose the vocational school, BMS. Nevertheless, 
Turkish second-generation students are significantly less likely to attend 
the more prestigious academic tracks in upper-secondary education. Even 
if some of them move up from Hauptschule towards more academic tracks 
in the next level, group differences remain high as a result of the downward 
streaming into the lower-ability track at the first transition point after 
primary education.
The entrance ticket to tertiary education is the Matura diploma in the 
upper-secondary academic tracks (AHS/BHS). Tertiary education can 
3	
Because of the complexity of the Austrian education system, two separate figures are shown.

Navigating the System
157
broadly be divided into two streams: vocational and academic tertiary 
education. But, as the provision of vocational education is predominant 
in upper-secondary education in Austria, vocational education is not very 
prominent in tertiary education when compared to France and Sweden 
(The first universities of applied sciences were established in 1994/1995). 
This partially explains the lower continuation rates into post-secondary 
education as well as the lower proportions of higher-education graduates 
in Austria. Most students, especially from the upper-secondary vocational 
streams, stop their education at this stage and do not move on to tertiary 
education. Only pupils from the academically orientated track, AHS/BHS, 
regularly continue on to tertiary education.
Tertiary vocational training is offered in technical colleges and voca-
tional academies. Both schools provide qualifications that are considered 
the highest in the vocational sector. Technical colleges are also open 
to those who have completed an apprenticeship and hold a vocational 
Matura from upper-secondary education (Berufsreifeprüfung). Academic 
tertiary education is two-tiered, consisting of classical universities and 
Fachhochschulen. The former offer university programmes, while the latter 
are full-time schools with a strong labour market orientation where students 
can extend and refine their skills. As displayed in figure 6.3 and figure 6.4, 
the majority of students in either group who enter tertiary education enrol 
in universities and originate primarily in the AHS-Oberstufe track. Moving 
from vocational schools in upper-secondary education towards vocational 
tertiary education is rare in both survey cities.
When it comes to tertiary education, fewer second-generation Turks 
are found to enrol in university and they tend to be more likely to opt for 
vocational schools. The Austrian education system offers limited access 
to vocational tertiary training after a student has completed a vocational 
school at upper-secondary level. Overall, the comparison group in Austria 
is twice as likely to follow this path into tertiary education as the Turkish 
second generation. At this transition point, significant city variations can 
be seen. The continuation rates for the Turkish second generation are 10 per 
cent in Vienna and 20 per cent in Linz (see table A15, Appendix B).

158
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Figure 6.3  Outflow rates for the comparison group in Austria (Vienna and Linz) (%)
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Note: Outflow rates are calculated as a ratio of students who entered point 2 to all the students who successfully left point 1, and so on.

Navigating the System
159
Figure 6.4  Outflow rates for the Turkish second generation in Austria (Vienna and Linz) (%)
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Note: Outflow rates are a calculated as a ratio of students who entered point 2 on all the students who successfully left point 1, and so on.

160
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
A typology of education pathways in Austria
The Austrian education system is highly stratified and has three major tran-
sition points: after leaving primary school, before entering upper-secondary 
education, and finally the decision before tertiary education. Early tracking, 
as well as the second chance of an upward transfer after lower-secondary 
education, leads to a number of complex education pathways. Overall, up 
to nine routes can be distinguished (see table 6.6).
To begin with the shortest pathways, on average one-tenth of the 
Austrian student population decide to drop out of school as early as after 
lower-secondary education (see early school leavers (9) in table 6.6).
The majority of the Turkish second generation surveyed took the straight 
vocational route (No. 4, table 6.6). Around 40 per cent were streamed into 
Hauptschule after primary school, and continued in the apprenticeship 
system or BMS vocational schools until they left school and entered the 
labour market. Only half as many students in the comparison group were 
streamed in the same way.
By contrast with second-generation Turks, most of the students from 
the comparison group followed the straight academic route via the two 
academically orientated tracks of lower- and upper-secondary education 
towards entry to tertiary education (No. 1, table 6.6). Equally common is 
the short academic route, which is almost equally popular with both study 
groups (on average around 18 per cent in both groups) which stops after the 
Matura diploma in upper-secondary education (No. 2, table 6.6).
Some of the education pathways differ between the Turkish second 
generation and the comparison groups not only within cities, but also across 
cities. For example, almost 13 per cent of the Turkish second generation in 
Vienna starts with Hauptschule in lower-secondary education and enters 
the academic track in the next level of compulsory education before ending 
their education (No. 6, table 6.6). This group is twice as big as the comparison 
group in the same city – but the same size as the comparison group in Linz.
Finally, comparatively few students start in the lower-ability track 
(Hauptschule) and move up to the academic track in upper-secondary 
education, and even continue on to some sort of tertiary education (No. 7, 
table 6.6). While the percentages are not significantly different between 
the comparison groups in the two cities and the Turkish second generation 
in Linz (7 per cent to 8 per cent), the Turkish second generation in Vienna 
is almost non-existent in the group of upward movers.

Navigating the System
161
Table 6.6  Typology of education pathways in Vienna and Linz, by group and city (%)
Label 
Tracks 
% Distribution
 
 
Vienna
Linz
 
 
start
→
end
CG
2GT
CG
2GT
1
Straight-academic route 
AHS-Unterstufe
AHS-Oberstufe or BHS
Any type of tertiary education
24.8
7.9
19.6
12.6
2
Short-academic route
AHS-Unterstufe
AHS-Oberstufe or BHS
stop
17.2
19.8
20.5
16.5
3
Academic-vocational route 
AHS-Unterstufe
Apprenticeship and similar
stop
10.4
4.3
3.8
3.4
4
Straight-vocational route
Hauptschule
Apprenticeship and similar
stop
21.6
40.4
21.3
40.7
5
Vocational-tertiary route
Hauptschule
Apprenticeship and similar
Any type of tertiary education
0.4
0.4
1.2
0.4
6
Vocational-academic route
Hauptschule
AHS-Oberstufe or BHS
stop
5.6
12.7
13.2
8.7
7
Vocational-upward route 
Hauptschule
AHS-Oberstufe or BHS
Any type of tertiary education
8.0
2.3
7.6
6.8
8
Minimum education route 
(Early school leaver) 1
AHS-Unterstufe
stop
2.4
9.9
1.7
9.7
9
Minimum education route 
(Early school leaver) 2
Hauptschule
stop
9.6
1.9
10.6
0.9
Early school leaver (1+2)
AHS-Unterstufe
/Hauptschule
stop
12.0
11.8
12.3
10.6
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: CG=Comparison group. 2GT=Second-generation Turks. AHS=Allgemeinbildende höhere Schule. BHS=Berufsbildende höhere Schule.

162
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
6.3	
Conclusion
When exploring the extent to which the institutional arrangements of 
national education systems shape the education trajectories of the compari-
son group and the Turkish second generation in different ways in France, 
Sweden and Austria, the following conclusions can be drawn.
The perspective on education pathways adopted in this chapter has 
uncovered the fact that second-generation Turks in Austria experience 
three major roadblocks on their education paths before the age of ten. 
Firstly, they enter pre-school facilities much later, if at all. Secondly, they 
are more frequently streamed into the lower-ability track at the first 
transition point. At the descriptive level, early selection seems to be one 
of the major explanations for the education position of the Turkish second 
generation in Austria. But the effects of tracking and early selection, as 
argued in the introduction to this chapter, have to be discussed by taking 
other relevant aspects of differentiation into account as well. Early selec-
tion might not be a problematical institutional feature if the degree of 
permeability was higher at a later stage, and if opportunities for upward 
movement remained available to students who had been streamed earlier 
into lower-ability tracks. The results for Austria show, however, that the 
chances of upward transfers are low at the end of lower-secondary educa-
tion. Indeed, a ‘second chance’ exists for graduates from the lower-ability 
track to move up into one of the two academic tracks. But the stakes are 
high against obtaining the marks necessary for that upward move. Early 
selection and differentiation into different ability tracks at this point also 
influence the chances of students moving into more prestigious tracks at 
the second and third transition points. On the other hand, the descriptive 
results for the Swedish and French education systems indicate that the 
chances of continuing in the more academic tracks are higher for second-
generation Turks.
So far, the findings of this chapter point to striking differences between 
the tracked education system in Austria on the one hand, and the com-
prehensive systems in France and Sweden on the other, with the latter 
providing greater opportunities in both relative and absolute terms for the 
Turkish second generation. But this investigation of different education 
paths has also raised a number of country-specific mechanisms of dif-
ferentiation in the two relevant comprehensive education systems, those 
of France and Sweden.
The formal mechanism of differentiation in the French education system 
is the orientation process at the end of compulsory education. The findings 

Navigating the System
163
of this chapter show yet again that the French system has found ways to dif-
ferentiate the student population further within its comprehensive system 
through an informal hierarchy of disciplines and tracks in upper-secondary 
education. In formal terms, there is no hierarchy between the lycées in 
upper-secondary education, but in practice, the vocationally orientated 
lycée is considered less prestigious (Alba & Silberman 2009; Brinbaum & 
Cebolla Boado 2007). Although the baccalauréat became the educational 
norm, it seems that the French education system created means of fostering 
distinctions between students, using schools and certificates ranked in 
terms of prestige. This informal hierarchy functions as additional verti-
cal differentiation within the academic stream. Most importantly, on a 
descriptive level, it seems that second-generation Turks are most affected 
by this differentiation through their higher participation rates in the less 
prestigious tracks.
This practice of differentiation seems to be a distinct marker between 
the comprehensive education systems of France and Sweden. While the 
institutional arrangements and the degree of formal differentiation remain 
similar, the actual practice of differentiation varies between the two sys-
tems, with Sweden showing less differentiation. The focus on institutional 
arrangements and on the practice of differentiation provides initial insight 
into how education pathways and subsequent outcomes are shaped by the 
structure of education systems. Table 6.7 summarises the relevant institu-
tional arrangements in each country and classifies them into favourable and 
unfavourable conditions for the educational mobility of second-generation 
Turks based on the outcomes of this chapter.
The predominantly favourable institutional arrangements in Sweden 
– such as starting school early, low differentiation and high levels of perme-
ability – appear to produce a cumulative effect that increases upward mobil-
ity in education. Some of these favourable conditions and arrangements are 
also present in the structure of the French education system (table 6.7). At 
the same time, formal and informal differentiation takes place, leading 
to mixed results in the French case. The case of Austria shows that early 
selection is a major blockage on the road to upward mobility in education. 
Even though there appears to be a second chance to move from the lower 
tracks onto the more academically orientated tracks at the end of lower-
secondary education, the great majority remain in the stream in which 
they were placed at the beginning of lower-secondary education. Finally, 
it is worth noting that low participation in pre-school acts as an additional 
chokehold for mobility and is probably an important factor in explaining 
the high rates of downward streaming at the first transition point.

164
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Whether the argument that institutional arrangements really make a 
difference can be sustained has to wait until variations in individual-level 
characteristics, such as social origin, background and the availability of 
relevant resources within and outside the family home, are held constant. 
Thus, chapter 7 explores how many of the differences in transition rates 
still persist after adjusting the analysis using individual-level controls. This 
analytical strategy will not only provide us with insight into the interac-
tion mechanisms between institutional arrangements and various sets of 
individual-level factors, but it will also contribute to the debate about which 
education system provides the highest level of equality.
Table 6.7  Favourable and unfavourable conditions and practices for upward 
mobility in education
Country
Unfavourable
institutional conditions 
and practices
Favourable
institutional conditions 
and practices
Degree of 
upward mobility 
in education
Austria
–
Pre-school not obligatory
–
Intra-secondary 
permeability
Low
–
Early selection/tracked 
lower-secondary 
education
–
Second chance for stu-
dents of the vocational 
track through BHS
–
High finality of selection
France
–
(Almost) dead-end 
vocational track
–
Early start in educational 
institutions
Mixed 
–
Selectivity along 
prestigious tracks 
in upper-secondary 
education
–
Entitlement to pre-school 
facilities
–
Late selection/integrated 
track in lower-secondary 
education
–
Selectivity in tertiary 
education
–
Second chance for 
students on vocational 
track (bacc prof)
Sweden
–
Selectivity in tertiary 
education
–
Early start in educational 
institutions
High
–
Entitlement to pre-school 
facilities
–
Late selection/integrated 
track in lower-secondary 
education
–
All tracks in upper-
secondary education 
lead to credentials 
allowing for entering 
tertiary education

7	
Interactions between Individual-level 
and Institutional-level Factors
7.1	
Introduction
The discussion about whether education systems and their various de-
grees of differentiation produce inequalities is an ongoing debate in the 
sociology of education. Most emphasis so far has been on the interaction 
between tracking and the socio-economic family background of students. 
Earlier studies pointed to more significant effects for social background 
in systems where students are selected at an earlier age (Comber & Keeves 
1973 and Husen 1967, 1973, both cited in Van de Werfhorst & Mijs 2010: 417). 
Those findings have been confirmed in recent studies (Breen & Jonsson 
2005, for example). If early selection has a negative effect on equality, then 
inequality is assumed to increase more across transitions in education 
systems that have a large degree of differentiation.
This interaction may also account for a large part of the difference in 
achievement between children of immigrants and the majority school 
population in Europe (Crul & Vermeulen 2003; Heath et al. 2008). Because 
the effect of family background has been shown to be high in stratified 
systems, children of Turkish immigrants might be expected to be more 
disadvantaged since the majority of them come from low socio-economic 
family backgrounds (see chapter 2). This interaction might therefore serve as 
an explanation for group differences in education outcomes, and as a factor 
explaining variations in inequality of education between differentiated and 
less differentiated education systems.
Selection is, however, not the only institutional feature that might ac-
count for differences in outcomes between the Turkish second generation 
and the comparison group within and across countries. As shown in chapter 
6, the availability of pre-school places, age when education begins, and the 
grade retention system differ between all three compared systems and 
should be considered important institutional features as well.
This chapter focuses on types of differentiation (such as pre-school 
attendance, age when entering the education system, and early versus 
delayed selection) and the related interaction with various types of 
individual-level characteristics as a potential explanation for group dif-
ferences in education pathways. It is organised into three main sections. 
In the first section, I turn to the explanation of group differences within 

166
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
systems. This is done by looking into the three compared countries sepa-
rately and exploring differences between second-generation Turks and 
the comparison group. The second part of this chapter explores interac-
tions between institutional-level and individual-level characteristics for 
second-generation Turks in Austria, France and Sweden. I will expand 
on the previous chapters by exploring the role of internal and external 
family ties and the related resources that help second-generation Turks to 
navigate successfully through the education systems. Finally, the conclud-
ing section summarises the main findings of the chapter by discussing 
the interactions observed between institutional and individual-related 
characteristics.
7.2	
What causes inequalities in education careers within 
systems?
This section begins by exploring empirically the factors that account for 
inequalities in the education careers of the Turkish second generation and 
the comparison group in each country’s school system. One finding of 
the previous chapters was that differences in outcomes can primarily be 
explained by parents’ differing education levels. This finding is in line 
with sociological literature on ethnic educational inequalities and has 
also been found to explain variations in transition rates between children 
of immigrants and majority-group pupils in France (Brinbaum & Kieffer 
2005; Vallet & Caille 1996), Austria (Bacher 2003; Unterwurzacher 2007) and 
Sweden (Jonsson & Rudolphi 2008; Jonsson & Rudolphi 2011). This chapter 
addresses the issue of whether the strength of parents’ education levels in 
explaining group differences in transition rates varies according to when 
tracking takes place (early versus delayed). In addition, it tests whether 
children of Turkish immigrants benefit from their parents’ education in 
a similar way to children of the comparison group. The knowledge about 
education that’s available in Turkish families may be less useful for the 
schooling success of their children because the parents were educated 
predominantly in Turkey (see chapter 2). For these parents, it may have 
been more difficult, in relative terms, to acquire the kind of knowledge 
necessary to successfully navigate the host countries’ education systems. 
A second explanatory factor might be the previous performance of the 
child at school, and how it influences choice at the point of transition to the 
next education level. School performance affects not only the individual 
(and his or her parents) in making the final choice for one track rather 

Interactions between Individual-level and Institutional-level Factors
167
than another, it is also an important criterion in the recommendations 
given by class councils or teachers when they evaluate students’ prospects 
and recommend whether they should be assigned to academic or general 
education. Since information on what grades were obtained is not available 
in the data used here, information on grade retention is used to account for 
problems in school performance. Finally, previous studies have indicated 
that variations in pre-school attendance rates might contribute to the 
explanation of different rates of continuing at school.
The dependent variables used throughout this first section are transition 
points between education tracks (see Tolsma, Coenders & Lubbers 2007 for 
a similar approach). Children pass through a series of transitions (including 
transition points) in the course of their education careers. These determine 
the routes and the sets of alternatives available at later branching points. 
Looking at transition points allows the exploration of interactions between 
system-related features and individual-level characteristics throughout the 
entire education career.
Table 7.1  Analytical strategy for analysing education pathways 
Transition 
point
Age of 
student
Metric of dependent variable 
and type of track
% distribu-
tion
Type of regres-
sion analysis 
applied
(national titles)
CG
2GT
Austria 1 9/10
1=academically 
orientated
(AHS-Unterstufe)
58.5
33.8
Binomial logistic 
regression
0=vocationally 
orientated
(Hauptschule)
41.5
66.2
2 14/15
1=leaving school
9.6
11.0
Conditional 
logistic  
regression
2= vocationally 
orientated
(Lehre, 
Polytechnikum, 
BMS)
30.6
45.1
3=academically 
orientated
(AHS, BHS)
59.8
43.9
3 18/19
1=entering 
university
(Universität, 
Akademien)
51.6
33.0
Binomial logistic 
regression
 
 
 
0=leaving 
school
 
48.4
67.0

168
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Transition 
point
Age of 
student
Metric of dependent variable 
and type of track
% distribu-
tion
Type of regres-
sion analysis 
applied
(national titles)
CG
2GT
France
1 15/16
1=leaving school
5.4
7.6
Multinomial 
regression
2=vocationally 
orientated
(CAP/BEP)
13.7
39.2
3=academically 
orientated
(Lycée)
80.9
53.2
2 18/19
1=entering 
university
(Université, DUT, 
BTS, etc.)
83.3
63.5 Binomial logistic 
regression
 
 
 
0=leaving 
school
 
16.7
36.5
Sweden 1 15/16
1=academically 
orientated
(Teoretisk/
Studieförb. Gym-
nasieskolan)
57.9
53.6
Binomial logistic 
regression
0=vocationally 
orientated
(Yrkesinriktad 
Gymnasieskolan)
42.1
46.4
2 18/19
1=entering 
university
(Universitet, 
Högskola, 
Yrkeshögskole-
utbildning)
73.9
60.5 Binomial logistic 
regression
 
 
 
0=leaving 
school
 
26.1
39.5
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: CG=Comparison group. 2GT=Second-generation Turks.
In France and Sweden, two main transition points characterise education 
pathways; in Austria, as a result of early tracking, education pathways have 
three main transition points. The probability of passing on to the next 
level of education has been estimated conditionally on having reached 
the previous level. Those students who dropped out of school are no longer 
included in the analysis at later stages.
Table 7.1 summarises the analytical strategies and the type of regression 
analysis applied. It further provides the percentage distributions for the 
dependent variables at each transition point (per study group) for students 
who have reached the preceding education level. For example, out of the 
total number of students from the comparison group who successfully 
finished upper-secondary education in Austria, 51.6 per cent continued in 
some sort of tertiary education.

Interactions between Individual-level and Institutional-level Factors
169
Each dependent variable represents possible choices for continuing 
to the next track. Depending on the education choices available, either 
binomial or multinomial logistic regression was used. One exception was 
the second transition point in Austria. Choices by the student population 
either to continue on one of the two tracks or to leave the education system 
are dependent on prior tracking. As explained in chapter 6, students in 
Austria follow different tracks in lower-secondary education before they 
choose their next education level at the second transition point. Here, I 
follow the methodological approach applied by Stocké (2007), who ex-
amined such decisions and their effects on families’ social class position 
in the German education system by using conditional logic models. This 
type of analysis has been used in empirical applications of rational choice 
studies, and the models are often referred to as ‘discrete choice models’ 
(see also Ben-Akiva & Lerman 1994; Breen & Jonsson 2000; Long & Freese 
2006: 293ff).
Given that education systems in the three countries differ from each 
other, this section reports the findings for each country separately. The 
results are compared and discussed in the conclusion of this chapter.
7.2.1	
France
The descriptive exploration of outflow rates and education pathways in 
chapter 6 highlighted two major transition points in the French education 
system: The first, after completing collège, and the second, before enter-
ing post-secondary/tertiary education. Significant group differences have 
been observed at the first transition point, with second-generation Turks 
entering the academic track less often than the comparison group. These 
differences persist descriptively when turning to the second transition 
(see chapter 6).
The strength of the variables listed above and their effect on the explana-
tion of group differences at the first transition point in the French system is 
tested through multinomial logistic regression. The findings are presented 
in table 7.2. The dependent variable is track selection and indicates three 
possibilities: The track followed is the academic option (1), the vocational 
track (2), or the early school leaver (3). The left side of table 7.2 shows the 
comparison between making it into the academic versus the vocational 
track, while the right side displays the empirical findings for the comparison 
between leaving school early versus entering the vocational track.

170
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Table 7.2  Multinomial logistic regression of track chosen in upper-secondary 
education in France (odds ratios)
Academic 
Leaving school
 
M1
M2
M3
M4
M1
M2
M3
M4
Second-generation 
Turks
0.20***
(0.04)
0.39***
(0.09)
0.48**
(0.11)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Parents’ education 
level
1.51***
(0.13)
1.46***
(0.13)
n.s.
n.s.
Father employed 
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Attended pre-school
excluded
excluded
Grade retention 
(primary)
0.24***
2.26*
(0.05)
(0.74)
Grade retention 
(secondary)
n.s.
1.97*
(0.63)
City: Paris 
2.19***
2.03***
1.89***
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
(0.37)
(0.35)
(0.33)
Interactions:
Parents’ education 
levels *Second-
generation Turks
0.60*
(0.13)
n.s.
R2
0.17
0.21
0.31
0.31
0.17
0.21
0.31
0.31
N.
851
851
846
846
851
851
846
846
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Reference category: Vocational track. Standard errors are in parentheses. Levels of 
significance: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. n.s.=Not significant. All models are controlled for age 
and gender. Model 4 in this table is the same as in the previous model (but complemented with 
the interaction term).
For each comparison, three models of increasing complexity are applied. 
The first model (M1) shows the size of the differences between second-
generation Turks and the comparison group tested for age, gender and city 
of residence. Model 2 (M2) includes parents’ education levels and fathers’ 
employment status as indicators of social origin, while the last model (M3) 
controls for prior grade retention. Pre-school attendance had to be excluded 
from the analysis because almost all children in France went to maternelle 
before entering primary school (see chapter 6). The final model (M4) ex-
amines the interaction between the education levels of second-generation 
Turks and their parents in order to investigate whether second-generation 

Interactions between Individual-level and Institutional-level Factors
171
Turks benefit in a similar manner to the comparison group from their 
parents’ education.
The results on the left side of table 7.2 show that the odds of the Turkish 
second generation entering the academic rather than the vocational track 
were only one-fifth those of the comparison group. The gap in continuation 
rates between the two groups reduces once parents’ education levels are 
introduced, while the father’s employment status does not contribute signifi-
cantly to the explanation of different continuation rates. Parents’ education 
levels were revealed to be the strongest positive determinant of a student’s 
likelihood of proceeding towards the academic track. Put differently, part of 
the group differences are related to the fact that second-generation Turks in 
France originate more frequently from families with lower levels of education. 
Finally, when introducing grade retention in primary and lower-secondary 
school, the significant group differences in terms of entering the academic 
track are further reduced but still remain significant.
Overall, even after considering the set of explanatory variables, Turkish 
second-generation students are still twice as likely to enter the vocational track 
as their non-immigrant age-mates. It is worth noting that there are substantial 
differences between the two survey cities. This means that students in Stras-
bourg are still less likely to proceed into seconde générale or lycée technologique 
compared to students in Paris, even if they had equal experiences of grade 
retention and have similar social origins. This finding needs further explora-
tion and I will return to this with some possible explanations below.
Finally, Model 4 shows a negative interaction effect (odds ratio below 1), 
indicating that a higher level of education in the parents does not improve 
the chances of their children entering the academic lycée as much for the 
Turkish second generation as it does for their French age-mates.
What makes students in the French education system leave school after 
compulsory education instead of entering the vocational track? The answer is 
presented in the right-hand part of table 7.2. Clearly, grade retention in primary 
and lower-secondary education mediates early school leaving. Students in both 
groups who do not meet the demands of schooling during compulsory educa-
tion are at risk of dropping out before entering upper-secondary education.
By now we have seen that both the influences we had anticipated, pa-
rental socio-economic background and prior problems with achievement, 
turned out to be major explanations for inequalities in continuation rates 
between the compared groups in the French cities at the first transition 
point. In particular, the differences in continuation rates between academic 
and vocational tracks were substantially reduced by these characteristics. 
Nevertheless, a significant variation persists between the compared groups.

172
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Let’s now turn to the second important transition point for students 
in French schools at the end of upper-secondary education. That is when 
students have to decide whether they will leave school and enter the labour 
market or continue in some type of post-secondary/tertiary education. 
Since the French education reforms of the mid-1980s, which aimed to make 
the bacc the education norm, preparations for joining the labour market 
have shifted mainly to the post-secondary level. Over the last 30 years, the 
number of students who entered the tertiary level has increased rapidly 
(Duru-Bellat & Kieffer 2001), and so obtaining any tertiary-level professional 
diploma became of major importance for a successful entrance into the 
labour market. In other words, continuing beyond the lycée is of major im-
portance for students’ future chances of employment. Continuation into any 
type of post-secondary/tertiary education is the next dependent variable. 
The analytical strategy is similar to the model of the first transition, but 
the outcome for tertiary education is a dummy variable set to 1 if the final 
choice was any type of post-secondary/tertiary education, and to 0 if the 
student did not continue and dropped out of the French education system.1
One of the aims of this chapter is to further explore the impact of prior 
tracking on continuation rates. In the French case, only bacc holders can 
enter tertiary education. As discussed in chapter 6, three types of education 
track offer the baccalauréat and are therefore the entrance tickets into the 
tertiary sector: students who enter a lycée can either attend the general or 
the technical track, while students who have been sorted into the vocational 
stream (BEP/CAP) can proceed with additional schooling to obtain the vo-
cational baccalauréat. This differentiation makes the French system highly 
selective (Brinbaum & Cebolla Boado 2007). The general baccalauréat keeps 
its pre-eminence in terms of status and opens the clearest way to tertiary 
education, while the technological and the vocational baccalauréats are less 
valued. As Brinbaum and Cebolla Boada (2007: 465) state, ‘the orientation 
towards a vocational or a technical track does occur in France in a negative 
way: “good” pupils are invited to attend the general track, while pupils with 
lower performance are orientated towards vocational training’. Differences 
in the continuation into tertiary education among the comparison group 
and second-generation Turks may be related to the higher track placement 
of the comparison group in the general lycée. The results for the second 
transition point in the French education system are shown in table 7.3.
1	
In chapter 6, inequalities among groups for type of programmes in tertiary education had 
been observed. But in order to achieve comparability across the three educational systems at 
this stage of the education spectrum, the binary distinction (entering or not) is used for France.

Interactions between Individual-level and Institutional-level Factors
173
The first model (M1) explores the gap in continuation rates among the 
comparison group and second-generation Turks (via the dummy variable 
second-gen. Turks), already tested for age, gender and city of residence. The 
odds of the Turkish second generation in France continuing with any type of 
tertiary education are only around one-third of those of the comparison group. 
Moreover, in line with the previous findings, significant city differences are 
found, with students in Paris showing higher continuation rates than those 
living in Strasbourg. In a next step (M2), I will control for prior track placement. 
As shown in table 7.3, students who obtain the technical or vocational bacc 
are less likely to continue in any type of post-secondary or tertiary education.
Table 7.3  Binomial logistic models of continuing in post-secondary/tertiary 
education in France (odds ratios)
 
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
Second-gen. Turks 
0.29***
0.61*
n.s.
n.s.
(0.06)
(0.15)
Track followed before: 
academic
20.21***
17.00***
14.17***
(5.81)
(4.97)
(4.21)
Parental educational level
1.58***
1.55***
(0.19)
(0.19)
Father employed 
n.s.
n.s.
Attended pre-school
excluded
Grade retention (primary)
n.s.
Grade retention (secondary)
0.39***
(0.10)
City: Paris 
1.97***
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
(0.35)
Interactions:
Parental educational level* 
Second-generation Turks
0.56* 
(0.16)
R2
0.12
0.41
0.44
0.47
0.47
N.
705
683
683
681
681
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Levels of significance: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. 
n.s.=Not significant. All models are controlled for age and gender. Model 5 in this table is the same 
as in the previous model (but complemented with the interaction term).
Furthermore, the gap between the comparison group and the Turkish 
second generation is reduced by half but still remains significant. As we 
found in chapter 6, second-generation Turks are over-represented in these 

174
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
less prestigious tracks, which seems to explain a substantial part of the 
group differences at this transition point. Vocational and technical diploma-
holders are also more frequently found in Strasbourg, especially among the 
Turkish second generation, which is why the differences between the two 
French cities disappear at this stage of the analysis.
The significant differences between the two compared groups disappear 
completely once parents’ education background is taken into account. As 
before, this variable behaves as predicted, with children of more highly 
educated parents having a greater chance of making the move into tertiary 
education. It is worth noting that the significance of the education level of the 
parents at this point is almost the same as at the first transition point. Finally, 
grade retention in compulsory education (primary and lower-secondary) is 
considered (M4). Those students who have repeated a grade in collège are 
found to make their way into the final stage of education less often, while 
schooling problems in primary school do not exert an influence anymore. 
After testing for all these explanatory variables (Model 4), the strongest 
predictor of moving beyond upper-secondary education is still the type of 
baccalauréat obtained in upper-secondary education. But the strength of this 
variable was substantially reduced by testing for parents’ education levels 
(M3) and for prior grade retention in secondary education (M4). This means 
that students from less educated families, who have repeated a grade at collège 
level, are less often found in the lycée general. They travel through the French 
education system via the technological lycée or even along the professional 
vocational track, and often obtain less prestigious bacc diplomas, which 
make them less likely to continue on to post-secondary/tertiary education.
The negative interaction effect in Model 5 shows a similar pattern to the 
transition to the academically orientated lycées. A more advanced level of 
education on the part of the parents does not increase the likelihood of 
children entering post-secondary/tertiary education as much in the case 
of the Turkish second generation as in the case of their French peers.
Figure 7.1 summarises the findings of table 7.2 and table 7.3 by showing 
the predicted probabilities of making the two transition points (academic 
versus vocational and post-sec./tertiary versus leaving school) for the com-
parison group and the Turkish second generation, tested for family back-
ground differences, prior grade retention, and tracking in upper-secondary 
education. As a result, the figures display pathways through the French 
education system for students from both groups who have equivalent 
family backgrounds, track placements, and grade retention experiences. 
The results are presented separately for the two compared groups in Paris 
and Strasbourg.

Interactions between Individual-level and Institutional-level Factors
175
Figure 7.1  Predicted probability of continuing in the academically orientated tracks 
at different transition points for the Turkish second generation and the 
comparison group in France
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Integrated track
Academic versus vocational
Any tertiary versus stop
Lower-secondary
Upper-secondary
Tertiary
Comparison group 
Paris and Strasbourg
Second-generation Turks Paris
Second-generation 
Turks Strasbourg
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Predicted probabilities are calculated from final models presented in table 7.2 and table 
7.3; all other variables held at their mean. Estimates for comparison groups in Paris and Strasbourg 
are identical and therefore overlap in the figure (broken black line). Since all students attend the 
integrated track in lower-secondary education, their predicted probability was set to 1.
The education pathways of the Turkish second generation are not the same 
for the comparison group. The gap still persists between second-generation 
Turks and the comparison group at the first transition point, even after 
testing for differences in the parents’ levels of education, father’s employ-
ment status and prior grade retention. Displaying the results for both cities 
separately provides further insight into the significant city differences at the 
first transition point. While the continuation rate of the comparison group 
is identical in each city, substantial variation occurs between the Turkish 
second generation in Paris and Strasbourg. As displayed in figure 7.1, the 
relative gap between the comparison group and the Turkish second genera-
tion at this stage is around 10 percentage points in Paris, while it´s twice that 
in Strasbourg. What might explain these remaining city differences? Many 
studies have reported that family preferences can amplify the negative 
effects of familial constraints, leading to stronger class differentials in access 

176
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
to upper-secondary education in France (Beaud & Pialoux 1999; Duru-Bellat 
& Kieffer 2001; Merle 2002). Those studies revealed that better-off families 
often preferred the academically orientated lycées for their children, while 
this was usually not the case among less well-off families (Brinbaum & 
Cebolla Boado 2007). In chapter 2, we saw that the majority of the Turk-
ish first generation in Paris has already moved towards becoming middle 
class, compared to the Turkish community in Strasbourg. Those social class 
differences in the first generation across cities may contribute to diverse 
perceptions and to preferences for certain school tracks for their children. 
Given that second-generation Turks in Strasbourg more often come from 
less well-off families compared to their counterparts in Paris, the vocational 
alternative might be more valued by Turkish parents in Strasbourg as a stable 
and safe trajectory towards the labour market for their children. This line 
of argument would also explain the preference among second-generation 
Turks for attending the vocationally orientated track within the lycées.
A completely different picture appears at the highest end of the education 
spectrum where no differences exist among bacc holders about continu-
ing on to tertiary education, once tracking in lycées, parents’ education, 
and prior grade retention are held constant (see figure 7.1). As discussed 
above, the type of bacc that students hold as well as the level of education 
of their parents can completely explain the educational inequalities at this 
important point in the French education system.
7.2.2	
Sweden
The first important decision point in Swedish schools appears at the end 
of lower-secondary education, at the age of fifteen or sixteen. Similar to 
the French education system, pupils have to decide between vocational or 
academic tracks in upper-secondary education. But differently from France, 
second-generation Turks and their comparison group do not differ signifi-
cantly in their continuation rate at this first transition point (see figure 6.2). 
This descriptive finding was also confirmed through multivariate analyses2 
2	
Binomial logistic regression analysis is used for this transition point. Ideally, and similar to 
the French case, one would have studied three possibilities at this stage: entering the academic 
track, the vocational track or leaving school early, but the numbers of school leavers were too 
small to include them as a separate category in the analysis. That’s why the dependent variable 
was set to one if the track followed was the academic track and set to zero for the vocational 
track. Early school leavers have been dropped from this analysis, which yielded a total number of 
479 out of 501. The analysis for Sweden has a second methodological limitation. Again, because 
of small case numbers, grade retention in primary school had to be excluded from the analysis.

Interactions between Individual-level and Institutional-level Factors
177
(table 7.4, M1, left side), even after adjusting for gender and age differences 
among the two compared groups. The next two steps controlled additionally 
for differences in the parents’ education background, the employment status of 
the father (M2), pre-school attendance and grade retention in gymnasium (M3).
Table 7.4  Binomial logistic regression predicting track placement at the transition 
to upper-secondary and tertiary education in Sweden (odds ratios)
Academic versus Voca-
tional
(Upper-secondary)
Tertiary education versus 
leaving school
 
M1
M2
M3
M4
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
Second-
generation Turks
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
0.60*
0.61*
n.s.
n.s.
(0.13)
(0.14)
Track followed 
before: academic
-
-
 
5.21*** 5.06***
5.11***
 
(1.18)
(1.16)
(1.18)
Parents’ educa-
tional level
1.26**
(0.09)
1.26**
(0.09)
 
1.19*
(0.10)
1.21*
(0.10)
 
Father employed 
n.s.
n.s.
 
n.s.
n.s.
 
Attended 
pre-school
n.s.
 
n.s.
Grade retention – 
primary
excluded
 
excluded
Grade retention – 
secondary
n.s.
 
n.s.
 
Interactions
Parental educa-
tional levels *2GT
n.s.
0.63*
(0.11)
R2
0.01
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.03
0.17
0.24
0.25
0.27
N.
479
479
477
477
444
442
442
440
440
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Levels of significance: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. 
n.s.=Not significant. All models are controlled for age and gender. Grade retention in primary 
school has been excluded because of the small number of cases. Model 4 (left side) and Model 5 
(right side) are the same as in the previous model (but complemented with the interaction term).
The likelihood of attending an academically orientated track increased 
along with a higher education level on the part of the parents, while 
pre-school attendance and grade retention did not play a significant role. 

178
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
The interaction between second-generation Turks and parents’ education 
background did not show significant outcomes, underlining the fact that 
having more highly educated parents increases the odds of continuing in the 
academic track in an equal way for all pupils in the Swedish school system.
Turning to the second main transition point (see table 7.4, right part 
of table), second-generation Turks are found leaving school significantly 
more often than continuing on to any type of post-secondary or tertiary 
education (M1). In the next step (M2), I ask whether it makes a difference, 
when entering post-sec/tertiary level, which track a student was placed 
in for upper-secondary education. Both school types in upper-secondary 
education, academically orientated and vocationally orientated, provide 
students with diplomas that allow them to enter the tertiary sector. As show 
in table 7.4 (right side), the odds of continuing in post-secondary/tertiary 
education are 5.2 times higher for students who entered the academic track 
in upper-secondary education. Vocational schools in Sweden mainly give 
students the skills they need to compete in the labour market – which 
explains why their students leave the Swedish education system in higher 
numbers at this stage. But the track followed before the second transition 
point does not affect the significant group differences found in Model 1, 
since the comparison group and the Turkish second generation attended 
these tracks in almost equal numbers (compare also chapter 6).
But the disadvantaged position of the Turkish second generation disap-
pears and can be fully explained by differences in parents’ education levels 
(M3). Since more children of highly educated parents make the transition, 
the fact that the Turkish second generation is over-represented in lower-
educated families makes the difference at this stage in the Swedish educa-
tion system. But young adults of Turkish origin, and from similar education 
backgrounds, have the same chance of entering tertiary education as their 
age-mates from the comparison group. Table 7.4 also indicates that grade 
retention in compulsory education does not affect this transition any more 
(M4). Model 5 shows a negative interaction effect (odds ratio less than one) 
at the highest transition point for group and parents’ education background, 
indicating that better education on the part of the parents does not improve 
the chances of Turkish immigrants’ children reaching tertiary education 
as much as it improves the chances of their Swedish peers.
Figure 7.2 displays these results in graph form, and the findings are pre-
sented following the protocol established in the previous section. All students 
leave the integrated track at the age of fifteen to sixteen and decide either to 
continue on to the vocational track or the academic track in upper-secondary 
education. The relative chances of continuing on to the academically orien-

Interactions between Individual-level and Institutional-level Factors
179
tated gymnasium are around 55 per cent for both groups. Three years later, 
students in the Swedish education system move on to various types of tertiary 
education or they leave the education system for the labour market. As in 
the French system, over the past 20 years, having a professional third-level 
diploma has become of increasing importance for getting a job. As explained 
above, disparities in continuation rates between the two compared groups 
can be fully explained by differences in parents’ education backgrounds. As 
displayed in figure 7.2, children from both groups have a relative chance of 
70 per cent of continuing in any type of tertiary education.
Figure 7.2  Predicted probability of continuing in the academically orientated tracks 
at different transition points for the Turkish second generation and the 
comparison group in Sweden
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Integrated track
Academic versus vocational
Any tertiary versus stop
Lower-secondary
Upper-secondary
Tertiary
Comparison group
Second-generation Turks
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Estimates are calculated from Model 3 (left side) and Model 4 (right side) in table 7.4; 
all other variables held at their mean. Since all students attend the integrated track in lower 
secondary education, their predicted probability was set to 1.
7.2.3	
Austria
Having described the education pathways in the two comprehensive educa-
tion systems in France and Sweden, I will now turn to the results for Austria. 
As examined in the previous chapter, the Austrian education system can 
be characterised as highly stratified. It sorts students into different types 

180
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
of ability tracks for the first time at the age of ten, after primary school. 
The descriptive exploration in chapter 6 has further indicated that in both 
Austrian survey cities, only one in every three second-generation Turkish 
pupil enters the academic track at this stage, while the continuation rate 
is twice as high for the comparison group.
Results of the multivariate analyses at this first transition point are 
presented in table 7.5. The dependent variable is track selection and is set to 1 
if the track followed is the academic option, and 0 if it is the vocational track.
Table 7.5  Binomial logistic regression predicting track placement at the first 
transition to lower-secondary education in Austria (odds ratios)
M1
M2
M3
M4
Second-generation Turks
0.30***
0.64**
ns
(0.04)
(0.11)
Parents’ education levels
2.21***
2.11***
(0.17)
(0.17)
Father employed 
n.s.
n.s.
Attended pre-school
1.51*
(0.28)
Grade retention -primary
0.51*
(0.13)
City: Vienna
n.s.
1.41*
1.46*
(0.21)
(0.22)
Interactions: 
Parents’ education levels* 
second-generation Turks
n.s.
R2
0.13
0.29
0.30
0.30
N
942
942
936
936
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Levels of significance: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. 
n.s.=Not significant. All models are controlled for age and gender. Model 4 in this table is the same 
as in the previous model (but complemented with the interaction term).
The first model (M1) shows the size of the differences between second-
generation Turks and the comparison group controlled for age, gender and 
city of residence. In line with the descriptive results, in both Austrian cities 
second-generation Turks are found to be less likely to follow the academic 
track. The odds of being on the academic track in lower-secondary education 
were only one-third of those of the comparison group. Next (M2), parents’ 
education levels and fathers’ employment status were included. Parents’ 
education levels were revealed to be the strongest positive determinant 

Interactions between Individual-level and Institutional-level Factors
181
of a student’s likelihood of going for the academic track, and reduced the 
group differences by more than half. Interestingly, after testing for ‘social 
origin’, city differences become significant, with pupils in Vienna (from 
both compared groups) entering the academic track more often.
Next, pre-school attendance and grade retention in primary school are 
taken into account (M3). Both variables behave in the expected fashion, 
with pre-school attendance increasing the chances, and prior grade reten-
tion decreasing the chances of continuing on the academic track. Group 
differences in both measures contributed to the overall explanation of 
group differences at the first decision point. Finally, it was found that when 
the parents’ level of education is higher, all children’s chances of entering 
the academic AHS-Unterstufe improved, since the interaction term of Model 
4 is not significant.
The second important decision point for all students in Austria ap-
pears after compulsory education, when students decide to continue on 
the academic tracks (1, AHS-Oberstufe or BHS), the vocational tracks (2, 
BMS, the preparatory class Polytechnikum and apprenticeship) or to leave 
the education system (3). Although the academically orientated track in 
lower-secondary education is the most stable route to the next academic 
track, students from the lower-ability track (Hauptschule) can still leave the 
vocational path and enter the academic stream in the next stage.
Table 7.6 shows the results of the decisions taken by students in Austria 
at the second stage in their education careers. It also shows the degree to 
which they are affected by institutional and individual factors. The set of 
independent variables remains almost the same as at the first transition 
point. But this time I further examine whether it makes a difference if 
students were placed in the academic or vocational tracks earlier.
To begin with the difference between the options, academic versus voca-
tional, we find the Turkish second generation continuing less often on the 
academic tracks (table 7.6, right side). The discrepancies between the compared 
groups decrease once earlier track placement is taken into consideration. In 
other words, Turkish second-generation students enter the academic path 
at upper-secondary education less often because they have already been 
streamed into the lower-ability track in higher numbers before. Students 
who went to the AHS-Unterstufe are almost 11 times more likely to continue 
on the academic path (M2). Nevertheless, the high rate of early selection into 
the vocational track during lower-secondary education does not completely 
account for the significant gap at the second transition point. Interestingly, in 
Model 2, city differences appear between Vienna and Linz. Students in Linz 
are less likely to move on to the academic track than their age-mates in Vienna.

182
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Table 7.6  Conditional multinomial logistic regression predicting track placement at the transition to upper-secondary education in Austria (odds ratios)
Early school leaving
Academic 
 
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
Second-generation Turks
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
0.41***
0.66*
n.s.
n.s.
(0.06)
(0.11)
Track followed before: academic
3.78***
4.23***
4.55***
10.79***
8.72***
8.44***
(0.68)
(0.52)
(0.51)
(1.98)
(1.67)
(1.62)
Parents’ education levels
n.s.
n.s.
1.33***
1.31**
(0.11)
(0.12)
Father employed 
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Attended pre-school
ns
n.s.
Grade retention – primary
3.85***
n.s.
(1.19)
Grade retention – secondary
3.28***
n.s.
(1.04)
City: Vienna 
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
0.67*
0.71*
0.71*
(0.11)
(0.12)
(0.12)
Interactions:
Parents’ education levels*second-
generation Turks
n.s.
0.40***
(0.08)
R2
0.36
0.51
0.53
0.57
0.36
0.51
0.53
0.57
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Reference category is Vocational track. Standard errors are in parentheses. Levels of significance: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. n.s.=Not significant. All models are 
controlled for age and gender. Model 5 in this table is the same as in the previous model (but complemented with the interaction term).

Interactions between Individual-level and Institutional-level Factors
183
But what explains the remaining gap between the two groups at this transi-
tion point? As indicated in Model 3, significant group differences disappear 
completely once parents’ education is taken into account, while pre-school 
attendance and prior grade retention in compulsory education (M4) do 
not exert a significant impact on making it to the academically orientated 
track. The ‘lower-than-1’ value of the interaction term (M5) indicates that at 
this transition point, higher levels of education in the parental generation 
do improve the chances of the comparison group more than those of the 
children of Turkish immigrants. As discussed above, the knowledge that 
Turkish families have of education and education systems may be less useful 
because it tends, for the most part, not to have been obtained in Austria. 
For these parents, it may have been more difficult to acquire the knowledge 
needed for success in the Austrian school system.
When turning to group differences and the factors related to early school-
leaving (left side of table 7.6), one clear takeaway point should be noted: 
students who faced achievement problems early in their education careers 
and had to repeat grades in primary school or lower-secondary are most 
likely to leave school early (table 7.6, M4, left side).
Students who make it into the academic tracks, AHS-Oberstufe or BHS, 
have the choice of continuing with tertiary education after graduating 
successfully with a diploma. It is worth noting that these two academic 
tracks, which provide an entrance to tertiary education, differ in their cur-
riculums. AHS-Oberstufe prepares students for university-based education 
programmes, while BHS schools provide higher vocationally orientated 
qualifications in different areas and a well-rounded general education. 
But unlike France, where the technical lycée is generally less valued, both 
Austrian academic tracks are equally prestigious. As shown in the previous 
chapter, around six out of ten students follow the general academic track, 
AHS-Oberstufe, and this does not differ significantly between the Turkish 
second generation and the comparison group.
But as explored in chapter 6, there are substantial differences between 
the two groups in the rates at which they continue beyond upper-secondary 
education in the Austrian system. In order to examine the factors influencing 
this last transition point, multivariate regression analysis was used to predict 
the transition to any type of tertiary education. The results are presented in 
table 7.7. As indicated by the first model (M1), second-generation Turks are 
only half as likely as the comparison group to enter any type of post-secondary 
education. This disadvantaged position for second-generation Turks does not 
change once the previous academic track is taken into consideration (M2). 
This is not surprising given that the participation rates in these academic 

184
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
tracks did not differ between the two groups before. Students from the BHS 
schools are twice as likely to leave the education system as their counterparts 
in the more general academic track, since these schools prepare students for 
specific jobs rather than for university education. But what accounts for the 
differences in the continuation rates at this last transition?
Table 7.7  Binomial logistic regression predicting the transition into tertiary 
education in Austria (odds ratios)
Tertiary education
versus Leaving education
 
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
Second-generation Turks
0.49***
0.49***
0.63*
0.70*
(0.09)
(0.10)
(0.14)
(0.16)
Track followed before: general 
academic
2.04***
(0.41)
1.84**
(0.38)
1.99**
(0.42)
Parents’ education level
1.32**
1.25*
(0.12)
(0.11)
Father employed 
n.s.
Attended pre-school
n.s.
Grade retention -primary
n.s. 
Grade retention -secondary
n.s.
City: Vienna 
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s. 
Interactions: 
Parents’ education 
level*second-generation Turks
0.59**
(0.11)
R2
0.06
0.10
0.12
0.14
0.17
N.
481
481
481
478
478
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Levels of significance: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. n.s.=Not significant. Standard errors 
in parentheses. All models are controlled for age and gender. Model 5 in this table is the same as in 
the previous model (but complemented with the interaction term).
Model 3 (M3) indicates that, in Austria, entering tertiary education is 
still dependent on parents’ education levels. In line with the analysis of 
the previous two transitions, the gap decreases once there is a control for 
parents’ education. Overall, even after taking differences in pre-school 
attendance and grade retention into account (M4), the Turkish second 
generation in Austria is still found to enter tertiary education significantly 

Interactions between Individual-level and Institutional-level Factors
185
less often. And it is finally worth noting that this finding applies to both 
survey cities. Similar to the patterns observed at the previous transition 
point (academic versus vocational), the interaction term between second-
generation Turks and parental education level is negative, indicating that 
the comparison group benefits more if their parents are highly educated 
than do the children of Turkish immigrants.
After the separate discussions of each transition point, figure 7.3 is a 
graph summarizing the results based on the findings above. It shows the 
predicted probability of continuing along the academic tracks for both 
groups, tested for the lists of indicators described above. In short, it shows 
the chances of continuing along the more prestigious tracks for students 
of the Turkish second generation and the comparison group, in both cases 
coming from similar parental backgrounds and with similar experiences in 
grade retention and prior tracking throughout their school careers. Similar 
to figure 7.1 for the French education system, the findings are presented 
separately for both Austrian cities.
Figure 7.3  Predicted probability of continuing in the academically orientated tracks 
at different transition points for the Turkish second generation and the 
comparison group in Austria
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
Academic versus vocational
Academic versus vocational
Academic versus stop
Lower-secondary
Upper-secondary
Tertiary
Comparison group Vienna
Comparison group Linz
Second-generation Turks Vienna
Second-generation Turks Linz
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Estimates are calculated from Model 3 in table 7.5 (lower-secondary education), Model 4 
on the right side of table 7.6 (upper-secondary education) and Model 4; all other variables held at 
their mean.

186
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Two results emerge very clearly from the graph presented in figure 7.3. 
Firstly, second-generation Turks are facing disadvantaged positions both 
at the beginning and at the end of the Austrian education system. The gap 
in the relative chances between the two compared groups in both survey 
cities is around 10 percentage points at the first and third transition points. A 
second finding appears with respect to city differences. In Vienna, students 
(of both compared groups) are found more often to enter the academic track 
at the first transition point. This finding is in line with previous studies that 
generally reported higher enrolment rates for the academically orientated 
AHS-Unterstufe in Vienna, compared to the remaining Austrian federal 
states for the whole student population (Bacher 2008; Fassmann 2002; 
Schlögl & Lachmayr 2004), as well as for children of immigrants (Unterwur-
zacher 2007; Unterwurzacher & Weiss 2008). Those regional differences may 
be explained by the availability of more academically orientated schools 
in Vienna, as well as easier accessibility. A second reason might be that 
Hauptschulen in the inner city area of Vienna have a more negative image 
than the ones in the less urbanised regions, and that Viennese parents 
develop ‘avoiding strategies’ by enrolling their children in academic schools 
even if they might not meet their demands (Unterwurzacher 2007: 82). But 
students in Linz catch up at the second transition point in which they are 
more frequently found to enter the academic tracks. They go through the 
Hauptschule track in the normal way, but then are more likely to exercise 
the option of leaving the vocational path and taking the academic route 
after lower-secondary education.
7.3	
The relevance of educational resources for mobility in 
education
Each of the sections above on Austria, France and Sweden explored dif-
ferences in the education pathways followed by second-generation Turks 
and their comparison groups. Education pathways in the first part of this 
chapter were defined according to Tolsma and colleagues (2007) as a set of 
different transition points in the school career. This is the first examina-
tion of the interactions between countries’ institutional arrangements 
and individual-level characteristics. The findings will be compared in the 
concluding part of this chapter.
This section widens the perspective on education pathways and interac-
tion mechanisms by asking to what extent the educational resources ana-
lysed in chapter 4 and chapter 5 are relevant in explaining the educational 

Interactions between Individual-level and Institutional-level Factors
187
mobility of the Turkish second generation in the three education systems. 
The perspective on education pathways outlined in the first section of 
this chapter will be complemented by an examination of the interactions 
between educational resources and the sequences of tracks a student at-
tended during his or her education career. As shown in chapter 6 and in the 
first section of this chapter, the degree of stratification in education systems 
and the choices made at the most important transition points lead to a 
variety of education routes students may take on their journeys through the 
system. For instance, students in Austria who started in primary education, 
took the academic track in lower- and upper-secondary education and 
continued in post-secondary/tertiary education have been classified as 
following the ‘straight academic route’ (see table 6.6 in chapter 6). Other 
students have been categorised as following the ‘straight vocational route’ 
because they started on the vocational track after primary school and 
continued on the apprenticeship track afterwards. Similar country-specific 
sequences of tracks have been observed in France and Sweden as well, and 
were classified in typologies in chapter 6 (see table 6.2 and table 6.4). Based 
on these detailed, country-specific typologies, I reduced the number of 
sequences into the main education pathways for each country, to serve as 
the dependent variable throughout this section.3
Table 7.8  Main education routes for second-generation Turks in Austria, France and 
Sweden 
Austria
France
Sweden
1
Straight academic route 
Straight academic route
Straight academic route
2
Short academic route
Short academic route
Short academic route
3
Upward vocational route
Upward vocational route
Upward vocational route
4
Vocational route
Vocational route/Early 
school leaver 
Vocational route/Early 
school leaver 
5
Early school leaver
3	
I had to combine some of the very detailed sequences presented in chapter 6 in order to 
achieve an adequate number of cases per pathway to conduct the following statistical analysis. 
For example, up to seven distinct paths have been detected in France in the previous analysis. 
Three out of seven routes started with collège, followed by some type of lycée and ended in 
tertiary education. These tracks have been combined into one pathway labelled as ‘straight 
academic route’ in the following analysis because they differ only slightly. Please refer to Ap-
pendix B of this chapter for details on the combination of sequences for each country.

188
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Table 7.8 shows the main education routes through which second-generation 
Turks travel. In each system, five major routes are available.
1	 The straight academic route describes second-generation Turks who 
always followed the academic tracks. In Austria, students who started 
on the academic track in lower-secondary education, continued there 
through upper-secondary education until post-secondary/tertiary educa-
tion are classified as belonging to this group. In the French and Swedish 
systems, this category includes students who followed the integrated 
track before entering the academic track in upper-secondary education 
and post-secondary/tertiary education.
2	 Second-generation Turks who followed the academic track but stopped 
after upper-secondary education are classified as students who took the 
short academic route.
3	 The upward vocational route describes second-generation Turks who 
started on the vocational tracks but made use of the ‘second chance’ 
to move up to the academic tracks and continue until post-secondary/
tertiary education. In the French and Swedish systems, these are students 
who followed the vocational tracks in upper-secondary education and 
had moved into the academic path by the end of this stage (at an average 
age of eighteen or nineteen). In Austria, the ‘second chance’, which pro-
vides an opportunity to move out of the vocational track, appears after 
lower-secondary education and therefore earlier than in either Sweden 
or France. Thus, vocational upward-movers in Austria are students who 
were streamed into the vocational track after primary school but moved 
upwards at the end of lower-secondary education (at an average age of 
fifteen) and continued on the academic path beyond upper-secondary 
education.
4	 The vocational route describes students who followed exclusively voca-
tional tracks.
5	 Early school leavers describes students who left the education system 
after compulsory education. Since this section concentrates on second-
generation Turks only, routes 4 and 5 had to be combined for France 
and Sweden because the case numbers were insufficient to conduct 
multivariate analysis.
This section examines how relevant individual-level factors are for second-
generation Turks in terms of the decisions they make about which path to 
follow in each education system. As measures for individual-level factors, 
I come back to the most relevant predictors of school success explored in 
chapters 3 and 4: parents’ education levels, parental and older sibling sup-

Interactions between Individual-level and Institutional-level Factors
189
port in school-related activities, and the perceived importance of parental 
and sibling support. Next, I turn to the characteristics of, and the support 
provided by, the two main agents outside the family: peers and teachers 
(see chapter 5). Table 7.9 provides an overview of the main independent 
variables from these chapters, which will be used to explore interaction 
mechanisms with education pathways (and therefore with system-related 
factors) in this section as well.4
Table 7.9  Overview of individual-level factors (independent variables)
Variable
Metric of variable
Parents’ education levels
1(Min)=primary or below; 5 (Max)=Tertiary
Perceived importance of parents*
1(Min)=not at all important; 5 (Max)=very important
Parental support*
1(Min)=never; 5 (Max)=very often
Perceived importance of older 
siblings*
1(Min)=not at all important; 5 (Max)=very important
Older sibling support*
1(Min)=never; 5 (Max)=very often
Perceived importance of peers*
1(Min)=not at all important; 5 (Max)=very important
Ethnic composition of best friends 
(peer group diversity)*
0 (Min)=all close friends are co-ethnics; 1 (Max)=all 
three friends of national origin
Proportion of native peers in school*
0 (Min)= none; 4(Max)=most
Had peers without a diploma*
1(Yes)1); 0 (No)
Perceived importance of teachers*
1(Min)=not at all important; 5 (Max)=very important
Teacher support*
1(Min)=never; 5 (Max)=very often
Note: *=during lower-secondary/compulsory education.
The greatest level of interaction between education pathways and 
individual-level factors is likely to be observed in Austria. This is because 
in the previous chapter, I have already observed greater relevance for 
individual-level factors in terms of their impact on education attainment. 
Moreover, I anticipate that family resources will also be of greater relevance 
for the upward mobility of second-generation Turks in Austria compared 
to France and Sweden, because the most important decision point that 
determines education pathways appears when students are around age 
ten, a moment at which family members are of greater importance for 
school decisions and support. Based on the results of the previous chapters, 
I further expect to observe a moderate number of interactions in France. 
Family resources will be relevant at the point at which the transition into 
4	
For detailed information and descriptive outcomes of these variables, please refer to chapters 
4 and 5 and the respective appendices.

190
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
upper-secondary education is about to take place (the orientation process). 
At a later stage, teachers and peers in school will emerge as important agents 
in providing the resources necessary for upward mobility – as signified by 
the high number of correlations with becoming a ‘high achiever’ observed 
in chapter 5. Finally, it is my hypothesis that I will find the lowest number 
of interactions between institutional arrangements and education resources 
for second-generation Turks in Sweden because of the late selection for 
tracking, the high degree of permeability between tracks, and the fact that 
all tracks (vocational as well as academic) lead to educational credentials 
that allow students to access post-secondary/tertiary education.
I will apply multinomial logistic regression to explore the relevance of 
educational resources for second-generation Turks following each one of 
the four (in the cases of France and Sweden) or five (in the case of Austria) 
specific education pathways displayed in table 7.8. I run one model for each 
country separately, which includes all independent variables of interest as 
well as the control variables, age and gender, simultaneously. The significant 
results are displayed schematically in table 7.10 (the full models including 
coefficients, model fits and so on are displayed in Appendix B).
The results for second-generation Turks in Austria (left column of table 
7.10) indicate the relevance of four significant individual-level factors for 
following the straight academic route rather than the vocational route 
(which served as the reference category in the analysis): Parents’ education 
levels, parental support for education, teacher support, and the number of 
native peers in the closest peer group (peer group diversity). The chances 
of second-generation Turks following the straight academic route instead of 
the vocational path are increased where there are more education resources. 
The significant correlation of these four factors is not surprising given that 
I found strong associations between these variables and becoming a ‘high-
achiever’ according to the previous analysis of educational attainment.
Parents’ education levels, parental support and the ethnic composi-
tion of the closest peer group are also significantly related to the odds of 
following the short academic route (versus the vocational route). Second-
generation Turks with primarily non-immigrant peers and with more highly 
educated parents who provide greater support are more likely to take the 
academic path after primary school. What seems to make the difference 
on the academic route between continuing into post-secondary/tertiary 
education (straight academic route) or not (short academic route) is the 
support provided by teachers. The more often second-generation Turks 
are encouraged by their teachers, the higher their likelihood of continuing 
beyond upper-secondary education.

Interactions between Individual-level and Institutional-level Factors
191
Table 7.10  Schematic overview of significant correlations between individual-level 
factors and education pathways for second-generation Turks in Austria, 
France and Sweden 
Austria
France
Sweden
Straight academic route
+
Parents’ education 
levels
+
Parents’ education 
levels
+
Importance of peers
+
Parental support
+
No. of native peers 
in school
+
Parents’ education 
levels
+
Peer group diversity +
Teacher support
+
Teacher support
Short academic route
+
Parents’ education 
levels
+
Teacher support
–
Teacher support 
+
Parental support
+
Peer group diversity
Upward vocational route
+
No. of native peers 
in school
+
No. of native peers 
in school
+
Importance of 
teachers
Vocational 
route
Reference category
Reference category
Reference category
Early school leaver
 
–
Teacher support 
 
 
 
 
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Results are derived from multinomial logistic regression analysis on following education 
routes per country for second-generation Turks (full models are displayed in Appendix B – tables 
A18 to A20). Only significant results (at least p<0.05) are displayed in table 7.10. All models include 
the list of variables shown in table 7.9. In addition, all models are controlled for age and gender as 
well as for city of residence in France and Austria (capital city versus second survey city).
Second-generation Turks who have been streamed into the vocational track 
(Hauptschule) after primary education have a chance to move upwards at 
the end of this track (the upward vocational route). What increases the 
likelihood of moving up instead of staying on the vocational path is the 
number of native peers in the school peer group. Family-related factors, such 
as parents’ education levels or their support, do not significantly increase 
the chance of moving upwards. Students travelling this upward vocational 
route come predominantly from low socio-economic backgrounds where 

192
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
parents often do not have the means to support their children in their school 
activities (see chapter 4). This is why family factors do not play a major role 
for students travelling this path. But in order to gain information about the 
workings of the education system and to learn about the availability of the 
‘second chance’ for upward mobility, second-generation Turks seem to use 
non-immigrant peers in school as a source of information that might not 
be available in their own families.
What makes second-generation Turks stay on the vocational route in-
stead of dropping out of school after compulsory education? The last row 
of table 7.10 provides the answer: with increasing support from teachers, 
second-generation Turks follow the straight vocational route instead of 
leaving school early (since the observed effect on leaving school early is 
negative). In other words, the support of teachers is particularly important 
to second-generation Turks at both the lowest and highest tipping points 
of the Austrian education system. That support influences them to follow 
the straight academic route instead of the short academic route, and to not 
drop out of school but to continue on the vocational path.
The significant association between education routes and individual-
level resources for second-generation Turks in the French education system 
are displayed in the middle column of table 7.10. Having parents with high 
levels of education, more perceived support from teachers, and increasing 
numbers of non-immigrant peers in school all increase the odds of second-
generation Turks in France following the straight academic route. These 
findings are in line with the results in previous chapters and in the first 
section of this chapter. An important branching point for students in the 
French system appears at the end of collège during the orientation process 
that determines whether students enter the straight academic path or not. 
In order to manage this selection process successfully and to stay on the 
straight academic route afterwards, the three factors we’ve seen are of great 
relevance for second-generation Turks. In particular, the education levels 
of the parents and the number of non-immigrant friends in the school 
peer group are significantly associated with continuing on this route until 
post-secondary/tertiary education. This becomes clear once the significant 
factors linked to these two routes are compared: support from teachers 
seems to be a relevant factor for students following the short academic route. 
By contrast, the likelihood of following the straight academic route to the 
top of the education ladder is related to parents’ education levels and the 
number of non-immigrant peers in schools as well as the support of teachers.
The support provided by teachers and the information accessed through 
contacts with non-immigrant peers in schools are also of great relevance 

Interactions between Individual-level and Institutional-level Factors
193
for second-generation Turks who followed the vocational path but made 
use of the ‘second chance’ to move up towards post-secondary/tertiary 
education (upward vocational route). By the age of eighteen or nineteen, 
family resources are of little relevance, while outside-family agents seem 
to provide significant resources for becoming an upward mover.
Turning finally to the results for Sweden (right side of table 7.10), I find 
the education backgrounds of the parents and the perceived importance 
of peers significantly increase the chances of second-generation Turks 
following the straight academic route rather than the vocational/early-
school-leaver path in the Swedish education system. The positive effect 
of parents’ education levels for second-generation Turks who followed the 
straight academic route until tertiary education is in line with the findings 
presented in the first section of this chapter.
The second relationship I observed shows that the greater the perception 
of the importance of peers is for second-generation Turks in Sweden, the 
higher the likelihood of following the straight academic route. This finding 
is surprising given that, in chapter 5, I could not find any significant link 
with educational attainment for second-generation Turks. At the same time, 
this significant outcome highlights the advantage of a detailed investigation 
examining education pathways, insofar as it enhances previous findings 
on educational attainment.
One surprising result seen in chapter 5 was the negative relationship be-
tween increased teacher support and the highest educational attainment of 
second-generation Turks in the Swedish education system. The investigation 
of education pathways conducted in this section reveals that this applies 
especially to second-generation Turks in upper-secondary education. Those 
second-generation Turks for whom teacher support becomes relevant are 
more likely to follow the vocational path instead of the short academic route 
(see negative effect in the short academic route).
Finally, I could not find any significant relationship between individual-
level factors and following the upward-mobility path, as compared to the 
straight vocational/early-school-leaving route for second-generation Turks 
in Sweden.
The investigation of education pathways and the relevance of education 
resources provided by internal and external family members for second-
generation Turks has revealed a more nuanced perspective on the interplay 
between institutional arrangements and individual-level factors. Although 
the findings resemble to some extent the patterns that have been observed 
in the previous chapters on educational attainment, the results of this 
section indicate precisely which educational resources are relevant for 

194
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
second-generation Turks for each education pathway in each of the three 
compared education systems.
7.4	
Conclusion
This chapter has investigated the effects of interaction between education 
systems and individual-related factors. ‘Interactions’ were defined as the 
interplay between the institutional arrangements of education systems 
and the various individual and group-related resources that are needed to 
navigate successfully through these systems. This has been examined using 
two related perspectives: I looked at the extent to which school system fac-
tors interact with the individual-level factors of the students, and whether 
and how in each of the three countries they contribute to the explanation 
of inequalities between the school careers of second-generation Turks and 
their comparison groups. This section summarises the findings of this 
chapter and relates them to the findings of the previous chapters of this 
book.
Early selection and parents’ education backgrounds
In all three education systems, I found strong associations between parents’ 
education levels and the success of their children at school. Children of 
better-educated parents more often take the academic or more prestigious 
education tracks in all three education systems. This is not surprising given 
the well-known sociological findings about social reproduction in the field 
of education – and it would have been more surprising if I had not found 
such an association. But the strength of these associations varied across 
the education systems, which points to interactions with the structure 
of the education system. A typical finding in the sociology of education 
is that the later the key transition points occur in a child’s schooling, the 
lower the social class inequalities (e.g. Breen & Jonsson 2005). This can 
broadly be confirmed through my findings. The earlier a student is selected 
and tracked into different ability schools or streams, the more important 
parents’ education background becomes. In Austria, more inequality in 
parents’ educational attainment led to more accentuated differences in 
their children’s chances in school, since the education system is highly 
selective at an early stage of schooling. The opposite is the case in France 
and Sweden, where the disadvantaged children of less-educated parents 
are less dependent on their family backgrounds when tracked at a later age. 

Interactions between Individual-level and Institutional-level Factors
195
But throughout my analysis, I found that parents’ education levels mattered 
for making the transitions throughout the whole education system. Even at 
the transition to tertiary education, I still observe a significant association 
between parents’ education and their children’s educational success.
This finding has profound consequences for second-generation Turks 
when competing with the comparison group. In chapters 2 and 3, we saw 
that the great majority of the Turkish second generation has its roots in 
families whose parents came to Austria, France and Sweden primarily to 
work. Those parents frequently had few educational qualifications and 
often lacked the means to support their children in school-related activi-
ties. Bearing this in mind led me to hypothesise in the introduction that 
a substantial number of the differences between second-generation Turks 
and the comparison groups in the various countries could be attributed to 
that starting position, particularly the education backgrounds of the family 
of origin. Put differently, I expected to find that educational inequalities 
between second-generation Turks and the majority population were in 
fact ‘old inequalities’, that is, educational inequalities that were related to 
historic differences in social class origins.
In line with established findings in the sociology of education, I further 
expected that parental backgrounds would be more relevant in systems 
with early selection, while comprehensive systems with late selection would 
have a positive effect on equal outcomes, and so the Turkish second genera-
tion would profit from the latter. The findings in this chapter largely support 
these assumptions. In Austria, discrepancies between the comparison group 
and the Turkish second generation in terms of making the first transition 
into the academic track were found to be high, and a substantial part of this 
disadvantaged position could indeed be explained by the parents’ education 
levels. By contrast, students of Turkish origin did not face any disadvantage 
at the first decision point in the Swedish system, which streams students 
at a later stage in their education. We have to keep in mind, however, that 
the Turkish parental generation in Sweden is a highly selective group, and 
that around 25 per cent of them attended further education in Sweden (see 
chapter 2). This specific characteristic of Turkish parents in Sweden may 
also contribute positively to the non-existence of a gap between the Turkish 
second generation and the comparison group.
Following the argument that delayed selection may reduce the number of 
discrepancies between the comparison group and second-generation Turks 
in Sweden, one might expect to find similar results in the French system. 
Indeed, on average, quite a substantial number of second-generation Turks 
enter the academic tracks in lycées, and their chances of entering the aca-

196
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
demic path are higher than in a highly stratified system, such as the Austrian 
one. But since the baccalauréat diploma certificate became the education 
norm in France, the continuation rates for the comparison group have also 
increased over recent decades, and the odds of entering the academic track 
for second-generation Turks in the French comprehensive system are almost 
the same as for their counterparts in Austria at the first (and early) selection 
point. But unlike in the Austrian education system, these differences are 
not as frequently explained by differences in the parents’ levels of educa-
tion. Instead, they are generally related to earlier problems in meeting the 
academic demands of compulsory schooling (grade retention, for example).
This chapter has further tested whether children of Turkish immigrants 
benefitted from their parents’ education in a similar way to children in 
the comparison group. For this purpose, I have compared the two groups 
according to parents’ education levels and the outcome variables (transition 
points). I found weaker effects for parents’ education levels for second-
generation Turks in Austria at the second and third transition points; in 
France at the first and second points, and in Sweden at just the second. 
These results indicate that having better-educated parents does not improve 
the chances of children making the transition to higher tracks for second-
generation Turks as much as it does for the comparison group. As argued 
before, for immigrant parents it may have been relatively more difficult 
to acquire the kind of knowledge necessary to successfully navigate the 
host country’s education system. These findings underline an important 
distinction between the Austrian and French education systems on one side, 
and the Swedish system on the other: the same level of parental education 
does not improve their children’s opportunities in the same way for both 
groups already in secondary education, while this pattern appears only at 
the transition to higher education in Sweden.
Tracking
As shown in the last two chapters, Turkish second-generation students 
in Austria are streamed in high numbers into the less ambitious track at 
the age of ten compared to their Austrian comparison group. This early 
selection and the tracking into different paths have consequences for their 
school careers. In my investigations, I found that early track placement 
determines almost all subsequent group differences at the later transition 
points. The higher rate of placement in the lower-ability track in the early 
stages of education explains a large part of the group differences in the more 
prestigious academic tracks after compulsory education, while Sweden 

Interactions between Individual-level and Institutional-level Factors
197
and France provide a comprehensive school system in which selection into 
ability tracks is delayed until the age of fifteen. The findings discussed so 
far indicate a clear distinction in terms of educational success and relative 
opportunities for the Turkish second generation in Austria on the one side, 
and in Sweden and France on the other. Interactions between system-
related and individual-related factors are high in stratified systems, while 
most of the interactions are moderate or even low in the comprehensive 
systems. It is true that in Sweden and France, the educational opportunities 
of second-generation Turks are less dependent on their parents’ levels of 
education, and that the chances of climbing the education ladder are greater. 
Delayed selection increases the chance of children of less educated parents 
entering academic paths, compared to the early sorting system in Austria.
The empirical evidence presented in this chapter does allow, however, 
the further indication of differences between the comprehensive education 
systems in France and Sweden. So far, little attention has been paid to this 
in the field of education and ethnic educational inequalities, since most 
of the time comprehensive systems are contrasted with tracked systems. 
However, in the French system, ‘indirect’ tracking appears. The differentia-
tion into two types of baccalauréat diploma within the academic stream in 
upper-secondary education makes the French system selective. As shown 
in chapter 6 and complemented by the findings of this chapter, second-
generation Turks are more affected than the comparison group by this 
selective mechanism because they are over-represented in the vocational 
track. Being in the vocational stream in the Swedish system also reduces 
the chance of continuing in post-secondary/tertiary education, but this 
applies to all students in the Swedish system.
The relevance of educational resources
The last section of this chapter examined the relevance of educational 
resources and how they are related to the types of education pathways 
chosen by second-generation Turks in the three education systems. ‘Interac-
tions’ became most evident when looking at how far extra support provided 
by family members, teachers and peers correlated with specific education 
paths in the different countries. Institutional arrangements are reflected 
in the structure of education pathways. For example, in each country I 
observed a ‘straight academic route’. This route consists of sequences of 
attending academic tracks until entering post-secondary/tertiary educa-
tion. But in the Austrian education system, this path starts at the age of 
ten, and students subsequently have to pass three major transition points 

198
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
before they reach the highest point in the system. By contrast, the straight 
academic routes in France and Sweden start at the age of fifteen or sixteen 
and comprise two transition points up to post-secondary/tertiary education.
Overall, the greatest number of interactions between relevant individual-
level factors and education pathways could be seen in Austria. As hypoth-
esised, parents’ education levels and their support in education matters 
are found to be relevant factors for second-generation Turks who follow 
academic routes. Students are already on the academic track by the age of 
ten, which explains the importance of family characteristics and resources 
if they are to successfully follow the academic path in Austria. Teachers 
and the degree of contact with non-co-ethnic peers outside school become 
relevant too in terms of accessing the additional support and information 
that seems vital if second-generation Turks are to stay on the academic path.
Some of the Turkish second-generation students streamed into the 
vocational path after primary school make use of the chance to move 
upwards when they finish lower-secondary education. On this path, non-
immigrant peers are important because the second-generation youngsters 
come predominantly from families whose parents do not have the means to 
support their children educationally, or to provide them with information 
about the workings of the Austrian education system (see chapter 4). Thus, 
hanging out and exchanging information about their school careers with 
native friends in school seems to be of relevance for second-generation 
Turks who wish to move off the vocational and onto the academic tracks.
The overall number of significant correlations between education path-
ways and individual-level factors are fewer in France than in Austria, but 
still more than in Sweden. Parents’ education, the number of French peers 
in school, and teacher support are pertinent factors for second-generation 
Turks in terms of successfully managing the orientation process at the 
end of compulsory education and so entering the straight academic path. 
Outside-family networks and resources provided in the school are signifi-
cantly related to being an upward mover away from the vocational path 
and towards post-secondary/tertiary education.
The lowest number of significant interactions was seen in the Swed-
ish education system. Although parents’ education and peers were also 
significant for students on the Swedish ‘straight academic path’, the greater 
permeability between tracks and the possibility of accessing post-second-
ary/tertiary education from all upper-secondary tracks makes education 
resources provided by family members, peers and teachers generally less 
relevant to the success of the Turkish second generation in Sweden.

8	
Explaining Cross-national Differences 
in Educational Mobility
8.1	
Introduction
There is substantial literature on educational inequalities based on ethnicity 
and varying levels of educational mobility for children of immigrants in 
north-west European countries. Fairly stable patterns have been documented 
in various national studies indicating that children of immigrants in Europe 
whose parents originate from less-developed non-European countries per-
form below their respective majority student groups. In north-west Europe, 
ample attention is devoted to the children of Turkish immigrants, one of the 
largest groups in these countries and among the most disadvantaged groups 
in terms of education. Although these patterns are evident in most of these 
countries, first comparative studies point towards remarkable differences in 
the size of these disadvantages for second-generation Turks from one country 
to another. But as stated in the introductory chapter of this book, neither the 
extent of the differences nor the reason for those cross-border variations are 
at all clear. There is very little systematic research that compares institutional 
settings for educational mobility in north-west European countries and their 
effects on second-generation Turks. Accordingly, this study asked what ex-
plains the variations in the educational mobility of second-generation Turks 
across three north-west European countries and five cities, namely Sweden 
(Stockholm), France (Paris and Strasbourg) and Austria (Vienna and Linz).
I studied educational mobility in the first place by analysing educa-
tion outcomes at the aggregated level. I looked at the detailed range of 
educational attainment as well as, in greater detail, at two extremes of the 
education spectrum: leaving school early and achieving a post-secondary/
tertiary education. The dichotomy of ‘failure and success’ in schooling 
provides valid and comparable measures across countries to establish 
cross-national differences.
Secondly, this study investigated education pathways as a dependent vari-
able in order to shed light on the processes of mobility. Using retrospective 
data on education careers, I was able to apply a longitudinal approach in 
order to examine how groups navigate the education systems by passing 
through a set of transitions from beginning to end.
As I have argued throughout this study, both perspectives – outcomes 
and pathways – are crucial to gaining a detailed picture of educational 

200
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
mobility across countries. This two-fold approach extends previous studies 
that tended to look primarily at current or final educational attainment.
In addition to the two-fold approach to systematically examining the 
degree of educational mobility across countries, the analysis took a mul-
titude of explanatory factors into consideration to explain differences in 
the degree of educational mobility for second-generation Turks. In more 
concrete terms, two analytical foci have guided this study: First, individual-
level factors were considered to explain different outcomes in attainment 
and education pathways. Second, by drawing on social capital literature in 
the sociology of education and its links to immigration studies, I explored 
the role played by family members and outside-family agents and their 
resources that might be relevant to educational mobility.
Particular attention has been paid to parents’ education levels as a factor 
explaining educational mobility. As demonstrated here, the Turkish second 
generation often comes from a less advantaged background in terms of levels 
of education. Given the well-established link between socio-economic fam-
ily background and educational attainment in the sociology of education, 
a substantial part of the differences in education between the comparison 
group and second-generation Turks was expected to be explained by dif-
ferences in the education levels of their parents.
Moreover, this study moved beyond the classic explanation of parents’ 
education by investigating the transmission of resources between genera-
tions. Therefore, different involvement strategies and patterns of support 
provided by family members were examined. This analytical step extended 
previous studies in three ways. First, most research provides some evidence 
that the effectiveness of family involvement varies across different ethnic 
origin groups, but few studies look systematically at parental involvement, 
including its possible variations across countries and cities and variations 
within the same origin group. Moreover, most of the studies are limited to 
parental influences only. But, especially within immigrant families, it is 
often the older siblings who act as role models and provide their younger 
brother and sisters with relevant information on and support in schooling 
activities. Thus, sibling as well as parental involvement and support have 
been analysed.
Previous studies further indicate that external family networks may 
provide additional resources that help to overcome a disadvantaged position 
at school. The most important agents in the educational mobility process 
outside the family home are peers and teachers. This is why this study 
examined the significance of the perceived importance of peers, the ethnic 
composition of peer groups, and the number of dropout friends. Extra 

Explaining Cross-national Differences in Educational Mobility
201
support provided by teachers and the perceived importance of teachers 
have also been studied. These factors were considered in given education 
systems.
The second focus of this study changed the perspective of the role played 
by the institutional arrangements of education systems in shaping education 
pathways and outcomes. Attention was given to the generic characteristics 
of the education systems (in Austria, France and Sweden) and their degree 
of differentiation in the following areas: the quantity of education received 
(the number of years of schooling received and the length of the school 
day), the point in children’s schooling when they are selected for different 
tracks, tracking, and the degree of permeability between education tracks. I 
analysed how decisions about which education options to choose are made, 
and how these decisions may be pre-determined by the opportunities avail-
able to students – which are, in turn, defined by structural configurations 
and institutional arrangements.
Thirdly, to establish explanatory factors and to understand the divergent 
patterns of educational mobility by the Turkish second generation across 
countries, much attention was given to interaction mechanisms between 
individual-level and institutional-level factors. Interactions were defined 
as the interplay between institutional arrangements of education systems 
on the one hand, and individual and group-related characteristics and 
resources on the other hand – and the ways in which these are used to 
navigate successfully through these education systems. Although chapter 
7 has already provided an overview of these interaction mechanisms, they 
will be a major topic of this concluding chapter.
All these elements formed part of the analytical framework that was 
used to explain cross-national differences in the educational mobility 
of second-generation Turks. Drawing on the unique data set of the TIES 
survey, and by applying a variety of quantitative methods, these elements 
have been studied on the basis of two levels of comparison, both of which 
contribute to the systematic investigation of cross-national variations in 
educational mobility. In the relative comparison, outcomes for the Turkish 
second generation have been compared with a native comparison group 
in each of the cities studied, and the differences in education levels found 
between these groups were then compared across countries. With this 
approach, the comparison group served as a reference group to describe 
the educational mobility process. The absolute comparison evaluated the 
opportunities of the Turkish second generation across countries, with the 
aim of shedding light on how variations in national institutions, such as 
education systems, account for differences in outcomes. Within this level 

202
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
of comparison, educational mobility is characterised in relation to the best 
performing second-generation Turkish group in one of the countries and 
cities. Both levels of comparison are important perspectives to describe 
educational mobility processes of second-generation Turks.
In this concluding chapter, I will try to deepen the scope of the compara-
tive analysis by looking in greater detail into the interaction mechanisms 
between individual-level and institutional-level explanatory factors, which 
aim to understand and explain cross-national differences in the educational 
mobility of second-generation Turks. Different pieces of this puzzle have 
been highlighted throughout this study and will be brought together in 
this chapter. They need to be considered in relation to each other in order 
to understand the variations found.
The structure of this concluding chapter is as follows: In line with the 
first research question, the next section establishes the actual size of the 
absolute and relative differences in educational mobility, both from one 
country to another and from one city to another within those countries. 
Afterwards, I turn to the main question of this study: ‘What explains 
cross-national differences in educational mobility?’ I present outcomes 
for each set of explanatory factors separately (individual-level and 
institutional-level factors) before interaction mechanisms between these 
two sets of explanatory factors are described in greater detail. I conclude 
this chapter with some general remarks on the relevance of the applied 
approach for future comparative studies of the educational mobility of 
children of immigrants.
8.2	
Cross-national and cross-city differences in educational 
mobility
A number of national studies have shown that second-generation Turks 
are one of the most educationally disadvantaged groups in north-west 
Europe. First comparative studies pointed to remarkable differences in 
the size of these disadvantages but came with a number of methodological 
limitations: They had to rely on secondary data with varying definitions of 
‘the second-generation’ and often on outcomes for educational attainment 
across countries which were not comparable. This study aimed to redress 
these shortcomings by providing a systematic inquiry into cross-national 
differences in the educational mobility of children of Turkish immigrants 
in Austria, France and Sweden. It also used the first comparable data set 
available, the TIES survey, which allowed for a systematic comparison.

Explaining Cross-national Differences in Educational Mobility
203
Accordingly, this study started to examine variations in education out-
comes at the aggregated level by investigating three levels of comparison: 
Among second-generation Turks, in the three survey countries and five 
survey cities between generations, and in relation to local comparison 
groups in the cities, concerned. The investigation of absolute differences 
between second-generation Turks across countries revealed that the size 
of the group of high achievers (post-secondary or more) is twice as high 
in France and Sweden as it is in Austria. At the same time, the highest 
percentage of early school leavers (primary and lower-secondary education 
at the most) among the Turkish second generation was seen in the Austrian 
cities.
Although there has been substantial inter-generational progress made 
by the Turkish second generation relative to their parents in all three 
countries, this progress in the levels of education attained appeared at 
very different rates. The Turkish second generation in Sweden and France 
displayed exceptional inter-generational achievement, while it was moder-
ate in Austria. The proportion of second-generation Turks that experienced 
long-range upward mobility (leaping over at least one of their parents’ 
education categories), for example, is almost three times as high in Paris 
and Stockholm, and twice as high in Strasbourg, as in the Austrian cities, 
Vienna and Linz.
The relative comparison between second-generation Turks and the com-
parison group showed that educational attainment differences were most 
pronounced at the bottom and the top of the education ladder in Austria and 
France. In both countries, such comparative attainment differences were 
higher overall than in Sweden. These attainment differences were also mir-
rored in the analysis of education pathways. In general, second-generation 
Turks are academically more disadvantaged than the comparison group 
because they attend more frequently the less academic tracks and are less 
likely to follow the academic tracks that lead to tertiary education. These 
relative differences in education pathways are most evident in the Austrian 
education system, can be seen clearly in France, and are least pronounced 
in Sweden.
Overall, the absolute and relative comparisons of attainment and 
education pathways revealed similar rankings across the three compared 
countries and five cities. Second-generation Turks show the weakest 
performance in Austria, a medium to high level in France and the best 
performance in Sweden. So the educational mobility of second-generation 
Turks shows significant differences between Austria, France and Sweden. 
The next section looks at how these differences can be explained.

204
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
8.3	
Explaining differences in educational mobility
This section summarises the findings of investigations into two sets of 
explanatory factors for differences in the educational mobility and educa-
tion outcomes of second-generation Turks – (1) individual-level factors and 
(2) the role played by the generic institutional arrangements of education 
systems. The former set of explanatory factors concentrates on family 
members, such as parents and older siblings and their resources, as well as 
on peers and teachers as the most important agents outside the family. The 
latter perspective on the institutional arrangements of education systems 
focuses on the three most important dimensions for describing the degree 
of differentiation in education systems and their relevance for explaining 
cross-national variations. These are: pre-school age and age at entering 
education (quantity of education), timing of selection and tracking, and the 
degree of permeability and opportunities for upward transfers.
Individual-level factors
Parents
One of the most important factors explaining the extent of the differences 
between the compared groups is the education background of the parents. 
I found that a substantial part of the disadvantage observed in second-
generation Turks can be explained by differences in the parents’ education 
levels. This finding applies to all three countries and all five cities. For 
example, the over-representation of early school leavers could be completely 
explained in four out of the five cities when holding the education level 
of the parents constant (the gap only remained statistically significant in 
Strasbourg). Also, the significant under-representation of second-generation 
Turks among high achievers was substantially reduced in all three countries 
when controlled for parents’ education levels.
In other words, in each of the three countries, a substantial part of the 
disadvantaged position of second-generation Turks can be linked to their 
parents’ levels of education. Children of Turkish immigrants come in higher 
numbers from less educated families, which accounts for a large part of the 
educational disadvantage. Nevertheless, significant disadvantages did not 
always vanish after statistically testing for parents’ levels of education.
Several scholars have claimed that the quality of ties between genera-
tions is important in explaining the transmission of resources. Therefore, 
I explored the involvement strategies and patterns of support provided by 
Turkish families in Austria, France and Sweden. Research has shown that 

Explaining Cross-national Differences in Educational Mobility
205
children of immigrants benefit from such involvement and that parents are 
crucial in determining their children’s experiences and academic success.
Results based on the perception of the Turkish second generation re-
vealed that the frequency of parental involvement varies across countries. 
On average, it is most frequent in Austria, followed by France, with least 
involvement in Sweden. At the same time, parental involvement is most 
dependent on certain family characteristics in Austria, such as parents’ 
education levels or language abilities in German. Although some of these 
factors significantly influence parental involvement in Sweden and France 
as well, the magnitude of these findings was greatest in the Austrian cities. 
The upward educational mobility of second-generation Turks in Austria has 
been found to correlate much more closely with various forms of additional 
support provided by their parents, when compared to their counterparts 
in France and Sweden. This finding remains significant even after control-
ling for parents’ education levels, indicating that parental involvement 
does increase educational mobility irrespective of the parents’ levels of 
education. Talking about their children’s studies, the most common type 
of parental involvement is probably a form of parental control and a way 
for parents to communicate effectively their expectations to their children, 
which translates into better education outcomes in the Austrian context.
Taken together, the results show that the support provided by parents is 
a relevant factor in the educational mobility of second-generation Turks in 
Austria. At the same time, only those Turkish fathers and mothers who are 
equipped with higher educational credentials and a sophisticated ability 
in the German language are able to support their children educationally. 
This is still the minority of the Turkish community in Austria. The impor-
tance of parental support in school-related activities is, however, not per 
se a characteristic of Turkish families, but rather an aspect common to all 
students in the Austrian education system – albeit to a lesser extent for the 
comparison group than for second-generation Turks.
Older siblings
In addition to the role played by parents, I extended the discussion about 
family influences by investigating simultaneously the supportive behaviour 
of older siblings. Older siblings can act as intermediaries between younger 
children and their schools, and their own experiences of school can be a 
major source of support. Examining the role of older siblings’ involvement 
in the school activities of their younger brothers and sisters, I observed 
similar patterns to those found for parental support: educational upward 
mobility by second-generation Turks in Austria correlates with the extra 

206
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
support they receive from older siblings, beyond parental involvement 
and parents’ own education levels. However, I did not find significant 
benefits beyond parental involvement as a result of older sibling support 
in France or Sweden. Thus, school support provided by older siblings is of 
great importance for second-generation Turks in Austria beyond parental 
involvement, while siblings are less relevant to educational mobility by 
second-generation Turks in France and Sweden.
Peers
While previous studies of the educational success of second-generation 
immigrants in general revealed that ‘significant others’, such as peers 
and teachers, are important mediating actors in processes of educational 
attainment, systematic research into their significance specifically for 
second-generation Turks in Europe is scarce. In this study I partially 
redressed this shortcoming. I examined the relative influence of peers 
and the mechanisms through which they operate to affect education 
outcomes.
The results show that closest friends and peers are perceived as relatively 
important in second-generation Turks’ schooling in all three countries 
and all five cities. On a descriptive level, they are evaluated as being as 
important as their family members. When examining the influence of 
the perceived importance of peers on educational attainment, I did not 
find, however, the expected positive link to educational attainment once 
parents’ education levels and support were held constant. In other words, 
even if peers and best friends are perceived as important in helping with 
second-generation Turks’ study and homework, they are less central in the 
process of educational mobility than parents.
Instead, what seems to matter in Austria and France but not in Sweden is 
the ethnic composition of peers. Having a high proportion of non-co-ethnics 
among their best friends increases the likelihood of a second-generation 
Turk becoming a high achiever in Austria – beyond the parents’ education 
levels and parental support. In France, a similar finding could be seen 
for the ‘school’ peer group of second-generation Turks. The more they are 
surrounded in their secondary schools by students with native parents, the 
greater the likelihood of moving beyond upper-secondary education. These 
findings seem to be in line with previous US studies into the schooling of 
children of immigrants that indicated that non-immigrant peers and closest 
friends often served as important agents enabling them to access resources 
and information that were not available in their families, but which were 
relevant for upward educational mobility.

Explaining Cross-national Differences in Educational Mobility
207
Teachers
As well as the significant role played by peer groups, teachers have been 
highlighted as important agents in strengthening the upward educational 
mobility of the second generation. My analysis revealed that support from 
teachers is positively correlated with higher achievement among second-
generation Turks in Austria and France, which suggests that teachers are 
important mediating actors in educational mobility. But this applies to all 
students in these two countries. With increasing levels of teacher support, 
students in either group show a greater likelihood of making it to the top 
of the education ladder. Surprisingly, the results for Sweden work in the op-
posite direction. Students of both groups in Stockholm who perceived their 
teachers to be of great importance for schooling and help with homework 
were less likely to become high achievers.
Comparing the magnitude of the correlation between individual-level 
explanatory factors (inside and outside the family home) and education 
outcomes for second-generation Turks across the three countries and five 
cities, I observed a ‘ranking’ similar to the findings of my previous chap-
ters: individual-level factors were of greatest relevance in Austria, of some 
relevance in France, and of least importance and often absent in Sweden. 
These findings raise the question as to why some individual-level factors are 
of greater relevance for second-generation Turks in some countries and cities 
but not in others, and point to interactions with institutional-level factors.
Institutional-level factors
Pre-school attendance and age at entering education
Among the most important generic institutional factors that might explain 
the differences across countries are pre-school attendance and the age at 
entering education. Entry into pre-school is the most common start for 
children’s education careers. In France and Sweden, pre-school is optional 
and free for all children between the ages of two and six. It is also seen 
as an integral part of the education system. Municipalities are obliged to 
provide pre-school places for all children and pre-school services offer 
a full-day care system. Results for the French cities and for Stockholm 
indicate that almost all children in both groups had attended some sort 
of pre-school facility by the age of three – which is also the average age of 
entering pre-school in these countries. Although not statistically signifi-
cant, second-generation Turks in Stockholm are found to be even more 
likely to attend pre-school, and start on average earlier than children in 
the comparison group.

208
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
By contrast with France and Sweden, pre-school education in Austria 
usually takes place in the kindergarten, which is not considered part of the 
education system and thus has the ethos of early childcare rather than early 
education. Kindergartens can be run by either local authorities or private 
organisations. In principle, children can go to kindergarten from age three, 
while the average starting age is four. As shown in this study, pre-school 
attendance for pupils from both groups in Austria is lower than in France 
or Sweden. Moreover, the attendance rate varies considerably between the 
groups. In both Austrian cities, second-generation Turks were less likely to 
attend kindergarten, and the majority of those who did go started later than 
age four, which meant that they had shorter pre-school careers.
The different institutional arrangements for pre-school attendance 
and start age result in remarkable differences in the time children have 
to prepare for compulsory education across the three countries. While 
second-generation Turks have already experienced, on average, three years 
of pre-schooling in France and Sweden before entering primary school, their 
counterparts in Austria predominantly start primary school with only one 
year of pre-school under their belts.
Timing of selection and tracking
A second important institutional arrangement that contributes to the 
explanation of cross-national variations in outcomes for the Turkish sec-
ond generation is the timing of selection (or tracking). The first selection in 
Austria appears after primary school at the age of ten. Students are streamed 
into two separate types of school: vocational (Hauptschule) schools and 
academically orientated (AHS-Unterstufe) lower-secondary schools. Haupts-
chule represents the lower tier and is open to everybody after primary 
school. But the academically orientated track (Allgemeinbildende höhere 
Schule [AHS]) prepares students to continue on to upper-secondary schools 
leading to the Matura, the university entrance certificate. Admission to 
the academically orientated track depends on marks received at the end of 
primary school. Teachers can also give recommendations, but these do not 
have a binding character. Almost seven out of ten second-generation Turks 
are streamed onto the vocational track (Hauptschule), while the continua-
tion rate among the comparison group is only four out of ten. This pattern is 
the same in each survey city. Moreover, as examined in this study, the early 
selection at age ten has profound consequences for the education careers 
of second-generation Turks in Austria. Young adults who are streamed into 
the academic track in lower-secondary education predominantly move on 
to the second academic level (AHS-Oberstufe), while the majority of the 

Explaining Cross-national Differences in Educational Mobility
209
students who were streamed into the vocational path in lower-secondary 
education continue on the vocational path.
Students in France and Sweden follow the same integrated track up 
to the age of fifteen or sixteen – five, or even six, years later than their 
Austrian counterparts. The first time they are allocated the academic 
or the vocational track is just before upper-secondary education. In the 
French education system, the selection process that links compulsory and 
non-compulsory education is called orientation, and it is then that parents 
first express their preferences for their child’s education. Based on this 
information and on the grades achieved in the final certificate, the class 
council advises whether a student should attend academic or vocational 
lycées. The most common route for students in the comparison group is 
entry to the academic lycée. Around 80 per cent of the comparison group 
go on to the academic lycée, while only about 50 per cent of students of 
Turkish origin follow that track. Dissimilarities between the two French 
cities, Paris and Strasbourg, appear at the first selection point, with Turkish 
second-generation students in Paris continuing more often on the academic 
track than their age-mates in Strasbourg. The comparison group does not 
differ significantly between the two cities. Students who do not choose the 
academic track in upper-secondary education move on to vocational lycées.
Similar to the French education system, students in Sweden are first 
selected when they are fifteen or sixteen. At the first transition point 
between lower- and upper-secondary education, slightly more than 50 per 
cent of each group moves on to the academic track. The Turkish second 
generation does not differ significantly from the comparison group in their 
continuation rates at this first selection point in Sweden.
Overall, the far greater numbers of immigrant-origin children who are 
streamed into the vocational route at an early age in Austria explains some 
of the differences between Austria and the other two countries in terms 
of the under-representation of second-generation Turks in the academic 
schools and in tertiary education. Differences between the comprehensive 
systems in Sweden and France seem to be related to the selective character 
of the orientation process in the French education system, which differenti-
ates the student population more than in the Swedish education system, in 
which a comparable process is absent.
The investigation of education pathways has brought up a number of 
additional mechanisms of differentiation that are relevant beyond formal 
mechanisms of differentiation such as early selection and the orientation 
process. These mechanisms of differentiation are most evident in the French 
education system. What seems to be of greater relevance in the French 

210
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
education system is the informal hierarchy of disciplines and tracks in 
upper-secondary education. Second-generation Turks are more affected 
by this differentiation because they participate in higher numbers in these 
less prestigious lycées. The practice of differentiation seems to be a distinct 
marker between the comprehensive education systems in France and 
Sweden. While the institutional arrangements and the degree of formal 
differentiation remain almost similar, the actual practice of differentiation 
varies between the two comprehensive systems, with Sweden showing 
fewer means of differentiation.
Permeability and opportunities for upward transfers
Early selection and tracking might not be problematical institutional 
features of education systems if the degree of permeability were high at 
later stages and if opportunities for upward transfers were available to the 
students who were streamed downwards earlier in their education careers. 
Both the Austrian and the French education systems do provide such second 
chances for students in the lower and vocationally orientated tracks.
In Austria, students who have been streamed onto the vocational track 
(Hauptschule) at the age of ten have an opportunity to move up to the 
academically orientated tracks at the end of lower-secondary education 
(at the age of fifteen). But the empirical results for Austria show that the 
proportion of upward movers at the end of Hauptschule is relatively small. 
The stakes seem to be high against obtaining the marks required for enter-
ing one of the two academic tracks. This applies in particular to the Turkish 
second generation, since they are found to be upwardly mobile less often 
at this transition point, compared to the comparison group (23.2 per cent 
and 41 per cent, respectively).
In the French system, the possibility of moving from the vocational track 
to the academic track appears much later than the Austrian education 
system. Students who do not enter the academic track in upper-secondary 
education move on to vocational lycées. Students who obtain the Brevet 
d’Études Professionnelles (BEP) diploma at the end of this track (on aver-
age around age seventeen or eighteen) can attend an additional two-year 
course to obtain the professional baccalauréat. This bacc prof certificate 
allows students who followed the vocational path to enter tertiary educa-
tion as well, and this route is used significantly more often by the Turk-
ish second generation than by the comparison group (27.8 per cent and 
22.1 per cent respectively) in both French cities. Thus, the possibility of 
entering post-secondary/tertiary education through the ‘back door’ is an 
important institutional arrangement that explains parts of the relatively 

Explaining Cross-national Differences in Educational Mobility
211
high participation rates of second-generation Turks in this academic level 
in France. But it takes those students on average two years longer than the 
comparison group, who overwhelmingly follow the straight academic route, 
to attain a similar level.
The Swedish education system does not really provide ‘second chances’ 
because the permeability between tracks at the end of each stage is always a 
given. Students in lower and upper-secondary education can choose tracks 
without restrictions, while all upper-secondary tracks provide certificates 
that permit students to continue on to post-secondary/tertiary education.
8.4	
Interactions between individual-level and institutional-
level factors
While the previous two sections reviewed explanatory factors at the 
individual level and institutional level separately, I now turn to the interac-
tions between both sets of factors to explain variations in the educational 
mobility of second-generation Turks in five cities in Austria, France and 
Sweden. Interactions were defined as the interplay between the institu-
tional arrangements of education systems and the various individual and 
group-related resources that are relevant for second-generation Turks if 
they are to navigate successfully through the systems. The perspective on 
interactions provides a framework that helps us to understand why the 
relevance of individual-level factors and their related resources varies for 
second-generation Turks across education systems and at different points 
in time, and therefore contributes to the explanation of cross-national 
differences in educational mobility.
Some studies have emphasised the importance of interactions between 
single institutional arrangements and particular individual-level factors 
in understanding cross-national differences in educational mobility. One 
interaction that is often emphasised is the relationship between early selec-
tion and parents’ education levels or ‘social class origin’. Investigation of this 
interaction has shown that the earlier students are placed in different ability 
tracks, the greater the relevance of details such as parents’ education levels. 
This finding is often contrasted with processes in comprehensive education 
systems that have late selection points, which show weaker interactions 
with parents’ education. This interaction has also been stressed as an ex-
planation for differences in the education outcomes of second-generation 
Turks across north-west European countries.

212
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Although highly relevant, these studies do not investigate the importance 
of other institutional arrangements, and most often do not move beyond 
other important individual-level factors, such as the family of origin. In this 
study, I aimed to redress this research gap. As I have shown, it is important 
to consider the combination of a number of the institutional arrangements 
of different education systems which together form country-specific insti-
tutional constellations.
The main components of the Austrian institutional constellation are the 
late start age at pre-school, early selection into different ability tracks (at 
the age of ten) and a low degree of permeability between tracks after the 
early tracking and half-day training system in compulsory education.
An early start age at pre-school, full days of pre-school activities, assured 
pre-school places and a full-day comprehensive compulsory schooling 
system are among the most important components that constitute the 
French institutional constellation. The orientation process in which the 
selection into upper-secondary education is prepared is the most crucial 
institutional arrangement in the education careers of students in France. 
Moreover, the differentiation in upper-secondary academic tracks and the 
‘second chance’ to enter post-secondary/tertiary education through the 
vocational upward-route are additional important features of this French 
institutional constellation.
The Swedish institutional constellation is composed of full-day pre-school 
activities that children can attend from age two and an integrated track from 
primary school up to the end of lower-secondary education with full-day 
teaching. The first allocation into different tracks appears at the transition 
into upper-secondary education at the age of fifteen or sixteen. Further im-
portant components are the high degree of permeability between tracks in 
upper-secondary education, and the possibility of entering post-secondary/
tertiary education from all available tracks in upper-secondary education.
Interaction mechanisms in Austria
The combination of institutional arrangements in Austria makes the 
beginning of the school career an important period that sets the course 
for subsequent stages. Pupils spend an average of two years at pre-school 
before starting in primary school – the only common, integrated track in 
which children from different backgrounds attend the same school. After 
four years in primary education, pupils are streamed into different ability 
tracks in lower-secondary education at the age of ten.
The emphasis in this institutional constellation on making selection 
decisions early on leads to greater interaction with family resources. Parents 

Explaining Cross-national Differences in Educational Mobility
213
are important agents in this early period in supporting their children in 
the learning process and determining school choices. The results of this 
study confirm the great relevance of the parents’ levels of education in 
the early selection process. Children whose parents have less education 
are frequently streamed into the less academic track (Hauptschule) at age 
ten. This is particularly true for second-generation Turks who are more 
often tracked into the lower stream because many of them come from less 
educated families. The Turkish first generation overwhelmingly migrated 
for work reasons and had relatively few education credentials and little 
experience of education. Thus, in this institutional constellation, larger 
inequalities in parents’ educational attainment lead to larger differences 
in their children’s opportunities at school.
This process is reinforced by the low participation rates in pre-schooling 
for second-generation Turks in the Austrian cities. Since children are not 
automatically entitled to a pre-school place, and Turkish parents may lack 
information about the workings of the Austrian pre-school system, second-
generation Turks attend pre-school for, on average, one year less than the 
comparison group. This, too, goes some way towards explaining the greater 
downward streaming of second-generation Turks at the first transition point 
after primary school. To a large extent, the early selection determines the 
subsequent education pathway. The majority of second-generation Turks 
in both the academic and vocational streams continue to travel the path 
onto which they were tracked at the age of ten.
Second-generation Turks who were placed on the academic path after 
primary school are predominantly children of better-educated parents. 
They also benefit from greater support at home because parents’ education 
levels and parental support are positively correlated. This support, along 
with the support of older siblings, enables these children to stay on the 
straight academic path in the Austrian education system.
Internal family resources become even more relevant in the light of the 
half-day school system in compulsory education. The responsibility for learn-
ing is shifted to the family home and to students’ leisure time, which makes 
family involvement and support significantly more important for students, 
especially in terms of homework. Although the relevance of family support 
can be seen for all students in the Austrian education system, it is of greater 
importance for second-generation Turks than for the comparison group.
In order to navigate successfully to the top of the education ladder, access 
to resources provided by non-immigrant peer networks, as well as support 
from teachers, become crucial aspects for children of Turkish immigrants in 
Austria. In particular, the support of teachers in upper-secondary education 

214
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
is of great relevance for second-generation Turks in ensuring they don’t stop 
their academic careers before entering post-secondary/tertiary education. 
In other words, while family resources are especially important in the early 
phase of the academic career, outside-family agents and related resources 
gain importance at a later stage.
The Austrian education system offers students who were streamed into 
the vocational path after primary school the option of moving upwards 
at the end of lower-secondary education. Having non-immigrant peers at 
school becomes important at this stage because second-generation Turks on 
the vocational path come predominantly from less educated families that 
are barely equipped with the relevant knowledge and resources to support 
their children in the upward process. If the family of origin doesn’t have 
enough knowledge of the Austrian education system and cannot provide 
the support children need to earn the marks that would permit them to 
move up, best friends outside the family home become the major source of 
information and support. But the percentage of second-generation Turks 
who finally move up at this stage is still low, indicating that not enough 
information and support are provided by the peer group in many cases. 
Moreover, as this study has shown, non-immigrant peer networks are rare 
among second-generation Turks in Austria who attend the vocational track 
in lower-secondary education.
While a small proportion of the Turkish second generation moves up from 
the vocational to the academic track, others do not meet the demands of 
their schools at all and drop out after compulsory education. More second-
generation Turks drop out of vocational schools than out of academic 
schools. Parents and older siblings are important in providing the resources 
and support to prevent this. But since most of the potential early school leav-
ers on the vocational path come from socio-economically disadvantaged 
families with limited resources to support their children, teachers become 
the most important agents for these students at this stage of the process. 
Solid student-teacher relationships and high levels of support are important 
factors in preventing early school leaving. The Austrian school system is, 
however, a half-day training system in which second-generation Turks who 
are at risk of dropping out may not get enough time with teachers to obtain 
the support they need. That is why the numbers of early school leavers are 
comparably high in the Austrian education system.
Interaction mechanisms in France
The French institutional constellation offers day-long education with stu-
dents from different backgrounds attending the same tracks in compulsory 

Explaining Cross-national Differences in Educational Mobility
215
education. It starts early with a comprehensive full-day pre-school system 
and continues with primary education along an integrated track until the 
end of lower-secondary school. The system offers afternoon classes with 
homework tutorials, which leads to few interactions with family resources. 
In particular, additional help from family members is perceived as less 
important because this type of support is institutionalised within the 
comprehensive full-time education system.
The most crucial moment in the French education system is the orienta-
tion process at the end of lower-secondary education in which students are 
prepared for selection into the next stage. In this process, parents express 
their preferences for their child’s education. Based on this information, 
and on the grades of the final certificate (brevet des collèges), teachers and 
officials evaluate each pupil’s chances of success and advises whether a 
student should be assigned to an academic or a vocational lycée.
Although this first selection appears late, the orientation process in this 
transition period is highly interactive with a number of individual-level fac-
tors. Firstly, parents with more advanced education backgrounds improve 
their children’s chances of being streamed into the academic tracks. The 
correlation between tracking and parents’ education further explains a large 
part of the unequal continuation rates into the academic track between the 
comparison group and second-generation Turks. Similar to the selection 
moment in Austria, a large proportion of the inequalities observed between 
the two groups at this stage can be attributed to differences in parents’ own 
levels of education.
Secondly, teachers and the support they provide are crucial in upward 
streaming at this stage. Teacher support is important to all students if they 
are to achieve excellent grades in the final exams at the end of compulsory 
education. These exams constitute a substantial part of the evaluation 
process leading to the academic tracks.
Finally, the ethnic composition of peers in schools matters for second-
generation Turks at this stage. In the orientation process, students and 
their parents express their preferences for their future education pathways, 
a process that requires substantial knowledge of the French education 
system. If parents do not possess this knowledge, peers in the comparison 
group whose parents or older siblings have experience and knowledge 
of the workings of the system become crucial sources of information for 
second-generation Turks.
The selection into different types of upper-secondary tracks through the 
orientation process determines, to a large extent, the education pathways 
of students. Those entering the academic path continue in high numbers 

216
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
beyond upper-secondary education into some form of post-secondary/
tertiary education. Since the bacc certificate at the end of upper-secondary 
education became the education norm in France, specifications for the 
labour market have been shifted to the post-secondary and tertiary educa-
tion sector. To manage the transition from the academic tracks into post-
secondary/tertiary education, parents’ education is an important mediating 
factor, although to a much lesser extent, as with the orientation process at 
the previous transition.
The majority of students streamed into the vocational track after 
lower-secondary education leave at the end of second-level education to 
take up jobs. But the French system offers a ‘second chance’ at the end of 
upper-secondary education to leave the vocational track in favour of post-
secondary/tertiary education. This late opportunity for an upward transfer 
interacts less strongly with parents’ education and family support. Instead, 
the number of native peers in the vocational school, and the support pro-
vided by teachers, are the most crucial factors for second-generation Turks 
if they are to acquire the bacc prof certificate and enter post-secondary/
tertiary education by this route.
Overall, the most crucial period in the French institutional constellation 
that determines the process of educational mobility for second-generation 
Turks is the orientation process at the end of compulsory education. Although 
this differentiation process is delayed, family background characteristics 
such as their parents’ education levels, as well as outside-family agents, such 
as non-immigrant peers and teachers, are still of great relevance in setting 
the course for upward educational mobility.
Interaction mechanisms in Sweden
Similarly to the comprehensive system in France, the Swedish institutional 
constellation provides full-day schooling from early pre-school through 
primary education until the end of the integrated track in compulsory 
education. The long and integrated full-day schooling phase makes family 
resources less relevant in the educational mobility process of both study 
groups. Even at the first transition point before entering different academic 
and vocational tracks in upper-secondary education, family characteristics 
such as parents’ education or additional educational resources are unim-
portant factors in managing this transition period successfully, because the 
transition is not linked to a specific differentiation process. Consequently, 
second-generation Turks enter academically orientated tracks in similar 
proportions to the comparison group, irrespective of their family back-
grounds.

Explaining Cross-national Differences in Educational Mobility
217
Interactions with individual-level factors only appear at the highest 
end of the Swedish education system. Children whose parents have less 
education are more likely to leave the education system. This is particularly 
true of second-generation Turks because they originate in greater numbers 
from less educated families. In addition to parents’ levels of education, 
peers are perceived as important agents by second-generation Turks in this 
schooling phase. The more support they receive from peers, the better their 
chances of managing the transition to post-secondary/tertiary education.
Students who follow the vocational track in upper-secondary educa-
tion are less likely to enter any type of post-secondary/tertiary education 
afterwards. But this finding applies to all students in the Swedish educa-
tion system, not just second-generation Turks. Most significantly, those 
who do want to continue to post-secondary/tertiary level do not perceive 
information or resources provided by agents outside the family as having 
any importance.
In short, the long, integrated schooling period in which pupils from 
different backgrounds learn together in a full-day system from early 
pre-school until the end of compulsory education leads to less interaction 
with individual-level factors. Moreover, the high degree of permeability 
between tracks and the fluid links between upper-secondary tracks and 
post-secondary/tertiary education make individual-level factors of minor 
relevance in the educational mobility of second-generation Turks in Sweden.
Cross-national differences
The empirical evidence available in this study highlighted the fact that 
cross-national differences in the educational mobility of second-generation 
Turks cannot be limited to a single set of explanatory factors. Two parties 
are involved in the process of educational mobility: children of Turkish 
immigrants, with their own characteristics, efforts, family backgrounds, 
and relationships with important agents such as peers and teachers; and 
the national education systems, with their differing institutional arrange-
ments. It is, however, the interaction between the two that determines the 
direction and the ultimate outcome of the educational mobility process. 
But these two are unequal partners. Education systems, in terms of their 
institutional arrangements and the way they determine the relevance of 
individual-level factors, matter more. In all the interaction mechanisms 
I have observed, the power relationship between individual-level and 
institutional-level factors has always been in favour of the education sys-
tems’ institutional arrangements. In particular, with increasing degrees of 
differentiation between education systems, the relevance of individual-level 

218
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
characteristics for second-generation Turks increases as well. This unequal 
power relationship becomes most evident when comparing the outcomes of 
second-generation Turks across different education systems, as I have done 
in this study. Education systems that provide more favourable institutional 
arrangements make the educational mobility of second-generation Turks 
less dependent on individual-level factors and resources, leading to higher 
educational attainment.
The theoretical and empirical contribution of this study is therefore 
its focus on interactions between individual-level characteristics and the 
generic institutional arrangements of education systems in order to explain 
differences in the educational mobility of second-generation Turks across 
countries. The examination of these interactions throughout the entire 
education career highlighted favourable and unfavourable institutional 
settings that are relevant if one is to grasp the variations in educational 
mobility in a cross-national comparison. Whether and how the institutional 
arrangements of education systems really matter can only be answered 
once these interactions with individual-level characteristics are considered. 
Future research that aims to understand why children of immigrants show 
different levels of educational mobility across countries should adopt and 
elaborate this systematic interaction approach further.

	
Appendix
Introduction
The purpose of this appendix is to provide enough information to enable 
the reader to understand how the samples were gathered, how variables 
in the analytical chapters were generated, and which types of regression 
analysis was used. This appendix is divided into two parts: Part A comprises 
information on relevant aspects of the TIES survey, such as (1) sampling 
frames and data collection, (2) response rates and (3) the issue of weighting 
and representativeness. Part B of the appendix records the measurement of 
variables, applied strategies of analysis (including regression analysis) and 
additional outcomes related to the main findings presented in each chapter.


PART A	 Survey samples, response rates 
and weights
1	
The TIES survey in Austria, France and Sweden1
Sampling frames
The methodological objective of the TIES survey was to obtain statisti-
cally representative information on integration-related topics from 
second-generation Turks, Moroccans and former Yugoslavians in fifteen 
European cities (Groenewold & Lessard-Phillips 2012). In order to achieve 
this aim, an adequate sampling strategy had to be developed. This sam-
pling strategy, similar to the sampling of minority populations in other 
surveys, was confronted with the following constraints: First, the lack of 
readily available sampling frames to sample members of minority groups 
such as the second generation. Second, the tendency of minority groups 
to concentrate in particular regions and parts of cities. Finally, the rarity 
of members of minority groups in the general population (Groenewold & 
Bilsborrow 2008; Groenewold & Lessard-Phillips 2012). These three major 
constraints influenced the way respondents were identified, sampled and 
afterwards included in the TIES survey in the three countries covered in this 
book, which as a result yielded slightly varied sampling frames. This section 
describes briefly the country-specific sampling frames of the TIES survey 
in Sweden, Austria and France (and the respective cities), supplemented 
by additional information on implementation in the field.
The ideal way to identify second-generation respondents is through up-
to-date municipal population registers that consist of personal records, 
including the following relevant information: name, current address, date 
of birth, place of birth, sex, father’s place of birth and mother’s place of 
birth. Of the three countries compared in this book, only Sweden has such 
an ideal situation. The Total Population Register provides a complete list of 
every person residing in Sweden, recorded in a comprehensive database that 
contains names, addresses, dates of birth and countries of birth, as well as 
1	
Some of these issues have been discussed and documented in other contexts (see for 
example, Crul & Heering 2008; Crul & Schneider 2009b; Groenewold & Lessard-Phillips 2012; 
Hamel 2007; Milewski & Hamel 2010). Consequently, the discussion here is not meant to be 
exhaustive but provides a basic overview of relevant aspects related to the survey samples.

222
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
immigration and emigration information. As a result, in the Swedish TIES 
sample, the Turkish second generation and the comparison group were 
both randomly drawn from the Total Population Register (updated version, 
31 January 2007), and they were subsequently visited and interviewed. In 
Sweden, the target group comprised second-generation Turks (aged between 
18 and 35), both of whose parents were born in Turkey.
Austria and France both lack comparable databases with the type of 
information on the parents of each inhabitant that’s needed to identify the 
second generation. This led to the development of alternative strategies 
for identifying the target population. In the Austrian case, an onomastic 
sampling approach was used. First, the names of all inhabitants in Linz 
and Vienna for the relevant age cohorts were drawn from the register data. 
Second, a sample of names of Turkish origin was pulled. Finally, a gross 
sample was produced from which respondents were randomly selected 
and interviewed. Given that the Turkish community is smaller in Linz 
(see chapter 2), the total number of relevant names in the gross sample 
was only about one-third that of Vienna. The comparison group was se-
lected by random route walking. Taking the house or apartment of the 
second-generation respondent as the starting point, the comparison group 
was interviewed in every fifth household from the starting point. Thus, 
respondents of the comparison group and the second generation lived in 
the same neighbourhood at the time of the interview.
Turning to the sampling frame in France, information important to 
identifying our target population was missing as a result of the absence 
of relevant information in the population register. The French research 
team at the Institut national d’études démographiques (INED) developed 
an alternative strategy by applying onomastic identification procedures 
to the public phone books for Paris and Strasbourg (Hamel 2007; Milewski 
& Hamel 2010). In total, 10,568 ‘Turkish’ names were identified using this 
approach. The database of names was sorted by city and postcode. After-
wards, postcode areas were selected with probabilities proportional to the 
number of Turkish names listed as residents. In a three-month screening 
period, questionnaires were used to select eligible respondents from this 
gross sample. As well as seeking demographic information such as date of 
birth to identify the relevant birth cohorts, the parents’ countries of birth 
were established in the screening survey, thus allowing the identification 
of second-generation Turks. Based on the results of this screening survey, 
a gross sample was created from which a random selection took place to 
choose the interviewees. The comparison group was randomly selected 
by the same procedure (phonebooks and a screening survey) and sampled 

Survey samples, response rates and weights
223
from the same postcode areas, although without applying an onomastic 
approach.
In all three countries, face-to-face interviews were conducted. The 
majority of the interviewers had a Turkish migration background them-
selves. This made it more likely that people contacted would take part, 
and reduced the language barrier. The fieldwork itself lasted much longer 
than initially intended in all three countries. In Austria, the fieldwork took 
around seven months in Vienna, and almost twice as long in Linz (thirteen 
months). This was because the target population in Linz is much smaller, so 
the minimum effective sample size took longer to compile. In the French 
cities, the fieldwork took place between May and July 2007 and between 
September and October 2007. In total, the actual fieldwork lasted for around 
five-and-a-half months. The Swedish TIES survey (conducted in two phases) 
took nine months and was completed in February 2008.
Taken together, the brief description of the sampling frames shows how 
complex it was to identify our target group and to achieve a minimum 
effective sample. Some disadvantages related to the sampling frames have 
to be mentioned. The method of the ‘Turkish-sounding-name’ that was 
applied in Austria and France may have left out children of mixed couples 
whose Turkish mothers and fathers have acquired their husbands’ and 
wives’ last names. This hypothetical bias may have been even stronger in 
France where the onomastic approach to names of Turkish origin is based 
only on last (family) names, since phone books do not provide information 
on first names. In this case, second-generation Turks who married partners 
of non-Turkish origin and acquired their last names do not appear in the 
sample either. A second problem with the French survey may be the fact 
that the gross sample from which interviews were drawn is based on fixed 
phone numbers from public telephone books. Potential interviewees in our 
relevant age cohort (18 to 35 years) are likely to have only a mobile phone, 
in which case they too would have been excluded from the survey.
Several arguments lead me to believe that these biases have little influ-
ence on the outcomes of this study. To begin with, the mixed marriage rate 
among the Turkish first generation in Austria and France is below 5 per 
cent (Gümüsoglu et al. 2009; Lhommeau & Simon 2010; Milewski & Hamel 
2010). Most of the fathers and mothers who migrated to the two destina-
tion countries were already married before migrating or came for family/
marriage reasons. The low inter-marriage rate among the first generation 
has also been proved empirically in the TIES survey (see chapter 2). Second, 
in order to reduce the bias caused by mixed marriages among the second 
generation, the French research team applied the following strategy: ‘The 

224
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
respondents living in the household of each Turkish-sounding-named 
person were asked if there was a Turkish immigrant in the household who 
had a daughter who had left home and married a man whose name was not 
Turkish, that is, who had a husband whose father was not born in Turkey. If 
the answer was “Yes”, the young woman was added to the sample’ (Milewski 
& Hamel 2010: 632). This procedure has reduced the potential bias. The last 
bias, which results from the use of fixed phone numbers in the French case, 
was reduced by noting the mobile number of the potential respondent if 
the parents answered the screening questionnaire. Then, a second call was 
made to contact the eligible person directly. Table A1 provides a summary 
of the main characteristics of the TIES samples and its sampling strategies 
in Austria, France and Sweden.
Table A1  Main characteristics of the TIES samples in Austria, France and Sweden
Austria
France
Sweden
Vienna and Linz
Paris and Strasbourg
Stockholm
Definition: Target 
group 
Born in country of 
residence 
Born in country of 
residence 
Born in country of 
residence 
At least one parent 
born abroad
At least one parent 
born abroad
Both parents born 
abroad
Between 18 and 35 
years old
Between 18 and 35 
years old
Between 18 and 35 
years old
Sampling frame
Onomastic approach
Onomastic approach
Probability 
sampling
based on …
Register data
Phonebook
Population register
Fieldwork duration
Vienna: 8 months 
4.5 months
9 months 
Linz: 13 months 
Survey evaluation: Response rates
While the previous section documented the sampling frames of the TIES 
study and the identification of respondents in the three countries being 
compared, this section turns to the question of how many of the eligible 
persons from the gross samples were willing to answer our survey. To 
begin with the Austrian cities, around 25 per cent of the gross sample was 
neutrally lost for reasons such as having parents who were born in a country 
other than their name would suggest, or that the target person had moved 
out or died. The final response rate among the Turkish second generation 

Survey samples, response rates and weights
225
was around 49 per cent in Vienna and 70 per cent in Linz. The comparison 
group responded almost equally in both cities at a rate of around 42 per 
cent. In Sweden, the overall response rate was 42.6 per cent. Finally, in 
France the overall response rate for second-generation Turks was 42.5 per 
cent (40.6 per cent in Paris and 44.7 per cent in Strasbourg) and around 50 
per cent for the comparison group (46.8 per cent in Paris and 52.5 per cent 
in Strasbourg) (all figures taken from Groenewold & Lessard-Phillips 2012).
Weights
As shown in the technical description above, the sampling frames vary 
to some extent from country to country. As a result of these variations, 
inequalities in the likelihood of individuals participating in the TIES 
survey may have arisen. Survey researchers refer to these hypothetical 
biases as ‘stratification’ and ‘non-response’. Stratification relates to differ-
ent response rates among all types of sub-groups, such as gender, age or 
education (see, for example, Pike 2008). In order to adjust for these unequal 
factors, ‘post-stratification’ weights can be calculated to bring the sample 
proportion in sub-groups into alignment with the population proportion 
in the sub-groups (Lee, Forthofer & Lorimor 1989: 14). A non-response bias 
adds to the stratification bias and leads in a similar direction. It occurs when 
response rates in general differ across the population groups being studied. 
(Groves & Couper 1998; Kalton 1983). Both types of bias are commonly 
seen as a threat to the validity of surveys, and researchers need to adjust 
their samples with weights. Nevertheless, the empirical results presented 
throughout this book are unweighted estimations. This decision is based 
on the following arguments:
First, calculating post-stratification and non-response weights for the 
samples in three countries is problematic because of the lack of reliable 
secondary data on the Turkish second generation that can be used to 
generate appropriate adjustments for sub-group differences, such as age, 
gender or the group size of the Turkish second generation. The condition 
essential to calculating weights is a basic knowledge of the population 
being studied and their distributions in relevant sub-groups, including 
demographic subgroups (Fuller 1974; Lee et al. 1989). As explained earlier 
in the context of the sampling frames, up to now, no relevant data existed 
on second-generation Turks at the city level in all five cities being studied. 
The French and Austrian teams used an onomastic approach to sample the 
target groups at the city level because the group size was unknown and no 
existing data sources were available.

226
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Second, apart from the problems of calculating sampling weights for the 
TIES survey, there is a general debate in the field of sociological research 
about whether sampling weights should be used at all when estimating 
regression equations. The degree of uncertainty increases when weighted 
analysis goes beyond estimating simple means or ratios, especially when 
adjustment procedures are complex and combine several types of weights 
(Gelman 2007a, b; Korn & Graubard 1995; Pfeffermann 1993; Pike 2008; 
Winship & Radbill 1994). The overall claim is that there are pitfalls to the 
common practice of estimating regression models with weighted data, 
especially in a cross-comparative analysis. If weights are generated on 
different criteria, as is the case for the TIES sub-samples used in this book, 
one can wonder what a weighted odds ratio from logistic regression, for 
example, is supposed to represent in the model. Moreover, statistical 
programmes perform weighted analysis, but it is not always clear which 
weighting procedures are appropriate (Gelman 2007b: 153). A third reason 
to consider the issue of weights in the context of analysis of the TIES survey 
is the focus on education pathways in the second part of this book. These 
pathways are based on retrospective information about our respondents. 
Even if post-stratification weights had been available for the year of the 
survey (2007/2008), what would the weighted probability of continuing in 
an Austrian Hauptschule rather than an AHS-Unterstufe at the age of fifteen, 
for example, tell us when the analysis is adjusted with a weight for the year 
2007? Given the high degree of uncertainty in relation to generating weights 
in the three countries under comparison, unweighted estimations are used.
2	
Comparing the TIES survey with reference data
Although the TIES survey samples probably reflect the best data one can 
expect to retrieve from the field in light of the problems encountered, the 
major drawbacks in terms of the sampling frames and implementation lead 
to the question of whether the TIES data is representative for the Turkish 
second generation in the selected countries and cities. This is especially 
the case for the Turkish second generation in the Austrian and French 
cities as a result of the absence of suitable sampling frames. To investigate 
this question, the next section presents comparisons between TIES survey 
results and available reference data for the same target population. More 
precisely, the educational attainment of second-generation Turks and their 
parents will be used to draw comparisons between the TIES survey and 
available reference data. The aim of this comparison is to test whether the 

Survey samples, response rates and weights
227
different sampling frames and strategies resulted in an over-representation 
or an under-representation of certain sub-groups in the TIES survey which 
might affect the main variables of interest and the results presented in this 
book. The comparison is limited to Austria and France only. In the case of 
Sweden, the target group in Stockholm was drawn from a probability sample 
based on register data and is therefore not included in the comparison. In 
addition, publicly available reference data on the second generation is only 
provided by aggregated groups of origin countries in Sweden (Fleischmann 
2011: 216).
Austria
The TIES survey results for the Turkish first generation were compared 
with observations in the 2001 Austrian Census with regard to educational 
attainment and selected labour market outcomes. More precisely, the 
examination of the Austrian census was restricted to the two TIES survey 
cities of Vienna and Linz. The first generation in both surveys was defined 
as ‘born in Turkey’, and the Austrian census data was further restricted to 
the same birth cohorts as those available in the TIES survey (1930 to 1972). 
Since information on educational attainment in the Austrian census is only 
available in three broad categories (compulsory, upper-secondary and post-
secondary education), a comparable classification was taken on board for 
the TIES survey samples. Results of the evaluation are displayed in table A2. 
The comparison of the educational attainment and selected labour market 
positions reveals some differences for the Turkish first generation in Linz, 
while the variations between the two sources for Vienna are modest. Turkish 
fathers and mothers in the Linz TIES survey sample seem to be slightly 
positively selected with regard to educational attainment. They obtain 
their educational credentials from compulsory education less often, and 
have post-secondary diplomas more often. Higher educational attainment 
also translates into slightly higher participation rates in the service sector 
of the local labour market, especially among Turkish women in the Linz 
TIES survey sample. There is, however, a major difference between the two 
compared sources: the time of the data collection (2007/2008 versus 2001), 
which could explain some of the deviations.
The census data from 2001 has its limitations when it comes to children 
of Turkish immigrants since they can only be identified by country of 
birth and language spoken at home (for applications of this strategy, see 
Herzog-Punzenberger 2003a). Although this might be the most appropriate 
strategy when working with the Austrian census data, it is not equivalent 

228
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
to the definition of second-generation Turks in the TIES survey. Therefore, 
I compare education outcomes with the findings of the ‘Leben in Zwei 
Welten (Living in two worlds)’ (LiZW) study conducted two years before 
the TIES study (Weiss 2007b). LiZW is a representative survey for Austria 
comprising a very similar definition of the second generation to that used 
in the TIES survey. Since participants in the reference table in LiZW were 
aged between 20 and 26 and it was limited to those who had completed their 
education, the TIES outcomes were restricted to the same birth cohort and 
that cohort’s final academic attainment.2
Table A2  Educational attainment and selected occupations of the Turkish first 
generation compared: Austrian Census and TIES samples in Vienna and 
Linz (%)
Austrian Census (2001)
TIES survey (2007-2008)
Vienna
Linz
Vienna
Linz
 
Father Mother Father Mother   Father Mother Father Mother 
Educational 
attainment 
Compulsory 
education
67.0
81.1
73.7
87.4
67. 2
83.1
60.1
72.6
Upper-
secondary 
education
26.7
14.5
23.3
11.0
27.9
15.4
29.5
22.6
Post-
secondary 
education
6.3
4.4
3.0
1.6
4.9
3.5
10.4
4.8
Occupation 
Unskilled 
worker 
25.8
36.4
34.1
48.7
29.4
37.4
32.8
37.4
Manual 
worker
36.5
16.9
33.8
15.7
41.3
19.8
32.8
27.1
Service 
worker
10.4
14.2
8.1
9.2
8.7
13.9
10.9
20.0
N.
12,467
8,228
1,075
682
247
208
193
146
Sources: Austrian Census 2001; TIES 2007-2008. 
Note: In the Austrian census, only first-generation Turks born between 1930 and 1972 were 
included.
2	
Unfortunately, the LiZW publications do not provide descriptive information on the parental 
generation, such as educational attainment or labour market position.

Survey samples, response rates and weights
229
Regarding the educational attainment of the Turkish second generation 
in Austria, the differences between the estimates from both surveys are 
marginal and suggest that the TIES data is not strongly biased with respect 
to educational attainment, at least when comparing both TIES survey cities 
to the nationwide reference data (see table A3). Some minor variations 
can be seen when comparing the city estimates in the TIES survey to the 
reference data. Second-generation Turks in Vienna and Linz more often 
obtain a certificate from the academic tracks AHS-Oberstufe and BHS, but 
this appears to be realistic given the well-known differences in educational 
attainment between Austria’s urban and rural regions (Fassmann 2002; 
Schlögl & Lachmayr 2004).
Summing up, the comparison with reference sources suggests that the 
Turkish first generation in Linz seems to be more positively selected than 
the Turkish population from 2001 in terms of educational attainment and 
labour market participation. This applies especially to Turkish mothers. 
When turning to the core dependent variable ‘educational attainment’, 
the comparison suggests that there is no substantial bias in the Austrian 
TIES survey in terms of the educational attainment of the Turkish second 
generation.
Table A3  Educational attainment of the Turkish second generation (aged 20-26 
years) compared: LiZW and TIES samples in Vienna and Linz (%)
LiZW survey
TIES survey 
(both cities)
TIES Vienna
TIES Linz
Year (of survey)
2005-2006
2007-2008
2007-2008
2007-2008
Primary and lower-
secondary education
30
29.4
32.8
18.7
Vocational education
26
23.7
22.0
26.4
Upper-secondary/
academic orientation
24
27.6
27.7
31.0
Technical college
17
16.2
14.5
20.7
Post-secondary/tertiary
3
3.1
3.0
3.3
total
100
100
100
100
N.
414
228
137
91
Sources: Leben in Zwei Welten study (2005-2006), taken from (Weiss 2007a); TIES 2007-2008. 
Note: Only respondents aged between 20 and 26 are included.

230
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
France
In France, there are few statistical resources that supply relevant data on 
children of immigrants, and even fewer use definitions of an ‘immigrant 
generation’ similar to that used in the French TIES survey. Official statis-
tics, such as census data, mostly cover information on variables related to 
the nationality and countries of birth of individuals. The French census 
category ‘immigrant’ is defined by the National Institute of Statistics 
(INSEE) as ‘all persons who have been born abroad and who are foreign 
nationals’ (Simon 2007; Thierry 2009). In other words, the definition of 
immigrant used in the census covers all first-generation immigrants, but 
it excludes citizens of France and children of immigrants born in France. 
The latter constitute the second generation as it was defined in the TIES 
survey samples. For the purpose of comparison, I use two recent national 
representative surveys conducted in France. First, the educational attain-
ment of the parents’ generation is compared to outcomes presented in 
Kirszbaum et al. (2009). Their study is based on the family history survey 
(Étude de l’histoire familiale) carried out by the National Institute for Sta-
tistics and Economic Studies and the National Institute for Demographic 
Studies. It involved interviews with 380,000 respondents aged eighteen 
or older. Most importantly, the survey was bridged with the 1999 census 
and sought to integrate the census data and questions in relation to the 
countries of birth of the respondents and their parents (Kirszbaum et al. 
2009:14-15). The Turkish first generation is defined as Turkish nationals 
born in Turkey or whose partners are Turkish immigrants. The comparison 
with the educational attainment of the Turkish first generation reveals 
strong differences (see table A4). Turkish fathers and mothers in the TIES 
survey are more frequently found to obtain higher levels of education than 
in the reference data. This applies especially to first-generation Turks in 
Paris. However, it appears realistic given that the majority of the Parisian 
Turkish community came from the more developed areas of Turkey and 
often immigrated with higher educational credentials and specialised 
occupational skills (see chapter 2).3
3	
Note that the categories of the educational attainment in table A4 and table A5 are different 
from the Austrian categories as a result of different information provided in the source data 
and publications.

Survey samples, response rates and weights
231
Table A4  Educational attainment of the Turkish first generation compared: Family 
History Survey and TIES samples in Paris and Strasbourg (%)
Family History 
Survey 
France 
TIES survey 
(both cities)
TIES Paris
TIES  
Strasbourg
1999
2007-2008
2007-2008
2007-2008
 
Father Mother Father Mother Father Mother Father Mother 
No school/
primary
76.0
81.0
47.0
60.6
41.5
53.2
52.4
67.9
Lower secondary
14.8
12.0
28.0
18.6
27.8
17.3
28.4
19.8
Upper secondary
5.8
4.0
15.8
15.0
16.5
20.2
15.8
9.9
Post-secondary/
tertiary 
3.4
3.0
9.2
5.8
14.2
9.3
3.4
2.4
total
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
N. 
n.a.
n.a.
500
500
248
248
252
252
Sources: Family History Survey 1999, taken from Kirszbaum et al. (2009); TIES 2007-2008. 
Note: n.a.=Not reported.
We have to bear in mind that there are three major differences between the 
French TIES survey samples and the reference survey that might cause de-
viations and therefore make it difficult to examine the amount of potential 
bias in the French TIES survey. These are: the coverage (nationwide versus 
Strasbourg and Paris), the time of data collection (1999 versus 2007-2008) 
and the missing information on similar birth cohorts. The family history 
survey has a number of methodological caveats when studying outcomes 
for children of immigrants, including Turkish immigrants (Kirszbaum et 
al. 2009: 15-16). To overcome these limitations I turn to a recent publication 
based on a second representative survey of descendants of immigrants in 
France called the ‘Trajectories and Origins Survey’ (TeO) (Beauchemin, 
Hamel & Simon 2010). This survey was conducted one year after the TIES 
survey and includes 21,000 respondents. Most importantly, the second 
generation was defined in the same way as in the TIES survey samples: 
born in France, aged 18 to 35 and with at least one parent who immigrated 
to France.4 Comparing the educational attainment of the Turkish second 
generation with the TeO survey reveals almost identical results once the 
4	
Unfortunately, the ‘TeO’ survey could not be used to compare the first generation since the 
recent publications do not contain descriptive breakdowns of educational attainment or labour 
market position for the Turkish first generation in similar birth cohorts. That’s why the family 
history survey from 1999 was used for comparison.

232
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
nationwide survey is compared to Paris and Strasbourg taken as a whole. 
Slightly more than two-thirds had moved beyond compulsory education in 
each survey. However, once the estimates from the TeO survey are compared 
with each TIES city separately, differences appear. The Turkish second 
generation in Paris is somewhat over-represented in upper-secondary and 
post-secondary education in Paris, while their counterparts in Strasbourg 
are slightly under-represented compared to the nationally representative 
data.
Table A5  Educational attainment of the Turkish second generation compared: TeO 
Survey and TIES samples in Paris and Strasbourg (%)
Source
Brinbaum et 
al. (2010)
Author’s 
analysis
Author’s 
analysis
Author’s 
analysis
Based on 
TeO survey
France
TIES survey 
(both cities)
Paris
Strasbourg
Year (of survey)
2008-2009
2007-2008
2007-2008
2007-2008
Lower-secondary at 
the most
36.7
36.0
22.9
48.7
Upper-secondary and 
higher
63.3
64.0
77.1
51.3
 
N.
314
500
248
252
Sources: TeO survey results are taken from Brinbaum et al. (2010:48) and have been re-estimated 
for men and women together; TIES 2007-2008.
Summing up, we can see that there are differences in terms of the educa-
tional attainment of the parental generation, in that there are slightly more 
highly educated Turkish first-generation immigrants in the two French 
TIES survey cities. But the results of the comparison between the Turkish 
second generation and the most recent comparable data source deviate less 
strongly from the results found in the TIES survey, suggesting that the bias 
in the TIES survey is modest.

PART B	
Measurement, analysis strategies 
and additional outcomes
2	
The Worlds of Turkish Fathers and Mothers
Table A6  Three main reasons for migration from Turkey, fathers (%) (Chapter 2, 
Section 2.4)
Austria 
France 
Sweden 
%
Vienna 
Linz 
Paris 
Strasbourg
Stockholm 
…
 
 
 
 
 
85
 
 
 
work
 
80
 
 
work
 
 
75
work
 
 
 
 
70
 
work
 
 
 
65
 
 
 
 
 
…
 
 
 
 
 
40
 
 
 
 
 
35
 
 
 
 
work
30
 
 
 
 
 
25
 
 
 
 
 
20
 
 
 
 
asylum
15
family 
family
 
 
family/partner 
10
 
 
 
family
 
5
study 
study
family/study
study
 
Source: TIES 2007-2008
Table A7  Three main reasons for migration from Turkey, mothers (%) (Chapter 2, 
Section 2.4)
Austria 
France 
Sweden 
%
Vienna 
Linz 
Paris 
Strasbourg
Stockholm 
…
 
 
 
 
 
55
 
 
partner
partner
 
50
 
 
 
 
 
45
 
 
 
 
 
40
family
 
 
 
Marriage
35
partner
marriage 
 
 
 
30
 
family
family
family
 

234
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Austria 
France 
Sweden 
%
Vienna 
Linz 
Paris 
Strasbourg
Stockholm 
25
 
 
 
 
family
20
 
partner 
 
 
 
15
marriage 
 
 
 
 
10
 
 
marriage
marriage
asylum
5
 
 
 
 
 
Source: TIES 2007-2008
3	
An Initial Look at Education Outcomes
Table A8  Respondents still in school, by city and group (%) (Chapter 3, Section 3.1)
Group
 
 
 
Turkish Descent
(N.)
Comparison Group
(N.)
Austria
Vienna
%
21.4
54
29.6
74
Linz
%
34.0
70
31.2
73
France
Paris
%
56.1
139
31.0
54
Strasbourg
%
30.6
77
37.9
67
Sweden
Stockholm
%
19.9
50
18.8
47
Source: 2007-2008
Table A9  EDU Codes classification for Austria, Sweden and France (Chapter 3, 
Section 3.1)
 
Edu. 
Code 
No. 
Description
Austria
France
Sweden
Primary 
education
11
Primary education
Volksschule
école 
élémentaire
12
Special education
Sonderschule
SEGPA
–
Lower-
secondary 
education
21
Vocational track
Hauptschule, 
Polytechnikum
–
–
22
Integrated track 
–
Collège 
Grundskolan
23
Mixed track 
–
–
–
24
Academic track
AHS-Unterstufe
–
–

Measurement, analysis strategies and additional outcomes
235
 
Edu. 
Code 
No. 
Description
Austria
France
Sweden
Apprentice-
ship and 
upper-
secondary 
education
31
Apprenticeships 
and similar
Lehre
CAP/BEP
–
32
Post-lower 
secondary orienta-
tion
BMS 
–
33
Higher vocational 
orientation*
BHS
Lycée 
technologique
Gymnasie 
Utbildning
34
Academic 
orientation*
AHS-Oberstufe
Lycée général
Gymnasie 
Post-
secondary/
tertiary 
education
41
Tertiary vocational 
+ Higher post-
secondary
Akademien, 
Kolleg
BTS/DUT
 
42
University and 
similar
Universiät, 
Fachhochschule
universitaire
Universitet,
Högskola, 
Rkeshögskole-
utbildning
50
PhD
Doktorat
doctorate
doctorate
Notes: *=Provides access to university; Edu. Code No. 11-124=Compulsory education.
Measurement of independent variables included in Section 3.3
Parents’ education level covers the highest diploma achieved by one of 
the parents. The variable ranges from (1) no diploma or a primary school 
diploma to (4) a post-secondary/tertiary education credential. This variable 
is entered as a continuous variable.
I further controlled through a dummy variable whether at least one of 
the fathers and mothers achieved their highest level of education in the host 
country – (1) if they did, (0) if they did not.
The labour market participation of the parents’ generation is measured 
with a dummy variable indicating whether (1) or not (0) both parents were 
employed when the child was aged fifteen.
Parents’ host country language ability is measured with the same index 
as presented in chapter 2. Recall that we asked our respondents to evalu-
ate whether their mothers and fathers speak or spoke the host country’s 
language on a scale from ‘not at all’ to ‘very well’. Separate information 
for fathers and mothers has been combined into a ‘language ability index’. 
This scale had a reliability of >0.8 for all groups in all cities. The variable 
has been entered as a continuous variable in the empirical model (from 
low to high).

236
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Family size is a numerical variable representing the total number of 
children in the family as a measurement of the family size. This variable 
ranges from 0 to 10.
Both parents present is a dummy variable indicating whether our re-
spondents grew up in a two-parent household (1) or not (0).
Years since migration captures the length of time, in years, the parents 
have lived in one of the five receiving cities. This variable is the average 
length of residence of both parents. In cases where this information was 
missing (for either father or mother), only one parent was considered in 
order to reduce the number of missings.
Parents originate from less-developed regions in Turkey. I used the develop-
ment index presented in chapter 2 and classified ‘less-developed regions’ 
(1) as regions with values between 19 and 59 on the scale. The (0) in the 
dummy variable represents averagely developed to highly developed regions 
of origin for the parents.
Fathers and mothers did not come for work and family reunification reasons 
is a dummy variable coded (0) if fathers and mothers came for work and 
family (marriage, reunification, etc.) reasons, while it is coded (1) if the 
parents came for asylum and/or to study.
I further included gender and age as control variables for the demographic 
characteristics of the respondents and whether the respondent was still in 
school during the time of the interview.

Measurement, analysis strategies and additional outcomes
237
Table A10  Descriptive outcomes of main independent variables (mean, standard deviation) – second-generation Turks by city (Chapter 3, 
Section 3.3)
 
 
Austria
France
Sweden
 
 
 
 
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg
Stockholm
 
Variable
Range (label)
mean 
s.d.
mean 
s.d.
mean 
s.d.
mean 
s.d.
mean 
s.d.
1
Male 
0
(No)
1
(Yes) 
0.43
0.5
0.49
0.5
0.48
0.5
0.38
0.5
0.49
0.5
2
Student
0
(No)
1
(Yes) 
0.21
0.4
0.33
0.5
0.56
0.5
0.30
0.5
0.19
0.4
3
Parents’ education levels
1
(No school/
primary)
4
(Post-secondary/
tertiary)
2.21
1.0
2.38
1.1
2.22
1.1
1.83
0.9
2.39
1.2
4
At least one parent with host country 
diploma
0
(No)
1
(Yes) 
0.14
0.4
0.23
0.4
0.08
0.3
0.08
0.3
0.43
0.5
5
Both parents employed
0
(No)
1
(Yes) 
0.34
0.5
0.58
0.5
0.37
0.5
0.28
0.5
0.53
0.5
6
Parents’ host country language ability 
1
(Not at all)
6
(Very well)
4.01
1.0
4.55
1.0
3.82
1.0
3.62
1.1
4.89
0.8
7
Family size
0
(Siblings)
10
(Siblings)
2.62
1.4
2.14
1.1
2.02
1.3
3.02
1.8
2.52
1.9
8
Both parents present
0
(No)
1
(Yes) 
0.93
0.3
0.92
0.3
0.92
0.3
0.95
0.2
0.87
0.3
9
Years since migration (Parents)
14
(Years)
63
(Years)
31.74
6.8
33.35
6.7
33.16
4.1
34.03
4.0
33.97
5.2
10
Parents originate from less developed 
regions in Turkey
0
(No)
1
(Yes) 
0.50
0.5
0.24
0.4
0.50
0.5
0.44
0.5
0.69
0.5
11
Father and mother that came for 
reasons other than work or family
0
(No)
1
(Yes) 
0.05
0.2
0.11
0.3
0.22
0.4
0.28
0.5
0.35
0.5
 
N.
 
 
 
 
252
206
248
252
251
 
N. (total)
 
 
 
 
1209
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Note: s.d.=Standard deviation.

238
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Table A11  Ordered logistic regression on education level (Chapter 3, Section 3.3)
Model1
Model2
Model3
Model4
 
B
Exp(B)
 
B
Exp(B)
 
B
Exp(B)
 
B
Exp(B)
Ref: Vienna
Linz
0.54
1.71
**
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
(0.18)
Paris
1.96
7.08
***
1.42
4.14
***
1.47
4.37
***
1.26
3.51
***
(0.18)
(0.19)
(0.20)
(0.23)
Strasbourg
0.78
2.17
***
0.50
1.64
***
0.68
1.97
***
0.51
1.66
*
(0.17)
(0.18)
(0.18)
(0.21)
Stockholm
1.15
3.14
***
1.10
2.99
***
0.91
2.49
***
0.80
2.21
***
(0.17)
(0.18)
(0.20)
(0.21)
Age
0.11
1.11
***
0.13
1.13
***
0.15
1.16
***
(0.01)
(0.02)
(0.02)
Male
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Student
2.46
11.66 ***
2.47
11.86
***
2.47
11.80 ***
(0.16)
(0.17)
(0.17)
Parents’ education levels
0.24
1.26
***
0.22
1.25
***
(0.07)
(0.07)
At least 
one parent 
with host 
country 
diploma
n.s.
n.s.
Both 
parents 
employed
n.s.
n.s.
Parents’ (host country) language ability 
0.27
1.31
***
0.28
1.31
***
(0.07)
(0.07)
Family size
-0.09
0.91
*
-0.10
0.90
*
(0.04)
(0.04)
Both 
parents 
present
ns
ns
Years since migration (Parents)
ns
Parents originate from developed 
regions in Turkey
ns
Father and mother did not come for 
work and family reasons 
0.40
1.49
*
(0.16)

Measurement, analysis strategies and additional outcomes
239
Model1
Model2
Model3
Model4
 
B
Exp(B)
 
B
Exp(B)
 
B
Exp(B)
 
B
Exp(B)
Nagel-
kerke’s
R2
0.12
0.32
0.36
0.37
N.
1209
 
 
1209
 
 
1184
 
 
1181
 
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Levels of significance: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. Dependent Variable, Education level: 
lower-secondary at the most (1), upper-secondary and apprenticeship (2) and post-secondary/
tertiary education (3).
4	
Behind the Scenes: The Family Examined
This section provides more details of the analysis presented in chapter 4. It 
starts by presenting measurement information for the main independent 
variables, and then includes a brief overview of their descriptive outcomes. 
Next, model specifications are given, while the final part of this section 
shows the results of the multivariate analysis that were not presented in 
chapter 4.
Measurement of the main independent variables
In order to explore patterns of family influence and support in school 
activities for children and siblings, I used the following items from the 
TIES survey:
To begin with, the importance of fathers and mothers in supporting their 
child with his or her studies when they were in secondary school (aged 
eleven to fifteen) ranged on an answer scale from (1) ‘not important at all’ 
to (5) ‘very important’. This question was asked separately about mothers 
and fathers. The information from both variables was combined as one scale 
(alpha reliability >0.7 for all groups in all cities), which I labelled perceived 
importance of parents. The same survey item was also available for older 
siblings and was used to describe the perceived importance of siblings in the 
second half of chapter 4.
In order to measure parental control, I used the following two ques-
tions: ‘When you were in secondary school, how often did your parents 
… control the time you spent on homework? … and … talk with you about 
school or studies? Both Likert-type survey items ranged from (1) ‘never’ 
to (5) ‘often’.

240
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
The questions, ‘How often did your parents meet with or talk to your 
teachers? … and how often did your parents help you with your homework?’ 
were used as variables for the parents’ participation aspect. Similar to the 
variables described before, both questions had five ordered answer pos-
sibilities: ‘never’, ‘rarely’, ‘sometimes’, ‘regularly’ and ‘often’.
Finally, the parental support index is a combined indicator measured 
via the four items described above. I combined the following variables 
into one summarising index: parents, (1) controlled the time they spent on 
homework; (2) helped them with their homework; (3) talked with them about 
school or studies; (4) met with or talked to their teachers when they were 
in secondary school. As explained above, each of the four items had five 
answer categories varying from ‘never’ to ‘often’ and were combined in the 
index as a continuous scale capturing parental support while at secondary 
school. This scale had a reliability of >0.7 for all groups in all cities.
Talking about school and helping with homework were also asked for older 
siblings. Similar to the survey questions on parents, both Likert-type survey 
items for siblings ranged from (1) ‘never’ to (5) ‘often’ as well.
The sibling support index is a combined indicator for the two items 
described above. I combined the variables (1) helping with homework and 
(2) talking about school or studies into one mean index. This continuous 
scale capturing sibling support while at secondary school ranged from 1 to 
5. This scale had a reliability of >0.7 for all groups in all cities.
I further used two additional control variables related to siblings: First, 
I used a dummy variable on whether older siblings had left school without 
a diploma. Second, I introduced the total number of older siblings as a 
continuous variable.
It should be noted here that respondents without older siblings were 
set to ‘never’ in all variables for sibling support. I re-estimated all analyti-
cal models without those who had no older siblings, yielding very similar 
results. Given the small sample size of the TIES survey, I therefore decided 
to include those without older siblings, setting them to ‘no support’ (never). 
Note also that I additionally tested for the total number of older siblings, 
which did not explain away the significant results for sibling support.
Finally, as explained in chapter 4, the following control variables were 
also used, either directly in the statistical models or in the correlation 
matrixes (for distributions, see previous chapters and related appendices): 
gender, age, parents’ education levels, parents’ host country language ability 
and the length of time they had resided in the country.
Table A12 shows means and standard deviations (in brackets) for each 
of the main independent variables by group and city.

Measurement, analysis strategies and additional outcomes
241
Table A12  Descriptive outcomes of independent variables, by group and city 
(Chapter 4, Section 4.2)
Austria
France
Sweden
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg Stockholm
Variable
Metric
2GT
CG
2GT
CG
2GT
CG
2GT
CG
2GT
CG
Importance 
of parents
1=
not 
important
2.76
(1.1)
3.10
(1.2)
3.16
(1.2)
3.18
(1.2)
3.26
(1.3)
3.54
(1.1)
2.65
(1.4)
3.47
(0.9)
2.07
(1.1)
2.65
(1.1)
5=
very 
important
Homework 
control
1=
never
2.86
(1.2)
2.91
(1.2)
3.26
(1.2)
2.71
(1.2)
3.02
(1.3)
3.23
(1.4)
2.72
(1.5)
3.53
(1.3)
2.41
(1.2)
1.93
(1.1)
5=
often
Talking 
about 
school
1=
never
3.38
(1.2)
3.27
(1.2)
3.61
(1.2)
3.52
(1.1)
3.65
(1.1)
3.93
(1.0)
3.73
(1.2)
4.05
(1.0)
3.65
(1.0)
3.54
(0.9)
5=
often
Helping 
with 
homework
1=
never
2.53
(1.2)
2.81
(1.1)
2.84
(1.3)
2.81
(1.1)
2.07
(1.2)
2.98
(1.3)
1.68
(1.1)
3.06
(1.1)
1.89
(1.0)
2.48
(1.0)
5=
often
Contact 
with 
teachers
1=
never
3.30
(1.2)
2.93
(1.1)
3.33
(1.3)
2.71
(1.1)
3.00
(1.1)
3.31
(1.0)
2.96
(1.3)
3.28
(1.0)
2.38
(1.0)
2.13
(0.8)
5=
often
Parental 
support 
index
1=
never
3.02
(1.0)
2.98
(0.9)
2.93
(0.8)
3.25
(1.1)
2.94
(0.9)
3.36
(0.8)
2.78
(1.0)
3.48
(0.8)
2.58
(0.8)
2.52
(0.7)
5=
often
Importance 
of siblings
1=
not 
important
2.32
(1.5)
1.64
(1.1)
2.83
(1.7)
1.88
(1.3)
1.80
(1.2)
2.24
(1.4)
2.38
(1.4)
2.16
(1.5)
3.01
(1.4)
3.90
(1.1)
5=
very 
important
Help with 
homework
1=
never
2.11
(1.4)
1.56
(1.0)
2.49
(1.5)
1.70
(1.1)
1.80
(1.3)
1.58
(0.9)
2.17
(1.4)
1.53
(1.0)
1.69
(1.0)
1.34
(0.8)
5=
often
Talking 
about 
school
1=
never
2.02
(1.3)
1.48
(0.9)
2.30
(1.4)
1.78
(1.1)
1.99
(1.3)
1.93
(1.2)
2.48
(1.6)
1.75
(1.1)
2.58
(1.2)
2.14
(1.1)
5=
often
Sibling 
support 
index
1=
never
2.07
(1.3)
1.52
(0.9)
2.39
(1.4)
1.74
(1.0)
1.89
(1.2)
1.75
(1.0)
2.32
(1.4)
1.64
(1.0)
2.13
(0.9)
1.74
(0.8)
5=
often

242
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Austria
France
Sweden
Vienna
Linz
Paris
Strasbourg Stockholm
Variable
Metric
2GT
CG
2GT
CG
2GT
CG
2GT
CG
2GT
CG
Has older 
siblings 
without 
diploma
1=
Yes
0.11
(0.3)
0.03
(0.2)
0.10
(0.3)
0.03
(0.2)
0.03
(0.2)
0.08
(0.3)
0.50
(0.4)
0.07
(0.3)
0.09
(0.3)
0.07
(0.3)
0= No 
Number 
of older 
siblings
0 -10
2.62
(1.4)
1.10
(1.2)
2.14
(1.1)
1.45
(1.2)
2.01
(1.2)
1.79
(1.4)
2.99
(1.7)
1.74
(1.4)
3.19
(1.6)
2.13
(1.4)
N.
 
 
252
250
206
234
248
174
252
177
251
250
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Mean values are presented, standard deviations in brackets. 2GT=Second-generation Turks. 
CG=Comparison group.
Model specifications: Binomial logistic regressions
The main dependent variables used in chapter 4 are early school leavers and 
high-achievers – both of which are binary outcomes with two values, (1) for 
high achievers and (0) for not. Binomial logistic regression was therefore 
used. I estimated a set of models of increasing complexity for each outcome 
variable shown in chapter 4 and afterwards. I further introduced the inter-
action terms for the parental support index and the sibling support index 
for second-generation Turks as presented in chapter 4.
In addition to the final models, interactions between city, parental 
support and sibling support were estimated in order to explore whether 
parental support was more relevant for second-generation Turks in Vienna 
(versus Linz) and for Paris (versus Strasbourg). I already mentioned in 
chapter 4 that none of these interaction terms with cities was significant. 
This validates the modelling strategy of combining both cities in Austria and 
France into one model. I also estimated a model that comprised a squared 
term of the variable ‘parental support index’. Previous research found that 
parents who exerted too much control over their children and participated 
in their schooling too much tended to have children with lower levels of 
achievement (Kao 2004). Note that this squared term was not statistically 
significant in any of my analysis. Thus, the effect of the parental support 
index was linear and not curvilinear. To phrase it in non-technical terms: 
more support from Turkish parents for their children is clearly better than 
too little when looking at education outcomes.

Measurement, analysis strategies and additional outcomes
243
It is also important to note that I tested corrections to the binomial 
logistic model estimates, since my outcome variables were not balanced 
in all five cities on both dependent variables. For example, both the total 
number of high achievers in Vienna and Linz and the total number of early 
school leavers in Stockholm and Paris were rather small. In other words, 
in some cities I had a much higher number of observations for which Y 
= 0 rather than Y = 1. As noted by King and Zeng (2001a, b), having a low 
rate of Y = 1, along with a small sample size, can skew the coefficients 
estimated using the binomial logistic regression, as well as the predicted 
probabilities arising from it. Therefore, I tested corrections of potential 
biases using a version of the logistic regression model recently developed 
by Gary King and Langche Zeng (2001a, b) – labelled ‘Rare Events Logistic 
Regression (ReLogit)’ – to compute unbiased estimates in a situation such 
as this. However, it turned out that running the models with ‘ReLogit’ in 
Stata 11 changed only slightly the coefficients that were obtained (only at 
the 3rd decimal). Thus, I decided to not use ReLogit given the rather small 
differences in the outcomes and the constraints imposed by this procedure 
on calculating predicted probabilities.
A final note on comparing odds ratios across countries and regression 
models: Throughout this book, there are several estimates in which I 
fit logistic regressions on a country or city level (always with the same 
independent variables across countries) and compare the estimates ex-
pressed in odds ratios. This approach is quite routine in social sciences. 
Very recently, critical voices from quantitative methodology scholars 
appeared in a number of articles and recent working papers questioning 
this procedure (see for example Karlson, Holm & Breen 2012; Mood 2010). 
They underline problems of comparability across models that stem from 
‘unobservables’. The estimates of logistic regression models are affected 
by omitted variables that can vary across samples, even when estimating 
models with the same independent variables, and lead to problems in 
comparing and interpreting odds ratios across countries and models. 
Mood (2010) presents a number of solutions for this problem. According 
to her, average marginal and average partial effects should be used as 
measures for comparison instead of odds ratios since they are not affected 
by unobserved heterogeneity that is unrelated to the independent variables 
in the models. But these estimates are population averages and are not 
sufficient for my analysis because I am rather interested in the change 
in a probability that occurs for individuals on foot of a change in the 
independent variable (for example, the chance to be a high achiever chang-
ing with a one unit increase in the parental support index). According to 

244
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Mood, this can only be done by using marginal effects. But, as she notes 
herself, ‘these measures are affected by unobserved heterogeneity, and 
cannot be straightforwardly compared’ (Mood 2010:78). In other words, 
the problem of comparability across countries remains unsolved as with 
the measures of odds ratios. As long as the jury is still out on how best to 
provide meaningful solutions to the problems of comparability in logistic 
regression, I acknowledge the potential bias of ‘unobservables’ but follow 
the commonly used approach in social sciences by comparing odds ratios 
across countries.
Table A13  Binomial logistic regression of leaving school early for second-generation 
Turks (odds ratios) – sibling support, by country (Chapter 4, Section 4.3)
Austria
 
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
Importance of siblings
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
ns
Help with homework
0.74*
ns
–
–
–
(0.11)
Talking about school
0.65*
–
–
–
(0.12)
Sibling support index
0.64**
0.63**
0.66*
(0.10)
(0.10)
(0.11)
Has older siblings without a 
diploma
2.13*
(0.72)
n.s.
Number of older siblings
n.s.
n.s.
Parents’ education levels
0.63***
(0.08)
Parents’ host country language 
ability
n.s.
Parental support index
0.76*
(0.10)
City (Vienna)
1.77*
1.78*
1.82**
1.79*
1.67*
n.s.
 
(0.41)
(0.41)
(0.42)
(0.41)
(0.40)
R2
0.03
0.04
0.06
0.06
0.08
0.17
N.
458
458
458
458
453
453
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Note: Levels of significance: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.

Measurement, analysis strategies and additional outcomes
245
France
 
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
Importance of siblings
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Helping with homework
n.s.
n.s.
–
–
–
Talking about school
n.s.
–
–
–
Sibling support index
n.s.
n.s.
n.s. 
Has older siblings without a 
diploma
2.55**
(0.87)
2.41*
(0.83)
Number of older siblings
ns
ns
Parents’ education levels
0.69*
(0.11)
Parents’ host country language 
ability
n.s.
Parental support index
n.s.
City (Paris)
0.43**
0.47**
0.46**
0.46**
0.52*
n.s.
 
(0.12)
(0.14)
(0.13)
(0.13)
(0.16)
 
R2
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.07
0.12
0.15
N.
500
500
500
500
492
491
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Note: Levels of significance: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.
Sweden
 
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
Importance of siblings
ns
2.10*
2.18*
2.06*
2.05*
2.07*
(0.66)
(0.73)
(0.70)
(0.63)
(0.70)
Helping with homework
2.14*
2.04*
–
–
–
(0.74)
(0.76)
Talking about school
n.s.
–
–
–
Sibling support index
2.26*
2.02*
n.s.
(0.96)
(0.71)
Has older siblings without a 
diploma
n.s.
n.s.
Number of older siblings
n.s.
n.s.
Parents’ education levels
0.77*
(0.22)
Parents’ host country language 
ability
n.s.
Parents’ support index
n.s.
R2
0.14
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.20
0.21
N.
241
241
241
241
241
241
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Note: Levels of significance: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.

246
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Table A14  Binomial logistic regression of achieving post-secondary/tertiary 
education for second-generation Turks (odds ratios) – sibling support, by 
country (Section 4.3)
Austria
 
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
Importance of siblings
n.s.
n.s.
0.71*
0.68**
0.69*
0.69*
(0.11)
(0.10)
(0.10)
(0.11)
Helping with homework
1.38*
n.s.
–
–
–
(0.21)
Talking about school
1.98***
–
–
–
(0.39)
Sibling support index
1.75***
1.81***
1.68**
(0.29)
(0.31)
(0.30)
Has older siblings without a 
diploma
n.s.
n.s.
Number of older siblings
n.s.
n.s.
Parents’ education levels
1.36*
(0.17)
Parents’ host country language 
ability
n.s.
Parents’ support index
1.37*
(0.21)
City (Vienna)
0.59*
0.58*
0.56*
0.57*
n.s.
n.s.
 
(0.15)
(0.15)
(0.14)
(0.14)
(0.17)
(0.20)
R2
0.03
0.04
0.09
0.07
0.09
0.14
N.
458
458
458
458
453
453
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Note: Levels of significance: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.
France
 
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
Importance of siblings
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Helping with homework
n.s.
n.s.
–
–
–
Talking about school
n.s.
–
–
–
Sibling support index
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Has older siblings without a 
diploma
0.31***
0.32**
(0.11)
(0.11)
Number of older siblings
0.78**
0.82*
(0.06)
(0.07)

Measurement, analysis strategies and additional outcomes
247
France
 
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
Parents’ education levels
1.24*
(0.12)
Parents’ host country language 
ability
n.s.
Parents’ support index
n.s.
City (Paris)
2.80***
2.78***
2.82***
2.81***
2.36***
2.33***
 
(0.54)
(0.54)
(0.55)
(0.55)
(0.49)
(0.49)
R2
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.10
0.18
0.21
N.
500
500
500
500
492
491
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Note: Levels of significance: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.
Sweden
 
M1
M2
M3
M4
M5
M6
Importance of siblings
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s. 
n.s.
n.s. 
n.s.
Helping with homework
n.s.
n.s.
–
–
–
Talking about school
n.s.
–
–
–
Sibling support index
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Has older siblings without a 
diploma
n.s.
n.s.
Number of older siblings
n.s.
n.s.
Parents’ education levels
1.14*
Parents’ host country language 
ability
n.s.
Parents’ support index
n.s.
R2
0.11
0.11
0.12
0.12
0.12
0.12
N.
241
241
241
241
241
241
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Note: Levels of significance: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001.
5	
Beyond the Family: Peers and Teachers
The following section presents the measurements of the main variables 
of interest used in chapter 5: characteristics of peer group networks and 
relationships with teachers.

248
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Peer group characteristics
To examine peer group characteristics, I made use of four indicators: The 
first variable covers information on the education levels of the closest 
friends, while the remaining three focus on the ethnic composition of peer 
groups and their perceived importance.
a	
Having low-achieving friends (dropout peers)
Interviewees were asked to state if they had close friends in secondary 
school who left school without either a diploma or a school certificate. 
Having friends without a school diploma is a dummy variable in the analysis, 
while having no dropout friends serves as the reference category.
b	
Ethnic composition of the three best friends
One of the main explanatory variables is the peer group composition 
of the interviewees’ three best friends during their secondary schooling. 
Interviewees were asked to give this information for each of their three 
best friends separately. While this information was shown separately in 
the descriptive section of chapter 5 (table 5.3), I combined the information 
on a scale for the multivariate analysis as follows: Three dummy variables 
were generated (one for each best friend) indicating whether the friend was 
a host country native or not. Afterwards, all three answer categories were 
added and divided through the total number of valid answers. The final 
variable ‘peer composition’ is a scale, ranging from (0) all three best friends are 
co-ethnics to (1) all three best friends are host country natives. For example, if 
a respondent answered all three peer items by saying that all of his closest 
friends during secondary school were host country natives, this person 
scored three points. This number was divided by three because three valid 
answers were given. The respondent in this example would get the value 1 on 
the peer group composition scale. On the other hand, if a person said that his/
her first best friend was a host country native, but the second and the third 
best friends were of Turkish origin, the score on the scale would be 0.3 (1 + 0 
+ 0 = 1 / 3 valid answers = 0.333), and so forth. The composition scale of the 
close circle of friends is introduced as a continuous variable in the analysis.
c	
Number of non-immigrant friends in school
Another important independent variable is the total number of host country 
native friends in school. Respondents were asked to indicate how many 
of their friends in secondary school were host country natives. Possible 
responses were ‘none’, ‘very few’, ‘some’, ‘many’ and ‘most’. This indicator 

Measurement, analysis strategies and additional outcomes
249
captures the ethnic composition of social networks in school, and is used 
as a continuous variable. Although there might be some overlapping with 
the previous question on the ethnic origin of the three best friends, I follow 
Ream and Rumberger (2008), arguing that both indicators cover different 
types of peer groups.
d	
Perceived importance of peers
The respondents were asked whether peers were of importance in sup-
porting them in their studies or school work while they were in secondary 
school. This item had five answer categories ranging from (1) ‘not important 
at all’ to (5) ‘very important’ and is treated as a continuous variable in the 
analysis.
Relationships with teachers in secondary school
a	
Teacher support
Relationships with teachers in secondary school are captured through 
answers to three separate survey questions. Respondents were asked to 
think about the teachers in their most important secondary school, and to 
indicate to what extent they agreed on the following statements: (1) ‘I got 
along well with most of my teachers’, (2) ‘most teachers really listened to me’ 
and (3) ‘I received extra help from my teachers when I needed it’. Answer 
categories included ‘totally disagree’, ‘disagree’, ‘neither agree nor disagree’, 
‘agree’ and ‘totally agree’. Given the high correlation between these items 
(see chapter 5), they have been combined into one measure labelled, ‘teacher 
support’. This scale had a reliability of >0.7 for all groups in all cities.
b	
Perceived importance of teachers during secondary school
Similar to the statements about the perceived importance of peers and 
family members (see chapter 4), the respondents were also asked whether 
teachers were of importance in supporting them in their studies or school 
work while they were at secondary school. This item had five answer cat-
egories ranging from (1) ‘not important at all’ to (5) ‘very important’ and is 
treated as a continuous variable in the analysis.

250
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
6	
Navigating the System
Table A15  Characteristics of education pathways in Vienna and Linz, by group (%) 
Vienna
Linz
City 
differences
   
 
Compari-
son group
Second-
generation 
Turks
 
Compari-
son group
Second-
generation 
Turks
 
Second-
generation 
Turks
Lower-secondary education
Attended
100.0
100.0
100.0
100.0
Academic
62.4
34.1
54.3
33.5
Vocational
37.6
65.9
***
45.7
66.5
***
Upper-secondary education
Vocational 
14.8
29.5
14
44.3
***
Apprentice-
ship and 
similar
89
82.5
83.9
73.9
BMS
11
17.5
16.1
26.1
Academic 
85.2
70.5
**
86.0
55.7
***
***
AHS-O.
68.1
63.0
57.3
55.4
    BHS
31.8
37.0
 
42.7
44.6
 
 
Post-secondary/tertiary education
Attended
33.6
10.7
***
28.6
19.9
**
University
90.5
88.9
89.5
80.5
    Vocational
9.5
11.1
 
10.5
19.5
 
 
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Levels of significance: *<0.05; **<0.01; ***<0.001. City differences compare the outcomes of 
the Turkish second generation between Vienna and Linz.

Measurement, analysis strategies and additional outcomes
251
Table A16  Characteristics of education pathways in Paris and Strasbourg, by group (%) 
Paris
Strasbourg 
City differ-
ences
 
 
Com-
parison 
group
Second-
generation 
Turks
 
Com-
parison 
group
Second-
generation 
Turks
 
Second-
generation 
Turks
Upper-secondary education
Vocational 
14.8
29.5
14.0
44.3
Academic 
85.2
70.5
**
86.0
55.7
***
***
Lycée général
81.6
72.2
82.0
52.1
Lycée
technologique
18.4
27.8
**
18.0
47.9
***
***
Post-secondary/tertiary education
All tracks
81.8
76.0
84.7
50.3
***
University
53.1
51.6
56.3
54.1
Prof. Voc. (Ec. 
D’ingénieur 
and prepara-
tory classes
27.7
10.3
19.5
6.3
  DUT/BTS 
19.2
38.1
***
24.2
39.6
*
 
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Levels of significance: *<0.05; **<0.01; ***<0.001. City differences compare the outcomes of 
the Turkish second generation between Paris and Strasbourg.
7	
Interactions between Individual-level and Institutional-
level Factors
This section provides additional information on the analytical steps taken 
in section 7.3 of chapter 7. The dependent variable used in this section is 
education routes. As explained in greater detail in chapter 7, the classifica-
tion of these education routes is based on the country-specific typologies of 
the education pathways presented in chapter 6 (see table 6.2, table 6.4 and 
table 6.6). Education routes are defined as sequences of education tracks 
followed by students up to their final level of education.
In France and Sweden, seven education routes were noted in chapter 6, 
while Austria provides up to nine routes that students can follow. Since the 
analysis presented in section 7.3 is based on the sample of second-generation 
Turks only, I had to combine some of the routes presented in chapter 6 into 
broader types of pathway in order to achieve sufficient numbers per cat-
egory (route), which allowed statistical analysis to be performed. Table A17 

252
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
provides detailed information on the combination of education routes per 
country. Since the dependent variable is categorical, I used multinomial 
logistic regression to predict the route placement of second-generation 
Turks in each country. The vocational route served as a reference category. 
Table A 18, table A19 and table A20 provide the detailed outcomes of each 
estimation.
Table A17  Classification of education routes as a dependent variable for Section 7.3 
Austria
France
Sweden
1
Straight academic route 
(AHS-Unterstufe-AHS-
Oberstufe/BHS – any type 
of post-secondary/tertiary 
education)
Straight academic route
(Collège-Lycée (bacc) general 
or technologique – any type 
of post-secondary/tertiary 
education)
Straight academic route
(Grundskola-Academic 
Gymnasieskolan – any 
type of post-sec/tertiary 
education)
2
Short academic route 
(AHS-Unterstufe and 
Oberstufe)
Short academic route
(Collège-Lycée (bacc) general 
or technologique)
Short academic route
(Grundskola-Academic 
Gymnasieskolan)
3
Upward vocational route
(Hauptschule-AHS-Oberst./
BHS – any type of post-sec/
tertiary education)
Upward vocational route
(Collège-CAP/BEP – any type 
of post-secondary/tertiary 
education)
Upward vocational route
(Grundskola-Vocational 
Gymnasieskolan – any type 
of post-secondary/tertiary 
education)
4
Vocational route
(Hauptschule-apprentice-
ship)
Vocational route/Early 
school leaver
(Collège-CAP/BEP-stop/or 
Collège-stop)
Vocational route/Early 
school leaver (Grundskola-
Vocational Gymnasieskolan 
/Grundskola-stop)
5
Early school leaver
(AHS-Unterstufe or 
Hauptschule-stop)

Measurement, analysis strategies and additional outcomes
253
Table A18  Multinomial logistic regression predicting education pathways, second-
generation Turks in Austria (odds ratios)
Austria
Straight 
academic 
route
Short 
academic 
route
Upward 
voca-
tional 
route
Early 
school 
leaver
10%
23%
11%
15%
 
 
Ref.: Vocational route
Parents’ education 
levels
No/primary(1); 
Tertiary(5)
1.74**
(0.31)
1.87***
(0.26)
n.s.
n.s.
Importance of 
father and mother 
Min (1); Max (5)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Parental support 
index
Min (1); Max (5)
3.16**
( 1.06)
1.56*
(0.34)
n.s.
n.s.
Importance of 
siblings 
Min (1); Max (5)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
 
Sibling support 
index
Min (1); Max (5)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Importance of peers 
Min (1); Max (5)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
 
Peer group diversity 
(best friends)
All Turkish origin (0); 
All native origin(1)
3.35*
(1.41)
3.67*
(1.31)
n.s.
n.s.
No. of native peers 
in school
None (1); Most (5)
n.s.
n.s.
1.88***
(0.32)
n.s.
Peers without a 
diploma
Yes (1); No(0)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Importance of 
teachers
Min (1); Max (5)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
 
Teacher support 
index
Min (1); Max (5)
2.91**
(0.93)
n.s.
n.s.
0.54**
(0.12)
N. 
449
R2
 
0.46
 
 
 
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Levels of significance: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. 
n.s.=Not significant. All models are controlled for age, gender and city of residence (Vienna versus 
Linz).

254
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Table A19  Multinomial logistic regression predicting education pathways, second-
generation Turks in France (odds ratios)
France
Straight 
academic 
route
Short 
academic 
route
Upward 
vocational 
route
42%
12%
8%
 
 
Ref.: Vocational route/Early school leaver
Parents’ education 
levels
No/primary(1); 
Tertiary(5)
1.30*
(0.14)
n.s.
n.s.
Importance of father 
and mother 
Min (1); Max (5)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Parental support 
index
Min (1); Max (5)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
 
 
Importance of 
siblings 
Min (1); Max (5)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
 
 
Sibling support index
Min (1); Max (5)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Importance of peers 
Min (1); Max (5)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
 
 
Peer group diversity 
(best friends)
All Turkish origin (0); 
All native origin(1)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
 
 
No. of native peers in 
school
None (1); Most (5)
1.41**
(0.18)
n.s.
1.73**
(0.36)
Peers without a 
diploma
Yes (1); No(0)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Importance of 
teachers
Min (1); Max (5)
n.s.
n.s.
1.60*
 
(0.12)
Teacher support 
index
Min (1); Max (5)
1.72**
(0.28)
1.85**
(0.43)
ns
N. 
492
 
R2
 
0.32
 
 
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Levels of significance: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. 
n.s.=Not significant. All models are controlled for age, gender and city of residence (Paris versus 
Strasbourg).

Measurement, analysis strategies and additional outcomes
255
Table A20  Multinomial logistic regression predicting education pathways, second-
generation Turks in Sweden (odds ratios)
Sweden
Straight 
academic 
route
Short 
academic 
route
Upward 
vocational 
route
39%
10%
16%
 
 
Ref.: Vocational route/Early school leaver
Parental educational 
levels
No/primary(1); 
Tertiary(5)
1.10*
n.s.
n.s.
(0.12)
 
Importance of father 
and mother 
Min (1); Max (5)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Parental support index
Min (1); Max (5)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
 
 
Importance of siblings 
Min (1); Max (5)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
 
 
Sibling support index
Min (1); Max (5)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Importance of peers 
Min (1); Max (5)
1.68**
n.s.
n.s.
(0.32)
 
Peer group diversity 
(best friends)
All Turkish origin (0); 
All native origin(1)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
 
No. of native peers in 
school
None (1); Most (5)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
 
 
Peers without a 
diploma
Yes (1); No(0)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
Importance of teachers
Min (1); Max (5)
n.s.
0.56*
n.s.
 
(0.16)
 
Teacher support index
Min (1); Max (5)
n.s.
n.s.
n.s.
N. 
251
 
R2
 
0.24
 
 
Source: TIES 2007-2008 
Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Levels of significance: * p<0.05, ** p<0.01, *** p<0.001. 
n.s.=Not significant. All models are controlled for age and gender.


	
Bibliography
Abadan-Unat, N. (1995), ‘Turkish migration to Europe’, in R. Cohen (ed.) The Cambridge survey 
of world migration, 279-284. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Abadan-Unat, N. (1976), ‘Turkish migration to Europe (1960-1976)’, in N. Abadan-Unat (ed.) 
Turkish workers in Europe 1960-1976, 1-44. Leiden: E.J. Brill.
Aden, H. (2004), ‘Frankreich’, in W. Gieler & D. Fricke (eds.), Handbuch europäischer Migration-
spolitiken. Die EU-Länder und die Beitrittskandidaten, 61-72. Münster: Lit Verlag.
Ahmad, F. (2003), Turkey: The quest for identity. Oxford, UK: Oneworld Publications.
Akgündüz, A. (2008), Labour migration from Turkey to Western Europe, 1960-1974: A multidisci-
plinary analysis. Aldershot/Burlington: Ashgate.
Alba, R. (2005), ‘Blurred vs. bright boundaries: Second generation assimilation and exclusion in 
France, Germany and the United States’, Ethnic and Racial Studies 28 (1): 20-49.
Alba, R., J. Handl & W. Müller (1994), ‘Ethnische Ungleichheiten im deutschen Bildungssystem’, 
Kölner Zeitschrift für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie 46 (2): 209-237.
Alba, R. & R. Silberman (2009), ‘The children of immigrants and host-society educational 
systems: Mexicans in the U.S. and North Africans in France’, Teachers College Record 111 
(6): 1444-1475.
Alba, R., J. Sloan & J. Sperling (2011), ‘The integration imperative: The children of low-status 
immigrants in the schools of wealthy societies’, Annual Review of Sociology 37: 395-415.
Allmendinger, J. (1989a), Career mobility dynamics: A comparative analysis of the United States, 
Norway, and West Germany. Berlin: Max-Planck-Institut für Bildungsforschung.
Allmendinger, J. (1989b), ‘Education systems and labour market outcomes’, European Sociological 
Review 5 (3): 231-250.
Allmendinger, J., C. Ebner & R. Nikolai (2007), ‘Soziale Beziehungen und Bildungserwerb’, in A. 
Franzen & M. Freitag (eds), Sozialkapital. Grundlagen und Anwendungen. Kölner Zeitschrift 
für Soziologie. Sonderheft 47, 487-513. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.
Andersson, R. (2007), ‘Ethnic residential segregation and integration processes in Sweden’, in 
K. Schönwälder (ed.) Residential segregation and the integration of immigrants: Britain, the 
Netherlands and Sweden, 61-90. Berlin: WZB Discussion Paper Nr.: SP IV 2007-602.
Arum, R., A. Gamoran & Y. Shavit (2007), ‘More inclusion than diversion: Expansion, differentia-
tion, and market structure in higher education’, in Y. Shavit, R. Arum & A. Gamoran (eds), 
Stratification in higher education: A comparative study, 1-38. Stanford: Stanford University 
Press.
Bacher, J. (2008), ‘Bildungsungleichheiten in Österreich: Basisdaten und Erklärungsansätze’, 
Erziehung & Unterricht 158: 529-542.
Bacher, J. (2003), ‘Soziale Ungleichheit und Bildungspartizipation im weiterführenden Schul-
system Österreichs’, Zeitschrift für Soziologie 28 (3): 3-32.
Bauböck, R. (1986), ‘Demographische und soziale Struktur der jugoslawischen und türkischen 
Wohnbevölkerung in Österreich’, in H. Wimmer (ed.) Ausländische Arbeitskräfte in Österreich, 
181-240. Vienna: Campus Verlag.
Bauböck, R. & B. Perchinig (2006), ‘Migrations- und Integrationspolitik’, in H. Dachs, P. Gerlich, 
H. Gottweis, H. Kramer, V. Lauber, W.C. Müller & E. Tálos (eds), Politik in Österreich: Das 
Handbuch, 726-743. Vienna: Manzsche Verlags Universitätsbuchhandlung.
Bayram, N., H. Nyquist, D. Thorburn & N. Bilgel (2009), ‘Turkish immigrants in Sweden: Are they 
integrated?’, International Migration Review 43 (1): 90-111.

258
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Baysu, G. & K. Phalet (2012), ‘Staying on or dropping out: The role of intergroup friendship and 
perceived teacher support in minority and nonminority school careers’, Teachers College 
Record 114 (5).
Beauchemin, C., C. Hamel & P. Simon (2010), ‘Trajectoires et origines: Enquete sur la diversité 
des populations en France. Premieres résultats’, Documents de travail (INSEE/INED) 168.
Beaud, S. & M. Pialoux (1999), Retour sur la condition ouvrière: Enquête aux usines Peugeot de 
Sochaux-Montbéliard. Paris: Fayard.
Ben-Akiva, M.E. & S.R. Lerman (1994), Discrete choice analysis: Theory and application to travel 
demand. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Benito, M. (2005), Active civic participation of immigrants in Sweden, Country report prepared 
for the European research project, POLITIS. Oldenburg: University of Oldenburg.
Bernitz, H. & H. Bernitz Lokranz (2006), ‘Sweden’, in R. Bauböck, E. Ersboll, K. Groenendijk & H. 
Waldrauch (eds), Acquisition and loss of nationality, volume 2: Country analyses: Policies and 
trends in 15 European countries, 517-550. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press – IMISCOE 
Research.
Blau, P.M. (1977a), Inequality and heterogeneity: A primitive theory of social structure. New York: 
Free Press New York.
Blau, P.M. (1977b), ‘A macrosociological theory of social structure’, American Journal of Sociology 
83 (1): 26-54.
Bloch, L.P. (2007), ‘Frankreich’, in K.J. Bade, P.C. Emmer, L. Lucassen & J. Oltmer (eds), En-
zyklopädie Migration in Europa: vom 17. Jahrhundert bis zur Gegenwart, 122-141. Paderborn: 
Ferdinand Schöningh.
Bourdieu, P. (1986), ‘The forms of capital’, in J.E. Richardson (ed.) Handbook of theory and research 
for the sociology of education, 241-258. Westport: Greenwood Press.
Bourdieu, P. (1983), ‘Ökonomisches Kapital, kulturelles Kapital, soziales Kapital’, in R. Kreckel 
(ed.) Soziale Ungleichheiten – soziale Welt. Sonderband 2. Göttingen: Schwarz & Co.
Bourdieu, P. & J.-C. Passeron (1979), Die Illusion der Chancengleichheit: Untersuchungen zur 
Soziologie des Bildungswesens am Beispiel Frankreichs. Stuttgart: Klett.
Brauns, H., S. Steinmann, A. Kieffer & C. Marry (1999), ‘Does education matter? France and 
Germany in comparative perspective’, European Sociological Review 15 (1): 61-88.
Breen, R. (2004a), ‘The comparative study of social mobility’, in R. Breen (ed.) Social mobility in 
Europe, 1-16. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Breen, R. (2004b), ‘Statistical methods of mobility research’, in R. Breen (ed.) Social mobility in 
Europe, 17-36. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Breen, R. & M. Buchmann (2002), ‘Institutional variation and the position of young people: A 
comparative perspective’, The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 
580 (1): 288-305.
Breen, R. & J.O. Jonsson (2005), ‘Inequality of opportunity in comparative perspective: Recent 
research on educational attainment and social mobility’, Annual Review of Sociology 31: 
223-243.
Breen, R. & J.O. Jonsson (2000), ‘Analyzing educational careers: A multinominal transition 
model’, American Sociological Review 65 (5): 754-772.
Brinbaum, Y. & H. Cebolla Boado (2007), ‘The school careers of ethnic minority youth in France. 
Success or disillusion?’, Ethnicities 7 (3): 445-474.
Brinbaum, Y. & A. Kieffer (2005), ‘D’une génération à l’autre, les aspirations éducatives des 
familles immigrées: Ambition et persévérance’, Éducation et Formations 72: 53-75.
Brinbaum, Y., L. Moguérou & J.-L. Primon (2010), ‘Parcours et expériences scolaires des jeunes 
descendants d’immigrés en France’, in C. Beauchemin, C. Hamel & P. Simon (eds), Documents 
de travail (168). Trajectoires et Origines: Premiers résultats Paris: INED/INSEE.

Bibliography
259
Bronfenbrenner, U. & P.A. Morris (1998), ‘The ecology of developmental processes’, in L.M. Lerner 
(ed.) Handbook of child psychology: Theoretical models of human development, 993-1028. New 
York: Wiley.
Brown, B.B. (1990), ‘Peer groups and peer cultures’, in S. Feldman & G.R. Elliot (eds) At the 
threshold: The developing adolescent, 171-196. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Brubaker, R. (1992), Citizenship and nationhood in France and Germany. Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press.
Campbell, B.A. (1980), ‘A theoretical approach to peer influence in adolescent socialization’, 
American Journal of Political Science 24 (2): 324-344.
Castles, S. & M.J. Miller (1993), The age of migration: International population movements in the 
modern world. London: Macmillan.
Cebolla Boado, H. (2007), ‘Immigrant concentration in schools: Peer pressures in place?’, 
European Sociological Review 23 (3): 341-356.
Coleman, J.S. (1988), ‘Social capital in the creation of human capital’, American Journal of Sociol-
ogy 94 (Supplement): S95-S120.
Coppedge, M. (1999), ‘Thickening thin concepts and theories: Combining large N and small in 
comparative politics’, Comparative Politics 31 (4): 465-476.
Crosnoe, R. (2001), ‘Academic orientation and parental involvement in education during high 
school’, Sociology of Education 74 (3): 210-230.
Crosnoe, R.,M. Johnson-Krikpatrick & G.H. Elder (2004), ‘Intergenerational bonding in school: 
The behavioral and contextual correlates of student-teacher relationships’, Sociology of 
Education 77 (1): 60-81.
Crul, M. (2000a), ‘Breaking the circle of disadvantage: Social mobility of second-generation 
Moroccans and Turks in the Netherlands’, in H. Vermeulen & J. Perlmann (eds), Immigrants, 
schooling and social mobility: Does culture make a difference?, 225-244. London/New York: 
Palgrave Macillan.
Crul, M. (2000b), De sleutel tot success: Over hulp, keuzes en kansen in de Schoolloopbanen van 
Turkse en Marokkaanse jongeren van de Tweede Generatie. Amsterdam: Het Spinhuis.
Crul, M. & L. Heering (2008), ‘Introduction’, in M. Crul & L. Heering (eds), The position of the 
Turkish and Moroccan second generation in Amsterdam and Rotterdam: The TIES study in the 
Netherlands, 19-25. IMISCOE Research. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Crul, M. & J. Holdaway (2009), ‘Children of immigrants in schools in New York and Amsterdam: 
The factors shaping attainment’, Teachers College Record 111 (6): 1476-1507.
Crul, M. & J. Schneider (2010), ‘Comparative context integration theory: Participation and 
belonging in new diverse European cities’, Ethnic and Racial Studies 34 (4): 1249-1268.
Crul, M. & J. Schneider (2009a), ‘The children of Turkish immigrants in Germany and the Neth-
erlands: The impact of differences in vocational and academic tracking systems’, Teachers 
College Record 111 (6): 1508-1527.
Crul, M. & J. Schneider (2009b), The second generation in Europe: Education and the transition to 
the labour market. TIES policy brief. Amsterdam/London: Open Society Institute.
Crul, M., J. Schneider & F. Lelie (2012), ‘Introduction to the international TIES project’, in M. Crul, 
J. Schneider & F. Lelie (eds), The European second generation compared: Does the integration 
context matter?, 11-18. IMISCOE Research. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Crul, M., P. Schnell, B. Herzog-Punzenberger, M. Wilmes, M. Slootman & R. Aparicio-Gomez 
(2012), ‘School careers of second-generation youth in Europe. Which education systems 
provide the best chances for success?’ in M. Crul, J. Schneider & F. Lelie (eds), The European 
second generation compared: Does the integration context matter?, 101-164. IMISCOE Research. 
Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.

260
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Crul, M. & H. Vermeulen (2006), ‘Immigration, education, and the Turkish second generation 
in five European nations: A comparative study’, in C.A. Parsons & T.M. Smeeding (eds), Im-
migration and the transformation of Europe, 235-248. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Crul, M. & H. Vermeulen (2003), ‘The second generation in Europe’, International Migration 
Review 37 (4): 965-986.
Crul, M., M. Zhou, J. Lee, P. Schnell & E. Keskiner (2012), ‘Success against all odds’, in M. Crul & 
J.H. Mollenkopf (eds), The changing face of world cities: Young adult children of immigrants 
in Europe and the United States, 65-96. New York: Russell Sage.
D’Addio, A.C. (2007) ‘Intergenerational transmission of disadvantage: Mobility or immobility 
across generations? A review of evidence for OECD Countries’, in OECD social, employment 
and migration working papers. Paris: OECD.
De Broucker, P. & K. Underwood (1998), ‘Mobilité intergénérationnelle du niveau de scolarité: 
Une comparaison internationale axée sur les études postsecondaires’, Revue trimestrielle 
de l’éducation 5 (2): 30-51.
De Heus, M. & J. Dronkers (2010), ‘The educational performance of children of immigrants in 16 
OECD countries. The influence of educational systems and other societal features of both 
countries of destination and origin’, ROA working papers.
De Tapia, S. (2009), ‘Permanences et mutations de l’immigration turque en France’, Hommes et 
migrations 1280: 8-19.
De Tapia, S. (2006), ‘Le Turcs expatriés en 2005-2006: Combien sont-ils? Où sont-ils? Les étrang-
ers en Turquie: Combien sont-ils? D’ou viennent-ils?’, Revue Européenne des Migrations 
Internationales 22 (3): 229-251.
Diefenbach, H. (2004a), ‘Bildungschancen und Bildungs (miss) erfolg von ausländischen 
Schülern oder Schülern aus Migrantenfamilien im system schulischer Bildung’, in R. Becker 
& W. Lauterbach (eds), Bildung als Privileg, 221-245. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwis-
senschaften.
Diefenbach, H. (2004b), Kinder und Jugendliche aus Migrantenfamilien im deutschen Bildungssys-
tem: Erklärungen und empirische Befunde. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.
Domina, T. (2005), ‘Leveling the home advantage: Assessing the effectiveness of parental involve-
ment in elementary school’, Sociology of Education 78 (3): 233-249.
Dornbusch, S.M. (1989), ‘The sociology of adolescence’, Annual Review of Sociology 15: 233-259.
Dornbusch, S.M., P.L. Ritter, P.H. Leiderman, D.F. Roberts & M.J. Fraleigh (1987), ‘The relation 
of parenting style to adolescent school performance’, Child Development 58 (5): 1244-1257.
Downey, D.B. (2001), ‘Number of siblings and intellectual development: The resource dilution 
explanation’, American Psychologist 56 (6-7): 497-504.
Downey, D.B. (1995), ‘When bigger is not better: Family size, parental resources, and children’s 
educational performance’, American Sociological Review 60 (5): 746-761.
DuMouchel, W.H. & G.T. Duncan (1983), ‘Using sample survey weights in multiple regression 
analysis of stratified samples’,  Journal of the American Statistical Association 78 (383): 535-543.
Duncan, G.J., J. Boisjoly & K.M. Harris (2001), ‘Sibling, peer, neighbor, and schoolmate correlations 
as indicators of the importance of context for adolescent development’, Demography 38 (3): 
437-447.
Duru-Bellat, M. & A. Kieffer (2008), ‘Du baccalauréat à l’enseignement supérieur en France: 
déplacement et recomposition des inégalités’, Population 63 (1): 123-157.
Duru-Bellat, M. & A. Kieffer (2001), ‘The democratization of education in France: controversy 
over a topical issue’, Population 13 (2): 189-218.
Duru-Bellat, M., A. Kieffer & I. Fournier-Maerelli (1997), ‘Le diplôme, l’âge et le niveau: sens et 
usages das les comparaisons de système éducatifs’, Sociétés Contemporaines 26 (26): 45-72.

Bibliography
261
Dustmann, C., T. Frattini & G. Lanzara (2012), ‘Educational achievement of second generation 
immigrants: An international comparison’, Economic Policy 27 (69): 143-185.
EFFNATIS (2003) ‘Effectiveness of national integration strategies towards second generation 
migrant youth in a comparative European perspective – EFFNATIS’. Bamberg, Germany: 
European Forum for Migration Studies.
Esser, H. (2006), Migration, Sprache und Integration. AKI-Forschungsbilanz 4. Berlin: Arbeitsstelle 
interkulturelle Konflikte und gesellschaftliche Integration (AKI). Wissenschaftszentrum 
Berlin für Sozialforschung (WZB).
Esser, H. (2001), ‘Kulturelle Pluralisierung und strukturelle Assimilation: das Problem der 
ethnischen Schichtung’, Swiss Political Science Review 7(2): 95-130.
Esser, H. (1990), ‘Familienmigration und Schulkarriere ausländischer Kinder und Jugendlicher’, 
in H. Esser & J. Friedrichs (eds), Generation und Identität 97, 127-146. Opladen, Germany: 
Westdeutscher Verlag.
European Commission (2002), Key data on education in Europe. Brussels: Eurostat.
European Commission (2006a), The education system in Austria. Brussels: Eurostat.
European Commission (2006b), The education system in France. Brussels: Eurostat.
European Commission (2006c), The education system in Sweden. Brussels: Eurostat.
Eurostat (2010), ‘Education’, in Eurostat (ed.) Europe in figures: Eurostat yearbook 2010, 243-277. 
Brussels: Eurostat.
Faas, C., M.J. Benson & C.E. Kaestle (2013), ‘Parent resources during adolescence: Effects on 
education and careers in young adulthood’, Journal of Youth Studies 16 (2): 151-171.
Faist, T. (1995), Social citizenship for whom? Young Turks in Germany and Mexican-Americans in 
the United States. Aldershot: Avebury.
Fassmann, H. (2009), ‘European migration: Historical overview and statistical problems’, in H. 
Fassann, U. Reeger & W. Sievers (eds), Statistics and reality. Concepts and measurements of 
migration in Europe, 21-43. IMISCOE Research. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Fassmann, H. (2002), Räumliche Disparitäten im österreichischen Schulsystem. Vienna: Ge-
schäftsstelle der Österreichischen Raumordnungskonferenz (ÖROK).
Fassmann, H. & R. Münz (1996), Migration in Europa: Historische Entwicklung, aktuelle Trends 
und politische Reaktionen. Frankfurt am Main: Campus Verlag.
Feliciano, C. (2005a), ‘Does selective migration matter? Explaining ethnic disparities in edu-
cational attainment among immigrants’ children’, International Migration Review 39 (4): 
841-871.
Feliciano, C. (2005b), Unequal origins: Immigrant selection and the education of the second 
generation. New York: Lfb Scholarly Publishing.
Fleischmann, F. (2011), Second-generation Muslims in European societies: Comparative perspec-
tives on education and religion. Leuven: Catholic University of Leuven; Utrecht: Utrecht 
University.
Fuller, C.H. (1974), ‘Weighting to adjust for survey nonresponse’, The Public Opinion Quarterly 
38 (2): 239-246.
Gándara, P., S. O’Hara & D. Gutiérrez (2004), ‘The changing shape of aspirations: Peer influence 
on achievement behavior’, in M.A. Gibson, P. Gándara & J.P. Koyama (eds), School connections: 
U.S. Mexican youth, peers, and school achievement, 39-62. New York: Teachers College Press.
Ganzeboom, H.B.G. & D.J. Treiman (1996), ‘Internationally comparable measures of occupational 
status for the international standard classification of occupations’, Social Science Research 
25 (3): 201-239.

262
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Gelman, A. (2007a), ‘Rejoinder: Struggles with survey weighting and regression modeling’, 
Statistical Science 22 (2): 184-188.
Gelman, A. (2007b), ‘Struggles with survey weighting and regression modeling’, Statistical 
Science 22 (2): 153-164.
Gerring, J. (2008), ‘Case-selection for case study analysis: Qualitative and quantitative tech-
niques’, in J.M. Box-Steffensmeier, H.E. Brady & D. Collier (eds), Oxford Handbook on Political 
Methodology, 645-684. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gerring, J. (2007), Case study research: Principles and practices. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Gibson, M.A., P. Gándara & J.P. Koyama (2004), ‘The role of peers in the schooling of U.S. Mexican 
youth’, in M.A. Gibson, P. Gándara & J.P. Koyama (eds), School connections: U.S. Mexican youth, 
peers, and school achievement, 1-17. New York: Teachers College Press.
Goldscheider, C., E. Bernhardt & F. Goldscheider (2008), ‘What integrates the second generation? 
Factors affecting family transitions to adulthood in Sweden’, in C. Bonifazi, M. Okólski, J.E. 
Schoorl & P. Simon (eds), International migration in Europe. New trends and new methods of 
analysis, 225-246. IMISCOE Research. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Greenfield, L. (1998), ‘Is nation unavoidable? Is nation unavoidable today?’, in H.P. Kriesi (ed.) 
Nations and national identity, 37-54. Zurich/Chur: Rüegger Verlag.
Groenewold, G. & R. Bilsborrow (2008), ‘Design of samples for international migration surveys: 
methodological considerations and lessons learned from a multi-country study in Africa and 
Europe’, in Bonifazi C., M. Okólski, J.E. Schoorl & P. Simon (eds), International migration in 
Europe; new trends and new methods of analysis, 293-312. IMISCOE Research. Amsterdam: 
Amsterdam University Press.
Groenewold, G. & L. Lessard-Phillips (2012), ‘Research methodology’, in M. Crul, J. Schneider & 
F. Lelie (eds), The European second generation compared: Does the integration context matter?, 
39-58. IMISCOE Research. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Groves, R.M. & M.P. Couper (1998), Nonresponse in household interview surveys. New York: Wiley.
Gümüsoglu, T., M. Batur, H. Kalayci & Z. Baraz (2009), Türkische Migranten in Österreich. Eine 
Querschnittsstudie der Türkischen Migrantengemeinschaft zwischen transnationaler Struktur 
und Integration. Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.
Halldén, K. (2008), ‘The Swedish educational system: classifying education using the ISCED-97’, 
in S.L. Schneider (ed.) The international standard classification of education (ISCED 1997). 
An evaluation of content and criterion validity for 15 European countries. Mannheim: MZES.
Haller, W., A. Portes & S.M. Lynch (2011), ‘Dreams fulfilled, dreams shattered: Determinants of 
segmented assimilation in the second generation’, Social Forces 89 (3): 733-762.
Hallinan, M.T. & R.A. Williams (1990), ‘Students’ characteristics and the peer-influence process’, 
Sociology of Education 63 (2): 122-132.
Hamel, C. (2007), ‘L’enquete européene TIES: The integration of the European second generation 
– Méthode d’échantillonnage: patronymes et screening téléphonique’, in E. Cédiey (ed.) La 
mesure des descriminations liées à “l’origine” Lyon: ISM CORUM.
Hammar, T. (2004), ‘Research and politics in Swedish immigration management 1965-1984’, in 
M. Jandl & I. Stacher (eds), Towards a multilateral migration regime: Special anniversary 
edition dedicated to Jonas Widgren, 11-34. Vienna: ICMPD.
Hannan, D.F., E. Smyth & S. McCoy (1999a), ‘A comparative analysis of transitions from education 
to work in Europe (CATEWE). Volume One: A conceptual framework’, ESRI Working Paper 
118: 1-63.
Hannan, D.F., E. Smyth & S. McCoy (1999b), ‘A comparative analysis of transitions from education 
to work in Europe (CATEWE). Volume Two: Country Reports’, ESRI Working Paper 118: 1-203.

Bibliography
263
Hanushek, E.A. (2006), ‘Does educational tracking affect performance and inequality? 
Differences-in-differences evidence across countries’, The Economic Journal 116 (510): 
C63-C76.
Harzig, C. (2004), Einwanderung und Politik: Historische Erinnerungen und Politische Kultur 
als Gestaltungsressourcen in den Niederlanden, Schweden und Kanada. Göttingen: V&R 
Unipress.
Heath, A.F. & Y. Brinbaum (2007), ‘Explaining ethnic inequalities in educational attainment’, 
Ethnicities 7 (3): 291-305.
Heath, A.F., C. Rothon & E. Kilpi (2008), ‘The second generation in Western Europe: Education, 
unemployment, and occupational attainment’, Annual Review of Sociology 34: 211-235.
Hecker, P. (2006), ‘Country profile No. 5: Turkey’, Focus Migration, 1-9. Hamburg, Germany: 
HWWI.
Herzog-Punzenberger, B. (2007), ‘Angeworben – hier geblieben – aufgestiegen? Intergeneration-
ale soziale Mobilität von EinwanderInnen in Österreich’. Vienna: Jubiläumsfonds der Stadt 
Wien für die Österreichische Akademie der Wissenschaften.
Herzog-Punzenberger, B. (2006), ‘Dazugehören am Beispiel der zweiten Generation in Öster-
reich’, in A. Weiss (ed.) Zu wahr, um schön zu sein, 241-256. Innsbruck: StudienVerlag.
Herzog-Punzenberger, B. (2003a), ‘Die “2. Generation” an zweiter Stelle? Soziale Mobilität 
und ethnische Segmentation in Österreich – eine Bestandsaufnahme’. Vienna: Wiener 
Integrationsfond.
Herzog-Punzenberger, B. (2003b), ‘Ethnic segmentation in school and labour market: 40 year 
legacy of Austrian guest worker policy’, International Migration Review 37 (4): 1120-1144.
Herzog-Punzenberger, B. & A. Unterwurzacher (2009), ‘Migration-Interkulturalität-Mehr-
sprachigkeit. Erste Befunde für das österreichische Bildungswesen’, in W. Specht (ed.) 
Nationaler Bildungsbericht Österreich 2009. Band 2. Fokussierte Analysen bildungspolitischer 
Schwerpunktthemen, 161-182. Graz: Leykam.
Herzog-Punzenberger, B., R. Fibbi, C. Vera-Laruccea, L. DeSipio & J.H. Mollenkopf (2012), 
‘Citizenship and Participation’, in M. Crul & J.H. Mollenkopf (eds), The changing face of 
world cities: Young adult children of immigrants in Europe and the United States, 183-205. 
New York: Russell Sage.
Horvat, E.M., E.B. Weininger & A. Lareau (2003), ‘From social ties to social capital: Class differ-
ences in the relations between schools and parent networks’, American Educational Research 
Journal 40 (2): 319-351.
Irtis-Dabbagh, V. (2003), ‘Jeunesse originaire de Turquie en France: revue de la question à travers 
le processus de socialisation’, Migrations Santé 114 (1): 22-36.
Jawhari, R. (2000), Wegen Überfremdung abgelehnt: Ausländerintegration und symbolische 
Politik. Vienna: Braunmüller Verlag.
Jonsson, J.O. & F. Rudolphi (2011), ‘Weak performance – strong determination: School achieve-
ment and educational choice among children of immigrants in Sweden’, European Sociologi-
cal Review 27 (4): 487-508.
Jonsson, J.O. & F. Rudolphi (2008), ‘Ethnic minorities’ education in Sweden: Advantages and 
disadvantages’, paper presented the RC28 conference, Work Poverty and Inequality in the 
21st Century, Stanford University, 8 August 2008.
Joppke, C. (1999), Immigration and the nation state: The United States, Germany and Great Britain. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Juul, S. (2008), An introduction to stata for health researchers. College Station: Stata Press.

264
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Kalter, F. (2008), ‘Einleitung. Stand, Herausforderungen und Perspektiven der empirischen Migra-
tionsforschung’, in F. Kalter (ed.) Migration und Integration: Sonderheft der Kölner Zeitschrift 
für Soziologie und Sozialpsychologie 48, 11-35. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.
Kalter, F., N. Granato & C. Kristen (2007), ‘Disentangling recent trends of the second generation’s 
structural assimilation in Germany’, in S. Scherer, R. Pollak, G. Otte & M. Gangl (eds), From 
origin to destination, 215-242. Frankfurt am Main/New York: Campus Verlag.
Kalton, G. (1983), Introduction to survey sampling. Newbury Park/London: Sage Publications.
Kao, G. (2004), ‘Parental influences on the educational outcomes of immigrant youth’, Interna-
tional Migration Review 38 (2): 427-449.
Kao, G. (2001), ‘Race and ethnic differences in peer influences on educational achievement’, in 
D. Massey & E. Anderson (eds), The problem of the century: Racial stratification in the U.S. at 
the millenium, 437-460. New York: Russell Sage.
Kao, G. (1995), ‘Asian Americans as model minorities? A look at their academic performance’, 
American Journal of Education 103 (2): 121-159.
Kao, G. & K. Joyner (2004), ‘Do race and ethnicity matter among friends?’, The Sociological 
Quarterly 45 (3): 557-573.
Kao, G. & L.T. Rutherford (2007), ‘Does social capital still matter? Immigrant minority disadvan-
tages in school-specific social capital and its effect on academic achievement’, Sociological 
Perspectives 50 (1): 27-52.
Kao, G. & J.S. Thompson (2003), ‘Racial and ethnic stratification in educational achievement 
and attainment’, Annual Review of Sociology 29: 417-442.
Kao, G. & M. Tienda (1995), ‘Optimism and achievement: The educational performance of 
immigrant youth’, Social Sience Quarterly 76 (1): 1-19.
Karakasoglu, Y. (2007), ‘Türkische Arbeitswanderer in West-, Mittel- und Nordeuropa seit Mitte 
der 1950er Jahre’, in K.J. Bade, P.C. Emmer, L. Lucassen & J. Oltmer (eds), Enzyklopädie Migration 
in Europa: vom 17. Jahrhundert bis zur Gegenwart, 1054-1061. Paderborn: Ferdinand Schöningh.
Karlson, K., A. Holm & R. Breen (2012), ‘Comparing regression coefficients between same-sample 
nested models using logit and probit. A New Method’, Sociological methodology 42 (1): 286-313.
Kasinitz, P., J.H. Mollenkopf, M.C. Waters & J. Holdaway (2008), Inheriting the city: The children 
of immigrants come of age. New York: Russell Sage.
Kastoryano, R. (1986), Etre Turc en France: Réflexions sur familles et communautés. Paris: 
L’Harmattan.
Kastoryano, R. (1990), ‘Immigrés and gastarbeiter’, The European Journal of International Affairs 
19 (4): 74-94.
Keefe, S.E., A.M. Padilla & M.L. Carlos (1979), ‘The Mexican-American extended family as an 
emotional support system’, Human Organization 38 (2): 144-152.
Keith, T.Z., P.B. Keith, K.J. Quirk, J. Sperduto, S. Santillo & S. Killings (1998), ‘Longitudinal effects 
of parent involvement on high school grades: Similarities and differences across gender and 
ethnic groups’, Journal of School Psychology 36 (3): 335-363.
Kerckhoff, A.C. (2001), ‘Education and social stratification processes in comparative perspective’, 
Sociology of Education 7 (Extra Issue): 3-18.
Kieffer, A. (2008), ‘Applying the ISCED 97 to France: some issues and propositions’, in S.L. 
Schneider (ed.) The international standard classification of education (ISCED 1997). An evalu-
ation of content and criterion validity for 15 European countries, 103-124. Mannheim: MZES.
Kim, E. (2002), ‘The relationship between parental involvement and children’s educational 
achievement in the Korean immigrant family’, Journal of Comparative Family Studies 33 
(4): 529-540.
King, G. & L. Zeng (2001a), ‘Explaining rare events in international relations’, International 
Organizations 55 (3): 693-715.

Bibliography
265
King, G. & L. Zeng (2001b), ‘Logistic regression in rare events data’, Political Analysis 9 (2): 137-163.
Kirszbaum, T., Y. Brinbaum & P. Simon (2009), The children of immigrants in France: The 
emergence of a second generation, Innocenti working paper no. 2009-13. Florence: UNICEF 
Innocenti Research Centre.
Kjeldstadli, K. (2007), ‘Nordeuropa: Dänemark, Norwegen, Schweden und Finnland’, in K.J. 
Bade, P.C. Emmer, L. Lucassen & J. Oltmer (eds), Enzyklopädie Migration in Europa: Vom 17. 
Jahrhundert bis zur Gegenwart, 54-67. Paderborn: Ferdinand Schöningh.
Kleger, H. & G. D’Amato (1995), ‘Staatsbürgerschaft und Einbürgerung-Oder: Wer ist ein 
Bürger? Ein Vergleich zwischen Deutschland, Frankreich und der Schweiz’, Journal für 
Sozialforschung 35 (3/4): 259-281.
Koopmans, R. (2010), ‘Trade-offs between equality and difference: Immigrant integration, 
multiculturalism and the welfare state in cross-national perspective’, Journal of Ethnic and 
Migration Studies 36 (1): 1-26.
Korn, E.L. & B.I. Graubard (1995), ‘Examples of differing weighted and unweighted estimates 
from a sample survey’, The American Statistician 49 (3): 291-295.
Kraler, A. (2011), ‘The case of Austria’, in G. Zincone, R. Penninx & M. Borkert (eds), Migration 
policy making in Europe: The dynamics of actors and contexts in past and present, 21-60. 
IMISCOE Research. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Kraler, A. & D. Reichel (2010), ‘Quantitative data in the area of migration, integration and 
discrimination in Europe: An overview’, PROMINSTAT Working paper no. 1.
Kraler, A. & K. Sohler (2005), Active civic participation of immigrants in Austria: A country report 
prepared for the European research project POLITIS. Oldenburg: University of Oldenburg.
Kristen, C. (2005), School choice and ethnic school segregation: Primary school selection in 
Germany. Münster/New York: Waxmann.
Kristen, C. & N. Granato (2004), ‘Bildungsinvestitionen in Migrantenfamilien’, in K.J. Bade & M. 
Bommes (eds), Migration-Integration-Bildung: Grundfragen und Problembereiche, 123-142. 
Osnabruck: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht – IMIS.
Lareau, A. & E.M. Horvat (1999), ‘Moments of social inclusion and exclusion. Race, class, and 
cultural capital in family-school relationships’, Sociology of Education 72 (1): 37-53.
Lauglo, J. (2000), ‘Social capital trumping class and cultural capital? Engagement with school 
among immigrant youth’, in S. Baron, J. Field & T. Schuller (eds), Social capital: Critical 
perspectives, 142-167. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lebon, A. (1979), ‘L’aide au retour des travailleurs étrangers’, Economie et Statistique 113: 37-46.
Lee, E.S., R.N. Forthofer & R.J. Lorimor (1989), Analyzing complex survey data (Series: Quantitative 
Applications in the Social Sciences). Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications.
Lessard-Phillips, L. & C. Ross (2012), ‘The TIES respondents and their parents: Background 
socio-demographic characteristics’, in M. Crul, J. Schneider & F. Lelie (eds), The European 
second generation compared: Does the integration context matter?, 59-100. IMISCOE Research. 
Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Levels, M. & J. Dronkers (2008), ‘Educational performance of native and immigrant children 
from various countries of origin’, Ethnic and Racial Studies 31 (8): 1404-1425.
Levels, M., J. Dronkers & G. Kraaykamp (2008), ‘Immigrant children’s educational achieve-
ment in Western countries: Origin, destination, and community effects on mathematical 
performance’, American Sociological Review 73 (5): 835-853.
Lhommeau, B. & P. Simon (2010), ‘Les populations enquêtées’, in C. Beauchemin, C. Hamel & 
P. Simon (eds), Trajectoires et origines. Enquête sur la diversité des populations en France. 
Premieres résultats. Documents de travail, 11-18. Paris: INED/INSEE.

266
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Lieberson, S. (1991), ‘Small N’s and big conclusions: An examination of the reasoning in compara-
tive studies based on a small number of cases’, Social Forces 70 (2): 307-320.
Long, S.J. & J. Freese (2006), Regression models for categorical dependent variables using Stata. 
College Station: Stata Press.
Loury, G.C. (2005), ‘Intergenerational mobility and racial inequality in education and earnings’, 
in G.C. Loury, T. Modood & S.M. Teles (eds), Ethnicity, Social mobility, and public policy: 
Comparing the US and UK, 160-177. New York: Cambridge University Press.
Lucas, S.R. (2001), ‘Effectively maintained inequality: Education transitions, track mobility, and 
social background effects’, American Journal of Sociology 106 (6): 1642-1690.
Lundberg, I. & I. Svanberg (1991), ‘Turkish voluntary associations in Stockholm’, Migration 10: 
35-73.
Lundström, S. (1991), ‘Bilateral municipal cooperation on migrants: Return ticket Kulu-
Stockholm’, International Migration 29 (1): 119-123.
Marks, G.N. (2005), ‘Accounting for immigrant non-immigrant differences in reading and 
mathematics in twenty countries’, Ethnic and Racial Studies 28 (5): 925-946.
Matuschek, H. (1985), ‘Ausländerpolitik in Österreich. 1962-1985: Der Kampf um und gegen die 
ausländische Arbeitskraft’, Journal für Sozialforschung 25 (2).
Mayer, K.U. & N. Brandon Tuma (1987), Applications of event history analysis in life course research. 
Berlin: Max Planck Institut für Bildungsforschung.
Mayer, K.U. & E. Brückner (1989), Lebensverläufe und Wohlfahrtsentwicklung: Konzeption, Design 
und Methodik der Erhebung von Lebensverläufen der Geburtsjahrgänge 1929-1931, 1939-1941, 
1949-1951. Berlin: Max-Planck-Institut für Bildungsforschung.
McNeal, R.N. (1999), ‘Parental involvement as social capital: Differential effectiveness on science 
achievement, truancy, and dropping out’, Social Forces 78 (1): 117-144.
Melby, J.N., R.D. Conger, S.-A. Fang, K. Wickrama & K.J. Conger (2008), ‘Adolescent family experi-
ences and educational attainment during early adulthood’, Developmental Psychology 44 
(6): 1519-1536.
Merle, P. (2002), ‘Démocratisation ou accroissement des inégalités scolaires? L’exemple de 
l’évolution de la durée des études en France (1988-1998)’, Population 57 (4-5): 633-660.
Milewski, N. & C. Hamel (2010), ‘Union formation and partner choice in a transnational context: 
The Case of descendants of Turkish immigrants in France’, International Migration Review 
44 (3): 615-658.
Mood, C. (2010), ‘Logistic regression: Why we cannot do what we think we can do, and what we 
can do about it’, European Sociological Review 26 (1): 67-82.
Morgan, S.L. & A.B. Sørensen (1999), ‘Parental networks, social closure, and mathematics learn-
ing: A test of Coleman’s social capital explanation of school effects’, American Sociological 
Review 64 (5): 661-681.
Müller, W. & Y. Shavit (1998), ‘Introduction’, in Y. Shavit & W. Müller (eds), From school to work: A 
comparative study of educational qualifications and occupational destinations, 3-48. Oxford, 
UK: Clarendon Press.
Münz, R., P. Zuser & J. Kytir (2003), ‘Grenzüberschreitende Wanderungen und ausländis-
che Wohnbevölkerung: Struktur und Entwicklung’, in H. Fassmann & I. Stacher (eds), 
Österreichischer Migrations- und Integrationsbericht: Demographische Entwicklungen 
– sozioökonomische Strukturen – rechtliche Rahmenbedingungen, 21-86. Klagenfurt: Drava 
Verlag.
Muradoglu, D. & G. Ongan (2004), ‘1994. Herkunft und Rückkehr’, in H. Gürses (ed.) Gastarbajteri: 
40 Jahre Zuwanderung, 143-146. Vienna: Mandelbaum Verlag.

Bibliography
267
Murdie, R.A. & L.-E. Borgegard (1998), ‘Immigration, spatial segregation and housing segmenta-
tion of immigrants in metropolitan Stockholm, 1960-95’, Urban Studies 35 (10): 1869-1888.
Musterd, S. (2005), ‘Social and ethnic segregation in Europe: Levels, causes and effects’, Journal 
of Urban Affairs 27 (3): 331-348.
Muus, P. (2003), ‘An international comparison of migration and immigrant policy with respect 
to immigrants from Turkey and their participation in the labour market’, in L. Hagendorn, 
J. Veenman & W. Vollenberg (eds), Integrating immigrants in the Netherlands: Cultural vs. 
socio-economic integration, 17-40. Aldershot/Burlington: Ashgate.
Nauck, B. (2011a), Familiale Determinanten des Bildungserfolgs von Kindern und Jugendlichen mit 
Migrationshintergrund: Expertise für die Arbeitsgruppe “Bedingungen erfolgreicher Integra-
tion” der Deutschen Akademie der Naturforscher Leopoldina. Halle: Deutsche Akademie der 
Naturforscher Leopoldina.
Nauck, B. (2011b), ‘Kulturelles und soziales Kapital als Determinante des Bildungserfolgs bei Mi-
granten?’, in R. Becker (ed.) Integration durch Bildung: Bildungserwerb von jungen Migranten 
in Deutschland, 71-93. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.
Nauck, B. (1997), ‘Sozialer Wandel, Migration und Familienbildung bei türkischen Frauen’, 
in B. Nauck & U. Schönpflug (eds), Familien in verschiedenen Kulturen, 162-199. Stuttgart, 
Germany: Enke Verlag.
Nauck, B. & A. Kohlmann (1998), ‘Verwandtschaft als soziales Kapital – Netzwerkbeziehungen 
in türkischen Migrantenfamilien – Netzwerkbeziehungen in türkischen Migrantenfamilien’, 
in M. Wagner & Y. Schütze (eds) Verwandtschaft: Sozialwissenschaftliche Beiträge zu einem 
vernachlässigten Thema, 203-235. Stuttgart: Enke Verlag.
Nowotny, I. (2007), ‘Das Ausländerbeschäftigungsgesetz: Die Regelung des Zugangs von Aus-
länderInnen zum Österreichischen Arbeitsmarkt’, in H. Fassmann (ed.) 2. Österreichischer 
Migrations- und Integrationsbericht 2001-2006: Rechtliche Rahmenbedingungen, demographis-
che Entwicklungen, sozioökonomische Strukturen, 47-74. Klagenfurt: Drava Verlag.
OECD (2005), School factors related to quality and equity: Results from PISA. Paris: OECD.
Ogbu, J.U. (1997), ‘Racial stratification and education in the United States: Why inequality 
persists’, in A.H. Halsey, H. Lauder, P. Brown & A. Stuart Wells (eds), Education: Culture, 
economy, society, 765-778. New York: Oxford University Press.
Ogden, P.E. (1995), ‘Labour migration to France’, in R. Cohen (ed.) The Cambridge survey of world 
migration, 289-296. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Ogden, P.E. (1991), ‘Immigration to France since 1945: Myth and reality’, Ethnic and Racial 
Studies 14 (3): 294-318.
Parnreiter, C. (1994), Migration und Arbeitsteilung: AusländerInnenbeschäftigung in der 
Weltwirtschaftskrise. Vienna: Promedia.
Pásztor, A. (2010), ‘Go, go on and go higher an’ higher. Second-generation Turks’ understanding 
of the role of education and their struggle through the Dutch school system’, British Journal 
of Sociology of Education 31 (1): 59-70.
Penninx, R. (2003), ‘Integration: The role of communities, institutions, and the state’, in Migration 
Policy Institute (ed.) Migration fundamentals. Washington DC: MPI.
Perchinig, B. & K. König (2003), Austria. Brussels: Migration Policy Group.
Perlmann, J. (1988), Ethnic difference: Schooling and social structure among the Irish, Italians, Jews, 
and Blacks in an American city, 1880-1935. Cambridge/New York: Cambridge University Press.
Pfeffermann, D. (1993), ‘The role of sampling weights when modeling survey data’, International 
Statistical Review 61 (2): 317-337.

268
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Phalet, K., P. Deboosere & V. Bastiaenssen (2007), ‘Old and new inequalities in educational 
attainment. Ethnic minorities in the Belgian Census 1991-2001’, Ethnicities 7 (3): 390-415.
Pike, G.R. (2008), ‘Using weighting adjustments to compensate for survey nonresponse’, Research 
in Higher Education 49 (2): 153-171.
Portes, A. (1998), ‘Social capital: Its origins and applications in modern sociology’, Annual Review 
of Sociology 24: 1-24.
Portes, A. & R.G. Rumbaut (2001), Legacies: The story of the immigrant second generation. New 
York: Russell Sage.
Portes, A. & R.G. Rumbaut (1996), Immigrant America: A portrait. Berkeley: University of 
California Press.
Platt, L. (2005), ‘The intergenerational social mobility of minority ethnic groups’, Sociology 39 
(3): 445-461.
Raley, J.D. (2004), ‘Like family, you know? School and the achievement of peer relations’, in M.A. 
Gibson, P. Gándara & J.P. Koyama (eds), School connections: U.S. Mexican youth, peers, and 
school achievement, 150-173. New York: Teachers College Press.
Ream, R. & R.W. Rumberger (2008), ‘Student engagement, peer social capital, and school dropout 
among Mexican American and non-Latino white students’, Sociology of Education 81 (2): 
109-139.
Reitz, J.G. (2002), ‘Host societies and the reception of immigrants: Research themes, emerging 
theories and methodological issues’, International Migration Review 36 (4): 1005-1019.
Reitz, J.G. (1998), Warmth of the welcome: The social causes of economic success for immigrants 
in different nations and cities. Boulder: Westview Press.
Reitz, J.G. & K. Somerville (2004), ‘Institutional change and emerging cohorts of the “new” 
immigrant second generation: Implications for the integration of racial minorities in Canada’, 
Journal of International Migration and Integration 5 (4): 385-415.
Rothon, C., A.F. Heath & L. Lessard-Phillips (2009), ‘The educational attainments of the “second 
generation”: A comparative study of Britain, Canada, and the United States’, Teachers College 
Record 111 (6): 1404-1443.
Rumbaut, R.G. (2008), ‘The coming of the second generation: Immigration and ethnic mobility 
in southern California’, The Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science 
620 (1): 196-236.
Rumbaut, R.G. (2004), ‘Ages, life stages, and generational cohorts: Decomposing the immigrant 
first and second generations in the United States’, International Migration Review 38 (3): 
1160-1205.
Rumbaut, R.G. (1999), ‘Assimilation and its discontents: Ironies and paradoxes’, in C. Hirschmann, 
P. Kasinitz & J. De Wind (eds), The handbook of international migration: The American experi-
ence, 172-195. New York: Russell Sage.
Schlögl, P. & N. Lachmayr (2004), Motive und Hintergründe von Bildungswegentscheidungen in 
Österreichen: Eine repräsentative Querschnittserhebung. Vienna: ÖIBF.
Schneeweis, N. & R. Winter-Ebmer (2007), ‘Peer effects in Austrian schools’, Empirical Economics 
32 (2-3): 387-409.
Schneider, J. & M. Crul (2012), ‘Comparative integration context theory: Participation and 
belonging in new diverse European cities’, in M. Crul, J. Schneider & F. Lelie (eds), The Euro-
pean second generation compared: Does the integration context matter?, 19-37. Amsterdam: 
Amsterdam University Press – IMISCOE Report.
Seawright, J. & J. Gerring (2008), ‘Case selection techniques in case study research: A menu of 
qualitative and quantitative options’, Political Research Quarterly 61 (2): 294-308.

Bibliography
269
Seifert, W. (1997), ‘Admission policy, patterns of migration and integration: The German and 
the French case compared’, New Community 23 (4): 441-460.
Shavit, Y. & W. Müller (eds) (1998), From school to work: A comparative study of educational 
qualifications and occupational destinations. Oxford: Calrendon Press.
Shavit, Y., M. Yaish & E. Bar-Haim (2007), ‘The persistence of persistent inequality’, in S. Scherer, 
R. Pollak, G. Otte & M. Gangl (eds), From origin to destination, 37-57. Frankfurt/New York: 
Campus Verlag.
Silberman, R. & I. Fournier (2007), ‘Is French society truly assimilative? Immigrant parents and 
their offspring on the French labour market’, in A.F. Heath, S.Y. Cheung & S.N. Smith (eds), 
Unequal chances: Ethnic minorities in western labour markets, 221-269. Oxford/New York: 
Oxford University Press.
Simon, P. (2007), ‘La question de la seconde génération en France: Mobilité sociale et discrimina-
tion’, in M. Potvin, N. Venel & P. Eid (eds), La deuxième génération issue de l’immigration: une 
comparaison France-Québec, 39-70. Montreal: Athéna éditions.
Stadtler, H. (1990), ‘Die Linzer Wirtschaft in der ersten Hälfte des 20. Jahrhunderts’, in G.F. 
Wirtschaftsdokumentation (ed.) Linzer Wirtschaftschronik, 155-182. Linz: Verlag GFW.
Stanton-Salazar, R.D. (2011), ‘A social capital framework for the study of institutional agents 
and their role in the empowerment of low-status students and youth’, Youth & Society 43 
(3): 1066-1109.
Stanton-Salazar, R.D. (2004), ‘Social capital among working-class minority students’, in M.A. 
Gibson, P. Gándara & J.P. Koyama (eds), School connections: U.S. Mexican youth, peers, and 
school achievement, 18-38. New York: Teachers College Press.
Stanton-Salazar, R.D. (2001), Manufacturing hope and despair: The school and kin support 
networks of U.S.-Mexican youth. New York: Teachers College Press.
Stanton-Salazar, R.D. (1997), ‘A social capital framework for understanding the socialization of 
racial minority children and youths’, Harvard Educational Review 67 (1): 1-40.
Statistik Österreich (2010), Bevölkerung in Privathaushalten nach Migrationshintergrund. Vienna: 
Statistik Österreich.
Stocké, V. (2007), ‘Explaining educational decision and effects of families’ social class position: 
An empirical test of the Breen-Goldthorpe model of educational attainment’, European 
Sociological Review 23 (4): 505-519.
Suárez Orozco, M.M. (1991), ‘Migration, minority status, and education: European dilemmas and 
responses in the 1990s’, Anthropology & Education Quarterly 22 (2): 99-120.
Sun, Y. (1998), ‘The academic success of East-Asian-American students: An investment model’, 
Social Science Research 27 (4): 432-456.
Sund, E.M. (2004), ‘Schweden’, in W. Gieler & D. Fricke (eds), Handbuch europäischer Migration-
spolitiken, 157-168. Münster: LIT Verlag.
Sund, K. (2007), Teachers, family and friends: Essays in economics of education. Stockholm: 
Stockholm University. Swedish Institute for Social Research (Dissertation No. 72).
Thierry, X. (2009), ‘France’, in H. Fassmann, U. Reeger & W. Sievers (eds), Statistics and real-
ity: Concepts and measurements of migration in Europe, 67-88. Amsterdam: Amsterdam 
University Press – IMISCOE Report.
Thomson, M & M. Crul (2007), ‘The second generation in Europe and the United States: How is 
the transatlantic debate relevant for further research on the European second generation?’, 
Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies 33 (7): 1025-1041.
Tolsma, J., M. Coenders & M. Lubbers (2007), ‘Trends in ethnic educational inequalities in the 
Netherlands: A cohort design’, European Sociological Review 23 (3): 325-339.

270
Educational Mobility of Second-generation Turks
Turan, F. (1984), Kurder: Bakgrund och exil i Tensta och Rinkeby. Stockholm: Stockholms social-
förvaltning.
Turney, K. & G. Kao (2009), ‘Barriers to school involvement: Are immigrant parents disadvan-
taged?’, The Journal of Educational Research 102 (4): 257-271.
Unterwurzacher, A. (2007), ‘Ohne Schule bist Du niemand. Bildungsbiographien von Jugendlichen 
mit Migrationshintergrund’, in H. Weiss (ed.) Leben in zwei Welten. Zur sozialen Integration 
ausländischer Jugendlicher der zweiten Generation, 71-95. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag.
Unterwurzacher, A. & H. Weiss (2008), ‘Die interkulturelle Schule aus regionaler Perspektive’, 
in B. Leibetseder & J. Weidenholzer (eds), Integration ist gestaltbar. Strategien erfolgreicher 
Integrationspolitik in Städten und Regionen, 221-253. Vienna: Braumüller.
Vallet, L.-A. & J.-P. Caille (1996), ‘Les élèves étrangers ou issues de l’immigration dans l’école 
et le collège francais: Une étude d’ensemble’, Le dossiers d’Éducation et formations 67. Paris: 
Ministère de l’Éducation National.
Van de Werfhorst, H.G. & J.J.B. Mijs (2010), ‘Achievement inequality and the institutional 
structure of educational systems: A comparative perspective’, Annual Review of Sociology 
36: 407-428.
Van de Werfhorst, H.G. & F. van Tubergen (2007), ‘Ethnicity, schooling, and merit in the Neth-
erlands’, Ethnicities 7 (3): 416-442.
Van Niekerk, M. (2000), Premigration legacies and immigrant social mobility. Lanham: Lexington 
books.
Vaquera, E. & G. Kao (2008), ‘Do you like me as much as I like you? Friendship reciprocity and 
its effects on school outcomes among adolescents’, Social Science Research 37 (1): 55-72.
Vermeulen, H. (2000), ‘Introduction: The role of culture in explanations of social mobility’, in 
H. Vermeulen & J. Perlmann (eds), Immigrants, schooling and social mobility: Does culture 
make a difference?, 1-21. London: Palgrave Macmillan.
Vermeulen, H. & R. Penninx (eds) (2001), Immigrant integration: The Dutch case. Amsterdam: 
Het Spinhuis.
Vogel, M. (2007), ‘Die jüngere Entwicklung im Bereich des Asyl- und Fremdenrechts’, in H. 
Fassmann (ed.) 2. Österreichischer Migrations- und Integrationsbericht 2001-2006: Rechtliche 
Rahmenbedingungen, demographische Entwicklungen, sozioökonomische Strukturen, 19-41. 
Klagenfurt: Drava Verlag.
Volf, P.-P. & R. Bauböck (2001), Wege zur Integration: Was man gegen Diskriminierung und 
Fremdenfeindlichkeit tun kann. Klagenfurt: Drava Verlag.
Weiss, H. (2007a), ‘Sozialstrukturelle Integration der Zweiten Generation’, in H. Weiss (ed.) Leben 
in zwei Welten. Zur sozialen Integration ausländischer Jugendlicher der zweiten Generation, 
33-69. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialsissenschaften.
Weiss, H. (ed.) (2007b), Leben in wei Welten. Zur sozialen Integration ausländischer Jugendlicher 
der zweiten Generation. Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialsissenschaften.
Weiss, H. & A. Unterwurzacher (2007), ‘Soziale Mobilität durch Bildung? Bildungsbeteiligung von 
MigrantInnen’, in H. Fassmann (ed.) 2. Österreichischer Migrations- und Integrationsbericht 
2001-2006: Rechtliche Rahmenbedingungen, demographische Entwicklungen, sozioökonomis-
che Strukturen, 227-246. Klagenfurt: Drava Verlag.
Weldon, S.A. (2006), ‘The institutional context of tolerance for ethnic minorities: A comparative, 
multilevel analysis of Western Europe’, American Journal of Political Science 50 (2): 331-349.
Westin, C. (2006), ‘Sweden: Restrictive immigration policy and pulticulturalism’, MPI. Migration 
Information Source.

Bibliography
271
Westin, C. (2003), ‘Young people of migrant origin in Sweden’, International Migration Review 
37 (4): 987-1010.
Wihtol de Wenden, C. (2011), ‘The case of France’, in G. Zincone, R. Penninx & M. Borkert (eds), 
Migration policymaking in europe, 61-94. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Wihtol de Wenden, C. (1994), ‘The French debate: Legal and political instruments to promote 
integration’, in H. Fassann & R. Münz (eds), European migration in the late twentieth century, 
67-80. Boorkfield, Vermont: Edward Elgar Publishing.
Wilpert, C. (1992), ‘The use of social networks in Turkish migration to Germany’, in M. Kritz, L.L. 
Lim & H. Zlotnik (eds), International migration systems, 177-189. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Wimmer, H. (1986a), ‘Die Arbeitswelt der ausländischen Arbeitnehmer’, in H. Wimmer (ed.) 
Ausländische Arbeitskräfte in Österreich, 241-306. Frankfurt/New York: Campus Verlag.
Wimmer, H. (1986b), ‘Zur Ausländerbschäftigungspolitik in Österreich’, in H. Wimmer (ed.) 
Ausländische Arbeitskräfte in Österreich, 5-32. Frankfurt/New York: Campus Verlag.
Winship, C. & L. Radbill (1994), ‘Sampling weights and regression analysis’, Sociological Methods 
and Research 23 (2): 230-257.
Zhou, M. (1999), ‘Segmented assimilation: Issues, controversies, and recent research on the 
new second generation’, in C. Hirschmann, P. Kasinitz & J. DeWind (eds), The handbook of 
international migration: The American experience, 196-210. New York: Russell Sage.
Zhou, M. (1997), ‘Growing up American: The challenge confronting immigrant children and 
children of immigrants’, Annual Review of Sociology 23: 63-95.
Zhou, M. & C.L. Bankston (1998), Growing up American: How Vietnamese children adapt to life 
in the United States. New York: Russell Sage.


	
Other IMISCOE Research titles
Franck Düvell, Irina Molodikova and Michael Collyer (eds)
Transit Migration in Europe
2014 ISBN 978 90 8964 649 1
Michael Bommes, Heinz Fassmann and Wiebke Sievers (eds)
Migration from the Middle East and North Africa to Europe: Past Developments, 
Current Status and Future Potentials
2014 ISBN 978 90 8964 650 7
Masja van Meeteren
Irregular Migrants in Belgium and the Netherlands: Aspirations and 
Incorporation
2014 ISBN 978 90 8964 643 9
Yolande Jansen
Secularism, Assimilation and the Crisis of Multiculturalism: French Modernist 
Legacies
2013 ISBN 978 90 8964 596 8
Marlou Schrover and Deidre M. Moloney (eds)
Gender, Migration and Categorisation: Making Distinctions between Migrants 
in Western Countries, 1945-2010
2013 ISBN 978 90 8964 573 9
Birgit Glorius, Izabela Grabowska-Lusinska and Aimee Kuvik (eds)
Mobility in Transition: Migration Patterns after EU Enlargement
2013 ISBN 978 90 8964 392 6
Joan Font and Mónica Méndez (eds)
Surveying Ethnic Minorities and Immigrant Populations: Methodological 
Challenges and Research Strategies
2013 ISBN 978 90 8964 543 2
Marek Okólski (ed.)
European Immigrations: Trends, Structures and Policy Implications
2012 ISBN 978 90 8964 457 2

Ulbe Bosma (ed.)
Post-Colonial Immigrants and Identity Formations in the Netherlands
2012 ISBN 978 90 8964 454 1
Christina Boswell and Gianni D’Amato (eds)
Immigration and Social Systems: Collected Essays of Michael Bommes
2012 ISBN 978 90 8964 453 4
Maurice Crul, Jens Schneider and Frans Lelie (eds)
The European Second Generation Compared: Does the Integration Context 
Matter?
2012 ISBN 978 90 8964 443 5
Bram Lancee
Immigrant Performance in the Labour Market: Bonding and Bridging Social 
Capital
2012 ISBN 978 90 8964 357 5
Julie Vullnetari
Albania on the Move: Links between Internal and International Migration
2012 ISBN 978 90 8964 355 1
Blanca Garcés-Mascareñas
State Regulation of Labour Migration in Malaysia and Spain: Markets, 
Citizenship and Rights
2012 ISBN 978 90 8964 286 8
Albert Kraler, Eleonore Kofman, Martin Kohli and Camille Schmoll (eds)
Gender, Generations and the Family in International Migration
2012 ISBN 978 90 8964 285 1
Giovanna Zincone, Rinus Penninx and Maren Borkert (eds)
Migration Policymaking in Europe: The Dynamics of Actors and Contexts in 
Past and Present
2011 ISBN 978 90 8964 370 4
Michael Bommes and Giuseppe Sciortino (eds)
Foggy Social Structures: Irregular Migration, European Labour Markets and 
the Welfare State
2011 ISBN 978 90 8964 341 4

Peter Scholten
Framing Immigrant Integration: Dutch Research-Policy Dialogues in 
Comparative Perspective
2011 ISBN 978 90 8964 284 4
Liza Mügge
Beyond Dutch Borders: Transnational Politics among Colonial Migrants, 
Guest Workers and the Second Generation
2010 ISBN 978 90 8964 244 8
Rainer Bauböck and Thomas Faist (eds)
Diaspora and Transnationalism: Concepts, Theories and Methods
2010 ISBN 978 90 8964 238 7
Cédric Audebert and Mohamed Kamel Dorai (eds)
Migration in a Globalised World: New Research Issues and Prospects
2010 ISBN 978 90 8964 157 1
Richard Black, Godfried Engbersen, Marek Okólski and Cristina Pantîru (eds)
A Continent Moving West? EU Enlargement and Labour Migration from 
Central and Eastern Europe
2010 ISBN 978 90 8964 156 4
Charles Westin, José Bastos, Janine Dahinden and Pedro Góis (eds)
Identity Processes and Dynamics in Multi-Ethnic Europe
2010 ISBN 978 90 8964 046 8
Rainer Bauböck, Bernhard Perchinig and Wiebke Sievers (eds)
Citizenship Policies in the New Europe: Expanded and Updated Edition
2009 ISBN 978 90 8964 108 3
Gianluca P. Parolin
Citizenship in the Arab World: Kin, Religion and Nation-State
2009 ISBN 978 90 8964 045 1
Maurice Crul and Liesbeth Heering (eds)
The Position of the Turkish and Moroccan Second Generation in Amsterdam 
and Rotterdam: The TIES Study in the Netherlands
2008 ISBN 978 90 8964 061 1

Marlou Schrover, Joanne van der Leun, Leo Lucassen and Chris Quispel (eds)
Illegal Migration and Gender in a Global and Historical Perspective
2008 ISBN 978 90 8964 047 5
Corrado Bonifazi, Marek Okólski, Jeannette Schoorl and Patrick Simon (eds)
International Migration in Europe: New Trends and New Methods of Analysis
2008 ISBN 978 90 5356 894 1
Ralph Grillo (ed.)
The Family in Question: Immigrant and Ethnic Minorities in Multicultural Europe
2008 ISBN 978 90 5356 869 9
Holger Kolb and Henrik Egbert (eds)
Migrants and Markets: Perspectives from Economics and the Other Social 
Sciences
2008 ISBN 978 90 5356 684 8
Veit Bader
Secularism or Democracy? Associational Governance of Religious Diversity
2007 ISBN 978 90 5356 999 3
Rainer Bauböck, Bernhard Perchinig and Wiebke Sievers (eds)
Citizenship Policies in the New Europe
2007 ISBN 978 90 5356 922 1
Rainer Bauböck, Eva Ersbøll, Kees Groenendijk and Harald Waldrauch (eds)
Acquisition and Loss of Nationality: Policies and Trends in 15 European Countries
Volume 1: Comparative Analyses
2006 ISBN 978 90 5356 920 7
Volume 2: Country Analyses
2006 ISBN 978 90 5356 921 4
Leo Lucassen, David Feldman and Jochen Oltmer (eds)
Paths of Integration: Migrants in Western Europe (1880-2004)
2006 ISBN 978 90 5356 883 5
Rinus Penninx, Maria Berger and Karen Kraal (eds)
The Dynamics of International Migration and Settlement in Europe: A State 
of the Art
2006 ISBN 978 90 5356 866 8

IMISCOE Textbooks
Marco Martiniello and Jan Rath (eds)
An Introduction to Immigrant Incorporation Studies: European Perspectives 
(Vol. 3)
2014 ISBN 978 90 8964 648 4
Marco Martiniello and Jan Rath (eds)
An Introduction to International Migration Studies: European Perspectives 
(Vol. 2)
2012 ISBN 978 90 8964 456 5
Marco Martiniello and Jan Rath (eds)
Selected Studies in International Migration and Immigrant Incorporation 
(Vol. 1)
2010 ISBN 978 90 8964 160 1