DOI 10.1515/gps-2013-0004      Green Process Synth 2013; 2: 179–180
 Organization profile 
 Bassam Alfeeli* 
Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research  
 *Corresponding author: Bassam Alfeeli , Kuwait Institute 
for Scientific Research  – Nanotechnology and Advanced 
Materials Program, PO Box 24885, Safat 13109, Kuwait, 
e-mail: bfeeli@kisr.edu.kw 
 The Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research (KISR) is an 
autonomous public institute under the authority of Council 
of Ministers of the State of Kuwait. Its Board of Trustees is 
chaired by a Minister delegated by the Council of Minis-
ters. In recent years, the Minister of Education and Higher 
Education has served in this capacity. KISR ’ s mission is to 
conduct scientific and applied research with the empha-
sis on industry, energy, natural resources, food resources 
and major elements related to the national economy in 
order to serve the economic and technical development 
of Kuwait and to provide consultation to the government 
in areas including scientific fields and national scientific 
research policies. 
 KISR was established in 1967 by the Arabian Oil 
Company (Japan) in fulfillment of an oil concession 
agreement with the Government of Kuwait. The agreement 
states that KISR shall carry out applied scientific research 
in the fields of petroleum and fisheries. In 1973, the 
Kuwait government assumed direct responsibility of KISR 
and specified its mission to carry out applied scientific 
research especially regarding issues related to industry, 
energy, agriculture, and the national economy. KISR con-
tinued to expand in the areas of food, water, and environ-
ment studies and grow horizontally to incorporate almost 
all elements of the natural sciences. Moreover, KISR was 
entrusted with undertaking research and scientific and 
technological consultations, for both governmental and 
private sectors in Kuwait, the Gulf region and the Arab 
world, and encouraged collaboration with international 
institutes. Some examples of research projects include 
microsatellite identification and characterization in 
peanut, processes for spent catalyst handling and utiliza-
tion, coke formation on catalysts during the hydroprocess-
ing of heavy oils, bioremediation of oil-contaminated soil, 
multi-effect distillation plants, holographic interferom-
etry of anodic dissolution of metals in aqueous solution, 
Main Subject Areas of Research at KISR
Physics and Astronomy,
 4%
Earth and
Planetary
Sciences, 9%
Chemical
Engineering, 10%
Chemistry,
6%
Energy, 7%
Materials Science, 8%
Agricultural and 
Biological Sciences, 12%
Other Engineering, 14% Enviromental Science,
 16%
Computer Science, 2%
Immunology and
Microbiology, 2%
Mathematics, 1%
Veterinary, 1%
Decision Science, 1%
Economics,
Econometrics,
and Finance, 1%

180      B. Alfeeli: Kuwait Institute for Scientific Research
rapid and simple method for determination of cholesterol 
in processed food, and house dust as a source of human 
exposure to polybrominated diphenyl ethers in Kuwait. 
 KISR ’ s Nanotechnology and 
Advanced Materials Center 
 KISR ’ s Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials Center 
(KNAMC) was established in 2009 with  $ 50 million 
government initiative to support R&D development in 
Kuwait. KNAMC research focus areas include renewable 
energy systems (photovoltaic, fuel cell, and hydrogen 
storage), construction materials (high performance con-
crete), surface protection coating materials (corrosion 
and erosion resistant, self-cleaning, and antibacterial), 
catalyst materials (oil production and refining), water 
purification and desalination, and chemical and physi-
cal sensing technologies. KNAMC is planned to be opera-
tional by 2015 and will house state-of-the-art 360 m 2 clean 
room facility equipped fabrication and characterization 
tools, materials synthesis laboratory, modeling and simu-
lation laboratory, and chemical and physical properties 
characterization facilities. 
 KNAMC objectives include designing, synthesizing 
and developing new nanostructured materials, incorpo-
rating new fundamental knowledge on nanoscience and 
nanotechnology with the national needs into devices 
and products, enhancing young researchers ’ skills and 
capabilities in nanoscience and nanotechnology, and 
foster the transfer of new technologies into real prod-
ucts for commercial and public benefits. Some examples 
of research projects include fabrication of high hydro-
gen storage nanocomposite powders, development of 
nanosensors for food packaging applications, fabrication 
of nanoparticles from local sand for cement performance 
enhancement, merging micro- and nano- technologies for 
gas chromatography systems development, nanocompos-
ite for wear resistant coating applications, and modeling 
and simulation of catalytically enhanced nanocrystalline 
metal hydrides for hydrogen storage applications.