UCLA
Ufahamu: A Journal of African Studies
Title
Our South African Freedom Dreams
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/2b37b4q1
Journal
Ufahamu: A Journal of African Studies, 38(1)
ISSN
0041-5715
Author
Kelley, Robin D.G.
Publication Date
2014
DOI
10.5070/F7381025030
Copyright Information
Copyright 2014 by the author(s). All rights reserved unless otherwise 
indicated. Contact the author(s) for any necessary permissions. Learn 
more at https://escholarship.org/terms
 
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org
Powered by the California Digital Library
University of California

Ufahamu 38:1  Fall 2014
Our South African Freedom Dreams
Robin D.G. Kelley
When Nana Osei-Opare asked to reprint my article, “The Third 
International and the Struggle for National Liberation in South 
Africa,” I balked. I was only twenty-three when I wrote it for a 
graduate seminar at UCLA, and like most preliminary research 
projects it was based on a slim body of primary sources since I had 
no access to South African archives. I had just settled on an ambi­
tious and unrealistic dissertation project comparing the histories 
of the Black Left in South Africa and the U.S. South—unreal­
istic because I had no prospect of getting into South Africa. In 
1985, President P. W. Botha declared a state of emergency, and 
my participation in protests at the South African Consulate in 
Beverly Hills did not bode well for my visa application. Looking 
back at the essay three decades later, I find some of it downright 
embarrassing—particularly the occasional flights into rigid Marx­
ist language, and the limited sources available to me. Of course, 
in 1986, the Soviet Union was three years from collapse and the 
Soviet Archives were several years from opening. But considering 
these constraints, and the audacity of youth, there are things about 
the article of which I’m proud.
Taking a page from Cedric Robinson, whose book Black 
Marxism had just appeared in 1983, I suggest that a Black radical 
tradition rooted in earlier notions of African redemption, rural 
opposition culminating in resistance to the Land Act of 1913, and 
expressions of working-class and petit bourgeois African nation­
alism had already produced a vision of self-determination. These 
movements preceded the formation of the Communist Party of 
South Africa (CPSA), whose initial orientation was toward the 
white working class. Imagine a Communist Party anywhere back­
ing striking miners under the banner, “Workers of the World 
Unite and Fight for a WHITE SOUTH AFRICA!” When African 
trade unionists, as well as officials of the Communist International 
(Comintern) in Moscow, criticized Party leaders for their uncriti­
cal support of the Rand Revolt in 1922, to the exclusion of the 
more numerous African miners’ struggles, white South African 
© 2014 Robin D.G. Kelley. All Rights Reserved.

240
UFAHAMU
Communists made the absurd argument that the “advanced” 
white proletariat must win the fight for socialism first in order to 
free the entire working class.
Predictably, the Comintern directed the CPSA to orient 
its work “toward the African masses,” which generated tumul­
tuous internal splits in the Party and sharp debates over what 
this meant. For Africans and so-called Coloureds, who now domi­
nated the Party numerically, the goal was to take their land back 
and live in a state where the indigenous majority ruled. White 
Communists saw as their task to educate a backwards African 
working class to support a white-led proletarian revolution. Of 
course, the latter was a failed strategy from the beginning. And 
while the majority of the African, Coloured, and Indian comrades 
knew this, they depended on the Comintern to lay down the law, 
as it were. Although I conclude that the Comintern played a key 
role in enforcing the demand for African self-determination, the 
essay’s central contribution, I think, is to turn the usual claim that 
the Communists infiltrated the African nationalist movement on 
its head. Rather, the nationalists infiltrated the Communist Party, 
adopted a radical vision of self-determination that recognized 
South Africa as a settler colonial state, and demanded the return 
of land and black majority rule, expressed as an “independent 
native South African Republic with full equal rights for all races.”
It took extraordinary chutzpah for an exclusively white del­
egation of South African Communists to travel to Moscow in 1928 
in order to oppose this policy. Not surprisingly, they were sum­
marily dismissed and sent back to defend the Native Republic 
thesis. The backing of the Comintern mattered, but what mattered 
more was the fact that the CPSA had become a largely African 
organization and the thesis had been widely adopted by Party 
branches all over the country. Nevertheless, Sidney Bunting, the 
long-time socialist and Communist leader, who led the all-white 
delegation to Moscow to argue against the thesis, did win one 
concession—an important one on which I should have elaborated. 
He succeeded in changing the language to “a native republic as a 
stage toward a workers’ and peasants’ republic,” to further under­
score that the ultimate objective was a multiracial, democratic, 
socialist South Africa.
Politics, not merely youthful curiosity, drove me to this 
topic. Like many of my fellow students, I was involved in the 

241
Kelley
antiapartheid movement on campus. I was also on the edito­
rial board of Ufahamu and, during the preceding year, served as 
president of the African Activists Association (AAA). In those 
days, we considered Ufahamu to be the theoretical arm of the 
AAA, not a dispassionate scholarly journal. It stood for the kind 
of radical Africana studies we were groping toward—recognizing, 
of course, that such groping required sharp debate, disagree­
ments, and contradictions. One must imagine what it meant to us 
to inherit a journal that not only published new scholarship, but 
poetry, polemics, and political insights from the likes of Walter 
Rodney, Amilcar Cabral, and Ngugi Wa-Thiongo, among others.
Evidence of my own political orientation at the time can 
be found in the first two essays I published in Ufahamu. One 
examined the challenges of socialist transformation in the Peo­
ple’s Republic of the Congo, with an eye toward the lessons we 
might take for future revolutions; the other discussed the role 
of the international sports boycott of South Africa in anticipa­
tion of the 1984 Olympic Games in Los Angeles.1 Both issues 
were at the forefront of my political work. I was both active in a 
left-wing party, actively pursuing dreams of socialist revolution, 
and chair of the Los Angeles Ad Hoc Committee to Keep South 
Africa Out of the Olympics. The latter, of course, was more urgent, 
practical, and effective. We were part of a broad coalition of stu­
dents calling on the University of California to divest its holdings 
from South Africa. This was my generation’s “Boycott, Sanctions, 
Divestment” moment, and many of us put our bodies on the line, 
building makeshift shanty towns on campus and sitting in at the 
South African Consulate. Taking leadership from Tim Ngubeni, 
stalwart South African activist and first director of UCLA’s Com­
munity Programs Department, we supported the call for boycott 
and divestment, educated our community, built momentum, and 
by the summer of 1986, succeeded in persuading the U.C. Regents 
to divest $3.1 billion worth of holdings from South Africa and 
Namibia. Although it took nine years, and the University of Cali­
fornia took longer to divest than most major banks (including 
Citibank, Chase Manhattan, and Barclays), its leaders ultimately 
decided to abide by the wishes of the students and faculty and 
take an ethical stance against apartheid.
While we won that battle, none of my comrades in the 
AAA or involved with Ufahamu was naïve enough to believe 

242
UFAHAMU
divestment, alone, would topple apartheid and birth a new demo­
cratic state founded on the principles of the Freedom Charter. We 
knew that the struggle on the ground, inside South Africa mat­
tered. And given the experiences of Mozambique, Guinea Bissau, 
Angola, and Namibia, many of us believed it would be bloody. 
The struggle was, indeed, bloody, but it was the apartheid state 
that shed most of the blood. The United Democratic Front and 
the ANC demonstrated the power of massive popular resistance, 
strikes, and civil disobedience, the power of people to stop South 
Africa’s racial regime from functioning. We rejoiced when Man­
dela was finally released, and looked upon the elections of 1994 
with great optimism.
I should point out here that I never pursued my ambitious 
dissertation topic, opting instead to focus on the U.S. South, and 
become an Americanist. I continued to maintain a political and 
scholarly interest in Africa, but I can claim no special expertise. 
Nevertheless, I think it is safe to say that many of us involved in 
the struggle to end apartheid did not expect a democratic South 
Africa to take a neoliberal turn, or to abandon the principles of 
the Freedom Charter many people in South Africa and around 
the world hold dear. But perhaps more surprising, in light of my 
essay on South African Communists and National Liberation, was 
the degree to which the Communist Party survived as part of the 
ruling coalition. This is one of the great ironies of the moment—
one I could not have anticipated. Even as the ANC under Thabo 
Mbeki promoted neoliberal reforms to privatize public assets and 
attract multinational capital—at the expense of working people, 
the poor, and the sick—the South African Communist Party 
(SACP) never left the governing alliance, nor was it driven out. In 
1996, the SACP sharply criticized the ANC for promoting policies 
on behalf of the wealthy and rising middle class, and accused it of 
pursuing “a deliberate strategy to marginalize” Communists and 
the Congress of South African Trade Unions (COSATU).2 And it 
continues to criticize state policies that undermine labor, generate 
unemployment, deepen inequality, and weaken democracy.
So why does the SACP remain in the governing alliance? 
Because it understands neoliberal restructuring as a global pro­
cess imposed by international finance capital on the South African 
state, potentially undermining its sovereignty. A very recent state­
ment issued by the SACP’s Political Bureau minced no words: 

243
Kelley
“The past 20 years have seen a massive monopoly capitalist-
driven dismantling of our productive economy. The restructuring 
of the work-place has been monopoly capital’s counter-offensive 
in the face of the important democratic advances made through 
working class struggle and the post-1994 democratisation pro­
cess. Casualisation, labour-brokering, increasing capital intensity, 
growing monopoly domination at the expense of more labour-
intensive, medium-scale enterprises have been some of the key 
features that have hollowed out important working class gains 
achieved through legislation. Massive disinvestment out of our 
country, tax avoidance through tax havens, transfer pricing, col­
lusive behaviour, and an investment strike have played a major 
role in the sustained crisis levels of domestic unemployment and 
under-employment. This is the strategic agenda that must be 
fought and defeated.”3 The strategic agenda to which they refer 
comes not from the ANC but from multinational capital, the IMF, 
the World Bank, and the like. They view the ANC-led government 
as deeply flawed but also under attack, while giving the regime 
credit for leading “a major and progressive fiscal redistributive 
programme.”4
Perhaps this is the real meaning of an “independent native 
republic,” a conception of national liberation in which the con­
solidation of a multiracial democratic state takes precedence? 
“One Azania, one Nation,” as the slogan once went. (Indeed, the 
Communist Party of South Africa changed its name to the South 
African Communist Party in 1953, after it was forced underground, 
to signal its unwavering support for a united struggle for national 
liberation.) I think there may be an important lesson here for all 
the Left critics who see the SACP’s refusal to break entirely with 
the state as a capitulation to neoliberalism. The mere fact that the 
South African Left is strong and the unions are well organized 
and militant—especially compared to the nations of the global 
north, where austerity and growing inequality are the order of the 
day—is striking evidence of an unusually high level of debate and 
political participation throughout the country. For many South 
African Leftists, maintaining a democratic united front is vital in 
order to withstand any potential intervention—they don’t want to 
become another Chile.
And yet, how do we understand the rise of the Economic 
Freedom Fighters (EFF), a Marxist-Leninist, nationalist, populist 

244
UFAHAMU
movement critical of the ANC’s neoliberal turn and government 
corruption, dismissive of the SACP for its collaboration, and 
calling for massive land redistribution, nationalization of major 
industries, and massive state investments in housing, education, 
employment, and infrastructure? Whatever we might think about 
the EFF and the critique of the cult of personality surrounding 
Julius Malema, its agenda and orientation more closely resemble 
those of the Communists in the 1930s, 40s, and 50s. The EFFs 2013 
Founding Manifesto argues that “the political freedom attained 
symbolically in 1994 through inclusive elections [has] not trans­
lated into economic freedom, which must empower and assist the 
oppressed and exploited people of South Africa to be liberated 
from economic and social bondage. This feature of South Africa 
justifies our struggle for economic freedom and is also directed 
at the emancipation of the African continent.”5 In other words, 
does the EFF represent what Sidney P. Bunting ironically imag­
ined to be the final stage in the struggle for a “Native Republic,” 
i.e., “a workers’ and peasants’ republic”? Does this mean that the 
struggle for self-determination, as envisioned by James La Guma 
and the first generation of South African Communists, has yet to 
be achieved? And, finally, does the challenge from the EFF expose 
the limits of national liberation without considering the larger 
continental or global struggle for sovereignty, social justice, and 
the dismantling of racial capitalism?
Endnotes
1	 “Problems of Socialist Transformation in Africa: The Congolese Experience,” 
Ufahamu 13, nos. 2 and 3 (1984): 259-282; “The Role of the International Sports 
Boycott in the Anti- Apartheid Movement,” Ufahamu 13, nos. 2 and 3 (1984): 
26-39.
2	 Vijay Prashad, The Poorer Nations: A Possible History of the Global South 
(New York: Verso Books, 2013), p. 171.
3	 SACP Political Bureau, “Unity in Diversity: Not Insults, Scapegoating, Polarisa­
tion,” (November 11, 2014), http://www.sacp.org.za/main.php?ID=4549
4	 Ibid.
5	 Economic Freedom Fighters Founding Manifesto (2013), http://effighters.org.
za/documents/economic-freedom-fighters-founding-manifesto/