Students on the Move: 
The Future of International
Students in the United States
Dao Luu, Olga Bain, and Madeleine Green
Dao Luu is a project associate at the American Council on Education.
Address: 1 Dupont Circle, Washington, DC 20036, USA. E-mail:
Dao_luu@ace.nche.edu. Olga Bain is assistant professorial lecturer at the
George Washington University. E-mail: ob_olga@usa.net. Madeleine
Green is vice president for international initiatives at the American Council
on Education. E-mail: madeleine_green@ace.nche.edu.
T
he American Council on Education released an issue brief,
Students on the Move: The Future of International Students in
the United States, in October 2006, that summarizes the exist-
ing research on international students in the Unites States and
examines the US market position with respect to other major
hosting countries in attracting international students. It found
that while the United States continues to enroll the majority of
international students, trends in other major hosting and send-
ing countries suggests that US dominance cannot be taken for
granted. 
The discussion of global trends in international student
enrollments assumes an agreement on the definition of an
international student. However, because countries count inter-
national students differently, international comparisons are
potentially inconsistent. Some countries include permanent
residents or other long-time residents when reporting interna-
tional student enrollments; other countries do not. Some count
only students enrolled in degree-earning programs; others
adopt broader parameters to include students in intensive
English-language programs. Definitions vary not only among
countries but also change over time within the same country,
which makes yearly comparisons among countries more diffi-
cult. The impact of these discrepancies in data reporting is dif-
ficult to estimate. UNESCO recently introduced the term and
definition for an internationally mobile student in an attempt to
address these inconsistencies. It remains to be seen whether
countries will adopt this term and change their data reporting.
Nonetheless, the available data provide valuable information
on the mobility of international students and where they are
choosing to pursue their studies.
Trends in Other Countries
In 2004, there were 2.5 million international students world-
wide; it is projected that this will increase to 7.2 million in
2025. According to OECD data, in 2004 the United States
attracted 21.6 percent of all the international students, down
from 25.3 percent in 2000. While the US share of internation-
al student enrollments slipped, other major host countries
maintained or expanded their enrollments. Among the top
competitor countries, the United Kingdom was the only coun-
try to report a decline in market share (1 percentage point),
whereas France expanded its share by 2 percentage points and
the other countries remained stable. Outside of the top six
hosting countries, Canada, New Zealand, and South Africa also
expanded their market share.
Among the top six host countries, the United States had the
weakest growth in international student enrollments, from
1999/2000 to 2004/05. While international student enroll-
ments grew by nearly 17 percent in the United States, they
grew by 29 percent in the United Kingdom, 46 percent in
Germany, 81 percent in France, 42 percent in Australia, and
108 percent in Japan. However, the absolute numbers in these
countries are considerably smaller. Growth rates in competitor
countries may be attributed to national policies, initiatives to
recruit international students, coordination between govern-
ments and their universities, and in some cases a strong insti-
tutional motivation to generate revenue. The United States is
also a mature market; thus, it may be more difficult to signifi-
cantly expand enrollments there. 
International student enrollments in the United States
could also be affected by efforts of China and India to expand
their higher education capacity. Both China and India are
developing graduate programs to encourage more of their own
students to study at home and reduce the outflow of money
and talent. Strategic investments in 100 Chinese universities
are aimed at improving their quality and turning them into
“world-class” institutions in research and innovation. India is
also strengthening its higher education system. Furthermore,
traditional source countries are now also host countries. The
Chinese Ministry of Education reported that international stu-
dent enrollments grew by 213 percent from 44,711 in 1999 to
140,000 in 2005. In the past five years, international student
enrollments have increased in China by more than 20 percent
annually. 
Strategies in Other Countries
Governments have developed national systems that coordinate
the recruitment of international students and promote their
respective higher education brand worldwide. Examples
include Australia Education International, Edufrance, the
British Council, and the German Academic Exchange Service.
In the United Kingdom, the prime minister's Initiative for
International Education combines institutional and national
efforts to recruit international students. Some governments
have also adopted national policies that lessen restrictions on
11
international higher education
internationalization trends
In 2004, there were 2.5 million international stu-
dents worldwide; it is projected that this will
increase to 7.2 million in 2025.

international students including flexible work/study options,
allowing part-time employment while studying, and permit-
ting international students to stay longer after graduation to
find employment. 
Immigration and other policies have been strategically
aligned to attract international students. Canada, for example,
expects that recent immigration policy changes and the easing
of employment restrictions for international students will
increase enrollments from abroad by as much as 20,000.
Other policies include a point-based immigration system that
is favorable to highly skilled professionals (as found in the
United Kingdom) or the granting of permanent residency to
professionals in designated high-demand fields of engineer-
ing, computer sciences, and hard sciences (as practiced in
Germany). 
Non-English-speaking countries are increasingly offering
programs in English to appeal to international students. For
example, the Netherlands, Sweden, Finland, Poland, Turkey,
and Japan offer from 50 to more than 1,000 programs in
English. In Korea there are 10 English-only universities.
A strategy that can potentially be very successful is the cre-
ation of regional education hubs. In 1999, Singapore
announced that it would attract “world-class” academic institu-
tions to become the regional destination of choice for students,
researchers, and industry. The Middle East is home to two
emerging educational hubs—Knowledge Village in Dubai
(United Arab Emirates) and Education City in Doha (Qatar)—
both of which are establishing themselves as hosts of various
foreign education providers and training centers. 
Conclusion
The United States continues to receive the largest number of
international students. However, recent trends indicate that
the global landscape is changing. Although potential demand
is high, a redistribution of international students among host
countries is under way. This change may be due to perceptions
that the United States is unwelcoming, vigorous competition
from other countries, and successful national strategies of
other 
countries 
to 
recruit 
international 
students.
________________
Author's note. This article is based on “Students on the Move: The
Future of International Students in the United States,” by Olga Bain,
Dao Luu, and Madeleine Green, available at the ACE Web site:
http://www.acenet.edu. 
Demographic Challenges and
the Future of the Higher
Education
Manja Klemencic and Jochen Fried
Manja Klemencic is a postdoctoral fellow at the Minda de Gunzburg
Center for European Studies at Harvard University, Cambridge, MA,
USA. E-mail: m.klemencic.01@cantab.net. Jochen Fried is director of
education initiatives at the Salzburg Seminar, Salzburg, Austria. E-mail:
jfried@salzburgseminar.org.
T
he demographic prospects certainly add a new dimension
to the familiar pressures on higher education. It is surpris-
ing then that these factors are so rarely addressed in relevant
scholarly literature or in the higher education policy arena. The
aim of this special section of International Higher Education
(IHE) is to highlight demography in higher education plan-
ning and to encourage further research on this theme. The
articles in this special section of IHE result from presentations
at the Salzburg Seminar session, Shifting Demographics in
Higher Education, conducted in November 2006.
Higher education is rapidly becoming a universal aspira-
tion. Over the past decades, the number of students has been
increasing steadily across the world, and according to some
projections the student number will almost double to reach
160 million by 2025. This trend, however, will play out in very
dissimilar ways given the diverging demographic develop-
ments in different parts of the world. Studies predict that until
2020 and beyond in most of the developed world, especially in
Europe, populations will decline rapidly, while in developing
countries, especially in Asia and Africa, the number of people
will continue to grow. At the same time, life expectancy is also
undergoing dramatic changes, rising continuously where
countries prosper, but remaining stagnant or even decreasing
where countries are falling behind. 
These demographic trends have far-reaching implications
for higher education. In regions where the anticipated increase
in population is matched by the prospect of an overall improve-
ment of socioeconomic conditions, as in Asia, the rising
demand for higher education will accelerate. By comparison,
the declining birthrates in Europe combined with a stable
socioeconomic situation may result in an excess supply of
higher education in terms of domestic demand. While some
regions will struggle to provide education, especially quality
education, for all eligible individuals, others will engage in an
ever fiercer “battle for brainpower,” as described in an article in
the Economist (October 6, 2006). The new knowledge society
requires a steady turnout of an increasingly highly qualified
workforce as well as a substantial pool of competent knowl-
edge producers. To be able to accomplish these tasks, any high-
international higher education
demography and the future of higher education
12
Non-English-speaking countries are increasingly
offering programs in English to appeal to interna-
tional students.