Social Medicine (www.socialmedicine.info)	  
- 83 -	  
Volume 8, Number 2, August 2014 
 
THEMES AND DEBATES 
 
“For the good of mankind”:  
The legacy of nuclear testing in Micronesia 
 
Seiji Yamada, MD, MPH; Matthew Akiyama, MD, MSc 
 
 
Abstract 
US government research on the health effects of 
exposure to radiation from nuclear weapons in-
volved gross violations of the human rights of peo-
ple in the Marshall Islands. In all likelihood, fallout 
from US nuclear weapons testing in the Pacific was 
deposited on other Micronesian islands. The US 
government should release the classified data it pos-
sesses on the history of nuclear testing, fallout pat-
terns, and the effects on the people of the Marshall 
Islands and the rest of Micronesia. Health workers 
should work to ensure that nuclear-armed states ful-
fill their treaty obligations to pursue negotiations 
toward the elimination of nuclear weapons. As a 
matter of social justice, in order to ensure the human 
right to health, the federal government should ex-
tend Medicaid eligibility to all Micronesian people 
from the Compact of Free Association nations. 
 
Introduction 
Since the first use of nuclear weapons in war at 
the end of World War II, efforts by the US govern-
ment to test the effects of these weapons on humans 
have run roughshod over human rights. The exam-
ple of US nuclear testing in the Pacific Islands is 
instructive. In the wake of the World War II, exten-
sive nuclear testing was performed in the Marshall 
Islands in Micronesia. Nuclear fallout is a known 
risk factor for cancer and other adverse health out-
comes in populations exposed to it. However, the 
long-term effects of this testing is controversial. 
This article examines the health consequences of US 
nuclear testing in the Marshall Islands, the impact of 
which have been underestimated by the US govern-
ment.  
 
Antecedent radiation studies in Hiroshima and 
Nagasaki 
In the aftermath of World War II, the US gov-
ernment created the Atomic Bomb Casualty Com-
mission (ABCC) to study the health effects of radia-
tion in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the Japanese cities 
on which the US dropped atomic bombs in August 
1945. In 1975, the ABCC was reorganized into a 
joint US-Japanese effort known as the Radiation 
Effects Research Foundation (RERF), which has 
followed those affected ever since. RERF scientists 
estimate that approximately 1,900 people developed 
cancer from radiation in Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 
the decades after the bombings through the year 
2000.1 Compared to the approximately 150,000 to 
200,000 people (90,000 to 120,000 in Hiroshima 
and 60,000 to 80,000 in Nagasaki) who had died by 
the end of 1945,2 1,900 cancer cases is not a very 
large number. 
Because the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings 
represent the first time in history that large numbers 
of people were exposed to radiation, it must be em-
phasized that much of what we know about the ef-
fects of radiation on humans is based on the work of 
the ABCC/RERF. Although the products of the ex-
plosions in Hiroshima and Nagasaki formed fallout, 
which came down after the blast in the form of 
“black rain,” the epidemiological and medical mod-
Seiji Yamada, MD, MPH 
Department of Family Medicine and Community Health 
John A. Burns School of Medicine 
University of Hawai‘i  
Email: seiji@hawaii.edu 
Matthew Akiyama, MD, MSc 
Division of Infectious Diseases  
New York University  
Submitted: December 25, 2012 
Accepted: January 28, 2012 
Conflict of interest: None 
Peer-reviewed: Yes 

	  
 
Social Medicine (www.socialmedicine.info)	  
- 84 -	  
Volume 8, Number 2, August 2014 
 
els of the radiation effects of the Hiroshima and Na-
gasaki bombings have been based on direct expo-
sure to alpha, beta, and gamma radiation from the 
overhead explosion itself. In Micronesia, in contrast, 
people were exposed to radiation from the fallout 
cloud settling on or being taken into their bodies.  
 
Nuclear testing in the Marshall Islands: Castle 
Bravo and Project 4.1 
In the immediate post-World War II period, the 
US took over Bikini Atoll in the Marshall Islands in 
order to continue nuclear weapons testing. As re-
counted by Holly M. Barker,3 in 1946 US Navy 
Commodore Ben H. Wyatt told Juda, the traditional 
leader of Bikini Atoll, that the Americans were try-
ing to learn how to use the atomic bomb “for the 
good of mankind and to end all world wars.” Com-
modore Wyatt asked Juda for him and his people to 
sacrifice their island “for the welfare of all men.”3 
For the initial kiloton (equivalent to thousands of 
tons of TNT) range Crossroads tests of 1946, Mar-
shallese on Bikini and nearby atolls such as 
Rongelap were evacuated. Bikinians did not return 
to Bikini until the 1970s. Subsequently, they ac-
quired body burdens of radiation so high that they 
needed to be evacuated again.4 
As the US developed a new generation of more 
powerful thermonuclear weapons, the government 
continued to study the effect of radiation on humans. 
In November 1953, the planning documents for the 
Castle series of nuclear tests outlined Project 4.1: 
“Study of Response of Human Beings Exposed to 
Significant Beta and Gamma Radiation Due to Fall-
Out from High Yield Weapons.”5 Conducted on 
March 1, 1954, at 15 megatons, the equivalent of 15 
million tons of TNT, Castle Bravo tested the largest 
thermonuclear device ever detonated by the US. It is 
important to keep in mind that Bravo itself was an 
experiment. As only the second thermonuclear test 
carried out, its yield had been predicted to be 6 
megatons, but the actual yield was 15 megatons.6 In 
the 1950s there was public discourse about the “hu-
manity” of thermonuclear weapons that would use 
“clean” fusion. Devices such as Bravo, however, 
produced massive quantities of radioactive fallout. 
Weapons using fission alone are limited in size be-
cause any single fission weapon cannot contain 
more than a critical mass of plutonium or highly 
enriched uranium. However, a fusion reaction can 
produce fast neutrons, which cause unenriched ura-
nium to undergo fission. The fusion core of Bravo 
was encased in one ton of unenriched uranium. In 
fact, 10 megatons of the 15-megaton yield was from 
fission.7 
Bravo was detonated at Bikini, and winds took 
its fallout toward populated islands to the east. Fall-
out fell most directly on approximately 65 people on 
Rongelap Atoll, 17 or 18 Rongelapese visiting 
Ailinginae, more than 150 people on Utrik Atoll, 23 
Japanese fishermen on board the Fukuryu Maru, and 
28 US military weather personnel on Rongerik At-
oll.8,9 Lesser amounts fell on other atolls as well, 
most notably Ailuk and Likiap. 
Navy radiobiology research physicians Cronkite, 
Conard, and Bond – assigned to the original De-
partment of Defense/Atomic Energy Commission 
(AEC) medical team that made up the staff of Pro-
ject 4.1 – were gathered within days of Bravo.8 All 
three were subsequently involved in long-term med-
ical surveillance at Brookhaven National Laboratory 
on Long Island. As the people of Rongelap were the 
most heavily exposed, followed by the people of 
Utrik, the residents of the two atolls were recruited 
for a US government medical program. The medical 
program followed the radiation-exposed people to-
gether with a “control population” of unexposed 
Rongelapese and Utrikese people who were not in 
the Northern Atolls on March 1, 1954.8 
In contrast to the mostly overhead, line-of-sight 
radiation exposure in Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the 
fallout from Bravo fell on Rongelap and Utrik, con-
taminating people’s food and cooking utensils in 
addition to settling on their bodies, leading to radia-
tion exposure in a range believed to be potentially 
lethal even by radiation experts today.10,11 Many 
experienced acute radiation sickness. Radioactive 
particles falling to the ground also caused long-term 
health effects, as people were exposed by eating 
plants that grew in the contaminated soil as well as 
animals consuming those plants. 
As a consequence of nuclear testing at the Neva-
da Test Site on the US continent, dairy cows ate 
grass contaminated with radioactive iodine, I-131. 
The cows produced milk that was consumed by 

	  
 
Social Medicine (www.socialmedicine.info)	  
- 85 -	  
Volume 8, Number 2, August 2014 
 
children. In the children’s bodies, the I-131 was 
concentrated by the thyroid gland. As the I-131 de-
cayed, it released radioactivity within the thyroid 
gland, inducing mutations that led to thyroid cancer. 
In 1997, a National Cancer Institute report cited es-
timates that 11,300 to 212,000 excess cases of thy-
roid cancer, with a median estimate of 49,000, 
would be produced by nuclear testing at the Nevada 
Test Site.12 
The half-life of radioactive isotopes varies wide-
ly. Iodine, for example, has a half-life of 8 days 
while strontium-90 and cesium-137 have half-lives 
of 29 and 30 years, respectively. Other radioactive 
elements have half-lives of thousands of years. Plu-
tonium-239, for example, has a half-life of 24,100 
years. While there is no dairy farming in Microne-
sia, coconut crabs, (considered a delicacy in the Pa-
cific Islands) concentrate strontium-90 in their 
shells, which the crabs eat as they molt. 
After they were told that it was safe to move 
back to Rongelap in 1957, “exposed” and “unex-
posed” test subjects of Project 4.1 returned home 
and ate locally grown food. By 1961, body burdens 
of cesium-137 were “300 times that of the medical 
team.”13,p47 With regard to Utrik Atoll (further 
downwind from Rongelap), in a 1956 research plan-
ning meeting of the AEC Advisory Committee on 
Biology and Medicine, Merril Eisenbud, the director 
of the AEC Health and Safety Laboratory, noted (as 
quoted by Barbara Rose Johnston14): 
 
They had been living on that Island; now that Is-
land is safe to live on but is by far the most con-
taminated place in the world and it will be very 
interesting to go back and get good environmen-
tal data, how many per square mile; what iso-
topes are involved and a sample of food changes 
in many humans through their urines, so as to 
get a measure of the human uptake when people 
live in a contaminated environment. 
 
Now, data of this type has never been available. 
While it is true that these people do not live, I 
would say, the way Westerners do, civilized peo-
ple, it is nevertheless also true that these people 
are more like us than mice. So that is something 
which will be done this winter. 
 
RERF’s ongoing study of the people of Hiroshi-
ma and Nagasaki has not detected genetic abnormal-
ities being passed on from atom bomb survivors to 
their children.15 While RERF is now conducting 
DNA studies at the molecular level, no such studies 
are being conducted in Marshallese people. In the 
Marshall Islands and perhaps in other parts of Mi-
cronesia, we also need to be concerned about radio-
active substances continuing to directly affect sub-
sequent generations as they consume food grown on 
contaminated land. 
 
Human radiation experiments 
In subsequent years, as the AEC/Brookhaven 
project evolved, the Project 4.1 physicians conduct-
ed medical experiments on the survivors of Bravo 
and the other people of Rongelap and Utrik (the 
“control group”) without their knowledge or consent 
under the guise of following them for their initial 
exposure to Castle Bravo fallout. From 1961 to 
1966, they conducted experiments on Marshallese 
people utilizing the radioactive agents chromium-51 
and tritium in order to determine the physiological 
handling of radioisotopes by the human body.13 Pre-
sumably the researchers reasoned that since these 
individuals had already been exposed to radiation 
and were going to suffer the consequences anyway, 
it was acceptable to expose them to further radia-
tion. Formerly classified correspondence among the 
researchers, with their offhand remarks preserved 
for posterity, was freely available on the Internet 
until 2004. In one letter from 1961 regarding the 
tritium-labeled water studies to determine total body 
water, Dr. Robert A. Conard, the director of medical 
research at Brookhaven, suggested, “I suppose we 
could try it on the unexposed people.”* Such cava-
lier attitudes regarding the health and well-being of 
Marshallese people are clear reflections of racist 
attitudes. 
 
How much radiation was released by nuclear 
testing in Micronesia? 
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  
*	  From a letter that was available in 2004 at the Human 
Radiation Experiments Information Management System 
(HREX) website, subsequently taken down during the 
Bush Administration 
	  

	  
 
Social Medicine (www.socialmedicine.info)	  
- 86 -	  
Volume 8, Number 2, August 2014 
 
The total yield of all tests conducted at the Ne-
vada Test Site was one megaton. In contrast, 109 
megatons were detonated in 66 tests at the Bikini 
and Enewetak test sites from 1946 to 1958. 
(Enewetak, another northwest atoll of the Marshall 
Islands, was used for nuclear testing beginning in 
1948. In 1952, it was the site of the 10-megaton Ivy 
Mike test, the first thermonuclear detonation.) If the 
Johnston Atoll and Christmas Island tests are fac-
tored in, a total of 152 megatons were detonated in 
Micronesia from 1946 to 1962.16 
Robert Whitcomb of the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention estimated that just the 1954 
Castle series of tests released more than 4 billion 
curies of I-131, more than 28 times the total amount 
of I-131 released by weapons testing at the Nevada 
Test Site.17 
 
How much cancer was caused by radiation in 
Micronesia? 
In Micronesia, the prevailing trade winds blow 
from the northeast. Bikini and Enewtak are situated 
in the northwest corner of the Marshall Islands – the 
locations presumably chosen so that fallout could be 
expected to head out over open ocean, though this 
means towards the rest of Micronesia. At the time of 
the Bravo detonation there a west-to-east wind at the 
altitude of the fallout cloud that took it in the direc-
tion of the populated Northern Marshallese atolls. 
However, given the sheer amount of radiation re-
leased from sum total of the Pacific tests, it is likely 
that the islands of Micronesia to the west of the 
Marshall Islands also received radioactive fallout. 
The individual paths of every fallout cloud from 
the Nevada Test Site were tracked very closely by 
the military as these clouds made their way across 
the continental US. Presumably, such data exist for 
the fallout clouds from the Pacific Island tests, but 
these details have not been released by the US gov-
ernment.  
Many Micronesians from other jurisdictions oth-
er than the Marshall Islands were also exposed 
while working on radiation cleanup activities in the 
Marshall Islands. Thus far, these individuals have 
been excluded from analyses of the health effects of 
nuclear testing.18 In general, we have little data on 
the morbidity caused by radiation in Micronesian 
jurisdictions other than the Marshall Islands from 
the 1940s to the present. Collection of cancer data is 
hindered by the fact that accurate diagnosis of can-
cer is contingent on the ability to obtain tissue biop-
sies; many people, especially in remote districts, 
have inadequate access to health care, resulting in 
fewer clinical diagnoses. In retrospect, it is difficult 
to say with any certainty how much of the burden of 
morbidity and mortality in Micronesia is attributable 
to nuclear testing.19,20 Going forward, the establish-
ment of cancer registries, which are starting to be 
implemented now, should improve data collection 
and utility. Steven Simon headed the Marshall Is-
lands Nationwide Radiological Study of 1990-1994, 
a study funded by the Nuclear Claims Tribunal 
(NCT), the quasi-governmental body of the Repub-
lic of the Marshall Islands dedicated to disbursing 
compensation for damages arising from the US nu-
clear weapons testing program in the Marshall Is-
lands. Since 2000, he has worked for the US gov-
ernment at the National Cancer Institute. In an arti-
cle published in August 2010, Simon, together with 
his colleagues at the National Cancer Institute, uti-
lized a mathematical model to estimate that among 
the 25,000 Marshallese born before 1979, there 
would be a total of 170 excess cancers related to 
radiation exposure from the Bikini and Enewetak 
detonations.21 This is a lower estimate than in a 
2004 National Cancer Institute report (a similar 
mathematical modeling exercise) for the US Senate, 
which estimated approximately 500 excess cancers 
related to radiation.22 
Simon and colleagues estimate that without nu-
clear testing in the Marshall Islands, there would 
have been 10,600 cancer cases.19 So, Simon and col-
leagues are saying that only 1.6% of cancer cases 
(170/10,600) occurring in Marshallese born before 
1979 are due to radiation exposure. It must be kept 
in mind that this is an estimate derived from a pre-
dictive model of cancer occurrence that – on the 
face of it for those who care for Marshallese patients  
– seems excessively low. That is to say, if there had 
been a complete and accurate cancer registry, the 
number of cancers caused by radiation would cer-
tainly be greater than 170. It should be interpreted in 
light of the US government’s vested interest in min-
imizing the consequences of its nuclear testing. 

	  
 
Social Medicine (www.socialmedicine.info)	  
- 87 -	  
Volume 8, Number 2, August 2014 
 
In assessments by US government scientists, it is 
now recognized that the Bravo test of 1954 was not 
the only test that deposited measurable radiation on 
the Marshall Islands. In fact, Simon and his col-
leagues at the National Cancer Institute have identi-
fied 20 of the 66 tests conducted from 1948 through 
1958 as having deposited radiation on both the mid-
latitude atolls, including Kwajalein, and southern 
atolls, including Majuro.23 Ivy Mike and Castle Bra-
vo are on this list, but no one talks about Castle 
Romeo (11 megatons) on March 27, 1954, a few 
weeks after Bravo or Castle Yankee on March 5, 
1955 (13 megatons). And what about the other 46 
tests? Where did the fallout from those tests go? As 
noted above, most likely toward the rest of Microne-
sia. In a 2012 report,24 Calin Georgescu, the United 
Nations Special Rapporteur on the implications for 
human rights of the environmentally sound man-
agement and disposal of hazardous substances and 
wastes, called upon the US government to release 
the heretofore classified information on the history 
of nuclear testing in the Pacific, the fallout patterns 
of the radiation clouds, and the data collected on 
people of the Marshall Islands and the rest of Mi-
cronesia. 
We think that the estimate of 170 cases of cancer 
from radiation in the Marshall Islands is excessively 
low. Perhaps the problem rests in the excessive reli-
ance of conventional radiation science on models 
derived from Hiroshima and Nagasaki data. Several 
scientists associated with the European Commission 
on Radiation Risk (ERCC)25 think that radiation 
causes much more disease than do the conventional 
radiation scientists. Rosalie Bertell (1929–2012), of 
the International Institute of Concern for Public 
Health, in her review of the National Cancer Insti-
tute studies, noted that the principal authors, Steven 
Simon and Andre Bouville, are physicists and that 
author Charles Land is a statistician who is “largely 
responsible for estimating the dose response to nu-
clear radiation at Hiroshima and Nagasaki.”26 Draw-
ing on exposure data from Simon et al., Bertell cal-
culated that the radiation exposure for Marshallese 
even in the Southern atolls was greater than the 
maximum amount allowed by the US government at 
that time. Conventional scientists note that these 
alarmists do not publish their findings in peer-
reviewed journals and call the ERCC report “poor 
science” that “should not be taken seriously in any 
deliberations on radiological protection policy and 
standards.”27 Even the Green Party has distanced 
itself from the first author of the ERRC report, Chris 
Busby, who has been accused of selling expensive 
and useless radiation products and services to the 
people of Fukushima in the aftermath of the March 
2011 nuclear power plant disaster.28  
 
How do we tell which cancers occurring now are 
the result of radiation? 
Because thyroid cancer, particularly papillary 
thyroid cancer, is so radiogenic, we can say with 
confidence that most of the thyroid cancers in the 
Marshall Islands, and perhaps to a lesser extent in 
the rest of Micronesia as well, are attributable to 
radiation exposure. However, we cannot say with 
certainty that radiation is responsible for any partic-
ular cancer in any particular person. Behavioral fac-
tors such as smoking, diet, alcohol use, and betel nut 
use, environmental exposures, and factors such as 
obesity and infections also contribute to cancer bur-
den in the region.  
 
Besides cancer, were there other health conse-
quences of nuclear fallout? 
Marshallese women report giving birth to many 
deformed infants. One abnormality, known as “jel-
lyfish babies,” is described by Marshallese women 
as looking like a mass of grapes, and probably rep-
resents hydatidiform moles.29,30,31 Abnormal births 
described as looking like “peeled grapes” have also 
been described by women in Utah who were down-
wind of the Nevada Test Site.32 In 1990-1991, Glenn 
Alcalay conducted a survey of 830 women living in 
the Marshall Islands, comparing pre-1952 and post-
1952 data. (The first test in the megaton range was 
Ivy Mike of 1952.) For the period after 1952, he 
found a strong correlation between the number of 
congenital anomalies, stillbirths, and miscarriages 
and the distance of residence from Bikini. In addi-
tion, the incidence of congenital anomalies in-
creased after 1952.33 The US government, however, 
has consistently denied that such reproductive ab-
normalities are the result of nuclear testing.34 

	  
 
Social Medicine (www.socialmedicine.info)	  
- 88 -	  
Volume 8, Number 2, August 2014 
 
Radioactive iodine, one of the by-products of nu-
clear testing, has the ability to destroy normal thy-
roid tissue in addition to its role in producing muta-
tions that lead to thyroid cancer. Radioactive iodine 
is used to therapeutically ablate overactive thyroid 
tissue or to ablate any thyroid tissue that remains in 
the body after surgical removal of the thyroid gland. 
For the Rongelapese and Utrikese who were fol-
lowed by the Brookhaven program, growth lag in 
children was not initially attributed to low thyroid 
function since the program lacked the laboratory 
technology to detect it in its early years. When hy-
pothyroidism was eventually recognized in these 
populations, affected individuals were treated with 
thyroid hormone.8 This, along with the physiologic 
experiments utilizing radioactive isotopes, is an ex-
ample of how the findings of the Project 4.1/ 
Brookhaven/AEC study of Marshallese people have 
contributed to medical science, raising issues of 
whether it is ethical to use these findings. While the 
US government continues to insist that the Mar-
shallese people were accidentally exposed to fallout 
by the Bravo test of March 1, 1954, the existence of 
planning documents, outlining Project 4.1, from the 
fall of 1953 indicates that the exposure of Mar-
shallese to fallout was deliberate and by design. 
Diabetes has been shown to disproportionately 
affect Marshallese.35 The question has been raised as 
whether nuclear testing has contributed to the inci-
dence of diabetes among this population. This de-
pends, however, on how the question is posed. Ion-
izing radiation has not been demonstrated to be a 
pathophysiologic cause of diabetes. However, the 
disproportionately high prevalence of diabetes in the 
Marshall Islands is certainly related to the social 
disruption caused by nuclear and other weapons 
testing.36,37 Micronesia is a strategic asset for the US 
After the period of nuclear tests on Bikini and 
Enewetak Atolls in the Marshall Islands (1946-
1958), nuclear weapons testing continued on John-
ston and Christmas Islands in Micronesia (1958-
1962), and nuclear weapon delivery systems testing 
continues today on Kwajalein Atoll in the Marshall 
Islands. The Ronald Reagan Ballistic Missile De-
fense Test Site on Kwajalein Atoll in the Republic 
of the Marshall Islands has been the target for inter-
continental ballistic missile testing and ballistic mis-
sile defense testing. The displacement of people by 
weapons testing has diminished the people’s ability 
to produce staples such as taro and breadfruit. Mar-
shallese have become more dependent on imported 
white rice and processed foods such as canned meat. 
Much of Micronesia has witnessed a breakdown of 
traditional cultural values and an increased preva-
lence of obesity and alcohol, tobacco, and other 
drug use. As communities lose their ability to pro-
duce their own food, people lead more sedentary 
lives. This has led to an epidemic of obesity and 
diabetes throughout the Pacific Islands. 
 
Is there any possibility for compensation for Mi-
cronesians affected by nuclear testing? 
The US provided the Republic of the Marshall 
Islands with $150 million in 1983 as compensation 
for all claims of damage to property and persons.38 
The Nuclear Claims Tribunal in the Marshall Islands 
compensated individuals for a variety of conditions, 
mostly cancers of various organs.39 The amount 
provided was manifestly inadequate, particularly to 
compensate for property damage, and the NCT 
funds have been exhausted. 
 
Micronesians’ access to health coverage in Ha-
wai‘i  
Some decades after the period of nuclear testing, 
which took place while Micronesia was a United 
Nations-mandated Trust Territory administered by 
the US, most of the jurisdictions became independ-
ent nations in the 1980s. Under the Compact of Free 
Association (COFAs), citizens of the Republic of 
the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micro-
nesia, and the Republic of Palau have the right to 
free entry into the US without a visa. Drawn by the 
prospect of education, employment, and health care, 
Micronesians are migrating to the US in increasing 
numbers, many entering through Hawai‘i. Accord-
ing to the US Census Bureau, the official Mar-
shallese population in the US tripled between 2000 
and 2010, from an estimated 6,700 to 22,434. Many 
believe that this is an underestimate. The majority of 
Marshallese migrants in the US reside in Hawai‘i 
(33%) and Arkansas (19%).40 
Health services in many jurisdictions of Micro-
nesia are only able to provide basic cancer diagnos-

	  
 
Social Medicine (www.socialmedicine.info)	  
- 89 -	  
Volume 8, Number 2, August 2014 
 
tic and treatment services. As the cost of US health 
care is prohibitive, many jurisdictions preferentially 
refer to the Philippines. However, because the Com-
pacts allow free entry into the US, many with health 
conditions choose to move to Hawai‘i.41 
The Personal Responsibility and Work Oppor-
tunity Act of 1996, part of welfare reform during the 
Clinton administration, eliminated funding for par-
ticipation by citizens of the Compact nations in 
Medicaid. However, individual states were able to 
choose to include COFA migrants. Initially, the 
State of Hawai‘i had chosen to allow Micronesians 
to participate in Med-QUEST, Hawai‘i’s managed 
care Medicaid program, funding their participation 
through state funds. In an attempt to cut the State of 
Hawai‘i’s budget during the recession, Republican 
Governor Linda Lingle took Micronesians off of 
Med-QUEST during the period of July through De-
cember 2010 and put them on a severely inadequate 
insurance program called Basic Health Hawaii. It 
took a concerted effort on the part of the Microne-
sian community in Hawai‘i, together with allies in 
the legal and medical community, to have their par-
ticipation in Basic Health Hawaii overturned in fed-
eral court. In his decision, Judge Michael Seabright 
agreed that Micronesians being excluded from Med-
QUEST was a violation of the equal protection 
clause of the 14th Amendment to the US Constitu-
tion. 
Appeals regarding the federal legal responsibility 
to fund health care for COFA citizens carry little 
weight these days in Washington, DC. When he was 
in the House of Representatives, Hawai‘i’s current 
Democratic governor, Neil Abercrombie, inserted 
into the House version of the health reform bill that 
became the Affordable Care Act language reinstat-
ing Medicaid for people living in Hawai‘i who are 
citizens of the Compact nations. This language was 
not included in the final version of the law. As Gov-
ernor, however, Abercrombie has opposed the man-
date to include COFA migrants in Medicaid and his 
administration appealed Judge Seabright’s decision. 
On April 1, 2014, a three-judge panel of the Ninth 
Circuit Court of Appeals handed down a ruling that 
the State of Hawai‘i’s has no obligation to fund 
Medicaid for COFA migrants. The plaintiffs’ re-
quest for a full panel (“en banc”) review from the 
Circuit Court has since been denied. The Attorney 
General of the State of Hawai‘i has announced that 
coverage would continue until the lawsuit is com-
pletely resolved.42 
There is rampant discrimination against Micro-
nesians in Hawai‘i.43,44 Generally, people in Hawai‘i 
like to congratulate themselves for their post-racial 
attitudes. However, racism is alive and well in Ha-
wai‘i, and the main target of discrimination in Ha-
wai‘i are Micronesians. Racism takes a number of 
forms. Political authorities in Hawai‘i point out that 
Micronesians utilize resources out of proportion to 
their numbers. The amount that the state spends on 
services for migrants from the Compact nations is 
emphasized as part of a demand for more “Compact 
Impact” federal funds. In the health care system, it is 
not unusual to hear comments such as these remarks 
reported in 2007 by a medical student at the Univer-
sity of Hawai‘i John A. Burns School of Medicine:  
 
Everybody is sick of caring for and wasting their 
taxes on these people that have no appreciation 
for what is being done for them and fake their 
illnesses to stay in the hospital for free food and 
board…We shoulda just wiped the islands off the 
earth when we had the chance.45 
 
Preventing nuclear war 
As Helen Caldicott taught us, we must “eradicate 
nuclear weapons because they are medically contra-
indicated.” Her observation is not simply that nucle-
ar war will ruin your day. Rather, her insight is that 
it is our duty as health workers to work to prevent 
nuclear war. As Caldicott noted,  
 
Rudolph Virchow… said, ‘Medicine is a social 
science and politics is medicine writ large,’ and 
I’ve realized in this work that the only way to 
stop the nuclear arms race is to educate the poli-
ticians that nuclear war is medically contraindi-
cated and, if they don’t believe us, remove them 
from office for the public health of the people of 
the world.46 
 
In April 2014, the Republic of the Marshall Is-
lands initiated lawsuits in the International Court of 
Justice in The Hague against the nine nuclear-armed 
nations of the world for failing to fulfill their obliga-
tions to the 1968 Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, 

	  
 
Social Medicine (www.socialmedicine.info)	  
- 90 -	  
Volume 8, Number 2, August 2014 
 
which requires signatories to negotiate to end the 
nuclear arms race and for a treaty on their eventual 
elimination. The nine named countries were the US, 
Russia, the UK, France, China, Israel, India, Paki-
stan, and North Korea. A parallel lawsuit against 
representatives of the US government was initiated 
in the Federal District Court in San Francisco, Cali-
fornia.47 
All health workers should support this effort to 
prevent others from suffering the consequences of 
nuclear weapons that the people of Micronesia have 
endured. Simply put, preventing nuclear war is good 
medicine and good public health. 
 
Conclusion 
If Micronesians are starting to feel that they and 
their lands have been sacrificed for the military and 
marketplace, unfortunately they are not alone.48 The 
particular role that Micronesia has played in the 
most extensive empire that the world has known has 
been to serve as the proving grounds for its most 
fearsome weapons. Micronesian people were sub-
jected to experimentation without their knowledge 
or consent. Their lands were contaminated - and in 
the future, with global warming, sea level rise, and 
severe weather – they may be unable to sustain hu-
man habitation.49 
In 1946, the US sought permission from Biki-
nians to use their islands for nuclear testing. It was 
proffered that this was God’s will and the testing 
would be “for the good of mankind.” Homelands 
were vacated. Fallout from nuclear testing was de-
posited on the people of the Marshall Islands and 
probably the rest of Micronesia. Adverse outcomes 
resulted not only from the direct effects of radiation, 
but also from the social upheaval caused by nuclear 
testing. In concert with the United Nations Special 
Rapporteur, we call upon the US government to re-
lease its classified information on nuclear testing in 
the Pacific, the fallout patterns of the radiation 
clouds, and its data collected on people of Microne-
sia. Together with the Republic of the Marshall Is-
lands, we call upon the nuclear-armed states to 
comply with treaty commitments to work toward the 
elimination of nuclear weapons. Whether or not US 
federal funding for health care for Micronesians is 
forthcoming, the compelling reason for Micronesi-
ans to have access to health care are the simple 
premises that health is a human right and that all 
humans should be included “under the rubric ‘hu-
man.’”50 
 
Acknowledgements:  
The authors would like to acknowledge Holly Bark-
er, PhD, the Honorable Tony deBrum, and Barbara 
Rose Johnston, PhD. 
 
References 
1. Radiation Effects Research Foundation. Frequently 
asked questions. How many cancers in atomic-bomb 
survivors are attributable to radiation? [cited 2013 
Nov 25]. Available from: 
http://www.rerf.or.jp/general/qa_e/qa2.html  
2. The Committee for the Compilation of Materials on 
Damage Caused by the Atomic Bombs in Hiroshima 
and Nagasaki. Hiroshima and Nagasaki: the physical, 
medical, and social effects of the atomic bombings. 
New York: Basic Books; 1981. 
3. Barker HM. Bravo for the Marshallese: regaining con-
trol in a post-nuclear, post-colonial world. Belmont, 
CA: Wadsworth/Thomson Learning; 2004. 
4. Niedenthal J. Bikini Atoll website. A short history of 
the people of Bikini Atoll. [cited 2014 Apr 20]. Avail-
able from: http://www.bikiniatoll.com/history.html. 
5. deBrum T. Testimony. In: Advisory Committee on 
Human Radiation Experiments. Public Meeting. 
Tuesday, July 5, 1994. [cited 2013 Nov 25]. Available 
from: 
http://www.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/radiation/dir/mstreet/comme
et/meet4/trnsct04.txt. 
6. Rhodes R. Dark sun: the making of the hydrogen 
bomb. New York: Simon and Schuster; 1995, p. 541. 
7. Operation Castle. 1954 – Pacific Proving Ground. 
Castle Bravo [cited 2013 Nov 25]. Available from: 
http://nuclearweaponarchive.org/Usa/Tests/Castle.html. 
8. Cronkite EP, Conard RA, Bond VP. Historical events 
associated with fallout from Bravo Shot--Operation 
Castle and 25 y of medical findings. Health Phys. 
1997 Jul;73(1):176-86. 
9. Deines AC, Goldman DI, Harris RR, Kells LJ. Mar-
shall Islands Chronology 1944 to 1990 [cited 2012 
Dec 2]. Available from: 
http://www.hss.doe.gov/Healthsafety/IHS/marshall/collectio
n/ihp/chron. 
10. Howard JE, Vaswani A, Heotis P. Thyroid disease 
among the Rongelap and Utirik population--an up-
date. Health Phys. 1997 Jul;73(1):190-98. 
11. Wolbarst AB, Wiley AL, Nemhauser JB, Christensen 
DM, Hendee WR. Medical response to a major radio-
logic emergency: a primer for medical and public 

	  
 
Social Medicine (www.socialmedicine.info)	  
- 91 -	  
Volume 8, Number 2, August 2014 
 
health practitioners. Radiology.	  2010 Mar;254(3):660-
77. 
12. Institute of Medicine. National Research Council. 
Exposure of the American people to iodine-131 from 
Nevada nuclear-bomb tests: review of the National 
Cancer Institute report and public health implications 
[cited 2013 Nov 23]. Available from: 
http://books.nap.edu/catalog/6283.html. 
13. Conard RA, Meyer LM, Sutow WW, Lowrey A, Can-
non B, Moloney WC, et al. Medical survey of the 
people of Rongelap and Utirik Islands nine and ten 
years after exposure to fallout radiation (March 1963 
and March 1964). Upton, NY: Brookhaven National 
Laboratory, Unites States Atomic Energy Commis-
sion; 1965 [cited 2014 Apr 20]. Available from: 
http://babel.hathitrust.org/cgi/pt?id=mdp.39015086583849;v
iew=1up;seq=1. 
14. Johnston BR. “More like us than mice”: radiation ex-
periments with indigenous peoples. In: Johnston BR, 
ed. Half-lives and half-truths: confronting the radioac-
tive legacies of the Cold War. Santa Fe, NM: School 
for Advanced Research Press; 2007. p. 25. 
15. Radiation Effects Research Foundation. Frequently 
asked questions. What health effects have been seen 
among the children born to atomic-bomb survivors? 
[cited 2012 Dec 2]. Available from: 
http://www.rerf.or.jp/general/qa_e/qa7.html. 
16. Simon SL, Robison WL. A compilation of nuclear 
weapons test detonation data for the U.S. Pacific 
ocean tests. Health Phys. 1997;73(1):258-264. 
17. Whitcomb RC. Reconstruction and analysis of ce-
sium-137 fallout deposition patterns in the Marshall 
Islands, US Centers for Disease Control, 2000. Cited 
by Alvarez R. Statement of Robert Alvarez, Senior 
Scholar, Institute for Policy Studies, before the Sub-
committee on Asia, the Pacific and the Global Envi-
ronment regarding the legacy of nuclear weapons test-
ing in the Marshall Islands, 2010 May 20 [cited 2014 
Apr 20]. Available from: demo-
crats.hcfa.house.gov/111/alv052010.pdf. 
18. deBrum T. Statement for session “Compact Perpetuity 
Clause and Nuclear Fallout over Micronesia.” Pre-
sented at Pacific Islands Traditional Leaders Summit; 
2012 Nov 22; Kolonia, Pohnpei, Federated States of 
Micronesia. 
19. Palafox NA, Yamada S, Ou AC, Minami JS, Johnson 
DB, Katz AR. Cancer in Micronesia. Pac Health Dia-
log. 2004;11(2):78-83 [cited 2013 Nov 26]. Available 
from: http://www.pacifichealthdialog.org.fj/Volume 
11/no2/PHD11 2 p078 083 Palafox orig.pdf. 
20. Katz AR, Palafox N, Johnson DB, Yamada S, Ou AC, 
Minami JS. Cancer epidemiology in the freely associ-
ated US Pacific Basin jurisdictions: challenges and 
methodologic issues. Pac Health Dialog. 
2004;11(2):84-87 [cited 2013 Nov 26]. Available 
from: http://www.pacifichealthdialog.org.fj/Volume 
11/no2/PHD11 2 p084 087 Katz orig.pdf. 
21. Simon SL, Bouville A, Land CE, Beck HL. Radiation 
doses and cancer risks in the Marshall Islands associ-
ated with exposure to radioactive fallout from Bikini 
and Enewetak nuclear weapons tests: summary. 
Health Phys. 2010 Aug; 99(2): 105-123. 
22. Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, Na-
tional Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health. 
Estimation of the baseline number of cancers among 
Marshallese and the number of cancers attributable to 
exposure to fallout from nuclear weapons testing con-
ducted in the Marshall Islands. Prepared for Senate 
Committee on Energy and Natural Resources. Sep-
tember 2004 [cited 2013 Nov 26]. Available from: 
http://marshall.csu.edu.au/Marshalls/html/Radiation/NCI-
report.pdf. 
23. Beck HL, Bouville A, Moroz BE, Simon SL. Fallout 
deposition in the Marshall Islands from Bikini and 
Enewetak nuclear weapons tests. Health Phys. 
2010;99(2):124-142. 
24. United Nations General Assembly, Human Rights 
Council. Report of the Special Rapporteur on the im-
plications for human rights of the environmentally 
sound management and disposal of hazardous sub-
stances and wastes, Calin Georgescu. Addendum: 
Mission to the Marshall Islands (27-30 March 2012) 
and the United States of America (24-27 April 2012). 
A/HRC/21/48/Add.1.2012 Sep 3 [cited 2013 Dec 1]. 
Available from: 
http://www.ohchr.org/Documents/HRBodies/HRCouncil/Re
gularSession/Session21/A-HRC-21-48-Add1_en.pdf. 
25. Busby C, ed. Recommendations of the European 
Committee on Radiation Risk: the health effects of 
exposure to low doses of ionizing radiation – regula-
tors’ edition. Aberystywth (UK): Green Audit; 2010 
[cited 2014 Apr 20]. Available from: 
http://www.euradcom.org/2011/ecrr2010.pdf. 
26. Bertell R. Peer review comments on contributions to 
the Health Physics Journal, Special Issue Vol. 99, Au-
gust 2010 and considerations of the larger question of 
the factors that have inhibited the Republic of the 
Marshall Islands from enjoying fundamental human 
rights. May 15, 2012 [cited 2013 Nov 26]. Available 
from: http://concernforhealth.org/wp/wp-
content/uploads/2012/06/BERTELL-Critique-of-
A27DD1.pdf. 
27. Thorne M. 2010 Recommendations of the European 
Committee on Radiation Risk: the health effects of 
exposure to low doses of ionizing radiation – regula-
tors’ edition [book review]. J Radiol Prot 2012;32(2): 
369–372. 
28. Monblot G, McCurry J. Post-Fukushima ‘anti-
radiation’ pills condemned by scientists. The Guardi-
an. 2011 Nov 21 [cited 2014 July 27]/ Available from: 

	  
 
Social Medicine (www.socialmedicine.info)	  
- 92 -	  
Volume 8, Number 2, August 2014 
 
http://www.guardian.co.uk/environment/2011/nov/21/christ
opher-busby-radiation-pills-fukushima 
29. Dibblin J. Day of two suns: US nuclear testing and the 
Pacific Islanders. London: Virago Press; 1988. 
30. Keever BD. Shot in the dark. Honolulu Weekly. 2004 
Feb 25-Mar 2. p. 5. 
31. Wypijewski J. From a tropical paradise to a nuclear 
hell. Los Angeles Times. 2004 Mar 1. 
32. Gallagher C. American ground zero: the secret nuclear 
war. Cambridge (MA): MIT Press; 1993.  
33. United States Advisory Committee on Human Radia-
tion Experiments. (Public Meeting). Statement of 
Glenn Alcalay. March 15, 1995 [cited 2013 Nov 27]. 
Available from: 
http://www2.gwu.edu/~nsarchiv/radiation/dir/mstreet/comm
eet/meet12/trnsc12a.txt 
34. deBrum T. BRAVO and today: US nuclear tests in the 
Marshall Islands. Presented at the Seventh Non-
Proliferation Treaty Review Conference at the United 
Nations; 2005 May 11 [cited 2003 Nov 27]. Available 
from: 
http://www.greenpeace.org/international/Global/internationa
l/planet-2/report/2005/6/marshall-islands.pdf 
35. Yamada S, Dodd A, Soe T, Chen TH, Bauman K. 
Diabetes mellitus prevalence in out-patient Mar-
shallese adults on Ebeye Island, Republic of the Mar-
shall Islands. Hawaii Med J. 2004 Feb;63(2):47-51. 
36. Pollock NJ. Health transitions, fast and nasty: the case 
of Marshallese exposure to nuclear radiation. Pac 
Health Dialog. 2002 Sep;9(2):275-82. 
37. Yamada S, Palafox N. On the biopsychosocial model: 
the example of political economic causes of diabetes 
in the Marshall Islands. Fam Med. 2001;33(9):702-4. 
38. Nuclear Claims Tribunal, Republic of the Marshall 
Islands. Welcome to the Nuclear Claims Tribunal [cit-
ed 2013 Nov 26]. Available from: 
http://nuclearclaimstribunal.com 
39. Nuclear Claims Tribunal, Republic of the Marshall 
Islands. Claims [cited 2013 Nov 26]. Available from: 
http://www.nuclearclaimstribunal.com/claim.htm - conditions 
40. Hixson L, Hepler BB, Kim MO. The Native Hawaiian 
and other Pacific Islander population: 2010. 2010 
Census briefs. 2012 May [cited 2014 Feb 27]. Availa-
ble from: 
http://www.census.gov/prod/cen2010/briefs/c2010br-12.pdf 
41. Hezel FX. Micronesians on the move: eastward and 
upward bound. Pacific Islands policy. Issue 9. Hono-
lulu, HI: East-West Center, 2013 [cited 2014 Apr 27]. 
Available from: 
http://www.eastwestcenter.org/sites/default/files/private/pip
009.pdf 
42. Peter J. HealthyPacific.org website. Citizens of Oce-
ania: COFACAN statement and call to action. 2014 
Apr 16 [cited 2014 Apr 22]. Available from: 
http://www.healthypacific.org/1/post/2014/04/citizens-of-
oceania-cofacan-statement-and-call-to-action.html 
43. Blair C. No aloha for Micronesians in Hawaii. Hono-
lulu Civil Beat. 2011 Jun 6 [cited 2013 Nov 26]. 
Available from: 
http://www.civilbeat.com/articles/2011/06/20/11650-no-
aloha-for-micronesians-in-hawaii 
44. Yamada S. Discrimination in Hawai‘i and the health 
of Micronesians and Marshallese. Hawaii J Public 
Health. 2011;3(1):55-57.  
45. Anonymous (medical student). Personal communica-
tion with Seiji Yamada. 2007 Sep 5. 
46. Oregon State University, Special Collections & Ar-
chives Research Center. [Video], “We the people: a 
prescription for ending the arms race,” Dr. Helen 
Caldicott; 1984 Oct 17. [cited 2014 Apr 26] Available 
from: 
http://scarc.library.oregonstate.edu/events/1984caldicott/vid
eo-caldicott.html 
47. Nuclear Zero Lawsuits website. [cited 2014 Apr 26]. 
Available from: http://www.nuclearzero.org 
48. Hedges C, Sacco J. Days of destruction, days of re-
volt. New York: Nation Books; 2011. 
49. Ahlgren I, Yamada S, Wong A. Rising oceans, cli-
mate change, food aid, and human rights in the Mar-
shall Islands. Health Hum Rights. 2014;16(1):69-80. 
50. Farmer P. Pathologies of power: health, human rights, 
and the new war on the poor. Berkeley (CA): Univer-
sity of California Press; 2003