Principled Nonviolence: An Imperative, Not 
an Optional Extra
Kevin P. Clements
This article compares principled and strategic nonviolent movements. While 
pragmatic, strategic nonviolence is effective for movements seeking to overthrow 
corrupt repressive and dictatorial regimes, it is much less successful in the 
progressive transformation of state and political systems. This is because principled 
nonviolence and movements associated with such value systems are ambivalent 
about political power and the role of the Weberian state. Conversely strategic 
nonviolent movements are willing to utilize the coercive power of the state for 
their own political purposes and in doing so often become fatally compromised, as 
happened in Egypt, Palestine and Syria. The promise of principled nonviolence is 
social, political, and economic institutions capable of transcending Machiavellian 
politics because of a radical commitment to pacifism and emancipatory political 
processes.
Keywords 
principled nonviolence, strategic nonviolence, Mahatma Gandhi,  
                        Martin Luther King, transformative politics
“Violence is the behaviour of someone incapable of imagining other solutions to the 
problem at hand.” Bruno Bettelheim
“I oppose all violence because the good it does is always temporary but the harm it 
does is permanent.” Mahatma Gandhi
“Nonviolence is a Weapon of the Strong.” Mahatma Gandhi
“Nonviolence is fine as long as it works.” Malcolm X
“Nonviolence is a flop. The only bigger flop is violence.” Joan Baez
“To kill one man is to be guilty of a capital crime, to kill ten men is to increase the 
guilt ten-fold, to kill a hundred men is to increase it a hundred-fold. This the rulers of 
the earth all recognise and yet when it comes to the greatest crime—waging war on 
another state—they praise it...” Mozi (China 470-391 BC)
Asian Journal of Peacebuilding  Vol. 3  No. 1 (2015): 1-17
Research Article
© 2015 The Institute for Peace and Unification Studies, Seoul National University
ISSN 2288-2693 Print, ISSN 2288-2707 Online

2  Kevin P. Clements
Principled vs. Pragmatic Nonviolence
Analyzing why individuals, groups, movements, organizations, and nations resort 
to (direct or indirect) violence to satisfy their interests and needs is perhaps the 
major problematique of peace and conflict studies. Analyzing individual, group, 
movement, and national alternatives to violence has not, however, received 
anywhere near the same amount of academic attention as has violence. This 
is partly because violence is assumed to be more interesting and sexier than 
nonviolence (“if it bleeds, it leads”), but it also reflects the fact that even in the 
richly normative discipline of peace and conflict studies we tend to be much more 
concerned with pathology than cure. 
One of the reasons for the relative neglect of nonviolence is that there is no 
single term that adequately explains what it is all about. Is it an ethical belief, an 
attitude, a tactic, or a strategy, or all of the above? What has motivated people 
in the past and what motivates people in the present to choose nonviolence in 
response to life’s many dilemmas? Why in the second decade of the 21st century 
has there been an upsurge of both academic and political interest in nonviolence?
There are many answers to all these questions. In the first place, it is clear 
that within most major religious and philosophical traditions nonviolence is 
viewed as a superior way of living—something to aspire to. These religious 
traditions developed what is known as “principled nonviolence.” This was, and 
is, seen as more virtuous than the old warrior traditions. Christians, for example, 
are enjoined to love their enemies; Hindus and Buddhists to observe the oneness 
of all things and not harm life; Taoists and Confucians to search for harmony as 
a universal truth principle. All of these religious traditions highlight the value of 
principled nonviolence. Nonviolence is a way of both understanding and living 
“truth” in the face of the physical, psychological, and moral vulnerability that 
flows from each one of us living in the company of others. 
Principled nonviolence is based on a rejection of all physical violence. It 
rests on a willingness to suffer instead of inflicting suffering, a concern to end 
violence, and a celebration of the transformative power of love and compassion. 
Nonviolence is seen as an outward manifestation of a loving spirit within each one 
of us. Recent neuroscience, incidentally, underlines that what world religions view 
as love may in fact be hard wired into our right-brain instincts for connection and 
bonding (McGilchrist 2009, 156). Principled nonviolence seeks to love potential 
enemies rather than destroy them, and promotes nonviolent, peaceful means to 
peaceful ends. Its preferred processes are persuasion, cooperation, and nonviolent 
resistance to forceful coercion for political purposes. 
Mahatma Gandhi was probably the most exemplary representative of 
this tradition. His whole life was dedicated to the nonviolent pursuit of justice 
and peace and to the principle of doing no harm to others. He wanted to build 

 Principled Nonviolence  3
communities and nations based on positive, nonviolent principles. Gandhi 
distinguished between “nonviolence for the weak,” which is the use of nonviolent 
techniques in resisting oppression (what is now thought of as tactical or strategic 
nonviolence), and “nonviolence for the strong,” which is a permanent nonviolent 
lifestyle for those with resources, power, and influence. Nonviolence for the strong 
involves self-discipline, simple living, an inner search for truth, and the courage 
to confront injustice and oppression by nonviolent means (Dalton 2012). This 
principled nonviolent tradition has over the years given rise to the Civil Rights 
Movement in the United States and fuelled many of the principled and pragmatic 
nonviolent political movements of the 21st century. It has been successful, for 
example, in places like Poland, the Philippines, and many countries in the former 
Soviet Union. Nonviolence as a way of life provides a powerful moral compass for 
evaluating whether different kinds of social movements, or economic, social, and 
political decisions, are likely to generate sustainable development and stable peace 
over the medium-to-long term. 
The second understanding of nonviolence is what is known as pragmatic, 
tactical, or strategic nonviolence. Some critics refer to this perspective as 
“nonviolence light.” This is a little unfair since many of the people who engage 
in tactical and strategic nonviolence often exhibit considerable courage 
when confronting oppressive regimes and deep-rooted injustice. The reason 
it is considered nonviolence light, however, is because it does not demand 
a commitment to personal pacifism or a nonviolent lifestyle. Pragmatic 
nonviolence simply asserts that physical violence is too costly or impractical; it 
is grounded in political struggle and is seen as an effective method or tool for 
generating political change. Instead of asking what is right, it asks what will work. 
Pragmatic nonviolence is a means to an end rather than an end in itself. It aims at 
short-term goals (e.g., the overthrow of a repressive regime, or changes to unjust 
and oppressive laws) rather than an end to all violence in all spheres of social life. 
Pragmatists see no particular problem in utilizing nonviolent tactics or strategies 
to overthrow a regime and then utilizing all the machinery of government 
(including its coercive security, police, and military capacities) to maintain 
order for the benefit of their own groups and interests. Principled nonviolent 
actors, on the other hand, always feel somewhat suspicious about power and the 
circulation of power elites. They are certainly wary of assuming responsibility for 
the monopoly of force and power at the heart of most state systems. Pragmatic 
nonviolence is not averse to the use of coercion—especially psychological and 
economic coercion. But it draws the line at physical coercion for regime change. 
Having achieved power, however, pragmatic nonviolent movements are willing 
to utilize physical coercion on behalf of the new regime. The principle concern 
of strategic, pragmatic nonviolence is to resist oppression, build mass-based 
movements, lower the entry and participation requirements, and ensure that they 
are effective instruments for waging a range of political struggles. Gene Sharp, 

4  Kevin P. Clements
one of the principal advocates of strategic nonviolence, argues that “nonviolence 
is what people do, not what they believe. Nonviolence is an alternative weapons 
system” (Sharp 1973, 110). Because of this philosophical position, strategic 
nonviolence focuses a lot of attention on articulating and promoting a wide 
range of nonviolent protest tactics, including the withdrawal of cooperation or 
noncooperation (with private and public sector actors), and civil disobedience to 
unjust customs, norms, and laws.  
The good news is that pragmatic, strategic nonviolence has often proven 
effective in civilian resistance to oppression (Chenoweth and Stephan 2011); the 
bad news is that many of these successful examples of pragmatic nonviolence have 
not proven so successful over the long haul. Many (e.g., the Moslem Brotherhood 
in Egypt) have come to power but have refused to grapple with many of the 
deeper sources of both direct and indirect violence, and have wittingly or 
unwittingly perpetuated popular preoccupation with state power, politics, and 
coercive agency. This is why I wish to argue that principled nonviolence is an 
imperative, not an optional extra. Principled nonviolence is capable of embracing 
all the tactics and strategies of strategic nonviolence, but it always maintains a 
critical wariness of the monopoly of violence at the heart of every state. Like 
strategic nonviolence, it encourages the development of grassroots capabilities, 
legitimacy, and resilience, but it is aimed at long-term rather than short-term 
solutions. It will work with the state when appropriate and oppose it when not. 
It derives its legitimacy and power from values that cannot be compromised. It 
does this by continual self-critique as well as by a robust commitment to constant 
change for a more just and peaceful world. It knows that simply overthrowing 
an unjust, repressive system is no guarantee of long-term justice and peace. It is 
the misplaced focus on the state that is proving to be the Achilles heel of strategic 
nonviolence. 
Nonviolence and the State
This raises an important question: Why do all change agents (whether from a 
principled or pragmatic nonviolent tradition) focus so much attention on the 
state? One reason is that the state’s monopoly of coercive capacity, force, and 
violence defines and shapes the ground rules for both pragmatic and principled 
nonviolence. We can’t avoid this. If we are to map the contours of violence then it 
is imperative that we understand who is dominant, who subordinate. Who is in 
and who is out. Who has power and who is relatively or absolutely powerless. My 
argument, however, is that principled nonviolent action is committed to seeing 
beyond “normal politics” to discern alternative political and human possibilities. 
This orientation generates a radical challenge to both the state and wider 
economic and social sources of direct, structural, and cultural violence. There is 

 Principled Nonviolence  5
nothing in pragmatic nonviolence that will necessarily or automatically move it 
in a more radical direction.
One of the reasons we are so preoccupied with the nation state is because 
state systems, in modern industrial economies, have an enormous capacity to 
determine social, economic, and political outcomes for people, and we know that 
they directly or indirectly have a critical role to play in terms of levels of wellbeing, 
cooperation, harmony, and peace. The downside of this fascination, however, is 
that social movement activists and leaders—and even peace researchers—become 
seduced by the logic of state power and in different ways reinforce it by and with 
their/our particular academic and political preoccupations.  
Recently, for example, in the academic field of Peace and International 
Relations there has been an upsurge of interest in the utility of nonviolent social 
movements for regime change and wider social and political transformation. 
The Journal of Peace Research (JPR), for example, dedicated its May 2013 issue to 
“Understanding Nonviolent Resistance” (Chenoweth and Cunningham 2013). 
In this issue there are a number of articles outlining the diverse ways in which 
nonviolent social and political movements have been successful in relation to 
self-determination movements, regime change, and general political struggles 
for human rights and other issues. This issue of JPR focuses attention on such 
things as resource mobilization, decreasing barriers to participation, coalition 
formation, tactics, strategy, discipline, elite defections, and the positive utility 
of “backfire” in resisting oppressive rule. Most of the papers “demonstrate the 
importance of treating nonviolent and violent strategies, as well as conventional 
political strategies, as alternative choices for engaging the state” (ibid., 271). Or as 
Chenoweth says, “Improved theory and data on the subject will help researchers 
and policymakers to shape strategies to support these movements when 
appropriate, and to manage changes in the international system that result from 
the success of nonviolent uprisings” (ibid.). 
These comments continue the preoccupations of an earlier paper on “Why 
Civil Resistance Works: The Strategic Logic of Nonviolent Conflict” (Stephan 
and Chenoweth 2008) and more recently Erica Chenoweth and Maria Stephan’s 
award-winning book on Why Civil Resistance Works (Chenoweth and Stephan 
2011). I will return to some of their key issues later in the paper. 
All of these recent contributions on the effectiveness of nonviolent tactics and 
strategy for political transformation are being proposed for pragmatic purposes 
and are seen by many critics as simply enlarging the number of nonviolent 
options available to protest movements around the world. It seems likely that the 
upsurge of recent interest in these movements springs from the desire of a range 
of political parties and movements to adopt or co-opt them because of their low 
entry costs and their effectiveness in building mass movements, rather than from 
any ideological or ethical commitment to a radically nonviolent future. 
In this sense strategic and pragmatic nonviolence is primarily a 21st century 

6  Kevin P. Clements
means of waging nonviolent political struggle in order to change repressive 
national and global political systems in a democratic and Western direction. 
These movements are, therefore, a very integral part of the wider liberal peace 
project (see Newman, Paris, and Richmond 2009). There is no deeper inclination 
or commitment to linking nonviolent means to nonviolent ends or to advancing 
local level solutions to locally driven problems. Many of the movements and 
parties adopting strategic nonviolence are doing so to advance liberal peace 
by non-coercive means. This suits the Western liberal peace agenda very well 
indeed. There are numerous examples of nonviolent means being used to 
overthrow a dictatorship or repressive rule without any future commitment to 
a more just or nonviolent future. As mentioned above, once repressive rulers 
have been overthrown, the leaders of strategic nonviolent movements see little 
or no contradiction between their nonviolent means and taking over all the old 
dictator’s machinery of government and coercive capacities. 
Strategic nonviolence, in these instances, does not extend to an ongoing 
deepening of nonviolent, pacific values or the emergence of state systems that are 
less dependent on force than those which have been replaced. Thus it seems to me 
that many of the sanguine predictions for the power of nonviolent civil resistance 
might need to be modified over the medium-to-long term. 
Strategic nonviolent tactics have been promoted tirelessly by the International 
Centre of Nonviolent Conflict (ICNC). Those associated with this organization 
have done a huge amount of work promoting pragmatic and strategic 
nonviolence. In doing so they have equipped a wide range of different groups 
and social and political movements with useful tactics and strategies for resisting 
political oppression and dictatorship. And they have been successful. Many recent 
nonviolent revolutions owe their success to the work and ideas of the ICNC. This 
organization can claim credit for overthrowing dictators, which is an important 
prerequisite for nonviolent transformation. But apart from ensuring that dictators 
don’t return, it is not primarily interested in transformational processes beyond 
opposition to repressive and oppressive rule. In fact, the ICNC specifically rejects 
the value or importance of principled nonviolence as unnecessary or irrelevant 
to the strategic logic of nonviolence. This means that they are more interested in 
short-to-medium term, strategic effectiveness rather than changed social values 
or long-term social and political transformation. The mission of the ICNC is 
to promote the strategic utility and effectiveness of nonviolent resistance as a 
political weapon. They assert that “Nonviolent conflict is a way for people to fight 
for rights, freedom, justice, self-determination, and accountable government, 
through the use of civil resistance—including tactics such as strikes, boycotts, 
protests, and civil disobedience” (http://www.nonviolent-conflict.org).
Note the stress on “fight” and how much of the focus of these fights is on 
civil resistance directed primarily, but not exclusively, at corrupt, repressive, 
unaccountable, and unjust governments. The ICNC is interested primarily in 

 Principled Nonviolence  7
expanding the repertoire of nonviolent options for civil resistance to unjust and 
oppressive rule. I am not opposed to these ICNC initiatives. In fact, I encourage 
them. It is definitely better to promote tactical and strategic nonviolent opposition 
to dictatorship and repressive rule than disorganized nonviolent activism, or 
worse, violent opposition to such rulers.
To the extent that these tactics have been effective in the Middle East 
(Celestino and Gleditsch 2013) and elsewhere, the ICNC, and other individuals 
and groups promoting pragmatic rather than principled nonviolence, can take 
credit for successfully focusing on nonviolence as a political strategy rather than 
a way of life (Dudouet 2013). They see these successful social movements as 
vindication for a pragmatic, non-threatening nonviolence.
While personally they might be interested in particular goals, as a political 
movement the ICNC and similar groupings are not that interested in moral 
values, short- or long-term political vision, or in ethical means/ends relationships. 
They are primarily interested in what works and what is politically effective. In 
their view most individuals and communities are happy to adopt nonviolent 
tactics but not so willing to adopt pacifism and nonviolence as personal guiding 
principles. Deeper values may be important to individuals, but as long as 
pragmatic nonviolence works, and as long as it is less personally or politically 
costly than violent options, pragmatists advocate nonviolence primarily for 
instrumental reasons.  
The advocates of strategic nonviolence are very reluctant, therefore, to accept 
the demands of principled nonviolence or pacifism. They argue that there is no 
particular reason why nonviolent political activists have to have any “principled” 
justifications for their behavior. In fact they argue that principled nonviolence 
(nonviolence as a way of life) is often an impediment to effectiveness. Principled 
actors, for example, might be too empathetic towards their opponents and not 
“tough” enough! Their justification for pragmatic nonviolence is largely utilitarian. 
It lies in the “success” of the movements. If millions of people over the past 50 
years have taken to the streets in “successful” nonviolent protest movements, 
this justifies pragmatic nonviolence. Most of the recent scholarship on these 
movements, therefore, has focused on tactics that have generated movement 
success in replacing regimes, securing independence, and reducing oppression. 
Theorists and advocates of strategic nonviolence argue that if these goods can 
be achieved with pragmatic nonviolence why would theorists or activists seek to 
complicate things with more “idealistic” aspirations?
Limitations of Pragmatic Nonviolence
Well before the current spate of papers and books eulogizing pragmatic 
nonviolence, L.K Bharadwaj argued the opposite case. He suggested a 

8  Kevin P. Clements
fundamental difference between pragmatic and principled nonviolence—
an irreconcilable difference between (for example) Gandhian nonviolence 
and pragmatic nonviolence, which he describes as a species of “moderate 
Machiavellianism” (Bharadwaj 1998, 79-81). Machiavelli (the first systematic 
exponent of cynical realism) suggests that “immorality is the very law of politics.” 
This is because success is all that is important to the ruler. He/she will justify 
any and all means in the pursuit of desirable political ends. This could mean, 
for example, torture, manipulation, subversion, war, propaganda, collective 
brainwashing, and so forth. Absolute Machiavellianism is willing to sacrifice 
everything on the altar of success. “Moderate Machiavellianism” on the other 
hand has slightly clearer normative boundaries, but if the moderate way fails 
Machiavellian logic will generate a willingness to contemplate, if not subvert, 
nonviolent, peaceable processes. 
Max Weber made similar comments in his lecture “Politics as a Vocation” 
where he argued: 
“The decisive means for politics is violence.” Against the prominent German pacifist 
and Great War opponent, E W Forster, he claimed “it is not true that good can follow 
only from good and evil only from evil, but that often the opposite is true. Anyone 
who fails to see this, is indeed, a political infant…Anyone interested in saving their 
soul should not seek it along the avenue of politics, for the quite different task of 
politics can only be solved by violence.” … [In response to the biblical injunction to 
turn the other cheek, Weber argues:] “for the politician, the reverse proposition holds, 
Thou shalt resist evil by force.” (Howes 2013, 427) 
In opposition to this position, Bharadwaj argues: 
As long as nonviolence is embraced on pragmatic grounds; and, not truth and 
morality, but success and power (in the Weberian sense of the imposition of our will 
on the other, in spite of the other’s resistance) are made the criteria of its efficacy, it 
prepares itself for self defeat. (Bharadwaj 1998, 79)
The reason for this is that the focus on political success is likely to lead to an 
opportunistic and half-hearted acceptance of nonviolence. It will be embraced as 
long as it is successful; but if it encounters deeper resistance or failure, as was the 
case in Syria, there will be a temptation to use other, more expedient or violent 
means. 
This willingness to compromise or explore alternatives to nonviolence will 
eventually lead to the destruction of good ends and means. This argument has 
been vindicated in Egypt and Tunisia over the past year (Gresh 2013). Without 
deep commitment to principled nonviolence, individuals, groups, and movements 
in both countries have been prepared to consider cynical nonviolence (such as 
nonviolent demonstrations under the auspices of the military and security forces) 

 Principled Nonviolence  9
or more violent options to secure economic, social, or political advantage.
Gandhi (and his disciple Martin Luther King), on the other hand, both want 
to preserve the purity of means and ends at all costs. They assert
the unity and integrality of means and ends, treating truth and nonviolence as 
convertible terms (two sides of the one coin). … [Gandhi] would rather that one use 
violence, or even “kill rather than be a coward” than accept nonviolence merely on 
pragmatic grounds or for reasons of expediency. (Bharadwaj 1998, 80)
The proponents of pragmatic nonviolence apply a minimal political principle 
of doing no physical harm to those they politically oppose. The advocates of 
principled nonviolence, on the other hand, apply a principled rejection of the use 
of physical or emotional violence in all personal and political life. They do not see 
nonviolence as a short-term, rational choice for particular political ends; rather, 
it is a way of life and being. The challenge is how to hold the principled and 
pragmatic in tension. Gandhi was definitely the leading advocate of principled 
nonviolence, but he was also willing to resort to pragmatic, tactical nonviolence 
for different types of political objectives. The difference between Gandhi and 
contemporary pragmatists, however, is that his pragmatic nonviolence always 
took place within a much more demanding principled framework. Gandhi was 
never happy with the short-term political gains he and his followers achieved as 
he knew that generating a non-violent world demanded personal and collective 
commitment to pacifism on a daily basis and for the long haul.
If we take two examples of principled nonviolent action—the Indian Struggle 
for Independence and the United States Civil Rights Movement—it is clear that 
analysts and activists in both movements were as concerned with the peaceful 
consequences of their processes as they were with the outcomes. They felt uneasy 
with processes that did not accord as much respect to their opponents as to their 
followers. Because of this they subjected their politics to much more radical and 
critical scrutiny than do those that are opportunistically nonviolent. If our goal is 
to be in peaceful relations with fellow human beings at all levels and in all sectors 
through time, then this is a much more demanding and radical proposition than 
simply applying nonviolence to achieve immediate political objectives.
In recognition of this, nonviolent actors, such as War Resisters International 
(WRI), have developed specific principles of nonviolent action. They know that 
many people will not be able to accept all of these principles all of the time, but 
these principles (most of which are some variant of Gandhi’s principles) do 
provide a reasonably clear normative framework for guiding nonviolent behavior. 
Without such principles it is possible for pragmatic nonviolent movements to 
engage in a wide variety of opportunistic actions that might do emotional or 
even physical harm to opponents while changing their economic, social, or 
political behavior. It is also the case that without such principles, those who are 

10  Kevin P. Clements
pragmatically nonviolent will have little incentive to work for inclusive, longer 
term, stable peace (with justice) after political objectives have been secured. The 
WRI principles are stated as follows:
• ‌We acknowledge the value of each person. This is fundamental; recognising the 
dignity and humanity of oneself and others. We refuse to mistreat our opponent as 
an enemy.
• ‌We recognise that we all have part of the truth; no-one has all of it. No one is all 
“right” or “wrong.” Our campaign information gathering, education and actions 
should reflect this.
• ‌Our actions emphasise openness to promote communication and democratic 
processes. We work for processes that express “power with” not “power over” others. 
Empowering all involved in a campaign is important. We promote democratic 
structures (internally and externally) to maximise self determination.
• ‌Our means (behaviours and actions) are consistent with our ends (of affirming life, 
opposing oppression and seeking justice, valuing every person). Our strategy must 
be based on this principle; we cannot justify a “victory” obtained through violent or 
deceitful methods.
• ‌We are willing to undergo suffering rather than inflict it. Refusing to inflict suffering 
is based on the value of each person and is a strategy that draws attention to 
our commitment and our cause. We will not violently fight back if attacked. We 
recognise jail may be a consequence of our actions; filling the jails may be a strategy.
• ‌We commit ourselves for nonviolent action according to the guidelines agreed. 
If necessary we will attempt to arrange orientation sessions or workshops in 
nonviolence to better understand and practice this commitment. (Clark 2009, 51)
These values are very different from the pragmatic guidelines for strategic 
nonviolent activists. Gene Sharp, for example, documents 198 different kinds 
of nonviolent action classified into three categories according to their strategic 
function: (1) Nonviolent protest or persuasion, (2) non-cooperation, and (3) 
nonviolent interventions aimed at disrupting old social relationships and/or 
forging new autonomous relations (Sharp 1973, 23). None of these tactics rest 
on any philosophical or principled positions, although a lot of Sharp’s original 
work was a detailed analysis of Gandhian philosophy and practice (Sharp 1970). 
They just represent actions that have proven effective in past conflicts. They are 
promoted as worthwhile tactics because they are considered, or have “proven” to 
be, effective. 
In another example, Kurt Schock, who is a very sophisticated advocate for 
pragmatic nonviolence, focuses on tactics that will (1) generate political leverage, 
(2) strengthen resilience in the face of repression, or (3) yield advice on when to 
concentrate or disperse movement forces in different campaigns (Schock 2005, 
27). These different dimensions or tactics of successful movements could just as 
easily be interim tactics for the military as for nonviolent resistance movements. 
Military strategists, for example, will try to exhaust nonviolent options before 

 Principled Nonviolence  11
contemplating violent ones because they know the costs of violence are higher 
than the costs of nonviolence. 
Chenoweth and Stephan argue very specifically that what makes pragmatic 
nonviolence so effective is the low entry costs for participants. Because actors 
do not need to embrace moral or political principles, and do not need to worry 
about the dangers and costs of armed violence, they can be more easily mobilized 
en masse (Chenoweth and Stephan 2011). 
This orientation has been vigorously promoted by the ICNC. The 
consequences have been varied. On the one hand there is no doubt that Gene 
Sharp’s strategies and tactics have been widely circulated around the world. There 
is also no doubt that these tactics have been put to use in a range of oppressive 
environments with considerable success. But there are downsides as well. The 
ICNC has been criticized in the past for its close links with Freedom House. (Peter 
Ackerman, the founding chair of ICNC, is also chair of the board of Freedom 
House.) They have also been criticized for being too close to U.S. government 
policy in relation to externally sponsored, internal subversion of some odious 
regimes. It suits the U.S. government well to have strategic nonviolent advocates 
focus their attention on states considered problematic to U.S. global interests. 
If these regimes can be overthrown by nonviolent popular movements, that 
removes the need for state-to-state subversion! It certainly postpones the need for 
“dirty tricks” campaigns or more high-risk military interventions. So, strategic 
nonviolence suits big states like the United States well. If strategic nonviolence, 
for example, can generate elite defections from odious regimes, this avoids the 
necessity for the United States to engage in covert or overt military engagement 
and helps the toppling of “dictatorships” in a “friendly” non-coercive fashion! In 
this way the United States can generate more and more democratic, like-minded 
states all around the world without damage to its reputation or any need to 
engage in diplomatic threat. 
In terms of outcomes, however, I would argue that in these instances there is 
very little to distinguish the tactics or choices of strategic nonviolent actors from 
actors with violent means at their disposal. 
In relation to military or political defections, for example, both violent and 
nonviolent strategists will try to generate incentive packages to encourage elite 
discontent, dissent, and defection. If the strategic nonviolent inducements do 
not work the sanctions are more mass mobilizations aimed at paralyzing the 
government. If the strategic violent actor’s inducements don’t work, the sanction 
is likely to be more coercive violent threat. Both violent and nonviolent strategists 
therefore aim at exerting power for particular political interests. Both are a long 
way from the goals and aspirations of principled nonviolent actors. 

12  Kevin P. Clements
Nonviolence and Political Power
Most of the pragmatic nonviolent literature is about a re-conceptualization of 
power such that citizens might realize and utilize their latent capacities more 
effectively. This contrasts rather dramatically with the principled nonviolent 
activists who are interested in radically recasting power as a tool of deeper social 
empowerment—“power with others” rather than “power over others.” Pragmatic 
nonviolence is about challenging those in power by withdrawing cooperation 
and compliance. It is about political competition by nonviolent means. 
Pragmatic nonviolence is not normally aimed at a fundamental rethinking of 
state institutions or the nature of the relationships between civil society and 
the state. Rather it is directed at enabling those who are relatively, or absolutely, 
powerless to realize their latent power so that they might (directly or indirectly) 
make state and political institutions work in their favor. Where state institutions 
are considered fragile or defective, pragmatic nonviolence is aimed at making 
them work more effectively and legitimately. This is not an anarchist/non-state 
option; it is simply a collection of methods for exerting power and influence on 
the part of the relatively powerless or disenfranchised by nonviolent means. It is a 
nonviolent political choice. The problem is that in most democratic environments 
this is not all that radical.  
Most politics in democratic systems are nonviolent, and most social and 
political movements that wish to be politically effective within state systems have 
to play by the Weberian logic of the state rather than by a deeper radical logic of 
personal, interpersonal, social, and communitarian nonviolence.
Principled nonviolence, on the other hand, has a much more radical 
ontology. It seeks to challenge and change the militarized, dominatory, and 
sovereign nature of contemporary politics so that political institutions are de-
centered, decentralized, responsive, and truly representative of diverse social 
and political opinion. Principled nonviolence is always ambivalent about the 
state because of the iron fist that lies beneath the velvet glove of all political and 
judicial institutions. They are not happy with rearranging the deck chairs on the 
Titanic, substituting one regime for another. They want safer ships! 
Principled nonviolence advocates want minimal state systems with 
absolutely minimal security establishments. They want deeper notions of popular 
legitimacy rather than claims based on a monopoly of force.1 John Burton, for 
example, argues that the whole point of collaborative problem solving is to 
challenge adversarialism wherever it occurs—within society, education, the polity, 
the judiciary, and the economy (Burton 1969). It would be very challenging for 
a Burtonian, therefore, to advocate pragmatic nonviolence because this is aimed 
primarily at the enhancement of adversarial tactics for very specific political 
purposes.  

 Principled Nonviolence  13
Principled nonviolence is aimed at something else altogether. It is aimed 
at building radical cultures of respect, dignity, and peacefulness at social, 
economic, and political levels. It is not seduced only by the political. It is based 
on giving practical recognition to, what I would call, the politics of love and 
compassion. Most principled nonviolence flows from Gandhian philosophy and 
is based on a daily practice to wage peace. Gandhi was always looking for the 
“truth” in relationships and believed that if he could discover what generated 
deeper empathetic compassion, this “truth force” would prove more compelling 
than brute force. He believed in living each day with truth, justice, patience, 
compassion, courage, and loving kindness as his companions. These are the 
values and concerns that I, and most principled peace advocates, promote. This 
is a much more radical commitment than simply looking for effective political 
tactics. Gandhi’s use of the ancient Hindu term ahimsa (which means not 
injuring or harming anyone, and being nonviolent in thought, word, and deed) 
actively promotes universal well-being for all species. This means a radical respect 
for the environment and all species, what Gandhi calls sarvodaya, or justice for all 
creatures (see Prakash 2013 for an elaboration of these concepts). It also involves 
a commitment to what Gandhi calls swaraj, or self rule, where we assume full 
responsibility for our own behavior and for decisions on how to organize our 
own communities. It stands in radical tension with what we might think of as 
dominatory politics. It is also based on swadeshi, or the “genius of the local,” 
where, as far as possible, needs are satisfied from one’s locality, drawing on the 
genius of local knowledge and skills. Finally, principled nonviolence is based on 
satyagraha, or nonviolent revolution, which is aimed at turning foes into friends 
and intolerance into hospitality. This is very different from mass-based social 
and political movements that assume that regime change will solve the problems 
of human coexistence. It is aimed at continual nonviolence, unleashing virtuous 
cycles from multiple acts of small goodness. They produce radical transformation 
by consistent altruism, goodness, and compassionate behavior. In actively 
resisting oppression satyagrahis understand that “there are wrongs to die for, yet 
not a single one to kill for” (Prakash 2013, 22).
All of these principles for a just and peaceful life are a long way from the 
short-term considerations of the pragmatic activist. They are a clear articulation 
of a living revolution, a daily revolution, a revolution that, by definition, knows 
no end. They are principles that give a radical edge to personal and political 
transformation, and the good news is that they have been embodied by many 
of the leaders and movements that advocate principled nonviolence—many of 
which join forces with strategic nonviolent movements for specific purposes; all 
of which would have some ambivalence about the current state-centric biases 
within the strategic nonviolent movement.
Most of the handbooks and manuals for principled nonviolent training 
(e.g., the WRI manual above) are pitched at ensuring that nonviolent movement 

14  Kevin P. Clements
processes are different from those of their opponents. If the state practices top-
down exclusive decision making, for example, the movement wants bottom-up 
participatory and consensual decision making. If the state doesn’t know how to 
enlarge consensual decision-making processes, then the movement wants to focus 
on how to do it. The WRI manual, for example, spends a lot of time defining 
what is meant by consensus decision making and how to develop what they 
call “spokecouncils” (Clark 2009). This is aimed at generating a different way of 
making decisions in collaboration with, rather than in opposition to, those whose 
values and interests are affected by the decisions. Similarly, these movements seek 
to embody gender, ethnic, and cultural diversity in different ways. Most if not all 
of them, however, have some common aspirations for a replacement of “brute 
force” with something more civilized. 
Conclusions
The advocates of pragmatic nonviolence like to assert that their position is a 
viable stance between militarism and pacifism. It is realistic, entry costs are low, 
and it has proven highly efficacious (Zunes, Kurtz, and Asher 1999). They suggest 
that pragmatic nonviolence is the moral equivalent of war. I would like to take 
issue with this assertion and suggest that unless there is a willingness to embrace 
principled, pacifist nonviolence these social movements are likely to get snared by 
the political logic of the modern industrial state and to find themselves as messily 
compromised as those who advocate more coercive positions. 
Social movement scholars argue that there are three major elements in 
relation to their success or failure: political opportunities, mobilizing structures, 
and framing processes (see McAdam, McCarthy, and Zahd 1996; Sharp 1980). 
My argument is that it is in the popular and elite framing of the movements that 
we will discover whether or not they have transformative potential, or are simply 
conducting politics by other means. The short- medium- and long-term successes 
of strategic nonviolence will be determined, not by the efficaciousness of tactics, 
but by whether or not the leadership of these movements and their followers 
embrace principled nonviolence. Without a significant leavening of the pragmatic 
and strategic lump these movements are simply engaged in political competition 
by nonviolent means. 
With more principled commitments they will become constant, agonistic 
irritants to the taken-for-granted powers of global economics and politics. 
Without this radical critical edge they may generate the illusion of change, but 
the dynamics will be just as unpeaceful, just as unjust, as the politics they seek to 
replace. What has happened to the 1979 Iranian Revolution (termed a successful 
nonviolent campaign by Chenoweth and Stephan)? Or the first Palestinian 
Intifada? Or People Power in the Philippines? (Chenoweth and Stephan 2011). 

 Principled Nonviolence  15
Because they were not imbedded in principled nonviolent movements their long-
term impacts have been mixed, both in terms of justice and peacefulness. The 
reality is that while all of these movements generated positive outcomes in the 
short term, they have not been able to transform these results into long-term 
positives because the leadership did not have the mental, moral, or value-based 
discipline to maintain peace and justice by peaceful means. 
The world has become a more peaceful place, not just because effective and 
legitimate state systems and the rule of law have been expanded (Pinker 2011), but 
because there has been a growing normative recognition of the unacceptability 
of violence as a political or social means of control. This message and this norm 
have been upheld through the centuries by religious and non-religious actors 
who have been willing to articulate a principled and ethical position affirming 
life and maintaining the unacceptability of direct or indirect violence. It is a 
normative position that needs to be constantly reiterated, but it’s the right one 
if we are to be the social and political change that we want to realize. Very little 
attention has been directed to the attitudinal or behavioral consequences of these 
values in the assessment of strategic nonviolence, and yet it has been carefully 
nurtured and promoted by principled nonviolent advocates for centuries. Does it 
matter whether actors are principled or pragmatic re nonviolence as long as the 
strategy and tactics work? I want to argue that it does matter. In fact it matters a 
lot, especially in areas where violence is considered an acceptable political tool. 
It matters particularly around issues of mobilization, persistence, leverage, and 
outcomes. This is because there is a big difference between short-term and long-
term change/transformation and outcomes.
Principled nonviolence is more likely to generate movement discipline, 
strategic flexibility, and critical understanding of the connections between 
direct oppression/structural violence and cultural violence. If there is no care, 
compassion, empathetic consciousness in strategic nonviolence, there is always 
the danger that it might result in a different kind of oppression, but nevertheless 
oppression, in consequence.
Principled nonviolence is an imperative, not an optional extra! It is the 
ethical glue that binds strategic and tactical nonviolence to its ethical heart. 
It is the spur that is needed to promote collaborative, open, and participatory 
institutions, and it is crucial to ensuring that all social systems really engage 
in that longer term and Herculean task of building cultures and structures of 
sustainable peace.
Note 
1.	
There is a curious alignment here between left- and right-wing agendas, although 
there are some big differences as well. Both see the dangers of state domination of the 

16  Kevin P. Clements
economy and society. The left, however, wants to reduce or eliminate the security sphere 
as much as possible, while the right wants to reduce the welfare and educational spheres as 
much as possible. Both are interested, however, in enhancing the power of non-state actors.
References
Bharadwaj, Lakshmi K. 1998. “Principled versus Pragmatic Nonviolence.” Peace Review 10 
(1): 79-81. 
Burton, John W. 1969. Conflict & Communication: The Use of Controlled Communication in 
International Relations. London: Macmillan, and New York: Free Press.
Celestino, Mauricio R., and Kristian S. Gleditsch. 2013. “Fresh Carnations or All Thorn, 
No Rose? Nonviolent Campaigns and Transitions in Autocracies.” Journal of Peace 
Research 50 (3): 385-400. doi:10.1177/0022343312469979.
Chenoweth, Erica, and Kathleen G. Cunningham. 2013. “Understanding Nonviolent 
Resistance: An Introduction.” Journal of Peace Research 50 (3): 271-276. doi:10.1177/ 
0022343313480381.
Chenoweth, Erica, and Maria J. Stephan. 2011. Why Civil Resistance Works: The Strategic 
Logic of Nonviolent Conflict. New York: Columbia University Press.
Clark, Howard. 2009. Handbook for Nonviolent Campaigns, 1st ed. Bilbao: War Resisters 
International.
Dalton, Dennis. 2012. Mahatma Gandhi: Nonviolent Power in Action. New York: Columbia 
University Press.
Dudouet, Veronique. 2013. “Dynamics and Factors of Transition from Armed Struggle 
to Nonviolent Resistance.” Journal of Peace Research 50 (3): 401-413. doi:10.1177/ 
0022343312469978.
Gresh, Alain. 2013. “Shadow of the Army Over Egypt’s Revolution.” Le Monde 
Diplomatique, No. 1308, 1-2. http://mondediplo.com/2012/08/02egypt (accessed May 
21, 2015).
Howes, David E. 2013. “The Failure of Pacifism and the Success of Nonviolence.” 
Perspectives on Politics 11 (2): 427-446. 
McAdam, Doug, John D. McCarthy, and Mayer N. Zald, eds. 1996. Comparative 
Perspectives on Social Movements: Political Opportunities, Mobilizing Structures, and 
Cultural Framings. Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press.
McGilchrist, Iain. 2009. The Master and His Emissary: The Divided Brain and the Making of 
the Western World. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Newman, Eric, Roland Paris, and Oliver P. Richmond. 2009. New Perspectives on Liberal 
Peacebuilding. Tokyo and New York: United Nations University Press.
Pinker, Steven. 2011. The Better Angels of Our Nature: Why Violence Has Declined. New 
York: Viking Books. 
Prakash, Madhu S. 2013. “Peaceful Revolution? Gandhi’s Four Paths to Get There.” Yes 
Magazine, July 12. 
Schock, Kurt. 2005. Unarmed Insurrections: People Power Movements in Nondemocracies. 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Sharp, Gene. 1970. Exploring Nonviolent Alternatives. Boston: P. Sargent Publishers.
Sharp, Gene. 1973. The Politics of Nonviolent Action. Boston: P. Sargent Publishers.

 Principled Nonviolence  17
Sharp, Gene. 1980. Social Power and Political Freedom. Boston: P. Sargent Publishers.
Stephan, Maria J., and Erica Chenoweth. 2008. “Why Civil Resistance Works: The Strategic 
Logic of Nonviolent Conflict.” International Security 33 (1): 7-44. 
Zunes, Stephen, Lester R. Kurtz, and Sarah B. Asher. 1999. Nonviolent Social Movements: A 
Geographical Perspective. Malden, Mass; Oxford: Blackwell Publishers.
Kevin Clements is the Foundation Director and Professor of Peace Studies at the National Centre 
for Peace and Conflict Studies at the University of Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand. He is the author 
of over 165 articles and chapters on Peace and Conflict Studies and seven single-authored or edited 
books. E-mail: Kevin.clements@otago.ac.nz