by 
Wolfram Dornik, Georgiy Kasianov, Hannes Leidinger, 
Peter Lieb, Alexei Miller, Bogdan Musial, Vasyl Rasevych
SELF-DETERMINATION, OCCUPATION, 
AND WAR IN UKRAINE, 1917-1922

The Emergence of Ukraine
Self-Determination, Occupation, and War 
in Ukraine, 1917–1922


Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies Press
Edmonton 	
2015	
Toronto
The Emergence of Ukraine
Self-Determination, Occupation, and 
War in Ukraine, 1917–1922
Wolfram Dornik, Georgiy Kasianov, 
Hannes Leidinger, Peter Lieb,  
Alexei Miller, Bogdan Musial, 
Vasyl Rasevych
Translated from the German
by Gus Fagan

Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies Press
University of Alberta	
University of Toronto
Edmonton, Alberta	
Toronto, Ontario
Canada T6G 2H8	
Canada M5T 1W5
Copyright © 2015 Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies
ISBN 978-1-894865-40-1 (pbk.)
	
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication
Dornik, Wolfram, 1978-, author 
          The emergence of Ukraine : self-determination, occupation, and war in 
Ukraine, 1917-1922 / Wolfram Dornik, Georgiy Kasianov, Hannes Leidinger, 
Peter Lieb, Alexei Miller, Bogdan Musial, Vasyl Rasevych ; translated from 
the German by Gus Fagan.
Partial translation of: Die Ukraine : zwischen selbstbestimmung und 
fremdherrschaft 
      1917-1922.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-894865-40-1 (pbk.)
           1. Ukraine--History--Revolution, 1917-1921.  2. Ukraine--History-- 
Autonomy and independence movements.  3. Ukraine--History--1917-.  
I. Kasianov, H. V. (Heorhii Volodymyrovych), 1961-, author  II. Lieb, 
Peter, 1974-, author  III. Fagan, Gus, translator  IV. Title.
 
DK508.832.D6713 2015                        947.7’0841                       C2015-900103-X
The translation and publication of this book has been funded by a generous 
grant from the Austrian Science Fund (FWF Der Wissenschafsfonds), Vienna, 
Austria. A grant for this book has also been provided by the Canadian 
Foundation of Ukrainian Studies.
Cover photo: Austro-Hungarian and Ukrainian soldiers on the railway, Kryvyi 
Rih, April 1918. (Reproduced with permission of the Heeresgeschichtliches 
Museum, Vienna).
All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in 
any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, 
without the prior permission of the copyright owner.
Printed in Canada

Contents
List of Maps  /  vii
List of Illustrations  /  viii
Publisher’s Preface, Marko Robert Stech  / ix
Editor’s Preface, Wolfram Dornik / xiii
Introduction, Wolfram Dornik  /  xv
1.	
Eastern Europe between War and Revolution, 1914–1922  /  1
1a.	
A Time of Troubles: Revolutionary Upheavals and Armed 
Conflicts in the Former Tsarist Empire, 1917–1922 , Hannes 
Leidinger  /  1
1b.	
The Ukrainian Policy of the Central Powers during the First 
World War, Peter Lieb and Wolfram Dornik  /  37 
2.	
Ukrainian Efforts at State-Building between Independence 
and Foreign Domination  /  76
2a.	
Ukraine between Revolution, Independence, and Foreign 
Dominance, Georgiy Kasianov  /  76
2b.	
The Western Ukrainian People’s Republic of 1918–1919,  
Vasyl Rasevych  /  132 
3.	
The German Empire and Austria-Hungary as Occupiers of 
Ukraine in 1918  /  155
3a. 	 Military Operations, Peter Lieb and Wolfram Dornik  /  155
3b. 	 The Administration of the Occupation, Wolfram Dornik and Peter 
Lieb  /  202
3c. 	 Economic Utilization, Wolfram Dornik and Peter Lieb  /  235
3d. 	 The View from Within: Everyday Life during the Occupation, 
Vasyl Rasevych  /  280

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
vi
4. 	
Ukraine in International Relations in 1918  /  298 
4a. 	 Russia’s Ukrainian Policy before 1917, Alexei Miller  /  298
4b.	
The Ukrainian Policy of Bolshevik Russia, 1917–1922, Bogdan 
Musial  /  321
4c-e. 	Limits to Power: Ukraine in the Strategies of the Allied Powers, 
1917–1924, Hannes Leidinger and Wolfram Dornik  /  347
4f. 	
Poland’s Ukrainian Policy, 1918–1922, Bogdan Musial  /  369
Conclusion  /  386
Looking Ahead: A Comparison of the Occupation Regimes of 1918 
and 1941–1944, Peter Lieb, Wolfram Dornik, and Georgiy Kasianov  /  386
Concluding Observations, Wolfram Dornik  /  399
Appendix  /  407
List of Sources  /  407
Abbreviations  /  419
Index  /
Authors  /  

List of Maps
[Page numbers following map titles refer 
to pages in the electronic files]
Map 1: The Kerensky Offensive and the “Response” of the Central 
Powers, Summer 1917 (Banks, A Military Atlas of the First World War, 
176; Ellis and Cox, The World War I Databook, 36ff.) [Leidinger, A Time 
of troubles, p. 4]  /  5
Map 2: Ethnolinguistic distribution of Germans, Poles, and 
Ukrainians ca. 1900 (Magocsi, Historical Atlas of East Central Europe, 
99) [Dornik and Lieb, “The Ukrainian Policy of the Central Powers 
during the First World War,” p. 10]  /  52
Map 3: Political borders of Ukraine, 1918 (Magocsi, Historical 
Atlas of East Central Europe, 36, 138) [Kasianov, “Ukraine between 
Revolution…,” p. 1]   /  78
Map 4: The Central Powers’ invasion of Ukraine, February to May 
1918 (ÖStA, KA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 469, No. 1492; ibid., Kt. 308, Fol. 
271; Österreichisches Bundesministerium für Landesverteidigung 
– Kriegsarchiv, ed., Österreich-Ungarns letzter Krieg 1914–1918, vol. 
7, supplement 6; Reichsarchiv, ed., Der Weltkrieg, 1914–1918, vol. 13, 
376–86) [Lieb and Dornik, “Military Operations,” p. 4]   / 159 
 
Map 5: The occupying powers’ administration of Ukraine, 
1 November 1918 (Österreichisches Bundesministerium für 
Landesverteidigung – Kriegsarchiv, ed., Österreich-Ungarns letzter 
Krieg 1914-1918, vol. 7, supplement 27/2) [Lieb and Dornik, “Military 
Operations,” p. 26]   /  193
Map 6: The administration of the occupation in Ukraine, mid-May 
1918. (ÖStA, KA, NFA, 2. Armee, Op. AK, Kt. 308, Fol. 275) [Dornik 
and Lieb, “Administration of the Occupation,” p. 3]   /  206 
Map 7: Central Europe, 1918–23 (Magocsi, Historical Atlas of East 
Central Europe, 126) [Musial, “The Ukrainian Policy of Bolshevik 
Russia,” p. 10]   /  336

List of Illustrations
[Page numbers following map titles refer 
to pages in the electronic files]
Facsimile 1: Economic organization (ÖStA, KA, AOK, Ukraine 
Akten, Kt. 2622, Nr. 6906) [Dornik and Lieb, “Economic Utilization,” 
p. 13]   /  255 
Facsimile 2: Organization of grain export from Ukraine, German-
Austro-Hungarian-Ukrainian Economic Center, Kyiv (ÖStA, 
KA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2613, Nr. 2030). [Dornik and Lieb, 
“Economic Utilization,” p. 14]  /  257
Facsimile 3: Ukrainian exports until 30 September and in 
October 1918 (BArch, R 3101/1303f.) [Dornik and Lieb, “Economic 
Utilization,” p. 21]   /  271
Figure 1: Agreed deliveries and actual deliveries (BArch, R 
3101/1341. Handelsvereinigung für Getreide, Futtermittel und 
Saaten. Ukraine-Bericht Nr. 98 für den 31. August)  /  269
Figure 2: Deliveries to the Central Powers until 16 August 1918 
(ÖStA, KA, AOK, Qu. Abt., Ukraine-Bestand, Karton 2.620, Nr. 5574)   
/  270

Publisher’s Preface
The publication of The Emergence of Ukraine: Self-Determination, 
Occupation, and War in Ukraine, 1917–1922, edited by Wolfram Dornik 
and others, is an important milestone in the long-standing efforts 
of the Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies and CIUS Press to 
research, publish, and disseminate information pertaining to Ukraine’s 
struggle for independence in the years 1917–21. This was one of the 
most complex, as well as understudied, periods of twentieth-century 
European history, when the defeat of the Central Powers in the First 
World War and the collapse of the Austro-Hungarian and Russian 
empires made it possible for the “non-historical nations” of Central 
and Eastern Europe to undertake the creation of independent states. 
The first CIUS Press book dedicated to this complex subject, 
Michael Palij’s monograph The Ukrainian-Polish Defensive Alliance, 
1919–1921, appeared in 1995. This book focused on the joint Ukrainian-
Polish military operation against Soviet Russia, the causes of its 
failure, and the subsequent Soviet offensive in Poland and its defeat. 
Against the background of these developments, the book presented 
a much broader picture of the political situation in Ukraine at that 
momentous time and of the difficult Polish-Ukrainian relations that 
then prevailed. The book presented the biographies of two national 
leaders, Symon Petliura and Józef Piłsudski, and recounted the war of 
1918–19 in Galicia between Poland and the Western Ukrainian People’s 
Republic. It went on to discuss in detail the Polish-Ukrainian Treaty 
of Warsaw (1920) and the Polish-Soviet Treaty of Riga (1921), which 
ended the Polish-Soviet war. The book also included a discussion of 
the fate of the Ukrainian Army after the end of the conflict, as well as 
Symon Petliura’s exile and assassination in Paris in 1926.
This book was soon followed by Anna Procyk’s monograph Russian 
Nationalism and Ukraine: The Nationality Policy of the Volunteer Army 
during the Civil War, published later in 1995. It focused on the nationality 
policy of the Russian Volunteer Army and the Russian liberals who 
dominated its policy-making. Challenging the generally accepted view 
that the character and aims of the White movement were mainly anti-
Bolshevik or even restorationist, Procyk showed that the concept of 
“One, Indivisible Russia” was central to the Volunteer Army’s ideology 
and contributed to its failure. She persuasively demonstrated that the 
political program of the liberal Russian intellectuals who dominated the 
Volunteer Army’s Political Center reinforced General Anton Denikin’s 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
x
refusal to deal with the independent Ukrainian governments of 1918–
19 and his hostility to the idea of a Russo-Ukrainian federation and/or 
anti-Bolshevik alliance. In essence, the book argued that the Volunteer 
Army failed to defeat the Bolsheviks because it was unwilling and 
unable to come to terms with the Ukrainian question and because, at 
critical junctures during the war, its struggle against an independent 
Ukraine overshadowed its struggle against the Bolsheviks.
In 2009, CIUS Press published an English translation of the 
monograph Western Ukraine in Conflict with Poland and Bolshevism, 
1918–1923 by a participant in the events analyzed, Vasyl Kuchabsky, 
whom a renowned specialist on modern Ukraine, Ivan Lysiak-
Rudnytsky, called “the most interesting historian of the Ukrainian 
revolution.” Originally published in German in Berlin in 1934, this 
monograph remains one of the most comprehensive accounts of the 
political, military, and diplomatic aspects of the Western Ukrainian 
struggle for independence. Although the central issues of this study 
were Polish-Ukrainian relations and the Ukrainian-Polish War in 
Galicia (1918–19), Kuchabsky also examined state-building in the 
Western Ukrainian People’s Republic and, to some extent, in the 
Ukrainian People’s Republic, as well as relations between the two 
republics. Making extensive use of the historical materials available 
at the time, he analyzed the Ukrainian-Polish conflict within the 
broader context of European politics, the Paris Peace Conference, 
the interests of the Allied powers, and the Russian attitude toward 
Ukrainian independence.
Apart from book-length studies of the revolutionary period of 
1917–21 in Ukraine, CIUS Press published several important essays on 
the subject in its collections on Russian-Ukrainian, Polish-Ukrainian, 
German-Ukrainian, and Jewish-Ukrainian relations. Other articles 
devoted to the period appeared over the years in the Journal of 
Ukrainian Studies published by CIUS. Moreover, various CIUS centres 
and programs cosponsored several conferences on the revolutionary 
period (such as the conference on “The First World War: The Ukrainian 
Dimension” held in Lviv on 12–14 September 2014, cosponsored by the 
Petro Jacyk Program for the Study of Modern Ukrainian History and 
Society at CIUS), as well as on related subjects (such as the conference 
on “Canada, the Great War and the Internment of Enemy Aliens, 1914–
1920,” held in Banff, Alberta, on 17–18 October 2014 and cosponsored 
by the Kule Centre for Ukrainian Canadian Studies at CIUS).
Currently, the Peter Jacyk Centre for Ukrainian Historical 
Research at CIUS and CIUS Press are preparing for publication Pavlo 

publisher’s preface
xi 
Khrystiuk’s Comments and Materials on the History of the Ukrainian 
Revolution, 1917–1920, edited by a prominent specialist in the field, 
Professor Mark von Hagen. This will be another important study of 
the collapse of the Russian Empire, Ukrainian state-building, and the 
Ukrainian-Soviet War to appear in English. 
The present volume, a slightly condensed version of the German-
language Die Ukraine zwischen Selbstbestimmung und Fremdherrschaft 
1917–1922 (Graz, 2011), marks an important new stage of our work in 
this area. It initiates a promising cooperative endeavor between CIUS 
and several prominent historians from Austria, Germany, Ukraine, 
and Russia, making available to English-speaking readers a wealth 
of hitherto unknown historical information based on the thorough 
research and evaluation of documents from military archives in 
Vienna, Freiburg, Berlin, Munich, and Stuttgart. While I appreciate 
the high scholarly quality of all the contributions to this book and 
commend their authors, I am particularly grateful to Wolfram Dornik 
for organizing this project and approaching CIUS Press with an offer 
of cooperation. All texts were very competently translated from the 
German by Gus Fagan and carefully edited by Myroslav Yurkevich. 
Last but not least, I would like to express my gratitude to the Austrian 
Science Fund (Fonds für Wissenschaft und Forschung, FWF), whose 
generous financial support made this publication possible, and to the 
Canadian Foundation for Ukrainian Studies for providing additional 
funding. It is thanks to the contributions of these individuals and 
institutions that we are now able to present English-speaking readers 
with this new perspective on the historical context of Ukraine’s 
struggle for independence during and after the First World War.
Marko Robert Stech
  


Editor’s Preface
Since 2011, when the German-language edition of this book was 
published, historians have actively pursued research on the period 
under discussion here. Innumerable publications have appeared in 
conjunction with the centennial of the First World War, presenting 
new interpretations of the subject. In countries where the Great War 
had been a neglected topic, the centennial has stimulated considerable 
scholarly output. This also applies to Ukraine: many new sources have 
been uncovered and new questions raised. We are thus witnesses to a 
re-examination of the “great seminal catastrophe” (George F. Kennan) 
and the “new time of troubles” (Manfred Hildermeier) in Ukraine and 
Eastern Europe. 
The integration of all this recent research into our volume would 
have required a new book, delaying its publication in English. The 
present English translation is a slightly condensed version of the 
German original; a Ukrainian translation is also in preparation and 
will be published soon. 
The project that produced this book has led to broader study of 
the subject. A new research project was undertaken to investigate 
the experience of warfare on the Eastern Front in the course of the 
First World War. This project, conducted at the Ludwig Boltzmann 
Institute for Research on the Consequences of War from 2011 to 
2014, was funded (like its predecessor) by the Austrian Science Fund 
(Fonds für Wissenschaft und Forschung, FWF; P-23070). It also involved 
research on Ukraine, and we benefited from the methodological and 
organizational experience of the previous project. A further result of 
the project was broader coverage of the subject. Although historical 
research on Ukraine is still underdeveloped, especially in German-
speaking countries, and there is still too little cooperation with 
Ukrainian scholars and institutions, we hope to have improved this 
to a modest extent. 
Translation is a lengthy process requiring the assistance and 
goodwill of many people and institutions. As the scholarly supervisor 
of the research project that produced the German version of this book, 
I wish to express my deepest gratitude to them. The FWF funded the 
translation and printing of the English version (PUB 46-V18). I also 
want to highlight the contribution of our partners at the Canadian 
Institute of Ukrainian Studies at the University of Alberta. Without 
their willingness to integrate this translation into their publications 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
xiv
program and their great commitment to the volume, it would not 
have been possible to produce it with such extraordinary scholarly 
diligence. I also wish to thank Marko Robert Stech for managing the 
project on behalf of CIUS, Gus Fagan for translating the book, and 
Myroslav Yurkevich for his editing of the text. I am grateful to Bernhard 
Bachinger for his editorial assistance in Austria. Finally, I want to 
express my thanks to the authors, who reviewed the translated texts 
of their contributions and supported us throughout the process. Their 
enthusiasm has been indispensable to the success of this enterprise, 
offering a fine example of how transnational projects can succeed, not 
only in the field of scholarly research but beyond. 
Wolfram Dornik
Graz, October 2014

Introduction
Wolfram Dornik
It is still the case, especially in the German-speaking world, that the First 
World War, in both public and academic perception, is overshadowed 
by the events of the Second World War and the Holocaust. The events 
of 1914 to 1918 appear marginal when compared with the incredible 
scope of the murder and persecution of the European Jews, the 
crimes against humanity perpetrated by the National Socialists, and 
their responsibility for the Second World War and its destructive 
consequences. The Stalinist crimes committed between the 1920s 
and the early 1950s, as yet inadequately analyzed, also overshadow 
those that had gone before. The view is gaining ground in academic 
research that the fundamental preconditions for fascism, Nazism, 
and Stalinism are to be found in the events of the First World War.1 
This includes not just the postwar order established in Paris. Many 
states considered that order unjust and demanded its revision. Recent 
research suggests that the events following the war were influenced 
much more decisively by soldiers’ experience of extreme violence 
on the front, the total mobilization of society in the warring states, 
radical nationalism, the removal of restrictions on violence against 
the civilian population, hunger, and increasing social inequality in the 
traumatized societies. In addition, research into the Eastern Front in 
the First World War was and still is overshadowed internationally by 
research into the war on the Western Front. The same applies to other 
theaters of war, such as Italy, Southeastern Europe, the Caucasus, the 
Near East, Africa, and the war at sea.
We thought it especially important, therefore, to undertake a 
detailed study of one as yet inadequately researched occupation from 
the final year of the First World War—the occupation of Ukraine by 
the Central Powers in 1918. It would allow us to study all the issues 
mentioned over a longer period, such as nationalist pressure in East 
European societies and its effects on political discourse, the cohesion 
of social groups influenced by the experience or practice of massive 
violence, the treatment of the civilian population by indigenous or 
1	
Alan Kramer, Dynamic of Destruction: Culture and Mass Killing in the First World War (Oxford 
and New York, 2007); Vejas Gabriel Liulevicius, War Land on the Eastern Front: Culture, 
National Identity, and German Occupation in World War I (Cambridge, 2000).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
xvi
foreign troops and by irregular armed groups, and the international 
state system of Eastern Europe, which was shaken by the upheavals of 
1917–18 and the accompanying border changes. 
Another central theme in recent research on the First World War is 
the questioning of traditional chronologies. Chronological divisions 
are particularly difficult in the case of East European conflicts.2 The 
declarations of war in July/August 1914 obviously mark the beginning. 
The end of the war, however, is fluid. Did it end with the exit from the 
war of one of the main players on the Eurasian continent, the Russian 
Empire, or with the February Revolution of 1917, the December 1917 
truce of Brest-Litovsk, or the Brest-Litovsk peace treaties of February 
and March 1918? Or did the First World War end with the truce 
treaties signed by the Entente with Austria-Hungary and Germany 
in November 1918? Throughout that whole year there were battles 
and occupations in Eastern Europe that went on well after 1918 and 
continued into the 1920s, such as the Freikorps (Free Corps) battles 
in the Baltics, the Ukrainian-Soviet war, and the Polish-Russian war.3 
Of course, most of the soldiers who had done the fighting found 
themselves “at home” from the turn of the year 1918–19. But in the 
following months “peace” did not mean “the absence of war.” War and 
armed conflict still dominated those areas for a long time.4 The usual 
periodization of the twentieth century also needs to be questioned, 
and other well-established concepts need to be looked at, such as Eric 
Hobsbawm’s “short twentieth century”5 (1914/17–1989/91) or Dan 
Diner’s “thirty-year world civil war.”6
We need to interpret developments after the First World War not 
so much as a break but as a continuity (George F. Kennan: “the great 
seminal catastrophe of this century”).7 The February Revolution of 
2	
Cf. Hannes Leidinger, “Knotenpunkte—Der historische Moment oder eine Geschichte der kurzen 
Dauer,” in Verena Moritz and Hannes Leidinger, Die Nacht des Kirpitschnikow. Eine andere 
Geschichte des Ersten Weltkriegs (Vienna, 2006), 244–70; The Eastern Front, 1914–1920: From 
Tannenberg to the Russo-Polish War, ed. Michael Neiberg and David Jordan (London, 2008).
3 
Neiberg and Jordan have made a significant contribution here: see The Eastern Front, 1914–1920, 
cited in the preceding footnote.
4 
As Timothy Snyder also found with regard to 1939–40: see his Bloodlands: Europe between 
Hitler and Stalin (London, 2010).
5	
Eric Hobsbawm, Age of Extremes: The Short Twentieth Century (London, 1994).
6	
Dan Diner, Das Jahrhundert verstehen: Eine universalhistorische Deutung (Munich, 1999).
7	
“Original catastrophe” (Urkatastrophe) is one of the metaphors used most frequently in 
connection with the First World War, although there are many who consider this term problematic: 
Wolfgang J. Mommsen, Die Urkatastrophe Deutschlands. Der Erste Weltkrieg 1914–1918 
(Stuttgart, 2002); see also the articles by Gerhard Hirschfeld and Aribert Reimann in Aus Politik 
und Zeitgeschichte, nos. 29–30 (2004).

introduction
xvii 
1917 not only shattered the institutions and borders of the Russian 
Empire but also set in motion a social upheaval that would stamp the 
entire twentieth century with its conflict between communism and 
the “free Western world.” The year 1918 was already clearly marked 
by this incipient dichotomy. The overwhelming majority of the 
states involved in the war opposed the stabilization and expansion 
of Bolshevik power. But the old lines of conflict were still in place, 
which meant that unity against the revolutionaries was not possible. 
The Whites, the Entente, the Central Powers, and the newly emerging 
states of Eastern Europe (Poland, Czechoslovakia, Ukraine, the Baltic 
states) were all anti-Bolshevik but for different reasons. For many, it 
was because they feared the restoration of Russian power, now under 
the guise of the red flag. For others, it was because, as bourgeois 
democratic or conservative military leaders, they felt threatened by the 
radical “left-wing” politics of the Bolsheviks. All of them also reacted 
differently to the perceived threat. The result, as the present volume 
makes clear, was a variety of realpolitik responses to the phenomenon 
of revolutionary Bolshevism, which was difficult to understand fully 
at the time.
The present study also makes it clear that traditional concepts and 
periodizations need to be rethought. Severe doubt is cast, for instance, 
on the concept of the “Russian Civil War.” This conflict had many 
elements that went far beyond civil war, as Hannes Leidinger shows 
in the first section of this book. Many of the decisive interveners in 
this Russian “Civil” War, such as the Czechoslovak Legion, the armies 
of the Central Powers in the western parts of the Russian Empire, 
or the Entente troops in eastern Asia, Murmansk, or the Caucasus, 
were not citizens of the Russian Empire. Similarly, the conflicts over 
autonomy and secession in the peripheral regions of the old tsarist 
empire were centered around issues not typical of civil wars (even 
when secessionist movements are central factors in a civil war, as was 
the case in the American Civil War). These influences were so decisive 
that they cannot be treated as side effects but have to be part of the 
conceptualization.
What these considerations have in common is the need to 
confront the narrowness of traditional perspectives and chronologies. 
The present study cannot offer a resolution of this dilemma but is 
presented as a contribution to the debate. We attempt to offer a new 
approach to the chronology of the First World War that integrates 
European perspectives more strongly and takes transitional phases 
into account.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
xviii
The Planning and Implementation of the Project
The present study is the product of a two-year project at the Ludwig 
Boltzmann Institute for Research on the Consequences of War under 
the title “The 1918 Occupation of Ukraine by the Central Powers” 
(P 21505-G18). It was financed by the Austrian Science Fund (FWF) 
and led by Stefan Karner. It was based on another project also led 
by Karner, entitled “The Economic and Social Consequences of the 
First World War for East Central Europe,” financed by the Jubilee 
Fund of the Austrian National Bank. This earlier project had already 
encountered the 1918 occupation of Ukraine by the Central Powers and 
its consequences. With this topic in mind, we organized a workshop 
in April 2008, the contributions to which we published in German that 
same year in the institute’s Blaue Reihe series.8 The following year, in 
cooperation with the Bukovyna Center in Chernivtsi, we published 
the collection in Ukrainian. At the same time, we set up a successor 
project to deal with this subject in greater depth and place it in the 
general context of Eastern Europe between the outbreak of the First 
World War in 1914 and the founding of the Soviet Union in 1922. It 
was accepted by the FWF and begun in June 2009. From the very 
beginning, we saw the present study as a continuation of the earlier 
projects. 
In view of the many overlaps between the different subjects and 
the close cooperation among the members of the project team, we 
decided to present the final study as a multi-author monograph. An 
arrangement according to subjects, in individually or collaboratively 
written chapters, seemed more compelling and informative because, 
with such an approach, the expertise of different individual 
participants, though with slightly different emphases, could then 
contribute to those subjects. We also opted for a collaborative project 
in order to strengthen the consistency of the work. Nevertheless, 
such an approach will still entail different styles, opinions, and 
responsibilities, which we wanted to acknowledge in the eventual 
format of the book.
As originally conceived, the central theme of the FWF project was 
the military occupation of Ukraine by German and Austro-Hungarian 
troops between February and November 1918. This section is the core 
of the present study. Wolfram Dornik and Peter Lieb deal with the 
concrete military events of the conquest, the suppression of uprisings, 
8	
Die Besatzung der Ukraine 1918. Historischer Kontext – Forschungsstand – wirtschaftliche und 
soziale Folgen, ed. Wolfram Dornik and Stefan Karner (Graz, 2008).

introduction
xix 
and the retreat. They also deal with the administration of what was 
not officially occupied territory, as well as the economic utilization 
of the country. They undertake an evaluation and reevaluation of the 
documents in military archives in Vienna, Freiburg, Berlin, Munich, 
and Stuttgart, as well as the memoir and heritage literature and existing 
academic publications. This is complemented by Vasyl Rasevych’s 
contribution dealing with the internal Ukrainian perspective on the 
occupation, based on Ukrainian discourse. This core is then flanked 
by three chapters that place the occupation in a broader context. In 
the first chapter, Hannes Leidinger examines the Russian Revolution 
of 1917 and its military consequences until the beginning of the 1920s. 
Then Wolfram Dornik and Peter Lieb give an account of the eastern 
and Ukrainian policy of the Central Powers, which forms the basis for 
the chapters on the occupation in section 3.9 
In the second section of the book, Georgiy Kasianov gives a concise 
account of internal developments in Ukraine between 1917 and 1922. 
He examines the numerous simplifications in the German and English 
academic literature, for instance, with regard to the Central Rada and 
the Hetmanate. Vasyl Rasevych closes this section with a chapter 
on Western Ukraine, a short-lived political experiment of central 
importance with regard to the successor states of the Habsburg 
Monarchy and the Polish-Ukrainian conflict.
The fourth and final section of this book is an analysis of the 
international context that formed the background to Ukraine’s 
attempts to establish a state between 1914 and 1922. As we shall 
see, the central players in the Ukrainian question between 1914 and 
1922 were Tsarist Russia, its Bolshevik/Soviet Russian successor, the 
Central Powers, France, Great Britain, the United States, and Poland. 
There was a significant difference in the methodological approach 
of Tsarist and Bolshevik Russia to the national question, but not in 
the fundamental claim to Russian power made by both regimes. The 
articles by Alexei Miller and Bogdan Musial seek to analyze these 
differences. Finally, the article by Hannes Leidinger and Wolfram 
Dornik is devoted to the Ukrainian policies of France, Great Britain, 
and the United States. Of course, both the United States and Great 
Britain pursued their own interests in Eastern Europe, which in both 
cases were predominantly economic and strategic. But it was France 
that saw itself here as the key player, with a central economic interest 
9	
In the English translation, Wolfram Dornik’s survey of developments on the Eastern Front has 
been omitted for lack of space.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
xx
in Ukraine. It was fears of a German advance in Central Asia that 
prompted the Entente powers to become involved in the Russian and 
Ukrainian question.10 We pay very little attention to Italy’s Ukrainian 
policy because Rome, confronted by difficulties on its own front, was 
never able to develop the presence here that it might have hoped for.11 
We thought it exceptionally important to examine not just the 
positions of the most important Central Powers and Entente states 
with regard to Ukraine but also those of other central actors. Among 
these, Poland was especially important because it had to fight, in the 
truest sense of the word, on its southern and southeastern borders 
with both new Ukrainian states at the end of 1918. Bogdan Musial 
demonstrates the dilemma of Polish politics, caught between the 
battle for Polish territory and the search for an ally in the struggle 
against the expansion of Russian power.12 
This final section portrays the international network in which 
Ukrainian politics attempted to operate in order to approach the 
question of why Ukraine failed to win international support for its 
independence. What seems to emerge from this is that Ukraine found 
no allies because an independent Ukrainian state did not correspond 
to the interests of any of the great powers, and it was unable to achieve 
that goal alone.
The study ends with a comparison of the First and Second World 
Wars, a frequent topic in German and English academic debate. This 
comparison emerged and was recognized as a topic for research during 
the very first meetings of the project group. We therefore decided to 
integrate into our work a critical comparison of the occupations of 1918 
and 1941–44. In this chapter, Wolfram Dornik, Georgiy Kasianov, and 
Peter Lieb identify ten factors that point to parallels and differences 
between the occupations and thereby make a contribution to the 
critical debate about continuity.
Of course, the themes addressed and outlined here do not 
illuminate all outstanding questions. In the present volume, we have 
not managed adequately to address such issues as the response of the 
Ukrainian population to the occupation during and after 1918, the 
attitude of the occupiers to Ukraine and to the East in general, the 
growth of Ukrainian national discourse, and the long-term economic 
10	
For the English translation, we have combined three chapters of the German edition here. Because 
the Entente states seldom shared a common position on the governments in St. Petersburg/
Moscow and Kyiv, they were treated in separate chapters in that edition..
11	
David Stevenson, The First World War and International Politics (Oxford and New York, 1991), 
186–90.
12	
The chapter on Switzerland’s Ukrainian policy has been omitted from the English translation.

introduction
xxi 
consequences of war, occupation, and revolution in Ukraine. The book 
frequently refers to but, because of its limited frame of reference, does 
not adequately discuss such issues as the biographical continuity of 
individuals or even social groups, the change in nationality discourses 
between 1914 and 1922, or the response to the experience of violence. 
Other important aspects would be illuminated by a study of the 
Ukrainian policies of the newly emerging states in the Caucasus, 
the Crimea, Belarus, the Baltic region, Finland, the Nordic states, 
Romania, Bulgaria, Italy, and Turkey. We hope that, with the present 
work, we have taken a first step toward encouraging a new and more 
lively academic encounter with Ukrainian history in the German- 
and English-speaking world and provoking further discussion. The 
unanswered political, economic, and social questions that have 
emerged in the Black Sea region in the past two decades need to be 
more strongly anchored in European research and public awareness. 
The states of this region are the bridge from Europe to Asia and are, 
for that reason, particularly sensitive regions for the future, regardless 
of whether this has to do with the preservation of political autonomy 
or the transit of people, culture, goods, services, and energy.
Sociopolitical Dimensions of East European History
A study dealing with cultural identity, even if it is based on political, 
military, and diplomatic history, always has sociopolitical relevance. 
Simply by opening up questions, by treating (or not treating) subjects, 
we are taking positions in the present. This is particularly clear 
today if we follow the political and historiographic discourses in 
Ukraine. Intense debates about cultural identity are going on, and the 
boundaries between what is and what is not Ukrainian are a central 
aspect of that discourse. This rigid deindividualized attribution of 
identities to groups on the basis of preestablished parameters goes 
back to the nationality discourse that has been current since the 
nineteenth century.13 Nationalism offers political legitimation, which 
has become increasingly important since the end of the eighteenth 
century owing to the erosion of the identity-forming and power-
stabilizing function of religion in the aftermath of the Enlightenment 
and the French Revolution. In these politically motivated processes of 
13 
This has been discussed in great detail since the late 1970s: see Benedict Anderson, Imagined 
Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism (1983); Ernest Gellner, 
Nations and Nationalism (1983); Eric Hobsbawm, Nations and Nationalism since 1780: 
Programme, Myth, Reality (1991); Hugh Seton-Watson, Nations and States: An Inquiry into the 
Origins of Nations and the Politics of Nationalism (London, 1977).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
xxii
homogenization, large social groups with a common language, culture, 
and tradition were defined. Quite by chance, certain elements were 
assigned to a nation and others excluded. As part of these processes, 
certain cultural elements or whole social groups were excluded.
In the present volume we neither wish to nor indeed can we 
offer a definition of what is Ukrainian or who is a Ukrainian. In 
the course of our work, however, we were repeatedly confronted 
by questions of definition, for instance, deciding to what national 
historiography and language group to assign an individual involved 
in a number of different cultural circles. This question has particular 
relevance for the present work. Is a Soviet politician who was born 
and grew up in Ukraine, who then worked his way up through local 
and republican institutions to Moscow and finally oriented himself 
on the supranational Soviet nomenklatura a Ukrainian or a Russian? 
Especially when he himself defines himself as neither one nor the 
other? Is the use of Russian for a Ukrainian individual a hegemonic 
action? Should we impose a national identity on someone who, in his 
lifetime, rejected it out of profound conviction? Or is this conviction 
handed down from him just propaganda? 
These questions are all research subjects in themselves and cannot 
be part of the present volume. This work is based on an individualist 
concept of identity; it assumes the possibility of multiple identities and 
gives central significance to the individual’s self-identification. Which 
religion, which mother tongue, which state one belongs to either by 
birth or passport are all irrelevant. The question is rather to which 
identities an individual feels that he or she belongs. But that is often 
difficult for us to verify retroactively. Since we regard this volume 
as a contribution to Ukrainian historiography, we have decided to 
use Ukrainian orthography and the corresponding transliteration of 
personal names in dubious cases to facilitate readability. In general, 
we follow the approach of “transnational history,” an approach that 
has been widely discussed in academic research in recent years 
and that Georgiy Kasianov and Philipp Ther define in their book 
on Ukrainian historiography: “Problems of Ukrainian history can 
usefully be presented from a transnational perspective, involving 
cultural transfers and processes of intercultural exchange…. [I]n our 
view transnational history concentrates on the relations between 
cultures and societies, deliberately eschewing concentration on any 
one culture or country. It compares sending and receiving cultures, 
highlighting agents of cultural exchange, and is thus oriented toward 
agency. Transnational history challenges simple models of diffusion. 

introduction
xxiii 
It studies the ways in which cultures use and appropriate cultural 
goods of distant or foreign origin.”14
The present book, although its theme is primarily political, 
military, and economic history, should therefore also be understood 
as a cultural project, one presented as transnational history. We thus 
subscribe to the deconstruction of large national narratives, the 
demise of which was announced by Jean-François Lyotard as early 
as 1979.15 We confront archival materials with the historiographic 
traditions of different states in order to overcome the national 
perspective. The close collaboration of international project teams 
makes it easier to overcome one’s own national boundaries without 
thereby either creating a new hegemonic hierarchy or dissolving one’s 
own cultural ties. This method does not “press” history into a uniform 
narration but rather lets in different viewpoints, as becomes evident 
especially in the third and fourth sections of the present book. What 
has emerged here is a trend toward the transnational negotiation of 
history. These processes increasingly escape appropriation by national 
political discourses. Without completely losing individual cultural 
backgrounds, these narrations are becoming increasingly natural in 
the era of digital “collective intelligence” in the Internet (for instance, 
Wikipedia or Twitter).16 Nation still matters, even now, more than two 
decades after the introduction of the World Wide Web and the alleged 
“end of history”17 that followed the collapse of the Eastern Bloc and 
the Soviet Union. But it is clear both from the work method we have 
chosen in this collaborative book and from the results of our work that 
“nation” is being increasingly deconstructed and is losing its unique 
position. Since the linguistic turn it has become impossible to write 
history that is unaware of the fact that language reflects power.18 In a 
14	
Georgiy Kasianov and Philipp Ther, “Introduction,” in A Laboratory of Transnational History: 
Ukraine and Recent Ukrainian Historiography, ed. Georgiy Kasianov and Philipp Ther 
(Budapest and New York, 2009), 2–3.
15	
Jean-François Lyotard, La Condition postmoderne: Rapport sur le savoir (Paris, 1979).
16 
Wolfram Dornik, “Internet: Maschine des Vergessens oder globaler Gedächtnisspeicher? 
Der Holocaust in den digitalen Erinnerungskulturen zwischen 1990 und 2010,” in Öffentliche 
Erinnerung und Medialisierung des Nationalsozialismus. Eine Bilanz der letzten dreißig Jahre, 
ed. Gerhard Paul and Bernhard Schoßig (Göttingen, 2010), 79–97.
17 
The concept first appeared in an article in The National Interest in the summer of 1989, then three 
years later in Francis Fukuyama, The End of History and the Last Man (New York, 1992).
18	
Doris Bachmann-Medick, Cultural Turns: Neuorientierungen in den Kulturwissenschaften 
(Hamburg, 2009); Geschichte schreiben in der Postmoderne: Beiträge zur aktuellen Diskussion, 
ed. Christoph Conrad and Martin Kessel (Stuttgart, 1994); Hayden White, “Das Problem der 
Erzählung in der modernen Geschichtstheorie,” in Theorie der modernen Geschichtsschreibung, 
ed. Pietro Rossi (Frankfurt am Main, 1987), 57–106.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
xxiv
scholarly publication, this is relevant not only to the analysis. In the 
case of multicultural Central and Eastern Europe, it is relevant to the 
choice of place-names. Since the end of the First World War, borders 
have been redrawn here without the involvement of local populations. 
Borders frequently do not reflect cultural realities but the balance of 
power at the time the borders were drawn. One of the consequences 
of this process is the renaming of places to fit new circumstances. 
Discussions about toponyms still continue today in the nationality 
discourses of regions previously belonging to the Habsburg and 
Romanov empires. In this translation, place-names are given in the 
language of the country in which they are now located, with variants 
in other languages supplied parenthetically on first mention in the 
text and in the index at the end of the volume. 
The Current State of Research
The results brought together in this book, even when partly based on 
comprehensive archival research, are part of a long historiographical 
tradition. Since we treat a great number of subjects in the chapters that 
follow, all of which have their own historiographies, it is not possible 
for us to acknowledge all of them here. We shall make reference only 
to the English, German, and most important East European studies on 
the First World War and Ukraine in 1918.19
Although, in the German-speaking sphere, there has been little 
research on the First World War in general and the Eastern Front 
specifically, the number of relevant publications has grown in recent 
years. For German scholars, the main reference for many years was 
Norman Stone’s The Eastern Front (1975). In the meantime, Timothy 
Dowling, William C. Fuller, Gerhard P. Gross, Michael Neiberg, 
and David Jordan have produced important works on the German 
Empire, Austria-Hungary, and Russia in the war in Eastern Europe 
between 1914 and 1917. They have revised conclusions in many areas 
and, through their research in the East European and especially the 
Russian archives since 1989–91, have managed to open up many issues 
for deeper and more comprehensive study.20 German publications on 
19	
Since this is a translation of the German-language volume published in 2011, we have not revised 
it to integrate the scholarly discourse of subsequent years (2011–14).
20	
Timothy C. Dowling, The Brusilov Offensive (Indianapolis, 2008); G. P. Groß, ed., Die vergessene 
Front. Der Osten 1914/15: Ereignis, Wirkung, Nachwirkung (Paderborn, 2006); William C. 
Fuller, The Foe Within: Fantasies of Treason and the End of Imperial Russia (Ithaca, 2006); 
Mark von Hagen, War in a European Borderland: Occupations and Occupation Plans in Galicia 
and Ukraine, 1914–1918 (Seattle and London, 2007); Geoffrey Jukes, The First World War: The 

introduction
xxv 
the Eastern Front are still lacking, but particular aspects of that front 
have been convincingly studied in a number of dissertations. These 
include Rudolf Jeřábek’s work on the Brusilov offensive and Richard 
Lein’s dissertation on the attitude of the Czechs to the Eastern Front.21 
Verena Moritz, Hannes Leidinger, Reinhard Nachtigal, Jochen Oltmer, 
Alon Rachamimov, and Georg Wurzer have aroused special interest 
in recent years with their work on prisoners of war on the Eastern 
Front, and that subject can now be considered well researched.22 
Up to now, works on the war in Eastern Europe have tended 
to emphasize military events between 1914 and 1917. There are 
significantly fewer studies of the occupations by Russian troops 
(Galicia and Bukovyna, as well as East Prussia in 1914–15) or troops 
of the Central Powers (Poland from 1915, the Baltic states from 1915, 
Belarus and Ukraine in 1918, as well as their troops stationed in Eastern 
Europe until 1919). So far there have been a few works on Poland and 
Vejas Liulevicius’s comprehensive work on the Baltic states.23 Abba 
Strazhas and Winfried Baumgart have written works on Germany’s 
Eastern Front, 1914–1918 (Oxford, 2002); Vejas Gabriel Liulevicius, War Land on the Eastern 
Front: Culture, National Identity, and German Occupation in World War I (Cambridge, 2000); 
The Eastern Front, 1914–1920, ed. Michael Neiberg and David Jordan; G. Irving Root, Battles 
East: A History of the Eastern Front of the First World War (Baltimore, 2007); Norman Stone, 
The Eastern Front, 1914–1917 (London, 1998).
21 
Rudolf Jeřábek, “Die Brussilowoffensive 1916. Ein Wendepunkt der Koalitionskriegführung 
der Mit-telmächte” (Ph.D. diss., Vienna, 1982); Richard Lein, “Das militärische Verhalten 
der Tschechen im Ersten Weltkrieg” (Ph.D.. diss., Vienna, 2009). Also Christian Reiter, “Der 
Untergang des IR 36. Der ‘Verrat’ der tschechischen Soldaten im Gefecht bei Sieniewa 1915” 
(Ph.D. diss., Vienna, 2008); Gabriel Zupcan, “Der Tschechoslowakische Legionär in Russland, 
1914–1920” (Ph.D. diss., Vienna, 2008).
22	
Hannes Leidinger and Verena Moritz, Gefangenschaft, Revolution, Heimkehr. Die Bedeutung 
der Kriegs-gefangenenproblematik für die Geschichte des Kommunismus in Mittel- und 
Osteuropa 1917–1920 (Vienna, Cologne, and Weimar, 2003); Reinhard Nachtigal, Russland 
und seine österreichisch-ungarischen Kriegsgefangenen (1914–1918) (Remshalden, 2003); 
Kriegsgefangene im Europa des Ersten Weltkrieges, ed. Jochen Oltmer (Paderborn, 2006); Alon 
Rachamimov, POWs and the Great War: Captivity on the Eastern Front (Oxford and New York, 
2002); Georg Wurzer, Die Kriegsgefangenen der Mittelmächte in Russland im Ersten Weltkrieg 
(Göttingen, 2005). See also the special issue of the journal Zeitgeschichte. Kriegsgefangenschaft 
1914–1920. Am Beispiel Österreichs und Rußlands 25, nos. 11/12 (1998).
23	
Jerzy Gaul, “The Austro-Hungarian Empire and Its Political Allies in the Polish Kingdom, 1914–
1918,” in Karl I. (IV.), der Erste Weltkrieg und das Ende der Donaumonarchie, ed. Andreas 
Gottsmann (Vienna, 2007), 203–21; Eugeniusz Cezary Król, “Besatzungsherrschaft in Polen 
im Ersten und Zweiten Weltkrieg. Charakteristik und Wahrnehmung,” in Erster Weltkrieg – 
Zweiter Weltkrieg. Ein Vergleich. Krieg, Kriegserlebnis, Kriegserfahrung in Deutschland, 
ed. Bruno Thoß and Hans-Erich Volkmann (Paderborn, Munich, Vienna, and Zurich, 2002), 
577–91; Liulevicius, War Land on the Eastern Front. Stephan Lehnstaedt is currently writing 
a Habilitation thesis for the German Historical Institute in Warsaw on the economics of the 
occupation of Poland in the First and Second World Wars. We await the results of his research 
with interest.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
xxvi
eastern policy in which they contextualize the military aspects for 
the first time.24 In the present volume, we acknowledge Baumgart’s 
work throughout. But we still lack more comprehensive research on 
Austro-Hungarian occupations in Eastern and Southeastern Europe.25 
Although Serbia was not part of the Eastern Front, Jonathan Gumz’s 
integrated work on the occupation by Austro-Hungarian troops is 
exemplary.26 
A number of studies have appeared in the German-speaking world 
on the occupation that is the subject of the present work. Wolfdieter 
Bihl was one of the pioneers here. He collaborated on the four-volume 
edition of documents about events in Ukraine from 1914 to 1922 
(Ereignisse in der Ukraine 1914–1922) edited in the 1960s by Theophil 
Hornykiewicz. In the years that followed, he published a series of 
articles on various aspects of Austria-Hungary’s Ukrainian policy.27 
Peter Borowsky’s study of Germany’s Ukrainian policy appeared in 
1970, and in 2005 Frank Grelka published a comparative study on 
the Ukrainian national movement under German occupation in 
1918 and in 1941/42.28 Frank Golczewski has recently published a 
comprehensive study of German-Ukrainian relations in the First 
World War and in the interwar period that also integrates the Austro-
Hungarian perspective.29 Peter Lieb had already written about the 
military aspects of the occupation with reference to the German 
24	
Winfried Baumgart, Deutsche Ostpolitik 1918. Von Brest-Litowsk bis zum Ende des Ersten 
Weltkrieges (Vienna and Munich, 1966); Abba Strazhas, Deutsche Ostpolitik im Ersten 
Weltkrieg. Der Fall Ober Ost 1915–1917 (Wiesbaden, 1993).
25	
One of the studies in this area is the work on Austro-Hungarian military administration by military 
figures involved: Hugo Kerchnawe et al., Die Militärverwaltung in den von den österreichisch-
ungarischen Truppen besetzten Gebieten (Vienna, 1928). Tamara Scheer has written a patchy 
and not very analytical work: Tamara Scheer, Zwischen Front und Heimat. Österreich-Ungarns 
Militärverwaltungen im Ersten Weltkrieg (Frankfurt am Main, 2009).
26	
Jonathan E. Gumz, The Resurrection and Collapse of Empire in Habsburg Serbia, 1914–1918 
(New York, 2009). 
27	
Ereignisse in der Ukraine 1914–1922. Deren Bedeutung und historische Hintergründe, ed. 
Theophil Hornykiewicz, 4 vols. (Philadelphia, 1966); Wolfdieter Bihl, “Beiträge zur Ukraine-
Politik Österreich-Ungarns 1918,” Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas, n.s. 14 (1966): 51–62; 
idem, “Die österreichisch-ungarischen Dienststellen in der Ukraine 1918,” Mitteilungen des 
Österreichischen Staatsarchivs, no. 20 (1967): 379–88; idem, “Zur Tätigkeit des ukrainophilen 
Erzherzogs Wilhelm nach dem Ersten Weltkrieg,” Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas, n.s. 
19 (1971): 538–40. In 2007 there was a thesis by a Viennese historian (supervised by Lothar 
Höbelt) on aspects of Austria-Hungary’s Ukrainian policy: Richard Oskar Friedrich Pucher, 
“Ukraine 1918 in offiziellen österreichischen Dokumenten” (Ph.D. diss., Vienna, 2007).
28	
Peter Borowsky, Deutsche Ukrainepolitik 1918 unter besonderer Berücksichtigung 
der Wirtschaftsfragen (Lübeck and Hamburg, 1970); Frank Grelka, Die ukrainische 
Nationalbewegung unter deutscher Besatzungsherrschaft 1918 und 1941/42 (Wiesbaden, 2005).
29	
Frank Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer 1914–1939 (Paderborn, 2010).

introduction
xxvii 
troops in Ukraine before the start of the present project, and Reinhard 
Nachtigal wrote an article in which he examined the battle of the 
Mius Firth during the German advance.30 The work of two American 
experts on Eastern Europe, Mark von Hagen and Timothy Snyder, 
deserves mention here. Von Hagen is the author of a brief work on the 
Ukrainian policy of the Central Powers based on American, Canadian, 
and Russian sources, and Snyder has contributed a study of Archduke 
Wilhelm.31 What all these publications have in common is that they 
each cover only a partial area and are based on a small national 
body of sources. In that work, however, the Ukrainian and Russian 
perspective was under-represented, as compared with the richly 
documented perspective of the Central Powers. We have attempted, 
in the present work, to ensure very broad access with documents from 
as many countries as possible and working jointly with historians 
from most of the countries involved.
We are obviously aware that other emphases would have been 
possible in a study of Ukraine in 1918. In the present study, for instance, 
we pay very little attention to cultural history. We are unable to offer a 
history of the reception of the occupation, nor have we done a detailed 
study of nation-building processes, of gender-specific aspects, of 
cultural or know-how transfers, or of how the occupied population 
perceived the occupiers. On the one hand, this had to do with our 
limited time and resources and. on the other hand, with the poorly 
developed level of research and the extremely difficult situation with 
regard to access to sources. Following the Soviet takeover, Ukrainian 
sources were filtered out to marginalize the anti-Bolshevik opposition 
and to prevent it from finding an appropriate place in communicative 
and cultural memory.32 Further research from Lviv, Budapest, Zagreb, 
Prague, and Warsaw on the military units of the Habsburg Monarchy 
30 
Peter Lieb, “A Precursor of Modern Counter-Insurgency Operations? The German Occupation 
of the Ukraine in 1918,” in University of Salford, European Studies Research Institute, Working 
Papers in Military History and International History, no. 4 (Salford, 2007); Peter Lieb, “Deutsche 
Herrschaft in der Ukraine 1918/19: Wegweiser zum Vernichtungskrieg?” Militärgeschichte. 
Zeitschrift für historische Bildung, no. 4 (2008): 10–13; Reinhard Nachtigal, “Krasnyj Desant: 
Das Gefecht an der Mius-Bucht. Ein unbeachtetes Kapitel der deutschen Besetzung Südrußlands 
1918,” Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas, n.s. 53 (2005): 221–46.
31 
Von Hagen makes no use of German or Austrian documents: Mark von Hagen, War in a European 
Borderland: Occupations and Occupation Plans in Galicia and Ukraine, 1914–1918 (Seattle and 
London, 2007); Timothy Snyder, The Red Prince: The Secret Lives of a Habsburg Archduke 
(New York, 2008).
32 
Here we follow the definition of Jan and Aleida Assmann: Aleida Assmann, Erinnerungsräume. 
Formen und Wandlungen des kulturellen Gedächtnisses (Munich, 1999); Jan Assmann, Das 
kulturelle Gedächtnis. Schrift, Erinnerung und politische Identität in frühen Hochkulturen 
(Munich, 1992).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
xxviii
could complement the theses developed in the third section of 
this book. Likewise, research in Turkish and Bulgarian sources on 
those countries’ economic and political interests, as well as their 
collaboration with their German and Austro-Hungarian allies, would 
be very valuable.
Acknowledgments
From the beginning, our efforts were supported by a number of 
people whom I would like to thank at this point. Our thanks go first to 
Stefan Karner, head of the Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Research 
on the Consequences of War and deputy director of the Institute for 
Economic, Social, and Enterprise History at the Karl Franz University 
in Graz. He assumed the scholarly and organizational leadership of 
the project and was always ready with advice and assistance from the 
inception of the project to its conclusion. The staff at the Boltzmann 
Institute, with their long years of experience, have made this study 
possible through their active help with research, language problems, 
and conceptual issues: Dieter Bacher, Christoph Benedikter, Alexander 
Fritz, Peter Fritz, Walter M. Iber, Harald Knoll, Armin Laussegger, 
Sigrid Lazar, Philipp Lesiak, Peter Ruggenthaler, Peter Sixl, Barbara 
Stelzl-Marx, Silke Stern, and Arno Wonisch. Our special thanks go 
to Juliane Nitsch for her editorial support in finalizing the present 
volume and to Martin Florian for arranging the maps.
A big thanks to all the coworkers on this project for their wide-
ranging and disciplined work! Special mention here goes to Peter 
Lieb, who has worked on the German occupation of Ukraine for some 
time and was a decisive influence in the planning of this project. His 
work has helped us in many respects as an essential starting point 
for a new look at Ukraine. His almost boundless enthusiasm for 
research helped me not only with his own contributions to the book 
but also with advice on a variety of technical and organizational 
matters and with assistance in my research in London. For a similar 
length of time we have had the support of Hannes Leidinger and 
Verena Moritz, whose knowledge and expertise on Central and 
Eastern Europe made a decisive contribution to the birth of this 
project and the theses developed in the study. Alexei Miller of the 
Central European University in Budapest and the Russian Academy 
of Sciences, with his long international academic experience, has 
added the Russian perspective. Georgiy Kasianov of the National 
Academy of Sciences of Ukraine in Kyiv and Vasyl Rasevych from 
its partner institute in Lviv provided valuable support in bringing 

introduction
xxix 
into the project a stronger Ukrainian focus, of which few German-
speaking academics were previously aware. Bogdan Musial, a long-
time partner of our institute, strengthened our project team with his 
expertise in the history of the Soviet Union and Soviet communism. 
Heartfelt thanks to all for their collegial cooperation in this project. 
It was the attitude of all those involved that enabled us to meet the 
challenges of a multi-authored study.
But it was not just the authors who produced this book; it was a 
whole series of helpers who worked in the background, out of sight. 
Elisabeth Klöckl-Stadler and Cornelia Stiegler edited the manuscripts. 
Harald Fleischmann of the Institute of Theoretical and Applied 
Translation Science at the University of Graz took on the translation 
of the Ukrainian and Russian contributions. Anna Yeromina kept the 
Ukrainian-Austrian information streams flowing during the project. 
Benjamin Grilj and Serhii Osadchuk of the Bukovyna Center and 
the Austrian Library in Chernivtsi; Andreas Wenninger, head of the 
Austro-Ukrainian Cooperation Bureau for Science, Education, and 
Culture; and Michael Dippelreiter of the Center for International 
Cooperation and Mobility of the Austrian Exchange Service were 
helpful with communication and organizational issues. Heartfelt 
thanks for assistance in organizing the preliminary workshop goes to 
Ewald Stadler, member of the Cultural Council of Austria and, in 2009, 
deputy director of the Cultural Forum of the Austrian Embassy in 
Budapest; also to Ambassador Michael Zimmermann and to Elisabeth 
Kornfeind, director of the Cultural Forum. In the fertile atmosphere 
of this event, we were able to lay the foundations of the present work. 
Last but not least, we are indebted to Gerald Schöpfer, the director 
of the Institute for Economic, Social, and Enterprise History of the 
University of Graz, and to his colleagues: Michaela Hohenwarter, 
Sabine List, Doris Mauthner, and Peter Teibenbacher have always 
been helpful with expert advice and with the organization of the final 
conference. Finally, our thanks to Wolfgang Hölzl of Leykam-Verlag 
and Helmut Lenhart for their fantastic cooperation in finalizing the 
German-language book for publication. 
As is clear from the list of sources, this book is the result of 
comprehensive research carried out by those involved in the project. 
Many people from archive staff have helped us in our work. Among 
these are the staff of the War Archive of the Austrian State Archives, 
especially Christoph Tepperberg, Otto Kellner, Andrea Hackel, Robert 
Rill, Klaus Pillmayer, Mirijana Josipovic, and Bernhard Wenninger. The 
director of the Military History Museum in Vienna, Mario Christian 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
xxx
Ortner, made possible our research in the museum’s picture archive 
and the reproduction of some of these for the book. Our gratitude for 
hospitality and support in our archival research in the United States 
goes to the staff of the Harvard Ukrainian Research Institute; also to 
Mark Kramer of the Davis Center at Harvard University and the staff 
of the Austrian Cultural Forum in Washington, especially Andrea 
Schrammel and Thomas Brandhuber. The staff of the Cultural Forum 
of the Austrian Embassy in London were similarly helpful, especially 
Melita Essenko and the director, Peter Mikl. Nicole-Melanie Goll and 
Éva Kosa assisted us in our research in the Budapest War Archives. 
We would also like to thank the Military History Research Bureau 
in Potsdam, especially Rolf-Dieter Müller, for logistical help in the 
Federal Archives/Military Archives. Martin Schmitz of Augsburg put 
very valuable documents at our disposal. 
Besides the funding for the German edition supplied by the FWF, 
others also contributed, especially the Styrian provincial governor, 
Franz Voves, the mayor of Graz, Siegfried Nagl, and the Research 
Service of the University of Graz. They made possible the organization 
of the final conference in June 2011. For support in the printing of the 
book, we want to thank the city of Vienna, the Federal Ministry for 
Science and Research, and the provincial government of Carinthia 
(Contemporary Historical Documents/Ethnic Groups Bureau).

1a. A Time of Troubles: 
Revolutionary Upheavals and Armed Conflicts in 
the Former Tsarist Empire, 1917–1922
Hannes Leidinger
The Decayed System
The knowledge that later generations have about individual events 
and historical processes can lead them to see developments more 
clearly than they really were or were seen at the time. Historians need 
to be aware of the temptation to become “prophets after the event.” 
They might otherwise tend to create an account suggesting “fateful” 
preconditions, “determinants” of a particular chain of events, or “fatal” 
turning points.1 From this vantage point, the fall of the Romanov 
Empire had been inevitable for some time. Its decline and fall is then 
seen as unavoidable. It is certainly the case that the events of 1905 
and the conflicts of the following years had shaken the foundations 
of the tsarist regime of Nicholas II. Following the war with Japan 
in 1904, Russia slid into its first revolution, which then ended with 
half-hearted and questionable concessions. Uprisings were brutally 
suppressed, and a restriction of voting rights limited the possibilities 
of restructuring within the constitutional monarchy to a narrow 
social stratum, with the result that there was no decisive impulse to 
overcome the obstacles to reform. Industrialization measures and 
efforts to improve agricultural production did nothing to overcome 
the gulf between government and opposition or between privileged 
layers of society and the poor.2
The collapse of the fragile state structure, however, was not 
inevitable, although its existence was soon threatened by additional 
challenges and especially by military conflicts with competing great 
powers. The years 1904 and 1905, the defeat in the war against Japan, 
with its enormous domestic consequences, should have served as 
a lesson. But when, in the summer of 1914, Nicholas sent his army 
against Germany and Austria-Hungary, he had overdrawn his bow. 
1	
Verena Moritz and Hannes Leidinger, Die Nacht des Kirpitschnikow. Eine andere Geschichte des 
Ersten Weltkriegs (Vienna, 2006), 121ff.
2	
Verena Moritz and Hannes Leidinger, Die Russische Revolution (Vienna, Cologne, and Weimar, 
2011), 23–35.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
2
The jingoism of the early days of the war, though limited to part of the 
urban population, as well as the “patriotic sentiment” of the Duma, 
though the latter was usually viewed critically and barely tolerated by 
the ruler and his advisers, served to draw a temporary veil over the 
country’s problems.3
The crisis soon deepened beyond the problems that were already 
evident. The civil and military leadership of the fragile empire rapidly 
lost ground both strategically and economically. Criticism of the 
incompetence of the autocracy and of its bureaucratic apparatus led to 
the creation of special committees with which the local self-governing 
bodies, the zemstvos in particular, attempted to overcome the lack 
of materials and supply bottlenecks. It was said, in this context, that 
the higher social circles should have stepped in earlier to rescue the 
empire. But actually these new bodies worked more often against 
than with one another. The fragmentation of economic life created 
problems of coordination. Consumers waited in vain for necessary 
supplies, a problem exacerbated by the desolate transport system.4
To economic and organizational deficits were added social and 
political protests, the articulation of special interests, and a creeping 
dissolution of state structures. By 1916–17 the tsar, the army, and 
government ministers were largely discredited. The sacrifices of 
the soldiers and of the population lost all meaning in the context of 
organizational deficits, defeats on the front, rising living costs, poor 
distribution of goods, and inadequate food supplies. Disillusionment 
increased with reports of wrong decisions, corruption, and war 
profiteering, as well as with rumors of arrests of “troublemakers” who 
had dared to express their outrage at all of this. Dissatisfaction grew, 
as well as a willingness to engage in opposition, particularly in urban 
centers. Strikes and street demonstrations increased, as did sharper 
criticism of the system.5
At protest demonstrations in the capital, St. Petersburg, renamed 
Petrograd in 1914, the chain of command broke at its most important 
points: the garrisons were reluctant to shoot at their “rebellious brothers 
and sisters.” The Duma resisted the orders of Nicholas II and, without 
his agreement, set up an independent committee to take control of 
the difficult situation. “Peasant soldiers” got rid of commanders they 
3	
Moritz and Leidinger, Die Nacht des Kirpitschnikow, 122.
4	
Hannes Leidinger and Verena Moritz, Der Erste Weltkrieg (Vienna, Cologne, and Weimar, 2011), 
56, 65ff.
5	
Ibid.

chapter 1a: a time of troubles
3 
disliked and fraternized with the “people.” Soviets (councils), which had 
first appeared in the events of 1905, reappeared. When leading organs 
of the soviets made contact with parliamentarians and coordinated 
their activities with those of the parliamentary committee, the tsar 
resigned. When potential pretenders to the throne failed to come 
forward, the Romanovs’ three centuries of rule came to an end.6 
Decentralization
The February Revolution of 1917 appeared, on the whole, as an 
elementary uprising against the monarchy, the symbols and 
functionaries of which disappeared immediately. Monarchic collapse 
provoked an accelerated disintegration that transformed a creeping 
into a galloping collapse of the state. The new Provisional Government, 
under the liberal Prince Georgii Lvov, was therefore confronted with 
numerous centrifugal forces that, taken together, led gradually to an 
almost complete atomization of society.7
It is also significant that the number of strikes did not decline 
following the events of that spring of 1917. On the contrary, as the 
claims and expectations of the factory workers grew, so also did the 
self-confidence of the “proletariat.” The creation of factory committees 
indicated a significant shift in power. Employee committees in the 
enterprises scrutinized the activities of management. At the same 
time, they took charge of the supply of raw materials, of hiring and 
firing, as well as the maintenance of production and discipline. A 
“neutral ministerial council,” whose task it was to arbitrate disputes 
but that aimed mainly at maintaining production in the service of the 
war economy, was unable, under these circumstances, to maintain 
a durable prohibition of the “class struggle.” The Lvov cabinet was 
considered partial by factory directors and workers alike. It was 
challenged by a proletarian militancy that, with the Red Guards, 
in existence since February, was undermining the authority of the 
urban militia. This proletariat, engaged now in an unending series of 
meetings, was being increasingly politicized.8
6	
Ibid.; cf. Moritz and Leidinger, Die Russische Revolution, 36–41.
7	
For observations on the increasing destabilization of Russia during the period of the Lvov 
government, see GARF, f. 1791, op. 2, d. 144, 82.
8	
S. A. Smith, Red Petrograd: Revolution in the Factories, 1917–1918 (Cambridge, 1983), 80–98, 
139–67; Rex Wade, Red Guards and Workers’ Militias in the Russian Revolution (Stanford, 
1984), 80–114, 173–82; Konstantin Paustovskij, Der Beginn eines verschwundenen Zeitalters 
(Frankfurt am Main, 2002), 481. 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
4
Developments in the countryside were now dominated by the 
desire on the part of the population to leave fundamental decisions 
to nobody else and to take charge of important matters themselves. 
Unlike the autarchic small units promoted by the tsarist prime 
minister Petr Stolypin, it was the obshchina, the village community 
responsible for the redistribution of land and the collective payment 
of communal taxes, that experienced a revival in 1917. It was the 
obshchina that undertook the initiative to demand lower rents from 
the well-off estate owners, as well as fair prices for grain, tools, and 
animals. There was then a significant radicalization from mid-1917. 
Following the appointment of Viktor Chernov from the Party of 
Socialist Revolutionaries as agriculture minister, the peasantry began 
a massive confiscation of estate land, spurred on at times by returnees 
from the front and by deserters. The villagers not only took action on 
their own initiative but also frequently used force. The plundering and 
destruction of estate homes was a manifestation of brutal vandalism 
that sometimes cost the nobility their lives. Murders and acts of revenge 
for the execution of peasant rebels in 1905 increased.9 Incidents of 
lynch law were reported from the provinces, from Tambov, Penza, 
Voronezh, Saratov, Orel, Tula, and Kazan. In September and October 
alone, peasants burned down 250 estate houses, about a fifth of all 
estate houses in the region.10 According to later publications in the 
USSR, the Provisional Government’s militia, in July 1917, reported an 
increase in “deforestation, damage to land, and arbitrariness” while, 
from June to September, the statistics recorded almost a threefold 
increase in the “destruction and occupation of estate houses.”11
Parallel to this settling of scores with the aristocracy, the 
local population created soviets, which, as a “revolutionary form 
of obshchina,” incorporated the ideals of village self-government. 
These local councils paid little attention to orders from the central 
government. Sometimes they declared their own village republics, 
with their own emblems and flags. Many established their own police 
forces and elected their own judges, as well as creating volunteer 
militias or Red Guards.12 
9	
See GARF, f. 398, op. 2, d. 144, 158.
10	
Orlando Figes, A People’s Tragedy: Russian Revolution 1891–1924 (London, 1996), 464. On the 
general topic of disintegration, see also Revoliutsiia i grazhdanskaia voina v Rossii, 1917–1923. 
Ėntsiklopediia, 4 vols. (Moscow, 2008), 1: 364–81.
11	
Geschichte des Bürgerkrieges in der UdSSR, vol. 1, Die Vorbereitung der Oktoberrevolution 
(Offenbach, 1999), 381 (first published in 1936). 
12	
Figes, A People’s Tragedy, 464ff.

chapter 1a: a time of troubles
5 
Map 1: The Kerensky Offensive and the “Response” of the Central Powers, Summer 1917 (Banks, 
A Military Atlas of the First World War, 176; Ellis and Cox, The World War I Databook, 36ff.)
Loss of Authority
In this situation, one can hardly speak of dual power existing between 
soviet deputies and government officials.13 Apart from the fact that the 
various institutions and social forces in the provincial centers tended 
to want cooperation, the Workers’ and Soldiers’ Soviet in the capital 
could have seized power at any time. The masses saw the Soviet as 
having the highest authority, all the more so as the government, in spite 
of the pacifist mood of the population, was continuing to pursue the 
war. The last straw was the attitude of the prominent Constitutional 
Democrat and foreign minister, Pavel Miliukov,14 who not only stood 
13	
In academic accounts of the revolution, “dual power” was and still is a central dogma.
14	
On the Constitutional Democrats (Cadets) and Miliukov, see P. N. Miliukov, Istoriia vtoroi 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
6
by Russia’s obligations to its allies but also talked of winning new 
territories from the war.15
A storm of indignation swept Miliukov from office. With him 
went the minister of war, Aleksandr Guchkov, who was replaced by 
Aleksandr Kerensky. Until then, Kerensky had been the minister of 
justice and was seen as the only representative of the left in the Lvov 
cabinet. A number of socialist politicians now entered the government. 
The Socialist Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, whose base was in the 
soviets, thereby gave their assistance to a weak government, not least 
because they themselves had been unprepared for the upheavals and 
for taking power.16
In Marxist circles there was talk of the need for a “bourgeois” 
phase of the revolution. Among the divided Social Democrats, it was 
Vladimir Lenin alone who, on returning from exile, set his Bolsheviks 
on a new course. With his demands for peace and all power to the 
soviets, he spoke for the popular mood and offered an alternative to the 
government course supported by the other socialists, a course leading 
to the Kerensky offensive, which ended in disaster. The offensive on 
the front was a failure. Whole regiments mutinied, and the army was 
disintegrating.17
Some units, such as the machine-gun regiment in St. Petersburg 
and the sailors at the Kronstadt naval base, were determined to get rid 
of the Provisional Government. In July 1917 they were joined by an 
increasing number of demonstrators who opposed the government. 
The level of violence increased. It seemed that the February events 
were about to be repeated. A large number of lives were lost, but 
eventually the protest ended without a change of government. The 
intervention of a number of army units that remained loyal to the 
government was decisive for the Bolsheviks. They hesitated to call for 
an armed uprising because, as Lenin warned, a premature uprising 
could end in defeat.18 Kerensky, who had replaced Prince Lvov as prime 
minister, nonetheless denounced him and his party as “putschists” 
and “agents of the Germans.” Representatives of the government 
russkoi revoliutsii. Izdanie snabzheno nauchnymi kommentariiami (Moscow, 2001); also 
Revoliutsiia i grazhdanskaia voina v Rosii, 2: 208–10.
15	
Rex Wade, The Russian Search for Peace, February–October 1917 (Stanford, 1969), 26–38.
16	
Nikolaj Suchanow, 1917, Tagebuch der Russischen Revolution (Munich, 1967), 28; N. K. 
Krupskaya, Memories of Lenin (London, 1942).
17	
Allan K. Wildman, The End of the Russian Imperial Army, 2 vols. (Princeton, 1980–87). 
18	
Alexander Rabinowitch, Prelude to Bolshevism: The Petrograd Bolsheviks and the July Uprising 
(Bloomington, 1968), 117ff., 121ff.

chapter 1a: a time of troubles
7 
declared that the Bolsheviks were carrying out the orders of Berlin 
and wanted to create chaos in Russia. About eight hundred Bolsheviks 
were arrested.19 Lenin himself went underground and fled to Finland, 
where he planned and demanded a transfer of power that would 
ultimately favor his own party more than the soviets. Lenin’s followers 
were divided about the way ahead, but the increasing destabilization 
of the country worked in his favor. “The state,” remarked the writer 
Konstantin Paustovsky, “fell apart like a lump of wet clay,” and “the 
army at the front melted away.”20
The general situation also threatened to destroy the leading 
bodies of the socialist parties in the government. The Kerensky 
government continued to lose support because it offered no energetic 
solutions to the problems of foreign policy, war, social policy, or 
agriculture. Indeed, the prime minister and the new commander in 
chief of the army, Lavr Kornilov, fought over which role each of them 
should play in the restoration of “order.” Kerensky took advantage of 
disputes and misunderstandings to get rid of rivals.21 His success in 
the so-called “Kornilov putsch” turned out to be a Pyrrhic victory. The 
“united socialist front” that he constructed against the military only 
helped the Bolsheviks, who soon were the dominant voices in the 
urban soviets. Lenin’s most important ally at this time, Lev Trotsky, 
was elected chair of the Petrograd Soviet. In October, Trotsky created 
the Military Revolutionary Committee for the defense of Petrograd 
against advancing German troops and against counterrevolutionaries. 
Trotsky thereby acquired a general staff that had the allegiance of the 
Petrograd garrison.22
The October Revolution happened as a coup d’état. In an unspectacular 
manner, power shifted to the Bolsheviks. The modest resistance of a few 
units that had remained loyal to Kerensky was defeated in the few days 
that followed. The supporters of Kornilov, whom the right had celebrated 
as the man of discipline who would rescue Russia, found themselves 
imprisoned in fairly comfortable quarters in the Bykhov Monastery. 
Having fallen out with Kerensky, whom they blamed for the chaos, they 
did not lift a finger to defend him against the attack by the extreme left. 
19	
Figes, A People’s Tragedy, 434.
20	
Paustovsky, Der Beginn eines verschwundenen Zeitalters, 11.
21	
See George Katkov, The Kornilov Affair: Kerensky and the Break-up of the Russian Army 
(London, 1980); Alexander Rabinowitch, The Bolsheviks Come to Power: The Revolution of 
1917 in Petrograd (New York, 1978), 132–44.
22	
Leon Trotsky, History of the Russian Revolution, vol. 3 (London, 1967), 87–119.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
8
Since no one believed that the radical socialists would hold on to power 
for long, they just let them be. There were indeed reasons to believe that 
they were just temporary beneficiaries of the collapse of authority and 
the decentralization of the state.23
The fact that Lenin took power in the name of the soviets, but only 
to establish a Bolshevik monopoly of power, gave domestic politics 
the character of a “war of all against all.” But inside the workers’ 
movement there was a desire to have a sharing of power. This was 
the view of the railworkers’ union, which threatened to bring the 
transport system to a halt if that did not happen.24 Since armed 
conflict between supporters and opponents of the Bolsheviks was 
taking place in Moscow, the Bolshevik leadership agreed to negotiate 
with the Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries. But then the tide 
turned, and Kerensky came out the loser. The new government, the 
Council of People’s Commissars (Sovnarkom), under the leadership of 
Lenin, prevailed, and Lenin withdrew from the talks.25 He demanded 
instead the arrest of the railway unionists and criticized his opponents 
inside the party for their willingness to compromise with socialist 
“traitors.” The individuals attacked by Lenin withdrew in protest from 
the party’s Central Committee. Five people’s commissars resigned 
their posts. Disunity and discord prevailed from the periphery to the 
highest organs of the center. Russia was never closer to anarchy than 
in those days of the “Great Socialist October Revolution” and in the 
months that followed.26 
Particularism and Autonomism, Federalism and Separatism
Following his arrest, Aleksei Nikitin, Kerensky’s minister of the 
interior, is alleged to have said to Volodymyr Antonov-Ovsiienko, 
“That’s your problem now.” It was Antonov-Ovsiienko’s task, with the 
units under his command, to storm the Winter Palace and arrest the 
heads of state. In the SS. Peter and Paul Fortress, Nikitin pulled from 
his pocket a telegram from the Central Rada in Kyiv. According to this 
telegram, the leading representatives of the Ukrainian people were 
more inclined to separate from Russia than ever before.27
23	
Moritz and Leidinger, Die Russische Revolution, 55–57.
24	
On opinions among the soldiers, see GARF, f. 1236, op. 1, d. 1, 28.
25	
RGASPI, f. 17, op. 1, d. 39.
26 
Karsten Brüggemann, Die Gründung der Republik Estland und das Ende des “Einen und 
unteilbaren Russland.” Die Petrograder Front des Russischen Bürgerkriegs 1918–1920 
(Wiesbaden, 2002), 17ff.
27	
GARF, f. 3348, op. 1, d. 149, 2ff.; Georg von Rauch, Geschichte der Sowjetunion (Stuttgart, 

chapter 1a: a time of troubles
9 
The nationality problem also reflected the disintegration of 
the old imperial structures. Representatives of the minorities had 
been meeting since the spring of 1917 and expressing their desire 
for autonomy. What they envisaged was a concept of federalism 
as proposed by the socialists and especially by the Socialist 
Revolutionaries that would reconstitute the republic proclaimed in 
September as a federal state. They had expected more information 
from Kerensky about this, but in vain.28 It would have been better 
if the Provisional Government had made a statement on this issue, 
as there were already instances of confrontation between St. 
Petersburg and the “peripheral nations.” A change in the unitary 
centralized nature of the Russian state was already an issue in the 
1905 revolution. Regional and national consciousness had been 
on the rise since the late nineteenth century in the culturally and 
religiously diverse empire, in which more than half the population 
did not consist of ethnic Russians and was better described by the 
state/territorial term rossiiskii than the ethnic term russkii.29
Opposed only by a privileged elite at the beginning, Russification 
soon found its opponents among the lower urban and rural classes. 
Also not to be overlooked was the fact that the growth of national 
sentiment in 1917 was having its effect in the tsarist army. Units 
were being formed along ethnic lines. The creation of Ukrainian 
formations was particularly important. However, plans for the long-
term reorganization of the army came to grief on developments in the 
territories of the old Romanov Empire. Most “peasant soldiers,” like the 
majority of the civilian population, opposed any continuation of the 
war. Many soldiers wanted to return to their local village in order not to 
lose out in the redistribution of land.30 The majority of the population, 
well over 80 percent, lived in the countryside, with a world view that was 
narrowly focused on the field and the village. They were nonetheless 
influenced by the social and national policies of local leaders. The 
Socialist Revolutionaries in particular were very successful in linking 
1987), 94.
28	
Geoffrey Swain, Russia’s Civil War (Stroud and Charleston, 2000), 133; Nikolaus Katzer, 
Die weisse Bewegung in Russland. Herrschaftsbildung, praktische Politik und politische 
Programmatik im Bürgerkrieg (Cologne, Weimar, and Vienna, 1999), 401; Rauch, Geschichte 
der Sowjetunion, 92ff.
29	
Katzer, Die weisse Bewegung in Russland, 399ff.
30	
Mark von Hagen, “War and the Transformation of Loyalties and Identities in the Russian Empire, 
1914–1918,” in Russia in the Age of Wars, 1914–1945, ed. Silvio Pons and Andrea Romano (Milan, 
2000), 1–35, esp. 2ff., 23–30, 34ff.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
10
the interests of the village with demands for ethnic autonomy and for 
the recognition of regional languages and cultures.31
These developments created difficulties for the Constitutional 
Democrats (Cadets) in the Provisional Government. In their view, 
the “nations” were not ready for self-administration. In the course of 
1917, practically the entire leadership of the Cadets moved toward a 
Russian nationalist position.32 Lvov’s cabinet was prepared to allow 
independence only to Poland. Even the soviets, in the first months 
after the tsar’s abdication, impressed on the Finns that they should 
undertake no unilateral steps toward self-determination. When Rada 
representatives arrived in St. Petersburg with relatively moderate 
demands, the Russians reacted initially by ignoring them. It was 
only under pressure from the Ukrainians, who interpreted their 
freedom with reference to the privileges of the seventeenth-century 
Cossack hetmans and confronted the Lvov government as sovereign 
representatives, that a three-man committee was formed, including 
Kerensky, to negotiate a compromise.33
Recognition of the Rada and of national autonomy provoked a 
government crisis in St. Petersburg. The rightward-drifting Cadets 
were outraged. Three of the party’s spokespersons resigned. They 
had assumed a rather weak national feeling among the peasantry. 
For them, it was petty-bourgeois groups that obviously identified 
themselves more strongly with movements for independence, and the 
rise of those movements was seen as having to do with the collapse of 
the empire. What these Russian centralists overlooked was that their 
own insistence on unity actually boosted the trend from autonomy 
to separation and that those forces in the “periphery” pushing for 
self-determination had broad mass support. When the repeatedly 
postponed elections to the Constituent Assembly took place after 
the October Revolution, socialist parties with national demands won 
majorities in Ukraine, Estonia, Georgia, Finland, and Armenia.34
Under these conditions, the Council of People’s Commissars, in 
its declaration of November 1917, offered the “nations” “complete 
31	
Figes, A People’s Tragedy, 374ff. 
32	
Katzer, Die weisse Bewegung in Russland, 401ff. 
33	
Anthony F. Upton, The Finnish Revolution, 1917–1918 (Minneapolis, 1980); The Ukraine, 1917–
1921: A Study in Revolution, ed. Taras Hunczak (Cambridge, Mass., 1977); John Reshetar, The 
Ukrainian Revolution, 1917–1920 (Princeton, N.J., 1950).
34	
Ronald Grigor Suny, The Revenge of the Past: Nationalism, Revolution, and the Collapse of the 
Soviet Union (Stanford, 1993), 29ff., 45, 54, 63, 75; Steven L. Guthier, “The Popular Base of 
Ukrainian Nationalism in 1917,” Slavic Review 38 (1979): 40.

chapter 1a: a time of troubles
11 
independence from Russia,” thereby recognizing the strength of the 
prevailing particularist sentiment in the regions of the old Romanov 
Empire. With decrees enacted immediately after the overthrow of 
Kerensky, Lenin endorsed not only the national aspirations of the 
people and their desire for peace but also the redistribution of land. 
Behind this propagandistically utilized alliance with “the people” was 
an ideologically colored calculation of power. “Bourgeois nationalism,” 
in the view of leading Bolsheviks, would be overcome by a class 
solidarity that transcended national boundaries. At meetings of the 
Council of People’s Commissars, faith in the “world proletariat” was 
no longer separate from Great Russian chauvinism. Peripheral regions 
were regarded as belonging to them, even though Stalin, as people’s 
commissar for nationalities, defended the independence of Finland, 
and Lenin added his signature to the independence declarations of the 
Scandinavians. In reality, the October regime stoked conflict in the 
regions in order to maintain its own and thus Russian dominance.35
In Kyiv, the Rada declared Ukraine a sovereign state,36 and 
representatives of Estonia, Livonia, and Georgia declared their intentions 
of establishing their own states. Although most ethnic minorities, up 
to then, would have accepted a federation within the borders of the 
defunct Romanov Empire, the situation changed fundamentally in 
January 1918. The Constituent Assembly, which had been seen as the 
platform for the restructuring of the whole empire, was dissolved by the 
Bolsheviks. Because they did not have a majority in that largely freely 
elected assembly, they decided to stop this democratic development in 
good time.37 Counterdemonstrations in St. Petersburg were violently 
suppressed. The Socialist Revolutionaries, the winners in the election, 
had to recognize that the peasants who had voted for them cared little 
about what happened in the capital and agreed in principle with the 
decrees of the people’s commissars. The opposition was also weak, 
mainly as a result of the conflicts that followed the February Revolution. 
The Socialist Revolutionaries were divided. Their Ukrainian members 
were sympathetic to national programs. One faction broke away from 
35	
For related debates and agendas of sessions of the Council of People’s Commissars, see RGASPI, 
f. 2, op. 1, d. 5133; ibid., f. 19, op. 1, d. 66; cf. Rauch, Geschichte der Sowjetunion, 93ff.
36	
See chapter 2a in the present volume.
37	
V. D. Bonch–Bruevich, Na boevykh postakh fevral'skoi i oktiabr'skoi revoliutsii (Moscow, 1930), 
250; The Bolshevik Revolution, 1917–1918: Documents and Materials, ed. James Bunyan and 
Harold H. Fisher (Stanford, 1961), 369ff.; Pitirim Sorokin, Leaves from a Russian Diary (New 
York, 1924), 125.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
12
the mother party to enter into а coalition with the Bolsheviks.38 These 
left Socialist Revolutionaries took over the agricultural portfolio. 
The solidarity between the “village”39 and the “industrial proletariat,” 
especially now that the workers’, soldiers’, and peasants’ soviets had 
fused, seemed to be manifesting itself both at the government level and 
in the soviet organizations.40
The right-wing Socialist Revolutionaries were also drawn into 
this battle and faced challenges from the Cadets as well as from 
right-wing and more far-right forces, including authoritarian circles 
among military officers. The splits in the party spectrum reflected 
rivalries among anti-Bolshevik governments that had been formed 
in Siberia and in the Volga and Ural regions in 1918. Programmatic 
differences, as well as conflicts over the substantial political and 
economic interests of bodies that aimed at regional autonomy rather 
than separation, led to “wars” between the authorities in Omsk, 
Samara, and Ekaterinburg.41 The disagreements took on the character 
of confrontations between “foreigners.” At the same time, antagonism 
between territories controlled by the Bolsheviks and those in which 
their opponents were dominant increased particularly. A few days 
after the Constituent Assembly was dissolved, a Don Republic was 
declared, led by Ataman Aleksei Kaledin. Although this did not mean 
that all hope for a future Russian federation had been abandoned, 
the decision of Kaledin and his Cossack supporters meant separation 
from the Russian center.42
Lenin’s opponents believed that defection from the “fatherland” was 
a result of the “despotic power and destructive policy of the Bolshevik 
dictators,” but other observers thought this explanation inadequate.43 
38	
Oliver H. Radkey, Russia Goes to the Polls: The Election to the All-Russian Constituent Assembly, 
1917 (Ithaca, N.Y., and London, 1989), 18ff., 23.
39	
Recent scholars are quite right to criticize the tendency of existing literature to overstate the 
unity of the Russian peasantry. For reasons of space, we are unable to go into social and regional 
differences in this article. However, the existing literature does hint at these differences, as well 
as acknowledging the fact that the behavior of large parts of rural society was sometimes similar. 
Cf. Aaron Retish, Peasants in Revolution and Civil War: Citizenship, Identity and the Creation 
of the Soviet State, 1914–22 (Cambridge, 2008); cf. Geoffrey Swain, review of Retish’s book in 
Revolutionary Russia 22, no. 2 (December 2009): 234–36. 
40	
Manfred Hildermeier, Geschichte der Sowjetunion 1917–1991. Entstehen und Niedergang des 
ersten sozialistischen Staates (Munich, 1998), 124.
41	
E. P. Sichinskii, “Iz istorii Vremennogo oblastnogo pravitel'stva Urala,” Istoria SSSR, 1992, no.1: 
167; G. Z. Ioffe, Kolchakovskaia avantiura i ee krakh (Moscow, 1983), 76ff.
42	
Peter Kenez, Civil War in South Russia, 1918: The First Year of the Volunteer Army (Berkeley, 
Los Angeles, and London, 1971), 61.
43	
Katzer, Die weisse Bewegung in Russland, 518.

chapter 1a: a time of troubles
13 
The opinion of the British Foreign Office, in early May 1919, was that 
Bolshevism had facilitated the disintegration of the tsarist empire. But 
on the issue of a federal structure for the empire, there were numerous 
views and tendencies. The Ukrainians, for instance, were not united 
on this. The leaders in Ukraine, as in Belarus, the Don, and the Kuban, 
were occupied with building their own independent states. Reuniting 
these in a new union would prove difficult. Apart from their stronger 
national identities, these nations would be unequally represented in 
a new constituent assembly chosen on the basis of population size. 
London commentators were critical of the fact that conflict between 
minorities and majorities would favor the Great Russian majority and 
would be difficult to reconcile with the principle of self-determination 
promoted by the Western powers.44
Ethnic minorities demanded guarantees of their rights. The 
task of a new constituent assembly would only be to give these 
a stamp of approval. The desire to send a common delegation of 
south Russian governments to the Paris Peace Conference ran up 
against the problem of how to find common agreement between, 
on the one hand, the Great Russian group and, on the other hand, 
the Ukrainians, Cossacks from the Don, the Kuban, and the Terek, 
as well as the Azerbaijanis and Georgians.45 Many therefore rejected 
the idea of a federal state and pursued their own separatist goals. 
The government in the Kuban broke with the other south Russian 
forces and sent its own delegation to Paris with the aim of seeking 
membership in the League of Nations. At the same time, it intended to 
sign a treaty with the Caucasian Mountain Republic regarding mutual 
support and recognition of independence.46 In Paris in October 1919, 
the representatives of Azerbaijan, Georgia, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, 
and Ukraine requested recognition as “independent states” and 
members of the League of Nations.47 Even without such declarations 
of sovereignty, many Cossacks, long seen as patriotic defenders of the 
tsarist empire and its borders, distanced themselves from Russia.48 At 
any rate, their concerns were not focused on the power struggles in St. 
Petersburg and Moscow but on the self-determined development of 
44	
TNA, FO 608/206, pp. 261–63.
45	
Katzer, Die weisse Bewegung in Russland, 266.
46	
Ibid., 267.
47	
TNA, FO 608/201, 30–35.
48	
Hannes Leidinger and Verena Moritz, Gefangenschaft, Revolution, Heimkehr. Die Bedeutung der 
Kriegsgefangenenproblematik für die Geschichte des Kommunismus in Mittel- und Osteuropa 
1917–1920 (Vienna, Cologne, and Weimar, 2003), 324.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
14
their own regions, in which, however, they brutally persecuted non-
native populations and pursued a policy of “ethnic cleansing.”49
The Russian population inside those “peripheral areas,” in the 
Cossack regions or in the urban centers and industrial areas, where 
they made up a considerable part of the general population, tended, 
especially among the less privileged social groups, to support socialist 
and pro-Bolshevik forces.50 The thin bourgeois and aristocratic 
stratum, whose leading groups were divided among themselves, was 
marginalized in the wake of the revolutionary upheavals. This section 
of society in the periphery experienced the rise of ethnic movements 
for self-determination. Gradually, they formed their own autonomous 
administrative and national bureaucratic structures. Initially, these 
offered little protection against the October regime, although that 
regime was by no means yet firmly in place. The future would also be 
determined by other forces.
Intervention
Following Lenin’s seizure of power, it was the actions of the Central 
Powers, the Germans with their Austro-Hungarian, Bulgarian, and 
Ottoman allies, that most influenced developments on the territory 
of the old tsarist empire. The Bolsheviks, renamed communists in the 
spring of 1918, had begun negotiations with the Central Powers. These 
collapsed initially because of demands from Berlin. The Communist 
Party and the Soviet leaders were divided on this. Some called for 
revolutionary war. Trotsky, however, as people’s commissar for foreign 
affairs, wanted an end to the war without formal negotiations.51 
Trotsky’s tactic, which was intended to gain time, did little to alter 
the balance of forces. When the troops of the Hohenzollerns and 
Habsburgs began their march eastward, Trotsky joined Lenin who, for 
practical political reasons, preferred to sign a treaty with the Germans 
that would be disadvantageous to the Soviet government but would 
give the newly established Russian Socialist Federal Republic a 
breathing space.52 The Council of People’s Commissars withdrew from 
St. Petersburg, which was now under threat, and moved to the new 
capital, Moscow.53 The Russian government signed a peace treaty with 
49	
Figes, A People’s Tragedy, 570, 581–83. 
50	
Andreas Kappeler, Kleine Geschichte der Ukraine (Munich, 2000), 181ff.
51	
Leon Trotsky, My Life (New York, 1960), 379–94.
52	
On the debates in the state and party leadership of the October regime, see RGASPI, f. 17, op. 1, 
d. 405, 1–13; ibid., d. 410, 3–17; ibid., d. 412, 9.
53	
Helmut Altrichter, Staat und Revolution in Sowjetrussland 1917–1922/23 (Darmstadt, 1996), 53.

chapter 1a: a time of troubles
15 
the Central Powers in Brest-Litovsk on 3 March 1918, relinquishing 
thereby 34 percent of its population, 30 percent of its rail network, 32 
percent of its agricultural land, 54 percent of its industrial area, and 
89 percent of its coal mines.54 In the relinquished areas, it was now 
German and Austro-Hungarian troops that determined events. Under 
their protection and dependent on them, Ukraine, the Don region, 
Georgia, Azerbaijan, and Armenia declared themselves independent 
states. England and Turkey wielded influence in the Caucasus.55
In Kyiv, during this period, the Rada lost power to the conservative 
Hetman Pavlo Skoropadsky. At almost the same time, troops of 
the Central Powers advanced to Rostov on the Don. In return for 
supplies, they provided the Cossacks, led by Petr Krasnov, with 
cannons, machine guns, more than 10,000 weapons, and 12 million 
shells.56 This was what Krasnov wanted from the German troops. 
He, in turn, presented himself vis-à-vis Kaiser Wilhelm as “sovereign 
ruler” of an independent state.57 These declarations of independence, 
dependent on Berlin, contradicted what, since the turn of the year 
1917–18, had been the goal of the White Volunteer Army. This army 
was in the process of being formed and had chosen the Don region 
as a base of operations in the struggle against the Bolsheviks. Led by 
previous commanders of the Russian army, Mikhail Alekseev and 
Lavr Kornilov and, following their early death, by Anton Denikin, this 
army could not survive without foreign support. It was also anything 
but sympathetic to the autonomist and separatist tendencies in these 
peripheral regions of the Romanov Empire. Moreover, the Whites 
sought an alliance with the states of the Entente, the enemies of the 
Central Powers. In spite of his own personal inclinations, toward 
Great Britain in particular, Denikin’s Volunteer Army profited from 
the relation of forces in the west and south of the old tsarist empire. 
Krasnov, whose own inclinations favored Germany, allied himself 
with Denikin. Denikin sought recruits for his small force in Ukraine. 
Germany tolerated these activities at first and showed sympathy for 
Lenin’s opponents. This was followed by negotiations with the Cadets 
and assistance for monarchist forces.58
54	
Revoliutsiia i grazhdanskaia voina v Rossii, 1: 202ff.; John Wheeler-Bennett, Brest-Litovsk: The 
Forgotten Peace (New York, 1938), 269; Rauch, Geschichte der Sowjetunion, 89.
55	
Rauch, Geschichte der Sowjetunion, 99ff.
56	
Kenez, Civil War in South Russia, 145.
57	
David Golinkow, Fiasko einer Konterrevolution: Das Scheitern antisowjetischer Verschwörungen 
in der UdSSR (1917–1925) (Berlin, 1982), 152ff.
58	
Kenez, Civil War in South Russia, 127ff.; Oleg Fediushin, Ukrainskaia Revoliutsiia 1917–1918 
(Moscow, 2007), 275.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
16
At the official and diplomatic level, however, the Germans 
and Austro-Hungarians were attempting to approach the Soviet 
government. Apart from strategic considerations, it was economic 
interests that brought together these unequal partners in Moscow, 
Berlin, and Vienna. This situation put pressure on the pro-Entente 
Volunteer Army. The Central Powers now opposed its recruitment 
efforts in Ukraine and were also hostile to Krasnov’s support for 
Denikin. He continued to offer the Whites money and arms but, 
among the anti-Bolshevik leaders, mistrust and discord now ruled. 
Denikin feared German influence on the Don Cossacks and did not 
think highly of Krasnov. The latter, in turn, became involved in a 
border dispute with Skoropadsky. If the heterogeneous resistance to 
the communists survived under these conditions, it was mainly due to 
the presence of the German and Austro-Hungarian armies.59
Within the territory under his control, Lenin considered the 
domestic Russian conflict settled. His opponents remained weak. The 
left-wing Socialist Revolutionaries had also failed when, in protest 
against the Brest-Litovsk peace, they left the Council of People’s 
Commissars and sought to change government policy by attempted 
uprisings and by murdering the German ambassador in Moscow, 
Wilhelm von Mirbach-Harff. In this way, the Russian Soviet Federative 
Socialist Republic (RSFSR) became a one-party dictatorship under 
the Communist Party. The Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries 
were forced out of the soviets. Rebellions were suppressed by Lenin’s 
security forces, by units of the secret police, the Cheka, as well as by 
the Red Army being created by Trotsky.60
In spite of these acts of violence, external instruments were 
needed to help the anti-Bolshevik forces get off the ground in 
territories controlled by the communists. The Czechoslovak Legion, 
the Druzhina, played a key role in this. Formed from soldiers of the 
Austro-Hungarian army who had defected to the Russians or were 
in Russian prisoner-of-war camps during the First World War, the 
Druzhina had fought against the Central Powers and had been involved 
in the Kerensky offensive. Following the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, these 
soldiers were to be sent along the only open route—through Siberia 
to Vladivostok—to strengthen Allied forces on the Western Front. 
But the transport of this well-armed force, numbering some tens of 
thousands of men during the period of the Provisional Government, 
59	
Kenez, Civil War in South Russia, 127, 148, 157, 163.
60	
Figes, A People’s Tragedy, 642–47. 

chapter 1a: a time of troubles
17 
posed a high security risk in those regions where Soviet power was 
still very fragile.61
Mistrust also played a role. The Kremlin rulers were seen as 
instruments of German war policy. When the people’s commissars 
attempted to recruit “internationalists,” especially prisoners of war 
from the ranks of the Austro-Hungarian troops,62 to the Red Army, 
the legionnaires saw this as a strategy of the Central Powers and a 
direct threat. For various reasons, there were delays in the transport 
to Vladivostok. As a result of conflicts between the Czechoslovak 
units and local Soviet representatives, Trotsky decided to disarm the 
Legion, by force if necessary.63 The crisis escalated in May and June 
1918. The Legion resisted and occupied the rail line in Siberia and in 
the area west of the Urals.64 The resulting power vacuum was filled by 
Russian oppositionists with the direct support of the Czechoslovaks. 
A Committee of Members of the Constituent Assembly (Komuch) 
was established in Samara, consisting overwhelmingly of Socialist 
Revolutionary delegates. However, obtaining little support from the 
local population and viewed critically by both left and right, the new 
rulers in Samara had little to put up against the approaching Red 
Army. At a conference in Ufa initiated by the Allies, the Socialist 
Revolutionaries were prepared to compromise with the national-
conservative government in Omsk that had also emerged in the course 
of the “Czech uprising.” As a result of this compromise, a “Directory” 
of the different power centers was established.65
This body, claiming “all-Russian” authority and consisting mainly 
of Socialist Revolutionaries, was short-lived. There was increasing 
criticism and intervention from the right. When the Czechs refused 
to help, the days of the Directory were numbered. With the full 
knowledge of the Allies, the onetime commander of the Black Sea 
Fleet, Admiral Aleksandr Kolchak, established his rule, arresting and 
persecuting socialist groups. The proclamation of Admiral Kolchak 
as supreme commander (verkhovnyi pravitel'), almost exactly one year 
61	
On the Czechoslovak Legion, see GARF, f. r-393, op. 3, d. 591; RGASPI, f. 17, op. 109, d. 117.
62	
RGASPI, f. 17, op. 109, d. 10.
63	
Gerbung Thunig-Nittner, Die Tschechoslowakische Legion in Russland. Ihre Geschichte und 
Bedeutung als politisch-geistiger Faktor bei der Entstehung der tschechoslowakischen Republik 
(Wiesbaden, 1970), 55ff.
64	
Leidinger and Moritz, Gefangenschaft, Revolution, Heimkehr, 387ff.
65	
David Footman, Civil War in Russia (New York and London, 1961), 96–103; Richard Luckett, 
The White Generals: An Account of the White Movement and the Russian Civil War (London, 
1971), 164; Manfred Hildermeier, Die Russische Revolution 1905–1921 (Frankfurt, 1989), 271.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
18
after the October Revolution, marked the defeat of the non-Bolshevik 
left. In the “revolutionary turmoil,” notions of regional government 
and federalism disappeared in the face of demands from the White 
officers that Russia be treated as one indivisible whole.66
Kolchak’s power, however, was without any firm base. Lacking 
popular support, he engaged in conflicts with local warlords and 
Cossack atamans who had the backing of the Japanese and the Western 
powers. During 1918, resistance to the Reds depended principally on 
the effective Czechoslovak Legion. Without its constant support, in 
the opinion of those who were familiar with the situation, the rule 
of the verkhovnyi pravitel' would have required greater engagement 
on the part of Western powers. Margarete Klante, an official in the 
department dealing with protection of detainees in the Prussian 
war ministry between 1914 and 1918, expressed publicly what many 
believed to be the case. Although she herself was anti-Czech, in the 
interwar period she carried out very fundamental research into the 
history of the Czechoslovak Legion, emphasizing its military prowess, 
and arrived at the conclusion that “it was when the Czechs began to 
withdraw that the White Russian front began to falter, and it never 
recovered.”67 A further factor, of course, was the lack of unity among 
the Allies. To protect the supplies they had delivered to the tsarist 
army in their struggle against the Central Powers, they landed troops 
in Murmansk, Arkhangelsk, and Vladivostok. The action in northern 
Russia was justified by the presence of German troops in Finland, and 
it proceeded with the initial agreement of the Bolsheviks. Before the 
Treaty of Brest-Litovsk, Moscow saw itself threatened by the German 
army and therefore did not oppose the continued alliance with the 
Entente. But when British and Japanese naval contingents landed in 
Vladivostok in early April 1918, the people’s commissars judged this 
to be the beginning of “hostile action against the Soviets.”68
Rumors circulated in Allied capitals about plans of the German 
emperor and his generals to bring the entire territory of the ex-
tsarist empire under Berlin’s control, mainly by mobilizing hundreds 
of thousands of German and Austro-Hungarian prisoners of war.69 
66	
On the policies of the White generals, see GARF, f. 6817, op. 1, d. 14; cf. Swain, Russia´s Civil 
War, 61–63. 
67	
ÖSTA, KA, Nachlass Raabl-Werner, B 141/4, Part II; See HGM, Plennyarchiv, Harald Halls to 
Joachim Givens, 26 January 1932.
68	
RGASPI, f. 17, op. 109, d. 10.
69	
James William Morley, The Japanese Thrust into Siberia, 1918 (New York, 1957), 343; cf. Leo 
Trotzki, Die Geburt der Roten Armee (Vienna, 1924).

chapter 1a: a time of troubles
19 
These reports were used by the Allies, in addition to their hostility 
to the Bolsheviks, to justify Allied intervention. More important 
still were Entente efforts, by “reestablishing the Eastern Front,”70 to 
keep German troops away from the Western Front.71 But Paris and 
London disagreed on how concretely to do this. For a long time the 
French prime minister, Georges Clemenceau, could not be persuaded 
about any “Russian engagement” of the Czechoslovaks. Clemenceau 
wanted to see them in action on the French battlefield.72 The 
American president, Woodrow Wilson, wanted to use his troops to 
defend the legionnaires “against German and Austrian prisoners of 
war.” Whether innocently or hypocritically, he linked the American 
presence in Siberia to the principle of maintaining neutrality with 
regard to internal developments in Russia.73 Another motive could 
not easily be rejected out of hand: Washington saw its small force, in 
alliance with the Czechoslovak Legion, as a counterweight to Japanese 
troops. Japanese expansionist aims in the Far East also divided leaders 
in Tokyo. The civilian and military elite warned against any unilateral 
move against Russia, as well as a possible confrontation with the 
American competitors in the Pacific. There were powerful opponents 
of any intervention that had not been adequately discussed and 
approved by all involved.74
It was a similar situation with the leaders in Britain and France. 
They agreed that their policy toward Russia was part of their world 
war strategy.75 David Lloyd George, the British prime minister, 
impressed on his collaborators that everything had to be done to 
counteract reinforcement of the Germans and Austro-Hungarians by 
the Soviets. “Seen in this light,” said Lloyd George, “a civil war or even 
the continuation of chaos would be advantageous for us.”76
The situation changed, however, with the armistice on the Western 
Front, the end of the First World War, and the annulment of the Brest-
70	
See chapter 4c-e in the present volume.
71	
David Bullock, The Russian Civil War, 1918–22 (Oxford and New York, 2008), 90ff.
72	
George Kennan, The Decision to Intervene (Princeton, 1958), 144ff.; John Bradley, Allied 
Intervention in Russia (London, 1968), 77.
73	
TNA, FO 379/3332, 85–91; George Kennan, Russia and the West under Lenin and Stalin (New 
York, 1961), 143; cf. chapter 4c-e in the present volume.
74	
Morley, The Japanese Thrust into Siberia, 55–57; Betty Miller Unterberger, The United States, 
Revolutionary Russia and the Rise of Czechoslovakia (Chapel Hill, N.C., and London, 1989), 
146–48.
75	
Bullock, The Russian Civil War, 1918–22, 90.
76	
A. M. Gollin, Proconsul in Politics: A Study of Lord Milner in Opposition and Power (London, 
1964), 557; see also the relevant sections of chapter 4c-e in the present volume.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
20
Litovsk treaty. Anti-Bolshevik motives then came to the forefront. The 
Allied victors even agreed to German troops remaining temporarily 
in the western regions of the ex-tsarist empire. The spread of “October 
ideas” and the offensive of the Red Army spurred the leaders in 
Paris and London to take “defensive measures.” Uncompromising 
anticommunists such as the British war minister, Winston Churchill, 
and the French general Ferdinand Foch were decisively in favor of an 
intervention to support the Whites.77 Impressive “plans for a crusade” 
which, as envisaged by Foch, would see large forces marching on 
Moscow, did not gain the support of civilian governments. When 
Woodrow Wilson’s proposal to bring the Bolsheviks and their 
opponents to the negotiating table had fallen through, Clemenceau, 
who had little sympathy for Wilson’s initiative, drew back from any 
“Russian adventure.”78 French troops, mostly stationed on the Black 
Sea coast, were withdrawn. Paris now supported the creation of 
a cordon sanitaire of Central European states against Soviet rule, a 
plan that gradually won acceptance, at the end of 1919, among the 
victorious powers of the First World War.79
Winston Churchill, who in May of that year had reinforced the 
British contingent in Arkhangelsk, eventually had to draw back from 
an active policy of intervention. Most British troops left the Caucasus 
and northern Russia in the autumn of 1919. They held on for a few 
more months in Batumi. Meanwhile, the evacuation of Siberia was 
in full swing. The Japanese were the last to leave their region around 
Vladivostok in October 1922.80
A vague recognition of the Kolchak government in June 1919 had 
no effect. The Whites received less and less assistance. In view of the 
desire for peace among their own populations and occasional mutinies 
among their forces, the Western powers decided to normalize relations 
with the Russian Soviet Republic.81 In this context, it proved to be an 
advantage that the Entente states had never succeeded in agreeing on 
a united approach to the Kremlin leadership. Even during the phase of 
confrontation, negotiating channels had been kept open. Talks were 
77	
Leidinger and Moritz, Gefangenschaft, Revolution, Heimkehr, 630–32; Figes, A People’s 
Tragedy, 573ff.
78	
Alex P. Schmid, Churchills privater Krieg. Intervention und Konterrevolution im russischen 
Bürgerkrieg, November 1918–März 1920 (Zurich, 1974), 76–78.
79	
Evan Mawdsley, The Russian Civil War (Edinburgh, 2008), 179.
80	
Rauch, Geschichte der Sowjetunion, 123, 142ff.
81	
Schmid, Churchills privater Krieg, 249.

chapter 1a: a time of troubles
21 
begun, compromises were sought, bilateral treaties were desired and 
finally achieved in the early 1920s.82
The Weakness of the Whites
Although the foreign intervention may appear contradictory, largely 
uncoordinated and half-hearted,83 the anti-Bolshevik forces would not 
have been viable without the influence of the Central Powers and their 
wartime opponents. With their occupied territories and bases in the 
hinterland and in the coastal towns of the “peripheral regions,” they 
offered the national movements and White forces secure zones and 
areas for retreat. Even though Bolshevik propaganda about an elaborate 
plan of the “world bourgeoisie” and large-scale assaults on “proletarian 
people’s power” may have had little to do with reality, the Czechoslovak 
forces under French command, estimated by Paris to be sixty thousand 
men, were a vital military factor on the Siberian front as well as in the 
Ural and Volga regions. In northern Russia there were more than ten 
thousand Entente soldiers engaged in battle against Soviet forces.84
Apart from this, however, the Allies played a subordinate role 
everywhere. Their assistance concentrated on providing funds. But 
this had little effect in view of the economic crisis in the ex-tsarist 
empire, with high inflation, devaluation of the ruble following the 
February Revolution, Bolshevik nationalization of the banks, the large-
scale collapse of the financial system, and the transition to a natural 
and subsistence economy. The tactic of the British secret service, 
which was to get the big financial institutions under British control 
and, by this means, under the pretext of fighting German influence, to 
support London’s “capitalist imperialist” aims, was at work again from 
the beginning of 1918.85
The sending of armaments, weapons, and munitions had a more 
substantial effect. The Entente arsenal, bulging at the end of the First 
World War, was largely placed at the disposal of the anti-Bolshevik 
forces, especially in 1919. But as the Western powers gradually 
moved toward relations with the Kremlin leadership and deliveries 
82	
See GARF, f. 7506, op. 1, d. 12, 6–8; ibid., d. 15, 28–36; TNA, FO 371/390, pp. 304–6.
83 
For a complaint about this from the British Foreign Office, see TNA, FO 608/206, p. 390–401.
84	
Mawdsley, The Russian Civil War, 219.
85	
TNA, WO 32 5697 and 33 967, also FO 608/247, 442–44; cf. Michael Occleshaw, Dances in 
Deep Shadows: Britain’s Clandestine War in Russia, 1917–20 (London, 2006), 45–48, 60–65. On 
French strategy, see chapter 4c-e in the present volume.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
22
to Kolchak, Denikin, and the anti-Bolshevik Atamanshchina86 were 
reduced or halted altogether, the shortages had an immediate effect 
on the enemies of the October regime.87
The defeat of the Whites revealed their dependence on foreign 
powers. In spite of this, it cannot be seen as the only reason for their 
failure. The tsarist officers had not, at the time, responded adequately 
to the revolutionary turmoil. With a nostalgic vision of the past, they 
carried out their operations against the Soviets, the Sovdepiia,88 as they 
had previously against the representatives of the February revolt, the 
Kerenshchina,89 solely by military means, without paying adequate 
attention to their political program. Plans for later regulations from a 
constituent assembly gave their decrees a purely provisional character.90
There was also some doubt about whether the Constitutional 
Democrats, the conservatives or the right-wing parties would 
be willing to give their approval to an as yet immature Russian 
parliamentarism. In any case, the Constituent Assembly of January 
1918 was dominated by the Socialist Revolutionaries who, by that 
time, were being ostracized and persecuted by the White generals. 
Among the Cadets who had joined the anti-Bolshevik military, efforts 
were made to respond to the social unrest in the country, but their 
proposals were heeded by very few. Moreover, liberal plans lagged 
behind developments in the cities and villages.91
For the workers and peasants, the Whites represented reaction, 
the return of entrepreneurs and estate holders. Baron Petr Wrangel, 
the successor to Denikin, also had to combat this broad front from 
his Crimean base in 1920, when he attempted to “liberate a piece 
of Russian territory” from the Bolsheviks. Promises to implement a 
progressive agrarian law ended up as complex and badly propagated 
regulations that gave considerable powers to the erstwhile rulers.92 
The old elite’s sentiments of revenge were dominant even in Wrangel’s 
86 	 Cossack ataman rulers and their followers.
87 
There are contradictory views on this: Figes, A People’s Tragedy, 574ff., 680; Mawdsley, The 
Russian Civil War, 369, 394. On British deliveries to various anti-Bolshevik forces until the 
end of 1918/beginning of 1919, see TNA, FO 608/177, 193. On the supply of English planes to 
Denikin, see TNA, FO 608/207, 78–80. On London’s criticism of the poor distribution of war 
materials in territories controlled by the Whites, see TNA, WO 158/752, 79ff.
88	
A derogatory term used by anti-Bolshevik forces to refer to Soviet Russia.
89	
The rule of Kerensky and his supporters.
90	
See Katzer, Die weisse Bewegung in Russland, 134ff., 457–75, 483–93.
91	
GARF, f. 439, op. 1, d. 51.
92	
P. N. Wrangel, The Memoirs of General Wrangel (London, 1929), 171–75.

chapter 1a: a time of troubles
23 
own entourage. This led frequently to excessive acts of violence 
that only confirmed the population in its already existing hostility. 
Against this background, the Whites, even more infuriated, turned 
against the “underprivileged classes,” especially against the Jews, 
vilified as the “stirrups of Bolshevism.” According to various estimates, 
between fifty and two hundred thousand died in pogroms. Ethnic 
independence movements such as the Ukrainian national movement 
were also responsible for pogroms. At least thirty thousand Jews were 
murdered in Ukraine.93 Moreover, Red Army units were not immune 
to widespread anti-Semitism.94
For a variety of reasons, the Red Army had the advantage. The 
skirmishes and then the all-out war between Poland and Soviet Russia 
ended in a truce and, eventually, a peace treaty after the failure of the 
Soviet offensive on the Vistula. The Red Army was therefore able to 
strengthen its forces in the Crimea and defeat Wrangel at the end of 1920. 
Here we have a final example of how the interaction between different 
national and regional goals had its effect on the White offensive.95
The White defense of “Russia, one and indivisible” had already 
created problems, especially in 1919. In his advance on Kyiv, Denikin 
ignored the language, culture, and institutions of the local population, 
to which, in the centralist tradition, rejecting Ukrainian national 
feelings, he referred as “Little Russians.” The Whites ruled out the 
Ukrainian Directory, led by Symon Petliura, as a partner. Petliura, 
following a controversial alliance with Poland, eventually had to 
give way to the Bolsheviks, as did the Russian anti-Bolsheviks, who 
had neglected to create a functioning administrative system in the 
territories they had conquered.96 At the same time, morale declined 
among Denikin’s most important partners. The Cossacks lacked any 
93 
Scholars are skeptical of claims exceeding one hundred thousand: Kappeler, Kleine Geschichte 
der Ukraine, 182. See also Ulrich Herbeck, Das Feindbild vom “jüdischen Bolschewiken.” Zur 
Geschichte des russischen Antisemitismus vor und während der Russischen Revolution (Berlin, 
2009), 234–314; A. F. Maleev, Tridtsat' dnei evreiskogo pogroma v mestechke Krivoe Ozero 
(Moscow, 1921); I. E. Tscherikover, Antisemitizm i pogromy na Ukraine, 1917–1918 (Berlin, 
1923); Iu. Larin, Evrei i antisemitizm v SSSR (Moscow and Leningrad, 1929); I. B. Shechtman, 
Pogromy dobrovol'cheskoi armii na Ukraine (Berlin, 1932).
94	
Herbeck, Das Feindbild vom “ jüdischen Bolschewiken,” 373–98; Lenin on the Jewish Question, 
ed. Hyman Lumer (New York, 1974); Sonja Margolina, Das Ende der Lügen. Russland und 
die Juden im 20. Jahrhundert (Berlin, 1992); Louis Rapoport, Hammer, Sichel, Davidstern. 
Judenverfolgung in der Sowjetunion (Berlin, 1992).
95	
Bullock, The Russian Civil War, 116–22.
96	
A. I. Denikin, Ocherki russkoi smuty, vol. 4 (Paris, 1925), 86–88.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
24
enthusiasm for an offensive against Moscow.97 Outside their own areas 
of settlement, they achieved less by their military ability than by their 
tendency to go on forays in search of booty. Especially when retreating, 
they engaged in plundering and acts of violence. These also featured in 
the defeat of Kolchak in his failed attempt to overthrow Soviet power 
from Siberia. In this battle sector as well, the population was not won 
over to the side of the Whites, although there were hardly any noble 
estates east of the Urals, and the peasants of the region, engaged in 
the dairy industry and in a mixed economy, were comparatively well 
off.98 In some areas, resistance to the anti-Bolshevik military was not 
restricted to the villages. In the struggle against Denikin, especially 
in Ukraine, whole areas placed themselves under rival gangs and 
particularly under partisan leaders such as Nykyfor Hryhoriiv and the 
anarchist leader Nestor Makhno.99 
Under such circumstances, the Whites did not have enough time 
to stabilize their rule in the territories they occupied. It was also a 
general disadvantage for them that they operated separately from 
one another, in peripheral regions of the old tsarist empire, while 
the Soviet government ruled over the central area, with access to 
weapons stores, industrial enterprises, and dense transport networks. 
The situation for the anticommunists was also worsened by internal 
conflicts. Denikin, with his relatively liberal views, was surrounded 
by conservatives and monarchists. Kolchak was encircled by Siberian 
and Far Eastern atamans, “schemers,” and “ambitious egotists,” a 
following that, in his own estimation, largely hung around behind the 
front and contributed little to the support of the troops.100 At the same 
time, Kolchak and his supporters were reluctant to give other military 
leaders too much scope for action. Denikin, for his part, unwillingly 
accepted the claim of the verkhovnyi pravitel' and his government in 
Omsk to sole representation. This government had also for some time 
regarded Nikolai Yudenich, who had risen to commander of a pro-
Allied army in northwestern Russia, as a competitor.101 
In an action that must have displeased the supporters of an 
“indivisible fatherland,” Yudenich, who himself rejected separatist 
97	
K. N. Sokolov, Pravlenie generala Denikina (Sofia, 1921), 191.
98	
Figes, A People’s Tragedy, 671.
99 
See, for example: Nestor Makhno, Krest'ianskoe dvizhenie na Ukraine 1918–1921. Dokumenty i 
materialy (Moscow, 2006).
100	 TNA, FO 608/177, 133–35; Peter Fleming, The Fate of Admiral Kolchak (Edinburgh, 2001), 136.
101	 GARF, f. 6817, op. 1, d. 14. See also Christopher Lazarski, The Lost Opportunity: Attempts at 
Unification of the Anti-Bolsheviks, 1917–1919 (Lanham, Md., 2008).

chapter 1a: a time of troubles
25 
tendencies, was forced to come to a compromise with Estonia.102 But 
the willingness of Estonians to support the Whites had its limits. Like 
the British units on the territory, their attitude was a more defensive 
one. Yudenich’s attempt to capture St. Petersburg in the autumn of 1919 
failed.103 Similarly unsuccessful were the operations of Prince Pavel 
Bermondt-Avalov. He attempted, with German assistance, to establish 
a foothold in Latvia in order to march eastward from there and capture 
Moscow before Kolchak or Denikin. The victors in the First World War 
viewed the possible expansion of Berlin’s influence with suspicion. In 
Riga, English naval units put an end to Bermondt-Avalov’s adventure. 
Latvia, Estonia, and Lithuania seceded from the empire, as Finland 
had already done in practice in May 1918. In 1920 they signed peace 
treaties with Lenin’s Soviet government, which thereby recognized the 
sovereignty of these neighboring western states.104
The Kremlin leadership, in the meantime, had succeeded 
in tightening up the militarized state apparatus. The Red Army 
functioned as the main support of the regime. Numerically it was far 
larger than the White forces. In fact, in what was militarily the most 
difficult period for Council of People’s Commissars, in 1919, Trotsky’s 
forces had twice as many infantrymen and machine guns as Denikin’s 
troops.105 It was only his cavalry that was weaker. As a result, Trotsky 
pushed forward his “proletarian” offensive on horseback. At the 
same time, in all weapons categories, he recruited officers from the 
old tsarist army in order to provide the leadership of his troops with 
experts. Although this policy was criticized in party circles, it proved 
successful militarily and was not simply the result of pressure applied 
to the potential “class enemy” and its supporters. Even such individuals 
as the former commander in chief of the army, Aleksei Brusilov, did 
not see the Whites as a genuine alternative to the October regime. 
In spite of ideological reservations, there were many who thought 
like Brusilov. To them, the Bolsheviks seemed to be the only possible 
representatives of the “Russian fatherland.”106 
The Red Army grew steadily. Between December 1918 and mid-
1919, it increased from around 400,000 to 1.5 million and, by 1920, to 5 
102	 GARF, f. 6817, op. 1, d. 14.
103	 Figes, A People’s Tragedy, 679–81; Brüggemann, Die Gründung der Republik Estland, 448.
104	 Leidinger and Moritz, Gefangenschaft, Revolution, Heimkehr, 631; Rauch, Geschichte der 
Sowjetunion, 140.
105	 Swain, Russia’s Civil War, 154.
106	 GARF, f. 5972, op. 1, d. 101; ibid., op. 3, d. 170.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
26
million.107 The overall character of the battles and campaigns changed. 
Until then, small units had ruled the terrain with “rapid movements.” 
What now emerged were stable front lines with larger fighting units 
ranging in size from ten thousand to one hundred thousand men. This 
form of war was made possible by conscription, which, in turn, led to 
many desertions and refusals to serve.108 
But here also, if we look more closely, we can see that the people’s 
commissars acted more wisely than their opponents. On the Soviet 
side, there were many attempts to reeducate insubordinate soldiers, 
while the Whites, without exception, had them killed. Against this 
background, when, for instance, Denikin’s units advanced on the army 
and weapons base at Tula, south of Moscow, deserters rejoined the 
Soviet troops. The Mensheviks, in addition, mobilized those workers 
who were still “on strike” against Lenin’s government to come to the 
defense against the Whites. Band leaders such as Makhno declared 
that it was essential first to eliminate the Whites in order then to get rid 
of the Reds. This temporary alliance between the communists and the 
“green” peasant revolution, the latter partly supportive of the Socialist 
Revolutionaries, gave Lenin’s government a temporary advantage.109 
But behind this limited alliance, an internal front was apparent in the 
Soviet power base.110 
Internal Conflict
The struggle between supporters and opponents of the October 
regime was accompanied by a radicalization that manifested itself in 
acts of repression against the population. Most of the population kept 
its distance from the warring parties and, for that very reason, was 
affected by these coercive measures—attacks from the Whites and an 
increasingly systematic Red terror. The special instrument of this terror 
was the Cheka, which had 37,000 men in January 1919 and about 137,000 
in the late summer of 1921. Tens of thousands were arrested, held as 
hostages, or executed. The system of camps for control and economic 
exploitation of the “class enemy” was already making its appearance.111 
107	 Swain, Russia´s Civil War, 154; Hildermeier, Geschichte der Sowjetunion, 142.
108	 GARF, f. 130, op. 2, d. 120; ibid., d. 277.
109	 Peter Kenez, review of Christopher Lazarski, The Lost Opportunity: Attempts at Unification of 
the Anti-Bolsheviks, 1917–1919, in Revolutionary Russia 23, no. 1 (June 2010): 129ff.
110	 Swain, Russia´s Civil War, 127; cf. GARF, f. 130, op. 3, d. 198; ibid., d. 363.
111	 See George Leggett, The Cheka: Lenin’s Political Police: The All-Russian Extraordinary 
Commission for Combatting Counter-Revolution and Sabotage (December 1917 to February 
1922) (Oxford, 1981).

chapter 1a: a time of troubles
27 
The Bolsheviks carried on a social campaign that, as a conflict 
among “Russian brothers,” was rejected not least by the village, 
although it took place in an already violent society.112 Conscription in 
the “modern state” and the First World War as a “total” war, involving 
all personal and material resources, changed whole regions, even 
those distant from the front. The return of soldiers from the ranks of 
the fallen tsarist army brought aggressive forces into the community 
(obshchina) that traditionally had attempted to enforce their code of 
ethics with frightful methods of torture and death.113
These various sources of brutality often served as a justification for 
the brutality of the Kremlin leadership’s rule. The Communist Party’s 
followers also made use of ideological weapons that served to further 
sharpen the conflict. This allowed them to claim, for instance, that 
nationalization decrees had transferred the management of factories 
from the workers to communist officials. The dissatisfaction of the 
proletariat, intensified by the shortage of supplies in the cities and 
industrial areas, expressed itself in an almost permanent readiness 
to strike. Among Bolshevik cadres, there was frequent criticism 
of the way in which workers’ needs were ignored and of rule by an 
increasingly bureaucratic party apparatus.114
Moreover, Lenin and his comrades regarded themselves as a 
“red island” in a “green” ocean of anti-Marxist “peasant masses.” The 
attempt to create a cleavage in agrarian society and the struggle of the 
newly formed “committees of the village poor” against the “wealthy 
kulaks” were directed, as a “strategy of socialist restructuring,” toward 
the maintenance of Bolshevik power. These committees, which were 
to provide assistance in the requisition of supplies by procurement 
troops and in the expropriation of the “rural bourgeoisie,” proved to 
be a failure.115 The rural population did not allow itself to be divided 
and reacted in a much more united fashion against the intrusion from 
outside. Following the lynching of village committee members, Lenin 
retreated from this form of class struggle in the village but continued 
to insist on the destruction of the village elite, still referred to in 
derogatory fashion as “kulaks.” The “grain war,” designed to provide 
112 On the issue of violence in Russian or Soviet history of the first half of the twentieth century, see 
Jörg Baberowski, Der Rote Terror. Die Geschichte des Stalinismus (Frankfurt am Main, 2007).
113	 See Maxim Gorki, “Vom russischen Bauern,” in Alexander W. Tschajanow, Reise ins Land der 
bäuerlichen Utopie (Frankfurt am Main, 1984), 97–99.
114	 Hildermeier, Geschichte der Sowjetunion, 155.
115	 Revoliutsiia i grazhdanskaia voina v Rossii, 2: 316.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
28
supplies to the urban centers, was continued and intensified.116 Added 
to all this were the efforts of War Communism, especially the attempt 
to hand over estates to state farms and collective farms. The socialist 
collective economy aroused the anger of the peasants, who regarded 
their ownership of “God’s earth” as an achievement of the 1917 
revolution.117 The alliance between the people and the Bolsheviks 
appeared to have ended. The crisis reached its height when famine 
claimed the lives of millions. Peasant rebellions spread, and half the 
agrarian collectives were destroyed. Often as a result of activities 
encouraged by the Socialist Revolutionaries, in 1920–21 the Council 
of People’s Commissars lost control of western Siberia, as well as 
territories in Ukraine and in the province of Tambov. Practically all the 
local population here joined the uprising led by Aleksandr Antonov.118
Following the defeat of the Whites, these uprisings represented 
an existential threat to the Communist Party leadership. This was 
evident in the anti-Bolshevik activities of Makhno after the collapse 
of the Wrangel front. Makhno upheld ideals of “soviet democracy,” 
a slogan that also appeared among the demands of the Kronstadt 
sailors for a Soviet with more parties. The sailors who, until then, 
had been reliable supporters of the Lenin group confronted the 
Council of People’s Commissars in a way similar to the striking 
workers, except that the workers were also demanding a recall of 
the Constituent Assembly.119
St. Petersburg, the city of the October Revolution, was in turmoil. 
Lenin and Trotsky reacted decisively to the challenge: disputes inside 
the Communist Party were dealt with by a “banning of factions.” 
Kronstadt was captured by the Kremlin’s elite force. Makhno was 
pursued for so long that he finally fled abroad in August 1921. Antonov 
was killed in a skirmish the following year. In June 1921 the revolt in 
Tambov was put down. Thousands died in these confrontations. An 
even larger number, including children, were imprisoned and later 
deported or shot.120
Antonov’s resistance had achieved a relatively high level of 
organization. The cooperation of regional peasant groups resembled 
116	 See, e.g., GARF, f. 130, op. 2, d. 277; ibid., f. 393, op. 3, d. 336.
117	 V. V. Kabanov, Krest'ianskoe khoziaistvo v usloviiakh voennogo kommunizma (Moscow, 1988), 
240–73.
118	 See Eric C. Landis, Bandits and Partisans: The Antonov Movement in the Russian Civil War 
(Pittsburgh, 2008); Swain, Russia’s Civil War, 142–47.
119	 Figes, A People’s Tragedy, 767.
120	 Swain, Russia’s Civil War, 145–47; RGASPI, f. 76, op. 3, d. 137.

chapter 1a: a time of troubles
29 
soviet rule without the communists. The victory of Lenin’s government 
was due, in no small measure, to the military means available to the 
Bolsheviks. To a certain extent, it was a collision of two different 
epochs. The Council of People’s Commissars had very reliable troops 
and security organizations with tanks, heavy weapons, bombers, and 
poison gas. The initially spontaneous peasant revolt was armed with hay 
forks, axes, pikes, and hoes.121 The Communist Party was also successful 
because it succeeded in uniting very loyal supporters behind it. By the 
end of 1920, the Red Army had built almost three thousand schools 
that, following the “ideals of the Enlightenment,” contributed to mass 
literacy but, first and foremost, carried out ideological indoctrination.122 
As a result, half a million soldiers joined the communists. They spread 
Lenin’s ideas and stabilized and militarized Soviet institutions, which 
were being led by younger officials in the meantime. The communists’ 
“youth work” bore fruit. The attempt to undermine the old order of 
agrarian society through class struggle had failed, but the generational 
conflict was effective. It was the adolescents from the village who 
swelled the ranks of the Young Communist League (Komsomol), and it 
was these members who participated to a significant extent in putting 
down the peasant revolts and the Kronstadt uprising.123 
The Moscow party leadership and people’s commissars had created 
a new “guard” for future conflicts. For the moment, they pulled back 
from the fight against their own population. Parallel to the violent 
suppression of the revolts, Lenin signaled a course correction and a 
willingness to compromise. His New Economic Policy (NEP) replaced 
the forced collection of food with levies; it also liberalized trade and 
small industry.124 
At almost the same time as it won the struggle against the Whites 
and the Allied intervention, Moscow changed its attitude toward 
the peripheral regions of the old tsarist empire that it had conquered 
between 1920 and 1922. The final takeover of power in Ukraine, the 
occupation of nation-states in the Caucasus, the possession of Siberia 
and the Far East, the elimination of Muslim princedoms, and the 
union with Soviet Turkestan, until then territorially separate from the 
121	 On the Antonov revolt, see also G. M. Mikhalev and I. Ia. Trifonov, “Antonovschina,” in 
Sovetskaia istoricheskaia ėntsiklopediia, vol. 1 (Moscow, 1961), 635–37. See also RGASPI, f. 17, 
op. 3, d. 128.
122	 GARF, f. 2313, op. 3, d. 26; ibid., f. 2314, op. 9, d. 2.
123	 Figes, A People’s Tragedy, 767ff.
124	 Historisches Lexikon der Sowjetunion 1917/22 bis 1991, ed. Hans-Joachim Torke (Munich, 1993), 
216–18.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
30
Russian Federation, not only created the preconditions for the founding 
of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR) in 1922–23. From the 
viewpoint of the Soviet leadership, it was now time to openly oppose 
the Great Russian chauvinism that the Whites, to their disadvantage, 
had inscribed on their banner, and which had often been concealed 
beneath the Red slogans of proletarian internationalism.125
Although the one-party dictatorship of the communists was not 
in doubt, and their leaders held the “commanding heights” in the 
emerging Soviet Union, the New Economic Policy also signaled a 
change in nationality policy. At the same time as the NEP came into 
force, the Tenth Bolshevik Party Congress passed a resolution on the 
promotion of national cultures and the opening of the administration 
to local forces. This “taking root” (korenizatsiia) also had its effect in 
Ukraine, where the independence movement, following constant 
changes of regime, had collapsed. Communist policy now favored 
local elites and allowed the use of national languages in the local 
press, schools, and state administration.126
Review and Definitions
Any attempt to summarize what is already a rather summary account 
of events from the eve of the February Revolution to the founding of 
the USSR runs into difficulties if one attempts to subsume the many 
conflicts under the heading of “Russian civil war.” Considering that 
the territory of the Russian Empire was involved and that communist 
“Soviet power” extended, in many cases, to the borders of that empire, 
we are dealing with a multi-ethnic area of action that should be 
denoted by the state/territorial term rossiiskii, as distinct from the 
ethnic term russkii. But can we legitimately use the term “civil war” 
here? Similarly, these events cannot be described simply as a crisis of 
the state in which the Red party dictatorship replaced the monarchy. 
The collapse of the system in February 1917 created a particularism 
that called the existing polity into question. Disintegrative tendencies 
made their appearance, effectively an “atomization of the empire.” 
Regions and even individual areas presented themselves as “miniature 
republics.” The mass of the agrarian population, whose political 
thinking had long been restricted to its own villages and fields, 
regarded the mostly spontaneous takeover of aristocratic estates and 
125 See Hannes Leidinger, “Nationale Kräfte,” in Barry McLoughlin, Hannes Leidinger, and Verena 
Moritz, Kommunismus in Österreich (Innsbruck, Vienna, and Bozen, 2009), 203–7. 
126	 Kappeler, Kleine Geschichte der Ukraine, 188–91.

chapter 1a: a time of troubles
31 
the establishment of local self-determination as the realization of old 
ideals and goals. Redistribution had begun before the “Red October.” 
Lenin’s land decree had merely given its blessing to this development. 
Decisions of any constituent assembly were therefore irrelevant.
Previous to their seizure of power, the Bolsheviks had generally 
profited from these processes of disintegration and from the initiatives 
of the peasants and workers. Their temporary alliance with the masses 
was further strengthened by their agreement with the desire for peace 
articulated by both the civil population and the soldiers, likewise by 
their apparent support for the movements for ethnic autonomy and 
independence. In this respect, it was not just the Russian Revolution 
but also the First World War that acted as an accelerating factor. 
The downfall of the Romanov Empire, the Habsburg Monarchy, and 
the Ottoman Empire, as well as the principle of self-determination 
formulated by both Lenin and Woodrow Wilson, particularly the 
interpretation of that principle following the end of the long global 
mass slaughter, contributed to the establishment of the nation-state 
as the norm of political order. Among the “nations” hitherto united 
under the rule of the tsar, the movement toward sovereignty, which so 
far had been weak, was strengthened. The demands that arose in this 
situation frequently went beyond autonomy. Separatist movements 
appeared, and regional governments, including those hostile to the 
Bolsheviks, saw Lenin’s coming to power as an opportunity to break 
away from Russia.
However, on Russia’s western borders, national movements aiming 
at sovereignty found themselves dependent on foreign powers. This 
was most clearly the case in Finland, the Baltic states, Ukraine, and 
the Caucasus. The most powerful intervention on the territory of the 
fallen Romanov Empire was that of the Central Powers. As was also the 
case with the Allies, their strategies were basically limited to meeting 
their military, economic, and political goals in the First World War. 
In the power vacuum created by the February Revolution, it became 
possible to produce a large effect with relatively small means. The 
half-hearted and flawed intervention of the disunited Allies managed, 
under such circumstances, to put their mark on events and strengthen 
the opponents of the communists.
The people’s commissars in Moscow, who, in spite of their initially 
weak rule, proved themselves more capable than their “internal 
enemies,” described this as a large-scale conspiracy planned by 
foreign “imperialists” and “capitalists.” But in reality there was no 
“general plan.” These conflicts were exacerbated by, among other 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
32
things, the “imponderables of history,” such as the appearance of 
the Czechoslovak Legion which, with its revolt against the October 
regime, took control of more territory than any other force during the 
First World War.
 Russia’s opponents established anti-Bolshevik governments and 
armies behind the lines of foreign troops and in the regions where 
they operated, as well as on the territories of the “peripheral nations” 
that had, on a number of occasions, struggled for independence in 
the past. The intervention of the Allies, frequently researched and 
partly exaggerated, was only one of a number of external factors. The 
impression was thus created, including among the decision-makers 
of the Entente governments, that an “artificial civil war” was being 
fomented and sustained from outside. After all, the fronts against 
Soviet units almost always collapsed as soon as the support of their 
foreign allies was removed. In Paris and London, in particular, there 
was the vain hope that Lenin’s enemies, after some initial assistance, 
would stand on their own two feet.127 
The relatively large military forces that confronted each other in 
the old Romanov Empire, especially in 1919, should not distract our 
attention from the real balance of forces. Both sides conscripted local 
populations. The result was mass desertion. In the decisive moments, 
however, the local populations supported the October regime because 
its slogans corresponded more closely to their wishes. The White 
officers, on the contrary, were badly equipped for a civil war. They 
lacked relevant programs. In addition, existing programs were often 
subordinated to the requirements of military operations. Many of their 
decrees appeared to have a purely provisional character, inasmuch as 
no one really believed that any definitive solutions were to be found 
by recalling the Constituent Assembly. In the meantime, their battles 
against the communists appeared as acts of revenge and punishment 
directed against workers and peasants who saw, in the tsarist generals 
and their advisers, only their previous exploiters. Divided among 
themselves or at least not well coordinated, the Whites, with their 
support for an “undivided Russia,” ran up against the various national 
movements. They thus alienated potential partners in the peripheral 
regions, and it was precisely from those regions, under initially difficult 
conditions, that the military campaigns against the Red central area, 
with its larger population and greater resources, would have to be led.
It became clear, once again, that most of the population had little 
127	 See TNA, FO 608/177, 156ff.

chapter 1a: a time of troubles
33 
interest in the power struggles going on in St. Petersburg and Moscow. 
Particularist forces continued to dominate. The conflict between the 
October regime and its opponents appeared, in many areas, as an 
import of external conflict. The Cossacks, for this and other reasons, 
were difficult allies for Denikin, as was confirmed by the Socialist 
Revolutionaries: “The peasants are indifferent; they simply want to be 
left in peace.” They “are hesitant to support a war between the different 
political parties” and would not “fight against their own brothers.”128 
Thus, many village communities declared themselves “neutral 
republics.” They created their own forces to protect themselves against 
foreign armies and appealed to both the Reds and the Whites to end 
their conflict by negotiation. The protests in many regions against the 
“willful unleashing of civil war” came not only from the peasantry but 
also from within the proletariat itself.129 
In many cases, the Bolsheviks were considered responsible for the 
armed confrontations. More than any other politician or party leader, 
Lenin had expected civil war,130 thought in those terms, pushed 
for it, and, following his relatively rapid triumph over the internal 
opposition in the spring of 1918, declared it ended.131 But then came 
the campaign of the people’s commissars against the village, the “grain 
war” and the “class struggle” against the so-called kulaks. The result 
was a strengthening of the “green front,” which, according to Lenin, 
constituted a greater threat to the Kremlin leadership than the armies 
of Denikin, Yudenich, and Kolchak put together.132 These uprisings 
attained an unprecedented scale and also underwent a qualitative 
change. “Peasant wars,” combined with workers’ strike actions and 
the uprising of the Kronstadt sailors, took on the character of a new 
128	  Quoted in Figes, A People’s Tragedy, 581.
129  Martin Krispin, “Bolschewiki und bäuerliche Opposition im russischen Bürgerkrieg. Der 
Bauernaufstand im Gouvernement Tambov 1920–21,” in Volksaufstände in Rußland. Von der 
Zeit der Wirren bis zur “Grünen Revolution” gegen die Sowjetherrschaft, ed. Heinz-Dietrich 
Löwe (Wiesbaden, 2006), 528.
130	  Contemporary witnesses and historians have seen the revolution and the civil war as a unity, on 
the model of the French Revolution. For the Duma president, Mikhail Rodzianko, the overthrow 
of the tsar in the spring of 1917 was the beginning of a bloody civil war. Socialists as well, such 
as Georgii Plekhanov, made Lenin and his April Theses responsible for the intensification of the 
conflict. See Moritz and Leidinger, Die Russische Revolution, 40, 45.
131	  It is worth noting, in this respect, the differences in the periodization of the Russian civil war by 
supporters and opponents of the Communist Party regime. For Rodzianko, among others, it began 
with the February Revolution. Many others place it at the time of the Kornilov putsch or during 
and after the October Revolution. See Moritz and Leidinger, Die Nacht des Kirpitschnikow, 185.
132	  Figes, A People’s Tragedy, 766; Ronald Kowalski, The Russian Revolution 1917–1921 (London 
and New York, 1997), 146.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
34
revolution. Influenced to some extent by the Socialist Revolutionaries, 
demands in the countryside for a “genuine soviet democracy” were 
now combined with calls for the rule of law and an increasing interest 
in the state as a whole.133 
The civil revolution (grazhdanskaia revoliutsiia), which aimed at 
representing the whole “working people” and was seen as the great 
new revolution after 1917,134 came to grief on the consolidated and 
militarized October regime. In spite of the many attempts to establish 
contact among the “rebels,” the poorly equipped insurgents were 
largely isolated in the regions. Following the brutal suppression of the 
uprisings, Lenin ordered a period of compromise and relaxation. It 
was not until the forced collectivization under Stalin in the late 1920s 
and early 1930s that the Communist Party again went to war against 
an even more defenseless rural population.
Under such conditions, tensions and confrontations in the 
Soviet domain were limited to local revolts. In the regions of the old 
Romanov Empire that were sovereign for shorter or longer periods, 
conflicts were mostly internal. These internal rivalries were always 
dependent on the actions of foreign interventionist forces, as the 
cases of Finland and Ukraine make clear. Great-power strategies and 
border-transcending conflicts of interest mixed with social unrest, 
particularist concerns, and separatist aspirations. 
Recent Russian publications give a similar account of the 
Makhnovshchina,135 in which the self-determination of the villages 
did not correspond to the anarchist ideas of the insurgent leader. 
It was rather a “peasant revolution” shaped by the land shortage of 
serfdom and provoked by the German occupation, the threat of White 
restoration, and Red war communism.136 Many scholars see the period 
from the fall of Nicholas II to the formation of the USSR as a new “Time 
of Troubles,” with reference to the crisis of the Muscovite empire at the 
beginning of the seventeenth century.137 Although this description is 
133	  On the “national concerns” of peasant communities and indications of an interest in the state on 
the part of the peasantry in 1918 and 1919, see, among others, Retish, Peasants in Revolution and 
Civil War, 166, 212, 265.
134	  It was, in other words, a “bourgeois revolution” (bürgerliche revolution) or a “citizens’ 
revolution” (Bürgerrevolution), equivalent to the fundamental changes that had taken place 
following the overthrow of the tsar, i.e., the events of 1917, transcending partial interests in many 
ways and directed toward a restructuring of the entire polity.
135	 The movement associated with Nestor Makhno.
136	 Makhno, Krest'ianskoe dvizhenie na Ukraine, 5–7.
137	 See Hildermeier, Geschichte der Sowjetunion, 134.

chapter 1a: a time of troubles
35 
imprecise, it does capture the complexity of the problematic. Liberal 
and conservative contemporaries saw the period from 1917 to 1922 
as a second smuta.138 But this period of “chaos” and “troubles” was not 
followed by a monarchy, by another ruling dynasty on the throne. 
Likewise, the social upheavals could not be contained but led rather 
to the Bolshevik dictatorship. The analogy thus has its limits. The 
emphasis here must be on the novelty of the “troubles.”139 
Notwithstanding such attempts at definition, this complex conflict 
is presented in the literature in a mostly unreflective manner simply 
as the “Russian civil war.”140 This term refers to a split in the polity, 
within which rival groups attempt to establish, by force of arms, their 
right to rule and their model of rule. After the February Revolution, 
however, there was neither an uncontested conception of a single 
state and duties of citizenship, nor did the Whites, in particular, have 
a chance of survival without foreign assistance. Nor was there much 
scope for “civil war” in regions with a large agrarian population that 
were able to achieve many of their goals independently in 1917–18. 
The “civil war” was created artificially not just by external factors but 
also by the ideology of the communist leaders in the Kremlin. It was 
typical that Trotsky should see the actions of the Czechoslovak Legion 
as part of a gigantic struggle between the capitalist “stock market” and 
the Soviet “people’s power.”141 Lenin and his supporters prepared for a 
great class struggle that would transcend national borders and secure 
their power base in Russia. Lenin’s “internationalism,” which included 
recruiting foreign Red Army and communist cadres as the nucleus of 
the later Comintern, operated ultimately within a scenario of global 
civil war.142 
Outside the Marxist-Leninist framework, however, it does seem 
doubtful whether one could integrate the antagonism between 
revolution and counterrevolution, Bolshevism and anti-Bolshevism, 
freedom and equality, universalism and particularism into an 
imposing interpretative model of European and global “civil wars.” 
138	 Russian term for the “Time of Troubles.”
139	 Katzer, Die weisse Bewegung in Russland, 1.
140 For example: Kruglyi stol, “Grazhdanskaia voina v Rossii,” Otechestvennaia istoriia, 1993, 
no. 3: 102–15; Iu. A. Poliakov, “Grazhdanskaia voina v Rossii: vozniknovenie i ėskalatsiia,” 
Otechestvennaia istoriia, 1992, no. 6: 32–41. For a more complete bibliography on the “civil 
war,” see Jonathan D. Smele, The Russian Revolution and Civil War, 1917–1921: An Annotated 
Bibliography (London and New York, 2003).
141	 Trotzki, Die Geburt der Roten Armee, 65.
142	 Leidinger and Moritz, Gefangenschaft, Revolution, Heimkehr, 287–322, 409–39, 533–646.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
36
Imperial endeavors and models of the polity based on the nation-
state have been central to our understanding of “late modernity” and 
the “short twentieth century.” In addition and beyond this, there is 
no reason why we should not conceptualize border-transcending 
conflicts as transnational or supranational crises.143 
To describe these events as a “Russian civil war” would be not only 
to marginalize important phenomena at the end of the First World 
War but also to accept the perspective of the October regime, whose 
terminology has entered the thinking and language of its opponents 
and neutral observers.144 Taking a critical distance from this, one 
has to give due weight to the aspirations for self-determination of 
the “peoples” of the old tsarist empire, as well as the concerns of the 
Russian workers and peasants. Considered in this way, the events of 
1917 to 1922 constitute a phase of efforts to achieve independence at 
the moment of the Bolshevik seizure and assertion of power. These 
developments also assume the tragic character of a futile attempt by 
most of the population to prevent a violent conflict “between brothers” 
and to defend the gains of 1917 less against the hapless Whites than 
against the victorious Bolsheviks. The new “Time of Troubles” is not, 
in this view, a period of civil war. In its totality, it should be understood 
rather as an era of revolution shaped by intervention and secession, 
as a phase of systemic collapse and far-reaching reorganization that 
offered alternatives to communist dictatorship until the founding of 
the USSR.145 
143	 For a different view concerning the use of the concept of “civil war,” see Enzo Traverso, Im 
Bann der Gewalt. Der europäische Bürgerkrieg 1914–1945 (Munich, 2008); Dan Diner, Das 
Jahrhundert verstehen. Eine universalhistorische Deutung (Munich, 1999); Ernst Nolte, Der 
europäische Bürgerkrieg 1917–1945. Nationalsozialismus und Bolschewismus (Frankfurt am 
Main, 1987). There is a lack of comparative research into civil wars, for which a number of 
reasons have been advanced. Among them is the fact that it is a very challenging task for scholars 
to find a common basis for processes that are complex and difficult to grasp empirically and are 
determined by an interplay of internal and external factors. See Peter Waldmann, “Bürgerkriege,” 
in Internationales Handbuch der Gewaltforschung, ed. Wilhelm Heitmeyer and John Hagan 
(Wiesbaden, 2002), 371ff. 
144 Hannes Leidinger, “‘Rot' gegen ‘Weiß.’ Die Ukraine und der ‘Russische Bürgerkrieg,’” in Die 
Besatzung der Ukraine 1918. Historischer Kontext – Forschungsstand – wirtschaftliche und 
soziale Folgen, ed. Wolfram Dornik and Stefan Karner (Graz, 2008), 93.
145	 Ibid.

1b. The Ukrainian Policy of the 
Central Powers during the First World War
Peter Lieb and Wolfram Dornik
The Central Powers did not really have a coherent Ukrainian policy. In 
the German Empire, this question was given no priority before 1914. 
It was quite a different matter, however, for their Austro-Hungarian 
allies. The Ukrainian question was not only a foreign-policy issue 
for Austria-Hungary but also a virulent internal problem, given 
that in 1910, roughly 3.5 million “Ruthenians” lived in the Austrian 
crownlands (Cisleithania), and almost half a million on the Hungarian 
side (Transleithania). They were settled in Galicia and Bukovyna, as 
well as in the Hungarian regions of Máramaros, Bereg, Ugosca, and 
Ung, where they made up about 40 percent of the population. Thus it 
was not merely symbolic that the chancelleries of Vienna and Budapest 
insisted on using the terms “Ruthenian” and “Ruthenia” to emphasize 
their difference from the “Ukrainians” of tsarist Russia.1 They were 
aware of the risk that the Ukrainian national movement in Austria-
Hungary would demand unification with Ukrainians in the Russian 
Empire. Within the Ukrainian national movement in the Habsburg 
Empire, however, there were three different approaches to this 
problem. Those belonging to the first group emphasized their identity 
with the Ukrainian nation, considered to be distinct from Russia, 
and described themselves as Ukrainians. They were also known as 
“Young Ruthenians.” The second group were the “Old Ruthenians,” 
who emphasized their affiliation to Russian culture. This may, to some 
extent, have been an expression of religious orientation, as many of 
those who belonged to the Russian Orthodox Church felt themselves 
to be “Ruthenians,” especially in Bukovyna. The third group were the 
Russophile “Old Ruthenians,” who rejected not only any confession 
that was not Russian Orthodox but also the Habsburg monarchy itself. 
1	
Wolfdieter Bihl, “Einige Aspekte der österreich-ungarischen Ruthenenpolitik 1914–1918,” 
Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osturopas (Wiesbaden), n.s. 14 (1966): 540–42; Wolfdieter Bihl, 
“Die Ruthenen,” in Die Habsburgermonarchie 1848–1918, vol. 3, Die Völker des Reiches, pt. 
1, ed. Adam Wandruszka and Peter Urbanitsch (Vienna, 1980), 555–84; Jaroslav Hrycak, “Die 
Formierung der modernen ukrainischen Nation,” in Ukraine. Geographie, Ethnische Struktur, 
Geschichte, Sprache und Literatur, Kultur, Politik, Bildung, Wirtschaft, Recht, ed. Peter Jordan 
et al. (Vienna, 2000), 189–210.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
38
Austro-Hungarian officials did not make a clear distinction between 
these two latter groups and suspected both of being Russophile.2
The Polish and Hungarian national movements felt particularly 
threatened by the Ukrainians and adopted a strongly anti-Ukrainian 
attitude well before 1914, as evidenced by the numerous polemical 
brochures that circulated in Vienna.3 However, the government 
attempted to keep the Ukrainian national movement on side by 
tolerating Ukrainian religious and cultural practices in Galicia.4 The 
Polish and Hungarian opposition had the effect of producing a certain 
amount of Russophilism in the Ukrainian movement. The hope here 
was that Ukraine would have more national autonomy in an alliance 
with Russia than in the Habsburg Monarchy, where the Poles had been 
the “ruling class” since the granting of autonomy to Galicia in 1873.5 
Ukrainian activities in Galicia that aimed at achieving an 
independent Ukrainian nation led to frequent tensions between Russia 
and Austria-Hungary in the years before the war. At this time Vienna 
had not yet begun to exploit the Ukrainian independence movement in 
Galicia for its own political ends. Some small concessions were made 
to the Ruthenians, but only insofar as they did not antagonize the 
Poles. For Russia, however, even this indicated a “hotbed of hostility 
to Russia,” as Klaus Bachmann so aptly described it in his work on 
Austro-Hungarian and Russian relations before 1914.6
When war broke out in 1914, the dominant expression from the 
Ukrainians was one of solidarity with the Habsburg throne, and the 
Ruthenians were seen in Vienna as “the Tyroleans of the east.”7 The 
Supreme Ukrainian Council (Holovna Ukraïns'ka Rada), formed on 
2	
Klaus Bachmann, Ein Herd der Feindschaft gegen Russland. Galizien als Krisenherd in den 
Beziehungen der Donaumonarchie mit Russland (1907–1914) (Vienna, 2001), 24–28.
3	
On the anti-Ukrainian attitudes of the Poles in Galicia, see Oleh S. Fedyshyn, “The Germans 
and the Union for the Liberation of Ukraine, 1914–1917,” in The Ukraine, 1917–1921: A Study 
in Revolution, ed. Taras Hunczak (Cambridge, Mass., 1977), 305–22; Antoni Podraza, “Polen 
und die nationalen Bestrebungen der Ukrainer, Weissrussland und Litauen,” in Entwicklung der 
Nationalbewegungen in Europa 1850–1914, ed. Heiner Timmermann (Berlin, 1998), 205.
4	
Heinz Lemke, Allianz und Rivalität. Die Mittelmächte und Polen im Ersten Weltkrieg (bis zum 
Februarrevolution) (Vienna, Graz, and Cologne, 1977), 104.
5	
Paul R. Magocsi, A History of Ukraine (Seattle, 1996), 397–457; Taïsija Sydorčuk, “Die Ukrainer 
in Wien,” in Ukraine. Geographie, 457–82; Anna Veronika Wendland, “Galizien: Westend des 
Ostens, Ostend des Westens. Annäherung an eine ukrainische Grenzlandschaft,” in Ukraine. 
Geographie, 389–422.
6	
Bachmann, Ein Herd der Feindschaft gegen Russland.
7	
Magocsi, A History of Ukraine, 397–457; Sydorčuk, “Die Ukrainer in Wien,” 457–82; Wendland, 
“Galizien: Westend des Ostens, Ostend des Westens,” 389–422. 

chapter 1b: the ukrainian policy of the central powers 
during the first world war
39 
1 August 1914 by National Democrats, Radicals, and Social Democrats,8 
began immediate negotiations with the authorities over the formation 
of a Ukrainian Legion. This Legion would also act as a positive signal for 
the Ukrainians in Russia. A Union for the Liberation of Ukraine (Soiuz 
vyzvolennia Ukraïny) was formed at the same time, mainly by emigrants 
from central and eastern Ukraine.9 
Eastern Europe and Ukraine in the Discussion of German War 
Aims until the End of 1917
Before 1914, the German Empire had no political interest in Ukraine, 
much less a plan for an independent Ukrainian state. A few German 
intellectuals concerned themselves with this subject in the nineteenth 
century and saw in Ukraine a separatist potential to weaken tsarist 
Russia. These ideas were then taken up again during the First World 
War.10 To understand Germany’s Ukrainian policy between 1914 and 
1918, it is essential to study the attitudes of German historiography 
on this issue. The question of imperial Germany’s war aims was one 
of the great historical debates after 1945. In the so-called “Fischer 
controversy” of the 1960s, there was a lively and sometimes polemical 
debate among experts about the continuity of German war aims during 
the First World War, which included a debate about Germany’s eastern 
policy. In his influential book Griff nach der Weltmacht (translated as 
Germany’s Aims in the First World War),11 Fritz Fischer argued that the 
military and political elite of the German Empire had had a kind of 
master plan. The contours of the policy of large-scale annexation 
that emerged in 1918 had already crystallized during the euphoria 
following the rapid victories in the West in August and September 
1914. It was Fischer’s view that the harsh conditions of the Treaty of 
Brest-Litovsk stood in a long tradition of Germany’s “reach for world 
power.”12 Although Fischer dealt with Germany’s Ukrainian policy 
only marginally, he saw it in the same light. 
8	
On the party system of the Austro-Hungarian Ukrainians, see Harald Binder, “Parteiwesen und 
Parteibegriffe bei den Ruthenen der Habsburgermonarchie,” in Ukraine. Geographie, 211–40.
9	
Frank Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer 1914–1939 (Paderborn, 2010), 86–102; Torsten 
Wehrhahn, Die Westukrainische Volksrepublik. Zu den polnisch-ukrainischen Beziehungen und 
dem Problem der ukrainischen Staatlichkeit in den Jahren 1918 bis 1923 (Berlin, 2004), 29–56.
10	
Fedyshyn, “The Germans and the Union for the Liberation of Ukraine,” 307ff.; Golczewski, 
Deutsche und Ukrainer, 246.
11	
See Fritz Fischer, Griff nach der Weltmacht. Die Kriegsziele des kaiserlichen Deutschland 
1914/18 (Düsseldorf, 1961).
12	
Fischer sharpened his theses later, claiming that this world power policy already existed before 
1914. See Fritz Fischer, Krieg der Illusionen. Die deutsche Politik von 1911 bis 1914 (Düsseldorf, 
1969).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
40
These claims about Germany’s eastern policy met very rapidly 
with opposition.13 Winfried Baumgart was the first to publish a large 
and detailed study of the final year of the war and rejected Fischer’s 
principal claims. According to Baumgart, Germany’s eastern policy, 
including its policy on Ukraine, was not the product of planned long-
term war aims but represented an adaptation to particular military 
situations. He emphasized, in addition, the different attitudes of the 
military high command and the Foreign Office. A few years later, Oleh 
Fedyshyn came to the conclusion that Fischer’s theses were “simply 
not borne out by the available documentation.”14 He stressed the lack 
of planning in Germany’s eastern policy throughout the war.
Fischer’s claims were supported, however, by his onetime student 
Peter Borowsky, who saw his own work explicitly as a “special study 
that continues the contribution made by Fritz Fischer.”15 According 
to Borowsky, there was indeed a planned long-term German policy 
on Ukraine in which political, economic, and public-relations 
interests dovetailed and reinforced one another.16 He claimed that 
the economic and political elite were even more “imperialist” than the 
military high command because the aim of the former was more long-
term.17 A later study by Claus Remer went even further.18 He saw a 
continuity in German policy even from the period before the outbreak 
of the First World War. Brest-Litovsk and the German invasion were a 
logical consequence of previous policy. Since then, historical research 
has moved between these two poles of a purposeful and directionless 
Ukrainian policy.
What can be said today, more than forty years after the Fischer 
controversy, about Germany’s Ukrainian policy between 1914 and 
1917? Some German politicians were taking an interest in Ukraine 
as early as August 1914 in connection with so-called “attempts to 
instigate insurgency” in the Russian Empire. According to this plan, 
13	
See Aus Politik und Zeitgeschichte, supplement to the weekly Das Parlament, 17 May, 14 June, 
and 21 June 1961. 
14	
Winfried Baumgart, Deutsche Ostpolitik 1918. Von Brest-Litowsk bis zum Ende des Ersten 
Weltkrieges (Vienna and Munich, 1966); Oleh Fedyshyn, Germany’s Drive to the East and the 
Ukrainian Revolution, 1917–1918 (New Brunswick, N.J., 1971), 256.
15	
Peter Borowsky, Deutsche Ukrainepolitik 1918 unter besonderer Berücksichtigung der 
Wirtschaftsfragen (Lübeck and Hamburg, 1970), 17.
16	
Borowsky described Baumgart’s foundational study as “undoubtedly…a backward step” because 
of its “loaded politics”: Borowsky, Deutsche Ukrainepolitik, 15.
17	
Borowsky, Deutsche Ukrainepolitik, 298.
18	
Claus Remer, Die Ukraine im Blickfeld deutscher Interessen. Ende des 19. Jahrhunderts bis 
1917/18 (Frankfurt am Main, 1997). Remer’s work is based on a thesis submitted to the University 
of Jena in the period of the German Democratic Republic and makes use of no new documents.

chapter 1b: the ukrainian policy of the central powers 
during the first world war
41 
the non-Russian “peoples on the periphery” were to be incited to rebel 
against the central government and bring down the Russian colossus 
from within.19 Poland, the Baltic states, Finland, the Caucasus, and 
even Ukraine were seen by Germany as potential areas for insurgency. 
Some thoughts about insurgency in Ukraine are already evident in 
August 1914 and, on 8 August, Kaiser Wilhelm himself expressed an 
interest. A strong supporter of this project was the undersecretary 
of state in the Foreign Office, Arthur Zimmermann, who spoke of 
inciting revolution from Finland to the Caucasus.20 Following these 
mind games, the first official government exploration took place. On 
11 August 1914 the foreign minister, Gottlieb von Jagow, informed 
the German ambassador in Vienna, Heinrich von Tschirschky: “We 
see insurgency as very important, not just in Poland but also in 
Ukraine.”21 The driving force behind these ideas was the very active 
German consul general in Lviv, Karl Heinze, who, in these weeks, 
was sending almost daily memoranda to Tschirschky or directly to 
the Foreign Office and the government. Heinze stressed the alleged 
anti-Russian sentiment among the Ukrainians in Lviv, a sentiment 
supposedly shared by many Ukrainians in the Russian Empire. He 
emphasized the existence of Ukrainian national sentiment and a 
separatist mood among the Russian-ruled Ukrainians. He also made 
frequent reference in his reports to the economic potential of this very 
large country.22
The Austrian foreign minister, Count Leopold Berchtold, reacted 
quite sensitively to these “insurgency efforts,” as he feared that the 
German Empire might be aiming to establish new nation-states under 
its own influence by promoting such insurgencies. On 12 August 1914, 
in a statement explaining Austria-Hungary’s plans for Poland, and as 
a response to Germany’s eastern plans, he expressed the suspicion 
19	
Fischer, Griff nach der Weltmacht, 109. There were similar plans against the British Empire, 
beginning with Ireland and Afghanistan. But all these plans came to nothing in spite of a few 
daring attempts, such as the well-known expedition of the Bavarian officer Oskar Niedermayer. 
See his memoirs: Oskar Ritter von Niedermayer, Meine Rückkehr aus Afghanistan (Munich, 
1918); also Hans-Ulrich Seidt, Berlin, Kabul, Moskau. Oskar Ritter von Niedermayer und 
Deutschlands Geopolitik (Munich, 2002). 
20	
Mark von Hagen, War in a European Borderland: Occupations and Occupation Plans in Galicia 
and Ukraine, 1914–1918 (Seattle and London, 2007), 55, 67. With regard to Wilhelm II, von Hagen 
makes use of an unpublished dissertation: Jerry Hans Hoffman, “The Ukrainian Adventure of the 
Central Powers” (Ph.D. diss., Pittsburgh, 1967).
21	
Fischer, Griff nach der Weltmacht, 117.
22 
See the numerous writings of Heinze in the archives: TNA, GFM, 6/107–8.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
42
“that the German government is discussing the idea that, in the 
event of a victory for our troops against Russia, it would establish an 
independent Kingdom of Poland and a Ukrainian state as a buffer 
against Russia.”23 Berchtold concluded that Poland would have to be 
attached to Austria-Hungary, which would also be advantageous to 
the German Empire, as it would block any Polish claims on Prussia. 
Even if Berchtold overreacted, the episode does demonstrate Austro-
Hungarian fears that the German Empire wanted to create satellite 
states in Eastern Europe under its dominance. 
Were these fears justified? Some historical research indicates 
that they were. For Fritz Fischer, Jagow’s telegram of 11 August 1914 
showed that “as early as the second week of the war, breaking Ukraine 
away from Russia was declared as a goal of official German policy.”24 
However, a more careful study of sources makes this claim look highly 
questionable. Jagow changed his mind very quickly and reacted 
negatively to Heinze’s proposals. On 31 August he sent a telegraph 
to Tschirschky saying that there was some interest in a Ukrainian 
insurgency but that the Germans had no direct links with people in 
Russia. Therefore it was Austria-Hungary that should take the lead 
here. If their ally did not warm to this idea, then Jagow would not be 
able “to promise to follow the plan or to spend a significant amount of 
money.”25 So the imperial government rejected the insurgency project 
in Ukraine.26 On the military side, there were parallel discussions 
about this with the Turkish and Austro-Hungarian “brothers in arms” 
until the winter of 1914–15. But when the Turks refused to make any 
troops available for such an expedition, the plan was finally dropped.27
The first kind of war aims program of the imperial government 
was the so-called September Program of Chancellor Theobald von 
23	
Quoted in Joachim Lilla, “Innen- und Außenpolitische Aspekte der austropolnischen Lösung 
1914–1916,” Mitteilungen des Österreichischen Staatsarchivs (Vienna), no. 30 (1977): 228ff.
24	
See Fischer, Griff nach der Weltmacht, 118. Fischer’s student Borowsky wrote of a “definite role 
for Ukraine in the new order”: Peter Borowsky, “Germany’s Ukrainian Policy during World War 
I and the Revolution of 1918–1919,” in German-Ukrainian Relations in Historical Perspective, 
ed. Hans-Joachim Torke and John-Paul Himka (Edmonton and Toronto, 1994), 84; Borowsky, 
Deutsche Ukrainepolitik, 292.
25 
TNA, GFM 6/107, Foreign Office A.H. 475/14, 31.8.1914.
26	
Fischer and Borowsky simply omitted this central document, although it was in the archive they 
used. See Fischer, Griff nach der Weltmacht, 120; Remer, Die Ukraine im Blickfeld, 172. This 
argument was largely accepted by von Hagen, War in a European Borderland, 54ff., but he 
himself used no primary sources. 
27	
ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Krieg 8b Januar-Juli 1918, Kt. 902, Mappe “Krieg 1914–1918 
Insurrektion in Russland, in der Ukraine, Anfang: August-September 1914.”

chapter 1b: the ukrainian policy of the central powers 
during the first world war
43 
Bethmann Hollweg.28 This suggested in a vague manner that “Russia’s 
dominance over the non-Russian vassal peoples must be broken.”29 But 
no matter how significant one considers the September Program, one 
fact remains: Ukraine plays no role in this document because, shortly 
before, the insurgency project for this part of Russia was judged to be 
unrealistic. When, in the following months, tsarist Russia occupied 
parts of Galicia and Bukovyna, direct intervention in Russian-ruled 
Ukraine became illusory.
 This reticence in the Ukrainian question is also apparent in later 
war aims programs. Certainly the German Empire wanted to redraw 
the map in Eastern Europe, but its interest was mainly in the Baltic 
countries and Poland.30 While Lithuania and Courland were to be 
annexed to the empire, Poland was to become a satellite state. These 
ideas were explicitly stated in the Kreuznach War Aims Program of 23 
April 1917, which has become almost a symbol of the excessiveness 
of the German Supreme Army Command (OHL).31 At that time, with 
the establishment of the Central Rada in Kyiv in March 1917, new 
perspectives should have opened for the German Empire in Ukraine. 
But there was no change of course. There is no indication, in this 
period, even of German financial support for the Rada.32 
28	
The Septemberprogramm is one of the main sources in the great debate about German war aims. 
Until the appearance of Fischer’s Griff nach der Weltmacht, this source was unknown to scholars. 
This document, written at the height of the Battle of the Marne, played a central role in his 
argument. For him, it was the master plan of German war policy in the First World War and 
remained valid throughout the war. According to this view, the imperial chancellor, Bethmann 
Hollweg, had not distanced himself from the demands of the Pan-Germans or the Supreme Army 
Command, or had done so only gradually. In his later book, Krieg der Illusionen, Fischer saw 
the Septemberprogramm as a continuation of ideas developed before the war. Karl-Dietrich 
Erdmann, however, argued that the Septemberprogramm was not the cause but a consequence 
of the war. Gerhard Ritter thought that the document had a rather defensive character. In his 
view, the Septemberprogramm represented a moderation of the much more extensive demands 
of influential circles in the frenzy of German victories in the early weeks of the war. A peace 
program without annexations would have been completely illusory in those weeks. See Fischer, 
Griff nach der Weltmacht; Fischer, Krieg der Illusionen; Karl-Dietrich Erdmann, Der Erste 
Weltkrieg (Munich, 1980); Gerhard Ritter, Staatskunst. Bethmann Hollweg als Kriegskanzler 
(1914–1917) (Munich, 1964).
29	
Fischer, Griff nach der Weltmacht, 93.
30	
Immanuel Geiss, Der polnische Grenzstreifen 1914–1918. Ein Beitrag zur deutschen 
Kriegszielpolitik im Ersten Weltkrieg (Hamburg and Lübeck, 1960); Abba Strazhas, Deutsche 
Ostpolitik im Ersten Weltkrieg, Der Fall Ober Ost 1915–1917 (Wiesbaden, 1993); Vejas Gabriel 
Liulevicius, War Land on the Eastern Front: Culture, National Identity, and German Occupation 
in World War I (Cambridge, 2000). 
31	
On the core content of the Programm, see Fischer, Griff nach der Weltmacht, 290ff.
32	
See Fedyshyn, Germany’s Drive to the East, 47.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
44
In contrast, the most radical elements in the German war aims 
discussion advocated very ambitious demands with regard to 
Ukraine. The Pan-German League defended the “peripheral states 
plan” as a way of resisting Russian influence. In the autumn of 1914 
the head of the League, Heinrich Class, put forward more concrete 
proposals, suggesting that Ukraine should be an independent state 
under a German or Austro-Hungarian dynasty.33 Class was unable 
to suggest any definite borders for the new state, as the geographic 
extent of Ukrainian national consciousness was still unclear. The 
tycoon August Thyssen also had an eye on Ukraine, although for him 
it was not Russia but the British Empire that was the main enemy of 
Imperial Germany. In order to strike at the heart of the English lion in 
its principal colonies, Egypt and India, the German Empire would have 
to bring southern Russia, the Caucasus, Asia Minor, and Persia into its 
sphere of influence. Thyssen wrote in this regard of “the Don region 
and Odesa.”34 This demand not only revealed ignorance of geography 
but also showed how an irrational hubris can be father to the thought. 
Other economically liberal circles had similar ideas during the course 
of the war.35
The most ambitious project of German economic liberals was 
the establishment of an economically united Central Europe under 
German leadership. This plan for a customs union of the German 
Empire with Austria-Hungary originated before the war. Emperor 
Wilhelm spoke to a small circle in 1912 about a United States of 
Europe as an economic counterweight to the United States of America. 
Walther Rathenau took up this idea in August 1914 and hoped that 
“the production of both empires would indissolubly” grow together. 
As a further step, he wanted France and Italy to be “forced” into the 
customs union.36 Rathenau’s proposals met no public response, unlike 
those of Friedrich Naumann and his book, Mitteleuropa, published in 
33	
See Remer, Die Ukraine im Blickfeld, 172–74; Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer, 153.
34	
Remer, Die Ukraine im Blickfeld, 176.
35 
According to the politician Ernst Müller-Meiningen of the Progress Party (Fortschrittspartei), 
“The way to the Mediterranean for Germany does not go through Gibraltar but through the 
Black Sea and the Dardanelles, i.e., through Ukraine.” See Ernst Müller-Meiningen, Diplomatie 
und Weltkrieg. Ein Führer durch die Entstehung und Ausbreitung der Weltkrisis auf Grund 
der amtlichen Materialien, vol. 2 (Berlin, 1917), 1224. See also the positions of the Prussian 
war ministry, written by Major Müldner von Mülheim in the summer of 1918 and quoted by 
Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer, 248ff. 
36	
This text, unpublished to date, is currently being edited by Alexander Jaser of Freiburg on behalf 
of the Rathenau-Gesellschaft as part of a project to publish material from the Rathenau archive. 
The authors wish to thank Mr. Jaser for allowing them to have a copy of the text.

chapter 1b: the ukrainian policy of the central powers 
during the first world war
45 
1915.37 With this book, Naumann was able to have direct influence on 
the public debate about war aims. His ideas had a much more critical 
reception in Austria-Hungary, where they were tagged with the 
stigma of imperialism. For Naumann, the world economy consisted of 
core zones dominated by powerful states. Three of these had existed 
so far: Great Britain, the United States, and Russia. So-called “satellite 
states” or “planet states” were to enlarge the core zones. These small 
states, “in the great thread of history, would no longer follow their 
own laws” but would serve “to strengthen the leading group to which 
they belong.”38 Naumann insisted that the German Empire and 
Austria-Hungary should form a common economic union in order 
to compete with other powers. Unlike Rathenau, Naumann saw the 
future of Central Europe, including the German Empire, in the East 
and not in the West. Naumann deliberately left open the question of 
Russia’s western border.39 
In addition, a small circle of academics had a relatively large 
influence with their writings on Ukraine.40 The principal figures 
here were Theodor Schiemann and especially Paul Rohrbach. Both 
were Baltic Germans who had emigrated to Germany at the end of 
the nineteenth century. Rohrbach succeeded in reaching beyond an 
academic audience. He was a highly educated, widely traveled and 
extremely productive writer. In his works he linked the ideas of 
nationalism with a belief in progress. He saw reactionary Russia as the 
tormenter of the non-Russian nationalities and, at the same time, as the 
main enemy of imperial Germany. This fear of Russia and sympathy for 
the aspirations of the non-Russian peoples to independence made him 
an enthusiastic promoter of the “peripheral states policy.”41 Rohrbach 
saw Ukraine as the key to defeating Russia: “Without Ukraine, Russia 
is not Russia; it has no iron, no coal, no grain, no harbors!... Life in 
Russia will peter out if an enemy takes Ukraine.... Whoever possesses 
37	
Friedrich Naumann, Mitteleuropa (Berlin, 1915). The book was reissued many times.
38	
Ibid., 165.
39	
Ibid., 99–101, 193.
40	
Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer, 218–39; Frank Grelka, Die ukrainische Nationalbewegung 
unter deutscher Besatzungsherrschaft 1918 und 1941/42 (Wiesbaden, 2005), 84–92.
41 
See Peter Borowsky, “Paul Rohrbach und die Ukraine. Ein Beitrag zum Kontinuitätsproblem,” 
in Deutschland in der Weltpolitik des 19. und 20. Jahrhunderts, ed. Immanuel Geiss and Bernd 
Jürgen Wendt (Düsseldorf, 1972), 437–62. On Rohrbach’s influence up to 1912, see Walter Mogk, 
Paul Rohrbach und das “Größere Deutschland.” Ethischer Imperialismus im wilhelminischen 
Zeitalter. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte des Kulturprotestantismus (Munich, 1972). See also 
his memoirs: Paul Rohrbach, Um des Teufels Handschrift. Zwei Menschenalter erlebter 
Weltgeschichte (Hamburg, 1953).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
46
Kyiv can force Russia!”42 This was how Rohrbach summarized his 
ideas in his 1916 publication, Weltpolitisches Wanderbuch.43 By 1918, 
ninety-five thousand copies had been sold, so it can be assumed that 
his ideas had a certain public outreach. One should not conclude from 
this, however, that Rohrbach played a key role in Germany’s policy on 
Ukraine.44 In spite of his publishing success, his influence on German 
politics was very limited.45 
So what kind of overall assessment should we make of Germany’s 
Ukrainian policy between 1914 and the end of 1917? That winning 
Ukraine might be the lever to break the Russian or even the British 
Empire? That the Pan-German League or German industrialists were 
engaged in this? Or that the writings of Paul Rohrbach reached a wide 
audience? In reality, none of this matters, for all these ideas came from 
different interest groups or individuals without any concrete political 
influence. The German government may have had vague ideas, 
but none of them were taken up in the official war aims program. 
There was no insurgency project and no thought of Ukraine as key 
to defeating Russia in any of the official or semi-official war aims 
programs between 1914 and 1917.46 There is no basis in reality for 
speaking of continuity in Imperial Germany’s Ukrainian policy during 
the First World War.47
Austro-Hungarian Policy on Ukraine, 1914–1917
The war aims debate in Austria-Hungary is difficult to summarize 
clearly because of the conflicting plans and ideas of so many different 
42	
Quoted in Borowsky, “Paul Rohrbach und die Ukraine,” 437.
43	
Paul Rohrbach, Weltpolitisches Wanderbuch 1897–1915 (Königstein, 1916).
44 
This is Borowsky’s view: see his “Paul Rohrbach und die Ukraine.” For a different opinion, see 
Fedyshyn, Germany’s Drive to the East, 24–30. 
45 
From 1915 he worked in the Central Office for Foreign Services at the Foreign Office, where he 
assessed the Russian press. But he was eventually removed from his post because his judgments 
about Russian conditions were considered incorrect. When Ukraine came under German control 
in 1918, Rohrbach traveled to the Germany embassy in Kyiv for two weeks. He was unable to 
achieve anything because the concrete political situation made his ideas irrelevant. He made a 
positive impression, however, on the chief of staff of Ober Ost, Major General Max Hoffmann. 
See Karl Friedrich Nowak, ed., Die Aufzeichnungen des Genaralmajors Max Hoffmann, vol. 1 
(Berlin, 1929), entries for 7 and 21 May 1918. 
46	
Hans Beyer, Die Mittelmächte und die Ukraine 1918 (Munich, 1956). One finds a similar 
argument in Grelka, Die ukrainische Nationalbewegung, 85. 
47	
Strongly supported by Fedyshyn, Germany’s Drive to the East, but opposed by Fischer, Griff nach 
der Weltmacht; Remer, Die Ukraine im Blickfeld; and Borowsky, Deutsche Ukrainepolitik. In the 
case of Borowsky, reference to Ukraine in the documents he cites is a matter of interpretation, 
since the word “Ukraine” does not appear there. 

chapter 1b: the ukrainian policy of the central powers 
during the first world war
47 
groups and interests. The dissolution of the Imperial Council in 
Cisleithania in 1918 meant that the discussion of war aims was 
carried on at an informal level among ministries, the general staff, and 
officials.48 At this level, the frequent differences between the military 
and civilian leadership as well as the different positions taken by the 
governments in Vienna and Budapest played a role.49 Hungary made 
its own demands, especially with regard to territories in Southeastern 
Europe. The Hungarian prime minister, István Tisza, was particularly 
tenacious and refused to compromise. This led to accusations from all 
sides of excessive “egoism” on Hungary’s part. But Hungary was not 
alone. The other nationalities in this multinational empire demanded 
their share of any gains from the war. Although not declared in so many 
words, from the very beginning the most important aim of this war 
for the Dual Monarchy was the survival and maintenance of its own 
integrity as a state. In addition, Austria-Hungary wanted to stabilize 
itself as a regional power on the basis of territorial gains from Russia. 
As early as November 1914, in guidelines sent to ambassadors in 
Constantinople and Berlin, the Ministry of Foreign Affairs wrote that 
“our main goal in this war is the long-term weakening of Russia, and 
therefore, in the event of victory, we would welcome the establishment 
of a Ukrainian state independent of Russia.”50 Territorial acquisitions 
would balance the different national aspirations in Europe as well as 
within the Dual Monarchy itself.
 One of the most important instruments to achieve this was the 
“Austro-Polish solution.” This was a key aspect of foreign policy and 
was at the center of the internal debate. Led by the finance minister, 
the Pole Leon von Biliński, a plan was drawn up to create a third 
state within the Monarchy by uniting Russian Congress Poland with 
Galicia. Its inclusion on an equal basis with Cis- and Transleithania 
48	
For a general account of the war aims debate, see Manfried Rauchensteiner, Der Tod des 
Doppeladlers. Österreich-Ungarn und der Erste Weltkrieg (Graz, Vienna, and Cologne, 1994), 
189–95, 311–20.
49	
The essential references here are Wolfdieter Bihl, “Die österreichisch-ungarischen Kriegsziele 
1918,” in Die Auflösung des Habsburgerreiches. Zusammenbruch und Neuorientierung im 
Donauraum, ed. Richard Georg Plaschka and Karlheinz Mack (Vienna, 1970), 119–23; Holger 
Herwig, The First World War: Germany and Austria-Hungary, 1914–1918 (London and New 
York, 1997); Rauchensteiner, Der Tod des Doppeladlers.
50	
ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA1, Krieg 8b Januar-Juli 1918, Kt. 902, Mappe “Krieg 1914/18 Insurrektion 
in Russland, in Ukraine, Anfang: August-September 1914,” Fol. 407ff., Schreiben des Ministers 
des Äußern an Pallavicini und Hohenlohe, 20.11.1914.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
48
would create a triple monarchy. Powerful interventions from both 
Hungary and the German Empire prevented this plan from being 
realized even though, until the end of 1915, it would have brought 
some gains for Germany. During the course of the war, however, 
Germany moved away from the Austro-Polish solution and itself began 
to exert influence on Poland. Emperor Karl promoted this idea again 
at the end of 1916.51 But within the Dual Monarchy, the Ukrainians 
as well as those who favored a greater German state were opposed 
to the idea. The Ukrainians were opposed because they feared being 
placed permanently “under the Polish heel” were Galicia to be joined 
to Poland within the triple state. Rather different solutions were being 
proposed within Ukrainian circles, whether in Austria-Hungary, in 
Russia, or in exile. Among them was the idea put forward by Archduke 
Wilhelm for the creation of a Habsburg monarchy in Ukraine.
The Ukrainian question was not just a theoretical one in Austria-
Hungary, since it was involved in the authorities’ practical negotiations 
with their own Ukrainian (Ruthenian) population in Galicia. On the one 
side was a radical Polish nationalism that was dominant in the Galician 
administration and had considerable support in the various ministries in 
Vienna and in the military. On the other side were firm expressions of 
support for the Kaiser from the Ukrainians. The Austro-Hungarian Army 
High Command (AOK) had discovered the Ukrainian question for itself 
before the summer of 1914.52 The k.k. Ukrainian Legion in the Austrian 
army (Landwehr) reflected these ambivalences. Sent to the Eastern Front, 
the legion was composed of volunteers from among Austro-Hungarian 
citizens “of Ruthenian nationality.” Its members were regarded as military 
personnel and were treated according to guidelines for volunteer defense 
organizations.53 But the Legion was poorly armed, its members were 
51	
Henryk Batowski, “Die Polen,” in Die Habsburgermonarchie 1848–1914, vol 3, Die Völker des 
Reiches, pt. 1, ed. Adam Wandruszka and Peter Urbanitsch (Vienna, 1980), 550–53; Jerzy Gaul, 
“The Austro-Hungarian Empire and Its Political Allies in the Polish Kingdom, 1914–1918,” in 
Karl I. (IV.), der Erste Weltkrieg und das Ende der Donaumonarchie, ed. Andreas Gottsmann 
(Vienna, 2007), 205–7; Lemke, Allianz und Rivalität, 33ff., 427–29. 467–70; Lilla, “Innen- und 
Außenpolitische Aspekte,” 221–50.
52	
Lemke, Allianz und Rivalität, 101ff. On the Ukrainian Legion and various other military volunteer 
organizations and formations of ex-prisoners of war, see Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer, 
271–91; Sokrates Iwanyc'kyj, “Die Ukrainische Legion und ihre Rolle im Kampf für die Freiheit 
der Ukraine,” in Arbeits- und Förderungsgemeinschaft der Ukrainischen Wissenschaft e.V., 
Mitteilungen 2, pt.1 (1965): 5–13.
53 
With just a few exceptions: ÖStA, KA, AdT, 145. IBrig, Kt. 1379, Nr. 420, Bestimmungen für die 
Freiwilligen Schützenformationen.

chapter 1b: the ukrainian policy of the central powers 
during the first world war
49 
either very young or very old, and they were often completely exhausted 
by reckless actions. Constantly renewed, the Legion played an important 
role in the plans of Archduke Wilhelm.54 
There was one chapter that cast a dark shadow across Austro-
Hungarian policy toward the Ukrainians in Galicia in the first months 
of the war.55 As the Russians advanced with surprising speed toward 
Galician territory, thousands of Ukrainians were suspected of being 
“Russophiles” and were either summarily executed by military and 
civilian officials or deported to a camp at Thalerhof near Graz or to 
other smaller camps in Lower Austria.56 Even in the years before the 
war, exaggerated stories had circulated in Vienna about Russophile 
infiltration of Eastern Galicia that the authorities now took for real. The 
suspects transported to Thalerhof in the autumn of 1914 were dumped 
on a green-field site and had to find their own accommodation. But 
before some suitable accommodation could be erected, an epidemic 
broke out in November and raged until April of the following year, 
costing 1,448 people their lives. A total of 16,400 people were interned 
at Thalerhof between 1914 and 1918.57 Only a few months later, the 
AOK admitted that this sweeping judgment about the “Ruthenian 
population” had been a mistake: “The misorientation of the troops 
with regard to the political allegiance and attitude of the population 
in Eastern Galicia, Bukovyna, and southwestern Russia often led to 
54 
See chapters 3a and 3b in the present volume. Also: Wolfram Dornik, “Polityka Avstro-
Uhorshchyny shchodo Ukraïny v roky Pershoï svitovoï viiny,” in Persha svitova viina ta problemy 
derzhavotvorennia u Tsentral'nii ta skhidnii Ievropi (do 90-richchia zakinchennia Pershoï 
svitovoï viiny). Materialy mizhnarodnoï naukovoï konferentsiï, Chernivtsi, 29-30 zhovtnia 2008 
(Chernivtsi, 2009), 6–22; Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer, 102–6; Ernst Rutkowski, “Die 
k.u.k. Ukrainische Legion 1914–1918,” in Österreichische militärhistorische Forschungen, nos. 
9–10 (2009); Timothy Snyder, The Red Prince: The Secret Lives of a Habsburg Archduke (New 
York, 2008), 99–120. See also the references in footnote 36 in Wolfram Dornik, “Besatzung der 
Ukraine durch österreichisch-ungarische Truppen 1918,” in Die Besatzung der Ukraine 1918. 
Historischer Kontext – Forschungsstand – wirtschaftliche und soziale Folgen, ed. Wolfram 
Dornik and Stefan Karner (Graz, 2008), 152ff. 
55	
On the ethnic situation in Galicia before 1914, see Bachmann, Ein Herd der Feindschaft gegen 
Russland. 
56 
As well as to smaller camps and stations in Lower Austria: Elizaveta Olentchouk, Die Ukrainer 
in der Wiener Politik und Publizität 1914–1918. Ein Beitrag zur Geschichte der Österreichischen 
Ukrainer (Ruthenen) aus den letzten Jahren des Österreichisch-Ungarischen Monarchie 
(Vienna, 1998), 199–214. There were, in addition, thousands of refugees in refugee camps in the 
Habsburg Monarchy (ibid., 234–74).
57 
In the summer of 1917, this became a prisoner-of-war camp. With regard to the figures quoted, see 
Georg Hoffmann, Nicole-Melanie Goll, and Philipp Lesiak, Thalerhof 1914–1936. Die Geschichte 
eines vergessenen Lagers und seiner Opfer (Herne, 2010), 17–24, 114ff., 177. I would like to thank 
Katharina Sampler for useful advice and for making available the first results of her dissertation 
research on this subject. See also Olentchouk, Die Ukrainer in der Wiener Politik, 214–33.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
50
serious errors of judgment and improper treatment of citizens.” It 
pointed to the differences between the Russophile “semi-intelligentsia” 
and the broad mass of Ukrainians. The latter aspired to “a unification 
of all Ukrainians attached to the Monarchy”; hence the army should 
not regard all suspects “equally as traitors.” It is also notable that the 
AOK ordered quite firmly that all announcements, warnings, and 
instructions should be posted in German, Polish, and Ukrainian 
(“with Cyrillic letters”).58 At the same time, all official statements 
for the “Ruthenians” were under no circumstances to recognize the 
notion of “Ukrainian.” 
While “Russophile Ruthenians” were being hunted in Galicia, 
the Austrian Foreign Ministry intervened in the discussion under 
way between the Germans and the Ottoman Turks about sending 
an expeditionary corps into the Caucasus and Ukraine. The idea of 
“instigating an insurgency” in Russian-ruled Ukraine was something 
from which Vienna could benefit.59 At the outbreak of the war, a number 
of exile Ukrainians in Vienna had formed the “Union for the Liberation 
of Ukraine” (SVU; Bund zur Befreiung der Ukraine, BBU), which was 
promoted and financed by the Foreign Ministry. Others were recruited 
by Austro-Hungarian agents of the Foreign Ministry from various pro-
independence organizations such as the “Zalizniak Group”60 and the 
“Austrian Ruthenians” (Österreichische Ruthenen): these were employed 
to destabilize tsarist Russia. Tens of thousands of crowns were paid 
to trusted Ukrainians abroad, especially in Turkey. From the autumn 
of 1914, the SVU was used for propaganda activities among Russian 
prisoners of war of Ukrainian nationality being held by Austria-
58	
ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Krieg 8b/Ukraina August-Dezember 1918, Kt. 903, Nr. 5271, 
Belehrung über die politische Orientierung der ruthenischen Bevölkerung, Juni 1915. 
59 
Wolfdieter Bihl, “Das im Herbst 1914 geplante Schwarzmeer-Unternehmen der Mittelmächte,” 
Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas (Wiesbaden), n.s. 14 (1966): 362–66; Helga Grebing, 
“Österreich-Ungarn und die ‘Ukrainische Aktion’ 1914–1918. Zur österreichisch-ungarischen 
Ukraine-Politik im ersten Weltkrieg,” Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas (Stuttgart), special 
edition, n.s. 7, no. 3 (1959): 270–76.
60	
Mykola Zalizniak was a founding member of the SVU but broke with it as early as September 
1914 and remained an opponent until 1918. From 1914, as part of the effort to instigate insurgency, 
Zalizniak received money for propaganda activities at home and abroad. He was influential in 
the Austrian Foreign Ministry until 1918 and advised Czernin during the peace negotiations 
at Brest-Litovsk. See Wolfdieter Bihl, “Die Tätigkeit des ukrainischen Revolutionärs Mykola 
Zalizniak in Österreich-Ungarn,” Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas (Wiesbaden), n.s. 13 
(1965): 226–30; Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer, 292; Grebing, “Österreich-Ungarn und 
die ‘Ukrainische Aktion,’” 282–87; Olentchouk, Die Ukrainer in der Wiener Politik, 145–74. On 
Zalizniak, see also ÖstA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Krieg 8b/Ukraine August-Dezember 1918, Kt. 
903, Mappe: “Material zur Beurteilung Zalisniak’s (November 14–Februar 15).” 

chapter 1b: the ukrainian policy of the central powers 
during the first world war
51 
Hungary.61 This cooperation with the SVU was reassessed at the end of 
1914 in view of the changes in the military situation. Any extension of 
the theatre of war into Russian-ruled Ukraine and a Ukrainian uprising 
now appeared illusory. Nevertheless, the Austro-Hungarian Foreign 
Ministry and the German Foreign Office were interested in maintaining 
the SVU.62 Until the end of the war, the SVU concentrated on propaganda 
and cultural activity among Ukrainian prisoners of war in prisoner-of-
war camps, especially in Freistadt. Its activity became more intense in 
1918, when the task was to provide political instruction for Ukrainians 
in the various camps for the formation of a Ukrainian (Cossack) Rifle 
Division (Schützen-Division).63 As far as we know, the SVU was not able 
to strengthen its ties beyond that either to the German Empire or to the 
subsequently established Ukrainian state.64
After the February Revolution of 1917, Ukrainian exiles increased 
their pressure on Austria-Hungary. Some held out the prospect of 
establishing a Ukrainian crownland in the framework of the Habsburg 
Monarchy. This was not a new idea: it had circulated repeatedly in 
the Ukrainian movement since 1848.65 In the course of the war, 
however, this plan took on greater relevance. In a memorandum 
from the Ukrainian Parliamentary Representation in the Imperial 
Council in August 1917, the representative Kost Levytsky called on 
the Central Powers to recognize Ukraine as rapidly as possible and 
“strongly support the wishes of the Ukrainian people at the peace 
conference.” Levytsky demanded that Ukrainians replace the Polish 
civilian and military representatives in the militarily occupied Kholm 
(Chełm) region. In general, the Ukrainian question would have to be 
addressed on a completely new basis in Volhynia and Kholm:66 “The 
61	
Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer, 108–28; Grebing, “Österreich-Ungarn und die ‘Ukrainische 
Aktion,’” 276–82; von Hagen, War in a European Borderland, 54–71; Lemke, Allianz und 
Rivalität, 102; Olentchouk, Die Ukrainer in der Wiener Politik, 98–145. 
62	
ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Krieg 8b Januar-Juli 1918, Kt. 902, Mappe “Krieg 1914/18 
Insurrektion in Russland, in der Ukraine, Anfang: August-September 1914.” In addition to 
generous “compensation” for further independent activity, the SVU presented a comprehensive 
bill for propaganda work among Ukrainians in the prisoner-of-war camps. The Foreign Ministry 
and the AOK were in conflict about this payment until the end of November 1915. See ÖStA, 
HHStA, MdÄ, PA1, Krieg 8b/Ukraine August-Dezember 1918, Kt. 903, Nr. 4704, Ministerium 
des Äußern an AOK, 2.10.1915; ibid., Nr. 5373, Protokoll zwischen Forgach und Hranilovic, 
26.11.1915. 
63 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3671, Nr. 23.750, Ronge an 
Kriegsministerium/Abt. 10, Oktober 1918. See also chapter 3b in the present volume.
64	
Fedyshyn, “The Germans and the Union for the Liberation of Ukraine,” 322. 
65	
Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer, 128–36; Lemke, Allianz und Rivalität, 106; Wehrhahn, Die 
Westukrainische Volksrepublik, 34ff. 
66	
On Kholm, see Klaus Kindler, Die Cholmer Frage 1905–1918 (Frankfurt am Main, 1990), 281–350.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
52
Kholm region should be separated from the Kingdom of Poland and, 
together with Austrian Volhynia, under the leadership of officers and 
officials of Ukrainian nationality...should be organized as a military 
governorate.” In addition, Levytsky believed that “the only solution...
would be to organize the Ukrainian regions of the Monarchy, 
in particular the onetime old Ukrainian Lodomerian-Galician 
Principality (Kholm, Volhynia, and present-day Eastern Galicia east of 
the San), incorporating the Ukrainian parts of Bukovyna, as a united 
crownland with a national parliament and a Ukrainian administration 
and to set up this crownland in such a way...that this Ukrainian province 
of Austria would be completely comparable to Russian Ukraine.”67 The 
steps toward independence taken by their fellow nationals in Russian-
ruled Ukraine increased the self-confidence and status of the Austro-
Hungarian Ukrainians. This was not the last proposal for a Ukrainian 
crownland as a solution to the national conflict between Poles and 
Ukrainians in Galicia.
67	
ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Liasse Krieg 58, Ukraine, Kt. 1042, Fol. 572–74, Pro memoria der 
Ukrainischen Parlamentarischen Vertretung, August 1917.
Map 2: Ethnolinguistic distribution of Germans, Poles, and Ukrainians ca. 1900 (Magocsi, 
Historical Atlas of East Central Europe, 99) 

chapter 1b: the ukrainian policy of the central powers 
during the first world war
53 
The Central Powers and Ukraine in Brest-Litovsk
In sum, neither the Germans nor the Austro-Hungarians had a clear 
policy on Ukraine before 1917. The German Empire officially had no 
interest in the country. Nothing illustrates this more clearly than the 
demands of General Erich Ludendorff before the peace negotiations in 
Brest-Litovsk. On 16 December 1917 this prominent and certainly most 
powerful supporter of annexations in the whole German discussion 
of war aims68 gave Major General Max Hoffmann the guidelines for 
negotiations with Bolshevik Russia. Among other things, Ludendorff 
demanded: German annexation of Lithuania and Courland, Polish 
independence, and respect for the right of national self-determination. 
Russia should therefore get out of Finland, Livonia, Estonia, Romanian 
territories, Eastern Galicia, and Armenia.69 Still, Ludendorff made 
no mention whatever of Ukraine.70 It was only the foreign minister, 
Richard von Kühlmann, who put Ukraine on the agenda before the 
departure for Brest-Litovsk, but he wanted to consult with the Russian 
Bolsheviks before recognizing the political independence of Ukraine.71
It was only in the course of negotiations between the Central 
Powers and Bolshevik Russia that Germany’s Ukrainian policy began 
to take on concrete form but, even then, remained essentially part 
of its policy toward Russia.72 It was not an independent goal, but 
more a means of pressure. On 24 December the Ukrainian Central 
Rada issued a general appeal for defensive measures, referring to 
its declaration of independence of 17 November 1917. The Central 
Powers recognized the opportunity, with the help of Ukraine, to exert 
diplomatic pressure on Russia. 
On 16 December the first delegates from the Ukrainian Rada 
arrived in Brest-Litovsk. The German emissaries wanted to recognize 
the new state as soon as possible. They pointed out that this would 
68 
See Michael Epkenhans, “Die Politik der militärischen Führung 1918,” in Kriegsende 1918. 
Ereignis, Wirkung, Nachwirkung, ed. Jörg Duppler and Gerhard P. Gross (Munich, 1999), 
217–33. On the eastern policy of the navy, see the relevant sections of Gerhard P. Gross, Die 
Seekriegführung der kaiserlichen Marine im Jahre 1918 (Frankfurt am Main, 1989).
69	
Fischer, Griff nach der Weltmacht, 421.
70	
Imperial Chancellor Georg von Hertling declared to the Reichstag on 29 November 1917 that the 
German Empire wished to respect the right of self-determination of the population of Poland, 
Lithuania, and Courland. Hertling did not mention Ukraine. See Baumgart, Deutsche Ostpolitik 
1918, 15. 
71	
Fischer, Griff nach der Weltmacht, 423.
72	
On the peace negotiations, see Borowsky, Deutsche Ukrainepolitik, 49–63; Fischer, Griff nach 
der Weltmacht, 415–48; Baumgart, Deutsche Ostpolitik, 13–28. 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
54
mean a “definite weakening” of the Bolsheviks and could only be in the 
interests of the Central Powers.73 On 3 January the German emperor 
gave the order: “In the meantime, negotiate with the Ukrainians 
and, if possible, form an alliance with them.”74 He later repeated his 
demand to pay “special attention” to these negotiations. Ludendorff 
also thought that a separate peace with the Ukrainians would be 
“desirable,” and Paul von Hindenburg, the chief of the German general 
staff, believed that with “the creation of a Ukrainian state...the Polish 
threat to Germany could be moderated.”75 German heavy industry had 
already shown an interest in Ukraine’s reserves of manganese and 
iron and had sent memoranda on this subject to the government.
The first conversations between the Rada representatives and 
the Central Powers took place between 1 and 5 January and, on 6 
January, the negotiations began. But these did not run as had been 
hoped. The main problem concerned the Kholm region, a bone of 
contention between Ukraine and Austria-Hungary: the latter feared 
negative repercussions on its own Polish population. The negotiations 
with the Bolsheviks also stalled very quickly. The cause here was, on 
the one hand, the excessive demands of the Germans with regard to 
annexations in the Baltic countries and in Poland that Hindenburg, 
expressing his “intense concern for the fatherland,”76 regarded as 
minimal. On the other hand, the Bolsheviks failed to comprehend 
the limits of their ability to maneuver, given their hopeless military 
situation, and made completely unrealistic demands, such as the 
renunciation of annexations or compensation.77 Similarly, the 
multinational Habsburg Monarchy could never have accepted the 
Bolshevik demand for referenda to allow national self-determination. 
On 13 January the Ukrainians put forward their demands. They 
wanted the Kholm region as well as other territory south of Białystok 
and a referendum in Eastern Galicia. On the following day, the whole 
73	
ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Liasse Krieg 70, Kt. 1056, Mappe “Krieg 70/6 Friedensvertrag mit 
der Ukraine Dez 17–Mai 18,” Fol. 72ff., Telegramm von Merey, 16.12.1917. 
74	
Quoted in Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer, 186.
75	
BA–MA, PH 1/55, Brief Kaiser Wilhelm an Lyncker v. 7.1.1918; BA–MA, PH 1/55, Brief 
Ludendorffs an den Reichskanzler v. 27.12.1917; BA–MA, PH 1/55, Brief Hindenburgs an Kaiser 
Wilhelm II v. 7.1.1918.
76	
BA–MA, PH 1/55, Brief Hindenburgs an den Reichskanzler v. 3.12.1917.
77 
On 26 December 1917 Hindenburg wrote to the imperial chancellor, Hertling: “I must express 
my serious concern that, without any limitation, we have renounced acquisition by force and war 
reparations.... One has the impression that, in these negotiations, it is not we but the Russians 
who are making demands.” See BA–MA, PH 1/55, Brief Hindenburgs an den Reichskanzler v. 
26.12.1917.

chapter 1b: the ukrainian policy of the central powers 
during the first world war
55 
basis of the negotiations changed: hunger strikes broke out in Wiener 
Neustadt and soon spread to the whole of the Austrian part of the empire. 
Austria-Hungary desperately needed grain, and it was the Ukrainians 
who could provide it. Ukrainian dealers were aware of their advantage 
and could drive up the price of grain.78 This issue hung over further 
negotiations in Brest. On 17 January the Austrian foreign minister, 
Count Ottokar von Czernin, announced in a telegram to Vienna that 
agreement had been reached with the Ukrainians. He expressed his 
annoyance that officials had allowed “public” reporting of the hunger 
strikes that had broken out in Cisleithania: “When I am stabbed in the 
back, as Austrian officials have now done by not suppressing these 
revolutionary appeals from the workers’ newspapers, then everything 
is in vain.... Now that this appeal is known here and in Russia, there is 
no prospect of an agreement with Petersburg, and probably not with 
Kyiv either.”79 In the following days, negotiations took place mainly 
between the Austro-Hungarians and the Ukrainians about the exact 
amounts of provisions, but the Ukrainians could not and did not 
wish to guarantee either precise tonnage or delivery times. Czernin 
knew that he could only justify concessions to the Ukrainians on the 
question of a Ukrainian crownland within the Habsburg monarchy 
and Kholm. But he needed a generous delivery of provisions from the 
Ukrainians to restore stability in Austria-Hungary.
A few days later, Czernin traveled to Vienna to take part in a meeting 
of the Privy Council on 22 January. There he summarized the state of 
the negotiations and presented for discussion the Ukrainian demands 
with regard to the Kholm region and the creation of a Ukrainian 
crownland in Eastern Galicia and Bukovyna.80 He also requested 
permission to sign a separate peace agreement with the Bolsheviks in 
case of the failure of their negotiations with the Germans concerning 
Livonia and Courland. There followed a lively discussion about the 
creation of a Ukrainian crownland. The participants were unanimous 
that such a policy would require them at least to rethink the Austro-
Polish solution if not to drop it entirely. Emperor Karl intervened 
in the discussion only at the end and offered his own summary. He 
allowed Czernin to sign a separate peace with the Russian Bolsheviks, 
78	
Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer, 187ff.
79	
ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Nachlass Czernin, Kt. 1092a, Fol. 159, Telegramm von Czernin an 
Flotow, 17.1.1918.
80	
Bihl, “Einige Aspekte,” 542ff. According to Golczewski (Deutsche und Ukrainer, 189–91), the 
Ukrainian delegation had not, up to that point, officially asked for a crownland; it was Zalizniak 
who arrived in Brest-Litovsk on 25 January and brought the crownland into the discussion 
between the Ukrainian and Austro-Hungarian delegations. 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
56
to enter into negotiations with the Ukrainians about a partition of 
Galicia,81 and, “as regrettable as it may be, to postpone the Austro-
Polish solution for now and, in its place, consider an annexation of 
Romania to the Monarchy.”82 As unrealistic as this may seem, it is 
still remarkable that the emperor allowed Czernin to negotiate over 
Eastern Galicia and the creation of a Ukrainian crownland.
Before returning to Brest-Litovsk, the Austro-Hungarian and 
German leaders met in Berlin on 5 February to discuss future strategy 
in the negotiations. They agreed that Ukraine should be used to put 
pressure on the Bolsheviks and, if the negotiations were to break down, 
to offer military and political support to the young state. For in the 
meantime, on 25 January (backdated to 22 January), the Rada in Kyiv 
had issued its Fourth Universal proclaiming Ukraine an independent 
state.83 The Germans had strongly impressed on the Ukrainians 
that, for tactical reasons, they should take this step, in accordance 
with international law, so that they could sign an internationally 
valid peace treaty.84 As early as 1 February 1918 the Central Powers 
recognized Ukraine as an “independent, free, and sovereign state.”85 
Events, however, came thick and fast in the second week of February. 
With the declaration of independence, Rada Ukraine found itself at 
war with the Ukrainian and Russian Bolsheviks. On 8 February, after 
day-long battles, the Bolsheviks drove the Rada out of Kyiv.86 The 
Rada desperately needed help, even though the question of territories 
and grain remained to be clarified with the Central Powers.
Against this background, the negotiations between the Ukrainians 
and the Central Powers in Brest-Litovsk entered their decisive phase 
in the early days of February. Agreement was reached on just about 
all essential points.87 On 7 and 8 February, the protocols were signed 
81	
As he had already done in the spring of 1917, Karl surrendered Galicia to a foreign power, not 
to the Germans this time but to the Ukrainians: Gaul, “The Austro-Hungarian Empire and its 
Political Allies,” 208; Rauchensteiner, Der Tod des Doppeladlers, 520. 
82	
ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Nachlass Czernin, Kt. 1092a, Fol. 163–75, Kronrats-Protokoll, 
22.1.1918.
83	
For a contemporary translation, see ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 469, Nr. 1481, Berichte 
über die politische Lage in der Ukraine Mitte April, 15.4.1918.
84	
Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer, 189.
85 
As the Austro-Hungarian legation in Bern informed the Swiss president on 11.2.1918: BA Bern, 
EPD, E 2001 B, 1000/1502, 13, B.15.11.2.
86	
It is strange that this key event is either mentioned only in passing or completely ignored by 
Fischer and Borowsky. 
87	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 465, Nr. 940, Telegram von Csicserics an AOK, 2.2.1918; 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 465, Nr. 949, Notizen zur Hauptkommission in Brest-Litowsk 
von Csicserics, 2.2.1918.

chapter 1b: the ukrainian policy of the central powers 
during the first world war
57 
regarding the Ukrainian crownland and the delivery of one million 
tons of grain. The protocol signed on 8 February stipulated that the 
government of Cisleithania would establish the Ukrainian crownland 
by the summer (20 July) at the latest.88 Austria-Hungary was not able 
to resolve the question of grain deliveries in a satisfactory manner. 
The Ukrainians had agreed, in a separate protocol, to deliver one 
million tons, but the formulation alone suggests how vague this 
agreement was: “Concerning the amount of grain that the Ukrainian 
People’s Republic will deliver, we believe we can state that this 
amount is available; collection and transport, however, will depend 
on whether the grain producers receive an equivalent amount of 
goods that we need and whether the four allied powers participate in 
the transport and in the improvement of transport organization.” The 
Austro-Hungarian diplomats added a handwritten remark that the 
ratification of the peace treaty by the Imperial Council would depend 
on the delivery of one million tons of grain.89  
With both these protocols accepted, the peace treaty could now 
be signed on the night of 8–9 February.90 Czernin telegraphed 
immediately to Vienna: “Peace with Ukraine has just been signed at 
two o’clock at night. I ask Your Majesty to allow all bells to be rung in 
Vienna as thanks to the Almighty for this first peace.”91 A few hours 
later, he sent a telegram admitting the price for this agreement: the 
transfer of the Kholm region.92 When news of the treaty broke, there 
was a storm of protest in Poland and Galicia. Flags of the German 
Empire and the Habsburg Monarchy were publicly burned, as well as 
portraits of both emperors. Soldiers of the Polish Legion and Polish 
administrative officials left their posts in outrage, and the Polish 
Regency Council objected with a letter to the Austro-Hungarian 
emperor.93 Numerous protest letters were sent to the ministry in 
Vienna from local assemblies in the Austro-Hungarian occupation 
88	
Ereignisse in der Ukraine 1914–1922. Deren Bedeutung und historische Hintergründe, ed. 
Theophil Hornykiewicz, vol. 2 (Philadelphia, 1967), 209–11.
89	
ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Kt. 523, Liasse XLVII, Krieg 1914–1918, Mappe 12g.
90	
Wolfdieter Bihl, Österreich-Ungarn und die Friedensschlüsse von Brest-Litowsk (Graz, 1970), 
97–100; Rauchensteiner, Der Tod des Doppeladlers, 537–39.
91 
ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Liasse Krieg 70, Kt. 1056, Mappe: “Krieg 70/6 Friedensvertrag mit 
der Ukraine Dez 17–Mai 18,” 120. 
92 
ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Liasse Krieg 70, Kt. 1056, Mappe: “Krieg 70/6 Friedensvertrag 
mit der Ukraine Dez 17–Mai 18,” 72ff., 116ff., 121. For contents, see Borowsky, Deutsche 
Ukrainepolitik, 60.
93 
The letter is in the archive of a member of the emperor’s court staff, August Demblin: ÖStA, 
HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Nachlass Demblin, Kt. 1092a, Karl an Czernin, 10.2.1918. 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
58
zone in Poland and in Galicia.94 
The policy of the Central Powers toward Poland in previous years 
had had little success. On 5 November 1916, in the so-called Two 
Emperors’ Manifesto, the emperors of Germany and Austria-Hungary 
had promised an independent Polish kingdom at the end of the war. 
But very little had been done since then with regard to concrete steps 
toward the establishment of a Polish state. In 1917 the German Empire 
and the Austro-Hungarian Empire had flirted with the idea of Romania 
rather than Poland as a zone of influence. This had been welcomed in 
Warsaw and Lublin, but now the Central Powers were “giving away” 
ancient Polish territory—a loss of trust that could never be repaired. 
Poland now turned to the Entente. After all, President Woodrow Wilson, 
in his Fourteen Points, had called for an independent Poland. Although 
the Austro-Polish solution revived briefly after Istvan Burián took over 
the Foreign Ministry in April 1918, for many Poles, after Brest-Litovsk, 
this was just an empty phrase.95 The most contentious part of the Brest-
Litovsk treaty, the Crownland Protocol, was still a secret.
Finally, there was agreement in the treaty about withdrawal from 
occupied territories, an exchange of prisoners of war, renunciation of 
war reparations, and the establishment of diplomatic and economic 
relations. The peace treaty did not offer any military assistance from 
the Central Powers for the extremely hard-pressed Rada, although 
some thought had already been given to this.96 
The peace treaty of Brest-Litovsk between the Central Powers and 
Ukraine, signed on 9 February 1918, was the first peace treaty of the 
First World War. In assessing this, one thing should be emphasized: 
in order to arrive at this treaty, both Ukraine and Austria-Hungary 
had to make concessions. The Ukrainians had to reduce their 
ambitions with regard to Eastern Galicia and be satisfied with a vague 
commitment to establish a crownland in the future. On the other side, 
Czernin knew that giving the Kholm region to Ukraine would be an 
affront to Poland and would be “a serious blow to the Austro-Polish 
solution.”97 The treaty as a whole, because of the vague compromises 
94	
ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Liasse “Krieg 56/32b, Aufregung wegen Abtretung Cholms in 
Galizien, Februar-April 1918” and “Aufregung wegen Abtretung Cholms an die Ukraine (im 
Friedensvertrag vom 9 Februar 18), Febr–Mai 1918.” 
95	
Gaul, “The Austro-Hungarian Empire and its Political Allies,” 205–9; Rauchensteiner, Der Tod 
des Doppeladlers, 520ff.
96	
Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer, 192. See the text of the treaty in ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, 
OpAbt, Kt. 466, Nr. 1035, Friedensvertrag von Brest-Litowsk vom 9 Februar 1918, 21.2.1918.
97 
As Czernin had already warned at the meeting of the Privy Council on 22 January: ÖStA, 
HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Nachlass Czernin, Kt. 1092a, Fol. 163–75, Kronrats-Protokoll, 22.1.1918.

chapter 1b: the ukrainian policy of the central powers 
during the first world war
59 
reached under time pressure, would create serious difficulties in the 
long run. Changes with regard to Kholm, dealt with below, would not 
pacify the Poles, since the loss of what they regarded as ancient Polish 
territory was unacceptable. For the non-Polish representatives in the 
Dual Monarchy, the treaty was a blessing. Letters of congratulations 
arrived at the Foreign Ministry by the dozen. The mayor of Vienna, 
Richard Weiskirchner, spoke of the “Bread Peace” (Brotfrieden), for 
now the hungry population would have its needs met.98
 The Reichstag in Berlin, especially the Social Democrats and 
the Center Party, welcomed the treaty as a very positive step, as did 
the press generally, since it recognized the right of national self-
determination. Industry welcomed the promise of a new market 
and trading partner. Some media indicated difficulties in obtaining 
provisions and problems that would arise from the solution of the 
Kholm question. There were fears that even higher prices would 
have to be paid for provisions, and the news that the Rada had been 
driven out of Kyiv promised nothing good. The only party to reject 
the treaty totally was the USPD (Unabhängige Sozialdemokratische Partei 
Deutschlands, Independent Social Democratic Party). In line with the 
Bolshevik argument, it rejected the legitimacy of the signatures to 
the treaty and voted against ratification.99 Bulgaria and the Ottoman 
Empire ratified the treaty quickly, as it really did not affect their 
own state interests. On the contrary, they hoped for rapid economic 
cooperation. The Ukrainian Central Rada accepted the treaty on 17 
March, after the Germans had taken Kyiv.
 But Austria-Hungary remained a problem. In the weeks following, 
Vienna began to move away from ratifying the treaty. First, there 
were the irreconcilable differences between the Polish and Ukrainian 
representatives in the Imperial Council concerning the Kholm region. 
Were Austria-Hungary to ratify the treaty, it would have to leave the 
region and hand it over to a commission. The Foreign Ministry was 
anxious about having to implement the crownland protocol, which 
could lead to a civil war in the northeast of the Dual Monarchy. Second, 
the ministry also did not want to ratify the treaty before the million 
tons of grain had been delivered from Ukraine. Until the summer of 
1918, the Germans and the provisional Ukrainian representatives in 
98 
ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Liasse Krieg 70, Kt. 1056, Mappe: “Krieg 70/6 Friedensvertrag 
mit der Ukraine,” Fol. 214–79, Glückwünsche und Danksagungen anlässlich des am 9.2.1918 
erfolgten Friedensschlusses mit der Ukraine.
99	
Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer, 240–44.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
60
Vienna100 attempted to persuade the Austro-Hungarian government 
to change its mind, but without success. As late as 9 October 1918, 
Burián telegraphed Warsaw that Vienna had finally decided, “in view 
of the change in the general situation...to put off the ratification of the 
Brest treaty.” The Polish and Ukrainian governments would settle the 
borders of the Kholm region in bilateral negotiations, and only then 
would Vienna ratify the treaty.101
For the Entente, Brest-Litovsk was a Rubicon that the Germans 
had crossed. Diplomatic recognition and the separate peace treaty 
with “Ukraine,” which they regarded as a German construct, was to 
them an annexation of part of united Russia. The true face of German 
militarism had finally shown itself. The Brest treaty with the Bolsheviks 
that followed on 3 March was, for the Entente, the final revelation of 
Germany’s annexationist aims in Eastern Europe. The broad support 
of the German Reichstag for both treaties confirmed that it was not 
just a military clique that had kidnapped the German population. The 
democratic part of the German Empire also shared this idea. President 
Wilson of the United States was disappointed, sent more troops to 
Europe, and set his sights on total victory over the German Empire—
with this Germany, compromise was clearly impossible.
Policies of the Central Powers during the Occupation of Ukraine
Whereas the Central Powers were willing to move some way to 
meet Ukrainian demands, they were completely unwilling to offer 
any compromises to the Bolsheviks. Their representatives left Brest-
Litovsk on 10 February, and Trotsky declared the situation to be 
one of “neither war nor peace.” The Central Powers saw this as a 
welcome opportunity to blame the Bolsheviks for the breakdown in 
negotiations. Two days later, the Central Powers and the Rada met 
in Brody to discuss the issue of military intervention. The Ukrainian 
negotiators explained that the problems in their country could only be 
resolved with the assistance of foreign troops. They emphasized that 
100	 Pavlo Skoropads'kyj. Erinnerungen 1917 bis 1918, ed. Günter Rosenfeld (Stuttgart, 1999), 299ff.
101 ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Liasse Krieg 70, Kt. 1056, Mappe: “Krieg 70/6 Friedensvertrag mit 
der Ukraine,” Fol. 349, Telegramm von Forgach an Ministerium des Äußern, 25.5.1918; ibid., 
Mappe: “Krieg 70/6 Friedensvertrag mit der Ukraine Dez 17–Mai 18,” Fol. 146, Czernin an 
Hohenlohe und Storck, 18.2.1918; ibid., Mappe: “Krieg 70/6 Verhandlungen über die Revision 
und Ratifikation des mit der Ukraine geschlossenen Brester Vertrages, Juni–Oktober 1918,” Fol. 
360, Diplomatische Mission der UVR in Wien an Ministerium des Äußern, 15.6.1918; ibid., Fol. 
373, Larisch an Ministerium des Äußern, 20.6.1918; ibid., Fol. 561ff., Forgach an Ministerium 
des Äußern, 5.8.1918; ibid., Fol. 701ff., Burián an Ugron, 9.10.1918; ibid., Fol. 701ff., Burián an 
Ugron, 6.10.1918.

chapter 1b: the ukrainian policy of the central powers 
during the first world war
61 
there should be no Slavic troops, only German and Hungarian.102 The 
Ukrainian foreign minister, Mykola Liubynsky, and Major General 
Max Hoffmann met at Brest-Litovsk and worked jointly on a Ukrainian 
appeal.103 The Rada’s appeal for assistance arrived in the capitals of 
the Central Powers on 16 February. At the same time, the Supreme 
Commander of all German Forces in the East (Ober Ost) declared that 
the Brest-Litovsk ceasefire would end at noon on 18 February.104 In 
Berlin, active preparations were made for a broad thrust from the 
Baltic to the Black Sea.
While there was agreement in Berlin on the way forward, in 
Vienna there were still differences. Czernin telegraphed the Austro-
Hungarian ambassador in Berlin and the German AOK105 that he 
considered assistance for the Rada expedient, but, because of Polish 
protests, he wanted to negotiate with the Rada about a change with 
regard to the Kholm region. He asked his German allies to postpone 
their military operation. Unlike Czernin, however, the military had its 
doubts. On 17 February the Austro-Hungarian chief of the general staff, 
Arthur Arz von Straußenburg, telegraphed Hindenburg that he did 
not think an intervention in Ukraine would be expedient; politically, 
the Rada lacked support, and “events in Ukraine would have to burn 
themselves out”; militarily, there was a lack of adequate supply routes 
and, at this time of year, large-scale military operations would not be 
possible.106 He thought that an operation against Russia would make 
more sense. In the next few days, however, Arz was persuaded to take 
part in the operation in Ukraine.
The decisive individual was Emperor Karl, who was at first strictly 
opposed to any Austro-Hungarian participation. After all, he had 
just begun a peace initiative with the Entente. Occupation of foreign 
territory would run wholly counter to his wish for peace. The units of 
the 12th Cavalry Schützen Division, which were ready to march on 17 
February, were ordered back to barracks the next day.107 On 19 February 
the Austro-Hungarian prime minister, Ernst Seidler von Feuchtenegg, 
102 ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Liasse Krieg 3f/Russland 1918, Kt. 836, Mappe: “Krieg 2 Russland 
k,” Arz an Ministerium des Äußern, 16.2.1918.
103	 Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer, 193.
104	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 466, Nr. 1043, Heeresbefehl des Obost, 16.2.1918.
105	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 466, Nr. 1040, Arz an Hindenburg, 17.2.1918.
106 ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Liasse Krieg 3f/Russland 1918, Kt. 836, Mappe: “Krieg 2 Russland 
k,” Arz an Hindenburg, 17.2.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 466, Nr. 1040, Arz an 
Hindenburg, 17.2.1918.
107	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 466, Nr. 1055, Teilnahme k.u.k. Truppen an den Operationen 
gegen Ukraine, 19.2.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
62
made a speech in the Imperial Council that had the approval of the 
emperor and the foreign minister. He gave assurances that Austria-
Hungary would not participate in any military advance into Eastern 
Europe. To put pressure on the Ukrainians, however, he suggested 
the possibility of abandoning the peace treaty if the promised food 
supplies were not delivered.108 Arz was extremely irritated, as he had 
been convinced by Czernin in the previous days that imperial troops 
should participate in the advance.109 Czernin, however, stuck to his 
guns. On 18 February he reached an agreement with the Rada that the 
Crownland Protocol should be given to the German Foreign Office 
for safekeeping110 and that the borders in the Kholm region would 
be established by both Poles and Ukrainians.111 Until the very end of 
the war, the Central Powers delayed any final solution of the border 
question in the Kholm region.112 
But the emperor also stuck to his position: no Austro-Hungarian 
troops were to join the German intervention. The Austro-Hungarian 
ambassador in Berlin, Gottfried zu Hohenlohe-Schillingfürst, 
telegraphed desperately a number of times to Vienna that Austria-
Hungary should join the Germans with a symbolic contingent of 
troops to avoid the threat of loss of prestige and lessen the chance 
of any cancellation of the grain deliveries from Ukraine. Behind the 
back of the emperor, Czernin attempted to work out some way to 
join the Germans. He told his diplomats in Brest-Litovsk to persuade 
the Ukrainians to issue an appeal for help to Austria-Hungary.113 The 
Ukrainian delegates did indeed repeat their appeal on 27 February.114 
The emperor then bowed to the pressure but attempted to save 
face.115 The press was to emphasize that the political situation had 
108	 “Reichsrat. Abgeordnetenhaus,” in Christlich-Soziale Arbeiter-Zeitung, no. 8, 23 February 
1918; 60th sitting of session XXII on 19 February 1918, in Stenographische Protokolle. 
Abgeordnetenhaus. Sitzungsprotokolle, 3161–3167, http://alex.onb.ac.at/, accessed 19 October 
2010, 11:02.
109	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 466, Nr. 1082, Parlamentsrede Dr. von Seidlers am 19.2.1918, 
23.2.1918.
110 In the summer, the protocol was burned in the courtyard of the Foreign Office.
111	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 466, Nr. 1035, Friedensvertrag von Brest-Litovsk vom 9.2.1918, 
21 Februar; ibid., Nr. 1044, Telegramm zwischen Arz und Czernin, 16–17.2.1918; ibid., Kt. 467, 
Nr. 1147, Csicserics an AOK, 4.3.1918.
112 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 468, Nr. 1419, Räumung des Cholmer Gebiets, 13.4.1918.
113 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 466, Nr. 1094, Hughes-Gespräche zwischen Glaise und Gayer, 
26.2.1918.
114	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1102, Depeche von Csicserics aus Brest-Litovsk, 
27.2.1918.
115 Arz informed Czernin that on 25 February he had given Emperor Karl “only very superficial 

chapter 1b: the ukrainian policy of the central powers 
during the first world war
63 
fundamentally changed in recent days as a result of the many appeals 
from Ukraine for assistance, the German advance, and insecure 
transport of grain resulting from chaotic conditions in the country. 
Therefore an occupation “of a peaceful character” had become 
necessary.116 The loss of image caused by the Dual Monarchy’s 
hesitation, however, could no longer be undone.117
For the Central Powers, their entry into Ukraine in those February 
days seemed to offer a window of opportunity to give Bolshevik 
Russia, already militarily weakened, the final political knockout. 
Rather appropriately, the action was given the code name “Punch” 
(Faustschlag). On 18 February German troops made a rapid advance 
eastward on a broad front: the whole Baltic region, Belarus, and 
Ukraine came under German control. The Bolsheviks had to make a 
humble return to Brest-Litovsk. But they were not there to negotiate, 
only to add their signature. On 3 March the Central Powers signed the 
peace treaty with Russia. Seen in this light, the occupation of Ukraine 
represented an immediate tangible success. But this view of the 
situation was short-sighted because none of the long-term problems in 
the East had been resolved. Quite the contrary. Whereas in the past the 
Central Powers had taken advantage of internal Russian tensions and 
exploited them for their own ends, now they were directly involved.118 
They were now the protectors and custodians of a chaotic state. This 
was recognized correctly by the supreme commander of German 
forces in the East at the time, Field Marshal General Prince Leopold 
of Bavaria: “Actually, the situation on the Eastern Front has become 
more complex; now we really cannot distinguish friend from foe.”119 
Leopold had been unsympathetic to this deep thrust into Ukraine, as 
he feared a fragmentation of German forces.120 But the Ober Ost lacked 
information about the military operations” to secure the rail line to Odesa “in order not to be held 
back again”: ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Liasse Krieg 3f/Russland 1918, Kt. 836, Mappe: “Krieg 
2 Russland k,” Czernin an Demblin, 25.2.1918.
116	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1121, Telegramm von Beyer an Weisner, 27.2.1918.
117 ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA 1, Liasse Krieg 3f/Russland 1918, Kt. 836, Mappe: “Krieg 2 Russland 
k,” Hohenlohe an Ministerium des Äußern, 7.3.1918.
118	 The then leader of rail transport in Kyiv, Stefan von Velsen, made this very apt assessment after 
the war: “We were the unwise neighbors when, in the spring of 1918, we decided to intervene in 
the internal strife of the Russian peoples and believed that, in so doing, we would establish useful 
political and economic relations with the great Slavic nations.” Stephan von Velsen, “Ukraine. 
Die Ukrainer und wir. Ein Rückblick auf die deutsche Okkupation,” Preußische Jahrbücher, no. 
176 (1919): 266.
119	 BayHSta, BayHA, Geh, StA, Nachlass Leopold von Bayern, Bd. 239, 1, Tagebucheintrag v. 
23.1.1918.
120	 Ibid., Tagebucheintrag v. 26.2, 7.3.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
64
both the power and the personality to enforce his ideas. Ludendorff in 
particular brushed these considerations aside, even though he himself 
had not originally intended any permanent presence in Ukraine.121 
The Supreme Army Command was unable to offer a clear strategy 
with regard to relations between the German Empire and Ukraine. 
In 1918, Germany’s eastern policy faced a fundamental dilemma 
with two opposing options: support for the Bolsheviks in Moscow or 
restoration of the old Russian regime. Should Germany proceed with 
the first option and maintain Brest-Litovsk and the “pact with the 
devil” in Moscow, as a way of accelerating the internal weakening and 
collapse of Russia? In the short term this was certainly an attractive 
solution, as it secured German influence in Ukraine for a certain time. 
But over the long term this option had its dangers, since it threatened 
to spread Bolshevik ideas into Central Europe. Or should Germany 
choose the second option and give its support to the representatives 
of restoration, the Whites? This would have been an ideologically 
more natural position for Imperial Germany, but it would have meant 
immediate Russian demands for the restoration of the Russian Empire. 
This would have its effect on Ukraine and the other occupied territories 
in the East. And one could not overlook the fact that most Germans, 
including the highest strata in the military, had shed no tears for the 
overthrown tsarist empire. After all, tsarist Russia had been a constant 
security risk in the East and was seen as the warmonger in 1914.
To this general dilemma of German eastern policy was now added 
a particular dilemma in its Ukrainian policy. Was it worth all the effort 
and resources to create an independent state from all this chaos, or 
should Germany rule the territory directly, using the Ukrainian 
government merely as a puppet? There were different opinions on this 
among both the politicians and the military. There was most support 
for a viable Ukrainian state in the Foreign Office and the Ministry of the 
Economy. The representative of this view in Kyiv, Privy Councillor Otto 
Wiedfeldt, saw the indirect rule in the British Empire as an inspiration 
and hoped to be able to apply that model in Ukraine.122 Among the 
military there was also support for an independent Ukraine, though 
not for indirect rule. The most prominent advocate of this position 
was undoubtedly General Field Marshal Hermann von Eichhorn, 
121 See TNA, GFM 6/35, Telegramm von Regierungsrat Schwarzkopf an Unterstaatssekretär 
Radowitz v. 6.3.1918. 
122 Cf. BArch, R 3101/1168, Brief von Geheimrat Wiedfeldt an den Staatssekretär des 
Reichswirtschaftsamts v. 7.5.1918.

chapter 1b: the ukrainian policy of the central powers 
during the first world war
65 
who, from 2 April, was supreme commander of German forces in 
Ukraine. Eichhorn warned against any support for tsarist forces and 
called instead for the creation of an independent state in Ukraine. This 
would also create a counterweight to Russia and Poland. With chaos 
reigning in Russia, success in stabilizing Ukraine would give this new 
state an even stronger appeal.123 Richard von Kühlmann’s successor 
as state secretary in the Foreign Office, Paul von Hintze, wanted to 
“Ukrainize” Russia from Kyiv.124 Hintze had taken this idea from the 
emperor. For Wilhelm, Kyiv “should become the Russian force for 
order in the rebirth of Russia,” but, unlike Eichhorn, he saw a future 
reunification of Ukraine with Russia as inevitable.125 The Ukrainian 
state, in this way of looking at things, was just a historical interlude.
There was certainly a lot of optimism and wishful thinking in 
Eichhorn’s idea. His more modest and realistic chief of staff, Wilhelm 
Groener, had a rather different view of the situation: “If the foundations 
of a healthy state are a capable army and good finances, then the 
Ukrainian state has no foundations at present.”126 Ludendorff agreed: 
“A viable independent Ukrainian state will never come into being. The 
national conception of Ukraine stands and falls with the presence of our 
troops.”127 Ludendorff and Groener would be proved right, for at no time 
were the Rada government or the Hetmanate that followed it viable; they 
survived by the grace of Germany and Austria-Hungary. For Groener, 
the Ukrainian government was merely a “cloak,” nothing more. He was 
annoyed with the “fiction of an independent state” and the “intricate 
maneuvering” (Eiertanz) around the Rada.128 The only solution, in this 
view, was to use the political and economic power of the German Empire. 
Eichhorn endorsed this view, although he wanted to support a stable 
123	 Cf. TNA, GFM 6/52, Notizzettel Eichhorns zu “Russland und Ukraine,” 17.6.1918.
124 Cf. Johannes Hürter, ed., Paul von Hintze. Marineoffizier, Diplomat, Staatssekretär. Dokumente 
einer Karriere zwischen Militär und Politik, 1903–1918 (Munich, 1998), 480. Telegram from 
Hintze to Ludendorff, 9.8.1918. Also the general thoughts of Ober Ost: “The events in Russia are 
without parallel. It is to be hoped that, in the not too distant future, we shall manage to restore 
stable relations to some extent.” See BayHStA, BayHA, Geh, StA, Nachlass Leopold von Bayern, 
Bd. 27, Brief des Kronprinzen Rupprecht an Prinz Leopold, 16.5.1918.
125 See TNA, GFM 6/52, Protokoll über die Besprechung der schwebenden politischen Fragen 
unter Vorsitz seiner Majestät zwischen den Vertretern der Reichsregierung und der Obersten 
Heeresleitung, Zu AS 3086, 9.7.1918.
126 BA-MA, N 46/172, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn Kr, Zusammenfassender Bericht über die 
wirtschaftliche und politische Lage in der Ukraine, Nr. 190 geh., 18.5.1918.
127 GFM 6/52, Protokoll über die Besprechung der schwebenden politischen Fragen unter Vorsitz 
seiner Majestät zwischen den Vertretern der Reichsregierung und der Obersten Heeresleitung, 
Zu AS 3086, 9.7.1918.
128	 Baumgart, Deutsche Ostpolitik, 124ff.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
66
independent state. German policy would then have to be “supported 
unreservedly by military power...regardless of how this might affect our 
relations with Austria-Hungary or whether we would incur the hatred 
of the Great Russian-oriented section of the population.”129 Thus, for 
Eichhorn and the other military leaders, direct rule over the Ukrainians 
was the only feasible way. More subtle forms of rule were alien to them. 
One should not forget, however, that within the military there were also 
divergent opinions about the goal of Germany’s eastern policy. Prince 
Leopold and especially Groener repeatedly criticized the escalating and 
overly ambitious plans of Ludendorff.130
 On the Austro-Hungarian side, opinions on Ukrainian policy 
were also sharply divided. The first military men to arrive in Ukraine 
warned that the Rada was powerless outside Kyiv. It was only when 
the grain did not arrive quickly enough and in the agreed amounts 
that Czernin wanted to rethink Ukrainian policy.131 For the troops in 
Ukraine, the situation became increasingly contradictory. They were 
there to secure and transport the grain. But the 2nd Army considered 
that “sooner or later, it will have to be a military occupation with all 
that this implies.” The troops were required to behave in a manner 
appropriate to the fact that they were not on enemy territory. It was 
completely clear to the AOK that, with such a small number of troops, 
an occupation was not possible. The head of the quartermaster division 
of High Command argued “that it is more in our interest today to 
support and maintain the present government, in spite of its mistakes 
and its meager executive power, than to remove it by force and create 
a chaotic, anarchic situation in Ukraine.”132 As a consequence, Vienna 
rejected any discussion concerning the responsibilities of the troops or 
a date for their withdrawal.133
129 BArch, R 3101/1314, Bericht des Feldmarschalls Eichhorn über die politische und wirtschaftliche 
Lage in der Ukraine, 4.6.1918. For similar statements by Groener, see Baumgart, Deutsche 
Ostpolitik, 135.
130	 Winfried Baumgart, ed., Von Brest-Litovsk zur deutschen Novemberrevolution. Aus den 
Tagebüchern, Briefen und Aufzeichnungen von Alfons Paquet, Wilhelm Groener und Albert 
Hopman, März bis November 1918 (Göttingen, 1971), 443, 445, 449. Leopold also criticized the 
Supreme Army Command (OHL) for its lack of goals and its “adventurist attitudes that border 
on megalomania.” See BayHStA, BayHA, Geh. StA, Nachlass Leopold von Bayern, Bd. 239.1, 
Tagebucheintrag v. 8.5.1918. As a qualification, however, one must add that Leopold later revised 
his journal. There is a similar critical remark about the OHL in the entry for 18.8.1918. This is 
absent, however, from the original journal.
131 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 468, Nr. 1329/1, Verhältnisse in Odesa, 29.3.1918.
132	 ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA X, Russland Liasse XI d 1, Kt. 152, Fol. 238ff., Zur Situation in der 
Ukraine, 11.4.1918. 
133 Ibid., Kt. 153, Mappe: “Geplante Militärkonvention der Mittelmächte mit der Ukraine März und 

chapter 1b: the ukrainian policy of the central powers 
during the first world war
67 
The status of the Crimea became a particularly difficult issue 
between the occupying powers and the Ukrainian government. 
Since the peninsula in the Black Sea was part of the German zone, 
the Ukrainian leadership came increasingly to the view that Ukraine 
should lay claim to it. There were fears that Germany wanted long-
term control of the strategic Crimea. The authorized representative 
of the Austro-Hungarian AOK to the Ukrainian government, Major 
Fleischmann, intervened to emphasize that the Crimea was essential 
to a prosperous Ukraine. Austria-Hungary wanted a strong Ukraine 
and therefore supported a Ukrainian claim to the peninsula. With 
this trick, he hoped “that from now on more mature elements, less 
influenced by the Germans, as well as the military leaders, would 
gradually get a chance to have their say and create a more favorable 
environment for Austria.”134 At the same time, the Rada increased its 
activities to support its claims to the Crimea.135 Once Hetman Pavlo 
Skoropadsky came to power, the government would become more 
active on this question in the late summer.136 But with the withdrawal 
of the Central Powers and the loss of the protecting power, the 
government’s priorities shifted to the struggle against the Bolsheviks.
When Burián replaced Czernin at the Foreign Ministry on 14 April, 
there was initially no obvious change in Vienna’s Ukrainian policy. But 
dissatisfaction with the Rada did not abate. On 23 April there was a 
meeting between the chief of staff of the Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew, 
General Groener; the Austro-Hungarian high representative in Kyiv, 
Ambassador János Forgách; and the authorized representative of AOK 
to the Ukrainian Rada, Major Fleischmann. The participants agreed 
that “cooperation with the current Ukrainian government, acting as 
it does, is not possible.” In the absence of an alternative, however, 
they should stick with it for now but make it “dependent” on the 
Central Powers. At this point there was no suggestion of a change of 
government.137 But Groener acted on his own, without informing his 
April 1918.”
134	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 468, Nr. 1364, Chiffrentelegramm von Fleischmann an AOK, 
2.4.1918. 
135	 At the end of April a Ukrainian otaman (Cossack commander) was chosen for the defense of the 
Crimea. He was to raise the Ukrainian flag on ships, fortifications and other buildings, which the 
defenders of an independent Crimea interpreted as an attack on their sovereign rights. See ÖStA, 
KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 468, Nr. 1438, Ukraine-Ansprüche, 15.4.1918.
136	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Nr. 1550, Schreiben der Muselmanischen Gesellschafts-
Organisation zur Befreiung der Krim, 25.4.1918. Further on the question of the Crimea, cf. Pavlo 
Skoropads'kyj, 264, 293ff., 312; Baumgart, Deutsche Ostpolitik, 151–55.
137 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 469, Nr. 1517, Vorgänge im Kiew, 29.4.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
68
allies. The very next day, he spoke with Skoropadsky, who had already 
been in contact with the German occupiers for some time. Groener 
made a number of demands to which Skoropadsky basically agreed,138 
paving the way for a change of government a few days later.139
Even after the overthrow of the Rada, neither the Austro-
Hungarian Foreign Ministry nor the AOK saw Ukraine officially as 
an occupied country.140 However, relations between Austria-Hungary 
and the Ukrainian state leadership did not improve. On the contrary, 
Skoropadsky was highly distrustful of the diplomats of the Habsburg 
Monarchy, whom he saw as intriguing and interested mainly in 
the Galician Ukrainians. He also regarded the Austro-Hungarian 
military as “brutal and corrupt.”141 In mid-May the head of the Austro-
Hungarian military, Arz, warned the foreign minister, Burián, against 
a new change of government, as this would further delay the grain 
deliveries and, in addition, there were insufficient resources to install 
a military administration.142 The main concern was still the delivery 
of large quantities of grain. Burián praised Eichhorn’s “energetic 
action” in overthrowing the Rada. He hoped that this would break the 
resistance of some ministers to grain export and finally improve the 
delivery.143 But Vienna remained reticent in relation to the Hetman 
government. The Foreign Ministry’s representative in Kyiv was to 
“enter into de facto relations...with the government but not recognize 
it officially.”144 Throughout 1918 Austria-Hungary did not take up 
138 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 469, Nr. 1529, Vorgänge im Kiew III, 2.5.1918. For 
Skoropadsky’s account, which emphasizes some points but significantly changes others, see 
Pavlo Skoropads'kyj, ed. Rosenfeld, 160–62. A major problem with this publication is that the 
differences between various versions are not adequately dealt with and are seldom pointed out. 
Passages that offer an assessment of personalities or situations going beyond description should 
be treated with great caution and attention to sources. 
139	 On the change of government, see chapters 2a and 3b in the present volume. In his recollections of 
the event, Skoropadsky emphasizes his own independent role in the change of government. That 
may have been so from his viewpoint, but the success of the coup depended entirely on German 
support: Pavlo Skoropads'kyj, 152–72, 217. Note in particular the statement that, according to 
Skoropadsky, Groener repeatedly made about the installation of the Hetmanate: “We do not 
intervene in your affairs.”
140	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 475, Nr. 1906, Darstellung der materiellen Lage der Armee im 
Felde, 18.8.1918.
141	 Pavlo Skoropads'kyj, 191, 210, 235ff., 269–72.
142	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Nr. 1572, Lage in der Ukraine, Okkupationsfrage, 
19.5.1918.
143 ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA X, Russland Liasse XI d 1, Kt. 152, Fol. 336f., Vorgänge in der Ukraine, 
21.5.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 469, Nr. 1530, Telegramm des AOK an Burián, 
1.5.1918.
144	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Nr. 1548, Vertrag mit Skoropads'kyj, 5 Mai.

chapter 1b: the ukrainian policy of the central powers 
during the first world war
69 
official diplomatic relations or open an embassy.145 But it maintained a 
diplomatic representation, led by Ambassador Baron János Forgách of 
Ghymes and Gács.146 The Foreign Ministry also sent Heinrich Zitovsky 
of Szemeszova and Szohorad147 as its representative to the army 
command in Odesa. He was to strengthen the political component of 
the sometimes arbitrary Austro-Hungarian military in Ukraine.148
It was not until June that Austria-Hungary’s diplomats recognized 
the advantages of having the Hetman in power: “In the present 
situation, the Central Powers are able to enforce their will almost 
as if it were an occupation, with the advantage that the orders come 
from an indigenous government, the executive of which is dependent 
on our support and forced to align itself with us completely.”149 A 
direct military occupation would have provoked major resistance 
from the Ukrainian population, but Skoropadsky’s Ukrainization 
measures seemed to have a pacifying effect. Shortly after the change 
of government, Burián had given up all hope with regard to any 
improvement in the grain deliveries. He believed that the delivery of 
one million tons of grain was no longer possible and considered the 
Brest-Litovsk treaty null and void. His central policy now became one 
of making a concession to the Poles, hoping thereby to keep them on 
the side of the Central Powers.150
But the commander of Austria-Hungary’s Eastern Army (Ostarmee) 
saw things differently. At the beginning of June, Alfred Krauss warned 
against Germany’s pursuit of colonial and long-term economic goals 
145 ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA X, Russland Liasse XI d 1, Kt. 153, Mappe: “Ukrainische Vertreter im 
Auslande (für Wien: Yakovlev & Lipinsky),” Fol. 1–55, Sammelakt zu ukrainischen Vertretern 
in Österreich-Ungarn. 
146 Forgách was born on 24 October 1870 and, from the 1890s, had been ambassador in St. 
Petersburg, Sofia, Belgrade, Rome, Brazil, and Saxony. From August 1914 his title was 
Ambassador Extraordinary and Plenipotentiary: Erwin Matsch, Der Auswärtige Dienst von 
Österreich(-Ungarn) 1720–1920 (Vienna, Cologne, and Graz, 1986), 96, 136. Until May, Forgách 
had been responsible for economic matters alongside Walter Ritter Princig von Herwalt, who in 
turn was followed by Prince Emil zu Fürstenberg. Fürstenberg took over the leadership of the 
representation in Kyiv in the autumn. (The latter is not to be confused with Prince Karl Emil 
zu Fürstenberg, born 16 February 1867, who was ambassador to Spain between 1911 and 1918): 
Matsch, Der Auswärtige Dienst, 112, 136, 154.
147	 Representatives of the Orient and Overseas Society of the Imperial Austrian Trade Museum 
in Vienna: Hof-und Staats-Handbuch der österreichisch-ungarischen Monarchie für das Jahr 
1918, vol. 44 (Vienna, 1918), 388.
148	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.618, Nr. 4597, Verzeichnis des öster-ung. und 
deutschen Behörden und Funktionäre in Kiew, 7.8.1918.
149 Underlined in the original, probably by one of the staff of AOK: ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, 
Kt. 472, Nr. 1710, Forgách an Burián, 28.6.1918.
150 ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA X, Russland Liasse XI d 1, Kt. 152, Burián an Hohenlohe, 29.5.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
70
in Ukraine and in the Crimea and concurrently insisted on clarity 
about the economic and political goals of Austria-Hungary in Eastern 
Europe, which could be achieved “with them [the Germans], using all 
diplomatic and military means.” Colonel Kreneis, chief of the Ukrainian 
section of the quartermaster division of AOK, proposed three options 
for binding Ukraine to the Central Powers, with a stronger role for 
the Habsburg Monarchy: first, the creation of a monarchy, allied 
with Austria-Hungary and Germany, under a Habsburg or a German 
prince; second, “maintenance of the fiction of a Ukrainian state” that 
would in fact be militarily and economically “completely in the hands” 
of the Central Powers; third, annexation by the Monarchy of the 
Austro-Hungarian “area of operations as far as the Dnipro” and the 
creation of a “Kingdom of Odesa under a Habsburg prince that would 
be joined with Eastern Galicia.”151 The AOK saw a strong Russia as a 
long-term threat to the Habsburg Monarchy. Ukraine, supported by 
Austria-Hungary, would be an ideal tool to weaken Russia, although 
this would carry the risk of strengthening an irredentist Ukrainian 
movement.152 Although these options may appear utopian today, 
they gave expression to the colonialist approach, the excessive 
overestimation of one’s own position, and the wishful thinking of 
many military decision-makers. 
But the chief of AOK did not want to tie himself down to any of 
these plans and asked the Foreign Ministry to state its position. In early 
June the ministry ordered an occupation regime more strongly linked 
with its German ally and acting, in general, with greater force. Thus 
economic life was to be restored more quickly and improvements made 
to the delivery of provisions. Clearly, the Foreign Ministry wanted to 
be the key player in Ukraine once again and to get the military under 
its control.153 But it was not until 10 July that Burián established clear 
goals. They should seek a loyal agreement with the Germans and 
have an open discussion of any differences. In the short term, the goal 
was to secure the delivery of provisions and raw materials. Ukrainian 
national and separatist tendencies were to be encouraged as a means 
of strengthening the state in relation to Great Russia. The “thin elitist 
layer” was to be empowered to “lead an orderly state.” In the long run, 
151	 Perhaps the AOK favored the last option; it was commented with “yes.”
152	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 471, Nr. 1684, Ukraine-Bericht, 6.6.1918.
153	 ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA X, Russland Liasse XI d 1, Kt. 152, Fol. 781f., Repressivmaßnahmen 
gegen die Unruhen auf dem Lande in der Ukraine und Proteste dagegen, 12.6.1918; ibid., Fol. 
857–59, Burián an Forgách und Larisch, 3.7.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 472, Nr. 1729, 
Ziele der Monarchie in der Ukraine, 6.7.1918; ibid., Nr. 1733, Ostarmee an AOK, 12.7.1918.

chapter 1b: the ukrainian policy of the central powers 
during the first world war
71 
it was important to secure the greatest possible amount of economic 
influence.154 The military leadership was dissatisfied with this vague 
response from the Foreign Ministry, especially with the absence of 
any strategy for achieving these goals.155 
The activities of Archduke Wilhelm were extremely embarrassing 
to Austro-Hungarian diplomacy. The son of Archduke Karl Stephen,156 
who played an important role with regard to the Austro-Polish 
solution, wanted to establish a Habsburg monarchy in Ukraine with 
the help of the Ukrainian Legion.157 This led to powerful protests 
in both Berlin and Kyiv.158 It was only following interventions from 
just about every relevant level of the German Empire, including the 
emperor himself, and from the Austro-Hungarian Foreign Ministry 
as well, that Emperor Karl, in a “most high letter,” “requested” that 
Archduke Wilhelm take no further action against Skoropadsky. A 
Habsburg archduke for Ukraine would have damaged relations with 
the German Empire.159 But it required another series of protests before 
Archduke Wilhelm and the Ukrainian Legion left Ukraine at the 
beginning of October 1918.160 
154 ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA X, Russland Liasse XI d 1, Kt. 153, ohne Nr., Telegramm von Burián an 
Arz, 10.7.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 474, Nr. 1862, Politische Ziele in der Ukraine, 
18.8.1918.
155	 ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA X, Russland Liasse XI d 1, Kt. 153, Fol. 419–29, Politische Ziele in 
der Ukraine, 18.9.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 474, Nr. 1862, Politische Ziele in der 
Ukraine, 18.8.1918; ibid., Nr. 1863, Klärung von Fragen in der Ukraine, 26.9.1918; ibid., Nr. 1864, 
Spanocchi an AOK, 27.9.1918.
156	 The Habsburg Archduke Karl Stephen of Austria was suggested by the Germans in 1916 as regent 
for Poland, but Kaiser Franz Joseph himself wanted to be the Polish king. This idea was taken 
up again under Karl, but Karl, too, entertained hopes for the Polish crown: Gaul, “The Austro-
Hungarian Empire and Its Political Allies,” 203–22; Timothy Snyder, Der König von Ukraine. 
Die geheimen Leben des Wilhelm von Habsburg (Vienna, 2009), 77–81. 
157 See Vasyl Rasevych, “Ein habsburgischer König für die Ukraine? Wilhelm von Habsburg und 
Kaiser Karl I,” in Karl I. (IV.), ed. Gottsmann, 223–30; Snyder, The Red Prince, 77–120. See 
also ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Nr. 1595, 2, Armeekommando an AOK, 8.5.1918; 
ibid., Kt. 472, Nr. 1709, Vertrauliche Nachrichten aus der Ukraine, 25.5.1918; ibid., Nr. 1712, 
Aktenkonvolut zu den Verhältnissen in der Ukraine, 29.5–30.6.1918; ibid., Nr. 1728, Ostarmee an 
AOK, 30.6.1918.
158	 Pavlo Skoropads'kyj, 235ff., 269ff.
159	 ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA I, Liasse XLVII, Krieg 1914–1918, Kt. 523, Konvolut 12d, Beziehungen 
Erzherzog Wilhelm zu ukrainischen Nobilitäten, Mai 1918. Interventions by the Ukrainian 
government may also have played a role when members of the Ukrainian Legion tended toward 
revolutionary propaganda and warned the people in advance of weapons searches. See ÖStA, 
HHStA, MdÄ, PA X, Russland Liasse XI d 1, Kt. 153, Mappe: “Unsere Truppen in der Ukraine, 
März–Nov 1918,” Zitkovsky an Ministerium des Äußern, 13.7.1918.
160 ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA X, Russland Liasse XI d 7–12, Kt. 154, Mappe: “Russland XI d/8 
Tätigkeit Erzherzog Wilhelms in der Ukraine und seine Abberufung, Juni–Okt 1918”; ÖStA, 
KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 472, Nr. 1728, Ostarmee an AOK, 30.6.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
72
Although the unrest in Ukraine declined in the course of the summer 
of 1918,161 the military situation on the Western Front deteriorated at 
the same time. Following the British tank breakthrough at Amiens on 8 
August 1918 (“Black Day of the German Army”), Arz painted a somber 
picture of Ukraine in a consultation with Hindenburg and Ludendorff in 
Spa on 14 August: Austria-Hungary would no longer have any military 
interest in Ukraine if its economic exploitation did not bring adequate 
returns. The maintenance of security was taking up too many forces 
that were desperately needed elsewhere. The defense of the Don region 
was doubtful and economically of little value.162 
From 4 to 15 September, on his own initiative, Skoropadsky traveled 
around Germany with his whole entourage. An official state visit to the 
German emperor, as well as talks with top-level military and economic 
personnel, were meant to raise his status both at home and in Germany. 
Although talks were held at the highest level, nothing substantial was 
achieved. Skoropadsky was committed to deeper relations, in return 
for which he was promised help in building an army and support in 
the removal of Archduke Wilhelm from Ukraine. With regard to 
Ukrainian-Polish relations (Kholm), the Germans attempted to commit 
Skoropadsky to moderation in order not to drive Poland further into the 
arms of the Entente. The visit had high symbolic value and demonstrated 
the German Empire’s interest in an independent Ukraine and its desire 
for the long-term stability of the Hetman regime that it had created. For 
the opponents of an independent Ukraine, however, this was grist to 
their mill, as it demonstrated the dependence of Ukraine, especially the 
Hetman, on Berlin.163
It was only toward the end of the occupation that both the Germans 
and the Austro-Hungarians started to rethink their Ukraine policy. At 
the beginning of October Arz, Austria-Hungary’s chief of AOK, saw 
the breakup of Russia as one of the most important goals, in order 
that “no new enemy arise, either militarily or economically.” In his 
view, the peace treaty with the Bolsheviks at Brest-Litovsk had been 
militarily necessary to gain respite on the Eastern Front.164 In view of 
the threat of defeat in the West, and with its own occupation troops in 
161	 See chapter 3a in the present volume. 
162	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 473, Nr. 1848, Besprechung in Spa, 14.8.1918.
163	 Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer, 328–30. The Hetman himself, in retrospect, assessed this 
journey rather modestly and with nuances, perhaps with too much of a critical distance: Pavlo 
Skoropads'kyj, 305–14. 
164 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2626, Nr. 3658, Klärung der Fragen in der Ukraine, 
4.10.1918. 

chapter 1b: the ukrainian policy of the central powers 
during the first world war
73 
short supply, the German OHL fundamentally changed its Ukrainian 
policy. The maintenance of Ukraine was “militarily necessary,” but 
the occupation should be “Ukrainized.” The “internal state structure” 
should be built up in accordance with the “needs and wishes” of 
the Hetman government.165 There should also be “fundamental 
democratic reforms.”166 At the end of October, the OHL contacted the 
Foreign Ministry once again concerning the future of an independent 
and friendly Ukraine. It stressed in particular the importance of 
international recognition and even suggested membership in Wilson’s 
League of Nations.167 Ukraine should be supported “as long as possible, 
so that this friendly nation is never again abandoned to anarchy.”168 
As early as the beginning of October, Groener and Ludendorff had 
considered a partial withdrawal from Ukraine. With the remaining 
troops, they hoped to maintain order and eventually to halt or even 
drive back the Entente troops landing in southern Ukraine.
The recall of the German ambassador in Kyiv, Philipp Alfons 
Mumm vom Schwarzenstein, and especially Groener’s recall at the 
beginning of October were, however, the first indications of a German 
withdrawal. Skoropadsky then asked the new chargé d’affaires 
of the Austro-Hungarian representatives in Ukraine, Prince Emil 
Egon Fürstenberg, whether the troops of the Central Powers would 
remain in Ukraine after the cessation of hostilities.169 In the truce of 
Compiègne, small contingents of German troops were told to stay in 
Ukraine. But for Austria-Hungary, this was no longer possible. At the 
end of October, the Habsburg Monarchy and its army disintegrated 
into total chaos.
Conclusion
Was the occupation of Ukraine in 1918 a step toward a German 
“reach for world power” (Fritz Fischer)? In some of the documents of 
165 Cf. TNA, GFM 6/99, Telegramm Nr. 2464, Der K. Staatssekretär Hintze an AA, 16.10.1918.
166	 Ibid., Kaiserlich Deutsche Gesandtschaft Ir Nr. 8947, An den Reichskanzler Prinz Max von 
Baden, 31.10.1918.
167	 See TNA, GFM, 6/99, Telegramm Nr. 2170 K. Gesandte an AA, 27.10.1918. It is unclear who 
made this amazing suggestion. Maybe Groener provided the impulse. On the previous day he had 
removed Ludendorff as First Quartermaster. 
168	 Reichsarchiv, ed., Der Weltkrieg, 1914–1918. Die Kriegsführung im Sommer und Herbst 1918. 
Die Ereignisse ausserhalb der Westfront bis November 1918, vol. 13 (Berlin, 1942), 390.
169 ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA X, Russland Liasse XI d 1, Kt. 153, Nr. 1088, Fürstenberg an Ministerium 
des Äußern, 10.10.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
74
important decision-makers, one does indeed find such thoughts,170 
and Ludendorff’s policy does appear ex post to fulfill the demands of 
the Pan-German League. His comprehensive annexation plans in the 
East as well as the founding of vassal states such as Ukraine could 
hardly be surpassed in their excessiveness. But this policy can also be 
interpreted differently. The Generalquartiermeister was well known to 
be an efficient and competent military leader but, at the same time, an 
unbelievable dilettante in matters of strategy. “We’ll simply bash in a 
hole. The rest will take care of itself. That’s what we did in Russia,” is 
what he is known to have said about the goal of the German offensive 
on the Western Front in the spring of 1918. This was Ludendorff’s 
catastrophic understanding of strategy: tactics determine strategy, 
which is known today as the tacticization of strategy.171 
Ludendorff’s words about the Western Front aptly describe his 
Ukrainian policy: the Germans simply marched into the country, 
and the rest would somehow take care of itself. The power vacuum 
in Eastern Europe was simply too tempting for the OHL (as it was for 
other German elites). They could achieve quick and simple military 
victories there, occupy large areas without major resistance, and 
exploit them for the German Empire. In addition, they could exert 
long-term pressure on the Bolsheviks in Moscow. A political plan for 
occupied Ukraine was a minor matter, but this policy overextended 
German power.172 It was a constant of 1918 that rapid tactical victories 
took precedence over long-term strategic planning. This led to the 
“unusual aimlessness and inconsistency”173 of the Central Powers’ 
Ukrainian policy.
It was also a German pecularity that the military, more than the 
government, determined the fundamentals of eastern policy. The 
territory of Ober Ost was officially under military administration174 
and, even in formally independent Ukraine, it was the military and 
not the politicians that took the lead. The OHL gave general guidelines 
170	 Cf. TNA, GFM 6/52, Notizzettel Eichhorns zu “Russland und Ukraine,” 17.6.1918.
171	 Herwig is quite right to point out that Ludendorff never rose above the intellectual level of a 
regimental commander. See Herwig, The First World War, 420. 
172	 We cannot go into any more detail here about Ludendorff’s plans to support the Don Cossacks or 
his Caucasus adventure in the summer and autumn of 1918. See Baumgart, Deutsche Ostpolitik, 
139–46 and 174–207. At many points, Baumgart revises Fischer’s claims about policy in the 
Caucasus. Cf. Fischer, Griff nach der Weltmacht, 486–95. 
173	 Baumgart, Deutsche Ostpolitik, 25ff. Fischer, in Griff nach der Weltmacht, 441–44, and 
Borowsky, in Deutsche Ukrainepolitik generally, stress that both the military and the imperial 
government pursued the same aims. They differed only about the way to achieve these. 
174	 Liulevicius, War Land on the Eastern Front.

chapter 1b: the ukrainian policy of the central powers 
during the first world war
75 
but left the concrete execution of policy on the ground to Army Group 
Eichhorn-Kiew. It was this group that also frequently formulated long-
term political and economic goals. Groener expressed it quite bluntly: 
“We do what we think is good and necessary and ask no further what 
Berlin Wilhelmstrasse and Erzberger and his comrades would have to 
say about it.”175 Nevertheless, it was precisely because of the boastful 
Groener that the military frequently sought a compromise with the 
political representatives of their own German government in Kyiv and 
with the Hetman government. In general, it is a bit of an exaggeration to 
speak of a “military dictatorship” in Ukraine.176 The German economy 
certainly had its own interest in Ukraine, but the representatives of 
the Ministry of the Economy were very weak advocates.
Austria-Hungary’s Ukrainian policy was similarly inadequate. 
It was characterized by a pronounced cacophony and an absence of 
clearly defined goals. The AOK and the commanders of the Ostarmee 
wanted to establish their own Ukrainian policy but, at the same time, 
the Foreign Ministry wanted to hold the reins firmly in its own hands. 
At the conclusion of military operations in March–April 1918, when 
a concrete Ukrainian policy should have been developed, Czernin 
was busy with Romania and later with the Sixtus affair. The two self-
confident commanders in Ukraine, Eduard von Böhm-Ermolli and 
later Alfred Krauss, stepped into this vacuum and attempted to act as 
independently as possible. This changed very little under Czernin’s 
successor, Burián. He attempted to reactivate the Austro-Polish 
solution and was reluctant to formulate medium- or long-term goals in 
Ukraine, as that would have run counter to his amicable relations with 
Poland. For Burián, the key was the largest and fastest possible delivery 
of provisions. This was the task of the German and Austro-Hungarian 
troops, and everything else was subordinated to it. Even at the end 
of the occupation, Austria-Hungary was unclear about the long-term 
existence of a sovereign Ukrainian state. Reunification with a united 
Russia liberated from the Bolsheviks was a possibility. Admittedly, 
this united Russia was not supposed to become too strong.  
 
 
175	 Quoted in Baumgart, Deutsche Ostpolitik, 124. The Wilhelmstrasse in Berlin is the location of 
the Foreign Office. 
176	 This is the explicit view of Grelka, Die ukrainische Nationalbewegung, 115ff. This view is shared 
by Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer, 194.

2a. Ukraine between Revolution, 
Independence, and Foreign Dominance
Georgiy Kasianov
In terminological discussions among Ukrainian historians since the 
end of the 1980s, the academic community has agreed that the concept 
of the “Ukrainian Revolution” comprises all events on Ukrainian 
territory between 1917 and 1920. Although the issue is not settled for 
good, the debate is now essentially about the precise time frame. Some 
experts suggest that this time frame should be extended to 1921 or 1922 
to include the insurgent movement of 1921 and the peasant uprisings 
in Soviet Ukraine in 1922. Others consider the revolution to have 
finally ended with the loss of Eastern Galicia to Poland in 1923.1 One 
should also mention the approach that sees the Ukrainian Revolution 
as lasting from 1914 to 1921. This would include the period of the First 
World War as the time in which the Ukrainian national movement 
mobilized and would take in the movement outside the Russian-ruled 
part of Ukraine. In the present article, we hold to the view that sees 
the Ukrainian Revolution as lasting from March 1917 (the creation 
of the Central Rada) to 21 November 1920, when Ukrainian troops 
engaged in the Soviet-Polish war retreated to Galicia. 
In this period there were half a dozen state or quasi-state bodies2 
that succeeded one another, existed side by side, and were proclaimed 
or dissolved. These included the Ukrainian People’s Republic, first as 
part of Russia and then independent (7 November 1917 to 28 April 
1918); the Ukrainian State (29 April to 15 November 1918); the Western 
Ukrainian People’s Republic (18 October 1918 to 21 January 1919); the 
Ukrainian People’s Republic (26 December 1918 to 21 January 1919 and 
16 July 1919 to 20 November 1920); the Ukrainian Soviet Republic (12 
December 1917 to July 1918) and the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 
1 
Originally, this term signified the events associated with the Ukrainian struggle for 
independence and national statehood. In the 1990s the concept of the “Liberation Struggle” 
(Vyzvol'ni zmahannia), adopted from the historiography of the emigration/diaspora, was also 
frequently used. Some historians use the phrase “Ukrainian National-Democratic Revolution.” 
Some Russian historians are critical of the term “Ukrainian Revolution,” seeing the events on 
Ukrainian territory, even if characterized by specific national features, as part of the Russian 
Revolution and Civil War. 
2	
D. Ianevs'kyi, Politychni systemy Ukraïny 1917–1920 rokiv: sproby tvorennia i prychyny porazky 
(Kyiv, 2003), 428–30.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
77 
(6 January 1919 to December 1919 and February to May 1920). We could 
also include in this list a number of local bodies, for example, the Soviet 
Republic of Donetsk and Kryvyi Rih, which was formally part of the 
Russian Socialist Soviet Republic (27 December 1917 to 19 March 1918); 
the Soviet Republic of Odesa (3 January to 13 March 1918); the Socialist 
Soviet Republic of Tavria (19 March to 30 April 1918), and the Galician 
Socialist Soviet Republic (15 July to 21 September 1920). Ukrainian 
territory was occupied by German, Austro-Hungarian, Romanian, 
Polish, French, and Russian troops and was a theater of war between 
the White and Red armies. There were also large insurgent peasant 
armies (Nestor Makhno, Nykyfor Hryhoriiv, Zeleny [Danylo Terpylo], 
Yevhen Anhel), as well as hundreds and thousands of smaller units of 
partisans, deserters, or plain bandits.
From the Fall of Tsarist Russia to the Hetmanate  
(February 1917 to April 1918)
In the events of the Ukrainian Revolution between February 1917 and 
April 1918, there are a number of different strands of action: the fall of 
the autocracy and the establishment of the Provisional Government’s 
rule on Ukrainian territory; the consolidation of the Ukrainian national 
movement as a political force and its evolution from a demand for 
political autonomy to a program for Ukrainian political sovereignty 
(independence); the political conflicts within the Ukrainian movement 
and its conflicts with other political forces, especially the Provisional 
Government and the Bolsheviks; the revolution of October 1917 in 
St. Petersburg and the subsequent political and military confrontation 
between the Central Rada and the Bolsheviks; the development 
of the peasant movement and the spontaneous “black repartition”;3 
the attempts to create a state (the Ukrainian People’s Republic); the 
peace of Brest-Litovsk and the occupation of Ukraine by German and 
Austro-Hungarian troops; the overthrow of the Central Rada and the 
establishment of the Hetmanate in April 1918.
In March 1917, almost immediately after the fall of the tsarist 
autocracy, parties that had long been forbidden resumed their activity, 
among them Ukrainian parties. The number of parties in Ukraine 
at this time is usually given as more than twenty, but this number 
includes the Russian as well as the newly formed or readmitted 
Ukrainian parties and other national parties (Jewish, Polish, etc.).4
3	
The spontaneous redistribution of land and the expropriation of property by the peasants.
4	
Olena Liubovets', “Ideino-politychni protsesy v ukraïns'kykh partiiakh u konteksti al'ternatyv 
revoliutsiinoï doby (1917–1920 rr.)” (Ph.D. diss., Кyiv, 2006).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
78
Map 3: Political borders of Ukraine, 1918 (Magocsi, Historical Atlas of East Central Europe, 138)

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
79 
Ukrainian historians have traditionally argued that, from the 
beginning, there were two competing currents in the Ukrainian 
national movement in 1917, autonomists and supporters of an 
immediate declaration of independence. The most recent documents, 
however, offer no evidence for this standpoint. In its first public 
declaration of 8 March 1917, the Society of Ukrainian Progressives 
(TUP)5 spoke of the implementation of Ukrainian national cultural 
rights through the principle of autonomy. On 25–27 March 1917, at 
the founding congress of the Union of Ukrainian Autonomists and 
Federalists, formed on the basis of the TUP, the slogan produced 
was “autonomy of Ukraine,”6 by which they understood political or 
national and territorial autonomy. This was also the position of the 
Ukrainian People’s Socialist Party, the Ukrainian Party of Labor, the 
Ukrainian Social Democratic Party, and the party with the largest 
membership, the Ukrainian Party of Socialist Revolutionaries.7 The 
autonomy solution was also supported initially, perhaps for tactical 
reasons, by the Ukrainian parties and associations that stood for the 
idea of independence, the Ukrainian People’s Party and the Union 
for Ukrainian Statehood.8 Immediately after the fall of the autocracy, 
therefore, in spite of numerous differences of opinion, there was at least 
a declared unity on the question of strategy, namely the achievement 
of national territorial autonomy within a federal democratic Russia. 
This relatively moderate position was supported not only by the 
parties but also by a variety of other organizations and movements, 
such as teachers’ organizations, soldiers’ and peasants’ congresses, 
cooperatives, and Ukrainian military formations.9 
At the same time, practically all the national Ukrainian parties and 
organizations declared their support for the Provisional Government. 
In spite of this, the Provisional Government did not welcome and 
indeed resisted the rapid and initially successful organizational and 
institutional development of the Ukrainian movement, especially its 
demand for autonomy. Between the spring and autumn of 1917, the 
5	
Nova Rada, 25 March 1917.
6	
Ibid., 2 March 1917.
7	
O. M. Liubovets', “Problema ukraïns'koï derzhavnosti v prohramakh i diial'nosti ukraïns'kykh 
politychnykh partii (berezen'-lystopad 1917),” Ukraïns'kyi istorychnyi zhurnal, 2003, no. 4: 22–25. 
8	
V. F. Verstiuk, “Ukraïns'kyi natsional'no-vyzvol'nyi rukh (berezen'-lystopad 1917),” Ukraïns'kyi 
istorychnyi zhurnal, 2003, no. 3: 65–67.
9	
The First Ukrainian Military Congress (5–8 May 1917), the All-Ukrainian Peasant Congress (28 
May–2 June 1917), and the Congress of Free Cossacks (16–20 October 1917) were among those 
that supported Ukrainian autonomy within a democratic Russia.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
80
struggle between the Central Rada and the Provisional Government 
over the division of powers and responsibilities was a constant feature 
of politics in Ukraine. 
The Ukrainian Central Rada was established in Kyiv at the 
beginning of March 1917.10 It was originally an attempt to create an 
all-Ukrainian political coordinating body under the leadership of 
the TUP but, under pressure from the Ukrainian Social Democrats, 
the “older” representatives of the Ukrainian movement had to 
recognize the equal rights of the other Ukrainian organizations. 
The conflict between the older political generation, represented 
by the TUP, and the younger generation, represented especially 
by the Social Democrats, was clear from the very founding of the 
Central Rada. The older generation attempted to restrict the Rada 
to the traditional functions of a national cultural movement, while 
the younger generation demanded, first of all, that more attention 
be paid to social and economic issues and, secondly, that the Rada 
have a stronger representation of non-Ukrainian organizations. In 
the first official announcement of the formation of the Central Rada 
and its leading bodies, it was said to have representatives of student, 
educational, scientific, and cooperative organizations, as well as 
the army and the Social Democrats.11 Its tactical and ideologically 
conditioned desire to have the widest possible representation resulted 
in the number of delegates expanding initially from 15 to 118 (April 
1917), and then to 798 (August 1917). At its height, the Rada had 822 
delegates, according to participants (Dmytro Doroshenko and Pavlo 
Khrystiuk). This rapid growth was the result of the collective entrance 
of whole organizations into the Rada, for instance, workers’, soldiers’, 
and peasants’ councils. There were delegates from the National 
Congress (elected at the beginning of April 1917), representatives 
of the above-mentioned councils (the most numerous), members of 
Ukrainian military committees, representatives of gubernia, district, 
and city organizations, Russian and national parties,12 as well as 
10	
There is no agreement among historians or direct participants about the exact date of this event. 
The following dates are proposed: 3 March (a meeting of Ukrainian public figures at which the 
words “Central Rada” were first used), 4 March (a meeting of leaders of the TUP and the Ukrainian 
Social Democrats at which it was decided to establish a body to coordinate and direct the work 
of Ukrainian organizations), 7 March (election of leading bodies; this date was first celebrated 
in 1918 as the founding date of the Central Rada), 9 March (the first minutes of a session of the 
Central Rada). See V. Verstiuk, “Ukraïns'ka Tsentral'na Rada. Period stanovlennia,” Ukraïns'kyi 
istorychnyi zhurnal, 2007, no. 2: 33–34; Ianevs'kyi, Politychni systemy Ukraïny 1917–1920, 67–71.
11	
Ukraïns'ka Tsentral'na Rada. Dokumenty i materialy u dvokh tomakh, vol. 1 (Kyiv, 1996), 44–45.
12	
According to estimates by historians, there were altogether nineteen parties represented in the Rada.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
81 
from organizations of ethnic minorities, professional, economic, 
and educational organizations.13 The Little Rada, a kind of executive 
committee, was established to manage the day-to-day affairs of the 
Central Rada. At the end of March 1917 the Central Rada called for an 
All-Ukrainian National Congress, which met in Kyiv from 6 to 8 April. 
More than a thousand delegates from a great variety of Ukrainian 
organizations attended.
It was the general opinion of contemporaries and later historians 
that this was the first and most impressive demonstration of the unity 
and influence of the Ukrainian movement. As things turned out, it 
was also the last. The congress unanimously accepted the slogan 
of Ukrainian national territorial autonomy within a “federal and 
democratic Russian republic.” There were similar national congresses 
throughout April at the gubernia level, as well as peasant congresses 
in the gubernias and districts, and the topic everywhere was national 
territorial autonomy. All this strengthened the arguments of the 
Central Rada in its discussions with the Provisional Government 
about the redistribution of power. 
The Provisional Government reacted negatively to the relatively 
cautious demands for national territorial autonomy14 from the 
Ukrainian delegation when it arrived in St. Petersburg on 15 May 
1917. At this time the minister of war in the Provisional Government, 
Aleksandr Kerensky, was in Kyiv. He met with the leaders of the 
Central Rada, discussed their demands, and requested that they 
“wait a little.” On 1 June the Provisional Government rejected the 
Central Rada’s demands for a nationally autonomous Ukrainian 
administration, claiming that, as a provisional government, it did not 
have the authority to make such a decision before the convocation of 
an all-Russian constituent assembly; moreover, the Central Rada was 
not a legitimate representative of the whole Ukrainian people. In the 
course of the negotiations, the Provisional Government expressed its 
concern that the territorial borders of the proposed autonomy were 
unclear, and this could create an extremely delicate situation. 
The reaction of the Ukrainian Central Rada was predictable. At the 
beginning of June 1917 the All-Ukrainian Peasant Congress, led by the 
Socialist Revolutionaries, supported the demands of the Central Rada 
13	
Ukraïns'ka Tsentral'na Rada, 1: 233–41.
14	
Initially, the issues were the creation of the post of Commissar for Ukrainian Affairs in the 
Provisional Government and the post of Government Commissar for Ukraine in Kyiv, elected 
by the Central Rada, limited financial autonomy, and public recognition of Ukraine’s right to 
autonomy.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
82
and instructed the All-Ukrainian Council of Peasant Deputies, present 
in full strength in the Central Rada, to draft a statute of autonomy 
for Ukraine.15 On 10 June 1917, at the second All-Ukrainian Military 
Congress, which had been prohibited by Kerensky, the Central Rada 
issued its Universal (proclamation) to the Ukrainian people, declaring 
that “from this day forth we shall build our own life” and calling on all 
Ukrainian organizations and local government bodies to establish “the 
closest organizational ties with the Central Rada.” It called on them to 
raise, on 1 July, a special tax “for our native cause” and to pay this tax 
to the treasury of the Central Rada.16 The Universal was unanimously 
supported by the Ukrainians but rejected by all the all-Russian parties 
and movements in Ukraine except the Bolsheviks, who became a kind 
of ally in this conflict with the Provisional Government.
On 15 June the Central Rada established an executive body, the 
General Secretariat. This was de facto a proto-government with 
responsibilities for land, finance, food supplies, the peasantry, relations 
among nationalities, and the maintenance of public order. The majority 
of the Secretariat was made up of Ukrainian Social Democrats. Its 
leader was Volodymyr Vynnychenko. The other Social Democrats were 
Borys Martos, Symon Petliura, Valentyn Sadovsky, and Ivan Steshenko. 
The Ukrainian Socialist Revolutionaries were represented by Pavlo 
Khrystiuk and the Socialist Federalists by Serhii Yefremov. There 
were also two non-party socialists, Mykola Stasiuk and Khrystofor 
Baranovsky.
The next two weeks were taken up with informal negotiations 
between St. Petersburg and Kyiv aimed at clarifying the positions 
of both sides. The contacts in Kyiv, members of the Constitutional 
Democrats and Mensheviks, argued that more attention should be 
paid to the demands of the Ukrainians.17 The Provisional Government 
itself, mired in a permanent political crisis, did not have the leverage 
to control the situation in Ukraine.
On 27 June the General Secretariat issued a declaration 
summarizing in broad terms, not very clearly for the most part, 
what it saw as its principal tasks and the main focus of its activity: 
reorganization of local authorities and administration (its nebulous 
15	
Ukraïns'kyi natsional'no-vyzvol'nyi rukh. Berezen'-lystopad 1917 r. Dokumenty i materialy 
(Kyiv, 2003), 347. The peasant enthusiasm for autonomy was easily explained: this was seen as 
the quickest way to resolve the land question. 
16	
Ukraïns'ka Tsentral'na Rada, 1: 105.
17	
O. B. Kudlai, “Perehovory Tsentral'noï Rady i predstavnykiv Tymchasovoho uriadu. 28–30 
chervnia 1917 r.,” Ukraïns'kyi istorychnyi zhurnal, 1999, no. 6: 46–47.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
83 
sentences could be interpreted to mean that they were to be 
subordinate to the Central Rada); Ukrainization of the educational 
system, the army, and financial organizations; preparation of a 
land law; normalization of the situation in the villages, and so on. 
On 29 June 1917 there was a meeting between a delegation of the 
Provisional Government (Irakli Tsereteli, Mykhailo Tereshchenko, 
Nikolai Nekrasov, Aleksandr Kerensky) and the Committee and 
General Secretariat of the Central Rada. The Ukrainians demanded 
that the Provisional Government recognize the Central Rada as the 
supreme power in the region, that it accept a document regulating 
the autonomy of Ukraine until such time as it could be regulated by a 
constituent assembly, and that it prepare a document containing the 
principles of land reform. The Russian delegation demanded that the 
Central Rada accept representatives of non-Ukrainian nationalities 
and insisted that the General Secretariat required the approval of the 
ministerial cabinet of the Provisional Government. 
The results of the negotiations were made public in the Second 
Universal of the Central Rada on 3 July 1917. This included the 
promise that it would accept “representatives of the revolutionary 
organizations of the other peoples who live in Ukraine,” prepare 
legislation for Ukraine’s autonomous structure to be submitted 
for confirmation to the Constituent Assembly, and support the 
Provisional Government in the Ukrainization of the army (formation 
of separate units composed exclusively of Ukrainians).18 One month 
later, on 4 August 1917, there came the “Provisional Instructions of 
the Provisional Government to the General Secretariat,” in which the 
General Secretariat, appointed by the Provisional Government on the 
basis of recommendations from the Central Rada, was designated the 
supreme organ of the Provisional Government in Ukraine. According 
to this document, the authority of the General Secretariat extended 
to the gubernias of Kyiv, Volhynia, Poltava, Chernihiv, and Podilia, 
encompassing internal affairs, finance, agriculture, education, trade 
and industry, labor law, and nationalities.19 It was only from this point 
that the General Secretariat really began its activity.
18	
The publication of the Universal coincided with the events of 3 and 4 July in St. Petersburg, where 
there was mass unrest and military encounters between government troops and revolutionary 
soldiers and sailors.   
19	
Konstytutsiini akty Ukraïny, 1917–1920. Nevidomi konstytutsiï Ukraïny (Kyiv, 1992). The 
document is also available in English in The Russian Provisional Government, 1917: Documents, 
ed. Robert Paul Browder and Alexander Kerensky, vol. 1 (Stanford, 1961), 396.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
84
Negotiations, appeals, conflicts over the division of responsibilities 
between St. Petersburg and Kyiv, plans and declarations about the 
organization of administration—all these had increasingly symbolic 
and little practical significance. In both St. Petersburg and Kyiv, the 
powers of the central organs became increasingly volatile. Between 
the spring and autumn of 1917 there was a constant fragmentation 
of power, both horizontally across the territory and vertically 
among the different political forces. From the center, the Provisional 
Government attempted to establish a vertical order appropriate to 
the administrative territorial structure of the empire (gubernia and 
district commissars as executive authorities, with zemstvos and city 
dumas as organs of local self-administration). The Central Rada, on 
the other hand, with its executive and provisional organs (General 
Secretariat, Committee for the Defense of the Revolution), was also 
very quickly attempting to establish its own division of powers within 
the framework of national autonomy. The workers’ councils (soon 
followed by soldiers’ and peasants’ councils) were a third actor. And, 
finally, there were the factory committees in the enterprises and the 
garrisons and logistic units, whose role in the summer of 1917 was 
becoming increasingly volatile, given the growing revolutionary 
mood and the disintegration of the army.20 
The horizontal fragmentation of power was expressed by the fact 
that orders from the central authorities were ignored, sabotaged, or 
even disobeyed and by the increasing de facto independence of local 
authorities. In the case of cities, this might be the city duma, the 
district commissar, or the local soviet; in the countryside, it might be 
the village assembly or the leaders of the local self-defense units.
By the autumn of 1917, the already difficult social and economic 
situation had deteriorated sharply. The weakness of the bodies 
responsible for law and order, the expropriation propaganda of the left-
wing parties, especially the Bolsheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries, 
the weakness of the central government, the constant decline in living 
standards (rising prices, lack of basic food and industrial commodities, 
speculation), the disintegration of the army—all these factors were 
leading to chaos. There was an increase in criminality in the cities, 
especially in the district centers and larger market towns. Shops and 
houses were plundered, wine cellars and factories were laid waste, 
20	
The advance of the Russian army on the southwestern front collapsed completely because of 
the disintegration of the advancing units between 16 and 20 June 1917. Soldiers discussed their 
orders and refused to carry them out. Whole lower-level detachments left the front line.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
85 
and various forms of street crime were a daily occurrence. Not just 
criminal elements but increasingly soldiers and “ordinary citizens” 
were engaging in robbery and theft.21 
The relatively peaceful summer of 1917 in the countryside was 
followed in the autumn by a flare-up of peasant expropriations. 
A growing sense of impunity, of “everything-is-permitted,” was 
increased by Socialist Revolutionary agitation for the redistribution 
of land. A contemporary observer recalls the ferment among the 
peasants caused by demobilized soldiers, deserters, and amnestied 
criminals: “They poisoned the village,” wrote Volodymyr Leontovych, 
“with their rage, their disrespect, yes even their hatred of law, 
morality, and justice, their hatred of everything that could restrict or 
rein them in. They incited the peasants to arbitrariness, destruction, 
and murder.”22 Another contemporary and chronicler of the events of 
1917–20, Dmytro Doroshenko, writes that by the end of the summer 
of 1917, “all appeals from the center to maintain peace and order and 
to await the decisions of the constituent assembly had lost all force. 
There were disturbances everywhere: theft of cattle and property 
from the estate owners, unauthorized expropriation of land, chopping 
down trees, arson, and the plundering of distilleries.”23 According to 
official data, there were as many as 525 such incidents perpetrated by 
dissatisfied peasants in the Ukrainian gubernias between July and the 
first half of October 1917.24 
Between August and October 1917, there was an evident 
radicalization of the Ukrainian movement. The Social Democratic and 
Socialist Revolutionary congresses, the meeting of the All-Ukrainian 
Soviet of Peasant Deputies, and the congress of the “enslaved nations 
of Russia,” which took place in September and October, all demanded 
an extension of the powers of the Central Rada and the General 
Secretariat (both politically and territorially) up to the creation of 
an autonomous republic. At the initiative of the Ukrainian Socialist 
Revolutionaries, the Third All-Ukrainian Military Congress passed 
a resolution on 20 October 1917 on the independent creation of a 
21	
V. Boiko, T. Demchenko, and O. Onyshchenko, 1917 rik na Chernihivshchyni (Chernihiv, 2003), 
44–50.
22	
National Archives of the Czech Republic, F. Ukrainian Museum. Kart. 57, inv. c. 784 (Leontovych 
V.) “Spohady i vrazhennia z chasiv ahrarnoï reform,” typescript 5. 
23	
D. Doroshenko, Istoriia Ukraïny 1917–1923 rr. Doba Tsentral'noï Rady, vol. 1 (Uzhhorod, 1932; 
repr. New York, 1954), 75.
24	
V. Verstiuk, Selians'ka problema v politytsi ukraïns'kykh politychnykh syl ta uriadiv 1917–1920 
rr. Istoriia ukraïns'koho selianstva, vol. 1 (Kyiv, 2006), 535. 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
86
“Ukrainian democratic republic.” On 25 October the Bolsheviks 
seized power in St. Petersburg. The Provisional Government 
fell. Relations with the central authorities changed radically. The 
Provisional Government was replaced by a power that saw extreme 
forms of demagogy and the use of force as the solution to political and 
social problems. On the nationality issue, the Bolsheviks supported 
the principle of self-determination for tactical reasons but, in the 
concrete instance of Ukraine, this was subordinate to “class” and to 
“revolutionary necessity.”
Subsequent to the events in St. Petersburg, the Ukrainian 
Bolsheviks attempted to repeat the 25 October scenario in Kyiv. 
The uprising led to armed clashes with troops of the Kyiv military 
district. The Central Rada later resumed power peacefully. It did not 
approve of the coup in St. Petersburg but did nothing to support the 
Provisional Government. The Bolsheviks, who had left the Central 
Rada immediately after the coup, initially took a loyal attitude to the 
developments.
On 1 and 3 November 1917 the Ukrainian Central Rada declared 
that it was taking all military installations in Ukraine under its 
control except the detachments at the front.25 Posts were created 
in the General Secretariat for ministers of military affairs (Petliura), 
food, justice, post and telegraph, and transport. The Central Rada 
also declared the extension of its rule to the gubernias of Kherson, 
Kharkiv, Katerynoslav, and Tavria (not including the Crimea). 
The Third Universal was proclaimed on 7 November. This 
Universal declared the founding of the Ukrainian People’s Republic 
(UNR) while remaining in federation with the Russian Republic. It 
proclaimed that all power in Ukraine (the nine gubernias) now rested 
with the Central Rada and the General Secretariat. The Universal also 
announced the abolition of estates and other forms of land “not worked 
directly by the proprietors,” which would now become the “property 
of the toiling people” without compensation. Until such time as the 
constituent assembly met, the administration of all matters pertaining 
to land would be in the hands of the General Secretariat and the land 
committees.26 It proclaimed the eight-hour day, the abolition of the 
death penalty, freedom of the press, religion, and association, and the 
25	
The entire staff of the Kyiv military district left the city on 31 October at the time of the truce 
negotiations between the Central Rada, the various parties, and the workers’ and soldiers’ 
councils.
26	
In the Ukrainian gubernias there were 9 gubernia, 94 regional, and 1,528 district land committees 
that had been created by the Provisional Government.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
87 
inviolability of person and domicile. It also proclaimed the principle 
of national-personal autonomy for non-Ukrainian national minorities 
living in Ukraine and demanded immediate peace negotiations.27
When the Central Rada and the General Secretariat published 
their principles and slogans, they obviously did so with the intention 
of continuing to act within a legal framework. All local organs that 
had previously functioned under the Provisional Government would 
continue to operate until the constituent assembly, to be elected on 27 
December 1917 and convoked on 9 January 1918, had made its decisions. 
According to decisions and orders of the Central Rada and the General 
Secretariat, decisions of the Provisional Government would remain 
in force on the territory of the Ukrainian People’s Republic, except 
where they had already been overruled by the Ukrainian authorities. 
Instructions were given to local authorities prohibiting unauthorized 
appropriation of land or property and deforestation. Attempts were 
made (unsuccessfully) to reunite the southwestern and Romanian 
front into one Ukrainian front. At the level of intentions, resolutions, 
and declarations, everything was directed toward the maintenance 
of law and order and a certain status quo until the convocation of the 
constitutional assembly.
In most cases, these intentions, resolutions, and declarations had 
little effect. The Ukrainian authorities had practically no real leverage to 
make them a reality. There was a colossal shortage of human resources, 
and the Ukrainian movement itself was not united in its intentions or 
actions. The social base of the movement was small and unreliable. At 
the time of the Third Universal, the leaders of the Central Rada and 
the General Secretariat had the support of the Ukrainian intelligentsia28 
(the social base of the new rule), the politicized elements of the 
Ukrainian peasantry, the Ukrainized troops, and representatives of the 
Ukrainian zemstvos and the Ukrainian cooperative movement. The 
overwhelming majority of the Russian intelligentsia, the urban middle 
27	
Ukraïns'ka Tsentral'na Rada, 1: 399–401.
28 
In the census of 1897, under the heading “nature of activity,” the possible answers were: social 
and public service, private legal practice, teaching and educational activity, science, literature 
and art, and therapeutic and medical activity. The total number of Ukrainians engaged in these 
activities was 27,900, two-thirds of whom lived in rural areas. Figures from Pervaia vseobshchaia 
perepis' naseleniia Rossiiskoi imperii 1897 g., in 89 volumes (St. Petersburg, 1887–1905), vol. 8: 
172ff., 176, 180ff., 184; vol. 13: 152ff., 156, 158ff., 162; vol. 16: 178ff., 182; vol. 18: 212–14, 216, 
218, 220, 222; vol. 32: 178–83, 185; vol. 33: 192, 194, 196, 198, 200, 202; vol. 47: 200–2, 204; 
vol. 48: 208, 211, 214, 216, 218; vol. 51: 198–200, 204–7, 210. The criterion for nationality was 
language. A Ukrainian was anyone who selected “Little Russian” as his mother tongue. Among 
the working population, 90 percent of the Ukrainians were peasants. 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
88
stratum, the industrial workers, representatives of urban government, 
officials, and the officer corps all opposed the Ukrainian movement or 
were neutral at best.
The potentially strongest support for the Ukrainian Revolution, 
the peasantry, rapidly lost all interest in politics with the advent of the 
“black repartition.”29 The prospect of a redistribution or appropriation 
of land that entailed no sanctions and was not controlled by anyone was 
far more attractive than waiting for the solution to the land question 
promised by the Central Rada. In any case, the relevant sections of the 
Third Universal could be interpreted as a call for a “black repartition,” 
and there were many who saw it that way.
In such a situation, the villages sank very quickly into anarchy. 
The “organization of national life,” previously seen as the pathway to 
“owning our land,” lost all relevance. District commissars reported 
in November that “there is no longer any authority in the village.” 
According to these reports, “the government attempted to implement 
the Central Rada’s Universal, but local people just plundered and did 
not recognize the authority of the Central Rada,” and “everyone just 
does as he wishes.”30 
In November and early December 1917 the General Secretariat, 
now the government of the Ukrainian People’s Republic, established 
the Ukrainian Central Bank, recognized the Council of People’s 
Commissars that had been created in St. Petersburg on 27 October 
1917 as a regional government, and established the General Court. 
Initial talks were begun with Germany about a truce. At the same 
time, attempts were made to reach an understanding with the 
Entente. All this was happening against the background of drastically 
worsening relations with Bolshevik organizations in Ukraine and 
with the Bolshevik government in St. Petersburg. On 17 November 
1917, in telephone negotiations between Mykola Porsh and Joseph 
Stalin, a member of the Council of People’s Commissars, it became 
clear that the government in St. Petersburg recognized only the 
Ukrainian Congress of Workers’, Peasants’, and Soldiers’ Deputies as 
the supreme power in Ukraine. Some workers’ and soldiers’ councils in 
Ukraine, influenced by the Bolsheviks, had already passed resolutions 
in support of this idea in November.
29	
This land decree was issued on 26 October 1917 at the Second All-Russian Congress of Soviets 
at the initiative of the Bolsheviks, who had made use of the Socialist Revolutionary slogan of 
“socialization of the land.” 
30	
V. V. Sokal's'kyi, Guberns'ki selians'ki z'ïzdy iak skladovi ukraïns'koï revoliutsiï 1917–1921 rr. 
(Kyiv, 2009), 107.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
89 
Elections to the All-Russian Constituent Assembly took place at 
the end of November 1917. The results alarmed the Bolsheviks. They 
received only 10 percent of the popular vote in Ukraine, while the 
Ukrainian parties received 77 percent. They were also worried by 
resolutions passed by councils in the larger cities of Ukraine (Kyiv, 
Kharkiv, Odesa, Poltava, Katerynoslav), which, while supporting the 
Council of People’s Commissars in St. Petersburg, also recognized the 
Ukrainian Central Rada as the authority in Ukraine.31 The Ukrainian 
Bolsheviks pursued their traditional methods. While they took part in 
relatively legitimate forms of political struggle, such as preparing the 
All-Ukrainian Congress of Soviets, they also made preparations for 
an armed coup and carried out intensive agitation against the Central 
Rada. In mid-November the Kyiv Revolutionary Committee, led by 
the Bolsheviks, declared the Central Rada to be counterrevolutionary 
and began preparations for an armed uprising.
For the Central Rada and the General Secretariat, the moment 
had now come in which the use of military force was necessary. The 
leaders of the Ukrainian Revolution, however, were not prepared for 
this development. Practically all the fighting units that could have 
been deployed to protect the Ukrainian People’s Republic were either 
independent of the Ukrainian leaders or had actually been trained 
in opposition to their principles and ideals. The representatives of 
the Ukrainian Social Democrats and Socialist Revolutionaries, who 
dominated in the Central Rada, were opposed to the formation of a 
regular national army. In a time of war, they were satisfied with the 
Ukrainization of units in the Russian army.
Ukrainian units had already begun to emerge spontaneously 
in the army in March 1917. Ukrainian conscript clubs were formed. 
Vicha32 were convened at which demands were made for the 
formation of Ukrainian units. Although in April 1917 the Central 
Rada supported an initiative of Ukrainian recruits to form a volunteer 
regiment named after Bohdan Khmelnytsky, the Rada played no role 
in its organization (the regiment had 3,500 soldiers and was sent to 
the front in July 1917). At the first All-Ukrainian Military Congress, 
in May 1917, a Ukrainian General Military Committee was formed 
under the leadership of Petliura. This committee was subordinate to 
the Central Rada and was in charge of the organization of Ukrainian 
31	
O. Boiko, “Politychne protystoiannia Ukraïns'koï Tsentral'noï Rady i bil'shovykiv (zhovten'–
hruden' 1917),” Ukraïns'kyi istorychnyi zhurnal, 2003, no. 4: 18. 
32	
Viche (Ukr., pl. vicha; Russ. veche) was the name for a traditional old Slavic democratic 
“assembly” and was revived by contemporaries.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
90
units in the army. In reality, the Ukrainization of troop units depended 
on individual commanders. The First Ukrainian Corps (about sixty 
thousand soldiers and officers)33 was formed on the southwestern 
front in the summer of 1917 under the command of Pavlo Skoropadsky. 
This fact is often given as an example of the successful Ukrainization 
of the army. Vynnychenko gave an account of the general situation: 
“The military units themselves began to reform. Regiments arose 
under the leadership of various hetmans and other Ukrainian 
individuals: the Sahaidachny Regiment, the Gonta Regiment, the 
Doroshenko Regiment, and so on. Once those regiments came into 
existence on their own initiative and had been officially recognized, 
they considered themselves somewhat independent, not subject to the 
general order. They only wanted to be part of the Ukrainian Corps at 
the front. But the famous ‘three corps’ did not really exist. The Russian 
command was frightened into giving approval for their formation but 
had no intention of doing anything about it. So these regiments could 
not be sent anywhere. This created confusion and chaos in troop 
movements and groupings. The commanders were angry and blamed 
the General Committee for disorganizing the army and interfering 
in its affairs. The regiments and soldiers were angry and accused the 
General Committee of inaction and inability to carry out its tasks. The 
General Committee was also angry and made superhuman efforts to 
put an end to the confusion.”34 
The truly scandalous and tragic fate of the Hetman Pavlo Polubotok 
Regiment was indicative of relations between the Central Rada and 
the General Secretariat on the question of military organization. 
The leaders of the Central Rada not only distanced themselves from 
this initiative but thwarted it.35 The Free Cossacks,36 with a strength 
33	
This is the number usually quoted, but other sources suggest that the number was no more 
than 25,000 to 30,000. See I. Ie. Petrenko, “Diial'nist' P. Skoropads'koho shchodo ukraïnizatsiï 
chastyn rosiis'koï armiï u 1917 r.,” in Problemy istoriï Ukraïny ХІХ – poch. ХХ st., vyp. ХV.SС 
(Kyiv, 2008), 136. 
34	
V. Vynnychenko, Vidrodzhennia natsiï, 3 vols. (Kyiv and Vienna, 1920), 1: 197ff.
35	
The regiment was formed in May 1917 at the initiative of recruits from the village of Hrushky 
near Kyiv. Many writers have pointed out that the Ukrainization of regiments and stationing 
them in Kyiv to protect the Central Rada only served eventually to prevent their movement to 
the front. Between 5 and 7 July, the soldiers (about five thousand men), reduced to despair by the 
shortage of food and lack of support from the Central Rada, stormed Kyiv, appropriated weapons, 
blockaded a number of establishments (bank, telegraph office), and occupied the headquarters 
of the militia and the arsenal. The disturbance was brought to an end through the mediation of 
the Central Rada, but the Rada refused official recognition to the regiment. See V. F. Soldatenko, 
Vynnychenko i Petliura. Politychni portrety revoliutsiinoï doby (Kyiv, 2007), 128–46. 
36	
The Free Cossacks began to organize themselves in March 1917 from local self-defense units for 
the maintenance of public order. 

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
91 
estimated to have been around sixty thousand men, was another 
armed force formed on an initiative from below but was ignored by 
the Central Rada and the General Secretariat alike. The statute of 
the Free Cossacks was not confirmed until November 1917, but even 
afterwards its sections were basically civilian organizations without 
any real status. It was not until January 1918, when armed conflict 
with the Bolsheviks had already broken out, that small units of Free 
Cossacks were formed in Kyiv. They then took part in the conflict, 
but without any noteworthy success. The creation of battle-ready 
Ukrainian units took place literally en passant, always lagging behind 
events. At the initiative of Petliura and the commander of the Kyiv 
military district, Viktor Pavlenko, two Serdiuk (Cossack) divisions 
were started in November that then defeated an attempted Bolshevik 
uprising in Kyiv on 30 November 1917.
As the winter of 1917–18 began and the Ukrainian People’s 
Republic feared for its existence, it lacked a serious military force. 
Its overall strength was a little over 25,000 bayonets, 1,680 swords, 
and 44 guns, around 16,000 of which were concentrated in Kyiv and 
the surrounding area.37 These would need to be strengthened by the 
Ukrainized units on the southwestern and Romanian fronts (at least 
50,000 soldiers).38 However, when fighting began between the troops 
of the Petrograd Council of People’s Commissars, the Ukrainian 
Bolsheviks, and the military units of the Central Rada, these units 
existed only on paper.
On 3 December the All-Ukrainian Congress of Soviets opened in 
Kyiv. The Ukrainian Bolsheviks were in a minority (they represented 
86 of the 300 soviets). On 4 December the Petrograd Council of People’s 
Commissars sent a manifesto to Kyiv signed by Lenin and Trotsky. 
This was the “Manifesto to the Ukrainian People with an Ultimatum 
to the Ukrainian Rada.” In this document, which recognized the right 
of the Ukrainian People’s Republic to independence, there was a 
protest against the actions of the Central Rada, which was allegedly 
trying to disorganize the common front (this refers to the movement 
of Ukrainian units on the northern and northwestern front to the 
Ukrainian front, formed from the merging of the southwestern and 
Romanian fronts in November 1917). The manifesto demanded that 
the disarming of Soviet troops and Red Guards in Ukraine cease, that 
37	
Ia. Tynchenko, Persha ukraïns'ko-bil'shovyts'ka viina (hruden' 1917–berezen' 1918) (Kyiv and 
Lviv, 1996), 40–41. The data concerning strength and location of troops are given in tables. 
38	
Ibid., 66.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
92
transit be refused to military units heading for the Don and the Kuban 
to join Aleksei Kaledin (who was fighting against the Council of 
People’s Commissars), and that armed units of the Council of People’s 
Commissars be allowed free passage to the front to fight Kaledin. In 
case the Ukrainian People’s Republic did not give a satisfactory reply 
within forty-eight hours, the Council of People’s Commissars “would 
deem the Rada to be in a state of open war with Soviet power in Russia 
and Ukraine.”
The majority of delegates rejected the ultimatum. The Bolshevik 
delegates,39 having assessed the situation, moved to Kharkiv, which 
was already in the hands of Bolshevik forces.40 In Kharkiv, they met 
with the delegates of the Third Congress of Soviets from the Donbas 
and Kryvyi Rih, which declared itself the All-Ukrainian Congress of 
Soviets. The congress elected a Central Executive Committee which, 
in turn, formed a government, the People’s Secretariat, under the 
leadership of Evgeniia Bosh. The Ukrainian Soviet Republic was 
proclaimed. There were now two governments in Ukraine that would 
soon enter into armed conflict with each other. On 17 December 1917 
the Executive Committee in Kharkiv proclaimed the Ukrainian Central 
Rada a “counterrevolutionary force” and declared war against it.41
At the end of 1917, the general situation in Ukraine was as follows. 
The administrative organs of the Provisional Government (gubernia 
and district commissars) were still formally in charge in the towns, 
gubernias, and districts, as were the city dumas. The Central Rada 
and the General Secretariat were formally the government in Kyiv 
and in the nine Ukrainian gubernias. These were in confrontation 
with the Central Executive Committee and the People’s Secretariat in 
Kharkiv. Bolshevik Revolutionary Committees were also active in the 
big cities. This list would be incomplete without the land committees, 
the zemstvos, and the local workers’, soldiers’, and peasants’ councils, 
39	
This move by the Council of People’s Commissars in St. Petersburg came as a surprise to the 
Ukrainian Bolsheviks. According to one contemporary observer, “the Central Committee of 
the party had not forewarned the Ukrainian organizations and had not attempted to discuss the 
advisability of such a major step. The ultimatum, right at the beginning of the All-Ukrainian 
Soviet Congress, put the Ukrainian Bolsheviks in an extremely difficult position because there 
was an explosion of chauvinism at this congress that bound all nationally inclined elements 
even more strongly to the Rada.” See S. K. Shreiber, “K protokolam pervogo vseukrainskogo 
soveshchaniia bol'shevikov,” Letopis' revoliutsii, 1926, no. 5: 61. 
40	
Kharkiv was taken by units from the Siversk region.
41	
Military operations took place mainly in the cities of Kharkiv, Katerynoslav, and Kyiv. The 
Soviet government in Kharkiv at this time had neither military forces of its own nor any real lever 
of power. It was basically an appendage of the Bolshevik military forces.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
93 
which were controlled in some cases by the Bolsheviks, in other 
cases by the Socialist Revolutionaries, Mensheviks, Ukrainian Social 
Democrats, and Ukrainian Socialist Revolutionaries. Finally, there 
were the command headquarters at the front and the administrative 
bodies in the rear. The country teemed with armed men over whom 
there was little or no control. In the towns, there were the army 
garrisons and army units with their command headquarters (at this 
time the army was rapidly disintegrating), Red Guard units, armed 
formations of Russian Bolsheviks, the armed forces of the Ukrainian 
People’s Republic, officers in training in military training centers 
and schools, and Red Cossacks. In the countryside there were the 
self-defense units, the Free Cossacks, groups of army deserters, and 
criminal elements.
It was against this background of chaos that armed conflict broke 
out between the Ukrainian People’s Republic and the Bolsheviks. In 
December 1917 the Bolsheviks had established control over Kharkiv 
and then captured Poltava, Chernihiv, and Katerynoslav. The 
General Secretariat was active in reorganizing the military forces of 
the Ukrainian People’s Republic and, at the same time, commenced 
negotiations with representatives of the Central Powers in Brest-
Litovsk.42 
To forestall a Bolshevik uprising in Kyiv, on the night of 17–18 
January 191843 military units of the Central Rada took control of 
thirty sites in the city from which an uprising could be launched or 
that could be attacked (factories, workshops, the administration 
of the southwestern railway). On the day before, the Revolutionary 
Committee in Kyiv had called for an uprising against the Central Rada. 
In this dramatic situation, on the night of 24–25 January, as an armed 
uprising hung in the air in Kyiv and the troops of the Ukrainian Soviet 
government (whose strongest units had come from Soviet Russia) 
were successfully advancing against Kyiv from the east, the Ukrainian 
Central Rada proclaimed its Fourth (and last) Universal.
The Universal declared the Ukrainian People’s Republic to 
be “independent, subject to no one, a free sovereign state of the 
42	
These negotiations, which had begun in early December, were initially private. The delegation 
of the Central Powers regarded the Council of People’s Commissars in St. Petersburg, which was 
now trying to arrange a separate peace, as the only representative of political power. Following 
the publication on 11 December 1917 of the General Secretariat’s note to all warring and neutral 
states, the delegation began official negotiations with the representatives of the Ukrainian 
People’s Republic on 22 December.
43	
Here and in the remainder of the text, dates are given according to the new Gregorian calendar.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
94
Ukrainian people.” The Council of People’s Ministers (the former 
General Secretariat) was given the task of making peace with the 
Central Powers. Once peace had been achieved, the army would be 
dissolved and replaced by a “people’s militia.” All the democratic rights 
proclaimed in the previous Universal were confirmed, as was the law 
passed the day before on national-personal autonomy. Elections to 
regional and district councils and city dumas were set for the time when 
the demobilized soldiers would return from the front. The previous 
decision to transfer land to the “toiling people” without compensation 
was also confirmed. A state monopoly of land was introduced, as was 
control of the banks “by the state and the people.” The Universal called 
for a struggle against the Bolsheviks.44 This Universal, which most 
scholars regard as a final declaration of independence, was the result 
of tense discussions between the two leading parties in the Rada, the 
Social Democrats and Socialist Revolutionaries, and between these 
and the non-Ukrainian parties (the Russian Mensheviks and Socialist 
Revolutionaries and the Bund were against declaring independence). 
What is clear is that the leaders of the major Ukrainian parties saw this 
action as something forced on them, since they continued to speak of 
a federation of “democratic nations.” This declaration of independence 
was, on the one hand, a response to Bolshevik aggression and, on the 
other hand, an important step in the context of the negotiations at 
Brest-Litovsk.
The Bolshevik-led uprising in Kyiv began on 29 January 1918. At 
the same time, Bolshevik forces advanced on Kyiv from Poltava and 
Chernihiv.45 The strongest forces of the Central Rada were concentrated 
in Kyiv to suppress the uprising, which is why the Bolsheviks were 
able to advance on Kyiv without too much difficulty. (Recent estimates 
suggest that the ratio of forces between the Bolsheviks and the 
Central Rada was seven to one;46 other sources suggest three to one.) 
On 5 February 1918, the commander of the military forces under 
44	
Doroshenko, Istoriia Ukraïny 1917–23 rr., 1: 264–68.
45	
Battles were fought mainly over control of railway junctions and towns capable of offering 
supplies to the warring sides. Control was often achieved without the use of force, as when 
units formally under the control of the Rada declared themselves “neutral” or went over to the 
Bolsheviks. There were also instances of conflict not with the troops of the Ukrainian People’s 
Republic but with troops in transit to the Don or Kuban or with garrison units that would not 
allow transit to “foreigners.” It should also be remembered that in Ukraine, when Bolshevik 
troops approached a town, events tended to follow a standard schema in which there would be an 
outbreak of workers’ uprisings and strikes led by local revolutionary committees assisted by Red 
Guards. 
46	
V. Holubko, Armiia Ukraïns'koï Narodnoï Respubliky (Lviv, 1997), 168. 

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
95 
the People’s Secretariat of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 
gave the order to storm Kyiv, where the uprising was still in progress. 
On 8 February Soviet forces occupied the city, and the Central Rada 
abandoned it. It might be thought ironic that during those same days, 
with cannons thundering all around, the Central Rada was discussing 
the draft law on workers’ control of enterprises and the eight-hour 
day.47 The city was subjected to the most brutal terror. The Bolshevik 
commander, Mikhail Muraviev, ordered that officers, haidamakas, 
monarchists, and “all enemies of the revolution” be killed in the 
streets. These “enemies” also included residents who spoke Ukrainian 
and individuals with a cultivated appearance.48 On 12 February the 
Ukrainian Soviet government moved from Kharkiv to Kyiv, where it 
remained until 28 February. It then fled before the advancing German 
army toward Poltava, Katerynoslav, Taganrog and beyond. 
In the situation at the time, it was only assistance from the Central 
Powers that could have rescued the Central Rada and its government. 
On the night of 8–9 February, a peace treaty was signed between the 
Ukrainian People’s Republic and the Central Powers. On 18 February, 
after a formal request for military assistance from the UNR, German 
troops began to advance into Ukrainian territory. They were followed 
ten days later by Austro-Hungarian units. On 8 May 1918 German 
troops occupied Rostov on the Don, having crossed the Ukrainian 
border and driven the Bolsheviks from Ukrainian territory. Earlier, on 
28 March 1918, an agreement was signed on establishing the “zones 
of influence” of the “occupying powers.”49 All this was portrayed as 
military assistance for an ally. In the initial period the occupying troops 
were forbidden to take military action against the local population in 
the event of “unfriendly actions” (which rarely occurred then). They 
would have to seek redress from the UNR authorities.50 
47	
Ukraïnа. Khronikа ХХ stolittia. Rik 1918 (Kyiv, 2005), 64.
48	
Volodymyr Zatonsky, a member of both the Ukrainian and the Russian Soviet governments, 
reported in his memoirs that he was almost shot by a patrol. An official Ukrainian identity paper 
made him suspect, but he was saved by a document signed by Lenin showing him to be a member 
of the Council of People’s Commissars. See V. P. Zatons'kyi, “Iz spohadiv pro ukraïns'ku 
revoliutsiiu,” Litopys revoliutsiï, 1929, nos. 5–6: 116–17. The total number of victims was about 
three thousand.
49	
See chapters 3a and 3b in the present volume.
50	
Peter Lieb, “Pryborkannia povstans'koho rukhu — stratehichna dylema. Nimets'ka okupatsiia 
Ukraïny 1918 roku,” in Okupatsiia Ukraïny 1918 roku. Istorychnyi kontekst – stan doslidzhennia 
– ekonomichni ta sotsial'ni naslidky, ed. Wolfram Dornik and Stefan Karner (Chernivtsi, 2009), 
110–40; Wolfram Dornik, “Okupatsiia Ukraïny avstro-uhors'kymy viis'kamy u 1918 rotsi,” ibid., 
141–83. For more detail, see chapter 3b in the present volume. 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
96
When the Central Rada and the UNR Council of People’s Ministers 
returned to Kyiv on 5 March, they found themselves in an extremely 
difficult situation. The whole vertical power structure had to be 
reestablished. At the same time, however, they had to pay attention 
to the obligations to their new allies (especially the deliveries of 
food), which in turn required an effective power structure. But this 
power structure was lacking. The Central Rada passed laws, made 
regulations, and took decisions in many areas, from the organization 
of the army to the introduction of Ukrainian as the official language 
of the state, from the minting of money to the creation of national 
holidays (for instance, 9 March, the birthday of Taras Shevchenko), 
from the establishment of a state sugar monopoly to the founding of 
a Ukrainian national university. At the beginning of March 1918, the 
national currency (the hryvnia), the state coat of arms (the trident 
of Volodymyr the Great), and the citizenship law of the Ukrainian 
People’s Republic were introduced. The main problem was that most 
of these decisions were never actually implemented, whether because 
of the lack of an effective administrative apparatus, the continued 
failure of the government to implement them owing to personnel 
changes caused by differences of opinion among the various parties, 
or because of an elementary lack of organizational ability and political 
will on the part of the state’s leaders. One need only realize that the 
Council of People’s Ministers spent the whole month of March on its 
own reorganization. According to a communication from the German 
Foreign Office, “It is completely out of the question that the Rada, with 
its own officials, could manage to carry out the delivery and transport 
of food, since it has no regular and functioning organization. And 
that cannot be changed quickly, for the Rada lacks both money and an 
effective executive apparatus (army, gendarmerie, courts, police).”51 
The Central Rada and the Council of People’s Ministers held only 
nominal power, maintained by the bayonets of the German and Austro-
Hungarian armies.52 In the towns and at railway junctions, order was 
maintained by garrisons of the “allies.” There was practically no control 
over the villages, where anarchy ruled. The peasantry recognized 
no power, while spontaneous land redistribution and plundering of 
estates continued as before. This was often accompanied by conflicts 
51	
Doroshenko, Istoriia Ukraïny 1917–1923 rr., 2: 11.
52 
The attitude of the “allies” is expressed very clearly in the words of General Hoffmann: “I 
am interested in Ukraine only until the next harvest. I do not care what happens after that.” 
See “Bericht des Leiters der operativen Abteilung der deutschen Ostfront über die Lage in der 
Ukraine im März 1918,” Archiv der Russischen Revolution, vol. 1 (Berlin, 1922), 288n. 

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
97 
among the peasants themselves, and there were open battles between 
individual villages. As the journalist Colin Ross reported to German 
headquarters on the Eastern Front, “There is no central power in the 
state capable of occupying an area of reasonable size. The whole 
country is divided into individual areas that sometimes do not extend 
beyond the borders of a district, a town, or even a village. In these 
areas, power is in the hands of political parties, individual political 
adventurers, robbers, and dictators. One finds villages surrounded 
by trenches, in conflict with each other over estate land. Some areas 
are ruled over by otamans who enforce their rule with the help of 
stewards and mercenaries. They have machine guns, artillery, and 
tanks, just as the population itself has acquired a host of weapons.”53
In April, the commanders of the German and Austro-Hungarian 
military forces themselves began to “maintain order,” especially in 
the villages. On 6 April the commander of German troops in Ukraine, 
Field Marshal Hermann von Eichhorn, issued his cultivation order 
at the start of the spring sowing.54 The Central Rada overruled his 
order and issued one of its own, thereby entering into open conflict 
with its allies. By this time, the latter were searching intensively for an 
alternative to the Rada. Its dissolution was made easier by the fact that 
it had no noticeable influence on the situation in the country, as well as 
by the presence of an active opposition in the form of large and middle 
landowners, from estate owners to wealthier peasants. They were 
the principal victims of the “black repartition,” which they attributed 
equally to Bolshevik demagogy, spontaneous land division, and the 
laws passed by the Central Rada that had the effect of practically 
legalizing it. A number of congresses and assemblies of representative 
organizations and political parties of the large and middle landowners 
stated openly, in March and April 1918, that a change of power was 
necessary and that the German and Austro-Hungarian military should 
be asked for help “in restoring order.” Similar attitudes prevailed in an 
influential part of the Ukrainian movement that stood in sometimes 
hidden and sometimes open opposition to the leaders of the Central 
Rada and the government controlled by the Socialist Revolutionaries 
and Social Democrats. In early April 1918 Yevhen Chykalenko, a 
leading representative of the Ukrainian movement, made a note about 
conversations in this milieu: “Everyone is waiting for the Germans to 
take everything into their own hands and appoint ministers, as our 
53	
Ibid., 288.
54	
Two weeks later, the German command installed military courts for civilians. 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
98
own people will not manage to establish order and bring peace to our 
young state.”55 
 A large part of the Russian-speaking urban population, as well 
as the overwhelming majority of the urban bourgeoisie and petty 
bourgeoisie, were passive allies of the opposition. By April 1918 the 
Central Rada had no serious social base. The Ukrainian peasants, 
having themselves divided up the land, had “forgotten” about national 
self-determination, while the intelligentsia was too weak. Nor did 
the Rada have an adequate battle-ready army (the consequence of 
ideological experiments) or external allies. Under such circumstances, 
a change of regime was a mere “technicality.” 
The initiative was taken by the German military commander 
in Ukraine and the German ambassador in Kyiv, Philipp Alfons 
Mumm von Schwarzenstein. In mid-April contact was established 
with Pavlo Skoropadsky, founder of the Ukrainian People’s Hromada 
(Community), the core of which consisted of ex-military and personally 
loyal officers. The informal negotiations resulted in the assumption of 
certain formal obligations. Skoropadsky was confronted with concrete 
demands whose implementation would guarantee him the “friendly 
neutrality” of the German military leaders.56 The same demands 
were presented to the Council of People’s Ministers of the Ukrainian 
People’s Republic, where they were certain to be rejected.
The circumstances of the overthrow are generally known. On 
23–24 April, a meeting took place between the military commanders 
of the occupation and the ambassadors of Germany and Austria-
Hungary. The decision was taken at this meeting for a change of 
regime in Ukraine (at the same time, negotiations were being held and 
documents signed for an “economic agreement” with the government 
of the Ukrainian People’s Republic).57 On 26–27 April, German units 
in Kyiv disarmed the units of the First Ukrainian Division (the so-
called Syn'ozhupannyky) and the Ukrainian artillery regiments. 
On 28 April a German military group entered the chamber of the 
Pedagogical Museum, where the Little Rada was meeting, broke up 
the meeting, and arrested some of those present (the pretext for this 
was the kidnapping of the banker Adam Dobry). On 29 April there 
took place what turned out to be the final session of the Ukrainian 
Central Rada (Little Rada), at which the constitution of the Ukrainian 
55	
Ievhen Chykalenko, Shchodennyk, 1918–1919, vol. 2 (Kyiv, 2004), 9.
56	
Doroshenko, Istoriia Ukraïny, 2: 31–32.
57	
See the detailed discussion in chapter 3b of the present volume.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
99 
People’s Republic was approved (titled “Statute Concerning the State 
Structure, Rights and Freedoms of the Ukrainian People’s Republic”). 
The Congress of the All-Ukrainian Union of Landowners, called by 
the Ukrainian Democratic Agrarian Party, met on the same day in 
the Kyiv circus. This congress not only announced the overthrow of 
the Central Rada and of the government of the Ukrainian People’s 
Republic but also proclaimed a new ruler, Hetman Skoropadsky. In 
a parallel move, forces of the Ukrainian People’s Hromada took all 
the essential junctions and centers in Kyiv under their control, while 
the Germans maintained their “neutrality.” The overthrow took place 
with little bloodshed. Three Ukrainian Sich Riflemen who were 
guarding the Pedagogical Museum lost their lives when the building 
was stormed. 
The Hetman’s first act as legislator, his “Manifesto to the Whole 
Ukrainian People,” announced the formation of the Ukrainian 
State, annulled all the laws and decrees of the Central Rada and the 
Provisional Government, dissolved the land committees, and restored 
private ownership of land.58 The Ukrainian People’s Republic and the 
Ukrainian Central Rada de facto ceased to exist.
Skoropadsky’s Ukrainian State
The regime that came to power following the coup of 29 April 1918 
differed little from its predecessor from the point of view of legitimacy 
and representativeness. It was supported by the large landowners, 
prosperous peasants, industrialists, and the financial bourgeoisie. 
The parties and organizations that supported Skoropadsky included 
the very small Ukrainian Democratic Agrarian Party, the Union 
of Landowners (a grouping of large landowners), and the Union 
of Industry, Commerce, Finance, and Agriculture (Protofis), a 
conglomerate of branch organizations from trade, industry, and 
finance. Finally, there was the Constitutional Democratic Party, 
which formed the government for just about the whole period of 
Skoropadsky’s rule.
In conditions of revolution, civil war, general anarchy, and 
economic collapse, the political strength and capacity of these social 
strata, parties, and organizations to influence events were very 
limited. The only real force that could be relied on to maintain law 
and order were the German and Austro-Hungarian troops. But their 
actual task in the country was a very narrow one—that of maintaining 
58	
Konstytutsiini akty Ukraïny, 1917–1920, 82.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
100
the structures necessary for the “exchange of goods” between 
Ukraine and the Central Powers. The ranks of Skoropadsky’s allies 
and supporters were also disunited when it came to his policies. The 
Democratic Agrarian Party soon went into opposition over his choice 
of Russian-speaking officials from the tsarist period to fill the posts 
in the bureaucracy, army, and police. Influential members of the 
Union of Landowners disagreed with Skoropadsky’s plans for land 
reform, the basic idea of which was to create a broad stratum of small 
and medium landowners. Representatives of the Union who were 
members of the Committee on the Land Question, which was meant 
to prepare the reform, blocked the committee’s work and delayed 
the implementation of the reform. Similarly, representatives of the 
Protofis forced the Hetman to take extremely unpopular measures 
against the workers (abolition of the eight-hour day, repression of 
trade unions) and hindered, where possible, the Ukrainization of the 
state. The same could be said of the representatives of the dominant 
Constitutional Democrats in Skoropadsky’s government who, in 
their majority, were opposed to an independent Ukrainian state 
from the outset.
In present-day studies, one finds quite different assessments of the 
political nature of Skoropadsky’s state. Some claim that “the Hetmanate 
of 1918 was an authoritarian bureaucratic regime in which the head of 
state had almost dictatorial powers. It lacked a representative body, had 
no separation of executive and legislative functions in government, and 
clearly restricted basic democratic freedoms. It had a small social base, 
and the exercise of government had a very makeshift character.”59 Others 
describe the Hetmanate as a “military-bureaucratic dictatorship.”60 
The Hetmanate is also often described in the traditional manner as a 
“puppet regime.”61 It is a commonplace of apologetic historical writing 
that Skoropadsky restored the state-building tradition of the Cossacks. 
In any case, no one questions the small social base of the state or its 
critical dependence on an external force.
It should not be overlooked that for all its attributes of dictatorial 
power (the Hetman personally appointed and dismissed the 
59	
R. Pyrih, “Derzhavna sluzhba Het'manatu Pavla Skoropads'koho (kviten'–hruden' 1918),” 
Ukraïna ХХ stolittia: kul'tura, ideolohiia, polityka (Kyiv), no. 15 (2009): 67.
60	
Ia. Pelens'kyi, “Peredmova. Spohady het'mana Pavla Skoropads'koho (kinets' 1917–hruden' 
1918),” in Pavlo Skoropads'kyi. Spohady. Kinets' 1917–hruden' 1918 (Kyiv, 1995), 23.
61	
V. Soldatenko, Ukraïna v revoliutsiinu dobu. Istorychni ese-khroniky. Rik 1918, vol. 2 (Kyiv, 
2009), 201. This work can be found on the home page of the Ukrainian Institute of National 
Remembrance: http://www.memory.gov.ua/.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
101 
government, was commander in chief, and exercised the functions of 
the highest court), this regime was politically very weak. Although 
censorship and various prohibitions and restrictions on the freedom 
of speech and assembly were imposed in the first few days, political 
forces and individuals continued to act legally or semi-legally in the 
Ukrainian state, often opposing the Hetman, holding congresses, and 
publishing newspapers prohibited by the government. It was typical 
of this period that in May 1918 the opposition parties organized their 
congresses in the environs of Kyiv “in the underground” after they 
had been banned in the city or even broken up by force. This was a 
symbolic demonstration of the limits of the ruler’s influence.
The brief imprisonment of some representatives of the Ukrainian 
People’s Republic was the sharpest form of repression of the political 
opposition.62 Vynnychenko’s imprisonment, on 10 July 1918, was 
typical. He was arrested under suspicion of having organized an 
uprising. His imprisonment lasted less than twenty-four hours and 
ended with the Hetman personally apologizing to the “injured party” 
through his chief of staff.63 This also indicates the difference between 
the Hetman and the German commanders, who were demanding 
that Vynnychenko be handed over to them. The arrest of Petliura, the 
head of the All-Ukrainian Union of Zemstvos, in July 1918 is another 
example, except this time it was the Germans who were demanding 
proper treatment of the arrested person because the German 
command was then trying to create a broader base for the political 
spectrum represented in the Hetman government. Skoropadsky was 
also inclined toward cooperation with the Ukrainian socialists.
The 
best-known 
instance 
of 
“severe” 
repression 
against 
representatives of the Ukrainian People’s Republic is that of the 
trial of members of the Central Rada by a military court. Vsevolod 
Holubovych, Oleksandr Zhukovsky, and four government officials 
were arrested in connection with the kidnapping of the banker 
Dobry. All the accused received short prison sentences. What is 
62	
In close proximity to the Hetman there were people (such as Dmytro Doroshenko) who were 
in constant contact with the leaders of the Ukrainian opposition parties. Skoropadsky himself 
was not inclined to use radical measures against representatives of the Ukrainian movement. 
It is worth mentioning that Symon Petliura was released on 12 November 1918 on personal 
instructions from the Hetman, whereupon he immediately joined the organizers of the uprising 
against the Hetman in Bila Tserkva (Skoropadsky, Spohady, 376n). 
63	
V. Vynnychenko, Shchodennyk, 1911–20, vol. 1 (Edmonton and New York, 1980), 289–96. 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
102
also remarkable is that preparations by the Ukrainian parties for an 
uprising against the Hetman were made in an almost legal manner 
through cultural and educational organizations.
The weakness of Skoropadsky’s government was particularly 
evident in its attempts to “maintain order” in the villages. The armed 
units of the Hetmanate (the Hetman Guards) were unable to gain 
control because the situation in the villages had been radicalized by 
the government’s attempts at normalization. They were unable to 
achieve their goal without the assistance of the occupation troops. 
The efforts of the occupying troops and the Hetman’s security 
forces to restore order also demonstrated a lack of understanding of 
local conditions. They underestimated the ability of the villages to 
organize themselves and offer military resistance, notwithstanding 
all the available information about massive arsenals of weaponry that 
existed after the collapse of the front and about the fighting ability of 
soldiers just recently returned from the war. The punitive expeditions 
and executions carried out by those in power just poured more oil on 
the flames and provoked the peasants into actions that in many cases 
grew into organized uprisings.
The first encounters with the occupying troops took place at the 
beginning of March in Podilia in the Austro-Hungarian zone. The 
conflict here was provoked by Polish volunteer formations whose 
members were often owners of businesses and estates that had 
been plundered. Revenge was frequently a motive in such conflicts 
and often led to extreme cruelty.64 Peasant uprisings began in mid-
May 1918. Sometimes they were provoked by attempts to confiscate 
weapons owned by the peasants, sometimes by the requisitioning 
of grain, and sometimes by attempts on the part of landowners 
to reclaim expropriated land. News that the Hetman intended to 
implement a land reform, in which the peasants would have to pay 
compensation for the land they had acquired, was a cause of unrest, as 
were the instructions on the distribution of the harvest issued in late 
May and early June 1918.65 Unrest was further increased by measures 
to confiscate harvests, collect compensation, and reclaim the property 
64	
P. Zakharchenko, Selians'ka viina v Ukraïni: rik 1918 (Kyiv, 1997), 49.
65	
The “Law on Rights to the Harvest of 1918 on the Territory of the Ukrainian State” of 27 May 
required that one-third of the harvest (or a corresponding compensation) from land sown without 
authorization would have to be given to the owner of the land. On 14 June it was declared that the 
sugar-beet harvest on fields sown without authorization belonged to the owners of the factories.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
103 
of the returning landowners, as well as by attempts to use force to 
compel the peasants to harvest grain.66
The actions of the peasantry varied in scale. There were local 
rebellions that involved armed attacks and murders (sometimes of 
whole families) of landowners who had returned to their estates. 
Prosperous peasants were also sometimes the object of such attacks. 
There were also organized actions that sometimes extended over 
whole districts. One such uprising was that organized by the 
Ukrainian Socialist Revolutionaries in the districts of Tarashcha and 
Zvenyhorod, in the Kyiv gubernia, between May and August 1918, 
in which, according to various sources, between twenty and forty 
thousand people were involved. The uprising was suppressed only 
with the help of the German military.
By the end of July, the uprisings had spread to the gubernias of Kyiv, 
Chernihiv, Katerynoslav, and Poltava. According to the estimates of 
Field Marshal Eichhorn, 10 to 12 percent of the peasants had taken part 
in “agrarian unrest,” in other words, 2.5 million people.67 According to 
calculations of the modern historian Viktor Savchenko, in the period 
up to the autumn of 1918 the occupying troops in Ukraine lost 22,000 
officers and men, the forces of the Hetman more than 30,000. The 
number of insurgents between May and September 1918 is estimated to 
have been around 80,000.68 With the assistance of the occupying troops, 
the situation in the villages was stabilized by the autumn of 1918.
During this period, government institutions took reasonable steps 
to resolve the agrarian problem in a civilized manner. In June 1918 the 
government passed a law permitting the state land bank to purchase 
land for the purpose of selling it to the peasants (the maximum area of 
each land parcel purchased was limited to 27 hectares) and allowing 
the private sale of land without limitation. But the estate owners 
were in no hurry to sell their “surplus” parcels of land, while the 
peasants, like the land bank that was meant to provide the loans for 
66	
The “liquidation commissions” established by the government attempted without much success 
to manage locally the return of property to the owners and reach some amicable settlement 
regarding compensation. The peasants were unwilling to return what had been taken, and the 
landowners made unrealistic demands. The situation was made worse by the government’s 
instruction of 4 July 1918, according to which it was the landowners themselves who would 
determine the value of losses. A number of measures were taken in July and August to force 
the peasants to bring in the harvest (which was very good), whereby the sanctions for sabotage 
included fines, imprisonment, and forced labor. 
67	
Soldatenko, Ukraïna v revoliutsiinu dobu, 2: 317. Archival source: TsDAVO, f. 2311, op. 1, spr. 
120, 143. 
68	
V. A. Savchenko, Pavlo Skoropads'kyi – ostannii het'man Ukraïny (Kharkiv, 2009), 223–24. 
These data require scrutiny.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
104
this purchase, lacked the necessary funds. So the Hetman’s intention 
to create a broad social stratum of small agricultural enterprises 
as the social foundation of the state came to nothing. It was also a 
project that everyone opposed: the peasants who had appropriated 
land without payment; the large landowners, who wanted to maintain 
their monopoly; the left-wing Ukrainian parties, which favored the 
socialization of land; and the occupying troops, which wanted the 
kind of large-scale economy that would guarantee them the deliveries 
of grain they required. So the Hetman’s plans, not infrequently 
sabotaged in small ways by the governing institutions themselves, 
remained hanging in the air, with the result that the Hetman had to do 
without the broad social support he had hoped for. Even as a project, 
it took a long time for the agrarian reform to get off the ground. It 
was only at the end of October that documents became available with 
concrete instructions about the implementation of the reform.
In the meantime, the situation in the towns was becoming critical. 
Speculation flourished in both food and industrial commodities, 
and food deliveries sometimes were not carried out. The Hetman’s 
policies toward labor (the removal of restrictions on working hours, 
the expansion of the rights of employers, the restriction of trade-
union activities) led to a growing number of strikes, in which the 
Bolsheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries played an active role. Here 
as well, the Ukrainian State was not master of the situation, and the 
occupying troops had to intervene. The most telling example was the 
railworkers’ strike of July 1918.69 The strike ended only when the 
German and Austro-Hungarian troops took control of a number of 
railway junctions and carried out reprisals70 against the organizers 
and participants in the strike.71 But it should be noted that in this 
case as well the Hetman government looked for a civilized solution to 
the problem. A number of the strikers’ economic demands were met 
(payment of wages and provision of food).
In spite of all these problems that resulted from the consequences 
of war and revolution, with their destruction and disorganization of 
social life, Skoropadsky’s Ukrainian State was an area of relative peace 
and order, especially when compared with Bolshevik Russia, where a 
69	
According to the (exaggerated) numbers in the Bolshevik press, more than two hundred thousand 
workers were involved in the strike.
70	
The term “reprisal” included arrest, detention, and expulsion. Extreme forms of violence, such as 
regularly existed in Soviet Russia or in areas involved in civil war, happened very seldom.
71	
See the detailed discussion in chapters 3a and 3c in the present volume.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
105 
bitter civil war was raging. The period from May to September 1918 
was a period in which, to some extent, systematic and thoughtful 
efforts were made to create the structures and infrastructure of 
Ukrainian statehood. It was a very impressive period when seen 
against the background of the chaotic experiments and organizational 
incompetence of the Central Rada.
The first months of Skoropadsky’s rule saw the creation of a 
central state administration, a government (Council of Ministers), and 
a centralized system of justice (courts, Senate). Under the Hetman, a 
more or less stable network of financial institutions was reestablished, 
and the work of local organs of self-administration was resumed 
(gubernia and district starostas). Where problems had arisen with 
organs of local self-administration (city dumas, zemstvos),72 they had 
been resolved by the autumn of 1918. Skoropadsky established an 
organization with police powers to maintain public order, the Hetman 
Guard. He took concrete steps to establish an army, one of his major 
achievements. He persuaded the Central Powers to give him what 
remained of the Black Sea fleet. Preparations for the organization of 
a future army were begun in May and June 1918. A general staff was 
created and a system of service grades and ranks established, as was 
the army structure. A law was passed on general conscription, and 
the leading personnel of the army were named. Most of Skoropadsky’s 
army (eight army corps, four cavalry divisions) was of course made 
up of these military leaders. Training and demonstration units were 
also established in the autumn (once again made up mostly of leading 
personnel). By November 1918 the armed forces of the Ukrainian 
State included the cadre units already mentioned, a Zaporozhian 
Division (Kharkiv gubernia), the Zaporozhian and Black Sea Cossacks 
(Zaporoz'kyi kozats'kyi kish, Chornomors'kyi kozats'kyi kish) stationed 
in Koziatyn and Berdychiv, the Serdiuk Division in Kyiv, the Sich 
Riflemen (Bila Tserkva), and the hundreds of the Guard. In October, a 
beginning was made to create a special volunteer corps consisting of 
officers from the tsarist army.73 The total strength of the army and other 
armed formations in the Ukrainian State was sixty-five thousand.74
72	
In a whole series of cases, gubernia starostas, whose powers were similar to those of 
prerevolutionary governors, simply dissolved local organs of self-administration that they 
considered an annoyance, which led to strenuous protests and central government intervention.
73	
This special corps was to maintain order in the border regions.
74	
A. O. Buravchenkov, “Zbroini syly Ukraïns'koï Derzhavy 1918 r.,” in Entsyklopediia istoriï Ukraïny, 
vol. 3 (Kyiv, 2005), 311. See also the detailed discussion in chapter 3b in the present volume.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
106
Ukrainization had a special place in Skoropadsky’s domestic 
policies. A network of Ukrainian primary schools was initiated 
in May and June 1918. The Hetman began a systematic process of 
Ukrainizing the state apparatus, the army, and the universities, 
although this caused some conflicts. Skoropadsky was the founder 
of the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences. His attempt to create a state 
apparatus represented the only systematic effort to do so during the 
whole course of the Ukrainian Revolution. In these attempts, he relied 
on the support of the occupying troops (an essential factor of political 
stability) and on a relatively small stratum of large landowners, as well 
as members of the old bureaucracy and officialdom. One could say 
that Skoropadsky was successful in creating a state infrastructure, but 
his system-building plans were clearly in contradiction with reality 
and met with resistance, both open (from the workers and peasants) 
and covert (from his “allies” in the country).
The situation of the Hetman and of the state he had created became 
less and less secure as the influence of the occupying troops waned. 
The German and Austro-Hungarian defeats on the Western Front 
and in the Balkans in the second half of 1918, as well as the partial 
withdrawal of troops from Ukraine, reduced their physical support for 
the regime. The Hetman became more active in probing the possibility 
of an alliance with the Whites, not least because of pressure from 
the Russians in his entourage. Whether because of the weakness of 
Skoropadsky’s regime or as a result of its being not harsh enough, 
a well-organized opposition covering a broad political spectrum 
had emerged by November 1918. A circular of 31 October from the 
Ministry of the Interior listed the clandestine and illegally active 
organizations that were hostile to the state and had to be combated. 
It included the Russian Communist Party (Bolshevik), the Communist 
Party (Bolshevik) of Ukraine, anarchist parties and circles, the left-
wing Ukrainian Socialist Revolutionaries, and the right-wing Russian 
Socialist Revolutionaries.75 It is remarkable that in their agitation 
against the government in Ukraine76 all the organizations listed, to 
the extent that they did not seek open conflict, met with no special 
problems. It suffices to note that local revolutionary committees 
carried out quite successful agitation against the government in 
the spring and autumn of 1918. The Bolsheviks in the neutral zone 
were practically unhindered as they prepared partisan groups for 
75	
Ukraïna. Khronika XX stolittia. Rik 1918 (Kyiv, 2005), 349–50.
76	
The leading bodies of the Ukrainian Bolsheviks were outside the country.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
107 
an uprising against the Hetman. The left-wing Ukrainian parties 
likewise had no special problems in their oppositional activity, which 
went as far as participating in the organization of peasant uprisings 
and strikes. The Ukrainian National Union was formed in August 
1918, a coalition of left-wing Ukrainian parties and the social and 
professional organizations that they controlled.
There were other opposition forces not mentioned in the ministry’s 
circular. These included the All-Ukrainian Peasant Union, influenced 
by the Ukrainian Socialist Revolutionaries; the All-Ukrainian Union 
of Zemstvos, led by the Ukrainian Social Democrat Symon Petliura; 
and organizations such as the Kyiv National Center, which brought 
together Russian nationalists and monarchists dissatisfied with the 
Hetman’s Ukrainization efforts. As already mentioned, the Hetman’s 
allies completely rejected Ukrainian statehood. The Constitutional 
Democrats, who were dominant in the government, accepted the need 
for a Ukrainian state only as a transition to the restoration of Russian 
unity. The big bourgeoisie and the industrialists saw the Ukrainian 
state merely as a tactical ruse. The “restoration and reunification of the 
fatherland” was a major theme in the speeches of delegates to the last 
congress of Protofis at the end of October 1918.77 On 17 October 1918 
a declaration of nine members of the Council of Ministers spoke of 
the necessity of establishing a federation with a non-Bolshevik Russia.
At the same time, the declarations and actions of the Ukrainian 
National Union became increasingly radical. They demanded the 
neutralization of “anti-Ukrainian elements” in the government and 
the promotion of patriotic forces. Its leaders (Vynnychenko and 
Mykyta Shapoval) negotiated with Skoropadsky on the formation of a 
coalition government and the calling of a national congress (planned 
for 17 November), while simultaneously planning an uprising against 
him. At the beginning of November they secured the support of the 
commanders of the Sich Riflemen, the Black Sea Cossacks, and the 
Zaporozhian Division,78 all of which were units of the Ukrainian 
State army. The military aspects of the plan were prepared by Yevhen 
Konovalets and Andrii Melnyk, commanders of the Sich Riflemen. 
Skoropadsky had been informed of the preparations for an uprising but 
undertook no serious countermeasures. What is more, on 9 November 
1918 he secured the release of Petliura, Porsh, and Yurii Kapkan from 
77	
Pavlo Khrystiuk, Zamitky i materiialy do istoriï ukraïns'koï revoliutsiï 1917–1920 rr., vol. 3 (New 
York, 1969), 115–16.
78	
Mykyta Shapoval, Velyka revoliutsiia i ukraïns'ka vyzvol'na prohrama (Prague, 1928), 120–21.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
108
prison, individuals who would certainly join the uprising. On the 
night of 13–14 November there was an illegal meeting, in the building 
of the Ministry of Transport, of representatives of the Ukrainian Party 
of Socialist Revolutionaries, the Ukrainian Social Democratic Labor 
Party, the Ukrainian Socialist Federalist Party, the Ukrainian Party 
of Socialist Independentists, and representatives of the army (Sich 
Riflemen). The decision was made to mount an uprising against the 
Hetman. A Directory79 under the leadership of Vynnychenko was 
elected at the same meeting.
The international situation prompted the search for strong 
new allies. The Bolshevik government was preparing a military 
intervention.80 The capitulation of Turkey and Bulgaria in October 
had accelerated the military as well as the political collapse of Austria-
Hungary and the German Empire. The withdrawal of their troops had 
begun at the end of October and continued until the beginning of 
1919. The Whites on the eastern border of Ukraine were becoming 
increasingly stronger, and secret negotiations were being carried 
out with some of their representatives. Skoropadsky was looking for 
a compromise or a temporary resolution of the conflicting pressures 
from the Ukrainian movement and from those who supported the 
restoration of a “united and indivisible Russia.” Having lost his main 
supporters, Austria-Hungary and Germany, he needed to turn to 
another external power that could deal with the elemental violence of 
the peasant war. The Entente states were then negotiating over future 
zones of influence, and “southern Russia,” in other words, the territory 
of the Ukrainian State, was being mentioned. 
On 14 November 1918 the Hetman signed an “edict” that has been 
described in later literature as “federalist,”81 in which he declared that 
“Ukraine must take the lead in the establishment of an all-Russian 
federation, the final goal of which will be the restoration of Great 
Russia.” The edict was a signal to the Entente and to the anti-Bolshevik 
forces allied with the Entente, as well as to the Hetman’s own allies 
79	
The intention was to elect the Directory for the period of the uprising, after which power would 
pass to a representative body. In addition to Vynnychenko, the Directory included Petliura, 
Andrii Makarenko, Fedir Shvets, and Opanas Andriievsky. 
80	
A fact worth mentioning here is that, during the preparations for the uprising, Vynnychenko 
met secretly with representatives of the Council of People’s Commissars, Khristian Rakovsky 
and Dmytro Manuilsky, who promised him the “neutrality” of the communist underground, 
demanding in return the legalization of the Communist Party (Bolshevik) of Ukraine in the 
future Ukrainian state. 
81	
P. Hai-Nyzhnyk, Finansova polityka uriadu Ukraïns'koï Derzhavy Het'mana Pavla 
Skoropads'koho (29 kvitnia–14 hrudnia 1918 r.) (Kyiv, 2004), 346. 

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
109 
in Ukraine who wanted Ukraine to be reunified with Russia. It was 
published on 15 November. The uprising, led by the Directory, 
began on the same day. Troops that had gone over to the Directory 
advanced on Kyiv from Bila Tserkva, Berdychiv, and Kharkiv. As they 
approached Kyiv, they were joined by increasing numbers of insurgent 
peasants. The Ukrainian National Union occupied government 
offices, driving out representatives of the Hetman administration. 
The counteroffensive of troops loyal to the Hetman had little effect. 
In some cases (the Serdiuk Division), they joined the uprising. On 19 
November the troops of the Directory and the insurgent groups were 
outside Kyiv but decided not to storm it because the German command 
had abandoned its neutrality and placed its units at the entrances to 
the city. This move was forced on them, as an entrance of insurgents 
into the city would have hindered the withdrawal of German troops. 
In addition, the Entente had demanded that the German command 
allow no insurgents to enter Kyiv because, at this time, they were 
negotiating with Skoropadsky. The army of the Directory withdrew to 
Vinnytsia and Fastiv.
The Hetman declared a general mobilization, but it was only the 
large number of tsarist officers in Kyiv that responded. The Directory 
countered on 27 November by declaring its own general mobilization. 
Petliura, in charge of the Directory’s troops, issued an order in which 
he promised an extra parcel of land to those peasants who joined the 
Directory’s troops “on time.”82 By the end of November, the Directory’s 
troops and the insurgents had taken control of most of the district 
centers of Left- and Right-Bank Ukraine. In the first half of December 
they captured Odesa and Mykolaiv, only to give them up under pressure 
from the Entente, which had a large military presence there.
On 14 December the troops of the Directory took Kyiv, having 
broken the resistance of a small number of officer groups. The 
Hetman’s military formations in the city went over to the insurgents. 
On the same day, Skoropadsky published his instrument of abdication 
and, some days later, left the city and the country in a German sealed 
train. The Directory entered the city in triumph on 19 December 1918. 
 
The Directory and the “Second” Ukrainian People’s Republic
On 26 December 1918, the Declaration of the Directory of the Ukrainian 
People’s Republic was published. This document proclaimed the rule 
of the workers and peasants in Ukraine. The Directory abolished all 
82 
The mass of recruits increased its numerical strength while decreasing its fighting capacity.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
110
the laws of the Hetmanate and reintroduced the eight-hour day and 
the right to strike. The land of the “small and laboring peasantry” was 
declared to be their inalienable property. The remaining land would be 
given to peasants who had little or no land “to be worked,” first of all to 
those who had taken part in the uprising. The “overall administration” 
of all land was in the hands of the Directory and would be carried out 
by the National Land Administration. This decision applied not only 
to estates but also to lands owned by monasteries, the church, and the 
state. The definitive decision on the exercise of power would be taken 
by a Labor Congress. The “exploiting classes” would lose their right 
to participate in government institutions (the expropriation of their 
property was not mentioned in the declaration).
On the same day, the Directory named the government of the 
Ukrainian People’s Republic, the Council of People’s Ministers, under 
the leadership of the Social Democrat Volodymyr Chekhivsky. The 
government would consist of representatives of the Ukrainian Social 
Democratic Labor Party, the Ukrainian Socialist Revolutionaries, the 
Socialist Independentists, and the Ukrainian Socialist Federalists.83 A 
representative of the Poalei Zion Party also joined the government as 
minister for Jewish affairs. There were no representatives of Russian 
or Polish parties. As events would later show, this government was 
really more of a technical body of the Directory, with the latter 
making all important decisions itself. The task of the government 
was to implement those decisions. But this turned out to be highly 
problematic. From the very first days of the second Ukrainian People’s 
Republic, the country experienced a kind of déjà-vu: extreme weakness 
of the central authority, disorganization and anarchy in the provinces, 
political and personal intrigue and conflict at the top, organizational 
inability of the leaders, and local power structures that were either 
lacking or weak. All this was painfully reminiscent of the experience 
of the Central Rada and General Secretariat. Added to this was a 
whole series of difficult internal and external circumstances.
The support of the masses during the month of the uprising against 
the Hetman disappeared as soon as the Directory entered Kyiv. The 
soldiers in the Directory’s army, estimated to have been between 
150,000 and 250,000 men, returned to the villages to take part in the 
distribution of land. By January 1919, the army had only around 50,000 
83	
Between the summer and winter of 1918, left-wing factions split from the two main parties in 
Ukraine, the Social Democrats and Socialist Revolutionaries. These left-wing factions supported 
Bolshevik ideology and fought against the Directory.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
111 
men.84 In reality, it was the units established under the Hetman that 
formed the core of the army of the Ukrainian People’s Republic. The 
army established following Petliura’s mobilization of 27 November 
1918, after the fall of the Hetman, when masses of volunteers joined, 
required significant organizational effort for which resources were 
not available. Among the population, especially among the peasantry, 
there were very few who wanted to be “mobilized.” 
On 8 January 1918, the Directory passed a law that would give recruits 
an extra five dessiatines (one dessiatine = 2.7 acres) of land and a loan for 
the purchase of equipment. But this measure made little difference, as 
the peasants had already appropriated both in the course of the “black 
repartition.” The size of the army was increased at the last minute, 
when fighting was already under way. Recruits were generally regarded 
as unreliable, and desertion was a mass phenomenon. In contemporary 
memoirs, one finds examples of recruits who disappeared the day 
after receiving their uniform and weapon. The fighting ability of the 
reliable units was decreased by this mobilization. For example, a unit of 
Sich Riflemen that had begun the uprising against Skoropadsky, most 
of whose senior and junior officers came from Galicia, was expanded 
during the uprising to a division and later to a corps. According to one 
observer, “Nobody asked—and, under the circumstances, this was not 
possible anyway—who was joining the ranks of the Riflemen, who 
this or that volunteer was: the most important thing was to reach full 
strength; the main thing was a first, a second, a third company.85 It is 
no wonder that many unreliable elements joined the corps, of little 
military value and even less moral worth.” The same observer writes 
that in the corps, following the capture of Kyiv, there were ten to fifteen 
desertions daily.86 
Building the army was also hindered by the already mentioned 
disputes among the leading politicians of the Ukrainian People’s 
Republic.87 Leading individuals in the parties represented in the 
Directory and in the government competed for influence over the 
84	
Zh. V. Mina, “Zbroini syly Dyrektoriï na pochatku ïï isnuvannia (lystopad 1918–traven' 1919 r.),” 
Visnyk Natsional'noho Universytetu “L'vivs'ka politekhnika” “Derzhava ta armiia” (Lviv), no. 
408 (2000): 49–54. 
85	
A Cossack expression for a military unit having the strength of a battalion. 
86	
Antin Krezub (Osyp Dumin), “Hrupa polkovnyka Rogul's'koho,” Kalendar “Chervonoï kalyny” 
(1929), 57–58. Quoted from the National Archives of the Czech Republic, f. Ukrainian Museum, 
Kt. 44, inv. c. 710/5, 452–53.
87	
These differences of opinion did not pertain only to the organization of the army. The left-wing 
factions of the Social Democrats and Socialist Revolutionaries did not want to fight against the 
Bolsheviks and eventually went over to their side.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
112
military, each one championing his own ideas about state-building. 
The sharpest conflict was the one between the two most influential 
members of the Directory, Petliura and Vynnychenko, over the 
organization of the army.88 In the selection of leading personnel, the 
differences were often not about professional suitability, experience, 
or competence but about ethnic origin and commitment to “the 
Ukrainian cause.” Moreover, in order to secure influence over and gain 
real support from the military, these various leaders of the Directory 
sought to ingratiate themselves with the otamans. Petliura, for 
instance, regularly gave large sums of money to individual otamans 
for “the organization of the army.”89 
During the period of Skoropadsky’s rule, the leadership had been 
expanded and a general staff had been created. In the assessment of 
specialists, this leadership personnel of fifteen thousand men was 
adequate, with a competently organized mobilization, to establish an 
operational army. The left-wing leadership of the Directory, however, 
had no trust in those officers who had served under the ancien régime. 
This created confusion and disorganization in the building of the 
army, angered the officers, and had a negative effect on the fighting 
morale of the army’s leading personnel. The career soldiers were 
also unhappy with the way in which the army was increased by 
incorporating whole groups of insurgents.
This form of mobilization, incorporating already existing insurgent 
units commanded by otamans into the army, was forced on the UNR 
by the circumstances of war, which made normal mobilization very 
difficult. The active army that was created was therefore made up not 
just of regular soldiers trained according to military rules but also 
of insurgents whose leaders, although they formally recognized the 
authority of the Directory and its military commanders and acted in 
their name, actually brought in armed detachments that were under 
no one’s control, used partisan methods of warfare, and were not 
suited for regular military engagements. Such units operated under 
the official aegis of the Directory. Units under Otaman Zeleny (Danylo 
Terpylo) were active in the Kyiv gubernia, those under Yevhen Anhel in 
the Chernihiv gubernia, those under Yukhym Bozhko in the Kherson 
and Mykolaiv gubernias, and units under Matvii Hryhoriiv in part of 
the Katerynoslav gubernia. Dozens of smaller insurgent groups had 
become part of the UNR army. According to contemporary estimates, 
88	
Soldatenko, Vynnychenko i Petliura.
89	
Vynnychenko, Vidrodzhennia natsiï, 3: 351.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
113 
the total strength of these insurgent units and “armies” in mid-1919 
was between 15,000 and 200,000.90 
Hundreds of these insurgent units and peasant “armies” had leaders 
whose political orientation was unclear and changed according to 
the situation and the leaders’ interests. Some of the insurgents were 
influenced by the Social Democrats and Socialist Revolutionaries, and 
many supported the Bolsheviks or went over to their troops as they 
approached. One of the largest insurgent armies, that of the anarchist 
Nestor Makhno, controlled a large part of the Katerynoslav gubernia 
and was fundamentally opposed to rule of any kind (although it used 
Bolshevik slogans and allied itself with them for certain periods). The 
leaders of the smaller units were mainly interested in the defense of 
their own villages or local areas under their control. Otamans in the 
provinces sometimes proclaimed their own republics91 or declared their 
personal rule over a certain territory. There were about 120 different 
“peasant republics” during the Ukrainian Revolution.92 These otamans 
frequently fought not only against the Directory, the Bolsheviks, 
the Whites, and the intervening foreign troops, but also against one 
another. The leadership of the Directory was unable to deal with this 
elemental form of violence. Having to fight a war on many fronts, it 
failed not only to establish a stable leadership over the insurgents but 
also to maintain stable lines of communication and information.
The otamans were autonomous to such an extent that at critical 
moments they changed sides. At the height of the struggle against 
the Bolsheviks in January 1919, Otaman Zeleny left his position 
outside Kyiv and withdrew with his units to the forest. The gap that 
this created in the front made it significantly easier for the Bolsheviks 
to take the city. In the battle against the Bolsheviks at Bila Tserkva 
in June of that year, it was only after a gala dinner in his honor and 
the promise of a share in the war booty that Zeleny agreed to join 
the UNR army and work with Yurii Tiutiunnyk. After the successful 
defense of Bila Tserkva against the Bolsheviks in August 1919, Zeleny 
and his “army” again left the Directory. 
90 
P. Hai-Nyzhnyk, “Otamanshchyna v period Dyrektoriï UNR: sotsial'na baza, rol' i mistse v 
natsional'no-vyzvol'nii borot'bi,” Literatura ta kul'tura Polissia, no. 58: Problemy filolohiï, istoriï 
ta kul'tury ХХ stolittia u suchasnykh doslidzhenniakh (Nizhyn: Vyd-vo NDPU im. M. Hoholia, 
2010), 105–14.
91	
The best-known of these, the Kholodnyi Yar Republic in the Cherkasy gubernia, existed (with 
interruptions) until the autumn of 1921.
92	
V. Savchenko, Atamany kazach'ego voiska (Moscow, 2006), 14.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
114
At the beginning of February 1919 Hryhoriiv, who had fought on 
the side of the Directory, went over to the Bolsheviks. The occasion 
for this was a secret agreement between the Directory and the 
Entente (French commanders) to withdraw Directory troops behind 
the Tiraspol–Voznesensk–Kherson line. First of all, Hryhoriiv, against 
Petliura’s orders, fought the Entente troops that had begun to occupy 
the area. Then, on 2 February, he joined the Bolsheviks.93 In the midst 
of fighting the Bolsheviks, in August 1919, Otaman Bozhko also 
refused to obey orders from supreme command. He commanded the 
Second Division of the UNR, made up of insurgents who had chosen 
their own commander.
These examples give some idea of the extent of the chaos that 
existed in the army of the Ukrainian People’s Republic as a consequence 
of “otamanship” and the narrow scope that the leaders of the UNR had 
in their direction of the war. Added to this was the situation within 
the leadership, which did not exactly promote efficiency. Following 
the successful overthrow of the Hetman, there was acute political and 
personal competition among the leaders, which had to do not only 
with ideological differences but also with personal ambition. 
 Attempts to move forward with the creation of state structures 
remained fragmentary and unsystematic, proceeding against the 
background of a war on many fronts, anarchy, peasant warfare, 
and economic disorganization. The Labor Congress, called by the 
Directory to resolve issues of state power, failed to do so because of 
differences of opinion among the delegates and disputes within the 
Directory itself, where the alternatives of soviets or dictatorship were 
debated endlessly. At the final session of the congress, total power was 
given to the Directory until the next congress. This, alongside the Act 
of Union with the Western Ukrainian People’s Republic on 22 January 
1918, was the most important decision of the congress and the most 
significant for the state-building of the second Ukrainian People’s 
Republic.94 Events at the front made it impossible to create functioning 
institutions, rebuild the economy, or resolve social problems. The 
Directory, which had come to power thanks to the uprisings of the 
peasant masses, very quickly lost the support of this largest sector 
93	
Both representatives of the Volunteer Army and Makhno’s people attempted to win Hryhoriiv 
to their side. See A. A. Lysenko, “Viis'kova ta politychna diial'nist' otamana N. Ia. Hryhor'ieva 
(Servetnyka) u 1918–1919 rr.,” Ukraïns'kyi istorychnyi zhurnal, 2009, no. 6: 63–80.
94	
Other efforts at state-building included the revocation of the decisions of the Hetmanate and the 
replacement of its institutions by “new” ones, the State Senate by the Supreme Court and the 
State Guard by the People’s Militia.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
115 
of society because it had nothing to offer them. The peasants had 
already divided up the land. The land law of 8 January 1918, which 
allowed fifteen dessiatines of land to “working” peasant households 
and five dessiatines to the poorest peasants, did not arouse any great 
enthusiasm among the peasantry.95 
The law had practically no influence in the towns. Among the 
politically active population, the workers supported the Bolsheviks, 
while the Russian-speaking bourgeoisie, officials, and the petty 
bourgeoisie supported the Whites. The Directory’s inability to keep 
its own people under control also made it unpopular. Although the 
Directory had restored civil liberties, commanders of regular troop 
units and insurgent detachments acted according to their own 
discretion. For instance, the commander of the Sich Riflemen, Yevhen 
Konovalets, prohibited the activities of a number of trade-union 
organizations in Kyiv on 22 December 1918, justifying this by the 
need to fight the Bolsheviks. Otaman Petro Bolbochan, commander 
of the Directory’s troops in Left-Bank Ukraine, closed down a workers’ 
congress in Kharkiv (controlled by the Mensheviks) and a peasant 
congress in Poltava. This led to arrests and public executions, which 
understandably undermined support for the Directory, as it was 
identified with this assault in public opinion and in oppositional 
propaganda. Most of the urban population was mainly interested in 
survival and would accept any government that could ensure stability.
The attack by Bolshevik troops96 against Left-Bank Ukraine and the 
Donbas began from the area around Kursk toward the end of December 
1918. A response to the four notes sent by the Directory to the Russian 
government arrived on 6 January. The Russian government rejected 
the “unjustified assumption” of the Directory that Russian troops 
were responsible for the fighting and maintained, as it had done in 
1918, that it was a conflict between the Directory and the Provisional 
Workers’ and Peasants’ Government of Ukraine, established by the 
Bolsheviks in November 1918. The Directory declared war on Soviet 
Russia on 16 January 1919, when Bolshevik troops had already pushed 
deep into Ukrainian territory and captured Kharkiv and Chernihiv. 
To the very end, Vynnychenko had hoped for an agreement with the 
Bolsheviks and had even offered the Moscow government various 
forms of treaty and proposed a united effort against the Whites and 
95	
Ukraïna. Khronika XX stolittia, Rik 1919 (Kyiv, 2005), 12.
96	
These were units of the All-Ukrainian Military Revolutionary Central Committee in Kursk, as 
well as units of the Red Army in “neutral guise,” both from Russia.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
116
the Entente. However, the military (Petliura, Bolbochan) put pressure 
on Vynnychenko. One of their arguments was that a declaration of 
war against Soviet Russia would increase the chances of support from 
the Entente. On the same day the Directory, the Ukrainian parties, and 
the Peasant Union had a meeting with the UNR military command to 
discuss the question of power. Some of those present (the military) 
argued for a military dictatorship, others for a “dictatorship of the 
working peasantry.” The demand was also raised to establish a Soviet 
republic. In the end, they decided to leave things as they were.97 
In the southern gubernias, the few operational army units of 
the UNR98 withdrew to the southwestern gubernias after some brief 
successes in January in Katerynoslav, Kherson, and Mykolaiv. The 
insurgent units either declared themselves neutral or went over to the 
Bolsheviks and fought against the Directory. The south of the country 
sank into total chaos. Simultaneously active in this region were 
the troops of the Directory, volunteer officer units, Bolshevik units, 
military revolutionary committees, large insurgent groups (Makhno, 
Hryhoriiv), as well as dozens and hundreds of small groupings of 
peasants, bands of deserters, self-defense units created by German 
settlers, Entente troops, and the remaining German and Austro-
Hungarian garrisons that were waiting to be evacuated. 
The situation was similar in Left-Bank Ukraine and parts of the 
Right Bank that were controlled by the Directory. The great mass of 
the population, the peasantry, were waiting for the Bolsheviks because 
they expected to benefit from their definitive resolution of the land 
question. A communication from the information bureau of the UNR 
army in February stated: “It is the opinion among the peasantry that 
they will be given the land in the winter, but in the summer it will be 
the pany99 who control the land.... The people want the Bolsheviks to 
come as soon as possible because they will crush the pany and give 
their possessions to the people.”100
In the towns and around the major railway junctions, the scenario 
of 1918 was repeated. As Bolshevik troops approached, the local 
revolutionary committees established by the Ukrainian Bolsheviks 
97	
V. F. Soldatenko, Ukraïna v revoliutsiinu dobu. Istorychni ese-khroniky. Rik 1919, vol. 3 (Kyiv, 
2010), 43. 
98	
According to the estimates of the UNR’s minister of military affairs, General Oleksandr Hrekov, 
the UNR’s total troop strength was around twenty-one thousand men. See Vynnychenko, 
Vidrodzhennia natsiï, 3: 244ff.
99	
Pan is a Ukrainian term for “landowner.”
100	 Soldatenko, Ukraïna v revoliutsiinu dobu, 3: 76.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
117 
would start an uprising. Southern Ukraine and the Crimea became a 
theater of war between the Bolsheviks, the Whites, and the troops of 
the Entente.
At the beginning of February 1919, the Directory101 and the 
government were forced to move to Vinnytsia, then on 6 March to 
Proskuriv, and on 18 March to Kamianets-Podilskyi. In April and 
May, the greater part of the Directory was in Rivne, with some in 
Stanyslaviv. The government was scattered between Stanyslaviv, 
Rivne, and Odesa. Negotiations with the French occupying troops had 
been taking place in Odesa since January.102 Although the Directory 
restructured the government a number of times, and the government 
made laws and regulations, its rule was often restricted to its location 
at the time. Authority at the front, in the best of cases, was in the hands 
of the army command (Petliura and the general staff); at worst, it was 
in the hands of the otamans. In the towns and villages formally under 
the control of the Directory, power was effectively exercised either by 
the military stationed there or by no one.
In March 1919, the Directory lost its last hope of international 
support. Under pressure from Hryhoriiv’s troops, who were fighting 
on the side of the Bolsheviks, the Entente troops and the volunteer 
officer units left Kherson and Mykolaiv and, in April, left Odesa. The 
UNR’s few forces in the south were forced to withdraw to the Romanian 
border. The situation was brought to a head by the action of Otaman 
Omelian Volokh, who, on 21 March, formed a “military revolutionary 
committee” and began separate negotiations with the Bolsheviks. 
The latter knew how to take advantage of the situation and defeated 
the disorganized Ukrainian troops under Volokh’s command. Under 
pressure from the Bolsheviks (eight thousand men), the Zaporozhian 
Corps, which was loyal to the Ukrainian People’s Republic, withdrew 
to Romanian territory, where they were interned. At the same time, 
the Directory’s troops began an offensive from Volhynia that reached 
the outskirts of Kyiv but then lacked the forces to continue.
In April and May 1919, the leaders of the Directory managed 
to reorganize their remaining troops and expand their numbers 
101	 On 9 February, under pressure from the French, who were negotiating with the UNR, 
Vynnychenko resigned from the Directory. Petliura, who was also persona non grata for the 
Entente, remained in the Directory but resigned from his party.
102	 The French were making impossible demands that would effectively have abolished Ukrainian 
sovereignty: control of the UNR army, railway junctions, and finances. Ukraine would be 
recognized at an international peace conference, after which it would become a French 
protectorate.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
118
by mobilization. At this time, the Directory’s rule extended over 
a narrow stretch of land in Podilia and Volhynia, along a line from 
Lutsk through Sarny and Rivne to Kremianets. Bolshevik advances 
separated the Directory’s three military groups. There were disputes 
among members of the Directory and, on 29 April, there was an 
attempted uprising behind the lines when Otaman Volodymyr 
Oskilko, dissatisfied with being dropped as leader of the forces in 
Volhynia, made an unsuccessful attempt to overthrow Petliura. It was 
at this time that the disintegration of the state apparatus reached its 
lowest point: corruption, abuse of office, and embezzlement of public 
funds had become part of daily life.
On 1 May Petliura ordered the evacuation of the army from 
Volhynia to Galicia. On 5 May the Directory and the UNR government 
occupied some railway cars at the Radyvyliv border station. On 18 
May they rode to Zolochiv in their railway cars, and on 25 May to 
Ternopil. Their rule now extended over a few kilometers of railway 
track and the town of Brody. The situation was a catastrophe. On 25 
May, having taken Rivne, the Bolsheviks declared the liquidation of 
the “Petliura front.” They could not decide whether to continue their 
advance into Galicia, as it was formally part of another state. The 
Poles were advancing from the west against the troops of the Western 
Ukrainian People’s Republic, which, since 22 January, had formally 
been part of the UNR army. Trains with troops, munitions, officials 
of the UNR and their families had now gathered on a narrow strip of 
land along the railway line. In this hopeless situation, a decision was 
made to gather the remaining troops of the UNR and, according to a 
plan of Tiutiunnyk’s, to advance toward Proskuriv. Thus began the 
summer offensive of the UNR army. In the truest sense of the word, 
it had nothing to lose. In mid-July 1919, after difficult battles with 
varying degrees of success, they were caught in a vise on a small strip 
of land between Kamianets-Podilskyi and the Zbruch and Dnister 
Rivers. The situation was saved by the Ukrainian Galician Army of 
the Western Ukrainian People’s Republic, which crossed the Zbruch 
and attacked the Bolsheviks.103 
On 1 August Petliura issued his Kyiv Directive, and a month later, 
on 30 August, troops of the Ukrainian People’s Republic entered Kyiv. 
This success was due to the fact that the Bolsheviks had to fight on 
three fronts: against the UNR, against the White army advancing 
from the south and east, and against uprisings in the rear that were 
103	 As usual, the battles were fought over control of the railway junctions.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
119 
the result of their “war communism” and requisitioning of grain. 
At practically the same time, units of the White army from the 
east entered Kyiv, and the UNR army again withdrew. The attitude 
of the White leaders to the UNR and to the “Ukrainian question” 
was uncompromising. They refused to recognize the right of the 
Ukrainians to an independent state. On 17 September, in a message 
on behalf of the UNR to the “people of united (soborna) Ukraine,” 
Petliura announced his government’s program: independence for the 
Ukrainian People’s Republic, recognition of the peasants’ right to land 
without compensation, introduction of the eight-hour day, and direct 
elections to the Great State Council (parliament).104 On 24 September 
the UNR declared war against Denikin. The People’s Revolutionary 
Army of Makhno, the anarchist peasant leader, allied itself with the 
army of the UNR. 
The war against the Whites in Left-Bank Ukraine went on, with 
varying degrees of success, until October 1919. It was temporarily 
quiet on the Ukrainian-Bolshevik front and, in September, there were 
even negotiations with Trotsky over a common military front against 
the Whites. In the meantime, the policies of the Whites in Ukraine,105 
especially their plan to hand the land back to the estate owners, had 
led to mass resistance. In the southern gubernias, Makhno’s army 
disrupted the Whites’ areas of retreat, while insurgents in Left-
Bank Ukraine did the same, with the support of the Bolsheviks and 
the left-wing faction of the Ukrainian Socialist Revolutionaries (the 
Borotbists). Nonetheless, by the end of October 1919 the situation 
on the front against the Whites was critical. The most competent 
military unit, the Ukrainian Galician Army, had lost members to a 
typhus epidemic. On 6 November 1919 a truce was signed between 
the Whites and the Galician Army. 
To make matters worse, differences of opinion with the leadership 
of the Western Ukrainian People’s Republic, which was formally 
the western region of the Ukrainian People’s Republic, gave rise 
to military as well as political friction and disorganization. There 
were disagreements in particular with Yevhen Petrushevych and 
with the UNR over the lack of clarity with regard to its attitude to 
Poland. At that time, Kost Levytsky was in Warsaw, where he was 
holding negotiations with Poland on behalf of the UNR. There was a 
104	 Oleksandr Dotsenko, Litopys Ukraïns'koï revoliutsiï. Materiialy i dokumenty do istoriï 
Ukraïns'koï revoliutsiï, 1917–1923, vol. 2, bk. 4 (Lviv, 1923), 243–45.
105	 For a detailed discussion, see chapter 1a in the present volume.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
120
meeting of the State Council in Kamianets-Podilskyi on 25 October, 
with representatives of the UNR government, the Western Ukrainian 
People’s Republic, as well as the Ukrainian and Jewish political 
parties, but it made no decisions. In November, fighting flared up 
again with the Bolsheviks, who were successfully advancing against 
the Whites. The army of the UNR was no longer capable of carrying on 
a serious war on three fronts—against the Bolsheviks attacking from 
the north, against the Whites from the south and east, and against the 
Poles advancing from the west. On 14 November two members of the 
Directory, Andrii Makarenko and Fedir Shvets, went on an “official 
journey” to the peace conference in Paris. On 16 November the UNR 
government withdrew from Kamianets-Podilskyi, which was in the 
process of being occupied by the Poles. It moved first to Proskuriv, 
then to Starokostiantyniv, and was finally “stranded” in Chortoryia. 
Symon Petliura was now effectively the sole ruler of the Ukrainian 
People’s Republic, which then had something more than ten thousand 
exhausted soldiers. The UNR army found itself in a “triangle of death” 
in Chortoryia, surrounded by Denikin’s troops, who were retreating 
from the Bolsheviks, the Red Army, and the Poles.
On 28–29 November, there were meetings in Lviv between 
representatives of the Directory and the government at which it 
was agreed to submit to the demands of the Poles (the UNR-Polish 
border to be established along the Zbruch, i.e., loss of the western 
region) in return for military assistance. On 2 December, the military 
command and the leaders of the Directory decided to shift to partisan 
warfare behind the lines of the Bolsheviks and Denikin’s army.106 On 
5 December, following a decision by the UNR government, Petliura 
left for Warsaw (although Isaak Mazepa, the head of the government, 
later wrote that no one knew the purpose of Petliura’s journey). At 
this time, both the Directory and the government of the UNR had 
in fact collapsed. Things had gone so far that after an unsuccessful 
attempt to overthrow Petliura, a group of otamans of the UNR army 
(Omelian Volokh, Yukhym Bozhko, and Oleksandr Danchenko) took 
the government coffers that had been stored at some railway station 
and divided the money among themselves107 (one of the conspirators, 
Bozhko, lost his life under dubious circumstances). Part of the UNR 
army crossed into Poland and was interned there. Another part (about 
ten thousand men), led by the new commander in chief, Mykhailo 
106	 Dotsenko, Litopys Ukraïns'koï revoliutsiï, 46. 
107	 I. Mazepa, Ukraïna v ohni i buri revoliutsiï (Kyiv, 2003), 324–25.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
121 
Omelianovych-Pavlenko, managed to carry on a five-month “winter 
campaign” behind the Bolshevik lines that has been described among 
apologetic historians as a “successful attempt to preserve the army.”
On 25 December 1919 the Socialist Revolutionaries in Khmilnyk, 
in the Podilia gubernia, established a “Council of the Republic” that, in 
their view, was to take over from the Directory. On the following day, 
a party conference of Socialist Revolutionaries, Social Democrats, and 
Galicians decided to convene a “pre-parliament” that would dismiss the 
Directory. These events took place in an area controlled by the army 
as it advanced in its “winter campaign” along a line from Vinnytsia to 
Uman. These plans to reorganize the government of the UNR were 
given a boost at the beginning of 1920 as negotiations were under 
way with Poland. In February, the UNR government under Mazepa 
returned to Kamianets-Podilskyi. It was there that the essential 
decisions were made concerning the pre-parliament (the People’s 
Council of State) and the sharing of power between the government 
and the Directory (decisions that remained on paper). 
On 22 April 1920, a treaty was signed in Warsaw between 
the Ukrainian People’s Republic and Poland in which the UNR 
relinquished its claim to the Western Region of the UNR. Two days 
later a joint offensive of the UNR army, formed anew on Polish 
territory, and the Polish army was undertaken against Bolshevik-
occupied Ukraine. Kyiv was captured on 6 May. This final phase of 
the existence of the Ukrainian People’s Republic (May to November 
1920) was characterized by an intensive effort to rebuild the state 
and by the usual “organizational chaos” resulting from the critical 
shortage of professional experts and the inability of politicians to 
agree. But the obvious instability on the military front against the 
Red Army made any kind of stable policy impossible. The successful 
Soviet counteroffensive began in June. Before the final onslaught, the 
UNR government retreated along the familiar route to Zhmerynka, 
then to Proskuriv, and finally to Kamianets-Podilskyi. In mid-July 
1920 the UNR army and government crossed the Zbruch to Polish 
territory. Bolshevik troops advanced as far as Warsaw, where they 
suffered defeat in August. By the end of September, a kind of border 
had begun to exist between the UNR and Soviet Ukraine along the 
line from Korosten through Zhytomyr to Berdychiv. On 18 October, a 
truce was signed between Poland and the Russian Soviet Federative 
Socialist Republic (RSFSR), as a result of which the UNR army lost 
its Polish ally. The balance of forces was too unequal. The UNR 
government withdrew for the last time to Kamianets-Podilskyi, but 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
122
on 16 November it was forced to flee to Tarnów. Toward the end of the 
year, the last fighting troops of the UNR followed it across the Polish 
border. On 21 May 1921, a peace treaty was signed in Riga between 
Poland and the RSFSR that buried any last hopes of support for the 
Ukrainian People’s Republic. 
The Bolsheviks and Soviet Power in Ukraine
Like all the other regimes that succeeded one another in Ukraine 
between 1917 and 1920, the Soviets never controlled the whole of 
Ukrainian territory (the nine gubernias) before the end of 1920. 
Their efforts to build state structures, like those of all the others, 
were affected by extreme circumstances: large-scale political and 
military conflicts with “external forces” (foreign intervention troops, 
White Guards, Ukrainian parties and state structures) and “internal” 
enemies, i.e., dissidents of every kind.108 The most important slogan 
with regard to building the new state was “All power to the soviets,” 
which initially referred to the soviets (councils) of workers’ deputies, 
later to the soviets of workers’ and soldiers’ deputies, and eventually 
included the peasant soviets. The main actors in establishing such a 
soviet system in Ukraine were to be the Ukrainian and all-Russian left-
wing parties, although, during the civil war, other more mobile forms 
of the organization of power also played a role, such as revolutionary 
or military revolutionary committees.
As was the case with all other regimes at the time of the Ukrainian 
Revolution, the social base of Soviet power was very small, essentially 
the industrial proletariat in eastern Ukraine and a section of the poorest 
peasantry, some of whom had sunk to the level of lumpenproletariat. 
The zealously nurtured social demagogy and the programmatic 
calls for expropriation made allies of a large section of the landless 
peasantry, depending on the situation. In Bolshevik theory, property-
owing peasants were regarded as part of the petty-bourgeois class. 
On 18 April 1918 the Central Executive Committee of Ukrainian 
Soviets, having fled from the occupying armies to Taganrog, created 
(practically as a substitute for itself) the “All-Ukrainian Bureau to Lead 
the Insurgent Struggle against the German Occupiers.” This included 
Ukrainian Bolsheviks, Russian left-wing Socialist Revolutionaries, 
and a Ukrainian Social Democrat. At a meeting of representatives of 
Bolshevik organizations of Ukraine, which were still illegal, it was 
decided to establish a Communist Party (Bolshevik) of Ukraine or 
108	 See chapter 4b in the present volume.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
123 
CP(B)U.109 It was a very small party, with just 4,364 members in early 
June 1918.
On 4 May 1918, the supreme commander of the armed forces 
of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic,110 Volodymyr Antonov-
Ovsiienko, informed the Council of People’s Commissars in a 
memorandum that the units assigned to him had ceased all activity. 
They were to be disarmed on the territory of the RSFSR.111 The All-
Ukrainian Bureau then began to redeploy some of these “disarmed 
troops” in the neutral zone that separated the Ukrainian State from 
the RSFSR. By the autumn of 1918, it had put together two divisions 
with a total of six thousand men.
 The First Party Congress of the CP(B)U, meeting in Moscow at 
the beginning of July 1918, decided that the main task of the All-
Ukrainian Bureau, now renamed the All-Ukrainian Central Military 
Revolutionary Committee, was to prepare an uprising against 
Hetman Skoropadsky and the occupying troops. On 28 November 
this body ceased to exist. Some of its members joined the Provisional 
Workers’ and Peasants’ Government of Ukraine,112 formed in Kursk 
under the leadership of Georgii Piatakov. This government issued a 
manifesto on 29 November 1918 in which it proclaimed the overthrow 
of the Hetman and called for a struggle against the Directory. Military 
operations against the Directory now began, involving the two above-
mentioned insurgent divisions and units of the Red Army, with a 
deployment of 22,000 soldiers.113 
On 4 January 1919, following a decision of the Military 
Revolutionary Committee of the RSFSR, a Ukrainian front was 
created. By 6 February, its troops had taken the Donbas and the whole 
of Left-Bank Ukraine, including Kyiv. With the assistance of Makhno’s 
Revolutionary People’s Army and Hryhoriiv’s units, “Soviet power”114 
109	 This was to be a Ukrainian Bolshevik party, although a number of representatives, led by 
Emmanuil Kviring, were demanding a regional section of the All-Russian Communist Party 
(Bolshevik).
110	 The Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic proclaimed in Kharkiv in December 1917 is meant here.
111	 Grazhdanskaia voina na Ukraine 1918–1920 gg., vol. 1, bk. 1 (Kyiv, 1967), 134.
112 It is noteworthy that the decision to form the government was made by five people: TsDAVO, f. 
2, op. 1, spr. 14, 1ff. Real power was in the hands of the Military Revolutionary Committee of 
the Kursk Direction, which was set up on instructions from Moscow and whose members were 
Antonov-Ovsiienko, Stalin, and Zatonsky.
113	 Ukraïna: politychna istoriia ХХ – pochatok ХХІ stolittia (Kyiv, 2007), 409.
114	 This term is a euphemism. Real power in the cities was exercised by the military revolutionary 
committees, which were dominated by members of the CP(B)U and, in the countryside, 
by the committees of poor peasants. One should not forget the Extraordinary All-Ukrainian 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
124
was established in most of the southern gubernias of Ukraine (the 
troops of the Entente had hastily withdrawn from Odesa, Kherson, 
Mykolaiv, and the Crimea). On 6 January 1919, the Provisional 
Workers’ and Peasants’ Government in Kharkiv proclaimed the 
establishment of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic. The new 
state was formally legitimized by the Third All-Ukrainian Congress 
of Soviets at the beginning of March. 
The establishment of the “second Soviet power” in Ukraine 
met certain strategic needs. First of all, the large war effort and the 
maintenance of the army depended on the industrial resources of the 
Donbas and on the grain and food resources of the Dnipro region. 
Second, Ukraine was a staging area for the offensive against Europe 
where, the Bolshevik leaders believed, the world revolution would 
take place. Bolshevik policy in Ukraine pursued both these goals 
and demanded a rapid mobilization of resources. Under wartime 
conditions, this required extraordinary measures whose radical 
nature was only deepened by the Bolsheviks’ ideological postulates—
the “dictatorship of the proletariat,” the abolition of private property, 
and the end of money-commodity relations.
Where the Bolsheviks were in control in Ukraine, they applied 
the same methods as in the RSFSR: requisitioning of grain and food 
directly from the peasants by means of armed “food detachments,” 
a centralized system for the distribution of food and industrial 
commodities with the use of ration cards, prohibition of private 
commerce, and the establishment of agricultural communes and state 
farms (sovkhozy) to replace the estates and large private agriculture.
In January 1919, the government of Soviet Ukraine began to 
nationalize large industry, mining, and sugar factories and introduced 
a state monopoly on grain and food. In February 1919, the Central 
Committee of the Russian Communist Party passed a resolution on 
forced deliveries of food in Ukraine. The plan was to requisition 139 
million poods of grain (1 pood = 16.38 kg), practically half the entire 
supply. In April 1919, there was a decree on the forced delivery of 
“surplus grain” from 1918. Special detachments were posted at railway 
and marine stations to prevent the transport of flour, grain, sugar, 
oil, and other types of food. Food detachments made up of armed 
communist workers raided villages.
Commission, formed on 3 December 1918 as a regional branch of the Extraordinary All-Russian 
Commission to Combat Counterrevolution, Speculation, and Sabotage (VChK or Cheka). It 
organized class terror, and its power was unrestricted.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
125 
The reaction was predictable: there were widespread uprisings in 
the villages. According to official statistics, there were 93 actions by 
the peasants against the Bolsheviks in April 1919; by July of the same 
year, the number had increased to 207. In Left-Bank Ukraine alone, 
there were 57 insurgent groups numbering altogether 22,000 men.115 
The leaders of the large peasant insurgent armies that had been allied 
with the Bolsheviks shortly before—Hryhoriiv, Otaman Zeleny, and 
even Makhno—now turned their arms against the Bolsheviks. At 
this time, Bolshevik power in the areas they controlled existed only 
in the towns (mainly gubernia and district centers). The countryside 
was dominated by anti-Bolshevik uprisings. To fight this “Ukrainian 
jacquerie,” the Bolsheviks had to create a so-called “internal front” in 
April 1919 that mobilized 21,000 fighters, artillery, cavalry, and even 
an inland fleet.116
The disintegration of the armies of the Ukrainian front reached a 
critical point in May and June. Upon hearing reports of the excesses of 
the food detachments and the Special Commission (Cheka), soldiers 
and lower-ranking officers refused to carry out orders, convened 
assemblies, discharged their superiors, or deserted. Not infrequently, 
a unit sent to suppress a peasant rebellion actually joined it. The 
uprisings behind the lines and the unrest at the front helped the 
Whites win. At the end of June, the Bolsheviks, under pressure from 
Denikin’s troops, withdrew from Kharkiv and Katerynoslav, and the 
Whites took over all of Left-Bank Ukraine. In June 1919, in view of 
the economic and military situation, the state administrative bodies 
of Soviet Ukraine and the RSFSR were consolidated. At the end 
of August, the government of Soviet Ukraine fled from Kyiv. The 
government established by the Whites, from the viewpoint of the mass 
of the population, especially the peasantry, was no less foreign than 
that of the Bolsheviks. Denikin’s restorationist policy,117 his complete 
ignorance of the real situation in the villages, and his Great Russian 
chauvinism led to mass spontaneous as well as organized actions 
by the peasantry behind the lines of Denikin’s army by the autumn 
of that year. The activity of Makhno’s army, with a force that varied 
between 50,000 and 100,000 men, soon became the main problem for 
the Whites.
115	 O. V. Mykhailiuk, Selianstvo Ukraïny v pershi desiatylittia ХХ st.: sotsiokul'turni protsesy 
(Dnipropetrovsk, 2007), 333–34.
116	 Ukraïna: politychna istoriia ХХ – pochatok ХХІ stolittia (Kyiv, 2007), 412.
117	 For more details on Denikin’s policies, see chapter 1a in this volume.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
126
On 10 July 1919 the Central Committee of the CP(B)U, under the 
leadership of Stanislav Kosior, established the “Bureau behind the 
Lines,” whose task was to organize underground activity and uprisings 
in the rear of Denikin’s army and coordinate the activities of the 108 
CP(B)U committees working in the underground.118 In October 1919, 
the bureau began to establish revolutionary committees that were to 
organize local uprisings and diversions. In Moscow, in December 1919, 
the Ukrainian government created an extraordinary administrative 
organ in Ukraine, the All-Ukrainian Revolutionary Committee, under 
the leadership of Hryhorii Petrovsky. In the meantime, the situation at 
the front had changed radically. A mobilization of resources that had 
been accompanied by the most brutal terror and a reorganization of 
the army had made it possible for the Bolsheviks to mount a successful 
counterattack. In the course of December 1919 they took the Donbas 
and, on 16 December, the Red Army entered Kyiv. Following the 
wishes of the Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party, 
they chose “proletarian” Kharkiv as the capital city, which was also the 
location of the All-Ukrainian Revolutionary Committee. At the end of 
December 1919, the White armies were concentrated in the Crimea. 
By the end of January 1920, most of the Ukrainian gubernias were 
under Bolshevik rule.
In January 1920 the All-Ukrainian Revolutionary Committee, 
according to previous agreements concerning the military and 
political union of both republics, decided that all decrees and orders 
issued by the Council of People’s Commissars of the RSFSR were 
also valid on Ukrainian territory. The armed forces of both countries 
were finally merged under Moscow’s control. In mid-February 1920, 
the All-Ukrainian Central Executive Committee decided to end the 
activity of the All-Ukrainian Revolutionary Committee and reinstate 
the Council of People’s Commissars of the Ukrainian SSR. In March 
and April there were elections to the village and county soviets. 
Based on the results of those elections, the congresses of soviets at 
the district and gubernia levels were elected. When the competing 
left-wing parties (Mensheviks, Ukrainian Socialist Revolutionaries) 
had been suppressed, the CP(B)U managed to obtain a decisive 
majority in the executive committees of the soviets at all levels, from 
70 percent at district level to 85 percent at the level of the gubernias. 
Communist Party policies were implemented in the villages mainly 
118	 A. V. Lykholat, Rozhrom natsionalistychnoï kontrrevoliutsiï na Ukraïni (1917–1933) (Kyiv, 
1955), 404. 

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
127 
by the Committees of Poor Peasants (komnezamy), which had begun 
to be formed in March 1920. By November 1920 there were about 
ten thousand of these committees, which actively supported the 
communists in their requisitioning of food.
It seemed at first that the “third Soviet power” had learned the 
lessons of the recent past. In a resolution of the Central Committee of 
the Russian Communist Party “On Soviet Power in Ukraine” that was 
personally prepared by Lenin himself, the errors made with regard to 
the nationality question, land, and food would not be repeated. The 
resolution recognized the independence of Ukraine and contained 
a clause on the need for free development of Ukrainian culture 
(language, education) in order, as the resolution said, “to be able to 
explain, in a comradely manner, the common interests of the working 
people of Ukraine and Russia.” With regard to land, the plan was for 
the complete elimination of estates. The policy on food suggested that 
“surplus grain” would be appropriated mainly from the kulaks. 
Representatives of Ukrainian left-wing parties would be allowed 
to share power. In December 1919, an agreement on collaboration was 
reached between the CP(B)U and the Ukrainian Communist Party (the 
left wing of the Ukrainian Socialist Revolutionaries, the Borot'bisty). 
One of the Borotbists, Hryhorii Hrynko, became a member of the 
All-Ukrainian Revolutionary Committee, and representatives of 
his and other left-wing parties were accepted as members of local 
revolutionary committees.119
On 5 February 1920, the All-Ukrainian Revolutionary Committee 
confirmed the land law, which dealt with the distribution of land and 
imposed limits on the size of land parcels that could be made available 
to state farms. The establishment of agricultural communes would be 
voluntary. All the land that had previously belonged to estate owners, 
the state, the tsar’s family, or the monasteries was declared to be 
the “property of the working people” (the confiscation of estate land 
continued to the end of 1920). Further events demonstrated, however, 
that these intentions were no more than declarations. Soviet power 
found itself in the midst of a real and anticipated war, and its actions 
corresponded to the laws of war and to the Bolsheviks’ ideological 
principles, which formally aspired to a dictatorship of the proletariat 
119	 A. Voinovych, “Uchast' livykh politychnykh partii v diial'nosti mistsevykh orhaniv vlady na 
Pivdni Ukraïny v 1920 r.,” Problemy istoriï Ukraïny: fakty, sudzhennia, poshuky (Kyiv), no. 14 
(2005): 60–61.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
128
but, in practice, strove to maintain a one-party dictatorship of 
professional revolutionaries.
The Bolsheviks themselves considered the situation to be just 
a “peaceful breather.” Petr Wrangel still controlled the Crimea (a 
problem that was not resolved until the end of 1920) and, between 
April and November 1920, the country was at war with Poland. In the 
countryside, the peasant war that the Bolsheviks had ignited continued 
to rage. Forced deliveries of food continued in spite of the directive on 
surplus grain and led to large-scale requisitioning of grain supplies. 
The size of the surplus, according to the Ukrainian government, was 
estimated to be 160 million poods, less than what had been demanded 
by the previous Soviet rulers, but the harvest in the autumn of 1919 was 
only 25 percent of what it had been the previous year.120 The attempt 
to obtain grain at “fixed prices” was unsuccessful, first because the 
peasants had no confidence in the currency (there were ten different 
types of currency at that time, from the tsarist to that of the Provisional 
Government to that of the Ukrainian People’s Republic) and, second, 
because the term “fixed prices” meant that the grain would be acquired 
gratis, since the government was not in a position to offer even the 
most elementary industrial goods in exchange. 
The end result was that Ukrainian grain was, to a large extent, 
once again “pumped out” (the Bolshevik expression) by force. The food 
detachments began their work again and succeeded in “pumping out” 
70 million poods (4.3 million tons) of grain, a result that was achieved 
by means of massive force and repression against the unwilling 
peasants. In the spring and summer, food policy in the countryside 
took on an explicit class character. Those who resisted the delivery of 
grain were declared to be kulaks (this category included all the well-
off peasants, and often middle peasants as well). In the autumn of 
1920, the “campaign for bread” and the “campaign against the kulaks” 
were one and the same in official rhetoric. 
 In addition to the food detachments, Red Army units were deployed 
in the confiscation of grain “surpluses” and agricultural products.121 
We can get some idea of the scale of the forces engaged from the 
fact that the staffs of the special food committees in the gubernias, 
120	 I. Khmel', Agrarnye preobrazovaniia na Ukraine (1917–1920 gg.) (Kyiv, 1990), 105–12.
121	 The forced deliveries also involved fodder, cattle, hay and straw. The activists of the local 
committees of poor peasants were allowed to take clothing, personal objects, and even meals as 
payment.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
129 
regions, and districts comprised about sixty thousand people. In the 
autumn of 1920, the army became involved in food collection.122 The 
best-known (and most extreme) example of this was the Red Cavalry 
of Semen Budenny, which was involved in forced deliveries in the 
Poltava gubernia in the late summer of 1920.
The result was a new outbreak of civil war. Once again the peasants 
reached for their weapons. The struggle against the insurgents was 
made difficult by the particular partisan tactics that the peasants 
had mastered during the years of the civil war after 1917. As a rule, 
there was just a small stable core (the otaman and his staff) around 
whom, depending on the situation, dozens or hundreds of peasants 
came together and constituted the mass of fighters. They attacked the 
activists and representatives of Soviet power, food detachments, or 
army units, mainly by night. By day, these insurgents became ordinary 
peasants. These groups generally avoided open conflict with the Red 
Army units deployed against them.123
By the autumn of 1920, the Bolsheviks had again lost control over 
large parts of rural Ukraine. Outside the towns, it was hundreds of 
small peasant detachments that set the tone. They melted away as the 
regular army approached, only to reappear when it left. In late 1920 
and early 1921, according to official statistics, there were as many as 
one hundred thousand men in the larger insurgent units in Ukraine.124 
By the late spring of 1920, Nestor Makhno’s army had been organized 
again and advanced during the summer far into Left-Bank Ukraine, 
which was then behind the lines of the southwestern front in the war 
against Poland. All military efforts to localize, encircle, or destroy 
Makhno’s army in 1920 failed.125
The response of Soviet power was total terror. In April 1920, 
kidnapping and family liability were introduced in the villages. 
122	 In the early autumn of 1920, there were 482,000 men in the army on the territory of Soviet 
Ukraine.
123	 Descriptions of this kind are to be found mostly in the apologetic literature. See, for instance, 
V. Ia. Revehuk, U borot'bi za voliu Ukraïny (Vyzvol'ni zmahannia na Poltavshchyni 1920–1925) 
(Poltava, 2000).
124	 O. I. Hanzha, Opir selian stanovlenniu totalitarnoho rezhymu v USRR (Kyiv, 1996), 5ff.
125	 In October 1920, a military and political agreement was signed with Makhno according to 
which the rear of the Red Army, now advancing toward the Crimea, would be kept free, and 
Makhno’s army would join in the fighting against the Whites. In return, Makhno’s supporters 
and the anarchists who had not fought against Soviet power would be granted an amnesty and 
a guarantee of security. The treaty was violated as early as November of the same year, but the 
attempt to destroy Makhno’s army was unsuccessful. It was not until the autumn of 1921 that 
Soviet forces managed to drive the remnants of Makhno’s army as far as the Romanian border, 
which they finally crossed on 28 August.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
130
Following the capture of the Crimea, the end of the Polish-Soviet 
war, and the final defeat of the UNR army, Soviet power had massive 
resources available to defeat the peasants, but neither military 
operations nor punitive expeditions achieved the desired effect. On 
the contrary, peasant uprisings spread even farther, to the gubernias 
of Tambov and Voronezh, to western Siberia and the Volga region. By 
the spring of 1921, Soviet power had put an end to the uprisings in 
Ukraine, but there was no guarantee that they would not break out 
again at the first relaxation of military pressure.
In the meantime, the situation had become critical in the towns, 
traditionally considered the strongholds of the “dictatorship of the 
proletariat.” The policy of “war communism” reached its high point 
in 1920. The complete nationalization of all strategically important 
branches, even the militarization of coal and iron production, the 
introduction of universal compulsory labor, the rejection of money-
commodity relations,126 the abolition of private property, and the 
extremely centralized direction of industry all led to economic 
collapse. The Soviets attempted to overcome the crisis by force: the 
creation of a “labor army,” persecution (imprisonment in camps) of 
“labor deserters,” and brutal repression of speculators and anyone 
described as such. By the spring of 1921, production in the metal 
industry was 5 percent of its prewar level, coal production was 22 
percent, and the sugar factories produced 4 million tons of sugar, 
down from 85 million tons before the war.
Economic decline undermined the position of the sector of the 
population declared by the Bolsheviks to be the social base of the 
regime, the industrial working class. The daily bread ration available 
with the ration card fell to 100 grams daily in the industrial centers. The 
market, which continued to exist in spite of all efforts to wipe it out, 
went over to bartering. The most sought-after “currencies” were salt, 
matches, sugar, flour, and fuel. The shortage economy and widespread 
hunger forced many workers to rescue themselves by leaving the city 
and returning to the land or engaging in some kind of small enterprise 
not approved by the state.
By the spring of 1921, Soviet power in Ukraine (as in the RSFSR 
generally) had reached an extremely dangerous point. The economic 
collapse threatened to become a political one. In view of this 
126	 Along with other measures, such as the centralized distribution of food and industrial 
commodities by means of ration cards, payment for the use of public transport, post, telegraph, 
and communal services was also abolished.

chapter 2a: ukraine between revolution, independence, 
and foreign dominance
131 
situation, the Bolsheviks, on Lenin’s initiative, were prepared to make 
concessions. The Tenth Party Conference of the Russian Communist 
Party introduced the New Economic Policy. Forced deliveries were 
replaced by a food tax, and the peasants were now able to sell 
their remaining grain on the market. Nonstrategic branches were 
denationalized, and private enterprise was permitted, as was private 
capital and free trade. These and other measures eased the social 
situation and made possible the political consolidation of the Bolshevik 
regime. This, however, meant the end of the Ukrainian Revolution.127
127	 On the integration of Ukraine into the USSR, see chapter 4b in the present volume.

2b. The Western Ukrainian People’s Republic 
of 1918–1919
Vasyl Rasevych
When the Western Ukrainian People’s Republic was proclaimed, on 
1 November 1918, on the Ukrainian ethnic territory of the former 
Austria-Hungary, this did not happen spontaneously or by chance. 
The creation of the new republic was simply the high point in the 
development of the Ukrainian national movement in the Habsburg 
lands. The establishment of a Ukrainian state came as a shock, 
however, to the Polish elite of Galicia, which had never paid serious 
attention to the “Ukrainian question.” The newly created state, with 
its capital in Lviv (Lemberg), where the politically active Ukrainians 
were in a minority in relation to the Poles, was threatened from the 
outset by the outbreak of a bloody Polish-Ukrainian conflict that could 
soon put an end to its existence. The republic lasted only a little more 
than eight months, but it was the first major step of the Ukrainian 
movement in its struggle for independent statehood.
The Ukrainian National Movement within the Habsburg Monarchy
The Ukrainian political movement was in some ways less developed 
than other national movements in Austria-Hungary. It began only very 
gradually to address the masses, and the political leadership limited 
its demands to a partition of Galicia according to ethnic criteria and 
the unification of Eastern Galicia and Northern Bukovyna to form a 
separate Ukrainian province within the Habsburg Monarchy. In view 
of its internal weakness, the Ukrainian movement in Austria-Hungary 
saw it as one of its priorities to mobilize external support. As a way 
of dealing with difficulties in relations with Poland, the movement 
had long oriented itself on the central government in Vienna, and its 
leadership was traditionally loyal to the Habsburgs.
With the advent of the First World War, the political demands of the 
Galician Ukrainians became more radical, but this did not affect their 
program. Before the war, the leadership of the Ukrainian movement 
had been in the hands of the Ukrainian National Democratic Party 
(UNDP), distinguished by the fact that its leading bodies consisted 
mainly of jurists and lawyers. They had grown up in the Austrian legal 
system, and nothing was further from their minds, even theoretically, 

chapter 2b: the western ukrainian people’s republic 
of 1918–1919
133 
than a violent seizure of power, even one that might be formally 
legitimate. In their ambitions for a state of their own, the Galician 
political leaders, such as Kost Levytsky, Yevhen Olesnytsky, Yevhen 
Petrushevych, and even Lonhyn Tsehelsky, remained strictly within 
the Habsburg paradigm. From being an arbiter in the Polish-Ukrainian 
conflict, the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy would become the source 
of legitimacy for the new Ukrainian state that was to be created.
Until the outbreak of the First World War, there had been no 
essential changes in the programs of the most important Ukrainian 
parties in Galicia and Bukovyna as regards their national and political 
ideal. The program of the Narodovtsi (1899) stated: “It is our wish, in 
an Austrian state that is respected internationally and strengthened 
by the harmony and satisfaction of all its peoples, to achieve for the 
Ruthenian people, on the basis of a constitution and by legal means, 
a political status that is its due among the peoples of this state.”1 
This postulate remained later in the program of the UNDP, which 
described its national political ideal more precisely: “We, the Galician 
Ruthenians, part of the Ukrainian-Ruthenian nation that once 
possessed independent statehood, after which it fought for centuries 
for its right to political sovereignty, which has never relinquished the 
rights of an independent nation and does not relinquish them now, 
declare it to be the final goal of all our strivings to continue working 
until the whole Ukrainian-Ruthenian people has achieved cultural, 
economic, and political independence and, in time, is united in a 
single national organism, in which the whole people can make use 
of its cultural, economic, and political rights for the general good. 
In our striving for this goal, and in recognition of our affiliation 
to the Austrian state, we are working to ensure that the territory 
occupied by Ruthenians in the Austrian state becomes a province 
in its own right, with the most far-reaching autonomy in legislation 
and administration.”2 Until October 1918, the maximal demand of 
the Ukrainians was for a federalist transformation of the Monarchy 
and the creation of an autonomous Ukrainian province. As far as 
the Ukrainian population of Transleithania was concerned, what the 
Galician Ukrainians wanted, considering that national life there was 
only in its initial stages, was to establish “close mutual relations” in 
1	
TsDIA Lviv, f. 146, op. 7, spr. 4529, 12, Narodna prohrama. Nakladom Tovarystva “Narodna 
Rada,” pid zariadom K. Bednars'koho (Tekst prohramy narodovtsiv, pryiniatoi zboramy muzhiv 
doviria politychnoho tovarystva “Narodna Rada” u L'vovi 25 bereznia 1892 roku). 
2	
Ibid., 9.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
134
order “to create a national movement similar to that which already 
exists in Galicia and Bukovyna.”3 On the nationality question, neither 
the program of the Ruthenian-Ukrainian Radical Party nor that of the 
Ukrainian Social Democratic Party was particularly radical. What 
distinguished them from the National Democratic Party were their 
more progressive social and economic demands and their theoretical 
plans for agriculture.
On the eve of the war, the leading Ukrainian parties in Galicia 
and Bukovyna began gradually to move away from their principle of 
loyalty to the Habsburg Empire, even though this was not reflected 
in official documents. The discussions over strategy and tactics for 
building the Ukrainian political movement led to the formation of 
two competing groups. The dividing line was not between the parties. 
The polarization grew out of mutual accusations that loyalty to the 
Austro-Hungarian government was given priority over the concerns 
of the oppositional Ukrainians. That there was no strategic difference 
between the aims of both groups is demonstrated by the fact that 
the “unofficial group,” that is, the opposition, did not create its own 
structures. Within the then leading political force, the UNDP, the 
oppositional members did not come together as a group either.
At the head of the official group, which was completely loyal to the 
Austro-Hungarian government and state, were well-known political 
figures such as Mykola Vasylko from Bukovyna and Kost Levytsky, 
the leader of the Galicians. With his aristocratic origins and his study 
at the Theresian Academy in Vienna, Vasylko was able to establish 
good contacts with the government and with financial circles in the 
empire. His political credo rested on two pillars: he stood for a strong 
Austro-Hungarian state and was unable to imagine life outside the 
Habsburg Empire.4 In a letter to Wilhelm von Habsburg he defined 
his political orientation, calling himself a “truly faithful Austrian 
patriot of the Habsburg dynasty.”5 His unchallenged leadership in 
the political movement in Bukovyna and his successes in Viennese 
governing circles even allowed him to control Galician Ukrainian 
politics for a time. He worked in tandem with Levytsky, both pursuing 
an ultra-loyal political course. 
A group of Galician politicians came together to oppose this 
orientation. Led by Yevhen Petrushevych, this group included Yevhen 
3	
“Nova partiia, ieï prohrama i orhanizatsiia,” Buduchnist', 15 December 1899.
4	
Stepan Baran, “Mykola Vasyl'ko (Nekroloh),” Dilo, 8 August 1924: 1–4.
5	
TsDIA Lviv, f. 309, op. 2, spr. 109, Lyst M. Vasyl'ka do Vil'hel'ma Habsburga vid 24 kvitnia 1917.

chapter 2b: the western ukrainian people’s republic 
of 1918–1919
135 
Levytsky, Lonhyn Tsehelsky, Volodymyr Bachynsky, and others. The 
core of the group was made up of representatives in the Cisleithanian 
Imperial Council (Reichsrat), with the base consisting of the oppositional 
forces among the Ukrainian Parliamentary Representation (UPR) in 
Vienna. Having removed the Bukovynian representatives from the 
UPR, they now had a majority there. The General Ukrainian Council 
(Zahal'na Ukraïns'ka Rada, ZUR) and the People’s Committee (Narodnyi 
Komitet), the leading organ of the Ukrainian National Democratic 
Party, remained in the hands of Kost Levytsky’s supporters. As conflict 
developed between these two currents, the opponents of the loyalist 
course not only did not produce new slogans but also did not question 
the methods of political struggle. They shared the idea of autonomy 
and regarded petitioning as their principal political activity.
The first hard blow to the pro-Austrian loyalist position was the 
Two Emperors’ Manifesto of Kaiser Franz Joseph I and Kaiser Wilhelm 
II in November 1916. It announced the intention of Austria-Hungary 
and Germany to establish a Polish kingdom in the foreseeable future 
on territory wrested from Russia. The Polish factor was much more 
important to the Habsburg Empire than the young and confused 
Ukrainian movement. The Habsburgs depended on Polish support. 
Vienna did not intend incorporating Galicia into the Kingdom of 
Poland, but regional autonomy would be further extended.6 Among 
the Ukrainian population of the empire, the manifesto provoked a 
storm of outrage that continued even after the death of the emperor. 
The Ukrainians of Galicia protested, and the new emperor, Karl I, 
promised to take account of Ukrainian demands, but only after the 
war. Ukrainian political circles in Galicia considered the very fact that 
such a manifesto could appear to be a declaration of bankruptcy for 
the loyalist policies of the group around Levytsky and Vasylko.
The politicians who had opposed this course forced the previous 
leadership to resign, and Vasylko was also forced to resign as vice 
president of the General Ukrainian Council, thereby losing the right 
to speak in the name of the whole Ukrainian movement in Austria-
Hungary. This shift in the balance of forces had a negative effect on 
Ukrainian politics generally. Shortly before the publication of the 
manifesto, Vasylko had attempted to establish contact with influential 
government circles in Germany. He was able to have a number of talks 
with the German side that gave him clearly to understand that their 
6 
Tadeusz Dąbkowski, Ukraiński ruch narodowy w Galicji Wschodniej, 1912–1923 (Warsaw, 
1985), 80.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
136
position on the future of Galicia and the whole of Ukraine differed on a 
number of points from that of their Austro-Hungarian allies. In a letter 
of 25 November 1916, Vasylko summarized the German position on 
the Ukrainian question as follows: “Of course, all measures here are 
dictated first and foremost by German interests. On the other hand, 
it is a fact that the Germans are absolutely clear that our interests are 
also exceptionally important and decisive for them. In this respect, 
they really want to support us and offer serious assistance. There is 
therefore no basis for the exaggerated pessimism that is widespread 
among uninformed circles with regard to Germany, just as there was 
also no basis for the previous exaggerated hopes.”7 Even Vasylko’s 
main opponents, the group around Petrushevych, had to admit that 
after his departure from the Ukrainian stage Germany’s interest in 
the “Ukrainian card” began to wane.8 Having lost any influence 
over Galician politics, Vasylko concentrated on leading the Ukrainian 
clubs of Bukovyna, where he pursued his previous line. The split 
in the Ukrainian movement between the Galician and Bukovynian 
politicians certainly did not contribute to a positive image abroad, 
especially in the central government in Vienna.
When parliament resumed in 1917, the demands from 
representatives of the various national groups concerning national 
autonomy had become much more radical. The Ukrainian Parliamentary 
Representation declared that the continuing subordination of the 
Ukrainians to the Poles, in a single province, was nothing but disregard 
for national rights and for the principle of national self-determination. 
Under the leadership of Yevhen Petrushevych, the UPR categorically 
rejected any form of community of Ukrainians and Poles in one and 
the same province.9 The partition of Galicia was now a minimal 
demand. Vienna answered with delaying tactics.
An analysis of all the documents and the press (including the 
oppositional ones) leads one to the conviction that in 1918 the Austro-
Hungarian Ukrainians saw themselves pressured by circumstances 
into choosing between an all-embracing Ukraine and loyalty to the 
empire. Most were inclined to support autonomy within a reformed 
Habsburg Monarchy. There were many reasons for this. When the 
war began, the Ukrainians had decided unequivocally to fight on the 
7	
TsDIA Lviv, f. 746, op. 1, spr. 6, 5.
8	
Ievhen Levyts'kyi, Lysty z Nimechchyny (Vienna, 1916), 13.
9	
P. Mahochi, Istoriia Ukraïny (Kyiv, 2007), 439.

chapter 2b: the western ukrainian people’s republic 
of 1918–1919
137 
side of the Central Powers.10 This had to do with the weakness of the 
Ukrainian movement and with the fact that Russia was part of the 
Entente. The Austro-Hungarian orientation was the firm foundation 
of the policy of the Ukrainian parties. In the preface to his book Zoloti 
vorota,11 in which he assessed Ukrainian politics at the time, Vasyl 
Kuchabsky explained its source: “In view of the weakness of the 
Ukrainian people, the afflictions imposed by the occupying states, 
Austria and Russia, were absolutely unwelcome, but they were the least 
unwelcome. One of the essential tasks of Ukrainian policy, then, was 
to convince these powers that the increasing national consciousness 
and culture of the Ukrainian people would not lead to a derogation 
of its loyalty. The tactic of loyalism, on which, in Ukraine’s national 
interest, no shadow should fall, became an axiom of Ukrainian 
political thought.”12
This policy of loyalty to Austria-Hungary on the part of the 
Ukrainians within the empire did not prevent them, however, from 
forging radical plans for territory wrested from the Russian Empire. At 
the start of the First World War, a political organization of Ukrainians 
from Russia was formed in Lviv, the Union for the Liberation of 
Ukraine (Soiuz vyzvolennia Ukraïny, SVU). The SVU was a nonparty 
organization that represented the political interests of Ukrainians 
under Russian rule. Its political plans were linked to a defeat of Russia 
in the war and the overthrow of tsarism so that, “out of its ruins,” a 
“free and independent Ukraine” could emerge.13 The SVU received 
considerable financial support from the Austro-Hungarian government 
on condition that it be used solely for propaganda in the Russian 
Empire.14 Galician politicians were deeply involved in this, and there 
is no doubt that some SVU material was distributed in Bukovyna 
and Galicia. With the formation of the SVU, a “legal” basis existed 
for the development of a concrete program for a future independent 
Ukrainian state. The Galicians eagerly began developing concrete 
plans for Ukrainian territory in Russia.15 Kost Levytsky continued to 
10	
Mykhailo Lozyns'kyi, Halychyna v rr. 1918–1920 (Vienna, 1922; repr. New York, 1970), 11.
11	
Ukrainian for “golden gate.”
12	
Vasyl' Kuchabs'kyi, Zoloti vorota. Istoriia Sichovykh Stril'tsiv 1917–1919 (Lviv, 1937), 6.
13	
I. Pater, Soiuz vyzvolennia Ukraïny: problemy derzhavnosti i sobornosti (Lviv, 2000), 74; Nasha 
platforma (Vienna), no. 1, 5 October 1914: 2.
14	
For more detail, see chapter 1b in the present volume.
15	
Wassyl Rassewytsch (Vasyl' Rasevych), “Außenpolitische Orientierungen österreichischer 
Ukrainer (1912–1918),” in Confraternitas. Ukraïna: kul'turna spadshchyna, natsional'na 
svidomist', derzhavnist', vol. 15 (Lviv, 2006–7), 623–36.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
138
insist throughout 1917 that the main task of the Ukrainian political 
movement was “the liberation of Ukrainian territory from foreign rule 
and the creation of state constitutional organs of self-determination for 
the Ukrainian people.”16 The implementation of this demand was, for 
him, unequivocally bound up with Austria-Hungary. It was his view 
that this initiative would allow the Galician Ukrainians to maintain 
“clear and unambiguous” relations with Austria.17 This was also the 
position of the oppositional Ukrainian Parliamentary Representation, 
which adopted the following resolution in February 1917: “The 
Ukrainians wish for nothing other than a close affiliation with Austria; 
not one, however, that is dependent on other constitutionally equal 
factors, but one that affiliates us directly with the Empire.”18
Possible unification in an all-embracing Ukraine was mentioned 
only when the task was to wrest political concessions from the 
government in office, such as the founding of a Ukrainian university or 
the partition of Galicia. This tactic was explained by Levytsky in 1919. 
In 1918 the Ukrainian National Democrats had formulated very clear 
demands on the central government in Vienna: “either the Ukrainian 
territory within the Austrian Monarchy obtains the independent 
constitutional order under Austria that is its due, with an end to Polish 
sovereignty, or, regardless of how much Austria might not want this or 
be able to accomplish it, our road will lead not to Warsaw but to Kyiv, 
to unite us with the Ukrainian state whose independence has been 
proclaimed by the Central Rada in Kyiv.”19
Cautious Preparations for Autonomous Statehood in 1918
The radicalization of other national movements in the Austro-
Hungarian Monarchy in 1918 prompted the Ukrainians to make 
preparations for a possible collapse of the empire. From September–
October, Ukrainian politicians began to play a double game in that 
they worked out the modalities for a federalist transformation of the 
empire while, at the same time, preparing the foundations for an 
independent state. Lonhyn Tsehelsky, a deputy in the Cisleithanian 
Imperial Council and one of the best-known representatives of the 
opposition, described this period in his memoirs: “We were outwardly 
16	
Kost' Levyts'kyi, “S'ohochasnyi stan ukraïns'koï spravy. 1917 rik,” Dilo, 6 January 1917: 1.
17	
Ibid.
18	
“Rishennia parliamentarnoï komisiï UPR,” Ukraïns'ke slovo, 20 January 1917: 1.
19	
Kost' Levyts'kyi, “Natsiolnal'no-demokratychne storonnytstvo v 1918 r.,” Republyka, 1 April 
1919: 1ff.

chapter 2b: the western ukrainian people’s republic 
of 1918–1919
139 
loyal to Austria but were preparing its overthrow. If Austria managed 
to survive, we would be part of its federal structure. In the event of 
its disintegration, we were determined and prepared to proclaim our 
own independent state and, should the occasion arise, to unite with 
greater Ukraine.”20
Hopes for possible reform of the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy were 
strengthened, to some extent, by the events connected with the Brest-
Litovsk peace treaty, for it was here that the Central Powers not only 
recognized the existence of a sovereign Ukrainian People’s Republic 
(UNR) in Kyiv but also, in a secret appendix to the treaty, guaranteed 
the establishment of Ukrainian national political autonomy within 
the Habsburg Monarchy (the Crownland Protocol). There had also 
been agreement on a border favorable to the Ukrainians in the Kholm 
region. On this occasion, the People’s Committee of the UNDP met 
in extraordinary session. The resolution passed by the People’s 
Committee greeted the recognition of the fact that the Ukrainian state 
existed and proclaimed that “the whole Ukrainian people of Galicia 
will exercise its right to statehood within the borders of the Habsburg 
Monarchy.”21 At an extraordinary session of the People’s Committee 
on 18 February 1918, it was resolved that in all the districts of Galicia 
a festival would be held on 3 March under the slogan, “Long live 
Ukrainian statehood in the Habsburg Monarchy.”
The Polish population of Eastern Galicia responded to the Brest-
Litovsk treaty, especially to the losses in the Kholm region, with 
strikes and protests aimed at preventing Austria-Hungary from 
implementing these undertakings. And although the Ukrainian parties 
succeeded in mobilizing a mass movement such as had never been 
seen before in support of the undertakings given in Brest-Litovsk, the 
Austro-Hungarian government never risked implementing the secret 
Crownland Protocol.22
Another blow to the positions of the committed Austro-Hungarian 
autonomists was the coup in Kyiv. German troops supported Hetman 
Skoropadsky’s seizure of power and recognized his Ukrainian State. 
This severely restricted the Austro-Hungarian Ukrainians’ freedom 
of action, as threats to unite with Kyiv in a single Ukrainian state 
were no longer effective. Kost Levytsky considered three ways out 
20	
Lonhyn Tsehel's'kyi, Vid lehend do pravdy. Spomyny pro podiï v Ukraïni zv'iazani z Pershym 
Lystopadom 1918 r. (New York and Philadelphia, 1960), 33.
21	
“Z Narodnoho Komitetu,” Ukraïns'ke slovo, 15 February 1918: 1.
22	
Ukraïns'ke slovo, 20 February 1918: 1.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
140
of this situation: “First, an understanding with the Hetman, since he 
nourishes good intentions with regard to an independent Ukrainian 
state; second, an alliance with Ukrainian parties to fight the Hetman 
for the democratization of the Ukrainian State; or, third, support for 
the Austro-German movement in Ukraine.”23
A resolution was passed at a meeting of the People’s Committee on 
11 May 1918 that clearly condemned Germany’s “brutal interference” 
in the internal affairs of Ukraine.24 The UNDP also recognized the 
right of the political organization that had created the Ukrainian 
People’s Republic, the Central Rada, to continue to exercise state 
power. The committee also declared that “the Central Powers, which 
demand that the UNR adhere to the Brest-Litovsk treaty and its 
additional provisions, are also themselves legally and morally obliged 
to fulfill those undertakings into which they entered with the UNR 
and with the whole Ukrainian people in the Brest-Litovsk treaty and 
its additional provisions, whether publicly or confidentially.” This 
meant that the Central Powers should hand over Kholm and Pidliashia 
(present-day Podlachia) to the UNR. The strong condemnation of 
Germany for its brutal interference in Ukraine’s internal affairs did 
not cause the Galicians to change their position with regard to the 
Austrian government. They wanted it “to partition Galicia, in keeping 
with its commitments, and to establish a separate state organism in 
Eastern Galicia and Bukovyna within the framework of Austria.”25
In the summer of 1918 Yevhen Petrushevych, head of the 
Ukrainian Parliamentary Representation in the Austrian paliament, 
said that “the star of the Habsburg dynasty still shines bright and clear 
in our firmament.”26 By the autumn of 1918, however, there were few 
politicians who did not see that what was coming was a victory of 
the Entente and the inevitable collapse of Austria-Hungary. From 
this time on, secret groupings emerged throughout the empire that 
worked on different models for the future restructuring of the state. 
With the announcement of President Woodrow Wilson’s “fourteen 
points,” at the latest, the principle of self-determination of nations had 
become a fundamental postulate of international politics. Wilson’s 
23	
Levyts'kyi, “Natsional'no-demokratychne storonnytstvo v 1918 r.,” 1ff.
24	
“Narodnyi Komitet pro derzhavnyi perevorot u Kyïvi i parliamentarnu krizu v Avstriï,” Dilo, 14 
May 1918: 1–4.
25	
Ibid.
26	
O. Karpenko, “Lystopadova 1918 r. Natsional'no-demokratychna revoliutsiia na 
zakhidnoukraïns'kykh zemliakh,” Ukraïns'kyi istorychnyi zhurnal, 1993, no. 1: 18.

chapter 2b: the western ukrainian people’s republic 
of 1918–1919
141 
program promised independence for Poland. For the peoples of 
Austria-Hungary, he promised “the freest opportunity for autonomous 
development.” The Ukrainians took this declaration very seriously. 
It prompted the Galicians to pursue their struggle for independence 
even more vigorously.27 Educated in the spirit of Austro-Hungarian 
constitutionalism, they continued to rely on international resolutions 
and “thereby underestimated the potential of their own people.”28
The Ukrainian politicians of Galicia found it very difficult to depart 
from their basic principle of the unconditional legitimacy of power, 
which is why, even as they developed their own plans, they always 
did so with reference to Austria. Even when Emperor Karl rejected the 
Ukrainian demand for the partition of Galicia, and it became clear that 
Ukrainian autonomy was not to be part of the planned transformation 
of the Monarchy, the Galician Ukrainians still hoped for a legislated 
solution. It was for this reason that they did not proclaim the unity of all 
Ukrainian territories in Austria-Hungary until after Karl’s manifesto 
of 16 October 1918 announcing the transformation of Austria into a 
federal state.29 But even then, the group around Kost Levytsky did 
not go beyond demanding agrarian reform, which they saw as an 
extremely radical step, equivalent to an attack on Austro-Hungarian 
power: “At that time (autumn 1918), it was clear to us that the collapse 
had to come. It was suggested in the People’s Committee that our 
response to this should be a demand for agrarian reform, since our 
program called for land, especially the large estates, to become the 
property of the people, without compensation, and for this land to be 
distributed to the peasants with little or no land.”30 The fact that the 
Ukrainians made this demand at a time when the other peoples of the 
empire, no longer satisfied with federalism, were declaring their own 
independent states, demonstrates their “backwardness” and their late 
entry into this process. What is more, the Ukrainian political leaders 
tried for a long time to ignore the fact that the Entente had given up 
any plans for a separate peace with Austria-Hungary, which meant, in 
practice, that the disintegration of the empire into nation-states was 
inevitable. It was not until the autumn of 1918 that the leadership of 
27	
Matvii Stakhiv, Zakhidna Ukraïna. Narys istoriï derzhavnoho budivnytstva ta zbroinoï і 
dyplomatychnoï oborony v 1918–1923, vol. 3 (Scranton, 1960), 102.
28	
Valerii Soldatenko, Ukraïna v revoliutsiinu dobu. Istorychni ese-khroniky. Rik 1918, vol. 2 (Kyiv, 
2009), 313.
29	
Vasyl Kuchabsky, Western Ukraine in Conflict with Poland and Bolshevism, 1918–1923 
(Edmonton and Toronto, 2009), 24.
30	
Levyts'kyi, “Natsional'no-demokratychne storonnytstvo v 1918 r.,” 1–2.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
142
the People’s Committee adopted a new slogan and began to prepare for 
the collapse. Stepan Baran later recalled this historic decision: “There 
was only one thing left for us to do: to make ourselves ready, at the 
last minute, to ensure that the Ukrainian lands in Austria-Hungary 
did not come under a foreign yoke. Therefore, when I returned from 
the country at the beginning of September, at the first session of the 
People’s Committee on 7 September 1918, which had been put off 
until then by the leaders of political life in our region, as secretary of 
the committee I took a decisive step by pointing out the need for our 
forces to prepare for the moment of Austria-Hungary’s collapse and, 
when necessary, to establish our own state organism.”31 At this highly 
conspiratorial session, it was decided to establish a coordinating body 
to prepare for the collapse of the empire. Two commissions of the 
People’s Committee were created: “An organizational commission 
to instruct the organs with a view to taking over administration in 
Eastern Galicia and a military commission to prepare the armed forces 
to carry out a  coup.”32
The members of the organizational commission were Volodymyr 
Okhrymovych, Vasyl Paneiko, and Stepan Baran. Since its activity 
was “strictly conspiratorial,”33 the committee left no documents 
behind. The decisions of the People’s Committee were only reported 
verbally. Levytsky was the liaison to the Ukrainian Parliamentary 
Representation, and his task was to inform the UPR about the decisions 
of the People’s Committee. Some members of the UPR had their own 
plans for the overthrow of the empire. This alternative group was 
led by Yosyf Folys, Ivan Kyveliuk, and Lonhyn Tsehelsky. Originally 
they had tended to support the idea of a “transformation of Austria-
Hungary on a federal basis,”34 and their ultimate aim was to persuade 
the Austro-Hungarian emperor “to carry out a coup from above, in 
other words, to dissolve or suspend parliament and introduce a new 
constitution by imperial edict that would create autonomous regional 
national states united in a federal state, with a federal parliament 
responsible for foreign and military affairs.”35 To realize this plan, Folys 
and Tsehelsky made contact with representatives of the Slovenian, 
Croatian, and Czech national movements. At a joint meeting in the 
31	
Stepan Baran, “Do istoriï povstannia ZUNR,” Dilo, 6 January 1923: 1ff.
32	
Levyts'kyi, “Natsional'no-demokratychne storonnytstvo v 1918 r.,” 1–2.
33	
Baran, “Do istoriï povstannia ZUNR,” 1–2.
34	
Tsehel's'kyi, Vid lehend do pravdy, 25.
35	
Ibid.

chapter 2b: the western ukrainian people’s republic 
of 1918–1919
143 
autumn of 1918, they decided to propose to Emperor Karl “that, before 
the coup, military commanders and units in the national capitals 
be replaced by those that would be subordinate to the national 
constituent assemblies and would prevent any unrest directed against 
the coup.”36 Galician politicians and religious dignitaries, among 
them Yuliian Romanchuk, Yevhen Levytsky, Volodymyr Bachynsky, 
Yevhen Petrushevych, Tyt Voinarovsky, Stepan Smal-Stotsky, 
Sydir Holubovych, Ivan Kyveliuk, Oleksander Stefanovych, Andrei 
Sheptytsky, Vasyl Paneiko, Volodymyr Okhrymovych, and Teodosii 
Lezhohubsky, were informed of these intentions.37 
The Cossack officer Petro Bubela, assisted by two other officers, 
Volodymyr Ohonovsky and Dmytro Paliiv, was chosen to make the 
necessary preparations and carry out agitation among Ukrainians in 
the Austro-Hungarian army.38 Tsehelsky wrote in his memoirs: “The 
coup had already been decided secretly by the leaders of the Ukrainian 
National Council in August 1918 as it became clear that Austria could 
not escape catastrophe. The organizer of the coup was to be a liutenant 
in the Austrian army, Petro Bubela, a determined, quiet, even-tempered, 
and discreet man.” The plan was thwarted to some extent by the sudden 
death of Folys. Nonetheless, the “trio for carrying out the military 
coup” performed its main task in that it not only designed the scenario 
for the transfer of power but also identified the pro-Ukrainian forces 
inside the imperial army and consolidated them in a system of secret 
organizations. The trio was led politically by a commission established 
by the Ukrainian National Council and consisting of Kyveliuk, 
Tsehelsky, and Paneiko.39 According to Tsehelsky, this commission, 
which was also secret, was already in a position on 25 October 1918 “to 
inform the delegates of the Ukrainian National Council in Lviv and the 
delegates in Vienna generally about preparations for the coup on the 
territory between the Zbruch and the San.”40
But the implementation of the UNDP People’s Committee’s plan 
was an entirely different matter. According to Stepan Baran, the 
People’s Committee had set up its own commission to carry out the 
coup, and it actually made preparations. Baran wrote in 1923 that it 
was his initiative to establish the military committee: “Knowing that 
36	
Ibid.
37	
Ibid., 26.
38	
Ibid., 17.
39	
Ibid., 35.
40	
Ibid., 36.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
144
a military organization would be necessary in order to perform our 
task, we decided at the second meeting to seek out reliable people 
among the Ukrainian officers in Lviv and set up our own military 
committee with the task of carrying out the military organization. I 
turned to Cossack officers known to me, Liubomyr Ohonovsky, Vasyl 
Baranyk, and Ivan Vatran. We enlarged the commission by bringing 
in Dr. Stepan Tomashivsky, Dr. Mykhailo Lozynsky, and Omelian 
Saievych.”41 The officers called upon to join the commission were 
in agreement with the creation of their own Ukrainian military 
committee. There is reason to believe that this committee played a 
decisive role in the events of 1 November 1918. Its membership and 
essential tasks were later confirmed by one of the participants in those 
events. Vasyl Paneiko wrote that, having returned from Switzerland, 
he was active in the organization of a secret committee that included 
Okhrymovych, Stepan Rudnytsky, Mykhailo Lozynsky, Stepan 
Tomashivsky, and Osyp Nazaruk.42 The meetings of the committee, 
which was in touch with the military committee, were held in the 
museum of the Shevchenko Scientific Society.43
On behalf of the committee, Vasyl Paneiko traveled to Bukovyna 
to make contact with the Ukrainian Legion in order to expedite its 
move to Lviv and choose the commander of the uprising. He was 
uncertain about the extent to which the commander of the Legion, 
Archduke Wilhelm von Habsburg, was committed to the Ukrainian 
cause and, with the help of Ostap Lutsky, selected Dmytro Vitovsky 
for that role.44 In the end, however, he was not happy with this choice, 
and so, in the military committee, he insisted on naming another 
organizer for the uprising. He was allowed to travel to Kyiv “in order 
for the Hetman to select a commander.”45 The Galician politicians had 
thought of Oleksandr Udovychenko, but the Hetman did not agree.
Stepan 
Baran 
invited 
the 
Ukrainian 
otamans 
Teodor 
Rozhankovsky and Nykyfor Hirniak to Lviv for consultations. It was 
then decided that the Ukrainian Legion should organize the military 
coup. Representatives of the Legion reached agreement on their plans 
with the military committee and began to prepare the uprising.46 
Knowing that the other Ukrainian parties did not have such a dense 
41	
Baran, “Do istoriï povstannia ZUNR,” 1–2.
42	
Vasyl' Paneiko, “Pered Pershym Lystopada,” Dilo, 1 November 1928: 1.
43	
“Viis'kovyi komitet,” Dilo, 1 November 1928: 2.
44	
Paneiko, “Pered Pershym Lystopada,” 1.
45	
Ibid.
46	
Baran, “Do istoriï povstannia ZUNR.” 

chapter 2b: the western ukrainian people’s republic 
of 1918–1919
145 
network in the regions, Baran decided to consolidate forces for the 
preparation of the uprising that was to take place on 1 November 
and invited the best-known politicians from the districts, regardless 
of party affiliation, to a meeting. His main demand to the political 
activists was that they establish district committees to assume the 
functions of state administration at the given time.47
It was decided that the general political direction of the state-
building process should be entrusted to an assembly designated 
as the “Ukrainian National Council.”48 This decision was taken 
on 10 October 1918 at a session of the UPR at which Petrushevych, 
Romanchuk, Metropolitan Andrei Sheptytsky, and other prominent 
Ukrainian representatives were present. Yevhen Levytsky was given 
the task of producing the statute for the Ukrainian National Council, 
and Bachynsky was made responsible for the convocation of the 
constituent assembly.49
On 18 and 19 October 1918, an assembly was held in Lviv with 
public officials and representatives of the various political parties. 
Those attending included the Ukrainian representatives in the Vienna 
parliament and in the Galician Diet, along with representatives of the 
Greek Catholic Church. On the basis of Emperor Karl’s manifesto, the 
assembly declared itself to be the Ukrainian National Council with 
parliamentary authority. At the head of the Council was a representative 
to the Vienna parliament, Yevhen Petrushevych. In accordance with 
the principle of national self-determination, the Council proclaimed 
the formation of a Ukrainian state on Ukrainian ethnic territories 
in Austria-Hungary. Although not all the territories claimed were 
represented at the assembly, the National Council declared that the 
new state included not only Eastern Galicia and Northern Bukovyna 
but also Transcarpathia (which had no representatives at the 
assembly).50 The relation of the newly proclaimed state to Austria-
Hungary remained undefined. That would depend on the decisions 
taken by the Entente with regard to the future of the Monarchy.51 
In the event that the Entente decided to dissolve the Monarchy, the 
Ukrainian National Council reserved for itself the right to form a 
47	
Ibid.
48	
Lozyns'kyi, Halychyna, 27.
49	
Baran, “Do istoriï povstannia ZUNR.”
50	
Kost' Levyts'kyi, Istoriia politychnoï dumky halyts'kykh ukraïntsiv. Na pidstavi spomyniv i 
dokumentiv (Lviv, 1926), 106.
51	
O. Krasivs'kyi, Halychyna u pershii chverti ХХ st.: Problema ukraïns'ko-pol's'kykh stosunkiv 
(Lviv, 2000), 107.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
146
union of Ukrainian territories in Austria-Hungary with Ukrainian 
territory previously part of the Russian Empire.
The resolutions announced by Petrushevych to the assembly of 19 
October 1918 did not satisfy the representatives of the Ukrainian Social 
Democratic Party. Some of the Radicals and National Democrats were 
also opposed. The problem was the absence of any clause providing 
for the unification of Ukrainian territory in Austria-Hungary with 
the Ukrainian State.52 On the following day, Petrushevych headed 
a delegation to Vienna for further negotiations with the Austro-
Hungarian emperor. Some of the participants in the Lviv assembly 
hoped for the proclamation of an independent Ukrainian state and 
demanded a complete break with Vienna. The political leaders of 
the Ukrainian movement in the Habsburg Monarchy based their 
position on the claim that their forces were too weak to be able to 
declare the unity of all territories in an all-embracing Ukraine. The 
Ukrainians in Cisleithania were not such a significant revolutionary 
force that they could separate their territory from Austria-Hungary, 
confront Poland’s ambitions for power in the region, and implement a 
unification with the Ukrainian People’s Republic, which had existed 
since the beginning of 1918.
But it was not just the relative weakness of the Ukrainian movement 
in Austria-Hungary that led to this moderate decision. When they 
thought about an all-inclusive Ukraine, the Austrian Ukrainians knew 
they could not count on political agreement with the Ukrainian State 
of Hetman Skoropadsky. There had been poor relations right from the 
start between the Ukrainian State and Austro-Hungarian politicians. 
The Hetman was mistrustful of Germany’s Austro-Hungarian ally. 
The plans of the Galician politicians and the Habsburg Monarchy 
regarding the future of the Ukrainian political order worried him. 
He championed a plan for a “Greater Ukraine” that would include 
not only all ethnic Ukrainian territories but also the Crimea and the 
Kuban. The Austro-Hungarians favored a “Little Russian” solution, 
with Eastern Galicia and Northern Bukovyna remaining outside, or 
a unification of all Ukrainian territory with the Habsburg Crown. 
Skoropadsky was especially disturbed by the “Greek Catholic” 
plan for the postwar period. According to that plan, the Habsburg 
Archduke Wilhelm, whose Ukrainian name was Vasyl Vyshyvany, 
would mount the Ukrainian throne and unite all Ukrainian territory 
in a personal union with the Habsburg Crown. Galician Ukrainian 
52	
Lozyns'kyi, Halychyna, 31.

chapter 2b: the western ukrainian people’s republic 
of 1918–1919
147 
support for that plan was the cause of the intra-Ukrainian conflict. But 
what most divided the Ukrainians on both sides of the border were 
their conceptions of Ukrainian statehood, the nation, and the Greek 
Catholic Church.53
The activities of Archduke Wilhelm not only provoked Hetman 
Skoropadsky’s resistance but also created confusion in the plans of the 
Galician politicians. Not all of them shared the idea of a monarchist 
future under the house of Habsburg. Most of them did not know 
what the archduke’s plans were. Unlike the majority of the Galician 
Ukrainian politicians, however, Wilhelm had had a good deal of 
personal experience of the Hetman. In a letter of 18 October 1918 to 
Metropolitan Sheptytsky, he warned against a union of Galicia and 
Bukovyna with the Ukrainian State.54 In this letter he described 
Skoropadsky as a “colossus with feet of clay” that could come crashing 
down at any moment and bury with it any hope of Ukrainian 
independence. In his view, the optimal form of statehood would be 
national autonomy within the borders of the Habsburg state. In the 
same letter, he expressed his agreement with the strategy and plans 
of the group around Kost Levytsky.
That Ukrainian politicians, as late as October 1918, did not want 
a complete break with Austria-Hungary is demonstrated by the fact 
that, at the session of the Ukrainian National Council on 19 October 
that decided on the composition of delegations, the Council chose not 
only a Galician delegation under Kost Levytsky and a Bukovynian 
delegation under Omelian Popovych but also an executive delegation 
in Vienna.55 The National Council found it extremely difficult to make 
a complete break with Vienna. Its presidium continued to negotiate 
with the Austro-Hungarian government as if it were not aware of the 
catastrophic situation in Vienna. On 23 October, when the Ukrainian 
delegation informed the Austrian prime minister, Max Hussarek 
von Heinlein, about the decision of the Ukrainian National Council 
in Lviv, they assured him that the new state would maintain close 
links with the empire. They wanted the prime minister to appoint 
Levytsky governor of Galicia so that he could introduce reforms that 
53 
Ia. Pelens'kyi, “Peredmova: Spohady Het'mana Pavla Skoropads'koho (kinets' 1917–hruden' 
1918),” in Pavlo Skoropads'kyi, Spohady (kinets' 1917–hruden' 1918) (Kyiv and Philadelphia, 
1995), 21.
54	
TsDIA Lviv, f. 358, op. 3, spr. 166, 36–40.
55	
Lozyns'kyi, Halychyna, 31.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
148
would give the Ukrainians predominance over the Poles.56 What is 
also remarkable is the fact that, not just in October but even after 
the proclamation of the Western Ukrainian People’s Republic, a 
significant number of Ukrainian politicians remained in Vienna, even 
the president of Western Ukraine, Yevhen Petrushevych.
The Race against the Poles
The Ukrainians were forced to act quickly by news of the planned 
arrival of the Polish Liquidation Commission, formed in Cracow 
on 28 October 1918, which was to take over power in the region. 
Lviv was to come under Polish rule on 2–3 November. The decisive 
action of the Poles made it necessary for the Ukrainians to be more 
determined.57 The Lviv delegation began concrete preparations on 25 
October. Under the leadership of Roman Perfetsky, an organizational 
bureau was created that issued instructions at district and local levels 
for the establishment of Ukrainian rule. On 31 October, the People’s 
Committee of the UNDP entrusted all preparations to the delegation 
of the Ukrainian National Council in Lviv.58
Polish preparations for the proclamation of an independent state, 
unlike those of the Ukrainians, were more systematic and better 
organized. No one had any doubts as far as a future renewal of Poland 
was concerned. As early as 15 September 1917, the Regency Council 
of the Kingdom of Poland was established, with the agreement of 
Germany and Austria-Hungary. This was the first and most important 
step toward the creation of a Polish state administration for all Polish 
territories. On 7 October 1918 the Regency Council proclaimed the 
independence of Poland and, on the next day, took over command of 
troops from the occupying Central Powers. As the supreme organ of 
the Polish state, the Regency Council declared that it was necessary 
to establish both economic and political independence, guaranteed 
by international treaty, as well as territorial integrity.59 The goal of 
Poland’s political leadership was the unification of all of Poland’s 
“historical” territory, and it regarded the problem of Galicia as an 
“internal Polish affair.” This made the outbreak of Polish-Ukrainian 
conflict practically unavoidable.60
56	
Krasivs'kyi, Halychyna u pershii chverti ХХ st., 108.
57	
Mahochi, Istoriia Ukraïny, 439.
58	
Levyts'kyi, “Natsional'no-demokratychne storonnytstvo v 1918 r.”
59	
Soldatenko, Ukraïna v revoliutsiinu dobu, 314.
60	
Lozyns'kyi, Halychyna, 36–37.

chapter 2b: the western ukrainian people’s republic 
of 1918–1919
149 
In all their preparations for the founding of new states, both Poland 
and Ukraine continued to look to Vienna, still the capital of the empire. 
The Liquidation Commission under Wincenty Witos, established in 
Cracow on 28 October, proclaimed the takeover of power in all of Galicia 
and informed the Austrian prime minister, Heinrich Lammasch, and the 
Galician governor, Karl von Huyn. The Poles, considering the transfer 
of power from the Austrian governor to the Polish side legitimate and 
justified, planned a journey of their representatives to Lviv, where this 
act was to take place. The Ukrainian National Council also proclaimed 
its authority over the territory. Neither the Poles nor the Ukrainians 
paid any attention to what the other side was doing, but both wanted a 
legitimate transfer of power from the Galician governor. The Ukrainian 
delegation in Vienna had apparently succeeded in getting recognition 
from the Austrian Council of Ministers of the right of the Ukrainians 
to their own state, but that decision never reached Lviv. Therefore the 
Galician governor, von Huyn, did not have the formal authority to 
relinquish power and transfer it to the Ukrainians. In response to the 
demands of the Ukrainian delegation, he declared on 31 October that 
he would not transfer power to either the Ukrainians or the Poles, since 
the problem would have to be resolved by a peace conference.61 But 
there is no agreement about this fact. Some politicians declared that 
Prime Minister Lammasch, in response to the demands of the Vienna 
delegation of the Ukrainian National Council, had instructed the 
Galician governor to hand over power to the Ukrainian representatives, 
but that the telegram with this instruction had been intercepted by the 
Poles in Cracow.62 
During the night of 31 October/1 November the Ukrainian military 
command, led by an officer of the Ukrainian Legion, Dmytro Vitovsky, 
carried out the uprising, seized power in the Galician capital, and later 
took administrative control of more than fifty districts. In its appeal to 
the “Ukrainian people,” the Ukrainian National Council announced 
the establishment of a Ukrainian state: “The Ukrainian state and its 
supreme organ, the Ukrainian National Council, were established 
according to your will on 19 October in the Ukrainian lands of the 
former Austro-Hungarian Monarchy. The Ukrainian National Council 
has this day taken power in the capital, Lviv, and on the whole territory 
of the Ukrainian state.”63 
61	
Levyts'kyi, Istoriia politychnoï dumky halyts'kykh ukraïntsiv, 131.
62	
Mykhailo Demkovych-Dobrians'kyi, Ukraïns'ko-pol's'ki stosunky u ХІХ storichchi (Munich, 
1969), 16.
63	
Lozyns'kyi, Halychyna, 42ff., 58.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
150
Western Ukraine’s Struggle for Survival
The Ukrainian National Council announced that until political power 
was properly reorganized, the local Ukrainian district and village 
organizations would continue to carry out their usual functions. 
All soldiers of Ukrainian nationality were mobilized to defend the 
young state. A special summons was issued to Ukrainian soldiers in 
the Austro-Hungarian army outside Galicia. They were to return as 
rapidly as possible to their new state and serve in its defense. Until 
a new Ukrainian army was created, the maintenance of public order 
and defense would be carried out by so-called military units, which 
would include members of the general public capable of bearing arms. 
Everyone living on its territory, regardless of nationality or 
religion, would be a citizen of the new Ukrainian state. National 
minorities (Poles, Jews, Germans) were guaranteed equal rights and 
would elect their own representatives to the Ukrainian National 
Council. All former laws would remain in force on the territory of 
the Ukrainian state except those that contradicted the principles of 
the new state. Once the new state structure had been consolidated, 
a constitutional assembly would be elected on the basis of direct and 
universal franchise. Jurists would be charged with getting to work 
immediately on drafting a constitution.
The seizure of power in Lviv was peaceful, and the leadership of the 
National Council rejected the suggestion that three hundred leading 
representatives of the Polish population should be arrested as security 
in case of Polish resistance. The new Ukrainian government did not 
want to provoke any violence on the part of the Poles. Nevertheless, on 
1 November, the Poles began to mobilize their forces for battle against 
the Ukrainians. In Lviv, a Polish National Committee was established 
under the leadership of Tadeusz Cieński. The military leader of Polish 
forces was Czesław Mączyński.64 The battle began for the key parts 
of the city.65 Unfortunately for the Ukrainians, the Ukrainian Legion 
did not arrive on time from Chernivtsi. The Legion was supposed 
to defend the city while the rest of the Ukrainian military forces 
were being organized. The fact that the Legion did not arrive until 
three days later had a negative effect on the defensive capacity of the 
Ukrainian forces. The first military units that fought against the Poles 
and later joined the Legion were the basis on which the Ukrainian 
Galician Army would be built, the army of Western Ukraine.
64 
Mieczysław Wrzosek, Wojny o granice Polski Odrodzonej 1918–1921 (Warsaw, 1992), 168.
65	
Mykola Lytvyn and Kim Naumenko, Istoriia ZUNR (Lviv, 1995), 47. 

chapter 2b: the western ukrainian people’s republic 
of 1918–1919
151 
The fighting between the Poles and Ukrainians in Lviv lasted from 
the very first day on which the Western Ukrainian state was proclaimed 
until 21 November. The leadership of the new state was then forced 
to leave the city along with its troops. In this short time, however, the 
Ukrainians managed to establish the most important state agencies. 
On 9 November 1918 the National Council established its provisional 
executive organ, the State Secretariat of the Western Ukrainian People’s 
Republic, which then functioned as government from 13 November.66 
On the same day, the constitutional foundation of the new state was 
established, the “Provisional Basic Law on the Sovereign Independence 
of the Ukrainian Lands of the Former Austro-Hungarian Monarchy,” 
and the official name of the new state was the Western Ukrainian 
People’s Republic (Zakhidnoukraïns'ka Narodna Respublika, ZUNR). In 
a very short time, the ZUNR had been able to develop the essential 
juridical foundation to regulate the most important areas of public 
life: organization of the military, the provisional organization of legal 
jurisdiction, official language, the educational system, citizenship, 
and land reform. An analysis of the documents shows that the basic 
principles underlying ZUNR law were democratic and, to some extent, 
liberal. The state that claimed, even if only declaratively, 70,000 square 
kilometers and 6 million people did not intend to become monoethnic.67 
The ZUNR guaranteed its national minorities freedom of development 
and proportional representation in the supreme legislative body, even 
if, in practice, the national minorities refused to send representatives to 
the Ukrainian National Council and it remained in reality an exclusively 
Ukrainian body.68
On 25 October 1918, simultaneously with the events in Galicia, 
the Ukrainian Regional Committee of Bukovyna was established 
in Chernivtsi under the leadership of Omelian Popovych as the 
Bukovynian central administration. The committee lacked both a 
widespread network in the province and support in the city. Two days 
later, Romanian representatives in the Vienna parliament established 
the Romanian National Council, which began immediately to secure 
its power in Bukovyna. On 3 November, the Ukrainians held a mass 
66 Mykola Chubatyi, Derzhavnyi lad na Zakhidnii oblasti Ukraïns'koï Narodnoï Respubliky (Lviv, 
1921), 16–17.
67	
V. S. Kul'chyts'kyi, M. I. Nastiuk, and B. I. Tyshchyk, Istoriia derzhavy i prava Ukraïny (Lviv, 
1996), 177.
68	
Pavlo Hai-Nyzhnyk, UNR ta ZUNR: stanovlennia orhaniv vlady i natsional'ne derzhavotvorennia 
(1917–1920) (Kyiv, 2010), 212.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
152
assembly in Chernivtsi that declared Bukovyna part of a united 
Ukrainian state. Popovych became president of the province. In view 
of the internal weakness of the Ukrainian movement in Bukovyna, 
and based on its experience with Austria-Hungary’s constitutional 
management of inter-ethnic problems in the Habsburg Monarchy, the 
Ukrainian Regional Committee began negotiations with moderate 
Romanian representatives. They were able to reach agreement with 
only one of the Romanians, Aurel Onciul, who had limited influence 
on the situation. On 6 November, the provincial administration of 
Bukovyna handed power to Popovych and Onciul, who proceeded 
to act on behalf of both the Ukrainian and Romanian national 
organizations. These institutions would govern the respective parts 
of the province in which their ethnic group was in the majority. The 
Romanian National Council, however, led by Jancu Flondor, had no 
intention of sharing power with the Ukrainians. The council’s leaders 
immediately asked Romania to send troops.69 The Romanian army did 
not hesitate and, on 11 November, occupied the whole of Bukovyna, 
including Chernivtsi. Although Bukovyna was only nominally part of 
the Western Ukrainian People’s Republic, it was military intervention 
from outside that brought down its legitimate government.70
There were no representatives of Transcarpathia at the meeting of 
the Ukrainian National Council on 19 October. The separatist process 
began here much later than in Galicia and Bukovyna, and under very 
different circumstances. The new Hungarian Republic under Mihály 
Károlyi laid claim to all territories that had been under the jurisdiction 
of the Hungarian Kingdom.71 Among the Transcarpathian regions, 
the most strongly pro-Ukrainian were Máramarossziget (present-day 
Sighetu Marmaţiei) and the area around the city of Huszt (present-day 
Khust). However, the fact remains that, apart from a brief presence of 
Ukrainian troops, Transcarpathia was never under ZUNR control.
The State Secretariat and the National Council left Lviv on 
21 November and moved to Ternopil. The loss of the capital had a 
negative effect on the fighting morale of the Ukrainian Galician 
Army. When the Poles finally captured Lviv, they not only closed 
Ukrainian institutions and carried out searches and arrests but also 
instigated a bloody pogrom against the Jewish population of the city. 
69	
Mahochi, Istoriia Ukraïny, 444.
70	
I. Piddubnyi, “Politychne zhyttia Bukovyny 1918–1940 rr.,” in Bukovyna 1918–1940 rr.: 
zovnishni vplyvy na vnutrishnii rozvytok (Chernivtsi, 2005), 58.
71	
Mahochi, Istoriia Ukraïny, 445.

chapter 2b: the western ukrainian people’s republic 
of 1918–1919
153 
It has been argued that this pogrom was an act of revenge for Jewish 
neutrality toward the Ukrainian state, but in reality it was a typical 
bloody anti-Semitic action that involved robbery, murder, and rape. 
It is estimated that 78 people were killed and 453 wounded in this 
pogrom. Altogether 13,375 people had their belongings plundered 
or lost their homes.72 Ukrainians, too, were not spared by the new 
authorities. Those regarded as the greatest security risks were sent to 
an internment camp in Dąbie, while the rest, including priests, were 
imprisoned in Lviv.
The Ukrainian government remained in Ternopil until 2 January 
1919, when it moved to Stanyslaviv (present-day Ivano-Frankivsk). A 
meeting of the Ukrainian National Council was held here on 3 January 
and declared its intention to unite with the Ukrainian People’s Republic 
“in an undivided sovereign republic.”73 The act of union, which took 
place on 22 January 1919 in St. Sophia Square in Kyiv, was purely 
symbolic. Following the union with the UNR, the official name of the 
ZUNR was Western Province of the Ukrainian People’s Republic. The 
two governing bodies, however, continued to operate separately. In 
spite of the union and the military assistance and food supplies that 
the Galicians obtained from the UNR, the leadership in the Western 
Province continued to follow its own line in both domestic policy and 
international relations.
The war between Western Ukraine and Poland continued with 
mixed results.74 On two occasions, the Ukrainians almost reached 
Lviv but never succeeded in capturing it. Attempts on the part of the 
Entente to mediate failed a number of times. Symon Petliura, the head 
of the Directory in Kyiv, visited Western Ukraine once but was really 
on the side of the Entente. He tried to get the Western Ukrainians 
to compromise, hoping that they would then be able to redirect 
their army from fighting the Poles to fighting the Bolsheviks. For the 
Galician Ukrainians, however, the Poles were the main enemy. They 
could not let the Poles take their territory, to say nothing of making 
an agreement that would amount to a capitulation.75 All attempts by 
the Entente to end the Polish-Ukrainian conflict would have been at 
72	
M. Lytvyn, “Stolytsia ZUNR,” in Istoriia L'vova. U tr'okh tomakh, vol. 3 (Lviv, 2007), 25; 
Christoph Mick, “Ethnische Gewalt und Pogrome in Lemberg 1914 und 1941,” Osteuropa 53, no. 
12 (December 2003): 1810–30.
73	
Lytvyn and Naumenko, Istoriia ZUNR, 126.
74	
For a detailed account, see chapter 4f in the present volume.
75	
Stakhiv, Zakhidna Ukraïna, 48ff.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
154
the expense of the Western Ukrainian People’s Republic, which is why 
they all failed. The final warning to the Western Ukrainians was the 
threat from the mission led by Joseph Berthélemy on 28 February 1919 
that if the ZUNR rejected the Entente’s conditions, it would face the 
army of General Józef Haller, a Polish army created in France. It was 
well armed and would pose a serious threat to the weakened Ukrainian 
Galician army. Under cover of the fight against the Bolsheviks, it was 
moved to Eastern Europe to fight the ZUNR.
By June 1919, after exhausting battles, the Petrushevych 
government controlled only a tiny amount of territory, consisting of 
parts of the Borshchiv, Husiatyn, Chortkiv, and Horodenka districts. 
On 9 June, faced with the threat of defeat, Petrushevych abolished the 
office of president and the State Secretariat and proclaimed himself 
dictator. The government and the State Secretariat were replaced by 
the plenipotentiaries of the Dictator and the Military Chancellery. 
He removed the military command, which led to some short-term 
successes. On 25 June, however, Poland received official permission 
from Paris to extend its military operations over the whole territory 
as far as the Zbruch, which amounted to approval from the Entente 
for the occupation of Galicia.76 Approval for the deployment of the 
Haller army on the Galician front came at the same time. Polish troops 
reached the Zbruch on 17 June and forced the Western Ukrainian 
government out of Galicia. 
The brevity of the existence of the Western Ukrainian People’s 
Republic had to do with a number of factors. Among the internal factors 
were the asymmetrical structure of Ukrainian society (the complete 
absence of a nobility and a stratum of major industrialists), the lack 
of competent officials (a small number of Ukrainians in the Austrian 
civil service), the shortage of experienced military commanders, and 
weak support for the Ukrainian demand for independence among 
the urban population. There was no Ukrainian majority in almost 
all the larger and smaller towns in Galicia; furthermore, neither 
their economic nor social status enabled them to have significant 
influence on the socioeconomic and political conditions in the towns. 
Among the external factors were the international community’s 
lack of familiarity with the Ukrainian question and the unfavorable 
international circumstances.
 
76 
“Sprawy polskie na konferencji pokojowej w Paryżu w 1919 r.” Dokumenty i materiały, vol. 2 
(Warsaw, 1967), 353.

3a. Military Operations
Peter Lieb and Wolfram Dornik
The Invasion of Ukraine by the Central Powers,  
February to May 1918
“It is the strangest war that I have ever experienced—it is being 
carried out almost exclusively on the railway and with railway 
carriages. They put a handful of infantrymen with machine guns 
and a cannon on the track and head off for the next station, which 
they capture, then arrest the Bolsheviks, bring in more troops by 
rail, and then set off again. But this has, in any case, the attraction 
of novelty.”1 That is how the chief of staff of Ober Ost, Major General 
Max Hoffmann, described the advance of German troops at the 
beginning of Operation Faustschlag (Punch), the occupation of parts 
of the Baltic states, Belarus, and Ukraine. 
The original deployment of forces for Operation Faustschlag was 
very small. Army Group Linsingen was set to invade Ukraine with six 
weak divisions2 and one cavalry brigade.3 Their destination, according 
to the orders of their commander in chief, was Kyiv. The Germans 
initially advanced only along the railway lines and reached the 
Ukrainian capital very quickly because most of the Ukrainian railway 
personnel supported the German (and, later, Austro-Hungarian) 
troops. On 2 March the 45th Landwehr Division entered the suburbs 
of Kyiv. On the following day, the whole city was liberated from 
Bolshevik rule. This did not mean, however, the complete overthrow 
of Bolshevik power, since they still controlled the east of the country. 
The key question for the German military leadership was how to 
organize this further eastward advance. A proper plan of operations 
1	
Die Aufzeichnungen des Generalmajors Max Hoffmann, ed. Karl Friedrich Nowak, vol. 1 (Berlin, 
1929), Eintrag v. 22.2.1918.
2 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 466, Nr. 1090, Militärischer Stimmungsbericht über die Lage 
im Osten, 26.2.1918.
3	
These were the 91st, 215th, and 224th Infantry Divisions, the 7th und 45th Landwehr Divisions, as well 
as the 2nd Cavalry Division, joined later by the 4th Bavarian Cavalry Brigade. See Reichsarchiv, 
ed., Der Weltkrieg, 1914–1918. Die Kriegführung im Sommer und Herbst 1918. Die Ereignisse 
außerhalb der Westfront bis November 1918, vol. 13 (Berlin, 1942), 376. For a general account of 
the military operations in Ukraine, see ibid., 376–99. On the problems of official historical writing 
between the wars, see Markus Pöhlmann, Kriegsgeschichte und Geschichtspolitik. Der Erste 
Weltkrieg. Die amtliche deutsche Militärgeschichtsschreibung, 1914–1956 (Paderborn, 2002).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
156
simply did not exist.4 Kyiv was taken, but then the Germans found it 
necessary to advance on “the Bolshevik center, the city of Kharkiv.”5 
Then, in April, they moved into the Donets Basin toward Rostov on 
the Don.6 Moreover, in order to gain complete control of the east-west 
railway line in Ukraine, they had to take the railway junction at Homel, 
which was on Russian territory. All these ad hoc military decisions 
demonstrate the previous lack of interest in this country. Throughout 
the campaign, the Germans had to improvise in order to make up 
for inadequate military preparations. At the beginning of March, the 
troops were increased to nine divisions, later to twelve, organized in 
three army corps: Korps Gronau (later renamed the XXXXI Reserve 
Corps) in the north covered the border with Soviet Russia; Groener’s 
I Army Corps in the center was to advance on Poltava and Kharkiv; 
in the south, Korps Knoerzer was to advance in the direction of the 
Sea of Azov and later into the Donets Basin.7 The Germans wanted in 
particular to gain control of the fertile agricultural land in the Crimea, 
while providing the new Ukrainian state with a solid economic 
foundation by taking the coal reserves of the Donets Basin. In the far 
south, from 6 March, the 52nd Corps advanced from Romania toward 
the Black Sea ports with two infantry divisions, the Bavarian Cavalry 
Division, and the Austro-Hungarian 145th Infantry Brigade, which all 
came from the 9th Army (Army Group Mackensen).8 
Austria-Hungary had taken part in the operation only after 28 
February in order to prevent its German allies from getting all the 
rich booty. This decision, however, was a difficult one. Emperor Karl 
had resisted being part of this operation, which was at first solely 
German. But the Ukrainians kept up the pressure. On 25 February, 
two emissaries came to Eduard von Böhm-Ermolli, the commander 
4	
Von Brest-Litovsk zur deutschen Novemberrevolution. Aus den Tagebüchern, Briefen und 
Aufzeichnungen von Alfons Paquet, Wilhelm Groener und Albert Hopman. März bis November 
1918, ed. Winfried Baumgart (Göttingen, 1971), 288. Letter from Groener to his wife, 9 
March 1918: “The measures taken by Obost and Linsingen for the Ukrainian operation are not 
impressive; they were taken on the spur of the moment and given little thought.” 
5	
HStA Stuttgart, M 46/21, Korps Knoerzer, Abt. Ia, Nr. 1707, Die Operationen des Korps Knoerzer 
nach Einnahme von Kiew bis zur Einnahme von Rostow, 29.5.1918.
6	
BA-MA, N 46/171, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Abt. Ia, Nr. 14902 op an Ob.Ost, 9.4.1918.
7	
Reichsarchiv, ed., Der Weltkrieg, 1914–1918, 378, 384.
8	
These were the 217th Infantry Division and the 11th Landwehr Division. The 212th Infantry 
Division came later. See Österreichisches Bundesministerium für Landesverteidigung – 
Kriegsarchiv, ed., Österreich-Ungarns letzter Krieg 1914–1918, vol. 7, Das Kriegsjahr 1918 
(Vienna, 1938), Supplement VII, 5, Map “Vormarsch der k.u.k. 2. Armee bis Odessa 28. 
Februar bis Mitte März 1918.”

chapter 3a: military operations
157 
of the 2nd Army.9 “In the name of the whole Ukrainian people” and 
“on their own authority, in the absence of any link with the Central 
Rada,” they asked for Austro-Hungarian assistance in the struggle 
against the Bolsheviks. On the previous day, the troops selected for 
the advance had already been given their orders.10 Böhm-Ermolli 
gave the instructions: “The troops advancing into Ukraine should be 
reminded once again that our intervention is to offer peaceful support 
for the new and as yet unconsolidated state and should under no 
circumstances lead to hostilities. Special measures will be necessary to 
protect supplies in the rear of the troops and for the proper evaluation 
of the country’s resources. Waste nothing!”11
Like the Germans, the Austro-Hungarian troops advanced along 
the railway lines from the borders of Galicia and Bukovyna into 
Podilia.12 Their first task was to secure the railway line to Odesa in 
order to guarantee supplies and the export of provisions. Only when 
they had reached Odesa did the Austro-Hungarians begin to expand 
their operations and advance further eastward. But already in these 
first operations there were constant disputes and conflicts between 
the Germans and the Austro-Hungarians over their respective zones 
and plans of operation and sharing of railway capacity. Unlike in Italy 
or in the campaigns against Serbia in 1915 or against Romania in 1916, 
in the Ukrainian operation the Central Powers were unable to agree 
on a joint command, even though Emperor Wilhelm of Germany had 
sought agreement on this a number of times with the Austro-Hungarian 
emperor. Of course, a German was supposed to be in overall command. 
But the Austrians, as was often the case, had a strong aversion to the 
typical representatives of the Prussian military. They were annoyed at 
“the dictatorial tone of General [Erich] Ludendorff” and rejected “the 
unlikeable [Alexander von] Linsingen.” Their suggestion that Böhm-
Ermolli should take command with a German chief of staff13 would 
have inversely reflected the actual relation of forces between them. 
The Germans, of course, refused to accept this.14
9 
They were Dr. Stepura, commissar for the Podilia gubernia, and Major Mykolaiv, staff officer 
for the commander in chief of the southwestern front: ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 466, Nr. 
1095, Telegramm des 2. Armeekommandos an AOK und Obost, 26.2.1918.
10 
ÖStA, KA, AdT, Kt. 754, FJB 13, 6. Tagebuch des Feldjägerbataillon Nr. 13, Einträge vom 26. 
und 27.2.1918.
11	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1110, Hindenburg an Arz via Cramon, 26.2.1918.
12 
See the uncritical account of Austro-Hungarian military operations in Ukraine: Österreich-
Ungarns letzter Krieg, 103–50, 406–16, 798–800.
13	
TNA, GFM 6/36, Telegramm Nr. 24, von Mumm an AA, 18.3.1918.
14	
For more detail, see chapter 3b in the present volume.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
158
The growing rivalry between the two allies over political influence 
and honor on the battlefield had been there from the start of the war 
and was now set to continue in Ukraine.15 Tension between these 
allied powers was not new,16 but it reached a new intensity in the 
spring of 1918.17 This was the case not only in the course of the military 
operations but also later, during the whole period of occupation. 
Wilhelm Groener observed in the German army a “powerful hatred” 
of the Austrians, and he himself hoped that “the Italians would mount 
a strong attack” in order to put a brake on the demands from Vienna.18 
This competitive approach was manifest in the “absurd race”19 to 
see who would reach a railway station or town first.20 As a result, at 
Slobidka in Podilia, the German Ehrenstein Battalion fell into a trap 
and suffered great losses.21 Something similar happened during the 
capture of Odesa. In this case, it was not just military prestige that 
was at stake but also economic interests. Both attempted to be the first 
to gain control of the remaining ships in the harbor and the military 
supplies stored in the city.22 However, in spite of these rivalries and 
mutual dislike, military comradeship functioned more or less at the 
regional level, as, for instance, in southern Ukraine, with the 52nd 
Corps under General Robert Kosch.
From mid-March the advance of the Central Powers slowed, 
especially in the cities along the Black Sea coast and in the eastern 
15	
The complaints about military recognition continued after the war. See Alfred von Dragoni, 
“Die Kämpfe um Nikolajew und Cherson im Frühjahr 1918,” Österreichische Wehrzeitung, no. 
18 (1928): 2ff. 
16	
Holger H. Herwig, The First World War: Germany and Austria-Hungary, 1914–1918 (London 
and New York, 1997).
17	
Oleh S. Fedyshyn, Germany´s Drive to the East and the Ukrainian Revolution, 1917–1918 (New 
Brunswick, N.J., 1971), 255.
18	
Von Brest-Litovsk zur deutschen Novemberrevolution, “Brief an seine Frau v. 9.3.1918,” 288. 
Hoffmann had similar thoughts. See Die Aufzeichnungen des Generalmajors Max Hoffmann, 
vol. 1, Eintrag v. 14.3.1918.
19	
Von Brest-Litovsk zur deutschen Novemberrevolution, Eintrag v. 7.3.1918, 280.
20 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1153, Hetzjagd Žmerinka–Odessa, 4.3.1918; ÖStA, 
KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1162, Regelung der Verhältnisse in der Ukraina, 5.3.1918; 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1164, Arz an Hindenburg, 5.3.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, 
AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1176, Telegrammsammlung, 6.3.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, 
Kt. 467, Nr. 1177, Ludendorff an Arz, 6.3.1918; ÖStA, KA, AdT, UR 13, Kt. 801, III. Tagebuch, 
Eintrag v. 25.3.1918.
21 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1211, Vorfälle bei Žmerinka und Slobidka, 
20.3.1918. See Österreich-Ungarns letzter Krieg, 124. German and Austro-Hungarian losses 
at Slobidka were three hundred, including seven officers. See Von Brest-Litovsk zur deutschen 
Novemberrevolution, 280. 
22 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1273, Vorgänge bei Odessa, 20.3.1918.

chapter 3a: military operations
159 
industrial region of Ukraine.23 The retreating Bolsheviks blew up 
bridges and railway lines. Heavy losses were sustained in battles for 
important railway junctions and towns.24 The advancing troops had 
to go forward on foot in some places. In some regions there were even 
major setbacks. In Mykolaiv, for instance, a few days after the German 
and Austro-Hungarian troops had captured the city, an uprising 
23	
See the assessment made by the command of the Austro-Hungarian XII Corps in the second half 
of March: ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/KorpsKdo, 12. Korps, Kt. 1661, ohne Nr., Beurteilung 
der Lage durch das XII. Korpskommando, 31.3.1918.
24	
See the report of the command of the Austro-Hungarian XII Corps to the 2nd Army: ÖStA, KA, 
FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, 1918 Situations- und Tagesmeldungen, 
Op. Nr. 3454/8, 2. Armeekommando an QuAbt des 2. Armeekommandos, 18.4.1918.
Map 4: The Central Powers’ invasion of Ukraine, February to May 1918 (ÖStA, KA, AOK, 
OpAbt, Kt. 469, No. 1492; ibid., Kt. 308, Fol. 271; Österreichisches Bundesministerium für 
Landesverteidigung – Kriegsarchiv, ed., Österreich-Ungarns letzter Krieg 1914–1918, vol. 7, 
supplement 6; Reichsarchiv, ed., Der Weltkrieg, 1914–1918, vol. 13, 376–86) 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
160
began that lasted from 22 to 25 March: the staff of 52nd Corps briefly 
found themselves in the midst of a full-fledged battle.25 Kherson had 
to be evacuated on 20 March because of an uprising that began on the 
day after the city was occupied, and it was not retaken until 5 April. 
There were also heavy battles in Kharkiv at the beginning of April and 
in Rostov in early May.26
Naval forces were also employed. On 12 April Austria-Hungary’s 
Danube Flotilla arrived in Odesa and was able to support the advancing 
troops with minor actions at sea and on rivers. German submarines 
were also in use to capture departing cargo ships or warships of the old 
tsarist navy that had been taken over by the Bolsheviks.27 Bulgarian 
and Turkish ships joined the action later.
But in spite of these reinforcements, the obvious shortage of 
troops was increasingly having its effect as the armies advanced. In 
mid-March, Ludendorff needed more troops for the large German 
spring offensive in the West, but Ober Ost successfully insisted that at 
the moment no troops could be withdrawn. In fact, in order to secure 
the harvest, the 1st Cavalry Division and the 92nd Infantry Division 
had to be sent to Ukraine. The advance continued eastward, but every 
kilometer of land gained also meant a further stretching of the supply 
routes, and consequently even more troops were then needed to 
secure the railway lines.28 
With the capture of Rostov on the Don on 8 May 1918, the campaign 
in Ukraine finally ended. On 28 May Kaiser Wilhelm issued a decree 
that there should be no further military operations beyond the already 
captured territory in order not to endanger the peace with Russia.29 In 
spite of this, however, skirmishes on the border with Bolshevik Russia 
continued until the autumn of 1918. In mid-June the Bolsheviks even 
attempted a large amphibious landing at Taganrog, to which we shall 
return below. 
25 
Letters from Kosch to his wife: BA-MA, N 754/10.
26 
In Kharkiv, the Germans lost sixty, including three officers and thirty-nine wounded, among 
them two officers. Seven soldiers were missing. In Rostov, Korps Knoerzer lost twenty-one 
soldiers, with fifty-four wounded. See BA-MA, N 46/171, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn-Kiew, Lage 
am 10.4.1918 morgens; BA-MA, N 46/171, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn-Kiew, Lage am 13.5.1918. 
In its situation report, the Supreme Command of the Austro-Hungarian forces emphasized the 
increasing intensity of the battles: ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 469, Nr. 1492, Über die Lage 
XII., 23.3.–25.4.1918.
27 
ÖStA, AVA, Nachlässe, Nachlass: Böhm-Ermolli, B 1466, Mikrofilm B 1466, Eintrag v. 
12.4.1918.
28	
Reichsarchiv, ed., Der Weltkrieg, 1914–1918, 378.
29	
Ibid., 338.

chapter 3a: military operations
161 
Although this “railway campaign”30 in Ukraine impressed 
contemporaries and excited the military “railway experts” in 
particular,31 this novel experience received very little attention or 
examination in the interwar period.32 The conditions of the “railway 
campaign” were too unique, and a repetition of that constellation in 
the future seemed too improbable for the military to believe that they 
could draw general lessons from it. Nevertheless, there were certain 
principles evident in the operations in Ukraine that resembled the 
overwhelming military successes of the German Wehrmacht more 
than twenty years later in their Blitzkrieg campaigns against Poland, 
France, and other countries.33 
The Central Powers did not operate on a broad front, as so often 
happened in this war, but aimed at winning key points.34 Korps 
Knoerzer, which acted as a spearhead in the first weeks, summarized 
this principle succinctly: “In view of the strength of our troops, it 
was not possible to occupy the whole of Ukraine. What was needed, 
therefore, was to capture the provincial capitals and the main 
commercial centers quickly.”35 But, as was the case in the lightning 
campaign against the Soviet Union in the summer of 1941, such tactics 
had the long-term disadvantage that the hinterland could be controlled 
only superficially with a small number of troops and, beyond the main 
transport routes, hostile partisan groups were able to form.36 
In order to achieve a successful advance away from the railway 
lines, the German troops in Ukraine in 1918 created “flying columns” 
30	
See Österreich-Ungarns letzter Krieg, 7: 121. 
31	
Wilhelm Groener, Der Weltkrieg und seine Probleme. Rückschau und Ausblick (Berlin, 1920); 
Stefan von Velsen, “Deutsche Generalstabsoffiziere im 1. Weltkrieg 1914–1918. Erinnerungen,” 
Die Welt als Geschichte, no. 16 (1956): 250–93.
32 
Shortly after the war ended, Groener wrote: “The advance along the railway in Ukraine in 1918 
was particularly exciting. The diversity brought great joy to leaders and troops and showed 
how control of the railway lines makes it possible to control a large country.” See Groener, Der 
Weltkrieg und seine Probleme, 74. On the development of German policy in the interwar period, 
see Matthias Strohn, The German Army and the Defence of the Reich: Military Doctrine and the 
Conduct of the Defensive Battle, 1918–1939 (Cambridge, 2010).
33	
See the discussion of this comparison in the chapter “Looking Ahead” in the present volume.
34	
The storm troops on the Western Front operated according to this principle, although only 
tactically. See Bruce Gudmundson, Stormtrooper Tactics: Innovation in the German Army, 
1914–1918 (Westport and London, 1989); Ralf Raths, Vom Massensturm zur Stoßtrupptaktik. 
Die deutsche Landkriegstaktik im Spiegel von Dienstvorschriften und Publizistik 1906–1918 
(Freiburg, 2009).
35	
HStA Stuttgart, M 46/16, Korps Knoerzer, Abt. Ia, Nr. 214, An Generalkommando I. A.K., 
6.3.1918.
36 
On 22 March Groener wrote urgently to Ludendorff: “We desperately need more troops for 
these vast spaces, otherwise our authority will go down the drain.” See Von Brest-Litovsk zur 
deutschen Novemberrevolution, 317.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
162
equipped with armored vehicles, infantry, and artillery, in other words, 
ad hoc groups that anticipated the “battle groups” of the Second World 
War. But these “flying columns” were an exception, used only when 
working railway lines were not available.37 The most important means 
of transport in the First World War, especially in Ukraine, was indeed 
the railway, closely followed by the horse. In Operation Faustschlag the 
Germans achieved rates of advance that no other army in both world 
wars was able to repeat and that are difficult to match even today. 
The US Army, in its “lightning campaign” during Operation Iraqi 
Freedom in 2003, took twenty days (21 March to 9 April), with the 
most modern technology, to advance the 550 km from the Kuwait-Iraq 
border to Baghdad and finally take the city. The Germans in 1918, by 
comparison, needed only fourteen days (18 February to 3 March) to 
cover the same distance between Kovel and Kyiv and take control of 
that city. The remaining advance, over the 900 km to Rostov, engaging 
in battles along the way, took only another two months. 
The speed of the advance had much to do with the fact that officers 
on the spot were able to react quickly and flexibly to any particular 
situation, without contacting their superiors. After three years of 
static trench warfare with murderous artillery fire in the West (and, 
to a certain degree, also in the East), this mentality was astonishing. 
At first Linsingen wanted to advance only as far as Kaunas (Kovno), 
but the continued advance to Kyiv was a result of “pressure from the 
troops to keep moving forward…. To be surprised by both friend and 
foe was a pleasure,”38 as Groener smugly remarked. 
The rapid advance of the Central Powers created confusion and 
amazement among the enemy, as well as among the Ukrainian 
population. The liaison officer attached to the Foreign Office reported 
from Ukraine that everywhere there was an “almost fairy-tale dread” 
of the “approach of the Germanski. The maintenance of this moral 
prestige appears to be the basis for further successes.”39 What was 
the significance of this “fairy-tale dread”? Did it indicate respect for 
37	
For instance, in the advance of 52nd Corps toward Odesa. See Kosch’s letters to his wife: BA-MA, 
N 754/10.
38	
Von Brest-Litovsk zur deutschen Novemberrevolution, Eintrag v. 8.3.1918, 285.
39 
BArch, R 3101/1314, Bericht über Eindrücke in der Ukraine von Oblt.d.Res. Colin Ross, 
Verbindungsoffizier der militärischen Stelle des Auswärtigen Amtes. Although Ross only held 
the rank of first lieutenant, his report aroused great interest at the top levels of the empire. Copies 
of his report were remarked on favorably by the Foreign Office, the Ministry of the Economy, and 
the OHL. General Hoffmann also approved of the report. See the correspondence in TNA, GFM 
6/35.

chapter 3a: military operations
163 
the military achievements of the Germans or fear of their use of terror 
against the enemy and the civilian population?
This is a controversial point in the historical evaluation of the 
Blitzkrieg in Ukraine in 1918. Was the “measured terrorization” of the 
civilian population and of the enemy an integral element of a German 
plan to spread chaos among their opponents?40 With regard to 
Ukraine, the picture is highly ambivalent. First of all, one should not 
lose sight of the overall context. In the early spring of 1918, conditions 
in Ukraine were extremely chaotic and unclear. The authority of the 
Rada was not properly recognized anywhere. On the Black Sea coast, 
for instance, “every town wanted to be independent.”41 There were, 
in addition, ethnic tensions between Ukrainians, Russians, Tatars, 
German settlers, Cossacks, Poles, and Jews. Countless criminal 
bands, paramilitary groups, remnants of the tsarist army, fighting 
groups such as the anarchist Makhno movement, as well as the 
Polish and Czechoslovak Legions were hanging around in the towns 
or looking for hideouts in the country away from the railway lines. 
Disbanded soldiers and officers of the old tsarist army wanted to find 
their way home or stayed where they were and sought to keep their 
heads above water by taking on small jobs. Most of them were still 
armed and joined one of the fighting groups, mainly the Bolsheviks. 
An order of the German 2nd Cavalry Division showed very clearly 
the difficulties that the troops were facing: “Conditions in the new 
area of operations are difficult in that the local rural population, not 
having enough clothes, often wear Russian military uniforms, and the 
external appearance of the Rada troops is no different from that of the 
Bolshevik groups. It would be practical to recruit German-speaking 
Ukrainians as interpreters. We should not, without any more ado, 
shoot at every person wearing a Russian uniform but should first try 
to ascertain whether the person concerned has hostile intentions.”42 
It was therefore difficult to get a clear view of the situation, and very 
hard or impossible for the soldiers of the Central Powers to distinguish 
between friend and foe.
40	
On the Polish campaign, see Jochen Böhler, Auftakt zum Vernichtungskrieg. Die Wehrmacht in 
Polen 1939 (Frankfurt am Main, 2006); Alexander B. Rossino, Hitler Strikes Poland: Blitzkrieg, 
Ideology and Atrocity (Lawrence, Kans., 2003). 
41	
BA-MA, N 754/10, Brief Koschs an seine Frau, 21.3.1918.
42	
BayHStA-KA, 5, Chev. Regt., Bd. 1, 2. Kavalleriedivision, Abt. Ia, Allgemeine Anordnungen, 
17.2.1918. Even in September 1918, masses of unemployed disbanded Russian soldiers living in 
the towns wore full or partial uniforms. See BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 21, Bezirk Wolhynien 
West. Bay.Kav.Division, Abt. Ia, Nr. 3276 W, Stimmung im Lande, 19.9.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
164
However, the political direction for the German soldiers had been 
made very clear. Both before and shortly after the invasion, they were 
strongly reminded of their task: “We are in a friendly country. The 
government and the population are ready to make available to us 
everything we need to carry out our task, but they expect of us that we 
behave according to the appropriate rules, whatever the requirement. 
This is the only way to maintain the trust of the population or to win 
it where it does not yet exist.”43 The commander of the 91st Infantry 
Division, Lieutenant General Hermann Clausius, ordered leaflets to be 
distributed to the population informing them that the Germans were 
in their country as friends.44Requisitioning of food should therefore 
be absolutely avoided.
In fact, many Ukrainians, including Jews,45 welcomed the 
German troops as liberators from Bolshevism. This was particularly 
apparent in towns that had been occupied by the Bolsheviks for some 
time, such as Feodosiia or Rostov.46 But the Germans also frequently 
encountered “very unfriendly” sentiments from the local population 
in response to their invasion.47 The orders to the troops then changed: 
the population was not to be trusted.
43	
BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, Generalkommando I. A.K., Abt. Ib, Nr. 4122, 16.3.1918. 
See BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, Korps Knoerzer, Abt. Ib, Nr. 528, 24.3.1918. 
Besondere Anordnungen (Zusammenfassung der bisher erlassenen wichtigsten Bestimmungen). 
This contains the statement: “We find ourselves in a friendly country. Our behavior toward 
Ukrainian officials and the population must reflect this.” See also BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 
18, Generalkommando 52, Nr. 4412, Besondere Anordnungen, 19.3.1918. These orders relate 
back to a central order of the Linsingen Army Group: HStA Stuttgart, M 46/15, Fernspruch 
Heeresgruppe Linsingen, Abt. Ia, Nr. 13204, 16.2.1918. By way of explaining the German 
intervention, Ober Ost commanded that “the sins of the Bolshevik Government should be made 
clear once again to the Russians.” See BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, Verst. 93. Res.Inf.
Brigade, Abt. Ia, Nr. 2296, ObOst drahtet, 17.2.1918. 
44 
HStA Stuttgart, M 46/21. 91, Infanteriedivision, Abt. Ia, Nr. 605/18, Bericht über die Ereignisse 
vom Verlassen der Stochodstellung an bis zur Einnahme von Kiew, 16.3.1918.
45	
HStA Stuttgart, M 46/21. 91, Infanteriedivision, Abt. Ia, M 46/16. 91, Infanteriedivision, Abt. 
Ia, Nr. 513/18, Funkspruch an Korps Knoerzer, 9.3.1918. However, this positive attitude of the 
91st Infantry Division did not seem to be shared by Korps Knoerzer, which added a handwritten 
question mark on the margin.
46	
BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 18, Kaiserl. Deutsches Gouvernement Sewastopol, Abt. Ia, Nr. 120, 
Bericht über die Tätigkeit der B.K.D. von Bierislawa bis zur Besetzung von Feodossija, 13.5.1918; 
HStA Stuttgart, M 413/1214, III./württem. Landwehr Feld-Artillerieregiment, 1. KTB, Eintrag v. 
8.5.1918; HStA Stuttgart, M 46/21, Korps Knoerzer, Abt. Ia, Nr. 1707, Die Operationen des Korps 
Knoerzer nach Einnahme von Kiew bis zur Einnahme von Rostow, 29.5.1918. See Max Fritsche, 
Das königlich sächsische Landwehr Infanterieregiment Nr. 106 (Dresden, 1925), 163; Oberst 
Fromm, Das Württembergische Landwehr Infanterieregiment Nr. 126 im Weltkrieg 1914–1918 
(Stuttgart, 1921), 55, 65.
47	
TNA, GFM 6/35, Telegramm des K. Legationsrats an AA, 9.3.1918.

chapter 3a: military operations
165 
As was demonstrated by the many counter-orders, there were 
many excesses and instances of indiscipline on the part of the 
German troops. The XXII Reserve Corps warned, for instance, that 
“the establishment of orderly conditions” also depended on “how our 
troops observe the existing regulations and laws.”48 In retrospect, 
a representative of the German Ministry of the Economy stated: “It 
cannot be denied that our military and civilian authorities in this wild 
country, with its insecure conditions, did not always behave completely 
legally and considerately, especially in the early period.”49 Not least 
because of this, the mood in the country threatened to turn against 
the Central Powers. But there was certainly no conscious or planned 
terrorization of the population during the invasion in the spring of 
1918. Even though the extent of the excesses is still unknown, they did 
not reflect the general policy of the Central Powers.
The Radicalization of the Struggle against the Bolsheviks
But with the actions of the Bolsheviks, the military opponent that 
most frequently brought weapons and propaganda to bear against the 
Central Powers, the situation was quite different. They sometimes fled 
at the approach of enemy troops but frequently engaged in delaying 
actions. They had some support in the countryside but more in the 
towns.50 Often they fought without uniforms and, in many cases, 
killed soldiers of the Central Powers whom they took prisoner.51 In 
most cases, the German and Austro-Hungarian troops recognized the 
Bolsheviks only when they had opened fire. The latter did not respect 
the Hague Conventions of 1899 and 1907, according to which they were 
to make themselves known as combatants. Kosch summarized this 
kind of warfare with the following words: “A very difficult war against 
the inhabitants of a country is always bad because it is unpredictable 
and prey to a thousand accidents.”52
48	
BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 20, Bezirk Wolhynien, Generalkommando XXII. R.K., Abt. Ia, Nr. 
222 op, 29.3.1918.
49	
BArch, R 3101/1168, Reichswirtschaftsstelle bei der Deutschen Ukrainedelegation an den 
Staatssekretär des Reichswirtschaftsamts, 17.8.1918.
50 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3669, NA Nr. 11222, Die 
militärische Lage Großrusslands im März und April 1918.
51	
Cf. HStA Stuttgart, M 46/16, Morgenmeldung Korps Knoerzer, Abt. Ia, 5.3.1918; Fromm, Das 
Württembergische Landwehr Infanterieregiment Nr. 126, 80. There were, however, cases where 
the Bolsheviks treated their prisoners well. See BA-MA, N 754/10, Brief Koschs an seine Frau 
vom 25.3.1918. 
52	
BA-MA, N 754/10, Brief Koschs an seine Frau v. 26.3.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
166
At the beginning of the campaign, explicit orders were given to 
the German troops that the Bolsheviks should be taken prisoner, 
whether armed or not.53 This is also suggested by general orders to 
erect prisoner-of-war camps, as well as by reports about Bolshevik 
prisoners.54 There is a lack of clarity, however, in German orders issued 
at the end of March: “Organized Bolsheviks and the Czech divisions 
are our enemies and are to be treated according to the laws of war.” 
In other words, they were to be shot. But the following sentence is 
perplexing: “Officers, military officials, and staff of the Entente are 
likewise to be regarded as enemies.”55 It is, however, unthinkable 
that Entente officers were shot in the East without more ado, as this 
would have led to a massive wave of international protest.56 In sum, 
this order was not unambiguous, but there are clear indications that 
in late March and early April most Bolshevik prisoners were shot 
immediately.57 A postwar German regimental history claimed that 
Bolsheviks who resisted were shot, while the remainder were handed 
53	
BayHStA-KA, Landsturm Regt 1, Bd. 4, Armee Abt. Gronau, Abt. Ia, Nr. 09570 geheim, 
Verhalten dem Feinde gegenüber beim Vorgehen aus unseren Linien, 17.2.1918.
54	
Cf. HStA Stuttgart, M 46/16, HGr Linsingen, Abt Ic, Nr. 17960 geh, Besondere Anordnungen 
für die Unternehmung des Korps Knoerzer, 16.2.1918; HStA Stuttgart, M 46/16, Korps 
Knoerzer, Abt. Ia, Fernspruch an 92. I.D., 28.2.1918; HStA Stuttgart, M 46/21, 91. Inf.-Division, 
Abt. Ia, Nr. 605/18, Bericht über die Ereignisse vom Verlassen der Stochodstellung an bis zur 
Einnahme von Kiew, 16.3.1918; BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 1, 15. Bayerische Reserve-
Infanteriebrigade, KTB, Eintrag v. 19.2.1918; BayHStA-KA, 5. Chevauleger Regiment, Bd. 4, 
2. Kavalleriedivision, Abt. Ia, Nr. 476/18, 23.2.1918; BayHStA-KA, 5. Chevauleger Regiment, 
Bd. 4, 2. Kavalleriedivision, Abt. Ia, Nr. 476/18, Divisionsbefehl für den 24.2.1918; Ludwig 
Freiherr von Gebsattel, Das K.B. 1. Ulanen-Regiment “Kaiser Wilhelm II. König von Preußen.” 
Nach Kriegsakten, Kriegstagebüchern und Mitteilungen ehemaliger Angehöriger des Regiments 
(Augsburg, 1924), Eintrag v. 22.2.1918, 201.
55	
Cf. BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, Korps Knoerzer, Abt. Ib, Nr. 528, Besondere 
Anordnungen (Zusammenfassung der bisher erlassenen wichtigsten Bestimmungen), 24.3.1918. 
Cf. also: BayHStA-KA, 5. Chevauleger Regiment, Bd. 4, 2. Kavalleriedivision, Abt. Ia, Nr. 
656/18, 23.3.1918. This states that “When Czechs are taken prisoner, and when procedures are 
undertaken in keeping with the laws of war, brief reports are to be made to the leader of the escort 
battalion containing statements made by participants in the battle and any written materials 
found in the possession of the Czechs.” 
56 
In March 1918 there were French, British, Belgian, and Serbian officers in Kyiv whom the 
Ukrainian government expelled by 19 March under German pressure. Cf. TNA, GFM 6/36, 
Telegramm von Mumm an AA v. 16.3.1918.
57	
Cf. BA-MA, N 46/171, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn-Kiew, Lage am 6.4.1918 morgens. In the battle 
for Katerynoslav, Korps Knoerzer counted five hundred enemy dead, with their own losses at 
seven dead and fourteen wounded. Cf. HStA Stuttgart, M 46/21.215, Infanteriedivision, Abt. Ia, 
Nr. 6111/18 op, 24.5.1918; HStA Stuttgart, M 62/2, KTB der 52. k.w. Landwehr Infanteriebrigade, 
Eintrag v. 30.4.1918.

chapter 3a: military operations
167 
over to the Ukrainian government.58 Obviously, the orders left 
individual German units a certain scope for interpretation.
The state of command for the Austro-Hungarian troops was 
similar. In the early months, there were no clear orders on how to 
treat the Bolsheviks. It was not until 9 May, when the advance had 
ended, that a corresponding order was sent to the 59th Infantry 
Division: “No matter how difficult the battles in this country may 
seem, the Bolsheviks, who are not recognized by us in international 
law—whether we confront them as individuals, in groups, or in larger 
formations—and who, since they are acting against the laws of the 
Ukrainian People’s Republic, have no right to be treated according to 
international law, are to be regarded as irregulars and not as regular 
troops. Similarly, any attack on our troops by such unauthorized 
persons is a serious crime that, according to the principles of self-
defense in war, can only be atoned by immediate death.”59 In the 
following months, orders and reports from the command of the 
Austro-Hungarian 2nd Army (Ostarmee) to the divisions always portray 
the Bolsheviks as troublemakers among the population and prisoners 
of war. They should therefore be treated with “special severity.” But 
what this meant was not specified unambiguously.60 Not surprisingly, 
the shooting of individual Bolsheviks or whole groups was a daily 
occurrence throughout the occupation.61
The radicalization of the fighting against Bolshevik units can be 
demonstrated by two instances in which German troops massacred 
large numbers of Bolsheviks: the massacre at Perekop in the Crimea 
in April and the mass killing at Taganrog in June 1918. Both events 
are very well documented and allow certain conclusions to be drawn. 
58	
Fromm, Das Württembergische Landwehr Infanterieregiment Nr. 126, 65. The regimental history 
of the 106th Landwehr Infantry Regiment says that the Bolsheviks, “according to orders, were to 
be treated as irregulars.” Cf. Fritsche, Das königlich sächsische Landwehr Infanterieregiment 
Nr. 106, 151.
59	
ÖStA, KA, AdT, FAR 59, Kt. 832, Abfertigung Nr. 57, 9. Mai 1918. First quoted in Wolfram 
Dornik, “Die Besatzung der Ukraine durch österreichisch-ungarische Truppen 1918,” in Die 
Besatzung der Ukraine 1918. Historischer Kontext – Forschungsstand – wirtschaftliche und 
soziale Folgen, ed. Wolfram Dornik and Stefan Karner (Graz, 2008), 168.
60 
ÖStA, KA, AdT, FABrig 59, Kt. 4131, Nr. 307, Verhalten der Zivilbevölkerung gegenüber, 
20.8.1918.
61 
At the level of troops in the field, see the examples of the 13th Military Police Battalion and the 
3rd Uhlan Regiment: ÖStA, KA, AdT, FJBat 13, Kt. 754, 6. Tagebuch des Feldjägerbataillons Nr. 
13; ÖStA, KA, AdT, FJBat 13, Kt. 754, 7. Tagebuch des Feldjägerbataillons Nr. 13; ÖStA, KA, 
AdT, UR 3, Kt. 800, Lagebücher, Einträge vom 25., 26.6.1918, 2., 17., 24., 27.7.1918, 5., 6.10.1918. 
See also the situation reports and daily reports to the 2nd Army: ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/
AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, 1918 Situations- und Tagesmeldungen.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
168
In the fighting at Perekop between 17 and 19 April 1918, the Germans 
made a breakthrough to the Crimea. According to German reports, 
about two thousand Bolsheviks were defending the isthmus. The 217th 
Infantry Division should have led the attack62 but was unable to arrive 
in time in sufficient numbers. The commander of the Bavarian Cavalry 
Division, Major General Moritz Freiherr von Egloffstein, requested that 
52nd Corps allow his division to begin the attack immediately. Permission 
was granted and, in a single day, the Bavarian Cavalry, with the 9th Jäger 
Battalion and the 29th Bavarian Jäger Regiment, broke through the 
Bolshevik defense lines. Then a wild pursuit of the fleeing Bolsheviks 
ensued; no prisoners were taken. The commander of the 1st Bavarian 
Cavalry Brigade, Colonel Joseph von Tannstein, commented: “This had 
the effect of spreading great fear among the enemy (especially after the 
battle at Perekop). All the local population said so.” Since Tannstein’s 
brigade was outnumbered in battle, this psychological shock element 
had a very welcome effect, according to this Bavarian cavalry officer: 
“Bolsheviks who have been beaten do not offer any more resistance.”63 
Kosch praised the Bavarian Cavalry Division for its “ruthless courage in 
the attack against the barbarous and treacherous enemy,” which was a 
“model for all future undertakings.”64 
In these battles in the Crimea, why did the Bavarian Cavalry 
not take any prisoners? The issue cannot be resolved simply by the 
questionable and brutal utilitarian considerations quoted above, since 
the division, in the previous war years on the Eastern Front, had been 
quite concerned to deal correctly with prisoners of war.65 It was rather 
62	
Cf. BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 18, Generalkommando (z.b.V.) Nr. 52, Chef/Ia, Nr. 4863, 
14.4.1918.
63	
BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 19, 1. bayer. Kavallerie Brigade. Kommandeur. Erfahrungen aus 
den Operationen und Kämpfen gegen die Bolschewisten in Taurien und in der Krim in der Zeit 
v. 16.4.–2.5.1918, 20.5.1918. The division’s report admitted that no prisoners had been taken. Cf. 
BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 18, Kaiserl. Deutsches Gouvernement Sewastopol, Abt. Ia, Nr. 120, 
Bericht über die Tätigkeit der B.K.D. von Bierislawa bis zur Besetzung von Feodossija, 13.5.1918. 
See also Kosch’s letter of 21.4.1918 to his wife: BA-MA, N 754/10: “Well, the defeat at Perekop, 
where the Bavarians wiped out just about everyone, will hopefully instill some salutary fear in 
them [the Bolsheviks].”
64	
Cf. BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 18, Generalkommando (z.b.V.) Nr. 52, Abt. Ia, Nr. 4920, 
Korpsbefehl, 19.4.1918.
65	
Cf. BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 28, Bayerische Kavalleriedivision, Abt. Ib, Nr. 2428, 
Divisionsbefehl, 18.1.1917. Cf. the general order of the War -Ministry, in BayHStA-KA, 
Kriegsministerium, Nr. 546/15 g.U.3. geheim, Betrifft: Misshandlung von russischen 
Gefangenen, 29.7.1915. This says: “It must be emphasized explicitly that it does not correspond 
to German interests to handle the Russians badly. Among the majority of Russian soldiers, there 
was no previous hatred of the Germans. It would be impolitic to provoke such sentiment by bad 
treatment. On the contrary, every effort must be made, while maintaining order and discipline, to 
treat them in a manner that is just and humane.” 

chapter 3a: military operations
169 
a mixture of different factors that led to this radicalization. From mid-
March, the troops of the Central Powers had witnessed Bolshevik 
atrocities against the Ukrainian population.66 The victims were mainly 
nobles and officers. For instance, hundreds if not thousands of officers 
were executed in Kyiv.67 In his personal diary, the commander in chief 
of the Austro-Hungarian 2nd Army, Böhm-Ermolli, wrote about “bestial 
horrors carried out by the Bolsheviks, but also by the peasantry.” Thirty-
two “Russian” officers, members of a Ukrainian unit, were “found killed, 
stripped, and mutilated” by the peasants.68 It is seldom possible to verify 
today exactly what happened and the number of victims, but there is 
no doubt that massacres became daily occurrences quite early on in 
the Russian Civil War. Widespread reporting of such horrors must have 
poisoned the mood and radicalized the attitude of the troops. Since 
the officer corps not only of the Bavarian Cavalry Division but also of 
most of the Austro-Hungarian military came almost exclusively from 
the nobility, these reports would not have had a moderating effect on 
their behavior. Added to this was the fact that, in southern Ukraine, the 
Bavarian Cavalry would frequently have encountered German settlers. 
There were no linguistic barriers to communication here, and a sense 
of ethnic community would have bound them together. These German 
settlers would have had very little good to say about the Bolsheviks. 
Since they were the wealthiest group among the peasantry, they had 
been subject to Bolshevik plundering and destruction. Many of them 
had been abducted. Before and after 1917, they were regarded by the 
population, and later by the Bolsheviks, as allies of the enemy.69 
66	
Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew did not issue an order to make a collection of these atrocities 
until July 1918: BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 22, Nachrichtenoffizier der OHL beim 
Generalkommando XXII, Res.-Korps, Nr. 1076, An alle Nachrichtenoffiziere der Divisionen und 
Etappenkommandanturen, 24.7.1918.
67	
Different numbers are to be found in the literature and in sources. The number 900, which 
appears in the history of the 133rd Landwehr Infantry Regiment, seems to be the most credible, 
as this regiment was the first to enter the capital. Cf. Max Romstedt, Das Kgl. Sächs. Landwehr 
Infanterieregiment Nr. 133 (Dresden, 1924), 108. The number 3,000 is mentioned two years 
after the event in a report by a Swiss citizen to the Swiss foreign ministry: BAR Bern, E 2300, 
1000/716, 282, Bericht des Schweizers Carl Heinrich Würgler “Die Bolschewistische Diktatur” 
an das Eidgenössische Politische Departement, Abteilung für Auswärtiges, 12.7.1920, 13ff. See 
also the report of the American consul, Summer: NARA, US Department of State, relating to 
internal Affairs in Russia and Soviet Union 1910–1929, War Series 6, RG 59, Russia, IV Reports 
from Consul General Moscow on Conditions in Russia, Cable message from American Consul 
at Moscow via Vladivostok, No. 222, 1.3.1918. The historian Mark von Hagen writes of more 
than 2,500 victims in his War in a European Borderland: Occupations and Occupation Plans in 
Galicia and Ukraine, 1914–1918 (Seattle and London, 2007), 87. 
68 
ÖStA, AVA, Nachlässe, Nachlass: Böhm-Ermolli, B 1466, Mikrofilm B 1466, Eintrag v. 
19.3.1918.
69	
Cf. BA-MA, N 754/10, Briefe Koschs an seine Frau vom 21.3., 29.3. und 31.3.1918; Fromm, Das 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
170
The German troops, including the Bavarian Cavalry Division, had 
been deployed to southern Ukraine from Romania with an order from 
the 9th Army that did not encourage moderation: “All troops being sent 
into Ukraine are to be instructed about the conditions there, which 
are reminiscent of the invasion of Belgium in the summer of 1914. 
They are also to be instructed about the nature of irregular warfare, 
with special attention to fighting in built-up areas.... Weapons are to 
be used ruthlessly against an armed enemy. Insurgencies are to be 
nipped in the bud before they can grow.... A friendly reception and 
peaceful behavior of the population by light of day should not lead 
to carelessness.”70 But the first reports from the Bavarian Cavalry 
Division did not have anything negative to say about the country. 
In the second half of March, however, this changed in Mykolaiv. 
The events there were an almost traumatic experience. This southern 
Ukrainian industrial city was regarded as a Bolshevik stronghold 
and was home to many unemployed and armed workers. Once the 
Central Powers had occupied Mykolaiv on 17 March, the German and 
Austro-Hungarian troops continued their rapid advance eastward in 
the direction of Kherson without waiting for reinforcements. On 23 
March, after a funeral of comrades who had been killed by troops of 
the Central Powers, the Bolsheviks staged a demonstration that led 
to an uprising in the city. This quickly became a mass uprising that 
created extreme difficulties for the German troops and staff of the 
52nd Corps. After some tense hours, German and Austro-Hungarian 
reinforcements were able to restore order. But their intervention had 
led to fierce street battles with the use of artillery. “Behind the lines 
of the troops, everyone was disarmed.” Anyone found afterwards 
in possession of a weapon was killed on the spot or, during a new 
search of the city some days later, was shot following a summary court 
martial.71 German troops did not even hesitate to break their promise 
of an amnesty for Bolsheviks who surrendered.72
Württembergische Landwehr Infanterieregiment Nr. 126, passim.
70	
BayHStA-KA, 2. S.R.R., Bd. 7, AOK 9, Abt. Ia, Nr. 6654 op, Armeebefehl betreffend Verhalten 
der Truppen in der Ukraine, 26.3.1918. On the troops sent into Kyiv, cf. BayHStA-KA, 5. Chev. 
Regt., Bd. 1, 2. Kavalleriedivision, Abt. Ia, Allgemeine Anordnungen, 17.2.1918: “It is likely that 
the Bolsheviks will carry on a kind of Francs-tireurs war.” 
71	
Cf. BA-MA, N 754/10, Briefe Koschs an seine Frau vom 24.3. und 31.3.1918. See also the drastic 
order of the 217th Infantry Division in BayHStA-KA, 29. InfRegt, Bd. 2, 29. bay.Inf.Regt. (Jäg.
Regt.), Auszug aus Divisionsbefehl (217. ID) v. 23.3.18, Abt. Ia, Nr. 47, 26.3.1918.
72 
Cf. BayHStA-KA, 29. InfRegt, Bd. 2, Bayer. Res. Jäger Batl. 1; Auszug aus dem Kriegstagebuch 
mit Gefechtsbericht. Das K.B. Reserve Jägerbataillon Nr. 1, ed. Hans Muggenthaler et al. 
(Munich, 1935), 363–68.

chapter 3a: military operations
171 
For the Central Powers, the uprising in Mykolaiv clearly 
demonstrated their vulnerability, given their small number of troops 
in this large country permeated in parts by hostile units. This incident 
also exposed the problem of advancing rapidly without having secured 
the territory in the rear. The experience of the battle in Mykolaiv and 
the conclusions drawn from it would now become a yardstick for 
future actions. The command of the Austro-Hungarian Army Group 
Command Kherson (k.u.k. Armeegruppenkommando Cherson) and 
the German 52nd Corps circulated a short and succinct report.73 The 
attitude of the officers and units deployed in Mykolaiv had now clearly 
become more radical. Army Group Command Kherson indicated that 
“right from the start, one has to proceed with the greatest ruthlessness 
against the rabble.”74 The Germans adopted a similar tone. According to 
Kosch, “the Russian bows only to brute force, to which he is accustomed 
from his former government. This worked here [in Mykolaiv], and it 
will also work in Kherson, which was fortunately taken after heavy 
fighting. There is no place for weakness here.”75 The Bavarian Cavalry 
Division also drew its conclusions: “The experiences in Mykolaiv have 
demonstrated that the only thing that works against the population 
is to be ruthlessly strict. Every man we meet with a weapon in his 
hand has to be shot immediately. Arrests, followed by a court-martial, 
are only seen as weakness.” But the division also cautioned that “of 
course, the use of force” was permissible “only to maintain order,”76 
and “the strictness that is required against the population” had to be 
“accompanied by irreproachable and disciplined behavior on the part 
of the troops.”77 Nevertheless, these orders did not as yet mean that the 
whole population was to be seen as an enemy. Even in Perekop, the 
 
73	
ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, Nr. 234, Erfahrung aus den 
Straßenkämpfen in Nikolajew, 25.3.1918; BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 18, Generalkommando 
z.b.V. Nr. 52, Abt. Ia, Nr. 4608, Erfahrungen bei den Straßenkämpfen in Nikolajew, 3.4.1918. 
Since the German report is abridged and was published later, it may be assumed that the original 
report was written by the Austro-Hungarians. 
74	
ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, Nr. 234, Erfahrung aus den 
Straßenkämpfen in Nikolajew, 25.3.1918.
75	
BA-MA, N 754/10, Brief Koschs an seine Frau vom 5.4.1918. See also the letter from Kosch to 
his wife on 2.4.1918: “Calm has gradually been restored here; the bloody lesson and the many 
death sentences passed later seem to have borne fruit. The Russian needs a firm hand, and then 
he complies.” 
76	
BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 18, Bay.Kav.Div., Abt. Ia, Nr. 943, Divisionsbefehl, 4.4.1918.
77 
BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 18, Bay.Kav.Div., Abt. Ia, Nr. 966, 6.4.1918. See also: BayHStA-
KA, 1. Kav.Brig., Bd. 7, 217. Infanteriedivision, Abt. Ia, Nr. 47 op, Divisionsbefehl, 25.3.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
172
Bavarian Cavalry did not bother unarmed Bolshevik party members.78 
But with regard to armed Bolsheviks, the orders were now clear.
 Before the battle at Perekop, there was one other concrete reason 
why the Bavarian Cavalry took no prisoners: the Bolsheviks had shot 
prisoners from the 2nd Bavarian Heavy Cavalry Regiment.79 In the 
battle itself, the division suffered severe losses. There were 220 dead 
and wounded, almost all of them shot with handguns, indicating that 
these battles were fought in close combat.80 Shortly after the battle, 
the Bavarian Cavalry Division sharpened its tone against the enemy 
in an order of 29 April 1918: “Let us go forward now until we have 
finally eliminated these hateful bandits, whom we must recognize not 
as soldiers but as robbers and murderers.”81
Yet the 52nd Corps could also find practical and flexible solutions 
to the issue of armed captured Bolsheviks, as was demonstrated in 
the capture of Sevastopol. While the Bavarian Cavalry Division, after 
its breakthrough at Perekop, moved toward the Kerch peninsula and 
captured Feodosiia, Kosch sent the 217th Infantry Division and 15th 
Landwehr Division to Sevastopol, where the fleeing Bolsheviks had 
gathered and had the Russian Black Sea Fleet under their control. 
78	
BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 19, 1. Bayer. Kavalleriebrigade, Kommandeur. Erfahrungen aus den 
Operationen und Kämpfen gegen die Bolschewisten in Taurien und in der Krim in der Zeit vom 
16.4.–2.5.1918, 20.5.1918. This report says: “A report that a place was a strong nest of Bolsheviks 
led to an unnecessary splintering of forces, as the population seeking help understood the 
Bolsheviks to be everyone who agreed with their basic principles (distribution of land, etc.). The 
place in question was then generally found to be peaceful.... In all places, only those Bolsheviks 
were sought who had previously been seen with weapons [underlined in the original] and, in such 
cases, they were immediately sentenced to death.” 
79	
See Eugen Frauenholz, Das K.B. 2. Kürassier- und Schweres Reiterregiment (Munich, 1921), 
293: “While on patrol, First Lieutenant Baron von Gohre, Private Riepl, and Cavalryman Johann 
Huber were taken prisoner by the Bolsheviks. Some days later, according to local residents, 
and based on the autopsy, it was established that the prisoners had been taken to Bolshevik 
headquarters and, since all three refused to reveal the strength of our forces, they were, contrary 
to international law, made to stand against the wall and shot. An enemy like this could no longer 
be treated as an honest adversary. Once these facts were known, our regiment took no more 
prisoners.” This account, given after the war, is confirmed by BA-MA, N 754/10, Brief Koschs 
an seine Frau v. 19.4.1918; BayHStA-KA, 29. InfRegt, Bd. 3, 29. Bayerisches Jägerregiment, 
Nachrichtensammlung v. 18.4.1918.
80	
BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 19, 1. Bayer. Kavallerie Brigade. Kommandeur, Erfahrungen aus 
den Operationen und Kämpfen gegen die Bolschewisten in Taurien und in der Krim in der Zeit 
vom 16.4.–2.5.1918, 20.5.1918. The 29th Bavarian Jäger Regiment also suffered major losses, with 
29 dead and 151 wounded. Cf. BayHStA-KA, 29. InfRegt, Bd. 3. 29, Bayerisches Jägerregiment, 
KTB, Eintrag v. 19.4.1918.
81	
Cf. BayHStA-KA, 29. InfReg, Bd. 3. BayKavDiv. Divisions-Tagesbefehl, 20.4.1918. The 
brutalization of the Bavarian cavalrymen is also confirmed by statements from their own side, 
for instance, in the history of the 126th Landwehr Regiment: Fromm, Das Württembergische 
Landwehr Infanterieregiment Nr. 126, 79.

chapter 3a: military operations
173 
Kosch feared renewed street fighting, as had happened in Mykolaiv. 
His situation was not a simple one, particularly as a Ukrainian brigade 
was based in the Crimea and wanted to assert the authority of the Rada.
Before the feared storming of Sevastopol, Kosch received 
three delegations from the city. While he immediately rebuffed 
the representatives of the Rada, he promised the mayor that peace 
and order would be established if the citizens did not take up arms 
against the Germans. It was, however, only with the representatives 
of the workers’ soviet that Kosch engaged in a proper negotiation. He 
promised that he would not intervene in their organization if they 
reined in the workers. The Bolsheviks were guaranteed their lives if 
they handed over the fortress peacefully. The coup took place and, on 
30 April, Sevastopol came under German control practically without a 
fight. Kosch thought it would be “quite impossible to have all 5–8,000 
Bolsheviks shot.”82 
His colleague Colonel Arthur Bopp, on the other hand, as 
commander of the 52nd Württemberg Landwehr Brigade, showed no 
scruples only a few weeks later about shooting thousands of captured 
Bolsheviks at Taganrog. This was by far the greatest German mass 
crime during the whole period of occupation.83 After the initial 
campaign had been completed, there were still conflicts, especially on 
the eastern border of Ukraine. On 11 June the Bolsheviks carried out a 
major coup. In an amphibious operation, eight thousand men landed 
on a peninsula between Taganrog and the Miius Firth84 in order to 
attack the German troops in the vicinity of Rostov. Korps Knoerzer 
briefly considered withdrawing from the city but then decided 
against it on account of “the lack of initiative constantly shown by 
these opponents, their poor discipline and lack of leaders.” Instead, 
Knoerzer sent the 52nd Württemberg Landwehr Brigade and the 7th 
Bavarian Cavalry Brigade against the enemy.85 
82	
BA-MA, N 754/10, Brief Koschs an seine Frau v. 30.4.1918.
83	
In the works written about the period of occupation in Ukraine, the battle at Taganrog merits a 
footnote at most. For the only detailed analysis, see Reinhard Nachtigal, “Krasnyj Desant: Das 
Gefecht an der Mius-Bucht. Ein unbeachtetes Kapitel der deutschen Besetzung Südrusslands 
1918,” Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas, no. 53 (2005): 221–46.
84 
The Miius Firth is actually the wide estuary of the river as it flows into the Black Sea. The battles 
at Taganrog are often referred to as the Battle on the Miius Firth.
85	
HStA Stuttgart, M 46/20, 7. Landwehrdivision Stab, Gefecht am Mius-See 9.6.–13.6.1918, 
Abschriften. 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
174
Colonel Bopp was given the task of leading the attack. He 
divided the units under his command into three groups86 and, after 
two days, drove his opponents back to the sea. Only between one 
and two thousand Bolsheviks could be rescued by the landing craft. 
The Germans took no prisoners during the battle from among the 
“Bolsheviks who were defending themselves desperately”87 and, after 
the battle, Bopp issued a written order to shoot all prisoners. Only ten 
were kept for interrogation and later executed. On 14 June, the day 
after the battle, the battlefield was searched once again for scattered 
Bolsheviks, and they covered the many bodies because “with the high 
temperatures...the numerous bodies of dead men and animals lying 
around were creating intolerable and unhealthy conditions.”88 The 
war journal of the Württemberg Landwehr Brigade speaks of 6,000 
enemy dead against 39 of their own troops, with 169 wounded and 
two missing.89 Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew published the outcome 
of the battle and hoped that this would give a “severe fright” to the 
Bolsheviks with regard to any future undertakings. The German 
delegation in Kyiv also considered the shootings justified but feared 
that publication in Germany or in neutral countries would “create a 
bad impression...because it could be concluded from this that we are 
conducting this war in a brutal manner.”90 
If this mass execution of Bolsheviks was already a horrible war 
crime, there is still some question as to whether there was also 
another one: among these shot, were there women and children 
from surrounding villages? As the German delegation in Ukraine 
86	
Taking part were one cavalry regiment, six and one-half infantry battalions, and three and one-
half artillery groups. Cf. HStA Stuttgart, M 62/2, KTB der 52. k.w. Landwehr Infanteriebrigade, 
Eintrag v. 12.6.1918. Nachtigal estimates the number of German soldiers to have been 3,000 but, 
with this military structure, there may have been as many as 4,000. See Nachtigal, “Krasnyj 
Desant,” 234.
87	
HStA Stuttgart, M 62/2, KTB der 52. k.w. Landwehr Infanteriebrigade, Eintrag v. 13.6.1918.
88 
HStA Stuttgart, M 413/1214, KTB der III./württem. L.F.A.R. 1, Eintrag v. 14.6.1918.
89	
HStA Stuttgart, M 62/2, KTB der 52. k.w. Landwehr Infanteriebrigade, Eintrag v. 13.6.1918. The 
Austro-Hungarian general staff officer assigned to the commander of Army Group Eichhorn-
Kiew, Waldbott, reported to AOK on 15.6.1918: “The destruction of the 10,000 Bolsheviks who 
landed at Taganrog (5,000 killed, 5,000 driven into the sea, 10 taken prisoner) was announced 
immediately in Kyiv by means of wall posters.” Cf. ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 472, 
Nr. 1707, Bericht über die Aufbringung der Lebensmittel durch den k.u.k. bevollmächtigten 
Generalstabsoffizier beim Oberkmdo der HG Eichhorn-Kiew, 15.6.1918.
90	
TNA, GFM 6/52, Deutsche Ukraine Delegation, An Reichskanzler Hertling, Kiew, 16.6.1918. 
The press release said: “Those remaining on land were killed, only 10 men surrendered.” Cf. BA-
MA, N 46/171, Neueste Kriegs-Nachrichten. Presse-Abteilung–Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Kiew, 
15.6.1918.

chapter 3a: military operations
175 
feared, letters appeared in the German press from German soldiers 
who had taken part in the battle containing “similar descriptions” of 
mass executions of “civilians, among them women and children.”91 
The incident was even going to be debated in the Reichstag,92 which 
is why Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew demanded an explanation from 
Korps Knoerzer. The commanding general of the corps, Karl Albrecht 
von Knoerzer, replied an hour later by telephone that this involved 
“civilian bandits without uniform or other identification, among 
them some women and adolescents.”93 In spite of receiving other 
war documents from Korps Knoerzer, Ober Ost was not satisfied with 
this answer. Accordingly, on 11 August, Colonel Bopp had to give a 
personal and detailed response to the accusations.94 Bopp indicated 
the previous atrocities committed by the Bolsheviks against German 
soldiers95 as well as against the civilian population, such as the murder 
of the former tsarist general Pavel von Rennenkampf. Moreover, the 
Bolsheviks were not wearing uniforms, were “nothing but murderers,” 
and “had pretended to be harmless villagers so that they could shoot 
at our people again.” Bopp frankly admitted the shooting of prisoners 
early in the morning of 14 June, among whom were a few armed 
women.96 But the colonel vigorously rejected the accusation that 
women and children from the civilian population had been killed. In 
addition, he emphasized that the shooting was broadly supported by 
the Ukrainian population.97 
A detailed study of the numerous after-action reports from 
various German units deployed at Taganrog give us a comparatively 
clear picture of what happened. The order to shoot prisoners is 
91	
HStA Stuttgart, M 46/20, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Abt. Ia, Nr. 2604/18, Fernspruch v. 12.7.1918. 
The location of these letters is unknown. 
92	
Friedrich Ebert may have raised this. See Nachtigal, “Krasnyj Desant,” 237
93	
HStA Stuttgart, M 46/20, Korps Knoerzer, Abt. Ia, Nr. 2779, Fernspruch Nr. 359 aus dem Felde, 
12.7.1918.
94 
HStA Stuttgart, M 46/20, Korps Knoerzer, Abt. Ia, Nr. 2779, Bericht über das Gefecht bei 
Taganrog im Besonderen und über die nach dem Gefecht erfolgte Erschießung der gefangenen 
Bolschewiki, 11.8.1918.
95	
According to a report by the 4th Bavarian Chevauleger Regiment, the Bolsheviks were taking no 
German prisoners at the start of the battle. Cf. BayHStA-KA, 4. Chevauleger Regiment, Bd. 1, 
Meldung Chev. 4. an 7. Brigade, vom 12.6.1918, 3.30 Uhr Nachm.
96	
Other sources support the claim that there were women in the ranks of the Bolsheviks. See 
Fromm, Das Württembergische Landwehr Infanterieregiment Nr. 126, 92ff.
97 
Lieutenant General von Arnim, leading the corps in Knoerzer’s absence, confirmed what Bopp 
had said and, in an additional written statement, confirmed the correctness of his decision. 
See HStA Stuttgart, M 46/20, Korps Knoerzer, Abt. Ia, Nr. 3487, Erschießung gefangener 
Bolschewisten, 13.8.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
176
explicitly confirmed,98 and an instruction regarding the digging of 
mass graves can also be found in the documents.99 But there is no 
mention of a mass execution of civilians.100 It is possible that this was 
not written down in official war journals or after-action reports, but 
there would have been some mention of the participation of local 
residents in the battle. But there is no such mention. It appears that 
the Bolsheviks forced the local population to carry out some logistical 
tasks,101 but the civilians clearly did not take part in the battle and 
do not appear to have assisted the landed Bolsheviks in any other 
way.102 There are two possible reasons why civilians still might have 
been killed. During the battle, there was some bitter close combat 
in the villages and on the farms where the Bolsheviks, according to 
German reports, “hid in mounds of straw, behind houses, hedges, 
etc....to fire on our companies, and some defended themselves to the 
last.”103 Civilians might have become victims in this way. On 14 June 
there was another order to “ruthlessly” cleanse and disarm the local 
towns and villages.104 Here as well, it cannot be ruled out that local 
residents were executed. But in general there is no sound evidence for 
a mass killing of civilians at Taganrog. To claim, on the basis of such 
98	
HStA Stuttgart, KTB des Stabes Korps Knoerzer vom 16.2.–3.10.1918, Eintrag v. 14.6.1918; 
HStA Stuttgart, M 411/394, III./Landwehr Infanterieregiment 121, KTB, Eintrag v. 14.6.1918. 
Das KTB der 52. The Württemberg Landwehr Infantry Brigade was silent about the execution.
99	
BayHStA-KA, 5. Chevauleger Regiment, Bd. 4, Kommando Bezirk Taganrog, Artillerie 
Kommandeur 149, Nr. 356, Bezirks-Befehl v. 19.6.1918, Abschrift Korps Knoerzer IVb/Ib/2086, 
17.6.1918.
100	 In an East German publication dealing with crimes committed by the Germans in Ukraine in 
1918, based on limited sources, the execution of prisoners is mentioned, but not the execution of 
civilians. When the order to shoot had been made known there was, according to one veteran, 
“no limit to our outrage. Some others of our comrades were indifferent. It was war.” Some other 
units described his battalion as a “murder battalion.” See Albert Norden, Zwischen Berlin und 
Moskau. Zur Geschichte deutsch-sowjetischer Beziehungen ([East] Berlin, 1954), 117.
101 Cf. HStA Stuttgart, M 411/395, III./L.I.R. 121, Bericht über die Gefechte bei Federowka am 12.6 
und bei Cristoforow am 13.6.1918, 22.6.1918. 
102 A communist account of 1965 claimed that five hundred local residents had joined the landing 
force. Cf. Nachtigal, “Krasnyj Desant,” 236, n. 61. However, this data should be regarded with 
caution, since Soviet historians wanted to portray partisan warfare in the First and Second World 
Wars as a people’s war. The reality was different. Nachtigal also describes the quoted account as 
“semiofficial.”
103	 See BayHStA-KA, 5. Chevauleger Regiment, Bd. 1, Gruppe Nord (Stab 5. Bayr. Chevaulegers-
Regiment), Gefechtsbericht über die Gefechte nordw. u. westl. Taganrog vom 10.–14.6.1918, 
17.6.1918. Cf. also HStA Stuttgart, M 411/395, III./L.I.R. 121, Bericht über die Gefechte an der 
Miusbucht, 24.7.1918.
104	 BayHStA-KA, 4. Chevauleger Regiment, Bd. 11, 7. Bayr. Kav.Brig, Brigadebefehl v. 14.6.1918; 
HStA Stuttgart, M 62/2, 52. Württembergische Landwehr Infanteriebrigade, KTB, entry of 
14.6.1918.

chapter 3a: military operations
177 
examples, that the local population was an integral part or an object of 
war for the Germans is highly questionable,105 quite apart from the 
fact that, with regard to numbers, the incidents at Taganrog were an 
absolute exception during the German occupation of Ukraine in 1918. 
Before the start of the invasion, the order of Korps Knoerzer stated: 
“Treat the local population well. They have already suffered enough 
at the hands of the Bolsheviks, those murderers and thieves.”106 In 
the weeks that followed, the local population certainly became more 
mistrustful of the Germans, but the soldiers did attempt, at Taganrog 
as well, to distinguish between the Bolsheviks and the uninvolved 
local population.107 
Still, there is no doubt that this incident, as well as the previous 
battles in the Crimea, demonstrated a radicalization of the German 
troops in their campaign against the Bolsheviks. Prisoners were no 
longer taken, even if they numbered in the thousands. And no one 
appeared to be bothered by this any longer.108 For Bopp, the incident 
had no career consequences. He kept his command and was even 
promoted to major general in November 1918. Knoerzer, however, 
maintained after the war that it was because of the Taganrog incident 
that he did not receive a decoration for the war in the East.109 The 
incident may also have played a role in his demotion in rank: on 2 
October the corps named after him was disbanded, and he became 
commander of his old 7th Landwehr Division.
Finally, it is interesting to note the argument of Bopp’s direct 
superior, Lieutenant General von Arnim.110 In his justification of 
this mass execution, he wrote: “For the reasons given, I consider 
the shooting of the prisoners to be not only humane and completely 
legal but also militarily necessary and correct.”111 This argumentation 
105 As claimed by Michael Geyer, “War and Terror: Some Timely Observations on the German Way 
of Waging War,” in War and Terror in Historical and Contemporary Perspective, ed. Michael 
Geyer (Chicago, 2003), 47–69, http://www.aicgs.org/documents/warandterror.pdf, accessed 13 
June 2010.
106	 HStA Stuttgart, M 46/15, 7. Landwehrdivision, Befehl v. 16.2.1918.
107	 Nachtigal, “Krasnyj Desant,” also starts from the assumption that there was no mass execution 
of civilians. 
108	 It seems fairly clear from the morning report of Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew for 15 June 1918 
that no prisoners were taken. The incident, then, was no secret to the staff of the Army Group. 
See BA-MA, N 46/171, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Lage am 15.6.1918 morgens.
109	 Cf. HStA Stuttgart, M 660/131, Die Befreiung der Ukraine vom Bolschewismus durch das Korps 
Knoerzer 1918, written in 1925. 
110	 Knoerzer was on leave at this time.
111	 HStA Stuttgart, M 46/20, Korps Knoerzer, Abt. Ia, Nr. 3487, Erschießung gefangener 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
178
reminds us of the Second World War: with the firm conviction that 
they were acting out of the necessities of war, combined with the belief 
that they had right on their side, it seemed to the German military that 
they could use any means to assert their claim.
Uprisings during the Period of Occupation
Although incidents on this scale did not occur again during the period 
of occupation, the occupying troops often had to deal with uprisings. 
These disturbances had a number of causes. The country’s social 
problems remained unresolved and were exacerbated by rising prices, 
unpaid wages, and the continuing lack of urgently needed land reform. 
Ethnic and religious conflicts were also a constant source of trouble. 
The occupiers believed that Entente agents were at work. Among 
the rural population, many saw the troops of the Central Powers as 
supporters and defenders of the widely unpopular Rada, and later 
especially of the Hetmanate.112 Military requisitioning or enforced 
purchases also did little to calm the situation. Disturbances were also 
facilitated by the small numbers of troops. In August, for instance, the 
number of German troops in Chernihiv was “so small that they were 
by and large powerless to confront this ferment.”113 
The German Zone of Occupation
Since the Central Powers entered Ukraine not as enemy territory but 
as supporters of a friendly power, they were legally bound to hand 
over criminals to the Ukrainian courts. But this was not, of course, 
how the army saw it; moreover, the Ukrainian justice system was 
extremely rudimentary.114 As early as March 1918, some German 
units sought to circumvent this regulation and ordered that anyone 
attacking the occupation forces should be brought before a German 
military court.115 This order, however, had to be withdrawn shortly 
Bolschewisten, 13.8.1918. On returning from leave, Knoerzer felt it necessary to write again 
directly to Groener. He had “never given the order to execute the prisoners” but regarded it as 
legally “defensible”: HStA Stuttgart, M 46/20, Brief Knoerzers an Groener v. 9.9.1918. 
112	 Von Hagen, War in a European Borderland, 96–98.
113	 BayHStA-KA, Etappenkommandantur 54, Bd. 22, Etappenbezirk Czernigow, Abt. Ia, Nr. 
1049/18, Monatsbericht v. 22.7.–21.8.1918, 21.8.1918.
114	 When prisoners were handed over to the Ukrainian authorities, it seems that they were 
immediately shot without any lengthy process. Cf. Fromm, Das Württembergische Landwehr 
Infanterieregiment Nr. 126, 61.
115	 HStA Stuttgart, M 46/16, Korps Knoerzer, Abt. Ib, Nr. 528, Besondere Anordnungen 
(Zusammenfassung der bisher erlassenen wichtigsten Bestimmungen), 24.3.1918.

chapter 3a: military operations
179 
afterwards.116 Other units used a similar artifice and ordered that, in 
accordance with art. 18 of the imperial decree of 28 December 1899, 
armed Bolsheviks “should be treated according to military procedure 
[Kriegsbrauch],” in other words, they should be shot. Only in cases of 
doubt should a witness be required.117 The imperial decree of 1899, 
however, only applied to occupied enemy territory; consequently, the 
court of the Bavarian Cavalry Division described this new regulation 
as “not unobjectionable.”118 In any case, the Germans had thereby 
bypassed the Ukrainian justice system and questioned Ukrainian 
state sovereignty or, rather, circumvented it.
Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew gradually moved away from the legal 
regulations regarding operations in friendly territory: if Ukrainian 
authorities failed to proceed against agitators, “the German General 
Command should act on its own discretion.” German commanders 
were “fully responsible on their own” for the disarming of localities if 
the Ukrainian authorities “cannot or will not carry out...their duty.”119 
The great break came on 25 April, when the Army Group ordered the 
use of military courts in case of attacks on German or other allied 
troops in the city of Kyiv.120 Two days later the order was extended to 
the whole German zone in Ukraine and in the Crimea.121 
This extension of the authority of military courts was one of the 
issues that led to conflict with the Rada. Under German pressure, 
and before Skoropadsky’s takeover of power, the Rada confirmed 
116	 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 30, Generalkommando I. A.K. Abt III, Nr. 4387/243, 
19.3.1918 mit dem Zusatz des Korps Knoerzer v. 26.3.1918.
117	 BayHStA-KA, 2. S.R.R., Bd. 6, 2. Schweres Reiterregiment, Regimentsbefehl v. 7.4.1918. This 
order came from the Bavarian Cavalry Division on 5 April 1918.
118	 BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 51, Bayerische Kavalleriedivision, Gericht der Division. 
Kriegstagebuch, Eintrag 1.–30.4.1918. The division commander therefore refused confirmation 
of two death sentences and asked the 52nd Corps to clarify. The Supreme Command of the 9th 
Army declared the judgement unlawful. For the wider German discussion concerning the legal 
status and sentencing of irregular troops, see Andreas Toppe, Militär und Kriegsvölkerrecht. 
Rechtsnorm, Fachdiskurs und Kriegspraxis in Deutschland 1899–1940 (Munich, 2008).
119	 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 30, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Abt. G., Nr. 13, 10.4.1918. Cf. 
also BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 21, Bezirk Wolhynien. Generalkommando XXII. R.K., Abt. Ia, 
Nr. 578 op. geh., Befehl der Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, 14.4.1918.
120	 HStA Stuttgart, M 46/5e, Korps Knoerzer, Abt. Ic, Nr. 1121, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn drahtet 
am 25.4.1918, 29.4.1918. Printed in Die Deutsche Okkupation der Ukraine. Geheimdokumenten 
(Strasbourg, 1937), 59. 
121	 BayHStA-KA, 1. Kav.Brig., Bd. 12, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Nr. 377/18, 5.5.1918. Using the 
reference number for this order, one finds in another document that it was already given on 27 
April 1918. Cf. BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 22, Bezirk Wolhynien, Generalkommando XXII. 
R.K., Abt. Ia, Nr. 1103 op., 4.5.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
180
the authority of military courts.122 As before, this order did not apply 
to all instances where public security was threatened. In the case of 
offenses by Ukrainians committed against Ukrainian authorities, the 
offenders had to be handed over to a Ukrainian court. This regulation 
did not please some hardliners, such as the commander of the 
Bavarian Cavalry Division, who feared that it could be “interpreted 
as a weakness.”123 Moreover, some German commanders believed 
that because of this new regulation they no longer needed to rely on 
cooperation with the Ukrainian authorities.124
But Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew very quickly countered this 
trend, since cooperation with the local Ukrainian authorities was 
a cornerstone of what was perhaps the only successful chapter in 
the German period of occupation—combating partisan groups and 
pacifying the country. The initial conditions here were extremely 
unfavorable, as the demobilized Russian soldiers returned from the 
front with their weapons. Social and political tensions exacerbated the 
situation. The systematic disarmament of the villages was therefore 
“the only way to pacify the country,”125 and this was the central task of 
the Central Powers’ troops during the months of occupation.126 Shortly 
after the Hetman came to power, there were two joint instructions 
from the Army Group and the Ukrainian government concerning 
the billeting of troops in public and private quarters and cooperation 
“with the Ukrainian authorities in maintaining peace, order, and 
security.”127
An order from Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew on 23 May 1918 
undermined this policy. The Army Group demanded “the sharpest 
measures against rebellious elements” and recourse to “the practices 
of warfare” in dealing with resistance. It recognized, at the same 
time, that only a minority of peasants, about 10 or 12 percent, were 
122	 Cf. BayHStA-KA, 1. Kav.Brig., Bd. 12, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Nr. 377/18, 5.5.1918.
123	 BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 21, Bezirk Wolhynien West. Bay.Kav.Division, Abt. Ia, Nr. 2349 W, 
Innere Lage im Bezirk Wolhynien West, 18.8.1918. 
124	 BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 22, Bezirk Wolhynien, Generalkommando XXII. R.K., Abt. Ia, Nr. 
1103 op., 4.5.1918. An addendum from the General Command states that “According to this order, 
the participation of Ukrainian authorities in disarmament is no longer necessary.”
125	 HStA Stuttgart, M 46/16, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Abt. Ia, Nr. 3086/18, 26.7.1918.
126	 As an example of the concrete disarmament process carried out by Austro-Hungarian troops, see 
the daily entries, especially from May to July: ÖStA, KA, AdT, FJBat 13, Kt. 754, 6. Tagebuch 
des Feldjägerbataillons Nr. 13; ÖStA, KA, AdT, UR 3, Kt. 800, Lagebuch I.
127	 The written instructions reached the Austro-Hungarian AOK through Waldbott, the Austro-
Hungarian liaison officer to Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew: ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 472, 
Nr. 1712, Aktenkonvolut zu den Verhältnissen in der Ukraine v. 29.5.–30.6.1918.

chapter 3a: military operations
181 
terrorizing “the whole country.” “Foolhardy measures such as 
mistreatment and the burning of houses” only damaged “Germany’s 
reputation.”128 Whatever the ambivalence of this order, it was a clear 
rejection of indiscriminate terror methods. From mid-May, Eichhorn 
could no longer assume that more troops would be sent to the East, so 
he had to rely increasingly, nolens volens, on assistance from the native 
population in pacifying the country.129
But these measures had no rapid effect, as it appeared in some 
regions that the Germans had lost control to the rebels. In June 
1918 there were large uprisings,130 particularly in the area of Smila, 
Zvenyhorodka, and Uman (Cherkasy oblast). At the end of June, 
the Austro-Hungarian liaison officer to Army Group Eichhorn-
Kiew, Captain Klemens Waldbott, reported that the German troops 
“had proceeded vigorously and forcefully against the revolutionary 
peasants,” although, in the previous months, they had been critical 
of the brutal behavior of the Austro-Hungarian troops: “Today they 
resort to drastic measures, perhaps a little late.”131 On 27 June, Mumm 
had delivered a handwritten note from the Kaiser to the Hetman in 
which he was called upon to “Ukrainize the Kyiv government” in 
order to pacify the country.132
The suppression of these uprisings in the vicinity of Zvenyhorodka 
deserves closer analysis in order to better understand the evolution of 
the German approach. The XXVII Reserve Corps was responsible for 
security in the town as well as in the areas affected by the uprisings. Its 
commander, General Bernhard von Watzdorf, had arrived in Ukraine 
at the beginning of April, that is, before the outbreak of the rebellion. 
In spite of the generally chaotic conditions, he was “determined,” as 
he wrote in his journal, “to establish order here and to create trust 
in us among the population.”133 In an order issued a few days later, 
128	 BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 21. Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Abt. Ia, Nr. 1094/18, 23.5.1918. On the 
burning of villages, see Fritsche, Das königlich sächsische Landwehr Infanterieregiment Nr. 
106, 181.
129	 BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 22, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Abt. Ia, Nr. 1093/18, 23.5.1918.
130	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, 1918 Situations- und 
Tagesmeldungen, Nr. 4185/1, Morgenmeldung vom 10.5.1918. 
131 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 472, Nr. 1712, Aktenkonvolut zu den Verhältnissen in der 
Ukraine, 29.5.–30.6.1918.
132 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 472, Nr. 1712, Aktenkonvolut zu den Verhältnissen in der 
Ukraine, 29.5.–30.6.1918. According to rumors that Waldbott relayed in his report, Eichhorn and 
Groener had threatened to leave Kyiv and had threatened Mumm with decommissioning. This 
claim has not been able to be verified with reference to German or Ukrainian documents. 
133	 BA-MA, N 776/45, Tagebuch Generalleutnant v. Watzdorf, Eintrag v. 7.4.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
182
he stressed the need for explicit cooperation with the Ukrainian 
authorities in all administrative questions and in the disarmament of 
the villages. Mistakes would thereby be avoided. Although Watzdorf 
admitted that executing administrative tasks “contradicts our soldierly 
feelings,” the German officer and soldier should set an “example” to 
“win the trust of the whole nation.”134 This Saxon general thus showed 
himself to be an extremely level-headed and moderate officer. In the 
following months, with the 15th Bavarian Reserve Infantry Brigade 
subordinated to him, he managed to pacify this turbulent region with 
a comparatively modern approach to combating insurgency.
The Bavarian Reserve Infantry Brigade had to begin its mission under 
difficult circumstances. True, at first the Bolsheviks seldom attacked 
German soldiers, but they plundered and murdered the Ukrainian 
population in the brigade’s area of deployment. Initially the brigade 
was unable to deploy enough troops to put an end to the disturbances. 
At the end of March, a battalion of the 126th Landwehr Infantry 
Regiment was unable, on its own, to disarm the city of Yelysavethrad 
(present-day Kirovohrad). The situation escalated. In the opinion of 
the brigade commander, Major General Franz Samhaber, the villages 
could not be disarmed effectively without the “sharpest measures,” 
i.e., the death penalty.135 In mid-April, to ensure the surrender of 
weapons, units of the brigade began taking hostages in some villages, 
even though these hostages were not shot. But this measure brought 
only modest success, as, according to the brigade, the peasants seldom 
gave up their weapons.136 The weapons recovered demonstrated the 
existence of an enormous threat: 2 cannon, 39 machine guns, 10,119 
rifles, and 494 pistols were surrendered in May alone.137 On 20 May, 
an aroused group of peasants in the village of Okhrimove threatened 
a detachment of the 11th Landwehr Cavalry Schützen Regiment and 
killed a German soldier. The brigade requested permission from the 
XXVII Reserve Corps to burn the village, since it was impossible to 
134 BayHStA-KA, Etappenkommandantur 54, Bd. 22, Militärbezirk Kiew, XXVII. Res.Korps, Abt. 
Ia, Nr. 1100, 13.4.1918.
135 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, Bayr. 15. Res.Inf.Brigade, Nr. 1489, An den Militärbezirk 
Kiew. XXVII, Res.Korps, Bericht über die Ereignisse vom 8., 9., 10., 11.4.1918.
136	 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, K.bayr. 15. Res.Inf.Brigade, Nr. 2602, Brigadebefehl, 
23.5.1918.
137	 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, K.bayr. 15. Res.Inf.Brigade, Nr. 2374, Entwaffnungen. 
Nachweisung der abgenommenen Waffen vom 1.–15.5.1918, 17.5.1918; BayHStA-KA, 15. 
Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, K.bayr. 15. Res.Inf.Brigade, Nr. 2907, Entwaffnungen. Nachweisung der 
abgenommenen Waffen vom 16.–31.5.1918, 2.6.1918.

chapter 3a: military operations
183 
investigate who was guilty.138 The corps rejected this. Even earlier, at 
the end of April, Watzdorf had prohibited “the burning of houses and 
villages” and had explicitly ordered the protection of the innocent, 
namely women and children.139 
It was shortly afterward that the above-mentioned uprising took 
place in the area of Smila, Zvenyhorodka, and Uman, which was in the 
brigade’s area of responsibility. It was to become the largest uprising 
during the period of occupation. Beginning on 5 June, incited and led 
by the Bolsheviks and onetime Rada supporters, poor peasants and 
decommissioned soldiers in a wide area south of Kyiv rebelled against 
the Hetman government and the German troops.140 The rebels took 
the entire German Gotha Landsturm Battalion and a squadron of the 
4th Hussar Regiment prisoner. At first, these prisoners were generally 
well treated. The “murder of German soldiers” happened “in only a 
few cases.”141 Influenced by these events, Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew 
issued a strict order. The uprising was to be suppressed using “the 
harshest measures.” This meant that all participants in the uprising 
and all those engaged in acts of sabotage were “to be judged in 
accordance with the customs of warfare and shot.” German officers 
were to make use of “all measures” to combat “the blind confidence 
that resides in the character of our men.” The XXVII Reserve Corps, 
extremely moderate until then, added to this command: “in the 
villages concerned, ruthless examples are to be set.”142 The corps now 
approved even the burning of houses or whole villages, although only 
in “individual cases, when the villages are particularly rebellious” and 
“the male population has left.”143 
Shortly afterward, however, the XXVII Reserve Corps qualified 
these instructions. The burning of villages was again prohibited because 
this created “homeless elements” that would be “new replacements” for 
138	 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 1, 15. Bayerische Reserve Infanteriebrigade, KTB, Eintrag 
v. 20.5.1918.
139 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, Militärbezirk Kiew. XXVII, Res.Korps, Abt. Ia, Nr. 1370, 
28.4.1918. Similar requests were made by the XXII. Reserve Corps: BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 
21, Bezirk Wolhynien. Generalkommando XXII. R.K, Abt. Ia, Nr. 578 op.geh., 14.4.1918.
140 A daily report from Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew speaks of at least 5,000 insurgents: BA-MA, N 
46/171, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Lage am 10.6.1918 morgens.
141 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, K.Bayr. 15. Res.Inf.Brigade, Nr. 9417 Adj., Gekürzte 
Truppenberichte über die Unruhen in und bei Zvenyhorodka, 18.6.1918; BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.
Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, Militärbezirk Kiew. XXVII. R.K., Abt. Ia, Nr. 2300, Korpsbefehl, 13.6.1918.
142	 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Abt. Ia, Nr. 1595/18, 
Brieftelegramm an das Generalkommando XXVII, Res.Korps, 9.6.1918.
143	 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, K.Bayr. 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Nr. 3298, 13.6.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
184
the bands. The burning of individual houses and farms was, “for this 
reason, to be restricted to the most urgent exceptional cases.”144 The 
counterproductive effects of these indiscriminate measures had been 
recognized very quickly. The 15th Bavarian Reserve Infantry Brigade 
also prohibited firing on villages as a way of forcing them to give up 
weapons.145 At the same time, it prohibited the taking of hostages, 
since this way of exerting pressure on villages to disarm had proved 
ineffective. In future, rebellious communities would have to give 
up money, cattle, or grain.146 This, in 1918, was what was generally 
understood in Ukraine to be “the harshest measures.”147 It should be 
recalled that orders in Ukraine in 1918 to set “ruthless examples” did 
not mean wiping out entire villages, civilians included, as happened 
in the Second World War.
There are also no indications of massacres in the documents relating 
to the suppression of revolt in Zvenyhorodka. The orders in existence left 
very little room for arbitrary action. The 15th Bavarian Reserve Infantry 
Brigade had already issued an order that, in the case of large operations, 
a legal councillor (Kriegsgerichtsrat) was to accompany the troops. This 
allowed judgments to be enforced immediately, and it also meant that 
the troops were acting within a legal framework. It was emphasized 
that there should be clear evidence in cases brought before a military 
court.148 Finally, “a German court” could “condemn no one...whose guilt 
had not been proven to the court.”149 Before the outbreak of the unrest, 
the brigade commander, Samhaber, had impressed on his troops that 
“our appearance must be resolute and calm.”150 “Harshness” was to be 
144 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, Militärbezirk Kiew, XXVII. Res.Korps, Abt. Ia, Nr. 2793, 
Bestrafung und Entwaffnung von Ortschaften, 18.7.1918.
145	 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, K.bayr. 15. Res.Inf.Brigade, Nr. 3365, Adj. Brigadebefehl 
v. 15.6.1918.
146	 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, K.bayr. 15. Res.Inf.Brigade, Nr. 3239, Adj. Brigadebefehl 
v. 12.6.1918.
147 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, Militärbezirk Kiew. XXVII, Res.Korps, Abt. Ia, Nr. 
1755, Zusätze des Generalkommandos v. 19.5.1918. This says, among other things: “When penal 
measures are being applied, all villages nearby should be involved and, through the imposition of 
contributions in kind, should be forced to give up the guilty parties.”
148 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, K.bayr. 15. Res.Inf.Brigade, Nr. 4460, Merkblatt für 
Unterweisung von Führern und Mannschaften für ihr Verhalten im besetzten Gebiet und bei 
Unternehmungen, 15.7.1918.
149	 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, Bez.Komdtr. Smiela, Merkblatt, 10.6.1918; BayHStA-
KA, 15. 4. Kav.Brig., Bd. 4, Gruppe Tannstein. Nr. 3020/I, Gerichtliches Verfahren gegen 
Landeseinwohner, 11.9.1918.
150	 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, K.Bayr. 15. Res.Inf.Brigade, Nr. 2602, Brigadebefehl, 
23.5.1918.

chapter 3a: military operations
185 
avoided in future so that “the well-disposed part of the population 
does not have to suffer for the actions of evil-minded minorities.” 
“Friendly inhabitants” should “be well treated and protected in every 
respect.”151 Collective liability of the civilian population for the actions 
of individuals was thereby rejected.152
A widespread railway strike in late July/early August as well as further 
disturbances in the Chernihiv region in August 1918 certainly showed 
that Ukraine had not been completely pacified. But these uprisings in 
the summer of 1918 remained “local.”153 By August, the 15th Bavarian 
Reserve Infantry Brigade managed to suppress the last flickers of the 
June uprisings and pacify the area constructively, although initially this 
peace was very fragile. The brigade was able to restore peace and order 
by means of a “systematically constructed network of agents,” close 
cooperation154 with Ukrainian officials, and local auxiliaries. A program 
for deserters who had participated in uprisings began to bear fruit. A 
longer deployment of individual units in particular locations proved 
particularly effective because they could then win the trust of the local 
population. Also, cooperation with the Ukrainian administration could 
be improved through personal contact.155 In fact, troops in transit or 
troops brought in for a short period to deal with uprisings were much 
more often to be blamed for attacks on the local population than units 
that were stationed locally.156
There were, however, also voices demanding harsher action. These 
came from the cavalry, in other words, precisely from those units that 
were frequently called in to act as “fire engines” and quickly put down 
local uprisings. During the uprisings south of Kyiv, the 4th Bavarian 
Cavalry Brigade requested its superior, the 93rd Infantry Division, to 
allow the destruction of whole villages, even though their superiors had 
long ago adopted a moderate approach. “Only immediate punishment 
151 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, K.Bayr. 15. Res.Inf.Brigade Nr. 4460, Merkblatt für 
Unterweisung von Führern und Mannschaften für ihr Verhalten im besetzten Gebiet und bei 
Unternehmungen, 15.7.1918.
152 See the explicit instruction of the XXVII Reserve Corps: BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 
30, Militärbezirk Kiew, XXVII. Res.Korps, Abt. Ib, Nr. 12406, Zwangsauflagen, 7.7.1918.
153 BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 20, Nachrichtenoffizier der OHL, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Zentral-
Abt., Tgb. Nr. 703, Innere Lage, 28.6.1918.
154 Skoropadsky later claimed that the initiative for cooperation came from him: Pavlo Skoropads'kyj. 
Erinnerungen 1917 bis 1918, ed. Günter Rosenfeld (Stuttgart, 1999), 280ff.
155	 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, K.Bayr.15. Res.Inf.Brigade, Nr. 7701/Adj., Monatsbericht 
über die allgemeine Lage, 22.9.1918.
156 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 30, Militärbezirk Kiew, XXVII. Res.Korps, Abt. Ia, Nr. 
3919, 13.9.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
186
will create a deterring example so that other villages do not dare to join 
the insurrection, and the conditions that enable the bands to exist will 
be removed.” According to the 4th Bavarian Cavalry Brigade, little would 
be achieved by taking provisions from these villages.157 Unfortunately, 
the response of the Infantry Division to this request has not been 
preserved, but it seems that the request was not granted.158 
The Austro-Hungarian Zone of Occupation
There was a similar evolution in the strategy for combating insurgency 
in the area controlled by Austro-Hungarian troops. At first, insurgents 
or those found sabotaging provisions, crops, or infrastructure were 
“immediately killed,” but this changed as the months passed.159 At 
the beginning of June, the Austro-Hungarian Army High Command 
(AOK) recommended fines for killed and wounded soldiers (40,000 
and 10,000 rubles respectively) instead of the burning of villages. This 
would be a “more practical” approach, as this money would make it 
possible to finance new purchases.160 Until then, it had been common 
practice to burn houses or whole villages as a way of forcing the 
inhabitants to hand over provisions or weapons.161 In spite of this, in 
June, troops were still being instructed to adopt a ruthless approach to 
restoring order, especially in the search for weapons.162 
On 1 June, at the request of Germany’s ally, martial law was declared 
in the Katerynoslav and Kherson gubernias. Following criticism from 
the Foreign Ministry and AOK about a too lax approach, Krauss felt 
under pressure to act. In his report to AOK at the beginning of July, 
he summarized a number of stricter measures being used to combat 
unrest. In agreement with the Ukrainian government, the use of 
military courts was to be extended to cases of activities “aimed directly 
157	 BayHStA-KA, 4. Kav.Brig., Bd. 4, Bayer. 4. Kav.Brig., Nr. 1648/I, An 93. Infanteriedivision, 
Tätigkeit der verst. 4. Bay. Kav.Brig. v. 26.6.–30.6.18, 30.6.1918.
158	 The brigade commander, von Poschinger, was appointed shortly afterwards to take command 
of 93rd Infantry Division. In a divisional order issued just fourteen days later, Poschinger made 
it clear that contributions, rather than the burning of houses or localities, were to be the method 
of punishment. Cf. BayHStA-KA, 2. S.R.R., Bd. 7, 93. Infanteriedivision, Abt. Ia, Nr. 595 op, 
Divisionsbefehl, 15.7.1918.
159	 ÖStA, KA, AdT, 145. IBrig, Kt. 1378, F. 68, Nr. 979, Expositur des 2. Armeekommandos (QAbt) 
an k.u.k. Stationskommando Sinielnikowo, 18.5.1918. This was announced in both Russian and 
Ukrainian: ÖStA, KA, AdT, 145. IBrig, Kt. 1378, F. 69.
160 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 471, Nr. 1681, Überfälle an Soldaten, 6.6.1918.
161 ÖStA, KA, AdT, FJB 13, Kt. 754, 6. Tagebuch des Feldjägerbataillons Nr. 13, Einträge v. 
11.5.1918, 20.–31.5.1918.
162	 ÖStA, KA, AdT, UR 3, Kt. 800, Lagebuch I, Eintrag v. 5.6.1918.

chapter 3a: military operations
187 
or indirectly against our interests” and “agitation and incitement 
against the Ukrainian government.” Acts of sabotage against railways, 
harvest, and property would be more severely punished (by “heavier 
fines,” among other things), and the disarmament of the population 
would be continued vigorously. “Sailors of the Black Sea Fleet known to 
be particularly dangerous” would be arrested and assigned to worker 
formations. Since citizens of the Entente states were also suspected of 
sabotage and incitement, they would be placed under control, and the 
Italian and French consuls would be expelled from Odesa. “Politically 
unreliable elements would soon be interned.”163 
As in the German zone, there were three phases in the 
counterinsurgency measures in the Austro-Hungarian zone of 
occupation. These were in May and June, when the insurgency was 
at its height; in July and August, when the situation was relatively 
calm; and in September and October, when the resistance had almost 
completely faded away, although it flared up again briefly at the end 
of the occupation.
According to a report from AOK’s chief of staff, the resistance 
movement had grown after the formation of the Hetman government, 
and the prestige of the Central Powers had suffered thereby.164 As a 
reaction to this, an extensive disarmament was begun on 7 May in 
which the units involved proceeded quite rigorously. Böhm-Ermolli 
allowed only German settlers and former Russian and Romanian 
officers to carry weapons.165 These disarmament actions seem to have 
led to an embarrassing number of Austro-Hungarian losses, which 
163	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 472, Nr. 1706, Repressivmaßnahmen gegen die Unruhen auf 
dem Land in der Ukraine und Proteste dagegen, 12.6.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, 
Kt. 2.615, Nr. 3070, Bericht des k.k. Eisenbahnministeriums an Ukraine-Abteilung, 10.7.1918. 
Although not as explicit as Forgách, a report from Waldbott, on 15 June, emphasized the 
uncertainty of the situation and implied repeatedly that a more vigorous approach was necessary: 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 472, Nr. 1707, Bericht über die Aufbringung der Lebensmittel 
durch den k.u.k. bevollmächtigten Generalstabsoffizier beim Oberkmdo der HG Eichhorn-Kiew, 
15.6.1918. On the Austro-Hungarian system of military courts, see Hans Hautmann, “Fragen des 
Strafvollzuges in der Endphase des Habsburgerreiches (1872–1918),” in Justiz und Geschichte. 
Symposionsbeiträge 1976–1993, ed. Erika Weinzierl et al., vol. 1 (Vienna, 1995), 664–84; Mathias 
Preuschl, “Österreichische Militärstrafgerichtsbarkeit 1914 bis 1918. Rechtliche Grundlagen und 
Judikatur” (Ph.D. diss., Vienna, 1999).
164	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.626, Mappe “Ukraine. Geheimakten,” Nr. 77, 
Lage in der Ukraine, 7.8.1918; ÖStA, KA, AdT, 145. IBrig, Kt. 1378, Nr. 823, Verbreitung von 
Proklamationen, 12.5.1918. 
165	 ÖStA, KA, AdT, 145. IBrig, Kt. 1378, F. 69, ohne Nr., Befehl Böhm-Ermollis, 7.5.1918; ÖStA, 
KA, AdT, 145. IBrig, Kt. 1379, Nr. 922, Vollständige Entwaffnung der Ukraine, 7.5.1918. 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
188
the XII Corps attributed to too much “blind confidence.”166 Again at 
the beginning of May, the command urgently instructed its troops: 
“Anyone bearing a weapon who commits an offense against our troops 
is to be killed immediately on the spot.” Austro-Hungarian prisoners 
of war guilty of a punishable offense (especially agitation against 
the Monarchy, the Imperial Army, or the Central Powers) were to be 
arrested immediately and handed over to the nearest military court. 
All Russians, Ukrainians, and “other foreigners” found “inciting or 
agitating against our military” were to be arrested and handed over to 
the Army Command in the city of Katerynoslav, where they would be 
remanded to a Ukrainian military court.167 Ukrainians whose offenses 
against the Austro-Hungarian military were not of a military nature 
were generally handed over to a Ukrainian court.168 At the end of May, 
Ambassador Forgách praised the success that had been achieved by 
“these vigorous and harsh measures” and recommended that this 
approach be continued in spite of Ukrainian protests.169 
One of the most serious incidents in the Austro-Hungarian zone 
occurred on 18 May 1918. Fourteen kilometers north of Yampil in 
Podilia, a food transport with an eighteen-man escort was captured 
by armed peasants. Two battalions of the XXV Corps were sent on a 
punitive expedition and were attacked from the village. The Austro-
Hungarian units returned fire and burned the village to ashes. “About 
100 peasants were killed and 9 executed. Among our own men, 1 dead, 
3 wounded, 1 missing.” At the same time, farther north, three hundred 
“mounted peasants/free Cossacks” attacked Austro-Hungarian troops. 
Following unsuccessful negotiations, the attack on Pysarivka was 
extended. The peasants surrendered the next day, and eighteen field 
guns with munitions as well as a large cache of weapons were seized. 
A similar incident occurred on 16 June in the vicinity of Kanizh, where 
166	 ÖStA, KA, AdT, FABrig 59, Kt. 4131, Nr. 276, Bemerkungen aufgrund letzter Inspizierung, 
17.6.1918; ÖStA, KA, AdT, FABrig 59, Kt. 4131, Nr. 307, Verhalten der Zivilbevölkerung 
gegenüber, 20.8.1918.
167	 This order was issued again at the end of May and included additional instructions concerning 
the type of custody. It was emphasized that this order should be strictly enforced: ÖStA, KA, 
AdT, FABrig 59, Kt. 4131, Nr. 197, Abänderung der Bestimmungen bzgl. Behandlung, 26. Mai; 
ÖStA, KA, AdT, 145. IBrig, Kt. 1378, F. 68, Nr. 471, Definition des Kriegsnotwehrrechtes, 25. 
April.
168 ÖStA, KA, AdT, UR 3, Kt. 800, Lagebücher, Einträge vom 6., 14., 16.6.1918, 12., 19., 29.7.1918, 
16.9.1918. 
169 ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA X, Kt. 152, Russland: Liasse XI d, Brief von Forgách an Burian vom 
31.5.1918.

chapter 3a: military operations
189 
62 insurgents were executed.170 In the area where the XII Corps was 
stationed, there were also frequent serious incidents. According to a 
succinct evening report of 22 June to the Ostarmee, “On an expedition 
in the area of Myloradivka and Huliaipole...47 Bolshevik murderers 
were killed; on a patrol along the west bank of the Dnipro south of 
Katerynoslav, 37 robbers were executed. Seized weapons were given 
to German colonists. Order restored.” The report does not give any 
reason for this rigorous approach.171
Since these many attacks caused great disquiet among the 
Ukrainian population, at the end of June the XII Corps issued a 
directive concerning behavior toward civilians during disarmament 
operations. Care should be taken when making an arrest, and 
enquiries should be made concerning the information and sources on 
the basis of which the arrest was made. Attacks on arrestees would not 
be tolerated, and those arrested should be handed over immediately 
to a military court. Following a successful disarmament, weapons and 
firearms passes should be given to “trustworthy people,” and a start 
should be made to setting up a village militia. Nevertheless, “People 
bearing weapons who commit offenses against Austro-Hungarian 
military personnel are of course to be killed immediately, i.e., at the 
place where the offense was committed.”172 
Perhaps as a result of this more cooperative approach, there was 
a decline in the numbers killed in July and August. According to the 
daily reports of the various sections of the Ostarmee, in May and June 
alone more than five hundred individuals were “executed,” shot, or 
“lost their lives” in flight during these “punitive expeditions,” “patrols,” 
and “weapons searches.” In the following months until October—
double the amount of time—only 380 deaths were reported. Most of 
these, described as “Bolsheviks,” were individuals or units made up of 
workers, Red Guards, insurgent peasants or, in some cases, Cossacks 
170	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, 1918 Situations- und 
Tagesmeldungen, Nr. 4493/8, Abendmeldung v. 20.5.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/
AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, 1918 Situations- und Tagesmeldungen, Nr. 4525/8, 
Abendmeldung v. 21.5.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 
308, 1918 Situations- und Tagesmeldungen, Nr. 5772/8, Abendmeldung vom 18.6.1918; ÖStA, 
KA, AdT, 145. IBrig, Kt. 1378, Nr. 1093, Verlautbarung von Vorfällen gegen die k.u.k. Truppen, 
21.5.1918. For more detail, see chapter 3d in the present volume.
171 Underlining in original: ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, 1918 
Situations- und Tagesmeldungen, Nr. 5901/8, Abendmeldung v. 22.6.1918.
172 ÖStA, KA, AdT, FABrig 59, Kt. 4131, Nr. 307, Verhalten der Zivilbevölkerung gegenüber, 
20.8.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
190
fighting the Central Powers.173 In July and August, reports continued 
concerning the formation of bands and local insurrections.174 There 
were fewer shootings and “executions.” Instead, the imposition of fines 
was stepped up. In addition, positive behavior toward the population 
could lead to a commendation from Division Command.175 
Nevertheless, bloody incidents continued in the summer. On 16 
July the XII Corps reported 48 persons killed during patrols over a 
number of days. The reason given was that “there is evidence that 
they had taken part in the earlier murder of hussars at Volodymyrivka 
or were robbers.”176 There was another more significant incident 
when a planned attack by 600–800 Bolsheviks on Austro-Hungarian 
troops in Mariupol was betrayed. In spite of this, on the night of 23–24 
July they managed for a time to occupy the field hospital and steal 
provisions as well as money. In the street fighting that then occurred, 
there were dead and wounded on both sides. Most of the rebels fled 
to the harbor, where they were surrounded and, “in the hunt that 
followed, numerous Bolsh[eviks] were killed.” A number of Bolsheviks 
attempted to flee in a sailing ship but were prevented by artillery and 
planes. They then withdrew to the railway station, where they were 
bombarded with artillery. Although they scattered throughout the 
town and in the surrounding villages, some were captured and “court-
martialed.” On 25 July the situation was calm again, and the Austro-
Hungarian troops began the search for weapons so as to prevent new 
uprisings.177 It is not clear from the documents how many Bolsheviks 
were killed but, in view of the large numbers involved in the attack, it 
was probably several hundred.
173	 See the daily reports to the Command of the Ostarmee/2nd Army: ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/
AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, 1918 Situations- und Tagesmeldungen. See also the note in 
Dornik, “Die Besatzung der Ukraine 1918 durch österreichisch-ungarische Truppen,” 166, n. 84.
174	 ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA X, Kt. 153, Russland Liasse XId/1 Fortsetzung bis Schluss, Juni–
November 1918, Nr. 13.290, Telegramm von Zitkovsky an das Ministerium des Äußern, 
18.8.1918; ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA X, Kt. 153, Russland Liasse XId/1 Fortsetzung bis Schluss, 
Juni–November 1918, Nr. 9004, Ordre de bataille der Ostarmee, 20.8.1918.
175 ÖStA, KA, AdT, FABrig 59, Kt. 4131, Nr. 307, Verhalten der Zivilbevölkerung gegenüber, 
20.8.1918.
176	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, 1918 Situations- und 
Tagesmeldungen, Nr. 6834/8, Abendmeldung v. 16.7.1918.
177	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, 1918 Situations- und 
Tagesmeldungen Nr. 7142/8, Abendmeldung v. 24.7.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/
AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, 1918 Situations- und Tagesmeldungen, Nr. 7176/8, Auszug 
aus der Abendmeldung vom 25.7.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, 
Kt. 308, 1918 Situations- und Tagesmeldungen, Nr. 7217/8, Abendmeldung vom 26.7.1918.

chapter 3a: military operations
191 
Although a bit later than the Germans, from the summer of 1918 
the Austro-Hungarians began to cooperate more closely with the 
Ukrainian administration. On 10 July the commander of the 59th 
Infantry Division announced to his troops that, in future, “in cases 
of unrest, uprisings, arrests, and other similar official actions,” they 
were to cooperate with the Ukrainian militia. With the approval 
of higher-level command, Austro-Hungarian troops were to offer 
military support to the Ukrainian militia. The Austro-Hungarians 
would decide how the action was to be carried out, but the relevant 
Ukrainian official was responsible for the action.178 Nevertheless, this 
did not prevent the continued use of collective punitive violence in the 
following months. For instance, on 26 August the XXV Corps reported 
that bands in its area had been suppressed during previous days. The 
bands had been dispersed, weapons searches carried out and, with 
the help of informers, a number of band members had been arrested. 
“Twenty-nine members of bands were immediately shot. A number of 
houses belonging to residents who joined bands were destroyed.”179 
Even when the situation had become calmer,180 the Austro-
Hungarian commanders of the occupation troops did not have 
complete confidence in this calmness in August and September. 
The troops were constantly warned of imminent unrest, strikes, and 
uprisings. This was because appeals to the peasants to rebel cropped 
up again and again.181 It was believed that Moscow was pulling the 
strings here,182 but there were no major uprisings, although some 
incidents occurred in September and October. Suspects were generally 
handed over to the Ukrainian authorities, who then undertook 
investigations into minor acts of sabotage.183 In the final days of 
178 ÖStA, KA, AdT, FABrig 59, Kt. 4131, Nr. 317, Militärische Mitwirkung bei Aktionen der 
ukrainischen Miliz, 10.7.1918.
179	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, 1918 Situations- und 
Tagesmeldungen, Nr. 8441/8, Abendmeldung v. 26.8.1918.
180 According to the Austro-Hungarian liaison officer at the German-Austro-Hungarian Economic 
Headquarters, this was generally apparent from the end of July: ÖStA, KA, AOK, Qu. Abt., 
Ukraine-Bestand, Kt. 2.617, Nr. 4204, Tätigkeitsbericht der deutsch-österreichisch-ungarischen 
Wirtschaftsabteilung, 29.7.1918; ÖStA, KA, AOK, Qu. Abt., Ukraine-Bestand, Kt. 2.621, Nr. 
6218, Bericht der wirtschaftlichen Aufklärungszentrale beim AK Ost, 7.9.1918; ÖStA, KA, 
AOK, Qu. Abt., Ukraine-Bestand, Kt. 2.621, Nr. 6300, 19. Wochenbericht, 18.–24.8.1918.
181 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.621, Nr. 6072, Übersetzung eines Aufrufes des 
Allukrainischen Zentral-Kriegs-Revolutions-Komitees, 26.8.1918.
182	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.626, Mappe “Ukraine.Geheimakten,” Nr. 77, Lage 
in der Ukraine, 7.8.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.626, Mappe “Ukraine.
Geheimakten,” Nr. 140, Bericht über Bolschewiki in der Ukraine, 27.9.1918.
183	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, 1918 Situations- und 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
192
October, the occupying troops again grew increasingly nervous. On 
24 October the commander in Odesa, Eduard von Böltz, issued a 
warning to the troops that disturbances were to be feared the next 
day (the anniversary of the October Revolution).184 On the previous 
day there had been a dramatic incident with numerous killings. On 23 
October, units of the 15th Infantry Division and the 59th Search Party 
Detachment (Streifdetachement) began action against a band in which 
39 Bolsheviks were shot and a similar number of local residents were 
stabbed to death. A village was reduced to ashes by artillery fire.185
The tactical withdrawal of Russian and Ukrainian Bolsheviks as 
well as the anti-Hetman movement between August and October also 
contributed to calming the situation. The Bolsheviks in particular had 
to rethink their strategy, especially after the failure of the uprisings 
against Skoropadsky and of the strike in late July and early August. The 
tough approach of the occupying troops suppressed local uprisings in 
June and July, and the widespread railway strike had no major effect, 
as the occupying troops continued to be able to use the railway. The 
Russian Bolsheviks were facing collapse in the spring and summer 
of 1918. The Czechoslovak Legion controlled nearly the whole of the 
Trans-Siberian Railway, while the Whites had had some successes and 
were receiving support from the Entente. To make matters worse, the 
Red Army was only in the process of being formed and had suffered 
heavy losses in the previous months. Lenin now had to concentrate 
all his forces on maintaining power and winning back or securing the 
core area of Russia.186 In a report of 10 October, Klemens Waldbott 
surmised that “The Bolsheviks are lying in wait for the withdrawal 
of our troops and are not mistaken in believing that they can then 
take power in Ukraine.” It was Waldbott’s opinion that if the Central 
Powers wanted to prevent the Bolsheviks from coming to power, 
Tagesmeldungen, Nr. 9711/8, Abendmeldung vom 5.10.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK 
AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, 1918 Situations- und Tagesmeldungen, Nr. 9745/8, 
Abendmeldung vom 6.10.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 
308, 1918 Situations- und Tagesmeldungen, Nr. 9938/8, Tagesmeldung vom 11.10.1918.
184	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, QuAbt, Kt. 697, Nr. 7003, Kundmachung, 
24.10.1918.
185	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, 1918 Situations- und 
Tagesmeldungen, ohne Nr., Telegramm des 4. Generalkommandos, 23.10.1918. 
186	 Orlando Figes, A People’s Tragedy: Russian Revolution 1891–1924 (London, 1996), 589–649; Peter 
Gosztony, Die Rote Armee. Geschichte und Aufbau der sowjetischen Streitkräfte seit 1917 (Vienna, 
Munich, Zurich, and New York, 1980); Verena Moritz, “‘Ein Missverständnis, das sich in Kürze 
aufklären wird.’ Der Zwischenfall von Tscheljabinsk und der Bürgerkrieg in Russland,” in Verena 
Moritz and Hannes Leidinger, Die Nacht des Kirpitschnikow. Eine andere Geschichte des Ersten 
Weltkriegs (Vienna, 2006), 171–205. See also chapters 1a, 1b, 2a, and 4b in the present volume. 

chapter 3a: military operations
193 
then they would have to continue the occupation and, in the event of 
withdrawal, get a start on “the rapid creation of a Ukrainian national 
army.”187 This then happened, but much too late for the Ukrainian 
army to take over the security of the country. 
The Withdrawal of Troops from Ukraine, October–December 1918
On 14 October, at Austro-Hungarian Army High Command, a general 
conference of the chiefs of general staff of all armies took place. They 
discussed initial preparations for a withdrawal of the armies from the 
occupied territories “to the peripheral regions of Austria-Hungary.” 
It was agreed that the first priority was the maintenance of law and 
order and support for the regions concerned on their own territory.188 
Preparations for withdrawal were begun at all levels in the last days 
187	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 474, Nr. 1866, Beurteilung der politischen Lage in der Ukraine, 
11.10.1918.
188 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 476, Nr. 1985, Maßnahmen bei Räumung der besetzten Gebiete, 
16.10.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 309, 1918 Befehle und 
Verlautbarungen, Allgemeine Verlautbarungen des Kommandos der Ostarmee, 30.10.1918.
Map 5: The occupying powers’ administration of Ukraine, 1 November 1918 (Österreichisches 
Bundesministerium für Landesverteidigung – Kriegsarchiv, ed., Österreich-Ungarns letzter Krieg 
1914-1918, vol. 7, supplement 27/2) 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
194
of October. It was particularly important that the railway lines and 
coastal areas of the Ostarmee be secured as long as possible.189
There were still ten Austro-Hungarian divisions in Ukraine in 
September, and these were reduced to six by early October. When 
the Bulgarian front collapsed at the end of September, the emperor 
ordered Krauss to withdraw his last troops from Ukraine as rapidly as 
possible and send them to the Balkans. Bulgaria had agreed to a truce 
and made a peace offer to the Entente on 26 September. The Balkan 
front thereby collapsed, and the southeastern flank of the Monarchy 
was directly threatened. At the end of September, the 15th, 30th, and 
59th Infantry Divisions as well as the 4th Cavalry Division were moved 
by ship and rail from Ukraine to the Balkans. This was followed by the 
return of the Hungarian units, which had started to mutiny at the end 
of October.190 
On 25 October, the Hetman asked Major General Lelio von 
Spannocchi to ensure that Austro-Hungarian troops would remain in 
Ukraine. At the same time, the Ukrainian foreign ministry asked the 
United States and other Entente states to allow troops of the Central 
Powers to stay in Ukraine, since they would “provide the greatest 
service in fighting all-destroying Bolshevism.”191
Requests from village elders to the XII Corps at the end of 
October show that this fear was not unfounded. They requested 
that not all troops should leave, since insurgents were taking over 
more and more areas; the environs of Oleksandrivsk (present-day 
Zaporizhia) and Mariupol were already being terrorized by about 
five hundred insurgents. The local Austro-Hungarian commanders 
hesitated to move against them without orders from above, and the 
189	 ÖStA, KA, AdT, UR 3, Kt. 800, Nr. 167, 21. IBrigKmdo an GrpKdo Nowo-Ukrainka, 30.10.1918; 
ÖStA, AVA, Nachlässe, Nachlass: Spannocchi, B 760, Fas. 3. Because of the increasing 
separation of army units, comprehensive measures had already begun in early September to 
secure the railway lines. The head of railway administration within AOK envisaged an “extensive 
and thorough destruction of rail lines” during the withdrawal that would “completely paralyze 
railway transport for a long time.” Whether this was done during the withdrawal, and how 
thoroughly, is not clear from the Austrian documents: ÖStA, KA, NFA, Korpskommanden, 12. 
Korps, Kt. 1662, ohne Nr., Vorbereitende Maßnahmen auf ukrainischen Bahnen, 1.9.1918. Troops 
were withdrawn from the Katerynoslav gubernia at the beginning of October. From mid-October 
these measures were strengthened: ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/KorpsKdo, 12. Korps, Kt. 
1661, Nr. 2599, Sammelakt “Fangstoß”; ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/KorpsKdo, 12. Korps, 
Kt. 1661, Nr. 2716, Sammelakt zur Räumung und Zerstörung der Bahnanlagen 8–28.10.1918.
190 ÖStA, AVA, Nachlässe, Nachlass: Krauß, B 60, Fas. 14c, Schreiben von General Alfred Krauß 
an das Österreichische Kriegsarchiv, 15.4.1932.
191 ÖStA, AVA, Nachlässe, Nachlass: Spannocchi, B 760, Fas. 3, Nr. 1803/9, Spannocchi an AK Ost, 
ohne Datum.

chapter 3a: military operations
195 
Ukrainian troops there were too weak to fight against the bands. The 
corps was unwilling and unable to offer protection and attempted 
instead to assist Ukrainian military units in arming the population 
for self-defense.192
On 30 October, two days after the Austrian emperor had sought 
peace and a truce with Italy, the staff of the Ostarmee withdrew to 
Vinnytsia; the security of the city was taken over by the XVII Corps. 
Krauss later claimed that the withdrawal was justified because, 
following the removal of the mutinous Hungarian troops, there were 
not enough troops to secure Odesa (there was fear of a Bolshevik 
uprising), and he wanted to save the city from an expected attack by 
the British fleet on the Black Sea.193 Chaos reigned everywhere. The 
troops of the Ostarmee, with mostly Hungarian and Galician and some 
South Slav units, were already attempting on their own initiative to get 
back to their home countries. Since early September, these had been 
moving inexorably toward independence. Even with his manifesto of 
16 October proposing federalization, the emperor was no longer able 
to halt this development.194 Ten days later, Karl officially dissolved the 
alliance with the German Empire.
On 29 October, the Hungarian government ordered its troops to 
lay down their arms immediately. The soldiers refused to acknowledge 
the orders of their mostly German- or Hungarian-speaking officers, 
with whom they ceased to feel a bond. These officers represented 
the old rulers and no longer had the authority of their new nation-
states. Some regiments, such as the 97th Infantry Regiment, sent their 
German officers home, declared themselves “subject to the Entente,” 
and attempted to reach Belgrade through Romania. In the meantime, 
parts of the Habsburg Monarchy had become involved in disputes 
about claims to particular regions, which were also hindering the 
return transport of troops.
On 4 November the Ostarmee made a desperate appeal for an 
orderly withdrawal. The soldiers were warned that there was a great 
distance and an unfriendly population between them and their 
homeland. There was even reference to the withdrawal of Napoleon’s 
192	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/KorpsKdo, 12. Korps, Kt. 1662, Nr. 2870/2869, Sammelakt zu 
Bandaufständen, 26.10.1918.
193 ÖStA, AVA, Nachlässe, Nachlass: Krauß, B 60, Fas. 14c, Schreiben von General Alfred Krauß 
an das Österreichische Kriegsarchiv, 15.4.1932.
194	 For greater detail, see Feliks J. Bister, “Majestät, es ist zu spät…”Anton Korošec und die 
slovenische Politik im Wiener Reichsrat bis 1918 (Vienna, Cologne, and Weimar, 1995).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
196
troops in 1812, which had famously ended in catastrophe, as a way 
of encouraging the troops to stay together and have patience. Lack 
of discipline and “Bolshevik ideas” were to be “dealt with ruthlessly” 
by commanders. Krauss ordered: “I appeal finally to everyone to be 
mindful of their duties to their homeland, to the widows and orphans 
of their comrades who have died a hero’s death on the field of honor. 
They call on you to make every effort, after a happy return home, to 
join in the work for the reconstruction and renewal of your fatherland 
for the good of all.”195 
The fate of the military governor of Odesa, Lieutenant Field 
Marshal Eduard von Böltz, can be seen as a symbol of the dramatic and 
chaotic situation. Having handed over command of the Odesa region 
to the infantry general Ludwig von Fabini, he committed suicide in 
Odesa on 9 November.196 One can only speculate about the reasons 
for his death, as he did not leave a letter. It remained unclear for weeks 
what had become of Böltz, and the exact details of the event are still 
unknown.
In the meantime, communication was interrupted for days 
between Krauss and Army High Command. Krauss and his staff had 
no information about the situation at home and were dependent 
on rumors. On 5 November, a telegram arrived from Army High 
Command stating that the Ostarmee had to stay in Vinnytsia. With 
his personnel, who were pushing to return home, Krauss decided to 
move to Rivne, where he was imprisoned for weeks and humiliated 
by a soldiers’ council. It was not until 30 November that they received 
permission from the Western Ukrainian (Polish) authorities to leave 
Rivne and return to Vienna through Czechoslovakia. Divested of all 
their possessions, they arrived in Vienna on 1 December. Only part of 
the operation’s funds was able to be rescued.197 
Acting individually, the commanders of the various sections 
of troops sought desperately to maintain order and coordinate the 
195 ÖStA, KA, AdT, UR 3, Kt. 800, Nr. 1463, Armeebefehl, 4.11.1918. First quoted in: Dornik, “Die 
Besatzung der Ukraine 1918 durch österreichisch-ungarische Truppen, ” 176ff.
196 ÖStA, AVA, Nachlässe, Nachlass: Spannocchi, B 760, Fas. 10, Hughesgespräch zwischen 
Spannocchi, Kreneis und Belitska, 10.11.1918. Krauss was accused of responsibility for Böltz’s 
suicide, against which he defended himself vigorously. For his own account on the suicide, see 
ÖStA, AVA, Nachlässe, Nachlass: Krauß, B 60, Fas. 14c, Schreiben von General Alfred Krauß 
an das Österreichische Kriegsarchiv, 15.4.1932.
197 ÖStA, AVA, Nachlässe, Nachlass: Krauß, B 60, Fas. 14c, Schreiben von General Alfred Krauß 
an das Österreichische Kriegsarchiv, 15.4.1932.

chapter 3a: military operations
197 
withdrawal.198 On 9 November, the corps were made independent 
and had to find their own way back individually to their garrisons. 
The return was a test of patience, and most units did not arrive until 
December. Eastern Galicia had already declared its independence as 
the Western Ukrainian People’s Republic199 and blocked the railway 
lines to foreign troops. It was only after lengthy negotiations that the 
Ostarmee was able to reach agreement on the transit of troops with 
the Ukrainian authorities in Lviv on 20 November and with the Polish 
authorities in Warsaw on 24 November. Organizational problems 
exacerbated the difficulty: the change from Russian to Central 
European gauge, lack of coal, as well as lack of locomotives and rolling 
stock. The troops were constantly exposed to pillaging by the local 
population and often had to wait for days at stations before continuing 
their journey.200 Of the previous Austro-Hungarian contingent, only 
Spannocchi, with a small staff, remained in Ukraine. His task was to 
organize the repatriation of the remaining troops from Ukraine and of 
the prisoners of war who were now streaming back from civil war-torn 
Russia. He also had to recover army property or sell it where possible. 
Spannocchi did not reach Vienna until January 1919.201 
The situation for German troops in Ukraine was somewhat 
different. Although the front in Belgium and France was close to 
collapse, there was still a wish, even in October 1918, to hold on 
to territory in the East. On 16 October, that is, before Ludendorff’s 
dismissal, Supreme Army Command (OHL) saw “the retention of 
Ukraine, under present circumstances, as a necessity of war.”202 With 
their own forces, they thought it possible to deal with a withdrawal 
of Austro-Hungarian troops east of the Dnipro. But if they were to 
withdraw across the Buh, Army Group Kiew would not be able to fill 
198	 ÖStA, KA, AdT, UR 3, Kt. 800, Nr. 1107, Regimentsabfertigung vom 9. November. For the 155th 
Hungarian Infantry Division, see KA Budapest, F. II.220, Kt. 1, Magyar királyi 155. honvéd 
gyaloghadosztály. I am grateful to Éva Kosa and Nicole-Melanie Goll for their research in the 
Hungarian archives and for bringing this document to my attention.
199	 For more detail, see chapter 2b in the present volume.
200	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, 1918 Situations- und 
Tagesmeldungen, Die Ereignisse bei der Ostarmee und beim 4. General-Kommando in der Zeit 
von Ende Oktober 1918–Jänner 1919.
201	 Österreich-Ungarns letzter Krieg, 7: 798–800; ÖStA, KA, NFA, 2. Armee, Op. AK, Kt. 308, 
1918 Situations- und Tagesmeldungen, Die Ereignisse bei der Ostarmee und beim 4. General-
Kommando in der Zeit von Ende Oktober 1918–Jänner 1919. See also Spannocchi’s report and 
the accompanying documents concerning the operations of the Ostarmee in November and 
December 1918: ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, QuAbt, Kt. 723.
202 TNA, GFM 6/99, Telegramm Nr. 2464, Der K. Staatssekretär Hintze an AA, 16.10.1918. 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
198
the vacuum.203 As Groener informed Waldbott on 23 October, the 
Army Group thought it could prevent a possible landing of Entente 
troops in Ukraine by force of arms. German troops in the Crimea and 
Tavria had been given the appropriate orders.204 Shortly afterwards, 
Groener replaced Ludendorff as first general quartermaster in OHL. 
The recall of the most capable senior German military leader from 
Ukraine was not a good sign for any further presence of German 
troops in the country. 
The truce of Compiègne on 11 November fundamentally changed 
the situation, even though the German Empire had committed itself to 
leaving German troops in the East until the arrival of Entente troops 
in order to stop a westward Bolshevik advance. The situation was not 
a simple one. With the revolution in Germany, soldiers’ councils had 
also been established among the occupation troops in Ukraine.205 The 
already ramshackle discipline threatened to disintegrate entirely. 
Everyone wanted to go home. Some units, though unauthorized to do 
so, left their posts and abandoned important stretches of railway.206 The 
Ukrainian population became increasingly hostile to the occupation 
troops. The country was in turmoil, and a civil war developed between 
the troops of the Hetman, the Directory, the Makhno movement, and 
the Bolsheviks. The remaining troops of the Central Powers found 
themselves between the various fronts. The partial withdrawal of 
German troops began on 16 November and was seriously threatened. 
Organizing the withdrawal presented the military authorities with a 
central question: should they undertake a long but secure march on 
foot or use the railway, which was more rapid but significantly riskier, 
as it exposed them to attack? The great distance and the age structure 
of most of the regiments led them to choose the second option, which 
turned out to be the right one.207 
203 See TNA, GFM 6/99, Telegramm Nr. 2154 K. Geschäftsträger an AA, 25.10.1918.
204 ÖStA, AVA, Nachlässe, Nachlass: Spannocchi, B 760, Fas. 3, Nr. 4099, Groener an Waldbott, 
23.10.1918.
205 The official regimental history of the 2nd Bavarian Heavy Cavalry Regiment claims that soldiers’ 
councils had been rejected in the regiment and that the soldiers trusted only their officers. If 
this claim is correct, it sheds interesting light on the self-image of this cavalry regiment. See 
Frauenholz, Das K.B. 2. Kürassier- und Schweres Reiterregiment, 306.
206	 BA-MA, PH 6-I/89, XX. Armeekorps. Generalkommando, Abt. Ia, Nr. 3287, 29.12.1918, Ia 
Mitteilung Nr. XXII.
207 Cf. Velsen, “Deutsche Generalstabsoffiziere im 1. Weltkrieg 1914–1918,“ 291; ÖStA, KA, NFA, 
2. Armee, Op. AK, Kt. 308, 1918 Situations- und Tagesmeldungen, Die Ereignisse bei der 
Ostarmee und beim 4. General-Kommando in der Zeit von Ende Oktober 1918–Jänner 1919.

chapter 3a: military operations
199 
German troops were to withdraw from Ukraine in six phases, 
first from the Crimea and then gradually from east to west.208 The 
troops retreated from their outlying garrisons and concentrated 
themselves along the railway lines in order to secure them. Against 
all expectations, there was good cooperation between the soldiers’ 
councils and the officers.209 Both explicitly pointed out the danger of 
being caught between the fronts in the civil war. The German troops 
were ordered to remain strictly neutral in the internal battles for 
control of Ukraine. Only in case of attack on their own troops were 
they authorized to defend themselves. In Kyiv, the Germans more 
or less maintained peace and order for a while.210 On 13 December 
Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew and the Soldiers’ Council signed an 
agreement with the Directory to hand over the city peacefully and 
mount a joint struggle against the Bolsheviks.211 The evacuation of 
the German troops thus proceeded more or less satisfactorily in spite 
of quite a few attacks by Bolsheviks and some by Directory troops. 
On 18 January, Army Group Kiew left the Ukrainian capital, and the 
last German soldiers came home in mid-February 1919 to a country 
shaken by revolution.
Conclusion
Communist accounts of Ukraine in 1918 have always attempted to 
create the image of a growing people’s war against which the Germans 
were powerless.212 The reality at the time was completely different. By 
the end of August 1918, the Germans had by and large succeeded in 
pacifying their zone of occupation. At the beginning of October 1918, 
Groener wrote home to his wife: “It is so peaceful and quiet in Ukraine 
208	 BArch, R 3101/1180, Oberbefehlshaber Ost, Abt. Ic, Nr. 11826/18, 12.11.1918.
209 See, for example, the joint appeal in: BA-MA, PH 5-I/7, Heeresgruppe Kiew, Abt. Ia, Nr. 7476/18, 
18.11.1918; BA-MA, PH 5-I/5, Beschlüsse des Großen Soldatenrats der Heeresgruppe Kiew 
v. 27.11.1918. See also the warning of Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew to its officers concerning 
cooperation in BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 30, Heeresgruppe Kiew, Abt. Ia, Nr. 7448/18, 
16.11.1918.
210	 See the appeal in BA-MA, PH 5-I/5, An die Einwohner von Kiew. It is interesting that the text 
was in German and Russian but not in Ukrainian. 
211	 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 30, Heeresgruppe Kiew, Abt. Ia, Nr. 8346/18, 13.12.1918. 
Near Bilhorod, for instance, German troops killed fleeing Bolsheviks and even received a gift 
of money “from the grateful population.” See BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 20, Gen.Kdo. XXII. 
R.K., Abt. Ia, Nr. 5245 op, 2.12.1918; BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 20, Bezirk Wolhynien West, 
Bay.Kav.Div, Abt. Ia, Nr. 5179 W, Tagesbefehl v. 2.12.1918.
212	 See Die Deutsche Okkupation der Ukraine. Geheimdokumenten, 14; also, for a general account, 
Joachim Petzold et al., Deutschland im Ersten Weltkrieg, vol. 3, November 1917 bis November 
1918 (Berlin, 1969).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
200
at the moment that life would be quite pleasant were it not for the 
shadows cast by the uncertainties from the other theaters of war and 
from Berlin.”213 The generals in command of the various German army 
corps214 in Ukraine had a similar view of the situation. At a meeting 
in October, they agreed that the domestic situation in Ukraine was 
developing favorably and was likely to improve even further.215 With 
security established, the conditions required for successful state-
building were in place. The Germans also benefited from the fact that 
the Ukrainian Bolsheviks had held back in the summer. 
But the Germans were unable to win the sympathy of the 
Ukrainian population. As in every uprising, the government and the 
occupiers were judged by the modest reality, while the rebels, that 
is, the supporters of the Rada or the Bolsheviks, as well as the other 
groups fighting the Central Powers or the Hetmanate in either an 
organized or a sporadic manner, were able to influence the population 
with promises and propaganda.216 The peace was an unstable one, 
as shown by the murder of Field Marshal Eichhorn on 30 July 1918 
by a Socialist Revolutionary. The country was unable to overcome 
its internal divisions and, following the withdrawal of the Central 
Powers, degenerated into a brutal and bloody civil war.
Winfried Baumgart’s assessment was correct: “On the whole, the 
eight months of the Hetman government were a period of relatively 
stable peace and order that, one must emphasize, was ensured by 
the bayonets of the allied troops.”217 If there is a positive aspect to the 
German and Austro-Hungarian occupation of Ukraine, it was precisely 
this partial establishment of internal security and a functioning 
administration in the unstable country. The passage of months was 
also a learning process for the occupying troops. It is certainly the 
case that, in suppressing uprisings, they sometimes had recourse to 
drastic deterrents, but in their subsequent efforts at pacification they 
very quickly abandoned these terror methods. The core elements of 
213	 Von Brest-Litovsk zur deutschen Novemberrevolution, 442.
214	 It is unclear from this document whether the reference is to the chiefs of staff, as the term used is 
“Korpschefs.” Militarily, the chief of staff takes the place of the general in the latter’s absence. 
215	 BayHStA-KA, Etappenkommandantur 54, Bd. 22, 18. Kavalleriebrigade. I, Nr. 70 per.geheim, 
28.10.1918.
216	 See the recognition of this in BayHStA-KA, Etappenbezirk Czernikow, Abt. Ia, Nr. 1049/18, 
Monatsbericht v. 22.7.–21.8.1918, 21.8.1918.
217	 Von Brest-Litovsk zur deutschen Novemberrevolution, 33. Subtelny also makes a positive 
assessment of this period as a “relatively calm hiatus imposed by the German occupation.” Orest 
Subtelny, Ukraine: A History (Toronto, Buffalo, and London, 1994), 355–57.

chapter 3a: military operations
201 
this latter approach were: building up systematically an intelligence 
network that gave early warning of new unrest; the creation of local 
self-defense units and a militia, although the latter was more often 
brutal than efficient;218 a flexible approach to insurgents at a tactical 
level designed to catch them off guard; and, finally, close cooperation 
with Ukrainian officials by making use of lists of names, interpreters, 
people familiar with a locality, and the like in order to avoid errors. 
Reports indicate that this cooperation worked well in most cases in the 
German zone of occupation, but not in the Austro-Hungarian zone. 
The civilian population was to be protected, and violent measures 
were to be avoided. In the search for the genuinely guilty, greater 
emphasis was placed on the military courts. In extreme cases, at the 
beginning of the occupation, the sinister phrase “punitive expedition” 
could mean reducing a whole village to ashes, but not the shooting of 
innocent people. The most common measure was the imposition of 
contributions. But the occupiers continued to be ruthless against the 
insurgents themselves. In case of an uprising, they were to be shot 
immediately or later court-martialed.219 When it came to daily contacts 
of the occupying soldiers in the villages, it was difficult to distinguish 
between insurgents and civilians, but they generally attempted to 
make this distinction.
218	 BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 21, Bezirk Wolhynien West, Bay.Kav.Division, Abt. Ia, Nr. 3276 
W.8., Stimmung im Lande, 19.9.1918. The 15th Bavarian Reserve Infantry Brigade made a more 
positive assessment of the militia: BayHStA-KA, 15.Res.Inf.Brig., Bd.7, K.Bayr.15.Res.Inf.
Brigade, Nr. 7701/Adj., Monatsbericht über die allgemeine Lage v. 22.9.1918. 
219	 For the central orders of Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew on combating insurgency, see BayHStA-
KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 22, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Abt. Ia, Nr. 1093/18, 23.5.1918; BayHStA-KA, 
Kav.Div., Bd. 21, Bezirk Wolhynien (Generalkommando XXII. Res.-Korps), Abt. Ib/III, Nr. 680, 
4.7.1918; BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 20, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn-Kiew, Abt. Ic, Nr. 22803, 
Anweisung v. 29.5.1918; BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 20, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn-Kiew, Abt. Ia, 
Nr. 2825/18, 18.7.1918; BayHStA-KA, 1. Kav.Brig., Bd. 13, Heeresgruppe Kiew, Abt. Ia/III, Nr. 
4864/16, 7.9.1918; BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 30, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn-Kiew, Abt. 
Ia, Nr. 1781/18, Brieftelegramm an XXVII. Res.Korps, 17.6.1918; BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.
Brig., Bd. 30, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn-Kiew, Abt. Ia, Nr. 2636/18, 13.7.1918. HStA Stuttgart, M 
46/16, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Abt. Ia, Nr. 3086/18, 26.7.1918. 

3b. The Administration of the Occupation
Wolfram Dornik and Peter Lieb
Negotiations between the German Empire and Austria-Hungary 
over the Zones of Occupation
Ever since the Brusilov catastrophe in the summer of 1916, Austria-
Hungary had been under almost complete German control in its 
military, foreign, and economic policy and, to some extent, in its 
domestic and administrative policy as well. These control measures 
were implemented through the Hindenburg Front and the Combined 
War Leadership. The military and political leadership in Vienna 
therefore attempted, at every opportunity, to demonstrate its 
independence of Berlin. This was also the case in its Ukrainian policy. 
Thus the tensions that emerged in these negotiations were not just 
a result of personal vanity. Austria-Hungary feared, rather, that at 
the end of the war it would find itself still under the “German wheel.” 
From the very beginning, the negotiations between Germany and 
Austria-Hungary over a possible combined command of the troops in 
Ukraine proved extremely difficult. Since the beginning of the Austro-
Hungarian advance on 28 February, there had been disputes over 
the allocation of zones of operation, that is, future areas of interest, 
in Ukraine. Paul Hindenburg and Erich Ludendorff on the one side 
and Ottokar von Czernin and Arthur Arz von Straussenburg on the 
other jealously sought to maintain control of areas each had already 
captured.1 Arz complained bitterly to Hindenburg on 3 March: “I 
would like to ask Your Excellency to look at the map of Russia and see 
what a small territory is being claimed by Austria-Hungary and what 
Germany has already occupied and what would thereby fall to it as an 
 
1	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1126/1, Abgrenzung des österreichisch-ungarischen 
und deutschen Operationsgebietes in der Ukraine, 2. März; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 
467, Nr. 1138, Ludendorff an Arz und seine Antwort, 2. März; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 
467, Nr. 1146, Bahn Zmerinka-Odessa, 4. März; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, 1160, Arz 
an Hindenburg und Antwort, 5. März; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, 1162, Regelung 
der Verhältnisse in der Ukraina, 5. März; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, 1164, Arz an 
Hindenburg und Antworten, 5. März.

chapter 3b: the administration of the occupation
203 
area of interest.”2 In the following days they were only able to agree on 
a provisional division of operational zones during the advance.3
Nevertheless, negotiations over possible combined command and 
over zones of occupation continued. On 14 March the commander in 
chief, Arz, rejected the German proposal that the troops in Ukraine be 
led by the German Army Group Linsingen. There were concerns about 
placing the commander of Austria-Hungary’s 2nd Army, Baron Eduard 
Böhm-Ermolli, under Linsingen’s command. Emperor Karl rejected a 
joint command, “supposedly out of annoyance at the dictatorial tone 
of General Ludendorff and because of dislike for [Alexander von] 
Linsingen, who was intended as commander of combined forces and 
whom the Austrians regarded unsympathetically.” Arz proposed 
that either both zones of operation be placed under the command of 
Böhm-Ermolli or that they be administered separately.4 For Wilhelm 
Groener, the first was unthinkable; as for the second, he had some 
formal concerns but no material ones.5
Austria-Hungary’s stubborn attitude provoked a stormy reaction 
in Germany’s Supreme Army Command (OHL). In the early hours of 
15 March, Hindenburg sent a note to Arz in which he threatened to 
station a number of German troops in Odesa to equal the number of 
Austro-Hungarian troops already there. The city would then have to be 
divided. In addition, he demanded that German troops in Kherson, east 
of the Boh (Southern Bug), be placed under German command and that 
there be a combined administration of the Zhmerynka–Odesa railway 
line.6 Austria-Hungary’s Army High Command (AOK) chose not to 
reply to this note because Emperor Karl now intervened in the debate: 
a combined command here was simply not desirable and did not come 
under the provisions concerning combined command as agreed in 
September 1916.7 In their respective areas, “each party...in agreement 
with the Ukrainian government, should be in unrestricted control.” 
2 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1138, Ludendorff an Arz und seine Antwort, 2. März.
3 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1171, Ukraina, März; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, 
Kt. 467, Nr. 1174, Ukraina-Regelung, 6. März; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1176, 
Telegrammsammlung bzgl. Befehlsverhältnisse, 6. März; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, 
Nr. 1177, Ludendorff an Arz, 6. März; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1183, Weisung 
für die Ukraine-Kommission, 10. März.
4 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1214, Leitung der Operation, 14. März.
5	
Cf. TNA, GFM 6/36, Nr. 24, Telegramm von Mumm an AA, 18.3.1918.
6 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1224, Hindenburg an Arz, 15. März.
7	
See Holger H. Herwig, The First World War: Germany and Austria-Hungary, 1914–1918 (London 
and New York, 1997), 212–22.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
204
The emperor, however, attached great importance to maintaining 
the February agreements regulating the sharing of provisions from 
the East.8 Karl wished to show independence and hoped that this 
independent approach would assure the quickest possible delivery of 
food from Ukraine to relieve the famine in Cisleithania. Groener had 
already frequently insisted at General Headquarters that joint command 
was absolutely necessary for the reputation of the allied troops and 
for dealings with the Rada. Wilhelm, the German emperor, had asked 
Karl on a number of occasions to see reason and give way. A few hours 
later, Wilhelm reacted to the definitive decision of the Habsburgs with 
just a few words expressing his “great regret.” He could “not suppress 
the fear” that thereby the procurement of provisions for “our peoples” 
and “the internal situation in Ukraine, which is friendly to us, will now 
become even more difficult.”9 On 20 March, therefore, the Austro-
Hungarian 2nd Army, advancing into Ukraine, was removed from the 
command of Ober Ost (command of all German forces in the East) and 
again placed directly under Austria-Hungary’s AOK.10 The troops in the 
Linsingen area, the 4th Army, as well as the 3rd and 7th Armies, stationed 
in Romania, remained under the command of Ober Ost. 
It took days before an agreement could be reached on spheres 
of influence. Both army leaderships obstructed each other with 
demands concerning jointly administered port cities and railway lines 
or threatened that sections of their own troops would not be placed 
under allied command. There was also mutual suspicion about hidden 
agendas behind these demands. On the one hand, as early as mid-
March, the Austro-Hungarian emissaries suspected that the German 
troops were aiming to take over the government in Kyiv and, for that 
reason, did not want any Austro-Hungarian troops there. On the 
other hand, the general staff officer in Ober Ost, Major Brinckmann, 
reported to OHL that he was convinced “that Austria-Hungary is 
pursuing extensive political goals in southern Ukraine. While it is 
our wish that Ukraine soon become a viable state, and we therefore 
promote the creation of a sovereign government and an army, Austria-
Hungary seems to have no interest in this.” The Austro-Hungarians, 
8 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1220/1, Vereinbarungen wegen der Ukraine, 15. März.
9	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1282, Schriftverkehr zwischen Wilhelm, Karl und 
Arz, 16.–19. März.
10	
ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 309, 1918 Befehle und 
Verlautbarungen, Armeekommandobefehl Nr. 41 vom 31. März; ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/
AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 309, Armeekommandobefehl Nr. 8 vom 20. März; ÖStA, KA, FA, 
NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 309, Armeekommandobefehl Nr. 9 vom 21. März.

chapter 3b: the administration of the occupation
205 
it was thought, wanted to establish themselves permanently, both 
politically and economically, in Odesa.11 
It was not until 28 March that “a military agreement between both 
army commands with respect to Ukraine” could be signed. According 
to this agreement, Austria-Hungary would get the southwestern part of 
Volhynia as well as the Podilia, Kherson, and Katerynoslav gubernias.12 
Germany got all the other gubernias, including the Crimea. Military 
operations already begun in Katerynoslav would be completed under 
German command; those already begun in Tavria (part of the present-
day Kherson and Zaporizhia oblasts) and the Crimea would be 
completed under Austro-Hungarian command. Mykolaiv, Mariupol, 
and Rostov would be occupied jointly, but Mykolaiv and Rostov would 
be under German command, Mariupol under Austro-Hungarian 
command. Taganrog and Novorossiisk would be administered by 
the Germans. The German head of railways in Kyiv, with an Austro-
Hungarian deputy, would be in charge of railways and canals and 
rivers. The precise regulations would be left to them. The coal and iron 
area in Katerynoslav would be administered and exploited on a one-
to-one basis. Other raw materials would be shared according to the 
articles of the Berlin agreement of February 1918.13 Kyiv would have 
an Austro-Hungarian garrison with at most two battalions without 
higher-level command officials. This reduced Austro-Hungarian 
influence in the capital to a minimum. Austro-Hungarian facilities 
for the repatriation of prisoners of war situated in the German zone 
would be placed under the respective German command of that area. 
Officers and other organs “coordinating economic relations...under the 
terms of the Berlin Economic Agreement” should “not be hindered by 
either side.” “Only Austro-Hungarian troops of German nationality” 
were to be used in settlements of German colonists. Since this was not 
possible, German troops would have to be stationed in those areas.14 
The communications link in Odesa would be administered by a parity 
commission.15
The Austro-Hungarians were not entirely satisfied with the result 
of the negotiations. The commander of the 145th Infantry Brigade, Major 
11	
TNA, GFM 6/36, Nr. 599, Telegramm des Leg.Sekr. v. Lersner an AA, 20.3.1918.
12	
The eastern part of the Katerynoslav gubernia would be assigned as hinterland to the German 
I Army Corps and the Korps Knoerzer: ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Nr. 1585, 
Überlassung von Teilen des G. Jekaterinoslaw an Deutsche, 14.5.1918.
13	
For more details on economic arrangements, see chapter 3c in the present volume.
14 
ÖStA, KA, AdT, FJBat 13, Kt. 754, 6. Tagebuch des Feldjägerbataillons Nr. 13, Eintrag v. 5. Mai.
15 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 468, Nr. 1326, Übereinkommen über Ukraine.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
206
General Oskar von Hranilovic-Czvetassin, agreeing with Czernin, 
stated that a combined command would be useful only for the duration 
of military operations. But in the case of a lasting occupation of those 
areas, once peace had been established, this was to be avoided, since it 
would not serve long-term economic interests.16 In addition, Austria-
Hungary hoped that the approach in Ukraine would establish a model for 
Romania. Because of the smooth transition from military operations to 
the subsequent occupation, the Germans had been in overall command 
in Romania since the summer of 1916. This subordination, in the longer 
term, was to change as a result of the peace then being negotiated with 
Romania. It was thought that this demonstrative independence in 
Ukraine would give Austria-Hungary a better position in future peace 
negotiations, as well as in the secret talks undertaken with the Entente. 
Of course, those talks failed in the end. 
16	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1226, Telegrammsammlung, 15.–16.3.1918.
Map 6: The administration of the occupation in Ukraine, mid-May 1918. (ÖStA, KA, NFA, 2. 
Armee, Op. AK, Kt. 308, Fol. 275) 

chapter 3b: the administration of the occupation
207 
The Administration of the German Zone of Occupation
Although the military operations to occupy Ukraine had not yet been 
completed, on 16 March  Army Group Linsingen announced guidelines 
for the German troops in Ukraine. In consultation with Ukrainian 
and civilian German departments, there were three tasks to be 
accomplished: the pacification of the country, the promotion of trade, 
and the stimulation of the agricultural economy.17 All three turned 
out to be more difficult than previously thought, mainly because there 
were never enough troops available.
The top military command in Ukraine was initially Army Group 
Linsingen. Its commander in chief, General Alexander von Linsingen, 
was generally considered to be a difficult person, and the judgments 
made about him confirm this. Groener called him “an old boot” 
(olle Knackstiefel), Max Hoffmann doubted his military abilities, and 
the Austrians and Hungarians completely refused, as we have seen 
above, to place themselves under his command.18 On 25 March 1918 
Linsingen was replaced by Field Marshal General Hermann von 
Eichhorn and Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew (later officially renamed 
Army Group Eichhorn).19 The new commander in chief was described 
as “a general who was full of character, highly educated, and 
possessed of inner nobility”20 but, given his age of seventy, he was 
thought to be “quite old and no longer as capable.”21 As chief of staff 
he was therefore assigned the experienced, diplomatically educated, 
and organizationally brilliant Lieutenant General Wilhelm Groener.22 
17	
Cf. BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 22, Heeresgruppe Linsingen, Abt. Ic, Nr. 19061, Abschrift, 
21.3.1918. 
18	
Cf. Von Brest-Litovsk zur deutschen Novemberrevolution. Aus den Tagebüchern, Briefen und 
Aufzeichnungen von Alfons Paquet, Wilhelm Groener und Albert Hopman. März bis November 
1918, ed. Winfried Baumgart (Göttingen, 1971), Eintrag vom 9.3.1918, 288; ibid., Brief Groeners 
an seine Frau vom 15.4.1918, 344; Die Aufzeichnungen des Generalmajors Max Hoffmann, ed. 
Karl Friedrich Nowak, vol. 1 (Berlin, 1929), Eintrag vom 29.3.1918; TNA, GFM 6/36, Nr. 24, 
Telegramm von Mumm an AA, 18.3.1918.
19	
In the interests of clarity, the name “Eichhorn-Kiew” will be used for this army group with 
reference to the period from April to August. 
20 
Stefan von Velsen, “Deutsche Generalstabsoffiziere im 1. Weltkrieg 1914–1918. Erinnerungen,” 
Die Welt als Geschichte, no. 16 (1956): 286. 
21	
Von Brest-Litovsk zur deutschen Novemberrevolution, Brief Groeners an seine Frau vom 
29.3.1918, 332.
22	
As successor to Ludendorff in OHL, Groener was later to play an important role through his 
part in the “Ebert-Groener pact.” Also later, as defense minister in the late phase of the Weimar 
Republic, he figured prominently in German domestic politics with his banning of the SA. Cf. 
Gerhard W. Rakenius, Wilhelm Groener als Erster Generalquartiermeister. Die Politik der 
Obersten Heeresleitung 1918 (Boppard am Rhein, 1977); Johannes Hürter, Wilhelm Groener. 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
208
Although Groener had criticized Ludendorff more than once, he 
was regarded as a protégé of OHL. While Ober Ost was in fact the 
direct superior of the army group, Groener frequently communicated 
directly with Berlin, and Ober Ost largely gave the general a free 
hand in Ukraine. The supreme commander of Ober Ost, Field Marshal 
General Prince Leopold of Bavaria, described Army Group Eichhorn-
Kiew as “absolutely the most important command post on my eastern 
front,”23 but he actually visited the Ukrainian capital only once, and 
that at the beginning of November 1918. Following the murder of 
Eichhorn by a Ukrainian Socialist Revolutionary at the end of July,24 
General Günther Graf von Kirchbach took command; the Army Group 
was now renamed Army Group Kiew. Sixty-eight years old at the time, 
Kirchbach was also considered “too old and without the necessary 
abilities for this difficult post”25 and therefore did not concern himself 
“too much with political and military questions.”26 There is no doubt 
that the real “ruler” in Ukraine during all these months of occupation 
was Groener. 
In May 1918, once the military operations to occupy the country 
had come to an end, Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew assigned to each 
of the six corps subordinate to it a Ukrainian gubernia as its military 
district.27 The troops of occupation consisted of a number of second- 
and third-class formations, that is, mostly Landwehr divisions or 
infantry divisions that had only been raised late in the war. There were 
also some dozens of territorial (Landsturm) battalions. The average 
age of the occupying soldiers was quite high. A good example is the 
387th Landwehr Infantry Regiment, part of the 11th Landwehr Division. 
Practically wiped out at Cambrai in 1917, the regiment was reassembled 
in the East. All soldiers between the ages of twenty and thirty-five were 
then moved to the West, and their places were taken by soldiers from 
Reichswehrminister am Ende der Weimarer Republik (1928–1932) (Munich, 1993). See also his 
memoirs: Wilhelm Groener, Lebenserinnerungen. Jugend, Generalstab, Weltkrieg (Osnabrück, 
1972).
23	
BayHStA-Geheimes Hausarchiv, Nachlass Leopold von Bayern 239 I, Eintrag v. 31.7.1918.
24 
See also Skoropadsky’s account of this: Pavlo Skoropads´kyj. Erinnerungen 1917 bis 1918, ed. 
Günter Rosenfeld (Stuttgart, 1999), 274ff.
25 
Velsen, “Deutsche Generalstabsoffiziere im 1. Weltkrieg 1914–1918,” 289.
26	
Von Brest-Litovsk zur deutschen Novemberrevolution, Brief Groeners an seine Frau vom 
13.8.1918, 420.
27 
I. Army Corps: Kharkiv; XXII Reserve Corps: Volhynia; XXVII Reserve Corps: Kyiv; XXXXI 
Reserve Corps: Homel; 52nd Corps: Crimea; Corps Knoerzer: Rostov. When Korps Knoerzer was 
disbanded, the XX Army Corps came to Ukraine for the final weeks of the occupation. It took the 
district around Poltava. There were no Armeeoberkommandos in Ukraine in 1918.

chapter 3b: the administration of the occupation
209 
various territorial units. So the average age of the regiment was thirty-
eight, and a fifth of the men were already over forty. Since the regiment 
in Ukraine was used to reinforce positions on the Soviet Russian border 
and to assist in the harvest, adequate training was impossible.28 In some 
units, discipline and morale were not very high. Some of the junior 
officers and older soldiers seemed to show little enthusiasm for the 
service.29 From the early autumn of 1918, there were some serious cases 
of insubordination.30 In addition to the German troops, there were also 
a number of more exotic units, such as the Muslim Battalion, which, 
from May until its dissolution in October 1918, served in the district of 
the XXII Reserve Corps in Volhynia.31 This battalion was put together 
in Germany from among Muslims who had been Russian prisoners of 
war and was meant to be a friendly gesture toward the Ottoman ally. 
The Ottoman Empire was concerned about the protection of Muslim 
Tatars in the Crimea and had been thinking of sending a large Turkish 
contingent to the region.32 
There were also German elite units in the Crimea, or at least units 
that considered themselves as such. They included the cavalry, with 
its “old German horse-riding spirit.”33 In the industrialized trench 
warfare of the Western Front, the cavalry very soon had no place and, 
even in the East, it never managed to regain its previous dominance 
on the field of battle. In the spring of 1918, therefore, the German army 
disbanded the majority of its cavalry divisions or reconstituted them as 
dismounted cavalry rifle divisions.34 The 1st and 2nd Cavalry Divisions 
28	
BayHStA-KA, 1. Kav.Brig., Bd. 11, Generalkommando I. A.K., Abt. Ia, Nr. 1887 op., v. 6.11.1918.
29	
See the urgent order of the commanding general of the XXVII Reserve Corps, Lieutenant General 
Gustav Bernhard von Watzdorf, in BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 30, Militärbezirk Kiew. 
XXVII. R.K., Abt. Ia, Nr. 17800, v. 31.8.1918. See also BayHStA-KA, Etappenkommandantur 
54, Bd. 22, 18. Kavalleriebrigade, Abt. I, Nr. 70 per.geheim, v. 28.10.1918.
30	
BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 51, Bayerische Kavalleriedivision, Gericht der Division, KTB, 
Eintrag v. 1.–30.9.1918. There is a description of an incident that occurred during a transport of 
parts of the 1st Bavarian Landsturm Regiment to the West. The soldiers refused to obey orders 
and demanded leave from the front. Four men were sentenced to death by a military court. The 
division commander of the Bavarian Cavalry Division confirmed only two of the sentences. King 
Ludwig III of Bavaria eventually pardoned the men. 
31	
BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 20, Bezirk Wolhynien West. Bay.Kav.Div, Abt. Ia, Nr. 4631 w., v. 
25.10.1918. Betr.: Auflösung des muselman. Batls. One of the reasons given for the dissolution 
of the Muslim Battalion was the poor pay its soldiers received for their service in Ukraine. This 
resulted in around 350 soldiers deserting the battalion. 
32 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 469, Nr.1481, Berichte über die politische Lage in der Ukraine 
Mitte April, 15.4.1918.
33	
BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 18, Bay.Kav.Div, Abt. Ia, Nr. 1125, v. 1.7.1918. The quotation is from 
General Kosch on the occasion of the Bavarian Cavalry Division leaving his district. 
34	
The 5th, 8th, and 9th Cavalry Divisions were dissolved. The 6th and 7th Cavalry Divisions as well as 
the Guard Cavalry Division were reestablished as Cavalry Rifle Divisions. The staff of 3rd Cavalry 
Division became the staff of 65th Corps. The 4th Cavalry Division had already been stood down.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
210
and the Bavarian Cavalry Division were the only remaining mounted 
cavalry divisions. These three divisions were sent to Ukraine in 1918 
along with a number of independent regiments. Some venerable 
regiments, rich in tradition, with such resonant names as the Prussian 
Garde du Corps Regiment or the Bavarian 4th Chevauleger Regiment 
“König,” were to fight the last skirmish of their regimental history 
here against insurgent Bolsheviks and peasants. Mounted squadrons 
of regimental cavalry were deployed throughout the country as police 
troops and “tactical firefighters,” so the dying cavalry had one last 
brief historical renaissance in Ukraine in 1918. 
The military administrative posts throughout the country were 
the Etappe Commands (Etappenkommandanturen). The Germans 
installed the first of these etappe commands in eastern Ukraine at the 
beginning of March. There were 45 of them by mid-June and almost 
90 by the end of the occupation.35 They were under the command 
of older or reactivated reserve or Landwehr officers, mostly having 
the rank of captain, major, or lieutenant colonel. They had a small 
staff of officers, mostly just one adjutant with the rank of lieutenant, 
and a military court advocate. The shortage of officers in the fourth 
year of war forced them “temporarily” to do without interpreters, 
medical officers, and officers for raw materials and trade.36 The etappe 
commands were supposed to support Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew 
by dealing with the economy, trade, and deliveries of grain. They 
also dealt with the recruitment of Ukrainians for volunteer labor in 
Germany.37 The occupation troops, by contrast, were responsible for 
the protection of railway lines, the maintenance of internal security, 
and the disarmament of the villages.38
35	
Cf. HStA Stuttgart, M 46/16, Heeresgruppe Kiew, Abt. Ic, Nr. 26546 v. 16.8.1918, Die mit K.M. 
3851.5.18 A.M. v. 15.6.1918 genehmigten Etappen-Kdten; BA-MA, PH 5-I/3, Heeresgruppe 
Kiew, Abt. Ib, Nr. 7110/18 v. 1.11.1918. 
36	
HStA Stuttgart, M 46/16, Heeresgruppe Kiew, Abt. Ic, Nr. 26546 v. 16.8.1918, Die mit K.M. 
3851.5.18 A.M. v. 15.6.1918 genehmigten Etappen-Kdten.
37	
See BayHStA-KA, 15.Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 30, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn-Kiew, Abt. Ic, Nr. 22586, 
Anwerbung landwirtschaftlicher Arbeiter-Familien für Deutschland, 28.5.1918. According to 
this source, at the end of May there were five recruitment offices in Ukraine, with five more 
planned. A shortage of officials meant that no further offices were established. There are many 
documents confirming the existence of such recruitment offices in the Austro-Hungarian zone 
(model contracts, advertising placards, provisions regarding unemployment, etc.): ÖStA, KA, 
FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.613, Nr. 1816, Anwerbung landwirtschaftlicher Arbeiterfamilien 
für Deutschland. To date, no concrete indications of the numbers of workers involved have been 
found either in the German or in the Austro-Hungarian documents. 
38	
BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, K.bayr. 15. Res.Inf.Brigade, Nr. 1752, An das K.bayr.
Kriegsministerium, 23.4.1918.

chapter 3b: the administration of the occupation
211 
The relations of command and responsibility between the 
occupation troops and the etappe commands, in case of disturbances, 
were unclear. It was not until September that  Army Group Kiew 
drew up comprehensive instructions, but these do not appear ever 
to have been published. So every corps managed things differently. 
The XXVII Reserve Corps, for instance, left it to its 92nd Infantry 
Division and 15th Bavarian Reserve Infantry Brigade to decide how 
to handle their command relations with the etappe commands.39 In 
the case of the XXII Reserve Corps, on the other hand, the etappe 
command was given “a certain administrative power over the troops”; 
it was “tactically…responsible for peace, security, and order in its 
district.”40 This regulation, however, met with widespread rejection 
on the part of the troops for the simple reason that the troop leaders 
were generally of higher rank.41 Moreover, the troop leaders had much 
more experience of combat than the older and mostly reactivated 
etappe commanders. This regulation was rescinded in November.42
It is difficult to estimate the total number of German occupation 
troops in Ukraine in 1918. In the middle of 1918 there were 20 
divisions,43 shrinking to 16 by November.44 It is problematic to take 
these divisions as the only basis for reckoning numbers, since a 
number of independent brigade staffs, such as that of the 15th Bavarian 
Reserve Infantry Brigade, de facto fulfilled the function of a divisional 
staff.45 Added to these were a number of reserve battalions. The 
39 
BayHStA-KA, Etappenkommandantur 54, Bd. 22, Militärbezirk Kiew. XXVII. R.K, Abt. Ia, Nr. 
1100, Richtlinien v. 13.4.1918. The 15th Bavarian Reserve Infantry Brigade placed itself under the 
Etappenkommandanturen. See also BayHStA-KA, 15. Mkr 1824, K.Bayr.15. Res.Inf.Brigade Nr. 
7347/Adj, An das Kgl. Bayr. Kriegsministerium, 16.9.1918.
40	
BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 18, Bezirk Wolhynien West. Bay.Kav.Div., Abt. Ia, Nr. 2889 W., 
Etappenkommandanturen, 6.9.1918.
41	
BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 20, Bay.Kav.Div., Abt. Ia, Nr. 4898 W, An das Generalkommando 
XXII. Res.Korps, 8.11.1918.
42	
BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 20, Bay.Kav.Div., Abt. Ia, Nr. 4987 W, Regelung des dienstl. 
Verhältnisses zwischen Et.K’drn. u. Truppenführern, 18.11.1918.
43 
BA-MA, N 46/171, Truppen der Heeresgruppe, außer Etappe (o.D.). The fifteen divisions 
mentioned here were soon joined by the 1st Cavalry Division, as well as four divisions of the 52nd 
Corps in the Crimea. 
44	
BA-MA, PH 5-I/3, Heeresgruppe Kiew, Abt. Ib, Nr. 7110/18 v. 1.11.18. The 7th Württemberg 
Landwehr Division, not shown on this map, was in Odesa at the time, waiting there (in vain) 
for transport to another theater of war. See Reichsarchiv, ed., Der Weltkrieg, 1914–1918. Die 
Kriegführung im Sommer und Herbst 1918. Die Ereignisse außerhalb der Westfront bis 
November 1918, vol. 13 (Berlin, 1942), 397ff.
45 
In September, this brigade commanded two infantry regiments, an infantry battalion, five cavalry 
regiments (including brigade staff), an artillery regiment, and a small number of engineer and 
intelligence troops. See BayHStA-KA, MKr 1824, K.Bayr. 15. Res.Inf.Brigade, Nr. 7347/Adj, 
Bericht zu K.M.E. v. 20.8.1917, 16.9.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
212
number of etappe troops and supply troops was insignificant. The 
number of German occupation troops in Ukraine in the summer of 
1918 was therefore probably around 250,000,46 shrinking by the end 
of the occupation to around 200,000.47 The number repeated in the 
literature of 500,000 troops in Ukraine is clearly too high.48 In the 
entire East occupied by German troops at the time of the collapse in 
November 1918, from the Baltic Sea to the Black Sea, the number of 
German troops was probably not more than 300,000.49 The “occupation 
density” of German soldiers in this very large country was therefore 
very low, as is clear from the example of the Bavarian Cavalry Division. 
With ten battalions under it, around 8,000 men, it had to secure 35,000 
sq. km.50 This would be equivalent to the current size of North Rhine 
Westphalia or Styria and Lower Austria taken together.51 
Alongside the military hierarchy, and parallel to it, there was the 
civilian representation of the German Empire in the form of the German 
delegation to Ukraine in Kyiv, headed by the ambassador, Baron Philipp 
Alfons Mumm von Schwarzenstein. In spite of his title, Mumm did not 
administer an embassy but a “diplomatic representation.” Consulates 
with both a consular and an economic mission were also opened in 
Katerynoslav, Odesa, Kharkiv, and Mykolaiv.52 Since Ukraine was 
46	
See BA-MA, N 46/171, Truppeneinteilung 13.6.1918. To this must be added about twenty 
thousand men of the Etappeninspektion Bug. On the basis for reckoning the strength of individual 
battalions, see Hermann Cron, Imperial German Army 1914–18: Organisation, Structure, Orders 
of Battle (Solihull, 2001) (Original German title: Geschichte des Deutschen Heeres im Weltkrieg 
1914–18, Berlin, 1937). Individual units in Ukraine appear to have reached their target strength. 
See BayHStA-KA, 5. Chevauleger Regiment, Bd. 1, 5. Chevauleger Regiment, KTB, Eintrag 
v. 1.6.1918; BayHStA-KA, 5. Landsturmregiment 1, Bd. 4, Bayerisches Landsturmregiment 1. 
Anlagen zum KTB, 1.7.1918.
47	
BA-MA, PH 5-I/3, Heeresgruppe Kiew, Abt. Ib, Nr. 7110/18, 1.11.1918.
48	
See Peter Borowsky, “Germany’s Ukrainian Policy during World War I and the Revolution 
1918–19,” in German-Ukrainian Relations in Historical Perspective, ed. Hans-Joachim Torke 
and John-Paul Himka (Edmonton and Toronto, 1994), 86.
49	
See BA-MA, RH 61/2315, Verteilung der deutschen und k.u.k. Divisionen am 26.10.1918. 
According to this, AOK 8 had four divisions and AOK 10 had three. Three further divisions were 
in the process of being transported to the Western Front. There were about thirteen thousand 
German soldiers in the Caucasus. See BA-MA, RH 61/2315, Übersicht über die deutschen 
Truppen im Kaukasus.
50	
BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 18, Bezirk Wolhynien West, Bay.Kav.Div, Abt. Ia, Nr. 2198 W, 
13.8.1918. Bericht über die Lage im Bezirk Wolhynien West.
51	
This was relatively better than in the case of the Second World War. For the example of the 
707th Infantry Division in Belarus in 1941, see Peter Lieb, “Täter aus Überzeugung? Oberst Carl 
von Andrian und die Judenmorde der 707. Infanteriedivision 1941/42,” Vierteljahreshefte für 
Zeitgeschichte, no. 50 (2002): 545.
52	
Frank Golczewski, Deutsche und Ukrainer 1914–1939 (Paderborn, 2010), 245.

chapter 3b: the administration of the occupation
213 
officially a friendly country and therefore did not come under German 
or Austro-Hungarian administration, it was the Foreign Office in 
Berlin that was theoretically responsible for Ukrainian policy. But the 
reality was different, as it was the military that determined strategy. 
However, because of the good personal relations between Groener 
and Mumm, the two men were often able to find compromises on 
particular issues, bridging the faulty parallel hierarchies of civil and 
military representatives. But there was no unity of command among 
the German occupation apparatus.
Since the Central Powers were officially in the country as a 
protection force, they frequently had to show restraint, at least 
superficially. Many German officers thought that this had an 
unsatisfactory effect on their daily work. As much as Groener and other 
military leaders might have been annoyed at this privately, they still 
ordered their subordinate officers to exercise restraint in expressing 
opinions on Germany’s Ukrainian policy. They could be “politically 
engaged only insofar” as necessary “to encourage the inhabitants of 
this country to do what is reasonable and useful.”53
Eichhorn, Groener and their entourage in Kyiv got along quite well, 
privately and personally, with their Ukrainian counterparts, even with 
representatives of the Rada. Yet, at the same time, Groener castigated 
the Rada as a “government club”54 and as a “conventicle of immature 
students and other youthful visionaries and bad elements.”55 In mid-
April he decided that cooperation with the Rada was no longer possible. 
That Groener was involved in the overthrow of the Rada on 29 April is 
no longer open to doubt.56 Not for nothing, a few days previously, had 
the Army Group issued its “guidelines for behavior in case of a change of 
government.” This would come into force with the cue “change.”57 General 
Gustav Bernhard von Watzdorf, commander of the XXVII Reserve Corps, 
which was stationed in Kyiv, wrote in his personal diary on 28 April about 
the planned arrest of some Ukrainian government members the next 
53	
BayHStA-KA, Etappenkommandantur 54, Bd. 22, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, N.O., Nr. 692, 
27.6.1918.
54	
BA-MA, N 46/172, Brief Groeners an Ludendorff v. 23.3.1918.
55	
Von Brest-Litovsk zur deutschen Novemberrevolution, 348.
56	
For an opposing view, see ibid., 357, n. 365.
57	
BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn-Kiew, Abt. Ia, Nr. 254/18 [o.D., 
allerdings kurz vor 24.4.1918], Richtlinien für Verhalten der Truppen im Falle Regierungswechsel. 
According to an appendix added by the XXVII Reserve Corps, only officers could give this 
command. No junior officers or troops could be used even for writing services. See also HStA 
Stuttgart, M 46/5e, Korps Knoerzer, Abt. Ic, Nr. 1121, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn drahtet, 29.4.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
214
day. On 29 April he noted: “Troops are on heightened alert. Everything is 
being prepared for the overthrow of the government.”58 
Two previous orders issued by Eichhorn had sharply crystallized 
as points of conflict between the Germans and the Rada. One was the 
cultivation order, which required the immediate tillage of fields and 
the reversal of the land expropriations that had taken place after the 
revolution. The other was the command concerning the jurisdiction 
of German military courts in Ukraine, which aroused powerful 
opposition in the Rada. After its session on 28 April, the Rada sent a 
telegraphic protest to Berlin and issued a public decree declaring that 
the cultivation order was not valid. It also demanded the immediate 
recall of Field Marshal Eichhorn. This was an open provocation of the 
German occupying power and provided it with the opportunity to move 
against the Rada. The ministers for war, foreign affairs, and agriculture 
as well as a number of other important persons were arrested, and the 
Rada session was dispersed. On the next day the German ambassador, 
Mumm, apologized to Vsevolod Holubovych for the “unintended 
dispersal of the Rada.” At the same time, Pavlo Skoropadsky, with 
some of his confidants, had prepared a congress of peasants and estate 
owners who would proclaim him Hetman.59 The Rada reacted to this 
putsch by bringing Socialist Federalists and other independent parties 
into the government, forming a new State Council and adopting a more 
moderate constitution, but it was too late. On the afternoon of the same 
day, supporters of Skoropadsky began to occupy major posts according 
to a previously agreed plan. On the night of 29 April there were 
exchanges of fire between troops loyal to the Rada and supporters of 
Skoropadsky.60 On the same night, with only a few units, Skoropadsky 
was able to gain control of the internal affairs and war ministries and 
the state bank. He now had the power centers in his hands.61 
58 
BA-MA, N 776/45, Tagebuch Generalleutnant v. Watzdorf, Einträge vom 28. und 29.4.1918.
59 
See the report of the signals intelligence service concerning the inauguration of Skoropadsky: 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3670, Nr. 14.321, Bericht 
über die ukrainischen Verhältnisse, 10.6.1918.
60	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 469, Nr. 1498/3, Lage in der Ukraine, 28.4.1918; ÖStA, KA, 
FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 469, Nr. 1517, Vorgänge in Kiew, 29.4.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, 
Kt. 469, Nr. 1525, Nachrichten aus der Ukraine, 30.4.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 
469, Nr. 1526, Nachrichten aus Kiew, 30.4.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 469, Nr. 1527, 
Burian an Trauttmansdorff, 30.4.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 469, Nr. 1528, Burian an 
Trauttmansdorff, 30.4.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, 
1918 Situations- und Tagesmeldungen, Chronologische Zusammenstellung der Kiewer Vorgänge.
61	
Pavlo Skoropads'kyj, 152–72. These memoirs are based on different versions of notes compiled 
by Skoropadsky after the war. There are difficulties in assessing the value of this source, as there 
is no indication of the variations between the different versions and very few references to the 
fact that there are variations. 

chapter 3b: the administration of the occupation
215 
Even before being proclaimed in that position, the Hetman had 
secured the support of the Germans, who had been in contact with him 
since mid-April. Shortly before the overthrow of the Rada, he made far-
reaching concessions to Groener. These included the recognition of the 
Brest-Litovsk peace treaty, the dissolution of the Rada, an agreement 
not to establish a Ukrainian army, recognition of the jurisdiction of 
German military courts, the dismissal of “all undesirable persons” 
from “state administration,” the cancellation of all regulations 
limiting trade with the Central Powers, the resolution of “the agrarian 
question by restoring all property rights” (that is, extensive reversal of 
the expropriations and compensation for nationalized or distributed 
land), the recognition of finance and currency arrangements in 
accordance with already established agreements, and compensation 
for the military assistance being provided to Ukraine. Skoropadsky 
agreed, with very few reservations, to these German demands.62 On 
30 April, influenced by the Central Powers, especially by Groener and 
Fleischmann, Skoropadsky attempted to form a new government. 
The occupying powers pressured him to bring left-wing ministers 
into the government in order to make it more widely acceptable to 
the population.63 That same day he issued a declaration announcing 
his takeover of the government and the dissolution of the Rada. The 
remaining supporters of the Rada were arrested, and the building was 
occupied by Skoropadsky’s guards.64 However, his method of seizing 
power and his conservative anti-revolutionary policies would create 
permanent enemies among the majority of Rada supporters, and this, 
in the end, would lead to his own overthrow half a year later.65
Although the Germans had now achieved their political goals, 
namely the removal of the Rada and the creation of a reliable point 
of contact, they were not entirely satisfied with the way in which this 
had been done. The city commandant in Kyiv, General Gaspard von 
62	
In mid-May the Ostarmee expressed concerns to the AOK and to the Austro-Hungarian Foreign 
Ministry about the agreement between Groener and Skoropadsky. The Foreign Ministry, 
however, regarded these agreements not as a state treaty but as “informal agreements” in which 
the representatives of the Austro-Hungarian Foreign Ministry had also been involved. They were 
therefore not “bound” by these agreements, which did not mean that individual points would be 
revised: ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Nr. 1548, Vertrag mit Skoropadsky, 5.5.1918.
63	
See details in chapter 2a of the present volume.
64 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 469, Nr. 1529, Die Vorgänge in Kiew III, 2.5.1918. For the list 
of ministers and Fleischmann’s assessment, see ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Nr. 1547, 
Vorgänge in Kiew IV, 3. Mai; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, 1564, Vorgänge in Kiew VI, 
8.5.1918.
65	
See chapters 2a and 2b in the present volume.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
216
Eberhardt, had made the arrests during a session of the Rada. Two 
days later, Eberhardt had to exchange his post with the commander of 
the 33rd Landwehr Brigade in Poltava, Major General von Dittfurth.66 
The Germans appeared not to be bothered, however, by the internal 
political implications of the overthrow of the Rada, according to 
the assessment of Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew: “One should not 
exaggerate the extent to which our intervention has made us disliked. 
The Russian [sic] has great respect for firm action. On the other hand, 
this experience has demonstrated that our patience with the Rada has 
not won us the love of the Social Revolutionaries.”67 
With the Hetman, the German military had a negotiating 
partner whom they respected socially and personally, if for no other 
reason than that he had once been a Russian general. A product of 
tsarist Russia and “a passionate soldier,” Skoropadsky had been “a 
supporter of the war party” and had fought against the Germans 
“with enthusiasm.”68 But his past did not bother the German military 
at all. They harbored no feelings of revenge or other emotions 
against the Hetman—an unmistakable sign of the last remnants of 
“cabinet warfare” in the midst of total war. This respect was based on 
reciprocity.69 The Hetman also did not fail to respect the diplomats of 
the Foreign Ministry. This contrasted quite strongly with his reaction 
to some representatives of the German economy and to the Austrians 
and Hungarians. He accused the latter of corruption and deceit70 and, 
according to German documents, showed contempt for their limited 
military abilities.71 
66	
BA-MA, N 776/45, Tagebuch Generalleutnant v. Watzdorf, Eintrag v. 1.5.1918. According to Von 
Brest-Litovsk zur deutschen Novemberrevolution, 359, n. 375, Eberhardt was given command of 
an infantry brigade in the West. 
67	
BayHStA-KA, 15.Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, N.O. der OHL, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Zentral-Abt., 
Tgb. Nr. 390, Innere Lage, 17.5.1918.
68	
Cf. BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 21, N.O.d.O.H.L. Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Zentral-Abt., Tgb. 
Nr. 503, Innere Lage unter besonderer Berücksichtigung des Hetmantums, 30.5.1918.
69 
Jaroslaw Pelenski, “Hetman Pavlo Skoropadsky and Germany (1917–18) as Reflected in his 
Memoirs,” in German-Ukrainian Relations in Historical Perspective, 73; Pavlo Skoropads'kyj, 
276–79.
70	
Pelenski, “Hetman Pavlo Skoropadsky and Germany,” 75.
71	
BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 21, N.O.d.O.H.L. Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Zentral-Abt, Tgb. 
Nr. 503, Innere Lage unter besonderer Berücksichtigung des Hetmantums, 30.5.1918. In this 
document, it is said of the Hetman that “His dislike of the militarily and politically incompetent 
Poles is just as well founded and credible.”

chapter 3b: the administration of the occupation
217 
The Administration of the Austro-Hungarian Zone of Occupation
On 27 March, the day before signing the agreement on the administration 
of the occupation, the chief of the operations section of the general 
staff, Major General Alfred Freiherr von Waldstätten, presented a 
report on Ukraine. He drew a somber picture of a chaotic state led by 
the “old” and “powerless” Rada president, Mykhailo Hrushevsky, who 
was being exploited by all sides. Neither the Rada, the government, nor 
the idea of Ukrainian national identity were accepted by most of the 
population. Kyiv in particular was a dangerous place in which there were 
thousands of tsarist officers who had fled from the Bolsheviks and were 
engaged in political intrigue. Entente officers were also turning public 
opinion against the Central Powers. In addition, revolutionary and 
counterrevolutionary activists were adding to the chaos. Waldstätten 
was also critical of the influence of the German allies and demanded 
that money be set aside for propaganda activity in Ukraine to counter 
German activities aimed at controlling the Rada.72 
Austro-Hungarian generals also reported chaotic conditions 
in provincial cities such as Odesa, which was taken by German and 
Austro-Hungarian troops on 12 March after some heavy fighting.73 In 
a report from the 30th Infantry Division on 18 March, the situation was 
described as still extremely chaotic and difficult. The Central Rada had 
practically no support, as Ukrainian speakers were only a minority 
there. The jerry-built structures of the Central Rada had less popular 
support than the better organized City Duma, whose goal was to make 
Odesa a free city. A well-disciplined Polish Legion, which saw itself as 
the protector of the Poles in Odesa, did not support the Rada. There 
were also tens of thousands of soldiers from the dissolved Russian army 
in the city who belonged to various national committees and pursued 
their own interests. There was a catastrophic shortage of food, coal, oil, 
and ore, which, it was feared, would soon lead to riots.74 
It soon became clear that the Austro-Hungarians lacked experts 
with a knowledge of the recently occupied country. At the beginning 
of April, they began efforts “to resume trade with Ukraine...to attract 
all those Austro-Hungarian subjects who had had relations with the 
country before the war and knew conditions there.” In the following 
72 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 468, Nr. 1328, Waldstätten an AOK, 29.3.1918.
73 
For the specifics on the revolutionary year 1917 in Odesa, see Tanja Penter, Odessa 1917. 
Revolution an der Peripherie (Cologne, Weimar, and Vienna, 2000).
74 
ÖStA, AVA, Nachlässe, Nachlass: Spannocchi, B 760, Fas. 9.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
218
months, lists arrived from all parts of the army with names of Gagists75 
and troop members who, in some cases, had had long experience of the 
country and knew its language.76 But because of the limited personnel 
resources throughout the army, very few people with knowledge of 
the country were deployed in Ukraine.
The 2nd Army and parts of the 4th and 7th Armies took part in the 
invasion of Ukraine. The advance was linked to the dismantling of 
the Eastern Front, which was now to be organized by the General 
Commands (Generalkommando). The Commands of the 2nd and 4th 
Armies (the latter was dissolved and its units integrated into the 
2nd Army) departing for Ukraine were replaced by the 4th General 
Command. The Command of the 7th Army was replaced by the 7th 
General Command.77 The 4th General Command, made up of the 
quartermaster sections of the 2nd and 4th Army, was stationed in 
Lviv; attached to it were the 2nd and 25th Infantry Divisions, the 45th 
Schützen Division, the 12th Cavalry Schützen Division, and the 4th 
Cavalry Division.78 The commandant of this General Command was 
the infantry general Viktor von Webenau. Its sector of deployment 
was the area of Volhynia occupied by Austro-Hungarian troops, parts 
of the military district of Lublin, and the northern part of Bessarabia, 
as well as Galicia and Bukovyna. Divided into etappe commands 
(Etappenkommandos) and manned with weak Landsturm units, the 
General Command managed a variety of tasks. These included 
administration of the return home of prisoners of war, the rebuilding 
of destroyed infrastructure,79 the dismantling of military installations 
erected during the war, the preparation of harvest detachments, the 
reception and further transmission of looted property, the purchase 
of goods in Ukraine for the military administration, transport 
75	
Gagist was a term used in the Austro-Hungarian military to refer to long-serving officers and 
noncommissioned officers. See Die Habsburgermonarchie 1848–1918. Die Bewaffnete Macht, 
ed. Adam Wandruszka and Peter Urbanitsch, vol. 5 (Vienna, 1987), 552, 593–98, 743.
76	
ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 309, 1918 Befehle und 
Verlautbarungen, Allgemeine Verlautbarungen des 2. Armeekommandos am 8.4.1918.
77	
The Austro-Hungarian General Commands during the First World War should not be confused 
with the German units of the same name at that time and, later, in the Second World War. A 
General Command in the Austro-Hungarian army was equivalent to a corps in the German 
army: ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 4. Armee, Kt. 484, Beilagen zum Tagebuch des 
Generalkommandos 4 v. 8.4.–30.10.1918, Beilage 1.
78	
ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 4. Armee, Kt. 484, Beilagen zum Tagebuch des 
Generalkommandos 4 vom 8.4.–30.10.1918, Beilage 6. 
79	
Formally the task of repairing infrastructure fell to the military command in Lviv (formerly in 
Ostrava in Moravia), but this was placed under the General Command. 

chapter 3b: the administration of the occupation
219 
management and supervision, border security, the construction of 
facilities in the rail transit stations (making use of prisoner-of-war 
companies), support for the post in Lviv, the maintenance of peace 
and order, reinforcing troop numbers from among those returning 
home, and recruitment among the local population for Landsturm 
units.80 In the course of late summer, all General Command areas in 
the northeast of the Monarchy were placed under the authority of the 
Military Centers in the Rear (Militärische Zentralstellen im Hinterland). 
Galicia, for instance, was subordinated to the military command in 
Lviv.81 The remaining troops were placed under the Ostarmee or moved 
to other sections of the front.82 
The troops advancing into Ukraine had to deal not only with 
their own military duties but also with managing the thousands of 
returning Austro-Hungarian prisoners of war. Negotiations between 
Bolshevik Russia, Germany, and Austria-Hungary on the question of 
prisoners  had begun on 31 December 1917 in St. Petersburg. Although 
the talks dealt with what was only a limited problem, they dragged 
on. An agreement was finally signed at the beginning of February but 
was rendered ineffective by the breakdown of negotiations at Brest-
Litovsk on 10 February 1918 and the end of the truce. In spite of this, 
thousands of former prisoners  had been making their own way home 
since December. In a Russia stricken by revolutionary chaos, this was 
no simple journey. Austria-Hungary was particularly troubled by this 
because it feared that the returning prisoners would carry the “virus 
of revolution” into the already poisonous mood behind the lines and 
radicalize the situation in the army. AOK was pushing for a legal 
resolution of the prisoner-of-war issue and relied on the Red Cross.83 
80	
For the variety of activities of 4th General Command, see ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 
4. Armee, Kt. 484, Beilagen zum Tagebuch des Generalkommandos 4 vom 8.4.–30.10.1918.
81	
The 7th General Command was dissolved on 15 June, and its responsibilities in the Austro-
Hungarian area were given to the 4th General Command. Its troops were used to form the 
XI Corps, which was subordinated to the Ostarmee. On the dissolution of the 7th General 
Command, see ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 7. Armee, Kt. 289, Separat-Reservat-
Generalkommandobefehl Nr. 2 v. 14.6.1918.
82	
The much reduced 4th General Command remained responsible for the administration of 
Bessarabia (until it was taken over by Romanian authorities) and Volhynia, as well as for the 
administration of march formations and the security of the border with Romania: ÖStA, KA, FA, 
NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 4. Armee, Kt. 484, Beilagen zum Tagebuch des Generalkommandos 4 
vom 8.4.–30.10.1918, Übergabe des 4. GenKmdos an MilKmdo Lemberg, 18.8.1918. For a general 
account, see ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 4. Armee, Kt. 485, Nr. 45.587, Ausscheiden 
der innerhalb der Monarchie gelegenen Gebietsteile des 1. und 4. Genkmdos aus dem Bereich der 
A.i.F., 14.8.1918.
83	
Verena Moritz and Hannes Leidinger, Zwischen Nutzen und Bedrohung. Die russischen 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
220
During the advance into Ukraine, thousands of their own onetime 
soldiers volunteered, and others were picked up in the villages and 
towns. In his diary, Böhm-Ermolli wrote of 66,273 prisoners of war84 
who “arrived” in March at the advancing 2nd Army.85 At the end of 
April, corps commands were given guidelines for the treatment of 
returning prisoners of war. Collection points were to be established 
in Ukraine from which the returning soldiers could be taken back 
to Austria-Hungary in the area of the 4th General Command.86 
Those  being repatriated were to be set up with adequate funds for 
the return journey in order to avoid dissatisfaction on their part. To 
attract greater numbers of these ex-prisoners, posters were put up and 
information points established at the returnee mission in Kyiv and 
at collection points in Kharkiv.87 But these measures may not have 
achieved the desired success since, as late as September, the military 
reconnaissance (Nachrichtenstelle) in Volodymyr-Volynskyi reported 
that, in Kyiv, “there are many of our prisoners of war who do not want 
to leave the good work that they have found there.”88 
Two weeks after the Hetman came to power, the Austro-
Hungarian troops in Ukraine were also restructured. Field Marshal 
Eduard von Böhm-Ermolli was replaced on 16 May by General Alfred 
Krauss. Krauss was assisted by the chief of general staff, Major 
General Alexander Belitska. The 2nd Army was renamed the Ostarmee, 
with its headquarters in Odesa.89 The Austro-Hungarian Ostarmee 
consisted of the XII Corps in the Katerynoslav gubernia (the 15th, 
34th, and 59th Infantry Divisions, the 5th Honved Cavalry Division, 
Kriegsgefangenen in Österreich (1914–1921) (Bonn, 2005), 210–29; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, 
OpAbt, Kt. 466, Nr. 1018, Csicerics an AOK, 11.2.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 
2. Armee, QuAbt, Kt. 696, Nr. 4017, Disziplinäre Verhältnisse beim ErsBaon SchR 31, 8.7.1918.
84	
These numbers may be realistic, since the 2nd Army, on 9 March, reported 3,000–5,000 
returning daily: ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, QuAbt, Kt. 694, Nr. 1334, 
Heimkehrerzahlen, 9.3.1918.
85 
ÖStA, AVA, Nachlässe, Nachlass: Böhm-Ermolli, B 1466, Mikrofilm B 1466, Eintrag v. 28.–
31.3.1918.
86	
Existing buildings and housing complexes served as collection points, since the shortage 
of materials meant that new sites could not be constructed: ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/
KorpsKdo, 12. Korps, Kt. 1663, Nr. 8069, Regelung des Heimkehrerwesens in der Ukraine durch 
das 2. Armee-Kommando, 28.4.1918.
87	
ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, QuAbt, Kt. 693, Nr. 2923, Regelung des 
Heimkehrerwesens in der Ukraina, 13.6.1918.
88 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3674, Nr. 24.107, Verhältnisse 
in der Ukraine, 16.9.1918.
89	
ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, QuAbt, Kt. 695, Nr. 1872, 
Kommandoverhältnisse, 29.3.1918. 

chapter 3b: the administration of the occupation
221 
and the 145th Infantry Brigade), the XXV Corps in Podilia (the 155th 
Honved Infantry Division and the 54th Schützen Division), and the 
XVII Corps in Kherson (2nd and 7th Cavalry Divisions, as well as the 
11th and 30th Infantry Divisions).90 The units were made up mainly 
of soldiers from the South Slav (Slovenian, Croatian) regions of the 
Habsburg Monarchy and from the northwestern and southeastern 
regions of Hungary, Bohemia, Moravia, Galicia, and Bukovyna.91 
The 36th Infantry Division, the 21st Schützen Division,92 and the 4th 
Cavalry Division also took part in the invasion.93 By early October, the 
troops had shrunk to just six divisions. All three corps had only two 
divisions each.94 In addition, the 2nd Cavalry Division (with only the 
3rd Cavalry Brigade) and the 145th Infantry Brigade were placed under 
the command of the Ostarmee.95 As in the case of the German troops, 
the numerical data for the Austro-Hungarian troops in Ukraine need 
to revised downward. The Ostarmee itself assumed a maximum of 
240,000 troops in Ukraine at the end of August,96 and by the beginning 
of October it may have been less than half that.97 
By the summer, an entire network of Austro-Hungarian military 
and civilian officials had been established in Ukraine.98 The general in 
charge in Kyiv was Major General Lelio von Spannocchi, assisted by 
90	
ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 309, 1918 Befehle und 
Verlautbarungen, Allgemeine Verlautbarungen des Kommandos der Ostarmee am 20. Mai 1918.
91	
Allthough it has to be admitted that the national/ethnic structure of the military units became 
more and more mixed throughout the war: Rudolf Hecht, Heeresergänzung – Österreich-Ungarn 
im 1. Weltkrieg (Vienna, 2010), 449–57.
92	
ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, QuAbt, Kt. 693, Nr. 853, Sammelakt zur 
militärischen Teilnahme an der wirtschaftlichen Ausnutzung der Ukraine, Februar/März 1918.
93	
See Österreich-Ungarns letzter Krieg, Das Kriegsjahr 1918, no. VII, supplements 6 und 27.
94 
XII Corps: 5th Honved Cavalry Division and 15th Infantry Division; the 59th Infantry and 4th 
Cavalry Division were already departing; XVII Corps: 11th Infantry and 7th Cavalry Division; 
XXV Corps: 155th Honved Infantry and 54th Schützen Division.
95	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2626, Nr. 8399, Kriegsgliederung der k.u.k. Ostarmee, 
1.10.1918.
96 
Their monthly maintenance cost was around 97.4 million crowns: ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/
AGKdo, 2. Armee, QuAbt, Kt. 710, Nr. 43.295, Stellungnahme zur beabsichtigten Aufbringung 
des Heeresbedarfes in der Ukraina, 26.9.1918.
97	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2626, Nr. 8399, Kriegsgliederung der k.u.k. Ostarmee, 
1.10.1918; Österreich-Ungarns letzter Krieg, Das Kriegsjahr 1918, no. VII, supplement 32, 
“Letzte Kriegsgliederung der öst.-ung. und der dem k.u.k. AOK unterstellten deutschen 
Streitkräfte am 15. Oktober 1918”; Alfred Krauss and Franz Klingenbrunner, Die Besetzung 
der Ukraine 1918 (Vienna, 1928), 389. See also John Ellis and Michael Cox, The World War I 
Databook: The Essential Facts and Figures for All the Combatants (London, 2001), 247.
98	
For individual persons and positions in Kyiv on 8 August, see ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine 
Akten, Kt. 2618, Nr. 4597, Verzeichnis der öster.-ung. und deutschen Behörden und Funktionäre 
in Kiew, 7.8.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
222
Major Moritz Fleischmann von Theissruck (he was also the “authorized 
representative of Austro-Hungarian High Command to the Ukrainian 
Rada”). Spannocchi took his orders directly from Austria-Hungary’s 
AOK, and all Austro-Hungarian military personnel stationed in Kyiv 
and in the German zone of influence were formally under his command. 
The Austro-Hungarian general staff officers of the Army Group 
Eichhorn-Kiew, the Austro-Hungarian representatives at the German-
Austro-Hungarian Economic Center, and the prisoner-of-war missions 
were subject to his instructions in military and economic matters. 
Spannocchi was to cooperate with the ambassador, Forgách, as much as 
possible and, in political matters, it was Forgách who was the leader.99 
Lieutenant Field Marshal Georg Alexich in Kyiv was responsible for the 
repatriation of prisoners of war. The representative of the War Ministry in 
Kyiv was Gustav Riemer (replacing the Military Commission of Colonel 
Milan Lennoch).100 The liaison officer to Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew 
was Cavalry Captain Klemens Waldbott zu Bassenheim-Bornheim. 
The military representatives, also with economic responsibilities, were 
Captain Josef Daróczy, general staff officer at the German-Austro-
Hungarian Economic Center, and Major Franz Buchar, general staff 
officer to the director of the railways and chief of Austro-Hungarian staff 
at the Railway Center in Kyiv. The governor of Odesa101 was Lieutenant 
Field Marshal Eduard Edler von Böltz.102 
In general, Krauss attempted to establish Odesa as an economic 
and political counterweight to Kyiv and make use of existing 
separatist tendencies. In an agreement signed between the Ukrainian 
government and the Austro-Hungarian military, there was a promise 
of an authorized representative of the Ukrainian government at 
the headquarters of the Ostarmee in Odesa and a certain amount 
of consultation in matters that would affect the occupying troops. 
The Germany army in Ukraine was indignant about the agreement, 
suspecting that Austria-Hungary was attempting to establish its own 
Ukrainian state in southern Ukraine, with Odesa as its capital. And 
this suspicion was not altogether unfounded. Krauss had repeatedly 
99	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2626, Mappe “Ukraine. Geheimakten,” Nr. 20, 
Befehlsverhältnisse in der Ukraine, 20.6.1918.
100	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 309, 1918 Befehle und 
Verlautbarungen, Allgemeine Verlautbarungen des Kommandos der Ostarmee am 20.7.1918.
101	 Previously group commandant, later also military governor of Odesa.
102	 For the military organization of the Austro-Hungarian Ostarmee after 1 October 1918, see 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2626, Nr. 8399, Kriegsgliederung der k.u.k. Ostarmee, 
1.10.1918.

chapter 3b: the administration of the occupation
223 
brought this idea forward, particularly when it came to thinking 
about an official military occupation of the country.103 When this 
agreement was signed, Eichhorn protested both to Skoropadsky and 
to the command of the Ostarmee. He saw it as a violation of the Brest-
Litovsk treaty and feared a partition of Ukraine.104 However, Krauss 
continued to insist that a representative of the Ukrainian government 
be sent to Odesa.105 The Hetman, too, was not enthusiastic about the 
actions of the Austro-Hungarians in southern Ukraine and remained 
mistrustful of the Austrians and Hungarians.106 
Krauss’s intention with these actions was to get around not only 
the German troops, with their monopoly of power in Kyiv, but also the 
Austro-Hungarian Foreign Ministry, whose representatives in Kyiv 
were becoming increasingly powerful. Since taking over the post in 
mid-April, the foreign minister, Burián, had been attempting to get 
control of the political agenda in Ukraine and repeatedly reminded the 
military representatives of their proper place. Between February and 
April, Czernin had been losing control of affairs in Ukraine as a result 
of the tough peace negotiations with Romania, the completion of the 
Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with Bolshevik Russia, the Polish question, and 
the Sixtus affair.
In spite of this dense network of newly created Austro-Hungarian 
institutions in Ukraine, the separation of responsibilities remained 
problematic. Time and energy were repeatedly being lost as a result 
of tensions between military and political authorities. One particular 
area of dispute concerned control of the migration of Ukrainians to 
Austria-Hungary. There was a fear that the Ukrainians in Galicia 
and Bukovyna could join with those of the old Russian Empire and 
become an uncontrollable centrifugal political force. Basically, it 
103	 Krauss had suggested, at the time, a division of Ukraine into two general governorates and 
had proposed a detailed administrative plan for the “Southern Ukrainian general governorate”: 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 472, Nr. 1729, Ziele der Monarchie in der Ukraine, 6.7.1918.
104 Both Germans and Ukrainians protested against the influence on Ukrainian internal affairs 
in Odesa. It was only after some maneuvering by Krauss himself, as well as by Waldbott and 
Ambassador Forgách, that the situation calmed down. See ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 
470, Nr. 1614, Komorny-Absetzung, 20.5.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Nr. 1629, 
Ostarmee an AOK, 22.5.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Nr. 1644, Beratungen 
mit Staatssekretär Kistiakowski, 23.5.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 472, Nr. 1707, 
Aktenkonvolut zur Situation in der Ukraine, 13.–25.6.1918.
105	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 471, Nr. 1679, Fragen der Ostarmee, 5.6.1918.
106 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 472, Nr. 1712, Aktenkonvolut zu den Verhältnissen in der 
Ukraine, 29.5.–30.6.1918; Pavlo Skoropads'kyj, 269–73.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
224
was the Austro-Hungarian military commission in Kyiv that was 
responsible for issuing permits for Ukrainians wishing to travel to 
Austria-Hungary; it was also responsible for the military intelligence 
service of the 2nd Army. It was only in very urgent cases that the 
representative of the Foreign Ministry, Forgách, could issue such a 
travel permit.107 Not until the beginning of August were they able to 
agree on a new regulation according to which the passport authorities 
of the Foreign Ministry in Kyiv and Odesa had the authority to accredit 
passports for the whole of Ukraine. However, the passport authority 
of the AOK would also have to issue a permit. Guidelines were also 
approved concerning local border traffic. It was hoped that this would 
improve trade between Ukraine, Galicia, and Bukovyna and thus 
also increase the amount of provisions for Austria-Hungary.108 Local 
border trade, however, led to very active smuggling not only of goods 
but undoubtedly also of propaganda. 
On 1 June, after long deliberation and following the example of 
the Germans, the jurisdiction of military courts was introduced into 
the Austro-Hungarian zone in Ukraine. The increase in the numbers 
of military police helped in the suppression of uprisings,109 although 
their numbers, around 4,000 men (1,500 in Odesa alone), were quite 
small for such a large area of occupation.110 Generally, after June 1918, 
a bit later than the Germans, the Foreign Ministry in Vienna and the 
command of the Ostarmee were insisting more strongly on cooperation 
between the troops and Ukrainian officials,111 from prohibiting direct 
107	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 309, 1918 Befehle und 
Verlautbarungen, Allgemeine Verlautbarungen des 2. Armeekommandos am 10.5.1918. On 
Zitkovsky (born 2.10.1883), see Jahrbuch des k.u.k. Auswärtigen Dienstes 1916, 26. May 1916, 
vol. 20 (Vienna, 1916), 460.
108	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 309, 1918 Befehle und 
Verlautbarungen, Allgemeine Verlautbarungen des Kommandos der Ostarmee am 13.8.1918.
109	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 472, Nr. 1707, Aktenkonvolut zur Situation in der Ukraine, 
13–25.6.1918.
110	 After Serbia and the Lublin area, which were much smaller, this was the area with the third 
largest number of military police: ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 475, Nr. 1906, Darstellung 
der materiellen Lage der Armee im Felde, 18.8.1918, Beilage 12.
111	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Op. Geh. Nr. 1560, Gerichte, Kriegsleistungsgesetz 
Ukraine, 6.5.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Op. Geh. Nr. 1568, Kriegsleistungsgesetz 
in der Ukraine, 9.5.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Op. Geh. Nr. 1581, Regelung der 
Verhältnisse in der Ukraine, 12.5.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Op. Geh. Nr. 1583, 
Gerichtsbarkeit, Kriegsleistungsgesetz in der Ukraine, 13.5.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, 
Kt. 470, Op. Geh. Nr. 1586, Anordnungen der Deutschen in der Ukraine, 14.5.1918; ÖStA, KA, 
FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Op. Geh. Nr. 1612, Gerichtsbarkeit und Kriegsleistungsgesetz in der 
Ukraine, 19.5.1918.

chapter 3b: the administration of the occupation
225 
intervention in rail transport (this intervention was now to take place 
only through official channels) to promoting cooperation with their 
corresponding military and civilian officials.112 
In spite of all these efforts, the Austro-Hungarian authorities 
never came close to having as much influence in Ukraine as their 
German allies. This was made particularly clear at the time of 
Skoropadsky’s coup, engineered by Groener, in which Fleischmann 
and Forgách were mere onlookers. They had got wind of events, but 
all they could do was discreetly sound out the persons involved to get 
better information.113 Fleischmann in particular attempted, through a 
network of “Austrophile” “loyal” individuals, to improve his access to 
information, but ultimately he had only limited success.
Combined  Executive Bodies of Administration
Although the Austro-Hungarians and Germans were unable to agree 
on a combined military structure in Ukraine, they were nonetheless 
forced to cooperate in organizing the economic administration in order 
to better exploit the occupied territory. The organizational agreement 
of 28 March had contained the first economic arrangements, including 
the organization of the railways and shipyards as well as agreements 
that regulated shipping on the rivers and on the Black Sea. A Combined 
Railway Center (Gemeinsame Eisenbahnzentralstelle) was established in 
Kyiv to organize the railways and a similar River Transport Center 
to oversee shipping (which, given Austria-Hungary’s dominance in 
shipping on the Danube, was to be led by one of its  officers).114 In 
about two dozen treaties, agreements, and protocols signed between 
April and September, the Central Powers agreed among themselves 
and/or with the Ukrainian government on the regulation of economic 
matters. These included the creation of institutions to improve the 
exploitation of resources, regulation of food prices, contribution 
quotas, and formulas for the allocation of war materials and procured 
goods. There were just two agreements that did not focus mainly 
112	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 309, 1918 Befehle und 
Verlautbarungen, Allgemeine Verlautbarungen des Kommandos der Ostarmee am 20.5.1918; 
ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 309, 1918, Beilage zu Allgemeinen 
Verlautbarungen Nr. 152; ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, QuAbt, Kt. 693, 
Nr. 2856, Organisation der ukrainischen Militär- und Zivilbehörden, 23.6.1918; ÖStA, KA, 
FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, QuAbt, Kt. 696, Nr. 4111, Verkehr mit ukrainischen 
Behörden, 16.7.1918.
113	 For what Skoropadsky had to say about Fleischmann, see Pavlo Skoropads'kyj, 155.
114	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 468, Nr. 1430, Regelung von einigen Fragen in der Ukraine, 
April 1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
226
on economic matters—the already mentioned agreement on the 
administration of the occupation and the agreement with Ukraine 
concerning the handover of the 1st Cavalry Schützen (Cossack) 
Division, which will be discussed below. The central institutions for 
the administration of the economy were the Ukrainian Food Council, 
the German-Austro-Hungarian Economic Center, and the Ukrainian 
State Grain Bureau.115
But in spite of these extensive regulations, there was constant 
friction in the day-to-day work of the allied troops. According to a 
report submitted to AOK at the end of May by the Austro-Hungarian 
liaison officer to Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew, Captain Waldbott, the 
main reason for this may have been the personal dislike between 
Groener and Krauss. Krauss jealously guarded Austria-Hungary’s 
independent interests in Ukraine, while Groener, with great self-
confidence, was intent on exploiting Ukraine in an amicable 
arrangement with the new government he had himself created. 
Groener frequently told Waldbott that he was dissatisfied with the 
Brest-Litovsk treaty, the Berlin agreement of February, and the Kyiv 
treaty signed in May because they were all based on the “illusion” of an 
independent Ukrainian state. They had “built on this false foundation. 
In fact, Ukraine is a country without borders, without a language, and 
without a government.” Waldbott, however, tried to soothe relations 
between Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew and the Ostarmee and, in some 
cases, managed to accomplish this.116 
It was only in the maritime area that military relations among the 
Central Powers were relatively free of friction. The Wulff section of 
the Austro-Hungarian Danube flotilla was in the ports of Odesa and 
Kherson; German U-boats as well as Bulgarian and Turkish warships 
were in the port of Odesa; Turkish naval forces were at Sevastopol.117 
They were to ensure control of the Black Sea and the navigable rivers 
of Ukraine in order to accelerate the export of procured goods. At first 
they also intervened in the battles for the military conquest of Ukraine. 
The Turkish presence was to support  that country’s (unsuccessful) 
claims with regard to the Crimea.
115	 For more detail, see chapter 3c in the present volume.
116	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Nr. 1649, Waldbott an AOK, 28.5.1918.
117	 Österreich-Ungarns letzter Krieg. Das Kriegsjahr 1918, supplements VII/6, Map, 
“Kräftegruppierung im Südosten nach Besetzung der Ukraine am 1. Juni 1918.”

chapter 3b: the administration of the occupation
227 
The Hesitant “Ukrainization”: Ukrainian Military Formations 
during the Occupation by the Central Powers
Although the Germans wanted Ukrainian cooperation in combating 
insurgency, they were also very skeptical about building an Ukrainian 
army. Shortly after its return to power in Kyiv, the Rada began to 
create at least provisional militias and volunteer formations (red and 
black Haidamakas, a Zaporozhian Corps, and Sich Riflemen) that 
were to serve as the military arm of the government until the creation 
of an organized army. The old army118 had been largely dissolved in 
April 1918 because of its unreliability. German military leaders such 
as Groener and the Austro-Hungarian High Command saw a new 
army as an unpredictable factor.119 However, the Rada attempted, in 
contact with the Central Powers, to build a stand-alone Ukrainian 
army. Officers, non-commissioned officers, and soldiers were to be 
given their ranks from the time before the “Bolshevik upheavals.”120 
The men to be enlisted  in this army were  eighteen- and nineteen-
year-old youths, as they would have been less affected by the 
“corrosive influence of the soldiers’ councils and Bolshevik theories.” 
Recruitment was to have begun in June 1918, but the date continued 
to be postponed. It was still unclear at that point to what extent the 
militias and volunteer formations, as well as the Ukrainian Cossack 
Schützen Division created by the Central Powers, would be integrated 
into the new army.121
The few Ukrainian formations created by Germany and Austria-
Hungary from among Ukrainians who had been Russian prisoners of 
war were extremely controversial within the Central Powers. There 
were fears in Vienna and Berlin that these units would one day turn 
against their own troops. Shortly after the signing of the Brest-Litovsk 
treaty with Ukraine, a “division” was being put together in Cisleithania, 
and preparations were being made for its transfer to the Rada.122 In the 
spring of 1918, however, the German Empire dissolved its division, 
described as “bluecoats” (Blauröcke, syn'ozhupannyky) because of the 
118	 “Old army” means the remnants of the army from the period of the Provisional Government, 
which in turn had been based on the tsarist army.
119 Cf. BA-MA, N 46/172, Niederschrift über die Besprechung, An ObOst v. 23.4.1918.; ÖStA, KA, 
FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2614, Nr. 2387, Ukrainasitzung, 28.6.1918.
120	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 309, 1918 Befehle und 
Verlautbarungen, Allgemeine Verlautbarungen des Kommandos der Ostarmee am 14.7.1918.
121 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 468, Nr. 1407, Lage in der Ukraina Ende März 1918, 16.4.1918.
122	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, QuAbt, Kt. 692, Nr. 702, Ukrainische 
Kriegsgefangene – Formierung zu Abteilungen, 19.2.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
228
color of their uniform, but Austria-Hungary continued with this 
project, although there was still some skepticism about it.123 Ukrainians 
from among the prisoners of war, often described as “graycoats” 
(Grauröcke, sirozhupannyky), were gathered together from the areas of 
the 2nd and 4th Armies124 and from the upper Austrian prisoner-of-war 
camps in Kleinmünchen and Freistadt. Those Russian prisoners of 
war accommodated at the Eastern Front were collected in Volodymyr-
Volynskyi.  Selected officers were trained in upper Austria, and they 
would “form the basis of a disciplined, soldierly feeling, combat-ready 
army that was well disposed to the Monarchy.”125 They would later be 
sent to Volhynia. The signals service of AOK and some of their own 
“propaganda organs” from the ranks of the Union for the Liberation 
of Ukraine were responsible for training the officers.126 These troops 
were to be a future basis for the internal security of Ukraine. This 
military formation was also a sign to the Ukrainians within the Austro-
Hungarian Monarchy that it took the Ukrainian movement seriously 
and supported it, even though it saw the movement as something 
mostly outside the Monarchy itself.127 In the political education of the 
officers, the focus would be the friendly relationship between the two 
countries and the mutual advantages of cooperation between Austria-
Hungary and Ukraine. On social questions, “Bolshevik ideas” were 
to be combated and shown to be absurd. A Ukrainian newspaper, 
Vidrodzhenie (Rebirth), was provided for this purpose, as well as other 
newspapers and pamphlets.128 Although the Ukrainian formation 
was described as a “division,” it consisted of only 7,227 Ukrainians 
deployed in infantry companies, a divisional cavalry and artillery, 
a technical company and a telephone company, a medical unit, and 
a divisional train. For purposes of training, a further 220 Austro-
Hungarian officers and soldiers were attached to the division.129 
123	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2614, Nr. 2387, Ukrainasitzung, 28.6.1918.
124	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, Sonstiges, Ukrainische Formationen, Kt. 1952, Nr. 1, Anweisung zur 
Formierung ukrainischer Baone des k.u.k. 4. Armeekommandos, 18.2.1918.
125 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3669, Nr. 7370, Formierung 
der ukrainischen Armee, 3.4.1918.
126 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3669, Nr. 6815, Propaganda 
bei ukrainischen Truppen, 22.3.1918.
127	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Nr. 1632, Ukrainische Division, 29.5.1918.
128 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3669, Nr. 7370, Formierung 
der ukrainischen Armee, 3.4.1918.
129	 The structure of the division was extremely unusual and did not correspond to the standard 
strength: ÖStA, KA, NFA, Sonstiges, Ukrainische Formationen, Kt. 1952, Nr. 28, Organisation 
der 1. Ukrainischen Schützen-Kosakendivision.

chapter 3b: the administration of the occupation
229 
After months of intervention and pressure from the Hetman,130 the 
1st Ukrainian Schützen Division131 was handed over to the Ukrainian 
government.132 There was no further recruitment of Ukrainians from 
Russian prisoners of war.133 
In addition to this military formation, which was created under 
Austro-Hungarian control, the Rada established a number of units 
of Sich Riflemen (Sichovi Stril'tsi). One of them raised the delicate 
question of a battalion made up of Austro-Hungarian prisoners of 
war on Ukrainian territory in 1917–18 (Halyts'ko-Bukovyns'kyi Kurin' 
Sichovykh Stril'tsiv).134 The Austro-Hungarian High Command raised 
serious concerns about this shortly after the occupation because 
these soldiers were Austro-Hungarian citizens fighting for a foreign 
country, which constituted “high treason.” On 27 April, the day before 
the Hetman came to power, Fleischmann recommended that no action 
be taken with regard to the Sich Riflemen for the moment. On 6 May, 
AOK’s legal consultant called for the immediate withdrawal of Austro-
Hungarian citizens from the Sich Riflemen and their repatriation. 
Because of their breach of “sworn duty and loyalty,” which was a 
punishable offense, they had to be dealt with by legal means.135 
During the Skoropadsky putsch, the Stril'tsi, not least because of 
their anticipated repatriation to the Habsburg Monarchy, were the 
last troops to remain loyal to the Rada and refused to recognize the 
Hetman in the months that followed. In mid-May some hundreds of 
them joined the (Oleksandr) Natiiv Brigade in Oleksandrivsk (present-
day Zaporizhia), which was also hostile to the Hetman.136 
The Sich Riflemen mentioned here are not to be confused with 
the Ukrainian Sich Riflemen (Ukraïns'ki Sichovi Stril'tsi). They were a 
Galician volunteer organization created at the beginning of the war 
130	 ÖStA, KA, NFA, Sonstiges, Ukrainische Formationen, Kt. 1952, Nr. 724, Telegramm des AOK-
Verbindungsoffiziers bei den ukrainischen Truppen an die Operative Abteilung des AOK v. 
11.7.1918; Pavlo Skoropads'kyj, 216.
131	 The division was frequently referred to as the “1st Ukrainian Schützen Cossack Division,” but the 
term “Cossack” was removed from official references in the summer.
132	 ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA X, Russland Liasse XI d/9, Plan der Aufstellung einer ukrainischen 
Armee, Juli–Oktober 1918. For further detail, see chapter 2a in the present volume.
133 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3673, Nr. 23.750, Ronge an 
Kriegsministerium/Abt. 10, Oktober 1918; ÖStA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA I, Kt. 1041, Liasse Krieg, 58 
Ukraine, Fol. 228–233, AOK an Ministerium des Äußern, 24.8.1918.
134	 On the different military units of the Rada, see Peter Abbott and Eugene Pinak, Ukrainian 
Armies 1914–55 (Oxford and New York, 2004), 9–13.
135	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 469, Nr.1513, Stellungnahme des Justizreferenten des AOK, 
6.5.1918.
136	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 472, Nr. 1709, Vertrauliche Nachrichten aus der Ukraina, 
25.5.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
230
to take part in the campaign against Russia. Their demands were too 
extreme for the Austro-Hungarian authorities. They wanted better 
arms, training, and treatment and, on top of that, the establishment of 
a Ukrainian state.137 As Austria-Hungary feared offending Poland by 
creating a strong Ukrainian Legion, it did not want to offer too much 
support to the Ukrainian movement in Galicia. Consequently these 
demands were not met as the initiators would have wanted. Instead, 
only a small number of the Ukrainian Sich Riflemen were taken into 
the k.k. Ukrainian Legion. The Legion was poorly armed and, with 
2,500 men, was very small but all the more motivated.138 
By June 1918 the Hetman had created his own State Guard, 
made up mostly of onetime tsarist officers and consisting of five 
infantry companies and one cavalry company.139 At the beginning 
of July, Groener had ordered that no obstacles be raised against the 
recruitment of onetime Russian officers to the Ukrainian army.140 By 
that time, there existed two pioneer battalions, a technical regiment, 
the 1st Kyiv Infantry Division, the 121st, 122nd, and 123rd Regiments, 
an artillery brigade, and four guard cavalry regiments. The Free 
Cossacks, however, who were meant to be a “special army” in the 
struggle against the Bolsheviks, were disarmed by German troops.141 
The recruitment of the army proceeded at a very slow pace during 
the summer. According to reports from the Austro-Hungarian 
signals intelligence service in Ukraine in September and October, the 
organization was extremely uneven, discipline and training poor, and 
recruitment slow, but provisions and armaments relatively good. In 
spite of these efforts, the army had only 85,000 men as of 25 October, 
according to the Ukrainian minister of war,142 totally inadequate to 
bring stability to the state.
137	  StA, HHStA, MdÄ, PA I, Kt. 902, Liasse Krieg 8b, Ukraine 1914 VIII–1915 VII, Fol. 461–465, 
Forderungen der Sitschower-Schützen, August 1914.
138	 See chapter 1b in the present volume.
139	 See Abbott and Pinak, Ukrainian Armies 1914–55, 13–16.
140	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2615, Nr. 2788, Groener an AOK, 3.7.1918.
141 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3670, Nr. 13.754, 
Militärische Daten über ukrainische Armee, 12.6.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, 
Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3671, Nr. 15.956, Ostarmee an AOK, 24.6.1918.
142 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3674, Nr. 24.107, Verhältnisse 
in der Ukraine, 16.9.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3674, 
Nr. 26.131, Militärpassstelle Kiew an AOK, 2.10.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, 
Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3674, Nr. 26.587, Ostarmee an AOK, 12.10.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, 
Evidenzbüro 1918, Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3674, Nr. 26.588, Aktenkonvolut zur ukrainischen 
Armee, 12.7.–5.10.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 
3675, Nr. 28.065, ukrainische Armee, 25.10.1918.

chapter 3b: the administration of the occupation
231 
The Ukrainian Border Guard was also a cause of concern for the 
Central Powers. It was made up of 28 brigades (about 120,000 men) 
and was directly subordinate to the War Ministry. But this formation 
was also disunited, chaotic, and poorly armed. Its personnel were 
recruited from ex-Russian soldiers of all ranks. They had not been 
paid any wages until June, so there were high levels of corruption and 
desertion.143 In spite of all this, the Border Guard, in cooperation with 
the German troops, was supposed to secure the border with Bolshevik 
Russia, thousands of miles long and still contested in many areas.
But the Central Powers were not alone responsible for the sluggish 
pace in establishing the Ukrainian army or for the desolate state of 
the paramilitary formations. The Hetman himself was also part of the 
problem, as he believed that the Central Powers would not withdraw 
before the spring of 1919 and saw no urgency in the creation of his 
own armed forces.144 It was only when the Central Powers began 
their preparations for withdrawal that they wanted to “use all means” 
to drive forward the establishment of the Ukrainian army, “even 
at the cost of the mobility of our own troops.”145 This army was to 
be a counterweight to the Entente and the Bolsheviks. The plans 
were very ambitious. The army was to consist of sixteen infantry 
divisions, four cavalry divisions, an independent cavalry brigade, and 
some smaller already existing units. Its military equipment was to 
come from captured Russian matériel.146 Assistance in building the 
Ukrainian army was embedded in the larger policy of “Ukrainizing” 
the occupation.147 The impetus for this new policy, however, came 
from outside. The imminent defeat in the West made it extremely 
unlikelythat the Central Powers would stay in Ukraine.
143 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3670, Nr. 14.707, Ukrainische 
Grenzwache, 14.6.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 
3671, Nr. 15.701, Militärpassstelle an AOK, 23.7.1918.
144	 Cf. Pelenski, “Hetman Pavlo Skoropadsky and Germany,” 77; Pavlo Skoropads'kyj, 203.
145	 BayHStA-KA, Etappenkommandantur 54, Bd. 22, 18. Kavalleriebrigade, Abt. I, Nr. 70 per.
geheim v. 28.10.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3674, 
Nr. 27.007, Karte über Grenzeinteilung der ukrainischen Korpsbezirke 12.10.1918; ÖStA, KA, 
FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3674, Nr. 27.683, Militärpassstelle an 
AOK, 12.10.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3674, Nr. 
27.684, Militärpassstelle an AOK, 15.10.1918.
146	 Cf. BayHStA-KA, Etappenkommandantur 54, Bd. 22, Chef des Generalstabes des Feldheeres, 
Abteilung Fremde Heere, Nr. 19210, Die Ukrainische Wehrmacht Ende Oktober 1918, 1.11.1918.
147	 Groener wrote on 20 October that the new government was to be more “Ukrainized” and more to 
the left. See Von Brest-Litovsk zur deutschen Novemberrevolution, 446ff.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
232
The Cultural and Propaganda Activities of the Central Powers
Propaganda, as an aspect of policy with regard to the press, culture, 
and information, was soon a central area of activity for the occupation 
administration. German efforts in this respect are difficult to assess 
because of the shortage of documentation, even though one finds 
repeated demands for targeted propaganda activity in the military 
documents and in spite of the fact that Groener arranged for 
journalists from the empire to attend a major press conference in Kyiv 
in August.148 We know from Ukrainian sources that German troops 
in Kyiv engaged in a certain amount of censorship and, in the early 
phase of the occupation, repeatedly closed down newspapers at short 
notice on account of critical press reports.149
The documentation for the Austro-Hungarian side is significantly 
better. Just a few days after the start of the eastward advance, the 
signals service of the XII Corps issued guidelines stating that care 
should be taken to prevent the infiltration of propaganda material 
through the thinly occupied front and via returning prisoners of 
war. Bolshevik attempts to foment revolution were seen as a special 
danger. This development was to be countered by means of espionage 
networks, civilian agents,150 and propaganda among the Russian 
soldiers as well as the civilian population in order to “bring about 
the final overthrow of the Bolsheviks.” The chaos in Russia, as well 
as Trotsky’s antidemocratic measures and contradictory statements, 
were to be presented as evidence.151 There is a certain irony in the 
fact that the Monarchy should be pointing to antidemocratic measures 
in Russia when it had itself suspended parliament until spring 1917, 
used weapons against its own citizens who staged hunger strikes, 
and executed or interned in 1914, without any evidence, thousands of 
citizens whom it described as “Russophiles.”
At the end of March, Austria-Hungary’s AOK set up the newspaper 
Nedelia (The Week) as a way of better implementing its policy. Its task 
was to combat Bolshevik ideas, strengthen future relations between the 
Habsburg Monarchy and Ukraine, and emphasize the good treatment 
of Ukrainian prisoners of war in Austro-Hungarian custody (especially 
148	 Ibid., 425–37.
149	 Mark von Hagen, War in a European Borderland: Occupations and Occupation Plans in Galicia 
and Ukraine, 1914–1918 (Seattle and London, 2007), 90ff.
150	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, Kmdo. Odessa (Gouv.), Kt. 3870, Nr. 1013/1039, Bericht der NA-Stelle des 
Gruppenkommandos Odessa, 31.5.1918.
151 ÖStA, KA, AdT, Kt. 4131, FABrig 59, Nr. 208, Richtlinien für die Fortsetzung der 
Propagandatätigkeit, 5.3.1918.

chapter 3b: the administration of the occupation
233 
the cultural education of prisoners in the Freistadt camp). It would 
also provide a “favorable interpretation” of the Brest-Litovsk peace 
treaty with Ukraine, underlining especially the economic and political 
advantages as well as the amicable solution of the Kholm question. In 
addition to the newspaper, pamphlets were to be “distributed as widely 
as possible in the country.”152 With regard to the domestic Ukrainian 
press, there was also an urgent need for action, as demonstrated by 
the example of Odesa. Except for one Russian newspaper, Odesskii 
listok (Odesa Leaflet), and one German, Odessaer Rundschau (Odesa 
Review), the rest of the press was “absolutely hostile, spreading reports 
about defeat at Mykolaiv and exploiting every incident in the city to 
our disadvantage.” There had also been a widespread rumor that 
the Central Powers would restore tsarist rule.153 The basic principles 
of press policy in Ukraine were laid down on 15 April and, the very 
next day, a journalist from the War Press Bureau (Kriegspressequartier), 
Josef Hermann, was dispatched to Ukraine.154 Hermann was directly 
subordinate to Fleischmann, and his task was to make sure that the 
press bulletins from the army commands in Kyiv, Odesa, and other 
cities were distributed as widely as possible: “The guiding idea must 
be that skillful journalistic and commercial propaganda will open up 
stores of provisions for us in Ukraine.” They had to pull out all the stops: 
Sunday supplements, provision of filtered information to journalists, 
photos, films, radio programs, publication of articles, even operas, 
concerts, and variety shows were being considered.155
The Austro-Hungarian communications sections were to praise 
the friendship between Austria-Hungary and Ukraine and the 
advantages of cooperation to both states. They were also to emphasize 
that Austro-Hungarian troops would not change domestic Ukrainian 
conditions in any way and would take nothing from “the peasantry.” 
Because of the multi-ethnic composition of the Ukrainian population, 
officers were instructed that, in those areas “where there are no or 
very few Ukrainians,” of course “they should emphasize not so much 
152	 ÖStA, KA, AdT, Kt. 1378, IBrig 145, F. 68, Nr. 354, Ukrainische Propaganda.
153 ÖStA, AVA, Nachlässe, Nachlass: Spannocchi, B 760, Fas. 9, Politischer Bericht Nr. 2 des 
Kommandanten der k.u.k. Besatzungstruppen in Odessa v. 26.3.1918.
154	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 468, Op. Geh. Nr. 1440, Journalisten nach Kiew senden, 
16.4.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.611, Nr. 1150, Ukraine-Tätigkeit des 
KPQu, 6.6.1918.
155	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, AOK, KPQ, Kommandobefehle, Kt. 22, Sonder-Kommandobefehl Nr. 5, 
18.4.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
234
their friendship with Ukraine as with the inhabitants in general.”156 At 
the end of June, the communications sections were entrusted with the 
task of providing the newspapers with “brief notices” about combating 
insurgencies and disarmament activities so that the latter would not 
rely on their own “false” investigations.157
However, coverage of Ukraine never got into full swing either in 
Ukraine or on the home front. Many reports in the home press failed 
to correspond to the conceptions of the military leadership.158 The 
Kriegspressequartier issued an order on 1 September that, in the home 
press, there should be one reporter on Ukraine assigned to “take an 
interest and make sure that inaccurate articles in certain leading 
papers be immediately refuted.” Abroad as well, especially in Russia 
and Germany, the coverage of Ukraine and of the Austro-Hungarian 
troops was to be directed and intensified in a similar manner.159 
In spite of all these measures and efforts, coverage of Ukraine on 
the home front and influence on the Ukrainian press in the occupied 
areas never had the success hoped for. This may have been due to 
the shortage of time or the inadequate resources. But a much more 
important reason was that the “home front” had to deal with the fact 
that no food or far too little food was coming from Ukraine. And 
in Ukraine itself, it was no longer possible to combat the negative 
sentiment that had become widespread among the population during 
the first half of the occupation period as a result of the military 
attacks during the invasion, the counterinsurgency campaign, the 
procurement of food supplies, and the occupation forces’ support for 
the unloved Skoropadsky regime.   
  
  
   
    
 
156	 ÖStA, KA, AdT, Kt. 1379, IBrig 145, Nr. 466, NA und AW-Dienst-Leitlinien, 16.4.1918.
157 ÖStA, KA, AdT, Kt. 4131, FABrig 59, Nr. 307, Verhalten der Zivilbevölkerung gegenüber, 
20.8.1918.
158	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, AOK, KPQ, Kommandobefehle, Kt. 22, Reservatbefehl Nr. 64, 1.9.1918; 
ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, AOK, KPQ, Reservatbefehl Nr. 66, 7.9.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, AOK, 
KPQ, Sonderkommandobefehl Nr. 22, 29.9.1918.
159	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, AOK, KPQ, Reservatbefehl Nr. 64, 1.9.1918.

3c. Economic Utilization
Wolfram Dornik and Peter Lieb1
The Economic Interests of the Central Powers in Ukraine
From the beginning of 1918, a central aspect of Austria-Hungary’s 
Ukrainian policy was the acquisition of food from “Russia’s granary.” 
Myths circulated about the mass of grain and raw materials stored 
in Ukraine. These desires were also aroused by Ukrainian politicians 
who attempted, with promises of grain deliveries, to draw the attention 
of the Entente and the Central Powers as well as neutral states to their 
own political goals, such as diplomatic recognition, support in the 
struggle against the Bolsheviks, and trade agreements.2 But it was 
clear, even in Ukraine itself, that such claims were illusory.3
The food situation in the Habsburg Monarchy at the beginning 
of 1918 was dire. As early as the autumn of 1914, large parts of the 
agriculturally important northeast of the empire had been occupied 
by Russia. At the same time, there were none of the traditional 
deliveries of grain or raw materials from such sources as Russia, 
Romania, or South America, which were now hostile or neutral. Since 
the beginning of the war, Hungary had also closed its borders within 
the Dual Monarchy to the export of food, although it did contribute 
to provisions for the army. At the same time, the tight transport 
situation, the lack of manure, and military conscription had all reduced 
productive capacity and the distribution of food. The Austrian part 
of the empire was now dependent on itself, on the assistance of its 
German ally, and on the utilization of the occupied territories. 
The first shortages in Austria-Hungary’s war economy appeared 
in the winter of 1914–15, and the situation deteriorated from one year 
to the next, especially in the cities. The high costs of the war drove up 
prices, but wages did not keep pace. It was only after long negotiations 
that Hungary was persuaded to offer more than its share of provisions 
for the imperial army from 1916, but these deliveries continued to 
be disputed. In the autumn of 1916, following the Russian successes 
1	
We would like to thank Vasyl Rasevych for valuable information on Ukrainian documents and 
literature for this chapter.
2	
Switzerland, for instance. See details in chapter 4g of the German edition of the present volume. 
3	
V. Soldatenko, Ukraïna v revoliutsiinu dobu. Istorychni ese-khroniky, vol. 2, Rik 1918 (Kyiv, 
2009), 69.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
236
in the Brusilov offensive, the economy of the Danube Monarchy 
became completely dependent on Germany, but that did not relieve 
the catastrophic food situation. Goods from the occupied territories in 
Poland, Serbia, Montenegro, and Italy did not fundamentally improve 
the situation.4 The Austro-Hungarian economic structure was simply 
too weak and had suffered for decades from fundamental problems 
that had never been overcome. The food crisis reached its peak in the 
“January strikes” between 3 and 25 January 1918, involving three-
quarters of a million workers. Starting in the big cities and industrial 
regions, it had spread throughout the country. Even earlier, there 
had been hunger riots in smaller towns that had been put down with 
military force. In the early months of 1918, it had become clear to 
everyone that the limits of endurance had been reached and, as the 
emperor stated in a handwritten note to Eduard von Böhm-Ermolli at 
the end of March, the continuation of the war itself was in question.5 
In the meantime, Hungary was unable to deliver the provisions 
demanded, and by spring it was on the verge of its own food crisis.6
On the German side, the invasion of Ukraine served a political 
purpose—the weakening of Soviet Russia. But even the Germans 
regarded a plentiful delivery of provisions as a welcome by-product 
that could improve their own tight food situation. The “turnip winter” 
of 1916–17 had been a catastrophe. Average consumption per day 
had been only 1,200 calories.7 During the First World War, there was 
a horrendous number of deaths from malnutrition in the German 
Empire. According to the Imperial Health Ministry in December 
1918, the figure had reached almost 763,000 for the whole period of 
the war.8 The food supply improved in the winter of 1917–18 because 
of better government management of nutrition, tighter regulation of 
4	
Maureen Healy, Vienna and the Fall of the Habsburg Empire: Total War and Everyday Life 
in World War I (Cambridge, 2004), 31–86; Herbert Matis, Leitlinien der österreichischen 
Wirtschaftspolitik 1848–1918 (Vienna, 1973), 29–67; Manfried Rauchensteiner, Der Tod 
des Doppeladlers. Österreich-Ungarn und der Erste Weltkrieg (Graz, Vienna, and Cologne, 
1994), 144–46, 262–67; Roman Sandgruber, Ökonomie und Politik. Österreichische 
Wirtschaftsgeschichte vom Mittelalter bis zur Gegenwart (Vienna, 1995), 322ff.; Max-Stephan 
Schulze, “Austria-Hungary̕s Economy in World War I,” in The Economics of World War I, 
ed. Stephen Broadberry and Mark Harrison (Cambridge, 2005), 95–97; Robert J. Wegs, Die 
österreichische Kriegswirtschaft 1914–1918 (Vienna, 1979), 29ff
5	
Rauchensteiner, Der Tod des Doppeladlers, 409–12, 533–37.
6	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Nr. 1612, Aktenkonvolut zu Gerichtsbarkeit und 
Kriegsleistungsgesetz in der Ukraine, 18–20.5.1918.
7	
Anver Offner, The First World War: An Agrarian Interpretation (Oxford, 1989), 45–53.
8	
See “Aus einer Denkschrift des Reichsgesundheitsamtes,” 16.12.1918, in Ursachen und Folgen. 
Vom deutschen Zusammenbruch 1918 und 1945 bis zur staatlichen Neuordnung Deutschlands in 
der Gegenwart, ed. Herbert Michaelis and Ernst Schraepler, vol. 1 (Berlin, 1958), 283–88.

chapter 3c: economic utilization
237 
rations, and a satisfactory potato harvest, but it still remained tight. 
The daily bread ration in the empire was just 250 grams, and 600–700 
grams at the front. From the beginning of 1918, there was no more 
pork for the urban population.9 This did not help ease the social and 
political difficulties in the country, as demonstrated by the January 
strikes of 1918.
The Central Powers were concerned not just about providing food 
for the population but also about fodder for the horses. The 1917 grain 
harvest was very poor and was more or less a failure east of the Elbe. 
At the beginning of 1918, the War Ministry believed that, with stocks 
at home and supplies from Romania, they would make it through 
only to May. The ministry estimated that, until the new harvest in the 
autumn of 1918, there would be a shortage of 500,000 tons of fodder. 
Grain and fodder from Ukraine seemed the only solution.10 In return, 
chemicals, medicines, textiles, and agricultural machinery would be 
delivered to Ukraine.11
Substantial German and Austro-Hungarian interest in Ukrainian 
resources was already clear in the Berlin Agreement signed on 5 
February 1918, five days before the signing of the Brest-Litovsk treaty 
with Ukraine. This agreement regulated the delivery of “grain, grain 
products, and fodder” from Ukraine over land or water. Until 31 
August, these would essentially be shared one-to-one. A temporary 
modification of the allocation formula allowed Austria-Hungary to 
exceed its share of deliveries until 31 May, for which Germany would 
be compensated in the period from June to August. On 21 February, 
the agreement was extended to the “other areas of Russia” and to 
other product groups (pulses, oil seeds, oil and fat, meat, cattle, eggs, 
and other food products), the latter being shared six-to-four in favor 
of Germany.12
The high level of expectations from Ukraine is clear in the reports 
from German representatives in Ukraine even many weeks after the 
9 
BA-MA, RH 61/810, Manuskript “Die deutsche Ernährungslage im Frühjahr 1918,” von Dr. 
Mehrens, Februar 1942.
10	
BArch, R 3101/1190, Kriegsministerium, Nr. 1369.18.B2, Berlin, 15.2.1918. The ministry 
estimated that the army would need 130,000 tons of fodder per month. But in the case of major 
battles, experience showed that much more would be needed.
11	
See ibid., Antwort zu Abschrift II Fr 89, Wirtschaftliche Fragen der zweiten Verhandlungszeit, 
Bericht Nr. 2 v. 13.1.1918.
12 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.609, Nr. 61, Teilungsschlüssel für Nahrungsmittel 
zwischen Österreich-Ungarn und Deutschland, 23.3.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, 
Kt. 2.634, Vereinbarungen über ein gemeinschaftliches Vorgehen Deutschlands und Österreich-
Ungarns bei der Wiederanknüpfung von Handelsbeziehungen mit den einzelnen Teilen des 
ehemaligen russischen Reiches, 21.2.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
238
invasion, for instance, that from the leader of the German Economic 
Office in Kyiv, Privy Councillor Otto Wiedfeldt, who described the 
situation there in the brightest of colors: as a “raw materials country,” 
Ukraine was “an excellent extension to our agriculturally intensive 
and industrially highly developed economy.” Wiedfeldt’s report to 
the state secretary in the Ministry of the Economy culminated in 
this assessment: “Ukraine offers us such favorable future economic 
possibilities as may never appear again.”13 In light of such descriptions, 
it is no wonder that, as early as mid-March, Groener complained that 
“people in Berlin see Ukraine as a pot of fat that you can just dip your 
finger into and lick. And they believe I’m the magician who can make 
grain and pork out of nothing, or at least put them on a train bound 
for home.”14
The Austro-Hungarian War Ministry was somewhat more modest. 
In mid-April, it accused the various departments dealing with the 
export of food of being in the dark “as regards supplies of Ukrainian 
grain and other foodstuffs and raw materials.... The most contradictory 
reports are being circulated.” Liaison officers or other officials were 
therefore to be sent to every divisional command in order to draw 
up accounts of supplies, production possibilities, prices, and other 
economic developments.15 But reports to general staff during the 
whole period of occupation remained unsatisfactory.16 
The Economic Situation in Ukraine in 1918
Ukraine had been the “granary” of the tsarist empire before and during 
the war and had produced the greater part of its grain exports. According 
to German figures, a “cautious estimate” would indicate that Ukraine’s 
average annual production of surplus grain between 1909 and 1913 was 
5.5 million tons (340 million poods),17 of which almost 80 percent was 
exported to other parts of the empire or abroad. Some economists went 
so far as to describe Ukraine “quite rightly as an exceptional country” 
13 
BArch, R 3101/1168, Brief von Geheimrat Wiedfeldt an den Staatssekretär des 
Reichswirtschaftsamts vom 7.5.1918.
14	
Von Brest-Litovsk zur deutschen Novemberrevolution. Aus den Tagebüchern, Briefen und 
Aufzeichnungen von Alfons Paquet, Wilhelm Groener und Albert Hopman. März bis November 
1918, ed. Winfried Baumgart (Göttingen, 1971), “Tagebuch Groener, Eintrag v. 10.3.1918,” 291. 
15 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.609, Nr. 157, Vereinbarungen über Getreidelieferungen 
aus der Ukraine, 20.4.1918.
16	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.619, Nr. 5230, Oberquartiermeisterei der Ostarmee 
an die Ukraine-Abteilung des AOK, 22.8.1918.
17	
1 pood = 16.38 kilograms.

chapter 3c: economic utilization
239 
with “the most promising future” ahead.18 Ukrainian emigrants and 
Galician Ukrainians also promoted this view.19 
The reality at the turn of the year 1917–18, however, looked 
completely different and, indeed, very grim. The commencement of 
regular trade and the fulfillment of contractual agreements proved 
extremely difficult for a number of reasons. Economic life in Ukraine 
had almost come to a halt following three and a half years of war, 
revolution, and civil war. Occupation by the Central Powers could 
initially do little to change that. The Rada government had neither 
a functioning administration nor a system for the collection of taxes 
or other income. Its financial foundation consisted of the printing of 
bank notes, which drove up inflation. The karbovanets' was introduced 
in April, but trust in this new currency remained low, and people 
resorted to the ruble or the currency of the Central Powers.20 The 
Central Powers themselves flooded the country with their own 
currencies through their purchases. Austria-Hungary made 180,000 
crowns available to the troops for the purchase of food and other goods 
but without any agreement about price limits, which caused prices 
to rocket.21 From the very beginning, then, the Central Powers were 
confronted with the problem that they lacked the necessary means to 
buy goods in Ukraine. Rampant inflation meant that the peasants had 
plenty of money but lacked confidence in the various currencies, as 
they were unable to buy anything with them. In any case, they were 
able to make more money by using the grain to distill spirits rather 
than selling it directly.22
Whereas the Austrians and Hungarians requisitioned grain by 
force and did not even inform their German allies about the quantities 
18	
BArch, R 3101/1137; Handelsstatistische Blätter, ed. S. Zuckermann, 1918, no. 4.
19	
See, e.g., Michael Hruschewskyj, Die ukrainische Frage in historischer Entwicklung (Vienna, 
1915); Eugen Lewicky, Die Ukraine, der Lebensnerv Rußlands (Stuttgart and Berlin, 1915). 
20 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 468, Nr. 1407, Lage in der Ukraina Ende März 1918, 16.4.1918; 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 475, Nr. 1906, Darstellung der materiellen Lage der Armee im 
Felde, 18.8.1918. The karbovanets' as the sole means of payment for purchases by the Austro-
Hungarian troops was not introduced until the end of September: ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK 
AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 309, Allgemeine Verlautbarungen des Kommandos der 
Ostarmee v. 27.9.1918.
21	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.619, Nr. 4962, Bericht Zitkovskys an das Ministerium 
des Äußern, August 1918.
22 
See BArch, R 3101/1314, Bericht über die Eindrücke in der Ukraine von Oblt d.R. Colin Ross, 
Verbindungsoffizier der militärischen Stelle des Auswärtigen Amts, verfasst Mitte März 1918. 
See also BArch, R 3101/1314, Stand der Dinge am 31.3.1918. Bericht von Herrn Geheimrat 
Wiedfeldt. It says, in this report: “Catching colds and freezing here, we ourselves are a test of 
how it is absolutely impossible, in this climate, to get by without the use of alcohol.” 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
240
exported,23 the Germans were undecided as to whether they should 
follow this bad example or attempt some method for the exchange of 
goods.24 Yet even among civilian officials in the Habsburg Monarchy 
there was dissatisfaction with the ruthless methods of the military. At 
the end of May, the leader of the Austro-Hungarian delegation to the 
Economic Center, Court Councillor Emil Heindl, proposed a system 
of coupons “whereby the Ukrainian who delivers grain receives a 
coupon for the purchase of certain goods.” These goods were to be 
imported from both Germany and Austria-Hungary; however, the 
Ukrainian administration opposed this.25 One of the liaison officers 
from the German Foreign Office made a somewhat unusual proposal: 
by “introducing a new vice such as opium smoking,” the peasants 
could easily be persuaded to exchange their grain for the drug.26 
The most important and protracted stumbling block for the export 
of grain from Ukraine was the land question. But this “most burning 
problem”27 was not resolved right up to the time of withdrawal of 
the Central Powers, neither by the Rada nor later by the Hetman 
government. In 1916, altogether 30 percent of agricultural land (not 
including forests) was in the hands of the large estate owners. The 
proportion varied greatly from region to region. Whereas large estate 
owners had only 9.5 percent of the land in the Chernihiv gubernia 
and 18.7 percent in the Kharkiv gubernia, they held 45.2 percent in 
the southern Ukrainian gubernia of Tavria and 43.5 percent in the 
Kherson gubernia.28 The farmland not in the possession of the large 
estates belonged, as rustic land,29 to the peasantry. The average 
independent Ukrainian peasant owned 7.4 hectares, but he would 
have required between eight and eleven hectares to earn his own 
23 
See BA-MA, RM 41/62, Der Staatssekretär des Reichs-Marine-Amts, Nr. A. VI.S. 7605, 
29.4.1918.
24	
Except for Groener, the military wanted forced requisitioning. See BArch, R 3101/1314, Bericht 
von Herrn Geheimrat Wiedfeldt, 31.3.1918.
25	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.611, Nr. 1189, Situationsbericht von Heindl an 
die Kriegs-Getreide-Verkehrsanstalt, 1.6.1918. His proposal was also attacked by his German 
colleagues. See BArch, R 3101/1137, Der Unterstaatsekretär in der Reichskanzlei, 4.7.1918.
26 
BArch, R 3101/1314, Bericht über die Eindrücke in der Ukraine von Oblt d.R. Colin Ross, 
Verbindungsoffizier der militärischen Stelle des Auswärtigen Amts, Mitte März 1918. This was 
not, after all, a new means of economic policy, as the British had used similar methods in the 
mid-nineteenth century to force the Chinese to open their markets, leading to the opium wars.
27	
BA-MA, N 46/172, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Kr Nr. 190 geheim, Zusammenfassender Bericht 
über die wirtschaftliche und politische Lage in der Ukraine, 18.5.1918.
28	
BArch, R 3101/1316, Heeresgruppe Kiew, Wirtschaftsnachrichten Nr. 2, Kiew, 15.10.1918. The 
statistics are based on tsarist figures. In the richly forested gubernia of Volhynia, estate owners 
had 48.2 percent of the land and forest, but that figure fell to 27.4 percent for agricultural land.
29	
Rustic land belonged to the peasantry by law (especially since the abolition of serfdom in 1861).

chapter 3c: economic utilization
241 
living.30 There were great regional differences here as well. The 
smallest average farm sizes were in the gubernias of Podilia (4.2 
hectares) and Poltava (5.4 hectares). The largest were in the gubernias 
of Katerynoslav (10.2 hectares) and Tavria (16.2 hectares). These larger 
sizes were partly the result of the above-average size of farms in the 
possession of German colonists.31 In sum, the great mass of peasants 
and peasant smallholders were not able to live independently from 
their agricultural production. Only about 15 percent of the peasantry 
had more than eleven hectares, the amount necessary to secure an 
independent existence.32 A powerful socially explosive situation had 
therefore developed on the land, and it exploded in the February 
Revolution of 1917. The resolution of the land question was also a key 
element in the widespread revolutionary thinking and action in the 
collapsing Russian Empire. The demand for a just distribution of land 
headed the list of demands in Ukraine in the revolutionary year of 1917 
and in the first legislative measures taken by the Central Rada.33 In the 
Rada’s Fourth Universal, the land was de facto nationalized.34 But the 
Rada was also divided about the way forward, as there was massive 
resistance to the socialization of land planned for April: it was seen 
as absolutely essential to preserve smallholdings.35 The peasants did 
not want to till their fields in the spring of 1918 because of the lack of 
clarity about the future. They frequently hid their grain supplies from 
the occupying troops or even deliberately destroyed the sown fields.36 
Even though there was a Ukrainian decree that every peasant had to 
till his land, it remained unclear whether the harvest would be his. 
In addition, the Rada lacked the administrative apparatus that could 
have overseen the implementation of its laws and decrees.
The Central Powers were also not united on how to resolve 
the problem. At the end of March, the Austro-Hungarian Finance 
Ministry proposed a comprehensive distribution of land by means 
of cooperation between the independent peasantry, the Ukrainian 
30	
See BArch, R 3101/1316, Heeresgruppe Kiew, Wirtschaftsnachrichten Nr. 3, Kiew, 1.11.1918. The 
figures are based on surveys made in 1905.
31	
In the Katerynoslav gubernia in 1905, the average size of a German farm was 30.3 hectares; in 
Tavria, 40 hectares.
32	
BArch, R 3101/1316, Heeresgruppe Kiew, Wirtschaftsnachrichten Nr. 3, Kiew, 1.11.1918.
33	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 469, Nr. 1481, Fleischmann an das AOK, 15.4.1918.
34	
Ukraïns'ka Tsentral'na Rada. Dokumenty i materialy u dvokh tomakh, vol. 2 (Kyiv, 1997), 22ff. 
For a contemporary German translation, see ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 469, Nr.1481, 
Berichte über die politische Lage in der Ukraine Mitte April, 15.4.1918, Beilage 3.
35	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 469, Nr. 1481, Fleischmann an das AOK, 15.4.1918. 
36	
BA-MA, N 46/172, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn-Kiew, Abt. Ic, Nr. 19961, 8.4.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
242
state organs, and the occupying powers. The new land distribution 
was to legalize the existing pattern of ownership while compensating 
the estate owners for lost land.37 But the Austro-Hungarian Foreign 
Ministry, out of concern for Polish estate owners, adopted no 
part of this plan except the basic principle that there should be no 
expropriation without compensation. The German Foreign Office, at 
least officially, attempted not to intervene in this internal Ukrainian 
affair.38 But that was not the case with the German military. In March, 
Groener complained that the Ukrainian prime minister, Vsevolod 
Holubovych, was “making problematic attempts to create a socialist 
state instead of taking care of what is most urgent, ensuring that the 
spring sowing is carried out.”39 Words were followed by deeds. On 6 
April 1918, Field Marshal Eichhorn issued his so-called “cultivation 
order”. Whoever sowed the field would reap the harvest. As these 
regulations contradicted certain elements of the Fourth and Fifth 
Universals, they provoked a great deal of unrest in Ukraine.40 From a 
German point of view, however, this made for clarity about the harvest, 
and the German army corps were soon reporting on the good effect of 
the cultivation order, since the estate owners and peasants with larger 
holdings were now beginning to till the soil.41 Nevertheless, the 
cultivation order was disputed even on the German side,42 as it had 
three serious consequences. First, it was an intervention in Ukrainian 
internal affairs, thus undermining the sovereignty of the Rada 
government. The order was consequently a prelude to the overthrow 
of the Rada only a few weeks later. Second, the order did not resolve 
the land question; it remained only a provisional resolution. And 
third, it created a great deal of unrest among the smallholders, who 
37 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, QuAbt, Ukraine Akten, Kt.: 2.627, Nr. 216, Bericht von Dr. Schwarzwald 
v. 29.3.1918.
38 
BArch, R 3101/1166, Telegramm des K. Botschafter z.D. an Auswärtiges Amt v. 9.4.1918.
39	
Von Brest-Litovsk zur deutschen Novemberrevolution, 302.
40 
Włodzimierz Mędrzecki, Niemiecka interwencja militarna na Ukrainie w 1918 roku (Warsaw, 
2000), 141.
41	
BA-MA, N 46/172, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Oberkommando G. Nr. 158, Auszug aus den 
Berichten der Generalkommandos über die Wirkung des Befehles des Generalfeldmarschalls, 
betr. Landbestellung, 6.4.1918.
42	
The plans of Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew began to emerge as early as the beginning of April. 
The German delegation to Ukraine telegraphed about this to the German Ministry of the 
Economy: “The military, who appear to want to establish a military dictatorship over the whole 
country, seem to want to issue a very firm regulation. But that will make no difference, since 
they lack the means to carry it out.” See BArch, R 3101/1096, Deutsche Ukrainedelegation an 
Reichswirtschaftsamt, 8.4.1918; BA-MA, N 46/172, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn-Kiew. Abschrift 
eines Fernspruches v. 7.5.1918.

chapter 3c: economic utilization
243 
had hoped for a distribution of land and now feared a return to the 
pre-revolutionary situation. When the Rada attempted to give voice to 
this unrest about the order and to resist it, it was overthrown.
The cultivation order did little to change the economic situation 
in Ukraine for the time being. Hardly any grain was procured by the 
Central Powers. They themselves were partly to blame for this. During 
the invasion, their own troops had taken over the railway network.43 
Similarly, the German Reichsbank had not yet made funds available to 
begin the purchase of Ukrainian grain.44 Austria-Hungary’s military 
requisitioning had also aroused mistrust and unrest among the 
peasants. Any delivery of grain in the quantities hoped for at Brest-
Litovsk was now out of the question. However, the Central Powers 
still pushed for an agreement with Ukraine. For not only in Austria-
Hungary but now also in the German Empire, there was a threat that 
bread rations would have to be reduced.45 
Exports from Ukraine to the Central Powers
First Phase: Chaos
From the very beginning, German officials doubted whether the Rada 
government would be able to deliver the amounts agreed upon at 
Brest-Litovsk. In addition, “the whole procurement activity” had to be 
“extensively supported by military measures.”46 Parts of the country 
were still not pacified and would remain so until the summer of 1918, 
which meant that the most important transport routes had to be kept 
under military supervision. The inability of the Rada to deliver the 
grain initially promised at Brest-Litovsk and later contractually agreed 
upon very soon became a burden on relations between Ukraine and 
the Central Powers. This non-delivery was also the main reason for 
the overthrow of the Rada at the end of April.
Certainly at the beginning of the occupation, the greater part of 
the German and Austro-Hungarian military were interested in taking 
short-term advantage of Ukraine.47 The complex situation in Ukraine 
43	
See Von Brest-Litovsk zur deutschen Novemberrevolution, “Tagebuch Groener, Eintrag v. 
8.3.1918,” 284.
44	
BA-MA, N 46/172, Generalleutnant Groener an Obost, Zusammenfassender Bericht der 
Heeresgruppe über die derzeitige Lage in der Ukraine v. 18.4.1918; BArch, R 3101/1096, 
Telegramm des Kaiserlichen Botschafters an Auswärtiges Amt, Kiew, 29.3.1918.
45	
See BArch, R 3101/1220, Telegramm Nr. 245, von Mumm an AA v. 9.4.1918.
46	
BArch, R 3101/1136, Deutsche Ukrainedelegation. Der Vorsitzende der Gesamt-Kommission, J. 
Nr. 74, 13.4.1918.
47	
See Karl Freiherr von Bothmer. Moskauer Tagebuch 1918, ed. Gernot Böhme (Paderborn, 
2010), “Eintrag vom 28.7.1918,” 100. Bothmer was a representative of Supreme Command at the 
embassy in Moscow. 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
244
meant that their focus was mostly a purely military one. Ludendorff 
had advised quite early on that, to procure the grain and raw 
materials, they would have to “use such measures as are unbefitting 
the dignity of the highest representatives of the German Empire.”48 
The representative of German Supreme Army Command (OHL) in 
Kyiv, Colonel von Stolzenberg, expressed this most clearly: “Bread 
and fodder are essentials of life for us. In the West, we are facing the 
most difficult final battle. Diplomatic and long-term considerations 
cannot be decisive when we have to take by force what is essential to 
our life and struggle and when nothing else is possible. Whether it is 
with this government, which cannot last, or with another is a matter 
of indifference. Commissions, at this time, have no place here, only 
military orders.”49
The Foreign Office and especially the Ministry of the Economy 
had a completely different view of the situation. They had the best 
intentions of helping Ukraine develop a functioning state system by 
advising on all economic, sociopolitical, financial, and administrative 
matters.50 It was here that Germany policy differed fundamentally 
from that of Austria-Hungary.
Orders to the Austro-Hungarian troops corresponded more to 
Stolzenberg’s approach. Even during the invasion and in the early 
phase of the occupation, the most important goal was “to acquire 
food supplies.” Requisitions were part of the daily routine of troops 
stationed in the countryside.51 At the end of March Emperor Karl 
himself, in a handwritten memo to Böhm-Ermolli, ordered that 
“requisitions have to be carried out ruthlessly, even by force.”52 
According to the emperor, if deliveries of food from Ukraine did 
not arrive quickly, the continuation of the war was in question. In 
48 
TNA, GFM 6/35, Telegramm Nr. 466 von Ludendorff über AA an Reichskanzler, 6.3.1918.
49 
TNA, GFM 6/35, Telegramm des K. Legationssekretärs Bülow an AA v. 10.3.1918. Oberst 
Stoltzenberg telegrafiert am 9. d. M. aus Kiew an ObOst. Colonel Stolzenberg sent this telegram 
just two days after the arrival of the Rada in Kyiv. See Winfried Baumgart, Deutsche Ostpolitik 
1918. Von Brest-Litowsk bis zum Ende des Ersten Weltkrieges (Vienna and Munich, 1966), 125, 
n. 39.
50 
Cf. BArch, R 3101/1170, Der Staatssekretär des Reichswirtschaftsamts, IDR 1870. V. Anlage, 
11.6.1918; BArch, R 3101/1164, Zentral-Einkaufsgesellschaft m.b.H. Vorstand, Nr. 3105, Berlin, 
17.7.1918.
51 
Examples can be seen in the following troop journals: ÖStA, KA, AdT, Kt. 754, FJB 13, 6. 
Tagebuch des Feldjägerbataillon Nr. 13, 85–111; ÖStA, KA, AdT, Kt. 754, UR 13, Tagebuch vom 
Dezember 1917–20. November 1918, Eintrag v. 23.3.1918.
52	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 468, Nr. 1372, Handschreiben Kaiser Karls an Böhm-Ermolli 
v. 31.3.1918.

chapter 3c: economic utilization
245 
Böhm-Ermolli’s procurement order, issued following this memo, he 
explained what was meant by requisitioning: “Basically, one buys and 
then pays in cash. But if there is no agreement between buyer and 
seller, then there has to be an enforced purchase, taking into account 
the target prices that have been ordered.” If there was not enough 
money available,53 then a certificate would be issued that could be 
cashed at the nearest military cash point. It was clear, however, that 
force was to be used where necessary: “If we do not properly make use 
of Ukraine, something to which it has agreed in the peace treaty, then 
the whole operation in Ukraine is worthless.”54
Just a few weeks after the capture of the city, Austria-Hungary’s 
supreme political representative in Kyiv, Ambassador Forgách, was also 
keen to give his own troops clear instructions about their dealings with 
Ukrainian officials in economic matters. There were constant problems 
with border officials who did not want to grant export licences. On 26 
March, the Foreign Ministry informed civilian and military officials 
dealing with Ukraine in Vienna, Budapest, Kyiv, and Odesa that there 
should be no delay in negotiations with the Rada concerning the 
procurement and export of food. The ministry insisted, however, that this 
procurement should “not be carried out by means of requisitioning but 
by means of cash payments” or exchange for other products. Collection 
and purchase for the territory behind the lines were to be carried out by 
commissioners and buyers from cartels but under military supervision.55 
To acquire the rubles necessary for purchasing, a financial 
agreement had been entered into as early as 21 February for the 
establishment of a German-Austro-Hungarian bank syndicate. This 
was to be organized by a joint Central Bureau for Russian Currency 
located in Berlin.56 But the early results were unsatisfactory, so in late 
April the Austro-Hungarians began purchasing rubles in Lublin and 
established currency exchange offices for Austro-Hungarian prisoners 
of war returning from Russia.57 In addition to the financial agreement, 
53	
The 13th Ulanen Regiment, for instance, did not carry out a procurement that had been ordered 
because of a lack of funds: ÖStA, KA, AdT, UR 13, Tagebuch vom Dezember 1917–20. November 
1918, Eintrag v. 25.3.1918. 
54	
ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, Abschrift des AOK-Befehls 
mit Qu. Nr. 121.055, 9.4.1918.
55	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.609, Nr. 74, Sammelakt zur Aufbringung in der 
Ukraine, 19.–26.3.1918.
56 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.611, Nr. 1255, Vereinbarung mit den Türken 
und Bulgaren, 10.6.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, OpApt, Kt. 467, Nr. 1210, 
Zusatzvertrag zum Friedensvertrag mit Rußland, Anlage 11a, 7.3.1918.
57	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.609, Nr. 199, Ministerium des Äußern an AOK, 
28.4.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
246
the Central Powers signed an agreement on transport. According to 
it, the Black Sea and the Danube would be open to naval transport, 
and a Black Sea Bureau58 would be established with a mixed staff. For 
the management of goods coming across “dry borders,” that is, by 
rail, canals, and rivers (except the Danube), two “land offices” were 
established. Each was subordinate to its respective military leadership. 
The land office in Brest-Litovsk59 was under Army Group Eichhorn-
Kiew, while that in Lviv60 was under the 2nd Army/Ostarmee.61 Assisted 
by border posts, the land offices were to supervise the transport of 
goods in Ukraine, gather economic information, guide the activities 
of the cartel organizations, and handle the accounts for the goods 
purchased.62
The central economic institution on the Austro-Hungarian side 
was the Department for Trade with Ukraine, established in the Foreign 
Office in March. In June it was merged with the Ukrainian section of the 
Quartermaster Staff within Army High Command (AOK) to become 
the Ukrainian Department of AOK.63 Led by Colonel Emil Kreneis, it 
was involved in all organizational matters at the interface of politics, 
58	
On the organization of Austro-Hungarian naval transport, see ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine 
Akten, Kt. 2.611, Nr. 1340, Organisation der Marine-Behörden am Schwarzen Meer, 7.6.1918.
59 
Until 15 May it had been the land station in Biała (Biała Podlaska).
60	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.612, Nr. 1735, k.u.k. Kriegsministerium an das 
AOK, 17.6.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, QuAbt, Kt. 695, Nr. 2162, 
Bestimmungen für die Rohstoffstellen für die bei dem russischen Handel tätigen Offizieren der 
Kriegs-Rohstoff-Abteilung, 30.3.1918. 
61 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.611, Nr. 1255, Vereinbarung mit den Türken und 
Bulgaren, 10.6.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 466, Nr. 1096, Vereinbarung zur Regelung 
der Transportfragen im Verkehr über das Schwarze Meer und die Donau sowie über die trockene 
Grenze des ehemaligen Russland, 27.2.1918.
62 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.609, Nr. 92, Bezahlung der in der Ukraine für die 
KGV und die OeZEG eingekauften Waren, 3.4.1918.
63	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.633, Nr. 122.442, Errichtung der Ukrainischen 
Abteilung beim AOK, 24.5.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, QuAbt, 
Kt. 693, Nr. 2839, Errichtung der Ukrainischen Abteilung beim AOK, 2.6.1918. The Ukrainian 
Department of AOK was later placed under the command of the quartermaster section of the 
Ostarmee. It was led by Lieutenant Colonel Richard Skubec. He was also the leader of War Group R, 
responsible for Ukraine, Volhynia, Galicia, Bukovyna, Transylvania, and Romania and, following 
the formation of the Ukrainian Department, deputy head of the department. The management of 
raw materials, to the extent that this affected military administration, was moved on 1 October to 
the War Ministry. The previous head of the Ukrainian Department, Colonel Kreneis, was made 
quartermaster general of the Ostarmee. Some of the personnel of the Ukrainian Department moved 
to the quartermaster staff of AOK, others to the War Ministry: ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine 
Akten, Kt. 2.616, Nr. 3401, Ukraineangelegenheiten – Kompetenz-Festsetzung, 17.8.1918; ÖStA, 
KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.616, Nr. 3402, Personal der Ukraineabteilung, 22.7.1918; 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.623, Nr. 7024, Unterstellung der Ukraine-Abteilung 
unter den Chef der Quartier-Abteilung des AOK, 24.9.1918.

chapter 3c: economic utilization
247 
economics, and the military. But there were no substantive initiatives 
from there regarding Ukrainian policy. Arz, Krauss, and Spannocchi 
on the military side, and Burián and Forgách on the political side were 
the key figures, and it was they who also directed economic policy. In 
Ukraine itself, it was Major General Karl von Sendler, quartermaster 
general of the 2nd Army/Ostarmee, who was responsible for economic 
acquisitions for the troops. He was directly subordinate to Krauss and 
led both the technical-industrial group in the quartermaster staff and 
the Austro-Hungarian shipping section.64 The problems of this dual 
structure were already apparent in April. First, the civil and military 
authorities operated in the same territories in a way that was mutually 
obstructive. Second, the military authorities offered much higher 
prices than their civilian counterparts. Third, this dual structure gave 
the Ukrainians an excuse for not fulfilling their own obligations. The 
Germans were also unhappy with this situation.65
In spite of or precisely because of these multilateral attempts to 
make use of Ukraine, very few goods were being exported to the 
homelands. Numerous railway carriages were waiting at the border 
because they had not been released by the Ukrainian authorities.66 
There was also a shortage of rolling stock, locomotives, and fuel. In 
addition, the capacity of the railways to carry goods to the border was 
very limited.67 In order to preserve at least the appearance of a “bread 
peace” with Ukraine, AOK ordered twenty carriages each to be sent to 
Vienna, Prague, and Budapest.68 
In addition to food supplies, war material found in the country 
played an important role. Materials captured from the Red Guards 
during the invasion were put to use immediately. But stored equipment 
previously belonging to the tsarist army, the troops of the Russian 
Provisional Government, the Ukrainian Rada, or Romania was 
considered to be “war material” whose status needed clarification.69 
64 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.612, Nr. 1446, Geschäftseinteilung des AK-Ost, 
14.6.1918.
65 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.609, Nr. 90, Militärische Aufbringungsorganisation 
in der Ukraine, 5.4.1918.
66	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.633, Nr. 121.211, Ausfuhrschwierigkeiten in der 
Ukraine, 10.4.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Op. Geh. Akten, Kt. 467, Nr. 1218, 
Meldung des 2. Armeekommandos an AOK, 17.3.1918.
67	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 468, Nr. 1397, Telegramm des 2. Armeekommandos an AOK, 
7.4.1918.
68 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.628, Nr. 120.805, Befehl des AOK, März 1918. 
69	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 468, Nr. 1426, Einschreiten des ukrainischen Kriegsministers, 
13.4.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
248
On 8 March, however, the 2nd Army ordered that stored equipment 
was also “to be confiscated by our own troops and used where 
necessary...in that regard, any validly asserted claims of ownership 
by the Ukrainian government would have to be recognized.”70 War 
materials definitely considered Ukrainian were to be left to the 
Ukrainian government. This requirement remained in place during 
the summer.71 
Food procurement in Bessarabia was a special case, since 
northern Bessarabia was not part of Ukrainian territory and had 
been occupied by Austro-Hungarian troops in March. Initially a 
provisional arrangement was made whereby the advancing 7th Army 
did the requisitioning. Lack of adequate infrastructure meant that 
no military administration would be established.72 The export of 
provisions for Bukovyna had to be canceled at the beginning of June 
because of shortages in Bessarabia itself.73 In mid-July the 4th General 
Command took over military administration.74 
Second Phase: Creating a Procurement System
After the first few weeks, the Central Powers sought to bring order out 
of the chaos of their previous economic policy and began to construct 
a regular procurement system for the agricultural products they 
wanted. But this turned out to be a difficult task, since it remained 
unclear just how much food and fodder the Central Powers could 
expect. Representatives of the Rada gave detailed estimates at the 
beginning of April. After a number of deductions—among them 2.6 
million tons (160 million poods) exported, 328,000 tons (20 million 
poods) requisitioned for the troops of the Central Powers, 164,000 tons 
(10 million poods) for the brewing of alcohol, 328,000 tons (20 million 
poods) stolen by the Bolsheviks—only 442,000 tons (27 million poods) 
remained for export to the Central Powers. With existing stores, that 
70	
ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, QuAbt, Kt. 694, Nr. 1251, Zweck der 
Expedition in der Ukraina, 8.3.1918.
71	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.611, Nr. 1110, Russische Munitionsdepots in 
Woloczyska, 8.6.1918.
72 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.633, Nr. 122.446, Militärverwaltung in 
Nordbessarabien, 28.5.1918.
73	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.613, Nr. 1788, Schreiben der bukowinischen k.k. 
Landesregierung an den Präsidenten des Volksernährungsamtes v. 10.6.1918.
74	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.614, Nr. 2281, Verwaltung von Bessarabien, 16. Juli. 
Documents from 4th General Command in ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 4. Armee, 
Kt. 485, Nr. 42.304, Sammelakt zur Verwaltung Bessarabiens. See also chapter 3b in the present 
volume.

chapter 3c: economic utilization
249 
left a maximum of 655,220 tons (40 million poods) and represented 
only about two-thirds of the amount agreed at Brest-Litovsk. This was 
clearly less than the Central Powers had hoped for. The Ukrainian 
representatives in Brest-Litovsk, after all, had boasted of potential 
exports of 3.3 million tons (200 million poods). The Germans consoled 
themselves with the thought that these statistics were “incorrect” 
and that a more efficient organization of procurement by the Central 
Powers would increase this amount.75 
On 9 April, in a new agreement,76 the Rada committed itself, 
for the period until 31 July 1918, to deliver 60 million poods,77 just 
under one million tons, of grain and grain products, fodder, pulses, 
seeds, and oil seeds to the German Empire and Austria-Hungary. 
Prices would be established for each product that could be changed 
only by mutual agreement,78 although Groener described the prices 
as “outrageously high.”79 In this agreement, just as in the Berlin 
agreement of February, Austria-Hungary was to receive more in April 
and May because of its severe food crisis. In the days following, the 
agreement was extended to include delivery of 50,000 tons of sugar, 
200,000 cattle, and 400–500 million eggs.80 
In order to put life into this agreement, the three parties established 
a German-Austro-Hungarian-Ukrainian Economic Center with 
branches in the provinces.81 The Economic Center would take over from 
the Ukrainian Food Ministry, deal with settling accounts, arrange and 
supervise transport, eliminate misunderstandings, receive statistical 
75	
BArch, R 3101/1314, Sitzung vom 1. April 1918 betr. Getreide u. Futtermittel, Vorsitz Gawriloff, 
Berichterstatter Goldstein.
76	
On 23 April this new agreement was incorporated into the general economic agreement.
77	
This amount had been unanimously agreed some days previously by the Rada government, 
although there had been some concerns about it. See the minutes of the session of the UNR 
Council of Ministers of 3 April 1918 in Ukraïns'ka Tsentral'na Rada, 244ff.
78 
BArch, R 3101/1220, Telegramm der Handelskommission an AA v. 9.4.1918, Vereinbarungen über 
Getreidelieferungen aus der Ukraine. Six million poods were to be delivered by the end of April, 
another 15 million by the end of May, 20 million again by the end of June, and another 19 million 
by the end of July. The German delegation was pleased with the outcome of the negotiations but 
believed that they could have got more if the Austro-Hungarians had not repeatedly indicated the 
precarious food situation at home. See BArch R 3101/1136, Deutsche Ukraine Delegation, An den 
Herrn Staatsekretär des Reichswirtschaftsamts, Freiherrn von Stein, Kiew, 10.4.1918.
79	
Von Brest-Litovsk zur deutschen Novemberrevolution, “Tagebucheintrag v. 9.4.1918,” 340.
80	
BArch, R 3101/1136, Deutsche Ukraine Delegation. Der Vorsitzende der Gesamt-Kommission, 
J.Nr. 74, 13.4.1918; TsDAVO Ukraїny, fond 1118, op. 1, spr. 37, 14. See Ursachen und Folgen, 188; 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 469, Nr. 1477, Zusatzverträge zu den Friedensverträgen mit 
Ruβland und der ukrainischen Volksrepublik, 17.6.1918.
81	
On the territorial distribution of these economic centers, see ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine-
Akten, Kt. 2.613, Nr. 2030, Organisation der Getreide-Ausfuhr aus der Ukraine.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
250
information, and exercise control over the organs subordinate to it. 
Goods would be received at rail, river, sea, and border stations. The 
Economic Center would also have the authority, in procurement areas 
with inadequate infrastructure, to install commissioners from the 
local population.82 The most important task of the Economic Center, 
however, was to allocate the procured goods to the land offices and 
the Black Sea Bureau according to a complex allocation formula.83 
The Austro-Hungarian delegation was made up of Court Councillor 
Emil Heindl84 and Mr. Lorant,85 as well as other representatives from 
the Austrian Central Purchasing Syndicate (ÖZEG), the Austrian 
and Hungarian Finance Ministry, and the Austro-Hungarian Bank. 
AOK’s general staff officer at the Economic Center was Captain von 
Daróczy.86 The German delegate to the Economic Center was a certain 
Mr. Meyer, head of the Central Purchasing Syndicate in Berlin.87
Although the new agreement definitely prohibited military 
procurement except for the purpose of meeting the needs of the troops 
themselves,88 Austria-Hungary was very slow to implement this.89 Its 
Ukrainian Department ordered that military procurement was to be 
maintained but emphasized that this “applied to purchase and not 
requisitioning.” The reason for this was the critical food situation in 
Austria and the still unresolved issue of whether Kyiv was at all “in 
a position to begin immediately with the delivery of the food that 
we so urgently need.” But the goods procured heretofore and in the 
future should conform to the accepted amounts and prices. Military 
requisitioning should cease when the civilian authorities, with the 
82 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine-Akten, Kt. 2.609, Nr. 157, Vereinbarungen über Getreidelieferungen 
aus der Ukraine, 20.4.1918.
83 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine-Akten, Kt. 2.626, Nr. 8400, Richtlinien für die militärische 
Mithilfe bei der wirtschaftlichen Ausnützung der Ukraine.
84	
He was a representative of the Orient and Overseas Company and of the Austrian Trade Museum 
in Vienna. See Hof- und Staats-Handbuch der österreichisch-ungarischen Monarchie für das 
Jahr 1918, vol. 44 (Vienna, 1918), 507.
85	
In the Staatshandbuch for 1918 there is just one Ernst Lorant, secretary of the Hungarian 
Allgemeine Creditanstalt in Budapest (ibid., 1324).
86	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.618, Nr. 4597, Verzeichnis der öster.-ung. und 
deutschen Behörden und Funktionäre in Kiew, 7.8.1918.
87	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine-Akten, Kt. 2.610, Nr. 365, Organisation der Aufbringung in der 
Ukraine, 15.5.1918.
88 
See Groener’s instructions to Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew: ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine-
Akten, Kt. 2.618, Nr. 4597, Verzeichnis der öster.-ung. und deutschen Behörden und Funktionäre 
in Kiew, 7.8.1918.
89	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine-Akten, Kt. 2.610, Nr. 365, Organisation der Aufbringung in der 
Ukraine, 15.5.1918.

chapter 3c: economic utilization
251 
assistance of the Ukrainian government, had delivered the agreed 
amounts in the different procurement areas.90 It was only following 
strong protests from the Germans and the Ukrainians that this practice 
ceased in May.91 But instances of this continued to occur in the Austro-
Hungarian zone throughout the occupation.92 Many troops employed 
it as a disciplinary measure. Sometimes individual soldiers did it to 
improve their own food situation.93 
It was the Berlin agreements of 18 May that almost completely 
deprived Austria-Hungary of its power in the matter of procurement.94 
Two days before, Krauss had replaced Böhm-Ermolli, who had been 
considered responsible for the failures up to then. Shortly before 
the agreements were signed, Krauss had protested strongly against 
the new regulations.95 Krauss was considered to be a forceful man, 
and the emperor had sent him to Ukraine as a “dictator”96 in order 
to improve procurement at least in southern Ukraine. But his scope 
for action disappeared with the Berlin agreements. These agreements 
complemented the February agreement and gave Germany, until 15 
August, “according to the agreed allocation...the right to all cereals, 
those in Ukraine, in the other parts of the former Russian Empire, in 
90 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine-Akten, Kt. 2.609, Nr. 121, Beibehalten der militärischen 
Aufbringungsaktion, 12.4.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine-Akten, Kt. 2.609, Nr. 138, 
Militärische Aufbringungsaktion, 16.4.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine-Akten, Kt. 2.609, 
Nr. 157, Vereinbarungen über Getreidelieferungen aus der Ukraine, 20.4.1918.
91	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Nr. 1565, Streitigkeiten in der Ukraine wegen 
Aufbringung, 9.5.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Nr. 1580, Telegramm-Sammlung 
zur militärischen Aufbringung, 12.–14.5.1918.
92 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.617, Nr. 4204, Tätigkeitsbericht der Deutsch-
österreichisch-ungarischen Wirtschaftsabteilung, 29.7.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine 
Akten, Kt. 2.619, Nr. 5249, Schreiben der Kriegsgetreideverkehrsanstalt an das AOK, 21.8.1918.
93	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.609, Nr. 211, Störung der ukrainischen 
Aufbringungsaktion durch militärische Käufe, 1. Mai; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, 
Kt. 2.610, Nr. 325, Situationsbericht Nr. 10, 5.5.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 
2.624, Nr. 7410, Bericht des Obersten Kreneis über die Bereisung der Ukraine, 7.10.1918. See also 
ÖStA, KA, AdT, FAR 59, Kt. 832, Abfertigung Nr. 95 vom 20.7.1918; ÖStA, KA, AdT, FAR 59, 
Kt. 832, Abfertigung Nr. 118, 19.8.1918; ÖStA, KA, AdT, FAR 59, Kt. 832, UR 3, Lagebuch v. 
17.10.1918, Eintragungen vom 14., 21., 24., 29.7.1918; ÖStA, KA, AdT, FAR 59, Kt. 832, UR 13, 
Tagebuch vom Dezember 1917–20. November 1918, Einträge vom 16.3.1918, 3.6.1918.
94	
On the background to this agreement, see Theodor Ritter von Zeynek. Ein Offizier im 
Generalstabskorps erinnert sich, ed. Peter Broucek (Vienna, Cologne, and Weimar, 2009), 294ff.
95	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Nr. 1633, Verwendung k.u.k. Truppen in Ukraine, 
25.5.1918. He confirmed this in an account of the situation in Ukraine written in 1932: ÖStA, 
AVA, Nachlässe, B 60 Krauß, 14c, Schreiben von General Alfred Krauß an das Österreichische 
Kriegsarchiv, 15.4.1932.
96	
It is not completely clear whether Karl himself had used this term, but Krauss referred to it twice 
in his memoirs and expressed his unhappiness with this description, which, he wrote, had an 
“unpleasant sound” and “was not necessary”: Alfred Krauß, Die Ursachen unserer Niederlage. 
Erinnerungen und Urteile aus dem Weltkrieg (Vienna, 1923), 253ff.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
252
Romania, and in the Bessarabian territories occupied by Romania 
until the new harvest.”97 Until 15 July, 150,000 tons of grain would 
be delivered from the German Empire to Austria-Hungary.98 Austro-
Hungarian influence in the common institutions in Ukraine shrank 
considerably in the following months. Austria-Hungary withdrew 
increasingly to its own zone of occupation. Criticism from Berlin or 
Kyiv about its behavior was met with either demonstrative protest 
or formal concessions that were hardly ever adhered to. But, in the 
meantime, even AOK had recognized that procurement could only 
be influenced by the civilian authorities,99 and important military 
figures, such as the governor of Odesa, Eduard von Böltz, questioned 
the existing approach: “Even the forced requisitions with military 
support yielded very few results: around 22,000 poods100 of grain in 
two and a half months from the 30th Infantry Division! In my view, 
one should at least attempt to leave the grain to free purchase. The 
stores of grain that are certainly hidden in the country and have not 
been discovered will suddenly appear....”101 The extensive military 
procurement ceased, and cooperation with the Ukrainians improved 
dramatically.102
The food obtained by the new procurement organizations 
established between April and June was to go mainly over land to 
the German Empire via the stations at Holoby and at Baranowicze in 
Poland. Since most of the deliveries were going to western Germany 
and to the places where they were needed on the Western Front, the 
“wet route” by way of the Danube was not suitable, as it would take too 
long. It would take eight weeks on the river but only two weeks by rail. 
Only a small amount was sent by ship to the Black Sea port of Brăila in 
97	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Nr. 1634, Neuer Berliner Vertrag, 25.5.1918.
98	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.612, Nr. 1465, Wirtschaftliche Ausnutzung 
der Ukraine, 23.6.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.612, Nr. 1577, 
Kriegsgetreideverkehrsanstalt an Ukraine-Abteilung, 17.6.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/
AGKdo, 2. Armee, QuAbt, Kt. 693, Nr. 2972, Ernteaufbringung in den okkupierten Gebieten, 
31.5.1918. According to a report from the Austro-Hungarian High Command on 18 August, 
Germany was unable to deliver all the grain that had been agreed: ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, 
Kt. 475, Nr. 1906, Darstellung der materiellen Lage der Armee im Felde, 18.8.1918.
99	
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 470, Nr. 1634, Neuer Berliner Vertrag, 25.5.1918; ÖStA, KA, 
FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 474, Nr. 1863, Klärung von Fragen in der Ukraine, 26.9.1918.
100	 360.36 tons.
101 ÖStA, AVA, Nachlässe, B 760 Böltz, Fol. 9. This is an undated report on his experiences as city 
commandant and governor of Odesa. Since he speaks of the five months “since we arrived,” this 
report must have been written in August.
102	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.610, Nr. 432, Bericht Nr. 13, 17.5.1918.

chapter 3c: economic utilization
253 
Romania, from where it was transported by rail to Germany.103 Austria-
Hungary was more open to using the Black Sea and the Danube but 
also used its rail lines through Bukovyna and Galicia.
In this second phase of economic policy, the Central Powers were 
able to implement their preferred trade policies. This involved a 
comprehensive reorganization of their economic centers in Ukraine. 
On the German side, it was the Foreign Office that was mainly 
responsible for trade policy, but the Ministry of the Economy attempted 
to exercise some influence “in order to develop the economic forces 
of Ukraine” and “guide this development.”104 The Imperial Ministry 
of the Economy (Reichswirtschaftsamt) was first established only 
in October 1917 as the central economic authority of the German 
Empire.105 It was therefore responsible for the procurement of goods 
in Ukraine. The War Food Office (Kriegsernährungsamt) then took over 
responsibility for its distribution at home. The Imperial Economic 
Office of the German Ukraine Delegation functioned as an extended 
arm of the Ministry of the Economy. It was subordinate to the German 
Ukraine Delegation of the Foreign Office in Kyiv and provided it with 
expert advice.106 The head of this Economic Office in Kyiv was Privy 
Councillor Otto Wiedfeldt, who had exercised some influence on 
the organization of the German war economy through his previous 
positions in the Ministry of Internal Affairs and in the Ministry of the 
Economy.107 Of course, power rivalries were unavoidable throughout 
these months. The Foreign Office kept close watch and was successful 
in preventing any independent organizations from emerging in the 
Economic Office in Kyiv.108 On the other hand, both the Foreign Office 
and the Ministry of the Economy joined forces in competing with “the 
military authorities” in Kyiv, “who were so excessively equipped with 
means and personnel.”109 In general, however, there was “harmonious 
103 BA-MA, RH 61/847, Ergebnis der Besprechung am 30.4.1918 in Berlin über die in der Heimat zu 
treffenden Beförderungsmaßnahmen für die aus der Ukraine zu erwartenden Lebensmittel.
104 BArch, R 3101/1170, Der Staatssekretär des Reichswirtschaftsamts, IDR 1870. V, 11.6.1918.
105	 See Hans Gotthard Ehlert, Die wirtschaftliche Zentralbehörde des Deutschen Reiches 1914 bis 
1919. Das Problem der “Gemeinwirtschaft” in Krieg und Frieden (Wiesbaden, 1982).
106	 See BArch, R 3101/1170, Telegramm Ludendorffs an Reichskanzler v. 21.6.1918.
107	 On Wiedfeldt, see Peter Borowsky, Deutsche Ukrainepolitik 1918 unter besonderer 
Berücksichtigung der Wirtschaftsfragen (Lübeck and Hamburg, 1970), 81ff.; Ernst Schröder, 
Otto Wiedfeldt. Eine Biographie (Neustadt and Aisch, 1981). 
108 See BArch, R 3101/1170, Auswärtiges Amt, Nr. Ap 1554. 107085, An den Staatssekretär des 
Reichswirtschaftsamts, Berlin, 26.7.1918.
109 BArch, R 3101/1170, Auswärtiges Amt, Nr. Ap 1554. 107085, Telegramm des Botschafters 
Mumm an Auswärtiges Amt v. 15.6.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
254
cooperation” at a personal level in day-to-day work.110 
The Ukrainian State Grain Bureau had been established before 
Skoropadsky came to power. It had sole authority, assisted by trade 
networks in Ukraine, to purchase Ukrainian agricultural products. It 
was the executive agent of the food ministry in which wholesalers, 
mill owners, and agricultural associations were represented. The 
State Grain Bureau assumed responsibility for cooperation with the 
Economic Center. But it was only after the Hetman had taken power that 
the newly created institutions began to function.111 Following protests 
from the Central Powers about the inadequate performance and 
escalating corruption in the State Grain Bureau,112 the Ukrainian Food 
Council was established on 24 May.113 The Food Council was a kind of 
coordinating body to which the State Grain Bureau and the German-
Austro-Hungarian-Ukrainian Economic Center were subordinate. It 
was here that meetings were held and agreements reached between 
representatives of the occupation troops, the German government, 
the Ukrainian Food Ministry, the various centers of the Central 
Powers (among them the Central Purchasing Syndicate Berlin, the 
Austro-Hungarian Central Purchasing Syndicate, and the War Grain 
Transport Office). These agreements dealt with the procurement of 
food and fodder for the armies in Ukraine, the transport of food and 
provisions for cities and industrial areas, and exports to the Central 
Powers. The Food Council met regularly, and all the difficulties that 
arose between the various parties were discussed here. Although 
many of its sessions were quite stormy, it was a well-functioning 
institution in which decisions could be made on short notice.114 The 
Food Council intervened repeatedly in the summer to protect Kyiv or 
Odesa from shortages or from famine.115 
110 Stefan von Velsen, “Deutsche Generalstabsoffiziere im 1. Weltkrieg 1914–1918. Erinnerungen,” 
Die Welt als Geschichte, no. 16 (1956): 286.
111	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.610, Nr. 325, Situationsbericht Nr. 10, 5.5.1918; 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.610, Nr. 365, Organisation der Aufbringung in der 
Ukraine, 15.5.1918.
112 This was confirmed by Skoropadsky in his memoirs: Pavlo Skoropads'kyj: Erinnerungen 1917 
bis 1918, ed. Günter Rosenfeld (Stuttgart, 1999), 250.
113 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.633, Nr. 122.595, Schreiben der Militärkommission 
Kiew an AOK, 25.5.1918.
114	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.611, Nr. 1221, 6. Wochenbericht der 
Eisenbahnzentralstelle Kiew, 30.5.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.612, Nr. 
1752, Deutsch-österreichisch-ungarische Wirtschaftszentrale an AOK, 16.6.1918; ÖStA, KA, 
FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.617, Nr. 3779, Organisation der Kartelle, 19.7.1918.
115	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.617, Nr.3688, Bericht Nr. 14, 17.7.1918.

chapter 3c: economic utilization
255 
Facsimile 1: Economic organization (ÖStA, KA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2622, Nr. 6906).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
256
Beginning in May, a dense network of purchasers from the cartels 
and centers was established in the German zone of occupation in 
Ukraine. They operated locally in the gubernias, which in turn had 
been divided into purchasing areas, and they bought the goods that had 
been allocated to their cartels and centers.116 A common Raw Materials 
Center was established in Kyiv to coordinate the purchases supplied 
until mid-July by all the German and Austro-Hungarian centers.117 
Exports from Ukraine to the Central Powers were handled by export 
syndicates. For Austria-Hungary, these included the Trade Association 
East from Vienna, the Import and Export Trading Syndicate (MERX), 
the International Import and Export Syndicate (INTAK), the Northern 
Bohemian Import and Export Syndicate, and the Hungarian-Ukrainian 
Export Syndicate (EXUKRAN). The goods were then transported 
further by rail or ship to the land offices, for which the Black Sea 
Bureau or the Central Staff for Railways (Eisenbahnzentralstelle) in 
Kyiv were responsible. The land offices then sent these products on 
to the centers and cartels in the homeland that were responsible for 
their distribution. In Austria-Hungary the goods were received by the 
Imperial Food Office (k.k. Amt für Volksernährung), which sent them on 
to the Austrian Central Purchasing Syndicate (ÖZEG).118 Most of the 
products were distributed in Austria (Cisleithania), especially in the 
cities. Only a small proportion of the products were sent to Hungary.119 
116 See the agreements for the Metal Centers, the Egg-Importing Company, and the Leather Centers: 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.614, Nr. 2396, Vertrag zwischen den Metallzentralen 
Deutschlands und Österreich-Ungarns über die Aufbringung in der Ukraine; ibid., Nr. 2458, 
Vertrag zwischen OeZEG und Eier-Import-Gesellschaft über Aufbringung in der Ukraine; ibid., 
Nr. 2462, Abkommen zwischen der deutschen und österreichisch-ungarischen Lederzentrale 
über Aufbringung in der Ukraine.
117	 The Austro-Hungarian cartels and centers complained of a shortage of staff that put them at an 
unfair disadvantage vis-à-vis their German counterparts: ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, 
Kt. 2.617, Nr. 3681, Bericht des Verbindungsoffiziers bei der Rohstoffabteilung, 17.7.1918.
118	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.611, Nr. 1321, Bericht des Österreichischen 
Warenverkehrsbüros an die Ukraine-Abteilung, 9.6.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, 
Kt. 2.612, Nr. 1735, Zusammenwirken der deutschen zivilen und militärischen Stellen bei 
Wiederaufnahme des Handelsverkehrs mit Russland, 17.6.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine 
Akten, Kt. 2.617, Nr. 3779, Organisation der Kartelle, 19.7.1918.
119	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.611, Nr. 1300, Ukrainische Importe – Teilung 
zwischen Österreich und Ungarn, 11.6.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.614, Nr. 
2253, Niederschrift über die Verteilung der ukrainischen Einfuhren an Zucker zwischen Ungarn 
und Österreich.

chapter 3c: economic utilization
257 
Facsimile 2: Organization of grain export from Ukraine, German-Austro-Hungarian-Ukrainian 
Economic Center, Kyiv (ÖStA, KA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2613, Nr. 2030). 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
258
Once purchases by the troops had ceased,120 apart from provisions 
for the troops themselves, the Austro-Hungarian units were called 
on by Ukrainian organizations or private individuals to undertake 
measures for supervision or security.121 At the beginning of July, 
they were moved into economically important areas to help with the 
harvest. The areas settled by German colonists played an important 
role because the Central Powers expected higher crop yields there, 
and a greater willingness to cooperate. Austro-Hungarian troops 
were also required to replace the German troops still stationed 
in the Austro-Hungarian zone. The goal of the action was, by 
means of this support, to gain control of the harvest and receive a 
share in return for the labor.122 As before, the troops may have 
been negligent in implementing the new guidelines that prohibited 
military requisitioning. At the beginning of October, the command 
of the Ostarmee reissued its “guidelines for military assistance in the 
economic utilization of Ukraine,” which stressed once more that 
“members of the army, except in case of dire necessity, are not to act 
as buyers.” These guidelines also contained concrete instructions for 
participation of the troops in procurement. In the case of “normal 
procurement,” they were to provide only “beneficial influence, 
support, and supervision.” In the case of “procurement under military 
pressure,” they were to “provide military assistance or carry out 
military requisitioning.” But military requisitioning was defined as an 
“extreme means of coercion” that had to be requested by the Ukrainian 
Food Council and carried out in the presence of Kyiv officials. Use of 
weapons by military commanders was prohibited. Goods required by 
the military were to be handled by civilian organizations, paid for, 
and loaded in the usual way. Only if supplies were hidden should 
there be “confiscation without compensation.”123 There were similar 
orders on the German side. Purchasing was to be undertaken only 
to cover current needs and was to involve Ukrainian officials so as 
120	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.612, Nr. 1465, Wirtschaftliche Ausnutzung der 
Ukraine, 23.6.1918.
121	 ÖStA, KA, AdT, UR 3, Kt. 800, Lagebuch vom 17. Oktober 1918, Eintragungen v. 26.7.1918.
122	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.614, Nr. 2455, AK Ostarmee an AOK, 4.7.1918; ÖStA, 
KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.622, Nr. 6906, Bericht der Ostarmee über Aufbringung und 
Einfuhr, 25.9.1918.
123 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.626, Nr. 8400, Richtlinien für die militärische 
Mithilfe bei der wirtschaftlichen Ausnützung der Ukraine.

chapter 3c: economic utilization
259 
not to impair procurement by shared institutions and not to incur the 
hostility of the local population.124 
An integral part of every agreement was the maximum price 
for particular products, but this was always exceeded in practice.125 
The reason for this was that traders as well as peasants held back 
grain in the hope of getting much better prices on the black market. 
The Austro-Hungarian troops, however, offered prices above the 
maximum. In exceptional cases, such as supply shortages, Ukrainian 
officials were also able to pay more than the maximum price. Captain 
Daróczy, the Austro-Hungarian general staff officer at the Economic 
Center in Kyiv,126 stated rather laconically in a report on 29 July: “It is 
a fact that, as soon as permission is given to exceed maximum prices, 
stores from the old harvest can be brought out very quickly.”127 
The system thus established was a mixed government-military-
private system in which, under the circumstances, the Ukrainian, 
German, and Austro-Hungarian institutions cooperated relatively 
well. Mistrust, mutual accusations, and irritation still arose among 
the various parties, but most of the organizational problems that 
actually arose were generally able to be discussed and resolved in 
the Ukrainian Food Council. But the old rifts still existed between 
the allies and their Ukrainian counterparts. According to a report by 
the director of the Austrian Central Purchasing Syndicate, Lukacs, 
the Austrians and Hungarians felt themselves circumvented by their 
German colleagues on many issues.128 Vienna was also dissatisfied 
with the Ukrainians: “Experience has shown that the Ukrainian 
organizations are completely incapable of fulfilling the tasks assigned 
to them; hence their own civilian organizations are essentially 
hindered in their activity.” A report from AOK on 20 June stated that the 
124	 See BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 19, Bezirk Wolhynien West, Bay.Kav.Division, Abt. Ia, Nr. 
2769 W, Beitreibungen zur Deckung des laufenden Truppenbedarfs, 1.9.1918.
125 For example, the maximum prices for September: ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 
2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 309, Allgemeine Verlautbarungen des Kommandos der Ostarmee v. 
3.10.1918, Nr. 226. According to a report of the Bavarian Cavalry Division, the maximum prices 
were sometimes exceeded by a factor of four to six. The division was then in a dilemma. The 
Ukrainian government could not provide for the troops, nor was the division itself able to buy 
food, since purchases above the maximum price were forbidden by command of Army Group 
Eichhorn-Kiew. See BayHStA-KA, MKr 1824, Bay.Kav.Div, Abt. Ia, Nr. 1131, Verwendung der 
B.K.D, 4.6.1918.
126	 He was also a representative in the Ukrainian Food Council.
127 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.617, Nr. 4204, Tätigkeitsbericht der Deutsch-
österreichisch-ungarischen Wirtschaftsabteilung, 29.7.1918.
128	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.612, Nr. 1400, Wahrnehmungen des Vertreters der 
österreichischen Zentraleinkaufs-Gesellschaft bei der Wirtschaftszentrale in Kiew, 8.6.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
260
daily number of railway carriages leaving for the Habsburg Monarchy 
had decreased from 190 at the end of April to fewer than 60 at the 
end of May. For Austria-Hungary, this meant that the briefly improved 
situation was again becoming acute owing to reduced deliveries and 
their own as yet unreaped harvest.129
  The overall result of the deliveries in the first months of 
occupation was worse than poor. Up to 31 July, 43,158 tons of food 
and other goods passed through the land station in Lviv, 11,000 tons 
of which were sent to Vienna. The food delivered to the capital city 
(fat and bacon, animals for slaughter, eggs, and sugar) provided some 
short-term relief. Altogether, the deliveries to the Central Powers 
that passed through the stations in Lviv, Brest-Litovsk, and the Black 
Sea and that crossed Austria-Hungary’s eastern border by 31 July 
amounted to roughly 152,229 tons. Even if ore, sulphur, rubber, rags, 
skins, rope, and other products were to be included, the total would 
not amount to the one million tons promised at Brest-Litovsk.130
It was becoming increasingly clear to the occupying powers 
that the state institutions of Ukraine had too little support in the 
gubernias, right down to the individual villages, and that state 
directives could only be implemented by force or by the use of 
coercive measures, such as withholding salt provisions in retaliation 
for uncooperative behavior. Numerous solutions were discussed, 
including the introduction of a free market. But it was the view of 
the Austro-Hungarian army that a purely commercial organization 
could not function because of poor security, the mistrust of the rural 
population, and the inadequate infrastructure.131 
When the Berlin agreements of February ran out in the summer, 
the new agreements of 27 July prohibited the troops from contracting 
deliveries of monopolized goods. Purchase of provisions for the 
troops required the agreement of local Food Office officials, and 
requisitioning was allowed only in extreme cases. Monopolized 
goods needed by the troops could only be purchased by Ukrainian 
government officials. Non-monopoly goods were available for free 
129	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.612, Nr. 1465, Wirtschaftliche Ausnutzung der 
Ukraine, 23.6.1918; ibid., Nr. 1598, Hughes-Gespräch zwischen Kiew und Ukraine-Abteilung, 
17.6.1918.
130 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.636, Aufstellungen über die Lebensmitteleinkäufe, 
21.3.–31.7.1918.
131	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.615, Nr. 2752, Gesichtspunkte zur Frage der 
Lebensmittelaufbringung, 10.7.1918.

chapter 3c: economic utilization
261 
purchase. A monthly sum of 97.4 million crowns132 was made available 
to the quartermaster section of the Ostarmee for such purchases for its 
240,000 men.133
Although the procurement and purchasing system between the 
Central Powers and Ukraine had been put on a new footing, the main 
problem—the land question—remained unresolved. The expropriation 
of large estates remained the same great bone of contention under the 
Hetman as it had been under the Rada.134 On 23 May 1918, Skoropadsky 
issued a law regulating the cultivation of fields that accorded with 
Eichhorn’s decree: whoever sowed the fields in the autumn of 1917 had 
the right to harvest them, and whoever sowed in the spring of 1918 had 
the right to the summer harvest.135 The socialization of the land was 
thereby put to rest. There was a significant restriction, however, on the 
ownership of large amounts of land: no one could acquire more than 
27.5 hectares (25 dessiatines).136 Wiedfeldt was satisfied with this law, 
since he saw it as strengthening the wealthier peasants, “the pioneers 
of agrarian culture.”137 The German military was to support this and, 
“hand in hand with the Ukrainian government, restore peace, order, 
and security to the country so that farming, industry, and trade may 
bloom again.”138 The most urgent task for the troops was to support 
the export of grain. But all this was still a long way from resolving the 
land question.
A new law came into force on 15 July that nationalized the 
greater part of yields. The producers could retail a portion to meet 
their own needs and to feed the animals. Anyone who resisted this 
132	 For details of the account, see ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, QuAbt, Kt. 
710, Nr. 37.024, Stellungnahme zur beabsichtigten Aufbringung des Heeresbedarfes in der 
Ukraine, 26.9.1918.
133 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.626, Nr. 8400, Richtlinien für die militärische 
Mithilfe bei der wirtschaftlichen Ausnützung der Ukraine; ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/
AGKdo, 2. Armee, QuAbt, Kt. 710, Nr. 43.295, Stellungnahme zur beabsichtigten Aufbringung 
des Heeresbedarfes in der Ukraina, 26.8.1918; ibid., Kt. 717, Nr. 2661, AOK an Expositur der 
Ostarmee, Jekaterinoslaw, 9.8.1918; ibid., Nr. 2694, Einlieferungen der St.G.B., 9.9.1918.
134	 For Skoropadsky’s view on the land question, see Pavlo Skoropads'kyj, 195–201, 228–30, 314–19.
135 See ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.611, Nr. 1312, Bericht des Warenverkehrsbüros, 
6.6.1918; Soldatenko, Ukraïna v revoliutsiinu dobu, 233.
136	 1 dessiatine=1.1 hectare.
137 BArch, R 3101/1166, Geheimrat Wiedfeldt an Staatssekretär des Reichswirtschaftsamts v. 
29.5.1918.
138 BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7, Militärbezirk Kiew. XXVII. Res.Korps, Abt. Ia, Nr. 
2000, 30.5.1918; ibid., Richtlinien im Anschluss an G.K.O, Abt. Ia, Nr. 1756, 19.5.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
262
could lose his property and agricultural stock.139 Three months later 
came Skoropadsky’s next thunderbolt in the agrarian question. Under 
pressure from the large landowners, he issued a new law in mid-
August according to which tenants had to hand over their surpluses 
to the estate owners. Wiedfeldt quite rightly criticized this law, as it 
removed any incentives for the tenants to produce more. And it was 
precisely the tenants who had shown themselves to be most productive. 
Wiedfeldt also feared the political repercussions of this law, which was 
a slap in the face to the tenants, who had been hoping to acquire more 
land or revenue from their harvest.140 So the land question remained a 
stumbling block, a bone of contention, and a source of conflict. It was 
also one of the main reasons why the deliveries fell far short of what 
had been agreed.
In spite of the failure to resolve the land question, some calm was 
restored in the internal political situation141 during the summer, but 
Ukraine remained economically, socially, and politically unstable. 
This was demonstrated by the railway strike, which lasted from 15 
July until the first week of August. The main issue in the strike was the 
fact that wages were not being paid and, in any case, were failing to 
keep up with rapidly increasing prices. Trade union recognition was 
also an issue.142 The  Central Powers suspected that the Entente was 
behind the strike. The intelligence section of the Ostarmee interpreted 
the event as a protest against both the occupying powers and the 
unpopular Ukrainian government over the export of Ukrainian grain. 
The strikers knew that a transport blockade would hit the Central 
Powers hardest.143 German authorities, however, regarded the strike 
as a purely internal Ukrainian affair.144 The occupying military took 
139	 Soldatenko, Ukraïna v revoliutsiinu dobu, 237.
140	 See BArch, R 3101/1166, Reichswirtschaftsstelle bei der Deutschen Ukrainedelegation, Kiew, 
29.8.1918.
141 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.617, Nr. 4204, Tätigkeitsbericht der Deutsch-
österreichisch-ungarischen Wirtschaftsabteilung, 29.7.1918.
142	 See also Pavlo Skoropads‘kyj, 250–53.
143	 BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 18, Fernspruch der Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Abt. Ia, Nr. 2928/18, 
o.D.; ibid., XXII. R.K., Abt. Ia, Nr. 2716, 18.7.1918. ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, 
Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3672, Nr. 18.568, Eisenbahnstreik und Vorgänge in der Ukraine, 
August 1918. The Bavarian Cavalry Division repeated its most radical order, in which it stated: 
“Anyone who offers the least resistance is to be shot on the spot.” See BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., 
Bd. 18, Bezirk Wolhynien West. Bay.Kav.Division, Abt. Ia, Nr. 2009 W., 6.8.1918.
144	 See BayHSt-KA, MKr 1779, Chef des Generalstabes des Feldheeres, Abteilung Fremde 
Heere, Nr. 15100 geh., 15.8.1918. Die militär-politische Lage im Osten; BArch, R 3101/1194, 
Eisenbahnzentralstelle Kiew, Besprechung v. 2.8.1918. The Bavarian Cavalry Division, on the 
other hand, saw hostility to the Germans as one of the motives behind the strike. See BayHStA-

chapter 3c: economic utilization
263 
charge of the railways on the important stretches and proceeded 
“vigorously” against the strikers, imprisoning the “ringleaders” and 
sending them behind the lines to Brest. Army Group Eichhorn-
Kiew also ordered that those willing to work should be given better 
protection and provisions.145 In general, the Central Powers were able 
to cushion the effects of the strike on transport capacity. Nonetheless, 
in the final weeks of July only 33 carriages a day were moving in 
Ukraine. From the second week of July to the beginning of August, 
the number of daily carriages carrying food sank rapidly146 but, 
because there had been a high level of transport in early July, it was 
still a successful month for the export of food.147 At the beginning 
of August, when the troops had almost completely restored rail 
transport, the strike came to an end.148 From the second half of August 
and into October, the situation was very calm, a fact confirmed by the 
secretariat of the Economic Center in its weekly report in the second 
half of September: “There is no news of serious strike agitation on the 
railways or in workers’ circles, and reports agree that German and 
Austro-Hungarian troops are increasingly winning the trust of the 
population. One of our representatives has written: ‘They do not love 
us, but there would be lamentations if we were to withdraw.’”149
Furthermore, Turkey and Bulgaria also tried to gain some economic 
influence in Ukraine.  Between February and May 1918, Germany 
and Austria-Hungary signed trade deals with these two countries. 
Both agreed initially not to purchase or export goods independently 
from Ukraine. On 19 April, during negotiations in Berlin concerning 
a common approach on the part of Germany, Austria-Hungary, and 
Bulgaria to the resumption of economic relations with the various 
territories of the former Russian Empire, a secret agreement was 
signed. According to this agreement, Bulgaria was to receive between 
KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 51, B.K.D. Gericht, KTB, Eintrag 1.–31.8.1918.
145	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, QuAbt, Kt. 696, Nr. 4152, Eisenbahnstreik – 
Anordnungen, 17.7.1918.
146	 See the facsimile below. See also ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.625, Nr. 8193, 24. 
Wochenbericht der Eisenbahnzentralstelle Kiew, Oktober 1918.
147	 See BArch, R 3101/1303, Eisenbahnzentralstelle Kiew, 21. Wochenbericht, 1.–7.9.1918; ibid., 
Bildliche Darstellung der monatl. Ausfuhr aus der Ukraine.
148	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.617, Nr. 4096, Wirtschaftliche Nachrichten aus 
Kiew, 12.8.1918; ibid., Nr. 4204, Tätigkeitsbericht der Deutsch-österreichisch-ungarischen 
Wirtschaftsabteilung, 29.7.1918; ibid., Kt. 2.618, Nr. 4418, Bericht von Waldstätten an 
Ukraine-Abteilung, 8.8.1918; ibid., Kt. 2.619, Nr. 5425, Regelung der Lohnverhältnisse bei den 
ukrainischen Eisenbahnen, 27.8.1918.
149	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.625, Nr. 8123, Wochenbericht der Deutsch-
österreichisch-ungarischen Wirtschaftszentrale Nr. 11 und 12, 16.–30.9.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
264
2 and 5 percent of procured food and fodder, depending on the product. 
Separate allocations were established for raw materials and other 
products. There was a similar agreement with Turkey a week later in 
which Turkey agreed not to procure goods in any part of the former 
Russian Empire but retained the right to send its agents as observers 
to the various organizations. A complicated allocation formula was 
established, according to which Turkey was to receive between 
3 and 12.5 percent of the food and fodder imported by the Central 
Powers. Separate allocation formulas were worked out for certain raw 
materials and goods.150 In spite of this, however, there were repeated 
incidents where the two allies exported goods from Ukraine without 
any consultation.151 At the end of September, Austria-Hungary’s High 
Command ordered the Ostarmee to make it “difficult from now on for 
Bulgaria to export from Ukraine, but without attracting attention.”152 
A month later, the Austro-Hungarians ceased all deliveries to Bulgaria 
and Turkey.153 But over all these months the proportion of goods 
exported by Bulgaria and Turkey was very small. Altogether, only 130 
carriages from Ukraine went to Bulgaria, 271 to Turkey.154 
Third Phase: Attempts to Establish Free Trade
At the end of July, when the spring agreement between Ukraine and 
the Central Powers had run out and had been only provisionally 
extended,155 
intensive 
efforts 
were 
made 
to 
establish 
new 
regulations.156 These led, on 10 September, to a new agreement for the 
150 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.611, Nr. 1064, Türkischer und Bulgarischer Einkauf 
in der Ukraina, 6.6.1918; ibid., Nr. 1255, Vereinbarung mit den Türken und Bulgaren, 10.6.1918.
151	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.611, Nr. 1252, Ausfuhr von Waren aus der Ukraine 
durch Bulgaren ohne schlüsselmäßige Teilung, 13.6.1918. In early June, for instance, the captain 
of a Bulgarian steamer, Boris, attempted to export various goods without the permission of the 
Austro-Hungarian command in Odesa: ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.611, Nr. 
1207, Vertragswidriger Abtransport von Waren durch Bulgaren aus Odessa, 9.6.1918.
152	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.626, Mappe “Ukraine. Geheimakten,” Nr. 124, 
Bulgarische Ausfuhr, 28.9.1918.
153	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.624, Nr. 7718, Freier Handel in der Ukraine, 
12.10.1918; ibid., Kt. 2.625, Nr. 8221, Einstellung der Lieferung an Bulgarien und Türkei, 
21.10.1918.
154 BArch, R 3101/1303, Ukraine-Ausfuhr nach den Zentralmächten bis zum 30.9.1918; ibid., 
Ukraine-Ausfuhr nach den Zentralmächten im Oktober 1918.
155	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.617, Nr. 4096, Wirtschaftliche Nachrichten aus 
Kiew, 12.8.1918.
156	 See also the agreement on the German and Austro-Hungarian approach that served as a basis 
for the negotiations: ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.617, Nr. 3934, Berliner 
Vereinbarungen v. 27.7.1918, 2.8.1918.

chapter 3c: economic utilization
265 
year 1918–19.157 Part of this was an agreement on grain that contained 
a detailed plan for the procurement, delivery, and allocation of grain 
until August 1919. The procurement organization was also improved. 
The Ukrainian Food Council was required to open offices of the State 
Grain Bureau in all important locations.158 During this period, the 
State Grain Office would procure 5.1 million tons (313 million poods) 
of grain, of which 1.6 million tons (about 100 million poods) would be 
for export.159 In a separate financial agreement, Berlin specified the 
printing of bank notes that the Central Powers would use to pay for 
these exports. In addition, Ukraine was granted preferential credits 
from German banks to the amount of 1 billion Reichsmarks.160 
There had been previous attempts to replace the existing state 
monopoly with free trade, and in mid-July a Ukrainian law took the 
first step in this direction. From then on, only a certain number of 
goods would remain state monopoly: rye, wheat, millet, buckwheat, 
lentils, beans, peas, maize, barley, oats, all sorts of flour, bran, groats, 
by-products from the processing of grains, sugar, spirits, oilseeds, and 
all sorts of oilcakes.161 But it was only in the autumn that there was any 
fundamental change in this third and final phase of economic policy, 
when free trade replaced the state monopoly for most of these key 
products. The German military had previously opposed free purchase 
because they feared that they would then become dependent on 
Ukrainian officials in providing for the occupation troops.162 In the 
early autumn, however, the representatives of the German economy 
prevailed. They hoped that this would revitalize the Ukrainian 
economy and create opportunities for procurement for their own 
157	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 474, Nr. 1865, Wirtschaftsabkommen mit der Ukraine, 
25.9.1918. See also ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt.: 2.626, Nr. 8400, Richtlinien für 
die militärische Mithilfe bei der wirtschaftlichen Ausnützung der Ukraine.
158 Text in BArch, R 3101/1169, Niederschrift über ein Wirtschaftsabkommen zwischen dem 
Ukrainischen Staate einerseits sowie Deutschland und Österreich-Ungarn andererseits für das 
Wirtschaftsjahr 1918/19, Berlin 1918; see also ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.622, 
Nr. 6474, Wirtschaftsabkommen zwischen der Ukraine sowie Deutschland und Österreich-
Ungarn für das Wirtschaftsjahr 1918/19, 10.9.1918.
159	 According to this agreement, the peasants would provide for themselves, while the State Grain 
Bureau would take charge of provisions for the rest of the population, for the troops, and for 
export.
160	 P. Hai-Nyzhnyk, Finansova polityka uriadu Ukraïns'koï Derzhavy Het'mana Pavla 
Skoropads'koho (29 kvitnia – 14 hrudnia 1918 r.) (Kyiv, 2004), 78ff.
161 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.626, Nr. 8400, Richtlinien für die militärische 
Mithilfe bei der wirtschaftlichen Ausnützung der Ukraine.
162	 See BArch, R 3101/1097, Heeresgruppe Eichhorn. Chef des Generalstabes, Abt. Ic, Nr. 20265, 
17.4.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
266
industry.163 On the Austro-Hungarian side, it was the governor of 
Odesa, Böltz, who strongly supported free purchase and an end to 
military requisitioning.164
The Ukrainian government was now also sympathetic to free 
purchase and, in August and September, the Ukrainian Food Ministry 
raised the maximum price for bacon, vegetables, butter, milk products, 
potatoes, and fish. Ukrainian sellers and German buyers could now 
have direct contact with one another. The export organizations in 
this area were now superfluous.165 The Ukrainian state continued to 
hold a monopoly in grain but, from September 1918, was also playing 
with the idea of free trade here as well.166 The trade minister, Sergei 
Gerbel, stated this publicly. This arrangement was also good for the 
large landowners: once they handed over a certain percentage of 
their grain, it would leave them free to dispose of the rest.167 But the 
imminent withdrawal of the Central Powers meant that the tender 
plant of free trade would have no impact.
At the beginning of October, Hindenburg asked the Foreign 
Office and the Ministry of the Economy for their assessment of the 
consequences of a withdrawal from Ukraine. While the Foreign Office 
feared “serious difficulties” with the supply of provisions to Germany, 
the Ministry of the Economy took a more sober view of the situation. 
Of course, a withdrawal from the country would “have an adverse 
effect on the food situation and on the economy.” However, “if we were 
to take a close look at current imports,” then the loss “would not be of 
such great importance that we would have to maintain the occupation 
under all circumstances.” From the viewpoint of future economic 
relations, however, a withdrawal from Ukraine would have negative 
effects.168 At the same time, the Reich Treasury (Reichschatzamt) 
indicated the general failure of economic policy in Ukraine. German 
163 See BArch, R 3101/1169, Telegramm Auswärtiges Amt an Diplomatische Vertretung Kiew v. 
30.10.1918.
164 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.621, Nr. 6304, Zustände in der Ukraine, 15.9.1918.
165	 Cf. BArch, R 3101/1169, Reichswirtschaftsstelle bei der deutschen Ukraine-Delegation. Tgb Nr. 
1672. Kiew, 6.11.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.624, Nr. 7718, Freier Handel 
in der Ukraine, 12.10.1918.
166	 Cf. BArch, R 3101/1169, Reichswirtschaftsstelle bei der Ukrainedelegation, Tgb Nr. 1997/I, 
6.12.1918.
167 Cf. BArch, R 3101/1341, Handelsvereinigung für Getreide, Futtermittel u. Saaten GmbH, 
Berichte, Verlademeldungen der Deutsch-österreichisch-ungarischen Wirtschaftszentrale Kiew, 
Berlin, 11.10.1918.
168 BArch, R 3101/1180, Der Staatssekretär des Reichswirtschaftsamts I D R 8547, An den Herrn 
Staatssekretär des Auswärtigen Amts, Berlin, 17.10.1918.

chapter 3c: economic utilization
267 
economic and financial expenditure bore no relationship to output. 
Advances paid to Ukraine would never flow back to the Reich. The 
treasury saw only one solution: “In this situation, from the viewpoint 
of the Reich’s financial administration, it is absolutely necessary to 
begin a gradual withdrawal from Ukraine immediately, with a short 
time frame for the liquidation of the undertaking.”169
Austria-Hungary was initially more optimistic. During the 
withdrawal from the Katerynoslav gubernia, its economic officials 
were ordered to stay at their posts and continue trading.170 But 
when the headquarters of the Ostarmee withdrew, it seems that the 
civilian officials left Ukraine as well. There is no evidence of the 
“lamentations” over the withdrawal of Austro-Hungarian troops 
foretold by the economic centers. Once those troops withdrew, the 
Germans considered themselves no longer bound by their agreements 
with their erstwhile ally. They did hope, however, that they would 
be able to take over their treaty rights from the treaties that Austria-
Hungary had signed with Ukraine.171 
Even in the autumn of 1918, after the truce of 11 November, when 
the export of grain and food from Ukraine was no longer practically 
possible owing to the shortages in that country, Germany still wanted 
to “maintain...a certain control over the procurement and distribution 
of Ukrainian grain.”172 In the new political situation, however, it soon 
became clear that this was completely illusory. From the late autumn of 
1918, as a consequence of the civil war, Germany’s economic relations 
with Ukraine ceased altogether.
The Results of Ukrainian Exports
It was already clear in the summer that, despite all efforts, exports 
from Ukraine to the Central Powers were very modest. Not a single 
product was delivered in the quantity agreed in the treaty. Of the 
50,000 tons of sugar agreed to be delivered to the Central Powers by 
31 July, 37,750 tons (about 75 percent) were delivered by the end of 
August; of the 200,000 cattle, 91,000 (45 percent) were delivered, and 
169 TNA, GFM 6/99, Der Staatssekretär des Reichsschatzamts (Graf Roedern) IV.A.6347, An den 
Herrn Chef des Generalstab des Feldheeres, 22.10.1918.
170 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.625, Nr. 8121, Räumung der Ukraine, 19.10.1918.
171 BArch, R 3101/1304 [Reichswirtschaftsamt] IDR 9518, Niederschrift über die Sitzung des 
Ständigen Russischen Ausschusses am Freitag, 8.11.1918 um 9:30.
172	 BArch, R 3101/1304, Reichswirtschaftsstelle bei der Deutschen Gesandtschaft, Tgb.Nr. 1777, An 
den Herrn Staatssekretär des Reichswirtschaftsministeriums, 15.11.1918.

THE EMERGENCE OF UKRAINE
SELF-DETERMINATION, OCCUPATION, AND WAR IN UKRAINE, 1917–1922
268
of the 400–500 million eggs, only 60 million (12–15 percent).173 But 
the most glaring shortfall was in grain, the very item for which the 
Central Powers had invaded Ukraine in the fi rst place. By 31 August, 
exactly 102,000 tons (about 10 percent) of grain, pulses, fodder, and 
seeds had been exported to the Central Powers.174 According to the 
Ukrainian Food Ministry, of the 8,260 wagons of food that were sent 
by rail to the Central Powers by 16 August, 2,324 (28.14 percent) went 
to Germany and 4,326 (52.37 percent) to Austria. Another 1,610 (19.49 
percent) went by sea.175
Figure 1: Agreed deliveries and actual deliveries (BArch, R 3101/1341. Handelsvereinigung für 
Getreide, Futtermittel und Saaten. Ukraine-Bericht Nr. 98 für den 31. August)
173 BArch, R 3101/1316, Heeresgruppe Kiew, Wirtschaftsnachrichten Nr. 1, Kiew, 20.9.1918.
174 At the end of July, the announced fi gure of 110,000 was higher than had actually been exported. 
The cause of this discrepancy—perhaps a computational error—is not clear. But the fact remains 
that the quantities exported from Ukraine were far below the levels agreed. See BArch, R 
3101/1341, Handelsvereinigung für Getreide, Futtermittel und Saaten, Ukraine-Bericht Nr. 73 für 
den 30.7.1918. The fi gures from the Quartermaster General of the Austro-Hungarian Ostarmee 
are even smaller and suggest that by 31 July only 7 percent of agreed grain had been delivered, 
and 18 percent of cattle: ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.622, Nr. 6906, Bericht der 
Ostarmee über Aufbringung und Einfuhr, 25.9.1918.
175 ÖStA, KA, AOK, Qu. Abt., Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.620, Nr. 5574, Bericht des Bevollmächtigten 
Generalstabsoffi ziers 
bei 
der 
Deutsch-österreichisch-ungarischen 
Wirtschaftszentrale, 
25.8.1918.
	  -­‐	  	  	  	  
	  200,000	  	  
	  400,000	  	  
	  600,000	  	  
	  800,000	  	  
	  1,000,000	  	  
	  1,200,000	  	  
Sugar	  (tonnes)	  
Livestock	  (head)	  
Eggs	  (crates	  up	  to	  
100,000	  units)	  
Grain	  (tonnes)	  
to	  be	  delivered	  by	  31	  July	  
actually	  delivered	  by	  the	  end	  of	  August	  

CHAPTER 3C: ECONOMIC UTILIZATION
269 
Figure 2: Deliveries to the Central Powers until 16 August 1918 (ÖStA, KA, AOK, Qu. Abt., 
Ukraine-Bestand, Karton 2.620, Nr. 5574)   
Although Ukraine was unable by far to carry out its contractual 
obligations in the period up to the summer, it continued to give 
optimistic forecasts for the future throughout the period of 
occupation.176 The Central Powers also seemed to live in a dream world 
and did not want to see the country’s limited economic capacity.177 
Only a few of those involved saw the situation diff erently.178 An 
176 See BArch, R 3101/1316, Heeresgruppe Kiew. Wirtschaftsnachrichten Nr. 2, Kiew, 15.10.1918.
177 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.615, Nr. 2896, Die Ukraine. Auszug aus dem Vortrag 
von Major Konrad John, 13.7.1918; BArch, R 3101/1304, Kt. 2.617, Nr. 4167, Waldbott an Ukraine-
Abteilung, 30.7.1918.
178 BArch, R 3101/1304, Kt. 2.617, Nr. 4204, Tätigkeitsbericht der Deutsch-österreichisch-
ungarischen Wirtschaftsabteilung, 29.7.1918; ibid., Kt. 2.619, Nr. 4937, Bericht des Schweizer 
Geschäftsmannes Edgar Brun, 10.8.1918; ibid., Kt. 2.622, Nr. 6906, Bericht der Ostarmee über 
Germany	  
28%	  
Austria-­‐Hungary	  
52%	  
Mari6me	  border	  
20%	  
Deliveries	  to	  Central	  Powers	  by	  16	  August	  

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
270
external observer, the American general consul in Moscow, DeWitt 
U. Poole, made a more realistic assessment in April of the amount of 
grain available for export. Although his sources suggested that eight 
million tons of grain could be gained from the harvest of 1917, the 
Central Powers were only able to procure half a million tons by the 
time of the 1918 harvest.179
In the final phase as well, the Ukrainian state was unable to deliver 
the amounts contracted in the September agreement. From the time 
of the agreement until the end of October 1918, the last date of regular 
deliveries, the amount of grain that should have been made available 
for export according to the agreement was 460,000 tons (27.3 million 
poods). But only 30,000 tons were loaded during this period, less than 
one-tenth of the agreed amount,180 although the autumn harvest, with 
15.3 million tons, was relatively good.181 
Although grain, fodder, and pulses were at the top of Germany’s 
list of priorities,182 and although the Austro-Hungarian ambassador 
in Berlin also emphasized that food and fodder had “priority over 
all other exports from Ukraine,”183 this grain policy was a disaster 
by the end of the occupation. The million tons promised at Brest-
Litovsk never came close to being achieved. By 23 December 1918, 
137,854 tons of grain and fodder had been loaded, 129,310 tons had 
crossed the border, and 48,575 tons had eventually arrived in the 
German Empire.184 Since these statistics from the Trade Syndicate 
for Grain, Fodder, and Seeds agree almost exactly with the figures 
from the Eisenbahnzentralstelle in Kyiv, the figure of roughly 130,000 
Aufbringung und Einfuhr, 25.9.1918. 
179	 NARA, US Department of State, relating to internal Affairs to Russia and Soviet Union 1910–
1929, War Series 6, RG 59, Russia, Department of State Periodical Report of Matters relating 
to Russia (681.00/1161), Present Food Resources of the Ukraine. Paraphrase of Telegram from 
DeWitt U. Poole, American Consul General at Moscow, Nr. 331, 10.4.1918.
180 See BArch, R 3101/1341, Handelsvereinigung für Getreide, Futtermittel und Saaten, Ukraine-
Bericht Nr. 98 für den 31.8.1918; ibid., Ukraine-Bericht, Nr. 139 für den 31.10.1918.
181 Mędrzecki, Niemiecka interwencja militarna na Ukrainie w 1918 roku, 249.
182 See BArch, R 3101/1304, Geheimrat Wiedfeldt an Herrn Staatssekretär des Reichswirtschaftsamts. 
25.5.1918. The list of priorities was: 1) grain, including flour, 2) fodder, 3) pulses, 4) eggs, 5) fat, 
including bacon and oil, 6) meat, 7) sugar, 8) raw materials and tobacco. The most important raw 
materials for export were: 1) rubber, tires, old rubber, 2) hemp, 3) Japanese camphor. See also 
BArch, R 3101/1304, Kriegsministerium, Kriegsamt, Z Ia 232/5.18 KRA. Dringlichkeitsliste für 
die Zufuhr von Rohstoffen aus der Ukraine v. 1.6.1918.
183	 BArch, R 3101/1304 K.u.k Österreichisch-Ungarische Botschaft. Kommerzdirektion, Nr. K 
14901/Res, 7.5.1918.
184 BArch, R 3101/1341, Handelsvereinigung für Getreide, Futtermittel und Saaten, Ukraine-
Bericht, Nr. 149 für den 23.12.1918. 

chapter 3c: economic utilization
271 
Facsimile 3: Ukrainian exports until 30 September and in October 1918 (BArch, R 3101/1303f.).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
272
tons is the definitive one for total exports of grain from Ukraine to 
the Central Powers.185 
There was obviously an extensive black market on the border to 
Soviet Russia and to Austria-Hungary.186 It was probably larger on the 
Austro-Hungarian border and was noticed by officials of the Habsburg 
Monarchy. In the guise of “small border trade,” this smuggling at least 
helped improve provisions in the border areas. Following strong 
protests about “colossal smuggling” at the Lviv land office,187 AOK 
issued “stricter instructions” in order to reduce it “to an acceptable 
minimum.”188 Soldiers were encouraged to purchase food packets 
privately and send them to their families. Their allowances were even 
increased for that purpose,189 and offices were established from which 
they could send the food packets.190 But no valid figures are available 
for smuggling191 or for private food packets.
The Central Powers had to get by as best they could with these 
faltering deliveries of grain and fodder. The Vienna mayor at the 
185	 According to the Trade Syndicate, 105,530 tons had crossed the border by the end of September. 
The Railway Center’s figure for grain exports in this period was 7,770 wagons. If we assume 
13.5 to 14 tons per wagon, then the figures agree. See BArch, R 3101/1341, Handelsvereinigung 
für Getreide, Futtermittel und Saaten, Ukraine-Bericht Nr. 120 für den 30.9.1918; BArch, 
R 3101/1303, Bildliche Darstellung der monatl. Ausfuhr aus der Ukraine. Using figures from 
Czernin, Fedyshyn claims that altogether 1.5 million tons of grain and food reached the Central 
Powers from Ukraine by legal and illegal routes: Oleh S. Fedyshyn, Germany’s Drive to the East 
and the Ukrainian Revolution, 1917–1918 (New Brunswick, N.J., 1971), 259. This figure is clearly 
too high.
186 See the reports on petroleum smuggling in Brody: ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 
2.611, Nr. 1029, Schmuggel mit Mineralölprodukten in Brody, 8.6.1918.
187	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.617, Nr. 4112, Bericht der Landstelle Lemberg 
über Schmuggelwesen, 31.7.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.626, Nr. 8400, 
Richtlinien für die militärische Mithilfe bei der wirtschaftlichen Ausnützung der Ukraine; 
ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.617, Nr. 4292, Schmuggel zwischen Ukraine und 
Österreich, 2.8.1918.
188	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 309, Allgemeine Verlautbarungen 
des Kommandos der Ostarmee vom 14.9.1918, Nr. 207. The following document suggests that 
there may have been a “loss” of products during transport, since goods were pilfered from trains 
on the way to the border: ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.616, Nr. 3335, Schmuggel 
an der Grenze, Eindämmung, 22.7.1918.
189	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 309, Allgemeine Verlautbarungen 
des Kommandos der Ostarmee vom 15.10.1918.
190	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 309, O.Q. Nr. 3000, Errichtung 
von Heimatpaket-Abschubstellen im Bereiche der Ostarmee.
191 According to official Austro-Hungarian estimates, these “unofficial Ukrainian exports” were 
twice the size of official exports: ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.612, Nr. 1711, 
Protokoll des Russischen Ausschusses des AOK, 13.6.1918; Ottokar Czernin, Im Weltkriege 
(Berlin and Vienna, 1919), 346. The Hungarian government was annoyed by the smuggling, 
since it felt robbed of the quantities it had been promised: ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, 
Kt. 2.612, Nr. 1658, Einfuhr aus der Ukraina nach Österreich im Schmuggelwege, 1.7.1918.

chapter 3c: economic utilization
273 
time, Richard Weiskirchner, coined the term “bread peace,” which is 
still sometimes used today, but the biggest export from Ukraine to 
the Central Powers was not grain but other foodstuffs and cattle. In 
particular, the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy improved its stock of 
horses with the much better horses from Ukraine.192 By the end of July, 
altogether 90,000 horses had been procured, one-third for the army in 
the field, two-thirds for civilian use.193 In addition to grain, oilseeds, 
and fodder, the most important exports from Ukraine were eggs, 
bacon, lamb, fowl, canned goods, cattle, butter, and cheese. Added 
to these were raw materials and booty. The export of these goods 
required almost three times more railway capacity than the export 
of grain. Between April and September, these goods were carried 
by 23,000 wagons to the German Empire, Austria-Hungary and, 
to a lesser extent, to Turkey and Bulgaria.194 The number of wagons 
carrying grain was 7,800.195 Even including these, the total amount of 
goods delivered to the Central Powers was less than half the value of 
the grain and grain products that were promised at Brest-Litovsk to be 
delivered by the end of June.196
What were the reasons for these very low export figures? First of 
all, the occupying troops required a certain amount of food for their 
own use. This, however, was a relatively small proportion overall and 
accounted for only around 10 percent of the deliveries of the State 
Grain Bureau. This is a smaller amount than expected because the 
number of occupying troops was far smaller than has been assumed 
in studies up to now.197 
German officials listed a number of other reasons. The poor harvest, 
the shortage of money for purchases, and the failures of the State Grain 
Bureau were all blamed. According to its “admittedly not impeccable 
figures,” only 1.3 million tons (80 million poods) of the promised 3 
million tons (181 million poods) from the new harvest were purchased 
192	 ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, QuAbt, Kt. 693, Nr. 853, Sammelakt zur 
militärischen Teilnahme an der wirtschaftlichen Ausnutzung der Ukraine, Februar/März 1918.
193	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 475, Nr. 1906, Darstellung der materiellen Lage der Armee im 
Felde, 18.8.1918.
194	 See, for example, the permit to export 300 poods of tin and four tons of castor oil and glycerine for 
the Ottoman navy: ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.611, Nr. 1263, Schlüsselmäßige 
Anrechnung Türkischer Importe aus Ukraine, 13.6.1918.
195	 BArch, R 3101/1303, Bildliche Darstellung der monatl. Ausfuhr aus der Ukraine.
196 Ukrainian sources speak of about 20 percent of the agreed amounts for July and August: I. 
Dats'kiv, “Ekonomichni aspekty Brests'koho dohovoru 1918 roku,” Istoriia Ukraïny (Kyiv, 
2008), 46.
197	 See chapter 3b in the present volume. 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
274
from September to November. Also, according to German statements, 
the “encroachments by the withdrawing Austro-Hungarian troops” 
had a negative influence on procurement. Similarly, they were unable 
to stop the booming black market on the borders with Russia and 
Austria-Hungary. Other factors were the “transport difficulties” after 
October caused by the withdrawal of Austro-Hungarian troops and 
the civil war that flared up at the beginning of November.198 
Exports from the Central Powers to Ukraine
Trouble-free use of the railways was an essential precondition for 
getting the Ukrainian economy moving. In the spring of 1918, the 
Germans had continued their advance in order to take advantage of the 
coal reserves in the Donets Basin, but hopes that the Ukrainian state 
would be able to provide itself with coal were not fulfilled.199 Much less 
would Ukraine be able to export coal—indeed, the German Empire 
soon found it necessary to export coal to Ukraine.200 Throughout the 
occupation, coal was the most important export from the German 
Empire. At first it was estimated that 105,000 tons per month would 
be needed to secure grain transport on the railways.201 In April 1918, 
the German Empire contracted to deliver 315,000 tons of coal to 
Ukraine until 31 July and then an additional 144,000 tons until 31 
198	 BArch, R 3101/1318, Wirtschaftsnachrichten der Heeresgruppe Kiew, Nr. 1 v. 20.9.1918; BArch, 
R 3101/1341, Handelsvereinigung für Getreide, Futtermittel und Saaten GmbH, Berlin, Berichte 
(bis 2. Okt.18). Verlademeldungen (bis 10. Okt. 1918) der Deutsch-österreichisch-ungarischen 
Wirtschaftszentrale Kiew, 11.10.1918; BArch, R 3101/1169, Reichswirtschaftsstelle bei der 
Ukraine Delegation, Tgb Nr. 1997/I, 6.12.1918.
199	 On 16 June, the Austro-Hungarian captain and engineer Gutmann, having traveled through the 
district, wrote a report on the coal mines in the Donets Basin. He was very optimistic about 
the capacities and technical equipment of the mines. But his report dealt mostly with the poor 
administration of the mines and the transport system, the wage-price spiral, the lack of food, 
the poor training of the workers and officials, and their political unreliability: ÖStA, KA, FA, 
NFA, HHK AK/KorpsKdo, 12. Korps, Kt. 1663, Nr. 10.686, Bericht über die Kohlenwerke im 
Steinkohlegebiet des Donezbeckens in der Ukraine von Hauptmann Ing. Gutmann, 16.6.1918.
200	 Studies have often claimed that the Germans wanted to exploit the coal reserves for their own 
use. Cf. Peter Borowsky, “Germany’s Ukrainian Policy during World War I and the Revolution 
of 1918–19,” in German-Ukrainian Relations in Historical Perspective, ed. Hans-Joachim Torke 
and John-Paul Himka (Edmonton and Toronto, 1994), 89; Caroline Milow, Die ukrainische Frage 
1917–1923 im Spannungsfeld der europäischen Diplomatie (Wiesbaden, 2002), 160, although, on 
the following pages, German exports of coal are described in detail. In view of the massive coal 
reserves in the Ruhr, the Saarland, and Silesia, this argument is not convincing.
201	 BArch, R 3101/1136, Deutsche Ukrainedelegation, Der Vorsitzende der Gesamt-Kommission, 
J.Nr. 74, 13.4.1918. Ludendorff had originally insisted that “coal deliveries to Ukraine” would 
only come into question “as occasional assistance.” See TNA, GFM 6/36, Telegramm Nr. 576 des 
K. Legationssekretärs Lersner an AA, 18.3.1918.

chapter 3c: economic utilization
275 
October 1918.202 Ukraine wanted 8,175 tons of naphtha petroleum, but 
the Central Powers agreed to only 750 tons of oil products: gasoline, 
benzol mixture, kerosene, paraffin candles, grease, and machine 
oil. All other products requested by Ukraine, such as agricultural 
machinery, manufactured goods, paper and parchment, chemical/
pharmaceutical goods, and textile machinery, would be delivered 
according to surplus capacity.203 
The Germans wanted to use coal initially as “one of the most 
important means of leverage”204 with regard to grain deliveries, but 
this very soon proved illusory. The volume of coal exports to Ukraine 
very quickly exceeded the amount of goods that Ukraine was able 
to deliver to the Central Powers. By the end of May, Germany had 
delivered 5,300 wagons of coal (and other goods) to Ukraine. During 
the same period, only 1,800 wagons of grain, food, and raw materials 
were delivered to Germany.205 This relationship did not improve much 
by the end of September, the last date for valid data. From April to 
September, Germany delivered 23,500 wagons of coal (plus a small 
proportion of agricultural machinery and oil products) to Ukraine. 
During the same period, only about 10,700 wagons arrived in 
Germany.206 Although the amount of coal exported did not reach the 
level agreed, what Germany had to export was more than just “some 
of its own coal.”207
Until June 1918, in spite of these coal exports, there was no central 
German organization that dealt with the export of German goods 
to Ukraine. Until then, German goods were frequently purchased 
by Austro-Hungarian traders and exported to Ukraine. At the 
beginning of June, the Federation of German Wholesalers and the 
War Committee of German Industry established the Export Syndicate, 
which was given the sole right to export to Ukraine by the Ministry 
202	 Milow, Die ukrainische Frage 1917–1923 im Spannungsfeld der europäischen Diplomatie, 161.
203	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.610, Nr. 365, Organisation der Aufbringung in der 
Ukraine, 15.5.1918. 
204	 BArch, R 3101/1096, Deutsche Ukrainedelegation an Reichswirtschaftsamt v. 8.4.1918.
205	 BArch, R 3101/1303, Bildliche Darstellung der monatlichen Ausfuhr aus der Ukraine; BArch, R 
3101/1303, Eisenbahnzentralstelle Kiew. 27. Wochenbericht 13.–19.10.1918. See also an article by 
the onetime head of the Railway Center, Stefan von Velsen, “Ukraine. Die Ukraine und Wir. Ein 
Rückblick auf die deutsche Okkupation,” Preußische Jahrbücher, no. 176 (1919): 261. Velsen’s 
figure of 6,000 wagons of coal by the end of May is too high. He gives the number of wagons 
leaving Ukraine as 2,000.
206	 BArch, R 3101/1303, Eisenbahnzentralstelle Kiew, 27. Wochenbericht vom 13.–19.10.1918; ibid., 
Bildliche Darstellung der monatlichen Ausfuhr aus der Ukraine.
207	 Borowsky, “Germany’s Ukrainian Policy during World War I and the Revolution of 1918–19,” 89.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
276
of the Economy.208 The syndicate was thus responsible for the export 
of German industrial products. It purchased or ordered goods in 
Germany and exported them to Ukraine. The situation of German 
exports to Ukraine improved after that. Within one month of the 
founding of the Export Syndicate, products to the value of 100 million 
marks were exported or being prepared for export to Ukraine.209
Compared with German exports, those of Austria-Hungary 
were quite modest. Its main exports to the end of September were 
mineral oil products from Galicia (707 wagons) and 648 wagons with 
enamelware, agricultural machinery, scythes and other industrial 
products. With a few other smaller product groups, the total amount 
was 1,937 wagons.210 The creation of an organization to deal with 
exports to Ukraine was also very slow here, even though officials 
dealing with purchasing were pressing hard for goods to be sent to 
Ukraine as quickly as possible as a way of improving procurement. 
All exports to Ukraine were processed by the Austrian and Hungarian 
Goods Transport Bureau (Waren-Verkehrs-Büro), which received goods 
from the export organizations. The bureau sent the goods to the land 
office in Lviv or the Black Sea office at Brăila, which in turn passed 
them on to the branches of the transport bureau in Ukraine or to the 
command of the Ostarmee. Their route (Instradierung)211 then took 
them by rail or ship along the field transport system of the Austro-
Hungarians or that of the Railway Center in Kyiv.212 There was very 
active smuggling that affected imports to Ukraine across the border 
from Bukovyna and Galicia, just as there was in the case of Ukrainian 
exports. The German Empire protested repeatedly about this.213  
However, as the quartermaster general of the Ostarmee bitterly 
complained at the beginning of September, these exports to Ukraine 
208	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.614, Nr. 2555, Gesellschaftsvertrag der 
Ausfuhrgesellschaft, 2.7.1918.
209 BArch, R 3101/1137, Der Unterstaatsekretär in der Reichskanzlei, 4.7.1918.
210	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.613, Nr. 1862, Telegramme betreffend die 
Bereitstellung von Mineralölprodukten für die Ukraine vom 23.–25.6.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, 
AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.624, Nr. 7718, Freier Handel in der Ukraine, 12.10.1918.
211	 Instradiere is a military term, especially in Austria, meaning to begin a march along a marching 
route or by rail; in the postal service, it indicated the determination of a route for postal 
transmission. 
212	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.612, Nr. 1655, Schematische Darstellung der 
Durchführung des Exportes nach der Ukraine, 19.6.1918; ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, 
Kt. 2.618, Nr. 4842, Schematische Darstellung des Exports in die Ukraine, 20.8.1918. 
213 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.614, Nr. 2557, Protokoll über die in der Zentral-
Einkaufsgesellschaft in Wien abgehaltene Besprechung, 7.7.1918.

chapter 3c: economic utilization
277 
did not have the positive effects that had been hoped for. There had been 
hopes for a reduction of inflation, an improvement in public attitudes 
to the Austro-Hungarian occupying power, and a corresponding long-
term improvement in its economic positioning after the war. In early 
October, Arz stated that the strategy was to direct Austro-Hungarian 
exports toward the Dual Monarchy’s own zone of occupation “in order 
to gain a foothold in the economy there for the transition period and 
for the period of peace that would follow.”214 
Exploitation or Utilization?
In spite of the coal exports and the various efforts to establish economic 
structures, the economic motor of Ukraine never started up. To the 
Ukrainian population, the occupation by the Central Powers and 
their support for the Hetman and his counterrevolutionary measures 
regarding the land question were the root of all their problems. The 
initially optimistic Wiedfeldt expressed it clearly in August: “All 
economic misfortunes are more or less blamed on us. If we intervene, 
those disadvantaged by our intervention denounce us, whether it be 
large landowners, entrepreneurs, or workers. If we keep our distance, 
it is even worse, as the accusation is then made that the Germans are 
intentionally letting things go to ruin.”215
How should we assess the economic policy of the Central Powers 
in Ukraine? First of all, there was no single economic policy. While 
short-term utilization was at the forefront for the Austro-Hungarian 
and German military, foreign-policy and economic officials in Vienna 
and Berlin had long-term plans to stabilize Ukraine economically and, 
in the medium term, to tie it in to their own economies. For them, 
it was more than just a question of grain and food imports from an 
occupied country. It was not for nothing that the German Ministry of 
the Economy complained in October 1918 that, while the withdrawal 
from Ukraine would create no short-term problems concerning 
provisions for the homeland, it would be “a great loss” for potential 
future economic relations.216 Wiedfeldt always had in mind “the great 
English model in the English colonies”: “There, everything proceeds 
214	 ÖStA, KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.622, Nr. 6681, Bericht der Quartiermeister-Abteilung 
der k.u.k. Ostarmee, 4.9.1918; ibid., Kt. 2.626, Nr. 3658, Klärung der Fragen in der Ukraina, 
4.10.1918. 
215	 BArch, R 3101/1168, Reichswirtschaftsstelle bei der deutschen Ukrainedelegation an den 
Staatssekretär des Reichswirtschaftsamts v. 17.8.1918.
216 BArch, R 3101/1180, Der Staatssekretär des Reichswirtschaftsamts I D R 8547. An den Herrn 
Staatssekretär des Auswärtigen Amts, Berlin, 17.10.1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
278
along civilian lines, hardly apparent on the outside, while the military 
is the power in the background.”217 Using the rhetoric of debates of the 
1960s, Peter Borowsky describes the long-term economic policy of the 
Foreign Office and the Ministry of the Economy as “more imperialist” 
than that of the OHL.218 From today’s perspective, however, one cannot 
get away from the fact that this policy was more purposeful and 
progressive than any economic policy aimed at short-term advantage. 
Present-day state-building is essentially no different.
Shortly before the end of the occupation, the German Economic 
Office in Kyiv affirmed that Austria-Hungary had pursued a much 
more vigorous economic policy than Germany, but this report also 
added: “One cannot claim, however, in the meantime, that Austro-
Hungarian exports surpassed those of Germany or that Austria-
Hungary was more commercially successful in Ukraine.”219 From 
today’s perspective, there is nothing to add to this summary.
When one of the architects of this alliance with Ukraine, Czernin, 
attempted in retrospect to pass a more differentiated judgment, he 
nevertheless had to admit “that the hopes generally raised by the 
conclusion of the Brest-Litovsk peace treaty were far from fulfilled.”220 
From today’s perspective, there is only one judgment that can be 
rendered about the results of the Central Powers’ economic policy: 
it was a grandiose failure.221 The amount of grain expected to reach 
Austria-Hungary and Germany was not achieved even to a small 
extent. Instead, the German Reich had to export large amounts of coal 
to Ukraine and, in addition, had to pay 110 million marks monthly in 
occupation costs.222 Economically, the Ukrainian undertaking ended 
up costing money, and the invested money was lost when the civil 
war broke out. The Paris peace settlements created a final barrier 
to Germany’s wishes in Eastern Europe and in the Caucasus. Thus 
the economic policy of the Central Powers in Ukraine cannot be 
217 BArch, R 3101/1168, Brief von Geheimrat Wiedfeldt an den Staatssekretär des 
Reichswirtschaftsamts v. 7.5.1918.
218	 Borowsky, Deutsche Ukrainepolitik, 298.
219	 BArch, R 3101/1169, Reichswirtschaftsstelle bei der deutschen Ukraine-Delegation, Tgb Nr. 
1672, Kiew, 6.11.1918.
220	 Czernin, Im Weltkriege, 344. He hoped that the thousands of wagons that came from Ukraine had 
saved “millions” of lives (ibid., 347).
221	 As Colonel Kreneis had already claimed in a comprehensive report to AOK at the end of 
September: ÖStA, KA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 476, Nr. 1987, Kreneis an AOK, 28.9.1918.
222 BArch, R 3101/1168, An die Regierung des ukrainischen Staates, Entwurf eines Militär- und 
Wirtschaftsabkommens, Juni 1918.

chapter 3c: economic utilization
279 
described as “exploitation,” although such plans did exist, above all on 
the Austro-Hungarian side, at the start of the occupation. In sum, the 
term “utilization” would be more appropriate here or, more exactly, 
“failed utilization.” 
  
    
 

3d. The View from Within: 
Everyday Life during the Occupation
Vasyl Rasevych
When German and Austro-Hungarian troops marched into Ukraine, 
they were confronted with a catastrophic situation. The Central Rada 
had effectively lost control over the territory. The greatest insecurity 
factor was the complete demoralization of the old Russian army and 
the large number of deserters. Most of them were armed and, as they 
attempted to make their own individual way home, they took by force 
whatever they needed from the civilian population. Large areas were 
afflicted by bands of plundering marauders. The Bolsheviks were also 
terrorizing their opponents and inciting the population to plunder the 
large estate holders.223 When the Bolsheviks withdrew, they left small 
groups behind in the occupied territory. Strengthened by the local 
proletariat, these soon formed mobile bands that went on to terrorize 
and rob the civilian population. Bolshevik agitators were active 
everywhere, telling the people that the occupying troops intended to 
take away their democratic freedoms and return the land to the estate 
owners. Under such circumstances, it was only small circles among 
the more educated population who appreciated the reasons for the 
invasion by the troops of the Central Powers and hoped that they 
would restore order.224
The Germans’ first impression of Ukraine was a positive one, 
since they did not encounter any particular hostility and even noticed 
that people were relieved that they had arrived. They hoped that the 
people would be so exhausted by the rule of the Bolsheviks and their 
plundering and anarchic conditions that it would be relatively easy 
for them to build up the administration of the occupation. At first the 
German troops were impressed by the large amounts of food they 
223	 ÖStA, HHStA, PA I, Kt. 500, Liasse XLVII/2 b 20, Über die Lage 26. Jänner bis 24. 
Februar 1918. Östlicher Kriegsschauplatz; Dmytro Doroshenko, Moï spomyny pro nedavnie-
mynule (Lviv, 1923), 57ff.; Pavlo Skoropads'kyi, Spohady. Kinets' 1917–hruden' 1918 (Kyiv and 
Philadelphia, 1995), 110–16, 172ff.; Volodymyr Vynnychenko, Vidrodzhennia natsiï (Istoriia 
ukraïns'koï revoliutsiï), vol. 2 (Vienna, 1920), 216–60.
224	 ÖStA, HHStA, PA I, Kt. 500, Liasse XLVII/2 b 20, Über die Lage XI. 24.2 bis 22/III. 1918; 
Valerii Soldatenko, Ukraïna v revoliutsiinu dobu. Istorychni ese-khroniky. Rik 1918, vol. 2 (Kyiv, 
2009), 112ff.; Skoropads'kyi, Spohady, 209.

chapter 3d: the view from within: everyday life during the occupation
281 
found, especially meat, since they had had so little along the whole 
invasion route. There also appeared to be plenty of grain that the 
peasants had no motivation to sell. What kind of money would they 
get for it anyway?225
The very different goals pursued by the left-wing Rada and the 
command of the German and Austro-Hungarian troops would 
eventually have to give rise to conflict between these two actors 
in Ukrainian politics. It was the intention of the Rada, which had 
returned from Zhytomyr to Kyiv with the German troops, to continue 
its previous agrarian policies. The goal of the German and Austro-
Hungarian troops, however, was to procure food in Ukraine as 
quickly as possible and transport it back to the homelands. It soon 
became very clear to the new military powers that the Rada lacked 
the capacity to carry out the undertakings it had made in the Brest-
Litovsk peace treaty. In addition, the left-wing parties in the Rada 
were now engaging in confrontation with the German command 
over the latter’s intervention in Ukraine’s internal affairs. When the 
German commander, Field Marshal Hermann von Eichhorn, issued 
his “cultivation order” and introduced military courts226 in Ukraine, 
some members of the Rada threatened to abrogate the Brest-Litovsk 
treaty. They began to see the policies of the Central Powers as those 
of an occupying power. The Ukrainian government, under Vsevolod 
Holubovych, did not dare to oppose Eichhorn, but the Rada continued 
to protest and called on the peasants to resist the orders of the occupying 
power. Ukrainian politicians also completely rejected the way in which 
the German and Austro-Hungarian troops were procuring food. They 
attempted to prohibit unauthorized requisitioning by the occupying 
power or to allow it only under supervision by Ukrainian officials.227 
The Occupying Powers between the Fronts in the Struggle  
over Land
The invasion of Austro-Hungarian and German troops in Ukraine was 
a signal for the estate owners, who had had their lands expropriated, 
and for other entrepreneurs that there was at last going to be a change 
of government and that they could count on the return of their 
225 Włodzimierz Mędrzecki, Niemiecka interwencja militarna na Ukrainie w 1918 roku (Warsaw, 
2000), 137.
226	 Grazhdanskaia voina na Ukraine 1918–1920. Sbornik dokumentov i materialov v trekh tomakh, 
chetyrekh knigakh, vol. 1, bk. 1 (Kyiv, 1967), 131.
227	 Pavlo Khrystiuk, Zamitky i materiialy do istoriï ukraïns'koï revoliutsiï 1917–1920 rr., vol. 2 
(Vienna, 1921), 164.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
282
illegally expropriated property. The estate owners and the average 
well-off peasants saw the troops as their “natural allies,” for whom 
the inviolability of private property was an absolute principle.228 
Practically from the very first day of the occupation, the estate owners 
began to reclaim their lost property. Theirs was their initiative behind 
the formation of the “punitive units” that would force the peasants to 
return what they had stolen. The situation in the villages was thus 
more than tense.
The Ukrainian foreign minister, Dmytro Doroshenko, wrote that 
in the villages in 1917–18 a number of antagonisms had come to a 
head, especially between the social classes: “It was not just hostility 
between the peasants and the estate owners, incited by a variety of 
agitators from the spring of 1917; it was generally a struggle between 
the better off and the poorest. In the autumn, under the Central 
Rada, everything centered on the property of the large estate owners, 
which was burned, plundered, and destroyed. With the arrival of the 
Bolsheviks, this class hostility took the form of an equally drastic 
and destructive conflict between the various hostile categories of the 
peasant and Cossack masses.”229 Taking advantage of the temporary 
power vacuum in February–March 1918, according to Doroshenko, 
“the estate owners and the well-off peasants themselves began to 
reclaim their stolen property and, for this purpose, formed so-called 
punitive units that attracted the worst social scum, which used 
the most hideous methods of violence in their activity. The Polish 
landowners in Podilia and Volhynia set the example. They simply 
asked Austria-Hungary to occupy Right-Bank Ukraine, restore order, 
and force the peasants to compensate for the damage they had caused 
by either money or labor.”230
The return of land to estate owners and the obligation forced on 
the peasantry to restore stolen property to its owners began under the 
Rada, at the same time as the requisitioning by Austro-Hungarian and 
German troops and the attacks of the “punitive expeditions.” The new 
Hetman regime was supposed to limit this, if not stop it altogether, and 
bring it into some legal framework. The proclamation of Skoropadsky 
as hetman, however, was seen as an additional signal to the estate 
owners to activate their punitive units and have them act in even 
228	 Ibid., 156.
229	 Doroshenko, Moï spomyny pro nedavnie-mynule, 51.
230	 Ibid., 58.

chapter 3d: the view from within: everyday life during the occupation
283 
more brutal fashion.231 The estate owners, bypassing officials of the 
Hetmanate, often turned directly to the Austro-Hungarian or German 
units for assistance, which very soon not only created a negative image 
of the occupiers but also led to the view that the Ukrainian state was 
not really so independent. When the new Ukrainian regime attempted 
to bring an end to the anarchy and achieve a return to legality, it met 
with resistance not just from the rural proletariat, which did not want 
to lose what it had gained in the revolution, but also from the well-off 
peasants, who did not want to part with their harvested produce and 
food for a scant return in cash. The peasants raised their concerns, 
especially about the introduction of forced labor on the fields of the 
estate owners.
Following the coup of 29 April, Skoropadsky began an approach 
that differed fundamentally from what had gone before. He relied 
on previous tsarist officials and did not pay even formal attention to 
the national element in the state. Even more, he was a supporter of 
the “greater Ukrainian” concept of the Ukrainian nation, in which 
ethnicity played no role. He completely rejected Ukrainian national 
political ideas, which, in his view, were a “Galician” creation. He 
regarded the previous policies of Symon Petliura and Volodymyr 
Vynnychenko as “pro-Galician,” in other words, as extreme socialism 
in danger of tipping over into Bolshevism.232 
Skoropadsky held the view that the restoration of strong rule was 
necessary to fight chaos and anarchy, at least as strong as the Russian 
imperial power before the revolution. Consequently, the restoration 
of the inalienability of private property became a cornerstone of the 
new Hetmanate. He said, in his Manifesto to the Whole Ukrainian 
People: “The right to private property, as the foundation of culture and 
civilization, will be completely restored; all the laws of the previous 
Ukrainian government and the Russian Provisional Government 
are null and void.... In the area of finance and economy, completely 
free trade is restored, and greater scope will be given to enterprise 
and individual initiative....”233 In the thinking of the Ukrainians, 
especially the peasantry, the arrival of the occupying troops and 
the Hetman’s restrictive policies were inextricably linked together. 
The fact that previous representatives of the Central Rada were now 
231	 Ibid.
232	 Skoropads'kyi, Spohady, 183.
233	 Derzhavnyi Vistnyk, 16.5.1918, no. 1; Konstytutsiini akty Ukraïny, 1917–1920. Nevidomi 
konstytutsiï Ukraïny (Kyiv, 1992).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
284
dispersed throughout the country and were agitating against the new 
state leadership contributed to the negative image of this policy. They 
proclaimed that the German occupation was the product of a “union 
of large estate owners” who “had elected the Hetman and called in the 
Germans to take the land away from the peasantry.”234 The Bolsheviks 
also contributed to the demoralization.
Having experienced the plundering of estates during the Bolshevik 
advance, as well as life under the Provisional Government and the 
Central Rada, the people returned gradually and not very willingly 
to peaceful conditions in which the law should now rule. The return, 
with help from the occupying troops, of orderly conditions and the 
restoration of property to the estate owners that now took place under 
the newly constructed administrative apparatus led to the Hetmanate 
being seen as a foreign power. Good and even friendly relations now 
existed between the Hetman and the German representatives in 
Kyiv. These people generally belonged to the same social class. The 
Germans were impressed by the Hetman’s way of restoring order. 
The Austro-Hungarians, on the other hand, were not only far away, 
stationed in Odesa, but were regarded by the Hetman through a 
disagreeable Galician prism. He not only mistrusted the Galician 
Ukrainians but also had reservations about the presence of Austro-
Hungarian troops in Ukraine. He perceived here the hidden danger 
of a “Uniate” expansion, as well as plans to bring all Ukrainian lands 
into a personal union with the Habsburg throne.235 Skoropadsky was 
particularly annoyed by the activities of Archduke Wilhelm and his 
Ukrainian Legion.236
For Skoropadsky, the Galician and Russian Ukrainians were two 
different peoples from two different countries: “The whole culture, 
religion, and outlook of the inhabitants are completely different. 
The Galicians would like to convey to the Entente the image of an 
allegedly united Ukraine that is totally hostile to Russia and in which 
it is the Galicians themselves who play the major role. Our people 
will never agree to this. It is logical that the Galicians behave in this 
manner; they can only gain from it. That our socialist parties joined 
in this is also understandable. Neither I nor the government want this 
extreme socialism, certainly not our ‘abysmal’ Russian variety, which 
234	 Skoropads'kyi, Spohady, 209.
235	 Ibid., 239.
236	 See chapter 3b in the present volume.

chapter 3d: the view from within: everyday life during the occupation
285 
very soon degenerates into raging Bolshevism.”237 He transferred his 
rejection of the Galician model of Ukrainianism almost automatically 
to the policy of the Austro-Hungarian occupiers. He thought that 
conditions were much better in the German occupation zone than 
in the Austro-Hungarian, where, in his view, plundering was almost 
legal and corruption widespread.238 
The rigorous policies of the armies of the Central Powers as well as 
the Hetman’s policy of restoring the land to the estate owners created 
opposition to the occupying powers among the Ukrainian peasantry.239 
The lack of understanding for the situation in the countryside and the 
misguided direction of agrarian policy alienated the peasantry from 
the idea of a Ukrainian national state and made the populist promises 
of the Bolsheviks even more attractive. Their promise to distribute 
the land of the large estates was far more attractive than the policy of 
expropriation. The Hetman’s government refused to recognize that 
the land had now been handed over to the peasants who had little or 
no land, even though this had been done in a revolutionary, chaotic, 
and illegal manner. The only way out of this situation would have 
been an attempt to reach a compromise between the peasants and the 
large landowners, but such a compromise could not be achieved.240 
Combating Insurrection in Early Summer after the  
Fall of the Central Rada
The peasants began to see the Hetman and the occupying power as 
the enemy, and war began in earnest. There were some uprisings, but 
the struggle frequently took the form of a “guerilla war.” This partisan 
tactic emerged spontaneously and was partly successful. The peasants 
armed themselves, attacked Austro-Hungarian or German units or 
estates, then returned to their homes and hid their weapons until the 
next action. Meanwhile, local unrest reached such dimensions that 
one can describe it as a real uprising. The Ukrainian politician Serhii 
Shemet wrote to Skoropadsky on 17 May 1918: “The party has received 
information from southern areas of the Poltava gubernia that in many 
villages, members of peasant organizations who returned to their 
villages after the peasant congress in Kyiv was banned have decided 
to kill everyone who traveled to Kyiv to elect the Hetman. The uprising 
237	 Skoropads'kyi, Spohady, 184ff.
238	 Ibid., 184.
239	 Petro Zakharchenko, Selians'ka viina v Ukraïni: rik 1918 (Kyiv, 1997), 68.
240	 Soldatenko, Ukraïna v revoliutsiinu dobu, 237.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
286
against the Hetman has already begun. They have begun to kill the 
landowners as well as their wives and children, burn their houses, 
and steal their grain. Around the villages of Buromka, Denysivka, and 
Khrestyteleve, in the districts of Lubny and Zolotonosha, conflict has 
been raging for four days between the insurgents and the Haidamaky. 
The insurgents are forcibly recruiting farmers. The agitation against 
the Hetman was a great success.”241
Almost the entire top political leadership of the Ukrainian state 
spoke of the coarseness of German and Austro-Hungarian policy 
in Ukraine. Not only did they make no effort to win the people’s 
sympathy, but they did everything to turn the people against them. 
Germany’s top military and diplomatic personnel frequently remarked 
that the Ukrainians had little say, as it was the Germans who “had 
rescued them and now protect them.”242 The brutal behaviour of the 
occupation troops, the propaganda of the left-wing parties and the 
Bolsheviks, as well as the wrath of the punitive expeditions triggered 
a series of uprisings. Peasant attacks on units of the Central Powers 
led to greater repression, which in turn infuriated the peasantry even 
more. As Doroshenko describes it, it was a vicious circle: “Insurgent 
peasants attacked the Germans, the Germans retaliated, whereupon 
the peasants formed bands to avenge themselves, and so it went 
throughout the summer.”243 It was not only the Austro-Hungarian 
and German troops that began to feel the negative attitude of the 
Ukrainian peasantry that summer: “the Hetman regime began to 
sense the danger” as well.244 
From mid-May, the wave of uprisings spread to Podilia. The 
first uprisings had already been provoked in March, when Polish 
landowners, with the help of Austro-Hungarian troops, began to 
reclaim their land and stolen property. The first mass explosion 
occurred on 8 March in the Yampil area, when a volunteer unit came 
to the village of Ihnativka to oversee the restoration of property to the 
previous owners. Before peace could be restored in the village, four 
people were killed. One officer was killed in a shootout during a village 
assembly. The remaining soldiers were disarmed by the peasants. The 
leader of the unit had his right hand cut off before being torn apart by 
241	 Quoted ibid., 240; Dokumenty o razgrome germanskikh okkupantov na Ukraine v 1918 godu 
(Moscow, 1942), 142ff.
242	 Doroshenko, Moï spomyny pro nedavnie-mynule, 7.
243	 Ibid., 59.
244	 Mykhailo Omelianovych-Pavlenko, Spomyny (Lviv, 1930), 47.

chapter 3d: the view from within: everyday life during the occupation
287 
the crowd, which then killed the rest of the attackers. This incident 
led the peasants to organize their own self-defense. The insurgents 
then occupied a large part of the area to control entry to their villages 
and attack neighboring estates and even smaller towns. In mid-May 
the Austro-Hungarian troops moved in and put down the uprising.245 
 The occupying troops frequently used artillery against insurgent 
peasants, thus destroying whole localities. Once the insurgency had 
ended, the activists would be arrested, and significant amounts of 
money then had to be paid. These uprisings took place in the Poltava, 
Kyiv, Kharkiv, Volhynia, and Podilia gubernias. The peasant uprising 
that took place in Kanizh and its surrounding area in May 1918 is 
particularly well known. It involved more than 700 insurgents and 
lasted for some time. When the insurgency was finally suppressed by 
Austro-Hungarian troops, 117 people were either shot or hanged.246 
Ukrainian village heads in the various districts of the Podilia 
gubernia repeatedly informed their superiors of encounters between 
armed peasants and Austro-Hungarian units. The head of the militia 
in the district of Kremianets, Voloshyn, reported on peasant resistance 
in the villages of Tsvyklivtsi, Ruda, and Havrylivtsi to Habsburg troops 
who wanted to arrest the members of the local land committees. After 
these had got away in time, the Austro-Hungarian troops took four 
hostages.247 This practice of hostage taking was widely used by the 
Habsburg army as a means of putting pressure on the local population.
The commanders of the occupying troops understood very well 
that the only way to resolve the insurgency problem was to disarm 
the peasants. Most conflicts broke out in the villages when an army 
unit attempted to do this. This kind of conflict arose in almost 
every district. On 18 May 1918 the interior minister, Fedir Lyzohub, 
declared that everything movable that had been stolen from the estate 
owners had to be returned. This was to apply not only to what the 
peasants themselves had expropriated but also to everything that 
245	 Zakharchenko, Selians'ka viina v Ukraïni, 49.
246	 Vladyslav Verstiuk, Olena Dziuba, and Volodymyr Repryntsev, Ukraïna vid naidavnishykh 
chasiv do s'ohodennia. Khronolohichnyi dovidnyk (Kyiv, 1995), 273; Ukraïns'ka RSR v period 
hromadians'koï viiny. 1917–1920 rr., vol. 1 (Kyiv, 1967), 413–14. Austrian sources speak of 62 
insurgents killed: ÖStA, KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308, 1918 
Situations- und Tagesmeldungen, Nr. 4493/8, Abendmeldung v. 20.5.1918; ibid., Nr. 4525/8, 
Abendmeldung v. 21.5.1918; ibid., Nr. 5772/8, Abendmeldung v. 18.6.1918; ÖStA, KA, AdT, 145. 
IBrig, Kt. 1378, Nr. 1093, Verlautbarung von Vorfällen gegen die k.u.k. Truppen, 21. Mai. See 
also chapter 3a in the present volume.
247	 “Telehrama nachal'nyka militsiï Kremenets'koho povitu Voloshyna vid 10.5.1918” in 
Grazhdanskaia voina na Ukraine 1918–1920, 140.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
288
had been handed over to the peasants for temporary use according 
to decisions of the land committees. This order further stated that, 
if these enforced restitutions were not carried out, the police or, in 
extreme cases, the military would intervene, and those guilty would 
be punished according to law. All previous activities of these land 
committees would be examined, and the results would be handed 
over to officers of the law. Destruction of seed or woodlands would be 
severely punished.248 
As a rule, attempts by the occupying troops to disarm the peasants 
in this or that village met with determined resistance. The response 
of the peasants to demands to hand over their weapons voluntarily 
was to fire those weapons. In May 1918, the typical outcome in all 
such instances was suppression of the resistance by means of artillery, 
the burning of houses, or the taking of hostages. The peasants, 
nonetheless, did not hand over their weapons, which meant that the 
hostages were brought before military courts.249 
Austro-Hungarian and German soldiers frequently requisitioned 
food and cattle without paying for them or offered fixed prices that 
had been arranged with the Ukrainian authorities but offered little 
value to the peasants because of inflation. The district and village 
heads reported such instances, emphasizing that the troops had been 
adequately provided with food and fodder.250 Such robbery and the 
burning of houses that accompanied it were frequently justified by the 
claim that the peasant family had refused to say where all the family 
members or their remaining supplies were.251 Although this was 
not always possible in wartime conditions, it was seen as disloyalty. 
Hostility to the Austrians was aroused especially by the methods 
used to pacify the villages: use of the rod, threats, arrests, and forced 
requisitioning of grain, cattle, and horses.
As time passed, the nature of the armed conflicts between the 
peasants and the military changed. The peasants no longer just resisted 
attempts to take their property or weapons: they formed armed groups 
and carried out attacks on German and Austro-Hungarian units. The 
248	 “Rozporiadzhennia ministra vnutrishnikh sprav pro povernennia pomishchykam ïkh vlasnosti 
vid 18.5.1918,” ibid., 154. 
249	 “Postanova Lubens'koho povitovoho starosty pro peredachu voienno-pol'ovomu sudu uchasnykiv 
protynimets'koho povstannia v selakh Denysivka i Zolotukha vid 18.5.1918,” ibid., 154–55.
250	 “Informatsiia holovy Bilhorods'koï hromads'koï upravy Iakovenka kyïvs'komu povitovomu 
komisaru pro hrabezhi z boku nimets'kykh soldat vid 18.5.1918,” ibid., 156.
251	 “Protokol nachal'nyka militsiï 6-ho viddilu Odes'koho povitu pro spalennia avstriis'kymy soldatamy 
khaty selianyna Kravchuka s. Avdotivka Kovalevs'koï volosti vid 16.5.1918,” ibid., 149.

chapter 3d: the view from within: everyday life during the occupation
289 
initiative to form such groups came mostly from demobilized soldiers 
of the old tsarist army or from Bolshevik agitators. In May 1918, in the 
village of Kachkivka in the Yampil district of the Podilia gubernia, 
the onetime commander of the Winter Palace in Petrograd, Mykola 
Kryvoruchko, gathered together three hundred peasants, armed 
them, and set off. The insurgents even had sixteen cannons in their 
arsenal. Led by Kryvoruchko and convinced that they would pick up 
at least another forty thousand peasants on the way, they advanced 
on the town of Yampil. Capturing the town, they added 26 machine 
guns to their armory.252 When attacked by Austro-Hungarian troops, 
they withdrew to the surrounding forest and regrouped. This cat-and-
mouse game lasted into the summer.253
The most common forms of protest were refusal to hand over 
weapons or pay taxes, illegal deforestation, and the sowing of grain in 
fields where sugar beet was to be grown. They also resisted Bolshevik 
agitation.254 Faced with the danger that a village might be destroyed, 
the peasants could turn against the insurgent activists. On 18 May 
1918, in the district of Yampil, some peasants under the leadership 
of Kryvoruchko captured Austrian carts with bread but, on the very 
next day, Austro-Hungarian troops took the village of Kachkivka. One 
Austro-Hungarian soldier and thirty-five peasants were killed. The 
troops also burned about two hundred homes. Some of the insurgents 
managed to capture an Austro-Hungarian cannon and opened fire on 
the village. The frightened peasants of Pysarivka, fearing that their 
village would also be burned, captured the insurgents and handed 
them over to the Austrians and Hungarians.255 
At the end of May, there was an increase in the incidence of 
sabotage in the villages. The command of the Ostarmee set out a 
detailed set of measures to combat this. According to order no. 4344 
of 14 May 1918, cattle put to pasture in grain fields were to become the 
property of the Austro-Hungarian army. If those guilty of sabotage 
could not be investigated and shot on the spot, then suspects were to 
252	 “Materialy administratyvnoho viddilu viis'kovoho ministerstva za 21 travnia pro povstannia 
selian v Podil's'kii huberniï,” ibid., 158.
253	 According to Soviet sources, troops of the Hetman and the Central Powers burned the villages 
but, in the months that followed, did not dare to leave the main roads, which was why the battles 
lasted so long. See “Donesennia vchytelia Smilians'koï himnaziï het'mans'komu Ministerstvu 
vnutrishnikh sprav pro povstans'kyi rukh v Zvenyhorods'komu poviti Kyïvs'koï huberniï vid 
20.6.1918,” ibid., 190ff.
254	 Ibid.
255	 “Informatsiia Iampil's'koho povitovoho starosty Han'ka pro povstannia v poviti,” ibid., 157.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
290
be arrested and held until they could be tried by a military court. If, 
in cases of poisoning or the destruction of sowings, no suspects could 
be identified, the peasants would be fined 36.6 kg of grain per hectare 
of arable fields damaged. The carts in which the requisitioned grain 
was delivered would also be confiscated.256 Anyone who destroyed 
sowings could be executed on the spot or sentenced to ten years’ 
imprisonment and a fine of 10,000 rubles. If no guilty individuals 
could be found, the whole district would be fined.257
In June 1918, peasant resistance began to take on the form of 
full-scale uprisings. Peasants in the districts of Zvenyhorodka and 
Tarashcha rebelled not just against the occupying troops but also 
against the Hetman regime. By 10 June there were uprisings in 
fourteen villages in the Tarashcha district alone. There were nearly 
four thousand insurgents, all of whom were armed, and they even had 
machine guns.258 Insurgent peasants from the village of Stryzhavka 
took four junior officers from Captain Ivzhenko’s unit and shot them. 
On 9 June Burkov’s punitive unit, with thirty Germans, entered 
Stryzhavka. The insurgents were dispersed by artillery. But on 10 June 
the crowd disarmed and arrested the heads of militia in Piatyhory 
and Zhashkiv, Voitsekhovsky and Pozharnytsky. A German unit 
supported by Ivzhenko’s men captured the insurgents near the village 
of Stavyshcha. After the battle, the village of Yanyshivka was burned. 
On 12 June, the Germans and the Hetman’s units had to withdraw 
from Tarashcha and retreat toward Bila Tserkva. Not only the 
representatives of the Hetmanate but also most of their intelligence 
agents withdrew with the Germans. The insurgents then dealt with 
twenty-seven officers in a number of villages and plundered the sugar 
factory in Luka.259
June was one of the “hottest” months in Ukraine. Uprisings 
and attacks on occupying troops spread in the areas around Kyiv, 
Chernihiv, Kherson, and in the Donbas. In many regions, these 
formations had a large number of fighters, sometimes led by career 
officers, at other times, as in the case of Nestor Makhno, under the 
black flag of anarchism. In the Zvenyhorodka region, “Free Cossacks” 
256 “Nakaz 12-го avstro-uhors'koho korpusu pro pokarannia za otruiennia abo pidpaly posiviv na 
pomishchyts'kykh zemliakh,” ibid., 159.
257	 “Informatsiia pro pokarannia za znyshchennia vrozhaia u Smilians'komu poviti Kyïvs'koï 
huberniï,” ibid., 174.
258	 “Povidomlennia het'mans'koho henshtabu pro povstannia v Tarashchans'komu poviti vid 
11.6.1918,” ibid., 175.
259	 “Donesennia Tarashchans'koho povitovoho starosty Dubinenka vid 14.6.1918,” ibid., 178.

chapter 3d: the view from within: everyday life during the occupation
291 
arose under the command of Yurii Tiutiunnyk. An uprising led by 
Levko Shevchenko was ruthlessly suppressed. In August 1918, Matvii 
Hryhoriiv formed a group of insurgents in the village of Verbliudka 
in the Kherson gubernia. It had 175 peasants armed with Austro-
Hungarian guns, hay forks, and axes. They began with attacks on the 
Hetman’s guards, on Austro-Hungarian troops, and frequently also 
on estate owners. The Hetman sent a unit of 350 men armed with a 
number of machine guns to fight the partisans. But Hryhoriiv’s men 
defeated the Hetman’s unit in spite of being outnumbered. Later, in 
October 1918, they captured an Austro-Hungarian military train. 
Eventually, Otaman Hryhoriiv’s partisan army numbered about six 
thousand armed insurgents.260 
In almost all instances, the cause of insurgency was the same: 
accompanied by German or Austro-Hungarian troops, a landowner 
would appear in the village to reclaim his property. As a rule, these 
actions, in which goods taken from the landowner were restored to 
him by force, were very brutal. The suspects included not only the 
peasants on whose property the stolen goods were found but also the 
activists of the local self-government. The soldiers were not satisfied 
just to burn the houses of those suspected of criminal activity; they 
usually executed them.261 The landowners “offended” by the previous 
socialist regime wanted to reclaim their lost property, but also to take 
revenge on their “offenders” and teach them a lesson.262 The Hetman 
himself stated in his memoirs that there were by no means few 
instances in which landowners reclaimed more than they had lost as a 
way of improving their material situation.263 The participation of units 
of occupying troops in these punitive actions, especially when there 
were executions of local people, created an extremely negative image 
of the occupying powers. Misunderstandings were added to this, as 
none of the German troops spoke Ukrainian. Without knowing the 
language, it was difficult for the German officers to get an accurate 
picture of the situation, with the result that they almost always sided 
with the landowners.
To fight the insurgents more effectively, the occupying army 
declared martial law, forbidding assemblies, demonstrations, and 
260	 V. Horak, “Makhno, Hryhor'iev, Tiutiunnyk. Dolia tr'okh otamaniv,” Voienna istoriia, 2006, nos. 
4-6, http://www.warhistory-ukrlife.ru/4_6_06_3.htm, 21.3.2011.
261 Mędrzecki, Niemiecka interwencja militarna na Ukrainie w 1918 roku, 221.
262	 Soldatenko, Ukraïna v revoliutsiinu dobu, 239.
263	 Skoropads'kyi, Spohady, 184.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
292
even meetings in private dwellings. In some districts, the soldiers of 
the Central Powers, supported by the Hetman’s forces, succeeded in 
driving out the rebels. But the latter only withdrew to the forests, from 
where they were able to attack neighboring locations. The insurgents 
killed not only numerous landowners but also official representatives 
of the Hetman regime and intelligence agents.264 In order to frighten 
the local inhabitants and prevent them from joining the insurgency, 
the military executed by hanging, frequently in the village center. 
The gallows, with bodies hanging from them, remained standing for 
days.265 
Not every Austro-Hungarian soldier shared the same attitude 
to these punitive operations. Quite a few village heads from the 
Katerynoslav gubernia requested that ethnic German and Hungarian 
units not take part in these actions. Units made up of Austrian 
Galicians were more passive, out of solidarity with the local population. 
Hungarian units, on the other hand, which carried out actions in the 
district of Verkhniodniprovsk, acted with extraordinary brutality. In 
the village of Volodymyrivka, on 17 June 1918, 16 persons suspected of 
subversive activity on behalf of the Bolsheviks were handed over to a 
Hungarian unit. The military court sentenced all of them to execution 
and burned their homes. On 19 June, this unit shot fourteen people 
in Huliaipole. Other forms of punishment were frequently used to 
punish lack of loyalty to the Hetman. Lesser offences were punished 
with public whipping or caning.266
Winning Hearts and Minds with Vasyl Vyshyvany and the  
Austro-Hungarian Ukrainian Legion?
Unlike Skoropadsky, the Austrian Archduke Wilhelm, referred to 
in Ukraine as Vasyl Vyshyvany, had a romantic enthusiasm for the 
“people” (Volk), which he greatly idealized. This idealization matched 
his ideas of a “glorious” past and Cossack freedom. Unlike the military 
commanders and diplomats, he did not think that the main reason 
for Austria-Hungary’s presence in Ukraine was “mainly because of 
grain and to prevent Germany from getting a foothold.”267 From the 
264	 Golos Iuga, no. 12, 4 July 1918; cf. ibid., 207.
265	 Ibid.
266	 For instance, the telephone operator P. Smilianenko was beaten with a stick when she 
was suspected of giving information to the Bolsheviks: “Donesennia Katerynoslavs'koho 
huberns'koho starosty heneral-maiora Chernykova departamentu Derzhavnoï varty pro diï 
avstro-uhors'kykh viis'kovykh vid 29.6.1918”; cf. ibid., 198ff.
267	 TsDIA Lviv, fond 309, op. 1, spr. 1198, Memoiren Wilhelms von Habsburg, Oberst der USS.

chapter 3d: the view from within: everyday life during the occupation
293 
beginning, he saw Austria-Hungary as having a twofold mission in 
Ukraine: the defense of Austro-Hungarian positions in competition 
with the Germans and the promotion of Ukrainian national ideas. 
Sooner or later, this would bring him into conflict with Skoropadsky 
and with the German command. He considered his most urgent tasks 
to be the Ukrainization of Zaporizhia268 and the struggle against the 
Hetman’s policy of Russification.269 As commander of the Austro-
Hungarian Ukrainian Legion stationed near Oleksandrivsk (present-
day Zaporizhia), he wanted to get close to the local Ukrainian 
population.
Some political milieus in Ukraine also contributed to the growing 
dissatisfaction in Kyiv, Berlin, and Vienna with the pro-Ukrainian 
policies of the archduke. In May 1918, some socialist organizations 
in Odesa launched an initiative to prepare an uprising against 
Skoropadsky’s government and a handover of power to Archduke 
Wilhelm. But this project of the Odesa socialists found no support at 
meetings of the central committees of the Ukrainian Social Democrats 
and Socialist Revolutionaries, Odesa socialists, or officers of the Kyiv 
Sich Riflemen.270 Colonel Petro Bolbochan launched another initiative 
to proclaim Archduke Wilhelm hetman of all Ukraine. According to 
his calculations, this would be a counterweight to German and Austro-
Hungarian influence in Ukraine, remove the “Russian-German” 
regime of Hetman Skoropadsky, bring about a unification of Galicia 
with Ukraine and, in general, weaken the influence of the Central 
Powers.271 Thus it was not just the Ukrainian socialists who associated 
Skoropadsky with a course that was too pro-German and pro-Russian. 
Some conservative circles also wanted an end to the Hetman regime 
and saw the alternative in a so-called “Habsburg solution.” 
The methods employed by both occupying powers to procure 
food were generally nothing other than expropriation and repression. 
Archduke Wilhelm gave his description of the situation: “With the 
permission of the Hetman, German units are going all over Ukraine 
and using force to restore the property of the pany.272 From now on, 
268	 Southeastern Ukraine, once home to the Zaporozhian Sich.
269	 TsDIA Lviv, fond 358, op. 3, spr. 166, 21ff., Brief von Wilhelm von Habsburg an den Metropoliten 
Andrei Sheptytsky aus Oleksandrivsk vom 24.5.1918.
270	 Iurii Tereshchenko and Tetiana Ostashko, Ukraïns'kyi patriot z dynastiï Habsburgiv: naukovo-
dokumental'ne vydannia (Kyiv, 2008), 36.
271	 Ibid., 37.
272	 In the Slavic languages, pan (pl. pany) is a term for “landlord,” “employer,” or “head of a family” 
(Eds.).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
294
what the muzhiks273 have tilled and sown will belong to the pany. Of 
course, the muzhiks are rebelling. Accounts are settled in blood. The 
muzhiks are being hung and shot, and villages are being burned. And 
of course it sometimes happens that the peasants slaughter German 
units. In one village, for instance, they killed four thousand Germans.274 
Then comes a punitive expedition. Blood flows again, men are hanged, 
and everything disintegrates. Whole areas are destroyed....”275 
Archduke Wilhelm’s Ukrainian Legion easily found a common 
language with the peasants, as its commanders spoke Ukrainian well. 
In 1918, the peasants considered their private property more important 
than nationality or religion.276 Wilhelm von Habsburg was aware of 
this and was more considerate in dealing with individual incidents, as 
shown by an account he gave in Baden in August 1918:277 “We came to 
the village. The members of my legion went around and talked to the 
peasants. Peace and order came to the village. They greeted us with 
bread and salt and took care of us. And wherever the legion went in 
Ukraine, that is how it was. What was needed was tact, nothing but 
tact and understanding of the soul of the Ukrainian peasants, which 
was how my riflemen behaved. They came through agitated and 
‘rebellious’ districts, and immediately everyone calmed down. They 
even thanked us for coming by and gave us food, for which they did 
not want money.” 
The peasants were extremely surprised to meet soldiers and even 
officers of a foreign army who spoke Ukrainian. But what surprised 
people most was the strength of their convictions and their national 
consciousness. When the Austro-Hungarians captured Kherson, 
Oleksandrivsk, and Nykopil, soldiers of the Ukrainian Legion were 
stationed in those cities and, in permanent contact with the local 
population, propagated Ukrainian national ideas.278 The legionnaires 
organized a national theatre with daily shows in Ukrainian and 
held concerts in the city parks, where the Ukrainian intelligentsia 
used to meet. Wilhelm supported the establishment of a Ukrainian 
273	 Russian term for “serf” (Eds.).
274 This figure is highly doubtful, as there is no information about such a large massacre. This may 
have to do with an attack on German colonists. (Eds.).
275	 Ia. Okunevs'kyi, “Rozmova z arkhykniazem Vil'hel'mom dnia 4. serpnia 1918 roku,” Dilo, no. 
100, 8 May 1931.
276	 Timothy Snyder, Czerwony książę (Warsaw, 2010), 115.
277	 Okunevs'kyi, “Rozmova z arkhykniazem Vil'hel'mom.”
278	 Vasyl' Vyshyvanyi, “Ukraïns'ki Sichovi Stril'tsi z vesny 1918 r. do povorotu v Avstriï,” Dilo, no. 
243, 1 November 1938, 2ff.

chapter 3d: the view from within: everyday life during the occupation
295 
newspaper, Sich, in which two Galician riflemen were active, Myron 
Zaklynsky and Kmet.279
The commander of the Ukrainian Legion was taking a risky step in 
supporting the establishment of schools and educational institutions. 
On his own initiative, he appointed soldiers to carry out this task in a 
number of districts. Two of his officers, Mykola Saievych and Dmytro 
Vitovsky, were given this task in Podilia and Kherson. The Ukrainian 
intelligentsia was impressed by these educational initiatives. They 
hoped that this cultural life of the Ukrainian population in southern 
Ukraine would be seen as a model and would attract other areas. Sofiia 
Tobilevych, the widow of the well-known Ukrainian dramatist Ivan 
Karpenko-Kary, wrote: “Led by officers and supported by experts in 
their fields—actors, singers, musicians—they introduced lectures for 
children and adults, organized films, concerts, theater productions, 
and festivals. This was a great cooperative cultural achievement that 
attracted the whole area.”280 
Throughout this period, Archduke Wilhelm managed not only to 
place his soldiers at the service of “Ukrainian national life” but also 
to ignore the commands of the Austro-Hungarian Ostarmee, which 
was insisting on more intensive counterinsurgency. Among the rural 
population, Wilhelm gained the reputation of a “red prince,” but he 
was seen by the Austro-Hungarian High Command as a politically 
unreliable officer. The Hetman administration attempted, as quickly 
as possible, to wipe out any traces of this “Ukrainization” by the 
Ukrainian Legion.281 
The Hetman administration also made sure that General Oleksandr 
Natiiv’s Ukrainian division was transferred from Oleksandrivsk to 
Melitopil. This was to prevent any solidarity between the Ukrainian 
Legion and the Ukrainian Cossacks. During the short period in which 
both were stationed in the same city, they had grown very close. 
Together they had visited Khortytsia, Velykyi Luh, and other places 
important in the history of the Zaporozhian Cossacks. It was the view 
279	 Vasyl' Vyshyvanyi, “Ukraïns'ki Sichovi Stril'tsi z vesny 1918 r. do povorotu v Avstriï,” Dilo, no. 
244, 3 November 1938, 2ff.
280	 Quoted in Tereshchenko and Ostashko, Ukraïns'kyi patriot z dynastiï Habsburgiv, 40.
281 In doing so, they did not refrain from petty measures, the sense of which is difficult to explain. 
When the Ukrainian Legion moved to Katerynoslav, the newspaper Sich in Oleksandrivsk was 
closed and the two Galicians arrested. It was only when their commander wrote a personal 
letter that they were released. A Russian newspaper then replaced the Ukrainian one. See Vasyl' 
Vyshyvanyi, “Ukraïns'ki Sichovi Stril'tsi z vesny 1918 r. do povorotu v Avstrii,” Dilo, no. 245, 4 
November 1938, 2ff.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
296
of the Ostarmee command that such “fraternizing” was detrimental 
from the viewpoint of internal Austro-Hungarian relations and from 
that of Hetman Skoropadsky’s authority.282 
In spite of his aristocratic origins, Archduke Wilhelm was largely 
in agreement with the ideas of the left-wing Ukrainian parties on 
agrarian reform. It was his view that neither Field Marshal Eichhorn 
nor Skoropadsky would approve a moderate agrarian policy because 
they were themselves sympathetic to the estate owners. He did not 
support the return of the estate owners to their estates and opposed 
the executions of Ukrainian peasants. He was especially proud that 
“the Riflemen never hanged anyone, always did good, and were liked 
by everyone.”283 Of course, the activity of the Ukrainian Legion in 
southern Ukraine was just a small episode in the larger history of 
occupation policy. It can only serve as an indication of the variants 
and alternatives that existed to the policy of violent expropriation and 
punitive actions.
Conclusion
Although the Austro-Hungarian and German troops operated in 
Ukraine quite freely and without supervision, a certain formal distance 
had to be maintained in their relations with Ukrainian officials. The 
Ukrainian foreign ministry gathered and analyzed information about 
irregularities on the part of the soldiers of the Central Powers. These 
were then handed over to the diplomatic representatives of both states 
for further examination and decision. Dmytro Doroshenko recalled 
Austro-Hungarian occupation policy in Ukraine: “The Austrians put 
down the unrest in the villages in 1918 with great cruelty. On the 
pretext of ‘fighting Bolshevism,’ activists in the Ukrainian movement 
were arrested (for instance, in the Katerynoslav region) and dragged 
from one prison to another. Even when Kyiv heard about it, the foreign 
minister did not always succeed in getting the prisoners out of the 
clutches of the Austrian administration. The one glimmer of light in 
this Austrian occupation is the fact that there were compatriots of ours 
from Galicia and Bukovyna serving in the Habsburg army, sometimes 
in units of their own, as was the case with the Ukrainian Legion in 
Kherson and Katerynoslav. These compatriots were not numerous and 
served mostly in subordinate positions. But they did at least achieve 
282	 Tereshchenko and Ostashko, Ukraïns'kyi patriot z dynastiï Habsburgiv, 34ff.
283	 Vasyl' Vyshyvanyi, “Ukraïns'ki Sichovi Stril'tsi z vesny 1918 r. do povorotu v Avstriï,” Dilo, no. 
246, 5 November 1938, 2ff.

chapter 3d: the view from within: everyday life during the occupation
297 
something in compensation, for a time, for the negative consequences 
of the presence of the Austro-Hungarian army in Ukraine.”284 
Skoropadsky, too, expressed himself on the negative aspect of the 
presence of Austro-Hungarian troops. It was his view that theft was 
almost the norm in the Austro-Hungarian zone and that corruption and 
deceit had grown to an unprecedented extent.285 Stepan Shukhevych 
remarked in his memoirs that among the staff of the troops behind 
the lines in Austria-Hungary there was a list of “profitable” posts for 
officers. One of the most attractive destinations was Ukraine: “Postings 
to Ukraine were the best, to the Albanian or Italian front the worst. 
Ukraine, because there one could steal, rob, order searches, in short, 
make a fortune.”286 Shukhevych was later appointed commander of 
military police in Odesa. He described Odesa as a good opportunity 
for Austro-Hungarian soldiers to enrich themselves because of the 
widespread corruption there: “You could really make quite a fortune. 
Rich, very rich merchants offered me beautiful and expensive gifts, 
but I refused them and left Odesa as poor as I was when I arrived 
there.... People I knew advised me repeatedly to take advantage of the 
opportunity and help myself, but I did not do it. I believed that there 
had to be one Ukrainian city ruled by law and order.”287 Shukhevych 
maintained that the military governor of Odesa, Eduard von Böltz, 
committed suicide at the end of the occupation because he feared that his 
financial misdemeanors would be discovered. He also maintained that 
the entire Austro-Hungarian civil staff in Odesa was involved in such 
activities.288 From an economic point of view, Odesa was exceptionally 
attractive because the merchant fleet was stationed there.289 
All in all, the presence of the Austro-Hungarian and German 
troops in Ukraine was characterized not only by an effort to support 
the establishment of a state administration and defend the country 
against Bolshevik Russia but also, in equal measure, by mass repressive 
measures against the Ukrainian peasantry. 
284	 Doroshenko, Moï spomyny pro nedavnie-mynule, 19–20.
285	 Skoropads'kyi, Spohady, 184.
286	 Stepan Shukhevych, Moie zhyttia. Spohady (London, 1991), 253.
287	 Ibid., 255.
288	 He claimed that the chief of the General Staff, Major Hemel, left Odesa with a fortune of 18 
million karbovantsi and that the head of the political department, Police Councillor Harvasii, left 
with a similar amount (ibid., 256). 
289	 Skoropads'kyi, Spohady, 195.

4a. Russia’s Ukrainian Policy before 1917
Alexei Miller
An important milestone in East European history was the Cossack 
uprising of 1648 led by Bohdan Khmelnytsky. The subsequent 
union between the Cossack Hetmanate and the Muscovite Tsarist 
Empire changed the relation of forces between Moscow and the 
Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth and laid the foundation for a 
gradual westward expansion of the Russian Empire. In the course 
of the eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, the Hetmanate 
and Sloboda Ukraine, which gradually acquired the name “Little 
Russia,” were incorporated ever more closely into the Russian Empire. 
The administrative autonomy of the Hetmanate was continuously 
restricted and, under Catherine the Great, formally abolished. The last 
traces of this autonomy (the Little Russian Collegium) disappeared in 
the early decades of the nineteenth century. 
The religious elite of the Hetmanate became prominent in the 
hierarchy of the Russian Orthodox Church already in the eighteenth 
century. The Cossack starshyna (officer caste) not only became a 
regional elite within the empire but was gradually incorporated into 
the Russian nobility. Its noble status was secured at the end of the 
eighteenth century and the beginning of the nineteenth, which is 
probably why its members offered no resistance to the abolition of 
regional autonomy.1
Representatives of the Kyivan clergy (Teofan Prokopovych/
Feofan Prokopovich) played a large role in the transformation of the 
Muscovite Tsardom into the Russian Empire, as well as in shaping 
Russian historical myth and a Russian image of national territory 
(Inokentii Gizel, author of the Synopsis).2 Imperial policy turned the 
Cossack starshyna into part of the imperial nobility. With the opening 
of universities in Kharkiv (Kharkov) (1804) and Kyiv (Kiev) (1834), 
conditions were created at the beginning of the nineteenth century 
1	
Zenon E. Kohut, Russian Centralism and Ukrainian Autonomy: Imperial Аbsorption of the 
Hetmanate, 1760s–1830s (Cambridge, Mass., 1988); Zenon E. Kohut, “The Ukrainian Elite in 
the Eighteenth Century and Its Integration into the Russian Nobility,” in The Nobility in Russia 
and Eastern Europe, ed. Ivo Banac and Paul Bushkovitch (New Haven, Conn., 1983), 65–97; 
Zapadnye okrainy Rossiiskoi imperii, ed. Mikhail Dolbilov and Alexei Miller (Moscow, 2006). 
2	
David Saunders, The Ukrainian Impact on Russian Culture, 1750–1850 (Edmonton, 1985).

chapter 4a: russia’s ukraine policy before 1917
299 
for the emergence of a local intelligentsia in whose ranks Ukrainian 
national ideas would ripen. The partition of Poland at the end of 
the eighteenth century eliminated the Dnipro (Dnieper) border, the 
existence of which for more than a century and a half had left deep 
marks on the development of the Ukrainian lands.3 The subsequent 
movements of population, especially into New Russia,4 annexed 
at the end of the eighteenth century, created in many respects the 
conditions for the emergence of our present-day conception of 
Ukrainian national territory.
Following the Polish uprising of 1830–31, the Southwestern 
Province became a theater of conflict between the Russian Empire and 
the Polish nobility (szlachta), each attempting to influence the process 
of identity formation of the numerically dominant Little Russian/
Ukrainian population. The Russian historical narrative had already, 
in the 1820s and 1830s, formulated the conception that they were 
part of the “Russian” population. The thesis that the Little Russians 
and Great Russians together belonged to the Russian nation was the 
ideological foundation of the policy that aimed to undermine Polish 
cultural influence in these lands.
In the 1840s and into the 1860s, the traditional Little Russian 
patriotism of the traditional elite was gradually giving way to the ideas 
of modern Ukrainian nationalism. The first instance of this was the 
narrow circle of the secret Brotherhood of SS. Cyril and Methodius, 
discovered by the authorities in 1847. It was followed in the 1860s by 
the milieu of the Kyiv Hromada (Community) and the editors of the 
St. Petersburg Osnova (Foundation, 1861–62). Most Russian officials 
and members of the Russian public perceived emerging Ukrainian 
nationalism as a threat not only to the territorial integrity of the empire 
but also to the construction of a Russian nation.5 This occurred 
against the background of the Polish uprising of 1863–64 and the 
abolition of serfdom in 1861, all of which added a social dimension to 
3	
From an administrative viewpoint, the border remained in place throughout the nineteenth century. 
The territories on the Right Bank constituted the Kyiv gubernia, while in the mid-nineteenth 
century a form of administration was established on the Left Bank that was characteristic of the 
Great Russian gubernias. For a long time, there were no zemstvo administrations on the Right 
Bank. They were first introduced in 1911. To a large extent, this had to do with the dominant 
status of Polish estate owners, something entirely lacking on the Left Bank.
4	
This included the territories north of the Black Sea, which, up to that point, had belonged to the 
Ottoman Empire and fell to Russia after the Russo-Ottoman war of 1768–74.
5	
Cf. P. A. Zaionchkovskii, Kirillo-Mefodievskoe obshchestvo (1846–1847) (Moscow, 1959); 
Alexei Miller, The Ukrainian Question: The Russian Empire and Nationalism in the Nineteenth 
Century (New York and Budapest, 2003).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
300
the problem. In 1847–48, the Russian government considered general 
restrictions unnecessary and limited itself to exiling the few members 
of the Brotherhood. It was only in the late 1850s and early 1860s that 
such measures began to be enforced. In 1859, as a defense against 
Polish influence, the use of the Latin alphabet (“Polish letters”) was 
forbidden for the Russian language, including the “Little Russian and 
White Russian dialects.” This decree also reflected a growing concern 
about the possible influence of Vienna on the Little Russians. The 
argument for the ban was that Vienna had attempted to introduce the 
Latin alphabet among the Galician Ruthenians.6 In July 1863, half a 
year after the beginning of the Polish uprising, the minister of internal 
affairs, Petr Valuev, issued a circular forbidding the publication of 
books for the common people in the Ukrainian language, especially 
primary school books and Holy Scripture.7 The officials thus opened 
the door to the use of administrative methods as a way of combating 
the emancipation of the Ukrainian language, in other words, to a 
policy of assimilation by means of prohibiting the Ukrainian language 
in education. In the short term, these measures were very effective. 
Support for the Ukrainian movement declined until the 1870s.
When the governor of the Kyiv gubernia from 1873 to 1875, 
Aleksandr M. Dondukov-Korsakov, found himself confronted by a 
new wave of the Ukrainian movement, he attempted to “tame” it rather 
than repress it. He offered Ukrainian activists certain possibilities for 
legal activity in the Russian Imperial Geographical Society and in the 
newspaper Kievskii telegraf (Kyiv Telegraph). This policy was initiated 
without the support of St. Petersburg, which made it possible for 
opponents of the Ukrainian activists in Kyiv, who thought of themselves 
as Little Russians, to persuade the bureaucracy in St. Petersburg in 
1875 of the need to intervene. A commission was established to deal 
with the Ukrainian question. After complex internal wrangling in the 
upper levels of the tsarist bureaucracy, the so-called Ukase of Ems was 
issued, a series of instructions to different officials, signed by the tsar, 
on combating the Ukrainian movement.8 Among other measures, the 
prohibition of Ukrainian books issued in 1863 was strengthened and 
extended to the theater. As in 1863, there was no unanimity among the 
6	
For a detailed discussion, see Alexei Miller, The Romanov Empire and Nationalism: Essays in the 
Methodology of Historical Research (New York and Budapest, 2008), 67–92.
7	
For the text of the instruction, see A. E. Miller, Ukrainskii vopros v politike vlastei i russkom 
obshchestvennom mnenii (St. Petersburg, 2000).
8	
On the text of the ukase, see Miller, Ukrainskii vopros v politike vlastei.

chapter 4a: russia’s ukraine policy before 1917
301 
top levels of the bureaucracy about the adequacy of these measures. 
The opponents of the Ukrainian movement among the Little Russians 
in Kyiv once again played an important role.9 In 1880 the governor 
of the Kyiv gubernia, Mikhail Chertkov, the governor of the Kharkiv 
gubernia, Dondukov-Korsakov, and Senator Aleksandr A. Polovtsov 
attempted to fundamentally moderate aspects of the Ukase of Ems, 
since it had proved to be counterproductive. Unlike in 1863, there was 
no decline in the activities of the Ukrainian movement. Instead, it had 
spread into Galicia, which was ruled by the Habsburgs. In the early 
1880s, the Austro-Hungarian authorities and the Polish elite in Galicia 
had taken repressive action against the Russophile elements and 
started to promote pro-Ukrainian sentiment among the Ruthenian 
population of Eastern Galicia. The assassination of Alexander II put 
an end to attempts to revise the Ukase of Ems. The new commission 
on the Ukrainian question, which was supposed to draft a new 
policy, now met in completely different circumstances, under a new 
leadership, and made very few slightly moderating changes to the 
harshest prohibitions of 1876.
In the 1860s and 1870s, Russian discourse on the Ukrainian 
problem was consolidated. In this discourse, “Ukrainophilism” or 
“Little Russian separatism” stood for Ukrainian nationalism. In the 
1870s, officials persisted in speaking of a Little Russian “dialect,” 
foiling any plans for the creation of a Ukrainian “literary language” 
that could have replaced Russian as the language of education and 
high culture. Officials also continued to refer to “Little Russians,” 
seen as a branch of the Russian nation, and considered “Ukrainian” 
an invention of anti-Russian forces. The unity of Little Russia, White 
Russia, and Great Russia was seen as the backbone of imperial strength 
and unity, analogous to the consolidation of the British, French, and 
German nations within their respective empires. This nationalist 
discourse was shared and actively promoted by those who saw 
themselves as Little Russians. The front line in the bitter struggle over 
the concepts “Little Russian/Ukrainian,” “Little Russia/Ukraine,” and 
“language/dialect” ran not between Great Russians and Ukrainians 
but between Great Russians and Little Russians on the one side and 
Ukrainians on the other. This struggle reflected the conflict between 
the different identity strategies chosen by various groups of educated 
and politically active people in Ukraine/Little Russia.10 
9	
For more detail, see Miller, The Ukrainian Question.
10	
For more detail, see A. Kotenko, O. Martyniuk, and A. Miller, “Maloros,” in A. Miller, D. 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
302
Socioeconomic Developments in the Late Nineteenth and  
Early Twentieth Centuries
In the second half of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the 
twentieth century, Russia experienced a period of intensive social 
and economic transformation. This had profound consequences for 
the development of the identity of different groups in Ukraine and for 
the attitude of political forces to the Ukrainian question. Migratory 
movements played an important role in all phases of development of 
the Russian Empire. They had a major influence on the processes of 
assimilation, shaping both the space of the empire and ideas about 
national territories. New Russia was among the main destinations 
for urban and rural migration in the nineteenth century. In the 
period between 1782 and 1858, around 1.5 million people, including 
serfs, migrated to this region. Between 1870 and 1896, the number 
of migrants remained high, 1.45 million. The end result of these 
migratory movements was that, at the end of the nineteenth century, 
Little Russians/Ukrainians made up about half the population of New 
Russia, while Great Russians constituted about 20 percent. It was only 
at the beginning of the twentieth century, when Siberia became the 
main destination for peasant migration, that the number of migrants 
to New Russia sank considerably (333,000 between 1897 and 1915).11 
As a result of this intensive migration, New Russia was claimed by 
Ukrainian nationalists as part of Ukrainian territory.
The abolition of serfdom opened up potentially great migration 
opportunities for the Ukrainian peasants, who suffered from an acute 
shortage of land. Until the 1890s, the government had reservations about 
peasant migration from the Southwestern Province because it feared a 
weakening of the Russian element vis-à-vis the “Polish threat.” In 1879, 
there was even a secret instruction to the governors of the Kyiv and 
Vilnius gubernias to prevent peasant migration.12 A report from Senator 
Polovtsov concerning a revision of the Chernihiv (Chernigov) gubernia 
in 1880 speaks of the “relatively strong urge of the peasants to migrate” 
and measures to “reduce the harmful effects” of this situation.13 It was 
not until 1881 that the government issued “Provisional Regulations 
for Migration of Peasants on Free Land.” This document, however, 
Zdvizhkov, and I. Shirle, Osnovnye obshchestvenno-politicheskie poniatiia v Rossii 18–nachala 
20 v. (Moscow, 2011).
11	
See B. N. Mironov, Sotsial'naia istoriia Rossii, vol. 1 (St. Petersburg, 1999), 22–25.
12	
National Library of Russia, Manuscript Department, fond 600, d. 1333, 28ff.
13	
Daniel Beauvois, Walka o ziemię 1863–1914. Pogranicze (Sejny, 1996), 281; S. M. Sambuk, 
Politika tsarizma v Belorussii vo vtoroi polovine XIX v. (Minsk, 1980), 154.

chapter 4a: russia’s ukraine policy before 1917
303 
was not published, and the peasantry was not informed for fear of 
provoking mass migration.14 Mass migration of Little Russian peasants 
from Ukraine developed at the end of the nineteenth century and the 
beginning of the twentieth century. Before 1858, there were practically 
no Ukrainians/Little Russians in the Steppe province, but at the end of 
the nineteenth century there were already about 100,000. By 1917, as 
a result of Prime Minister Petr Stolypin’s resettlement program, there 
were 800,000.15 There was a similar development in the regions beyond 
the Urals. Before 1858 there were also practically no Little Russians in 
Western Siberia, but there were 137,000 at the time of the census of 
1897. In Eastern Siberia there were 25,000 Ukrainians and, in the Far 
East, 61,000. By 1917, the number of Ukrainians in Western Siberia was 
375,000, with 427,000 in Eastern Siberia and 427,000 in the Far East. 
In the Volga region in 1897 there were more than 545,000 Ukrainians. 
Altogether 2.5 million Ukrainians, that is, about 10 percent of the entire 
Ukrainian/Little Russian population, were living in areas that were 
territorially detached from Ukrainian gubernias.16 In 1917, the number 
of Ukrainians living in gubernias bordering present-day Ukraine, in 
Tambov, Kursk, Voronezh, and Orel, was 2 million, with another 2 
million living in the regions of Kuban, Tver, and Stavropol.17 In regions 
with mixed populations of Great and Little Russians, the assimilation 
of Little Russians accelerated. In the census of 1926, at the height of the 
korenizatsiia (indigenization), when claiming non-Russian origins might 
well have proved advantageous, half the Little Russians in the Far East 
gave Russian as their mother tongue.18 According to reliable estimates 
of Soviet demographers in the 1980s, 1.5 million Little Russians had 
“become Russian” in the second half of the nineteenth century.19
14	
P. A. Zaionchkovskii, Krizis samoderzhaviia na rubezhe 1870–1880 godov (Moscow, 1964), 425.
15 
Steven G. Marks, “Conquering the Great East: Kulomzin, Peasant Resettlement, and the Creation 
of Modern Siberia,” in Rediscovering Russia in Asia: Siberia and the Russian Far East, ed. 
Stephen Kotkin and David Wolff (New York and London, 1995), 23–39.
16 
S. I. Bruk and V. M. Kabuzan, “Chislennost' i rasselenie ukrainskogo ėtnosa v XVIII–nachale 
XX v.,” Sovetskaia ėtnografiia, 1981, no. 5, table 3, 20–22.
17	
Ibid., table 4, 23.
18 
Andreas Kappeler, “Chochly und Kleinrussen: Die ukrainische ländliche und städtische 
Diaspora in Russland vor 1917,” Jahrbücher für Geschichte Osteuropas 45, no. 1 (1997): 58; 
A. A. Novoselova, “Sibirskie khokhly: k voprosu ob ėtnicheskoi prinadlezhnosti,” Ėtnografiia 
Altaia i sopredel'nykh territorii (Barnaul), no. 5 (2003): 27–28; A. A. Novoselova, “Ukraintsy 
v Srednem Priirtysh'e: identifikatsiia i samoidentifikatsiia v kontse 19–nachale 20 v.,” in 
Ukraina-Zapadnaia Sibir': dialog kul'tur i narodov (Tiumen, 2004), 51–62; A. A. Novoselova, 
“Potomki belorusskikh pereselentsev v derevniakh Srednego i Nizhnego techeniia reki Tary,” in 
Ėtnokul'turnye vzaimodeistviia v Sibiri (17–20 vv.) (Novosibirsk, 2003), 267.
19	
Bruk and Kabuzan, “Chislennost' i rasselenie,” 26, 30.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
304
From the 1860s, Russia saw rapid urbanization and industrialization. 
In 1860, Kyiv had 55,000 residents (just 10,000 more than in 1840), Kharkiv 
had 50,000, and Odesa (Odessa) 112,000. By 1874 the population of Kyiv 
had grown to 127,000. By 1881 the population of Kharkiv had risen to 
128,000, and that of Odesa to 220,000. In 1860 Lviv (Lemberg, Lwów), 
with 60,000 residents, was the second-largest city after Odesa on the 
territory of present-day Ukraine. At the beginning of the 1880s, when 
the population of Lviv had grown to 70,000, it was also behind Kyiv and 
Kharkiv.20 The growing cities and industrial areas became melting pots. 
At the time of the census in 1897, in the sixteen cities with more than 
50,000 residents in the part of Ukraine that was in the Russian Empire, 
it was only in Poltava that more than half the population gave Little 
Russian as their mother tongue, even though more than 80 percent of 
the urban population of Ukraine, according to the same census, came 
from the gubernia in which their city was located.21 This percentage 
increases when we take into account those who came from neighboring 
Ukrainian gubernias.
There was increased migration at the end of the nineteenth century 
as a result of industrial development. One of the main destinations 
was the Donbas, where coal mining started at the end of the 1890s. At 
the time of the census of 1897, when the industrial development of this 
region was just beginning, the population was 1,136,000, of whom 
62.5 percent (710,000) were Ukrainian/Little Russian and 24.2 percent 
were Great Russian. This was similar to the process of Anglicization 
of South Wales in the nineteenth century.
The rail network in Ukraine increased threefold between 1865 
and 1875 and grew at a rapid pace after that. In a memorandum to 
Alexander II written in 1864, Baron Pavel P. Korf clearly stated the 
consequences of this: “The Little Russian people today see the tsar 
as their bond with Russia and religion as their affinity with Russia; 
this bond and affinity will become stronger and inseparable.... The 
route to this is the railway.... It is not just goods that travel by rail but 
also books, ideas, customs and attitudes.... Great Russian and Little 
Russian capital, Great Russian and Little Russian ideas, attitudes and 
customs will blend, and these two already close peoples will become 
very much alike. Then just let the Ukrainophiles preach to the people 
20	
Patricia Herlihy, “Ukrainian Cities in the Nineteenth Century,” in Rethinking Ukrainian History, 
ed. Ivan L. Rudnytsky (Edmonton, 1981), 136–37. 
21	
Peter Woroby, “The Role of the City in Ukrainian History,” in Rethinking Ukrainian History, 
208.

chapter 4a: russia’s ukraine policy before 1917
305 
about Ukraine, about their struggles for independence and their 
glorious Hetmanate, even if they do it with the fiery verses of their 
Shevchenko.”22 The idea that social and economic developments would 
promote assimilation was widely shared by Russian and Ukrainian 
politicians. Of course, different conclusions were drawn from this. 
Many Russian politicians and officials thought that there was no need 
for political or administrative measures to promote the assimilation 
of the Little Russians; that things should be “left to take their natural 
course.” This partly explains why so little attention was paid to the 
development of elementary schools in the Ukrainian gubernias. In 
the second half of the nineteenth century, there was little progress 
in the development of elementary schools in the whole empire. There 
was practically no increase in state expenditure for peasant schools 
between 1862 and 1895. Only 11.3 percent of the cost of elementary 
schools was covered by the state budget. The peasants themselves 
contributed three times that amount, and the zemstvo administration 
bore 43.4 percent of the costs. In the Southwestern Province, where 
there were no zemstvos before 1911, the situation was much worse. 
In gubernias without zemstvos, the school budget was one-third 
less.23 It was not until the reign of Nicholas II that state expenditure 
for elementary schooling was substantially increased. By the outbreak 
of the First World War, Russia was about to introduce compulsory 
education. In this situation, the representatives of the Ukrainian 
movement found it necessary, as long as the assimilation process had 
not yet gone too far, to intensify their activities to whatever extent 
possible.24
Ukrainian and Russian Nationalism after the Revolution of 1905
The Revolution of 1905 brought about fundamental changes both in 
the political system of the Russian Empire and in the sphere of local 
politics. With political organizations no longer prohibited, legally 
22	
RGIA, fond 733, op. 193 (1863), d. 86, 20. Mikhail Katkov, describing in 1865 what he considered 
the most important measures for the Russification of the Kyiv gubernia, listed as number one the 
creation of a rail link between the Volga and the Dnipro. See M. N. Katkov, Sobranie peredovykh 
statei “Moskovskikh vedomostei” 1865 goda (Moscow, 1897), 757.
23	
Cf. Ben Eklof, Russian Peasant Schools: Officialdom, Village Culture and Popular Pedagogy, 
1861–1914 (Berkeley, 1986), 89, 94.
24 
Statements by Yevhen Chykalenko, one of the key figures in the Ukrainian movement at the 
beginning of the twentieth century, are typical: “Every city and every large area in Ukraine has 
been frightfully Russified”: Ievhen Chykalenko, Shchodennyk, vol. 1, 1907–1917 (Kyiv, 2004), 
281–82; “What you can do now with a few thousand, you will not be able to do then with millions 
when the people have become Russian”: Ievhen Chykalenko and Petro Stebnyts'kyi, Lystuvannia, 
1901–1922 roky (Kyiv, 2008), 72.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
306
competing political forces emerged at both local and state level in 
elections to the city dumas and the State Duma, the newly created 
imperial parliament. In Kyiv, this political battle was reflected in the 
pages of Russian and Ukrainian newspapers, since the abolition of 
censorship in Ukraine also meant the abolition of restrictions on the 
use of the Ukrainian language in the press.
In the years 1906–8 the Ukrainian movement was on the upswing. 
In 1906 practically every city had its Ukrainian newspaper. By 1908, 
only one of those daily papers remained, Rada (Council) in Kyiv.25 One 
of the reasons for this was administrative pressure from officials who 
imposed penalties for offenses against press law. But finances were the 
main reason for the loss of the Ukrainian provincial press. Even the 
Kyiv Rada, over many years, was unable to find more than two thousand 
subscribers and was only able to survive thanks to generous help from 
Yevhen Chykalenko and the existence of a single rich sponsor, Vasyl 
Symyrenko, who covered the annual deficit. Chykalenko described 
the situation in 1909 in these words: “The average urban resident who 
speaks the peasant Ukrainian language to a greater or lesser degree 
would not subscribe to our paper because he understands the Russian 
papers better and, what’s more, those papers give him more news and 
news that is more up-to-date.”26
The Society of Ukrainian Progressives (Tovarystvo ukraïns'kykh 
postupovtsiv, TUP),27 founded in 1908, became a coordinating center 
for Ukrainian cultural and political organizations. Among the 
organizations linked to the TUP were the hromady (communities), 
semilegal groups of intelligentsia founded in the 1860s in a number of 
cities, and the cultural organization Prosvita (Enlightenment), which 
opened branches in a number of gubernias and cities immediately after 
the revolution. Prosvita̕s influence was not equally strong everywhere. 
While it had the support of an extensive network of organizations in 
the Kyiv, Poltava, and Chernihiv gubernias, it had hardly any influence 
in other areas (Volhynia, Odesa, Kherson, Donbas).28 
25	
Steven Guthier, “Ukrainian Cities during the Revolution and the Interwar Era,” in Rethinking 
Ukrainian History, 159.
26	
Chykalenko, Shchodennyk, 1: 47–48.
27 
Outside the direct influence of the TUP there was a small number of groupings of more radical 
nationalists such as Dmytro Dontsov and Mykola Mikhnovsky, who openly called for the 
overthrow of the Russian Empire and the creation of an ethnic Ukrainian state.
28	
Heorhii Kas'ianov, Ukraïns'ka intelihentsiia na rubezi XIX–XX stolit'. Sotsial'no-politychnyi 
portret (Kyiv, 1993), 49. There is a clear record of publishing activity on the part of Ukrainian 
activists: by 1914 they had brought out 100,000 calendars, 200,000 copies of Shevchenko’s 
Kobzar, and 10,000 copies of Hrushevsky’s Illustrated History of Ukraine. Chykalenko’s 
agricultural brochures were also widely distributed.

chapter 4a: russia’s ukraine policy before 1917
307 
In 1908, the TUP initiated a bill signed by thirty-seven members of 
the State Duma to introduce the Ukrainian language in schools. The 
Kyiv Club of Russian Nationalists (KCRN),29 founded that same year 
by Anatolii Savenko and Dmitrii Pikhno under the patronage of Prime 
Minister Stolypin, agitated against the draft with the result that it was 
not even placed on the agenda of the Duma.30 Ukraine, especially Kyiv, 
thus became a battleground between two nationalisms deeply rooted 
there. As a consequence of a campaign initiated by the KCRN, local 
branches of Prosvita in the big cities were closed by the administration 
in 1910. In that same year, the KCRN celebrated its victory in elections 
to the Kyiv city duma, where it commanded a decisive majority.31 It 
played a leading role among the Russian nationalists who formed the 
All-Russian National Union in 1911. At the start of the First World 
War, the KCRN, which at that time had around three thousand 
signed-up members, changed its name to Progressive Club of Russian 
Nationalists and joined the Progressive Bloc.
The most important journalistic opponent of Rada was Kievlianin 
(The Kyivan), which was close to the KCRN and continued the anti-
Ukrainian line it had promoted since the 1870s. What was peculiar 
about the situation in Kyiv was that the Ukrainian activists and the 
Little Russian anti-Ukrainians were both directing their propaganda 
toward the same group, whose members identified themselves as 
Malorossy (Little Russians) or Khokhly. They had no fixed identity 
or political consciousness, and both sides wanted to turn them into 
nationalists, the one Ukrainian, the other Russian. In other words, 
the battle for the hearts and minds of individuals had begun and 
was added to the typical nineteenth-century conflict over abstract 
concepts such as Maloross or Ukrainian.
It corresponded to the logic of this struggle that both camps, whose 
supporters came from the same milieu and often knew one another 
personally, attempted to portray the other side in the darkest colors. The 
KCRN, in the discourse of Rada, was made up of Black Hundreds, arch-
29	
The founders and members of the club thought of themselves as Little Russians. At the beginning 
of the First World War, the club was the most influential Russian nationalist organization in Kyiv, 
if not in the whole of Russia. The history of the club has not been adequately researched, which 
has to do with the fact that the club was one of the first targets of the Bolsheviks after they came 
to power in Kyiv (seventy members were shot), and the archive was confiscated by the Cheka. 
30	
Ricarda Vulpius, “Ukrainskii iazyk i shkol'noe obuchenie v pozdneimperskii period,” Ab 
Imperio, 2005, no. 2 http://abimperio.net/.
31	
For its election program, see Sbornik kluba russkikh natsionalistov (Kyiv, 1910), 27–30.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
308
reactionaries, and traitors to their own nation.32 In KCRN discourse, 
the circle around Rada and the TUP were Mazepintsy,33 renegades, 
separatists, Russophobes, and agents of foreign powers, primarily 
Poland, but also Austria-Hungary and the German Empire.34 While 
Rada considered the anti-Ukrainian Little Russians to be thoroughly 
reactionary, which was far from being the case, Kievlianin equally 
incorrectly described the Ukrainian nationalists as cosmopolitans, 
socialists, and unprincipled revolutionaries.35
The situation was different, however, when both sides spoke about 
the unpoliticized Little Russians. For the Ukrainians, these were 
victims of Russification, “unconscious Ukrainians” who had to be 
saved for the Ukrainian nation.36 The Ukrainian discourse shared the 
Western view of the Russians as a half-wild Asiatic people incapable 
of living a European style of life. Politically, the eastern type of Great 
Russian was seen as incapable of democratically restructuring the 
state and recognizing the rights of minorities. This applied, moreover, 
not just to the advocates of monarchic order but also to the ally of the 
Ukrainian nationalists, the Constitutional Democratic (Cadet) Party. 
32	
Emotionally loaded terms for the anti-Ukrainian Little Russians abound in Chykalenko’s 
journals: “hostile pseudo-countrymen” (93, 306), “traitors” (142), “corrupted by Moscow” (340), 
“our converts who now call themselves Russian nationalists” (256) (Chykalenko, Shchodennyk, 
vol. 1).
33	
A reference to Hetman Ivan Mazepa (1639–1709) and a derogatory term for a “disloyal” 
Ukrainian.
34 
There are numerous examples in the collected writings of anti-Ukrainian journalists: Ukrainskii 
separatizm v Rossii (Moscow, 1998); Ukrainskaia bolezn' russkoi natsii (Moscow, 2004). 
Savenko made the following assessment of the German orientation of the Ukrainian camp: 
“The alliance of Ukrainomanes with the Germans is nothing new. The German tendency of the 
Mazepintsy started when relations between Russia and Germany cooled. And when two armed 
coalitions confronted each other in Europe, the Dual Alliance and the Triple Alliance, then the 
Ukrainomanes finally attached themselves to militaristic Germanness.... The whole plan of the 
Ukrainophiles, the creation of an independent Ukraine, rests on the external defeat of Russia. In 
the same way, Mazepa placed his hopes in Sweden and Charles XII” (A. Savenko, “Zametki,” 
Kievlianin, no. 38, 7 February 1909).
35	
“To have a clear idea about the Mazepintsy, one should not forget for a minute the dual character 
of this movement. On the one hand, they play with quasi-national feelings, inasmuch as they 
present themselves as passionate nationalists of the Ukrainian nation recently invented in 
Austria. On the other hand, these gentlemen are demagogues of the most sinister kind in the pure 
Haidamaky manner. When not afraid to say so, many of them, socialists and cosmopolitans, flout 
every nation, the Ukrainian included.... For this reason, they are prepared to subject themselves 
to the Austrians, the Germans, even to the devil himself. Since their true slogan is ‘Have-nots 
of the world, unite,’ these have-nots belong to the revolutionary socialist parties and form one of 
their offshoots” (“Mazepinskaia opasnost',” Kievlianin, no. 60, 1 March 1914).
36	
See, e.g., Chykalenko’s letter of 16 April 1906 to Stebnytsky, in which he writes that among the 
deputies to the State Duma “there were very few conscious Ukrainians, but of course many of 
Ukrainian origin” (Chykalenko and Stebnyts'kyi, Lystuvannia, 44).

chapter 4a: russia’s ukraine policy before 1917
309 
Yevhen Chykalenko, the leader of the TUP, wrote in his journal of 
Pavel Miliukov, the leader of the Cadets: “Twist it how you will, in the 
soul of every Katsap,37 even the most progressive of them, there sits a 
centralist.”38 The economic position of Russian Ukraine was described 
as colonial.39 The aspiration of many Little Russians to be closer to the 
Great Russians and their culture was dismissed as an error resulting 
from the traumas caused by enforced Russification. It was the credo 
of Chykalenko and the other Ukrainian nationalists that “all the 
Ruthenians, Little Russians, and Khokhly on the territory from the San 
to the Don should become nationally conscious Ukrainians.”40 
For the Russian nationalists who thought of themselves as 
Malorossy, the name Maloross had a “proud sound.” They competed 
with the Ukrainian nationalists for the cultural inheritance of 
Little Russia, claiming for themselves many key figures from the 
Ukrainian pantheon, including Shevchenko, and declaring them to be 
Little Russian.41 The KCRN saw itself as the true voice of the Little 
Russians: “I myself am a pure-blooded Maloross and love my country 
passionately, its wonderful nature, its customs, language, and legends, 
its history, just as I love the Khokhly with their laziness and their good-
heartedness. But with my whole strength I hate the Ukrainophiles, 
this traitorous and vile movement.” This was written a number of 
times by the leader of the club in the pages of Kievlianin.42 
From a certain time, the KCRN claimed a leadership role for itself 
among the Russian nationalists in the whole state. This claim was 
based, among other things, on its electoral successes: “While the Great 
Russian gubernias returned a significant number of revolutionaries 
even to the third State Duma, Little Russia sent thoroughly Russian 
nationalists to the Tauride Palace. And while Great Russian Moscow 
37	
A derogatory Ukrainian term for Russians.
38	
Chykalenko, Shchodennyk, 320.
39	
Stebnyts'kyi, “Ukraïna v ekonomitsi Rosiï,” in Vybrani tvory (Kyiv, 2009), 280.
40	
Chykalenko, Shchodennyk, vol. 1 (Kyiv, 2004), 281–82.
41	
Shevchenko’s status would decline from “genius” to “talented poet” in the discourse of the 
KCRN, and his symbolic role as “father of the nation” was played down. Cf. Kievlianin, no. 116, 
27 April 1908.
42	
A. I. Savenko, “Zametki,” Kievlianin, no. 134, 15 May 1908. This formula, created by Nikolai 
Rigelman and Sylvestr Hohotsky in the 1870s, became a kind of mantra in anti-Ukrainian Little 
Russian journalism. As Professor T. Lokot formulated it: “As a son of the Little Russian branch 
of the Russian family, I love everything Little Russian: the living Little Russian language (not 
the Ukrainian in which there is so much that is artificial and non-Little Russian), the Little 
Russian nature and, most important of all, the Little Russian people.” See T. Lokot', “Kak byt' s 
ukrainstvom,” Golos Moskvy, no. 277, 2 December 1911.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
310
and St. Petersburg served as the bulwark of revolution, Kyiv, the center 
of Little Russia, became the center of the whole Russian patriotic 
movement.”43 
Compared with the first half of the nineteenth century, the 
discourse concerning the Little Russians had now definitely changed. If 
the previous concern had been to “rediscover” the “Russian character” 
of the Little Russians, which had been suppressed and displaced 
through Polish influences, there was now hardly any mention of Polish 
influence at the beginning of the twentieth century, and the Russian 
character of the Little Russians was taken for granted (or imagined) as 
naturally given. Although this Russian character had to be “protected” 
from the “poisonous influence” of Ukrainian propaganda, the Little 
Russian variety of the Russian character was claimed to be even more 
“solid” than the Great Russian variety, which succumbed all too easily 
to the temptations of revolutionary ideas and the deceptive imaginings 
of minority milieus from the periphery of the empire.
The rise in the electoral strength of right-wing Russian 
nationalists,44 especially the KCRN, forced the Cadets to search 
for allies against the right among the supporters of the Ukrainian 
movement in the Southwestern Province. This cooperation was 
primarily tactical, since both sides had very different ideas about the 
“Ukrainian question” and problems of autonomy and federalism in the 
empire.45 However, driven by the logic of party competition, the Cadets 
took on certain demands from the Ukrainian camp and intervened in 
the State Duma on behalf of the oppressed Ukrainians. The KCRN, 
on the other hand, whenever the government took action against the 
43	
A. I. Savenko, “Zametki. Po povodu 100-letiia so dnia rozhdeniia Gogolia,” Kievlianin, no. 320, 
16 November 1908. 
44	
The political right in Russia was organizationally very divided. The largest organizations were 
the All-Russian National Union, the Union of the Russian People, the Union of the Archangel 
Michael, and the Black Hundred groups. Their programs were characterized by xenophobia, 
monarchism, and frequently by hostility to constitutionalism. The Union of 17 October 
represented the center right. It supported the constitutional reforms of the October Manifesto 
but differed from the Cadets on the issue of concessions to demands for autonomy from the 
nationalists on the imperial periphery. To date there has been only one monograph on the right-
wing movements: Daniil Kotsiubinskii, Russkii natsionalizm v nachale stoletiia: rozhdenie i 
gibel' ideologii Vserossiiskogo natsional'nogo soiuza (Moscow, 2001). The Kyiv Club of Russian 
Nationalists brought together a broad spectrum extending from the center right to the extremist 
supporters of the Black Hundreds.
45 
While the Ukrainians insisted on national autonomy as a first step and really wanted to achieve 
that status within a federation, the Cadets not only rejected federalism in principle for Russia but 
also rejected national autonomy. What the Cadets preferred was territorial autonomy, whereby 
territorial units would be smaller and their borders would not be determined by national or ethnic 
criteria.

chapter 4a: russia’s ukraine policy before 1917
311 
Ukrainian movement, called persistently for the suppression of the 
Ukrainian movement. It was against this background that both the 
KCRN and the TUP sought to influence public opinion in both capital 
cities regarding the Little Russians and the Ukrainian question. 
Right-wing representatives from the Southwestern Province 
liked to allow peasant deputies to speak in the Duma as if they were 
speaking on behalf of the whole Little Russian peasantry. Hryhorii A. 
Andriichuk, a deputy from the Podilia gubernia, declared: “We reject 
all Ukrainophile propaganda, as we have never considered ourselves 
non-Russian. With whatever insidiousness the self-ingratiating Mr. 
Miliukov and his consorts may attempt to sow discord between us 
and the Russians, they will not succeed. We Little Russians are just as 
Russian as the Great Russians.”46 
The most effective propaganda coup of the anti-Ukrainian Little 
Russians in Kyiv was a book published in 1912 by the Kyiv censor 
Sergei N. Shchegolev under the title The Ukrainian Movement as the 
Modern Stage of South Russian Separatism. Four editions of the book 
were published before the revolution, and Shchegolev, following 
the first, more detailed edition, published a shorter version, better 
suited for propaganda purposes. It contained a wealth of material 
(in this respect, the book still remains the most detailed account of 
the Ukrainian movement at the time) and attempted to demonstrate, 
with numerous quotations, the separatist nature of the Ukrainian 
movement. 
Petr Struve had broken with his fellow Cadets over the Ukrainian 
question, rejecting even a tactical alliance with the Ukrainian 
movement.47 But in the case of Struve, as in that of Shchegolev, we 
find in that same year a tendency to legalize the concept “Ukrainian” 
and reinterpret it, inasmuch as it was used as a synonym for “Little 
Russian”: “I am deeply convinced that a Little Russian or Ukrainian 
culture, as a local provincial culture, exists alongside the all-Russian 
culture and the all-Russian language.”48 
46	
Gosudarstvennaia Duma, Tretii sozyv. Stenograficheskie otchety. 1909, vol. 3 (St. Petersburg, 
1910), col. 3081. “We are Russians, and no one has the right to call us anything else,” said the 
peasant deputy Matvii Andriichuk from the Volhynia gubernia a year later. He was almost 
the namesake of his colleague from Podilia: see Gosudarstvennaia Duma, Tretii sozyv. 
Stenograficheskie otchety. Sessiia chetvertaia, vol. 1 (St. Petersburg, 1910), col. 1280. 
47	
But Struve criticized the “reactionaries” who “shout about ‘Mazepa treachery’ and paint a 
frightening picture of an Austro-Polish-Ukrainian war against Russia to separate Ukraine 
from Russia.” See P. B. Struve, “Obshcherusskaia kul'tura i ukrainskii partikuliarizm. Otvet 
Ukraintsu,” Russkaia mysl', 1912, no. 1: 85.
48	
P. B. Struve, ‘Obshcherusskaia kultura i ukrainskii partikuliarizm,’ 66.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
312
The Ukrainian camp very quickly concluded that it had to 
come up with an answer to Shchegolev in order to neutralize the 
propagandistic effect of his book in the imperial capitals.49 Petro 
Stebnytsky and Oleksandr Lototsky, both influential figures in 
Ukrainian circles in St. Petersburg, put together a thick brochure 
that was published anonymously in St. Petersburg in 1914 under the 
title The Ukrainian Question. This text, directed at liberal readers in 
the capital, is interesting inasmuch as it consciously sought to adapt 
not only the ideological content but also the conceptual system to the 
reader. The terms “Little Russia,” Khokhol, and Katsap are used without 
any of the negative connotations typical of the internal Ukrainian 
discourse. “Little Russia” and “Little Russian” are used repeatedly 
where, in the internal discourse, “Ukrainian” would most likely have 
been used.50 The authors attempt to demonstrate that assimilation 
in Ukraine had been only superficially successful and that the low 
level of literacy was a consequence of the fact that classes were held 
in what, for the people, was a foreign (Russian) language. They called 
for a halt to police persecution of the Ukrainian movement, since it 
was not questioning the territorial integrity of the empire but only 
struggling for autonomy. The concepts “Little Russia” and “Ukraine” 
were thereby not only being raised for discussion and reflection in 
the hostile political camp but were also being used to analyze and 
manipulate the conceptual system of their opponents.
The attitudes of various political forces to the Ukrainian question 
were most clearly expressed during a debate in the State Duma in 
February 1914, when deputies questioned the actions of the police 
against Ukrainian celebrations on the occasion of the centenary of 
the birth of Taras Shevchenko. The fact that the question had been 
signed by some dozens of deputies from different parties indicated 
that a relatively broad coalition had been formed in the Duma that 
was prepared to support certain demands of the Ukrainians. Miliukov, 
the main speaker for the Cadets, called on the government to seek an 
agreement with the moderate Ukrainian leaders who were prepared 
to accept autonomy within Russia in order not to play into the hands of 
the more radical Ukrainian nationalists such as Dmytro Dontsov, who 
were strongly anti-Russian. Savenko was Miliukov’s main opponent 
49	
Chykalenko and Stebnytsky discussed who should reply to Shchegolev that “Ukrainianism is 
not the result of some intrigue but rather, like the rebirth of any nation, has grown organically” 
(Chykalenko and Stebnyts'kyi, Lystuvannia, 284).
50	
Stebnyts'kyi, Vybrani tvory, 290–308. “Little Russia” and “Ukraine” are often used as synonyms, 
separated by a comma (ibid., 313).

chapter 4a: russia’s ukraine policy before 1917
313 
from the right and argued that the “moderate” view of Mykhailo 
Hrushevsky and other Ukrainian representatives was nothing but 
a tactic and that concessions would inevitably lead to an escalation 
of Ukrainian demands. Savenko demanded that “the police and the 
interior minister not be hindered in their work.”51 Some years later, in 
the emigration, Miliukov once against accused the Russian “nationalist 
intelligentsia,”’ who, in alliance with the state authorities after 1863, 
had gradually damaged relations with all the various peoples of the 
empire, including the Ukrainians.52 What one can say now is that, 
in the situation at the time, on the eve of the First World War, both 
speakers made comprehensible arguments. Miliukov was correct 
in pointing out that the policy of the right depended essentially on 
administrative measures. Savenko argued that the Ukrainians would 
not be satisfied with the concessions that Miliukov was willing to 
grant them. Miliukov himself was very well aware of this. By insisting 
in talks with his Ukrainian allies that, given the current relation of 
forces, they had to concentrate on practical measures, he was evading 
discussion of such contradictions. He attempted to persuade his 
Ukrainian partners that questions on which agreement could not be 
reached at that time would be resolved without difficulty after the 
overthrow of the autocracy. His expectation that the monarchy would 
collapse turned out to be perfectly accurate, as was his assessment 
that this would fundamentally change the nature of the Ukrainian 
question. What he did not foresee, however, was that the monarchy, 
and with it the empire, would collapse in such a manner that there 
would be no place in Russia either for his opponents, Savenko and his 
KCRN colleagues, or for his own partners, Chykalenko and his TUP 
colleagues, or for himself.
The First World War
On the eve of the First World War, the imperial authorities and the 
majority of the right and centrist forces represented in the Duma 
had no clear policy toward Ukraine. They did not want to exacerbate 
the tensions with the Ukrainians but, on the other hand, they had 
no idea how to reach an agreement with them. The great mass of the 
51	
Gosudarstvennaia Duma, IV sozyv. Sessiia II. Stenograficheskie otchety. Chast' II. Zasedaniie 
40. 19 February 1914 (St. Petersburg, 1914), cols. 901–15, 927–33.
52	
P. N. Miliukov, Natsional'nyi vopros. Proiskhozhdenie natsional'nosti i natsional'nye voprosy v 
Rossii (Prague, 1925), 154.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
314
population on the territory of present-day Ukraine was remote from 
politics and had no pronounced national consciousness.53 In Russia, 
Ukraine was seen as a threatened part of the imperial periphery and, 
at the same time, as a threatened part of national territory. In Ukraine/
Little Russia, the struggle between the Ukrainian national movement 
and Russian nationalism intensified, with the latter finding support 
among the anti-Ukrainian Little Russians. In light of a certain thaw 
in Russian relations with Poland, especially with Roman Dmowski’s 
National Democratic Party, Polish intrigue was no longer seen as 
playing the main role. This now shifted to German and Austrian 
machinations. Galicia, which had become a bulwark of the Ukrainian 
movement at the beginning of the twentieth century, was seen as 
playing a key role. At the same time, there were also strong Russophile 
circles in Galicia that were close to the anti-Ukrainian Little Russians 
in the Russian part of Ukraine. In Vienna, Galicia was similarly seen 
as a threatened borderland, as portrayed so vividly by Joseph Roth in 
his Radetzky March. 
The approaching war inevitably mobilized nationalists throughout 
the Russian Empire, especially in the western periphery. The irredentists 
made Russian nationalist plans for the “liberation of Russian land from 
the Austro-Polish and German yoke.” When Struve, in his famous 
article of 1914, “Great Russia and Holy Rus',” formulated Russia’s tasks 
in the war, the top of the list was “to unify and reunite all parts of the 
Russian nation,” in other words, to annex “Russian Galicia.” Using the 
language of organic unity typical in nationalist discourse, he employed 
the metaphor of healing the national body, arguing that the annexation 
of Galicia was necessary for the “inner healing of Russia,” since “the 
Little Russian branch, being part of Austria, had created and nourished 
the hateful so-called ‘Ukrainian’ question.”54 
The nationalists on the periphery, including the Ukrainians, were 
attempting feverishly to assess what might be the outcome of the war 
53	
The only Ukrainian daily newspaper, Rada, with a more or less constant subscriber base of two 
thousand between 1908 and 1911, was only able to increase the number of its subscribers to three 
thousand before the war. The right-wing Russian nationalist organizations had tens of thousands 
of members, for instance, in Volhynia. The membership of Black Hundred organizations exceeded 
one hundred thousand. These numbers, however, can be deceptive. Peasant membership was 
often purely formal and reflected the monarchism and anti-Semitism of these organizations 
rather than conscious support for Russian nationalism.
54	
Russkaia mysl', 1914, no. 12: 176–80.

chapter 4a: russia’s ukraine policy before 1917
315 
and thought that the long-hoped-for changes would now be possible.55 
The situation was radically heightened by the outbreak of war. Most of 
the peasants became armed soldiers, and millions of people, especially 
in the western borderlands, were forced out of their normal sphere of 
life and their traditional locations. The ethnic factor became immensely 
more important in politics and in mass consciousness.56 The daily 
horrors and harshness of war dispensed with conventional restraints 
at both the personal and the social level. In this context, it is also 
important that the neighboring imperial powers, Russia, Germany, and 
Austria-Hungary, had abandoned conventional limitations that they 
had followed for many decades in their mutual relations. For a long time, 
the macrosystem of continental empires in Eastern Europe had rested 
on the assumption that they would not attempt to destroy one another 
and depended on one another to manage the legacy of the Polish 
partitions. In the course of the war, however, which soon assumed the 
character of an all-out struggle for the very survival of empires, Vienna, 
Berlin, and St. Petersburg began actively to play the ethnic card to 
harm their enemies. They incited separatism in the competing powers 
while instigating repression against disloyal or suspect ethnic groups 
among their own subjects.57 It can be said that the explosive spread of 
nationalism in the western periphery of the Romanov Empire resulted 
in general from the hardships of “total war” and in particular from the 
new competitive policies of the imperial powers.
At the beginning of the war, Russian policy as regards the 
Ukrainian question was essentially limited to repression of Ukrainian 
activists. Ukrainian newspapers were closed down, and Hrushevsky, 
the leader of the movement, was exiled to Simbirsk. As early as the 
autumn of 1914, the Russian army occupied all of eastern and part 
of western Galicia.58 In their policy toward the Galician Ruthenians, 
55 
For the Poles, the First World War meant reunification and independence for Poland. For the 
Ukrainians, the war also strengthened the idea of unifying all of what they considered to be 
Ukrainian territory. The Armenians hoped to gain eastern Anatolia with the help of the Entente, 
and the Jews and Baltic Germans hoped for a German victory. All nationalists in the Russian 
Empire hoped that the autocracy would be replaced by a democratic system and that centralization 
would give way to autonomy or federalism. Some Muslims had the idea of a pan-Muslim or pan-
Turkic union.
56	
Mark von Hagen, “The Great War and the Mobilization of Ethnicity,” in Post-Soviet Political 
Order: Conflict and State Building, ed. Barnett R. Rubin and Jack Snyder (London, 1998), 34–57.
57	
See especially Eric Lohr, Nationalizing the Russian Empire: The Campaign against Enemy 
Aliens during World War I (Cambridge, Mass., 2003).
58	
On occupation policy, see the book by Aleksandra Bakhturina, which, though questionable in its 
analysis, is rich in factual detail: Politika Rossiiskoi imperii v Vostochnoi Galitsii v gody Pervoi 
Mirovoi voiny (Moscow, 2000). See also Mark von Hagen, War in a European Borderland: 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
316
there was a complete lack of coordination among military and civilian 
officials and the representatives of the Orthodox hierarchy. They each 
undermined the policies being followed by other branches of the 
administration. The lack of clear political directives played a key role. 
In general, officials tended to regard the local inhabitants as Russians 
and saw the Greek Catholic Church and Ukrainian identity as 
something external, superficial, imposed by Vienna, the Vatican, and 
the Poles, but without any support among the population and therefore 
as something that could be got rid of easily once Russian power had 
been established. Ideas of this kind led to repression of the Ukrainian 
language and the Greek Catholic Church. Ukrainian newspapers and 
printing presses were closed down. Prominent representatives of the 
Greek Catholic Church were arrested, including the metropolitan, 
Andrei (Roman Maria Aleksander) Sheptytsky. This provoked anti-
Russian sentiment among the local Ukrainian population. Defeats 
in the summer of 1915 forced the Russian army to withdraw from 
Galicia. More than a hundred thousand Russophile Galicians, who 
feared repression by Austrian officials and forced conscription 
into the Austro-Hungarian army, also fled with the Russians. The 
occupying Central Powers supported the Ukrainian nationalists and 
suppressed Russian nationalists in the occupied territories.59 Under 
these changed circumstances, Russia now had to struggle to win the 
loyalty and sympathy of the Ukrainians, while Germany, which had a 
free hand in the Ukrainian question since there were no Ukrainians 
in the German Empire, now joined the list of players in the Ukrainian 
question alongside Poland, Vienna, and the Vatican.
Shortly before the second planned occupation of Galicia in 1916, 
the Russian agent Vsevolod P. Svatkovsky, who was active in Bern and 
had some influence on Russian policy in Ukraine, made an analysis 
of the experience of the first occupation. He considered it a serious 
Occupations and Occupation Plans in Galicia and Ukraine, 1914–1918 (Seattle and London, 
2007); Miller, The Romanov Empire, chap. 7.
59	
Cf. Vejas Gabriel Liulevicius, War Land on the Eastern Front: Culture, National Identity, 
and German Occupation in World War I (Cambridge, 2000); Frank Grelka, Die ukrainische 
Nationalbewegung unter deutscher Besatzungsherrschaft 1918 und 1941/42 (Wiesbaden, 2005). 
Compared to the earlier policy of the Russian Empire, quite revolutionary measures were taken, 
especially in relation to the Ukrainian language. Following an order from Marshal Hindenburg, 
the language of the local inhabitants (Polish, Lithuanian, and Belarusian) was to be respected 
in Ober Ost, while Russian was to be prohibited in the press, education, and administration. 
The hierarchy of languages in the Russian Empire was turned on its head. Of course, this had 
no immediate effect on the spread of particular languages, but it did have important symbolic 
consequences. For the first time, knowledge of the languages of the periphery became a real 
advantage. A similar policy was followed in Ukraine.

chapter 4a: russia’s ukraine policy before 1917
317 
mistake that “in 1914–15, relying on the support of Russophile political 
circles in Galicia and of the nonpolitical majority of the Russo-
Galician population, we not only completely neglected the Ukrainians 
and Ukrainianism but let them know, in the clearest possible manner, 
what our feelings and intentions were.”60 “The almost complete 
disappearance of Ukrainian separatism at the beginning was 
interpreted as proof of the weakness of Ukrainianism and the strength 
of the Russophile elements in the region, which, however, was not the 
true cause of this phenomenon. We had not noticed the chief factor in 
the political life of the Russian population in this region, namely its 
Polonophobia. For this population, Russian occupation had put an end 
to Polish rule. Hostility among Ukrainian circles in Galicia to Russia 
and to the ‘Muscovites’ existed more in theory, while their hostility 
to the Poles was a traditional phenomenon replete with practical 
political and economic implications. This hostility was the strongest 
characteristic of the whole Russian population of the region, our 
own as well as that of the Ukrainian camp.”61 Svatkovsky criticized 
Bishop Yevlogii and other persecutors of the Greek Catholics, whose 
repressive policies had turned the Ukrainians against Russia.62
Russian foreign agents paid close attention to changes in 
Vienna’s and Berlin’s Ukrainian policy. They reported not only on the 
repressive measures against Russophile Ruthenians at the beginning 
of the war, including the creation of internment camps at Thalerhof 
and Theresienstadt, where tens of thousands were detained and 
thousands died, but also on their concessions to the Ukrainians. For 
the first time since the 1870s, a non-Polish governor was appointed, 
General Hermann Kolar, who ordered his officials to respect the 
Ukrainian language.63 The Austrian heir to the throne, Karl, then 
made a journey to Galicia during which he greeted the Ukrainians 
in their own language. Ukrainians were now frequently promoted to 
officer rank in the Austro-Hungarian army. Svatkovsky was also of 
the opinion that Hungary had its own Ukrainian policy, the goal of 
which was to bring all the Ukrainian territories within the Habsburg 
Monarchy under its rule in a kind of autonomy based on the Croatian 
60	
AVPRI, fond 135, op. 474, d. 27, 4.
61	
Ibid.
62	
Ibid., 4–6.
63	
On Vienna’s policy toward the Ukrainians in Galicia and Bukovyna, see Serhii Popyk, Ukraïntsi 
v Avstriï 1914–1918. Avstriis'ka polityka v ukraïns'komu pytanni periodu Velykoï viiny (Kyiv 
and Chernivtsi, 1999); Ereignisse in der Ukraine, 1914–1922: deren Bedeutung und historische 
Hintergründe, ed. Theophil Hornykiewycz, 4 vols. (Philadelphia, 1966–69). See also chapter 1b 
in the present volume.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
318
model. This could then serve as a strong bastion against Russia.64 
St. Petersburg was particularly concerned about reports of 
prisoner-of-war camps erected by the Germans and Austrians where 
Russian soldiers of Ukrainian origin were separated from the rest 
and received preferential treatment.65 There is a special file in the 
archives of the Special Political Department of the Foreign Ministry66 
with statements from soldiers who had escaped from the prisoner-
of-war camps, as well as a report from a chargé d’affaires in Bern, 
Mikhail M. Bibikov, who had succeeded in visiting two of those camps 
in Rastatt and Salzwedel. Bibikov estimated that about four hundred 
thousand men were being held there. Provisions were “much better 
than in the Russian camps.” The soldiers knew that their privileged 
treatment was due to the fact that they were Ukrainians. They were 
being given classes in reading and writing in the usual Galician 
phonetic orthography. They also had lessons in Ukrainian history 
and literature. There were even Ukrainian newspapers. According 
to Bibikov’s report, there were around forty thousand men who were 
particularly receptive to this propaganda and were being trained 
as members of a future Ukrainian army, engaging in maneuvers in 
special Ukrainian uniforms. “This propaganda,” wrote Bibikov, “has a 
solid foundation. The results achieved are very satisfactory.”67 
The Special Political Department of the Foreign Ministry, originally 
created to influence the Slavs in Austria-Hungary, soon made the 
Ukrainian question one of its priorities. In addition to monitoring 
the policy of hostile powers, it worked on proposals for changing 
Russian policy. St. Petersburg now began seriously to discuss possible 
measures to secure the goodwill of the Ukrainians. In the summer of 
1915, Mykhailo Tyshkevych, an estate owner from the Kyiv gubernia 
who saw himself as Ukrainian, socially conservative and loyal to the 
empire and its rulers, sent a declaration of loyalty by telegram to the 
tsar. Nicholas II replied, on 24 August 1915, in a telegram signed by 
Court Minister Vladimir B. Frederiks: “Sa Majesté m’a donné l’ordre de 
vous remercier ainsi que le groupe d’Ukrainiens réunis en Suisse pour 
les sentiments exprimés dans votre télégramme.”68 The revolutionary 
64 
АVPRI, fond 135, op. 474, d. 27, 8.
65	
Ibid., 44–61.
66	
Ibid., 26.
67	
Ibid., 6ff. See also chapters 1b and 3b in the present volume.
68 
Translation: “His Majesty has given me the task of expressing his thanks to you and to the group 
of Ukrainians in Switzerland for the sentiments expressed in your telegram” (АVPRI, fond 135, 
op. 474, d. 27, 12).

chapter 4a: russia’s ukraine policy before 1917
319 
significance of this telegram for official discourse consists in the fact 
that the word “Ukrainian” is used in an official document instead of 
the previously obligatory “Little Russian,” in what sounds like a direct 
quotation from the ruler himself. At the end of 1915, Hrushevsky was 
permitted to move from faraway Simbirsk to the university city of 
Kazan. The possibility of opening two Ukrainian secondary schools 
was discussed, and there were plans for the successor to the throne, 
accompanied by his orderly, the Little Russian Derevenko, to visit 
Galicia when the province was occupied again. Recommendations 
were made on how to handle the Greek Catholic Church, stressing the 
need to refrain from repressive measures of any kind. Lists were made 
of Ukrainian politicians, including politicians from Galicia, who could 
be attracted to the Russian side. Recommendations for achieving this 
stressed the overriding importance of the national question. It was 
therefore recommended that contact be established with individuals 
who would be willing to accept autonomy within Russia, and that 
such contacts should include even Ukrainian socialists of Borot'ba 
(Struggle), who, although they were “socialists,” were also “altogether 
decent people.”69 Svatkovsky’s opinion was that these concessions 
could be kept within a tight framework, since the unification of all 
Ukrainians in one state was so important to Ukrainian leaders that 
they would be willing to make extensive compromises with the 
Russian government, given that Russia alone was capable of uniting 
all the Ukrainian lands.70 
Svatkovsky clearly thought it important to prepare the ground 
for an agreement on the Ukrainian question with the Allied powers, 
especially the United States. In 1916 he sent his agent Tsetlinsky to the 
USA to make contact with, among others, Ukrainian emigrants living 
there.71 It is difficult to assess what further practical steps might have 
been taken in this revision of Ukrainian policy, as the monarchy was 
overthrown in February 1917.
The First World War and the Russian Revolution significantly 
changed the balance of forces in Ukraine. Ukrainian organizations 
were stronger, often thanks to the support of the warring powers. 
Armed Ukrainian units had been created, not just in the Austro-
Hungarian army (the Ukrainian Legion) but also, following a command 
from General Lavr Kornilov in the summer of 1917, in the Russian 
69	
Ibid., 48–55.
70 
АVPRI, fond 135, op. 474, d. 32, 3.
71 
АVPRI, fond 135, op. 474, d. 27, 60–61.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
320
army. At the same time, anti-Ukrainian forces had been significantly 
weakened. In Galicia this had to do with the exodus of Russophile 
Ruthenians in 1915 and the repression of Russophiles by Austria-
Hungary. In Russian Ukraine, many Russian nationalists either left 
the areas occupied by the Central Powers in 1915 and 1917–18 or 
became targets of the occupying powers. In 1916–17 the Bolsheviks in 
Ukraine sounded the death knell for the Russian nationalists, whom 
they regarded as the main enemy. Members of the KCRN (more than 
seventy people) captured by the Bolsheviks when they took Kyiv were 
shot.
Disputes between the supporters of a Little Russian or Ukrainian 
orientation continued during the interwar period in the emigration 
and in Galicia, which now belonged to Poland. In Soviet Ukraine, 
korenizatsiia (indigenization) represented a radical break with 
the Ukrainian policy of the Russian Empire and of the Russian 
nationalists.72 The concept of the all-Russian nation, which was 
supposed to embrace Great, Little and White Russians, was rejected, 
and the very notion of Maloross was forbidden. The Ukrainian nation 
was recognized by the Soviet authorities, taking territorial shape in 
the form of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic, which conducted 
an intensive policy of Ukrainization during the 1920s. 
72	
Cf. Miller, The Romanov Empire, chap. 7 and Conclusion.

4b. The Ukrainian Policy of Bolshevik Russia, 
1917–1922
Bogdan Musial
On 17 March 1917, two days after the abdication of the tsar, the 
Central Rada was formed in Kyiv and immediately called for 
Ukrainian autonomy and the transformation of the tsarist empire 
into a federation of free nations. Very soon, all parties and social 
organizations in Ukraine supported this demand. Very few were 
thinking of independence at that time. Against this background, the 
Rada sent a memorandum to the Provisional Government in May 1917 
demanding far-reaching Ukrainian autonomy, even to the point of 
creating Ukrainian armed forces.1 
At the beginning of June 1917, the Provisional Government 
rejected these demands, whereupon the Rada not only did not 
concede but radicalized its position. It now claimed for itself the right 
to represent the Ukrainian people and, on 16 June, established the 
General Secretariat as the future government. On 2 July, a delegation 
from the Provisional Government arrived in Kyiv to negotiate with 
the Rada. Both sides wanted a compromise, and the delegation signed 
a document recognizing the autonomy of Ukraine.2 
In the weeks and months that followed, the Rada adopted a 
number of measures, made decisions, and issued demands on the 
Provisional Government that went far beyond autonomy. The result 
was increasingly sharp conflicts with the Provisional Government. 
On 18 July 1917, the Rada declared the General Secretariat to be the 
supreme ruling body in Ukraine and, in September, openly demanded 
the right of self-determination for Ukraine. On 2 November, the Third 
All-Ukrainian Military Congress was held in Kyiv, attended by some 
three thousand delegates representing about three million Ukrainian 
soldiers in the Russian army. The All-Ukrainian Constituent Assembly 
1 
M. V. Sokolova, “Velikoderzhavnost' protiv natsionalizma: Vremennoe pravitel'stvo i 
Ukrainskaia tsentral'naia rada (fevral'–oktiabr' 1917),” accessed 1 November 2010, http://www.
hist.msu.ru/Labs/UkrBel/sokolova.htm; Oleh Pidhainy, The Ukrainian-Polish Problem in the 
Dissolution of the Russian Empire, 1914–1917 (Toronto and New York, 1962), 44–62.
2	
M. V. Sokolova, Istoriia Rossii. XX vek: 1894–1939 (Moscow, 2009), 443–45. The recognition 
of Ukrainian autonomy created a crisis in the Provisional Government, as a result of which the 
governing coalition fell apart. See Orlando Figes, A People’s Tragedy: Russian Revolution 1891–
1924 (London, 1996), 420.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
322
was announced while the congress was in session, paving the way for 
Ukrainian independence.3
Events unfolded very rapidly in Ukraine following the October 
putsch of 7 November 19174 in St. Petersburg and the Bolshevik 
seizure of power. The Rada rejected the Bolshevik claim to rule in 
Ukraine. The Bolshevik attempt to take power in Kyiv by force failed. 
Bolshevik forces were disarmed and driven from the city. The Rada 
also had to assert itself against the claim to power by representatives 
of the Provisional Government in Kyiv and the general staff of the 
Kyiv military district. On 11 and 12 November, forces loyal to the 
Rada fought against Russian forces in Kyiv and won. The pro-Russian 
troops then left the city, and the Rada assumed power.5 Some days 
later, on 20 November, the Rada proclaimed the Ukrainian People’s 
Republic. In its Third Universal, the Rada claimed full legislative and 
administrative powers for itself and for the General Secretariat as the 
government of the new republic. In its proclamation, it rejected the 
Bolsheviks’ claim to power but declared, at the same time, that the 
new republic wanted to establish a federation, the nature of which 
was not clearly defined, with the other nations of the old Russia on 
the basis of equality.6 The proclamation of 20 November did not 
therefore signify a final break with Russia.7
The measures taken by the new Ukrainian government in the 
military sphere were very important. The troops on the southwestern 
and Romanian front were renamed the “Ukrainian front” and 
placed under the command of the Rada government. This involved 
units from Brest-Litovsk all the way to Romania. Symon Petliura, 
a journalist, took over the important post of minister of war in the 
Ukrainian government with the task of creating a Ukrainian army out 
of these units. He was only partly successful in this task, as most of the 
Ukrainian soldiers had left their units and gone home.8
3	
Sokolova, “Velikoderzhavnost' protiv natsionalizma”; Pidhainy, The Ukrainian-Polish Problem, 
63–79.
4	
25 October according to the Julian calendar.
5	
Pidhainy, The Ukrainian-Polish Problem, 82–85.
6	
D. V. Iarosh, “Universaly Ukraïns'koï Tsentral'noï rady – Konstytutsiini akty ukraïns'koï 
derzhavnosti 1917–1988 rr.: ïkh zminy ta istorychne znachennia,” Universitets'ki naukovi 
zapysky, 2006, nos. 3–4: 41; Pidhainy, The Ukrainian-Polish Problem, 85–88.
7	
Ibid.
8	
Viktor Savchenko, Dvenadtsat' voin za Ukrainu (Kharkiv, 2006), chap. 1, accessed 6 November 
2010, 
http://militera.lib.ru/h/savchenko_va/index.html; 
Pidhainy, 
The 
Ukrainian-Polish 
Problem, 96.

chapter 4b: the ukrainian policy of bolshevik russia, 1917–1922
323 
The Bolshevik Right of Self-Determination— 
“An Instrument in the Struggle for Socialism”
With regard to domestic policy, the most important watchwords and 
goals of the Ukrainian People’s Republic nominally differed very little 
from those of the Bolsheviks, with the exception of centralization and 
basic rights. In addition to this, on 15 November 1917, five days before 
the proclamation of the Ukrainian People’s Republic, the Bolsheviks 
issued their Declaration on the Rights of the Peoples of Russia. This 
declaration, signed by Lenin, Stalin, and Bukharin, promised freedom 
of self-determination to all the nationalities of Russia, including the 
right of secession and the creation of independent states.9
Nevertheless, the Bolsheviks rejected the Rada’s proclamation of 
the Ukrainian People’s Republic because what they really wanted, from 
the beginning, was a centralized “socialist” state over which they could 
rule. Stalin, in a conversation at the beginning of April 1918 with one 
of the journalists on the Bolshevik paper Pravda, explained Bolshevik 
goals with regard to the future shape of the Russian political system: 
“In Russia...the forced unity of tsarism will give way to a voluntary 
federalism, so that this federalism, in the course of time, may give way 
to an equally voluntary and fraternal unity of the working masses of 
all Russia’s nations and ethnic groups. Federalism in Russia will be a 
transitional stage to a future socialist unity.”10 
According to Stalin, the central administrative ruling body of 
the Russian Federative Republic, including not only Ukraine but also 
Poland and all other peripheral regions of the old tsarist empire, was 
the Council of People’s Commissars, in other words, the Bolshevik 
leadership.11 The Council of People’s Commissars (Sovet Narodnykh 
Komissarov, hereafter CPC) was established under Lenin’s leadership 
on the day following the October putsch. Stalin was the people’s 
commissar responsible for nationality policy.
The right to self-determination, like all other rights, was 
interpreted by the Bolsheviks in their own way (“dialectically”). They 
used it to legitimize and assert their own claim to power (“socialist 
unitarism”). Stalin declared this openly on 15 January 1918: “The 
principle of self-determination must become an instrument in the 
9	
Istoriia Sovetskoi Konstitutsii. Sbornik dokumentov 1917–1957 (Moscow, 1957), 19ff.
10	
Stalin’s interview with a Pravda journalist on the organization of the Russian Federative 
Republic, published in Pravda, nos. 62–63, 3–4 April 1918.
11	
Ibid.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
324
struggle for socialism and subordinate to the principles of socialism.”12 
From the outset, for ideological reasons, the Bolsheviks did not 
accept the formation of national states on the periphery of the old 
tsarist empire, regardless of their political orientation, and they used 
all possible means to counter such attempts. The case of Ukraine is 
exemplary, especially as the country was not just ideologically and 
politically but also economically important to the Bolsheviks. What 
was at stake was food (Ukraine had been the granary of the tsarist 
empire), energy (coal), and the steel industry of the Donets Basin. It 
comes as no surprise, therefore, that after the putsch and their initially 
failed attempt in Kyiv, the Bolsheviks kept up their efforts to conquer 
Ukraine. They attempted an uprising at the beginning of December 
1918. Troops loyal to them attempted once again to use force to take 
power in Kyiv and other cities. These attempts were rebuffed by 
Ukrainian troops.13
A few days later, on 17 December, the Bolshevik regime issued 
its Manifesto to the Ukrainian People: “...we, the Council of People’s 
Commissars, recognize the Ukrainian People’s Republic and its right 
to secede from Russia or enter into a treaty with the Russian Republic 
on federal or similar relations between them. We, the Council of 
People’s Commissars, recognize at once, unconditionally and without 
reservations, everything that pertains to the Ukrainian people’s 
national rights and national independence.”14 At the same time, 
Lenin’s manifesto was an ultimatum to the Rada, demanding that it 
submit itself militarily to the Bolshevik regime in order to join with 
the Bolsheviks in the struggle against counterrevolution. Further, 
Lenin demanded that the Rada cease attempts to disarm Bolshevik 
forces in Ukraine and that Ukrainian forces, which should join with 
the Bolsheviks to fight anti-Bolshevik insurgents in southern Ukraine, 
place themselves under Bolshevik command. The ultimatum also 
stated that, if no satisfactory reply were received within forty-eight 
hours, the CPC would declare war on Ukraine.15
On the same day that Lenin issued his ultimatum, the All-
Ukrainian Congress of Soldiers’, Peasants’, and Workers’ Deputies 
12	
Stalin’s speech to the Third All-Russian Congress of Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’, and 
Peasants’ Deputies, held from 10 to 18 January 1918, in Stalin, Works, vol. 4, available at: 
http://www.marxists.org/reference/archive/stalin/works/1918/01/15.htm.
13	
Savchenko, Dvenadtsat' voin za Ukrainu.
14	
“Manifesto to the Ukrainian People with an Ultimatum to the Ukrainian Rada,” 16 December 
1917, in Lenin, Collected Works, vol. 26 (Moscow, 1964), 361–63.
15	
Ibid.

chapter 4b: the ukrainian policy of bolshevik russia, 1917–1922
325 
began in Kyiv. The congress had been initiated by the Ukrainian 
Bolsheviks, who hoped that they could take power by “legal” means. 
The Rada government supported the calling of the congress, which 
began on 17 December. The Bolsheviks, however, found themselves in 
a minority. The great majority of delegates supported the Rada, which 
rejected Lenin’s ultimatum and declared itself neutral in the Russian 
civil war. Most of the Bolshevik delegates then left the congress 
and went to Kharkiv.16 The Ukrainian People’s Republic was now at 
war with Bolshevik Russia. When the ultimatum of 17 December 
expired, the CPC declared war on the Ukrainian People’s Republic (18 
December). On the same day, the CPC appointed Volodymyr Antonov-
Ovsiienko commander in chief of Bolshevik forces in the war against 
the Ukrainian People’s Republic and against anti-Bolshevik forces 
in southern Ukraine.17 In Kharkiv, the Bolsheviks created pseudo-
Ukrainian ruling structures as a way of legitimizing externally their 
claim to power in Ukraine. The Bolshevik delegates from the All-
Ukrainian Congress, who had left Kyiv on 18 December and gone to 
Kharkiv, proclaimed the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic there on 
22 December 1917.18 Three days later, the Bolsheviks formed a Central 
Executive Committee and transferred to it all power in Ukraine. On 
26 December, in a telegram to the CPC, the Executive Committee 
declared, in the name of “the Ukrainian people,” that it opposed 
war with Russia, and concluded with these words: “In the name of 
the young Soviet power in Ukraine, we send our greetings to the 
consolidating all-Russian Soviet power.”19
On 29 December 1917, the CPC welcomed the formation of 
the “Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic” and assured its “brother 
republic” of its full support “in the struggle for peace.”20 This created 
the “international” basis for the legitimation of its claim to power in 
Ukraine. On 1 January 1918, Lenin named Sergo Ordzhonikidze, a 
close confidant of Stalin, as special commissar for Ukraine. His task 
was to unite and lead the activities of Soviet organizations in Ukraine 
16	
Pidhainy, The Ukrainian-Polish Problem, 96–99. Pidhainy writes of more than 2,500 delegates, 
of whom only 60 were Bolsheviks. See also Savchenko, Dvenadtsat' voin za Ukrainu. According 
to Savchenko, there were 1,575 peasant and soldier delegates and 125 Bolshevik delegates.
17	
Savchenko, Dvenadtsat' voin za Ukrainu.
18	
Pidhainy, The Ukrainian-Polish Problem, 96–99.
19	
 Telegram from the All-Ukrainian Central Executive Committee to the CPC, 26 December 1917, 
in Dokumenty po istorii grazhdanskoi voiny v SSSR, ed. I. Mints and E. Gorodetskii, vol. 1 
(Moscow, 1940), 54ff. 
20	
Declaration of the CPC, 29 December 1917, ibid., 57ff.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
326
in all fields (such as military, provisions, and banking).21 From mid-
December, Bolshevik units were concentrated in Kharkiv and the 
surrounding area, and it was from here that they were to conquer 
Ukraine. Those troops of the Black Sea Fleet who had sided with the 
Bolsheviks operated in southern Ukraine. By the beginning of January 
1918, they had taken a number of towns on the Black Sea coast.
The Rada attempted to organize resistance but had inadequate 
troops to counter the Bolshevik offensive. In the days and weeks 
that followed, the Bolsheviks captured eastern Ukraine and made 
advances in the south. In January 1918 the Red troops captured many 
towns in the east and south and advanced on Kyiv. Ukrainian forces 
were disintegrating. On the night of 29 January, the Bolsheviks in 
Kyiv organized an uprising with the participation of workers from city 
factories. Street battles followed, lasting a number of days, until troops 
loyal to the Rada managed to suppress the uprising on 4 February. 
Nevertheless, the hours of the Rada government seemed numbered in 
those days, as it was only in Kyiv and the surrounding area that they 
were able to hold out. Four days later, on 8 February, Bolshevik troops 
took Kyiv, and the Rada fled to Zhytomyr. By February, the whole of 
eastern and central Ukraine was in Bolshevik hands.22
The Central Powers Drive the Bolsheviks out of Ukraine
Support from the Central Powers meant that the Bolshevik occupation 
of Ukraine did not spell the end of the first Ukrainian nation-state. 
German troops began an offensive along the whole eastern front 
on 18 February 1918 and advanced 250 km in five days. They met 
with no resistance, as the Russian army had actually disintegrated. 
The Germans invaded Ukraine, followed ten days later by Austro-
Hungarian troops.23 Confronted with the German advance, the 
Bolsheviks reluctantly accepted the severe peace conditions set down 
by the Central Powers. On 3 March 1918, both parties signed a peace 
treaty in Brest-Litovsk. In this treaty, Bolshevik Russia gave up Poland, 
Courland, Latvia, Lithuania, Estonia, Finland, and Ukraine. “As a 
European power, Russia reverted economically and territorially to the 
21	
Lenin’s nomination of Sergo Ordzhonikidze as special commissar for Ukraine, 1 January 1918, 
in Leninskii sbornik, vol. 25 (Moscow, 1945), 11. 
22	
For more detail, see Iaroslav Tynchenko, Persha ukraïns'ko-bil'shovyts'ka viina, hruden' 1917–
berezen' 1918 (Kyiv and Lviv, 1996); Savchenko, Dvenadtsat' voin za Ukrainu, 493.
23	
For more detail, see Savchenko, Dvenadtsat' voin za Ukrainu, chap. 3.

chapter 4b: the ukrainian policy of bolshevik russia, 1917–1922
327 
position of Muscovy in the seventeenth century.”24 Russia lost one-
third of its prewar population, four-fifths of its coal and iron reserves, 
and one-third of its grain.25
For Russia, the most painful loss was Ukraine because of its 
grain-growing areas and heavy industry (coal, iron ore, and steel). 
Karl Radek, one of the leading Bolsheviks, lamented the economic 
consequences of the Brest treaty: “The Brest peace treaty separated 
from Russia the industrial regions of Poland, the Baltic, and the 
Donets Basin, as well as the most fertile regions of Ukraine. It reduced 
the productive capacity of the Russian economy and hampered the 
task of healing the wounds of war...which can only be brought about 
by means of socialist organized production.”26
The provisions of the Brest-Litovsk peace treaty were a humiliating 
defeat with serious consequences for the Bolshevik regime, if it were to 
last. Stalin spoke of a partition that the Central Powers had put in place 
between “socialist Russia and the revolutionary West.”27 Added to this 
were the catastrophic economic consequences of its territorial losses.
Not surprisingly, the Bolshevik regime never accepted its 
territorial losses. This was particularly true with respect to Ukraine. 
The Communist Party (Bolshevik) of Ukraine or CP(B)U was formed 
in April 1918. At its first party congress, in July 1918, it decided to 
affiliate itself with the Russian Communist Party (Bolshevik) as 
a regional organization. One of the initiators of the decision, the 
Russian German Emmanuil Kviring, declared that “the independence 
of Ukraine had no economic foundation” and that a prolonged 
separation of Ukraine from Russia would only be possible with foreign 
support. Mykola Skrypnyk, another delegate at the party congress, 
declared: “The independence [of Ukraine] serves as a cover for the 
counterrevolutionary struggle against Soviet power.”28 
In November 1918, one year after the October putsch, Central and 
Eastern Europe were again in the midst of upheavals that would turn 
the political map of the region on its head. In the autumn of 1918, the 
24	
Figes, A People’s Tragedy, 548.
25	
Sokolova, Istoriia Rossii, 501. See chapter 3a in the present volume.
26	
RGASPI, fond 5, op. 1, d. 3068, The economic consequences of the Brest-Litovsk peace treaty. 
Points of a speech by Karl Radek, no date (1918), 166ff.
27	
Stalin’s article “Partition,” Zhizn' natsional'nostei, no. 2, 17 November 1918.
28	
Quoted from Elena Borisenok, “Vliianie pol'skogo faktora na politiku bol'shevikov po 
natsional'nomu voprosu. Bol'sheviki i ukrainskii vopros v 1917–1923 godakh,” in Revoliutsionnaia 
Rossiia 1917 goda i pol'skii vopros: novye istochniki, novye vzgliady, ed. M. Volos and A. 
Orekhov (Moscow, 2009), 180ff.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
328
German front was facing collapse, and the German government was 
forced to ask for a truce with the Western powers. This was signed on 11 
November 1918 in Compiègne and amounted to a capitulation. Article 
11 of the truce agreement provided for an immediate withdrawal of all 
German troops in the East, including from former Russian territories 
such as Ukraine, back to the German borders of 1914. Article 15 
annulled the Brest-Litovsk treaty.29 In the previous week, on 3–4 
November, Austria-Hungary had signed a truce agreement with the 
Entente also agreeing to withdraw its troops immediately from the 
occupied territories and demobilize its army.30 The Danube Monarchy 
collapsed shortly afterward.
A power vacuum existed in Central and Eastern Europe in the 
autumn of 1918, leading to the creation of a number of new states. 
A completely new situation also developed in Ukraine following the 
withdrawal of the Central Powers. Hetman Skoropadsky fled to Berlin 
in December 1918. The Directory took power in Kyiv, led by Symon 
Petliura and Volodymyr Vynnychenko, and revived the Ukrainian 
People’s Republic. The Bolshevik regime once again renewed its 
claim to power in Ukraine, as in the other territories evacuated by 
the Central Powers. But the Bolsheviks always took care to ensure 
that their expansion had the appearance of granting the right to 
self-determination. On 29 November 1918, Lenin sent a telegram 
to Jukums Vācietis, commander in chief of the Red Army, with the 
following instructions: “As our troops advance westward and into 
Ukraine, provisional provincial governments should be created with 
the task of establishing soviets in the area. This has the good side that 
it prevents the chauvinists in Ukraine, Lithuania, Latvia, and Estonia 
from portraying our advance as an occupation and creates a favorable 
climate for the further advance of our troops.”31 
Two weeks previously, on 17 November, Lenin and Stalin had 
established the Ukrainian Revolutionary Council, which was to 
lead the struggle in Ukraine. Three days later, on 20 November, the 
Bolsheviks (“with the participation and direct support of Stalin”) 
established the Provisional Workers’ and Peasants’ Government of 
29 
“Waffenstillstandsbedingungen der Alliierten, Compiègne, 11. November 1918”: http://www.
dhm.de/lemo/html/dokumente/waffenstillstand/index.html.
30 
An English version of the truce agreement of 3–4 November 1918 at http://www.forost.
ungarisches-institut.de/pdf/19181103–1.pdf.
31	
Telegram from Lenin to the Supreme Commander, 29 November 1918, Leninskii sbornik, vol. 
34 (Moscow, 1945), 53ff. According to the reference note (ibid., 54), it was Stalin who wrote the 
telegram (apart from the final sentence, not given here).

chapter 4b: the ukrainian policy of bolshevik russia, 1917–1922
329 
Ukraine.32 On 29 November 1918, this government, led by Khristian 
Rakovsky, proclaimed the restoration of Soviet power in Ukraine. 
A few weeks later, the Bolsheviks began their offensive against the 
Ukrainian People’s Republic.33 At the end of 1918 Bolshevik troops, 
portrayed externally as “Soviet Ukrainian insurgents,” began 
their attack on independent Ukraine. They occupied Kharkiv on 3 
January and continued their advance. Ukrainian national units were 
disintegrating. Soldiers deserted, formed themselves into bands, 
robbed, plundered, and murdered. Whole units went over to the 
Bolsheviks. Ukraine sank into chaos, and the government of the young 
republic was unable to control the situation. The Reds advanced deep 
into eastern and northern Ukraine. They occupied Kyiv on 6 February 
and established their “Ukrainian” Soviet authorities, such as the 
“Ukrainian” Council of Commissars under Rakovsky. In the weeks that 
followed, the Bolsheviks captured central Ukraine and introduced an 
economic and political regime similar to that in other areas but much 
more radical: war communism in the countryside (requisitioning of 
food), the creation of committees of “poor peasants” to disrupt village 
life, and sovkhozy (state farms) to replace the estates.34 
In April 1919 the Bolshevik regime decided to dispense with the 
appearance of an “independent” Soviet Ukraine. On 23 April 1919, the 
Politburo of the Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party 
asked the Central Committee of the Communist Party of Ukraine to 
work out how, and in what form, the “unification” of Ukraine with 
Russia could be achieved. At the same time, the Politburo sent Adolf 
Joffe to Ukraine to strengthen the “centralist-oriented elements” 
there.35 Some weeks later, on 2 June 1919, the Politburo dissolved 
the “independent” Soviet Ukrainian armed forces, i.e., the Ukrainian 
Front, and placed its troops of the southern front (previously the 2nd 
Ukrainian Army) and of the 12th Army under the command of the Red 
Army. The Politburo also divided Ukraine into military districts.36 
32	
Dokumenty po istorii grazhdanskoi voiny, 433, n. 1.
33	
Manifesto of the Provisional Workers’ and Peasants’ Government of Ukraine, 29 November 
1918, in Dokumenty vneshnei politiki SSSR, 17 noiabria 1917 g.–31 dekabria 1918 g., vol. 1 
(Moscow, 1957), 582–86. On 30 November 1918 the commander of the Red Army’s 10th Army, 
Kliment Voroshilov, had given his troops the order to “liberate” Ukraine: Order of Voroshilov 
to the troops of the 10th Army, 30 November 1918, in Dokumenty po istorii grazhdanskoi voiny, 
433ff. The Bolshevik leaders, however, put off the offensive and concentrated their troops on the 
Ukrainian border, where there were still German troops.
34	
Sokolova, Istoriia Rossii, 653.
35	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 3, d. 3, Minutes of session of RCP(B) Politburo, 23.4.1919, point II, 2.
36	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 3, d. 11, Minutes of session of Politburo, Central Committee of the RCP(B), 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
330
In August, the Politburo ordered the unification of the Ukrainian 
Special Commission to Combat Counterrevolution, Speculation, and 
Sabotage (VChK) with the Soviet Russian VChK.37 
By April 1919, remnants of the Ukrainian national units under 
Petliura remained only in the western parts of Ukraine, in Volhynia 
and Galicia, where they were also fighting against Polish troops. In the 
summer of 1919, events took a turn. On 1 September 1919, after months 
of negotiations, the Ukrainian national government arranged a truce 
with Poland and a Polish-Ukrainian demarcation line.38 The truce with 
Poland enabled Petliura to unite all the remaining Ukrainian national 
forces against the Bolsheviks, who were meanwhile confronting, 
for the second time, the collapse of their Ukrainian front and their 
rule in Ukraine. On 11 August 1919, Trotsky complained: “There are 
difficulties in Soviet Ukraine. The enemy is pressing us from all sides.... 
The black August of the previous year [in Russia] is being repeated 
in Ukraine.... The young Ukrainian Red Army...is withdrawing. The 
enemies are gloating.”39 The Bolsheviks in Ukraine at this time were 
being confronted by a White offensive and peasant uprisings that they 
themselves had provoked by their ruthless occupation policy.
Soviet rule had only been nominal in Ukraine in the first months 
of 1918. The Bolsheviks did not really have the time to establish their 
own power structures or to take the kind of measures that were 
typical for them, such as the ruthless requisitioning of food, mass 
terror, and the struggle against the church and against the urban and 
village elites. What they had promised was work for the workers and 
land for the peasants. The peasants remembered those slogans.40 But 
the situation was completely different when the Bolsheviks occupied 
Ukraine for the second time in 1919. The peasants waited in vain for 
the land they had been promised as the Bolsheviks turned the estates 
into collective farms or large state farms. War communism raged 
in the countryside and in the towns, with its forced requisitioning 
2.6.1919, point I, appendix 1, 1, 5. On 30 November 1918, the “interim government of the 
Ukrainian Workers’ and Peasants’ Government” established the Soviet Ukrainian Army, which 
was integrated on 4 January 1919 into the just established Ukrainian Front. See Bol'shevistskoe 
rukovodstvo. Perepiska, 1912–1927 (Moscow, 1997), 77.
37	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 3, d. 21, Minutes of session of Politburo, Central Committee of the RCP(B), 
16.8.1919, point 3b, 1.
38	
Both sides had already agreed to a truce on 1 June 1919, but the Western Ukrainian forces did 
not abide by it. See Robert Potocki, Idea restytucji Ukraińskiej Republiki Ludowej (1920–1939) 
(Lublin, 1999), 44–49.
39	
RGASPI, fond 325, op. 1, d. 48, Appeal by Trotsky, 12.8.1919, 1ff.
40	
Savchenko, Dvenadtsat' voin za Ukrainu, chap. 12.

chapter 4b: the ukrainian policy of bolshevik russia, 1917–1922
331 
of food, plundering, political murder, and the mass terror of the 
VChK. Thousands of rural and urban residents lost their lives. This 
provoked widespread armed resistance, and local uprisings took 
place throughout Bolshevik-occupied Ukraine. In some cases, armies 
were formed by thousands of insurgents. Among the largest of them 
were the armies of Nykyfor Hryhoriiv in central Ukraine and Nestor 
Makhno in eastern Ukraine.41
Otaman Hryhoriiv had already organized a partisan unit during the 
period of German-Austro-Hungarian rule in Ukraine and supported 
Petliura afterward. He had about six thousand men at the end of 1918. 
In February 1919, however, he went over to the Soviet side. His unit 
was integrated as an independent brigade of the Soviet Ukrainian 
Division. On 7 May 1919, however, he mutinied and organized an 
anti-Bolshevik uprising in the rear of the Red Army, which was then 
fighting against Denikin’s army. At this time, he was in command of 
more than 20,000 insurgents with access to 50 cannons, 700 machine 
guns, and 6 tanks. Their slogans were “Ukraine for the Ukrainians,” 
“Power to the Ukrainian people’s soviets without communists,” and 
“Free trade in grain.” The uprising engulfed the southern regions of 
Ukraine (Cherkasy, Uman, Kremenchuk, Katerynoslav, Mykolaiv, and 
other towns). In June, Hryhoriiv joined forces with another Ukrainian 
partisan leader, Nestor Makhno. But conflicts soon arose between 
them and, on 27 July, Makhno murdered Hryhoriiv.42 
In eastern Ukraine in 1918, the anarchist Makhno had organized 
armed resistance to the occupation. Following the withdrawal of 
those armies, Makhno fought with the Bolsheviks against Petliura. In 
February 1919 he broke with the Bolsheviks. In the territories under 
his control, especially in the region of Katerynoslav, he created an 
anarchist peasant republic, centered in Huliaipole, in which Bolshevik 
power structures were not permitted, nor were such measures as 
the requisitioning of grain. At the end of May 1919, the Bolsheviks 
declared him an outlaw and took up arms against him and his 
formations. Denikin’s offensive, however, forced them once again to 
form an alliance with Makhno. Makhno’s army then made a decisive 
contribution to the Bolshevik victory over Denikin’s forces.43 The 
41	
Ibid.
42	
For more detail, see Viktor Savchenko, Avantiuristy grazhdanskoi voiny: istoricheskoe 
rassledovanie (Kharkiv, 2000), http://militera.lib.ru/bio/savchenko/index.html.
43	
Nestor Makhno, Krest'ianskoe dvizhenie na Ukraine 1918–1921. Dokumenty i materialy 
(Moscow, 2006), 5–27 and, among others, documents 107, 112, 115, 129, and 137.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
332
Bolsheviks, however, had no intention of sticking to their agreement. 
At the beginning of January 1920, with Denikin’s army defeated, 
Red Army troops began to encircle Makhno’s forces. The Bolsheviks 
ordered Makhno and his troops to fight the Poles, but Makhno 
refused. The Bolsheviks then treacherously attacked Makhno’s army, 
which numbered about twenty thousand men at the time.44 A bitter 
and, for the Bolsheviks, pointless battle broke out in eastern Ukraine. 
On 26 June 1920, Feliks Dzerzhinsky reported desperately to Lenin: 
“I’ve had no luck with Makhno. We could deal with him quickly if we 
had a cavalry. But that’s something I do not have.”45 
In the spring of 1919, hundreds of rebel groups and units were 
formed in Ukraine, making it impossible for the Bolsheviks to establish 
and maintain their rule. On 11 June 1919 Nikolai Podvoisky, a Bolshevik 
official sent to Ukraine, sent a memorandum to Lenin on the critical 
situation in Ukraine in which he wrote: “Kyiv was cut off for two 
months by counterrevolutionary bands.... In the spring [of 1919], the 
whole of petty-bourgeois Ukraine...became a counterrevolutionary 
camp.”46 The uprisings crippled the Ukrainian economy: food and 
other provisions, industrial production, transport, the production and 
delivery of wood and coal. Ukraine sank into economic chaos and 
political anarchy. Podvoisky complained in his memorandum that the 
country had become ungovernable. Two months would be needed to 
prepare the Red Army for these new circumstances and muster an 
army of thirty thousand men that would fight on the “internal front.”47 
Two months later, the situation had not improved from the Bolshevik 
point of view. On 6 August 1919, prompted by a telegram from Trotsky, 
the Politburo of the Russian Communist Party debated this issue. 
Trotsky demanded that the regions around Kyiv, Odesa, Mykolaiv, 
and Kherson be cleared of the “banditry” that held sway in Ukraine 
and was preventing the recruitment and organization of an army 
there. The Politburo decided to send five hundred members of the 
Department for Special Tasks and from other reliable organizations, 
such as the VChK, to Ukraine.48 
44	
Trotsky to Stalin, 9 January 1920, in Bol'shevistskoe rukovodstvo. Perepiska, 113ff.; Stalin to 
Trotsky, 9 January 1920, ibid., 114ff.; Decision of the All-Ukrainian Revolutionary Committee 
of 9 January 1920, in Makhno, Krest'ianskoe dvizhenie, 301, doc. 193. 
45	
Dzerzhinsky to Lenin, 26 June 1920, in F. Ė. Dzerzhinskii, Predsedatel' VChK-OGPU 1917–
1926. Dokumenty (Moscow, 2007), 192.
46	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 109, d. 43, 16–19, Memorandum to Lenin, 10 June 1919 (copy), 16.
47	
Ibid.
48	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 3, d. 19, Minutes of Politburo session, 6 August 1919, 1. 

chapter 4b: the ukrainian policy of bolshevik russia, 1917–1922
333 
In addition to the uprisings in Ukraine, the Bolsheviks were 
confronted, from May 1919, by a major offensive of Denikin’s forces in 
southern Russia. His units advanced toward Moscow in the summer of 
1919, with troops flanking westward into Ukraine. They soon drove the 
demoralized Bolshevik troops out of Ukraine, occupying the Donets 
Basin, eastern and southern Ukraine, and taking Kyiv on 31 August. 
On the day before, Ukrainian national troops had entered Kyiv. At 
this time, they were fighting with the Whites against the Bolsheviks 
and had already liberated large parts of central Ukraine.49 But conflict 
soon emerged between the nationalist forces under Petliura and the 
Whites, who, like the Bolsheviks, rejected independence for Ukraine. 
The situation intensified and, on 11 September, Petliura declared war 
on Denikin’s Volunteer Army and even asked Lenin for assistance. At 
the end of September, nationalist and Bolshevik forces ceased fighting 
each other. In October they became allies against the Whites, and 
the Bolsheviks promised to deliver weapons and munitions to the 
nationalist forces.50 
On 11 October, the Politburo decided: “A political and military-
technical agreement with Petliura is desirable. This agreement should 
be made public in order to compromise Petliura with the Entente.... All 
discussions are to be conducted as negotiations with the bourgeoisie 
of an oppressed nation that is opposed to Great Russian monarchism 
and imperialism.”51 On 11 September, the Politburo had decided to 
dissolve the whole Bolshevik governmental apparatus in Ukraine, 
leaving only a “nominal” Ukrainian government.52 
On 20 October, Denikin’s advancing Volunteer Army suffered 
a heavy defeat as it approached Orel, and again two days later at 
Voronezh. Other defeats followed, and the Whites began to retreat. In 
November and December 1919, the Bolsheviks again occupied almost 
the whole of central and eastern Ukraine and captured Kyiv at the 
beginning of December. By the end of December, the Whites held only 
the Crimea and Odesa. Petliura, of no more use to the Bolsheviks, fled 
with his units to Poland.53 
49	
 Sokolova, Istoriia Rossii, 621–24, 654; Savchenko, Dvenadtsat' voin za Ukrainu, chap. 6.
50	
 Ibid.
51	
 RGASPI, fond 17, op. 3, d. 29, Minutes of Politburo session, 11 October 1919, 3.
52	
 RGASPI, fond 17, op. 3, d. 26, Minutes of Politburo session, 11 September 1919, Point 13, 1.
53	
 Sokolova, Istoriia Rossii, 654, 704–7; Savchenko, Dvenadtsat' voin za Ukrainu, chap. 6.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
334
The “Unification” of Ukraine and Soviet Russia 
and the War with Poland
The Bolsheviks now began, during their third advance into Ukraine, 
to establish ruling bodies and complete the formal “unification” of 
Ukraine and Soviet Russia. On 20 and 21 November 1919, the Politburo 
debated its policy toward Ukraine and decided to proceed with the 
“careful preparation for the unification” of Ukraine and Soviet Russia 
that had been arranged on 2 June 1919. The Politburo also ordered 
the formation of an All-Ukrainian Revolutionary Committee that 
would take over from the “Ukrainian government” and govern until 
the convocation of the Ukrainian Congress of Soviets, which would 
decide on unification. The Politburo also decided to promote the 
Ukrainian language and culture and to liquidate the large landed 
estates and distribute the land among the poor peasants. The creation 
of state farms was to take place only in exceptional circumstances, 
and collectivization was to proceed without force.54 
In the meantime, on 2 December 1919, Petliura signed an agreement in 
the name of the Ukrainian People’s Republic with the Polish government 
that recognized the independence of Ukraine. Poland committed itself 
to support the Ukrainian People’s Republic. In return, Petliura ceded 
to Poland the territories of Eastern Galicia and Volhynia, which were 
already occupied by the Poles.55 This agreement prompted the Bolshevik 
regime, which was preparing an offensive against Poland,56 to modify its 
Ukrainian policy.57 On 9 February 1920 Georgii Chicherin, the people’s 
commissar for foreign affairs, wrote to the Politburo of the Russian 
Communist Party and to Lenin personally that, according to Western 
media reports, Poland would demand the independence of Ukraine from 
Soviet Russia. Chicherin also assumed that Poland would attempt to 
achieve this by force of arms. He wrote: “Either we give up Ukraine or 
the Poles, following a war for Ukraine, will march on Moscow. Or we 
attempt to localize the war by means of an immediate separation of a Red 
54	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 3, d. 41–42, Minutes of Politburo session, 20 and 21 October 1919; Resolution 
of the Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party on Soviet power in Ukraine: RGASPI, 
fond 17, op. 3, d. 42, 3–5.
55 
Michał Klimecki, “Wojna czy pokój. Polsko-ukraińskie negocjacje 1918–1921,” in Polska i 
Ukraina. Sojusz 1920 roku i jego następstwa, ed. Zbigniew Karpus, Waldemar Rezmer, and 
Emilina Wiszko (Toruń, 1997), 66–69.
56	
Cf. Bogdan Musial, Kampfplatz Deutschland. Stalins Kriegspläne gegen den Westen (Berlin, 
2008), 32–38.
57	
In January 1920 the Politburo again discussed the Ukrainian question, the construction of a 
state apparatus, the forms of “unification” with Russia, and power relations in Ukraine. The aim 
was to complete the “unification” of Ukraine and Russia. See RGASPI, fond 17, op. 3, d. 54–55, 
Minutes of Politburo session, 13, 17–18, and 20 January 1920.

chapter 4b: the ukrainian policy of bolshevik russia, 1917–1922
335 
independent Ukraine. To avoid a Polish attack, we should reintroduce the 
independence of the Ukrainian Soviet Republic and postpone federation 
to a future date.... The working masses in the West see the struggle for 
Ukrainian independence as the authentic struggle of a nation against 
its oppressor.”58 Four days later, Chicherin confirmed his view of the 
situation and pointed out that anti-Bolshevik forces in Ukraine would 
support the Poles and Petliura. It was therefore essential to formally 
separate Red Ukraine from Soviet Russia.59 
The Politburo then halted the formal incorporation (“unification”) 
of Ukraine and Bolshevik Russia, especially as, on 25 April 1920, Polish 
units began an offensive against the Red Army in Ukraine as a way 
of preempting a Soviet attack. The strategic goal of “Operation Kyiv” 
was to drive Bolshevik forces out of central Ukraine beyond the Dnipro, 
thereby allowing the government of the Ukrainian People’s Republic to 
exercise power and establish Ukrainian units that would take up the 
struggle against Soviet forces without the help of Polish troops. An anti-
Bolshevik state was to be created that would then be a Polish ally.60
Bolshevik troops in Ukraine were not just fighting Polish units 
but were also being confronted with uprisings behind their lines. 
According to a VChK situation report for the period 15–30 April 
1920, “Ukraine is now experiencing the next wave of uprisings.”61 
Both central and eastern Ukraine were affected. Soldiers of the 
First Galician Brigade, consisting of Ukrainian Galicians, murdered 
the commissar and turned their weapons on the Bolsheviks. The 
Bolshevik leadership, as a result, had the remaining Eastern Galician 
units within the Red Army disarmed and their officers and soldiers 
interned. Hundreds of them lost their lives. Numerous “bands” 
attacked the retreating soldiers of the Red Army. Insurgent peasants 
killed communists as well as officers and soldiers of the Red Army.62 
58	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 84, d. 93, Chicherin, People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs, to the 
Politburo of the Russian Communist Party, copy to Lenin, 10.
59	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 84, d. 93, Telegram from Chicherin to Trotsky and Rakovsky, copy to 
Stalin, 12.
60	
See Musial, Kampfplatz Deutschland, 39–42.
61	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 84, d. 93, Report on the situation in Ukraine according to reports from 
special units of the southwestern front for the period 15–30 April and 2 June 1920, 48ff.
62	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 109, d. 84, Telegram from Rakovsky and Berzin, 28 April 1920, 14; 
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 109, d. 84, Report from Muraviev to Lenin, Dzerzhinsky, and others on the 
retreat of the Red Army from Ukraine, 17 May 1920, 18–24. On 27 April, Rakovsky reported that 
the Bolsheviks had shot about two hundred “Galicians.” In Odesa, they had imprisoned another 
1,500 “Galicians.” Rakovsky spoke against the shooting of prisoners and recommended that they 
be sent to the North for political reeducation: RGASPI, fond 17, op. 109, d. 236, Telegram from 
Rakovsky to the Revolutionary War Council of the 14th Army, 27 April 1920, 5.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
336
Map 7: Central Europe, 1918–23 (Magocsi, Historical Atlas of East Central Europe, 126) 

chapter 4b: the ukrainian policy of bolshevik russia, 1917–1922
337 
The result was that Polish troops marched into Kyiv on 7 May and 
even moved eastward beyond the Dnipro. But they did not pursue the 
demoralized troops of the Red Army any farther. Piłsudski’s plan was 
to establish a strategic line along the Dnipro and then, as rapidly as 
possible, to station Polish troops in the Belarusian sector to stem the 
advance of concentrating Soviet forces. But Petliura did not manage to 
raise forces strong enough to match the Red Army, although he had 
support in the country, as Stalin himself had to admit. On 11 June 
1920, Stalin sent a telegram to Trotsky: “In the regions of western 
Ukraine, in the Kyiv region and, to some extent, in Poltava, Petliura has 
raised a serious force that can beat our Soviet forces. Village teachers, 
medical assistants, agronomists, and cooperative leaders support 
Petliura. They are organizing the middle and wealthy farmers against 
the revolution and the katsap….63 The only thing the peasants know 
about Soviet power is that it has many troops and takes away their 
grain.”64 In the second half of May, however, the Bolsheviks regained 
the initiative and forced Polish troops out of Ukraine. By the end of 
June, Polish forces were more or less back to where they had been on 
25 April, and the Red Army was preparing for a decisive offensive that 
commenced at the beginning of July.65
While Red Army units occupied central and western Ukraine 
and advanced westward, a partisan war against the Bolsheviks 
was raging in the Ukrainian hinterland. The Bolsheviks ruled the 
towns, but in the countryside it was the insurgents who were in 
charge. On 25 June 1920, Dzerzhinsky telegraphed from Kharkiv: 
“The whole counterrevolution is happening here in the [Ukrainian] 
countryside.”66 Jan Rutman reported, on 26 May 1920, on the work 
of the War Tribunals in Ukraine and stated that resistance was more 
widespread among the Ukrainian population than it was in Russia. 
Young and old men, women and children were taking part in the 
resistance. According to Rutman, they were fighting with firearms, 
pitchforks, and flails.67 Dzerzhinsky, whom the Politburo had sent to 
Ukraine in April 1920 to fight “banditry,” i.e., anti-Bolshevik uprisings, 
63	
Derogatory Ukrainian term for Russians.
64	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 109, d. 84, Telegram from Stalin to Trotsky, 11 June 1920, 36.
65	
Musial, Kampfplatz Deutschland, 42–45.
66	
RGASPI, fond 76, op. 3, d. 70, Telegram from Dzerzhinsky to Koris and Ksenofontov, 25 June 
1920, 15.
67	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 109, d. 84, Report from Jan Rutman on the work of the War Tribunals on 
the southwestern front, 22 May 1920, 26ff.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
338
reported on 22 May: “Tackling banditry here will not be so easy in the 
short term.”68 He was right. 
The situation long remained critical for the Bolsheviks in Ukraine, 
and the country was practically ungovernable in 1920. On 15 October 
1920, Lenin complained: “...we cannot get grain from Ukraine because 
warfare is raging there.”69 At the end of October 1920, according to 
the estimates of Soviet officials, there were about forty thousand 
armed “bandits” in Ukraine fighting against communist power.70 The 
Bolsheviks did not have adequate forces at the time to break the armed 
anti-Bolshevik resistance and suppress the uprisings.
In the summer and early autumn of 1920, the main forces of the 
Red Army were deployed on the Polish front and against the forces of 
the ex-tsarist officer General Petr Wrangel. The Bolshevik westward 
offensive on the Polish front collapsed on 15 August outside Warsaw, 
and the triumphant advance turned into a desperate retreat in the 
second half of August. Confronted with a Polish counteroffensive and, 
at the same time, with uprisings behind their own lines, the Bolsheviks 
asked for a truce with the Polish government, which was arranged on 
12 October. Peace negotiations were begun in Riga and concluded on 
18 March 1921. The peace treaty established the Polish-Soviet border, 
and the Polish side withdrew all claims east of the new border and in 
Soviet Ukraine.71
In April 1920, Wrangel raised the Russian Army in the Crimea 
out of the remnants of Denikin’s Volunteer Army and continued the 
fight against the Bolsheviks. In June 1920, Wrangel’s forces began an 
offensive from the Crimea into southern Ukraine and had achieved 
remarkable success by September. It was against this background 
that Nestor Makhno, who had been fighting with his insurgent forces 
against the Bolsheviks since January 1920, changed sides again and, 
on 2 October 1920, formed an alliance with the Bolsheviks for the 
third time in order to fight Wrangel.72
68	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 3, d. 71–72, Minutes of Politburo session, 20 and 26 April 1920; RGASPI, 
fond 76, op. 3, d. 70, Dzerzhinsky to Ksenofontov, 22 May 1920, 6.
69	
“Concluding Remarks at the Conference of Chairmen of Uyezd, Volost and Village Executive 
Committees of Moscow Gubernia, 15 October 1920,” in Lenin, Collected Works, vol. 31 
(Moscow, 1966), 336.
70	
Telex from Frunze to Lenin, 7 February 1921, on the breakthrough in the struggle against 
Ukrainian banditry, in Makhno, Krest'ianskoe dvizhenie na Ukraine 1918–1921, 585ff.
71	
See Musial, Kampfplatz Deutschland, 42–56.
72	
Sokolova, Istoriia Rossii, 707–14; “Military and Political Agreement between the Government 
of the USSR and the Makhno Army, 2 October 1920,” in Makhno, Krest'ianskoe dvizhenie na 
Ukraine, 485ff., doc. 269.

chapter 4b: the ukrainian policy of bolshevik russia, 1917–1922
339 
Following the implementation of the truce with Poland on 18 
October 1920, Red Army troops under Mikhail Frunze, joined by 
Makhno’s army, began an offensive against Wrangel that forced his 
troops to withdraw to the Crimea. In this desperate situation, Wrangel 
evacuated his troops with the help of the British fleet. The last ship 
with evacuees arrived in Istanbul on 16 November 1920.73 
The “Pacification” of Ukraine and the  
Establishment of Communist Rule
In November 1920, the Bolsheviks finally achieved a definitive victory 
in the Russian civil war. They were now able to deploy all their 
forces for the suppression of peasant uprisings, including in Ukraine, 
which was now being defended only by peasant insurgents. Once the 
Bolsheviks were able to deploy all their forces systematically, these 
insurgents, in the medium and long term, were fighting losing battles. 
On 2 November 1920, Trotsky wrote a memorandum on Ukraine 
that he sent to Lenin, Stalin, and other leading Bolsheviks. In his 
introduction, he wrote: “Soviet power has maintained itself in 
Ukraine up to now (and has done so very poorly) thanks especially 
to the authority of Moscow and to the Great Russian communists and 
the Russian Red Army.... The existing regime cannot be considered 
normal. Economically, Ukraine is an anarchy that is being covered 
by Moscow’s bureaucratic centralism.” Trotsky also pointed out that, 
even after the victory over Wrangel and Petliura, Ukraine remained 
the most vulnerable part of the republic. Without the Donets Basin, 
neither the Ukrainian nor the whole Russian economy could be 
rebuilt.74 
On 26 November 1920, Trotsky informed Lenin that Ukraine 
was gradually building up enough troops and that the battle against 
the insurgents was now on the agenda: “In this way, it is completely 
possible to aim for an imminent breakthrough.”75 Four days later, the 
Revolutionary War Council met under Trotsky and discussed the tasks 
of military officials in Ukraine. The main task was the liquidation of 
Ukrainian “banditry” because “the elimination of bandits from Ukraine 
and the permanent security of the Soviet regime are a life-and-death 
issue for Soviet Ukraine and an issue of extraordinary importance for 
73	
Sokolova, Istoriia Rossii, 707–14.
74	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 109, d. 43, Trotsky’s memorandum on Ukraine to Lenin, Stalin and others, 
2 November 1920, 65–67.
75	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 109, d. 43, Telegram from Trotsky to Lenin and others, 26 November 1920, 
75.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
340
the whole Soviet Federation and its international situation.”76 
The War Council decided to unite all Soviet forces in Ukraine 
under the command of Mikhail Frunze. The southern front was given 
the task of defending the Donets Basin against Makhno “bands,”77 as 
the Bolsheviks had broken their agreement with Makhno following 
the victory over Wrangel. On 24 November 1920, Frunze instructed 
his forces to destroy the Makhnovshchyna immediately. Two days later, 
Frunze declared Makhno and his army to be enemies of the Soviet 
Republic and of the revolution, ordering his troops to make a surprise 
attack and defeat them. The Makhno forces suffered heavy losses but 
were not wiped out. They renewed their fight against the Bolsheviks 
and caused them considerable losses. In the spring of 1921, however, 
Makhno’s forces suffered heavy defeats and disintegrated into smaller 
groups that were gradually wiped out or disbanded. On 28 August 
1921, Makhno and the remnants of his army crossed the border to 
Romania and ended their struggle against the Bolsheviks.78 
The Makhno Army was certainly not the only major “band” in 
Ukraine, but it was the biggest. In order to liquidate these “bands,” 
the Commission for the Liquidation of Banditry in Ukraine, led by 
Mikhail Frunze, was established in December 1920. Other members 
of the commission included Feliks Dzerzhinsky, Sergei Kamenev, and 
Khristian Rakovsky. In this struggle against “banditry,” the Bolsheviks 
deployed internal security units, field troops of the Red Army, troops 
of the VChK and various other armed units, altogether a force of some 
hundreds of thousands, while the insurgent forces were estimated 
in May 1921 to number between forty and fifty thousand men. 
Nonetheless, in the winter of 1920–21 the situation for the Bolsheviks 
in Ukraine was so difficult that they had to employ partisan methods 
against the insurgents.79 
76	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 109, d. 87, Protocol no. 134, session of the Revolutionary War Council of 
the Republic, 1 December 1920, 11f.
77	
Ibid.
78	
Frunze’s order to his troops on the southern front, 24 November 1920, in Makhno, Krest'ianskoe 
dvizhenie na Ukraine, 532–34; Frunze’s order to his troops on the southern front, 26 November 
1920, ibid., 535; Savchenko, Dvenadtsat' voin za Ukrainu, chap. 12.
79	
RGASPI, fond 76, op. 3, d. 70, Protocol no. 1, session of the Commission for the Liquidation of 
Banditry in Ukraine, 29 December 1920, 32; Regulation concerning command of all armed forces 
in Ukraine and representatives of the Revolutionary Military Soviet of the Republic (RVSR) 
in Ukraine, 29 December 1920, ibid., 33; Coded telegram to troop commanders in Ukraine, 
Comrades Frunze, von Sklaiansky, S. Kamenev, Lebedev, Dzerzhinsky, 4 January 1921, ibid., 
36; RGASPI, fond 17, op. 109, d. 128, Report of the RVSR on the situation of the Red Army, 23 
August 1921, 12–13v (with data on Red Army deployments); Savchenko, Dvenadtsat' voin za 
Ukrainu, chap. 12 (data on the strength of Russian forces and of insurgents). 

chapter 4b: the ukrainian policy of bolshevik russia, 1917–1922
341 
At the same time, the Bolsheviks were developing uniform 
guidelines for the combat of banditry in Ukraine that were signed on 
8 December 1920 by Rakovsky, Frunze, and Molotov. The guidelines 
contained the following provisions: The population was to be disarmed. 
If weapons were not surrendered, hostages were to be taken and shot. 
Anyone who did not voluntarily surrender a weapon was to be shot. 
The population was to be considered liable for all attacks on transport 
lines and bridges. Hostages were to be taken from villages along the 
railway lines and telegraph lines up to a distance of fifteen versts.80 In 
areas and localities particularly “infested by bands,” the population 
was also to be considered liable for all anti-Bolshevik attacks; in such 
cases, hostages were also to be taken. Fines were also possible, as well 
as the burning or destruction of the houses of “bandits.” Hostages 
were always to be taken from the better-off strata of the population. 
Thus the guidelines.81 
These measures were nothing new in Ukraine. The Bolsheviks 
had been using such methods to fight against Ukrainian insurgents 
since 1919. In May 1919, Trotsky had ordered the disarming of the 
Ukrainian population. June 1919 was the deadline for weapons to 
be surrendered and, from 1 July, the non-surrender of weapons was 
to be punished ruthlessly.82 On 30 June 1919, Rakovsky and Joffe 
informed Trotsky and Lenin about the critical situation in Ukraine 
and the many uprisings, which were to be combated by means of a 
general mobilization of men between the ages of 18 and 40, as well as 
by means of hostages and fines.83 
With time, the Bolsheviks radicalized their “methods of combating 
banditry” in Ukraine and elsewhere. On 22 May 1920 Robert Eideman, 
commander of troops in the rear of the southwestern front in Ukraine, 
ordered the collection of weapons in the villages. If a village refused to 
surrender its weapons, it was to be surrounded, and hostages were to 
be taken from the village population and shot. If this was not enough, 
the village was to be bombarded by cannon. In villages known to 
support the Makhno movement, hostages were to be taken and shot if 
the village did not distance itself from the Makhno movement. Villages 
80 
A Russian unit of distance: 1 versta is 1.066 km. 
81	
Brief guidelines for the combat of banditry in Ukraine, 8 December 1920, approved by Rakovsky, 
Frunze, and Molotov, published in Makhno, Krest'ianskoe dvizhenie na Ukraine, 555–57.
82	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 109, d. 12, Telegram from Trotsky to Rakovsky and others, 28 May 1919, 
19.
83	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 109, d. 43, Telegram from Rakovsky, Joffe, and others to Lenin, Trotsky 
and others, 30 June 1919, 23ff.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
342
along the railway line were to be made responsible and considered 
liable for the security of the section of line assigned to them.84
On 22 May 1920, Jan Rutman also reported on the situation in 
Ukraine and on the work of the Bolshevik War Tribunals there. He 
reported widespread resistance and recommended the following 
method to “pacify” the Ukrainian villages: the number of kulaks in 
each village was to be established, and then one in five or one in 
ten, depending on the situation, was to be shot and their property 
confiscated.85 Of course, these orders and recommendations were 
not just theoretical but were carried out in practice by the Soviet 
communists. They laid waste whole areas, burned villages, and 
tortured residents. In May 1921, for instance, the Bolsheviks “pacified” 
villages around Izium and Lyman (southeast of Kharkiv) as follows: 
“We called together an assembly, picked out five kulaks or suspected 
persons, and killed them with swords. Such measures intimidated the 
peasants and led them to reveal the bandits.”86 
On 7 February 1921, Frunze reported to Lenin on significant 
successes in the combat of “Ukrainian banditry.” As a result, the 
number of bandits at the end of October 1920 (40,000) had gone down 
to 6,500. In spite of this success, Frunze was not especially confident: 
“Banditry has declined. That’s a fact. But we can expect it to increase 
again in the spring.”87 Although Frunze’s prognosis was correct, the 
Bolsheviks succeeded in defeating the major bands in Ukraine by the 
summer of 1921, as they did in other areas of the former tsarist empire 
under their rule.88
On 1 September 1921, there were still 2,500 “bandits” in Soviet 
Ukraine who, according to data from the Intelligence Directorate of 
the Red Army, were organized in groups and were fighting against 
communist rule. In the following weeks and months, according to 
Soviet estimates, there were 3,300 “bandits” and 58 “bands” on 15 
84	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 109, d. 236, Telegram from the chief of the rear sector of the Southwestern 
Front, Eideman, to Zatonsky, 22 May 1920, 20.
85	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 109, d. 84, Report from Jan Rutman on the work of the War Tribunals of the 
Southwestern Front, 22 May 1920, 26ff.
86	
Extract from newsletter no. 116 of the Secret Intelligence Section of the CPC of the USSR on the 
Makhno movement in Ukraine, 2 July 1921, in Makhno, Krest'ianskoe dvizhenie na Ukraine, 
647. 
87	
Telex from Frunze to Lenin, 7.2.1921, on the breakthrough in the battle against Ukrainian 
banditry, in Makhno, Krest'ianskoe dvizhenie na Ukraine 1918–1921, 585ff.
88	
Cf. Musial, Kampfplatz Deutschland, 77–85; Sokolova, Istoriia Rosii, 732–42. 

chapter 4b: the ukrainian policy of bolshevik russia, 1917–1922
343 
October, growing to 6,752 by 1 November.89 After that, the number of 
“bandits” and “bands” diminished, and the general “band situation” 
in Ukraine and elsewhere gradually improved. By the end of 1921, 
the Bolsheviks had withstood the worst and were now combating 
relatively few insurgents in Ukraine.90 On 27 December 1921, Trotsky 
declared at the Ninth Congress of Soviets: “Banditry as a broad social 
phenomenon, as armed units of broader kulak masses and of parts of 
the middle peasant masses, is a thing of the past.”91 
It took unprecedented mass terror, costing the lives of many 
thousands of people, to break the resistance of the peasantry in 
Ukraine and elsewhere to Bolshevik rule. The total number of victims 
of Red revolutionary terror is estimated today to have been 2.31 
million, hundreds of thousands of whom were Ukrainians. The best-
known mass crimes committed by the Bolsheviks in Ukraine were: 
shootings in Kyiv in February 1918 (2,000 victims) and from February 
to August 1919 (3,000 victims), in Kharkiv from March to June 1919 
(3,000 victims), in Odesa from April to September 1919 (2,200 victims), 
in Poltava from April to July 1919 (2,000 victims), in the Crimea from 
December 1920 to July 1921 (between 50,000 and 76,000 victims), as 
well as shootings of hostages in November 1921 (5,000 victims). The 
number of victims of Bolshevik terror in the countryside is unknown 
but was certainly in the tens of thousands.92 Added to this were the 
victims of famine. In 1921–22 alone, according to estimates made at 
the time, more than 26 million people were suffering from hunger 
as a result of Bolshevik plundering. The regions especially affected 
were southern Ukraine, the Crimea, the Volga region, and the regions 
around the Kama River and the central course of the Don. The number 
of those who died from malnourishment in 1921 to 1922 is estimated 
to have been five if not six million.93 
89	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 87, d. 332, Situation report no. 5 of the Main Intelligence Directorate of 
the General Staff of the Red Army on the activities of Russian White Guards abroad and on the 
internal front, 1 September 1921, 22ff.; RGASPI, fond 17, op. 87, d. 332, Situation report no. 7 
of the Main Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff of the Red Army on the activities of 
Russian White Guards abroad and on the internal front,1 October 1921, 75; RGASPI, fond 17, 
op. 87, d. 332, Situation report no. 8 of the Main Intelligence Directorate of the General Staff 
of the Red Army on the activities of Russian White Guards abroad and on the internal front, 1 
November 1921, 100–102.
90	
Musial, Kampfplatz Deutschland, 83–85. 
91	
RGASPI, fond 325, op. 1, d. 72, Trotsky’s speech to the Ninth Congress of Soviets, 27 December 
1921, 33.
92	
Sokolova, Istoriia Rossii, 550–51, 763–65.
93 
I. B. Orlov, “NEP v regional'nom rakurse: ot usrednennykh otsenok k mnogoobraziiu,” in 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
344
All this brought the armed resistance in Ukraine and other 
Bolshevik-ruled territories to an end, allowing the Bolshevik regime to 
stabilize and secure its rule. The gradual rebuilding of the Ukrainian 
and the whole Soviet economy began in the spring of 1921 with the 
New Economic Policy (NEP). Tax-in-kind replaced requisitioning, in 
other words, the peasants had to deliver part of their produce as tax 
to the government. They could dispose of the rest independently on 
the free market.94 The NEP stimulated the development of the rural 
economy, small businesses, crafts, trade, and light industry in general, 
all of which enabled the supply of industrial goods to the villages.95 
This contributed to peace in the countryside. It was, after all, the 
forced requisitioning of food (war communism) that had frequently 
led to the peasant uprisings in the first place.
The Formation of the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics and the 
Ukrainian Question
In the summer of 1922, the Bolsheviks gave a new political form to 
the territories ruled by them. In August 1922 the Central Committee 
of the Russian Communist Party established a commission, chaired by 
Stalin, which was given the task of dealing with the mutual relations 
between Bolshevik Russia, Ukraine, Belarus, and the Caucasian 
Federation and making appropriate recommendations on how these 
should be regulated.96 Until then, the individual republics had been 
formally independent and had their own governments. This was, of 
course, only a fictitious independence. In reality, it was Lenin and his 
comrades in the Politburo who ruled the individual republics.97
On the nationality question, Stalin worked closely with Dmytro 
Manuilsky, who consulted him on 4 September 1922 about the political 
system of Bolshevik states. Manuilsky thought that the republican 
system should be replaced by a system of autonomy, for which he 
argued as follows: “The experience of the past year has shown that 
NEP: Ėkonomicheskie, politicheskie i sotsiokul'turnye aspekty, ed. A. S. Seniavskii, V. B. 
Zhiromskaia, and S. V. Zhuravlev (Moscow, 2006), 33–54; Nicolas Werth, “Ein Staat gegen 
sein Volk. Gewalt, Unterdrückung und Terror in der Sowjetunion,” in Das Schwarzbuch des 
Kommunismus. Unterdrückung, Verbrechen und Terror, ed. Stéphane Courtois et al. (Munich 
and Zurich, 2004), 51–295; Sokolova, Istoriia Rossii, 763–65.
94	
On 30 March 1921, the Politburo decided to end food requisitioning in Ukraine and introduce the 
free market: RGASPI, fond 17, op. 3, d. 144, Minutes of Politburo session, 30 March 1921, 3, 6–8.
95	
Musial, Kampfplatz Deutschland, 68–76; Sokolova, Istoriia Rossii, 766–69, 776–80.
96	
M. V. Aleksandrov, Vneshnepoliticheskaia doktrina Stalina (Canberra, 1997), 18ff.
97	
This is clear from the Politburo minutes. See RGASPI, fond 17, op. 3. 

chapter 4b: the ukrainian policy of bolshevik russia, 1917–1922
345 
the existing system in the periphery, especially in Ukraine, leads to 
numerous conflicts between central and regional authorities. This 
situation cannot continue.” He went on: “The formation of independent 
republics on the periphery, with their own TsIKs [Central Executive 
Committees] and Sovnarkomy [Councils of People’s Commissars], 
corresponded to a certain stage of our revolution that we could 
call the ‘national’ stage.... This was a necessary concession to the 
nationalist elements.... Without doubt, the introduction of autonomy 
where the regime had been ‘independent’ will influence the tempo of 
the transition that we call ‘change by stages.’ On the periphery of our 
republic, especially in Ukraine, the national element will delay this 
‘change by stages.’ The introduction of autonomy will hold back the 
Ukrainian transition for a certain time, but it will not produce any 
national movement in opposition to this course because there is no 
basis for it among the Ukrainian intelligentsia. The Ukrainian peasant 
has no interest in ‘national’ questions and will no longer participate in 
political bands.”98
This argument convinced Stalin, and at its session of 23–24 
September 1922 the commission ratified Stalin’s plan for the 
“autonomization” of the peripheral Soviet republics, in other words, 
their integration into the Russian Soviet Republic as autonomous 
formations.99 The day before, Stalin had explained his plan to 
Lenin: “The existing disorder and total chaos are creating conflicts, 
complaints, and irritations and are crippling economic activity in the 
whole of Russia.... If we do not…now replace the formal (fictitious) 
independence with formal (and real) autonomy, it will be much more 
difficult in another year to defend the actual unity of the Soviet 
republics.”100 
Lenin was not convinced, however, and insisted on the formation 
of a union of “equal” Soviet republics and maintaining the appearance 
of independence of the peripheral republics. He was thinking of 
the future world revolution and the formation of a “Union of Soviet 
Republics of Europe and Asia.” Lenin prevailed and, on 6 October 
1922, the plenum of the Central Committee of the Russian Communist 
Party changed Stalin’s plan. On 30 December 1922, the First Congress 
98	
RGASPI, fond 558, op. 11, d. 763, Manuilsky to Stalin, 4 September 1922, 1–3, in TsK RKP(b) – 
VKP(b) i natsional'nyi vopros, ed. L. S. Gatagova, L. P. Kosheleva, and L. A. Rogovaia, vol. 1, 
1918–1933 gg. (Moscow, 2005), 76ff.
99	
Aleksandrov, Vneshnepoliticheskaia doktrina Stalina, 18ff.
100	 Stalin to Lenin, 22 September 1922, in TsK RKP(b) – VKP(b) i natsional'nyi vopros, 78ff.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
346
of Soviets approved Lenin’s proposal for the formation of the Union of 
Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR). The USSR now existed as a political 
formation and continued until 1991.101
But nothing changed in the relations between the peripheral 
republics and Moscow. For the next sixty-nine years, the Ukrainian 
Soviet Republic existed with the appearance of independence, but de 
facto it was one of the provinces of the communist empire ruled from 
Moscow. By the same token, the formation of the USSR did not end the 
terror in Ukraine. It actually reached its high point in the 1930s, during 
the Stalin era. The consequences of communist rule were catastrophic 
for Ukraine and Ukrainians in every respect. It will take generations 
before the economic, social, and moral aberrations of the period of 
communist rule can be overcome in Ukraine.
 
101	 Aleksandrov, Vneshnepoliticheskaia doktrina Stalina, 18ff.

4c-e. Limits to Power: Ukraine in the Strategies 
of the Allied Powers, 1917–19241
Hannes Leidinger and Wolfram Dornik
Alliances, Strategies, Zones of Influence
The United States of America was critical of the way that the Habsburg 
Monarchy and the Ottoman Empire handled the nationalities 
question. It was less critical of the Romanov Empire in that regard. 
The US assessment was that Russia should not be broken up into 
individual regions and national units but, like the United States, 
should proceed to a multi-ethnic democratic society united by Russian 
culture. Washington was very pleased when the February Revolution 
of 1917 swept away the regime of Nicholas II. The American president, 
Woodrow Wilson, hoped that Russia, like the USA after it was liberated 
from colonial tutelage, would develop into a prosperous, economically 
buoyant democracy and thus a trading partner for the USA and an 
equal counterpart on the Eurasian continent. With their very rapid 
diplomatic recognition, on 19 March 1917, the Americans wanted to 
stabilize the Provisional Government under Georgii Lvov and keep it 
as an active player on the Eastern Front.2 
France’s reaction to the fall of the tsar was more hesitant. It was 
only after recognition of the new Russian government by Britain 
and Italy, France’s allies in the war against the German- and Austro-
Hungarian-dominated Central Powers, that France followed suit. 
The new government’s willingness to continue the war, as part of an 
alliance that was now strengthened, since April, by the entry of the 
USA, led to the final disintegration of the Romanov army. The crisis 
of the Russian state intensified under Lvov’s successor, Aleksandr 
Kerensky.3 Following Entente military defeats and mutinies among 
French forces, and in the climate of an increasing willingness to make 
1	
This chapter is a shorter version of the separate chapters 4c (Hannes Leidinger), 4d and 4e 
(Wolfram Dornik) in the German edition of this book.
2	
Clarence A. Manning, “The Ukrainians and the United States in World War I,” Ukrainian 
Quarterly 12, no. 4 (1957): 351–54; Constantine Warvariv, “America and the Ukrainian National 
Cause, 1917–1920,” in The Ukraine, 1917–1921: A Study in Revolution, ed. Taras Hunczak 
(Cambridge, Mass., 1977), 356ff.
3 
AAÉ, AAC/AP, CPC, Guerre 1914–1918, Russie, vol. 649, Paléologue, no. 487 and vol. 648, 
Jusserand, no. 169. We would like to thank Jacques Benkemoun and Elizabeth Blaickner for 
assistance with archival research in London and Paris. 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
348
peace, strategists of the Grande Nation were thinking of a compromise 
with its enemies, whereby the territorial integrity of the old tsarist 
empire was up for discussion. A memorandum of October 1917 
allowed the Habsburg Monarchy to have a protectorate in the form of 
a Polish-Ukrainian federation. Germany would have the upper hand 
in the Baltics and in Belarus in return for Alsace-Lorraine.4 
But Berlin did not agree and, at the same time, Entente circles 
failed to bring Austria-Hungary over to their side by means of a 
separate deal.5 Thus the planned agreement existed only on paper. 
The October Revolution was seen by the Western powers as an 
opportunity to insist on existing agreements, war aims, and alliance 
commitments. Talks between the Soviet government, the Council 
of People’s Commissars (Sovnarkom, CPC), and the Hohenzollern 
and Habsburg Empires about a truce and peace were initially met by 
the Entente with little more than protest notes. What followed then 
was a double strategy. France’s representatives, based in Iaşi in the 
south, the ambassador, Auguste de Saint-Aulaire,6 and the head of 
the military mission, Henri M. Berthelot, would support the Cossacks 
and the Ukrainian nationalists against the Bolsheviks. In the area 
dominated by the Soviets, Henri Albert Niessel, the head of the 
military mission, and Joseph Noulens, the French ambassador, would 
maintain contact with the representatives of the Bolsheviks. Saint-
Aulaire and especially Berthelot paid special attention to keeping 
Romania in the war and preventing Germany from appropriating the 
economic resources of Ukraine.7 
Ukraine’s highest political authority, the Central Rada, had 
already spoken to Noulens about financial assistance and had offered 
4 
SHD/AAT, série N, 1872–1919, 16N 3021, 3. Bureau A, “Note au sujet de l’attitude qu’il convient 
d’adopter à l’égard de la Russie.” French government members and diplomats had a more reserved 
attitude toward the movement for Ukrainian autonomy or independence until the second half 
of 1917. They saw the nationalist movement as a threat to their Great Russian ally. They also 
frequently thought that the growing tendency toward independence was a result of manipulation 
by the Central Powers. Cf. Gustave Cvengroš, La République Démocratique Ukrainienne – La 
République Française (1917–1922) (Lviv, 1995), 13ff., 25.
5	
Helmut Rumpler, “Kaiser Karl, die Friedensprojekte und das deutsch-österreichische 
Bündnis,” in Karl I. (IV.), der Erste Weltkrieg und das Ende der Donaumonarchie, ed. Andreas 
Gottsmann (Vienna, 2007), 15–18; Wilfried Fest, Peace or Partition: The Habsburg Monarchy 
and British Policy (London, 1978), 202–4; V. H. Rothwell, British War Aims and Peace 
Diplomacy 1914–1918 (Oxford, 1971), 79–87, 98–102; David Stevenson, The First World War 
and International Politics (Oxford and New York, 1991), 191ff.
6	
For his view of the situation, see Auguste de Saint-Aulaire, Confession d’un vieux diplomate 
(Paris, 1953).
7 
SHD/AAT, série N, 1872–1919, 7N 921, dossier 1, Clemenceau à Niessel, no. 13529 BS/3.

chapter 4c-e: limits to power: ukraine in the strategies 
of the allied powers, 1917–1924
349 
Georges Tabouis, the leader of the French military mission in Kyiv, 
cooperation with the Entente. Some representatives of the Grande 
Nation argued for very rapid negotiations in order not to offend 
“Francophile elements.”8 Paris led this effort, with the agreement 
of the Allied Supreme Council, and gave full authority to Tabouis, at 
the end of December, to represent France in a “de facto” independent 
Ukraine.9 In the weeks that followed, there was a joint effort with 
British representatives to deliver major economic assistance to the 
young state while, on 17 January 1918, Saint-Aulaire informed a Rada 
delegation in Iaşi that France was prepared to formally recognize 
Ukrainian statehood and establish regular relations with Kyiv.10
The US, however, remained cautious. In a note from acting 
Secretary of State Frank Polk to the French ambassador in Washington, 
on 11 January 1918, Polk stressed that the US was “carefully observing” 
the situation in Ukraine but had come to no firm conclusion on the 
recognition of separatist movements in Russia. Auguste de Saint-
Aulaire therefore insisted that the Rada adopt a pro-Entente position, 
something that some observers had begun to doubt in the meantime. 
Tabouis, who was carrying “in his pocket,”11 so to speak, the confirmation 
8 
Ibid., 4N 40, dossier 3, Berthelot, nos. 30–35; AAÉ, AAC/AP, CPC, Guerre 1914–1918, Russie/
Ukraine, vol. 694, Noulens, no. 1830.
9	
On French recognition of Ukraine, correspondence with the USA, and similar steps by Great 
Britain at the beginning of 1918, see Cvengroš, La République Démocratique Ukrainienne, 
21, 27, 34ff. Many scholars consider that Ukraine allowed itself to become an “example” of 
French nationality policy on the territory of the former tsarist empire. See especially Ghislain de 
Castelbajac, Sébastien de Gasquet, and Georges-Henri Soutou, Recherches sur la France et le 
problème des nationalités pendant la Première Guerre mondiale (Pologne-Lithuanie-Ukraine) 
(Paris, 1995), 127.
10 
AAÉ, AAC/AP, CPC, Guerre 1914–1918, Russie/Ukraine, vol. 695, Clemenceau à Berthelot, no. 
13625 BS/3.
11	
Earlier literature on this subject pointed out that Tabouis did not have the authority to recognize 
Ukrainian sovereignty. It was emphasized that Ukraine only proclaimed its separation from 
Russia in the course of 1918. But developments in the winter of 1917–18 suggest that France was 
extremely flexible in relation to separatist tendencies in the old Romanov Empire. The attitude 
of the French foreign minister, Stephen Pichon, for instance, in connection with the recognition 
of Finland, an attitude supported by other individuals around Clemenceau, suggests a double 
tactic. Repeatedly stressed fears that national independence could only serve the interests of 
the Central Powers led Pichon to regard Finnish independence as a mere transitional stage in 
the creation of a Russian federation. But the foreign minister also stressed that the Allies had to 
stand by the Scandinavians in their struggle for independence in order to create a counterweight 
to German influence in the region. However, if no unity could be achieved among the “nations” 
of the former tsarist empire, then Entente support for an independent Finland would be a sensible 
strategy to counter Berlin’s plans for hegemony. Cf. George A. Brinkley, “Allied Policy and 
French Intervention in the Ukraine, 1917–1920,” in The Ukraine, 1917–1921, 325; Louis Clerc, 
“De la province russe à l’État scandinave. Évaluation du regard diplomatique français sur la 
Finlande (1900–1920),” in Frontières du communisme. Mythologies et réalités de la division 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
350
of official recognition, was instructed by Henri Berthelot not to take 
any hasty steps. There were numerous reports that, confronted with 
the Bolshevik threat, Kyiv could expect more from German weapons 
than from French economic assistance.12 Ukraine then signed a peace 
treaty with the Central Powers on 9 February 1918. Russia followed on 
3 March with the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. Romania signed a few months 
later, making an agreement with Berlin and Vienna. In all cases, the 
agreements gave the stamp of approval to Wilhelmine and Habsburg 
dominance in the region.
Even during the occupation by the Central Powers, however, 
Great Britain did not completely withdraw from Ukraine. Lieutenant 
Colonel Joseph W. Boyle was sent on a secret mission to Ukraine by 
the British military attaché in Romania, Brigadier General C. Robert 
Ballard. Boyle was given a great deal of money (1 million Romanian 
lei and 1.1 million British pounds) and used it to create groups, 
consisting mostly of Bolsheviks, who instigated strikes and carried 
out sabotage of infrastructure in Odesa, Kharkiv, and Kyiv. According 
to Boyle, it was these groups that carried out the big explosions at 
weapons stores in Odesa and strikes in Kyiv in June and October. 
Even though the reports containing this information were written 
after 1919, his résumé reads like an extract from a spy novel: “First, 
it helped to detain a large force of the enemy in the Ukraine to deal 
with the unrest and guard the bridges and depots; up till the end 
of September, there were no less than 20 German divisions and 10 
Austrian divisions there. Second, it disabled the Black Sea Fleet to a 
large extent. Third, it prevented the enemy from collecting as much 
supplies as they might have done had the railways been working 
well. In fact, the results were far greater than those of the mission 
of Sir J. Norton Griffiths, were less expensive, and were carried out 
in circumstances of greater danger.”13 Even though Ukraine was not 
in the British zone of influence following the division of Russian 
territory, activities of the British secret service promoted unrest in the 
country and impeded its economic exploitation by the Central Powers. 
de l’Europe de la révolution d’Octobre au mur de Berlin, ed. Sophie Coeuré and Sabine Dullin 
(Paris, 2007), 68–71.
12 
AAÉ, AAC/AP, CPC, Guerre 1914–1918, Russie/Ukraine, vol. 695, Saint-Aulaire, nos. 102–20; 
SHD/AAT, série N, 1872–1919, 4N 40, dossier 3, Berthelot, no. 1648.
13 
Norton Griffiths was the British agent who, before the Central Powers’ occupation of Romania, 
sabotaged the oil fields and put them out of action for a few months. See Michael Occleshaw, 
Dances in Seep Shadows: Britain’s Clandestine War in Russia, 1917–1920 (London, 2006), 105–7 
(Eds.).

chapter 4c-e: limits to power: ukraine in the strategies 
of the allied powers, 1917–1924
351 
The suspicions of Austro-Hungarian intelligence officials that Entente 
officials were involved in the strikes and uprisings were not simply a 
figment of their imagination. However, during the remaining period 
until the end of the First World War, London did not again seriously 
consider supporting the Ukrainian independence movement.
Meanwhile, neither the British government under David Lloyd 
George nor the French government, led after November 1917 by 
Georges Benjamin Clemenceau, had any reason to break completely 
with Soviet Russia. It made sense to continue their relationship with 
the Communist Party leadership under Vladimir Lenin because 
relations between the new Kremlin leaders and the Wilhelmine 
Empire remained tense. There were conflicts on the demarcation line. 
Berlin’s contacts with the Russian oppositionists and the propaganda 
campaigns of the people’s commissars also poisoned the climate 
between the two.14 Under those circumstances, England concentrated 
increasingly on the Bolsheviks. London’s agent, Sir Robert Bruce 
Lockhart, followed them to Moscow, their new capital. At the 
beginning of May 1918, the Foreign Office instructed him to give 
cautious signals to the people’s commissars that possible diplomatic 
recognition was imminent. The Allies were considering plans for 
intervention in Russia with the agreement of the Bolsheviks. There 
would be no interference in Russia’s internal affairs; they would only 
revive the Eastern Front against the Central Powers.15 
If the proponents of an understanding between Lenin’s CPC and 
the Entente were not able to win the day, this was because of the 
dithering of the Allies’ representatives over the different options, 
namely, whether to support the pro- or anti-Bolshevik forces on the 
territory of the old tsarist empire. The attitude of the Paris Foreign 
Office on the Quai d’Orsay also had a major influence on developments. 
Joseph Noulens, whose subordinate was Niessel’s successor as leader 
of the military mission, Jean Guillaume Lavergne, himself a supporter 
of such an understanding, was given additional powers. Noulens had 
considerable freedom of action and became a key figure in working 
out anti-Soviet strategies, a development that would have been 
unthinkable without Clemenceau’s agreement in principle.16
14	
Iurii Fel'shtinskii, Krushenie mirovoi revoliutsii, vol. 1, Brestskii mir. Oktiabr' 1917–Noiabr' 
1918 (London, 1991), 350; ÖStA, AOK/Op.Abt., Ev. Grp.–R 1918: 12. Nachricht v. 16.6.1918; 
RGASPI, f. 17, op. 86, d. 112.
15	
Bruce Lockhart, Memoirs of a British Agent, Being an Account of the Author’s Early Life in Many 
Lands and of His Official Mission to Moscow in 1918 (London and New York, 1932), 270ff.
16 
SHD/AAT, série N, 1872–1919, 16N 3066, Noulens, no. 89 et Pichon à Clemenceau, no. 1567.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
352
This increasingly unequivocal opposition to the Kremlin leadership 
led to direct intervention in Russia by France and its allies.17 When it 
became clear that financial assistance alone to Lenin’s weak opponents 
was not enough to achieve the single-minded goal of overthrowing the 
October regime, their attention turned especially to an intervention 
by Japanese troops. Tokyo, part of the anti-German Entente from the 
end of August 1914 and pursuing a determined policy of hegemony in 
East Asia, did not want to risk a conflict with the United States, which 
it regarded as a competing power in the Pacific region and, at the same 
time, an ally in the war.18
Under these circumstances, much depended on the attitude of the 
United States and Woodrow Wilson. To win the USA over to a limited 
action on the territory of the former tsarist empire, the Czechoslovak 
Legion was brought into play. The druzhiny, consisting of deserters and 
prisoners of war, were seen at the end of 1917 as independent units 
under French command. Their contribution to Allied intervention 
on the territory of the collapsed Romanov Empire should not be 
underestimated. However, the engagement of the Western powers 
remained limited. Their goals were unclear, shortsighted, and 
contradictory.19 At one time it was a matter of securing Entente war 
supplies in Russia, on another occasion it was a matter of evacuating 
or supporting the Czechoslovak Legion, and at yet another time the 
goal was support for the Russian opponents of the October regime. 
There were always good reasons for entertaining doubts about 
their strength and their prospects of success, as well as for the need 
to weaken Germany by means of an “active Russian policy” and 
“maintenance of the Eastern Front.”
Even without measures of this kind, it was clear that the anti-
German alliance, especially after the arrival of US troops on the 
Western Front, was (materially) superior. The Central Powers were 
completely burned out and, to make matters worse for them, were 
deeply entangled in a civil war in Ukraine and in an intensive struggle 
to prevent the spread of revolutionary ideas.20 
17 
Sophie Coeuré, “Endiguer le bolchevisme? La ‘Double frontière’ dans le répertoire de 
l’anticommunisme (1917–1941),” in Frontières du communisme, 44.
18 
SHD/AAT, série N, 1872–1919, 4N 63, dossier 3, Jusserand, no. 669.
19	
See Hannes Leidinger and Verena Moritz, Gefangenschaft, Revolution, Heimkehr. Die 
Bedeutung der Kriegsgefangenenproblematik für die Geschichte des Kommunismus in Mittel- 
und Osteuropa 1917–1920 (Vienna, Cologne, and Weimar, 2003), especially 277, 378–80, and 
408ff.
20	
John Grigg, Lloyd George: War Leader 1916–1918 (London, 2002), 562.

chapter 4c-e: limits to power: ukraine in the strategies 
of the allied powers, 1917–1924
353 
The leadership of the British Empire, in particular, was slow to 
recognize this. Reports from the Foreign Office continued to focus on 
the desperate attempts to revise the Brest-Litovsk peace settlement and 
restore the Eastern Front. Discussions continued into the autumn of 1917 
about an intervention of US troops in the western periphery of the former 
tsarist empire. This proposal came from the foreign-policy adviser of 
the US president, Edward M. House. Woodrow Wilson, however, was 
skeptical about the idea. This may have had to do with the fact that the 
British prime minister, Lloyd George, also favored an intervention by 
US troops on the Eastern Front, and Wilson feared that this would mean 
exclusion of the US from postwar plans in Western Europe.21 
In London, at the beginning of 1919, the War Office summarized the 
events and decisions of 1918: “The political destiny of Russia was of no 
immediate concern to the Allies except in so far as it might, in the event 
of an inconclusive peace, assist in the continuity and enhancement of 
German military power.”22 The Ukrainian independence movement 
was also seen from this perspective. In the course of the peace 
negotiations between the Central Powers and the October regime, 
the US ambassador, David R. Francis, still in St. Petersburg, noted: 
“The language of the Ukrainian delegates agrees with the information 
received from the Allied agents at Kiev showing that the Entente can 
at present expect no effective help from the Ukraine. All that we can 
ask of her is to gain time to allow the Allied powers to act for the 
improvement of the general situation on this front. We again expressed 
the opinion that the only means of attaining this and consequently of 
deciding the attitude of the Ukraine in a manner conformable with 
the interests of our cause is to send to Russia an international [force] 
under the conditions we have indicated. It is well to note that this 
impression is shared by the Rumanian Government which has also 
had interviews with the delegates of the Ukrainian government.”23 
Once the Ukrainian delegation had been admitted to the Brest-
Litovsk talks, the US ambassador in St. Petersburg (later Moscow) 
recommended the simultaneous recognition of Finland, Ukraine, 
Siberia, the Don Cossacks, and the Soviet government because he saw 
the admission of the Ukrainians to the negotiations as a move on the 
21	
David M. Esposito, The Legacy of Woodrow Wilson: American War Aims in World War I 
(Westport, Conn., and London, 1996), 83–101, 110ff., 117–27.
22	
TNA, FO 608/177, Short History of Events in Russia from November 1917–February 1919, 
14.3.1919, 1.
23	
NARA, US DoS, Papers relating to the foreign relations of the U.S., 1918. Russia, vol. 2, 
Washington, D.C. 1918, 660-63.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
354
part of the Bolsheviks away from the all-Russian claim to power. The 
response of the British Foreign Office was unmistakably negative: “To 
encourage Ukrainian independence is to assist Germany’s aims and 
also to endanger the future peace of Europe.”24
What was increasingly coming to light in all this was the colonial 
and imperial interest of all the great powers in the territory of the 
former tsarist empire. The English and the French, just like Germany 
and its allies, were seeking their “place in the sun.” A competition 
over zones of influence had begun within the different alliances. In 
December 1917, the West European powers agreed that France would 
prevail in Ukraine, Bessarabia, and the Crimea, while England would 
take the Caucasus, Georgia, Armenia, and Kurdistan. Debate remained 
about the Don region, and the British Foreign Office later wanted a 
revision of the previous agreements.25 London had been in conflict 
with the plans of Clemenceau’s government for some months because 
it saw them as questioning the agreements already reached. The 
proposal that Allied troops under French command should support 
Anton Denikin’s Volunteer Army in the North Caucasus was seen by 
England as a violation of its sphere of interest.26 From the viewpoint 
of the British Empire, there was reason to believe that the Grande 
Nation, after a “Siberian phase,”27 would concentrate on the southern 
regions of the collapsed empire. Pierre Maurice Janin, the commander 
of Allied, mostly Czechoslovak, units in Siberia, informed his British 
partners that he would regard a new front east of Odesa, in the Crimea 
and at Rostov on the Don, as sensible. From there, according to Janin, 
Kyiv could be “secured” with Allied troops from the Balkans and from 
Palestine.28
These developments were then affected by the capitulation of 
the Central Powers, the reassignment of zones of influence, and the 
increasingly clear intention to “destroy Bolshevism” or at least to 
“contain” it. The commander of Allied forces in Thessaloniki, General 
Louis François Franchet d’Esperey, was asked by Clemenceau to 
develop plans with his Allied partners for a “bastion of resistance” in 
“southern Russia and Odesa” against Lenin’s Soviet regime.29 
24	
TNA, FO 371/3349, No. 197.905, The Russian Situation, 11.1918.
25	
TNA, FO 608/206, 331, 337.
26	
TNA, FO 371/3342, 62.
27	
Brinkley, “Allied Policy and French Intervention in the Ukraine,” 327.
28	
TNA, FO 371/3342, 59.
29 
Gérard Unger, Aristide Briand (Paris, 2005), 391; see also Kurt Fischer, Deutsche Truppen und 
Entente-Intervention in Südrußland 1918/19 (Boppard am Rhein, 1973), 43; Brinkley, “Allied 
Policy and French Intervention in the Ukraine,” 331.

chapter 4c-e: limits to power: ukraine in the strategies 
of the allied powers, 1917–1924
355 
The involvement of Henri Berthelot indicated a reactivation of 
the forces that had been preparing anti-Soviet actions immediately 
after the October Revolution in Iaşi and Kyiv. In addition to France’s 
local military mission, the others involved were France’s ambassador 
to Romania, Gustave de Saint-Aulaire, and a member of the Tabouis 
mission, Émile Henno, who, as “consul,” became the unauthorized 
representative of the Entente in Ukraine. These proponents of an active 
interventionist policy strongly supported the Whites under Anton 
Denikin, to whom Franchet d’Esperey had sent about thirty thousand 
weapons in November 1918.30 The Allies were united around Denikin 
and, at the same time, were making preparations for the purchase of 
grain in southern Russia and its transport through Odesa. An Anglo-
French commission led by the onetime British consul in Odesa, Sir 
John Picton Bagge, was established for this purpose.31 He traveled to 
Odesa at the end of November. Britain, in the background, attempted 
to support the Ukrainians with deliveries of weapons, just enough 
for them to maintain the fight against the Bolsheviks but not offend 
the Whites. Britain’s deliveries of weapons to the Ukrainians were 
stopped only when the French and Italians intervened in the British 
military missions. Those weapons would have been used against 
Poland, which was not in the interests of either France or Italy, as they 
planned for Poland to become a buffer state between Germany and 
Russia.32
Unlike just about a year before, in December 1917 and January 
1918, the French were now supporting not the Ukrainian national 
movement but the emerging Polish state and the “White generals” 
of the old Romanov Empire. The Entente planned further deliveries 
of assistance to Denikin’s army and sent Greek and French troops, 
although the designated commander of Allied forces in Ukraine, 
Philippe Henri d’Anselme, warned against active intervention in the 
region. D’Anselme indicated the war-weariness of the soldiers. Added 
to this was opposition in France. Journalists and parliamentarians in 
30 
SHD/AAT, série N, 1872–1919, 20N 225, Franchet d’Esperey, no. 5797/3 and no. 12564/2ch, 16N 
3147, Franchet d`Esperey, no. 5955/3 and 16N 3172, Berthelot, no 83/3 and 139/3; AAÉ, AAC/AP, 
Z-Europe, URSS, Action des Alliés dans le sud de la Russie, vol. 226, Pichon à Saint-Aulaire, no. 
42.
31	
TNA, FO 371/3342, No. 184.858, Cereal Commission to the Black Sea, 7.11.1918; TNA, FO 
371/3342, No. 190.940, Mr. Bagge, 18.11.1918; TNA, FO 371/3342, No. 191.958, Mr. Bagge’s 
mission to Odessa, 20.11.1918; TNA, FO 371/3342, No. 192.650, Grain from Russia, 21.11.1918; 
TNA, FO 371/3342, No. 196.022, Wheat situation in South Russia, 27.11.1918.
32	
TNA, FO 608/71/24, Polish oppression of Ukrainians, 24.1.1919, 394–96.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
356
Paris were opposing the “anti-Soviet campaign.” The left in particular 
proclaimed its solidarity with the Kremlin leadership, while the 
members of Clemenceau’s government showed themselves to be 
ill-informed. The situation in southern Russia was confusing. The 
Central Powers’ puppet regime under Pavlo Skoropadsky, which had 
tried in vain to shift to a pro-Entente course, had been overthrown by 
the Ukrainian nationalist Directory under Volodymyr Vynnychenko 
and Symon Petliura.33 The British and French regarded the new power 
as a quantité négligeable that was “half Bolshevik” in any case, given 
its social and political program.34 Émile Henno accordingly rejected 
the Petliura government, thus losing a potential partner that was soon 
having to defend itself against Moscow.35
“A Wretched Adventure”
When the first inadequately armed and poorly motivated French 
expeditionary forces, under the command of General Albert Borius, 
arrived in Odesa on 17 and 18 December, they were met by anything 
but a welcoming population. Henno had been in the city for a couple 
of weeks. Caught up in skirmishes with Directory troops, and with 
Henno’s involvement, they installed a military governor in the city 
who was subordinate to Borius and had previously been part of the 
entourage of the Siberian “supreme ruler,” Aleksandr Kolchak.36
Gradually, the Entente troops managed to secure their positions 
and expand their occupation zone. They departed from their original 
line by negotiating a truce with the Ukrainians and adopting a 
cooperative attitude toward the Directory’s war minister, General 
Oleksandr Hrekov. Since French representatives soon came to regard 
the Whites as increasingly unreliable and weak allies, and Henno had 
33	
Andreas Kappeler, Kleine Geschichte der Ukraine, 2d ed. (Munich, 2000), 173.
34	
TNA, FO 608/206, 349–55 and 608/207, 444. The reports that Pichon received about this had 
overestimated the strength of Skoropadsky’s government and underestimated the chances of the 
Directory. See Brinkley, “Allied Policy and French Intervention in the Ukraine,” 335. 
35 
AAÉ, AAC/AP, Z–Europe, URSS, Action des Alliés dans le sud de la Russie, vol. 225, Saint-
Aulaire, no. 857; Jean Xydias, L’intervention française en Russie, 1918–1919 (Paris, 1927), 
123ff., 126ff. In the second half of November 1918, on Henno’s initiative, there was a meeting 
in Iaşi between delegates of various anti-Bolshevik forces on the territory of the former tsarist 
empire. The Ukrainians were not formally represented. There were two delegates, however, who 
represented Skoropadsky’s standpoint indirectly. The meeting was dominated by conservative 
groups. Henno expressed his contempt for the “chauvinist,” “separatist,” and “socialist” Directory 
under Vynnychenko and Petliura. See Brinkley, “Allied Policy and French Intervention in the 
Ukraine,” 332, 337.
36	
Odessaer Zeitung, no. 239, 21 December 1918, 1; cf. SHD/AAT, série N, 1872–1919, 16N 3188, 
Rapport Garchery.

chapter 4c-e: limits to power: ukraine in the strategies 
of the allied powers, 1917–1924
357 
lost influence, nothing now stood in the way of continuing the course 
they had begun. Henri Berthelot and Philippe d’Anselme encouraged 
further negotiations with Hrekov.37 
Hrekov was speaking for a government that found itself in a 
hopeless situation vis-à-vis the Bolsheviks. Forced onto the defensive by 
the Reds and compelled to give up Kyiv, the Directory’s representatives 
agreed to the extensive demands made by d’Anselme’s chief of staff, 
Henri Freydenberg. The compromise had the appearance of a partial 
Ukrainian surrender. Under French pressure until the end of February 
1919, and in spite of resistance and caveats,38 they tolerated not only 
being placed under the military command of French generals but also 
foreign control of the country’s railways and finance. They also agreed to 
a restructuring of the government and the resignation of Vynnychenko, 
whom d’Anselme regarded as an incorrigible left-wing extremist.39 
French officers, in the manner of colonial masters, aimed to 
establish a protectorate without addressing the formal recognition 
of the Directory and independent Ukraine. Freydenberg’s goal was 
rather to work toward a union of the territory with a greater Russia,40 
although this still did not satisfy Denikin’s supporters. As resolute 
opponents of separatist currents, they saw the negotiations with 
Petliura’s representatives as an affront and had the backing of British 
officials in this. The Foreign Office in London was deluged with reports 
and dossiers that decried the inabilities as well as the unlikeableness 
of the French and, not without hints from the Whites, emphasized 
Freydenberg’s Jewish origins.41
The extent of annoyance at the actions of the Grande Nation 
can be seen in the reaction of the USA. Washington was outraged 
that the French were speaking in the name of the whole Entente 
when negotiating with the Ukrainians, in spite of the fact that the 
37 
SHD/AAT, série N, 1872–1919, 20N 729, Berthelot à Franchet d´Esperey, no. 240/3. 
38	
Cf. Cvengroš, La République Démocratique Ukrainienne, 58ff.; A. D. Margolin, From a Political 
Diary: The Ukraine and America, 1905–1945 (New York, 1946), 37; A. D. Margolin, Ukraina i 
politika antanty (Berlin, 1921).
39 
Brinkley, “Allied Policy and French Intervention in the Ukraine,” 339; cf. SHD/AAT, série N, 
1872–1919, 16N 3149, Rapport Freydenberg et d’Anselme. Freydenberg’s plan in the “French 
zone of southern Russia” was to separate the areas held by the Russian Whites from those of 
the Ukrainian nationalist supporters of the Directory. Cf. Brinkley, “Allied Policy and French 
Intervention in the Ukraine,” 338.
40 
SHD/AAT, série N, 1872–1919, 20N 763, d’Anselme, “Rapport d’ensemble.” For an account of 
the French position of 4 April 1919, see Brinkley, “Allied Policy and French Intervention in the 
Ukraine,” 342.
41	
TNA, FO 608/206, 111, 185ff., 331–37, 343, 379ff. On Freydenberg’s Jewish origins, see FO 
608/206, 245.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
358
Directory under Petliura was waging a war on two fronts, in Eastern 
Galicia against Poland and in the north against the advancing Red 
Army. Robert Lansing, the leader of the American delegation in 
Paris, reported in a letter to the US State Department that Ukrainian 
representatives in Paris had passed him documents revealing details 
of the negotiations between the French and the Ukrainians in Kyiv 
in January and February 1919. These revealed the extensive demands 
that French emissaries had made on Petliura.42 Reports of this kind 
caused the US to distance itself increasingly from its war allies.43 
In all this, a not unimportant role was played by the French-backed 
government in Warsaw. The Americans paid careful attention to the 
Ukrainian-Polish battles in Eastern Galicia between November 1918 
and June 1919. The Council of Four at the Paris Peace Conference 
(Thomas Woodrow Wilson, David Lloyd George, Vittorio Orlando, 
and Georges Clemenceau) even decided in March 1919 to invite 
Polish and Ukrainian delegations to Paris to negotiate a peace treaty. 
From early 1919, the brutal behavior of Polish troops toward the 
civilian population and prisoners of war had caused outrage in the 
USA and strengthened the wish for a rapid peace agreement.44 Such 
negotiations actually took place between 2 April and 13 May but were 
broken off without result.45 
In the meantime, conflicts, rivalries, and skirmishes broke out 
among the opponents of the Bolsheviks as they discovered their own 
mutual hostilities. Local populations distanced themselves from the 
foreign intervention and from the interim regimes. Village insurgencies 
and regional insurrectionary armies that cooperated more or less 
closely with the advancing Red Army were getting greater support.
Under these circumstances, the French soon lost the military 
outposts of their “south Russian” occupation zone. Following the loss 
of Kherson, Greek detachments were ordered back from Mykolaiv. 
In March 1919, Entente units were forced to retreat to Odesa. About 
42	
NARA, US DoS, Records of the American Commission to Negotiate Peace, RG 256, M 820, Roll 
486, No. 860e.00/43, Negotiations between the French Government and the Ukrainians, 7.4.1919.
43	
NARA, US DoS, Records of the American Commission to Negotiate Peace, RG 256, M 820, Roll 
486, No. 860e.00/57, French political efforts in the Ukraine, 11.4.1919.
44	
NARA, US DoS, Commission for Negotiation of an Armistice between Poland and the Ukraine, 
RG 256, M 820, Roll 169, No. 181.21401/10, Minutes and Report; NARA, US DoS, Commission 
for Negotiation of an Armistice between Poland and the Ukraine, RG 256, M 820, Roll 169, 
No. 181.21402/1, Memorandum; NARA, US DoS, Commission for Negotiation of an Armistice 
between Poland and the Ukraine, RG 256, M 820, Roll 198, No. 183.9 Ukraine/2–19.
45 
Jerzy Borzęcki, The Soviet-Polish Peace of 1921 and the Creation of Interwar Europe (New 
Haven and London, 2008).

chapter 4c-e: limits to power: ukraine in the strategies 
of the allied powers, 1917–1924
359 
eight hundred thousand residents of the city found themselves in an 
increasingly deplorable situation. They suffered from shortages of 
supplies, enormous price rises, a poorly functioning infrastructure, 
and problems of public safety. Marauding bands were a constant 
threat. There were attacks even in broad daylight, and numerous 
cases of robbery and murder. To make matters worse, there were 
disputes between the Russian Whites, the Ukrainians, and the Allied 
troops. The city divided into different zones. While the dealers and 
members of the old tsarist elite kept up the “glamorous, fashionable” 
life of the declining era, putting off the imminent apocalypse of the 
“old world” with their ghostly, graceful “dance on the volcano” in 
hotels, restaurants, and nightclubs, people in the workers’ quarters 
were preparing for strikes and uprisings.46
Given the advance of Soviet troops, the only possibility left 
to d’Anselme was to contain social protest. But it was no longer 
possible to maintain order. The growing chaos was accompanied by 
plundering, White units opened fire, Entente units mutinied and were 
out of control. At the beginning of April, however, in spite of all the 
inadequacies and reports of doom, d’Anselme managed to evacuate 
his troops.47
Clemenceau issued a directive on this matter on 27 March, but it 
did not refer to the Crimea, where the Allies, under Colonel Eugène 
Gervais Trousson, were grappling with similar problems. As in 
Odesa, the Red forces offered an unobstructed withdrawal of foreign 
intervention forces. The truce that was arranged held only to a limited 
extent, and certain actions prompted Trousson, with the support of 
the commander of the French Black Sea Fleet, Admiral Jean François 
Amet, to maintain the front. From the outset, however, the soldiers 
and sailors were clearly reluctant, which showed that it was time 
to withdraw. On Amet’s ships, many soldiers refused to obey. The 
restoration of discipline failed to satisfy the commanders. If peace was 
to prevail once and for all, declared Amet, this “unpopular” campaign 
against the Soviet Republic had to end.48 
46	
BAR, E 2300, 1000/7/6, 282. Moskau; M. S. Margulies, God interventsii, vol. 1 (Berlin, 1923), 
217ff., 192, 200, 260.
47	
Michael Jabara Carley, Revolution and Intervention: The French Government and the Russian 
Civil War 1917–1919 (Kingston and Montreal, 1983), 171; Brinkley, “Allied Policy and French 
Intervention in the Ukraine,” 341ff.
48	
E. Moulis and E. Bergonier, La Guerre entre les Alliés et la Russie (1918–1920) (Paris, 1937), 
175–81.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
360
Philippe Franchet d’Esperey then authorized the end of the “south 
Russian adventure,” which had been so powerfully attacked in the 
parliament in Paris. The parliamentarians’ critical remarks, which 
influenced the soldiers, appeared in the newspapers. One article in 
Liberté, for instance, asked the French public whether there had ever 
been anything so “wretched” as “our policy in Ukraine.” In the opinion 
of one parliamentarian, Henry Franklin-Bouillon, if the intervention 
there had been a good one, the French would have acted differently 
and at least have been able to help Petliura.49 
Interests and Resources
The French foreign minister, Stephen Pichon, defended the actions 
of his prime minister, Clemenceau, and France’s actions in defending 
its interests. This included measures taken against the Bolsheviks. It 
is not surprising, therefore, that the decision-makers in Paris opposed 
Woodrow Wilson and Lloyd George, who wanted to bring all the warring 
parties in the former tsarist empire, including Lenin’s supporters, to 
the negotiating table. The planned negotiations on Prince Island near 
Istanbul, the so-called “Prinkipo policy,” were sabotaged not least by 
the French prime minister and the Quai d’Orsay.50 
Ukrainian press offices in Paris and London were attempting to 
influence public opinion and win support for Ukrainian independence 
and for Petliura.51 In March, the press offices in Switzerland and 
London created a stir. It was claimed, in one press report, that the 
Entente had reached an agreement with Ukraine to the effect that 
Eastern Galicia would belong completely to Ukraine. This report 
created quite a stir in Warsaw, even though it soon became clear that 
it was an invention designed to disturb relations between Poland and 
the Entente. In a note of 11 March 1919, Edward Hallett Carr, later 
famous as a historian but engaged in 1917–18 in the Russian section of 
the British War Office, admitted that the treatment of Ukraine at the 
Paris Peace Conference had been “unfair.” The peace conditions had 
corresponded neither to ethnographic circumstances nor to military 
49	
Vasyl Markus, L`Ukraine Soviétique dans les relations internationales 1918–1923. Étude 
historique et juridique (Paris, 1959), 188. Like many other deputies and dignitaries, Franklin-
Bouillon had spoken out for the recognition of Finland: Clerc, “De la province russe à l’Ètat 
scandinave,” 68. There is an unfavorable account of Franklin-Bouillon in Georges-Henri Soutou, 
“La France et les Marches de l’Est 1914–1919,” Revue historique 260 (1978), 386.
50 
AAÉ, AAC/AP, E-Asie, Sibérie, vol. 7, Pichon à Martel, no. 66.
51	
TNA, PRO 30/69/1800, Alexander Shoulguin, The Problems of the Ukraine. The Ethnic Question. 
The National Culture. The Economic Life. The Will of the People (London, 1919).

chapter 4c-e: limits to power: ukraine in the strategies 
of the allied powers, 1917–1924
361 
strength.52 The treatment of Eastern Galicia in Paris demonstrated the 
low regard in which the Ukrainian question was held. The victorious 
powers were agreed that it would have to be dealt with as the leftover 
of a defeated enemy. But when Poland annexed western Ukraine, this 
was not at all what the Allied powers had in mind. For years, Eastern 
Galicia remained a bone of contention between Poland and the Allies, 
who thought that it should be administered by a representative of the 
great powers, Russia, or Czechoslovakia. But Poland would not give 
up the territory it had conquered and incorporated into its own state. 
The fait accompli was recognized by the Allies in 1923.53 
Great Britain did not support Ukraine’s independence at the Paris 
talks. Britain continued to set its sights on a united Russia under anti-
Bolshevik leadership. This is clear from a comment of Lloyd George: 
“I only saw a Ukrainian once. It is the last Ukrainian I have seen, and 
I am not sure that I want to see any more.”54 The Ukrainians had 
obviously neglected to lobby for their demands in London.
But there were also other reasons why conditions were 
unfavorable for the creation of pro-Ukrainian sentiment. Although 
associations of Ukrainian exiles in the United States had the 
support of senators and members of the House of Representatives,55 
any corresponding assistance was ineffective. The Ukrainians 
themselves remained disunited, but what was much more 
important was the position of the president. In his Fourteen Points 
of early 1918, Woodrow Wilson did not have in mind a general 
“right of national self-determination.” On the contrary, he had 
challenged the “Russian sister nations” that were struggling for 
independence to demonstrate “their intelligent and unselfish 
sympathy” for “Russia.”56 Dossiers later circulated in Washington 
about strengthening the Ukrainian national movement, but even 
here it was no more than a long-term plan for a Russian federation.57
52	
TNA, FO 608/71/24, Polish oppression of Ukrainians, 24 January 1919, 397–99.
53	
Margaret MacMillan, Paris 1919: Six Months That Changed the World (New York, 2003), 226.
54	
Quoted ibid., 226.
55	
Manning, “The Ukrainians and the United States in World War I,” 351–54; Warvariv, “America 
and the Ukrainian National Cause,” 356ff.
56	
Erez Manuela, The Wilsonian Moment: Self-Determination and the International Origins of 
Anticolonial Nationalism (Oxford and New York, 2007), 40ff.; Klaus Schwabe, “Woodrow 
Wilson und das europäische Mächtesystem in Versailles: Friedensorganisation und nationale 
Selbstbestimmung,” in Nation und Europa. Studien zum internationalen Staatensystem im 19. 
und 20. Jahrhundert, ed. Gabriel Clemens (Stuttgart, 2001), 89–98.
57	
Warvariv, “America and the Ukrainian National Cause,” 369–72.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
362
The US delegation went to the Paris Peace Conference with a number 
of recommendations concerning independence for the previously 
Austro-Hungarian territories of Czechoslovakia and Hungary, as 
well as for Poland and Ukraine. But these documents did not shift 
Wilson’s opinion. He stood by his position of restoring the borders 
of the Russian Empire. Only Poland would achieve independence.58 
Robert Lansing, in negotiations with the Ukrainian delegation on 30 
June 1919, stressed “that the U.S. was not in favor of independence for 
the Ukrainians but that it was in favor of a single Russia, in which the 
various portions should have a certain degree of autonomy.”59 Within 
the Department of State, the most influential people continued to 
defend the view that the Ukrainian national movement was a creation 
of Austrian or German propaganda,60 promoted especially during the 
war by the archbishop of Lviv, Metropolitan Andrei Sheptytsky.61 Any 
premature recognition of the “peripheral nations” of Russia would 
prejudice a rational solution to the Russian question and would 
threaten any reunification of Russian territory.62 This became a firm 
position in the months that followed.
The failure to grant Ukraine diplomatic recognition did not prevent 
the USA from developing careful economic contacts. In October 1919, 
liquidation stock from the USA to the value of 8.5 million dollars 
arrived in Ukraine and had probably already been paid for in cash 
or through the sale of food, alcohol, and private cars. The delivery 
of military vehicles was halted following French protests.63 Frank 
Polk, obviously disturbed by this trade, wrote to the French prime 
58	
Ibid., 372–80.
59	
NARA, US DoS, Records of the American Commission to Negotiate Peace, RG 256, M 820, Roll 
488, Doc.–No. 860e.01/7, Mr. Lansing stated to the Ukrainian Delegation that the U.S. was not in 
favor of independence for the Ukrainians, 30.6.1919.
60 
It cannot be absolutely confirmed that Baily was the source of this note, but the context of the 
documents suggests that this is highly likely: Harvard Libraries, Government Documents, 
Records of the DoS relating to Internal Affairs of the Ukraine (NARA microfilm publications), 
Film S 1040/M 1286, Roll 2, No. 860e.01/17, Division of Near Eastern Affairs (Russia). See also 
the order from the Department of State to the US ambassador in London to treat the Ukrainian 
national movement not as a product of ethnic or economic realities but as the result of Austrian 
and German propaganda: ibid., no. 18. DoS to Embassy London, 8.11.1919.
61	
On Sheptytsky’s role, see documents in Ereignisse in der Ukraine 1914–1922. Deren Bedeutung 
und historische Hintergründe, ed. Theophil Hornykiewicz, vol. 2 (Philadelphia, 1967), 408–53.
62	
Harvard Libraries, Government Documents, Records of the DoS relating to Internal Affairs of 
the Ukraine (NARA microfilm publications), Film S 1040/M 1286, Roll 2, No. 27, Division of 
Russian Affairs, 3.2.1920.
63	
NARA, US DoS, Records of the American Commission to Negotiate Peace, RG 256, M 820, Roll 
488, No. 860e.51/4, US Liquidation Commission. War Department, 20.10.1919.

chapter 4c-e: limits to power: ukraine in the strategies 
of the allied powers, 1917–1924
363 
minister, Georges Clemenceau, clarifying the exact circumstances of 
the deliveries and offering greater detail about the goods delivered 
and where they were being stored.64
France’s influence and resources were inadequate to begin a 
“campaign of the powers victorious in World War I against communism.” 
The most decisive proponents of intervention were gathered in 
London around the British war minister, Winston Churchill. In 1919, 
London gradually gave up cooperating with France over Russia. 
Lord George N. Curzon had already expressed the view in June that 
Ukraine was in Denikin’s zone of influence and was therefore an 
area of British interest. When Britain informed France in July that it 
would be supporting Denikin’s forces in their operations in Ukraine 
and the Crimea, there was little France could do but accept it. The 
French insisted, however, that at least their direct interests should be 
protected.65 Thus Ukraine returned once again, after a year and a half, 
to the center of British interests. The English military now observed 
events in Ukraine with greater attention. On 1 September 1919, the 
War Office instructed the leaders of British missions in Warsaw and 
Bucharest to cooperate as closely as possible in order to forge the 
Poles, the Ukrainians and eventually Denikin into a “continuous anti-
Bolshevik front.”66 
In view of the conflicts, controversies, and divergence of interests 
between Symon Petliura’s troops, Galician formations, Józef Piłsudski’s 
Polish units, and Denikin’s White Volunteer Army, with its Great 
Russian rejection of Ukrainian nationalism, Britain’s plans proved to 
be mere wishful thinking. The weak and disunited Ukrainian forces 
were ground between the two fronts of their stronger opponents in 
the West and East, especially between Warsaw and Moscow. 
But for the Whites as well, having received English support for 
much longer, things were also going badly. The defeat at Warsaw finally 
halted the advance of the Soviet army. The final attempt of Denikin’s 
successor, Petr Wrangel, to attack the “commissars” and “soviets” from 
the Crimea had also failed. The de facto recognition of Wrangel by the 
French government under Alexandre Millerand was little more than 
a gesture of sympathy for the Whites. Paris now finally settled on a 
64	
The delivery consisted of clothing, blankets, medical provisions and medicines, 75 Cadillac 
cars, and 100 Harley-Davidson motorcycles. Cf. NARA, US DoS, Records of the American 
Commission to Negotiate Peace, RG 256, M 820, Roll 488, No. 8, Polk to Clemenceau, 4.12.1919.
65	
Brinkley, “Allied Policy and French Intervention in the Ukraine,” 343.
66	
TNA, WO 158/752, Denikin’s Relations with Romania, Ukraine and Separatists.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
364
long-term alternative defensive plan, one that had been on offer for 
some time and was defended by the British, namely a cordon sanitaire 
of allied Central European states.
Lenin’s supporters had, in the meantime, secured Moscow’s 
hegemony in the western regions of the old Romanov Empire. They 
began by installing what was basically a Russian regime, then 
loosened the reins, but by the early 1920s they had made it clear that 
Soviet Ukraine, with its capital in Kharkiv, would have no independent 
foreign policy.67 In the run-up to the formation of the USSR, decisions 
were made in Moscow and in the ministries of the Western powers. 
Great Britain took the first step when, in February 1920, it signed 
a treaty with the commissars on the exchange of prisoners of war, 
which then became a model for similar treaties with numerous other 
Western and Central European states and, in the long term, furnished 
the basis for conventional bilateral relations.
The New Economic Policy provided the framework for (re)entry 
into “business with Russia.” In economic matters there was, not for 
the first time, a divergence of goals between Britain and France. The 
Grande Nation, which had suffered extensive losses between 1914 
and 1918, was not as willing to make compromises as was the British 
prime minister, David Lloyd George. It was taken for granted by 
Clemenceau and his successors that “Germany had to pay.” Something 
similar applied to Russia, which had incurred large debts to France 
until the end of Romanov rule. Financially stronger, England was the 
second major creditor in this part of the world, with 22.6 percent of 
foreign investments. But France, with 32.6 percent (13 billion gold 
francs), was by far the largest. The greater part of it (11.5 billion) was 
in securities guaranteed until 1917 by the Petrograd government 
under Tsar Nicholas II. Only a relatively small portion, 1.7 billion, was 
invested in enterprise, with great differences in the various regions 
of the empire. French capital was mainly invested in heavy industry 
and in mining, especially in Ukraine and the Donets Basin, where its 
financial participation was between 50 and almost 100 percent.68 
Shortly after the overthrow of Nicholas, French industrialists 
began to fear the negative effects of the revolutionary upheaval. 
Inventories of loss were established when open conflicts emerged with 
67	
Hannes Leidinger, “Also sprach Sinowjew,” in Barry McLoughlin, Hannes Leidinger, and 
Verena Moritz, Kommunismus in Österreich 1918–1938 (Innsbruck, Vienna, and Bozen, 2009), 
203ff.
68 
René Girault, Emprunts russes et investissements français en Russie, 1887–1917 (Paris, 1973).

chapter 4c-e: limits to power: ukraine in the strategies 
of the allied powers, 1917–1924
365 
the Council of People’s Commissars following the nationalizations 
that occurred after Lenin had seized power.69 After failed protests 
and interventions, the French government took over the Russian 
obligations and repaid the private investors at a reduced rate.70 
Rivalries concerning commercial advantage, zones of influence, 
and strategic alliances led to the German-Soviet Treaty of Rapallo 
(1922). This treaty represented substantial damage to France’s postwar 
policy.71 The public was shocked. In the months that followed, its state 
leaders limped along behind international events that demonstrated 
the achievements of Soviet diplomacy and the end of the isolation of 
the October regime. Numerous countries signed trade agreements 
with Moscow and, in time, publicly recognized the young USSR.72 
London took this step at the beginning of February 1924. At the end 
of October that same year, Paris decided to establish regular relations 
with the Soviet Union.73
Contextualization and Assessment
Russia underwent a process of disintegration following the collapse 
of the Romanov Empire, a process that was then reinforced by the 
October Revolution and caused the West European powers to make 
significant changes to their East European strategies. The willingness 
of Britain and France to support an independent Ukraine represented 
a seesaw policy on the part of the Entente states, which made use 
of separatist movements while maintaining contact with the Soviet 
regime.
This brief period of just a couple of months, which began with the 
creation of the Soviet Republic in Petrograd and Moscow and ended 
with the dominance of the Central Powers in the western peripheral 
regions of the former tsarist empire in the spring of 1918, revealed the 
divergent interests of the anti-German allies.
69	
Carley, Revolution and Intervention, 89–104, 123–41.
70	
Ibid., 124.
71	
Wolfgang Eichwede, “Der Eintritt Sowjetrusslands in die internationale Politik, 1921–1927,” in 
Osteuropa-Handbuch. Band Sowjetunion. Teil: Außenpolitik I, ed. Dietrich Geyer (Cologne and 
Vienna, 1972), 150–212.
72	
Ibid., 163, 179.
73	
V. A. Dunaevskii and V. V. Gusev, “Russko-frantsuzskie i sovetsko-frantsuzskie otnosheniia v 
osveshchenii sovetskoi istoriografii (1917–1967),” in Frantsuzskii Ezhegodnik 1967 (Moscow, 
1968), 329–42; cf. Eichwede, “Der Eintritt Sowjetrusslands in die internationale Politik,” 
179ff.; Iu. V. Borisov, Sovetsko-frantsuzskie otnosheniia (1924–1945gg.) (Moscow, 1964); 
Maxime Mourin, Les relations franco-soviétiques (1917–1967) (Paris, 1967); Anne Hogenhuis-
Seliverstoff, Les relations franco-soviétiques, 1917–1924 (Paris, 1981).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
366
Apart from their common focus on the Western Front and on 
strategies to relieve that front by means of measures in the East, the real 
goals of both the Grande Nation and the British Empire had to do with 
the establishment of zones of influence on the territory of the former 
tsarist empire. They also made different assessments with regard to 
reaching an understanding with the Bolsheviks. The complex tactics of 
the Entente states were also a result of the fact that this intervention in 
Russia was a historical precedent. The two-track approach was one of 
the consequences of this. On the English side, for instance, there was 
David Lloyd George’s willingness to compromise with the Kremlin 
leadership and Winston Churchill’s anti-communist crusade.
The Rada could not hope for support from London. Kyiv’s break 
with the Bolsheviks following the October putsch was still regarded 
in a positive light, but its alliance with the Central Powers meant that 
Britain now saw Ukraine as a puppet of Berlin. This impression was 
further strengthened under the Hetmanate. The situation improved 
briefly in 1919 when Petliura formed an alliance with Poland. His 
rapid overthrow and the Bolshevik seizure of power meant that, from 
Britain’s point of view, Ukraine was again at last part of Russia.
France, on the other hand, lacked the necessary political and 
economic strength for ambitious projects. Having run up against 
the limits of its own ability to influence events, France simply had 
to accept the stabilization of Soviet power and its establishment 
in Ukraine. Having weakened the position of Petliura’s fragile 
government by the Quai d’Orsay’s support for the territorial claims of 
Warsaw and Bucharest, Paris now had to accept Moscow’s hegemony 
in Kyiv and Kharkiv.
Given the balance of forces, the French military had demanded 
that Petliura’s Directory submit to Entente control and give up any 
claims to sovereignty. The direct intervention of 1918–19 was not 
motivated by recognition of an independent Ukraine but rather, in 
part, by imperialist colonialist goals. The fact that France had been 
the largest foreign investor in the tsarist empire and that the Russian 
Revolution had given it good reason to fear for its investments, not 
least in Ukraine, was another important factor here. The results of 
French strategy in this area were also less than had been expected. 
Here, as in the Treaty of Versailles, the maneuvers of the center-
right governments of Clemenceau and his successors on the issue of 
compensation suffered a diplomatic setback. The Treaty of Rapallo, 
the coming together of Moscow and Berlin, was a clear demonstration 
of France’s defeat and of the failure of its security policy. As a result, 

chapter 4c-e: limits to power: ukraine in the strategies 
of the allied powers, 1917–1924
367 
France had even less of the authority and economic power that would 
have enabled her to be a significant negotiating and trading partner of 
the USSR or to continue to structure or even maintain the “Versailles 
settlement” in Central and Eastern Europe. The cordon sanitaire 
and the Little Entente had to give way to expansionist fascism and 
national socialism, and then to the Hitler-Stalin pact. The conflicts 
of the 1930s, the Second World War, and a bloody decolonization 
signposted the declining significance of a great power. The signs 
of its decline had been there for a long time but, in that moment of 
European restructuring between 1917 and 1924, they had not been 
clearly perceived.
Great Britain’s predominance following the USA’s withdrawal from 
Europe was also deceptive. The economy of the island kingdom had 
been massively weakened, and its state was highly indebted. London 
was forced to sell its international holdings, profiting both the USA 
and Japan. At the same time, independence movements and demands 
for compensation for damages suffered in the war were becoming 
stronger in the colonies, the dominions, and in Ireland. Under such 
pressures, Lloyd George had to retreat to the French position: under 
the banner of “make Germany pay,” Berlin was now confronted with 
demands for reparations. In August 1919, the “ten-year rule” was 
adopted, promising no war in the next ten years. This reduction in 
defense spending begun in 1919 was also the beginning of Britain’s 
decline as a world power.74 
The United States was England’s successor as global player. In 
spite of its political weight and corresponding economic and political 
power, it held back in the short and medium term from making a 
decisive entry into international politics. In a hesitant manner and 
with few forces, it began to engage itself in the territories of the 
former Romanov Empire. What Washington wished for in principle 
was a united Russian territory with strong regional autonomy under 
a stable, democratic, anti-Bolshevik, pro-Western government.75 
The Americans were particularly reticent, however, in the western 
peripheral areas of the old empire. After the withdrawal of the Central 
Powers, the USA considered the position of the Directory under Symon 
74	
Patrick O. Cohrs, The Unfinished Peace after World War I: America, Britain and the Stabilisation 
of Europe 1919–1932 (Cambridge, 2008), 38ff.; Graham D. Goodlad, British Foreign and 
Imperial Policy, 1865–1919 (London and New York, 2000), 98–100.
75 
The Wilson administration may have been influenced by academics such as Ernest Denis: 
NARA, US DoS, Records of the American Commission to Negotiate Peace, RG 256, M 1107, 
Roll 46, No. 992, Report on Ernest Denis.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
368
Petliura too insecure and unstable. They expressed their repeated 
concern that Petliura would rely on Germany and thus could create a 
new German puppet state.76
With regard to the various conflicting Central, East-Central, and 
East European states at the peace negotiations in Paris, Wilson played 
the role of a moderate mediator. Previous Russian territories, with the 
exception of Poland, the Baltic region, and Finland, would be handed 
over to Bolshevik influence. The USA had thereby unwittingly helped 
to stabilize the Soviet Union, its future deadly enemy in the Cold War.
 
 
76 
This was emphasized in particular by the US ambassador to Great Britain, John W. Davis: 
Harvard Libraries, Government Documents, Records of the DoS relating to Internal Affairs of 
the Ukraine (NARA microfilm publications), Film S 1040/M 1286, Roll 2, No. 860e.01/7, Davis 
to Secretary of State, 31.1.1919.

4f. Poland’s Ukrainian Policy, 1918–1922
Bogdan Musial
Before 1914 there had been neither a Polish nor a Ukrainian state. 
Polish territories were divided between Germany, Austria, and Russia, 
Ukrainian territories between Austria and Russia. But it was the 
Russian Empire that ruled over most of Polish and Ukrainian territory. 
Against such a background, the need for cooperation between the 
supporters of Polish and Ukrainian independence was obvious, 
which is why the Polish irredenta before 1914 dreamt of a joint Polish-
Ukrainian march on Kyiv.1
The reality, however, proved much more complicated. Before 
Poland achieved its independence on 11 November 1918, Poland and 
Ukraine had even been at war with each other. On that day, the Polish 
Governing Council named Józef Piłsudski as Naczelnik (head of state 
with full powers) of the reestablished Polish state and assigned him 
the task of creating the first independent Polish government. Piłsudski 
thus became dictator and, at the same time, founding father of the new 
Poland. Until 1922 and then between 1926 and 1935, he influenced the 
history of the Polish state, including its policy toward Ukraine and 
toward Communist Russia, the Soviet Union.
Piłsudski was already quite familiar with Russia, the conditions 
there, Great Russian nationalism, and even the Bolsheviks.2 When 
the First World War broke out, he saw the chance of realizing the 
dream of an independent Poland and a weakened Russia. He was 
convinced that the Russian Empire, Poland’s greatest enemy, would 
be defeated by the Central Powers. He therefore organized Polish 
fighting units (legions) that entered the war on the side of the Central 
Powers against Russia. The military defeats suffered by Russian forces 
1 
Włodzimierz Suleja, “Piłsudski i Petlura,” in Polska i Ukraina. Sojusz 1920 roku i jego 
następstwa, ed. Zbigniew Karpus, Waldemar Rezmer, and Emilina Wiszko (Toruń, 1997), 113–
29.
2 
Piłsudski was born in 1867 on Russian-ruled territory near Vilnius and grew up there. At an early 
age, he became involved in the struggle for Polish independence and against the tsarist empire, 
spending many years in Siberian exile as a result. He was repeatedly arrested and eventually 
had to flee (1901) to Galicia (southern Poland), then part of Austrian territory. He was one of the 
founders and leaders of the Polish Socialist Party (1892). From 1908, he began to form Polish rifle 
units in Galicia that would fight, in the future war that he saw coming, on the side of Austria-
Hungary against the Russian Empire. Cf. Włodzimierz Suleja, Józef Piłsudski (Wrocław, 1995).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
370
and the February Revolution of 1917 would contribute, in his view, to 
the weakening and eventual defeat of the Russian Empire.3 
The events of 1917 seemed to open the way not only to Polish 
independence but also to the autonomy of many other nations of 
the empire, an idea that Piłsudski had been promoting for twenty 
years.4 Initially, however, Poland remained an object of German 
power politics, a powerless observer of the turbulent developments 
in Central and Eastern Europe, the Bolshevik October putsch, the 
Russian civil war that followed, and the occupation of Ukraine by 
the Central Powers. Piłsudski himself was arrested by the German 
authorities in July 1917 because he had refused to subordinate himself 
and his legions to the Central Powers. Imprisoned in the fortress at 
Magdeburg, he was not released until November 1918. When Poland 
achieved its independence, the Russian Empire had already collapsed. 
A number of nations of the old empire had already declared their 
independence: Finland (November 1917), Lithuania and Turkmenistan 
(December 1917), Ukraine (January 1918), Estonia (February 1918), 
Belarus (March 1918), Georgia, Armenia, and Azerbaijan (May 1918), 
and Latvia (November 1918). In Russia itself, a bloody civil war was 
raging, as well as both Red and White terror.
Piłsudski saw Kyiv as the key to the Russian question. He regarded 
Ukraine, with its economic potential (grain, coal, iron ore and steel 
production) and its large population (around 30 million), as a natural 
ally of Poland against Russia. At this time (November 1918), the 
Ukrainian People’s Republic (Ukraïns'ka Narodna Respublika, UNR) was 
fighting for its very existence against the Red Army. The Bolsheviks, 
with Lenin at their head, rejected Ukrainian independence and 
intended to occupy and sovietize it. The Bolsheviks had similar 
plans for other states that had emerged from the ruins of the tsarist 
empire, including Poland. The attempt, in November 1918, to take 
power in Poland through the councils collapsed in confrontation 
with the rapidly created structures of the reemergent Polish state. 
The Bolsheviks then began to militarily occupy territories claimed by 
Poland and to sovietize them. The result was the Polish-Soviet War, 
which did not end until October 1920.5 
3	
Andrzej Nowak, Polska i trzy Rosje. Studium polityki wschodniej Józefa Piłsudskiego (do 
kwietnia 1920 roku) (Cracow, 2001), 28.
4	
Ibid., 30.
5	
Ibid., 89–97.

chapter 4f: poland’s ukrainian policy, 1918–1922
371 
Two weeks after he came to power, Piłsudski sent a special 
mission to Kyiv to discuss the possibilities of military cooperation 
with the Ukrainian People’s Republic. In January 1919, delegates 
from Kyiv arrived in Warsaw to discuss disputed issues.6 At the end 
of 1918, however, a Polish-Ukrainian military alliance was out of the 
question for Poland, since it had no army that could have come to the 
assistance of the hard-pressed UNR. In November 1918, Polish forces 
amounted to some 6,000 men, although their numbers grew rapidly. By 
January 1919, the Polish army had around 110,000 volunteer soldiers 
and officers.7 Polish forces were not capable of engaging in serious 
military operations until the spring of 1919. Paradoxically, it was in 
a war against Ukraine over Eastern Galicia that the new Polish army 
fought its first battles. Polish-Ukrainian negotiations were therefore 
broken off in January 1919.
The Conflict in Eastern Galicia
Eastern Galicia was part of Austrian territory and had a complex ethnic 
structure. Its total population of 4.9 million was made up of 3.1 million 
Ukrainians, 1.1 million Poles, 620,000 Jews, and a few other small 
national groups. The Ukrainians dominated the countryside, while 
the cities were populated mostly by Poles and Jews. Austria-Hungary’s 
relatively tolerant policy toward national minorities meant that Jewish 
and Ukrainian parties and organizations were able to exist and carry 
on activity alongside Polish ones. Ukrainian parties and organizations 
defended Ukrainian autonomy and promoted Ukrainian national 
consciousness. Although the Ukrainian intelligentsia had developed 
relatively quickly, the majority of the numerically large peasantry cared 
little for Ukrainian national issues. The Poles and the Jews dominated 
administration, education, culture, and economy. Lviv, the most 
influential city in Eastern Galicia, was considered by the Poles to be one 
of the most important Polish cities, along with Cracow and Warsaw.8 
The Central Powers, Germany in particular, supported Ukrainian 
nationalism in order to play it off against Russia. In the peace treaty 
6 
Suleja, “Piłsudski i Petlura,” 116; Michał Klimecki, “Wojna czy pokój. Polsko-ukraińskie 
negocjacje 1918–1921,” in Polska i Ukraina, 43–79, 47ff.
7	
Robert Potocki, Idea restytucji Ukraińskiej Republiki Ludowej (1920–1939) (Lublin, 1999), 83.
8	
Cf. Piotr Eberhardt, Przemiany narodowościowe na Ukrainie XX wieku (Warsaw, 1994), 37–
66; Torsten Wehrhahn, Die Westukrainische Volksrepublik: Zu den polnisch-ukrainischen 
Beziehungen und dem Problem der ukrainischen Staatlichkeit in den Jahren 1918 bis 1923 
(Berlin, 2004), 29–40; Timothy Snyder, The Reconstruction of Nations: Poland, Ukraine, 
Lithuania, Belarus, 1569–1999 (New Haven and London, 2003), 122–37.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
372
with Ukraine signed at Brest-Litovsk, the Central Powers promised 
territories to Ukraine that included the Kholm region, which had a 
majority Polish population. The initially secret plan to make Eastern 
Galicia and Bukovyna into a crownland of the Habsburg Monarchy (the 
Crownland Protocol) proved to be a time bomb. The Poles, who insisted 
on the indivisibility of Galicia, regarded these decisions as unjust and 
anti-Polish. The Polish-Ukrainian conflict was thus preprogrammed.9 
When the Austro-Hungarian Monarchy collapsed in the autumn 
of 1918, Polish politicians in Galicia prepared themselves for the 
establishment of an independent Poland that would include Lviv and 
Eastern Galicia. Western Ukrainian politicians and activists, however, 
beat them to it and, on the night of 1 November, brought off a coup. 
With the help of Ukrainian national units, they occupied Lviv and 
other Eastern Galician towns and proclaimed the Western Ukrainian 
People’s Republic as an independent Ukrainian state. The Polish 
residents of Lviv, taken by surprise, organized a defense in which 
even schoolchildren participated and, in a few days, drove Ukrainian 
forces out of most sections of the city.10 In the other Eastern Galician 
towns, the Ukrainians had greater success, except for Peremyshl 
(Przemyśl), where the Poles won the upper hand. Polish forces soon 
made advances in other towns in the western part of Eastern Galicia. 
Poland failed in its attempts to resolve the conflict by means of 
arbitration. The Polish-Ukrainian War was already under way before 
Poland declared its independence.
On 22 November 1918, Polish troops succeeded in driving 
Ukrainian forces out of Lviv. But the city was under siege and under 
fire from Ukrainian units until April 1919. Immediately after the 
expulsion of the Ukrainians, there were anti-Jewish pogroms in which 
at least 73 people died. The Poles accused the Jews of having supported 
the Ukrainians in the conflict. A particular issue was the behavior of 
the Jewish militia armed by the Ukrainians.11 
In the Polish-Ukrainian War, the Poles gradually won the upper 
hand. The Western Ukrainian leadership did not manage to mobilize 
most of the Ukrainian peasantry for its forces. The peasants were 
more interested in their own economic existence. Western Ukrainian 
activists therefore made use of social slogans, promising the Ukrainian 
peasantry a distribution of land. They used pressure and did not 
9	
Wehrhahn, Die Westukrainische Volksrepublik, 67–101.
10	
Ibid. 102–34. See also chapter 2b in the present volume.
11	
Ibid., 127–56.

chapter 4f: poland’s ukrainian policy, 1918–1922
373 
hesitate to resort to force in order to mobilize the Western Ukrainian 
peasantry for their forces.12 
The Entente states attempted to mediate in the Polish-Ukrainian 
conflict so as to bring it to an end as quickly as possible. In their view, 
the priority was the struggle against an aggressive and criminal 
Bolshevism. The Polish-Ukrainian War was preventing a united front 
of Polish and Ukrainian forces against the Red Army. In February 1919, 
a military commission under the French general Joseph Berthélemy 
negotiated a truce and a demarcation line that would give Lviv and the 
oil region to the south around Boryslav to Poland. Around 70 per cent 
of the territory of Eastern Galicia, according to this proposal, would 
remain part of Western Ukraine.13
The commission also concluded that the Western Ukrainian 
People’s Republic was not a viable state, since the Eastern Galician 
independence movement was based on a very small stratum of 
intelligentsia. To win over the peasants, who had no interest in 
Ukrainian national issues, Western Ukrainian activists and politicians 
had promised them not only a distribution of land but also the houses 
and castles of Lviv. The Western Ukrainian leaders now had no control 
over the peasant unrest they had themselves provoked.14 
The Polish side reluctantly accepted the conditions set by the 
commission, but the Ukrainian side rejected them and ended the 
truce. On 10 March, Western Ukrainian forces began a new offensive 
that collapsed after ten days at Lviv. This was a turning point in the 
Polish-Ukrainian War; from now on it was the Polish side that took the 
initiative. On the night of 14–15 April, Polish troops began a successful 
offensive with the result that, from the end of April, Lviv was no longer 
subjected to Ukrainian artillery fire. Polish troops continued their 
offensive in May and captured other Eastern Galician towns including, 
on 27 May, Stanyslaviv (present-day Ivano-Frankivsk), the seat of the 
Ukrainian authorities. By the end of May, Western Ukrainian forces 
and officials were holding on to only a few eastern areas, a fraction of 
the territory to which they had laid claim.15
Under pressure from the Entente, Poland ended its offensive in 
late May. Truce negotiations were renewed with representatives from 
Kyiv. But the Western Ukrainian side did not observe the truce and 
12	
Ibid., 176–84; Klimecki, “Wojna czy pokój,” 53.
13	
Wehrhahn, Die Westukrainische Volksrepublik, 184–96; Klimecki, “Wojna czy pokój,” 48–57.
14	
Klimecki, “Wojna czy pokój,” 53.
15	
Wehrhahn, Die Westukrainische Volksrepublik, 208–18.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
374
launched a surprise offensive on 7 June, recapturing some areas. 
Poland was able to lay the blame for the continuing conflict on the 
Western Ukrainians. The Entente powers had sent a commission to 
Lviv to investigate numerous complaints about crimes against the 
population carried out by the Poles but also by the Ukrainians. The 
commission found no evidence of Polish crimes but plenty concerning 
Ukrainian ones. It also reported on the population’s enthusiastic 
reception of the Polish troops as liberators “who restored law and 
order in territories previously laid waste by Ukrainian bands.”16 
The commission recommended that the whole of Eastern Galicia 
be occupied by Polish troops. On 25 June 1919, the Council of Foreign 
Ministers in Paris permitted the Polish government to renew its 
offensive in Eastern Galicia in order to occupy it completely. The 
Haller Army, armed in France, would be sent to Poland and deployed 
in the struggle against the communists. Eastern Galicia should be 
given autonomy within the Polish state, and the final decision on its 
status would depend on a referendum.17
On 2 July, led by Piłsudski, the Polish army began its decisive 
offensive against Western Ukrainian troops and forced them out of 
Eastern Galicia. Between then and 18 July, Western Ukrainian forces 
(around 20,000 men) crossed the Zbruch River and entered the 
territory of the Ukrainian People’s Republic, controlled by Eastern 
Ukrainian troops.18 
The Polish-Western Ukrainian War, from November 1918 to July 
1919, cost the lives of about 25,000 soldiers, 10,000 Polish and 15,000 
Ukrainian. It is difficult to estimate the number of losses among 
the civilian population, but it was probably less than the number of 
soldiers lost. Atrocities committed against civilians and prisoners 
of war were not carried out on a large scale.19 Nonetheless, this war 
poisoned relations between Poland and Ukraine. For Poland, the 
problems of Eastern Galicia did not end with the defeat of the Western 
Ukrainians but went on for decades to play a major role in Poland’s 
internal and external affairs. It was Stalin who resolved the problem 
in his own way during the Second World War. Eastern Galicia was 
16	
Ibid., 226.
17	
Cf. ibid.; Kay Lundgren-Nielsen, The Polish Problem at the Paris Peace Conference: A Study of 
Policies of the Great Powers and the Poles (Odense, 1979), 385–87, 395.
18 
Michał Klimecki, Polsko-ukraińska wojna o Lwów i Galicję Wschodnią (Warsaw, 2000), 257ff.; 
Wehrhahn, Die Westukrainische Volksrepublik, 223–34.
19 
Michał Klimecki, “Ojczyzna dwóch narodów. Polsko-ukraińska wojna o Galicję Wschodnią 
(1918–1919),” Biuletyn Instytutu Pamięci Narodowej, 2010, no. 7–8: 14.

chapter 4f: poland’s ukrainian policy, 1918–1922
375 
incorporated into the Soviet Union and forcibly sovietized. The Poles 
living there lost their homeland forever, and the Ukrainians lost their 
freedom for decades.
The Ukrainian People’s Republic and Poland
The Ukrainian People’s Republic declared its independence in January 
1918. It included the territories of Eastern and Central Ukraine that had 
previously belonged to the tsarist empire. Its population in 1914 was 
around 31 million, of whom 23.3 million were Ukrainians (75 percent). 
In Eastern Galicia there were 3.1 million people who belonged to the 
Ukrainian nation.20 
From the beginning, the main enemy of the Ukrainian People’s 
Republic was the Bolshevik regime, although Denikin’s Volunteer 
Army had also rejected Ukrainian independence. Russian nationalists 
regarded Ukraine as an integral part of Great Russia. Poland was also 
threatened by the Bolsheviks, but the danger was not so acute as it was 
for Ukraine. Poland also had problems with Denikin and his generals: 
they did not question Poland’s independence, but they did question 
the territories claimed by Poland.21
Piłsudski understood quite well the importance of the Ukrainian 
question for Poland and was prepared to make compromises in 
Eastern Galicia. But he insisted as a minimum that the city of Lviv 
and the oil region around Boryslav should belong to Poland.22 The 
first Polish-Ukrainian negotiations collapsed because of the conflict in 
Eastern Galicia. Then came the Polish-Ukrainian battles in Volhynia, 
beginning in January 1918.23 Volhynia, in northwestern Ukraine 
north of Eastern Galicia, was a Russian-ruled area whose population 
was two-thirds Ukrainian. Poland claimed western Volhynia, while 
Eastern Ukraine claimed the Kholm region bordering on Volhynia. 
The fighting in Volhynia lasted until June 1919, at which time the 
Eastern Ukrainian forces were having to fight on two fronts, in the east 
against the Red Army and in the west against Polish troops. In spite 
of this, the Ukrainian People’s Republic never officially declared war 
on Poland because Symon Petliura, the military commander and, from 
20	
Eberhardt, Przemiany narodowościowe na Ukrainie, 57–59.
21	
For a more detailed discussion, see Nowak, Polska i trzy Rosje, 104–33.
22	
Suleja, Józef Piłsudski, 198ff.; Klimecki, “Wojna czy pokój,” 47.
23 
Zbigniew Karpus, “Ukraiński sojusznik Polski w wojnie 1920 roku,” Biuletyn Instytutu Pamięci 
Narodowej, 2010, nos. 7–8: 16–33; Viktor Savchenko, Dvenadtsat' voin za Ukrainu (Kharkiv, 
2006), chap. 8, accessed 6 January 2011, http://militera.lib.ru/h/savchenko_va/index.html. 
Savchenko writes that there had already been armed conflict in Volhynia in November 1918.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
376
February 1919, the head of government, wanted to reach an agreement 
with Poland. In February 1919, he attempted in vain to persuade his 
Western Ukrainian allies to reach a compromise with Poland.24 
The troops of the Red Army had taken Kyiv in February and 
later occupied other territories of the Ukrainian People’s Republic. 
In April and May 1919, the Ukrainian units under Petliura held only 
the eastern areas of Volhynia and Eastern Galicia. The situation was 
critical, so Petliura decided to resume negotiations with Poland. 
Petliura had already signaled his willingness to renew negotiations 
in April. The talks began on 20 May in Lublin and resulted in a truce 
on 24 May 1919. The UNR relinquished its claims to Eastern Galicia 
and recognized Polish claims in Volhynia as far as the river Styr. This 
represented a capitulation to Polish demands but was not surprising, 
given the difficult situation in which the UNR found itself as it fought 
for its very survival. In return, Poland recognized the Ukrainian state 
and committed itself to rendering military assistance to Ukraine in 
the fight against the Bolsheviks. In addition, the UNR had to restore 
expropriated Polish properties (mostly estates) to their owners or pay 
compensation.25 
The agreement, however, was not ratified, as the new political 
leadership of the UNR rejected its conditions. The negotiations 
continued in Lviv until 16 June 1919, when the Central and Eastern 
Ukrainian side agreed with the Poles on a truce and on a demarcation 
line based on the fronts of 1 June. Under pressure from the Western 
Ukrainians, however, this agreement was similarly not recognized 
because it represented a loss of most of the territories that they 
claimed. There was also some hope, at that time, that the offensive of 
the Western Ukrainian forces would be successful. On the Volhynian 
front, however, both sides maintained the truce.26 
The end of the Western Ukrainian People’s Republic and the 
extremely difficult situation of the UNR prompted the leadership 
to resume the negotiations with Poland that had been broken off in 
June. On 19 July, a UNR delegation arrived in Dęblin. It apologized 
for breaking the agreement of 16 June and declared that Ukraine 
wanted peaceful relations with Poland and a joint struggle against 
Soviet Russia. The delegation also proposed a “civilized” arrangement 
with regard to Eastern Galicia. Piłsudski supported, as he had done 
24	
Potocki, Idea restytucji, 44–49; Savchenko, Dvenadtsat' voin, chap. 8.
25	
Cf. Potocki, Idea restytucji, 43ff.
26 
Ibid., 44ff.; Karpus, “Ukraiński sojusznik,” 16.

chapter 4f: poland’s ukrainian policy, 1918–1922
377 
previously, the idea of Polish-Ukrainian cooperation, and truce 
negotiations began on 10 August, concluding on 1 September 1919. 
A demarcation line was established along the Zbruch River, and a 
neutral zone to the east of it. If Red troops entered this zone, they 
would be met by Polish forces. Both sides also agreed to the release of 
prisoners of war.27 
The agreement took into account all of Poland’s demands without 
Poland committing itself to offer military or political assistance to 
Ukraine. Nevertheless, this agreement represented a turning point 
in relations between Poland and Eastern Ukraine. With the Polish-
Ukrainian conflict settled in Poland’s favor, Piłsudski defended an 
independent Ukraine under Petliura’s leadership.28 From Poland’s 
point of view, an independent Ukraine that did not question Poland’s 
territorial claims in Eastern Galicia and Volhynia would be a strategic 
ally against the communists and the Great Russian nationalists.
The military value of this new ally was very small, since the UNR 
was then facing collapse. The Red Army and Denikin’s Volunteer Army 
were fighting on territory claimed by the UNR over which of them 
would rule Ukraine. Denikin’s army entered Kyiv on 1 September 
and occupied other Ukrainian territories as its main forces advanced 
toward Moscow. The situation of Petliura and his troops in September 
1919 was so dramatic that he even asked Lenin for assistance in 
fighting Denikin’s forces, against which he had declared war on 11 
September. When Denikin’s forces were defeated at Orel, they began 
to retreat. In November and December, the troops of the Red Army 
occupied almost all of Ukraine, and the remnants of the Eastern 
Ukrainian forces fled to Poland.
It was at this time that a new policy toward Ukraine crystallized 
in Poland, making it a guarantor of Ukrainian statehood. In October 
1919, Poland began secret truce negotiations with the Moscow regime. 
One of the most important conditions insisted on by Piłsudski was a 
“cessation of attacks on Petliura.”29 This would have implied Moscow’s 
recognition of an independent Ukraine, to which Lenin and his 
comrades would not agree. On 14 November, the Politburo discussed 
the Polish conditions for a truce and considered them acceptable, 
27	
Potocki, Idea restytucji, 45–49.
28	
Ibid.
29	
For a detailed account of the secret negotiations, see Nowak, Polska i trzy Rosje, 378–97; 
quotation on 387. The negotiations had to remain secret because the Entente powers, on which 
Poland depended, rejected all negotiations with the Bolsheviks at that time.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
378
except for the cessation of the military conflict with Petliura. This was 
rejected by the Politburo, pointing out that “independent negotiations 
are being carried out with Petliura, which is why we cannot let our 
relations with him be made dependent on a third party.”30 
The condition with respect to Petliura was one of three points 
on which Piłsudski wanted to test the genuineness of Soviet Russian 
avowals that they wished to establish a truce and then peace.31 In 
response to their rejection on the Petliura issue, Piłsudski informed 
the Soviet Russian side that “he would enter into no negotiations 
on the Petliura issue. He declared that, from the viewpoint of Polish 
interests, he could not allow Petliura to be defeated. He would therefore 
defend Petliura by force if he were attacked.”32 This was a declaration 
of war with regard to the Ukrainian question. Although the Polish-
Soviet war had been going on since the spring of 1919, it was relatively 
quiet on the front after September. Of course, the open threat from 
Piłsudski could not hold back the Bolsheviks from occupying Ukraine. 
In December 1919 they took Kyiv and, by the end of the year, they had 
occupied most of Central and Eastern Ukraine. Piłsudski then broke 
off negotiations with the Russian communists and prepared for war 
with the Red Army.33 
Polish reconnaissance had reported, as early as the summer of 1919, 
that the aim of the Russian communists was the invasion of Poland. This 
assessment was confirmed by further reconnaissance reports on Soviet 
Russian preparations for war against Poland. When the Bolsheviks 
finally settled the civil war in their favor, they began preparations for a 
major offensive on the Polish front. From January 1920, the Red Army 
concentrated its forces in the area around Smolensk, from where the 
main attack would be launched in the direction of Warsaw and farther 
toward the German border (the true goal).34
From the very beginning, the Polish military leadership had 
detailed knowledge of Soviet Russian preparations for their attack. In 
the summer of 1919, Polish cryptologists had succeeded in cracking 
the Soviet secret codes. From then on, Polish radio reconnaissance 
30	
RGASPI, fond 17, op. 3, d. 38, Minutes of Politburo session, 14.11. 1919, Point 4, 2.
31	
The two other points were the cessation of Bolshevik agitation among Polish forces and a ten-
kilometer neutral zone east of the Polish-Bolshevik front line, which was seen as a demarcation 
line. Cf. Nowak, Polska i trzy Rosje, 386ff.
32	
Quoted in Nowak, Polska i trzy Rosje, 394.
33	
Ibid., 396ff.
34	
Ibid.; Bogdan Musial, Kampfplatz Deutschland. Stalins Kriegspläne gegen den Westen (Berlin, 
2008), 32–40.

chapter 4f: poland’s ukrainian policy, 1918–1922
379 
easily decoded thousands of coded telegrams from individual units of 
the Red Army. The Polish military leadership was therefore very well 
informed about the state of the Red Army, the course of battles on the 
civil war front, as well as the position and concentration of troops in 
preparation for the coming operations.35 
At the beginning of December 1919, Petliura and the remnants 
of his forces (about 8,000 men) crossed the Polish front line. Around 
2,000 Ukrainian soldiers remained on Red Army-occupied Ukrainian 
territory to continue the struggle as partisans. Polish officials disarmed 
the Ukrainian soldiers and officers and interned them. In January 
1920, the Polish war ministry ordered that the Ukrainian soldiers and 
officers be treated not as internees or prisoners of war but as “military 
volunteers of foreign nationality.”36 
This decision was linked to the negotiations between Poland 
and Ukraine concerning an alliance, which had been under way 
since November 1919. On 2 December 1919, representatives of the 
Eastern Ukrainian government handed a declaration to the Polish 
side confirming that it recognized the existing Polish-Ukrainian 
demarcation line as the border, with Eastern Galicia and parts of 
Volhynia on the Polish side.37 These concessions were welcomed on 
the Polish side, since the Supreme Council of the Peace Conference 
in Paris had decided, on 21 November 1919, that Poland’s mandate in 
Eastern Galicia was a temporary one (25 years). The status of Eastern 
Galicia would then be decided by a referendum.38 
In return, the Ukrainian side expected the recognition of the 
UNR as an independent state, material assistance for the Ukrainian 
army, and the release of Ukrainian internees and prisoners of war. In 
addition, Polish territory would be a transit zone for military hardware 
and the soldiers of the Ukrainian army.39
The alliance with Poland was seen by the UNR as the last chance to 
rescue Ukrainian statehood. In this predicament, Ukraine was ready 
to accept all of Poland’s territorial demands, since the existence of the 
35	
Musial, Kampfplatz Deutschland, 39ff.
36 
Karpus, “Ukraiński sojusznik,” 17.
37	
Klimecki, “Wojna czy pokój,” 66ff. The declaration also said that a land reform, which would 
affect Polish estate owners in Ukraine, would be carried out only when a law had been passed by 
a democratically elected parliament. Until then, the rights of Polish estate owners would continue 
to be respected by regulations of both governments (ibid.).
38	
Caroline Milow, Die ukrainische Frage 1917–1923 im Spannungsfeld der europäischen 
Diplomatie (Wiesbaden, 2002), 350–55; Werhahn, Die Westukrainische Volksrepublik, 248.
39	
Klimecki, “Wojna czy pokój,” 66ff.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
380
Ukrainian state was at risk. Eastern Galician Ukrainian activists and 
politicians, who still saw Poland as Ukraine’s main enemy, rejected 
these concessions. They left the Ukrainian diplomatic mission and 
published their protest on 2 December.40 This led to a final break 
between the Western Ukrainian and UNR leaders but, at the same time, 
it facilitated the Polish-Ukrainian agreement. The negotiations led to 
a close military and political alliance. In February 1920, Ukrainian 
national units were being formed on Polish territory. By 25 April 1920, 
two Ukrainian divisions were ready for deployment—the 2nd Rifle 
Division, with almost 4,000 men, and the 6th Rifle Division, with more 
than 2,100 men. They were made up of Ukrainian volunteers (mostly 
onetime internees and prisoners).41
From the turn of the year 1919–20, Ukraine played a key role in 
Piłsudski’s political and strategic considerations with regard to Soviet 
Russia. The separation of Ukraine from Russia, regardless of whether 
it was Red or White, would represent a permanent weakening of 
Russia because of Ukraine’s economic significance. Without grain, 
coal, iron, or steel from Ukraine, Soviet Russia would be less of a threat 
to Poland and its neighbors. Piłsudski hoped that a Polish-Ukrainian 
alliance, with Poland playing the dominant role, would keep the 
aggressive Bolshevik regime in check, since he knew that Moscow 
did not want peaceful coexistence. Western Ukrainian activists and 
politicians were not the only opponents of Piłsudski’s alliance plans. 
They also met with some opposition in Poland itself, especially from 
the National Democrats.42 
In reality, Piłsudski had little room for maneuver in the spring of 
1920. He and his military leaders knew about Bolshevik preparations 
for a great final offensive against Poland and realized that this was not 
just a question of borders but of the very existence of the Polish state, 
reestablished after 120 years. The Entente powers, especially Britain, 
had in the meantime come to terms with the Bolshevik regime and 
were seeking a settlement with Lenin. They turned down an offensive 
war against Moscow because they underestimated the ideological 
expansionism and criminal energy of the communists.43 Against this 
background, Piłsudski’s attempt to restore Ukrainian statehood and 
40	
Ibid., 67ff.; Potocki, Idea restytucji, 49–51.
41 
Karpus, “Ukraiński sojusznik,” 18–21.
42	
For more detail, see Nowak, Polska i trzy Rosje, 559–83.
43	
Ibid., 426–29; Richard H. Ullman, Anglo-Soviet Relations, 1917–1921, vol. 2 (Princeton, 1968), 
317–32. 

chapter 4f: poland’s ukrainian policy, 1918–1922
381 
forge a Polish-Ukrainian alliance appeared to be the only possible 
solution. He thought it would be irresponsible and extremely dangerous 
to wait for the Bolsheviks to begin their offensive at a time favorable to 
them44 and  therefore decided to take the bull by the horns.
In his preparations for the final conflict with Lenin, Piłsudski 
sought an understanding with Russian anti-Bolshevik forces prepared 
to cooperate with Poland. He talked principally with Boris Savinkov, 
a onetime revolutionary and Russian politician who was arguing 
strongly for a Polish-Russian alliance against the Bolsheviks.45 Unlike 
the Polish-Ukrainian alliance, the Polish-Russian negotiations came 
to nothing.
On 21 April 1920, representatives of the Polish government 
and the UNR signed a treaty of alliance. The treaty acknowledged 
Ukraine’s right to independence and recognized the Directory as 
its government. Ukraine ceded Eastern Galicia, as well as parts of 
Volhynia and Podilia. The issue of land reform was left to a future 
Ukrainian constituent assembly. Until such a time, the rights of Polish 
estate owners would be regulated by special agreements. Minorities 
in Ukraine would have equal rights. 
An integral part of the treaty was the agreement on a Polish-
Ukrainian military alliance and the subordination of Ukrainian forces 
to Polish overall command. But the treaty also provided for Ukrainian 
command of their own forces once progress in the operation and 
operating conditions permitted. The Ukrainian government had the 
right to establish a governing administration in liberated Ukrainian 
territories. The costs of arming Ukrainian forces and of provisions for 
Polish and Ukrainian troops fighting in Ukraine would be borne by 
the Ukrainian government.46
Polish historians agree that the granting of rights to Polish estate 
owners whose land had already been distributed among the peasantry 
in 1918 was a political error. This made it easier for the Bolsheviks 
44	
Klimecki, “Wojna czy pokój,” 71.
45	
For more detail, see Nowak, Polska i trzy Rosje, 458–501. On 27 March 1920, Savinkov wrote 
to Piłsudski and challenged him to act, since only action could change the unfavorable political 
climate of weakness in the face of the Bolshevik threat in the West. If Piłsudski were to advance 
with his troops as far as Smolensk, that would make it clear to Russian nationalist circles in the 
emigration and to anti-Bolshevik forces in Russia that an alliance with Poland was essential to 
success (ibid., 480ff.).
46	
Klimecki, “Wojna czy pokój,” 71–73; Potocki, Idea restytucji, 57–63.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
382
to promote anti-Polish propaganda.47 Although the territorial 
concessions to Poland were extremely painful for Ukraine, Petliura 
and the UNR government had little choice. On 15 March 1920, Petliura 
wrote to Isaak Mazepa, the head of the Directory: “Poland aims to 
liberate us—for a price, of course: five districts of Volhynia…. In any 
case, without this or some other agreement with Poland, we would 
not be able to restore our statehood.”48
“Operation Kyiv”: The Attempt to Restore Ukrainian Statehood
On 17 April 1920, a few days before the signing of the Polish-Ukrainian 
alliance treaty, Piłsudski ordered his troops to attack the Soviet 
forces concentrated in Ukraine49 although his Polish forces were 
significantly weaker than the Red Army in numbers and equipment, 
especially as the Poles had no reserves. Poland would certainly not be 
able to sustain a long war. 
On 25 April 1920, Polish forces on the southern Ukrainian 
front made a surprise attack on the Red Army. The strategic goal of 
“Operation Kyiv” was to drive Russian forces out of central Ukraine 
across the Dnipro and help the UNR government recover power and 
establish more Ukrainian units that would then help the Polish troops 
in their struggle with Soviet Russia. An attack in the north, where 
the Red Army was concentrating its forces for the offensive against 
Poland, was to follow at a later time.50
On 7 May, Polish troops entered Kyiv and crossed the Dnipro east 
of the city. The front line ran from Chornobyl (north of Kyiv) along the 
Dnipro to Trypilia (south of Kyiv), and from there west of the Dnipro 
in a southwesterly direction as far as Volodarka (east of Bila Tserkva). 
Polish troops stopped there and did not pursue the defeated and 
demoralized units of the Red Army. They did not plan to occupy the 
whole of Ukraine: Polish forces were insufficient to accomplish that.51
The previously established Ukrainian units fought alongside the 
Poles. There were also numerous Ukrainian partisans and insurgents 
who attacked the retreating Red Army and Bolshevik activists and 
47	
Potocki, Idea restytucji, 58.
48	
Quoted in Potocki, Idea restytucji, 55.
49	
Klimecki, “Wojna czy pokój,” 71.
50	
Musial, Kampfplatz Deutschland, 39–42.
51	
Ibid.; for more detail, see Norman Davies, White Eagle, Red Star: The Polish-Soviet War 1919–
1920 and the “Miracle on the Vistula” (London, 2003), 105–29. 

chapter 4f: poland’s ukrainian policy, 1918–1922
383 
officials. On 26 April, Piłsudski addressed the Ukrainian people and 
assured them that Polish troops would remain on their soil only as 
long as it took for the legal Ukrainian government to resume power 
and the Ukrainian army to be in a position to defend the homeland 
from attack. The Directory also announced that the Polish troops had 
entered Ukraine as allies to fight their common enemy.52 
The entry of Polish troops, however, was met with no great 
enthusiasm on the part of the Ukrainian peasants, who were rather 
restrained in their reaction. The leaders of the UNR also failed to 
mobilize large sectors of the population. Polish reports indicate that 
they were disappointed by the reaction and were in agreement about 
the cause: there was widespread resistance to the Bolsheviks, but 
the partisans and insurgent groups were really local militias. They 
were not part of a movement that could be regarded as nationalist, 
even though they had fought under the banner of independence and 
anti-Bolshevism. The real goals of this movement were to drive out or 
destroy the Bolsheviks and to prevent the requisitioning of food and 
grain, as well as the mobilization of men.53 What was really decisive, 
however, in preventing the Ukrainian leadership from establishing 
stable structures of power was the lack of time. The Polish occupation 
of Ukraine west of the Dnipro was of short duration.54 
The Soviet political and military leaders did not lose their nerve 
following the surprise attack of the Polish army. They accelerated the 
movement of troops to Belarus (the western front) in order to proceed 
with the offensive. The Red Army began its offensive on 14 May but 
was soon halted by Polish units. The Red troops were more successful 
on the Ukrainian section of the Polish-Soviet front. They forced Polish 
units out of Kyiv in June. By the end of June, Polish troops, with their 
Ukrainian allies, were almost back to their starting position of 25 
April.55 
The Red Army began its main attack on the western front on 4 
July and was successful this time. Soviet troops also renewed their 
offensive on the southwestern front (the Ukrainian section) and were 
likewise successful. By mid-August, they had occupied large parts of 
Eastern Galicia and Volhynia and had reached Lviv, while their troops 
on the western front had reached Warsaw. Poland seemed destined 
52	
 Potocki, Idea restytucji, 66–84.
53	
 Ibid. 
54	
 Ibid., 84–100.
55	
 Musial, Kampfplatz Deutschland, 42–56.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
384
to final defeat. But Polish units began a successful counteroffensive 
on 16 August, and the triumphant westward advance of the Red 
Army turned into a panicky retreat within a few days. Troops on the 
southwestern front operating in the Ukrainian section also had to 
retreat with heavy losses.56 
By the beginning of October, Polish troops had occupied 
Maladzechna, Pinsk, and Lida (in present-day western Belarus), driven 
Soviet troops out of Eastern Galicia and large parts of Volhynia, and 
crossed the Zbruch. Ukrainian units had taken part in the fighting.57 
Polish forces halted their offensive on 18 October, since both 
parties had agreed to a truce and a demarcation line in Riga on 12 
October. Peace negotiations were then begun in Riga and ended on 
18 March 1921. The peace treaty regulated the border between Poland 
and Soviet Russia.58 Both sides had already committed themselves in 
the truce agreement to support “no foreign military operations against 
the other party to the treaty.” This meant that the Poles had to renounce 
their military alliance of April 1920 with the UNR, which was then 
done. The Polish authorities ordered that all non-Polish units vacate 
their territory by 2 November 1920. Ukrainian units then left all areas 
that fell to Poland in the truce agreement and moved to areas that had 
been occupied by Poland a short time previously. There Ukrainian 
units intended to continue their fight against the Red Army.59
At the beginning of November, Ukrainian forces numbered about 
40,000 men, of whom around 10,500 were battle-ready soldiers and 
officers. After a short and hopeless battle, the remnants of UNR troops 
and officials crossed the Zbruch again on 21 November. Around 20,000 
of them were disarmed and interned by the Polish authorities. These 
included soldiers and officers, but also officials and women and children. 
There were about 15,500 citizens of the UNR interned on Polish territory 
in February 1921. Symon Petliura, along with government and central 
officials, was in Tarnów, while soldiers and officers were in a number 
of internment camps.60 During the months and years that followed, 
their numbers gradually declined. They found work in Poland, traveled 
to other countries, or returned to Bolshevik, later Soviet, Ukraine. 
By the end of 1923, their numbers had gone down to about 3,100. On 
56	
 Ibid.
57	
 Ibid.
58	
 Ibid.
59 
 Karpus, “Ukraiński sojusznik,” 25 f.
60	
 Ibid., 26–33; Potocki, Idea restytucji, 107ff., 146–58, 183–88.

chapter 4f: poland’s ukrainian policy, 1918–1922
385 
31 September 1924, the last of the Ukrainian internment camps was 
closed.61 Petliura had to leave Poland at the end of 1923 and emigrated to 
Paris, where he was assassinated in May 1926.62
Thus ended the unequal Polish-Ukrainian alliance of April 1920. 
Thus ended also, for the next seventy years, the idea of an independent 
Ukraine. Polish domestic and foreign policy, however, continued to be 
influenced by the Ukrainian question until 1939. The Soviet regime 
exploited the Eastern Galician-Ukrainian irredenta against Poland and 
claimed Eastern Galicia under the pretext of uniting the Ukrainian 
nation in a single state. This was the goal that Stalin achieved in the 
autumn of 1939, with German assistance (the Hitler-Stalin Pact). 
 
 
 
61 
 Karpus, “Ukraiński sojusznik,” 26–33; Potocki, Idea restytucji, 183–88.
62 
 Waldemar Rezmer, “Symon Petlura (22 V 1879–25 V 1926). Szkic biograficzny,” in Polska 
i Ukraina, 151–61; Emilian Wiszka, “Symon Petliura v Pol'shchi i Frantsiï (1920–1926),” in 
Polska i Ukraina, 163–75; Suleja, “Piłsudski i Petlura,” 113–29.

Looking Ahead: 
A Comparison of the Occupation Regimes 
of 1918 and 1941–1944
Peter Lieb, Wolfram Dornik, and Georgiy Kasianov
Any comparison of the occupation regimes of 1918 and 1941–44 has 
to be made with care.1 Basically, in making a comparison, we are 
not making an equation. Rather, we use this comparison and the 
demonstration of parallels and divergences in order to highlight long-
term developments on the one hand and discontinuities on the other. 
In what follows, ten basic ideas will be presented.
1)	
First of all, the occupation of Ukraine was, in both cases, a 
military act. In the First World War, as in the Second, the invaders 
advanced very rapidly eastward, once by railroad and once with 
tank units leading the way, although in 1941 most of the army 
advanced on foot. Was the “railway campaign” of 1918 a precursor 
of the Blitzkrieg of the Second World War? As has been shown in 
a number of works, the concept of Blitzkrieg in 1939–40 was not 
a strategic but rather an operational or mainly tactical concept.2 
This reflected German military doctrine as it was developed at the 
end of the First World War and especially in the interwar period. 
Some of the key elements of this military doctrine were: the use of 
combined arms; the tactical deployment of the Luftwaffe to support 
ground forces; the delegation of responsibility to subordinate 
units; and the use of modern means of communication such as 
radio. What was decisive was the concentrated penetration of 
tank units on a relatively small section of the front, followed 
by a rapid independent advance deep into enemy territory. The 
1	
For general comparisons of the First and Second World War, see Erster Weltkrieg – Zweiter 
Weltkrieg. Ein Vergleich. Krieg, Kriegserlebnis, Kriegserfahrung in Deutschland, ed. Bruno 
Thoß and Hans-Erich Volkmann (Paderborn, Munich, Vienna, and Zurich, 2002). For the 
Eastern Front, see Rüdiger Bergien, “Vorspiel des ‘Vernichtungskrieges’? Die Ostfront des 
Ersten Weltkriegs und das Kontinuitätsproblem,” in Die vergessene Front. Der Osten 1914/15. 
Ereignis, Wirkung, Nachwirkung, ed. G. P. Groß (Paderborn, 2006), 383–408.
2	
The fundamental work here is Karl-Heinz Frieser, Blitzkrieg-Legende. Der Westfeldzug 1940 
(Munich, 1995).

looking ahead: a comparison of the occupation regimes 
of 1918 and 1941–1944
387 
goal was to encircle the enemy, thereby inflicting more of a 
psychological than a physical defeat.3 
	
	
There were some obvious differences between the Ukrainian 
campaign of 1918 and the early successes of the German army 
(Wehrmacht) in the Second World War. In 1918, for instance, fighter 
aircraft were not technically advanced enough to provide close air 
support. Planes were used in Ukraine, but only for identifying the 
enemy: since most Bolsheviks wore civilian clothes, this had only 
very moderate success.4 As the army depended largely on the 
railway lines, its advance route was predetermined. Moreover, 
Bolshevik units were militarily on a par. General Kosch expressed 
this insight very well when, comparing the Ukrainian campaign 
to the great battles on the Western Front, he spoke of “clutter” 
(Kleinkramm).5 Although there were these differences between 
1918 and 1939–40, there were also a number of basic similarities. 
The following were the most obvious: the concentration of force 
on focal points, independent decision-making by subordinate 
officers in tactical matters, and rapid pursuit to allow the enemy 
no reaction time.6
2)	
The whole of Ukrainian territory was affected in both world 
wars, but the state structure of Ukraine was clearly different in 
1941 from what it had been in 1918. What the Central Powers 
confronted, in the final year of the First World War and the second 
year of the Russian Revolution, was a chaotic country in which 
all social boundaries and systems of order were in question. The 
Wehrmacht, on the other hand, entered a country that had been 
“disciplined” by excessive violence for two decades. The brutal 
3	
After 1945, this doctrine was further developed by the Israeli Defense Force and, from the 1980s, 
by the US Army. In modern US doctrine this is known as “maneuver warfare” or sometimes 
“shock and awe.” See Harlan K. Ullman and James P. Wade, Shock and Awe: Achieving Rapid 
Dominance (Washington, D.C., 1996); Robert R. Leonhard, The Art of Maneuver: Maneuver 
Warfare Theory and Airland Battle (Novato, Calif., 1991).
4 
The Bavarian Cavalry Regiment made the following assessment of its battles in the Crimea: 
“It was our experience on operations that air reconnaissance of Bolshevik units was a complete 
failure.... The pilot cannot determine whether he is observing an advancing Bolshevik unit or 
a perfectly normal wagon transport of rural inhabitants.” See BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 18. 
Kaiserl. Deutsches Gouvernement Sewastopol, Abt. Ia, Nr. 120, Bericht über die Tätigkeit der 
B.K.D. von Bierislawa bis zur Besetzung von Feodossija, 13.5.1918.
5	
BA-MA, N 754/10, Brief Koschs an seine Frau v. 26.3.1918.
6	
For more detailed discussions of geopolitics and military operations on the Eastern Front in 
both wars, see Hew Strachan, “Die Ostfront. Geopolitik, Geographie und Operationen,” in Die 
vergessene Front, 11–26.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
388
“persecution of the kulaks,” collectivization, the annihilation 
of the political intelligentsia, and the knowingly accepted 
consequences of the catastrophic famine (Holodomor)7 directed 
against the Ukrainian peasantry in the early 1930s had stabilized 
Soviet power.8 In 1941, the Germans broke up Ukrainian territory, 
dividing it between Romania, the “District of Galicia” as part of 
the Generalgouvernement, the area of operations under German 
military administration, and the large civilian-administered 
Reichskommissariat Ukraine. At the local level, they made use of 
the existing administration. Many Ukrainians hoped initially 
in 1941, as they had in 1918, that with the help of the German 
occupiers they would be liberated from Moscow, and they 
therefore supported the new regime.9 Disillusionment set in very 
rapidly in 1918, leading to uprisings between June and July that 
then gave way to resignation after these rebellions had been put 
down. It was similar in 1941. Initially the population greeted the 
Wehrmacht as liberators. There were also quite a few Ukrainians 
who participated in the persecution of the Jewish population. 
As part of the auxiliary police or the Schutzmannschaften, they 
supported the genocide. In response to the brutal German 
regime, the repression, and the breaking up of national territory, 
a partisan movement began in 1941–42 but was very violently 
suppressed. It was only toward the end of the occupation that 
the occupiers began to concentrate on integrating anti-Soviet 
nationalist elements in the hope of creating a broader base for 
the fight against the Red Army. 
7	
Cf. Barbara Falk, Sowjetische Städte in der Hungersnot 1932/33. Staatliche Ernährungspolitik 
und städtisches Alltagsleben (Cologne, Weimar, and Vienna, 2005); Otto Wenzel, “Holodomor. 
Stalins Genozid in der Ukraine 1932–1933 in Berichten der Deutschen Botschaft Moskau und 
des Generalkonsulats Charkow,” Zeitschrift des Forschungsverbundes SED-Staat, Schwerpunkt: 
Grenzüberschreitungen 28 (2010): 5–24.
8	
The number of victims of this policy is still disputed today. The Black Book of Communism gives 
the number of 6 million deaths from famine in 1932–33, about two-thirds of them in Ukraine, 
the rest in Kazakhstan, the North Caucasus, and the Black Sea region: Stéphane Courtois et al., 
The Black Book of Communism: Crimes, Terror, Repression (Cambridge, Mass., 1999). To this 
must be added the 2 million peasants who, in the years of collectivization, had their possessions 
robbed and were deported to Siberia and Central Asia. Of these, 30,000 were shot by the GPU: 
Jörg Baberowski, Der rote Terror. Die Geschichte des Stalinismus (Munich, 2003), 126. In the 
ethnic and national purges of 1936–38, more than 1.5 million people were imprisoned and more 
than 760,000 murdered (Baberowski, Der rote Terror, 200).
9	
See Frank Grelka, Die ukrainische Nationalbewegung unter deutscher Besatzungsherrschaft 
1918 und 1941/42 (Wiesbaden, 2005).

looking ahead: a comparison of the occupation regimes 
of 1918 and 1941–1944
389 
3)	
In both cases, Ukraine was also occupied by allied armies under 
German leadership. In 1918 it was essentially two armies, the 
German and the Austro-Hungarian, that entered the country, 
supported by what were ultimately symbolic naval units from 
Turkey and Bulgaria. In 1941, the German army was accompanied 
by Hungarian, Italian, and especially Romanian units. The latter 
arrived in much larger numbers than the Bulgarians and Turks 
had been twenty-three years earlier, although qualitatively their 
influence was very small compared to that of the German military. 
One important difference had to do with the organization of troops 
during the invasion and occupation. In 1918 there was no overall 
command for the allied troops. The occupation administrations 
in the different zones were quite separate. It was only in the area 
of economic policy that the Germans led from May 1918, but even 
here there was a certain level of Austro-Hungarian participation. 
Between 1941 and 1945, the area was administered exclusively by 
the Germans. Only a small “morsel” was given to the Romanians 
as a reward for their participation in the campaign. It consisted 
of Bukovyna, Bessarabia, the Trans-Dnister region, and the area 
between the Dnister and the Boh (Southern Bug), with Odesa as 
its economic and political center.10
4)	
Another factor that should be noted in this comparison is the 
racist element. In 1918, the “perception of the Slavs among the 
Central Powers” was shaped by a “discourse about hygiene”11 in 
relation to what the occupiers saw as mostly poor and decrepit 
villages and settlements. It was believed that, in the East, 
they were dealing with less “developed” people, and that the 
best way to achieve anything with them was by being harsh. 
But this does not necessarily mean that the Germans at that 
time felt themselves to be culturally superior to the people or 
held them in contempt. In their private reports, soldiers of the 
Central Powers frequently wrote of their admiration for the 
splendid Ukrainian cities. Unlike in 1941,12 anti-Slavism was not 
a dominant element, and there was certainly none of the hatred 
expressed in World War II. An important factor then was the fact 
10	
Ekkehard Völkl, Transnistrien und Odessa (1941–1944) (Regensburg, 1996).
11 
Peter Hoeres, “Die Slawen. Perzeptionen des Kriegsgegners bei den Mittelmächten. Selbst- und 
Feindbild,” in Die vergessene Front, 199.
12	
Cf. Das Russlandbild im Dritten Reich, ed. Hans-Erich Volkmann (Cologne and Vienna, 1994).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
390
that the army and political landscape of their Austro-Hungarian 
ally was shaped in part by Slavic peoples, although they were 
disadvantaged and underrepresented, both domestically and in 
the army, when compared with their Hungarian- and German-
speaking counterparts.13 
	
	
In the Holocaust, of course, the anti-Semitic component was 
much more serious than the anti-Slavic one. From the beginning of 
the occupation in 1941, the annihilation of the Jewish population 
was carried out by the SS, the police, the local auxiliary police, 
some units of the Wehrmacht, and the local population.14 But what 
was the situation in 1918? Groener’s personal diary and German 
military documents are full of anti-Semitic expressions that are 
rhetorically similar to those of 1941–42. One of the orders from 
Army Group Eichhorn-Kiew, for instance, describes the Jews as 
“the principal rabble-rousers.”15 This attitude was widespread 
among the troops. For instance, in the judgment of the Bavarian 
Cavalry Division: “The Jews are the main rabble-rousers in the 
country. If we don’t put a stop to them, we’ll never have peace in 
this country.”16 For the XXXXI Reserve Corps, “the Jews...in spite 
of their appealing mask” were “our fiercest enemy.”17 Surprisingly, 
the commander of the 15th Bavarian Reserve Infantry Brigade, 
Major General Franz Samhaber, also blew the anti-Semitic 
trumpet—this despite the fact that his wife was Jewish:18 “The 
mass of Jews are against the new government and against the 
German troops. They are against any government, since anarchy 
allows them to exploit the people’s lack of culture and the general 
13	
The German cultural imperialism that Liulevicius found in the Ober Ost area is very difficult 
to identify in Ukraine. See Vejas Gabriel Liulevicius, War Land on the Eastern Front: Culture, 
National Identity, and German Occupation in World War I (Cambridge, 2000). See also Dennis 
E. Showalter, “‘The East gives nothing back’: The Great War and the German Army in Russia,” 
Journal of the Historical Society, 2002, no. 2: 69–87.
14	
Dieter Pohl, “Schauplatz Ukraine. Der Massenmord an den Juden im Militärverwaltungsgebiet 
und im Reichskommissariat 1941–1943,” in Christian Hartmann et al., Der deutsche Krieg im 
Osten 1941–1944. Facetten einer Grenzüberschreitung (Munich, 2009), 155–96.
15	
BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 21. Heeresgruppe Eichhorn, Abt. Ia, Nr. 1094/18 v. 23.5.1918.
16	
BayHStA-KA, Kav.Div., Bd. 18. Bezirk Wolhynien West. Bay.Kav.Div., Abt. Ia, Nr. 272 W v. 
16.6.1918.
17	
BA-MA, PH 6–II/16. XXXXI. Reservekorps. Generalkommando, Abt. Ia, Nr. 12130, Bericht 
über die innere Lage, 31.10.1918.
18	
BayHStA-KA, OP 47604, Nationalsozialistische Deutsche Arbeiterpartei, Gauleitung Sachsen, 
Rassenpol. Amt/Hauptstelle VI Dr. We./Ha. 40a/44, 27.4.1944. In this note of 1944, the Saxon 
Gauleiter asked for Samhaber’s birth and death dates, since his wife was “fully Jewish.”

looking ahead: a comparison of the occupation regimes 
of 1918 and 1941–1944
391 
disorder for their own purposes.”19 In fact, many Jewish merchants 
did very well out of the black market during the occupation 
period.20
	
	
Among the Austro-Hungarian documents, one also finds 
numerous anti-Semitic expressions and the claim that there 
were links between the Jewish population and Bolshevism. To 
demonstrate the split between widespread middle-class attitudes 
and left-wing ideology within the Jewish population, a report from 
the 4th Army described the poor Jewish population of Odesa as 
“thoroughly Bolshevik, Menshevik (Socialist Revolutionary)” and 
as a “very insecure element,” while “the rich” were anti-Ukrainian 
and inclined toward the bourgeoisie.21 In the daily reports to the 
command of the Ostarmee from the corps and divisions, Jews 
were repeatedly described as agitators or troublemakers close 
to the Bolsheviks.22 The anti-Semitic tone occurred frequently, 
especially in Fleischmann’s reports on the situation in Ukraine.23 
In mid-April, however, the representative of the Austro-
Hungarian Foreign Ministry at AOK, Trauttmansdorf, made a 
request to the Operations Department that the troops intervene 
when local inhabitants carried out acts of violence against 
Jews. The Executive Committee of Austrian Zionists had made 
representations to the Foreign Ministry, based on reports from 
Copenhagen, about Jewish pogroms in Turkestan and Ukraine. 
The handwritten comment on this document, most probably 
from Arz, says: “For the time being, nothing to be done.”24 One 
can only speculate whether the writer was anti-Semitic.
	
	
We need to be cautious about seeing all these quotations as 
unambiguously anti-Semitic solely on the basis of our knowledge 
of the later Holocaust.25 Rhetoric and reality were two different 
worlds in Ukraine in 1918. There were no anti-Semitic measures 
19 
BayHStA-KA, 15.Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7. K.Bayr.15.Res.Inf.Brigade, Nr. 2604, Bericht über die 
allgemeine Lage, 25.5.1918.
20	
Henry Abramson, A Prayer for the Government: Ukrainians and Jews in Revolutionary Times 
1917–1920 (Cambridge, Mass., 1999), 100.
21	
ÖStA, KA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 468, Nr. 1355, Bericht des 4. Armeekommandos (no date).
22	
ÖStA, KA, NFA, 2. Armee, Op. AK, Kt. 308, 1918 Situations- und Tagesmeldungen, Nr. 8475/8. 
23	
ÖStA, KA, AOK, OpAbt., Kt. 469, Nr. 1481, Berichte über die politische Lage in der 
Ukraine Mitte April, 15.4.1918.
24	
ÖStA, KA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 468, Nr. 1441, Judenpogrome in Turkestan und in der 
Ukraine, 15.4.1918.
25	
Cf. Showalter, “‘The East gives nothing back,’” 86, n. 26.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
392
on the part of the occupiers. There are even reports of German 
and Austro-Hungarian units protecting Jews from attack.26 
Neither in the months before nor especially in the months that 
followed  was the number of anti-Jewish pogroms as low as 
during the period of occupation by the Central Powers.27 This is 
an unmistakable sign that the Central Powers protected the Jews 
as part of maintaining order in the country. They also wanted to 
avail themselves of the know-how of the Jewish traders and did 
not want to make themselves vulnerable to attack from their own 
Jewish populations or those of the Entente.28 Another interesting 
fact is this: hardly any German regimental history from the 
immediate postwar period refers to the later typical Nazi “Jewish 
Bolshevik” bogeyman.29 
5)	
This does not mean that the war in 1918, unlike 1941, had no 
ideological component. On the contrary, anti-Bolshevism was 
widespread in the armies of the Central Powers. At first they 
treated the Bolsheviks as prisoners of war, but, week by week, 
their attitude to their enemies became much more extreme.  After 
a few weeks, captured Bolsheviks were generally shot without 
further ado. It is interesting that this happened only in Ukraine, 
not in the Baltics or other Russian regions.30 With regard to the 
number of prisoners shot, the massacre at Taganrog in June 1918 
eclipsed similar events from the Second World War. The fact 
that the German government and the Supreme Army Command 
(OHL) nonetheless continued to stand by the Brest-Litovsk peace 
treaty with Moscow demonstrates the contradictory character 
26 
Cf. BayHStA-KA, 15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 7. Ldw.-Inft.-Regt. 327, Tgb. Nr. 4799 II, Bericht über 
das nach Tarastscha entsandte Kommando, 13.4.1918; Mark von Hagen, War in a European 
Borderland: Occupations and Occupation Plans in Galicia and Ukraine, 1914–1918 (Seattle and 
London, 2007), 93.
27	
Abramson, A Prayer for the Government, 79. According to Abramson, there were 1,289 officially 
registered pogroms against Jews in Ukraine between September 1917 and the end of 1921. But 
there were only 46 in the year 1918 until November, and an unknown number of these took place 
in January and February.
28 
Grelka, on the other hand, argues for a stronger continuity of anti-Semitism: Grelka, Die 
ukrainische Nationalbewegung, 455–58.
29	
So far, it is only the history of the Bavarian 6 Chevauleger Regiment that makes one mention 
of the “rabble-rousing Jew.” See Otto Freiherrr von Waldenfels, Geschichte des kgl. Bayer. 6. 
Chevaulegers-Regiments “Kreß” im Kriege 1914–1919 (Bayreuth, 1921), 115.
30	
BayHStA-KA, 2. L.D., Bd. 20. Generalkommando VI. A.K., Abt. Ib, Nr. 850, Besondere 
Anordnungen Nr. 3, 16.3.1918; BayHStA-KA, 2. L.D., Bd. 22. 2. Bayr. Landwehr-Division, Abt. 
Ib, Nr. 3777, Spruch Nr. 871 an L.I.R. 2, 8.6.1918.

looking ahead: a comparison of the occupation regimes 
of 1918 and 1941–1944
393 
of Germany’s eastern policy in 1918. In the case of Operation 
Barbarossa, even before the beginning of the campaign, 
the Wehrmacht had issued a number of orders that violated 
international law, especially the so-called “commissar order.”31 
This decision to engage in warfare without limits had been made 
even before the war began and not, as was the case in 1918, only 
during the operation itself.32 Nonetheless, the elimination of the 
Bolsheviks does represent a continuity between both wars and, in 
that sense, the “commissar order” of 1941 was not a novel breach.
6)	
There was a discontinuity, however, in the use of violence 
against civilian populations in combating insurgency. In 1918 
the Germans did indeed use drastic measures to restore order. 
Armed insurgents who were captured were immediately shot; 
peasant homes and, in some cases, whole villages were burned 
down in acts of reprisal. There was no difference, in this 
respect, between the Germans and the Austro-Hungarians. 
The Germans were actually in the forefront in taking moderate 
measures, a policy that their Austro-Hungarian ally, after some 
initial hesitation, began to follow. Civilian populations were to 
be protected, and hostage-taking was forbidden. In 1918, the 
Germans also ascribed great value to the correct use of the court 
martial in dealing with criminal actions. The present study thus 
raises strong doubts concerning the thesis of the continuity of an 
alleged “German way of war.”33 One of the central orders from the 
commander of the Wehrmacht in Ukraine in 1942, General Karl 
31	
Felix Römer, Der Kommissarbefehl. Wehrmacht und NS-Verbrechen an der Ostfront 1941/42 
(Paderborn, 2008).
32	
This does not rule out the fact that there were phases in Operation Barbarossa when the war 
remained more or less conventional, as Christian Hartmann has convincingly shown in his 
Wehrmacht im Ostkrieg. Front und militärisches Hinterland (Munich, 2009).
33 
This thesis was first presented by John Horn and Alan Kramer in their book German Atrocities 
1914: A History of Denial (New Haven and London, 2001). In more recent publications, however, 
Kramer distances himself explicitly from this thesis: Alan Kramer, Dynamic of Destruction: 
Culture and Mass Killing in the First World War (Oxford and New York, 2007). The thesis is 
now most strongly defended by Isabel V. Hull, Absolute Destruction: Military Culture and the 
Practices of War in Imperial Germany (Ithaca and London, 2005); Michael Geyer, “War and 
Terror: Some Timely Observations on the German Way of Waging War,” in War and Terror 
in Historical and Contemporary Perspective, ed. Michael Geyer (Chicago, 2003), 47–69, 
accessed on 4 March 2011, http://www.aicgs.org/documents/warandterror.pdf. Geyer regards the 
conflict on the Eastern Front of 1914–18 as a “war of destruction”: Michael Geyer, “Gewalt und 
Gewalterfahrung im 20. Jahrhundert – Der Erste Weltkrieg,” in Der Tod als Maschinist. Der 
industrialisierte Krieg 1914–1918, ed. Rolf Spilker and Bernd Ulrich (Bramsche, 1998), 240–57. 
For a critical view, see Bergien, “Vorspiel des ‘Vernichtungskrieges’?”

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
394
Kitzinger, on combating partisans is exemplary for the contrast 
with 1918. The “fundamental principle” was that “if there is any 
doubt about the choice of appropriate measures, the more severe 
one is the right one.”34 The notorious “military jurisdiction order” 
(Kriegsgerichtsbarkeitserlass) had de facto eliminated military 
justice as protection for the civilian population even before the 
military campaign began.35 
7)	
One clear difference from the occupation strategy of the Second 
World War was that in 1918 the Central Powers never went so 
far as to put the nourishment of the Ukrainian population in 
hazard or deliberately to use hunger as a strategy for discipline or 
annihilation.36 Quite the contrary. The “Ukrainian Food Council,” 
in which both Ukrainians and the occupying powers were 
represented, invariably directed the distribution of food to those 
Ukrainian cities needing provisions. The guidelines for agrarian 
policy in the Second World War published by Erich Koch, the 
Reich’s Commissioner for Ukraine in 1941–44, were the exact 
opposite of that practice: “Ukraine has to deliver what Germany 
needs. This task has to be carried out without considering the 
loss of life.... With regard to this task, the nutritional needs of the 
civilian population are completely irrelevant.”37 
34	
IfZ-Archiv, MA-487, Wehrmachtbefehlshaber Ukraine, Abt. Ia, Nr. 4921 (3073)/42 geh., 
Richtlinien für die Befriedung der Ukraine, 28 June 1942.
35	
See Hartmann, Wehrmacht im Ostkrieg, 702–6; Felix Römer, “‘Im alten Deutschland 
wäre solcher Befehl nicht möglich gewesen.’ Rezeption, Adaption und Umsetzung des 
Kriegsgerichtsbarkeitserlasses im Ostheer 1941/42,” Vierteljahrshefte für Zeitgeschichte 56 
(2008): 53–99.
36	
The “hunger plan thesis” defended by Christian Gerlach and Alex J. Kay has not remained 
unchallenged, as none of the key documents that support it have been found at all levels of 
the hierarchy. See Christian Gerlach, Kalkulierte Morde. Die deutsche Wirtschafts- und 
Vernichtungspolitik in Weißrußland 1941 bis 1944 (Hamburg, 1999); Alex J. Kay, Exploitation, 
Resettlement, Mass Murder and Economic Planning for German Occupation Policy in the 
Soviet Union 1940–1941 (New York and Oxford, 2006). For general arguments against the 
thesis, see Klaus Jochen Arnold and Gert C. Lübbers, “The Meeting of the Staatssekretäre on 
2 May 1941 and the Wehrmacht: A Document up for Discussion,” Journal of Contemporary 
History 42 (2007): 613–26. On the treatment of Soviet prisoners of war, see Christian Hartmann, 
“Massensterben oder Massenvernichtung? Sowjetische Kriegsgefangene im Unternehmen 
‘Barbarossa,’” Vierteljahrshefte für Zeitgeschichte 49 (2001): 97–158; Reinhard Otto, Rolf 
Keller, and Jens Nagel, “Sowjetische Kriegsgefangene in deutschem Gewahrsam 1941–1945,” 
Vierteljahrshefte für Zeitgeschichte 56 (2008): 557–602. Johannes Hürter’s concept of “hunger 
calculation,” on the other hand, has been widely accepted: Johannes Hürter, “Die Wehrmacht 
vor Leningrad 1941/42,” Vierteljahrshefte für Zeitgeschichte 49 (2001): 377–440. See also 
Rolf-Dieter Müller’s similar but very early contribution in Das Deutsche Reich und der Zweite 
Weltkrieg, ed. Militärgeschichtliches Forschungsamt, vol. 4 (Stuttgart, 1983).
37	
Quoted in Götz Aly, Hitlers Volksstaat (Frankfurt am Main, 2005), 200.

looking ahead: a comparison of the occupation regimes 
of 1918 and 1941–1944
395 
8)	
With reference to the Austro-Hungarian military, the thesis has 
been discussed in recent years that its conservatism before and 
during the First World War caused it to fear any rise of nationalism 
both in its own ranks and in the occupied territories, such as 
Serbia (“the nation in arms”).38 This basic attitude, rooted in the 
traditions of the nineteenth century and upheld in the spirit of 
the supranational army, would not only protect the state and 
the monarchy but would make them equidistant with regard to 
the civilian population. This prevented the Austro-Hungarian 
army from using hunger as a weapon or using excessive violence 
against the civilian population in Ukraine in 1918. The army 
attempted to position itself as a guarantor for the protection of 
the civilian population against the entanglements of radicalized 
or nationalist (liberal) politicians; in the Ukrainian case, 
revolutionary and/or Bolshevik politicians. It was precisely this 
anti-modernist attitude of the military that most differentiated 
it from the occupation about a quarter of a century later. The 
officers of the First World War had their origins in the peaceful 
world of the European fin de siècle, while the Wehrmacht officers 
of the Second World War had been socialized in an environment 
of violence and political extremes. The First World War and the 
postwar turmoil were formative experiences for the generals. 
It was followed by the interwar period with the Paris peace 
settlements, the world economic crisis, and the radicalized 
domestic political discourses.39
	
	
This was the world in which the young Wehrmacht officers 
grew up. The blurring of the boundaries of violence between the 
military and civilians first became clearly apparent in the First 
World War, but its scope was relatively limited.40 The experience 
of revolution, economic crisis, Bolshevism and fascism, whether 
at home or in Eastern Europe, whether supported or opposed, and 
the accompanying dissolution of social ties meant that the officers 
of Nazi Germany in the Second World War no longer so clearly 
38 
Gumz has elaborated this with reference to the example of the Serbian general governorate: 
Jonathan E. Gumz, The Resurrection and Collapse of Empire in Habsburg Serbia, 1914–1918 
(New York, 2009), 235–48.
39 
Cf. Johannes Hürter, “Kriegserfahrung als Schlüsselerlebnis? Der Erste Weltkrieg in der 
Biographie von Wehrmachtsgeneralen,” in Erster Weltkrieg – Zweiter Weltkrieg, 759–71; 
Johannes Hürter, Hitlers Heerführer. Die deutschen Oberbefehlshaber im Krieg gegen die 
Sowjetunion 1941/42 (Munich, 2007).
40	
Kramer, Dynamic of Destruction.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
396
respected those boundaries as their fathers and grandfathers had 
done in the First World War. The most radical officers of the First 
World War later formed the core of the Nazi movement. They drew 
their own conclusions from the allegedly lenient attitude toward 
the occupied nations of the East. In the second occupation, the 
whip and the knout (a racist “land consolidation”) would play the 
dominant role and thus lead to victory.
9)	
In both cases, Ukraine was seen as a central source of economic 
supplies. In both wars, Ukraine would compensate for losses at 
home  caused by lost or reduced transport routes and suppliers.41 
In both cases, Ukraine was the door to Central Asia and therefore 
had special strategic significance. The difference, however, 
between 1918 and 1941–44 was that in the First World War, in 
spite of the world-power fantasies of army leaders and German 
annexationists, there was no definitive planning.42 In the Second 
World War, however, the National Socialists had clear plans: 
Ukraine had a key part to play in Hitler’s eastern policy.43
10)	 Finally and perhaps most importantly, the political circumstances 
in both cases were different. In 1918, the Central Powers marched 
into Ukraine as official protectors, even though both the German 
Empire and Austria-Hungary soon became de facto occupying 
powers. Nevertheless, the Ukrainian government, whether the 
Rada or the Hetman, was a political entity that had to be taken 
into account in the concrete structuring of the occupation. 
It had a certain foundation in international law that neither 
the Germans nor the Austro-Hungarians nor the Ukrainians 
questioned throughout the occupation, although, toward the 
41 
For general economic comparisons, see Rolf-Dieter Müller, “Totaler Krieg und 
Wirtschaftsordnung: Ausnahmezustand oder Chance eines grundlegenden Wandels? Deutsche 
Experimente in zwei Weltkriegen,” in Erster Weltkrieg – Zweiter Weltkrieg, 43–55.
42	
Michael Epkenhans has quite rightly pointed out that, in 1918, the top military leaders attempted, 
“by establishing a functional link between the negative developments in the West and the great 
new successes in the East, to ward off the consequences of the approaching catastrophe and 
thereby evade the ‘dilemma of truth’— military defeat and the destruction of the traditional 
domestic order.” See Epkenhans, “Die Politik der militärischen Führung 1918: ‘Kontinuität 
der Illusionen und das Dilemma der Wahrheit,’” in Kriegsende 1918: Ereignis, Wirkung, 
Nachwirkung, ed. Jörg Duppler and Gerhard P. Groβ (Munich, 1999), 222.
43 
White émigrés from Russia contributed to this. See Michael Kellogg, The Russian Roots 
of Nazism: White Émigrés and the Making of National Socialism 1917–1945 (New York and 
Cambridge, 2005).

looking ahead: a comparison of the occupation regimes 
of 1918 and 1941–1944
397 
end of the summer of 1918, Austria-Hungary was becoming 
increasingly critical of the Brest-Litovsk treaty. Moreover, the 
Central Powers recognized the existence of an allied state on 
the territory they occupied, albeit a state heavily dependent 
on them. That international law was frequently overtaxed in 
1918 or simply ignored when necessary has certain parallels 
with occupied Western (but not Eastern) Europe in the Second 
World War.44 Not least because they feared putting even more 
resources into the administration of this state, in 1918 the Central 
Powers allowed Ukraine a certain degree of sovereignty and 
self-organization. It was difficult, in any case, to build concrete 
structures of occupation in such a short period, especially as the 
Central Powers had not developed a concrete Ukrainian policy in 
the preceding months and years.
	
	
The armed invasion of 1941, on the other hand, was seen 
right from the beginning as a war of conquest. Although 
the Ukrainian national movement had a certain amount of 
influence on the political activity of the German occupiers in 
this latter case as well, it was the National Socialist world view 
that was the cornerstone of the whole occupation policy.45 This 
is demonstrated by the fact that, from 1941 to 1944, Ukraine 
was not administered by the military but by the civilian Reich 
Commissariat (Reichskommissariat) for Ukraine. During the three 
years of National Socialist occupation, it was possible to construct 
an entire regime for exploitation, terror, and annihilation. The 
ideological, political, and moral foundation was the racist doctrine 
of National Socialism and its concept of conquering “living space” 
(Lebensraum). The occupied territories were not seen as objects 
for the application of international law or interstate relations 
but rather, with their populations, as objects of extreme colonial 
exploitation and ideological warfare. These factors make it 
extremely difficult to compare the occupation regimes of the 
First and Second World Wars, whether with regard to treatment 
of the civilian population, the organization of the occupation, the 
system of resource exploitation, or the carrying out of reprisals.
44	
Cf. Peter Lieb, Konventioneller Krieg oder NS-Weltanschauungskrieg? Kriegführung und 
Partisanenbekämpfung in Frankreich 1943/44 (Munich, 2007).
45	
Wendy Lower, Nazi Empire-Building and the Holocaust in Ukraine (Chapel Hill, N.C., 2005).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
398
In this context, more analysis is needed on the extent to which 
the experience of the occupation in 1918 served as preparation for the 
occupation of 1941. The continuity of personnel seems to have been 
slight, but this also requires more intensive research. Initial studies 
suggest that very few of the later generals had personal experience 
of Ukraine in 1918. For instance, the later army commander General 
Hans von Salmuth had been a staff officer in Army Group Eichhorn-
Kiew in June 1918, later in the staff of Ober Ost.46 The case of officers 
of the Bavarian Cavalry Division who later became generals is 
informative here, too. All four of them who had served in this division 
at the beginning of 1918 had been transferred out of it before the later 
invasion of Ukraine.47 A prominent exception, although he had very 
little influence on the Reich’s eastern policy, was the Austro-Hungarian 
officer Eduard von Böhm-Ermolli. He became a citizen of the Reich 
with the annexation of the Sudetenland in 1938 and, in October 1940, 
at the age of 84, received the honorary rank of general field marshal. 
He was made honorary chief of the 28th Infantry Regiment before he 
died in December 1941.48 But there was someone else who did think 
it necessary to draw some lessons from the 1918 occupation. This was 
Adolf Hitler himself, who regarded the Ukrainian policy at the time of 
the First World War as too moderate and as a mistake that he would 
not repeat.49 
46	
In 1948 a US military court in Nuremberg sentenced Salmuth to twenty years in prison for 
crimes committed in the course of Operation Barbarossa. He was free again in 1953. See Jörg 
Friedrich, Das Gesetz des Krieges. Das deutsche Heer in Rußland 1941–1945. Der Prozeß gegen 
das Oberkommando der Wehrmacht (Munich and Zurich, 1993).
47	
Gustav Harteneck (1892–1984) was the only one to remain in the East until June 1918 as an ordnance 
officer in the Kyiv command. Eberhard Rodt (1895–1979) and Rudolf Freiherr von Waldenfels 
(1895–1969) joined infantry regiments in the West, and Gustav Freiherr von Perfall (1883–1969) 
became aide-de-camp to the king of Bavaria. Although he was a regimental commander in 1932, 
Perfall did not make a career in the Wehrmacht. He was promoted to lieutenant general but 
remained in the unprestigious post of inspector in the Wehrersatz-Inspektion in Nuremberg until 
dismissed from the army in 1943. Whether his monarchist attitude had a negative influence on his 
career in the Wehrmacht is uncertain but seems likely. See the personnel documents in BayHA-
KA, OP 61495 (Harteneck), OP 27835 (Rodt), OP 61659 (Waldenfels), OP 61590 (Perfall).
48	
Böhm-Ermolli was given a state funeral attended by Field Marshal Wilhelm Keitel. There is 
no detailed biography of Böhm-Ermolli, but there is an academic thesis: Richard Zahora, 
“Generalfeldmarschall Freiherr Eduard von Böhm-Ermolli,” phil. DA (Vienna, 2005). 
49	
On the occasion of a visit from Rosenberg, Hitler pointed out the murder of “the greatest 
friend of the Ukrainians in the last war,” Field Marshal Eichhorn. See Grelka, Die ukrainische 
Nationalbewegung, 443, n. 30.

Concluding Observations
Wolfram Dornik
We have attempted, in the present volume, to offer a more detailed 
examination of a period of Ukrainian and East European history in a 
transnational context and have been able thereby to demonstrate the 
complexity of Ukrainian state- and nation-building between 1917 and 
1922. Since we began our endeavors on this topic, two questions have 
stood at the center of our discussion but have not been adequately 
dealt with in this work; hence they will now be examined more 
closely. First, what were the effects of the occupation of Ukraine by 
the Central Powers in 1918 on the states involved? Second, why did 
Ukraine fail to achieve independence?
***
In general, the occupation of Ukraine by the Central Powers must be 
judged to have been a fiasco for all those involved. The invasion of 
German and Austro-Hungarian troops brought Ukraine independence 
for a short time, but it was unable to free itself from the grip of its 
new allies. Berlin and Vienna had too great an interest in the strategic 
situation and the economic resources of the country. Long-term plans 
for the postwar period were already being made in 1918, especially 
within the German economy. 
The initial situation seemed very favorable to the Central Powers. 
At Brest-Litovsk they saw the opportunity to make use of the Rada, 
which was desperately looking for international support, and they 
very quickly signed a peace treaty with it. Initially, the Ukrainian 
people had a basically positive attitude to the invading troops, hoping 
with their help to put an end to the revolutionary chaos, murder, 
dispossession, plundering, and lawlessness. During their advance, 
however, and during the period of uprisings in the early summer, the 
occupation troops began a harsh crackdown on Bolshevik insurgents 
in which it was difficult to distinguish insurgents clearly from civilians. 
Requisitioning of food by military means also did little to increase 
popular sympathy for the occupying troops. Although they made a 
renewed attempt to win the hearts and minds of the Ukrainian people 
with a change of strategy in May–June, with military tribunals and 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
400
greater involvement of the Ukrainian authorities in fighting insurgency 
and collecting provisions, as well as more considerate treatment of 
the civil population, there was already too much scorched earth. 
Moreover, the economy could not be revived in spite of the apparent 
political stability. The Bolsheviks were able to use this quite cleverly 
in 1918 to mobilize people behind their own propaganda, something 
they managed to do again in 1919 after regaining control. The 
corruption and arbitrariness that prevailed in the Austro-Hungarian 
zone deepened reservations about the occupying troops. But it was 
especially their support for the large estate owners, seen by the mass 
of peasants as a counterrevolutionary act, as well as the installation 
of the Hetmanate without broad popular support, that destroyed the 
trust of the Ukrainians in “foreign assistance.” What certainly spelled 
the death sentence for the Ukrainian ambitions of the Central Powers 
was their failure to offer more rapid and more impressive support for 
the construction of a stable state. Neither the Rada nor the Hetmanate 
managed to base themselves on a reliable administration or on a 
functioning instrument of public order, whether police, militia, or 
military, that could have dealt with internal Ukrainian conflicts. On 
the contrary, every attempt on the part of Kyiv to emancipate itself 
was eyed with mistrust in Berlin and Vienna, fearing that any military 
enhancement of the state could be, at some point, a problem for their 
own troops. In the countryside, therefore, armed confrontations 
continued between the large estate owners, seeking restoration of 
their property, and the mostly poor peasants and rural laborers. In 
the cities, the liberal bourgeoisie joined with the aristocratic elite 
that had fled from Moscow and St. Petersburg to confront the young 
workers’ movement. There were also ethnic conflicts. The spiral of 
violence was halted briefly by the Central Powers in the summer of 
1918 but flared up again, with undiminished relentlessness, following 
their withdrawal.
In general, the question can be asked whether the Central 
Powers were well advised when they overthrew the Rada. Even 
though their political leaders were inept in state-building and were 
unable to eliminate the chaos, the Rada did represent the broadest 
possible sector of the population. The installation of Skoropadsky, on 
the other hand, represented a significant step backward and a very 
narrow political focus. Even though the Hetmanate and the German 
occupying power attempted an even-handed policy, the symbolism 
of a large estate owner brought to power by German bayonets was 
disastrous both internally and internationally.

concluding observations
401 
Contrary to widespread opinion today, the German troops, 
after their first few months in Ukraine in 1918, had a cooperative 
approach to combating insurgency. There were also some promising 
beginnings in economic cooperation. But whether preference should 
be given to a policy of exploitation remained unclear to the very end. 
These beginnings, however, had no long-term success. The number 
of uprisings declined in the summer but resumed as soon as the 
occupying troops and their Hetman regime were driven out of the 
country in October and November. The Ukrainian people’s reception 
of the occupation troops in 1918 is a subject that still needs to be 
researched. It has been overshadowed by Soviet historiography and 
archival policy after 1918 and by the excesses of the years 1941–44. It 
is clear, however, that the popularity of the Central Powers declined 
in the course of their presence in Ukraine.
These circumstances affected not only the construction of a stable 
state but also Ukraine’s economic production. The present study has 
demonstrated that one can hardly speak of economic exploitation of 
Ukraine by the Central Powers in 1918. Exports from Ukraine failed 
to meet Berlin’s and Vienna’s expectations or match what had been 
promised in Brest-Litovsk. The delivery of provisions, which began 
very slowly in March–April, was no more than a drop of cold water on 
a hot stone for the Austro-Hungarian population, although it received 
the greater share of deliveries at the beginning of the occupation. Only 
occasionally did deliveries reach the famine-stricken cities, especially 
Vienna. There was no noticeable general improvement in the supply 
of provisions. Problems of distribution and corruption within the 
Habsburg Monarchy were also partly to blame. Even the summer 
harvest brought no improvement, and the strike in July–August 
actually made matters worse. It was only with the addition of cattle, 
eggs, vegetables, military booty, and other goods that the deliveries 
could even begin to approach the million tons originally agreed upon. 
Exports were diminished much less than had originally been assumed 
by the consumption of the hundreds of thousands of foreign soldiers 
stationed in the country. Austria-Hungary and Germany had to assist 
Ukraine with deliveries of coal and oil products, in addition to the 
agreed textiles and agricultural machinery, and Berlin had to grant 
extensive credits. Financially, the occupation was a disaster for both 
countries. 
A relatively well-functioning system of procurement was 
established between March and May 1918, but it was unable to get 
off the ground because of corruption, the growing unrest in the 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
402
country, peasant dissatisfaction with the agreed fixed prices, and the 
long-term economic orientation toward Russia. The fiscal effects of 
the revolution were not adequately addressed either by the Ukrainian 
leaders or by the occupying powers. This would have been the 
key to making it attractive for the peasants to deliver their grain. 
The supply and distribution of exchange goods demanded by both 
traders and the rural population was inadequate. The Central Powers’ 
buyers were bound by the fixed prices arranged with the Ukrainian 
government, but there was no confidence in either the currency or the 
price levels offered. This economic, social, and political cocktail led 
to the complete fiasco of the Central Powers’ Ukrainian experiment. 
For the Ukrainians themselves, the occupation did not bring the 
hoped-for outcome. The troops of the Central Powers brought about 
a short pause in the class struggle and in the civil war, but this did 
not lead to a sustainable stabilization of either the society or the 
state. In those parts of the country not adequately controlled by the 
occupying troops, unrest and chaos continued, though at a reduced 
level. The pragmatic connection with the Central Powers displayed 
at Brest-Litovsk was also, from the viewpoint of the Entente, hardly 
advantageous for Ukraine’s long-term status in the international state 
system.
Contrary to the widespread image created by interwar Soviet 
propaganda and historiography of “brutal exploitation” of Ukraine by 
Wilhelmine and Habsburg troops, the real catastrophe was caused by 
the collectivization of that period. This reached its peak in the famine 
of 1932–33, which caused the deaths of millions of people in the largely 
agricultural southwestern regions of the Soviet Union (Holodomor). 
The local famines and shortages of 1918 were mostly limited to the 
towns and were the result of the postrevolutionary collapse of trade 
and infrastructure. They were also exacerbated by the accompanying 
problems of communication between producers and consumers. The 
procurement system created jointly by the Central Powers and the 
Hetmanate, especially the Ukrainian Food Council, actually did help 
to compensate and made possible a more rapid reaction to supply 
problems in the country.
Although the occupation was hardly a phase of amicable peace, 
it was nonetheless relatively peaceful compared with the previous 
revolutionary year between February 1917 and February 1918 and 
with the period after November 1918. When viewed from the present, 
the events of 1918 appear in a somewhat milder light as compared with 
the brutal Ukrainization/Sovietization, collectivization, the famine 

concluding observations
403 
of 1932–33, the Stalinist purges, Nazi Germany’s military campaign 
of destruction against the Soviet Union, and the Soviet reconquest of 
Ukraine, including the extension of its territory into Eastern Galicia 
and northern Bukovyna. Between 1941 and 1944, the tragic high 
points in this history of violence on Ukrainian territory in the first 
half of the twentieth century included the murder of Ukrainian Jews 
in the Holocaust, the conscious or willingly accepted murder of the 
Ukrainian population by famine, the impressment of more than a 
million young Ukrainian men and especially young Ukrainian women 
into forced labor, the murder of millions of Soviet prisoners of war, 
among them hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians, the division of 
society in the battle for Ukrainian territory, the destruction on three 
fronts during the conquest, partisan warfare, and the withdrawal of 
Nazi Germany.
***
We turn now to the second question posed in this concluding 
assessment: why Ukraine was unable to sustain, in the long term, the 
independence it had achieved in 1917–18. One important factor, already 
mentioned in the introduction, was that Ukrainian independence 
was not supported by any of the central players in the international 
community. From December 1917–January 1918, the Central Powers 
saw the opportunity of weakening Russia by means of Ukrainian 
independence, but this attitude was not without reservations. For 
the German Empire, an independent Ukraine would simply be an 
intermediate step on the road to a federal anti-Bolshevik Russia, which 
would be a German ally in the East and a German area of influence. 
Very few believed, as Field Marshal Eichhorn did, in the future of an 
independent Ukraine. Austria-Hungary was skeptical to the very end 
because it feared the claims of its own Ukrainian minority, which 
opposed Polish administration and the Polish national movement 
in Galicia. A Ukraine under the protection of Vienna was seen as a 
possibility, but the Austrians were realistic enough to know that it was 
not very likely. Their real fear was that Kyiv would come under the 
influence of Russia or Germany, and this would put strategic pressure 
on the Danube Monarchy.
The interests of the other two states among the Central Powers 
could not be adequately examined in the present study. Turkey, 
on account of the Crimean Tatars, obviously had an interest in the 
strategically important peninsula in the Black Sea but lacked the power 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
404
to support its claim at that time. German interests in the Crimea were 
too important. Moreover, Istanbul was too concerned with threats 
in its own core territory and with domestic unrest. Bulgaria had 
never shown any interest in Ukraine and simply wished to develop 
economic relations. Bulgaria, however, had strong territorial interests 
in Romania, which were a central issue in the peace negotiations in 
Bucharest, and these interests drew Sofia away from a more active 
involvement with the Ukrainian question. With the Entente offensive 
on the Thessaloniki front in September, Bulgaria was concerned with 
the defense of its own core territory.
In the short term, there is no doubt that the alliance of the Ukrainian 
Central Rada with the Central Powers was a liberating stroke. With 
the assistance of the German military’s iron fist, the Rada was able 
to return to Kyiv. In the medium term, however, the Rada politicians 
had backed the wrong horse. Austria-Hungary was cautious and more 
interested in Odesa, while Germany soon became dissatisfied with 
the Rada’s activity and replaced it with the Hetman. Skoropadsky tried 
desperately to demonstrate his independence but did not succeed. His 
seizure of power tied him too closely to Berlin, a relationship that was 
further strengthened by his visit there in September 1918. When the 
Central Powers finally collapsed in November, he could no longer rely 
on trust at home or support from the Entente. He was rapidly replaced 
by the Directory and had to flee with the German troops to Berlin. 
Although the Entente did not have a unitary policy on Ukraine, 
the central states belonging to it—the USA, Great Britain, and France—
all shared a certain skepticism with regard to that country. Russia, 
of course, completely rejected an independent Ukraine. France made 
the most determined attempt to pursue its interest in Ukraine, but 
Paris had neither the military means nor the political power to sustain 
it. France had been too greatly weakened by the long war on its own 
territory, and its population was too war-weary. Battered by the 
“time of troubles,” the Russian Empire, now apparently rising again 
under the “red banner,” was too chaotic. Great Britain had a central 
strategic interest in Ukraine since it was the gateway to Central Asia 
and, were Germany to achieve dominance there, it would become 
a threat to British colonies in southern Asia. However, London 
concentrated on supporting Denikin and left Ukraine to French 
influence. It was only when this strategy failed that Britain turned 
its attention to Kyiv. But Britain was already too involved with the 
Whites in the Great Russian fairway to be able to offer support to 
separatist movements. In addition, London was cautious about the 

concluding observations
405 
Ukrainian national movement because of its links with Vienna and 
Berlin during the previous months and years. 
The United States had the least interest in an independent Ukraine. 
Throughout the revolutionary period, Wilson stuck to his idea of a 
united democratic Russia that, like the USA in North America, would 
hold almost an entire content together as a multinational state. After a 
short democratic phase in 1917, however, this state came increasingly 
under the control of Bolshevik revolutionaries in the course of 1918. 
Wilson’s idea was endangered, and the USA made one final but 
unsuccessful intervention. American foreign policy had hesitated too 
long to support the right forces and now saw itself confronted by a 
hostile regime. In all these considerations, Ukraine played only a very 
subordinate role.
From the perspective of St. Petersburg and Moscow, the Ukrainian 
question was absolutely clear. Regardless of whether it was ruled 
by a monarchy or a communist regime, Ukraine was economically, 
strategically, and politically too central to be allowed independence. 
The generals of the White opposition shared this view. The Bolsheviks 
understood better how to deal with the situation in the discourse of 
the period. They gathered the national movements together for their 
own purposes under the banner of “national self-determination” and 
“democracy” and gave them a formal pseudo-autonomy. The national 
movements were even played off against one another as a way of 
keeping them in check. That this strategy could not work in the long 
term has been demonstrated by the collapse of the Soviet Union, 
delayed until 1991, and the continuing conflicts over independence 
and borders.
At the international level, Ukraine had few potential allies with 
little influence. One of these was Poland, which was fighting for its 
own independence. But these potential allies found themselves in 
a conflict over territory that had been growing for decades. That 
conflict had long been limited to the intellectual circles of the 
national movements. But the creation of an apparently independent 
Polish state under the protection of the Central Powers from 1916 and 
the manipulation of Ukraine (and the Baltic states) in the struggle 
against Bolshevik Russia from 1917–18 gave the conflict real political 
significance. Following the collapse of the Central Powers and the 
creation of a genuinely independent Polish state in November 1918, 
the Ukrainian-Polish conflict became a bloody battle over Eastern 
Galicia and the Kholm region. The states of the Caucasus, themselves 
struggling for independence, were not practical partners. They were 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
406
very weak, involved with internal conflicts, and caught in the fronts 
between the Russian-oriented White restorationist movement; the 
interests of the great powers; Turkey, which was struggling for its own 
survival; and the equally Great Russian-oriented Red revolutionaries. 
There was another internal Ukrainian reason why Ukraine was 
unable to achieve independence. During this whole period, there 
was no internal consensus concerning the partners with whom and 
the orientation with which Ukraine could realize its independence. 
Indeed, the very notion of Ukrainian independence was in question. 
The Ukrainian national idea hardly existed among the largely 
illiterate peasant population. They spoke Ukrainian but did not 
concern themselves with the orientation of the state, who should lead 
it or, which came to the same thing, what it meant to be “Ukrainian.” 
The urban elite of the Ukrainian national movement was divided over 
an orientation on Europe or on Russia. These different orientations 
were irreconcilable, and there were further divisions within each 
group. The European group, in particular, was divided over whether 
to orient itself on Warsaw, Berlin, Paris, London, or Vienna. There was 
no consensus over a middle way that could be both European and 
Russian. This is still a disputed question in Ukraine, and orientations 
change depending on who is in power. It remains to be hoped that, 
after the bloody twentieth century and more than two decades of 
actual independence, the Ukrainians will find an answer to the 
question, Quo vadis Ukraine?
 
 

Sources
Austria
Heeresgeschichtliches Museum (Army History Museum), Vienna
Plennyarchiv, Brief Harald Halls an Joachim Givens v. 26.1.1932
Bildarchiv, Bestand: Nordostfront
ÖNB Austrian National Library (Österreichische Nationalbibliothek), Vienna
Bildarchiv, Bestand: Kriegsalben (Erster Weltkrieg)
ÖStA, Austrian State Archives (Österreichisches Staatsarchiv), Vienna
Allgemeines Verwaltungsarchiv (AVA)
Nachlass: Böhm-Ermolli, B 1466.
Nachlass: Krauß, B 60.
Nachlass: Spannocchi, B 760.
Nachlass: Böltz, B 760. 
Haus-, Hof- und Staatsarchiv (HHStA)
Ministerium des Äußern, Politisches Archiv I
Kt. 500, 523, 836, 902f., 1041f., 1056, 1076, 1081, 1092a.
Liasse Krieg 56/32 b.
Liasse Krieg 3f/Rußland 1918, Kt. 836.
Liasse Krieg 58, Ukraine, Kt. 1042.
Liasse XLVII, Krieg 1914–1918, Kt. 523.
Nachlass Czernin, Kt. 1092a.
Ministerium des Äußern, Politisches Archiv I
Kt. 152–154. 
Kriegsarchiv (KA)
KA, AdT, 145. IBrig, Kt. 1378f.
KA, AdT, FABrig 59, Kt. 4131.
KA, AdT, FAR 59, Kt. 832.
KA, AdT, FJB 13, Kt. 754.
KA, AdT, UR 3, Kt. 800.
KA, AdT, UR 13, Kt. 801.
KA, FA, AOK, Evidenzbüro 1918, Nachrichtenabteilung, Kt. 3669, 3670, 3673, 
3674, 3675, 3671, 3672.
KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Kt. 465-476.
KA, FA, AOK, OpAbt, Ev. Grp.-R 1918.
KA, FA, AOK, Ukraine Akten, Kt. 2.609-2.637.
KA, FA, NFA, AOK, KPQ, Kommandobefehle, Kt. 22.
KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, OpAK, Kt. 308f.
KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 2. Armee, QuAbt, Kt. 692, 693, 694, 695, 696, 
697, 710, 723.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
408
KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 4. Armee, Kt. 484f.
KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/AGKdo, 7. Armee, Kt. 289.
KA, FA, NFA, HHK AK/KorpsKdo, 12. Korps, Kt. 1661–1663.
KA, FA, NFA, Kmdo. Odessa (Gouv.), Kt. 3870.
KA, FA, NFA, Sonstiges, Ukrainische Formationen, Kt. 1952.
KA,Nachlass Raabl-Werner, B 141/4, II. Teil.
Czech Republic
National Archives of the Czech Republic, Prague 
F. Ukrainisches Museum, Kt. 44.
France
AAC/AP Archives of the Central Administration/Political Affairs (Archives de 
l’administration centrale/Affaires politiques 1914–1944), Paris 
Correspondance politique et commerciale, 1896–1918, Guerre 1914–1918, 
Russie, vol. 648f., 694f.
Z-Europe, URSS, Action des Alliés dans le nord de la Russie, vol. 217, 225, 226.
Z-Europe, URSS, Bessarabie, vol. 620.
E-Asie, Sibérie, vol. 7.
AAÉ Foreign Affairs Archives (Archives des Affaires étrangères), Paris
SHD/AAT Historical Defense/Armed Forces Archives (Service Historique de la 
Défense/Archives de l’armée de terre), Paris 
Série N, 1872–1919, 4N 40, 4N 63, 7N 810, 7N 921, 8N 15–16, 16N 3021, 16N 3023, 
16N 3025, 16N 3064, 16N 3066, 16N 3147, 16N 3172, 16N 3181, 16N 3188, 16N 
3191, 17N 622, 20N 225, 20N 729, 20N 763.
Germany
 
BA-MA Federal Archives/Military Archives (Bundesarchiv-Militärarchiv), 
Freiburg
N 46/171f. 
N 754/10.
N 776/45. 
PH 1/55.
PH 5-I/3, 5, 7.
PH 6-I/89.
RH 61/810, 847, 2315.
RM 41/62.

sources
409 
BArch Federal Archives (Bundesarchiv), Berlin-Lichterfelde
R 3101 (Reichswirtschaftsamt)/1096f., 1136f., 1164, 1166, 1168–70, 1180, 1190, 
1194, 1220, 1303f., 1314, 1316, 1318, 1341.
BayHA Bavarian Central State Archives (Bayerisches Hauptstaatsarchiv), 
Munich 
Bayerisches Hausarchiv, Geheimes Staatsarchiv 
Nachlass Leopold von Bayern.
Kriegsarchiv
1. Kav.Brig., Bd. 7, 11–13.
15. Res.Inf.Brig., Bd. 1, 7, 30.
509 Quellenverzeichnis.
2. S.R.R., Bd. 6f.
29. InfReg., Bd. 2f.
4. Chevauleger Regiment, Bd. 1, 11.
4. Kav.Brig., Bd. 4.
5. Chevauleger Regiment., Bd. 1, 4.
Etappenkommandantur 54., Bd. 22.
Kav.Div., Bd. 18–22, 28, 51.
Landsturm Regiment 1., Bd. 4.
Ministerium Krieg, 1779, 1824.
OP 61495 (Harteneck), OP 27835 (Rodt), OP 61659 (Waldenfels), OP 61590 
(Perfall), OP 47604 (Samhaber).
HStA Central State Archives (Hauptstaatsarchiv), Stuttgart
KTB des Stabes Korps Knoerzer.
7. Landwehrdividion, M 46/5e, 15f., 20f. 
52. Landwehrinfanteriedivision, M 62/2. 52. 
Kriegstagebücher von Infanterie Formationen, M 411/394, 395.
Kriegstagebücher von Feldartillerie- und Fußartillerieformationen, M 413/1214. 
Nachlass Knoerzer, M 660/131. 
Institut für Zeitgeschichte-Archiv (Institute for Contemporary History Archive), 
Munich
MA-487, Wehrmachtbefehlshaber Ukraine.
Great Britain
TNA The National Archives, London
FO 371/3012, 3018f., 390, 3283, 3342, 3347, 3349.
FO 373/3/16.
FO 379/3332.
FO 608/177, 71/24.
FO 608/201.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
410
FO 608/206.
FO 608/207.
FO 608/247.
FO 608/331.
FO 608/337.
GFM 6/35f., 52, 99, 107.
KV 2/661.
PRO 30/69/1800.
T 1/12128.
WO 158/752.
WO 32 5697. 
WO 33 967.
Hungary
War Archives, Budapest 
F. II.220, Kt. 1, Magyar királyi 155. honvéd gyaloghadosztály.
Russian Federation 
AVPRI Foreign Policy Archive of the Russian Empire (Arkhiv vneshnei politiki 
Rossiiskoi Imperii), Moscow  
F. 135, op. 474.
GARF State Archive of the Russian Federation (Gosudarstvennyi arkhiv 
Rossiiskoi Federatsii), Moscow 
F. 130, op. 2, 3.
F. 398, op. 2.
F. 439, op. 1.
F. 1236, op. 1.
F. 1791, op. 2.
F. 2313, op. 3.
F. 2314, op. 9.
F. 3348, op. 1
F. 5972, op. 1, 3.
F. 6817, op. 1.
F. 7506, op. 1.
F. r-393, op. 3.
RGASPI Russian State Archive for Social and Political History (Rossiiskii 
gosudarstvennyi arkhiv sotsial'no-politicheskoi istorii), Moscow 
F. 2, op. 1.
F. 5, op. 1.

sources
411 
F. 17, op. 1, 3, 84, 87, 109.
F. 17, op. 86, d. 112.
F. 19, op. 1.
F. 76, op. 3.
F. 325, op. 1.
F. 558, op. 11.
RGIA Russian State Historical Archive (Rossiiskii gosudarstvennyi istoricheskii 
arkhiv), St. Petersburg
F. 733, op. 193 (1863).
Russian National Library, Manuscript Department, Moscow 
F. 600, d. 1333. 
Switzerland
BAR Federal Archives (Bundesarchiv), Bern
Eidgenössisches Politisches Departement
E 2001 A, Kt. 877, 931.
E 2001 B, Abteilung für Auswärtiges 1918–20 (Nr. 1000/1501, 1502), Kt. 13, Kt. 
18.
E 2200.234, Schweizerische Vertretung Kiew, Nr. 1000/375.
E 2300, Politische und militärische Berichte der Auslandsvertretungen 1848–
1965 (Nr. 1000/716), 
Kt. 282, 
Eidgenössisches Volkswirtschaftsdepartement
E 7800, Generalsekretariat 1907–1955 (Nr. 1000/1961), Kt. 185.
Ukraine
TsDAVO Central State Archive of Supreme Bodies of Power and Government 
of Ukraine (Tsentral'nyi derzhavnyi arkhiv vyshchykh orhaniv vlady ta 
upravlinnia Ukraïny), Kyiv
F. 2, op. 1.
F. 2311, op. 1.
F. 1118, op. 1.
TsDIA Central State Historical Archive (Tsentral'nyi derzhavnyi istorychnyi 
arkhiv), Lviv 
F. 146, op. 7, spr. 4529.
F. 309, op. 2, spr. 109.
F. 358, op. 3, spr. 166, 1198.
F. 746, op. 1, spr. 6, 5.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
412
United States
Harvard Libraries, Cambridge, Massachusetts 
Government Documents, Records of the DoS relating to Internal Affairs of 
the Ukraine (NARA microfilm publications), Film S 1040/M 1286, 2 Rolls, Nr. 
860e.00, Political Affairs, Nr. 4, Letter of the US Mission in Berne, 21.11.1918.
NARA National Archives and Records Administration, College Park, MD
US DoS, Records relating to Internal Affairs Russia and Soviet Union 1910–1929, 
War Series 6, RG 59, Russia, IV 
US DoS, Records of the American Commission to Negotiate Peace, RG 256
M 820, Roll 198, 486, 488.
M 1107, Roll 13, 35, 46.
Commission for Negotiation of an Armistice between Poland and the Ukraine, 
RG 256, 
M 820/Roll 169.
Newspapers from various archives 
Basler Nachrichten, 27. March 1918
Buduchnist', 15.12.1899 
Christlich-soziale Arbeiter-Zeitung, no. 8, 23.2.1918
Dilo, 6.1.1923, 14.5.1918, 1.11.1928, 8.8.1924, 8.5.1931, 1.11.1938, 3.11.1938, 
4.11.1938, 5.11.1938
Golos Moskvy, no. 277, 2.12.1911
Kievlianin, no. 116 (27.4.1908), no. 134 (15.5.1908), no. 320 (16.11.1908), no. 38 
(7.2.1909), no. 60 (1.3.1914)
Nasha platforma, no. 1, Vienna, 5.10.1914 
Nova Rada, 25. 3.1917, 2.3.1917
Pravda, nos. 62–63, 3.–4.4.1918
Republyka, 1.4.1919 
Russkaia mysl', 1912, no. 1; 1914, no. 12
Ukraïns'ke slovo, 20.1.1917, 15.2.1918, 20.2.1918
Washington Post, 18.2.1918
Internet sources
Armistice convention with Austria-Hungary. Protocol of Conditions of the 
Armistice between the Allied and Associated Powers and Austria-Hungary 
(Signed at Villa Giusti, November 3, 1918), http://www.forost.ungarisches-
institut.de/pdf/19181103-1.pdf 4.3.2011.
Historisches Lexikon der Schweiz (HLS), http://www.hls-dhs-dss.ch/ 4.3.2011. 

sources
413 
List of diplomatic missions of Austria-Hungary http://www.enotes.com/topic/
List_of_diplomatic_missions_of_Austria-Hungary#cite_note-9 4.3.2011.
Memoirs of Alexander Isvolsky. Garden City, NY, and Toronto 1921, V–XV: 
http://www.archive.org/stream/recollectionsofa008591mbp 4.3.2011.
President Woodrow Wilson’s 14 Points (1918), http://www.ourdocuments.gov/
doc.php?flash=true&doc=62 4.3.2011.
The Supreme War Council, http://www.firstworldwar.com/atoz/
versaillescouncil.htm 4.3.2011.
US DoS, Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1918. 
Russia. vol. 2. Washington, DC 1918, http://digicoll.library.wisc.edu/cgi-bin/
FRUS/FRUS-idx?id=FRUS.FRUS1918Russiav02 4.3.2011, 649–651.
US DoS, Papers Relating to the Foreign Relations of the United States, 1918. 
Supplement 1. 
Waffenstillstandsbedingungen der Alliierten, Compiègne, 11. November 1918, 
http://www.dhm.de/lemo/html/dokumente/waffenstillstand/index.htm l 
4.3.2011.
The World War (1918), http://digicoll.library.wisc.edu/cgi-bin/FRUS/FRUS-
idx?id=FRUS.FRUS1918Supp01v0 1 4.3.2011, 465f., 496.
Published sources
Bonch-Bruevich, V. D. Na boevykh postakh fevral'skoi i oktiabr'skoi revoliutsii 
(Moscow, 1930).
Busemann, Melchior, ed. Der Friedensvertrag mit Rußland vom 3. März 1918, das 
deutsch-russische Wirtschaftsabkommen nebst dem Vertragszolltarif und der deutsch-
russische Zusatzvertrag (Berlin, 1918).
Cherikover, I. E. Antisemitizm i pogromy na Ukraine 1917–1918 gg. (Berlin, 1923).
Czernin, Ottokar. Im Weltkriege (Berlin and Vienna, 1919).
Davies, Norman. White Eagle, Red Star: The Polish-Soviet War 1919–1920 and the 
“Miracle on the Vistula” (London, 2003).
Denikin, A. I. Ocherki russkoi smuty, vol. 4 (Paris, 1925).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
414
Die deutsche Okkupation der Ukraine. Geheimdokumente (Strasbourg, 1937). 
Dokumenty o razgrome germanskikh okkupantov na Ukraine v 1918 godu (Moscow, 
1942).
Doroshenko, Dmytro. Moï spomyny pro nedavnie-mynule (Lviv, 1923).
Dragoni, Alfred von. “Die Kämpfe um Nikolajew und Cherson im Frühjahr 
1918,” Österreichische Wehrzeitung, 1928, no. 18: 2–3.
Frauenholz, Eugen. Das K.B. 2. Kürassier- und Schwere Reiter-Regiment (Munich, 
1921).
Fritsche, Max. Das königlich sächsische Landwehr-Infanterie-Regiment Nr. 106 
(Dresden, 1925).
Fromm, Oberst. Das Württembergische Landwehr-Infanterie-Regiment Nr. 126 im 
Weltkrieg 1914–1918 (Stuttgart, 1921).
Gebsattel, Ludwig Freiherr von. Das K.B. 1. Ulanen-Regiment “Kaiser Wilhelm 
II. König von Preußen.” Nach Kriegsakten, Kriegstagebüchern und Mitteilungen 
ehemaliger Angehöriger des Regiments (Augsburg, 1924).
Geschichte des Bürgerkriegs in der UdSSR, vol. 1, Die Vorbereitung der 
Oktoberrevolution (Offenbach, 1999).
Gorki, Maxim. “Vom russischen Bauern,” in Alexander W. Tschajanow, Reise ins 
Land der bäuerlichen Utopie (Frankfurt am Main, 1984), 89–110.
Gosudarstvennaia Duma, Tretii sozyv. Stenograficheskie otchety. 1909. Chast' 3 (St. 
Petersburg, 1910).
Gosudarstvennaia Duma, Tretii sozyv. Stenograficheskiie otchety. Sessiia chetvertaia. 
Chast' 1 (St. Petersburg, 1910).
Gosudarstvennaia Duma, IV sozyv. Sessiia II. Stenograficheskiie otchety. Chast' II. 
Zasedanie 40. 19 February 1914 (St. Petersburg, 1914). 
Grazhdanskaia voina na Ukraine 1918–1920. Sbornik dokumentov i materialov v trekh 
tomakh, chetyrekh knigakh, vol. 1, bk. 1 (Kyiv, 1967).
Groener, Wilhelm. Lebenserinnerungen. Jugend, Generalstab, Weltkrieg 
(Osnabrück, 1972).

sources
415 
__________. Der Weltkrieg und seine Probleme. Rückschau und Ausblick (Berlin, 
1920).
Hof- und Staats-Handbuch der österreichisch-ungarischen Monarchie für das Jahr 
1918, vol. 44 (Vienna, 1918).
Hruschewsky, Michael. Die ukrainische Frage in historischer Entwicklung (Vienna, 
1915). 
Janin, Pierre Maurice. Ma mission en Sibérie (Paris, 1933).
John, Volkwart. Brest-Litowsk. Verhandlungen und Friedensverträge im Osten 1917 
bis 1918 (Stuttgart, 1937).
Das K.B. Reserve-Jäger-Bataillon Nr. 1, ed. Hans Muggenthaler, Hugo Ritter von 
Pflügel, and Martin Scheuring (Munich, 1935).
Katkov, M. N. Sobranie peredovykh statei “Moskovskikh vedomostei“ 1865 goda 
(Moscow, 1897).
Kerchnawe, Hugo et al. Die Militärverwaltung in den von den österreichisch-
ungarischen Truppen besetzten Gebieten (Vienna, 1928).
Khrystiuk, Pavlo. Zamitky i materiialy do istoriï ukraïns'koï revoliutsiï 1917–1920 rr., 
vol. 2 (Vienna, 1921).
__________. Zamitky i materiialy do istoriï ukraïns'koï revoliutsiï 1917–1920 rr., vol 
3 (New York, 1969).
Konstytutsiini akty Ukraïny, 1917–1920. Nevidomi konstitutsiï Ukraïny (Kyiv, 1992).
Krauß, Alfred. Die Ursachen unserer Niederlage. Erinnerungen und Urteile aus dem 
Weltkrieg (Vienna, 1923).
Larin, Iurii. Evrei i antisemitizm v SSSR (Moscow and Leningrad, 1929).
Levyts'kyi, Ievhen. Lysty z Nimechchyny (Vienna, 1916).
__________. (Lewicky, Eugen). Die Ukraine der Lebensnerv Rußlands (Stuttgart 
and Berlin, 1915).
Levyts'kyi, Kost'. Istoriia politychnoï dumky halyts'kykh ukraïntsiv. Na pidstavi 
spomyniv i dokumentiv (Lviv, 1926).

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
416
Lockhart, R. H. Bruce. Memoirs of a British Agent: Being an Account of the Author’s 
Early Life in Many Lands and of His Official Mission to Moscow in 1918 (London and 
New York, 1932).
Lozyns'kyi, Mykhailo. Halychyna v rr. 1918–1920 (Prague, 1922; repr. New York, 
1970).
__________. Ukraïns'ka revoliutsiia. Halychyna v rr. 1918–1920 (Vienna, 1922).
Ludendorff, Erich. Meine Kriegserinnerungen 1914–1918 (Berlin, 1919).
Maleev, A. F. Tridtsat' dnei evreiskogo pogroma v mestechke Krivoe Ozero (Moscow, 
1921).
Margolin, A. D. From a Political Diary: The Ukraine and America, 1905–1945 (New 
York, 1946).
__________. Ukraina i politika Antanty (Berlin, 1921).
Margulies, M. S. God interventsii, vol. 1 (Berlin, 1923).
Miliukov, P. N. Istoriia vtoroi russkoi revoliutsii (Moscow, 2001).
__________. Natsional'nyi vopros. Proiskhozhdenie natsional'nosti i natsional'nye 
voprosy v Rossii (Prague, 1925).
Moulis, E., and E. Bergonier. La Guerre entre les Alliés et la Russie (1918–1920) 
(Paris, 1937).
Müller-Meinigen, Ernst. Diplomatie und Weltkrieg. Ein Führer durch die Entstehung 
und Ausbreitung der Weltkrisis auf Grund der amtlichen Materialien, vol. 2 (Berlin, 
1917).
Naumann, Friedrich. Mitteleuropa (Berlin, 1915). 
Niedermayer, Oskar Ritter von. Meine Rückkehr aus Afghanistan (Munich, 1918).
Noulens, Joseph. Mon ambassade en Russie soviétique, 1917–1919, 2 vols. (Paris, 
1933).
Nowak, Karl Friedrich, ed. Die Aufzeichnungen des Generalmajors Max Hoffmann, 
vol. 1 (Berlin, 1929).
Omelianovych-Pavlenko, Mykhailo. Spomyny (Lviv, 1930).

sources
417 
Österreichisches Bundesministerium für Landesverteidigung – Kriegsarchiv, 
ed. Österreich-Ungarns letzter Krieg 1914–1918, vol. 1, Das Kriegsjahr 1914 
(Vienna, 1931).
Österreichisches Bundesministerium für Landesverteidigung – Kriegsarchiv, 
ed. Österreich-Ungarns letzter Krieg 1914–1918, vol. 7, Das Kriegsjahr 1918 
(Vienna, 1938).
Reichsarchiv, ed. Der Weltkrieg, 1914–1918. Die Kriegführung im Sommer und 
Herbst 1918. Die Ereignisse außerhalb der Westfront bis November 1918, vol. 13, Die 
Kriegführung im Sommer und Herbst 1918 – Die Ereignisse außerhalb der Westfront bis 
November 1918 (Berlin, 1942). 
Rohrbach, Paul. Um des Teufels Handschrift. Zwei Menschenalter erlebter 
Weltgeschichte (Hamburg, 1953).
__________. Weltpolitisches Wanderbuch 1897–1915 (Königsstein im Taunus, 
1916).
Romstedt, Max. Das Kgl. Sächs. Landwehr-Infanterie-Regiment Nr. 133 (Dresden, 
1924).
Seeger, Charles Louis. Recollections of a Foreign Minister: Memoirs of Alexander 
Isvolsky (Garden City and Toronto, 1921).
Shapoval, Mykyta. Velyka revoliutsiia i ukraïns'ka vyzvol'na prohrama (Prague, 
1928).
Shekhtman, I. B. Pogromy dobrovol'cheskoi armii na Ukraine (Berlin, 1932).
Shreiber, S. K. “K protokolam pervogo vseukrainskogo soveshchaniia 
bol'shevikov,” Letopis' revoliutsii, 1926, no. 5.
Sisson, Edgar G. One Hundred Red Days: A Personal Chronicle of the Bolshevik 
Revolution. 25 November 1917–4 March 1918 (New Haven, 1931).
Skoropads'kyi, Pavlo. Spohady. Kinets' 1917–hruden' 1918 (Kyiv and Philadelphia, 
1995).
Sobotka, Felix. “Der Anteil Österreich-Ungarns an der Militärverwaltung in 
Rumänien 1917–1918,” in Die Militärverwaltung in den von den österreichisch-
ungarischen Truppen besetzten Gebieten, ed. Hugo Kerchnawe et al. (Vienna, 1928), 
305–17.

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
418
Sokolov, K. N. Pravlenie generala Denikina (Sofia, 1921).
Sorokin, Pitirim. Leaves from a Russian Diary (New York, 1924).
Stalin, J. W. Works, vol. 4 (Moscow, 1953).
Trotsky, Leon (Leo Trotzki). Die Geburt der Roten Armee (Vienna, 1924).
__________. History of the Russian Revolution, 3 vols. (London, 1967). 
__________. My Life (New York, 1960). 
Ukraïns'ka RSR v period hromadians'koï viiny 1917–1920 rr., vol. 1 (Kyiv, 1967).
Velsen, Stefan von. “Ukraine. Die Ukraine und Wir. Ein Rückblick auf die 
deutsche Okkupation,” Preußische Jahrbücher, no. 176 (1919): 260–66. 
Vynnychenko, Volodymyr. Vidrodzhennia natsiï, 3 vols. (Kyiv and Vienna, 1920).
Waldenfels, Otto Freiherr von. Geschichte des kgl. Bayer. 6. Chevaulegers-Regiments 
“Kreß” im Kriege 1914–1919 (Bayreuth, 1921).
Wilson, Woodrow. President Wilson’s Foreign Policy: Messages, Addresses, and 
Papers (New York, 1918).
Wrangel, P. N. The Memoirs of General Wrangel (London, 1929).
Zatons'kyi, V. Z. “Iz spohadiv pro ukraïns'ku revoliutsiiu,” Litopys revoliutsiï, 
1929, nos. 5–6. 
Zoloti vorota. Istoriia Sichovykh Stril'tsiv 1917–1919 (Lviv, 1937).
Zuckermann, S., ed. Handelsstatistische Blätter, 1918, no. 4.

Abbreviations
(French and German abbreviations in this list appear in archival and bibliographic 
references and are not translated into English)
AA Auswärtiges Amt
AAC/AP Archives de l’administration centrale/Affaires politiques, Paris
AAÉ Archives des Affaires étrangères, Paris
Abt(lg.). Abteilung
AdT Archiv der Truppenkörper
AGKdo Armee-Gruppen-Kommando
AK Armeekommando (österr.-ung.), Armeekorps (deut.)
Anm. Anmerkung
(k.u.k.) AOK (k.u.k.) Armeeoberkommando; bei den deutschen Truppen wird unter 
AOK ein den k.u.k. AK entsprechendes Kommando verstanden
AVPRI Arkhiv vneshnei politiki Rossiiskoi Imperii (Foreign Policy Archive of the 
Russian Empire), Moscow
BA-MA Bundesarchiv-Militärarchiv, Freiburg
BAR Bern Bundesarchiv, Bern
BArch Bundesarchiv, Berlin-Lichterfelde
Bay. Bayerisch
BayHA, Geh. StA Bayerisches Hausarchiv, Geheimes Staatsarchiv, Munich
BayHStA Bayerisches Hauptstaatsarchiv, Munich
Bd(e). Band/Bände oder Bund
betr./Betr. betreffend/Betreff
BIK Ludwig Boltzmann-Institut für Kriegsfolgen-Forschung
bzgl. bezüglich
bzw. beziehungsweise
Chev. Chevauleger
CP(B)U Communist Party (Bolshevik) of Ukraine
CPC Correspondance politique et commerciale
d. delo (dossier, file)
Div. Division
d.M. des Monats
Dok. Dokument
d.R. der Reserve
Ebd. Ebendort
ed. editor
EPD  Eidgenössisches Politisches Departement
ErsBaon Ersatzbataillon
Et.K'drn Etappenkommandanturen
EVD Eidgenössisches Volkswirtschaftsdepartement
f. folgende
F. Fond (archival collection, fond)
FA Feldakten

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
420
FABrig  Feldartilleriebrigade
Fas. Faszikel
FJB Feldjägerbataillon
Fn. Fußnote
FWF Fonds für Wissenschaft und Forschung
GARF Gosudarstvennyi arkhiv Rossiiskoi Federatsii (State Archive of the Russian 
Federation), Moscow
GenKmdo Generalkommando
GG Generalgouvernement
Gouv. Gouvernement
Habil. Habilitation
Hg. Herausgeber
HGM Heeresgeschichtliches Museum, Vienna
HHK Höhere Heereskommanden
HLS Historisches Lexikon der Schweiz
HStA Stuttgart Hauptstaatsarchiv, Stuttgart
IBrig Infanteriebrigade
ID Infanterie(truppen)division
IfZ Institut für Zeitgeschichte, Munich 
Inf.  Infanterie
inkl. inklusive
i.R. in Ruhe/im Ruhestand
Jg. Jahrgang
k. kaiserlich
Kav. Kavallerie
KD Kavallerie(truppen)division
Kdo Kommando
Kdt(en) Kommandant(en)
k.k. kaiserlich-königlich
KKRN Kievskii klub russkikh natsionalistov (Kyivan Club of Russian Nationalists)
Komsomol Communist Youth League
KorpsKdo Korps-Kommando
KPQ(u) Kriegspressequartier
Kt. Karton
KTB Kriegstagebuch
k.u. königlich-ungarisch
k.u.k. kaiserlich und königlich
(k.u.k.) MdÄ k.u.k. Ministerium des Äußern
Leg.Sekr Legations Sekretär
L.F.A.R. Landwehr Feldartillerieregiment
L.I.R. Landwehr Infanterieregiment
MG Maschinengewehr
MGG Militärgeneralgouvernement
milit. Militärisch
MilKmdo Militärkommando
muselman. Batls. muselmanisches Bataillon

abbreviations
421 
NARA National Archives and Records Administration, College Park, MD, USA
NEP New Economic Policy
NFA Neue Feldakten 
no. Numero 
N.O.d.O.H.L. Nachrichtenoffizier der Obersten Heeresleitung
Nr. Nummer
Oblt. Oberleutnant
Obost/ObOst/Ob Ost Oberbefehlshaber Ost
OHL Oberste Heeresleitung
ÖNB Österreichische Nationalbibliothek
op. opis'/opys (archival inventory)
OpAbt Operations-Abteilung
ÖStA, AVA Österreichisches Staatsarchiv, Allgemeines Verwaltungsarchiv, Vienna
ÖStA, HHStA Österreichisches Staatsarchiv, Haus-, Hof- und Staatsarchiv, Vienna
ÖStA, KA Österreichisches Staatsarchiv, Kriegsarchiv, Vienna
östr.-ung. österreichisch-ungarisch
QuAbt Quartiermeisterabteilung
r./rr. rik/rokiv/roky  year(s)
RCP(B) Russian Communist Party (Bolshevik)
Red. Redaktion
Res. Reserve
RG Record group 
RGASPI Rossiiskii gosudarstvennyi arkhiv sotsial'no-politicheskoi istorii (Russian 
State Archive for Social and Political History), Moscow
RGIA Rossiiskii gosudarstvennyi istoricheskii arkhiv (Russian State Historical 
Archive), St. Petersburg
RKP(b) Rossiiskaia Kommunisticheskaia Partiia (bol'shevikov)  Russian Communist 
Party (Bolshevik)
RSFSR Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic
S. Seite
SchR Schützenregiment
SFIO Section Française de l’Internationale Ouvrière
SHD/AAT Service Historique de la Défense/Archives de l’armée de terre, Paris
s.l. sine loco (no place of publication)
sovkhoz (state farm)
Sovnarkom Sovet Narodnykh Komissarov (Council of People’s Commissars)
spr. sprava (dossier, file)
S.R.R. Schweres Reiter Regiment
SSSR Soiuz Sovetskikh Sotsialisticheskikh Respublik (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics)
Tgb.  Tagebuch
TNA, FO The National Archives, Foreign Office, London
TNA, GFM The National Archives, German Foreign Ministry, London
TsDAVO Tsentral'nyi derzhavnyi arkhiv vyshchykh orhaniv vlady ta upravlinnia 
Ukraïny (Central State Archive of Supreme Bodies of Power and Government of 
Ukraine), Kyiv

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
422
TsDIA Tsentral'nyi derzhavnyi istorychnyi arkhiv (Central State Historical Archive), 
Lviv
TsK Tsentral'nyi Komitet (Central Committee)
TUP Tovarystvo ukraïns'kykh postupovtsiv (Society of Ukrainian Progressives)
u.a. und andere
Übers. Übersetzung
UdSSR Union der Sozialistischen Sowjetrepubliken (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics)
Ukrainian SSR Ukrainian Socialist Soviet Republic (Ukrainian Soviet Socialist 
Republic, 1937–91)
UNDP Ukrainian National Democratic Party
UNR Ukraïns'ka Narodna Respublika (Ukrainian People’s Republic)
UPR Ukrainian Parliamentary Representation
UR Ulanen-Regiment
URSS L’Union des républiques socialistes soviétiques (Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics)
(US) DoS (United States) Department of State
USPD Unabhängige Sozialdemokratische Partei Deutschlands
USSR Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
v./vv. vek/veka/veki  century (centuries)
VChK Vserossiiskaia chrezvychainaia komissiia po bor'be s kontrrevoliutsiei, 
spekuliatsiei i sabotazhem (All-Russian Extraordinary Commission to Combat 
Counterrevolution, Speculation and Sabotage; Cheka)
Vgl. Vergleiche
VKP(b) Vsesoiuznaia Kommunisticheskaia Partiia (bol'shevikov)  All-Union 
Communist Party (Bolshevik)
vol. volume 
vyp. vypusk (issue)
WVB Waren-Verkehrs-Büro
z.B. zum Beispiel
ZUNR Zakhidno-Ukraïns'ka Narodna Respublika (Western Ukrainian People’s 
Republic)
ZUR Zahal'na Ukraїns'ka Rada (General Ukrainian Council) 
Ia  Erster Generalstabsoffizier (Taktik und Operation)
Ib  Zweiter Generalstabsoffizier (Versorgung)
Ic  Dritter Generalstabsoffizier (Feindlagebild)
IIa Erster Adjutant (Offiziers-Personalangelegenheiten)
IIb Zweiter Adjutant (Unteroffiziers- und Mannschaftsangelegenheiten)
III  Abteilung Gericht

Authors
Wolfram Dornik, Ph.D., born 1978 in Feldbach, Austria. Member, 
Ludwig Boltzmann Institute for Research on the Consequences of 
War (Ludwig Boltzmann-Institut für Kriegsfolgen-Forschung) in Graz 
since 2004. Research interests: First World War (occupation in Eastern 
Europe, Eastern Front, international relations); culture of memory in 
the Internet; Austrian history, 1914–55. wolfram.dornik@bik.ac.at 
Georgiy Kasianov, Ph.D., born 1961 in Cheliabinsk, Russia. Head of 
the Department of Contemporary History and Politics at the Institute 
of Ukrainian History, National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, since 
2003. Research interests: Ukrainian history, nineteenth century 
to the present; history of ideas; post-communist politics of history. 
kasianov@irf.kiev.ua
Hannes Leidinger, Ph.D., born 1969 in Gmunden, Austria. Lecturer, 
Institute of History and Institute of Contemporary History, University 
of Vienna. Visiting professor, University of Vienna. Research interests: 
Austrian and Russian/Soviet history; film sources for Austrian history; 
Habsburg Monarchy; First World War; theories of history; historical 
sociology; research on capitalism, socialism, communism, and 
prisoners of war; military and espionage history. hannes.leidinger@
univie.ac.at
Peter Lieb, Ph.D., born 1974 in Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany. 
Senior Lecturer, Department of War Studies at the Royal Military 
Academy, Sandhurst, UK, since 2005. Previously member of the 
Institute of Contemporary History (Institut für Zeitgeschichte) in 
Munich. Research interests: German army in the First and Second 
World Wars; war and violence; insurgency und counterinsurgency in 
the twentieth century; theories of war. peter_lieb@hotmail.com 
Alexei Miller, Ph.D., born 1959 in Moscow. Senior Research Fellow, 
Institute of Scientific Information in the Social Sciences, Russian 
Academy of Sciences, Moscow. Professor, Central European University 
(Budapest), and Russian State University for the Humanities (Moscow). 
Currently Leverhulme Trust Professor at Manchester University. 
Research interests: empires and nationalism in Eastern and Central 
Europe; European political history. millera@ceu.hu

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
424
Bogdan Musial, Ph.D., born 1960 in Wielopole, Poland. Professor, 
Cardinal Stefan Wyszyński University in Warsaw. Research 
interests: twentieth-century history of Eastern and Central Europe, 
with emphasis on the Soviet Union, Poland, Belarus, and Germany, 
persecution of Jews, and Soviet partisan movements. b.musial@uksw.
edu.pl
 
Vasyl Rasevych, Ph. D., born 1966 in Zadovzhe, Ukraine. Senior 
Research Fellow, Ivan Krypiakevych Institute of Ukrainian Studies, 
National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine, Lviv, since 2002. Research 
interests: Ukrainian history (Galicia, 1890–1921); Ukrainian memorial 
sites; politics of history. rasevych@gmail.com.

Abbott, Peter, 229 n. 134, 230 n. 139
Abramson, Henry, 391 n. 20, 392 n. 27
Afghanistan, 41 n. 19
Africa, xv
Alberta, x, xiii
Aleksandrov, M., 344 n. 96, 345 n. 99, 
346 n. 101
Alekseev, Mikhail, 15
Alexander II (emperor of Russia), 301, 304
Alexich, Georg, 222
Alsace-Lorraine, 348
Altrichter, Helmut, 14 n. 53
Aly, Götz, 394 n. 37
Amet, Jean François, 359
Amiens, 72
Anatolia, 315 n. 55
Anderson, Benedict, xxi n. 13
Andriichuk, Hryhorii A., 311
Andriichuk, Matvii, 311 n. 46
Andriievsky, Opanas, 108 n. 79
Anhel, Yevhen, 77, 112
Antonov-Ovsiienko, Volodymyr, 8, 123, 
123 n. 112, 325
Antonov, Aleksandr, 28, 29 n. 121
Arkhangelsk, 18, 20
Armenia, 10, 15, 53, 354, 370
Arnim, Hans-Jürgen von, 177
Arnold, Klaus Jochen, 394 n. 36
Asia, xvii, xxi, 404; East, 352. See also 
Central Asia
Asia Minor, 44
Assmann, Aleida, xxvii n. 32
Assmann, Jan, xxvii n. 32
Augsburg, xxx
Austro-Hungarian Empire (Austria, 
Austria-Hungary, Austro-Hungarian 
Monarchy, Danube Monarchy, Dual 
Monarchy, Habsburg Empire, Habsburg 
Monarchy), ix, x, xiv, xvi, xix, xxiv xxvi, 
xxvi n. 27, xxvii, xxix, 1, 31, 37 –38, 
41 –42, 44 –48, 49 n. 56, 50 –52, 54 –59, 
62 –63, 65 –70, 72 –73, 75, 98, 108, 
132 –42, 143, 145 –49, 151 –52, 156, 160, 
188, 193 –95, 202 –6, 219 –30, 232 –33, 
235 –37, 239 –40, 243 –45, 249 –53, 256, 
260, 263 –64, 267 –68, 272 –74, 276 –78, 
276 n. 211, 282, 287, 292 –93, 297, 308, 
308 n. 35, 314 –15, 317 –18, 320, 328, 
347 –48, 350, 362, 369, 369 n. 2, 371 –72, 
390, 395 –97, 401 –4. See also Hungary, 
Lower Austria
Azerbaijan, 13, 15, 370
Azov, Sea of, 156 
Baberowski, Jörg, 27 n. 112, 388 n. 8
Bacher, Dieter, xxviii
Bachinger, Bernhard, xiv
Bachmann-Medick, Doris, xxiii n. 18
Bachmann, Klaus, 38, 38 n. 2, 38 n. 6, 49 n. 
55
Bachynsky, Volodymyr, 135, 143, 145
Baden, 294
Bagge, John Picton, 355
Baghdad, 162
Baily, 362 n. 60
Bakhturina, Aleksandra, 315 n. 58
Balkan Peninsula (Balkans), 106, 194, 354
Ballard, C. Robert, 350
Baltic region (Baltics), xvi, xxi, 63, 327, 
348, 368, 392
Baltic Sea, 61, 212
Baltic states (countries), xvii, xxv, 31, 41, 
43, 54, 155, 405
Banac, Ivo, 298 n. 1
Banff, x
Baran, Stepan, 134 n. 4, 142 –45, 142 n. 31, 
142 n. 33, 144 n. 41, 144 n. 46, 145 n. 49
Baranovsky, Khrystofor, 82
Baranowicze, 252
Baranyk, Vasyl, 144
Batowski, Henryk, 48 n. 51
Batumi, 20
Baumgart, Winfried, xxv –xxvi, xxvi n. 
24, 40, 40 n. 14, 40 n. 16, 53 n. 70 –71, 
65 n. 128, 66 n. 129 –30, 67 n. 136, 74 n. 
172 –73, 75 n. 175, 156 n. 4, 200, 207 n. 
18, 238 n. 14, 244 n. 49
Bavaria, 398 n. 47
Beauvois, Daniel, 302 n. 13
Belarus (White Russia), xxi, xxv, 13, 63, 
155, 301, 344, 348, 370, 383 –84
Belgium, 170, 197
Belgrade, 69 n. 146, 195
Belitska, Alexander, 220
Benedikter, Christoph, xxviii
Benkemoun, Jacques, 347 n. 3
Berchtold, Leopold, 41 –42
Berdychiv, 105, 109, 121
Index

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
426
Bereg, 37
Bergien, Rüdiger, 386 n. 1, 393 n. 33
Bergonier, E., 359 n. 48 
Berlin, xi, xix, 7, 14 –16, 18, 25, 47, 56, 59, 
61 –62, 71 –72, 75, 75 n. 175, 200, 202, 
205, 208, 214, 226 –27, 237 –38, 245, 249, 
250 –52, 254, 260, 263, 270, 277, 293, 
315, 317, 328, 348, 349 n. 11, 350 –51, 
366 –67, 399 –401, 404 –6 
Bermondt-Avalov, Pavel, 25
Bern, 56 n. 85, 316, 318
Berthélemy, Joseph, 154, 373
Berthelot, Henri M., 348, 350, 355, 357
Berzin, 335 n. 62
Bessarabia, 218, 219 n. 82, 248, 252, 354, 
389; northern, 248 
Bethmann Hollweg, Theobald von, 
42 –43, 43 n. 28
Beyer, Hans, 46 n. 46
Biała Podlaska, 246 n. 58
Białystok, 54
Bibikov, Michael M., 318
Bihl, Wolfdieter, xxvi, xxvi n. 27, 37 n. 1, 
47 n. 49, 50 n. 59 –60, 57 n. 90
Bila Tserkva, 101 n. 62, 105, 109, 113, 290, 
382
Bilhorod, 199 n. 211
Biliński, Leon von, 47
Binder, Harald, 39 n. 8
Bister, Feliks J., 195 n. 194
Black Sea, 17, 20, 44 n. 35, 61, 67, 105, 156, 
158, 163, 172, 173 n. 84, 187, 195, 212, 
225 –26, 246, 250, 252 –53, 256, 260, 276, 
299 n. 4, 326, 350, 359, 403
Black Sea region, xxi, 388 n. 8
Blaickner, Elizabeth, 347 n. 3
Boh (Southern Bug) River, 203, 389
Bohemia, 221
Böhler, Jochen, 163 n. 40
Böhm-Ermolli, Eduard von, 75, 156 –57, 
169, 187, 203, 220, 236, 244 –45, 251, 
398, 398 n. 48
Böhme, Gernot, 243 n. 47
Boiko, O., 89 n. 31
Boiko, V., 85 n. 21
Bolbochan, Petro, 115 –16, 293
Bolshevik Russia. See Russian Soviet 
Federative Socialist Republic
Böltz, Eduard Edler von, 192, 196, 196 n. 
196, 222, 252, 266, 297
Bonch-Bruevich, V., 11 n. 37
Bopp, Arthur, 173 –75, 175 n. 97, 177, 
Boris (captain of Bulgarian steamer), 
264 n. 151
Borisenko, Elena, 327 n. 28
Borisov, Iu., 365 n. 73
Borius, Albert, 356
Borowsky, Peter, xxvi, xxvi n. 28, 40, 40 n. 
15 –17, 42 n. 24, 42 n. 26, 45 n. 41, 46 n. 
42, 46 n. 44, 46 n. 47, 53 n. 72, 56 n. 86, 
57 n. 92, 74 n. 173, 212 n. 48, 253 n. 107, 
274 n. 200, 275 n. 207, 278, 278 n. 218
Borshchiv district, 154
Boryslav, 373, 375
Borzęcki, Jerzy, 358 n. 45
Bosh, Evgeniia, 92
Bothmer, Karl Freiherr von, 243 n. 47 
Boyle, Joseph W., 350
Bozhko, Yukhym, 112, 114, 120
Bradley, John, 19 n. 72
Brăila, 252, 276
Brandhuber, Thomas, xxx
Brazil, 69 n. 146
Brest-Litovsk (Brest), xvi, 15 –16, 18 –20, 
39 –40, 50 n. 60, 53, 55 –56, 55 n. 80, 58, 
60 –64, 69, 72, 77, 93 –94, 139 –40, 215, 
219, 223, 226 –27, 233, 237, 243, 246, 
249, 260, 263, 270, 273, 278, 281, 322, 
326 –28, 327 n. 26, 350, 353, 372, 392, 
397, 399, 401 –2
Brinckmann (Austrian major), 204
Brinkley, George, 349 n. 11, 354 n. 27, 
354 n. 29, 356 n. 34 –35, 357 n. 39 –40, 
359 n. 47, 363 n. 65
Britain (British Empire). See Great Britain
Broadberry, Stephen, 236 n. 4
Brody, 60, 118, 272 n. 186
Broucek, Peter, 251 n. 94
Browder, Robert Paul, 83 n. 19
Brüggemann, Karsten, 8 n. 26, 25 n. 103
Bruk, S., 303 n. 16, 303 n. 19
Brusilov, Aleksei, xxv, 25, 202, 236
Bubela, Petro, 143
Buchar, Franz, 222
Bucharest, 363, 366, 404
Budapest, xxvii –xxx, 37, 47, 245, 247, 
250 n. 85
Budenny, Semen, 129
Buh River, 197, 
Bukharin, Nikolai, 323
Bukovyna, xxv, 37, 43, 49, 52, 55, 133 –34, 
136 –37, 140, 144, 147, 151 –52, 157, 
218, 221, 223 –24, 246 n. 63, 248, 253, 
276, 296, 317 n. 63, 389; Northern, 132, 
145 –46, 372, 403
Bulgaria, xxi, 59, 108, 194, 263 –64, 273, 
389, 404
Bullock, David, 19 n. 71, 19 n. 75, 23 n. 95

index
427 
Bunyan, James, 11 n. 37
Buravchenkov, A., 105 n. 74
Burián, Istvan, 58, 60, 67 –70, 75, 223, 247
Burkov (German officer), 290
Buromka, 286
Bushkovitch, Paul, 298 n. 1
Bykhov, 7
Cambrai, 208
Carinthia, xxx
Carley, Michael Jabara, 359 n. 47, 365 n. 69
Carr, Edward Hallett, 360
Castelbajac, Ghislain de, 349 n. 9
Catherine II the Great (empress of Russia), 
298
Caucasian Federation, 344
Caucasian Mountain Republic, 13
Caucasus, xv, xvii, xxi, 15, 20, 29, 31, 41, 
44, 50, 74 n. 172, 212 n. 49, 278, 354, 405
Central Asia, xx, 388 n. 8, 396, 404. See 
also Asia
Charles XII (king of Sweden), 308 n. 34
Chekhivsky, Volodymyr, 110
Chełm. See Kholm
Cherkasy, 331; gubernia, 113 n. 91; oblast, 
181
Chernihiv, 93 –94, 115, 178, 290; gubernia, 
83, 103, 112, 240, 302, 306; region, 185
Chernivtsi, xviii, xxix, 150 –52
Chernov, Viktor, 4
Chertkov, Mikhail, 301
Chicherin, Georgii, 334 –35, 335 n. 58 –59, 
Chornobyl, 382
Chortkiv district, 154
Chortoryia, 120
Chubatyi, Mykola, 151 n. 66
Churchill, Winston, 20, 363, 366
Chykalenko, Yevhen, 97, 98 n. 55, 305 n. 
24, 306, 306 n. 26, 306 n. 28, 308 n. 32, 
308 n. 36, 309, 309 n. 38, 309 n. 40, 312 n. 
49, 313 
Cieński, Tadeusz, 150
Cisleithania, 37, 47, 55, 57, 146, 204, 227, 
256
Class, Heinrich, 44
Clausius, Hermann, 164
Clemenceau, Georges Benjamin, 19 –20, 
349 n. 11, 351, 354, 356, 358 –60, 363 –64, 
366
Clemens, Gabriel, 361 n. 56
Clerc, Louis, 349 n. 11, 360 n. 49
Coeuré, Sophie, 350 n. 11, 352 n. 17
Cohrs, Patrick O., 367 n. 74
Compiègne, 73, 198, 328
Congress Poland, 47, 54. See also Poland
Conrad, Christoph, xxiii n. 18
Constantinople, 47
Copenhagen, 391
Courland, 43, 53, 53 n. 70, 55, 326
Courtois, Stéphane, 344 n. 93, 388 n. 8
Cox, Michael, 221 n. 97
Cracow, 148 –49, 371
Crimea, xxi, 23, 67, 67 n. 135 –36, 70, 86, 
117, 124, 126, 128, 129 n. 125, 130, 146, 
156, 167 –68, 173, 177, 179, 198 –99, 205, 
209, 211 n. 43, 226, 333, 338 –39, 343, 
354, 359, 363, 387 n. 4, 404
Cron, Hermann, 212 n. 46
Curzon, N. George, 363
Cvengroš, Gustave, 348 n. 4, 349 n. 9, 
357 n. 38
Czechoslovakia, xvii, 196, 361, 362
Czernin, Ottokar, 50 n. 60, 55, 57 –58, 
58 n. 97, 61 –62, 62 n. 115, 66 –67, 75, 202, 
206, 223, 272 n. 185, 278, 278 n. 220, 
Dąbie, 153
Dąbkowski, Tadeusz, 135 n. 6
Danchenko, Oleksandr, 120
D’Anselme, Philippe Henri, 355, 357, 359
Danube Monarchy. See Austro-Hungarian 
Empire 
Danube River, 15, 225 –26, 246, 252 –53 
Dardanelles, 44 n. 35
Daróczy, Josef, 222, 250, 259
Datskiv, I., 273 n. 196
Davies, Norman, 382 n. 51
Davis, John W., 368 n. 76
Dęblin, 376
Demblin, August, 57 n. 93
Demchenko, T., 85 n. 21
Demkovych-Dobrians'kyi, Mykhailo, 
149 n. 62
Denikin, Anton, ix, 15 –16, 22 –26, 22 n. 87, 
23 n. 96, 33, 119 –20, 125 –26, 125 n. 117, 
331 –33, 338, 354 –55, 357, 363, 363 n. 66, 
375, 377, 404
Denis, Ernest, 367 n. 75
Denysivka, 286
Derevenko (tsar’s orderly), 319
D’Esperey, Louis François Franchet, 
354 –55, 360
Diner, Dan, xvi, xvi n. 6, 36 n. 143
Dippelreiter, Michael, xxix
Dittfurth, von (German officer), 216
Dmowski, Roman, 314
Dnipro (Dnieper) River, 70, 189, 197, 299, 
305 n. 22, 335, 337, 382 –83; region, 124 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
428
Dnister River, 118, 389
Dobry, Adam, 98, 101
Dolbilov, Mikhail, 298 n. 1
Don Cossacks, 353
Don River, 13, 92, 94 n. 45, 309, 343; 
region, 15, 44, 72, 354
Don Republic, 12
Dondukov-Korsakov, Aleksandr, 300 –301
Donets Basin (Donbas), 92,  115, 123 –24, 
126, 156, 274, 274 n. 199, 290, 304, 306, 
324, 327, 333, 339 –40, 364 
Dontsov, Dmytro, 306 n. 27, 312
Dornik, Wolfram, ix, xi, xiv –xv, xviii –xx, 
xviii n. 8, xix n. 9, xxiii n. 16, 36 n. 144, 
37, 49 n. 54, 95 n. 50, 155, 167 n. 59, 202, 
235, 347, 347 n. 1, 386
Doroshenko, Dmytro, 80, 85, 85 n. 23, 
94 n. 44, 96 n. 51, 98, 101 n. 62, 280 n. 
223, 282, 282 n. 229, 286, 286 n. 242, 296, 
297 n. 284
Dotsenko, Oleksandr, 119 n. 104, 120 n. 
106
Dowling, Timothy, xxiv, xxiv n. 20
Dragoni, Alfred von, 158 n. 15
Dual Monarchy. See Austro-Hungarian 
Empire
Dullin, Sabine, 350 n. 11
Dumin, Osyp, 111 n. 86
Dunaevskii, V., 365 n. 73
Duppler, Jörg, 53 n. 68, 396 n. 42
Dzerzhinsky, Feliks, 332, 332 n. 45, 335 n. 
62, 337, 337 n. 66, 338 n. 68, 340, 340 n. 
79
Dziuba, Olena, 287 n. 246
East Prussia, xxv. See also Prussia
Eberhardt, Gaspard von, 215 –16, 216 n. 66
Eberhardt, Piotr, 371 n. 7 –8, 375 n. 20, 
Ebert, Friedrich, 175 n. 92
Egloffstein, Moritz Freiherr von, 168
Egypt, 44
Ehlert, Hans Gotthard, 253 n. 105
Eichhorn, Hermann von, 64 –66, 68, 97, 
103, 181, 181 n. 132, 200, 207 –8, 213 –14, 
223, 242, 261, 281, 296, 398 n. 49, 403
Eichwede, Wolfgang, 365 n. 71, 365 n. 73
Eideman, Robert, 341, 342 n. 84
Ekaterinburg, 12
Eklof, Ben, 305 n. 23
Elbe River, 237
Ellis, John,  221 n. 97
Ems, 300 –301
England. See Great Britain
Epkenhans, Michael, 53 n. 68, 396 n. 42
Erdmann, Karl-Dietrich, 43 n. 28
Erzberger, Matthias, 75
Esposito, David M., 353 n. 21
Essenko, Melita, xxx
Estonia, 10 –11, 13, 25, 53, 326, 328, 370
Eurasian continent, 347
Europe, xxi, 47, 60, 124, 308 n. 34, 354, 367, 
406; Central, ix, xxiv, xxviii, 20, 44 –45, 
64, 327 –28, 336, 364, 367 –68, 370; East-
Central, 368; Eastern, ix, xiii, xv –xix, 
xxiv –xxviii, 39, 42 –43, 60, 62, 70, 74, 
154, 278, 315, 327 –28, 365, 367 –68, 370, 
395, 397; Southeastern, xv, xxvi, 47; 
Western, 353, 364 –65, 397
Fabini, Ludwig von, 196
Fagan, Gus, xi, xiv
Falk, Barbara, 388 n. 7
Far East, 19, 29, 303
Fastiv, 109
Fediushin, Oleg, 15 n. 58
Fedyshyn, Oleh, 38 n. 3, 39 n. 10, 40, 40 n. 
14, 43 n. 32, 46 n. 44, 46 n. 47, 52 n. 64, 
158 n. 17, 272 n. 185
Felshtinsky, Yurii, 351 n. 14
Feodosiia, 164, 172
Fest, Wilfried, 348 n. 5
Feuchtenegg, Ernst Seidler von, 61
Figes, Orlando, 4 n. 10, 4 n. 12, 7 n. 19, 10 n. 
31, 14 n. 49, 16 n. 60, 20 n. 77, 22 n. 87, 
24 n. 98, 25 n. 103, 28 n. 119, 29 n. 123, 
33 n. 128, 33 n. 132, 192 n. 186, 321 n. 2, 
327 n. 24
Finland, xxi, 7, 10 –11, 18, 25, 31, 34, 41, 53, 
326, 349 n. 11, 353, 360 n. 49, 368, 370
Fischer, Fritz, 39 –40, 39 n. 11 –12, 41 n. 
19, 41 n. 21, 42, 42 n. 24, 42 n 26, 43 n. 
28 –29, 43 n. 31, 46 n. 47, 53 n. 69, 53 n. 
71 –72, 56 n. 86, 73, 74 n. 172 –73, 
Fischer, Kurt, 354 n. 29
Fisher, Harold H., 11 n. 37
Fleischmann von Theissruck, Moritz, 67, 
215, 215 n. 64, 222, 225, 225 n. 113, 229, 
233, 391
Fleischmann, Harald, xxix
Fleming, Peter, 24 n. 100
Flondor, Jancu, 152
Florian, Martin, xxviii
Foch, Ferdinand, 20
Folys, Yosyf, 142, 143
Footman, David, 17 n. 65
Forgách, János, 67, 69, 69 n. 146, 187 n. 163, 

index
429 
188, 222, 223 n. 104, 224 –25, 245, 247
France (Grande Nation), xix, 19, 44, 154, 
161, 197, 347 –49, 349 n. 11, 352, 354 –55, 
357, 360, 363 –67, 374, 404
Francis, David R., 353
Franklin-Bouillon, Henry, 360, 360 n. 49
Franz Joseph I (emperor of Austria), 71 n. 
156, 135
Frauenholz, Eugen, 172 n. 79, 198 n. 205
Frederiks, Vladimir, 318
Freiburg, xi, xix, 44 n. 36
Freistadt, 51, 228, 233 
Freydenberg, Henri, 357, 357 n. 39, 357 n. 
41
Friedrich, Jörg, 398 n. 46
Frieser, Karl-Heinz, 386 n. 2
Fritsche, Max, 167 n. 58, 181 n. 128
Fritz, Alexander, xxviii
Fritz, Peter, xxviii
Fromm, Oberst, 165 n. 51, 167 n. 58, 169 n. 
69, 172 n. 81, 175 n. 96, 178 n. 114
Frunze, Mikhail, 338 n. 70, 339 –42, 340 n. 
78 –79, 341 n. 81, 342 n. 87
Fukuyama, Francis, xxiii n. 17
Fuller, William C., xxiv, xxiv n. 20
Fürstenberg, Prince Emil Egon, 69 n. 146, 
73
Fürstenberg, Prince Karl Emil, 69 n. 146
Gács, 69, 
Galicia, ix, x, xxv, 37 –38, 38 n. 3, 43, 
47 –50, 49 n. 55, 52, 56 –57, 56 n. 81, 
76, 111, 118, 132 –41, 147, 149 –52, 154, 
157, 218 –19, 221, 223 –24, 230, 246 n. 
63, 253, 276, 293, 296, 301, 314, 316 –17, 
317 n. 63, 319 –20, 330, 369 n. 2, 372, 
388, 403; Eastern, 49, 52 –55, 58, 70, 
76, 132, 139 –40, 142, 145 –46, 197, 301, 
315, 334, 358, 360 –61, 371 –77, 379, 381, 
383 –85, 403, 405; Western, 315. See also 
Lodomerian-Galician Principality
Galician Socialist Soviet Republic, 77, 
Gasquet, Sébastien de, 349 n. 9
Gatagova, L.S., 345 n. 98, 
Gaul, Jerzy, xxv n. 23, 48 n. 51, 56 n. 81, 
58 n. 95, 71 n. 156
Gebsattel, Ludwig Freiherr von, 166 n. 54
Geiss, Immanuel, 43 n. 30, 45 n. 41
Gellner, Ernest, xxi n. 13
Georgia, 10 –11, 13, 15, 354, 370
Gerbel, Sergei, 266
Gerlach, Christian, 394 n. 36
German Democratic Republic, 40 n. 18
Germany (German Empire, German 
Reich, Hohenzollern Empire, 
Wilhelmine Empire), xi, xvi, xxiv –xxvi, 
1, 15, 39 –46, 44 n. 35, 48, 51, 53, 53 n. 
70, 57 –58, 60, 64 –67, 69 –72, 74, 88, 98, 
108, 135 –36, 140, 146, 148, 157, 174, 181, 
186, 195, 198, 202 –3, 205, 209, 212 –13, 
219, 227, 234, 236 –37, 240, 243 –44, 
249, 251 –53, 263, 266 –68, 270, 273 –78, 
286, 292, 308, 308 n. 34, 315 –16, 348, 
350 –52, 354 –55, 364, 367 –69, 371, 
393 –94, 396, 398, 401 –4; Nazi, 395, 403
Geyer, Dietrich, 365 n. 71
Geyer, Michael, 177 n. 105, 393 n. 33
Ghymes, 69
Gibraltar, 44 n. 35
Girault, René, 364 n. 68,
Givens, Joachim, 18 n. 67	
Gizel, Inokentii, 298
Gohre, von (German officer), 172 n. 79
Golczewski, Frank, xxvi, xxvi n. 29, 39 n. 
9 –10, 44 n. 35, 45 n. 40, 48 n. 52, 49 n. 54, 
50 n. 60, 51 n. 61, 51 n. 65, 54 n. 74, 55 n. 
78, 55 n. 80, 56 n. 84, 58 n. 96, 59 n. 99, 
61 n. 103, 72 n. 163, 75 n. 176, 212 n. 52
Golinkow, David, 15 n. 57
Goll, Nicole-Melanie, xxx, 49 n. 57, 197 n. 
198
Gollin, A., 19 n. 76
Goodlad, Graham D., 367 n. 74
Gorki, Maxim, 27 n. 113
Gorodetsky, E., 325 n. 19
Gosztony, Peter, 192 n. 186
Gottsmann, Andreas, xxv n. 23, 14 n. 50, 
48 n. 51, 71 n. 157, 348 n. 5
Grande Nation. See France
Graz, xi, xiv, xxviii –xxx, 49
Great Britain (Britain, British Empire, 
England), xix, 15, 19, 41 n. 19, 44 –46, 
64, 347, 349 n. 9, 350 –51, 353 –55, 361, 
363 –67, 368 n. 76, 380, 404
Great Russia. See Russia
Grebing, Helga, 50 n. 59 –60, 51 n. 61
Grelka, Frank, xxvi, xxvi n. 29, 45 n. 40, 
46 n. 46, 75 n. 176, 316 n. 59, 388 n. 9, 
392 n. 28, 398 n. 49
Griffiths, J. Norton, 350, 350 n. 13
Grigg, John, 352 n. 20
Grilj, Benjamin, xxix
Groener, Wilhelm, 65 –68, 66 n. 129, 68 n. 
139, 73, 73 n. 167, 75, 156, 156 n. 4, 158, 
161 n. 31 –32, 161 n. 36, 162, 178 n. 111, 
181 n. 132, 198 –99, 203 –4, 207 –8, 207 n. 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
430
22, 208 n. 22, 213, 215, 215 n. 62, 225 –27, 
230, 231 n. 147, 232, 238, 240 n. 24, 242, 
249, 250 n. 88, 390
Gross, Gerhard P., xxiv, xxiv n. 20, 53 n. 
68, 386 n. 1, 396 n. 42
Guchkov, Aleksandr, 6
Gudmundson, Bruce, 161 n. 34
Gumz, Jonathan E., xxvi, xxvi n. 26, 395 n. 
38
Gusev, V., 365 n. 73
Guthier, Steven L., 10 n. 34, 306 n. 25
Gutmann (Austrian captain), 274 n. 199, 
Habsburg, Wilhelm von. See Wilhelm of 
Habsburg 
Habsburg Empire (Monarchy). See Austro-
Hungarian Empire
Habsburgs (Habsburg, house of), 14, 132, 
147, 204, 284, 287, 293, 296, 301
Hackel, Andrea, xxix
Hagan, John, 36 n. 143
Hague, 165
Hai-Nyzhnyk, Pavlo, 108 n. 81, 113 n. 90, 
151 n. 68, 265 n. 160
Haller, Józef, 154
Halls, Harald, 18 n. 67
Hanzha, O., 129 n. 124
Harrison, Mark, 236 n. 4
Harteneck, Gustav, 398 n. 47
Hartmann, Christian, 390 n. 14, 393 n. 32, 
394 n. 35 –36
Harvasii (Odesa official), 297 n. 299
Hautmann, Hans, 187 n. 163
Havrylivtsi, 287
Healy, Maureen, 236 n. 4
Hecht, Rudolf, 221 n. 90
Heindl, Emil, 240, 250
Heinlein, Max Hussarek von, 147
Heinze, Karl, 41 –42, 41 n. 22
Heitmeyer, Wilhelm, 36 n. 143
Hemel (Austrian officer), 297 n. 288
Henno, Émile, 355 –56, 356 n. 35
Herbeck, Ulrich, 23 n. 93 –94
Herlihy, Patricia, 304 n. 20
Hermann, Josef, 233
Hertling, Georg von, 53 n. 70, 54 n. 77
Herwalt, Walter Ritter von, 69 n. 146 
Herwig, Holger H., 47 n. 49, 74 n. 171, 
158 n. 16, 203 n. 7
Hetmanate, xix, 65, 68 n. 139, 77, 100, 102, 
110, 114 n. 94, 178, 200, 283 –84, 290, 
298, 305, 366, 400, 402
Hildermeier, Manfred, xiii, 12 n. 40, 17 n. 
65, 27 n. 114, 34 n. 137
Himka, John-Paul, 42 n. 24, 212 n. 48, 
274 n. 200
Hindenburg, Paul von, 54, 54 n. 77, 61, 72, 
202, 203, 266, 316 n. 59
Hintze, Paul von, 65, 65 n. 124
Hirniak, Nykyfor, 144
Hirschfeld, Gerhard, xvi n. 7
Hitler, Adolf, 367, 385, 396, 398, 398 n. 49
Höbelt, Lothar, xxvi n. 27
Hobsbawm, Eric, xvi, xvi n. 5, xxi n. 13
Hoeres, Peter, 389 n. 11
Hoffman, Jerry Hans, 41 n. 20
Hoffmann, Georg, 49 n. 57
Hoffmann, Max, 46 n. 45, 53, 61, 96 n. 52, 
155, 158 n. 18, 162 n. 39, 207
Hogenhuis-Seliverstoff, Anne, 365 n. 73
Hohenlohe-Schillingfürst, Gottfried, 62
Hohenwarter, Michaela, xxix
Hohenzollern Empire. See Germany
Hohenzollerns (Hohenzollern dynasty), 
14
Holoby, 252
Hohotsky, Sylvestr, 309 n. 42
Holubko, V., 94 n. 46
Holubovych, Sydir, 143
Holubovych, Vsevolod, 214, 242, 281
Hölzl, Wolfgang, xxix
Homel, 156
Horak, V., 291 n. 260
Horn, John, 393 n. 33
Hornykiewycz (Hornykiewicz), Theophil, 
xxvi, xxvi n. 27, 57 n. 88, 317 n. 63, 362 n. 
61 
Horodenka district, 154
House, Edward M., 353
Hranilovic-Czvetassin, Oskar von, 206
Hrekov, Oleksandr, 116 n. 98, 356, 357	
Hrushevsky, Mykhailo, 217, 239 n. 19, 
306 n. 28, 313, 315, 319
Hrushky, 90 n. 35
Hrytsak (Hrycak), Yaroslav, 37 n. 1
Hryhoriiv, Nykyfor (Matvii), 24, 77, 112, 
114, 114 n. 93, 116 –17, 123, 125, 291, 331
Hrynko, Hryhorii, 127
Huber, Johann, 172 n. 79
Huliaipole, 189, 292, 331
Hull, Isabel V., 393 n. 33
Hunczak, Taras, 10 n. 33, 38 n. 3, 347 n. 2
Hungary (Hungarian Republic), 47 –48, 
221, 235 –36, 256, 317, 362. See also 
Austro-Hungarian Empire
Hürter, Johannes, 65 n. 124, 207 n. 22, 

index
431 
394 n. 36, 395 n. 39
Husiatyn district, 154
Huszt. See Khust
Huyn, Karl von, 149
Iași, 348 –49, 355, 356 n. 35
Iber, Walter M., xxviii
Ihnativka, 286
India, 44
Ioffe, G., 12 n. 41
Iraq, 162
Ireland, 41 n. 19, 367
Israel, 387 n. 3
Istanbul, 339, 360, 404
Italy, xv, xx –xxi, 44, 157, 195, 236, 347, 355
Ivano-Frankivsk. See Stanyslaviv
Ivanytsky, Sokrates, 48 n. 52
Ivzhenko (Ukrainian captain), 290
Izium, 342
Jagow, Gottlieb von, 41 –42
Janin, Pierre Maurice, 354
Japan, 1, 367
Jaser, Alexander, 44 n. 36
Jena, 40 n. 18
Jeřábek, Rudolf, xxv, xxv n. 21
Joffe, Adolf, 329, 341, 341 n. 83
Jordan, David, xvi n. 2 –3, xxiv, xxv n. 20
Jordan, Peter, 37 n. 1
Josipovic, Mirijana, xxix
Jukes, Geoffrey, xxiv n. 20
Kabanov, V., 28 n. 117, 
Kabuzan, V., 303 n. 16, 303 n. 19
Kachkivka, 289
Kaledin, Aleksei, 12, 92
Kama River, 343
Kamenev, Sergei, 340, 340 n. 79
Kamianets-Podilskyi, 117 –18, 120 –21
Kanizh, 188, 287
Kapkan, Yurii, 107
Kappeler, Andreas, 23 n. 93, 30 n. 126, 
303 n. 18, 356 n. 33
Karl Stephen (archduke of Austria), 71, 
71 n. 156
Karl I (emperor of Austria), 48, 55, 56 n. 
81, 61, 62 n. 115, 71, 71 n. 156, 135, 141, 
143, 145, 156, 195, 203 –4, 244, 251 n. 
96, 317
Karner, Stefan, xviii, xviii n. 8, xxviii, 36 n. 
144, 49 n. 54, 95 n. 50, 167 n. 59
Károlyi, Mihály, 152
Karpenko, O., 140 n. 26
Karpenko-Kary, Ivan, 295
Karpus, Zbigniew, 334 n. 55, 369 n. 1, 
375 n. 23, 376 n. 26, 379 n. 36, 380 n. 41, 
384 n. 59, 385 n. 61
Kasianov, Georgiy, xix, xx, xxii, xxiii n. 
14, xxviii, 76, 306 n. 28, 386
Katerynoslav, 89, 92 n. 41, 93, 95, 116, 125, 
166 n. 57, 188 –89, 205, 212, 295 n. 281, 
296, 331; gubernia, 86, 103, 112 –13, 186, 
194 n. 189, 205, 205 n. 12, 220, 241, 241 n. 
31, 267, 292; region, 296, 331
Katkov, George, 7 n. 21
Katkov, Mikhail, 305 n. 22
Katzer, Nikolaus, 9 n. 29, 10 n. 32, 12 n. 43, 
13 n. 45, 22 n. 90, 35 n. 139
Kaunas, 162
Kay, Alex J., 394 n. 36
Kazakhstan, 388 n. 8
Kazan, 4, 319
Keitel, Wilhelm, 398 n. 48
Keller, Rolf, 394 n. 36
Kellner, Otto, xxix
Kellogg, Michael, 396 n. 43
Kenez, Peter, 12 n. 42, 15 n. 56, 15 n. 58, 
16 n. 59, 26 n. 109
Kennan, George F., xiii, xvi, 19 n. 72, 19 n. 
73
Kerch Peninsula, 172
Kerchnawe, Hugo, xxvi n. 25
Kerensky, Aleksandr, 6 –9, 11, 16, 22 n. 89, 
81, 83, 83 n. 19, 347
Kessel, Martin, xxiii n. 18
Kharkiv (Kharkov), 89, 92 –93, 92 n. 
40 –41, 95, 109, 115, 123 n. 110, 124 –26, 
156, 160, 160 n. 26, 212, 220, 298, 304, 
325 –26, 329, 337, 342 –43, 350, 364, 366; 
gubernia, 86, 105, 240, 287, 301
Kherson, 114, 116 –17, 124, 160, 170 –71, 
203, 221, 226, 290, 294 –96, 306, 332, 
358; gubernia, 86, 112, 186, 205, 240, 
291; oblast, 205
Khmel, I., 128 n. 120
Khmelnytsky, Bohdan (Ukrainian 
hetman), 89, 298
Khmilnyk, 121
Kholm (Chełm), 51 –52, 51 n. 66, 55, 59, 72, 
140, 233; region, 51 –52, 54 –55, 57 –62, 
139, 372, 375, 405
Kholodnyi Yar Republic, 113 n. 91
Khortytsia, 295
Khrestyteleve, 286 
Khrystiuk, Pavlo, x –xi, 80, 82, 107 n. 77, 
281 n. 227

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
432
Khust (Huszt), 152
Kindler, Klaus, 51 n. 66
Kirchbach, Günther von, 208
Kirovohrad. See Yelysavethrad
Kitzinger, Karl, 393 –94
Klante, Margarete, 18
Kleinmünchen, 228
Klimecki, Michał, 334 n. 55, 371 n. 6, 373 n. 
12 –14, 374 n. 18 –19, 375 n. 22, 379 n. 37, 
379 n. 39, 381 n. 44, 381 n. 46, 382 n. 49
Klingenbrunner, Franz, 221 n. 97
Klöckl-Stadler, Elisabeth, xxix
Kmet (Galician rifleman), 295
Knoerzer, Karl Albrecht von, 175, 177, 
177 n. 110, 178 n. 111
Knoll, Harald, xxviii
Koch, Erich, 394
Kohut, Zenon E., 298 n. 1
Kolar, Hermann, 317
Kolchak, Aleksandr, 17 –18, 20, 22, 24 –25, 
33, 356
Konovalets, Yevhen, 107, 115
Korf, Pavel, 304
Koris (Soviet official), 337 n. 66
Kornfeind, Elisabeth, xxix
Kornilov, Lavr, 7, 15, 33 n. 131, 319
Korosten, 121
Kosa, Éva, xxx, 197 n. 198
Kosch, Robert, 158, 160 n. 25, 162 n. 37, 
165, 168, 168 n. 63, 171 –73, 171 n. 75, 
209 n. 33, 387,
Kosheleva, L., 345 n. 98
Kosior, Stanislav, 126
Kotenko, A., 301 n. 10
Kotkin, Stephen, 303 n. 15
Kotsiubinsky, Daniil, 310 n. 44
Kovel, 162
Kovno, 162
Kowalski, Ronald, 33 n. 132
Koziatyn, 105
Kramer, Alan, xv n. 1, 393 n. 33, 395 n. 40
Kramer, Mark, xxx
Krasivsky, O., 145 n. 51, 148 n. 56
Krasnov, Petr, 15 –16
Krauss, Alfred, 69, 75, 186, 194 –96, 196 n. 
196, 220, 221 n. 97, 222 –23, 223 n. 
103 –4, 226, 247, 251, 251 n. 96
Kremenchuk, 331
Kremianets, 118; district, 287
Kreneis, Emil, 70, 246, 246 n. 63, 278 n. 221
Krezub, Antin, 111 n. 86
Krispin, Martin, 33 n. 129
Król, Eugeniusz Cezary , xxv n. 23
Kronstadt, 6, 28 –29, 33
Krupskaia, N., 6 n. 16
Kryvoruchko, Mykola, 289
Kryvyi Rih, 92
Ksenofontov, Ivan, 337 n. 66, 338 n. 68
Kuban region, 303
Kuban River, 13, 92, 94 n. 45, 146 
Kuchabsky, Vasyl, x, 137, 137 n. 12, 141 n. 
29
Kudlai, O., 82 n. 17
Kühlmann, Richard von, 53, 65
Kulchytsky, V., 151 n. 67
Kurdistan, 354
Kursk, 115, 115 n. 96, 123, 123 n. 112; 
gubernia, 303
Kuwait, 162
Kviring, Emmanuil, 123 n. 109, 327
Kyiv (Kiev, Kiew), xx n. 10, xxviii, 8, 11, 
15, 23, 43, 46, 46 n. 45, 55 –56, 59, 63 n. 
118, 64 –68, 69 n. 146, 71, 73, 75, 81, 81 n. 
14, 82, 84, 86, 89, 90 n. 35, 91 –96, 92 n. 
41, 98 –99, 101, 105, 107, 109 –13, 115, 
117 –19, 121, 123, 125 –26, 138 –39, 144, 
153, 155 –56, 162, 166 n. 56, 169, 170 n. 
70, 174, 174 n. 89, 179, 181, 181 n. 132, 
183, 185, 199, 204 –5, 212 –13, 215, 217, 
220 –27, 221 n. 98, 230, 232 –33, 238, 
244 –45, 250, 252 –54, 256, 258 –59, 
270, 276, 278, 281, 284 –85, 290, 293, 
296, 298, 300 –301, 304, 306 –7, 307 n. 
29, 310 –11, 320 –22, 324 –26, 328 –29, 
332 –33, 335, 337, 343, 349, 350, 353 –55, 
357 –58, 366, 369 –71, 373, 376 –78, 
382 –83, 398 n. 47, 400, 403 –4; gubernia, 
83, 103, 112, 287, 299 n. 3, 300 –302, 
305 n. 22, 306, 318; military district, 86, 
86 n. 25, 91, 322
Kyveliuk, Ivan, 142 –43
Lammasch, Heinrich, 149
Landis, Eric C., 28 n. 118
Lansing, Robert, 358, 362, 362 n. 59
Larin, Yu., 23 n. 93
Latvia, 13, 25, 326, 328, 370
Laussegger, Armin, xxviii
Lavergne, Jean Guillaume, 351
Lazar, Sigrid, xxviii
Lazarski, Christopher, 24 n. 101, 26 n. 109
Lebedev (Soviet official), 340 n. 79
Leggett, George, 26 n. 111
Lehnstaedt, Stephan, xxv n. 23
Leidinger, Hannes, xvi n. 2, xvii, xix, xxv, 
xxv n. 22, xxviii, 1, 1 n. 1 –4.  3 n. 6, 8 n. 

index
433 
23, 13 n. 48, 17 n. 64, 20 n. 77, 25 n. 104, 
30 n. 125, 33 n. 130 –31, 35 n. 142, 36 n. 
144, 192 n. 186, 219 n. 83, 347, 347 n. 1, 
352 n. 19, 364 n. 67
Lein, Richard, xxv, xxv n. 21
Lemberg. See Lviv
Lemke, Heinz, 38 n. 4, 48 n. 51 –52, 51 n. 
61, 51 n. 65
Lenhart, Helmut, xxix
Lenin, Vladimir, 6 –8, 11 –12, 14 –16, 
25 –29, 31 –35, 33 n. 130, 91, 95 n. 48, 
127, 131, 192, 323 –25, 324 n. 14, 326 n. 
21, 328, 328 n. 31, 332 –34, 332 n. 45 –46, 
335 n. 58, 335 n. 62, 338 –39, 338 n. 
69 –70, 339 n. 74 –75, 341 –42, 341 n. 83, 
342 n. 87, 344 –46, 345 n. 100, 351 –52, 
354, 360, 364 –65, 370, 377, 380 –81
Lennoch, Milan, 222
Leonhard, Robert R., 387 n. 3
Leontovych, Volodymyr, 85, 85 n. 22
Leopold (prince of Bavaria), 63, 66, 66 n. 
130, 208
Lesiak, Philipp, xxviii, 49 n. 57
Levytsky, Kost, 51 –52, 119, 133 –35, 
137 –39, 138 n. 16, 138 n. 19, 140 n. 23, 
141 –42, 141 n. 30, 142 n. 32, 145 n. 50, 
147, 148 n. 58, 149 n. 61
Levytsky, Yevhen, 134 –35, 136 n. 8, 143, 
145, 239 n. 19 
Lezhohubsky, Teodosii, 143
Lida, 384
Lieb, Peter, xviii –xx, xxvi, xxvii n. 30, 
xxviii, 37, 95 n. 50, 155, 202, 212 n. 50, 
235, 386, 397 n. 44
Lilla, Joachim, 42 n. 23, 48 n. 51
Linsingen, Alexander von, 156 n. 4, 157, 
162, 203 –4, 207
List, Sabine, xxix
Lithuania, 13, 25, 43, 53, 53 n. 70, 326, 
328, 370. See also Polish-Lithuanian 
Commonwealth
Little Russia, 298. See also Ukraine
Liubovets, Olena, 77 n. 4, 79 n. 7
Liubynsky, Mykola, 61
Liulevicius, Vejas Gabriel,  xv n. 1, xxv, 
xxv n. 20, xxv n. 23, 43 n. 30, 74 n. 174, 
316 n. 59, 390 n. 13
Livonia, 11, 53, 55
Lloyd George, David, 19, 351, 353, 358, 
360 –61, 364, 366 –67
Lockhart, Robert Bruce, 351, 351 n. 15
Lodomerian-Galician Principality, 52. See 
also Galicia, Volhynia
Lohr, Eric, 315 n. 57
Lokot, T., 309 n. 42
London, xxviii, xxx, 13, 20 –21, 22 n. 87, 
32, 347 n. 3, 351, 353 –54, 357, 360 –61, 
362 n. 60, 363, 365 –67, 404, 406
Lorant, Ernst, 250, 250 n. 85  
Lototsky, Oleksandr, 312
Löwe, Heinz-Dietrich, 33 n. 129
Lower Austria, 49, 49 n. 56, 212. See also 
Austro-Hungarian Empire
Lower, Wendy, 397 n. 45
Lozynsky, Mykhailo, 137 n. 10, 144, 145 n. 
48, 146 n. 52, 147 n. 55, 148 n. 60, 149 n. 
63 
Lübbers, Gert C., 394 n. 36
Lublin, 58, 224 n. 110, 245, 376; military 
district, 218, 
Lubny district, 286
Luckett, Richard, 17 n. 65
Ludendorff, Erich, 53 –54, 64 –66, 65 n. 
124, 72 –74, 73 n. 167, 74 n. 171 –72, 157, 
160, 161 n. 36, 197 –98, 202 –3, 207 n. 22, 
208, 244, 274 n. 201
Ludwig III (king of Bavaria), 209 n. 30
Luka, 290
Lukacs (Austro-Hungarian official), 259
Lumer, Hyman, 23 n. 94
Lundgren-Nielsen, Kay, 374 n. 17
Lutsk, 118
Lutsky, Ostap, 144
Lviv (Lemberg, Lvov, Lwów), x, xxvii –
xxviii, 41, 120, 132, 137, 143 –53, 197, 
218 –19, 218 n. 79, 246, 260, 272, 276, 
304, 362, 371 –76, 383
Lvov, Georgii, 3, 3 n. 7, 6, 10, 347
Lykholat, A., 126 n. 118
Lyman, 342
Lyotard, Jean-François, xxiii, xxiii n. 15
Lysenko, A., 114 n. 93
Lytvyn, Mykola, 150 n. 65, 153 n. 72 –73
Lyzohub, Fedir, 287
Mack, Karlheinz, 47 n. 49
MacMillan, Margaret, 361 n. 53
Mączyński, Czesław, 150
Magdeburg, 370
Magocsi, Paul R., 38 n. 5, 38 n. 7, 136 n. 9, 
148 n. 57, 152 n. 69, 152 n. 71
Makarenko, Andrii, 108 n. 79, 120
Makhno, Nestor, 24, 24 n. 99, 26, 28, 34 n. 
135 –36, 77, 113, 114 n. 93, 116, 119, 
123, 125, 129, 129 n. 125, 163, 198, 290, 
331 –32, 332 n. 44, 338 –41, 338 n. 70, 
338 n. 72, 340 n. 78, 341 n. 81, 342 n. 

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
434
86 –87
Maladzechna, 384
Maleev, A., 23 n. 93
Manning, Clarence A., 347 n. 2, 361 n. 55
Manuela, Erez, 361 n. 56
Manuilsky, Dmytro, 108 n. 80, 344, 345 n. 
98
Máramaros, 37
Máramarossziget (Sighetu Marmaţiei), 
152
Margolin, A., 357 n. 38
Margolina, Sonja, 23 n. 94
Margulies, M., 359 n. 46
Mariupol, 190, 194, 205
Marks, Steven G., 303  n. 15
Markus, Vasyl, 360 n. 49
Marne River, 43 n. 28 
Martos, Borys, 82
Martyniuk, O., 301 n. 10
Matis, Herbert, 236 n. 4
Matsch, Erwin, 69 n. 146
Mauthner, Doris, xxix
Mawdsley, Evan, 20 n. 79, 21 n. 84, 22 n. 87
Mazepa, Isaak, 120 –21, 120 n. 107, 382
Mazepa, Ivan (Ukrainian hetman), 308 n. 
33 –34, 311 n. 47
McLoughlin, Barry,  30 n. 125, 364 n. 67
Mediterranean Sea, 44 n. 35
Mędrzecki, Włodzimierz, 242 n. 40, 270 n. 
181, 281 n. 225, 291 n. 261
Melitopil, 295
Melnyk, Andrii, 107 
Meyer (German official), 250
Michaelis, Herbert, 236 n. 8
Mick, Christoph, 153 n. 72
Miius Firth, xxvii, 173, 173 n. 84
Mikhalev, G., 29 n. 121
Mikhnovsky, Mykola, 306 n. 27
Mikl, Peter, xxx
Miliukov, Pavel, 5, 5 n. 14, 6, 309, 311 –13, 
313 n. 52
Miller, Alexei, xix, xxviii, 298, 298 n. 1, 
299 n. 5, 300 n. 6 –8, 301 n. 9 –10, 316 n. 
58, 320 n. 72
Millerand, Alexandre, 363
Milow, Caroline, 274 n. 200, 275 n. 202, 
379 n. 38
Mina, Zh., 111 n. 84
Mints, I., 325 n. 19
Mirback-Harff, Wilhelm von, 16
Mironov, B., 302 n. 11
Mogk, Walter, 45 n. 41
Molotov, Viacheslav, 341, 341 n. 81
Mommsen, Wolfgang J., xvi n. 7
Montenegro, 236
Moravia, 218 n. 79, 221
Moritz, Verena, xvi n. 2, xxv, xxv n. 22, 
xxviii, 1 n. 1 –2, 2 n. 3 –4, 3 n. 6, 8 n. 23, 
13 n. 48, 17 n. 64, 20 n. 77, 25 n. 104, 30 n. 
125, 33 n. 130 –31, 35 n. 142, 192 n. 186, 
219 n. 83, 352 n. 19, 364 n. 67
Morley, James William, 18 n. 69, 19 n. 74
Moscow, xx n. 10, xxii, 8, 13 –14, 16, 18, 20, 
24 –26, 29, 31, 33, 64, 74, 115, 123, 123 n. 
112, 126, 169 n. 67, 191, 243 n. 47, 270, 
298, 308 n. 32, 309, 333 –34, 339, 346, 
351, 353, 356, 363 –66, 377, 380, 388, 
392, 400, 405
Moulis, E., 359 n. 48
Mourin, Maxime, 365 n. 73
Muggenthaler, Hans, 170 n. 72
Mülheim, Müldner von, 44 n. 35
Müller-Meiningen, Ernst, 44 n. 35
Müller, Rolf-Dieter, xxx, 394 n. 36, 396 n. 
41
Munich, xi, xix
Muraviev, Mikhail, 95, 335 b. 62
Murmansk, xvii, 18
Muscovy (Muscovite Tsardom), 298, 327. 
See also Russia
Musial, Bogdan, xix –xx, xxix, 321, 334 n. 
56, 335 n. 60, 337 n. 65, 338 n. 71, 342 n. 
88, 343 n. 90, 344 n. 95, 369, 378 n. 34, 
379 n. 35, 382 n. 50, 383 n. 55
Mykhailiuk, O., 125 n. 115,  
Mykolaiv, 109, 116 –17, 124, 159, 170 –71, 
173, 205, 212, 233, 331 –32, 358; 
gubernia, 112
Mykolaiv (Ukrainian officer), 157 n. 9
Myloradivka, 189
Nachtigal, Reinhard, xxv, xxv n. 22, xxvii, 
xxvii n. 30, 173 n. 83, 174 n. 86, 175 n. 92, 
176 n. 102, 177 n. 107
Nagel, Jens, 394 n. 36
Nagl, Siegfried, xxx
Napoleon Bonaparte (emperor of France), 
195
Nastiuk, M., 151 n. 67
Natiiv, Oleksandr, 229, 295
Naumann, Friedrich, 44 –45, 45 n. 37
Naumenko, Kim, 150 n. 65, 153 n. 73
Nazaruk, Osyp, 144
Near East, xv
Neiberg, Michael, xvi n. 2 –3, xxiv, xxv n. 
20

index
435 
Nekrasov, Nikolai, 83
New Russia, 299, 302
Nicholas II (emperor of Russia), 1 –2, 34, 
305, 318, 347, 364
Niedermayer, Oskar Ritter von, 41 n. 19
Niessel, Henri Albert, 348, 351
Nikitin, Aleksei, 8
Nitsch, Juliane, xxviii
Nolte, Ernst, 36 n. 143
Norden, Albert, 176 n. 100
Nordic states, xxi
North America, 405
North Caucasus, 354, 388 n. 8
North Rhine Westphalia, 212
Noulens, Joseph, 348, 351
Novorossiisk, 205
Novoselova, A., 303 n. 18
Nowak, Andrzej, 370 n. 3, 375 n. 21, 377 n. 
29, 378 n. 31 –32, 380 n. 42, 381 n. 45
Nowak, Karl Friedrich, 46 n. 45, 155 n. 1
Nuremberg, 398 n. 46, 398 n. 47
Nykopil, 294
Obost, 156 n. 4
Occleshaw, Michael, 21 n. 85, 350 n. 13
Odesa (Odessa), 44, 63 n. 115, 69 –70, 89, 
109, 117, 124, 157 –58, 160, 162 n. 37, 
187, 192, 195 –96, 203, 205, 211 n. 44, 
212, 217, 220, 222 –24, 222 n. 100, 223 n. 
104, 226, 233, 245, 252, 252 n. 101, 254, 
264 n. 151, 266, 284, 293, 297, 297 n. 288, 
304, 306, 332 –33, 335 n. 62, 343, 350, 
354 –56, 358 –59, 389, 391, 404; Soviet 
Republic of, 77, 355
Offner, Anver, 236 n. 7
Ohonovsky, Liubomyr, 144
Ohonovsky, Volodymyr, 143
Okhrimove, 182
Okhrymovych, Volodymyr, 142, 143, 144
Okunevsky, Ya., 294 n. 275, 294 n. 277
Oleksandrivsk. See Zaporizhia
Olentchouk, Elizaveta, 49 n. 56 –57, 50 n. 
60, 51 n. 61
Olesnytsky, Yevhen, 133
Oltmer, Jochen, xxv, xxv n. 22
Omelianovych-Pavlenko, Mykhailo, 
120 –21, 286 n. 244
Omsk, 12, 17, 24
Onciul, Aurel, 152
Onyshchenko, O., 85 n. 21
Ordzhonikidze, Sergo, 325, 326 n. 21
Orekhov, A., 327 n. 28
Orel, 4, 333, 377; gubernia, 303 
Orlando, Vittorio, 358
Orlov, I., 343 n. 93
Ortner, Mario Christian, xxix –xxx
Osadchuk, Serhii, xxix
Oskilko, Volodymyr, 118
Ostashko, Tetiana, 293 n. 270, 295 n. 280, 
296 n. 282
Ostrava, 218 n. 79
Otto, Reinhard, 394 n. 36
Ottoman Empire. See Turkey
Pacific Ocean, 19
Pacific region, 352
Palestine, 354
Paliiv, Dmytro, 143
Palij, Michael, ix
Paneiko, Vasyl, 142 –44, 144 n. 42, 144 n. 
44
Paris, ix –x, xv, 13, 19 –21, 32, 120, 154, 
278, 347 n. 3, 349, 351, 356, 358, 360 –63, 
365 –66, 368, 374, 379, 385, 395, 404, 406
Pater, I., 137 n. 13
Paul, Gerhard, xxiii n. 16
Paustovsky, Konstantin, 3 n. 8, 7, 7 n. 20
Pavlenko, Viktor, 91
Pelenski, Jaroslaw, 100 n. 60, 147 n. 53, 
216 n. 69 –70, 231 n. 144
Penter, Tanja, 217 n. 73
Penza, 4
Perekop, 167 –68, 168 n. 63, 171 –72
Peremyshl (Przemyśl ), 372 
Perfall, Gustav von, 398 n. 47
Perfetsky, Roman, 148
Persia, 44
Petliura, Symon, ix, 23, 82, 86, 89, 91, 101, 
101 n. 62, 107, 108 n. 79, 109, 111 –12, 
114, 116 –20, 117 n. 101, 153, 283, 322, 
328, 330 –31, 333 –35, 337, 339, 356 –58, 
356 n. 35, 360, 363, 366 –68, 375 –79, 
382, 384 –85
Petrenko, I., 90 n. 33
Petrograd. See St. Petersburg
Petrovsky, Hryhorii, 126
Petrushevych, Yevhen, 119, 133 –34, 136, 
140, 143, 145 –46, 148, 154
Petzold, Joachim, 199 n. 212
Piatakov, Georgii, 33 n. 130, 123
Piatyhory, 290
Pichon, Stephen, 349 n. 11, 356 n. 34, 360
Piddubny, I., 152 n. 70
Pidhainy, Oleh, 321 n. 1, 322 n. 5 –6, 322 n. 
8, 325 n. 16, 325 n. 18
Pikhno, Dmitrii, 307

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
436
Pillmayer, Klaus, xxix
Piłsudski, Józef, ix, 337, 363, 369 –71, 
369 n. 2, 374 –78, 380 –83, 381 n. 45
Pinak, Eugene, 229 n. 134, 230 n. 139
Pinsk, 384
Plaschka, Richard Georg, 47 n. 49
Plekhanov, Georgii, 33 n. 130
Podilia, 102, 118, 157 –58, 188, 221, 282, 
286, 295, 311 n. 36, 381; gubernia, 83, 
121, 157 n. 9, 205, 241, 287, 289, 311
Podlachia (Pidliashia), 140
Podraza, Antoni, 38 n. 3
Podvoisky, Nikolai, 332
Pohl, Dieter, 390 n. 14
Pöhlmann, Markus, 155 n. 3
Poland, ix, xvii, xix –xx, xxv, xxv n. 23, 
10, 23, 41 –43, 48, 53 n. 70, 57, 58, 65, 
72, 75, 119 –22, 128 –29, 132, 141, 146, 
148 –49, 153 –54, 161, 230, 236, 252, 
299, 308, 314, 315 n. 55, 316, 320, 323, 
326 –27, 330, 333 –34, 339, 355, 358, 
360 –62, 366 –85, 377 n. 29, 381 n. 45, 
405; Kingdom of, 42, 52, 71 n. 156, 76, 
135, 148; southern, 369 n. 2. See also 
Congress Poland, Polish-Lithuanian 
Commonwealth
Poliakov, Yu. A., 35 n. 140
Polish-Lithuanian Commonwealth, 298. 
See also Lithuania, Poland 
Polk, Frank, 349, 362
Polovtsov, Aleksandr, 301 –2
Poltava, 89, 93 –95, 115, 156, 208 n. 27, 216, 
304, 337, 343; gubernia, 83, 103, 129, 
241, 285, 287, 306
Pons, Silvio, 9 n. 30
Poole, DeWitt U., 270
Popovych, Omelian, 147, 151 –52
Popyk, Serhii, 317 n. 63
Porsh, Mykola, 88, 107
Poschinger, von (German officer), 186 n. 
158
Potocki, Robert, 330 n. 38, 371 n. 6, 376 n. 
24 –25, 377 n. 27, 380 n. 40, 381 n. 46, 
382 n. 47 –48, 383 n. 52, 384 n. 60, 385 n. 
61
Potsdam, xxx
Pozharnytsky (Ukrainian militiaman), 
290
Prague, xxvii, 247
Preuschl, Mathias, 187 n. 163
Prince Island, 360
Procyk, Anna, ix
Prokopovych, Teofan (Prokopovich, 
Feofan), 298
Proskuriv, 117 –18, 120 –21
Prussia, 42. See also East Prussia
Przemyśl. See Peremyshl
Pucher, Richard Oskar Friedrich, xxvi n. 
27
Pyrih, R., 100 n. 59
Pysarivka, 188, 289
Raabl-Werner, Nachlass, 18 n. 67
Rabinowitch, Alexander, 6 n. 18, 7 n. 21
Rachamimov, Alon, xxv, xxv n. 22
Radek, Karl, 327, 327 n. 26
Radkey, Oliver H., 12 n. 38
Radyvyliv, 118
Rakenius, Gerhard W., 207 n. 22
Rakovsky, Khristian, 108 n. 80, 329, 335 n. 
59, 335 n. 62, 340, 341, 341 n. 81 –83
Rapallo, 365 –66
Rapoport, Louis, 23 n. 94
Rasevych, Vasyl, xix, xxviii, 71 n. 157, 132, 
137 n. 15, 235 n. 1, 280
Rastatt, 318
Rathenau-Gesellschaft, 44 n. 36
Rathenau, Walther, 44 –45
Raths, Ralf, 161 n. 34
Rauch, Georg von, 8 n. 27, 15 n. 54 –55, 
20 n. 80, 25 n. 104
Rauchensteiner, Manfried, 47 n. 48 –49, 
57 n. 90, 58 n. 95, 236 n. 4 –5
Reimann, Aribert, xvi n. 7
Reiter, Christian, xxv n. 21
Remer, Claus, 40, 40 n. 18, 42 n. 26, 44 n. 
33 –34, 46 n. 47
Rennenkampf, Pavel von, 175
Repryntsev, Volodymyr, 287 n. 246
Reshetar, John, 10 n. 33
Retish, Aaron, 12 n. 29, 34 n. 133
Revehuk, V., 129 n. 123
Rezmer, Waldemar, 334 n. 55, 369 n. 1, 
385 n. 62
Riemer, Gustav, 222
Riepl (German soldier), 172 n. 79
Riga, ix, 25, 122, 338, 384
Rigelman, Nikolai, 309 n. 42
Rill, Robert, xxix
Ritter, Gerhard, 43 n. 28
Rivne, 117 –18, 196
Rodt, Eberhard, 398 n. 47
Rodzianko, Mikhail, 33 n. 130 –31
Rogovaia, L., 345 n. 98
Rohrbach, Paul, 45 –46, 45 n. 41, 46 n. 43, 
46 n. 45

index
437 
Romanchuk, Yuliian, 143, 145
Romania, xxi, 53, 56, 58, 75, 156 –57, 170, 
195, 204, 206, 219 n. 82, 223, 235, 237, 
246 n. 63, 247, 252 –53, 322, 340, 348, 
350, 350 n. 13, 355, 363 n. 66, 388, 404
Romano, Andrea, 9 n. 30
Romanov Empire. See Russia
Romanovs (Romanov dynasty), 3, 347, 364
Rome, xx, 69 n. 146
Römer, Felix, 393 n. 31, 394 n. 35
Romstedt, Max, 169 n. 67
Root, G. Irving, xxv n. 20
Rosenberg, Alfred, 398 n. 49
Rosenfeld, Günter, 60 n. 100, 68 n. 138, 
208 n. 24, 254 n. 112
Ross, Colin, 97, 162 n. 39
Rossi, Pietro, xxiii n. 18
Rossino, Alexander B., 163 n. 40
Rostov on the Don, 15, 95, 156, 160, 160 n. 
26, 162, 164, 173, 205, 354
Roth, Joseph, 314
Rothwell, V. H., 348 n. 5
Rozhankovsky, Teodor, 144
Rubin, Barnett R., 315 n. 56
Ruda, 287
Rudnytsky, Ivan Lysiak, x, 304 n. 20
Rudnytsky, Stepan, 144
Ruggenthaler, Peter, xxviii
Ruhr region, 274 n. 200
Rumpler, Helmut, 348 n. 5
Russia (Great Russia, Romanov Empire, 
Russian Empire, Tsarist Empire), ix –xi, 
xvi –xvii, xix, xxiv, 1, 3 n. 7, 6 –9, 11, 13, 
15, 18 –19, 24, 30 –32, 34 –35, 37 –48, 
50, 53, 55, 60 –61, 63 –65, 65 n. 124, 70, 
72, 74 –75, 77, 79, 79 n. 9, 81, 85, 92, 108, 
127, 135, 137, 146, 160, 192, 197, 202, 
216, 219, 223, 230, 232, 234 –35, 237 –38, 
241, 245, 251, 263 –64, 274, 284, 298 –99, 
299 n. 3 –4, 301 –2, 304 –5, 306 n. 27, 
307 n. 29, 308 n. 34, 309, 310 n. 44, 310 n. 
45, 311 n. 47, 312 –24, 315 n. 55, 316 n. 
59, 327, 342, 347 –55, 348 n. 4, 349 n. 11, 
362, 364 –67, 369 –70, 369 n. 2, 375, 392, 
402 –6; Northern, 18, 20 –21; Southern, 
333, 354 –56, 357 n. 39; Southwestern, 
49
Russian Soviet Federative Socialist 
Republic (Bolshevik Russia, Russian 
Federation, Russian Socialist Soviet 
Republic, Soviet Federation, Soviet 
Russia), ix, xix, 14, 16, 20, 22 n. 88, 23, 
25, 30, 53, 63, 77, 86, 93, 104, 104 n. 70, 
115 –16, 115 n. 96, 121 –26, 130, 156, 160, 
219, 223, 231, 236, 272, 297, 321, 323 –27, 
323 n. 10, 329 –30, 334 –35, 334 n. 57, 
337, 340, 344 –45, 351 –53, 353 n. 22 –23, 
355, 357, 359, 361 –66, 369, 371, 376, 380, 
381 n. 45, 382, 384, 396 n. 43, 403 –5. See 
also Muscovy, Soviet Union
Rutman, Jan, 337, 337 n. 67, 342, 342 n. 85
Rutowski, Ernst, 49 n. 54
Saarland, 274 n. 200
Sadovsky, Valentyn, 82
Saievych, Mykola, 295
Saievych, Omelian, 144
Saint-Aulaire, Auguste de, 348 –49, 348 n. 
6
Saint-Aulaire, Gustave de, 355
Salmuth, Hans von, 398, 398 n. 46
Salzwedel, 318
Samara, 12, 17
Sambuk, S., 302 n. 13
Samhaber, Franz, 182, 184, 390, 390 n. 18
Sampler, Katharina, 49 n. 57
San River, 52, 143, 309
Sandgruber, Roman, 236 n. 4
Saratov, 4
Sarny, 118
Saunders, David, 298 n. 2
Savchenko, Viktor, 103, 103 n. 68, 113 n. 
92, 322 n. 8, 324 n. 13, 325 n. 16 –17, 
326 n. 22 –23, 330 n. 40, 331 n. 42, 333 n. 
49, 333 n. 53, 340 n. 78 –79, 375 n. 23, 
376 n. 24
Savenko, Anatolii, 307, 308 n. 34, 309 n. 
42, 310 n. 43, 312 –13
Savinkov, Boris, 381, 381 n. 45
Saxony, 69 n. 146
Scheer, Tamara, xxvi n. 25
Schiemann, Theodor, 45
Schmid, Alex P., 20 n. 78, 20 n. 81
Schmitz, Martin, xxx
Schöpfer, Gerald, xxix
Schossig, Bernhard, xxiii n. 16
Schraepler, Ernst, 236 n. 8
Schrammel, Andrea, xxx
Schröder, Ernst, 253 n. 107
Schulze, Max-Stephan, 236 n. 4
Schwabe, Klaus, 361 n. 56
Schwarzenstein, Philipp Alfons von, 73, 
98, 181, 181 n. 132, 212 –14
Seidt, Hans-Ulrich, 41 n. 19
Sendler, Karl von, 247
Seniavsky, A., 344 n. 93

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
438
Serbia, xxvi, 157, 224 n. 110, 236, 395; 
general governorate, 395 n. 38
Seton-Watson, Hugh, xxi n. 13
Sevastopol, 172 –73, 226
Shapoval, Mykyta, 107, 107 n. 78
Shchegolev, Sergei, 311 –12, 312 n. 49
Shechtman, I., 23 n. 93
Shemet, Serhii, 285
Sheptytsky, Andrei (Roman Maria 
Aleksander), 143, 145, 147, 362, 362 n. 61
Shevchenko, Levko, 291
Shevchenko, Taras, 96, 305, 306 n. 28, 309, 
309 n. 41, 312
Shirle, I., 302 n. 10
Shoulguin, Alexander, 360 n. 51
Showalter, Dennis E., 390 n. 13, 391 n. 25
Shreiber, S., 92 n. 39
Shukhevych, Stepan, 297, 297 n. 286
Shvets, Fedir, 108 n. 79, 120
Siberia, 12, 16 –17, 19 –21, 24, 29, 302, 
353 –54, 369 n. 2, 388 n. 8; Eastern, 303; 
Western, 28, 130, 303
Sichinsky, E., 12 n. 41
Sighetu Marmaţiei. See Máramarossziget 
Silesia, 274 n. 200
Simbirsk, 315, 319,
Siversk region, 92 n. 40
Sixl, Peter, xxviii
Sixtus (prince of Bourbon-Parma), 75, 223
Skoropadsky, Pavlo (Ukrainian hetman), 
15 –16, 67 –69, 68 n. 138 –39, 71 –73, 90, 
98 –102, 101 n. 62, 104 –9, 111 –12, 123, 
139, 146 –47, 147 n. 53, 179, 192, 208 n. 
24, 214 –16, 214 n. 59, 214 n. 61, 215 n. 62, 
223, 225, 225 n. 113, 229, 234, 254, 254 n. 
112, 261 –62, 261 n. 134, 280 n. 223 –24, 
282 –85, 282 n. 232, 284 n. 234, 285 n. 
240, 291 n. 263, 292 –93, 296 –97, 297 n. 
285, 297 n. 289, 328, 356, 356 n. 34 –35, 
400, 404
Skrypnyk, Mykola, 327
Skubec, Richard, 246 n. 63
Slobidka, 158, 158 n. 21
Sloboda Ukraine, 298
Smal-Stotsky, Stepan, 143
Smele, Jonathan D., 35 n. 140
Smila, 181, 183
Smilianenko, P., 292 n. 266
Smith, S., 3 n. 8
Smolensk, 378, 381 n. 45
Snyder, Jack, 315 n. 56
Snyder, Timothy, xvi, xxvii, xxvii n. 31, 
49 n. 54, 71 n. 156 –57, 294 n. 276, 371 n. 8
Sofia, 69 n. 146, 404
Sokalsky, V., 88 n. 30
Sokolov, K., 24 n. 97
Sokolova, M., 321 n. 1 –3, 327 n. 25, 329 n. 
34, 333 n. 49, 333 n. 53, 338 n. 72, 339 n. 
73, 343 n. 92, 344 n. 93, 344 n. 95
Soldatenko, Valerii, 90 n. 35, 100 n. 61, 
103 n. 67, 112 n. 88, 116 n. 97, 116 n. 100, 
141 n. 28, 148 n. 59, 235 n. 3, 261 n. 135, 
262 n. 139, 280 n. 224, 285 n. 240, 291 n. 
262
Sorokin, Pitirim, 11 n. 37
South America, 235
South Wales, 304
Southern Bug River. See Boh River
Southwestern Province (of the Russian 
Empire), 299, 302, 305, 310 –11
Soutou, Georges-Henri, 349 n. 9, 360 n. 49
Soviet Republic of Donetsk and Kryvyi 
Rih, 77
Soviet Russia. See Russian Soviet 
Federative Socialist Republic
Soviet Ukraine. See Ukrainian Soviet 
Socialist Republic
Soviet Union. See Union of Soviet Socialist 
Republics
Spa, 72
Spain, 69 n. 146
Spannocchi, Lelio von, 194, 197, 197 n. 
201, 221 –22, 247
Spilker, Rolf, 393 n. 33
St. Petersburg (Petrograd), xx n. 10, 2, 6 –7, 
9 –11, 13 –14, 25, 28, 33, 55, 69 n. 146, 77, 
81 –82, 83 n. 18, 84, 86, 88 –89, 91, 92 n. 
39, 93 n. 42, 219, 289, 299 –300, 310, 312, 
315, 318, 322, 353, 364 –65, 400, 405
Stadler, Ewald, xxix
Stakhiv, Matvii, 141 n. 27, 153 n. 75
Stalin, Joseph, 11, 34, 88, 123 n. 112, 323, 
323 n. 10, 324 n. 12, 325, 327 –28, 327 n. 
27, 328 n. 31, 332 n. 44, 335 n. 59, 337, 
337 n. 64, 339, 339 n. 74, 344 –46, 345 n. 
98, 345 n. 100, 367, 374, 385
Stanyslaviv (Ivano-Frankivsk), 117, 153, 
373
Starokostiantyniv, 120
Stasiuk, Mykola, 82
Stavropol region, 303
Stavyshcha, 290
Stebnytsky, Petro, 305 n. 24, 308 n. 36, 
309 n. 39, 312 n. 49 –50
Stech, Marko Robert, xi, xiv
Stefanovych, Oleksander, 143

index
439 
Stelzl-Marx, Barbara, xxviii
Stepura (Ukrainian official), 157 n. 9
Stern, Silke, xxviii
Steshenko, Ivan, 82
Stevenson, David, xx n. 11, 348 n. 5
Stiegler, Cornelia, xxix
Stolypin, Petr, 4, 303, 307
Stolzenberg, von (German officer), 244
Stone, Norman, xxiv, xxv n. 20
Strachan, Hew, 387 n. 6
Straussenburg, Arthur von, 61 –62, 62 n. 
115, 68, 72, 202 –3, 247, 277, 391
Strazhas, Abba, xxv, xxvi n. 24, 43 n. 30
Strohn, Matthias, 161 n. 32
Struve, Petr, 311, 311 n. 47 –48, 314
Stryzhavka, 290
Stuttgart, xi, xix
Styr River, 376
Styria, 212
Subtelny, Orest, 200 n. 217
Suchanow, Nikolaj, 6 n. 16
Sudetenland, 398
Suleja, Włodzimierz, 369 n. 1 –2, 371 n. 6, 
375 n. 22, 385 n. 62
Summer (American consul), 169 n. 67
Suny, Ronald Grigor, 10 n. 34
Svatkovsky, Vsevolod, 101, 316 –17, 319
Swain, Geoffrey, 9 n. 28, 12 n. 39, 25 n. 105, 
26 n. 107, 26 n. 110, 28 n. 118, 28 n. 120
Sweden, 308 n. 34
Switzerland, xx n. 12, 144, 235 n. 2, 318, 
318 n. 68, 360
Sydorchuk, Taisiia, 38 n. 5, 38 n. 7
Symyrenko, Vasyl, 306
Szemeszova, 69
Szohorad, 69
Tabouis, Georges, 349, 355
Taganrog, 95, 122, 160, 167, 173, 173 n. 83, 
173 n. 84, 174 n. 89, 175 –77, 205, 392
Tambov, 4, 28; gubernia, 130, 303
Tannstein, Joseph von, 168
Tarashcha, 290; district, 103, 290
Tarnów, 122, 384
Tavria, 198, 205, 241 n. 31; gubernia, 86, 
240 –41; Socialist Soviet Republic of, 77
Teibenbacher, Peter, xxix
Tepperberg, Christoph, xxix
Terek River, 13 
Tereshchenko, Yurii, 293 n. 270, 295 n. 
280, 296 n. 282
Tereshchenko, Mykhailo, 83
Ternopil, 118, 152 –53
Terpylo, Danylo, 77, 112
Thalerhof, 49, 317
Ther, Philipp, xxii, xxiii n. 14
Theresienstadt, 317
Thessaloniki, 354, 404
Thoss, Bruno, xxv n. 23, 386 n. 1
Thunig-Nittner, Gerbung, 17 n. 63
Thyssen, August, 44
Timmermann, Heiner, 38 n. 3
Tiraspol, 114
Tisza, István, 47
Tiutiunnyk, Yurii, 113, 118, 291
Tobilevych, Sofiia, 295
Tokyo, 19, 352
Tomashivsky, Stepan, 144
Toppe, Andreas, 179 n. 118
Torke, Hans-Joachim, 29 n. 124, 42 n. 24, 
212 n. 48, 274 n. 200
Transcarpathia, 145, 152
Transleithania, 37, 47, 133
Transylvania, 246 n. 63, 
Trauttmansdorff (Hungarian official), 391
Traverso, Enzo, 36 n. 143
Trifonov, I., 29 n. 121
Trotsky, Lev (Leon), 7, 7 n. 22, 14, 14 n. 51, 
16 –17, 18 n. 69, 25, 28, 35, 35 n. 141, 60, 
91, 119, 232, 330, 332, 332 n. 44, 335 n. 
59, 337, 337 n. 64, 339, 339 n. 74 –75, 341, 
341 n. 82 –83, 343, 343 n. 91
Trousson, Eugène Gervais, 359
Trypilia, 382
Tsarist Empire. See Russia
Tschajanow, Alexander W., 27 n. 113
Tscherikover, I., 23 n. 93
Tschirschky, Heinrich von, 41 –42 
Tsehelsky, Lonhyn, 133, 135, 138, 139 n. 
20, 142 –43, 142 n. 34 
Tsereteli, Irakli, 83
Tsetlinsky (Russian official), 319
Tsvyklivtsi, 287 
Tula, 4, 26
Turkestan, 391; Soviet Republic of, 29
Turkey (Ottoman Empire), xxi, 15, 31, 50, 
59, 10, 209, 263, 264, 273, 299 n. 4, 347, 
389, 403, 406
Turkmenistan, 370,
Tver region, 303
Tynchenko, Yaroslav, 91 n. 37, 326 n. 22
Tyshchyk, B., 151 n. 67
Tyshkevych, Mykhailo, 318
Udovychenko, Oleksandr, 144
Ufa, 17

the emergence of ukraine
self-determination, occupation, and war in ukraine, 1917–1922
440
Ugosca, 37
Ukrainian People’s Republic (UNR), 
x, 57, 76 –77, 86 –89, 91 –93, 93 n. 42, 
94 n. 45, 95 –96, 98 –99, 101, 109 –14, 
116 –22, 116 n. 98, 117 n. 101 –2, 128, 130, 
139 –40, 146, 153, 167, 249 n. 77, 322 –25, 
328 –29, 334 –35, 370 –71, 374 –77, 
379 –84
Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic 
(Soviet Ukraine), 76, 92, 95, 121, 
123 –25, 123 n. 110, 126, 129 n. 122, 320, 
325, 330, 335, 338, 342, 346, 364, 384
Ukrainian State (of Hetman Pavlo 
Skoropadsky), 76, 99, 101, 104 –5, 107 –8, 
123, 139 –40, 146 –47, 286
Ullman, Harlan K., 387 n. 3
Ullman, Richard H., 380 n. 43
Ulrich, Bernd, 393 n. 33
Uman, 121, 181, 183, 331
Ung, 37
Unger, Gérard, 354 n. 29
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
(Soviet Union, USSR), xviii, xxiii, xxix, 
4, 30, 34, 36, 131 n. 127, 161, 332 n. 86, 
344, 346, 364 –65, 367 –69, 375, 402 –3, 
405. See also Russian Soviet Federative 
Socialist Republic
United States of America, xix, xxx, 44 –45, 
60, 194, 319, 347, 349, 349 n. 9, 352 –53, 
353 n. 23, 357 –58, 361 –62, 362 n. 59, 
367 –68, 368 n. 76, 387 n. 3, 398 n. 46, 
404 –5
Unterberger, Betty Miller, 19 n. 74
Upton, Anthony F., 10 n. 33 
Ural Mountains, 12, 17, 21, 24, 303
Urbanitsch, Peter, 37 n. 1, 48 n. 51, 218 n. 
75
Vācietis, Jukums, 328
Valuev, Petr, 300
Vasylko, Mykola, 134 –36
Vatican, 316 
Vatran, Ivan, 144
Velsen, Stefan (Stephan) von, 63 n. 118, 
161 n. 31, 198 n. 207, 207 n. 20, 208 n. 25, 
254 n. 110, 275 n. 205
Velykyi Luh, 295
Verbliudka, 291
Verkhniodniprovsk district, 292
Versailles, 366 –67
Verstiuk, Vladyslav, 79 n. 8,  80 n. 10, 85 n. 
24, 287 n. 246
Vienna, xi, xix, xxix –xxx, 16, 37 –38, 41, 
47 –50, 55, 57, 59 –62, 66 –68, 69 n. 147, 
132, 134 –36, 138, 143, 145 –49, 151, 158, 
196 –97, 202, 224, 227, 245, 247, 250 n. 
84, 256, 259 –60, 272, 277, 293, 300, 
314 –17, 317 n. 63, 350, 399 –401, 403, 
405 –6
Vilnius, 369 n. 2; gubernia, 302
Vinnytsia, 109, 117, 121, 195 –96
Vistula River, 23, 
Vitovsky, Dmytro, 144, 149, 295
Vladivostok, 16 –18, 20, 169 n. 67
Voinarovsky, Tyt, 143
Voinovych, A., 127 n. 119
Voitsekhovsky (Ukrainian militiaman), 
290
Volga River, 305 n. 22
Volga region, 12, 21, 130, 303, 343
Volhynia, 51 –52, 117 –18, 205, 209, 218, 
219 n. 82, 228, 246 n. 63, 282, 306, 314 n. 
53, 330, 334, 375 –77, 375 n. 23, 379, 
381 –84; gubernia, 83, 240 n. 28, 287, 
311 n. 46. See also Lodomerian-Galician 
Principality
Völkl, Ekkehard, 389 n. 10
Volkmann, Hans-Erich, xxv n. 23, 386 n. 1, 
389 n. 12
Volodarka, 382
Volodymyr the Great (Rus' prince), 96
Volodymyr-Volynskyi, 220, 228
Volodymyrivka, 190, 292
Volokh, Omelian, 117, 120
Volos, M., 327 n. 28
Voloshyn (Ukrainian militiaman), 287
Von Hagen, Mark, xi, xxiv n. 20, xxvii, 
xxvii n. 31, 9 n. 30, 41 n. 20, 42 n. 26, 51 n. 
61, 169 n. 67, 178 n. 112, 232 n. 149, 315 n. 
56, 315 n. 58, 392 n. 26
Voronezh, 4, 333; gubernia, 130, 303
Voroshilov, Kliment, 329 n. 33
Voves, Franz, xxx
Voznesensk, 114
Vulpius, Ricarda, 307 n. 30,
Vynnychenko, Volodymyr, 82, 90, 90 n. 34, 
101, 101 n. 63, 107 –8, 108 n. 79 –80, 112, 
112 n. 88, 115 –16, 116 n. 98, 117 n. 101, 
280 n. 223, 282, 328, 356 –57, 356 n. 35
Vyshyvany, Vasyl. See Wilhelm of 
Habsburg  
Wade, James P., 387 n. 3
Wade, Rex, 3 n. 8, 6 n. 15
Waldbott, Klemens, 181, 181 n. 132, 187 n. 
163, 192, 198, 222, 223 n. 104, 226

index
441 
Waldenfels, Otto von, 392 n. 29 
Waldenfels, Rudolf von, 398 n. 47
Waldmann, Peter, 36 n. 143
Waldstätten, Alfred von, 217
Wandruszka, Adam, 37 n. 1, 48 n. 51, 
218 n. 75
Warsaw, ix, xxv n. 23, xxvii, 58, 60, 
119 –21, 138, 197, 338, 358, 360, 363, 366, 
371, 378, 383, 406
Warvariv, Constantine, 347 n. 2, 361 n. 55, 
361 n. 57
Washington, DC, xxx, 19, 347, 349, 357, 
361, 367
Watzdorf, Gustav Bernhard von, 181 –83, 
209 n. 29, 213
Webenau, Viktor von, 218
Wegs, Robert J., 236 n. 4
Wehrhahn, Torsten, 39 n. 9, 51 n. 65, 371 n. 
8, 372 n. 9, 373 n. 13, 373 n. 15, 374 n. 18, 
379 n. 38
Weimar Republic, 207 n. 22
Weinzierl, Erika, 187 n. 163
Weiskirchner, Richard, 59, 273
Wendland, Anna Veronika, 38 n. 5, 38 n. 7
Wendt, Bernd Jürgen, 45 n. 41
Wenninger, Andreas, xxix
Wenninger, Bernhard, xxix
Wenzel, Otto, 388 n. 7
Werth, Nicolas, 344 n. 93
Western Province of the Ukrainian 
People's Republic, 121, 153
Western Ukrainian People's Republic 
(ZUNR), ix –x, 76, 114, 118 –20, 132, 148, 
151 –54, 197, 372 –73, 376
Wheeler-Bennett, John, 15 n. 54
White Russia. See Belarus 
White, Hayden, xxiii n. 18
Wiedfeldt, Otto, 64, 238, 253, 253 n. 107, 
261 –62, 277
Wiener Neustadt, 55
Wildman, Allan K., 6 n. 17
Wilhelm II (emperor of Germany), 15, 41, 
41 n. 20, 44, 65, 135, 157, 160, 204
Wilhelm of Habsburg (Archduke) 
(Vyshyvany, Vasyl), xxvii, 48 –49, 
71 –72, 134, 144, 146 –47, 284, 292 –96, 
294 n. 278, 295 n. 279, 295 n. 281, 296 n. 
283
Wilhelmine Empire. See Germany
Wilson, Woodrow, 19 –20, 31, 58, 60, 73, 
140, 347, 352 –53, 358, 360 –62, 367 n. 75, 
368, 405
Wiszka, Emilian, 385 n. 62
Wiszko, Emilina, 334 n. 55, 369 n. 1
Witos, Wincenty, 149
Wolff, David, 303 n. 15
Wonisch, Arno, xxviii
Woroby, Peter, 304 n. 21
Wrangel, Petr, 22 –23, 22 n. 92, 28, 128, 
338 –40, 363
Wrzosek, Mieczysław, 150 n. 64
Wurzer, Georg, xxv, xxv n. 22
Yampil, 188, 289; area, 286; district, 289
Yanevsky, D., 76 n. 2, 80 n. 10
Yanyshivka, 290
Yarosh, D., 322 n. 6
Yefremov, Serhii, 82
Yelysavethrad (Kirovohrad), 182
Yeromina, Anna, xxix
Yevlogii (Russian Orthodox bishop), 317
Yudenich, Nikolai, 24 –25, 33
Yurkevich, Myroslav, xi, xiv
Zagreb, xxvii
Zahora, Richard, 398 n. 48
Zaionchkovsky, P., 299 n. 5, 303 n. 14
Zakharchenko, Petro, 102 n. 64, 285 n. 
239, 287 n. 245
Zaklynsky, Myron, 295
Zalizniak, Mykola, 50, 50 n. 60, 55 n. 80
Zaporizhia (Oleksandrivsk), 194, 229, 
293 –95, 295 n. 281; oblast, 205
Zaporozhian Sich, 293 n. 268
Zatonsky, Volodymyr, 95 n. 48, 123 n. 112, 
342 n. 84
Zbruch River, 118, 120 –21, 143, 154, 374, 
377, 384
Zdvizhkov, D., 302 n. 10
Zeleny, Danylo, 77, 112 –13, 125
Zhashkiv, 290
Zhiromskaia, V., 344 n. 93
Zhmerynka, 121, 203 
Zhukovsky, Oleksandr, 101
Zhuravlev, S., 344 n. 93
Zhytomyr, 121, 281, 326
Zimmermann, Arthur, 41
Zimmermann, Michael, xxix
Zitovsky, Heinrich, 69, 224 n. 107
Zolochiv, 118
Zolotonosha district, 286
ZUNR. See Western Ukrainian People's 
Republic 
Zupcan, Gabriel, xxv n. 21
Zvenyhorod district, 103
Zvenyhorodka, 181, 183 –84; district, 290; 
region, 290 

The Emergence of Ukraine: Self-Determination, Occupation, and War in Ukraine, 
1917–1922, is a collection of articles by several prominent historians from 
Austria, Germany, Poland, Ukraine, and Russia who undertook a detailed 
study of the formation of the independent Ukrainian state in 1918 and, in 
particular, of the occupation of Ukraine by the Central Powers in the ﬁ nal 
year of the First World War. A slightly condensed version of the German-
language Die Ukraine zwischen Selbstbestimmung und Fremdherrschaft 1917–
1922 (Graz, 2011), this book provides, on the one hand, a systematic outline 
of events in Ukraine during one of the most complex periods of twentieth-
century European history, when the Austro-Hungarian and Russian empires 
collapsed at the end of the Great War and new independent nation-states 
emerged in Central and Eastern Europe. On the other hand, several chapters 
of this book provide detailed studies of speciﬁ c aspects of the occupation of 
Ukraine by German and Austro-Hungarian troops following the Treaty of 
Brest-Litovsk, signed on 9 February 1918 between the Central Powers and the 
Ukrainian People’s Republic. For the ﬁ rst time, these chapters oﬀ er English-
speaking readers a wealth of hitherto unknown historical information based 
on thorough research and evaluation of documents from military archives in 
Vienna, Freiburg, Berlin, Munich, and Stuttgart. 
The ﬁ rst section of the book deals with military aspects of the German and 
Austro-Hungarian conquest of Ukraine in 1918, the suppression of uprisings, 
occupation, and retreat; it also discusses the administration of occupied territory, 
the economic utilization of the country, the occupying powers’ relations with 
the Ukrainian government, and the internal Ukrainian perspective on the 
occupation. The second section details developments in Ukraine between 1917 
and 1922. The third section deals with the Central Powers’ policies toward 
Eastern Europe in general and Ukraine in particular, while the fourth and 
ﬁ nal section is an analysis of the international context of Ukraine’s eﬀ orts 
to establish a state during this period. This book is an essential resource for 
anyone interested in the history of the First World War and the modern history 
of Central and Eastern Europe.
Canadian Institute of Ukrainian Studies Press
www.utoronto.ca/cius
Design and typesetting by Christine Kurys Obbema
SELF-DETERMINATION, OCCUPATION, AND WAR IN UKRAINE, 1917-1922
THE EMERGENCE OF UKRAINE