Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106 
81
‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in  
EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work  
1 in a Way that Helps Human Rights?*, **
Las cláusulas de elementos esenciales  
de los acuerdos comerciales de la UE:  
¿Contribuye la política comercial de la UE  
a la protección de los Derechos Humanos?
Nicolas Hachez
Leuven Centre for Global Governance Studies
Sumario: I. Introduction: the trade-human rights nexus in the EU. 
1. The EU bilateral trade policy. 2. The human rights component in EU 
trade agreements.—II. The ‘essential elements’ clause. 1. A journey 
into creative legal drafting. 2. Critical assessment of FTA conditional-
ity. 2.1. Exceptions to generalised conditionality. 2.2. Criticism related to 
drafting and scope. 2.3. Criticism of the monitoring and application of hu-
man rights clauses.—III. Conclusion: are essential elements clauses so es-
sential to achieving the EU’s trade-human rights nexus?
Abstract: This article critically examines the EU policy of including ‘essen-
tial elements’ clauses in trade agreements as the principal avenue for the realization 
of the trade-human rights nexus required by the EU’s treaty obligation to use its ex-
ternal relations for the promotion of its core values. After evaluating the anatomy 
of such clauses, the article sets out to analyze the criticism which they have gener-
ated regarding (i) the fact that such clauses are not contained in all EU trade agree-
ments, (ii) their drafting and scope, and (iii) their monitoring and enforcement. The 
article then concludes with an assessment of the effectiveness and legitimacy of this 
policy, and of the way it impacts the credibility of the EU’s normative external rela-
tions agenda.
** Recibido el 17 de abril de 2015, aceptado el 11 de junio de 2015.
** The research leading to these results has received funding from the European Com-
mission’s Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under the Grant Agreement 
FRAME (project n.º 320000). This article draws from Laura Beke, Nicolas Hachez, David 
D’Hollander and Beatriz Pérez de la Heras, ‘Report on the integration of human rights in EU 
development and trade policies’, FRAME Deliverable No. 9.1, September 2014, available at 
http://www.fp7-frame.eu/reports/. I am grateful to the co-authors of the report for their very 
useful comments on earlier versions of this article. 

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
82 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106
Keywords: ‘essential elements’ clauses, trade-human rights nexus, Free Trade 
Agreements, conditionality.
Resumen: Este artículo examina de una manera crítica la política europea de 
incluir cláusulas de ‘elementos esenciales’ en acuerdos comerciales, como princi-
pal medio para la realización del nexo comercio-derechos humano exigido por la 
obligación de la UE de articular sus relaciones externas para la promoción de sus 
valores fundamentales. Después de estudiar la anatomía de dichas cláusulas, el ar-
tículo se propone analizar las críticas que estas cláusulas han generado en rela-
ción con (i) el hecho de que no todos los acuerdos comerciales de la UE contienen 
estas cláusulas, (ii) su redacción y alcance, y (iii) su evaluación e implementación. 
El artículo concluirá con una valoración de la efectividad y legitimidad de esta po-
lítica y de la manera en la que influye sobre la credibilidad del programa norma-
tivo de las relaciones exteriores de UE.
Palabras clave: cláusula de elementos esenciales, nexo comercio-derechos 
humanos, Acuerdos de Libre Comercio, condicionalidad.
I. Introduction: the trade-human rights nexus in the EU
For a number of years, the European Union (EU) has anchored its 
external relations into a firm normative agenda, to the point of being 
dubbed ‘Normative Power Europe’.1 Namely, the EU conducts its external 
relations with the stated purpose of promoting its values. This evolution has 
been made official in the Treaty of Lisbon, notably its article 21 (1), which 
states
The Union’s action on the international scene shall be guided by 
the principles which have inspired its own creation, development 
and enlargement, and which it seeks to advance in the wider world: 
democracy, the rule of law, the universality and indivisibility of human 
rights and fundamental freedoms, respect for human dignity, the 
principles of equality and solidarity, and respect for the principles of the 
United Nations Charter and international law.
In this context, economic foreign relations, and in particular trade 
can be a powerful lever for normative objectives and an avenue to foster 
1 See MANNERS, I., ‘Normative Power Europe – A Contradiction in Terms?’, Journal 
of Common Market Studies, n.º 40, 2002, p. 235.

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106 
83
societal change in partner countries2. Therefore, Art. 21 (3) TEU explicitly 
encompasses trade as part of the action of the EU ‘on the international 
scene’, and trade policy must consequently ‘be guided’ by the range of EU 
values, in which human rights feature prominently. Therefore, EU bodies 
and institutions have designed strategies to ensure that EU trade relations 
and instruments could effectively realize the so-called ‘trade-human rights 
nexus’.
In 2011, the European Commission and the High Representative of the 
European Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy (HR/VP, who also 
serves as the vice-president of the European Commission and as the Chair 
of the Foreign Affairs Council) have jointly declared that human rights 
were the ‘silver thread’ in all EU external relations, and have clarified their 
strategy to achieve the nexus: “The EU approach to trade policy focuses 
on using positive incentives, making use of trade preferences to promote 
human rights, coupled with a process of dialogue about the conditions to 
maintain those preferences.”3
Likewise, in 2012 the Council of the European Union established a 
‘Strategic Framework and Action Plan for Democracy and Human Rights’, 
in which a number of actions are listed as a way to “make trade work in a 
way that helps human rights.”4
In this article I will briefly survey and assess one aspect of the EU’s 
strategy on trade and human rights: that of promoting human rights through 
bilateral trade relations by including dedicated clauses in the numerous 
trade agreements it signs with third countries.
1. The EU bilateral trade policy
The EU’s Common Commercial Policy (CCP) is chiefly carried out by 
way of international agreements. Already in the 1957 Treaty of Rome, the 
then European Economic Community (EEC) had received the exclusive 
competence to conclude trade agreements. Since the entry into force of the 
Lisbon Treaty, this competence comprises virtually the full range of trade in 
2 HAFNER-BURTON, E., Forced to be Good. Why Trade Agreements Boos Human 
Rights, Ithaca, Cornell University Press, 2009, pp. 3-4.
3 European Commission and High Representative of the European Union for Foreign Af-
fairs and Security Policy, ‘Human Rights and Democracy at the Heart of EU External Action 
– Towards a More Effective Approach’, Joint Communication to the European Parliament 
and the Council, 12 December 2011, COM(2011) 886 final, p. 11.
4 Council of the European Union, ‘EU Strategic Framework and Action Plan on Human 
Rights and Democracy’, 25 June 2012, 11855/12, Action 11.

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
84 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106
goods, services, trade-related intellectual property rights and foreign direct 
investment.5
EU international trade policy has been implemented through multilateral 
agreements, via accession to the GATT and membership in the WTO. 
However, partly as a result of the stalemate in which multilateral trade talks 
now find themselves, culminating with the 2003 Cancún debacle, and in 
spite of its Treaty-imposed preference for multilateralism6 the EU decided 
in the mid-2000s to reshuffle its cards and to abandon the ‘multilateralism 
first’ doctrine which it had followed to show its commitment to the Doha 
round.7 The EU thus placed again so-called ‘free trade agreements’ (FTAs, 
i.e. particular trade liberalisation regimes negotiated bilaterally with select 
partner countries) at the centre of the CCP,8 while continuing to officially 
declare completion of the Doha round a priority.
Prior to this sea change, the EU already had a policy of concluding 
FTAs, though in certain contexts only, that is, on a geographical/regional 
basis, as part of deep and broad partnerships with Neighbourhood or ACP 
countries. As a result of this new orientation, the EU is now concluding 
or negotiating FTAs with other strategic partners based on economic 
considerations alone, with Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa 
(the so-called ‘BRICS’ countries) as the main prospective candidates for 
further FTAs.9 For example, new FTAs have recently been concluded with 
South Korea (2011), Singapore (2013, yet to enter into force), while others 
are currently being negotiated with e.g. India, Canada, ASEAN Countries, 
Japan, Mercosur, and most importantly the US. A self-standing investment 
agreement is also being negotiated with China.
It is therefore not easy to make sense of the broad network of trade 
agreements concluded by the EU, as these potentially belong to very 
different contexts, from purely trade relationships to much broader 
partnerships of which trade is only one aspect. It must also be noted that 
not all agreements concluded by the EU concerning trade necessarily 
accord trade preferences in the sense of cheaper market access for a 
5 WOOLCOCK, S., European Union economic diplomacy: the role of the EU in external 
economic relations, Farnham, Ashgate, 2012.
6 Art. 21 (1) para. 2 TEU.
7 SILES-BRÜGGE, G., Constructing EU Trade Policy – A Global Idea of Europe, Bas-
ingstoke, Palgrave-Macmillan, 2014, p. 1.
8 European Commission, ‘Global Europe: Competing in the world’, Communication 
from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament, the European Economic and 
Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, 4 November 2006, COM(2006) 567 fi-
nal., pp. 8-10.
9 See WOUTERS, J., ‘L’Union européenne et l’Organisation mondiale du Commerce: 
concurrents ou partenaires?’, Annuaire de droit européen, 2011, published 2013, p. 121.

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106 
85
range of goods and services. Many of them simply provide for trade 
cooperation, typically an agreement between the parties to stimulate 
trade amongst themselves, to cooperate towards a reduction of (tariff 
or non-tariff) barriers to trade, etc. In this connection, moreover, one 
should emphasise that many instruments are called ‘trade’ agreements 
somewhat abusively, as they are, in fact, development agreements.10 A 
very large number of agreements were indeed concluded with developing 
or emerging countries, and in the total of agreements concluded by the 
EU, a comparatively low number was signed with developed countries. 
Remarkably, the EU still does not have a trade agreement in place with, 
e.g. the US, Canada, Japan or Australia, as it is only after the change of 
strategy regarding trade liberalisation outlined above that the EU started 
to seriously negotiate trade deals also with developed countries. Moreover, 
in the comprehensive agreements concluded with developing or emerging 
countries, trade, trade liberalisation and enhanced market access are 
frequently presented specifically as a way to ensure the economic (and, 
since more recently, sustainable) development of the partner country. For 
example, the recent Economic Partnership Agreement between the EU and 
the Forum of the Caribbean Group of African, Caribbean and Pacific States 
(‘CARIFORUM)’, of which the trade pillar is being applied provisionally 
pending full ratification (see below, section 2.1), includes as its very first 
objective to “contribut[e] to the reduction and eventual eradication of 
poverty through the establishment of a trade partnership consistent with 
the objective of sustainable development, the Millennium Development 
Goals and the Cotonou Agreement”11 and defines itself as a ‘Trade 
Partnership for Sustainable Development.’12 To that end it then sets out 
to establish generous trade preferences on a wide range of products.13 The 
2010 EU-Vietnam Framework Agreement on Comprehensive Partnership 
and Cooperation (yet to enter into force) states even more clearly “that 
trade plays a significant role in development and that trade preferential 
programmes help to promote the development of developing countries, 
including Vietnam.”14
10 See European Commission, ‘Trade, growth and development. Tailoring trade and in-
vestment policy for those countries most in need’, Communication from the Commission to 
the European Parliament, the Council and the European Economic and Social Committee, 27 
January 2012, COM(2012) 22 final.
11 Economic Partnership Agreement between the CARIFORUM States, of the one part, 
and the European Community and its Member States, of the other part, signed 15 October 
2008, Art. 1(a).
12 Ibid., Title I.
13 Ibid., Arts. 15 ff.
14 Ibid., Art. 1 (5).

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
86 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106
However, for the sake of simplicity, in this article I will refer to all 
agreements which have a trade dimension (whether or not alongside other 
dimensions) as ‘trade agreements’.
2. The human rights component in EU trade agreements
Human rights have however been part and parcel of the negotiation of 
international agreements well before Lisbon, including agreements having a 
trade dimension. As early as the 1970s, the EU found itself in the situation 
of having close relationships and legally binding treaty obligations, notably 
of a financial nature, towards governments which were violating human 
rights.15 As a matter of fact, before linking trade and human rights as a 
matter of principle and in pursuance of its ‘normative power’, the EU first 
sought to establish this link as a way to suspend its relations with rogue 
governments and thereby avoid contributing —possibly through direct 
financing— to human rights violations.
The solution found was to abandon the politically neutral stance so far 
adopted in relation to trade agreements,16 and to include clauses specifically 
referring to human rights in these instruments. The wording, scope and 
effectiveness of these treaty provisions has evolved significantly over time, 
and below I briefly outline this evolution before moving to a comparative 
assessment of the human rights provisions which can be found in the EU 
trade agreements currently in force.
II. The ‘essential elements’ clause
1. A journey into creative legal drafting
The first mention of human rights in an EU trade agreement can be 
found in Art. 5 of the 1989 Lomé IV Convention with ACP Countries.17 
This clause, already quite detailed, is however not meant to be an operative 
provision giving the EU a way out in cases of human rights violations by 
one of its ACP partners. It rather emphasises the fact that development 
—the main aim of the Convention, though it includes trade provisions— 
‘entails respect of and promotion of all human rights.’
15 HAFNER-BURTON op. cit. (note 2), p. 51.
16 Ibid., 72.
17 See Fourth ACP-EEC Convention, signed in Lomé on 15 December 1989.

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106 
87
As indicated, this type of clause does not provide any kind of ‘stick’ to 
the EU in case one of the other parties violated human rights, which is what 
the EU was trying to achieve.18 All it did was more precisely define one of 
the ‘objectives and principles of cooperation’. Therefore, the EU adapted 
its reference to human rights in further agreements to move towards 
a formulation which, in full compliance with international treaty law, 
would progressively give it the possibility to suspend its obligations under 
international agreements (for instance the granting of trade preferences) and 
take other ‘appropriate measures’, thereby flanking these agreements with 
hard ‘human rights conditionality,’ as the terminology goes.19
In short, the legal reasoning was to include in the treaties explicit 
language making respect for human rights (and other values such as 
democracy) an ‘essential element’ on which the reciprocal obligations of 
the parties were premised, so that human rights violations of a certain scale 
by one of them could amount to a material breach of the treaty and justify 
suspension or other counter-measures.20 The typical ‘essential element’ 
18 FIERRO, E., European Union’s Approach to Human Rights Conditionality in Prac-
tice, Leiden, Martinus Nijhoff, 2003, p. 211.
19 However, the objective of such clauses as stated was broader that simply providing a shield 
to the EU. Namely, according to the Commission, such clauses would present several advantages:
— it makes human rights the subject of common interest, part of the dialogue between the 
parties and an instrument for the implementation of positive measures, on a par with 
the other key provisions;
— it enables the parties, where necessary, to take restrictive measures in proportion to the 
gravity of the offence […]. In the spirit of a positive approach, it is important that such 
measures should not only be based on objective and fair criteria, but they should also be 
adapted to the variety of situations that can arise, the aim being to keep a dialogue going;
 
In the selection and implementation of these measures it is crucial that the population 
should not be penalized for the behaviour of its government;
— it allows the parties to regard serious and persistent human rights violations and se-
rious interruptions of democratic process as a “material breach” of the agreement in 
line with the Vienna Convention ; constituting grounds for suspending the application 
of the agreement in whole or in part in line with the procedural conditions laid down 
in Article 65. The main condition involves allowing a period of three months between 
notification and suspension proper, except in “cases of special urgency”, plus an addi-
tional period of race if an amicable solution is being sought.
See European Commission, ‘Communication on the inclusion of respect for democratic 
principles and human rights in agreements between the community and third countries’, Brus-
sels 23 May 1995, COM(95)216 final, 7-8.
20 See in this regard CJEU, 3 December 1996, Portugal v. Council, C-268/94 and Vienna 
Convention on the Law of Treaties, signed in Vienna on 23 May 1969, Art. 60. This article 
reads: ‘1. A material breach of a bilateral treaty by one of the parties entitles the other to invoke 
the breach as a ground for terminating the treaty or suspending its operation in whole or in part. 
[…] 3. A material breach of a treaty, for the purposes of this article, consists in: […] (b) the vio-
lation of a provision essential to the accomplishment of the object or purpose of the treaty.’

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
88 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106
clause was given quite a number of different formulations since it was first 
attempted in the 1990 EU-Argentina Cooperation Agreement, in which it 
read “[c]ooperation ties between the Community and Argentina and this 
Agreement in its entirety are based on respect for the democratic principles 
and human rights which inspire the domestic and external policies of 
the Community and Argentina.”21 The actual words ‘essential elements’ 
were only added to the clause a few years later, in the 1992 Framework 
Agreement for Cooperation with Brazil.22
By way of comparison, Art. 1 (1) of the new 2010 EU-Korea 
Framework Agreement (yet to enter into force) now complements several 
mentions of human rights in the preamble and reads as follows:
[t]he Parties confirm their attachment to democratic principles, human 
rights and fundamental freedoms, and the rule of law. Respect for 
democratic principles and human rights and fundamental freedoms 
as laid down in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other 
relevant international human rights instruments, which reflect the 
principle of the rule of law, underpins the internal and international 
policies of both Parties and constitutes an essential element of this 
Agreement.23
Whereas Art. 1 (1) of the 2013 EU-Colombia/Peru Free Trade 
Agreement adopts a more direct and less detailed formulation: “[r]espect 
for democratic principles and fundamental human rights, as laid down 
in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, and for the principle of 
the rule of law, underpins the internal and international policies of the 
Parties. Respect for these principles constitutes an essential element of 
this Agreement.”24
An overview of all essential elements clauses present in the EU trade 
agreements currently in force25 evidences clear patterns in the drafting of 
the essential elements clause, along two kinds of factors. First, as indicated 
above, the typical drafting of the clause has evolved over time, which 
21 See Framework Agreement for trade and economic cooperation between the European 
Economic Community and the Argentine Republic, Signed 2 April 1990, Art. 1 (1)
22 See Framework Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Fed-
erative Republic of Brazil.
23 See Framework Agreement between the European Union and its Member States, of the 
one part, and the Republic of Korea, of the other part, signed 10 May 2010.
24 See Trade Agreement between the European Union and its Member States, of the one 
part, and Colombia and Peru, of the other part, signed 26 June 2012.
25 See BEKE, L., HACHEZ, N., D’HOLLANDER, D. AND PÉREZ DE LA HERAS, B., 
Report on the integration of human rights in EU development and trade policies, FRAME Deliv-
erable No. 9.1, 2014: http://www.fp7-frame.eu/reports/, Annex II (last visited 27 February 2015).

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106 
89
makes sense from the perspective of constantly trying to improve the 
language of agreements, notably in regard of past practice linked to similar 
clauses. Second, one can also clearly group these clauses on a geographical 
or regional basis, evidencing the fact that the EU, in its international 
relations and treaty negotiation practices, works very much on the basis 
of regional policies addressing blocs of countries. The temporal and 
geographical patterns have in many cases actually developed in parallel, as 
many agreements with countries of the same regional bloc were negotiated 
and concluded around the same time. For example, most of the agreements 
concluded with members of the former USSR were concluded in the second 
half of the 1990s and many of them look very much alike (see below, 
section 2.1). However, it may happen that certain countries belonging to a 
bloc negotiate a new agreement whereas other countries of the bloc do not 
wish so, or are slower in the negotiations, creating parallel treaty regimes in 
respect of the same issue and in the same region. For example, the Andean 
Community is currently split between Colombia and Peru which are under a 
brand new 2012 FTA, and Ecuador and Bolivia, whose trade relations with 
the EU are still only governed by the ‘old’ 1993 Cooperation Agreement 
which applied to all members of the Cartagena Agreement and does not 
grant trade preferences.
As Lorand Bartels notes, though a number of standard formulations 
now seem to have emerged in regard of the various phrases of the essential 
elements clauses,26 proper drafting ensuring the legal options described 
above was probably never achieved. The intention of the parties is however 
well known at this stage, and the end result is therefore undeniable, even if 
we have seldom seen these clauses in action (see below, section 2.3).27 The 
aim of securing a way out for the EU is all the more attained as, alongside 
the essential elements clause, the EU has also progressively adopted the 
practice of including ‘non-execution’ clauses expressly delineating the 
consequences to be attached to a violation of the ‘essential elements’ of the 
treaties.
Non-execution clauses have historically taken two forms: the ‘Baltic’ 
clause, which was notably included in agreements with Baltic states 
prior to their accession, and which authorised a party to suspend the 
application of the agreement with immediate effect in case of a serious 
breach of essential provisions. Given the lack of flexibility afforded by 
26 BARTELS, L., A Model Human Rights Clause for the EU’s International Trade 
Agreements, German Institute for Human Rights and Misereor, 2012: http://www.institut-
fuer-menschenrechte.de/uploads/tx_commerce/Studie_A_Model_Human_Rights_Clause.pdf, 
p. 10 (last visited 27 February 2015).
27 Ibid., p. 13.

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
90 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106
this formulation, the Baltic clause was progressively abandoned, and its 
concurrent, the ‘Bulgarian’ clause, became the standard, allowing either 
party to ‘take appropriate measures’ in case of breach by the other party, 
after proper consultation of that party and/or referral to a committee 
established by the treaty. Most non-execution clauses now dispense 
with this last condition ‘in cases of special urgency,’28 which are said to 
correspond (either in the clause itself, or in an interpretative declaration 
of the parties) to correspond to grave violations of the essential elements 
or the agreements. This means that, in cases of grave human rights 
violations by one party, the other is allowed to immediately take measures 
in response. In this regard, it is almost always specified that the measures 
chosen must be those which ‘least disturb’ the normal operation of 
the agreement, and sometimes as well that those measures must be 
‘proportional’, making suspension of the whole agreement an unlikely 
outcome.29
So far, the so-called Cotonou Agreement between the EU and the 
ACP countries30 can be said to have the most complex set of clauses 
ensuring human rights conditionality. Not only does it have the longest 
ever ‘essential element’ clause,31 it also sets up a detailed process of 
political dialogue around the essential elements,32 explicitly in order to 
pre-empt situations in which a party might deem it justified to activate the 
non-execution clause.33 As discussed in more detail below, in this case, 
the essential elements clause and the overall conditionality mechanism 
goes well beyond the reactive purpose of ensuring a way out for the EU 
in case of human rights violations. It is a genuine tool for proactively 
promoting human rights and other values in partner countries, meant to 
be applied on an ongoing basis, outside of and before any situation of 
human rights violations, combining ‘strong elements of both coercion 
and persuasion’.34 In the same vein, a number of Association Agreements 
(notably adopted in the framework of the Eastern Neighbourhood Policy 
28 European Commission (note 19), p. 8.
29 See in respect of Euro-Mediterranean Countries: BARTELS, L., ‘A Legal Analysis 
of The Human Rights dimension of the Euro-Mediterranean Agreements’, GREAT Insights, 
n.º 1, 2012, p. 7.
30 Partnership Agreement between the Members of the African, Caribbean and Pacific 
Group Of States of the one part, and the European Community and its Member States of the 
other part, signed in Cotonou, 22 June 2000.
31 Ibid., Art 9 (2).
32 Ibid., Annex VII.
33 Ibid., Art 96.
34 HAFNER-BURTON, E., ‘Trading Human Rights: How Preferential Trade Agree-
ments Influence Government Repression’, International Organization, n.º 59, 2005, p. 607.

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106 
91
and with Southern Asia countries) also take this more proactive stance 
towards linking trade agreements with human rights issues by having a 
chapter on ‘Cooperation on matters relating to democracy and human 
rights.’
Since 1995, it is the official policy of the EU to include respect for 
democratic principles and human rights in agreements between the Union 
and third countries, and the EU has generally been true to this policy (see 
below, section 2.1).35 In this regard, an increasingly followed method 
to place respect for human rights at the centre of all treaty relations 
between the EU and particular partners is to conclude ‘Framework 
Agreements’ which contain a comprehensive essential elements clause, 
a non-execution clause, and possibly a dispute settlement mechanism.36 
Thematic agreements are then subsequently concluded and ‘hooked’ onto 
the framework agreement, making the human rights apparatus included 
therein also applicable to treaty relations in the thematic fields. A recent 
example includes the 2010 EU-Korea Framework Agreement.37 However, 
the most early and prominent example of this practice is the Cotonou 
Agreement. As a response to the planned expiry of the trade preferences 
granted directly to ACP countries by the Cotonou Agreement in December 
2007,38 Art. 35 thereof mandates the parties to conclude ‘Economic 
Partnership Agreements’ on a regional basis to regulate their trade relations. 
The (interim) EPAs in force so far, namely with CARIFORUM States,39 
with Central African countries (to date only applicable to Cameroon),40 with 
35 In the early nineties, a number of agreements were concluded which contained an es-
sential elements clause, but no non-execution clause: see Argentina, Brazil, Andean Commu-
nity Framework Agreement, Vietnam.
36 The Council would have made this a policy preference. See BARTELS, L., The Eu-
ropean Parliament’s Role in relation to Human Rights in Trade and Investment Agree-
ments, European Parliament Directorate-General for External Policies of the Union, 
EXPO/B/DROI/2012-09, 2014: http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/etudes/
join/2014/433751/EXPO-JOIN_ET(2014)433751_EN.pdf, pp. 6-7 (last visited 27 February 
2015).
37 See above (note 23).
38 See World Trade Organization, Ministerial Conference, ‘European Communities – 
The ACP-EC Partnership Agreement’, Doha, 14 November 2001,WT/MIN(01)/15, 2, by 
which Art. I (1) of the GATT 1947 (MFN) clause, is waived until 31 December 2007. See 
also ONGUGLO, B. and ITO, T., How to make EPAs WTO compatible? Reforming the rules 
on regional trade agreements, ECDPM Discussion Paper No. 40, 2003: http://ecdpm.org/wp-
content/uploads/2013/11/DP-40-Make-EPAs-WTO-Compatible-Reforming-Rules-Regional-
Trade-Agreements1.pdf (last visited 27 February 2015). 
39 EU-Cariforum EPA (note 11).
40 Interim Agreement with a view to an Economic Partnership Agreement between the 
European Community and its Member States, of the one part, and the Central Africa Party, of 
the other part, signed 15/01/2009.

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
92 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106
Eastern and Southern African countries,41 and with Pacific States (to date 
only applicable to Papua New Guinea and Fiji)42 all specify that nothing 
in the Agreement shall be construed so as to prevent the adoption by the 
EU of any measure under, notably, Art. 96 of the Cotonou Agreement (the 
non-execution clause).43 One (the CARIFORUM agreement) even specifies 
expressly that this includes trade sanctions, and two (the CARIFORUM 
and the Pacific States Agreement) additionally restate that the EPA is 
based on the same essential elements as the Cotonou Agreement by 
referencing its Art. 9. Outside of the Cotonou ambit, the 2001 EU-Korea 
Framework Agreement’ essential elements and non-execution clauses 
are made expressly applicable to the subsequent EU-Korea Free Trade 
Agreement.44 The new 2010 EU-Korea Framework Agreement, yet to enter 
into force, further reinforces that link.45
2. Critical assessment of FTA conditionality
This might all seem like a well-oiled and steady policy, but significant 
exceptions and ambiguities in respect of certain types of agreements and 
practices threaten the effectiveness and coherence of EU conditionality 
altogether. Criticism of human rights clauses has to do with their inclusion 
(or not) in an agreement, their drafting and scope, and their effective 
implementation. We address these three lines of criticism in that order below.
2.1. Exceptions to generalised conditionality
The most notable and far-reaching exception to the inclusion of 
essential elements clauses in all agreements concerns sectoral trade 
41 Interim Agreement establishing a framework for an Economic Partnership Agreement 
between the Eastern and Southern Africa States, on the one part, and the European Commu-
nity and its Member States, on the other part, signed 29/08/2009.
42 Interim Partnership Agreement between the European Community, of the one part, and 
the Pacific States, of the other part, signed 30/07/2009.
43 It would have been even clearer to include again in each EPA a clear reference to the 
essential elements and to the consequences of their breach, but apparently this was a conten-
tious point, and whereas the EU was in favor of inclusion the clause was dropped in some 
cases. Whether or not this allows or evacuates the possibility of trade sanctions is debatable. 
See, in the case of the EPA with West Africa, X, West Africa, EU Reach Trade Deal, Bridges, 
Volume 18, Number 5, 13 February 2014: http://www.ictsd.org/bridges-news/bridges/news/
west-africa-eu-reach-trade-deal (last visited 27 February 2015)
44 See Free trade Agreement between the European Union and its Member States, of the 
one part, and the Republic of Korea, on the other part, signed 06/10/2010, Art. 15.14.
45 Above (note 23), Art. 43 (3).

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106 
93
agreements, which provide for trade liberalisation or cooperation only 
in respect of certain products or services. Hundreds of such agreements 
have been concluded over the years by the EU with many countries, 
some of which have problematic human rights records, and some of 
which concern sectors which are prone to human rights violations. We 
have identified such agreements notably in respect of the following 
sectors: wood, timber and forestry products; fish and fisheries products; 
agricultural products; industrial products; wine and spirits; steel and 
iron; textiles; oil seeds; and aviation. The concern is alleviated by 
the fact that many sectoral agreements are in the form of protocols 
to broader agreements which are conditional on respect for human 
rights. However, many others are self-standing and do not have any 
conditionality component. For example, the recent and innovative 
agreements introducing a Forest Law Enforcement, Governance and 
Trade (FLEGT) scheme with a number of developing countries, the 
so-called ‘Voluntary Partnership Agreements’ (VPAs), though they 
address sustainable development and a number of human rights (rights 
of indigenous peoples, right to information), do not include an ‘essential 
elements clause’.46 Likewise, fisheries Partnership Agreements, for 
example, have traditionally not contained an essential elements clause, 
though some have in their preamble a non-operational reference to 
an agreement in which essential elements are spelled out, such as the 
Cotonou Agreement.47 However, in 2013 protocols to such agreements 
with Morocco and Côte d’Ivoire may indicate a changing course as 
they include a reference to the relevant clauses of, respectively, the EU-
Morocco Association Agreement and the Cotonou Agreement.48
A second potentially far-reaching caveat to the generalised 
conditionality policy of the EU concerns the provisional application of 
the trade provisions of broader agreements. Many agreements containing 
‘beyond trade’ issues are mixed agreements and therefore require the 
ratification of all Member States before entering into force, which can 
take time. On the contrary, trade being an exclusive competence of the 
EU, this allows for creating legal obligations in that field without the 
intervention of the Member States. Therefore, many comprehensive 
agreements foresee that, pending complete entry into force following 
46 See for instance Voluntary Partnership Agreement between the European Union and 
the Republic of Liberia on forest law enforcement, governance and trade in timber products 
to the European Union (FLEGT), signed 27/07/2011.
47 See for example, Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community 
and the Republic of Côte d’Ivoire, signed 18/04/2008.
48 BARTELS, L., op. cit. (note 36), p. 7.

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
94 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106
ratification by EU Member States, the provisions pertaining to trade 
will be applied provisionally. This is sometimes done by way of an 
‘interim agreement’ between the EU and the partner at hand, in which 
the trade provisions of the broader agreement are repeated, and in which 
essential elements clauses are included as well. However, sometimes the 
provisional application takes place without having recourse to an interim 
agreement and may derive from a provision of the broader agreement 
itself, or from a decision of the parties to that effect. The 2012 EU-Iraq 
Partnership and Cooperation Agreement, for example, provides that as 
soon as Iraq and the EU have ratified it, certain trade provisions, but also 
the essential elements and the non-application clause, will enter into force 
and be applied.49 It is thus very clear that the provisional application of 
the agreement encompasses human rights conditionality, but this is not so 
in all cases of provisional application.
For example, the 2012 EU-Central America Association Agreement 
provides that ‘Part IV of this Agreement may be applied by the European 
Union and each of the Republics of the CA Party from the first day of the 
month following the date on which they have notified each other of the 
completion of the internal legal procedures necessary for this purpose. 
[…]’50 Here, the provisional application clause only refers to ‘Part IV’, 
that is, the trade pillar of the agreement, whereas the essential elements 
clause is contained in Part I on General and Institutional Provisions and 
the non-execution clause is contained in Part V on General and Final 
Provisions. This creates significant uncertainty as to the applicability 
of human rights conditionality during the provisional application phase. 
One might argue that the general provisions inform operational chapters 
of the agreement and that therefore ‘Part IV’ cannot be read in isolation 
of Parts I and V. This interpretation might be consistent with Art. 31 (1) 
of the Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties which states that treaty 
provisions ought to be interpreted in light of their context, meaning the 
preamble, the annex, but also ‘other agreements relating to the treaty’, 
which might encompass the other essential elements clause. Yet, one 
might argue just as validly that the text of the agreement does not 
require any interpretation as the meaning is clear and strictly restricts 
the provisions amenable to provisional application to the trade chapter. 
49 Partnership and Cooperation Agreement between the European Union and its Mem-
ber States, of the one part, and the Republic of Iraq, of the other part, signed 11/05/2012, Art. 
117.
50 Agreement establishing an Association between Central America, on the one hand, 
and the European Union and its Member States, on the other, signed 29/06/2012, Art. 353 
(4).

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106 
95
In any event, this ambiguity risks creating significant confusion and to 
severely water down the dissuasive or promotional effect that the essential 
elements clause might have, if any.
Even despite these potentially enormous gaps, the quasi-unflinching 
resolve of the EU to include essential elements and non-execution clauses 
in almost all its international agreements must be saluted, as it has 
seriously complicated a number of trade negotiations with developing and 
developed countries alike,51 notably because some of them did not see 
under what pretext trade issues absolutely had to be conditioned on human 
rights, the two issues belonging, according to them, to clearly distinct 
fields.52 Australia, for example, declined in 1997 to sign an agreement 
containing the standard EU essential elements clause.53 In the developing 
world, the negotiations between the EU and India are also clung to the 
issue of the inclusion of a human rights clause,54 amongst other stumbling 
blocks.55
2.2. Criticism related to drafting and scope
Another line of criticism concerns the fact that there exist slight 
variations in the drafting of the clauses, which may alter their scope and 
create uncertainty and inconsistencies as to the (largely hypothetical) 
situations which might trigger them.
First of all, the list of what constitutes ‘essential elements’ varies 
from one agreement to the next. Whereas ‘democratic principles’ and 
(fundamental) ‘human rights’ are always included, in other instances (the 
51 TAKÁCS, T., ‘Human rights in trade: the EU’s experience with labour standards con-
ditionality and its role in promoting labour standards in the WTO’, in WETZEL, J. (ed.), The 
EU as a ‘Global Player’ in the Field of Human Rights, Abingdon, Routledge, 2012, p. 99.
52 ZWAGEMAKERS, F., The EU’s Conditionality Policy: A New Strategy to Achieve 
Compliance, IAI Working Paper 12/03, 2012: http://www10.iadb.org/intal/intalcdi/
PE/2012/09808.pdf, p. 14 (last visited 27 February 2015); CHAUFFOUR, J.-P. and MAUR, 
J.-C., ‘Landscape’, in CHAUFFOUR, J.-P. and MAUR, J.-C., (eds) Preferential Trade 
Agreement Policies for Development: A Handbook, Washington D.C., The World Bank, 
2011, p. 15.
53 HAFNER-BURTON, E., ‘The Power Politics of Regime Complexity: Human Rights 
Trade Conditionality in Europe’, Perspectives on Politics, n.º 7, 2009, p. 33.
54 KHANDEKAR, G., The EU and India: A Loveless Arranged Marriage, FRIDE Policy 
Brief No. 90, 2, 2011: http://www.fride.org/download/pb_90_eu_and_india.pdf (last visited 
27 February 2015).
55 WOUTERS, J., GODDEERIS, I., NATENS, B., and CIORTUZ, F., Some Critical Is-
sues in EU-India Free Trade Agreement Negotiation, GGS Working Paper No. 102, 2013: 
http://ghum.kuleuven.be/ggs/publications/working_papers/new_series/wp101-110/wp102-
wouters-goddeeris-natens.pdf/ (last visited 27 February 2015).

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
96 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106
principles of) ‘the rule of law’, ‘respect for the principles of international 
law’ or even (the principles of) ‘market economy’ find their way onto the 
list. An analysis of these additional mentions clearly evidences that such 
additional mentions were included in consideration of events, situations 
or developments which have affected the partner country (though not 
necessarily always).56 Principles of market economy are indeed invariably 
essential elements of agreements concluded with former Soviet countries. 
Inclusion of the rule of law is a bit more widespread, but is especially 
present in agreements with countries where organised crime is reportedly 
more prevalent, such as the Balkans or Colombia. Finally, respect for 
the principles of international law are associated with ‘full cooperation 
with the ICTY’ and is included in agreements with former Yugoslav 
States. Whereas it is certainly true that the principles of the rule of 
law and respect for international law may require additional efforts in 
certain regions, there is no reason why these principles would not be 
essential to the relations of the EU with all its partners. The inclusion 
of the principles of market economy as essential elements is also rather 
dubious as it is clearly of another nature than the other principles. The 
plausible argument that market economy is somehow conducive to the 
realisation of human rights, notably the right to property or the right to 
set up a business, does not evacuate the question whether this limitation 
of the economic orientation of a partner country does not conflict with, 
e.g., the principle of self-determination.57 But beyond the questions 
surrounding the substantive merits of this reference, it must be noted 
that this essential element is not consistently applied across countries 
which have a history of planned economy. Neither the 1995 nor the 
2012 cooperation agreements with Vietnam, for example, include such 
reference. How can it be justified that the EU would not mind entering 
agreements with planned economy countries (including China, with 
which the EU is currently negotiating an investment agreement), whereas 
for others it makes it a point of principle that they would uphold the 
principles of market economy?
56 FIERRO, E., op. cit. (note 18), pp. 218 ff.
57 See Art. 1 (1) of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights, 
which provides: ‘All peoples have the rights of self-determination. By virtue of that right 
they freely determine their political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cul-
tural development.’ Admittedly, this reference to market economy also includes a mention of 
the documents of the 1990 CSCE Bonn Conference, in which the relevant countries took part 
(through the participation of the former USSR or Yugoslavia). However, adding to the ambi-
guity, this reference to CSCE documents also includes the 1975 Helsinki final act, which re-
states the provision of the ICESCR quoted above.

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106 
97
Moreover, the notion of human rights itself can be subject to variable 
interpretations and its plasticity can play out in various ways.58 The long-
lasting debate regarding the different ‘generations’ of rights and notably the 
extent to which labour rights are human rights seemed settled (at least for 
what concerns ‘core’ labour standards). The EU’s consecration of a notion 
of ‘universal, indivisible and interdependent’ human rights should also 
leave little doubt in this respect, but the recent ‘sustainable development 
chapters’59 containing provisions on labour rights inclusion in EU trade 
agreements has puzzled many observers of EU practice.60 Uncertainty of 
this sort about the exact scope of the essential elements clause is perhaps 
the reason why it is often proposed to expand the areas it is meant to 
cover. Very recently, for instance, the Commission proposed to make 
‘Inclusion of human trafficking in the Human Rights Clauses’ a priority of 
the EU Strategy towards the Eradication of Trafficking in Human Beings 
2012-2016, even though in its own assessment essential elements clauses 
encompass human trafficking.61
Hesitations regarding the exact scope of the essential elements clauses 
also stem from the considerable variation in the references to international 
instruments that are used to substantiate the notion of ‘human rights’. 
Whereas some agreements do not refer to any specific instrument, most do 
refer to ‘human rights as laid down in/proclaimed by/set out in/established 
by/defined in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights’. Others use 
geographically relevant regional instruments such as, for members of the 
OSCE, the Helsinki Final Act, and the Charter of Paris for a New Europe, 
or for members of the Council of Europe, the European Convention of 
Human Rights, which broadens the scope of the clause to certain rights 
that are not addressed in the Universal Declaration but well are in these 
regional instruments. Agreements outside of the ambit of the Organization 
for Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE) or the Council of Europe 
do not include references to specific instruments next to the UDHR, 
but an innovation was introduced in the 2010 EU-Korea Framework 
Agreement which lists as essential elements human rights ‘as laid down in 
58 See generally WILLIAMS, A., EU Human Rights Policies – A Study in Irony, Oxford, 
Oxford University Press, 2004.
59 For a detailed analysis of ‘sustainable development chapters’ in EU FTA and their re-
lationship with essential elements clauses, see BEKE, L., D’HOLLANDER, D., HACHEZ, 
N. and PÉREZ DE LAS HERAS, B., op. cit. (note 25), pp. 72-77.
60 BARTELS, L., op. cit. (note 26), p. 33.
61 European Commission, ‘The EU Strategy towards the Eradication of Trafficking in 
Human Beings 2012-2016’, Communication to the European Parliament, the Council, the Eu-
ropean Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions, 19 June 2012, 
COM(2012) 286 final, 12.

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
98 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and other relevant international 
human rights instruments’.62 This formulation may be interpreted as the 
admission that, in other agreements, the reference to human rights is strictly 
limited to those enumerated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
(UDHR) and other specifically mentioned agreements, whereas for South 
Korea, the list could be expanded to include any human right potentially 
‘relevant’ to a situation covered by the agreement. An author argues that a 
plausible reading however is to link the clause to the instruments binding 
on the parties,63 though technically ‘relevant’ is a broader term than, for 
example, ‘binding’ or even ‘applicable’. The same author also argues that 
a reference to relevant instruments makes the agreement ‘future proof’, 
as it also potentially includes any relevant instrument to be adopted in the 
future.64
The more or less erratic substantiation of standards of conditionality 
may additionally, as can be expected, affect the legitimacy of the 
Union’s efforts to link human rights and trade and other issues in 
international agreements, as different parties may be subject to limited 
or expansive conditionality according to the wording of the clause.65 
Several arguments can however put forward to explain variations. First 
of all, agreements are negotiated and it is natural that depending on 
the negotiation dynamics and other interests of the parties, the scope 
of the essential elements would be an element of the negotiation. An 
author argues that South Korea felt (rightly or wrongly) that it did not 
have a particularly problematic human rights record, and therefore had 
no reason to take issue with the clause as currently drafted.66 A second 
explanation could be related to the scope and ambitions of the various 
agreements, ranging from strictly trade issues to sweeping political and 
economic cooperation. It might be argued that the wider the scope of the 
mutual obligations, the stricter and more expansive the wording of the 
conditionality. However, an analysis of the different clauses present in 
the EU’s international agreements cannot confirm this hypothesis and 
rather evidence similarities based on temporal or regional patterns, and 
not based on the agreements’ material scopes.
62 Above (n 23), Art. 1 (1) (emphasis added).
63 KO, Y. L., ‘A Common Institutional Framework for EU-Korea Relations’, in HARRI-
SON, J. (ed.), The European Union and South Korea: The Legal Framework for Strengthen-
ing Trade, Economic and Political Relations, Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2013.
64 BARTELS, L., op. cit. (note 36), p. 9.
65 Already in 1995, the development of Guidelines on human rights clauses was meant to 
counter the fact that the use of different clauses and mechanisms can appear as discriminatory 
practice. See European Commission (note 19), 11.
66 KO, op. cit. (note 63).

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106 
99
2.3.  Criticism of the monitoring and application of human rights 
clauses
Another popular line of criticism of these clauses has to do with their 
implementation: the EU went through great lengths to insert a conditionality 
tool in all its agreements, but does it actually use it? The first critique is 
that the EU does not activate conditionality often enough, and regularly 
leaves human rights violations by partner countries unpunished. The 
European Parliament has made an issue of this, insisting that if ‘negative’ 
conditionality mechanisms were put in place, they would only be credible 
if activated.67 Indeed, progress in human rights has been noted to take 
place when, after a suspension of benefits, the partner country saw again 
the prospect of regaining them under certain conditions linked to human 
rights.68
A second critique is that the EU would be triggering the clause 
selectively, and therefore unfairly.69 Voices have raised to denounce double 
standards in this regard: the EU would be quick to activate conditionality 
against harmless partners, whereas it would be much more reluctant to 
do so in regards to more powerful countries.70 And indeed, the essential 
elements clause has so far only been activated against ACP countries, as the 
table below shows.71
67 See European Parliament resolution of 4 September 2008 on the evaluation 
of EU sanctions as part of the EU’s actions and policies in the area of human rights 
(2008/2031(INI)), in which it ‘[c]onsiders that failure to take appropriate or restrictive 
measures in the event of a situation marked by persistent human rights violations seri-
ously undermines the Union’s human rights strategy, sanctions policy and credibility’, 
para. 21.
68 BARTELS, L., The Application of Human Rights Conditionality in the EU’s Trade 
Agreements and Other Trade Arrangements with Third Countries European Parliament Di-
rectorate for External Relations, 2008: http://www.europarl.europa.eu/RegData/etudes/etudes/
join/2008/406991/EXPO-INTA_ET%282008%29406991_EN.pdf, p. 18 (last visited 27 Feb-
ruary 2015).
69 FIERRO, E., op. cit. (note 18), p. 309.
70 ZWAGEMAKERS, F., op. cit. (note 52), 5.
71 KEUKELEIRE, S. and DELREUX, T., The Foreign Policy of the European Union 
(2nd ed.), Basingstoke, Palgrave Macmillan, 2014, p. 207; DØHLIE SALTNES, J., The EU’s 
Human Rights Policy – Unpacking the literature on the EU’s implementation of aid condi-
tionality, Arena Working Paper 2/2013, 2013: http://www.sv.uio.no/arena/english/research/
publications/arena-publications/workingpapers/working-papers2013/wp2-13.pdf (last vis-
ited 27 February 2015). Sanctions in the form of a suspension of technical meetings foreseen 
under the EU-Uzbekistan Cooperation Agreement were taken against Uzbekistan in 2005, 
though the Common Position does not explicitly trigger the non-execution clause under that 
agreement. See Council Common Position 2005/792/CFSP of 14 November 2005 concerning 
restrictive measures against Uzbekistan.

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
100 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106
Year, Country
Coup  
d’état
Flawed 
Elections
Human 
Rights
Rule  
of Law
2011 Guinea-Bissau
X
X
2010 Niger
X
2009 Niger
X
2009 Madagascar
X
2009 Guinea
X
2008 Mauritania
X
2007 Fiji
X
2005 Mauritania
X
2004 Guinea
X
2004 Togo
X
X
2003 Guinea-Bissau
X
2003 Central African Republic
X
2001 Zimbabwe
X
X
X
2001 Liberia
X
X
X
2001 Côte d’Ivoire
X
2000 Fiji
X
2000 Haiti
X
2000 Côte d’Ivoire
X
1999 Guinea-Bissau
X
1999 Comoros
X
1999 Niger
X
1998 Togo
X
1996 Niger
X
Source: Consultations under the ‘essential elements’ clause, by country and reason for 
triggering, 1996-201272
Essential elements have thus sparsely been invoked, they have not always 
led to sanctions proper but rather to consultations, and the sanctions when 
applied did not involve the lifting of trade preferences but rather ‘suspension 
of meetings and technical co-operation programmes’.73 Moreover, essential 
elements clauses were only triggered in situations where drastic changes had 
taken place in the country in question, such as a coup, flawed elections, or 
72 Reproduced from DØHLIE SALTNES, J., op. cit. (note 71), p. 7.
73 European Commission and Special Representative of the European Union for Foreign 
Affairs and Security Policy (note 3), which contains in its Annex II a ‘summary of the meas-
ures that may be taken in response to serious human rights violations or serious interruptions 
of democratic process’, and which, surprisingly, does not list the lifting of trade preferences, 
but mentions ‘trade embargoes’.

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106 
101
brutal occurrences of grave human rights violations.74 Therefore, conditionality 
is normally not activated when human rights violations routinely take place in 
a country, unless the situation gravely and suddenly deteriorates.75 This is 
difficult to reconcile with the Strategic Framework and Action’s plan statement 
that ‘when faced with violations of human rights, the EU will make use of the 
full range of instruments at its disposal, including sanctions or condemnation. 
The EU will step up its effort to make best use of the human rights clause in 
political framework agreements with third countries’.76
This raises the question of the monitoring of the human rights situation 
in countries with which the EU has an agreement containing an essential 
elements clause. No agreement has so far established an organ specifically 
dedicated to the monitoring of the human rights situation of the parties, 
though this has sometimes been done subsequently after the entry into force 
of the agreement. For the rest, human rights issues can of course be addressed 
as part of the political dialogue foreseen by the agreement, if any, by the 
general committee in charge of overseeing and managing the agreement, 
or by parliamentary committees which are established by a number of 
agreements.77 Actually, when a party considers taking appropriate measures, 
the general committee must under the non-execution clause in most cases 
receive information and mediate between the parties. However, an exception 
to such role is normally foreseen for cases of ‘special urgency’, which are 
generally understood as including grave violations of essential elements. Civil 
society has traditionally had a role in monitoring human rights in all countries 
of the world, and in some EU agreements, it is given a formal or informal 
role with regard, notably, to human or labour rights. General standing organs 
involving civil society have also been set up by a number of Agreements.78 
There are finally no standard procedures to investigate alleged human rights 
violations in a partner country, contrary to FTAs concluded by other nations, 
under which a right of individual petitions may be recognised to the effect 
of inviting the relevant authority to investigate certain violations of human 
rights or other standards specified in the agreement.79 The lack of a similar 
mechanism has been lamented by one author stating
74 European Commission, ‘Using EU Trade Policy to promote fundamental human 
rights – Current policies and practices’, Non-Paper, 2012: http://trade.ec.europa.eu/doclib/
docs/2012/february/tradoc_149064.pdf, fn. 7-8-9 (last visited 27 February 2015).
75 BARTELS, L., op. cit. (note 68), p. 11.
76 Above (n 4), p. 3.
77 BARTELS, L., ‘Human Rights and Sustainable Development Obligations in EU Free 
Trade Agreements’, Legal Issues of Economic Integration, n.º 40, 2013, p. 301.
78 BARTELS, L., op. cit. (note 36), pp. 10-11.
79 See e.g. North American Agreement on Labor Cooperation (NAALC), signed 14 Sep-
tember 1993, Art. 16 (3).

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
102 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106
[t]here is no reason why the EU, with its commitment to promoting 
human rights in the world, should not follow best practice, and introduce 
into its trade agreements a mechanism whereby individuals, civil society 
and the other EU institutions are able to require the Commission (or the 
EEAS) to investigate whether third countries are complying with human 
rights conditions to which they have committed in the context of a free 
trade agreement or unilateral trade preferences. Of course, this does not 
mean that these actors would have any role in the formal decision to 
suspend the agreement.80
It must be concluded that, in general the conditionality policy lacks any 
proper ‘operational mechanism’ for implementation, monitoring of human 
rights situations and evaluation of the effectiveness of sanctions. All this is 
supposed to take place through local diplomatic missions which lack time 
and resources to conduct such ground work.81 Action 11 (a) of the 2012 
Strategic Framework for Human Rights, which promises to ‘Develop 
[a] methodology to aid consideration of the human rights situation in 
third countries in connection with the launch or conclusion of trade and/
or investment agreements’ might in this regard provide a welcome basis 
for regularly assessing the human rights situation of partner countries 
and evaluating the course that it is taking as well as the necessity or not 
of sanctions. Other authors are more critical and note that the overly 
integrative ambitions of EU FTAs, coupled with the sheer volume of 
the issues they address dilutes their operational nature, making their 
enforcement nearly impossible:
European PTAs are marred by considerable legal inflation. They 
ambitiously cover a wide range of topics, going much beyond the 
multilateral commitments entered into by the partners within the 
framework of the World Trade Organisation, but they are mostly 
unenforceable – if not entirely devoid of substance. The Union, in other 
words, seems to be using trade agreements to promote its views on how 
countries of the world should be run, and it is able to enlist its trade 
partners to do this, albeit in a noncommittal or semi-committal way. 
Trade policy therefore provides a vehicle for declaratory diplomacy.82
80 BARTELS, L., op. cit. (note 36), p. 19.
81 ZWAGEMAKERS, F., op. cit. (note 52), p. 5.
82 HORN, H., MAVROIDIS, P. and SAPIR, A., Beyond the WTO – An anatomy of EU 
and US preferential trade agreements, Brueghel Blueprint n.º 7, 2009: http://www.bruegel.
org/download/parent/238-beyond-the-wto-an-anatomy-of-eu-and-us-preferential-trade- 
agreements/file/663-beyond-the-wto-an-anatomy-of-eu-and-us-preferential-trade-agreements- 
english/, p. vi (last visited 27 February 2015).

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106 
103
Indeed, essential elements clauses seem to be considered chiefly as 
‘political’ clauses by the Council,83 and many observers have pointed out 
that, in comparison with the US approach, which takes a binding approach 
towards a small and clearly defined number of standards, the EU’s essential 
policies clauses are ‘aspirational’ and aimed at fostering dialogue.84 In any 
event, another author has warned against the temptation to activate essential 
elements clauses for the sole purpose of showing some muscle and/or 
avoiding the accusation of double standards. Indeed, apparently trade and 
other sanctions are only effective in certain contexts, and are completely 
useless in others. Therefore, risking to apply sanctions just to see them fail 
would harm rather than bolster the credibility of the Union’s conditionality 
policy.85 In this regard, one must be prepared to accept that the removal 
of trade benefits is perhaps not an argument that is convincing enough 
to induce change on its own. The example of the little effective GSP+ 
sanctions taken, for example, against Belarus or Myanmar may corroborate 
this hypothesis,86 and may explain why a violation of essential elements 
have never given rise to sanctions of that sort. Moreover, as conditionality 
is becoming an ever more contentious issue, all the more on the part of a 
post-colonial power,87 and as at least some partner countries are resisting 
it very assertively,88 the EU should probably tread quite lightly at the time 
83 See Council of the European Union, ‘Common approaches on the use of political 
clauses’, 2 June 2009, 10491/1/09. 
84 See CHAUFFOUR, J.-P. and MAUR, J.-C., op. cit. (note 52), p. 15.
85 BARTELS, L., op. cit. (note 68), p. 18. The ECJ (Mugraby, 6 September 2011, 
T-292/09) has indeed explicitly confirmed that they EU retained discretion in applying sanc-
tions for human rights violations and was in no way obliged to invoke the essential elements 
clause. See para. 40: ‘as regards the alleged failure by the Commission to act with respect to 
the suspension of the various Community assistance programmes in Lebanon, it must be held 
that, contrary to the applicant’s assertions, Article 2 of the Association Agreement is not in-
tended to permit or indeed to impose the recourse to and adoption of measures if the parties to 
that agreement fail to comply with the clause relating to fundamental rights contained in that 
article. Article 2 of the Association Agreement contains a provision on human rights, which 
provides that the relations between the parties and all the provisions of the agreement itself 
are to be based on respect of democratic principles and fundamental human rights.’
86 See BEKE, L. and HACHEZ, N., ‘The EU GSP: A Preference of Human Rights and 
Good Governance? The Case of Myanmar’, forthcoming in WOUTERS, J., MARX, A., 
GERAETS, D., and NATENS, B. (eds.), Global Governance though Trade, Cheltenham, Ed-
ward Elgar, 2015.
87 WETZEL, J., ‘Introduction’, in WETZEL, J., (ed.), The EU as a ‘Global Player’ in the 
Field of Human Rights, Abingdon, Routledge, 2012, p. 12.
88 See for example the assertion that the relationship of the EU with ACP countries has 
evolved from one of cooperation to one of coercion: HURT, S., ‘Co-operation and coercion? 
The Cotonou Agreement between the European Union and ACP states and the end of the 
Lomé Convention’, Third World Quarterly, n.º 24, 2003, p. 161.

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
104 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106
of contemplating sanctions for fear of fuelling conflict rather than fostering 
social change.89 The EU must finally be mindful of not doing more harm 
than good by activating sanctions as these could hit the local population 
more painfully than the government. And indeed, the EU has made it a rule 
that its sanctions and restrictive measures must comply with international 
law and fundamental rights, and must not entail an undue economic or 
humanitarian cost.90 This is why the conduct of human rights impact 
assessments has been rightly suggested before deciding on sanctions.91
III.  Conclusion: are essential elements clauses so essential to achieving 
the EU’s trade-human rights nexus?
Trade relations have been noted to be natural avenues for achieving 
normative objectives such as human rights. Legal instruments governing 
those relations are a powerful lever to achieve those aims, notably through 
conditionality policies.92 This has clearly been the philosophy of the EU 
since 1995, which it reaffirmed in its Strategic Framework for Human 
Rights, in which the Council lays down specific actions in respect of 
bilateral instruments to ‘make trade work in a way that helps human 
rights.’93 In this article I have provided an overview of the principal way in 
which EU bilateral trade and investment agreements has included ‘beyond 
trade’ concerns in a way that leverages human rights, namely the essential 
elements clauses.94 In this conclusion, I would like to outline a brief 
evaluation of whether and to what extent the EU’s ambitions in this regard 
have succeeded. The picture is quite mixed.
From the point of view of effectiveness, the EU has not deviated 
from its policy to systematically link trade and human rights by including 
‘essential elements’ clauses in all its general trade agreements since 1995. 
89 MEUNIER, S. and NICOLAIDIS, K., ‘The European Union as a conflicted trade 
power’, Journal of European Public Policy, n.º 13, 2006, p. 921.
90 See Council of the European Union, ‘Guidelines on implementation and evaluation of 
restrictive measures (sanctions) in the framework of the EU Common Foreign and Security 
Policy’, 15 June 2012, 11205/12 2012, 5. 
91 BARTELS,L., op. cit. (note 26), p. 31.
92 See generally HAFNER-BURTON, E., op. cit. (note 2).
93 Council of the European Union (note 4) Action 11.
94 As mentioned above, the more recent EU trade agreements now include ‘sustainable 
development chapters’ which seek to incept an ongoing dialogue with the partner country on 
sustainable development issues, including labour rights. The approach taken by those chapters 
is fundamentally different from that of the essential elements clause, and it has been argued 
elsewhere that such approach might not be less effective. See BEKE, L., D’HOLLANDER, 
D., HACHEZ, N., and PÉREZ DE LAS HERAS, B., op. cit. (note 25), p. 77.

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106 
105
The EU should be credited for this, as this single point has delayed and 
stiffened a number of negotiation processes. The essential elements clause 
potentially provides a hard mechanism through which the EU can sanction 
the many human rights violating countries with which it has an agreement 
in place. Yet, the EU very seldom activates conditionality in this way, 
and when it does, trade mechanisms are not at the heart of sanctions. This 
attitude has been analysed as a sign of weakness or pusillanimity from 
the EU, who would be talking the talk but would not dare walking the 
walk. Others have emphasised that sanctioning was not necessarily the 
point of conditionality: what is important would be to put human rights 
commitments on record, and thereby provide a basis for ongoing dialogue 
and progressive improvement. Partial evidence seems to show that, in terms 
of the correlation between trade instruments and human rights improvement 
over the long run, the dialogue-based approach is not necessarily negative.95
In terms of the legitimacy, the picture is also rather conflicted. 
Human rights conditionality is an established line of policy and has 
been practiced outside of Europe. Yet it is still being questioned by a 
number of —developed and developing— EU partners who do not favour 
linking human rights and trade in conditionality terms. Arguments are 
that insistence on improving human rights standards should not become 
disguised protectionism, and should not be used to put into question the 
comparative advantage of developing countries. Many EU Member States 
being former colonial powers, the imperialistic aftertaste of this normative 
agenda is also increasingly resented. However warranted these objections 
on principles might be, the way the EU has been concretely applying 
conditionality based on trade agreements somehow reinforces their import. 
The most important challenge in this regard has to do with perceived double 
standards. We have put in evidence the fact that deviations in the drafting 
of human rights clauses —however justified by historical or geographical 
criteria— potentially create obligations of a different scope and intensity 
across the group of EU trade partners. With regard to sanctions, the only 
times the EU ever acted on the basis of the human rights clauses were to 
target ACP countries – the former group of EU colonies, whereas certain 
events left ignored would also have warranted some reaction by the EU.
In terms of credibility, the EU has set the bar quite high for itself, by 
casting into constitutional stone its commitment to linking external (trade) 
relations and human rights, and by identifying concrete and ambitious 
95 See MARX, A., SOARES, J., and VAN ACKER, W., ‘The protection of the rights 
of freedom of association and collective bargaining. A longitudinal analysis over 30 years 
in 73 countries’, forthcoming in MARX, A., WOUTERS, J., BEKE, L and RAYP, G. (eds.), 
Global Governance and Labour Rights, Cheltenham, Edward Elgar, 2015.

‘Essential Elements’ Clauses in EU Trade Agreements Making Trade Work... 
Nicolas Hachez 
 
Cuadernos Europeos de Deusto 
106 
ISSN: 1130 - 8354, Núm. 53/2015, Bilbao, págs. 81-106
objectives, notably in the Strategic Framework for Human Rights. The 
effectiveness and legitimacy flaws identified above already largely affect 
the credibility of the EU’s stance as a global normative power, and have 
reportedly stood in the way of many EU foreign policy objectives. All in 
all, it is quite difficult to evaluate whether the EU conditionality policy as 
implemented through bilateral trade relations is successful. The EU has 
clearly chosen a progressive and non-adversarial approach, and therefore 
changes, if any, will take place incrementally and over the long run. 
However, the effectiveness, legitimacy and credibility issues we have 
outlined above confirm that the EU is fundamentally, in the words of 
Meunier and Nicolaidis, a ‘conflicted trade power’.96 It wants to do the right 
thing and robustly link trade and human rights, but other considerations 
stand in the way. This is of course normal as policy-making by definition 
entails compromise. However, given the ways in which the ‘essential 
elements’ strategy falls short, the outside observer is left wondering 
whether, in its position and with the tools at its disposal, the EU could and 
should not achieve more.
96 MEUNIER, S. and NICOLAIDIS, K., op. cit. (note 89).