Richard F. Gombrich
University of Oxford, Balliol College, Broad Street, GB–ox1 3BJ Oxford 
richard.gombrich@balliol.ox.ac.uk
British Higher Education Policy in the Last Twenty Years
The Murder of a Profession*
Preamble
This is the text of a lecture I gave on 7 January 2000 in Tokyo at the Graduate Institute of Policy 
Studies (GRIPS). The title – not the subtitle – had been assigned to me. I was asked to speak 
for an hour, which explains the rather unsatisfactory division of material between the main text 
on the one hand and the footnotes and appendices on the other. The lecture was simultaneously 
translated into Japanese. I have only added to the text as I delivered it a very few words of 
clarification.
In introducing me, Professor Aoki Tamotsu made it clear, at my request, that I was adhering 
strictly to the topic assigned, and it would be quite wrong to deduce that I saw no good in Brit-
ish higher education. Had I been asked to talk of that in general, I would have given a different 
lecture.
I also made it clear in answering questions that I had not the slightest wish to impugn the value 
of training people in special skills and equipping them for the job market. On the contrary, I 
recognise that every country has an obligation to do this for its citizens as well as it can. I do 
however see a crucial difference between education and training, and it is this which concerns 
me in the lecture.
British higher education policy over the last twenty years has been an unmiti-
gated catastrophe.
When a stranger from a distant place pronounces so uncompromising a mes-
sage of doom, the natural and sensible reaction must be to suspect exaggera-
tion, maybe even hysteria or paranoia. Over the next hour I have two tasks. 
The easy one, alas, will be to justify my words.1 The more difficult one will be 
to fit into the short time available enough facts, analysis and argument to do 
justice to the gravity of my topic. Most lecturers are megalomanic: they think 
they are so worth listening to that they should be allowed to harangue the au-
dience forever. So what is special about my talk today? I wish well to Japan in 
general and to Japanese universities in particular. I hear that you are in danger 
of repeating some of our mistakes. I fervently hope that I can prevent you 
from imitating a nation that has recently destroyed what I think were widely 
regarded as some of the world’s best universities. To do so, I feel that I must 
not merely analyse what has been happening but also explain the fundamental 
reasons why we have gone so wrong. I think we have not even been asking 
*
Text is retrieved from INDOLOGY: Resourc-
es for Indological Scholarship, http://indol-
ogy.info/papers/gombrich/, accessed: 30 Au-
gust 2012. Reprinted here by kind permission 
of the author.
1
Before coming to Japan I told quite a few aca-
demic friends and colleagues of how I pro-
posed to start this lecture. Not a single one 
demurred.

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years

the right questions about higher education, let alone giving good answers. 
So in the last part of this lecture I shall explain my own starting point, and 
talk about three interrelated themes which I regard as crucial: about truth in 
human society, about education as a human activity, and about professional­
ism, or what it is to be a professional. On my way, I shall be illustrating the 
dehumanizing illusion of quantification, negative egalitarianism (also known 
as jealousy), and the arrogance of power.
So what should I do in my allotted hour? My first draft was far too long, so, 
for better or for worse, I have made two decisions. I have decided that my 
top priority must be to make clear the main lines of my argument; and that to 
convey to you a picture of what has happened I should not deny myself the 
use of what some call “anecdotal evidence”, with the implication that such 
evidence is arbitrary and selective. Both decisions make the lecture more per-
sonal. I have made them because the statistics and many other data are easily 
obtainable from published sources, and because the fact that my text is being 
circulated allows me to do what I normally avoid and provide extra material, 
including some remarks I think important, in footnotes and appendices which 
are only in the written version.
The most important published source is known as the Dearing Report.2 In 
1996 the government appointed a commission under the chairmanship of Sir 
Ron Dearing, who had recently re-organized the Post Office. Its remit was to 
consider how higher education in the UK should develop over the next twenty 
years. Its seventeen members were drawn mainly from higher education and 
from business and industry. Neither the British Academy nor the Royal So-
ciety (the organizations which embody our leading scholars in the humani-
ties3 and science respectively) was represented, nor, so far as I know, were 
either museums or libraries. The committee was appointed with bipartisan 
support, so it hardly matters that it began under a Conservative government 
and reported, 14 months later, to a Labour one. The report has 466 pages and 
makes 93 recommendations. It was welcomed by the government and most of 
it is likely to be implemented. It begins by making the right noises: the chair-
man’s introductory comment ends with an elevating quotation from a British 
Poet Laureate, John Masefield, about the pursuit of truth and “the dignity of 
thought and learning”. These topics disappear after Chapter One, and the bulk 
of the report shows that the committee, if it ever kept these ideals in mind, was 
unable to find any link between them and the pragmatics of making policy. 
Thus, while the committee has lots to say about topics that government policy 
had already brought to the fore, notably quality control, access (who is to at-
tend university) and finance, in my eyes it massively misses the point.4
1) Make-believe as government policy
In 1992 John Major’s government passed a Further and Higher Education 
Act which brought dramatic change to higher education., Since 1965, British 
higher education had been organized on what was called the “binary sys-
tem”, binary because divided between universities and other institutions, 
mainly polytechnics and teachers’ training colleges. The degrees awarded by 
the latter institutions were validated by the Council for National Academic 
Awards;5 they had a strong bias towards vocational and applied subjects, and 
their teaching staff were not expected to publish research, though they were 
certainly not prohibited from doing so. The universities received block grants 
from the government through a small body of academics called the University 

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years

Grants Committee (UGC);6 the UGC had considerable autonomy and the uni-
versities had a great measure of discretion how to spend their grants, which 
until the late 1970s were given for five years at a time. Polytechnics, like state 
schools, were under local governments, which also gave them a more local 
character.7
In 1992 the binary system was abolished and the former polytechnics etc. 
mostly became universities, with corresponding changes in other areas of no-
menclature, so that their executive heads became Vice-chancellors or Princi-
pals and most senior teachers became professors. (In Britain the title of Pro-
fessor is reserved for those who in America are called “full professor”, and a 
professorship is the same as a chair.) There are now 132 members of the Com-
mittee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals (CVCP), and all the institutions they 
head answer to a huge new bureaucracy called the Higher Education Funding 
Council for England and Wales (HEFCE).8 HEFCE and the CVCP jointly fi-
nance another body called the Quality Assurance Agency (QAA). Money for 
research also comes to the universities through the Research Councils, and, 
for science, from contracts with government and industry. It is significant that 
the science research councils come under the government Dept of Trade and 
Industry and are formally required “to distribute their funds in such a way as 
to facilitate the creation of wealth (…); they have businessmen as chairmen 
and a substantial lay membership.”9
Since 1992, all universities compete for funds on an equal footing; all must 
follow the same rules and apply the same standards. Officially all degrees are 
equal. I doubt if there is anyone who believes this, but it is one of the lies we 
now have to tell. By nearly doubling overnight the number of university stu-
dents,10 teachers and vice-chancellors the government cannot possibly have 
preserved standards in any of those bodies, but it is virtually tabu to say that 
this is government by make-believe and that the emperor has no clothes. The 
emasculation of the CVCP is particularly serious. This body never had much 
power but it would stand up for the universities. Now numbering 132, it is 
2
The National Committee of Inquiry into 
Higher Education, Higher Education in the 
learning society, HMSO 1997.
3
The traditional British term is ‘arts’, but I take 
it that ‘humanities’ is more familiar in Japan. 
Like many other features of American educa-
tion, it is also becoming familiar in Britain.
4
The most recent official source on our topic 
is the debate on higher education held in the 
House of Lords in the week before Christmas. 
In my eyes it is not so woefully inadequate as 
the Dearing Report, but still fails to focus on 
the fundamental questions. For some details, 
see Appendix 1 below.
5
I served as a member of its Theology and Re-
ligious Studies Board 1983–1990.
6
In 1988 under Mrs Thatcher, this was supersed-
ed by the University Funding Council (UFC), 
which was directly under government control.
  7
The only private university in Britain, Buck-
ingham, was founded in the late 1970s and 
is of no importance; nor has it escaped the 
bureaucratic control described below. At Ox-
ford and Cambridge the colleges are private 
educational foundations, legally autonomous 
and with their own resources, but indirectly, 
through student fees etc., they are financially 
quite dependent on the state.
  8
Scotland and Northern Ireland have their par-
allel controlling bureaucracies.
  9
Quotation from Sir Keith Thomas’s Presiden-
tial Address to the British Academy, 1997, 
ms, p. 2.
10
The number of students in higher education 
was of course unaffected by this move, but 
was expanding rapidly in any case.

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
10
far too unwieldy to be effective, and not only includes many men (of course, 
hardly any women) who are not academics at all, but plenty of yes-men11 and 
careerists – some of whom make excellent use of their devolved power to 
determine their own salaries.
2) The quantitative story
In 1961, 5% of young people in Britain received higher education; in 1997 
the percentage was 34,12 and the government’s declared policy is to raise it 
to 50. Over the last twenty years the number of students has more than dou-
bled, while the unit of funding per student (known as the “unit of resource”) 
has fallen by 40% and is still falling: the government has announced plans 
to cut it by 0.8% in the current year and 0.9% in each of the next two years. 
Between 1980 and 1997 alone, the staff-student ratio almost doubled, from 
9:1 to 17.1.
In 1994–5 university expenditure on books and periodicals had fallen to less 
than one and a half volumes per student per year. As for the academic staff, 
a report commissioned by the government13 recently showed that salaries 
since 1981 alone have fallen by 30% compared with the average earnings of 
all other non-manual employees. Perhaps even more shocking, by 1997–8 
42% of academic staff were on fixed-term contracts, and if the present trend 
continues over 50% will be thus casualized by 2003–4. Even at Oxford, an 
increasing proportion of the teaching is being done by staff on short-term and 
part-time contracts, who are of course cheaper to employ. Such casual work-
ers do not get benefits such as pension rights.
3) Mrs Thatcher’s assault
Despite the steady increase in student numbers, Mrs Thatcher made savage 
cuts in higher education funding. In the years after she was first elected Prime 
Minister in 1979, there was much play with such clichés as “trimming the 
fat” and “cutting out the dead wood”. Her idea seemed to be that universities 
with their staff were like barrels of apples, which could be picked over and the 
rotten ones rejected, and that she was the first person ever to get this done. So 
far as I know no attempt has since been made to show that the proportion of 
dead wood or rotten apples was decreased by all the upheaval, or indeed that 
it achieved anything positive.
Perhaps I should pause to emphasize this point, since I understand that you 
may face a similar danger in Japan. When the government wants to seize 
power over education it calls it “reform”, but never explains what requires 
reform, what the universities have been doing wrong, beyond perhaps some 
meaningless phrase like “failure to modernize”, or connecting us with some 
unsatisfactory condition which is nothing to do with us.14 This is because if 
they were told what correction was wanted, the universities could make it 
themselves without outside interference, whereas the real purpose of the “re-
form” is to make them impotent. Similarly, since the aim of the “reform” is 
so vague, it will never be possible to test whether the changes were justified 
by success.
Let me record two memories of those days of Thatcher cuts. Our Professor 
of Hebrew was retiring and we had to convince the authorities that the Chair 
should be maintained and a successor appointed. It is a Regius Chair, which 
means that the Prime Minister makes the appointment on behalf of the mon-

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
11
arch – though these days it is customary for the Prime Minister to ascertain 
the wishes of the faculty rather than exercise personal preference. However, 
Mrs Thatcher was never one reluctant to put herself forward, so we thought 
it wise to consult someone who had just moved to Oxford from a high civil 
service post, in which he had come to understand the Prime Minister’s think-
ing. We showed him our draft, which began, “The Regius Professorship of 
Hebrew at Oxford was founded by Henry the Eighth.” “Cut that,” said our 
advisor, “Her response will be ‘Then isn’t it time for a change?’” So much for 
the tradition of the humanities.15
But the scientists fared even worse. We had as a visitor at Balliol College the 
Harvard Dean Professor Don Price, who had advised the Kennedy adminis-
tration on science policy. Sitting next to him at dinner one evening, I found 
him in a state of shock. That afternoon our Secretary of State for Education, 
Sir Keith Joseph, had visited Oxford off the record to address our assembled 
scientists. “If you want to do research,” he had said to them, “my advice to 
you is to emigrate.”
This background explains how it came about that when in January 1985 it 
was proposed to bestow an honorary degree on the Prime Minister, an Oxford 
graduate, the proposal was defeated in Congregation, the dons’ analogue to 
Parliament, by 738 votes to 319, the largest margin ever recorded. In thus 
snubbing the Prime Minister, the dons knew they were taking a political 
risk, but it was their one chance to record a protest which would be heard 
by the media. Professor Denis Noble, FRS, an eminent cardiac physiologist 
and founder of the organization Save British Science, made the most telling 
speech. He described the government’s education policies as
“… absolutely fundamental to the central purpose for which we and other educational insti-
tutions exist and to be producing possibly irreparable damage to those institutions. … [S]he 
knows and has been warned that virtually everyone who knows what is happening in the science 
11
At times the CVCP even goes over to the en-
emy. “We were alarmed to see that the Com-
mittee of Vice-Chancellors and Principals has 
recently called for ‘a national policy’ for the 
humanities, urging that a Research Council 
for the Humanities and Arts should identify 
‘national aspirations, needs [and] objectives’. 
… We are sceptical about so dirigiste an ap-
proach.” Sir Keith Thomas, loc. cit. in fn. 8.
12
Figures in this paragraph have been supplied 
by the AUT; some of those in the Dearing Re-
port are slightly different. For more statistics 
on the expansion, see Appendix 1.
13
The Betts Report. There is no sign that it will 
be acted upon.
14
In an open letter to the Secretary of State for 
Education in 1986, Oxford’s Vice-Chancellor 
wrote: “It is true that the economic perform-
ance of the country has been disappointing. 
It is also true that the universities contribute 
to the nation’s economic performance. But to 
infer, from a linking of these two statements, 
that higher education has been ineffective is 
neither logical nor just. It would be truer to 
say that an economic performance widely 
recognized to have been outstandingly bad 
has occurred in spite of the contribution of 
a higher education system which is widely 
recognized to be outstandingly good, and that 
in those circumstances the causes of the poor 
economic performance must be sought else-
where.” (Oxford University Gazette)
15
Let me here make a point of substance. It es-
capes rulers of academia who are not academ-
ics that the most important difference between 
science and the humanities is not that science 
is more expensive. It is that they have a dif-
ferent primary purpose. Science does indeed 
progress by novelty, by finding new facts and 
interpretations. The humanities, with a few 
exceptions like archaeology, rarely make true 
discoveries. Their purpose is rather to pre-
serve traditions of learning and understand-
ing, and to convey (mainly by teaching and 
example) insight into a wide range of human 
experience. To make “research productivity” 
a measure of success in the humanities is thus 
pointless, even harmful.

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
12
laboratories of this country is extremely alarmed… Sir Keith Joseph in a [recent] speech … 
said, ‘Too many of our university laboratories are full of equipment that belongs in museums 
of industrial archaeology.’ Yet, in Parliament, six days later, he announced a [huge] cut in the 
equipment grant.”16
Professor Noble reported that the President of the Royal Society had recently 
predicted that if things went on like this, “the contribution made by Britain to 
world science will be severely reduced.” Sadly, that prediction has been ful-
filled. Just a month ago Prof. Noble published an article17 about the steep fall 
in Britain’s share of Nobel prizes and other major international science prizes; 
he convincingly predicts that unless salaries rise dramatically, the decline will 
be irreversible.18
What laboratories are to science, libraries are to the humanities – though the 
libraries cost less. While expenditure on books and periodicals for university 
libraries was cut to the bone and beyond, government policy initiated in the 
Thatcher years and continued since has been to minimize the public subsidy 
of culture. Museums and libraries have been hit very hard. Even the British 
Library had its funds so cut that it had to curtail its purchase of foreign books 
to the point at which buying in some languages has stopped altogether. It may 
be believed that the Internet makes books redundant, but the very books the 
library is missing are most unlikely ever to be recorded electronically. Once 
such gaps in acquisition have gone on for a couple of years the lost ground 
cannot be recovered and the collection will never again be satisfactory. This 
means that in certain fields British scholars will have to rely on libraries 
abroad, probably the library of Congress.
4) The motives for the assault
On 8 June 1984 The Times Higher Education Supplement published a long 
and densely argued editorial entitled “Popper’s nightmare”. Karl Popper, I am 
sure you know, was a philosopher famous for his attacks on totalitarianism 
and his warnings against allowing too much power to the state. The edito-
rial discusses the “grand political irony” that “No previous government has 
so successfully aggrandized the power of the state while simultaneously and 
loudly proclaiming its deepest wish to roll back its frontiers.” The editor says 
(disingenuously, in my opinion) that all governments would like to “central-
ize the power to take decisions”, but “the early 1980s will be regarded in the 
future as a decisive episode in the creation of a tightly coordinated system of 
higher education under strict national direction. … Sir Keith Joseph … is the 
first secretary of state with the power to set a national policy.” He acquired 
this power through the cuts, and “the stick is mightily more effective than the 
carrot.” After commending Sir Keith for thus acquiring the power to “make 
education more relevant to the conditions of modern society”, and reassuring 
the reader, rather unconvincingly,19 that he would not abuse his power, the 
editorial quotes Karl Popper:
“The holistic planner overlooks the fact that it is easy to centralize power but impossible to cen-
tralize all knowledge which is distributed over many individual minds, and whose centralization 
would be necessary for the wise wielding of centralized power. But this fact has far-reaching 
consequences. Unable to ascertain what is in the minds of many individuals, he must try to 
control and stereotype interests and beliefs by education and propaganda. But this attempt to 
exercise power over minds must destroy the last possibility of finding out what people really 
think, for it is clearly incompatible with the free expression of thought, especially of critical 
thought. Ultimately it must destroy knowledge; and the greater the gain in power, the greater 
will be the loss of knowledge.”20

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
13
The editor concludes that “perhaps there may be some substance to fears of 
a Tory offensive against intellectual dissent. For what from the top of the 
system can appear nothing more than a sensible administrative policy may 
seem at the bottom a deadly ideological assault. So we arrive at Popper’s 
nightmare.”
Mrs Thatcher made her name as a free marketeer, believing that the economy 
did best if economic agents were allowed autonomy. In particular, the state 
should not try to “second guess” the decisions of businessmen. By contrast, 
she was the greatest centralizer of power Britain has known in modern times21 
and energetically promoted the state’s “second guessing” the decisions of lo-
cal government and the professions – in fact, of everyone except business-
men. I shall discuss to what extent her policies for higher education, and those 
of subsequent governments, have followed mercantilist and to what extent 
they have rather followed dirigiste principles. First, however, I must try to 
explain the thinking – or, more accurately, the attitudes – which underlie this 
approach to educational policy.
In this period, the early 1980s, Enoch Powell22 published an article in The 
Times in which he protested that economic growth should have the purpose 
of promoting education, not vice versa. Nothing could be more alien to Mrs 
Thatcher’s mind set. While many have noted her hostility to the professions, 
few seem to have understood its roots.
Lawyers, doctors and teachers are “professionals” in the sense that they pro-
fess a “calling”, analogous to a religious calling, to promote a general good, 
be it justice, health or education. To carry out their work requires both ex-
pertise and an ethical commitment.23 They get paid for their work, but it is 
16
Professor Noble’s speech in Congregation on 
29 January 1985 was released to the Press. 
He prepared a copy of it with invaluable 
footnotes; it will be deposited in the GRIPS 
library.
17
Denis Noble, “A Future for Science”, Oxford 
Magazine 172, Eighth Week Michaelmas 
term 1999, pp.1–5.
18
There was little remission in the decline of 
funding for science over the period. For ex-
ample, much damning information appeared 
in a short article by the Science Editor of 
the Independent newspaper entitled “Science 
chiefs’ budget attacks were suppressed”. 
(Independent, 10 September 1992, p. 6) The 
government had grossly falsified the figures 
by double-counting some allocations, and 
had suppressed publication of a warning letter 
sent them in May 1990 by the Advisory Board 
for the Research Councils. Its chairman had 
written: “On present government plans, the 
proportion of the nation’s wealth deployed 
through the science budget will have declined 
by 15% between 1981 and 1994.”
19
The editor goes so far as to admit that in 
“some recent decisions” he had “confused 
his constitutional authority with his private 
prejudices”, and mentions his “hostile scep-
ticism about social science”. In conversation 
with a Balliol colleague of mine, Sir Keith 
said that the social sciences were “inherently 
left-wing”.
20
For current evidence of this, see Appendix 5.
21
It is only fair to point out that the subsequent 
governments headed by John Major and Tony 
Blair have been happy to inherit this central-
ized control. Blair has granted considerable 
autonomy to Scotland and Wales and allowed 
London once again to have its own unitary lo-
cal government, but has done nothing what-
ever to restore power to the professions.
22
He had been a minister in an earlier Conserv-
ative government, in the days when the name 
‘Conservative’ still meant that, rather than 
‘right radical’. Earlier he had been a Profes-
sor of Greek. Though I abhorred some of his 
views, for he was an extreme British national-
ist, no one could deny his intelligence or his 
independence of thought.
23
For doctors this is embodied in the Hippocrat-
ic Oath.

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
14
virtually impossible for outsiders to evaluate it, so one of their commitments 
is not to overcharge. They take responsibility for exercising their judgment 
in the interest of their clients. The public, though suspicious of lawyers, has 
generally been inclined to trust the professions and to allow them to regulate 
their own affairs through professional councils.
For Thatcherism, this is all cant and hogwash. The professions are interest 
groups, just like other interest groups, and interest means only one thing, 
economic interest. If doctors want money to be spent on health, that is just 
because they want to get richer. Words like responsibility, judgment and trust 
are just a smokescreen. Just as the government must act in the economy to see 
that business interests have what is nowadays called “a level playing field”, it 
must unmask the pretensions of these so-called “professional” interest groups 
and level the playing field to ensure that doctors have no more privileges than, 
say, butchers.
In her belief that only the economy is real, the rest is just rationalization, 
Mrs Thatcher echoed Marx’s distinction between base and superstructure. 
The irony goes far deeper than that identified by the Times leader: Britain’s 
most right-wing Prime Minister was also the most Marxist. Les extremes se 
touchent.
This belief that in the end only money counts has led our rulers into a logical 
fallacy which explains many of the disasters that have befallen our educa-
tion system. If the economy is all that is real, everything has its price, which 
means that everything, or at least everything that matters, can be quantified. 
Moreover, only quantity can be accurately measured and hence evaluated by 
bureaucrats. If something cannot be measured, it is literally of no account.
Marxism was not the only major influence on Mrs Thatcher. She came from 
a cultural background of Protestant non-conformism.24 The oldest strain of 
such non-conformism is Calvinist, Puritan. Puritanism is at the same time 
both pro-wealth and anti-luxury. The Calvinists have always believed that 
the righteous are marked out by achieving worldly wealth, a sign of God’s 
favour. So getting rich is not just pleasant, but even morally desirable. Luxury, 
however, is an impediment to wealth; gratification is to be postponed to the 
afterlife. When Mrs Thatcher visited her Oxford college and was told that a 
girl student to whom she was being introduced studied mediaeval history, she 
exclaimed, “What a luxury!” That was not an approving remark.
The non-conformist movement that had the most influence in Britain was 
the Methodism of John Wesley. Wesley was suspicious of the intellect. The 
Protestant tradition since Luther has held that salvation comes about through 
faith alone, and the intellect is generally more an enemy than a friend to faith. 
It tends to make people think they know better and thus to indulge in the sin of 
pride. British culture has a horror of “showing off”. Even in schools, teachers 
will reprimand children who get too many answers right too fast: “Be careful, 
bighead, not to bump your head on the wall.”
English may thus be the only language in the world where the word “clever” 
is not necessarily a term of praise – though you cannot learn this from a dic-
tionary. It is fine for a dog to be clever, as shown by its catching a ball, and it 
is all right to be clever at a specific task, or even to be clever with your hands. 
So “clever” is a term of praise when it means skilful or well trained. But for a 
person to be described as clever in the sense of intelligent, of having general 
potential rather than a specific accomplishment, carries a strong overtone of 
moral dubiousness. This has enormous, and in my view disastrous, conse-
quences for the British view of the relation of education to training. It also 

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
15
helps to explain Mrs Thatcher’s distrust (if that is not too weak a word) of 
academics and intellectuals.
5) The main strands of policy: mercantilism and dirigisme
By ‘mercantilism’ I here mean belief in the value of a free market. We have 
not yet seen much of that in higher education, for all the rhetoric.
The famous example of a higher education system based on free market prin-
ciples is that of the United States. Admiration for that system must presum-
ably explain why in recent years British universities have been forced to fol-
low the American model in certain respects, even though those changes have 
nothing to do with a free market. All English universities except Oxford and 
Cambridge have switched from our traditional three-term academic year to 
the American system of two semesters. They have also abandoned the tra-
ditional one-subject or two-subject BA degree courses, intended to promote 
depth, in favour of the American “modular system”, in which students take 
courses which mostly last only one semester. Since each course is examined, 
there is far more examining than under the old system, in which exams were 
confined to the end of the academic year.25 Examining, like all evaluation, is 
a form of administration and takes time away from what used to be considered 
the essential duties of university teachers: teaching and research. At some of 
our universities there is now hardly any teaching between the Easter break 
and the summer holidays: the teachers are examining full-time.
Twenty years after Thatcher’s arrival, there is no free market in British higher 
education, for the simple reason that universities are not even free to set their 
own prices. It is the government that sets the level of fees. There is a debate 
nowadays about how much students should pay and how, but as it is unre-
solved I shall not discuss it except to say that universities are so desperately 
poor that what matters most is for them to get some more money, however it 
may come.26 If a university is to be modelled on a commercial enterprise, it is 
also wholly unclear who the customers are: the students or the taxpayers. The 
model vacillates. It is also unclear what the product is: sometimes it appears 
to be student qualifications, at other times national wealth. With such mud-
dle and ambiguity in the policies which are supposed to guide them, it is no 
wonder that the universities are easy targets for criticism, which then is used 
to justify ever greater control.
Rhetoric tends to place the student as customer; John Major’s government 
was especially fond of this switch in perception. But only the stupidest cus-
tomer buys a pig in a poke, so the student must be able to see what she is buy-
ing. Education used to mean placing yourself in the hands of a teacher whom 
24
I do not know whether she is personally re-
ligious, though I doubt it, but that is not rel-
evant.
25
Oxford, an extreme case, examines even less: 
there are no formal exams in the second year 
of the 3-year BA course. There is plenty of 
informal feedback from tutors, but the idea is, 
or used to be, that students should take some 
responsibility for pacing themselves and 
monitoring their own progress, rather than 
being nannied like small children.
26
“Only about one third of the total income of 
the University of Oxford is now derived from 
the Higher Education Funding Council.” Lord 
Butler, Master of University College, Oxford, 
quoted in the report of the House of Lords 
debate (see footnote 4). In the same source, 
the parallel figure for the London School of 
Economics is only 26%.

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
16
you trusted to give you what you needed. To some extent this model still 
works for doctors, since few people feel competent to judge their own medi-
cal requirements; accordingly, doctors have not wholly lost their professional 
status. One of the words most heard in higher education nowadays is “trans-
parency”. You must lay out your wares for the customer to see while consid-
ering purchase. This means far more than advertising on the Internet what 
subjects a course will cover. It is not enough to promise your pupil to exercise 
your professional judgment on her behalf; that is considered “subjective” and 
hence undesirable. The bureaucrat requires allegedly “objective”, quantitative 
criteria.27 The word ‘education’ etymologically contains the Latin root mean-
ing ‘to lead’, but a vendor cannot lead his customer, only mislead her. “The 
customer is always right” is the basic mercantilist adage.
In fact, of course, most students have more sense than to behave like commer-
cial customers. The client we really have to try to satisfy is the government. 
The government says it is only acting as agent for the taxpayer, but we can 
hardly treat the taxpayer as a customer, since it is hopeless to try selling to a 
customer from whom you can have no feedback. Here too there is no market. 
In free markets some businesses fail and others succeed, even predominate. 
But on the one hand, our government does not want any university to fail and 
go bankrupt, as this would waste the public money already invested. On the 
other hand, no university must be too commercially successful either. When 
recently a Vice-Chancellor asked “that state funds should be made available to 
match money which has been raised by universities’ own efforts,” a member 
of the Commons Education Select Committee killed the proposal by merely 
saying: “My worry is that … that will lead to universities like Oxford and 
Cambridge simply getting a lot of money.”28 We shall see more of this very 
British form of egalitarianism. What is on view here is not mere jealousy. It is 
also the confusion between equality of opportunity and equality of outcome 
(“all shall have prizes”), especially common in the Labour Party, that bedev-
illed the introduction of comprehensive secondary schools in the 1960s and 
‘70s.29 Markets do imply competition, but about that too we have much talk 
and little action.30
While there is really no market in British higher education, I suppose that 
begging is a kind of commerce. We call it fundraising. It is an established 
feature of the American scene, in which universities all employ bevies of pro-
fessional fundraisers and there is what they call a “culture of giving”; even in 
the income tax system there is a presupposition that one will make donations 
to charities. In Britain people think that their taxes support cultural institu-
tions, including universities, and resent the idea that they should give extra. 
Now, however, any university teacher who cares for his subject had better 
raise money for it if he wishes it to survive. I know that when I retire there 
will be no Buddhist studies at Oxford unless the money has been raised from 
private sources. I do not enjoy fundraising and have not been trained in it, so 
am probably not good at it; but there is no real choice.
Dependence on fundraising has its drawbacks for institutions concerned with 
the truth. Is advertising the most veridical form of human communication? 
For all its good qualities, we know, alas, that American universities are rid-
dled with hype, exaggeration beyond all reason. Americans seeking a refer-
ence from a British academic usually feel the need to remind us that we can-
not write for their market as we would write at home. No one there will get 
a job unless he is a “mega-star” at least, and the very word ‘average’, in any 
context, is the kiss of death. When we raise money, it is hard not to bend the 

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
17
truth. Most money comes from businessmen, and they naturally prefer to give 
money for subjects they regard as useful. I believe that management studies is 
the only field at Oxford which is not short of funds.31 It is hard to raise money 
for economics or sociology, much easier for an applied field like marketing; 
so the academic is likely to face the choice between pretending he is doing 
what he is not, which is dishonest, or doing just what he is paid to do, which 
is prostitution. The choice is somewhat humiliating.
We are about to have more commercialism at Oxford. Budgets will be de-
volved to individual faculties, which will be called “cost centres”, and there 
will be considerable financial autonomy. Instead of paying the salary of a 
professor of Sanskrit, the faculty will be able to use that money for teaching 
Turkish, equipping a new common room, or giving everyone a new computer. 
I can see a positive side to this, but it will also mean that we spend even less 
time on teaching and research. But who cares about that except an academic?
The recent trend for us to raise our own money and maybe even decide how 
to spend it is the only mercantilist strand in British higher education policy, 
which is overwhelmingly dirigiste. We are bureaucratized beyond belief. I 
have connections with a new university and helped them to set up some cours-
es in Indian studies. For this I had to wait around all day to be interviewed by 
two committees. While I was waiting I talked to a history professor who was 
being interviewed with me and he told me he had to attend so many meetings 
that he had time to lecture for only one hour a week. After the meeting I had to 
fill in a three-page form, with questions on my opinion of the room in which 
I had been interviewed. This is called “quality control”. It is Orwellian Nus-
peak, for it really denotes controlling quality only in the sense of pest control, 
i.e. keeping it down.
The central plank of the ideological platform of our “quality control” is the 
concept of “value added”, which of course comes straight from Marx.32 This 
is “value added per student”. To calculate this figure, you take the value of the 
student when she enters the university, her value when she leaves (typically 3 
years later, with a first degree), and deduct the former figure from the latter; 
you then take the average for the students who have passed through in the 
period under consideration. Marx wrote of the alienation of treating people 
as objects, but I doubt that even he envisaged that students could be so com-
moditized. It is hard for Oxford or Cambridge to score well for “value added” 
because we take students who are already “valuable”, i.e., well qualified; so 
this calculation works somewhat like the English schoolteacher’s reprimand 
and warns us not to get bigheaded.
Above all, “quality control” is a means of denying academics the right to act 
as professionals. On a recent inspection of Oxford teaching. the inspector sat 
27
We have even been warned about the use 
of qualitative judgments in testimonials: we 
should “stick to the facts”.
28
Quoted in Jasper Griffin, “A Don’s Dilem-
ma”, The Spectator , 25 September 1999, pp. 
20–21.
29
We shall meet this again in Appendix 4, where 
we discuss access (equality of opportunity) 
and dropout rates (equality of outcome).
30
See Appendix 3 for a discussion.
31
I am sure they would deny this; but appetites 
are great, and management is not the most 
modest of subjects.
32
The German term is Mehrwert.

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
18
in on a history tutorial. The student read an essay, the teacher discussed it 
with him. In the course of the discussion the teacher rose and pulled a book 
out of his bookcase to show it to the student. The inspector asked if it was on 
the syllabus. It was not, so the teacher was officially criticized for introduc-
ing an element into his teaching which had not been previously announced. 
Spontaneous interaction with a student and the exercise of judgment are both 
frowned on.
The model for the university is now the factory. The factory mass-produces 
qualified students, thus adding value to the raw material. The academics, the 
workers on the shop floor, are there merely to operate the mechanical pro-
cedures which have been approved by the management and checked by the 
inspectorate. Since they are mere operatives, they can of course be paid ac-
cordingly. Recent job advertisements show that a secretary in the university 
and a young lecturer get the same salary – something over sixteen thousand 
pounds a year. In Oxford you cannot buy even a tiny house, or raise a family, 
on that money.
Our rulers claim, of course, that they are not controlling what we do, only 
how we do it. This claim is either stupid or disingenuous, for the two cannot 
be separated – as was realised by the editorial I have quoted. So how are we 
now regulated? I could tell you of the horrors of the Research Assessment 
Exercise (RAE) and the Teaching Quality Assessment (TQA), but those come 
only every 4 or 5 years. I have chosen instead to take examples which impinge 
on my life almost daily.
6) Removing professional responsibility
My first example concerns something that we have imposed on ourselves at 
Oxford, but it is in accordance with the ubiquitous principles of “quality con-
trol”. These are now so pervasive that probably few people would understand 
what I am complaining about.
The career of a research student at Oxford is organized broadly as follows. 
On admission by the graduate studies committee of the appropriate faculty, 
she is assigned to a supervisor. The supervisor writes termly reports three 
times a year on the student’s progress; they are read by the chairman of the 
graduate studies committee and by the student’s personal advisor at her col-
lege, either of whom can intervene if anything seems amiss. The student can 
change supervisor at the request of either party – though such requests are 
infrequent. When the student submits her thesis, it is examined by two people 
not the supervisor, who are chosen by the graduate studies committee, often 
on the supervisor’s advice and always with the student’s consent, in the sense 
that the student has the right to object to a particular nomination. One of the 
examiners is usually from outside Oxford; both may be. The supervisor is 
rigidly excluded from the examining process. The career of a doctoral student 
between admission and submission is formally divided into three stages; to 
proceed from one stage to the next she has to submit written work and the 
supervisor recommends the promotion on a form.
Within the last decade, this progression has been greatly elaborated. At both 
the intermediate stages, the student’s written work must now be assessed by 
two people not the supervisor; they also interview the student and send writ-
ten reports to the graduate studies committee.
Any supervisor worth his salt will advise a student to consult specialist col-
leagues when appropriate; there has never been any bar to this. Moreover, 

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
19
there are few matters in life on which it is not worth having a second opinion. 
Here, however, we have bureaucratic overkill. The present system has four 
drawbacks, two for the student and two for the teachers.
Firstly, students see themselves as undergoing three examinations instead of 
one, and so suffer more nervous tension. Second, there are few topics on 
which five or more academics will entirely agree, so that the student often 
receives conflicting advice.
For the teachers, the amount of examining everyone has to do is multiplied, 
whereas – I repeat – examining is a form of administration and so should be 
minimized to leave time and energy for teaching and research. But the last 
drawback is the worst. The traditional relationship between teacher and pupil 
is replaced by an impersonal mechanism. The teacher’s responsibility for the 
student is removed; in fact, no individual now takes responsibility: if anything 
goes wrong it is just system failure and nobody takes the blame. Nor, if all 
goes well, does anyone deserve credit: why should a student be grateful to a 
supervisor who is just doing his job along prescribed lines?
The supervisor has even effectively lost the power to decide when a thesis is 
ready for submission. For this it is the higher powers, the agencies of govern-
ment, who are responsible. To their undying shame, the British Academy, 
which for a while acted like a research council (though an exceptionally poor 
one) for the humanities, decided33 in 1991 to recommend to the government, 
which of course accepted,34 that students should finish their doctorates in 
three or at most four years of graduate study. The motive behind this was 
power, not saving money. Scientists, who begin their research careers in a far 
more tightly controlled environment, are normally set a piece of work for the 
doctorate, which is completed in three years. Humanities research students 
were taking far longer, though less long than their American counterparts.
If one is lucky enough to be among the very few students who get a state 
grant to pursue research in the humanities, that grant is given for three, or 
in very few cases for four years of study. If the student studies for longer, it 
is entirely at her own expense: she costs the State nothing, and the marginal 
cost of her presence at the university is incalculably small. Nevertheless, any 
department in the humanities or social sciences in which students are taking 
over four years to complete their doctorates is penalized by no longer being 
allowed to take research students who are on state funding. The reason for 
delay is irrelevant: whether the student was ill, employed, or fulfilling family 
responsibilities makes no difference to the operation of the policy.35
To earn a doctorate, a thesis used to have to be judged “an original contribu-
tion to knowledge”. This wording has been changed to “a significant and 
substantial contribution”, which is thus glossed in the regulations: “Examin-
ers shall bear in mind that their judgment of the substantial significance of the 
33
Strictly, the proposal came from a Joint Work-
ing Group of the British Academy and the 
CVCP.
34
In 1988 the government had proposed a target 
for theses to be submitted in 4 years.
35
One of the first departments to be hit was eco-
nomics at Cambridge. This is, or certainly was, 
the most distinguished economics department 
in Britain. Its research students tended to be 
employed, before finishing their doctorates, 
at such prestigious institutions as the World 
bank and IMF. So the department’s four-year 
completion rate was poor, and soon it found 
itself with only foreign research students, plus 
perhaps the rare British student rich enough to 
pay the fees from his own pocket.

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
20
work should take into account what may reasonably be expected of a capable 
and diligent student after three or at most four years of full-time study.”
The British Academy document actually says (in paragraph 8) that “the stand-
ards set by some scholars and institutions for doctoral theses in the humani-
ties, although commendable, are too high.” In February 1992 Balliol College 
wrote a letter of reasoned protest to the President of the British Academy,36 
but of course it had no effect. The new policy would mean, wrote Balliol, that 
“the theses produced in British universities would cease to be serious works 
of scholarship comparable with the theses produced in any other European 
university.”
Some supervisors are still taking the risk of maintaining standards, though this 
means being badgered with inquiries from the authorities, and may lead to the 
blacklisting of their departments. Their replies may have to bend the truth, but 
at least they avoid the far worse lie of pretending that an Oxford doctorate is 
still what it used to be and conniving in the policy of make-believe.
7) The modern consensus: 
     universities as instruments of social and economic policy
Early last month the Prime Minister, Tony Blair, lectured in Oxford on educa-
tion. Of higher education he had only two things to say: that it should take 
more young people from the working class37 and that it should keep Britain 
internationally competitive (in economic terms).38 The promotion of social 
equality and economic growth are indeed the main two topics nowadays when 
universities are discussed. I wholeheartedly support both these aims of gov-
ernment. But are universities the instruments which can realize them?
Universities can draw a small percentage of young people from the working 
class into the middle class, but nothing like enough to make a great impact on 
society. Besides, the less the university they join is like a real university, the 
less it can do for its students. The problems of class division require remedial 
action on many fronts, and those remedies need to reach the child long before 
he or she is old enough to attend a university. The biggest problem of all is 
parental ambitions, and to change these could well take a whole generation.
The main contribution of universities to economic growth must be through 
applied science. That will not flourish if we neglect fundamental scientific re-
search, nor can any science flourish at universities if there is no money to pay 
for salaries or laboratories. British science has been starved of funds for years, 
and with so little input it is again sheer make-believe to expect much output.
If our universities maintain a good reputation abroad, they can earn by attract-
ing foreign students – and they have indeed been doing so. To continue to do 
so, however, they must maintain the value of British degrees. There is alas the 
plainest of evidence that the lure of short-term gain is killing the goose that lays 
the golden eggs. The substitution of something called “quality control” for the 
true quality of professionalism is make-believe of Orwellian dimensions.
8) A fundamentally different view of universities
Our Prime Minister apparently thinks that the purpose of universities is to 
promote social engineering and economic progress. I would like to put for-
ward, as briefly as I can, an alternative view.
Institutions work best if they have clear goals and are designed to achieve 
those goals. Hospitals are for care of the sick, orchestras for playing music, 

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
21
and they should be used for those goals, entrusted to the professionals who 
understand them, and only judged by how well they fulfil them. Universities 
are for truth: to promote its pursuit (curiosity) and encourage its use under all 
circumstances.
Two questions arise. Do we need to pursue truth? And are universities the 
only institution to do that? To take the second question first: religious bodies 
may claim to, but they are only interested in a few issues and perfectly indif-
ferent to most of the questions asked in academia; moreover, they are not pre-
pared to question absolutely anything or to follow the truth wherever it leads 
them. It is academic scientists who are, they say, on the verge of creating life 
in a laboratory. They are probably wise to ask the churches what they think 
of this, but the churches would never have made the discoveries, nor are the 
scientists bound to heed their advice.
But do we need institutions committed to truth? Just think of the many 
places where there have been or are none, the countries ruled by Hitler and 
Stalin. Britain gave to the world, through its Parliament, the concept of Her 
Majesty’s loyal opposition. It is very odd and very sad that our politicians 
today cannot see why the country should need a permanent and flourish-
ing loyal opposition, trained to question and not to accept shoddy answers. 
Worse, academics are being forced to lie and to connive at half-truths. But 
truth matters everywhere, not just in politics. Think of how little has been 
achieved intellectually under Hitler, Stalin, or any totalitarian regime. Truth 
can more than pay for its keep pragmatically. But it has a more than prag-
matic value.
This brings me to education. I suppose that society requires from govern-
ment four things: security, justice, health and education. Health and educa-
tion, full use of one’s body and mind, are surely analogous. Unfortunately, 
they are viewed differently, at least in Britain. Sickness of body is regarded 
as exceptional, requiring remedial action, full health as normal, the default 
mode. The mind is regarded in the opposite way: untutored ignorance is 
thought of as natural, and any interference with that ignorance is a kind of 
bonus or, as Mrs Thatcher would say, a luxury. Can poor Britain afford such 
luxuries? Well, in the eighties someone had the bright idea of printing a but-
ton for people like me to wear; it said: “If you think education is expensive, 
try ignorance.”
As I have indicated, the English are afraid and ashamed of “cleverness”. That 
is a major reason why universities are justified as places of training for the 
job market, and not for the education they provide. The latter squeezes in, 
in today’s vocabulary, as “transferable skills”: ability to reason or to express 
oneself fluently can enhance performance in any job and so can be justified 
in pragmatic terms. So perhaps can some of the subtler dispositions which 
education can enhance, such as curiosity, critical acumen, a sense of respon-
sibility, a catholic range of sympathy, aesthetic sensitivity, an independent 
spirit. Incidentally, my scientific colleagues agree with me that these can be 
enhanced by, and are certainly needed by, the study of the sciences as much as 
that of the humanities. But their ultimate justification is not pragmatic. They 
36
This was A.J.P. Kenny, who had been Master 
of the college. He was subsequently knighted 
by John Major’s government.
37
The technical term for this issue is access. See 
Appendix 4.
38
On this see footnote 14 above.

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
22
are the qualities which make us fully human. As Dante has Ulysses say: “We 
were not made to live like brutes, but to pursue virtue and knowledge.”39
What our rulers have wholly failed to realize is that education is a human 
activity.40 It has to be human in its methods as well as its results, for the two 
are not entirely separable. Getting programmed information from a computer 
is valuable in its place, but it is training, not education. If we think back to our 
own education, most of us will remember very little of the specific things we 
were taught; what we remember is our teachers. It is our good teachers who 
have influenced us and to whom we feel grateful long after the examinable 
content of what they taught has been forgotten.
The reason for the success of Oxford and Cambridge is terribly simple: the 
students are taught individually. More than that, the college system breaks up 
the large numbers of a modern university into communities small enough for 
us all to know each other individually, and as we meet in all kinds of activi-
ties, not only at lessons or lectures, we see each other as whole people. That 
is why my students are my friends and keep in touch for years after they have 
left Oxford. This is an expensive system, but even so I think it gives value for 
money, and if society decides it can no longer be afforded, something special 
will have been lost. Diamonds are indeed expensive; but who cares about the 
price of fake diamonds?
Education occurs in human relationships, not only between teacher and pupil 
but also between fellow-students and between colleagues. That is why we 
need academic communities. These communities will be as full of failings 
as human beings always are. What should be special about them is that they 
should know and admit it. The good academic very often says, “I don’t know” 
and “I am not sure”; he also says what one might do to find out, or explains 
why certainty will never be possible.
This intellectual honesty is being systematically destroyed. Like trust, judg-
ment and responsibility, intellectual honesty is thought to have no cash value 
and thus to be worthless. In the kind of society we now inhabit, pay is an ac-
curate index of esteem.41
In 1993, Conrad Russell published a book called Academic Freedom.42 Most 
of it had been written in 1991, but there is a despairing “Epilogue (April 
1992)”, written in the light of the Further and Higher Education Act of that 
year. I only wish I could read to you the whole of that epilogue, for it de-
scribes the demise of the academic profession more elegantly and forcefully 
than I ever could – but it is too long. Let me however quote just one para-
graph:
“[T]he idea of academic freedom must involve some sphere of autonomous professional jud-
gment. There must be some things recognized as academic questions, to be decided by acade-
mics according to academic standards. It is this sphere which is now being whittled away to 
nothing. … If we cannot decide how to teach, what the standard of the degree should be, what 
its justification and purpose are, or whether students are good enough to be admitted, what aca-
demic freedom do we have left? Professionals must have standards: without them, both grounds 
of self-respect and utility to society disappear. If, one after another, every one of these standards 
must be sacrificed on the altar of ‘efficiency’, what sort of professionals do we have left when 
the job is done? Almost everything academics are now asked to do, most of them believe to be 
wrong. Even if they are in error in that belief (and the possibility must be admitted), so long as 
they hold it, in conscience they ought to act on it. If they do not, their claim to society’s respect, 
and indeed to their own, is forfeit. No one who has lost his professional self-respect can long 
remain good at his job.”43
The academic profession, as some still call it, has been demoralized, pauper-
ized and humiliated. The best a young academic can hope for is to take Sir 

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
23
Keith Joseph’s advice and emigrate to America.44 Was my opening sentence 
an exaggeration?
Tokyo, January 2000
A) Appendix 1: Academic Recruitment Today
The House of Lords debate mainly interests me for what it said about aca-
demic recruitment. I rely on the report published in The Times by William 
Rees-Mogg, who edited that newspaper before it was bought by Rupert Mur-
doch. He summarizes:
“There was a general consensus that British universities are underfunded for the work they have 
to do, and our best universities are handicapped against those of the United States; that salaries 
are too low – well below those of the Civil Service; too much energy is taken up responding to 
bureaucracy; dropout rates are too high; students are accumulating large debts; and recruitment 
to academic posts is inadequate, particularly in science.”
He then quotes a statement that a quarter of all chairs in surgery are vacant 
and so are 74 clinical chairs in medicine, of which half have been vacant for 
more than a year.
It is becoming quite common in Oxford for first choices to turn down chairs, 
and not only in the sciences. Anyone who holds a chair abroad can hardly af-
ford to move to Britain. I know of a recent case where the person invited to 
a prestigious Oxford chair would have had to take on about three times the 
work for a salary one third of what he currently earns. It is in the nature of 
things that such cases of appointments refused cannot be publicized; but they 
are extremely serious. At the other end of the scale, no bright young person 
is likely to become an academic in Britain when they could certainly earn 
twice as much elsewhere, and will not even have the time or opportunity to 
do much of the research which might attract them into academia. There are 
of course no statistics on brain drain, and even if there were any, they would 
record neither the people who have made their academic careers abroad from 
the beginning, nor the non-British academics who have tried a spell at a Brit-
ish university but decided – sometimes reluctantly – that they cannot afford 
to stay. The academic staff at all top universities is, after all, recruited interna-
tionally – as our rulers choose never to remember.
39
Fatti non fummo per viver come bruti. Ma per 
seguir virtute e conoscenza.
40
Given that Thatcher, Blair, and several of the 
Ministers of Education have themselves been 
to Oxford, their blindness to educational val-
ues is, I must admit, a serious indictment of 
the education we have been providing. They 
simply do not realize what it is they have 
received. I think Oxford should make much 
more systematic and explicit efforts to eradi-
cate anti-intellectualism among its students. 
How deeply ingrained such attitudes are!
41
I am accordingly astonished and grateful that 
anyone who earns as little as I do should be 
thought worth listening to!
42
Conrad Russell, Academic Freedom, Routled­
ge, London and New York, 1993. Conrad 
Russell (Lord Russell), son of the philosopher 
Bertrand Russell, is a Professor of History at 
the University of London. He is also now the 
Liberal Democrat Party spokesman on higher 
education.
43
Russell, op. cit., p. 109.
44
“[A]lready people are leaving Oxford and 
Cambridge for the USA in order to recover 
the opportunity to do research.” Russell, 
1993, loc.cit.

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
24
I come from an academic family and my own two children, now in their thir-
ties, got excellent first class degrees at a top university, one in science and 
the other in humanities. It has never occurred to either of them to pursue an 
academic career.
Conrad Russell (see main text, fn. 42) wrote in 1992: “Those who can get off 
the sinking ship, to America, to early retirement, or to another occupation, will 
presumably do so in growing numbers. This, though, gives no clue to policy 
for those left in charge of what remains.” We are still awaiting that clue.
B) Appendix 2: The Statistics of Expansion
The first major planned expansion of British higher education occurred as 
the result of the Robbins Report (1963). At that time there were 31 universi-
ties in Britain. Since then there have been plenty of statistics published, but 
they are not easy to evaluate, because criteria and methods of counting have 
been changing. Accordingly, these statistics should only be used as giving an 
approximate idea. It is helpful to remember that over the period under consid-
eration the population of Britain has hardly changed in number.
Full-time students in higher education
1960
just under 200,000
1970
just over 400,000
1980
almost the same
1990
about 650,000
1997
about 1,160,000
Figures for the number of universities vary bewilderingly. In 1997 the Dear-
ing Report wrote: “Today there are 176 higher education institutions in the 
UK of which 115 are titled universities…” (para.3.83). The figure I have 
given for membership of the CVCP, 132, is more up to date but may slightly 
over-estimate the number of universities.
Chapter 3 of the Dearing Report has many statistical tables and charts, some 
with interesting international comparisons.
C) Appendix 3: Competition
There is no free market competition in British higher education, but disjointed 
fragments of policy have introduced certain competitive elements. Let me il-
lustrate.
As part of a pay settlement for academic staff in the late `80s, it was prohibit-
ed by Mrs Thatcher’s government to pay a flat rate at a given grade. Hitherto, 
all professors (in the British sense: the top academic grade) at Oxford and 
Cambridge had been paid the same salary. This peaceable arrangement saved 
much time, energy and emotional turmoil, and at Oxford a vote in Congrega-
tion confirmed that at least a majority preferred it. However, the government 
now forbade it. In the United States there is a free market in professorial 
salaries, so senior professors often move to more highly paid jobs, or use 
higher offers elsewhere to lever raises from their own universities. Since Brit-
ish universities cannot afford the cash to run such a system (which would also 

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
25
expose them even more blatantly to American competition), various compro-
mise systems have been tried.
At Oxford there are now seven professorial salary grades. When a chair is be-
ing offered, the Vice-Chancellor has the power to negotiate the salary. Once 
a professor is in post, he or she can apply when the grading is being recon-
sidered, once every two or three years. In theory, grades are then awarded by 
“objective” criteria, in accordance with the principle of “transparency”; the 
level of excellence required in order to be classified at each grade is expressed 
in an official formula. In practice, however, there is a predetermined sum of 
money available for distribution, so that promotion cannot but be competitive. 
The whole process of application and award is confidential, so the system is 
only relatively “transparent”, and seems to me to be an unsatisfactory hybrid 
between our old, now forbidden, system and true competition.
The Research Assessment Exercise (RAE) is nominally just that, an assess-
ment of how good university departments have been over the past few years 
at producing research. But it also contains an element of competition. Let me 
describe the system as it operated in 1996, when I was an assessor for the 
second time.
Individual researchers are assessed at one of five grades, from A to E. Their 
departments, which submit their names and publications, are assessed at one 
of six grades: the top is 5*, the rest go down from 5 to 1. A complicated 
formula is prescribed to the assessors for converting a department’s set of 
individual grades into a single joint grade. The individual grades remain se-
cret; the joint grades are published and determine the department’s level of 
research funding until the next RAE.
How is this calculated? The HEFCE assigns a sum of money to each joint 
grade from 5* to 1. Let us call these unknown figures u , v , w , x, y and z. 
(I suspect that z has a value of zero.) The values of these figures are not 
announced until the assessment is complete, nor is the total sum of money 
available for distribution. The money awarded to the department is then the 
value corresponding to its joint grade multiplied by the number of names 
submitted.
Let me give an example. Prof. P. heads a department of 9 academic staff, 5 of 
whom he knows to publish good research, even though he cannot be sure how 
good the assessors will think it. Another 2 of the staff have published nothing 
worth mentioning, so he is disinclined to submit their names at all. There are 
however also two who have published research in the relevant period but he 
finds their work undistinguished. If he submits their names, his department 
will probably get a lower joint grade than if he left them out. He guesses that 
without them his department will get a 5 and so be at level v; with them, he 
expects a 4 and level w. So if their names do not go forward he expects to get 
v x 5 pounds, with them w x 7 pounds. The trouble is that he has no idea of 
the values of v and w, so even if he is clever (and lucky) enough to predict the 
ranking correctly, he cannot calculate his better tactic, but has to guess. In the 
end it might even turn out, to his frustration, that he should have submitted all 
9 names, because even though the other two pull the joint grade down to a 3, 
x x 9 pounds turns out to be the biggest of the three sums.
Is this a serious way of funding academic research, or a kind of sadistic party 
game?
One does not have to be a social Darwinist, as I think Mrs Thatcher was, to 
agree that competition has value in many areas of human life. Academics nat-
urally compete to make discoveries and to impress their peers and students. 

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
26
It is possible (though untestable) that the British university system for a long 
time profited from being bicephalous: the friendly rivalry between Oxford 
and Cambridge is harmless and may be beneficial. However, competition for 
limited resources, as in both cases given above, is another matter, and in many 
cases seems an insane way of running the university system: co-operation 
would be both pleasanter and far more efficient.
Take the example of subjects with low student demand, like oriental lan-
guages. If universities co-operated, they could jointly offer a good range of 
options without great expense. Students would have to move (either change 
residence or commute), but other countries have managed that, and indeed it 
ought to be a benefit of the modular course system. But competition prevents 
a sensible solution. Funding goes with the student, so no university wants a 
student to emigrate. For instance, some years ago I had a research student at 
Oxford who needed to learn Nepali. This language is taught only at the School 
of Oriental and African Studies (SOAS) in London. The teacher was happy 
for him to join the class. However, the SOAS administration said that piece 
rate payments would not do: if he wanted to attend a SOAS class the student 
would have to enroll in SOAS and pay the full fees. Since he also needed to 
study some things at Oxford, and had paid Oxford his fees, that was of course 
impossible.
Competition means that academic hospitality is officially a thing of the past. 
What a nasty world we live in! I do still admit casual students to my classes 
free of charge, because luckily no one can stop me, but in doing so I am defy-
ing government policy.
D) Appendix 4: Access
‘Access’ is the technical term employed in education policy for making the 
social composition of the student body more closely reflect that of the popula-
tion at large. It thus deals with the recruitment of women, ethnic minorities 
and “mature” students (i.e., those over 25), as well as with the working class 
(nowadays called socio-economic groups D and E, or IV and V). But it is the 
working class who are the real problem; those ethnic groups, for example, 
who are under-represented at university are those who identify with the work-
ing class rather than the middle class.
This problem has a peculiarly English flavour. It is no accident that Marx 
wrote his theory of class in England. Economic class is of course a universal 
phenomenon. What I think (I am no specialist) is remarkable about England 
is this. Certain values, such as delaying sensual gratification, which translates 
into trying to save money, are perhaps typical of the middle class everywhere. 
In England, however, not only does the middle class set itself off from the 
working class with a set of self-conscious values and attitudes: the work-
ing class reciprocates. Just as the middle and upper classes are permeated 
by snobbery, the working class responds with a reverse snobbery. Enormous 
numbers of working class people do not want their children to join the middle 
class; they have a real counter-culture.
Obviously this is a vast and complex topic. British working-class counter-
culture has more or less captured pop culture and the media, so that all young 
people feel it obligatory to flirt with it. Young members of the upper middle 
class, privately educated at expensive schools, arrive at Oxford and Cam-
bridge affecting working class accents and dress styles; some even wear tat-
toos – though theirs are usually washable.

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
27
By and large the working class see universities as middle class institutions 
– which of course they have been – and hence reject them. I see this as part of 
the amazing hostility of the media to universities in general, but particularly 
to Oxford and Cambridge. The media cater to the mass market and love to 
portray Oxford dons as idle rich who spend their time swilling port and sherry 
at the taxpayer’s expense. This image of dons as a kind of decadent aristoc-
racy provides a hate object for the working class and the puritan middle class 
(like Mrs Thatcher) alike, and Edward Gibbon’s strictures on Oxford when he 
attended it in the middle of the 18th century are still quoted as if they applied 
today.
It was only after the Second World War that Oxford and Cambridge became 
anything like what most of the world today thinks of as a university. They 
had hardly any graduate studies – even the dons did not have doctorates – and 
they were quite small, sub-divided into many colleges with perhaps a couple 
of hundred students apiece.
Rather few aristocrats bothered to go to university. Oxford and Cambridge 
recruited both students and teachers mainly from the upper middle and espe-
cially the professional classes. They also knew that they were training an elite 
to rule not merely Britain but the British Empire.
A Balliol colleague of mine, Jasper Griffin, recently published an article 
which begins as follows:
“There are few things on which mankind is so well agreed as on the unfairness of admission to 
the universities of Oxford and Cambridge. That agreement does of course disappear as soon as 
we ask in what way it is unfair. … On the left, it is an article of faith that the ancient universities 
grossly favour the wealthy products of private education. The present government actually plans 
to penalise Oxford and Cambridge by reducing their grants from central funds if they do not 
admit more undergraduates from comprehensives. … Opinion in the Daily Telegraph , however, 
both of columnists and of correspondents, is convinced that Oxbridge already has an indefen-
sibly biased policy of favouring comprehensive school pupils and is determined to exclude the 
academically more deserving products of public schools.”45
The fact is that while Oxford has been trying for many years to devise an 
entrance procedure which will not disadvantage pupils from comprehensive 
schools, we also feel that we should take those students who show through 
academic achievement and potential, including attitudes, that they will profit 
from what we have to offer. Proof of our success in admitting suitable can-
didates is that only one or two percent drop out of the course, and even the 
percentage of third class degrees is down to around ten – though one must 
also remember that if there were no Thirds, a Lower Second would change its 
meaning. On the other hand, whatever we do, we never get more than about 
50% of our undergraduates from the state sector – and I believe that Cam-
bridge has the same experience. There are many schools from which pupils 
never apply to Oxbridge. Under government threat we are spending a dispro-
portionate time and effort on persuading them to give us a try. It is dispro-
portionate because we are already quite meritocratic. So the bright working 
class pupil who has been cajoled into applying may turn out not to be quite 
bright enough, and returns disgruntled from his interview, muttering “I told 
you so.”
The problem of Oxbridge access is an acute form of the problem of access 
to the university sector as a whole. If one bends over backwards to recruit 
45
See fn. 28 for reference. The Daily Telegraph 
is a Conservative newspaper.

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
28
students whose home and school have not prepared them for it, is one doing 
them a real favour? Concentration on “access”, i.e. on social background, at 
the expense of academic prowess and inclination, cannot but lead to a high 
drop-out rate – unless academic standards are abandoned altogether. In other 
words, equality of access cannot be made to yield equality of outcome.
The way this is distorted in the media, even those media one might expect 
to sympathetic to universities, is extraordinary indeed. I quote almost at ran-
dom from an article I saw by chance in The Independent Education Supple­
ment.46 It is headed: “New tables will lift the lid on university life. For years, 
universities have successfully sidestepped government attempts to establish 
performance indicators for what they do, but all that is about to change.” 
The first paragraph explains: “New data about to spew forth from the Higher 
Education Funding Council will let newspapers compile ‘official’ league ta-
bles comparing universities for their drop-out rates, or how good they are at 
attracting students from deprived backgrounds and State schools.” Then we 
shall be “named and shamed.”
E) Appendix 5: Academic Misery
To have pursued this topic further in the main text might have made it mo-
notonous, but I conclude by compiling a few more data.
Every year every academic has to fill in a form of “self-appraisal”. For two 
years it was my task to read those completed by the members of my faculty. 
The last question was: “What has given you the least satisfaction in your job 
this year?” Every single person answered either “Filling in forms like this 
one” or “Lack of time for research”.
The Dearing Report says (p. 218, para. 14.17): “A survey carried out among 
academic staff in one English institution found 25 per cent of respondents 
reported the reason for stress to be ‘too much work – no time to complete it’. 
Our survey of academic staff indicated that stress levels were a significant 
consideration …” I can report that my own doctor in Oxford has told me that 
hardly a day passes when he is not consulted by an academic suffering from 
stress.
The RAE has certainly contributed to this level of stress. Each academic is 
invited to submit up to four publications for assessment. It is officially stated 
that what is assessed is not quantity but quality. Not surprisingly, this message 
does not filter down. To my personal knowledge, university administrations 
tend to tell their staff that they have to submit four publications and that if they 
do not they may be invited to take early retirement. Staff are well aware that 
they are thus being constrained to publish work prematurely, or artificially to 
split what should be a single publication into two. Another abuse is that since 
universities are credited with the research of the staff they employ at the time 
of the assessment, regardless of where that research was done, people with 
good publications are hired for the year of the assessment and then “let go”.
The TQA is even worse. Departments reckon that preparation for an assess-
ment takes months. The documentation required beggars belief. For example, 
every course given has to show the inspectors not merely the syllabus and all 
hand-outs, bibliographies, etc., but samples of the best, the worst and the av-
erage written work produced by students on the course. I know of one depart-
ment, employing six teaching staff, which weighed its submission; it came to 
45 kilos of paper.

SYNTHESIS PHILOSOPHICA 
55–56 (1–2/2013) pp. (7–29)
R. F. Gombrich, British Higher Education 
Policy in the Last Twenty Years
29
All exam scripts written in the department over the last five years are to be 
shown. My department lost a mark (which is serious, as overall marking is out 
of 24) because on looking at an old exam script the inspectors could not find 
physical evidence that it had been marked by two examiners. It had, of course; 
but in order to ensure that the examiners judge the script independently we 
ask the first reader not to write on it.
Before the inspection, a department has to write a 6,000 word self-assess-
ment along minutely prescribed lines. “Objectives” have to be keyed into 
“aims”, which in turn have to be keyed into the university’s “mission state-
ment”. Since I was in charge of my faculty’s submission, I took this to my 
30-year-old daughter, who is a writer and a master of parody. Her product so 
pleased the inspectors that it was borrowed by another university who were 
being inspected after us.
This illustrates that the only way to live under such a regime is by cynical op-
portunism. Asked to predict the results of one’s research, the only safe tactic 
is to put down the results one has achieved already. Genuine research, after 
all, may turn out to be going up a blind alley. One works out what it is that 
the authorities want to hear, and tells it to them. That is one reason why the 
centralization of authority leads to ever increasing inefficiency, as Karl Pop-
per pointed out. It also leads to a collapse in morale.
46
By Lucy Hodges, 29 July 1999, p. 2.