Citation:
Parnell, D and Richardson, D (2014) Introduction. Soccer and Society, 15 (6). 823 - 827. ISSN
1466-0970 DOI: https://doi.org/10.1080/14660970.2014.920619
Link to Leeds Beckett Repository record:
https://eprints.leedsbeckett.ac.uk/id/eprint/29/
Document Version:
Article (Accepted Version)
The aim of the Leeds Beckett Repository is to provide open access to our research, as required by
funder policies and permitted by publishers and copyright law.
The Leeds Beckett repository holds a wide range of publications, each of which has been
checked for copyright and the relevant embargo period has been applied by the Research Services
team.
We operate on a standard take-down policy.
If you are the author or publisher of an output
and you would like it removed from the repository, please contact us and we will investigate on a
case-by-case basis.
Each thesis in the repository has been cleared where necessary by the author for third party
copyright. If you would like a thesis to be removed from the repository or believe there is an issue
with copyright, please contact us on openaccess@leedsbeckett.ac.uk and we will investigate on a
case-by-case basis.

Introduction 
Daniel Parnella*, David Richardsonb 
 
a Centre for Active Lifestyles, Carnegie Faculty, Leeds Metropolitan University, Leeds, LS6 
3QS, UK. 
b The Football Exchange, Research Institute for Sport and Exercise Sciences, Liverpool John 
Moores University, Liverpool, L3 3AF, UK. 
 
 
 
In the year of the World Cup in Brazil 2014, the sheer mass of content across multiple 
sources in both the media and research outputs suggests that football is a World game. 
Estimates of viewing figures for the most recent Football World Cup Finals range from 250 
million actual viewers (i.e., those that watched the final game) to 700 million viewers who 
consumed ‘some part’ of the game (i.e., the reach) (see FIFA, No 1 Sports Event). FIFA also 
reported that the cumulative television viewing figures for each of the 2006 and 2010 World 
Cups in Germany and South Africa was an incredible 26.29 billion1.  Significantly, it is the 
ability of football to ‘reach’ so many people that makes it a true game for all; irrespective of 
gender, age, ethnicity, religious belief, disability, socio-economic or health-status.  Brazil is 
the heart of creative and attractive football and the home of carnivals and sunshine. The 
business world readied itself to capitalize on the exposure that any alignment or presence at 
the World Cup could bring to the global awareness of their brand.  However, it would seem 
that those who seek to encourage and foster social good through football have been slow to 
capitalise on such intrigue and interest in order to capture and connect with all who have 
some propensity to consume football or to be reached by and through football. Most notably, 
the limited attention to social good or social welfare campaigns aligned to the World Cup was 
arguably the biggest miss of the whole tournament? This volume explores the power of 
football and its role in engaging and including its ‘populous’ in positive social and 
behavioural activity.  Specifically, this volume highlights a range of approaches that have 
                                                           
* Corresponding author. Email: D.Parnell@leedsmet.ac.uk 

been adopted and actioned by researchers, practitioners and organisations in order to 
stimulate, create and influence social good through football.  
 
The notions of inclusion and inclusivity require a coherent alignment to high 
accessibility, low costs and involvement of all. The social roots of football have long been 
established.  Across the globe, football’s culture, heritage, and identity are entrenched within 
its respective local communities. As such the relationship between the football club and the 
community has been inextricably linked. It is this relationship that ensures that, in order for 
football to continue to flourish, or even exist, it will forever be indebted to its communities. It 
is the synergy between football’s local and global appeal, its reach and subsequent 
responsibility and indebtedness to its communities that we must capitalise on, in order to 
ensure that football can act as a vehicle for the promotion of social good for all.  Given 
England’s global football brand and its long established football based community outreach 
programmes, viewed by many as models of ‘best practice’, this volume (mainly) focuses on 
activity occurring in football clubs in England. Within the England the link between football 
clubs and the community has been actively nourished through the development of the 
national Football in the Community (FitC) programme.  
 
Football clubs in England have a relatively long history of engaging in community-
based work. The late 70s saw the first moves to formalise a ‘Football and the Community’ 
programme. These early schemes were backed by the then Labour Government and the 
Sports Council2. The mid-80s saw the Sports Council pass governance of the programmes to 
other agencies which included the Football League and the Professional Footballers’ 
Association through the Footballers’ Further Education and Vocational Training Scheme3. 
During this time, the reputation of football was in steep decline as a consequence of emerging 

social issues (i.e., hooliganism, gangs and firms). Concerns over the increasingly fractured 
relationship between football and its communities demanded government intervention in 
order to re-establish the inter-connected and mutually beneficial relationship.  For many years 
FitC schemes across the country were positioned as deliverers of community engagement4. 
This delivery, typically involved encouraging more children to play, watch and support their 
respective football teams. Whilst the presence of the football club in its communities was 
more visible, questions remained as to the exact purpose of the football club’s community 
programme. Whilst football in England began to experience increasing commercialisation the 
relationship between football clubs and its communities remained strained and distant. In 
essence, people began to ask whether, given the apparent commercial growth of the football 
club, that they (the clubs) could do more for their communities5. In essence, the continuing 
commercialisation and ‘Sky-ification’ of football further contributed to this divide and the 
subsequent questioning of the moral obligation of football to its communities6.  As such, 
stakeholders within and external to the ‘game’ called for football clubs to display a greater 
level of corporate social responsibility (CSR), with a view to re-considering and re-
establishing their relationships with their communities7.  
 
The continuing appeal of football, the subsequent television deals and the apparently 
unabated rewards for clubs has intensified the pressure on football to ‘genuinely’ consider 
their social role. Indeed, the presence, and examination, of CSR practices within football is 
becoming increasingly scrutinised8.  Such scrutiny has been reported to be affiliated to New 
Labours’ election win in 1997 and the evolving welfare reform, as part of their ‘Third Way’ 
ideology, which in essence asserted that business was required to consider a more socially 
responsible approach to their operations. Football was not, and is not, immune from such 
scrutiny.  The Football Task Force (FTF) emerged with a remit to monitor the social 

responsibility of the football sector 9. Football stadia were identified as key arenas for 
encouraging and engaging fans in the development of positive health messages10, covering all 
aspects of stadia functions, and the football clubs were positioned as vehicles to deliver on a 
range of key policy objectives including health, education, community cohesion, 
employment, regeneration and crime reduction11. Despite this, very little is known of the day-
to-day existence and impact of such work. Some success has been reported through the 
engagement of men in health related behaviours with ‘raised health awareness’ being 
reported as a consequence delivering health messages at football clubs; a place where men 
feel comfortable12. Further findings included positive health changes, increases in physical 
activity levels, improved weight status and a reduction in alcohol consumption. This research 
coupled with a recent study in the Lancet, which evidences successful weight loss in men via 
the Fit Fans in Training programme delivered across Scottish Premier League Clubs suggests 
that mixing football and health promotion can work. Whilst the latter of these studies was 
costly to deliver, the positive impact of this work suggests that football can play a key role as 
part of the wider Public Health Service delivery13. 
 
With football clubs being asked to deliver so much (i.e., monitored and evaluated 
health related programmes), we are left with a skills shortage within and across practitioners 
working in football and the community programmes14. Despite the apparent success of such 
on-going and developing cases, we are in an age of public spending austerity and as such the 
existing practitioners are being asked to deliver on ever increasing and expanding agendas 
that (technically) require an accumulation of many more skills than just coaching. Such skills 
including, physical and physiological awareness, dietary and health advice, counselling, 
welfare and well-being alongside research, evaluation and monitoring techniques, require 
training and investment. Moreover, such practitioners require elevation to, alignment with, 

and/or consideration of inclusion in, the Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC) which 
includes areas such as social workers, psychologists and dieticians.  Such a shift in the 
professional status and recognition of the FitC coach will better enable the coach and football 
industry to deliver to these expanding health and care agendas15. 
 
Never has it been more important to adopt a genuine and inclusive approach to 
engaging with our local and global communities. As we reflect on the overwhelming media 
hype of the World Cup, and admire the way in which the business and commercial world has 
capitalised on such an iconic platform to accrue further global recognition, we must ask 
whether football and its populous have genuinely benefitted from and/or capitalised on this 
phenomenon. The excellent examples of social good and positive individual and 
organisational behaviour change highlighted in this volume only scratches the surface of 
potential.  We and football has the power to change lives. We can all do more...   
 
It is beyond the scope of this introductory pre-amble to provide a summary of 
discussion of the articles; the abstracts offer ample insight in to the excellent work that has 
been undertaken and collated here. Suffice to say that the ambition of the volume, when the 
original call for contributions was made was to locate like-minded researchers who have a 
shared interest in football and inclusivity.  The papers draw on sociological, political and 
economic perspectives from a breadth of contexts concerning the inclusivity, societal good, 
positive behaviour change, governance and practice of football clubs. The special edition also 
lends from an array of methodological lens that allows you, the reader, to see what is possible 
to achieve when working, and collaborating, with and alongside industry partners. To this 
end, we are satisfied that the journal offers a truly holistic, contextual and real understanding 

of  the joys and complexities associated with working within football in the community 
programmes whilst trying to make a difference to peoples’ lives through football.   
 
We hope that the collective nature of the papers offered in this journal will encourage 
football governing bodies and football CEOs to recognise that inclusion, inclusivity and 
social welfare make sound moral and business sense. This special issue champions the 
business case for inclusivity through the integration and mutual alignment of economic, 
social and health factors. We believe that it is time to stop asking football to cure, solve and 
eradicate societal ills through ad hoc, short term and short sighted investments and begin to 
gather real critical mass behind a long term strategic plan to engage, include, utilise and 
measure football’s power in engaging the masses in positive social good and social welfare 
practices. Football can change lives but it needs to better understand its reach, its fan base, 
and their subsequent indebtedness to positively impact their local and global communities. In 
the spirit of inclusivity, we believe that it is the responsibility of all levels of the football 
industry including football governing bodies, football CEOs, practitioners and the 
perspectives of the participants or people genuinely affected by and or reached by football, to 
make this happen. 
 
Collaboratively, the authors offer both research and applied insight and perspectives 
with a genuine desire to capitalise and optimise the social role of football. As such, the 
authors represent a growing interest including Manchester Metropolitan’s Football and its 
Communities research group and the critical mass of researchers representing the Leeds 
Metropolitan University Carnegie Faculty of Sport and their collaboration with the Football 
Exchange at Liverpool John Moores University. The Editors would like to formally thank and 
compliment all of the contributors for their novel research, time and effort in making a 

genuine contribution to the literature and applied working practice. This work represents the 
work undertaken by those with applied experience and insight, alongside their academic 
duties. As such those working in football and aligned stakeholders including policy makers, 
commissioners, project managers, health professional, community practitioners and coaches 
should find this special issue a pertinent, informative, timely and moreover a rally call to 
embrace a more holistic approach to tackling issues of inclusivity through football with a 
long term strategic investment in making change and improving lives.  
 
Acknowledgements 
This special issue has benefited from support from both the Higher Education Innovation 
Fund (Leeds Metropolitan University) and the Carnegie School of Sport, New Researcher 
Fund (Leeds Metropolitan University).  
 
Notes 
                                                           
1 Viewing figures for World Cups 2006 and 2010. 
2 Mellor, ‘The ‘Janus-faced sport’’ 
3 Walters and Chadwick, ‘Corporate citizenship in football’, 60 
4 Parnell, et al., ‘Football in the Community schemes: exploring the effectiveness of an intervention in 
promoting positive healthful behaviour change’.  
5 Brown et al., Football and its communities 
6 Taylor, ‘Multi-paradigmatic research design spaces for cultural studies researchers embodying postcolonial 
theorising’ and Anagnostopoulos and Shilbury,‘Implementing corporate social responsibility in English 
football’. 
7 Taylor, ‘Multi-paradigmatic research design spaces for cultural studies researchers embodying postcolonial 
theorising’. 
8 Walters and Chadwick, ‘Corporate citizenship in football’, 60; Anagnostopoulos and Shilbury,‘Implementing 
corporate social responsibility in English football’ and Breitbarth, and Harris. ‘The Role of Corporate Social 
Responsibility in the Football Business. Towards the Development of a Conceptual Model’. 
9 Mellor, ‘The ‘Janus-faced sport’’. 
10See latest EU Healthy Stadia report. 
11 Mellor, ‘The ‘Janus-faced sport’’; Parnell, et al., ‘Football in the Community schemes: exploring the 
effectiveness of an intervention in promoting positive healthful behaviour change’. 
12 Pringle, A., et al., ‘Effect of a national programme of men’s health delivered in English premier league 
football clubs’. 
13 Hunt et al., A gender-sensitised weight loss and healthy living programme for overweight and obese men 
delivered by Scottish Premier League football clubs (FFIT): a pragmatic randomised controlled trial. 
14 Mellor, ‘The ‘Janus-faced sport’’; Parnell, et al., ‘Football in the Community schemes: exploring the 
effectiveness of an intervention in promoting positive healthful behaviour change’ and Parnell, et al. 
‘‘Implementing Monitoring and Evaluation Techniques within a Premier League Football in the Community 

                                                                                                                                                                                        
Programme: A Case Study Involving Everton in the Community’, in The Routledge handbook of sport and 
corporate social responsibility, ed. Salcines, Babiak, and Walters. 
15 Parnell, et al., ‘Football in the Community schemes: exploring the effectiveness of an intervention in 
promoting positive healthful behaviour change’ and Parnell, et al. ‘‘Implementing Monitoring and Evaluation 
Techniques within a Premier League Football in the Community Programme: A Case Study Involving Everton 
in the Community’, in The Routledge handbook of sport and corporate social responsibility, ed. Salcines, 
Babiak, and Walters. 
 
References 
 
Anagnostopoulos, C., and D. Shilbury. ‘Implementing corporate social responsibility in 
English football: Towards multi-theoretical integration’. Sport, Business and Management: 
An International Journal  3, no. 4 (2013): 268-284. 
Breitbarth, T. and P. Harris. ‘The Role of Corporate Social Responsibility in the Football 
Business. Towards the Development of a Conceptual Model’. European Sport Management 
Quarterly 8, no. 2 (2008): 179-206. 
Brown A., T. Crabbe., G. Mellor., T. Blackshaw., and C. Stone. Football and its 
communities: Final report. London: The Football Foundation, 2006. 
FFIFA, No 1 Sports Event, FIFA.com (2014) http://www.fifa.com/ (accessed 10 January 
2014). 
Health Stadia. European Healthy Stadia Programme – Evaluation Report2012. 
 http://www.healthystadia.eu/resource-library/eu-healthy-stadia-pilot-documents.html 
(accessed 20 January, 2014). 
Hunt, K., Wyke, S., Gray, C.M., Andersen, A.S., Brady, A., Bunn, C., Donnan, P.T., 
Fenwick, E., Grieve, E., Leishman, J., Miller, E., Mutrie, A., Rauchhaus, P., White, D. and 
Treweek, T. ‘A gender-sensitised weight loss and healthy living programme for overweight 
and obese men delivered by Scottish Premier League football clubs (FFIT): a pragmatic 
randomised controlled trial’, Lancet, (2014): doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)62420-4 
Mellor, G. ‘The ‘Janus-faced sport’: English football, community and the legacy of the ‘third 
way’’. Soccer and Society 9, no. 3 (2008): 313-324. 
Parnell, D., G. Stratton, B. Drust, and Richardson, D. ‘Football in the Community schemes: 
exploring the effectiveness of an intervention in promoting positive healthful behaviour 
change’. Soccer and Society 14 (2013): 35-51.  
Parnell, D., G. Stratton, B. Drust, and D. Richardson. ‘Implementing Monitoring and 
Evaluation Techniques within a Premier League Football in the Community Programme: A 
Case Study Involving Everton in the Community’. In The Routledge handbook of sport and 
corporate social responsibility, ed. J. Salcines, K. Babiak, and G. Walters. London: 
Routledge, 2013.  
Pringle, A., S. Zwolinsky, J. McKenna, A. Daly-Smith, S. Robertson, and A. White. ‘Effect 
of a national programme of men’s health delivered in English premier league football clubs’. 
Public Health 127 (2013): 18-26. 

                                                                                                                                                                                        
Taylor, N. ‘Giving something back: can football clubs and their communities co-exist?’ In 
British football and social exclusion, ed. S. Wagg, 47-66. London: Routledge, 2004.  
Walters G., and S. Chadwick. ‘Corporate citizenship in football: Delivering strategic benefits 
through stakeholder engagement’. Management Decision 47, no. 1 (2009): 51-66.