Ensuring a successful  
UK research endeavour 
A Review of the UK Research Councils  
by Paul Nurse 
Consultation and Evidence Gathering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Ensuring a successful  
UK research endeavour 
A Review of the UK Research Councils  
by Paul Nurse 
Consultation and Evidence Gathering 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Contents 
1. Stakeholder Engagement 
1 
Call for Evidence 
1 
Advisory Group 
1 
Reference Group membership 
1 
Other stakeholders 
2 
Evidence and references 
3 
2. Call for Evidence: Summary of responses 
4 
Number of Responses 
4 
Summary analysis 
4 
Theme 1: Strategic decision-making 
5 
Theme 2: Collaboration and partnerships 
8 
Theme 3: Balance of the funding portfolio 
12 
Theme 4: Effective ways of working: 
14 
3. Bibliography 
21 
 
 
 

 
Stakeholder Engagement 1 
1. Stakeholder Engagement 
CALL FOR EVIDENCE 
A Call for Evidence was launched at the outset of the review, and received 252 responses. A summary of these 
responses, together with a list of respondents, is included later. 
 
ADVISORY GROUP 
Members of the advisory group which supported Sir Paul Nurse in his review of research councils were: 
 
Professor Lord Sushantha Kumar Bhattacharyya, Kt, CBE, FREng, FRS 
 
Professor Muffy Calder, OBE, FRSE, FREng 
 
Professor Sir David Eastwood, DL, FRHistS 
 
Dame Janet Finch, DBE, DL, FAcSS 
 
Dr Paul Golby, CBE, FREng 
 
Professor Ottoline Leyser, CBE, FRS 
 
Professor Molly Stevens, FREng, FIMMM, FRSC, FRPharmS, FSB 
 
Professor Terry Wyatt, FRS 
 
REFERENCE GROUP MEMBERSHIP 
Members of the reference group used to help test emerging thinking throughout the review were: 
 
Professor Thomas Cech 
Nobel Laureate, former President of Howard Hughes medical institute and 
Professor at the University of Colorado 
 
Sir Peter Gluckman, Chief Scientific Adviser to Prime Minister of New Zealand 
 
Professor Ian Boyd, Chief Scientific Adviser to Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs 
(Defra) 
 
Baroness Onora O’Neill 
Emeritus Honorary Professor of philosophy at the University of Cambridge 
and former President of the British Academy 
 
Professor Christiane Nüsslein-Volhard, Nobel Laureate and Professor at the Max Planck Institute for 
Developmental Biology 
 
Professor Sir John Cadogan, Inaugural President of the Learned Society of Wales and former director 
general of research councils at the Office of Science and Technology 
 
Sherry Coutu, Angel Investor and entrepreneur 
 
Sir Richard Lambert, Chancellor of the University of Warwick and former director general of the 
Confederation of British Industry (CBI) 
 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 
1 

1 
Stakeholder Engagement 
 
Professor Sir Konstantin Novoselov, Nobel Laureate and Langworthy Professor in the School of Physics 
and Astronomy at the University of Manchester 
 
Professor Dame Julia Slingo, Chief Scientist at the Met Office 
 
Colin Smith, Director of Engineering at Rolls Royce 
 
Professor Sir Alan Wilson, Professor of Urban and Regional Systems in the Centre for Advanced Spatial 
Analysis at University College London 
 
Professor Rick Rylance, Chief Executive of the Arts and Humanities Research Council (AHRC); and Chair, 
research councils UK executive group, representing research councils UK 
 
Professor Sir Ian Diamond, Vice-Chancellor, University of Aberdeen, representing Universities UK 
 
Professor Alistair Fitt, Vice-Chancellor, Oxford Brookes University, representing the University Alliance 
 
Sir Michael Arthur, President and Provost, University College London, representing the Russell Group 
 
Dr Ruth McKernan, Chief Executive, representing Innovate UK 
 
OTHER STAKEHOLDERS 
During the course of the review, and in addition to the above, Sir Paul, the Advisory Group and Secretariat also 
consulted with the following: 
 
Research Council Chief Executives 
 
Lord David Sainsbury, former Minister for Science and Innovation 
 
Professor Lord David Willetts, former Minister for Universities and Science 
 
Lord William Waldegrave, Former Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster 
 
Eddie Morland, Chief Executive, Health and Safety Laboratory 
 
Rob Varley, Chief Executive, Met Office 
 
Dr Martyn Sené 
Chief Executive, National Physical Laboratory 
 
Professor Dame Sally Davies, Chief Medical Officer for England 
 
Professor Chris Whitty, Chief Scientific Adviser, Department for International Development (DfID) 
 
Dame Ann Dowling, President, Royal Academy of Engineering 
 
Robert-Jan Smits, Director General, Research and Innovation, European Commission 
 
Professor Sir John Bell, Chair, Ofﬁce for Strategic Coordination of Health Research (OSCHR) 
 
John Cridland, Director-General, CBI 
 
Dr David Halpern, What Works National Advisor and Chief Executive of the Behavioural Insights Team 
 
David Sweeney, Director (Research, Education and Knowledge Exchange), Higher Education Funding 
Council for England (HEFCE) 
Roundtable meetings were held in Scotland (Edinburgh, Strathclyde), Wales (Cardiff), and Northern Ireland 
(Belfast), and with Innovate UK and business stakeholders. 
 
2 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 

 
Stakeholder Engagement 1 
 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 
3 
EVIDENCE AND REFERENCES 
Sources of evidence and information referred to during the review process are listed in Appendix B. 
 
 

2 
Call for Evidence: Summary of responses 
2. Call for Evidence: Summary of responses 
A summary of the main themes arising from the analysis of the responses to the Nurse Review Call for Evidence 
is provided here. 
This evidence was considered by Sir Paul Nurse and the review’s Advisory Group, and has informed the overall 
conclusions and recommendations of the review. 
 
NUMBER OF RESPONSES 
A total of 252 responses to the Call for Evidence were received. A breakdown of responses by type and by 
sector is at Annex 1. A full list of respondents is at Annex 2. 
 
SUMMARY ANALYSIS 
The call for evidence invited respondents to provide views in relation to four broad themes: 
1. 
Strategic decision-making 
2. 
Collaboration and partnerships 
3. 
Balance of the funding portfolio 
4. 
Ways of working 
Summaries of the main points arising under each of the review’s broad themes are provided below. Where 
possible, the balance of views on particular issues has been quantified; however it should be noted that not all 
respondents commented on all issues. 
Some common messages which cut across the themes include: 
 
A need for greater transparency and more evidence-based decision-making at all levels. 
 
A need for a long-term, high-level overarching research strategy / investment framework. 
 
Suggestions that more could be done to support interdisciplinary research across organisational boundaries. 
 
Concerns over increases in the concentration of research and the potential for a loss of diversity in the 
research base as a result. 
 
A tension between the need for long-term stability and the need for agility and dynamism in research 
funding. 
 
Concerns over a perceived reduction in funding opportunities and level of support for early career 
researchers, partially as a result of a perceived shift away from funding for small grants towards longer, 
larger research programmes 
 
No great appetite for reducing the number of Research Councils 
 
A need to connect activities to ensure a continuum of support from basic research to translation and 
application 
4 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 

 
Call for Evidence: Summary of responses 2 
THEME 1: STRATEGIC DECISION-MAKING 
Views were invited on how funding decisions are made; how society and government can engage with science 
funding decisions; how good decision-making can be encouraged at different levels; and how Research Councils 
can make the best decisions to ensure research drives economic growth and promotes health, quality of life and 
environmental sustainability. 
The following questions from the review Terms of Reference were suggested as relevant here: 
 
How should the Research Councils take account of wider national interests including regional balance and 
the local and national economic impact of applied research? 
 
Is the balance between investigator-led and strategically-focused funding appropriate, and do the right 
mechanisms exist for making strategic choices? 
 
Within each Research Council is the balance of funding well-judged between support of individual 
investigators, support of teams and support of equipment and infrastructure? 
There was a great diversity of views expressed in relation to how strategic decision should be made. 36 responses 
referenced the importance of the Haldane principle, with another 31 broadly supporting the principle that 
“research funding should be free from political interference”. However, alongside this there was recognition that 
government had a role to play – for example, one respondent suggested “Councils must demonstrate direct 
support to government policy”, another that “ministers should have an overt role in the location of large 
infrastructure”. 
Many respondents flagged the need for government to have an overarching well-informed, long-term research 
strategy, which would ensure the UK could take advantage of its strengths – a long-term research investment 
framework was seen by one as essential to “clarify government’s expectations of Research Councils” – with 
another feeling that Research Councils were currently too focused on their role as funders, rather than the 
strategic partners they could be. A number of respondents suggested the organisational framework that might 
need to be put in place to develop such a strategy. For example: 
 
A strategic board of 12 members that sit for up to 5 years, including scientists, engineers MPs and CEOs. 
 
Greater public involvement to take into account wider national interests. 
 
A panel of departmental Chief Scientific Advisors (CSAs) providing strategic input to annual RC 
plans/strategies and define grand challenges. 
 
A cross-Council/cross-government infrastructure committee to review all scientific infrastructure funded 
by government. 
 
An overarching independent governance mechanism for the cross-Council RCUK partnership. 
 
A greater role for RCUK as coordinator of Research Council decision making. 
 
A ‘Science Strategy Advisory Board’, with representatives from Research Councils, Council for Science and 
Technology, research intensive government departments and scientific/business communities to advise BIS 
director general Business and Science on investment and capability. 
 
A stronger role for RCUK in bringing consensus across councils on new impact policies, etc. 
 
A UK Research Advisory Board to develop a similar long-term national strategy framework to the Science 
and Technology Facilities Council (STFC) Science Board’s four-yearly ‘programmatic review’. 
 
An executive advisory committee to set strategic roadmaps. 
 
Developing an overarching strategic framework, cf. the Swedish Formas Research Council approach. 
 
A combined board and subcommittees to consider strategic decisions from an interdisciplinary perspective. 
 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 
5 

2 
Call for Evidence: Summary of responses 
A number also raised, as a precondition for a long-term research strategy, the need for long-term stable funding 
environment, and need for funding at internationally comparable levels. 
A major theme which a number of respondents raised was the need for transparency around decision-making at 
all levels (both at government level and within Research Councils and their advisory boards and panels), 
including around long-term decisions to invest in research institutes at the expense of university grants. Several 
respondents highlighted that Research Councils should engage and consult extensively with researchers, potential 
users, relevant bodies (including devolved government and Local Economic Partnerships (LEP)) and the general 
public in shaping their strategies. One respondent was concerned that Research Councils were “too reliant on 
the suppliers doing the commissioning”, and that they needed to challenge norms more. A number suggested 
that funding panels needed to reflect the needs of users better, with some respondents concerned that funding 
tended to follow previous funding, at the loss of ‘risky research’. 
Of the 82 respondents who provided an opinion on whether Research Councils had a role to play regionally, 
only 20% (17 respondents) thought Research Councils should have no regional role. However, views varied 
considerably on what that role might be, with an overarching worry that “a researcher with a good idea at one 
university [should not] be at a disadvantage because they are not in the desired location”. 
On the other hand, some respondents were concerned about the concentration of research funding in the golden 
triangle of Oxford, Cambridge and London. There was some feeling that the move by Research Councils 
towards longer and larger grants had led to increased concentration, with a suspicion that this move was as a 
result of admin pressures within councils. A number of respondents worried that this concentration would lead 
to a loss of dynamism and diversity in approaches being taken in research, and that this would lead to a loss of 
diversity in the research community itself. 
A number of respondents worried that opportunities were drying up for early career researchers – with some 
suggesting this was an impact of concentration – or that small projects were losing out to larger projects at the 
loss of interesting science and opportunities for early career researchers who are not in a position to apply for 
large grants yet. A number of respondents suggested early career researchers needed to be better integrated into 
strategic decision making. 
Of those who provided an opinion on the current balance between investigator-led and strategically-focussed 
funding, the most widely-held views were that the balance of funding between investigator-led and strategically-
driven research is OK, or that it leans too far towards strategically-driven research (see also Theme 3). 
Government departments, however, typically responded differently to this question, with most expressing the 
belief that there was a need for more strategically-focused funding. Concerns were expressed that investigator-led 
research was not always “sufficient to handle emerging strategic issues”, on which, for example, government 
needed evidence. 
Although not mentioned in the review Terms of Reference or Call for Evidence, 34 respondents (spanning 
universities, charities, industry and professional organisations) commented specifically on the dual support 
system. There was a consensus that dual support underpins the success of the UK research base, and should be 
maintained. 
“The Research councils and the dual support system have been the cornerstones of support for UK University research for the last 
century.” (University respondent) 
“The dual support system of funding research in universities is of critical importance in sustaining the international excellence of the 
UK research base” (University respondent) 
“This system allows institutions to take strategic decisions about their research activities and provides flexibility to undertake blue 
skies research and respond to new opportunities. Crucially, it also allows a diversity of funders – including charities, industry, the 
European Union and overseas funders – to invest in university research, which has significantly contributed to the strength of the UK 
science base. We therefore encourage the government to continue its endorsement of the dual support system.” (Charity respondent, 
endorsed by an industry respondent) 
6 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 

 
Call for Evidence: Summary of responses 2 
Other point which were raised under Theme 1: 
 
The need for a seamless pathway for funding for commercialisation between Research Councils, Innovate 
UK and other funders, recognising the complex nature of technology development. 
 
The potential for better strategic engagement with FTSE-250 companies. 
 
The need to work with government departments to build capability. 
 
The need for Research Councils to better engage with Devolved Administrations. 
 
The need for Research Councils to better serve the public engagement aspect of their Royal Charter 
objectives. 
 
The need for better futures/horizon-scanning to inform strategies. 
 
The role which cultural bodies outside the Higher Education Institutions (HEIs)sector can play. 
 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 
7 

2 
Call for Evidence: Summary of responses 
THEME 2: COLLABORATION AND PARTNERSHIPS 
Views were invited on the effectiveness of the Research Councils’ interactions with each other and with external 
organisations, as well as the Research Councils’ role in supporting collaborations and partnerships between 
institutions and between disciplines, and the links between Research Council-funded activities and other 
academic, industrial, European and global R&D activities. 
The following questions from the review Terms of Reference were suggested as relevant here: 
 
How can the Research Councils catalyse collaboration between institutions? 
 
How should the work of the research councils integrate most effectively with the work of agencies funding 
innovation, such as Innovate UK, and with the work funded by Departmental research and development 
budgets? 
 
Should the funding of Research Councils be directed almost exclusively to the university sector, with 
organisations such as the Meteorological Office, the Health and Safety Laboratories and the National 
Physical Laboratory out of scope? 
 
Do they (the Research Councils) adequately support interdisciplinary research? Are the right arrangements 
in place to ensure optimal funding for research that crosses disciplinary boundaries? 
Collaboration 
150 responses commented on how the Research Councils catalyse collaboration between institutions. There was 
a general perception that collaboration between institutions already happens and is encouraged, but that there is 
room to improve or roll out existing measures more widely. Many respondents cited Doctoral Training Centres 
and Partnerships, sandpits and other Research Council-led networking and workshops as effective methods to 
promote collaboration, and there was support for increased sharing of datasets, infrastructure and equipment. 
Several respondents suggested that all funding calls should include a collaboration requirement. Others 
highlighted the importance of Research Councils as well as HEIs in contributing to regional collaboration, and 
one respondent suggested that Research Councils should guard against UK devolution having a detrimental 
impact on cross-UK collaboration. One university respondent highlighted that “the competitive nature of the 
system has undoubtedly contributed to the UK’s research success. However, the balance between the benefits of 
collaboration and the benefits of competition is a fine one.” 
A small number of respondents suggested that collaboration cannot be forced, occurs naturally and must be 
researcher led; it is not for the Research Councils to demand it. The same respondents cautioned against the 
promotion of collaboration for collaborations sake, which could harm the principle of funding excellence. 
There was a widely-held view that Research Councils have a role to play in improving academia-industry 
relationships. Industry needs a clearer message on how to work with Research Councils and Research Councils 
must take the lead. One respondent “would encourage BIS, Innovate UK and Research Councils to go further in 
prompting , within the co-ordinated programmes, the use of consortia involving universities, Independent 
Research Organisations and relevant industrial partners.” Another respondent suggested that Research Councils 
should support more academics on secondments into industry, taking the Royal Academy of Engineering’s 
Industrial Secondment Scheme as an exemplar. CASE studentships (formerly known as Collaborative Awards in 
Science and Engineering) , Impact Acceleration Accounts and the BBSRC ‘Industry Club’ model were also 
highlighted as effective mechanisms to support academic-industry engagement. Several respondents suggested 
that Research Councils could engage more closely with regional companies / SMEs. 
Many respondents highlighted the complexity of the landscape around impact, which includes Research 
Councils, Innovate UK, Industrial Partnership Awards, Catapults, LEPs, UK Trade and Investment (UKTI), 
HEFCE, Catapult funds and BIS-European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) funding. An overarching view 
was that there is scope for development and need for greater cohesion in this complex landscape. Several 
respondents called for greater transparency in relationships and access to funds and a need to simplify the 
8 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 

 
Call for Evidence: Summary of responses 2 
landscape by standardising and streamlining. However a small number of respondents highlighted a need to 
make sure the focus on impact did not come at the expense of long term development and basic research. 
Specifically in relation to Innovate UK, several respondents highlighted a need for Innovate UK to focus more 
on research areas falling within the remits of AHRC and Economic and Social Research Council (ESRC). 
In terms of government departments, several respondents thought collaboration would be encouraged by 
allowing government researchers to take part in Research Council ‘sandpit’-type activities. Several respondents 
thought there should be more scope for Research Council consultation with government departments to make 
joint decisions on priorities and capability needs. There was also a call for Research Councils to continue to 
collaborate with devolved administrations. 
One respondent believed Research Councils should seek to attract more charitable and private investment into 
the science base. 
Access to Research Council funding 
Of the 120 respondents who commented on whether Research Council funding should be directed almost 
exclusively to the university sector, 47% (mainly those outside the HEI sector) thought that a wider range of 
organisations should be brought within the scope of Research Council funding (albeit with some caveats – see 
below), while 24% (mainly from the HEI sector) thought funding should be almost exclusively directed to HEIs. 
The remaining 29% did not state an explicit view but commented more broadly on the subject. 
One respondent pointed out that Research Councils should ensure their current eligibility policy is widely 
understood by the community albeit this respondent continued by suggesting that Research Councils could 
consider taking a more nuanced approach to implementation of the policy, e.g. by extending eligibility for a 
certain funding call. 
Main reasons cited in favour of funding being directed to the HEI sector included: a perception that non-HEIs 
would be distracted from their operational role if given access to Research Council funding; that science funding 
is already under too much pressure and increased administrative burdens. Many respondents highlighted the 
value of non-HEI partners but believed their role should be to collaborate with HEIs to apply for and work on 
Research Council funded projects. 
Other reasons cited by respondents included the perception: that such a move would increase competition at the 
expense of collaboration, and that HEIs provide the necessary critical mass of high quality facilities and 
experienced staff. A small number of respondents pointed out that a significant proportion of Research Council 
funding already goes to non-HEIs 
“We note a question that suggests the funding of Research Councils (RC) is directed ‘almost exclusively to the university sector’. 
This is simply untrue… Indeed, the ONS UK Gross Domestic Expenditure on Research and Development 2013 report records 
that £778M of £2,899M (26.8%) of RC expenditure in the UK goes to non-HEIs, and a further £200M goes to overseas 
activities (which are overwhelmingly non-HEIs). Thus in total 31.5% of RC expenditure is non-HEI. Government department 
R&D shows a very different split (28% to Public Research Institutes, 44% to business, 10% to HEIs, and 14.5% overseas).” 
(University respondent) 
Main reasons cited in favour of a wider range of organisations being brought within scope included the view that 
funding should be available based on merit and quality, rather than risk losing out on potentially excellent 
research. Respondents mentioned Public Sector Laboratories, Non-Departmental Public Bodies (NDPBs), 
Agencies, Research Institutes and Catapults as organisations which should be eligible to apply for Research 
Council funds. The stipulation that eligibility for Research Council funding should be on a ‘level playing field’ 
basis extended to a suggestion that non-HEIs should only be able to bid for Research Council funds if HEIs 
were then able to bid for funds and opportunities only available to non-HEIs. Several respondents were of the 
opinion that this approach would only work if additional funding was available to reflect the wider range of 
organisations eligible to apply, rather than a redistribution of existing funds, and there were concerns that 
 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 
9 

2 
Call for Evidence: Summary of responses 
Research Council funding should not be used to compensate for reductions in funding to these organisations 
from government departments. 
Interdisciplinary Research 
The need to better foster interdisciplinary research across organisational boundaries was a common theme – of 
the 154 respondents who commented on this issue, only 14% considered that the right arrangements were in 
place to ensure optimal funding for research that crosses disciplinary boundaries, while 46% considered that 
improvements could be made. 
A general perception was that while interdisciplinary research is usually managed well within individual Research 
Councils, cross-Council interdisciplinary research is poorly handled. 
“Inter-disciplinary work within the remits of the various councils works well, but anything between councils is 
problematic.”(University respondent) 
“In the area of research software, and in particular its role in world-leading interdisciplinary research, we believe that there are 
insufficient mechanisms for ensuring the research that crosses disciplinary boundaries is adequately funded.” 
(University respondent) 
“The Medical Research Council (MRC) and Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC) have strongly 
complimentary research grant areas which can aid in promoting interdisciplinary research. However, interdisciplinary research 
combining the more disparate disciplines does not always have obvious funding channels. The Research Councils do provide joint calls 
such as the recent ESRC/BBSRC call on Epigenetics, but as in this instance, these calls often have very specific themes. Having 
such themes is very effective for starting up new projects but is of limited use for pre-existing, highly interdisciplinary research that is 
unlikely to fit with a theme designed to drive new fields of research. Such strongly thematic funding calls are not a sustainable way of 
managing long-term research projects with highly diverse themes.” (Charity respondent) 
Many respondents highlighted a need for longer timeframes when it came to interdisciplinary research, and a 
need for further standardisation of Research Council process and structure to foster successful interdisciplinary 
projects. 29 responses highlighted peer review as a hindrance to interdisciplinary approaches, with 
interdisciplinary projects often judged on individual components rather than as a whole. Several respondents 
called for specific interdisciplinary review panels, or special training for interdisciplinary reviewers, with 
consideration given to which reviewers are suitable to assess interdisciplinary bids. One respondent suggested 
establishing an European Research Council (ERC)-style scheme to encourage novel, risky, researcher-led, 
interdisciplinary research. 
There were positive views that cross-Council themes work well (e.g. synthetic biology, food security) and that 
these could be enhanced through cross-Council interdisciplinary funding streams and the reinstatement of 
cross-council PhD studentships. Several respondents thought there was potential for better integration of arts, 
humanities and social sciences into interdisciplinary research. A small number of responses suggested that a 
percentage of the overall RC budget (suggestions ranged from 2–5%) should be top-sliced and used to support 
interdisciplinary research and other cross-Council activities. 
A minority counter-view was that too much interdisciplinary funding and a focus on big multidisciplinary 
projects was diverting funding away from more important single discipline areas. 
European and other global research activities 
Amongst the 80 respondents who commented on international links, the most widely-held view was that the UK 
was well engaged with international research activities, but that there was scope to do more. Positive comments 
highlighted many examples of UK access to international funds, including Newton, Horizon2020, COFUND, 
UK India Education and Research Initiative (UKIERI), Joint Platform Initiatives, Marie Curie Innovative 
Training Networks (ITNs) and EU Research Grants. The Russell Group response stated that 13% of their 
universities’ collective funding comes from EU Research Grants. 
10 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 

 
Call for Evidence: Summary of responses 2 
Some respondents felt that Research Councils should do more to help UK institutions gain access to 
international funds and to establish programmes with overseas partners. The US, Germany and Middle East 
were cited as countries offering particular potential for further link-up. A small number of responses highlighted 
the need to increase funding for big European research infrastructure and equipment such as CERN. 
A number of respondents suggested that Research Councils should play a greater role in developing a longer 
term strategy for international collaborations and that they should have an increased role in promoting UK 
scientific interests overseas. There is a perception that currently the division of responsibilities between Research 
Councils and government in relation to the UK’s scientific and research interests Europe is not clear. Several 
responses called for greater clarity and transparency on how UK institutions and government feed in to EU 
strategy. 
One respondent suggested focusing more funding on smaller bilateral programmes rather than always on large 
multi-country European funds. Another respondent called for reducing the administrative burden associated 
with accessing EU funds which is off-putting to some researchers and institutions. 
 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 
11 

2 
Call for Evidence: Summary of responses 
THEME 3: BALANCE OF THE FUNDING PORTFOLIO 
Views were invited on the Research Councils’ role in delivering an appropriately balanced portfolio of 
investments in science in the UK, taking into account factors such as government priorities / grand challenges, 
discovery and applied research, and geographical distribution. 
The following questions from the review Terms of Reference were suggested as relevant here: 
 
Are the divisions of scientific subject areas between the research councils appropriate? 
 
Is the balance of funding between different Research Councils optimal? 
 
What are the gaps or holes in the funded portfolios of the research councils? 
 
How should the Research Councils take account of wider national interests including regional balance and 
the local and national economic impact of applied research? 
 
Is the balance between investigator-led and strategically-focused funding appropriate, and do the right 
mechanisms exist for making strategic choices? 
 
Within each Research Council is the balance of funding well-judged between support of individual 
investigators, support of teams and support of equipment and infrastructure? 
Of the 113 respondents who submitted views in relation to the divisions of scientific subject areas between the 
Research Councils, 62 indicated that the divisions were broadly appropriate, albeit with some grey areas at the 
boundaries. In contrast, only 14 respondents believed the current divisions were arbitrary, were not optimal, or 
were out of date. 
13 respondents felt that there was little to be gained by a structural reform of the divisions between scientific 
subject areas across the Research Councils, and that significant restructure would be disruptive and costly, while 
potentially yielding little benefit. 
There was recognition that boundaries will exist between councils wherever divisions are drawn. The more 
important issue was considered by some to be ensuring an effective mechanism for funding and oversight of 
novel cross-council research or that which is at the interface of council remits, including the possibility of 
establishing a top-sliced or pooled fund as a means of dealing with this (see also Theme 2). 
97 respondents expressed a view in relation to the balance of funding between Research Councils. 
Approximately a quarter of these (26) considered that the balance of funding between councils or subject areas 
was broadly right. A slightly smaller proportion of the respondents (16; 16%) believed the balance was 
inappropriate. The remaining respondents (55; 57%) highlighted the areas for improvement without providing a 
direct comment on whether the current funding split between councils was in balance. 
Some respondents observed that the allocations appeared largely historical and that while some disciplines have 
grown in importance in recent years as global societal challenges have changed, the funding allocation has not 
changed to reflect this. This was particularly felt to be the case for arts, humanities and social science research, 
which currently receive the smallest allocations. 
That the balance of funding between research areas should be regularly reviewed was a common response, 
including from those who thought the current balance was broadly right. There was a view that “the funding 
system needs agility to respond to disruptive shifts rather than maintaining the status quo” and that decisions 
about relative funding levels should reflect the dynamics of the full research ecosystem and not just consider 
Research Council budgets in isolation. Ensuring a means of enabling this is closely connected with views 
captures under ‘strategic decision-making’ (see Theme 1 above). 
On the question of funding investigator-led versus strategically-focused programmes, the importance of ensuring 
a balance was consistently made. 82 respondents gave a direct view on the current balance: of these, the most 
12 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 

 
Call for Evidence: Summary of responses 2 
widely held views were that the balance was broadly appropriate (42 respondents; 51%) or that the balance was 
too far in favour of strategically-focussed programmes (36 respondents; 44%), and that there was a need for 
more investigator-led research which, it was felt, results in the greatest long-term impact. Several respondents 
who felt that the balance was currently about right qualified their statements by adding that the balance would no 
longer be appropriate if the current trend of increasing strategically-focused research continued. Only four 
respondents (5%) believed that funding was out of balance in the opposite direction, calling for more strategic 
programme funding. One response highlighted low success rates in investigator-led research as a key problem, 
arguing that this deters potentially excellent applications. 
“The review might examine success rates across the [Research Councils]; we fear it might conclude that higher numbers of 
excellent, highly-ranked proposals for research are not now being funded.” (Academy respondent) 
A point made by a number of respondents was that research is a continuum, where both curiosity-driven / 
investigator-led and strategically-targeted research have their place. A small number of respondents called for 
more funding for translation of research, but a more frequently expressed view was that more needed to be done 
to connect activities by different actors across the full Technology Readiness Levels chain to most effectively 
exploit research. 
This links to questions of how the Research Councils should take account of wider national interests in research 
funding decisions (see also Themes 1 and 2). Clear support was expressed for the focus on excellence as the 
primary criteria for funding decisions. There were also calls for a more strategic approach at a high level. In this 
respect the ‘8 Great Technologies’ and Industrial Strategy were welcomed by those who referenced them, 
although some thought they could be better aligned. Road-mapping for a given research theme was also 
highlighted as a means to better connect activities in different stages of the research continuum. 
Some notes of caution were sounded in response to questions over the balance of the funding portfolio. These 
included the risks of making radical changes – current long-term commitments mean that any changes need to 
be gradual – as well as risks related to over-specialisation. For example, one response urged that the breadth of 
the UK's strength across disciplines be protected, expressing concerns that over-specialism would weaken the 
UK's strength in breadth and ability to be nimble and responsive. 
Other frequently expressed views in response to questions on balance of funding included a need for more 
support for early career researchers. Well-established researchers were seen as disproportionately funded at the 
expense of ‘the next generation’ of researchers, a situation which one respondent believed could lead to national 
crisis in the next few decades if not addressed. Some cited a trend towards larger and longer grants as excluding 
early career researchers, and that increasing the proportion of short-term and smaller grants in the overall 
portfolio would be a means of helping to address this. Some respondents indicated that Research Councils could 
do more to help support training and career development for researchers at all levels. 
A number of issues were highlighted around the funding of equipment and infrastructure. These included the 
need for on-going operational funding to match capital funding, and that the requirement for an institutional 
contribution to match-fund new equipment was challenging. The importance of pooling and sharing of 
equipment and infrastructure, in order to maximise efficiencies, was recognised. 
 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 
13 

2 
Call for Evidence: Summary of responses 
THEME 4: EFFECTIVE WAYS OF WORKING: 
Views were invited on how the Research Councils can operate most effectively within the wider science and 
innovation system, recognising what works well and identifying opportunities for improvements. Respondents 
were encouraged to consider issues such as the strategic leadership provided by the Research Councils, how 
Research Councils engage with their communities, and the operation of the peer review system. 
Peer review system 
123 respondents provided views on the peer review system, with the top five areas requiring improvement 
identified as: 
 
the quality and composition of the review panel (by 50 respondents) 
 
assessment of inter-/cross-disciplinary research (by 38 respondents) 
 
transparency of the process and funding decision (by 17 respondents) 
 
costs and duration of the process (by 17 respondents) 
 
providing constructive feedback to applicants (by 14 respondents) 
In addition, several respondents welcomed the introduction of two-stage assessment processes for some 
schemes and two respondents suggested that current Research Council / peer review mechanisms tended to 
favour projects with lower risks. 
To improve the quality of the refereeing, some respondents recommended expanding the assessor pool to 
engage more industrialists, end users and international experts. It was also suggested that Research Councils 
should provide guidance and training to panels and reviewers, particularly to those required to assess 
interdisciplinary research. To reduce bias, two organisations recommended implementing a double-blind peer 
review system introduced by the journal Nature recently. It was also suggested a harmonised approach and 
system should be carried out across councils. 
Respondents had different opinions with regards to demand management, although adopting a common 
approach across Research Councils was considered desirable. Whilst some respondents agreed that it was 
necessary to restrict numbers of applications from each institution, others felt that such an approach would 
create barriers for collaborative or cross-disciplinary or blue skies research. It was also felt that demand 
management was against the principle of peer review where scientific excellence should be the primary selection 
criteria. Three organisations suggested using lottery draws to make the final funding decision for applications 
deemed fundable. 
There were concerns over the introduction of minimum grant value for Responsive Mode projects by some 
councils, with a perception that this was leading to a decline in support for early career researchers due to loss of 
smaller grant opportunities. 
The call for evidence was supplemented by members of the advisory group consulting their peers on their 
experience of the peer review process. 
Strategic leadership provided by the Research Councils 
62 respondents commented on the strategic leadership provided by the Research Councils, and views were very 
varied. Some respondents believed that the Research Councils played an important and strategic role in setting 
the agenda for the research community and influencing strategy of the complex research ecosystem within the 
UK. Others suggested that there was a need for greater leadership across councils and disciplinary boundaries, as 
well as in engaging scientific and social experts, Innovate UK and other government departments in horizon 
scanning, and use of conferences to set future strategic priorities. Several respondents suggested that the 
14 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 

 
Call for Evidence: Summary of responses 2 
leadership would be strengthened by a better coordination across the Councils and better support provided by 
RCUK. 
Respondents also highlighted the Research Councils’ role in areas such as fostering an employment environment 
that supports more attractive, sustainable research careers, and in promoting equality and diversity in the research 
base. 
Several responses commented on the potential benefits of having greater leadership and advocacy in the 
humanities and social sciences. 
How Research Councils engage with their communities 
Views on how well the Research Councils engaged with their communities were mixed, with some respondents 
citing examples of good practice such as engagement via research committees and on-site visits to HEIs, 
although there was some concern that loss of staff and reduced admin budgets was impacting on the Research 
Councils’ abilities to do this. The importance of engaging with the whole sector was highlighted, with some of 
the less research-intensive universities emphasising that all universities must be given the same opportunities to 
engage in forthcoming thematic or strategic calls, aligned with the principle of supporting research excellence 
wherever it is found. Several non-HEI organisations supported this and suggested that Research Councils should 
undertake more regional meetings to disseminate information about funding opportunities and good practice in 
preparation of grant applications. One respondent recommended that Research Councils should consider more 
innovative communication methods, e.g. webinars to ensure an equal communication to all HEIs. Three 
respondents suggested that secondment and people exchange between universities and Research Councils, at 
both director and programme manager level (as done in the US by National Science Foundation (NSF)), would 
improve engagement of Research Councils with their communities. The need for Research Council staff to have 
appropriate expertise to engage with and provide advice to applicants was highlighted. 
Four universities commented specifically on the need for better communication around forthcoming calls for 
research proposals, with short timescales between the announcement of new funding opportunities and the 
deadlines for submission of applications limiting the time available for the creation of bids. This was a particular 
issue for inter-/cross-disciplinary calls. 
Several learned societies, professional bodies and consortia group suggested that Research Councils should work 
more closely with them for better engagement with the general public and the research community. Both HEI 
and non-HEI organisations felt that Research Councils should involve and consult them at an early stage of 
strategic decision making and rolling out new policies. 
With regards to engaging industry, there was concern that there was a lack of visibility for medium-sized 
enterprises. There was a view that engagement with industry could benefit from a simplified structure and 
funding schemes and support for helping business make the right connections with the research base. 
Other operational issues 
One of the clearest messages was the need for more consistent, standardised and streamline processes and 
systems for managing funding schemes across the councils. Related to this, there was a strong view that there 
should be greater collaboration between Research Councils more generally, and that this should be addressed as 
a main priority. A need for a robust performance management framework to evaluate and report on success was 
also suggested. 
Several respondents commented on the need for up-to-date systems that were interoperable with those of 
Research Organisations, to enable a better provision of research information (e.g. Je-S, Gateway to Research and 
Researchfish). In particular there was a view that current processes for reporting on research outcomes were 
time-consuming and inefficient. 
Respondents expressed concern that excessive administrative were limiting the Research Councils’ strategic 
capacity and ability to engage with their communities and with other funding agencies. There were also concerns 
 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 
15 

2 
Call for Evidence: Summary of responses 
that policies introduced by Research Councils in order to make administrative savings often simply shifted the 
administrative and cost burden onto HEIs. 
A significant number of respondents commented on Research Councils’ funding for doctoral training, although 
views on this were varied. Some respondents believed that approaches should be harmonised across councils, 
whilst other believed that a single model for doctoral training would be inappropriate. 
2.1 Breakdown of responses to the Call for Evidence 
By response type: 
By sector: 
 
 
 
Number of 
responses 
Proportion of 
total 
Individual 
submission 
39 
15%
Organisational 
submission 
213 
85%
 
 
 
Number of 
responses 
Proportion of 
total
Academic 
131 
52%
Industry 
15 
6%
Charity 
12 
5%
Learned Societies, 
Academies & 
professional 
organisations 
38 
15%
Public sector 
54 
21%
Other 
2 
1%
Total 
252 
 
 
16 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 

 
Call for Evidence: Summary of responses 2 
2.2 List of Respondents to the Call for Evidence 
Inclusion of an organisation in the list indicates that written evidence was submitted either by the organisation 
listed in the form of an organisation-level response, or by an individual or group of individuals from that 
organisation. 
Aberystwyth University 
Academy of Medical Sciences 
Academy of Social Sciences and the Campaign for 
Social Science 
Agri-food and Biosciences Institute (AFBI) 
Agriculture and Horticulture Development Board 
(AHDB) 
Association for Innovation, Research and 
Technology Organisations (AIRTO) 
Arts and Humanities in Society Working Group of 
the Royal Society of Edinburgh’s Young Academy 
Association of Medical Research Charities (AMRC) 
Association of Research Managers and 
Administrators (ARMA) 
Association of the British Pharmaceutical Industry 
(ABPI) 
Aston University 
Astrophysics Group at the Mullard Space Science 
Laboratory – University College London (UCL) 
Babraham Institute 
Bangor University 
BioImagingUK 
Birmingham City University 
Bournemouth University 
BP 
British Academy 
British Ecological Society 
British Educational Research Association 
British Heart Foundation 
British International Studies (BISA) 
British Library 
British Machine Vision Association and Society for 
Pattern Recognition 
British Medical Association 
British Pharmacological Society 
British Trust for Ornithology 
Brunel University London 
Campaign for Science and Engineering 
Cancer Research UK 
Cardiff University 
Confederation of British Industry (CBI) 
Cell Therapy Catapult 
Centre for Environment, Fisheries and Aquaculture 
Science 
Challenger Society for Marine Science 
Chemistry Department – University of Sheffield 
Chief Medical Officer and Chief Scientific Adviser – 
Department of Health 
Cohort & Longitudinal Studies Enhancement 
Resources (CLOSER) – UCL 
Colbalt Light Ltd 
Council for Mathematical Sciences 
Council for Science and Technology 
Coventry University 
Chief Scientific Advisers of UK government 
departments 
Daphne Jackson Trust 
De Montfort University 
Department for Environment, Food and Rural 
Affairs (Defra) 
Department for Employment and Learning 
Diamond Light Source 
Durham University 
Eastern ARC 
ELIXIR 
EMBL-European Bioinformatics Instititue 
Faculty of Engineering – University of Sheffield 
Food and Environment Research (Fera) Science Ltd 
Glasgow Caledonian University 
Goldsmiths, University of London 
GlaxoSmithKline (GSK) 
 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 
17 

2 
Call for Evidence: Summary of responses 
GuildHE and Consortium for Research Excellence, 
Support and Training (CREST) 
GW4 Alliance 
H8 Standing Committee, British Academy Section 
Heads of Chemical Engineering UK (HCEUK) 
Health and Safety Laboratories, the Met Office and 
the National Physical Laboratory. 
Higher Education Funding Council for England 
(HEFCE) 
Heriot-Watt University 
Higher Education Funding Council for Wales 
(HEFCW) 
Imperial College London 
Independent Research Organisations Heads of 
Research Group 
Innogen Institute – University of Edinburgh 
Innovate UK 
Institute for Government 
Institute of Evolutionary Biology – University of 
Edinburgh 
Institute of Food Research 
Institute of Physics 
Institution of Chemical Engineers (IChemE) 
Institution of Engineering and Technology 
Institution of Environmental Sciences 
Jaguar Land Rover Ltd 
James Hutton Institute 
Jisc 
John Innes Centre 
Joint Nature Conservation Committee 
Keele University 
King’s College London 
Knowledge Transfer Network (KTN) 
Lancaster University 
Learned Society of Wales 
Liverpool John Moores University 
London School of Economics and Political Science 
(LSE) 
London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine 
London South Bank University 
Loughborough University 
Manchester Metropolitan University 
Medical Schools Council 
Meteorological Office 
million+ 
MRC Clinical Sciences Centre 
MRC Lifecourse Epidemiology Unit 
MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology 
MRC / Wellcome Trust Behavioural and Clinical 
Neuroscience Institute (BCNI) 
N8 
National Centre for Atmospheric Science 
National Heritage Science Forum 
National Institute for Social Care and Health 
Research (NISCHR) 
National Nuclear Laboratory (NNL) 
National Oceanography Centre 
National Physical Laboratory 
Natural England 
Natural History Museum 
Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) – 
British Antarctic Survey 
NERC National Centre for Earth Observation 
Norwich Research Park Doctoral Training 
Partnership (DTP) 
Norwich University of the Arts 
Nottingham Trent University 
Nuclear Innovation and Research Advisory Board 
Nuffield Council on Bioethics’ 
Open University 
Oxford Brookes University 
PHG Foundation 
Physiological Society 
Plymouth University 
Political Studies Association 
PraxisUnico 
Public Health England 
Queen Mary University of London 
Queen’s University Belfast 
18 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 

 
Call for Evidence: Summary of responses 2 
Rainbow Seed Fund 
Research Councils UK (RCUK) 
RCUK Energy Strategy Fellowship team 
Regional Studies Association 
Research Complex at Harwell 
Rolls-Royce 
Rothamsted Research 
Royal Academy of Engineering 
Royal Astronomical Society 
Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew 
Royal College of Nursing 
Royal Geographical Society (with IBG) 
Royal Society 
Royal Society Edinburgh 
Royal Society of Chemistry 
Royal Statistical Society 
Russell Group 
Satellite Applications Catapult Ltd 
Sciencewise 
Science Museum Group 
Science Policy Research Unit – University of Sussex 
Scotland’s Rural College 
Scottish Environment Protection Agency 
Scottish Funding Council 
Scottish government 
Scottish Natural Heritage 
Scottish Universities Environmental Research Centre 
Scottish Universities Physics Alliance (SUPA) 
Sheffield Hallam University 
SOAS, University of London 
Society for General Microbiology 
Society for Research into Higher Education 
Society of Biology 
Software Sustainability Institute 
Solace 
Space Glasgow – University of Glasgow 
Space Leadership Council 
St George’s – University of London 
STFC – Computing advisory panel 
STFC Council 
STFC – Particle Physics Advisory Panel 
STFC – Science Board, with input from Advisory 
Panels 
STFC – Solar System Advisory Panel 
Synthetic Biology Leadership Council 
The British Sociological Association 
The Forestry Commission Research Agency 
The Linnaean Society of London 
The National Archives 
Tokamak Energy Ltd 
Transport Systems Catapult 
Trym Systems Ltd 
UCB Celltech 
University College London 
UK BioIndustry Association 
UK Computing Research Committee 
UK industry association for space (UKSpace) 
UK National Institutes of Bioscience 
Ulster University 
Universities Scotland 
Universities UK 
University Alliance 
University and College Union 
University of Aberdeen 
University of Bath 
University of Birmingham 
University of Bristol 
University of Cambridge 
University of Edinburgh 
University of Exeter 
University of Glasgow 
University of Hertfordshire 
University of Leeds 
University of Leicester 
University of Liverpool 
University of Manchester 
 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 
19 

2 
Call for Evidence: Summary of responses 
20 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 
University of Nottingham 
University of Oxford 
University of Reading 
University of Roehampton 
University of Sheffield 
University of South Wales 
University of Southampton 
University of Stirling 
University of Strathclyde 
University of Surrey 
University of Sussex 
University of the Arts London 
University of Warwick 
University of York 
Victoria and Albert Museum (V&A) 
Wellcome Trust 
Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute 
Welsh Government – Chief Scientific Adviser Wales 
 
 

 
Bibliography 3 
3. Bibliography 
Sources consulted during the review are listed below. 
Baroness Onora O’Neill (2012) ‘Integrity and quality in universities: accountability, excellence and success’, 
British Academy Review 20. 
BMG Research for Research Councils UK (2014) RCUK User Satisfaction Survey 2014 Summary Report. Available at: 
http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/RCUK-prod/assets/documents/documents/USSReportSummary.pdf 
Campaign for Social Science (2015) The Business of People: The significance of social science over the next decade. Available 
at: http://campaignforsocialscience.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/02/Business-of-People-Full-Report.pdf 
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster (1993) Realising Our Potential: A Strategy for Science, Engineering and Technology. 
London: HMSO [Cmnd 2250] 
Committee of Enquiry into the Organisation of Civil Science (1963) Report of the Committee of Enquiry into the 
Organisation of Civil Science, under the chairmanship of Sir Burke Trend. London: HMSO [Cmnd 2171]. 
Cooksey, D (2006) A review of UK health research funding. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/228984/0118404881.pdf 
Council for Science and Technology, Terms of Reference. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/council-for-science-and-technology/about/terms-of-reference 
Coutu, S (2014) The Scale-up report on UK economic growth. Available at: http://www.scaleupreport.org/scaleup-
report.pdf 
Dainton F (1971) The Future of the Research Council System. In Cabinet Office, A Framework for Government Research and 
Development. London: HMSO 
Department for Business , Innovation and Skills (2014) Innovation Report 2014: Innovation, Research and Growth, 
Innovation Report. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/293635/bis-14-p188-
innovation-report-2014-revised.pdf 
Department for Business Innovation and Skills (2014) International Benchmarking of the UK Science and Innovation 
System, a report by Tera Allas Annex E: Summary data on comparator countries’ expenditure on science and innovation. 
Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/277043/bis-14-
544an-insights-from-international-benchmarking-of-the-UK-science-and-innovation-system-annexes-bis-
analysis-paper-03.pdf 
Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (2010) The allocation of science and research funding 2011/12 to 
2014/15. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/422477/bis-10-1356-
allocation-of-science-and-research-funding-2011-2015.pdf 
Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (2014) Insights from international benchmarking of the UK science and 
innovation system, a report by Tera Allas. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/277090/bis-14-544-insights-
from-international-benchmarking-of-the-UK-science-and-innovation-system-bis-analysis-paper-03.pdf 
 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 
21 

3 
Bibliography 
Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (2014) The allocation of science and research funding 2015/16. 
Available at: https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/332767/bis-14-
750-science-research-funding-allocations-2015-2016-corrected.pdf 
Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (2014) Triennial Review of Research Councils, Final Report. Available 
at: https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/303327/bis-14-746-
triennial-review-of-the-research-councils.pdf 
Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (2015) Geographic breakdown of public research and innovation 
expenditure. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/437447/bis-15-350-Public-
expenditure-on-research-and-innovation-2013-14.pdf 
Department for Business, Innovation and Skills (2015) Research Paper No. 226 Research and Innovation Organisations 
in the UK: Innovation Functions and Policy Issues. Available at: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/451265/bis-15-321-research-
and-innovation-organisations-in-the-UK-innovation-functions-and-policy-issues.pdf 
Department for Innovation, Universities and Skills (2007) The Allocations of the Science Budget 2008/09 to 2010/11. 
Available at: 
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/tna/+/http:/www.dius.gov.uk/publications/URN07114.pdf/ 
Department of Education and Science (1991) Higher Education, A New Framework. London: HMSO 
Department of Trade and Industry, Office of Science and Technology (2001) Quinquennial Review of the Grant 
Awarding Research Councils. London: HMSO 
Dowling, A (2015) Dowling Review of Business–University Research Collaboration. Available at: 
http://www.raeng.org.uk/publications/reports/the-dowling-review-of-business-university-research 
Enterprise Research Centre (23015) Benchmarking Local Innovation: The innovation geography of the UK Available at: 
http://www.enterpriseresearch.ac.uk/wp-content/uploads/2015/05/Benchmarking-Local-Innovation1.pdf 
Horrocks, S. (1999) The Nature and Extent of British Industrialised Research and Development, 1945–1970. ReFRESH 29 
House of Commons Innovation, Universities, Science and Skills Committee (2009) Putting Science and Engineering 
at the Heart of Government Policy , Chapter 4: The Haldane Principle Today. Available at: 
http://www.publications.parliament.uk/pa/cm200809/cmselect/cmdius/168/16807.htm 
Lord Rothschild (1971) The organisation and management of Government R&D. In Cabinet Office, A Framework for 
Government Research and Development. London: HMSO 
Ministry of Reconstruction (1918) Report of Machinery of Government Committee, Chaired by Lord Haldane. London: 
HMSO 
Nurse, P (2012) ‘Making Science Work’ Address of the president, Sir Paul Nurse, given at the Anniversary 
Meeting on 30 November 2011. Notes and Records: the Royal Society Journal of the History of Science 68(2) pp.187–192 
DOI: 10.1098/rsnr.2014.0001 
Nurse, P (2014) ‘Trust in Science’ Address of the president, Sir Paul Nurse, given at the Anniversary Meeting on 01 December 
2014. Available at: https://royalsociety.org/~/media/about-us/governance/anniversary-address-2014.pdf 
Office for National Statistics (2014) Business Enterprise Research and Development 2013. Available at: 
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/rdit1/bus-ent-res-and-dev/2013/stb-berd-2013.html 
22 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 

 
Bibliography 3 
Office for National Statistics (2014) The Changing Shape of UK Manufacturing. Available at: 
http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/uncategorised/summary/changing-shape-of-uk-manufacturing/art-changing-
shape-of-uk-manufacturing.html 
Office for National Statistics (2015) UK Government Expenditure on Science, Engineering and Technology, 2013. 
Available at: http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/rdit1/science--engineering-and-technology-statistics/2013/stb-
set-2013.html 
Parliamentary Office of Science and Technology (1995) POSTnote 57: Encouraging Industrial R&D, Available at: 
http://researchbriefings.files.parliament.uk/documents/POST-PN-57/POST-PN-57.pdf 
RCUK and UK Shared Business Services user satisfaction surveys for grants services: 
– 2014 Grant Peer Reviewers Satisfaction Survey 
– 2014 Grant Research Organisation Satisfaction Survey 
– 2013 Grant Panel Members Satisfaction Survey 
– 2013 Grant Applicant Satisfaction Survey 
RCUK–DFID Concordat, Summary. Available at: 
http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/international/funding/collaboration/rcuk-dfid-concordat/ 
Research Council Annual Reports 2013/14 Available at: AHRC: http://www.ahrc.ac.uk/documents/project-
reports-and-reviews/ahrc-annual-report-accounts/2013-14/ 
BBSRC: http://www.bbsrc.ac.uk/news/accounts/bbsrc-annual-13-14/ 
EPSRC: http://www.bbsrc.ac.uk/news/accounts/bbsrc-annual-13-14/ 
ESRC: http://www.esrc.ac.uk/news-events-and-publications/publications/corporate-publications/annual-
report-and-accounts/ 
MRC: http://www.mrc.ac.uk/documents/pdf/economic-impact-report-2013-14/ 
NERC: http://www.mrc.ac.uk/documents/pdf/economic-impact-report-2013-14/ 
STFC: http://www.stfc.ac.uk/files/stfc-annual-report-2013-2014/ 
Research Council Royal Charters. Available at: AHRC: http://www.ahrc.ac.uk/about/policies/royalcharter/ 
BBSRC: http://www.bbsrc.ac.uk/documents/royal-charter-pdf/ 
EPSRC: https://www.epsrc.ac.uk/about/history/royalcharter2003/ 
ESRC: https://www.epsrc.ac.uk/about/history/royalcharter2003/ 
MRC: http://www.mrc.ac.uk/documents/pdf/mrc-charter/ 
NERC: http://www.nerc.ac.uk/about/whatwedo/vision/nerc-royal-charter/ 
STFC: http://www.stfc.ac.uk/about-us/our-purpose-and-priorities/royal-charter/ 
Research Councils UK (2006) Report of the Research Councils UK Efficiency and Effectiveness of Peer Review Project. 
Available at: http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/RCUK-prod/assets/documents/documents/rcukprreport.pdf 
Research Councils UK (2006, revised 2015) Eligibility for Research Council Funding. Available at: 
http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/RCUK-prod/assets/documents/documents/eligibilitystatement.pdf 
Research Councils UK (no date) Applications across Research Council remits. Available at: 
http://www.rcuk.ac.uk/funding/fundingagreement/ 
Scottish Government (no date) Environment Biology and Agriculture – Main Research Providers. Available at: 
http://www.gov.scot/Topics/Research/About/EBAR/research-providers 
 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 
23 

3 
Bibliography 
24 
Ensuring a successful UK research endeavour – Consultation and Evidence Gathering 
Small Advanced Economies Initiative (2015) Broadening the Scope of Impact 
http://www.smalladvancedeconomies.org/wp-content/uploads/SAEI_Impact-
Framework_Feb_2015_Issue2.pdf 
Wilsdon, J., et al. (2015) The Metric Tide: Report of the Independent Review of the Role of Metrics in Research Assessment and 
Management. DOI: 10.13140/RG.2.1.4929.1363