Mondes du Tourisme 
10 | 2014
Tourisme créatif
Territorial development through cultural tourism
and creative activities
Ludovico Solima and Antonio Minguzzi
Electronic version
URL: https://journals.openedition.org/tourisme/366
DOI: 10.4000/tourisme.366
ISSN: 2492-7503
Publisher
Association Mondes du tourisme
Printed version
Date of publication: December 1, 2014
Number of pages: 6-16
ISSN: 2109-5671
 
Electronic reference
Ludovico Solima and Antonio Minguzzi, “Territorial development through cultural tourism and creative
activities”, Mondes du Tourisme [Online], 10 | 2014, Online since 30 September 2015, connection on 01
December 2023. URL: http://journals.openedition.org/tourisme/366 ; DOI: https://doi.org/10.4000/
tourisme.366 
The text only may be used under licence CC BY-NC-ND 4.0. All other elements (illustrations, imported
files) are “All rights reserved”, unless otherwise stated.

6
MO ND E S  D U  TOU R IS ME N° 10 • DÉC EMB R E 2014
LUDOVICO SOLIMA & ANTONIO MINGUZZI
LUDOVICO SOLIMA
Professeur associé en Économie et gestion des entreprises
Seconda Università di Napoli (Université de Naples II)
[ludovico.solima@unina2.it]
ANTONIO MINGUZZI
Professeur associé en Management des
destinations • Université du Molise 
[minguzzi@unimol.it]
Résumé. Cet article vise à définir un cadre d’évaluation de la compétitivité des destinations touristiques jouissant
d’un solide patrimoine culturel (tangible ou intangible) et ayant retenu des modèles de développement centrés
sur les industries culturelles et créatives locales. À partir d’une solide analyse de la littérature scientifique, tant
italienne qu’internationale, sur les destinations touristiques à fort patrimoine culturel, il évalue l’impact des
industries créatives sur le développement régional. Le modèle ainsi établi constituera un outil au service de
l’élaboration de politiques de gestion coordonnées et globales des destinations touristiques créatives. Cette
recherche a également pour ambition de grossir la littérature sur la gestion des destinations car, si ce fonds est
fourni au niveau international, il est relativement pauvre en études approfondies sur le patrimoine culturel et sur
les liens entre industries culturelles et créatives, d’une part, et processus de développement local, d’autre part.
Ainsi, bien que s’appuyant sur des travaux apportant un accroissement marginal de la connaissance, cette
recherche vise à établir un cadre très novateur. Une fois les résultats escomptés obtenus, ce cadre non seulement
contribuera au débat scientifique, mais accompagnera aussi les politiques des destination touristiques.
Abstract. The aim of this paper is to identify an interpretative framework for the competitiveness of tourism destinations
defined by a strong tangible or intangible cultural heritage and which have identified development patterns focused
around local cultural and creative industries. This paper will analyse in depth both Italian and international literature
on tourist destinations with a strong cultural heritage, evaluating the implications of creative industries for regional
development. The resulting model will help to develop a coordinated and comprehensive management policy for
creative tourism destinations. This research aims at contributing to the literature on destination management, which,
whilst extensive at an international level, is relatively scarce for in-depth studies on cultural heritage and the relationship
between cultural and creative industries and local development processes. For these reasons, although the approach
to this work can only be based upon marginal increases in knowledge, it aims at setting out a new and highly innovative
framework. Achieving the desired results will contribute not only to the scientific debate on the subject, but also
support regional development initiatives as defined by tourist destination policies.
Territorial development 
through cultural tourism 
and creative activities

7
DÉCEM BR E 2014 •  MON DES  DU  T OU RIS ME N° 1 0
DOSSIER • TOURISME CRÉATIF
DETERMINING FACTORS
IN THE ANALYSIS MODEL
Tourism and destination 
management 
The debate on tourism has always
been based upon the presumption
of a link between social and econo-
mic activities and their territory of
reference, while simultaneously iden-
tifying all the relative resources. The
process of identifying tourist
resources underpins the conditions
for developing the strategies and
organisation for a tourism system
(Grant, 1994; Teece, Pisano and Shuen,
1997). It is therefore necessary to
appreciate and organise the various
components of the natural and the
built environment (mountains,
churches, castles, monuments and
so on), together with the set of imma-
terial resources, such as local culture
or brands and even human resources,
in order to have a complete picture
of all the tourist resources within a
given local system. The debate sur-
rounding the development of social
and economic tourist activities is
therefore based above all upon ana-
lysing a territory, understood as “the
set of material and immaterial values,
such as people, culture, historical
legacy, urban and artistic heritage,
infrastructures, localisation and any
other type of situation that can
increase the value of the single parts”
(Kotler, Haider and Rein, 1993, p. 93).
The second fundamental concep-
tual step is where applying economic
management models to a tourist des-
tination results in a “place” being
defined as a “product”. The tourist
destination acquires its own overall
identity, and can therefore follow
the same strategic management
methods adopted in the business sec-
tor.
It follows that territories, especially
tourist destinations, are required to
act competitively with the aim of
implementing strategies that will dif-
ferentiate them from other areas
with which they are in competition,
and produce wealth and value for
the players in their own territorial
system by increasing tourists and
visitors. A more comprehensive and
contemporary definition of the com-
petitive success of a destination is
“a destination’s capacity of increasing
the well-being of its residents through
tourism. The actual success of the
destination is measured by the contri-
bution that tourism makes towards
enhancing the sustainable well-being
of destination’s residents” (Ritchie
and Crouch, 2003, p. 142). 
While a destination’s competitivity
depends upon its wealth of tangible
(and intangible) resources, its pro-
gress is linked to its capacity of adop-
ting management policies that reco-
gnise the relationships established
between the players who make up
the system in its entirety (Minguzzi
and Presenza, 2010). 
It follows that the success and
complexity of a tourist destination
are determined, on the one hand,
by the structural components of the
territory and, on the other, by how
they interact to create value, progress
and well-being for the different
players within the touristic and ter-
ritorial system (Minguzzi, 2006).
The cultural sector 
A territory can be analysed
through in a number of different
keys, emphasising certain aspects,
in particular those concerning the
economic fabric and the demogra-
phic structure of the territory, or its
natural, landscape-based and cultural
resources. If these are intrinsically
consistent resources, in both quan-
titative and qualitative terms, this
naturally influences the local deve-
lopment processes, where they can
help to achieve competitive goals,
such as economic growth, social
well-being, etc.
In this context, interest tends to
focus initially on cultural aspects,
which are then analysed from a tou-
rism point of view, in order to iden-
tify an attraction factor that will
help the development process of a
destination (Prentice, 1993; Timothy
and Boyd, 2006). 
Proceeding along these lines, it is
necessary first to establish the cultural
boundaries under the understanding
that the sector has been interpreted
according to different models, which,
over the years, have progressively
expanded its scope.
First and foremost, a distinction
can be made between tangible cul-
tural assets and intangible cultural
assets, where the former relate, accor-
ding to all available evidence, to the
physical evidence of man’s work,
such as monuments, archaeological
sites, museums and works of art
belonging to permanent collections,
etc., while the latter consist of the
activity, practice and knowledge sur-
rounding a community defined by

8
MO ND E S  D U  TOU R IS ME N° 10 • DÉC EMB R E 2014
LUDOVICO SOLIMA & ANTONIO MINGUZZI
TABLE 1 • THE SECTORS OF CULTURAL AND CREATIVE INDUSTRIES
CIRCLES
SECTORS
SUB-SECTORS
CHARACTERISTICS
CIRCLE 3: 
RELATED INDUSTRIES 
CORE ARTS FIELD
CIRCLE 1: 
CULTURAL INDUSTRIES
CIRCLE 2: 
CREATIVE INDUSTRIES AND ACTIVITIES
Visual arts
Performing arts 
Heritage
Film and Video
Television
and radio
Video games
Music
Books and press
Design
Architecture
Advertising
PC manufacturers, 
MP3 player
manufacturers, mobile
industry, etc.
Crafts
Paintings - Sculpture - 
Photography
Theatre - Dance - 
Circus - Festivals
Museums - Libraries -
Archaeological sites - 
Archives
Recorded music market - 
Live music performances -
revenues of collecting 
societies in the music sector
Book publishing - 
Magazine and press publishing
Fashion design, graphic 
design, interior design, 
product design
• Non industrial activities.
• Outputs are prototypes and “potentially
copyrighted works” (i.e. these works 
have a high density of creation that would
be eligible to copyright but they are
however not systematically copyrighted, 
as it is the case for most craft works, 
some performing arts productions 
and visual arts, etc.).
• Industrial activities aimed at massive
reproduction.
• Outputs are based on copyright.
• Activities are not necessarily industrial, 
and may be prototypes.
• Although outputs are based on copyright,
they may include other intellectual property
inputs (trademark for instance).
• The use of creativity (creative skills and
creative people originating in the arts field
and in the field of cultural industries) is
essential to the performances of these 
non-cultural sectors.
• This category is loose and impossible to
circumscribe on the basis of clear criteria.
It involves many other economic sectors
that are dependent on the previous
“circles”, such as the ICT sector.
“the cultural sector”
“the creative sector”

9
DÉCEM BR E 2014 •  MON DES  DU  T OU RIS ME N° 1 0
DOSSIER • TOURISME CRÉATIF
its strongly identifying link with his-
tory and local traditions. 
The link between cultural heritage
and tourism can depend upon a num-
ber of tourist services involved in the
many processes to maximise this heri-
tage, which vary according to the dif-
ferent decisions that tourists take
about which destination they choose
and how best to enjoy it. Before visi-
ting a destination, their decisions are
made through information, booking
and purchasing systems; during their
visit, through tourist welcome services
and other services aimed at making
their experience a memorable one;
on their return, through initiatives
with the aim of reinforcing loyalty
to the destination. 
This increasing integration of the
tourism offer is counterbalanced by
the simultaneous and progressive
affirmation of a specific type of tou-
rist demand, cultural tourism. In this
case, accessing the tangible and intan-
gible cultural heritage of a territory
is the only, or at least the principle,
reason that visitors choose the des-
tination in the first place and then
enjoy what it can offer(1).
Creative industries 
The cultural sector’s importance
does not only depend upon its inter-
section with a substantial portion of
the tourism market, because, as
shown in the most recent literature,
there is another, and possibly even
more extensive interconnection with
the so-called creative “industries”(2),
leading to the so-called “creative
tourism” (Richards, 2011; Flew and
Cunningham, 2010). 
As recently highlighted by
Santagata (2009), both tangible and
intangible historical and artistic heri-
tage represents the expression of
human creativity, both past and pre-
sent. Therefore, architecture, contem-
porary art and performance art
(music and entertainment) can also
be included within the definition of
cultural and artistic heritage. 
The different ways to express a
territory’s culture represent the
methods by which creativity is see-
ded, to become available for other
creative bursts (Pratt, 2013). Creativity
is also the raw material of the so-
called “content industries” (publi-
shing, radio, television, advertising
and cinema)(3). Further sectors that
benefit from the cultural dimension
of a territory are those that fall within
the scope of “immaterial culture”
(fashion, design and crafts, gastro-
nomy, computer technology).
A further framework, which does
not necessarily coincide with the one
just analysed, is contained in the
report prepared by Kern European
Affairs (KEA, 2006)
for the
Directorate-General for Education
and Culture of the European
Commission, and proposes a concen-
tric model. This includes a first
nucleus of activity, Core Arts Fields,
containing cultural heritage and
visual and performing arts, and a
secondary 
sphere, 
Cultural
Industries, containing publishing,
musical, audio-visual and video
games. The former involves a consu-
mer end-product that cannot be
reproduced and is intended for local
consumption (a concert, an exhibi-
tion, etc.). The latter refers to indus-
trial sectors where the consumer
end-product can be reproduced
(books, films, recordings) and is
intended for mass production, dis-
connected from any geographic
context.
Finally, within this model, and
which will be covered in greater
depth later on, there is a more exter-
nal group, that of “Creative
Industries and Activities”, which
includes sectors not generally referred
to as cultural, such as design, archi-
tecture and advertising, but which
are classified in this way as work in
this areas makes an overriding use
of creative professional capacities.
Culture therefore becomes a “crea-
tive” input to realise non-cultural
assets(4) (cf. table 1). On the basis of
this interpretation, the action of com-
panies operating in creative sectors
is intrinsically linked to the existence
of the cultural assets and activities
within a specific geographical area(5).
It is clear that, in terms of local
development, the cultural assets of
a territory can be analysed by looking
at the role that they have within the
tourist sector and how they relate
to the operators of content creation
and transmission and those involved
in the production of assets and ser-
vices connected to creativity(6)
(Campbell, 2011).
Table 2 highlights the relative
importance of the creative industries
in the world economy. It shows the
significant growth rates that are pro-
duced both in developed economies
than in emerging ones in the past
decade.

Developed economies
Developing economies
Transition
economies
10
MO ND E S  D U  TOU R IS ME N° 10 • DÉC EMB R E 2014
LUDOVICO SOLIMA & ANTONIO MINGUZZI
METHODOLOGY
Paper’s methodology is based on
the validation of mechanisms of ter-
ritorial development by analysis of
economic data of cultural tourism
and creative industries. 
As mentioned in the literature (Yin,
2003) the analysis of the single “case
study” may be sufficient to identify
phenomena “drive specific” related
to the critical factors that influence
local patterns of development.
The analysis of the relationship
between culture, creativity and local
development is built on industry data
for Europe and Italy. The relationship
confirms the critical factors paths of
cultural-led local development. The
results are discussed with reference
to the European industry conditions
considering the specific implications
of the Italian economy.
THE ITALIAN CASE
As recently registered by the
Osservatorio Nazionale del Turismo,
in the first six months of 2011, just
under 40% of visiting Italians (equal
to 15.6 million people) chose desti-
nations of historical and artistic value
as their travel destination, an incre-
ment of one percentage point com-
pared to the previous year(7). Over
the same period, visits to state-owned
TABLE 2 • CREATIVE GOODS: EXPORTS, BY ECONOMIC GROUP, 2002 AND 2008 (IN MILLIONS OF $)
GRAPHIC 1 • CULTURAL PRODUCTION SECTOR MULTIPLIER
(EUROS ACTIVATED FOR EACH EURO GENERATED IN CULTURAL PRODUCTION SECTOR)
Creative industries
Cultural industries
Cultural heritage
Performing arts 
and entertainment
Over all cultural 
production sector
2,1
1,2
2
1,2
1,7
Source: Unioncamere and Fondazione Symbola, 2013.
World
2002
2008
2002
2008
2002
2008
2002
2008
All Creative Industries
204.949 
406.992
127.903 
227.103 
75.836 
176.210 
1.210 
3.678 
Art Crafts
17.503 
32.323 
8.256 
11.443 
9.202 
20.715 
45 
164 
Audiovisuals
462 
811 
425 
726 
35 
75 
3 
10 
Design
114.692 
241.972 
60.967 
117.816 
53.362 
122.439 
362 
1.716 
New Media
17.365 
27.754 
11.422 
13.248 
5.908 
14.423 
36 
82 
Performing Arts
9.689 
26.136 
8.947 
22.539 
698 
3.323 
43 
274 
Publishing
29.817 
48.266 
25.970 
38.753 
3.157 
8.138 
690 
1.376 
Visual Arts
15.421 
29.730 
11.916 
22.578 
3.474 
7.097 
31 
56 
Source: UNCTAD, 2010. 

11
DÉCEM BR E 2014 •  MON DES  DU  T OU RIS ME N° 1 0
DOSSIER • TOURISME CRÉATIF
places of culture increased by nearly
10% compared to the previous year,
with around 20 million visitors(8).
In relation to the creative indus-
tries, Italy confirms its leading eco-
nomy in the value of transactions
even if development rates were less
intense of its world competitors (cf.
table 3).
Qualitative analysis of the cultural
offer carried out recently on Bank
of Italy and Urban Audit data sho-
wed a stable trend or a slight dete-
rioration in the rating of foreign tou-
rists satisfaction compared to five
Italian cities between 2006 and 2012
(cf. table 4). In this empirical analysis
have been evaluate the opinions of
the tourists on the services and factors
that influence the experience and
perception of cultural tourism in the
city sample. The results show in detail
the characteristics of the foreign
consumer of Italian “cultural” indus-
try and use it as a driver of interpre-
tation of the phenomenon.
On the basis of the foregoing
emerges an important reflection to
be developed in relation to the theo-
retical approaches. The international
debate is mainly based on Anglo-
Saxon models providing a whole
series of ideas on studies into the
classification of tourism resources
and facilities. At the same time,
within the ongoing scientific debate
on defining the elements of a territory
to be included in the strategic analysis
of a tourist destination’s develop-
ment, it is fully acknowledged that
there is a well-defined connection to
the system of cultural wealth of both
tangible and intangible heritage
(Simeon and Martone, 2014).
The approach of the studies on
cultural and creative industries with
the implications of tourism speciali-
zation provides a first response to
the industry level on the basis of the
empirical analysis related to the eva-
luation of the economic effects of
their development in terms of fallout
on the overall economy of the country. 
The graphic 1 highlights a strong
multiplier effect on the development
of the cultural system on the Italian
economy.
The next step is working on the
recent literature on cultural and crea-
tive industries onto two theoretical
bodies (i.e. the management of the
destination and its cultural heritage
and initiatives) to create an integrated
framework having as a common
denominator the studies on local
development issues (Flew, 2013).
COMPLEXITY, DIRECT AND
INDIRECT RELATIONSHIPS
On the basis of what has been sta-
ted so far, it is possible to identify a
relationship between cultural heritage
and the tourist sector in terms of local
development, relative to the economic
side-effects generated by flows of visi-
tors who remain, for a more or less
time, in a certain territory.
Economic side-effects are measu-
red by evaluating their economic
impact, which frequently takes place
when there is public investment in
culture. As mentioned previously, in
this case there seems to be a need to
tap the economic aspects associated
to public financial flows set up to
support the investment processes
within the cultural sector that are
capable of generating economic value
in direct, indirect and induced terms
(Solima, 1999, 2006). 
In terms of generating economic
value directly, it should be noted
that cultural heritage’s contribution
towards a growth in local economy
is based upon a number of assets
and services directly linked to its very
existence. The preparation of a cata-
logue for a museum, a radio trans-
mission on the occasion of a musical
performance or a television pro-
gramme at the inauguration of an
art exhibition determine, at least
potentially, the creation of economic
value within the territory(9). 
The capacity of a territory to
attract tourist flows is part of its ove-
rall indirect impact, which takes into
account what tourists spend in
buying goods (such as typical local
products) and hospitality services
(from restaurants, hotels and similar)
in the territory being analysed. 
In terms of induced economic
value, we mean the buying capacity
set in place locally through the pro-
cesses of wealth generation referred
to above, which set off a train of
further consumption at local level,
evaluated by using a correlation
coefficient to multiply the expen-
diture(10).
By introducing cultural and crea-
tive industries at this point in the
thinking process, it is evident that
the territory can be further enhanced
by its capacity of fuelling creative
circuits, through its material or
immaterial cultural capital, which
is the raw material of highly intensive

MO ND E S  D U  TOU R IS ME N° 10 • DÉC EMB R E 2014
LUDOVICO SOLIMA & ANTONIO MINGUZZI
12
to the local production fabric (in
terms of qualified workers and
knowledge seeded in the people living
there), but rather for a different type
of contribution that they bring to
an innovative production process
based upon talent and creativity.
This circumstance makes it pos-
sible to reinterpret the traditional
approaches to destination manage-
ment in a critical way, and on a
wider scale, be capable of analysing,
and appreciating, the contribution
offered by other economic operators
outside the tourist chain, but still
influenced by the tangible and intan-
gible cultural capital of the terri-
tory(13).
The same strategic option used
to maximise complementary ele-
ments in a logic of reciprocal inte-
productive processes (Lazzaretti and
Cinti, 2009).
As underlined in Florida’s seminar
paper (2002), creative people and
resources are strongly linked to their
context and therefore difficult to
replicate(11). For this reason, territory
plays a crucial role, in the extent to
which it can exalt the territorial
aspects of the local human capital,
stimulating the creation and deve-
lopment of creative industries(12). 
This means that the concept of
intangible capital can be reached
from another angle. This concept
has directed the blossoming Italian
literature on the origins and deve-
lopment of Italian districts (Becattini,
2000). In other words, human and
social capital are not only important
for the contribution they can bring
TABLE 4 •  RATING OF FOREIGN
TOURISTS SATISFACTION FOR FIVE ITALIAN
CITIES, 2006-2012
Foreign tourist
rank 2006
rank 2012
Bologna
3
2
Napoli
4
4
Palermo
5
5
Torino
1
3
Verona
2
1
Note: 1-2= high; 3= medium; 4-5= low.
EU exports of creative products
increased 43% over 1996-2005
In 2005, EU (27) led world exports of
creative goods ‒ US$ 145 billion
Italy strong position in design
Creative services rising sharply 11%
annual growth 2000-2005 (advertising,
architecture, digital, R&D)
Developed countries accounted for 82%
of world services exports
Creative goods: 
Top 10 exporters among developed economies, 2005
Rank
Developed
Value
Market 
Growth 
economy
(in millions of $)
share (%)
rate (%)
2005
2005
2000-2005
1
Italy
28.008 
8,35
5,9
2
United States
25.544 
7,61
3,6
3
Germany
24.763 
7,38
14,2
4
United Kingdom
19.030 
5,67
9,8
5
France
17.706 
5,28
8,6
6
Canada
11.377 
3,39
1,7
7
Belgium
9.343 
2,78
-
8
Spain
9.138 
2,72
8,1
9
Netherlands
7.250 
2,16
9,7
10
Switzerland
6.053 
1,8
9,1
TABLE 3 •  CREATIVE ECONOMY: LEADING TRADE IN EUROPE
Source: Staines and Mercer, 2013.

13
JU IN 2014 • M ONDES  DU  TO UR IS ME N° 9
DOSSIER • TOURISME CRÉATIF
and landscape resources; leisure
resources, such as golf courses, theme
parks, clubs, etc.; social and cultural
resources, such as events and shows,
and also artistic and cultural activi-
ties; assets and services linked to
typical local crafts and foods, such
as food and wine, and artistic crafts.
The second axis of the model is
represented by the system of touristic
facilities, which include infrastruc-
tures supporting mobility (tourist
arrival points, facilities and services
for transport by air, sea, rail and
road, etc.) and hospitality-related
facilities (welcome desks, restaurants
and catering services, etc.). A further
key element for the competitiveness
of a destination is defined by these
structures and the quality of the ser-
vices they provide. 
The third axis is composed of the
system of cultural and creative indus-
tries that include, for the former,
broadcasting operators (videos, films,
television, music) and publishing,
and, for the latter, operators working
in design, architecture and adverti-
sing. The figure 1 summarises what
has been said up until now.
WORKING CONDITIONS
AND POLICY THEORY
The issues discussed and proposed
in the previous chapter modify the
picture of destination management
in the way it is structured in current
literature (Ritchie and Crouch, 2003;
Minguzzi and Presenza, 2010). This
change occurs through an increased
complexity, producing an effect both
on governance and the strategic fra-
gration between the economic ope-
rators of the territory―a lever increa-
singly used by local policy makers―
must be framed into a new, wider
perspective that takes into account
the additional levels of interconnec-
tion with the local entrepreneurship(14)
(García-Tabuenca, Crespo-Espert and
Cuadrado-Roura, 2011).
We will therefore configure our
model to analyse territorial compe-
titiveness according to three main
axes. The first is composed of the
tangible and intangible attractions
within the territory, possibly at a
local level; the second is represented
by the set of existing structures and
infrastructures that support and
make the best use of tourism; the
third, covering cultural and creative
industries, promotes the potential
for innovative development within
the territory, through what is called
creative tourism.
As previously mentioned, in this
paper we wish to focus on the wealth
of tangible and intangible cultural
heritage in a specific territory, given
the levels of interconnection with
the operators of local entrepreneur-
ship previously described. When pro-
posing our model of analysis, we
decided that it could be useful to
include other strongly contextual
resources that could form a system
of “attractions within the territory”,
which is one of the three sustaining
axes of the theoretical formulation
under discussion.
The system of attractions within
a territory, combined with the mate-
rial and immaterial cultural heritage,
refers to natural resources, habitat
FIGURE 1 • 
THE COMPETITIVE FACTORS IN THE EXPANDED MODEL FOR LOCAL DEVELOPMENT
Heritage
Habitat & landscape
Leisure
Social & cultural
Craft & food
Mobility infrastructures
Tourist welcome structures
Cultural industries
Creative industries      
SYSTEM TERRITORIAL ATTRACTIONS
SYSTEM OF TOURIST STRUCTURES
SYSTEM OF CULTURE 
AND CREATIVITY

MO ND E S  D U  TOU R IS ME N° 10 • DÉC EMB R E 2014
LUDOVICO SOLIMA & ANTONIO MINGUZZI
14
mework (Andres and Chapain, 2013).
The number of reference variables
is increased, and there is a greater
complexity within the system of rela-
tionships, producing direct and indi-
rect effects on the tourist destination’s
territorial and production systems
(Comunian, Chapain and Clifton, 2010).
The approach specifically relating
to creative tourism destination mana-
gement, represented by a driver for
overall destination complexity obtai-
ned by co-ordinating tangible and
intangible resources within a com-
mon governance (Minguzzi, 2006) is
combined to the complex theme of
cultural heritage, which, in Italy, is
both a factor underpinning tourism
and promoting its growth, and, at
the same time, a sector often gover-
ned by a conservative and self-defi-
ning logic rather than with the aim
of achieving the most benefit and
implementing a system-based view. 
In this context, the understanding
of the role of creative industries, as
defined previously, assumes a par-
ticular significance for its direct and
indirect links to the tourist-cultural
system (Minguzzi, Paniccia and Valeri,
2011; Pilotti, 2011).
Creative industries are in turn defi-
ned by intangible components (local
identity, history, tradition), which
are structured over time into a series
of products and services that become
part of the economic actions taking
place both in the investment process
and in that of selling the end product.
This highlights the ties between crea-
tivity and the creation of factors of
attraction within the destination.
One only needs to think about the
wine and food related issues that
strongly define Italy as a whole, and
in particular those products that have
become international, such as pizza.
In a similar way, local traditions and
the specific history of a territory have
determined manifestations that have
become extremely popular interna-
tional events (the Palio of Siena, to
give one example). We could also
look at artistic events offering popular
music, and a number of literary,
theatrical, cinematographic and tele-
vision festivals, which can be local
events, as well as production com-
panies and locations that can
influence the creative tourism system
economically in varying degrees,
through the movement of people,
capital and profit.
No less important are advertising
initiatives, which are based on crea-
tivity and are used by operators to
represent the tourist system and
spread knowledge about it to the
outside world. In a wider perspective,
the entire cultural heritage system is
in turn the historical expression of
a creative and architectural creativity
belonging to cultures that existed in
these territories in times preceding
the present one. 
A strong interrelation emerges bet-
ween the three axes of the model,
where the variables are integrated
within a relationship of reciprocal
functionality. Creativity, in its widest
meaning, creates the conditions and
stimulates the development of many
elements of attraction in the territory
that produce value for visitors (tou-
rists) and local residents, through
the very existence of a system of tou-
rist structures and infrastructures
and the way it operates.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS
The basic idea is that it is not
enough to identify a single major stra-
tegy for a territory’s economic and
social growth from among those on
offer in order to integrate the various
players operating within the tourism
and cultural supply chains of the ter-
ritory. And further, the viewpoint
must be expanded to incorporate
within the local development process
those operators who make use,
directly or indirectly, of a territory’s
cultural heritage. This occurs directly
for “cultural industries”, which pro-
mote cultural heritage, and indirectly
for “creative industries”, whose inno-
vation processes are fuelled by crea-
tivity within the social fabric and are,
in turn, influenced―in a very decisive
way―by the very presence of a cul-
tural heritage and associated initia-
tives, leading to a new form of tou-
rism, creative one (Zhang and Wang,
2010).
The proposed model of analysis
reveals how creative tourism systems
are becoming increasingly more com-
plex to manage when they are seen
as systems in competition with other
territorial systems (Fernandes, 2011).
If creative industries are inserted into
this approach, it is possible to highlight
both the growing importance of intan-
gible resources as determining factors
within the processes of competitivity,
and the bonds that influence or favour
the development of the system.
In particular, issues regarding the
sustainability of creativity within a

15
DÉCEM BR E 2014 •  MON DES  DU  T OU RIS ME N° 1 0
DOSSIER • TOURISME CRÉATIF
system cannot be separated from the
role of education, which is not always
integrated with the players and the
dynamics of the territory to which it
refers, although it is always a critical
factor for the territory’s economic
and competitive development
(Minguzzi and Presenza, 2012).
Regarding tourist competitivity, the
operational implications deduced
from our analysis should be split into
two. The first part relates to the tou-
rism-territorial system, and the second
to the businesses composing it.
For the former, we must analyse
the true governance conditions defi-
ning Italy at this particular moment
in time. For around ten years (see
the legislation on tourism, Law n°
135/2001), the legislator has set out
the coordination procedures that
must exist between the responsibility
for tourist organisation issues given
by law to the regions, and the neces-
sary central coordination process
carried out through local tourism
systems (LTS), which every region
must set up within its territory. To
date, this model of intervention has
been shown to be non-systematic,
as it is difficult to implement either
in the regions where there was already
a well-established tourist organisation
system or in those where a lack of
consolidated experience or a lack of
political will has meant that it could
not be fully implemented. Also to
date, about half the Italian regions
have adopted LTSs that are them-
selves beset with teething problems
under the arduous governance models
to be implemented in order to
manage situations bursting with pro-
tagonists, administrative complexities
that need coordinating, strategic
conflicts with other specialisations
within the territory and, not least, a
lack of community identity among
the operators.
Closing the gap between tourism
and the system of cultural heritage
has been, for some time, an important
issue of debate, and one not yet been
fully achieved, mainly because of the
different historical and administrative
background separating the two sys-
tems. The culture of “conservation”
that has rightly defined the cultural
heritage system since it came under
public administration has resulted
in its autonomous and separate
management through bodies known
as superintendencies, which cannot
now be integrated into the gover-
nance of local tourism systems despite
the great progress and growth of a
culture exalting cultural heritage.
It is therefore not easy to think
about rapidly expanding tools of
intervention for creative tourism-
related policies specifically for creative
industries (Zhang, 2013). The mecha-
nisms whereby creative industries
have an indirect influence over the
tourism system and the already cri-
tical role of the education system are
such that it is difficult to anticipate
how these aspects can be coordinated
within regional tourism legislations
within a short time.
n n
Regarding companies, operational
development could have different
dynamics. According to both the
classic strategic view of optimisation
limited by a company’s objectives
in terms of the competitive structure
of the market in which it operates
(Porter, 1980), and the resource-based
view (Grant, 1994), the role of creative
industries in creative tourism systems
could determine a growing “dema-
terialisation” of the various factors
of competitivity. 
The role of creativity in businesses
(DCMS, 1998; European Com mis sion,
2010) and in territorial systems (Foord,
2008; Santagata, 2009) implies that a
company must understand how
much weight the two components
have on its present and future com-
petitiveness. This obviously depends
on the business model and the struc-
ture of the internal value chain, with
different dynamic balances being
involved over time.
At an operative level, a company’s
strategy must concentrate on the
importance of creativity for its busi-
ness models with great accuracy and
define how much creativity weighs
on its operations compared to how
deeply it is embedded within the
territory, representing therefore a
comparative advantage relative to
its competitors located elsewhere.
Only by evaluating very clearly
the weight of this intangible factor
within a company’s dynamic strategy
will it be possible to make the suc-
cessful step of transferring know-
ledge into best practice.
n
NOTES
(1) In literature and in practise, and specifically
in the case of national and international
research institutes preparing cultural statistics,
the identification of cultural tourism is

MO ND E S  D U  TOU R IS ME N° 10 • DÉC EMB R E 2014
LUDOVICO SOLIMA & ANTONIO MINGUZZI
because creative people look for cultural ameni-
ties and because creative people and resources
are more difficult to replicate. In other words, the
spatial dimension and the interactions generated
on a limited territory are crucial for creativity to
emerge and contribute to the economy. A vir-
tuous circle can then be nurtured, because these
creative people, once concentrated on a territory,
will create synergies and fruitful collaborations,
thereby fostering further creativity” (KEA, 2006,
p. 39),
(12) Although there may seem to be a para-
dox, the globalisation of economic processes
does result in specific territorial aspects being
preferred over others, imposing a new com-
petitive approach in which the factor “local”,
virtuously combining global and local aspects,
becomes a defining element in the success of
a territory.
(13) With reference to cultural districts,
Trimarchi (2009) effectively underlines the
relationship between culture and creativity. In
Italy, this can be expressed in various ways:
“Industrial districts of culture, or creative districts,
can be considered as the backbone of Italian
creativity, and include productions such as opera
in Emilia-Romagna (homeland to Verdi and
Toscanini and host to a network of very active
opera theatres); music in Naples (ranging from
the nineteenth century melodies to the more
recent world music and contemporary opera by
De Simone); industrial design and fashion design
in Milan; cinema, media and audio-visuals in
Rome; and handicrafts and food and wine in
various regions” (Trimarchi, 2009, p. 235).
(14) In the approach adopted here, we
intend to expand the observation perspec-
tive, identifying the territory as a unit of analy-
sis from a social angle that does not necessa-
rily coincide with that of metropolitan cities
(Barcelona, Berlin, London, etc.), which is the
one generally considered in studies on crea-
tive clusters (Foord, 2008). 
16
somewhat inconsistent (Garrod and Fyall,
2001). Approaches based on the reasons
leading to selecting a specific destination are
those that seem highly likely to supply the
most correct interpretation (Nyaupane,
White and Budruk, 2006), particularly when
compared to those that reclassify tourist
demand according to the destination’s (cultu-
ral) wealth, which, especially in Italy, is often
drawn up by local administrations and is not
necessarily objective.
(2) The first definition of creative industries
can be traced back to the report prepared by
the English Government Department for
Culture, Media and Sport (DCMS) at the end
of the last century [https://www.gov.uk/govern
ment/publications/creative-industries-mapping-
documents-1998].
(3) On this subject, it should be stated that
content industries made their first appearance
with the refinement of printing technology
(Gutenberg’s invention of mobile characters
and printing press in the mid-15th century),
so that, for the first time, “multiples” could be
produced at a low cost, intended for a pro-
gressively wider public compared to the privi-
leged classes that up until then had been the
exclusive keepers of knowledge (and the
power they derived from it). In more recent
times, digitalisation of contents has provided a
further boost to the circulation of informa-
tion, progressively emphasising the role of
distribution (Solima, 2004, chap. 1).
(4) “Culture is not analysed as a source of final
consumption (as in the case of films, books,
music, cultural tourism, etc.) but as a source of
intermediate consumption in the production pro-
cess, most of the time the final products being
functional (to the contrary of works of arts or to
the output of cultural industries) (...) Multiple
examples can be given to illustrate the econo-
mic added-value of creativity and of its cultural
components: design is the perfect example. It is
an activity involving the use of cultural references
and education for the production of non-cultural
goods and services” (KEA, 2006, pp. 36-38).
(5) This approach, in its conception, is similar
to Marshall’s idea of “industrial atmosphere”,
that is, the existence of a heritage of various
skills spread within a specific territory, capable
of assisting the generation and development
of district-based activities.
(6) “Many recent studies have shown that the
cultural and creative industries (hereafter,
“CCIs”) represent highly innovative companies
with a great economic potential and are one of
Europe's most dynamic sectors, contributing
around 2.6% to the EU GDP, with a high
growth potential , and providing quality jobs to
around 5 million people across EU-27. (…)
Beyond their direct contribution to GDP, CCIs
are also important drivers of economic and
social innovation in many other sectors”
(European Commission, 2010, pp. 2-3).
(7) Osservatorio Nazionale del Turismo, Il
turismo culturale in Italia, November 2011
[http://www.ontit.it/opencms/opencms/ont/it/f
ocus/focus/Il_turismo_culturale_in_italia].
(8) MIBAC, “Statistiche Culturali”
[http://www.statistica.beniculturali.it].
(9) This occurs, naturally, to the extent in
which the economic operators are located in
the same territory of a cultural heritage. If the
catalogue of an exhibition taking place in
Salerno is produced in Milan, obviously the
flow of wealth is located outside the territo-
rial boundaries (typically of a municipality or
region) that had been identified for the
impact assessment.
(10) In particular, refer to Bowitz and
Ibenholt (2009), Choi, Ritchie, Papandrea and
Bennett (2010), and to the references quoted
by them.
(11) Florida, as has been correctly highlighted,
“says that creative firms will increasingly follow
the talent (which he labels ‘the creative class’)

17
DÉCEM BR E 2014 •  MON DES  DU  T OU RIS ME N° 1 0
DOSSIER • TOURISME CRÉATIF
Références bibliographiques
Lauren ANDRES and Caroline CHAPAIN, “The integration of
cultural and creative industries into local and regional deve-
lopment strategies in Birmingham and Marseille: towards an
inclusive and collaborative governance?”, Regional Studies,
vol. 47, no. 2 (“Understanding Creative Regions”), 2013.
Giacomo BECATTINI, Il distretto industriale. 
Un nuovo modo di interpretare il cambiamento economico,
Rosenberg & Sellier, 2000.
Einar BOWITZ and Karin IBENHOLT, “Economic impacts of
cultural heritage. Research and perspectives”, Journal of
Cultural Heritage, vol. 10, no. 1, 2009.
Peter CAMPBELL, “Creative industries in a European 
capital of culture”, International Journal of Cultural Policy, 
vol. 17, no. 5, 2011.
Andy S. CHOI, Brent W. RITCHIE, Franco PAPANDREA and 
Jeff BENNETT, “Economic valuation of cultural heritage sites: 
a choice modelling approach”, Tourism Management, 
vol. 31, no. 2, 2010.
Roberta COMUNIAN, Caroline CHAPAIN and Nick CLIFTON,
“Location, location, location: exploring the complex 
relationship between creative industries and place”, Creative
Industries Journal, vol. 3, no. 1, 2010.
DCMS, The Creative Industries Mapping Document, 
DCMS, 1998.
EUROPEAN COMMISSION, Green Paper of 27 April 2010
Unlocking the Potential of Cultural and Creative 
Industries, 2010 [http://europa.eu/legislation_summaries/cul-
ture/cu0006_en.htm]. 
Carlos FERNANDES, “Cultural planning and creative 
tourism in an emerging tourist destination”, International
Journal of Management Cases, vol. 13, no 3 
(“CIRCLE Conference”), 2011.
Terry FLEW and Stuart CUNNINGHAM, “Creative industries
after the first decade of debate”, The Information Society: An
International Journal, vol. 26, no. 2 (“Creative Industries and
Urban Development”), 2010.
Terry FLEW (ed.), Creative Industries and Urban Development:
Creative Cities in the 21st Century, Routledge, 2013.
Richard L. FLORIDA, The Rise of the Creative Class: And How it’s
Transforming Work, Leisure, Community and Everyday Life,
Perseus Books Group, 2002.
Jo FOORD, “Strategies for creative industries: an international
review”, Creative Industries Journal, vol. 1, no. 2, 2008.
Antonio GARCÍA-TABUENCA, José Luis CRESPO-ESPERT and
Juan R. CUADRADO-ROURA, “Entrepreneurship, creative
industries and regional dynamics in Spain”, The Annals of
Regional Science, vol. 47, no. 3, 2011.
Brian GARROD and Alan FYALL, “Heritage tourism: a question
of definition”, Annals of Tourism Research, vol. 28, no. 4, 2001.
Robert M. GRANT, L’analisi strategica nella gestione aziendale, Il
Mulino, 1994 (original edn Contemporary Strategy Analysis,
Blackwell, 1991).
KEA, The Economy of Culture in Europe, study prepared for the
European Commission, October 2006
[http://ec.europa.eu/culture/library/studies/cultural-
economy_en.pdf].
Philip KOTLER, Donald HAIDER and Irving REIN, Marketing
Places: Attracting Investment, Industry, and Tourism to Cities,
States, and Nations, Free Press, 1993.
Luciana LAZZARETTI and Tommaso CINTI,
“Governance-specific factors and cultural clusters: the case of
the museum clusters in Florence”, Creative Industries Journal,
vol. 2, no. 1, 2009.
Antonio MINGUZZI, “Network activity as critical factor in
development of regional tourism organization. An Italian case
study”, in Luciana LAZZARETTI and Clara S. PETRILLO (eds),
Tourism Local Systems and Networking, Elsevier, 2006.
Antonio MINGUZZI, Paola PANICCIA and Marco VALERI, “Co-
evoluzione tra impresa e destinazione turistica. L’esperienza
innovativa dell’albergo diffuso”, in Luciano Pilotti (ed.),
Creatività, innovazione, territorio. Ecosistemi del valore per la com-
petizione globale, Il Mulino, 2011.

18
MO ND E S  D U  TOU R IS ME N° 10 • DÉC EMB R E 2014
LUDOVICO SOLIMA & ANTONIO MINGUZZI
Antonio MINGUZZI and Angelo PRESENZA, Destination building.
Teorie e pratiche per il management della destinazione turistica,
Pearson Prentice Hall, 2010.
Antonio MINGUZZI and Angelo PRESENZA, “Le condizioni di
efficacia nel processo di sviluppo turistico di un territorio”, in
Monica Meini (ed.), Turismo al plurale. una lettura integrata del
territorio per un'offerta turistica sostenibile, FrancoAngeli, 2012.
Gyan P. NYAUPANE, Dave D. WHITE and Megha BUDRUK,
“Motive-based tourist market segmentation: an application
to Native American cultural heritage sites in Arizona, USA”,
Journal of Heritage Tourism, vol. 1, no. 2, 2006.
Luciano PILOTTI (ED.), Creatività, innovazione e territorio.
Ecosistemi del valore per la competizione globale, Il Mulino,
2011.
Michael E. PORTER, Competitive Strategy, Free Press, 1980.
ANDY PRATT, “The cultural and creative industries: new
engines for the city?”, in Wilfried Wang (ed.), Culture: City,
Lars Müller, 2013.
Richard PRENTICE, Tourism and Heritage Attractions,
Routledge, 1993.
GREG RICHARDS, “Creativity and tourism: the state of the
art”, Annals of Tourism Research, vol. 38, no. 4, 2011.
J. R. Brent RITCHIE, Geoffrey I. CROUCH, The Competitive
Destination. A Sustainable Tourism Perspective,
CABI Publishing, 2003.
Walter SANTAGATA (ED.), Libro bianco sulla creatività, 
EGEA, 2009.
Maria I. SIMEON and Assunta MARTONE, “Relationships bet-
ween Heritage, intangible capital and cultural and creative
industries in Italy: a framework analysis for urban regenera-
tion and territorial development”, Advanced Engineering
Forum, vol. 11, 2014.
Ludovico SOLIMA, “L’impatto economico dei musei: l’espe-
rienza del Guggenheim Museum di Bilbao”, Economia della
Cultura, no. 2, 1999.
Ludovico SOLIMA, L’impresa culturale. Processi e strumenti di
gestione, Carocci, 2004.
Ludovico SOLIMA (ed.), Rapporto sull’economia dei beni culturali
in Campania, Mondadori Electa, 2006.
Judith STAINES and Colin MERCER, “Mapping of cultural and
creative industry export and internationalisation strategies in
EU Member States”, in European Expert Network on Culture
(EENC) Report, February 2013.
David J. TEECE, Gary PISANO and Amy SHUEN, “Dynamic
capabilities and strategic management”, Strategic Management
Journal, vol. 18, no. 7, 1997.
Dallen J. TIMOTHY and Stephen W. BOYD, “Heritage tourism
in the 21st century: valued traditions and new perspectives”,
Journal of Heritage Tourism, vol. 1, no. 1, 2006.
Michele TRIMARCHI, “The economics and policy of creativity:
the Italian perspective”, Creative Industries Journal,
vol. 2, no. 3, 2009.
UNCTAD [United Conference on Trade and Development],
Creative Economy Report 2010: Creative Economy: A Feasible
Development Option, 2010
[http://unctad.org/en/Pages/PublicationArchive.aspx?publica-
tionid=946]. 
UNIONCAMERE and FONDAZIONE SYMBOLA, Io sono cultura.
L’Italia della qualità e della bellezza sfida la crisi, 2013
[http://www.symbola.net/html/article/IosonoculturaLItaliadella
qualitaedellabellezzasfidalacrisi]. 
Robert K. YIN, Case Study Research: Design and Methods
(3rd edn), Sage, 2003 (1st edn 1984).
Hai-yan ZHANG and Zhong-yun WANG, “Research on indus-
trial convergence development of tourism industry and cul-
tural industry”, Resource Development & Market, no. 4, 2010. 
Yurong ZHANG, “Study on the main characteristics and
development countermeasures of creative tourism”, 2013
International Conference on Education, Management and Social
Science, ICEMSS 2013, August 2013.