IOSR Journal Of Humanities And Social Science (IOSR-JHSS) 
Volume 19, Issue 3, Ver. IV (Mar. 2014), PP 112-118 
e-ISSN: 2279-0837, p-ISSN: 2279-0845. 
www.iosrjournals.org 
www.iosrjournals.org                                                    112 | Page 
 
Beyond Women’s Rights. 
 
Rosemary Oyinlola Popoola 
Department of Political Science and International Relations Covenant University, Canaan land- Ota Ogun- 
State- Nigeria 
 
Abstract: The actualization of women rights has been a concern worldwide. Decades of outcry of 
dehumanization, degradation, humiliation, exclusion, discriminations, arbitrary deprivation of liberty and 
gender-based violence have led to numerous efforts at curbing these issues at the international, regional, 
national level and through legal framework, conferences, conventions, programmes. Similarly, there has been a 
rise in social advocacy groups at national, regional and global level. Yet, the problem is far from being 
ameliorated much less eliminated. This paper presents a descriptive analysis, based on literature review, of the 
major issues in women’s right. It examines the various debacles to actualizing women’s right one of which is 
patriarchy, and the inability of State to implement many of the legal frameworks. The paper finds that a major 
cause of women’s right violation is the financial dependency of women on their male counterparts. It 
recommends, as a departure from previous writing which demands more responsibility from State, the need for 
women’s responsibility. This is because social advocacy for women’s right without social responsibility from 
women will produce affirmative action for women who have opportunities they never explore. This does not seek 
to undermine the policy recommendations in other literature rather it is a call to rise above and beyond 
limitations through self-motivating steps that places a demand on women’s abilities and capacities. 
Key words: Gender Based Violence, Women’s Rights,  
 
I. 
Introduction. 
For several decades women’s right advocacy has revolved among many issues  which include female 
suffrage, gender discrimination, women empowerment, women’s participation, Women Liberation, Women 
equality and Access and Gender based violence. The specific focus of this study is gender based violence also 
known as violence against women. Gender based violence has been extensively defined in literatures but the 
most encompassing definition is one given by United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of Violence 
against Women (CEDAW)According to this definition  
―Gender-based violence which include among other physical, sexual or psychological harm or 
suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether 
occurring in public or private life. It encompasses, but is not limited to, physical, sexual and psychological 
violence occurring in the family, including battering, sexual abuse of female children in the household, dowry 
related violence, marital rape, female genital mutilation and other traditional practices harmful to women; non-
spousal violence and violence related to exploitation; physical, sexual and psychological violence occurring 
within the general community, including rape, sexual abuse, sexual harassment and intimidation at work, in 
educational institutions and elsewhere; trafficking in women and forced prostitution; and physical, sexual and 
psychological violence perpetrated or condoned by the state,  wherever it occurs‖.(United Nations Declaration 
on the Elimination of Violence against Women, 1979).  
This definition is widely accepted particularly because it redefines gender-based violence from physical 
dimension to encompass other aspects which had not previously been considered as violence. One of such 
include the psychological dimension which encompasses intimidation, exploitation and other subtle means 
through which a man tries to control his neighbor (Abama & Kwaja 2009:24, WHO,2012). This paper employs 
secondary data to examine the causes, response and challenges of gender-based violence.  
 
II. 
Issues In Women’s rights: Gender Based Violence 
Violence against women has occupied the forefront in women’s rights (Abama&Kwaja 2009:23). This 
is so because, Violence Against women has been one of the most humiliating, dehumanizing and denigrating 
social menace affecting the basic fundamental human right of women of all age, color, race, ethnicity, continent 
and country across the globe (Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces, 2005).  More so, 
studies by Danielson et tal 1998 Coker et tal 2000, Barkan, et tal 2000, cited by Family violence prevention 
Fund, 2004, link the increasing prevalence of violence against women to increasing rate of maternal death, 
HIV/AIDs and health challenges such as disability, arthritis, chronic pain, migraine, frequent headaches, 
sexually transmitted infections like chronic pelvic pain, stomach ulcers, and spastic colon (Augustyn et tal, 

Beyond Women’s Rights. 
www.iosrjournals.org                                                    113 | Page 
2004). Additionally, the World Health Organization confirms that violence against women causes more death 
and disability among women aged fifteen to forty-four than cancer, malaria, traffic accidents, and war (WHO, 
2004) 
However, defining and delineating the concept of  violence against women  has been a challenge  for  
lawyers, sociologists,  psychologists, academics, students and its precise definition remains an uncertain and 
controversial social subject. Women’s Aid (UK women’s NGO) defines violence against women as ―physical, 
sexual, psychological or financial violence that takes place within an intimate or family-type relationship and 
that forms a pattern of coercive and controlling behavior (Women’s Aid, 2008). One of the limitations of the 
Women’s Aid definition is that it restricts violence against women to the home while violence against women 
takes place surreptitiously beyond homes. Therefore, violence against women refers to all gender-based violent 
acts perpetrated against women, including physical, sexual, and psychological violence that occurs within the 
family or outside the family. (Aluko et al. 2007).Similarly, Abama&Kwaja2009, noted that violence against 
women is a prevalent harm to the basic rights, freedoms, health, and welfare of women. It occurs in many 
settings and at many hands, including those of relatives, acquaintances, employers, and the state (Abama & 
Kwaja 2009:24). Violence Against Women is a simple phrase that encompasses a horrifying list of abusive 
behavior both physically and psychologically (Onyejekwe 2004:36).  
Nevertheless, it is pertinent to note that while all the above definition shed more light into the concept, 
this perception is not a complete representation of the types of violence and thus it is restricted. This definition 
is narrow in scope because ―violence against women may include not only the intimate partner relationships of 
spousal, live-in partners and dating relationships, But other form of   harmful traditional practice‖ (National 
Coalition against Domestic Violence, 2005). However, it is important to include at this juncture that although 
women and girls are in most cases the victims, men and boys can also be the target group of gender-based 
violence.  
Furthermore, men are not always the perpetrators; but women also commit gender based violence 
either against men, or against other women (Funk et tal 2005). However, there exists broad empirical evidence 
that the huge majority of perpetrators of gender-based violence are male, whilst most of the victims are female 
(U.S. Department of justice, 2007). However, for purpose of this study the definition of violence against women 
given by Declaration on the Elimination of violence Against Women (DEVAW) will be adopted. It state thus  
―Any act of gender-based violence that results in, or is likely to result in, physical, sexual or 
psychological harm or suffering to women, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of 
liberty, whether occurring in public or private life. It encompasses, but is not limited to, physical, sexual and 
psychological violence occurring in the family, including battering, sexual abuse of female children in the 
household, dowry related violence, marital rape, female genital mutilation and other traditional practices 
harmful to women; non-spousal violence and violence related to exploitation; physical, sexual and 
psychological violence occurring within the general community, including rape, sexual abuse, sexual 
harassment and intimidation at work, in educational institutions and elsewhere; trafficking in women and forced 
prostitution; and physical, sexual and psychological violence perpetrated or condoned by the state,  wherever it 
occurs.‖ (United Nations Declaration on the Elimination of Violence against Women, 1979). 
However, gender based violence occurs everywhere, be it in the home, school, workplace or wider 
society.  The Commission on the Review of Higher Education in Nigeria (CRHEN) suggests that the occurrence 
of gender based violence is gradually assuming a serious dimension even as students identified sexual 
harassment as being among the stressors hindering academic work in the Universities(Odu & Olusegun, 2012).   
 
III. 
Causes Of Violence Against Women 
It is pertinent to note that   numerous causes of violence against women have been identified by 
scholars. The first and foremost cause of violence against women is cultural and gender-specific socialization 
(Abama &Kwaja 2009:25). This include cultural definitions of appropriate sex roles, expectations of roles 
within relationships, belief in the inherent superiority of males, values that give men proprietary rights over 
women and girls, notion of the family as the private sphere and under male control, customs of marriage (bride 
price/dowry), acceptability of violence as a means to resolve conflict(UNICEF, 2000).  
Secondly, women’s economic dependence on men, limited access to cash, credit, and poverty forces 
many women to remain in violent and dangerous relationships where they are often subject to rape and HIV 
infection by their HIV-positive partners. (Krug, et al., 2002).In the same vein, Heise (1994) observed that 
discriminatory laws regarding inheritance, property rights, use of communal lands, and maintenance after 
divorce or widowhood, limited access to employment in formal and informal sectors, limited access to education 
and training for women are the causes of increasing violence against women(Hiese ,1999) 
 Furthermore, lesser legal status of women either by written law and/or by practice, laws regarding 
divorce, child custody, maintenance and inheritance,  legal definitions of rape and domestic abuse,  low levels of 
legal literacy among women, insensitive treatment of women and girls by police and judiciary are also identified  

Beyond Women’s Rights. 
www.iosrjournals.org                                                    114 | Page 
causes of  domestic violence (WHO, 1997). In addition, political under-representation of women in power, 
politics, in the media as well as legal and medical professions; notions of family being private and beyond 
control of the State; risk of challenge to status quo/religious laws; limited organization of women as a political 
force; limited participation of women in organized political system amongst other (Heise,1994).  
 
IV. 
Consequences Of Violence Against Women 
It is however important to emphasize that violence against women has implications on the total 
wellbeing of women. The consequences of violence against women are numerous they include, but not limited 
to, the following: infectious diseases, mental health disorders, and other diseases such as hypertension, diabetes, 
dermatitis, asthma, allergy, acne, and abnormal menstrual bleeding (WHO, 1996). Victims of childhood abuses 
are at high rates of adult anti-social behavioral patterns that have the potential for creating or worsening existing 
health problems (WHO, 2002). These behaviors include smoking, the use of alcohol, driving while intoxicated, 
avoiding regular gynecological examinations, and not wearing seat belts, sedentary lifestyle, and high-risk 
sexual encounters (Walker, 1999).  Also, these victims show higher rates of numerous medical condition than 
the non-abused (WHO,2012). Some of these medical conditions includes physical disabilities, arthritis, 
migraine, stammering, sexually transmitted infections, chronic pelvic pain, stomach ulcers and spastic colon 
(Taliaferro, 2004).  
Other heinous impacts of gender-based violence are that it affects women’s access to basic services, 
specifically their ability to obtain contraceptives (USAID, 2006).It also has the ability to jeopardize making an 
informed choice about family planning, which input additional burden on an already overwhelmed health care 
systems, increases the likelihood of maternal complications and undermine progress in reproductive health and 
HIV/AIDS prevention (USAID, 2008) 
 
V. 
Violence Against Women And Prevalence Of Hiv/Aids 
It is also pertinent to note that emerging studies have shown a strong relationship between violence 
against women and the spread of HIV/AIDS in the developing world (Joint Report by UNAIDS, UNFPA, 
UNIFEM 2004). Gender-based physical and sexual violence is associated with a range of negative health and 
development consequences, including increased risk of HIV (Abama&Kwaja,2009:23). According to the 
published report of Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces on gender-based violence and 
HIV/AIDS, women and girls who are raped or sexually coerced do not have the ability to negotiate condom use 
while the men who are the perpetrators of such violent acts do not offer to use condoms in most cases (Geneva 
Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces, 2005).  
Vaginal lacerations and trauma from sexual violence further increases the risk of acquiring HIV. 
(Report on Gender-based Violence and HIV/Aids August 2006). In fact, a research carried out by Human right 
watch, 2003 in Uganda alleges that abusive men often intentionally infect their partners with HIV (Karanja, 
2003). Globally, half of all people living with HIV were female, and the proportion of women being affected by 
the epidemic continues to grow (UNAIDS, 2013). In 2005, 17.5 million women were living with HIV—one 
million more than in 2003 (UNAIDS/WHO, 2005). In sub-Saharan Africa alone, of the 25.8 million adults and 
children living with HIV, about 13.5 million were women (UNAID, 2005).  The United Nations estimates that 
6,000 young people aged 15 to 24 become infected with and a staggering two-thirds of these new infections 
were among women (WHO, 2002). Gender norms and inequalities increases vulnerability to HIV and 
exacerbate the difficulties associated with being infected and affected by HIV/AIDS, for women (US Report on 
HIV and Gender-Based Violence November, 2006).  
 Also, across-sectional study carried out on 1,388 women presenting for antenatal care at four health 
center in Soweto, South Africa found that women with violent partners have a 50% greater risk of acquiring 
HIV than women without violent partners (Dunkle et tal 2004).A similar study of women attending an HIV 
counseling and testing clinic in Tanzania reports that young HIV-positive women were 10 times more likely to 
report violence than HIV-negative women which supports the findings of Dunkle et tal 2004 that HIV/AIDS 
epidemic is affecting women and girls in increasing numbers (Maman etal., 2002). Furthermore, in Rwanda, 
where rape was used as a form of ethnic cleansing during the 1994 genocide, it is estimated that of the 250,000 
women who were raped and are still alive, 70%  had tested  HIV positive (Amnesty, 2004). 
 
VI. 
Violence against Women and Impact on Children. 
It is becoming increasingly evident that violence against women impacts negatively on their children. A study 
by Family Violence Prevention Fund, American Academy of Pediatrics  in collaboration with other notable 
organization that work on Gender- based violence notes that the impact of living in homes where violence is 
present is detrimental to the emotional, developmental and physical well-being of children (Augustyn et tal, 
2004).  Studies have shown that living with domestic violence increases children's risk of encountering the 
juvenile justice system (Kronkonsky Charitable Foundation, 2005). A Massachusetts study found that children 

Beyond Women’s Rights. 
www.iosrjournals.org                                                    115 | Page 
who grew up in violent homes had a six times higher probability of attempting suicide, a twenty-four percent 
chance of committing sexual assault crimes,  seventy-four percent increased incidence of committing crimes 
against a person, and a fifty percent increased chance of abusing alcohol or drugs(Impact of Domestic 
Violence‖; American Bar Association, 2005). 
Similarly,  as a consequence of violence against women in homes, many children exhibit signs of post-
traumatic stress disorder after witnessing domestic violence (William, 2006:313). Symptoms may include 
inability to sleep throughout the night, bedwetting, anger acted out through temper tantrums or directed inwards 
and manifested by withdrawal or disassociation (American Bar Association, 2005). As children grow older, they 
may experience feelings of guilt for not protecting their mothers and may turn to drugs or alcohol to numb these 
feelings. School-age children show poor academic performance, are frequently absent and may either have anti- 
social behavioral pattern or withdraw and disassociate (Lantern Project, 2005) 
Other equally significant repercussions of violence against women on their children in the absence of 
timely intervention and supportinclude, psychiatric disorders, developmental problems, academic under 
performance, suicide, abuse drugs, and alcohol, run away from home, engage in teenage prostitution, and 
commit sexual assault crimes (William, 2006:312-313). This plethora of negative implications of violence 
against women has made it a major concern at national, regional and global levels. The next section examines 
the responses to violence against women in details.  
 
VII. 
Responses To Women’s Rights Issues 
The right to respect, protect and ratify women right   which is critical to stopping violence against 
women have been a recurring issue in  human right discuss,  not only because these treaty  deal  with   women 
right  that  have been  constituted to be an inalienable, integral and indivisible part of universal human rights  
but much more because  they  concern  issues    of  human  dignity and decency which are fundamental to 
human  progress  and  development. In various countries and continents world over, conscious steps are taken to 
make violence against women history.These responses are from International community, Regional 
organization, State actors, local and Non-State actors (Non-Government Organizations, Community Base 
Organizations and Faith-Based Organizations). At the global level, there has been massive effort to curb the 
indignity on women. This is evident in numerous conferences that has been held, protocol, agreement, 
conventions and framework that has been ratified. Similarly, the United Nations that represents the apex of 
global community has through his numerous specialized institutions responded to violence against women.  
Since women’s right has become an integral aspect of human right various international and regional 
instruments and declarations have recognized violence against women as a ―form of discrimination and a 
violation of women’s human rights‖(Kofi Anan, 2006). More so, the widespread inclusion of the prohibition of 
gender-based violence in international and regional treaties and declarations, its recognition and application by 
the international tribunals, as well as its prevalence in the national legislation of the majority of States indicates 
that this prohibition represents a consensus in the international community about the normative force of   
prohibition on gender-based violence (Stark, 2006). 
For instance, Article 27 of the Fourth Geneva Convention adopted in 1949 provides that ―women  shall 
be especially protected against any attack on their honor, in particular against rape, enforced prostitution, or any 
form of indecent assault‖(Geneva Convention, 1949). In addition, Protocols supplementing the 1949 Geneva 
Conventions adopted in 1977 also prohibit   violence against women whether as sexual violence or rape. The 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR) and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights 
(UDHR) contains provisions prohibiting discrimination on the basis of sex. Although, these instruments do not 
explicitly refer to violence against women, sexual violence has been interpreted as falling under the prohibition 
against ―inhuman or degrading treatment‖ in the ICCPR (Dean, 2005) 
Similarly, Other important international legal framework and Declarations addressing Gender- based 
violence include the Vienna Conference on Human Rights (1993), the Programmed of Action of the 
International Conference on Population and Development (1994), the Beijing Declaration and Platform for 
Action, adopted at the Fourth World Conference on Women (1995), and the Addendum on the Eradication of 
All Forms of Violence against Women and Children (1998).  
More so, at the regional level there are legal Instruments aimed at protecting the rights of women 
against violence. In Africa, there are treaties or regional instruments at regional and sub-regional levels that 
prohibit gender-based violence. The African Charter on Human and People’s Rights,  Part 1, Chapter 1, Articles 
1- 18 stipulates the basic rights of every African (man, woman and child) and this significantly includes women 
as well. Furthermore, the Protocol on the Rights of Women in Africa is yet another regional instrument. It is an 
instrument for the advancement of women’s rights in the continent and was adopted on July 11, 2003 by the 53 
member nations of African Union (Atsenuwa, 2006). Also, in Southern Africa which consist of South Africa, 
Zimbabwe, Zambia, Mozambique and Southern African Development Community’s Declaration on Gender and 
Development (1997) also exist to protect women’s dignity 

Beyond Women’s Rights. 
www.iosrjournals.org                                                    116 | Page 
Significantly at the national level, States have responded to women rights and specifically violence 
against women in its entire ramification. Protections of the rights of women are implicitly stated in national 
constitution of most nations. The Nigeria federal constitution of 1999 protects the dignity of the human person 
and guarantees the right of every Nigerian (man, woman and child), to equality (section 42). The section states 
that ―Every Nigerian has a right not to be subjected to cruel, inhuman, and degrading treatment or punishment. 
All forms of gender-based violence are inhuman, degrading, and dehumanizing. Also, states within the 
federation have also enacted laws prohibiting violence against women. For instance, in Lagos State, a Domestic 
Violence and Related Matters Bill was passed in the House of Assembly in 2007. The   bill was passed and 
become known as Law No 15 of ―A Law to provide Protection against Domestic Violence and for Connected 
Purpose As part of the response to violence against women (BAOBAB 2007). 
Fundamentally, it is important to note that since the Second World War which marked the emergence 
of non-state actor and their increasing participation in Global arena a number of transnational non-government 
actors have also responded to issue of violence against women. Significant of these transnational institutions 
was Amnesty International.  Amnesty International’s has pioneered several global campaigns to Stop Violence 
against Women.It must be noted that individual on their own has spoken out against violence these includes 
statesmen, Clerics, Celebrities, Politician and ordinary citizen has well.  
 
VIII. 
Road Block To Enforcing Women’s Rights 
However, it is pertinent to note that far from ameliorating violence against women, increasing statistics 
makes it seems nothings had been done. There are numerous factors seen to be hindering the alleviation of 
violence against women.  This section focuses on the challenges to eliminating violence against women drawing 
majorly from Nigeria examples.  
A fundamental challenge to the eradication of violence against women is the failure of the States most 
of whom are signatory to the numerous international legal framework to effectively domesticate most of this 
international framework. Similarly, customary laws contribute to the persistence of violence in the family, and 
in some cases directly condone certain forms of violence against women. For instance, the Penal Code, 
applicable in northern States of Nigeria, allows the "correction of child, pupil, servant or wife" as long as it does 
not amount to grievous hurt (Section 55. (4). Also, marital rape is explicitly excluded from the definition of rape 
and is therefore, not a crime under Sharia penal legislation in Northern States of Nigeria or under the Criminal 
Code in force throughout other States of the federation. This is   a challenge because the legal instrument of 
State that is supposed to promote and protect right of women but in this case these same law gives   opportunity 
for violation of this same right.  
Fundamentally and as corollary to the above a major roadblock to ameliorating violence against women 
is the limitation and restriction of the concept of violence against women in some State law to domestic violence 
that is violence within family and specifically wife battery while neglecting other similar violence such as rape 
genital mutilation, sexual harassment, child marriage, discrimination against women in workplaces, 
insensitiveness of many company policies to women plight.  Similarly, a major challenge is that of negligence. 
Historically, the response by various stakeholders in the society, such as the police, service providers, religious 
organizations, family members and friends, has been highly insensitive to the plight of the female victims. 
Victims of Gender Based Violence specifically women, are often blamed for their plight (Chukwuman, 2005)  
Chukwuman, 2005 note extensively that the attitude of blaming violence in the home on the victim 
rather than the perpetrator was found not only among police officers and law enforcement officials but also 
among some prosecutors and judges. Intimidating and patronizing questions asked by prosecutors and judges 
during investigation and trial deter women from reporting rape and other crimes of sexual or family violence. 
Women fear the public and intrusive questioning about their private lives that may be used to undermine their 
case. Further compounding this problem, is the traditional insensitive and passive response to victims’ 
complaint by the society in general, and the police in particular. The major duty of the police is to maintain law 
and order in society, and protect lives and property. These lives include those in the home (Chukwuman, 2005).  
Significantly and worthy of note is the nature of language used in the law. With specific reference to 
Nigeria the laws protecting women’s rights contain a whole lot of ambiguities.   For instance, the Nigerian 
constitution and even the penal code do not give a framework from which domestic violence is to be defined. 
Simply put, the law consists of too many ambiguities which many times create crisis of interpretation and 
misinterpretation.  For instance , the issue of rape which is another dimension to domestic violence  the law does 
not stated explicitly what should be define as  consent in cases of rape, no  definition of consent is provided in 
the Criminal or Penal Codes of Nigeria, none of the codes provide a usable definition of the offense,. 
 However, the Criminal Code states that any person ―who unlawfully and indecently assaults a woman 
or girl is guilty of a misdemeanor, and is liable to imprisonment for two years,‖ but provides no guidance on 
what constitutes ―unlawful and   indecent assault‖. It is pertinent to note as corollary to the ambiguities in the 
language of law, the inequality in the administration of justice to violators show that more punitive measure for 

Beyond Women’s Rights. 
www.iosrjournals.org                                                    117 | Page 
women than given to men. For instance, a woman or girl results in two years imprisonment (pursuant to art. 360 
of the Criminal Code); the same crime merits three years if the victim is male (pursuant to art. 353). Such 
differences in sentencing, which are contingent only on the gender of the victim, contravene the constitutional 
and human right to both equal treatment and equality before the law. In setting different standards for the same 
crime, the legislature is effectively declaring that female victims are worth less than males this further pose 
more challenge to alleviate violence against women because men then to perceive women as reason for their 
pain rather than partners in progress of human race. 
Another fundamental deterrent to the actualization of women’s rights are women themselves. This may 
sound contradictory but closer observations of   the major issues according to CEDAW definition of violence 
majority of this violence were carried out by women against women. For instance, take most harmful traditional 
practice such as female genital mutilation, widowhood rite are perpetrated by women against their fellow 
women.   
Fundamentally, a major challenge to ameliorating violence against women is the psychological 
perception of women has the weak and prey for men. Other equally significant challenges include poverty, 
illiteracy, tradition, custom, sexual stereotyping of social roles and other cultural prejudice, economic 
powerlessness of women individually and as a class in society constitute barrier and challenge. For instance, 
culturally a woman is regarded as having been created primarily to reproduce ―mankind‖ and to satisfy men’s 
sexual appetite, lack of legal literacy are fundamental roadblock to eradicating violence against women.  
 
IX. 
Recommendations/Conclusion 
In view of this numerous challenges, what then is the way forward?  As complement to existing effort, 
the following are the policy recommendation for alleviating violence against women. 
First, there is need to create more knowledge work for women. The world economy is run by 
knowledge not farming and other hard labour work that require tilling the land. This is not to say that farming 
and other work which women have hitherto engage in should be abolish rather it is a call to expand women 
skills and capacity beyond farming to other area of life where their potentials can be best maximize. Put 
differently, the mind of everyman including women is a mine whose resource can be mined to benefit not just 
the individual but the society at large. Simply stated, the mind is the world unlimited natural resources which for 
long has not being mine enough to access the  unlimited value inherent in it. Similarly, empowerment should 
move beyond rhetoric’s and quick fix training workshop to encapsulate training women in lifelong learning 
attitude that keeps them on the edge  rather than the one  that confine  them within a particular field of endeavor. 
This is because the world is continually being flattened by forces of technology which in itself is eroding 
traditional job which hitherto has been reserve for women.  
Secondly, there is need for women to find inner strength to combat the menace against them not 
through violent mean or through reactionary process that undermine their femininity and credibility but one that 
emphasis their femininity without undermining their credibility. In other words, older women like women in 
primitive times, should show strength of character, tenacity of purpose, uncommon humility, and admirable 
public conduct, consistent and passionate pursuit of common good. These qualities will put them in good 
standing above the board and make them a beacon of hope to member of younger generation (Adegbola, 2007) 
Finally, there is need for responsibility on part of women to take their destiny in their hands. To see 
themselves  as responsible for the outcome of their life. It is generally believe that no person move forward as 
long as they look to outside forces for their deliverance. The freedom of women must come from women who 
have chosen to rise above all limitations and barrier. This is beyond what international legal framework can do, 
or what advocacy alone can achieve, or even what national and regional legal framework can do or what 
millennium development goals can do but rather it is a call to responsibility.  
A call to develop competencies and capabilities that places them at par and above their male 
counterpart. As no sensible leadership promotes a person beyond the level of competence. It was Oprah Winfrey 
that said excellent is the greatest deterrents against all forms of racism, sexism and other form of discrimination.  
The legendary leader and post-apartheid first black president of South Africa in closing his bestselling 
autobiography Long walk to freedomnoted that ―for with freedom comes responsibility and I dare not linger, for 
my long walk is not yet ended‖ same I believe for women that  with women right comes women duties as with 
freedom comes responsibility.  
 
References 
[1] 
Abama. E. &M. A. Kwaja (2009) Violence Against Women in Nigeria: How the Millennium Development Goals Addresses the 
Challenge. The Journal of Pan African Studies, vol.3, no.3, September 2009 
[2] 
Atsenuwa.A. (2006), Gender Based Violence: Legal Framework for Response being paper presented at Sensitization Seminar for 
the Police in Lagos State. July 18, 2006 
[3] 
American 
Bar 
Association. 
(2005). 
Impact 
of 
Domestic 
Violence 
on 
Children. 
[online] 
available: 
http://www.abanet.org/domviol/childimpact.html 

Beyond Women’s Rights. 
www.iosrjournals.org                                                    118 | Page 
[4] 
American 
Bar 
Association. 
(2005). 
Myths 
and 
Facts 
about 
Domestic 
Violence. 
[online]available: 
http://www.abanet.org/domviol/myths.html  
[5] 
Amnesty International. (2004), Rwanda "Marked for Death, Rape Survivors Living with HIV/AIDS in Rwanda. New York: 
Amnesty   International,  
[6] 
Augustyn. M. Debbie lee, Peter Sawires(2004) Domestic violence for child and adolescent health. Family Violence prevention 
Fund. Available at www.endabuse.org 
[7] 
Aluko, Yetunde, &Arowolo (2007), the silent crime: a sociological Appraisal of Gender-Based Violence Experienced by women in 
Yoruba Culture of Nigeria. Being a paper presented at the fifth African Population Conference, Arusha, and Tanzania: December 
10-14, 2007 
[8] 
Article 4(2) (e) of Protocol II quoting Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of August 12, 1949, Retrieved on from  
[9] 
BAOBAB (2007) Peace Building, Interpretation of Laws, and Legal Defense Work .Group for Women’s Human Rights, Lagos 
[10] 
Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, (1979). CEDAW General Recommendation   19, 
(1992) Retrieved from http://www.un.org 
[11] 
Chukwuma. E J. (2005), No Safe Haven an Annual report of Attack on Women in Nigeria December 2004 - November 2005  
[12] 
Chukawuma E. J. and Osarenren, N. (2001) beyond Boundaries: Violence against Women in Nigeria.   
[13] 
C.J. Onyejekwe (2004) Violence Against Women Nebula 1.1, June 2004 pg 32-37 
[14] 
Dean A. (2005) the Prohibition of Widespread Rape as a Jus Cogens, San Diego International Law .Journal. 357 
[15] 
Dunkle KL, Jewkes RK, Brown HC, Gray GE, McIntryre JA, Harlow SD. (2004), Gender-based Violence, relationship power, and 
risk of HIV infection in women attending antenatal clinics in South Africa. 
[16] 
Funk. A.   James L.  Juliana .O.(2005) Ending Violence against Women and Girls – Protecting Human Rights Good Practices for 
Development Cooperation 
[17] 
Geneva Centre for the Democratic Control of Armed Forces (DCAF) Women in an insecure world. Violence against women  fact, 
figure and analysis   edited by Marie Vlalvad, Lea Biasonwww.dcaf.ch 
[18] 
Heise, L M. Ellsberg and M. Gottemoeller, M. (1999), Ending Violence against Women. Population Reports, Series L, No. 11. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University School of Public Health. 
[19] 
Heise L.L., Pitanguy J.  And Germaine A. (1994), Violence against Women. The Hidden Health Burden. Discussion paper No 225, 
The World Bank. Washington DC: 
[20] 
Krug, Etienne, Linda Dalhberg, James Mercy, et al. Eds. (2002), ―World Report on Violence and Health.‖ World Health 
Organization. Geneva, Switzerland. Retrieved June2010http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/violence/pdf 
[21] 
Kronkosky Charitable Foundation Domestic Abuse Research Brief September 2005 
[22] 
Maman S,  M.S Mbwambo, J.K Hogan, N.M Kilonzo, G.P Campbell, J.C Weiss E, et al. (2002),  HIV-positive women report more 
lifetime partner violence: findings from a voluntary counseling and testing clinic in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.  Journal of   Public 
Health92(8) 
[23] 
Odu B. K. & G. F. Olusegun (2012) Determinant of Sexual Coercion among University Female Students in South-West Nigeria. 
Journal of Emerging Trends in Educational Research and Policy Studies (JETERAPS) 3(6): 915-920 
[24] 
Stark. B. (2001), Symposium on Integrating Responses to Domestic Violence: Domestic Violence and International Law  
[25] 
Taliaferro. E. (2004), Addressing the Heath Consequences of Domestic Violence    www, STAND.com   recess  
[26] 
USAID (2006) Confronting Gender Violencewww.usaid.gov 
[27] 
USAID (2008), Issue Brief Confronting the Impact of Gender-based Violence on Women’s Health 
[28] 
UNICEF (2000) Domestic violence against women and girls no 6 - J u n e 2 0 0  
[29] 
UNAIDS Global Coalition on Women and AIDS and World Health Organization 
[30] 
William W. Harris, PhD Frank W. Putnam, MD John A. Fairbank, PhD (2006)   Mobilizing Trauma Resources for Children in 
Interventions for Children Exposed to Violence Edited by: Alicia F. Lieberman, PhDRobert DeMartino, MD   at Pediatric Round 
Table.Johnson & Johnson Pediatric Institute, L.L.C. available at www.JJPI.com 
[31] 
Women’s Aid Home Page   http://www.womensaid.org.uk/Date accessed 18 June 200 
[32] 
WHO (2004). Violence against Women and HIV/AIDS Information Sheet.  
[33] 
WHO (2005) WHO Multi-country Study on Women’s Health and Domestic Violence against Women Initial results on 
prevalence,health outcomes and women’s responsesGeneva, World Health Organization 
[34] 
World Health Organization (2012) Understanding and addressing violence against women