This PDF is a selection from a published volume from the National 
Bureau of Economic Research
Volume Title: The Changing Frontier: Rethinking Science and Innovation
Policy
Volume Author/Editor: Adam B. Jaffe and Benjamin F. Jones, editors
Volume Publisher: University of Chicago Press
Volume ISBNs:  0-226-28672-X, 978-0-226-28672-3
Volume URL: http://www.nber.org/books/jaff13-1
Conference Date:  August 2-3, 2013
Publication Date:  July 2015
Chapter Title:  The Rise of International Coinvention
Chapter Author(s):  Lee Branstetter, Guangwei Li, Francisco Veloso
Chapter URL: http://www.nber.org/chapters/c13028
Chapter pages in book: (p.  135 – 168)

135
Lee Branstetter is professor of economics and public policy at Carnegie Mellon University, a 
nonresident senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, and a research 
associate of the National Bureau of Economic Research. Guangwei Li is a PhD student in 
public policy and management, and in strategy, entrepreneurship, and technological change 
at Carnegie Mellon University. Francisco Veloso is the Dean of the Católica–Lisbon School 
of Business and Economics.
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the US National Science Founda-
tion (SciSIP grant no. 0830233), the Portuguese National Science Foundation (PTDC/
ESC/71080/2006), the Carnegie Mellon Center for the Future of Work, the Kauffman Founda-
tion, and the World Bank. We received helpful comments from Bronwyn Hall and from seminar 
audiences at the NBER, Carnegie Mellon, the 2012 Asia Pacific Innovation Conference, and 
the Atlanta Conference on Science and Innovation Policy 2013, and we appreciate the research 
assistance and intellectual input of Matej Drev. The views expressed in this chapter are those of 
the authors, and we retain sole responsibility for any errors. For acknowledgments, sources of 
research support, and disclosure of the authors’ material financial relationships, if any, please 
see http://www.nber.org/chapters/c13028.ack.
5.1 Introduction
For decades, international economists and development economists have 
worked with models that posit a kind of ladder of economic development. 
Countries begin the development process as largely agricultural economies. 
As they accumulate skill, capital, and technology, economies move into 
more complex manufacturing and service activities. Finally, after decades 
of development and steady increases in income, countries begin to create 
new- to- the- world technology. However, this is something that emerges at 
the end of the development process in the standard models (Vernon 1966; 
Krugman 1979; Grossman and Helpman 1990, 1991).
Despite many years of impressive growth, China, and especially India, 
are still in the early stages of the conventional development process—this 
is evidenced by their still low levels of per- capita output and income. China 
5
The Rise of International 
Coinvention
Lee Branstetter, Guangwei Li, and Francisco Veloso

136    Lee Branstetter, Guangwei Li, and Francisco Veloso
and India lag far behind the industrial West, of course, but they also lag 
behind other developing countries, such as Brazil, South Africa, and Malay-
sia. However, India and China are already innovating, as is evidenced by the 
rapidly rising number of patents granted by the US and European patent 
offices to inventors residing in India and China. While the absolute number 
of patents remains low, the rates of growth have been exponential. A rapidly 
growing number of patent counts are not the only indicator of rising innova-
tion in these emerging markets; India and China are also hosting an expand-
ing number of research and development (R&D) centers sponsored by the 
world’s technologically elite firms (Basant and Mani 2012; Freeman 2006). 
Does this trend contradict conventional wisdom? Should we abandon our 
conventional economic models, or at least presume that they may not apply 
to these dynamic Asian giants? Respected experts in international economics 
have suggested as much, calling upon advocates of more traditional models 
to “wake up and smell the ginseng” (Puga and Trefler 2010). The growing 
role of emerging economies in global innovation has also raised signifi-
cant concerns among leaders in government, industry, and academia in the 
industrial West (National Research Council 2007, Royal Society 2010). Is 
the recent growth in emerging economies’ R&D activity undermining the 
traditional position of technological leadership enjoyed by the United States 
and other advanced industrial economies?
Using US patent data, we examine the innovative explosions in India and 
China. We trace the dramatic growth of US patents received by inventors 
residing in India and China across time, technological fields, organizational 
boundaries, and geographic space. We examine the quality of patents, as 
evidenced by patent citations, with a focus in this chapter on activity in 
India. 
In doing so, we make two contributions to the literature. First, we find 
that the rapid growth in US patents awarded to private sector inventors 
based in India and China is driven, to a great extent, by multinational 
corporations (MNCs) from advanced industrial economies and are highly 
dependent on collaborations between local inventors and other inventors 
in advanced economies.1 Therefore, India and China’s striking innovation 
surge may represent less of a challenge to conventional models of trade, 
economic growth, and development than it appears at first glance. The 
view that the increases in innovation in India and China are undermining 
the traditional position of technological leadership enjoyed by the United 
States and other advanced industrial economies might therefore also be 
exaggerated.
1. While Chen, Jang, and Chang (2013) and Jang, Wang, and Chen (2012) have shown 
the importance of international coinvention in the context of invention in certain emerging 
markets, we go well beyond this by examining all multinational patents and by comparing the 
quality of multinational and indigenous patents.

The Rise of International Coinvention    137
Second, we find evidence of an increasing trend of an international divi-
sion of R&D labor—or, phrased differently, a vertical distintegration of 
R&D, with various stages of the R&D process now being conducted in 
different locations around the world. The general phenonmenon of a verti-
cal disintegration of manufacturing has been studied in the international 
economics literature (e.g., Yi 2003; Hummels, Ishii, and Yi 2001; Krugman, 
Cooper, and Srinivasan 1995). We find conceptually similar changes in R&D. 
As the innovation networks of MNCs span the globe, emerging economies 
like India and China that possess both a huge scientific and engineering tal-
ent pool and large markets have become an important part of these global 
innovation networks. By undertaking R&D in emerging economies, MNCs 
can now provide innovative technologies to global markets at a lower cost, 
and introduce products more suitable for local and other emerging markets.
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows: section 5.2 provides the 
background of the rise of innovation in India and China and briefly explains 
how existing theoretical models may explain the rise of innovation in these 
two economies. Section 5.3 describes our data and presents descriptive fea-
tures of the rise of innovation in India and China. Section 5.4 presents 
empirical models and detailed regression results focusing on patent quality 
as well as quantity. Section 5.5 provides insights from a field study of MNC 
R&D activity in these emerging markets. Section 5.6 discusses policy impli-
cations and presents our conclusions.
5.2 Background
Industrial R&D activity within the borders of mainland China has 
increased at a very rapid pace over the last fifteen years, and has now reached 
levels that are quite impressive by the standards of developing economies. It 
is also one of the favorite destinations for multinational R&D investment. 
Over the 1997–2007 period, the total amount of US multinational R&D 
spending increased  thirty- three fold in China, from 35 million to 1.17 billion 
US dollars. The growth of R&D in India has been slower. Its R&D intensity 
was 0.76 percent of the gross domestic product (GDP) in 2007, essentially 
unchanged since 2000 (OECD 2012). Nevertheless, the total amount of US 
multinational R&D spending increased sixteenfold in India, from 22 million 
to 382 million US dollars over the 1997–2007 period.2
Tracking patents granted by the US Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) 
to inventors residing in India and China provides another useful way of 
2. The number is for  majority- owned affiliates of nonbank US parent companies in India 
or China. A “majority- owned affiliate” is an Indian or Chinese affiliate in which the combined 
direct and indirect ownership interest of all US parents exceeds 50 percent. (Source: US Depart-
ment of Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis, US Direct Investment Abroad: Finan-
cial and Operating Data for U.S. Multinational Companies, http://www.bea.gov/iTable/iTable 
.cfm?ReqID=2&step=1. Retrieved on August 8, 2012.)

138    Lee Branstetter, Guangwei Li, and Francisco Veloso
measuring the expansion of R&D within these countries.3 Anyone seeking 
to protect intellectual property within the borders of the United States must 
apply for patent protection from the USPTO. Given the importance of the 
US economy to the world in general, it is reasonable to regard patents taken 
out in the United States by inventors residing in India and China as a useful 
indicator of innovative activity there.4
Figure 5.1 shows the annual number of US utility patent grants with at 
least one inventor residing in India. We can see that US patents granted to 
Indian inventors grew rapidly. Over the 1996–2010 period, the total number 
of US patents granted to Indian inventors increased  twenty- fivefold. Figure 
5.2 presents the annual number of US utility patent grants with at least 
one inventor residing in China from 1981 to 2010. One can clearly see that 
the number of US patents granted to Chinese inventors exploded in recent 
years. Over the 1996–2010 period, the total number of US patents granted 
to Chinese inventors increased  forty- sixfold. A similar explosion can be 
observed using Chinese domestic patent data (Hu and Jefferson 2009). Over 
the 2000–2009 period, the total number of invention patents granted by the 
State Intellectual Property Office of the People’s Republic of China (SIPO) 
increased twentyfold.5
Using US patent data, one can further disaggregate patents generated in 
India and China into ones in which all listed inventors at the time of inven-
tion were based in those regions, ones that were created by international 
teams of inventors, and patents generated by inventors residing in India 
and China but owned by MNCs. Over 90 percent of US patents granted 
to American inventors are generated by teams of inventors in which every 
3. After we had produced the first draft of this chapter, we discovered that Chen, Jang, 
and Chang (2013) had used USPTO data to examine R&D cooperation between Chinese 
and foreign inventors and Jang, Wang, and Chen (2012) used USPTO data to compare this 
activity in India and China. While there is some overlap between the purely descriptive parts 
of their papers and our work here, there are also important differences. Our chapter considers 
both coinvention and multinational sponsorship of indigenous inventor teams, whereas they 
consider only the former. The econometric approach taken by these two papers differs entirely 
from ours. In particular, we focus on patent quality as revealed by patent citations, whereas 
their work does not. 
4. US patents have been used to measure inventive output in Britain (Griffith, Harrison, and 
Van Reenen 2006), Japan (Branstetter and Sakakibara 2002), and Israel (Trajtenberg 2001). 
At the same time, we recognize that the use of US patents as an indicator of inventive output 
of another country poses potential problems, and we include a discussion of these later in the 
chapter.
5. The SIPO grants three types of patents: invention, utility model, and design patents. In 
principle, applications for invention patents need to pass a substantive examination for novelty 
and nonobviousness and the utility model and design patents do not. In this sense, a Chinese 
invention patent is similar to a US utility patent. However, the degree to which Chinese patent 
examiners hold domestic applicants to the same standards of novelty and nonobviousness 
as US or European patent examiners is open to question. We will discuss this issue in the 
latter part of this chapter. Source: The State Intellectual Property Office of PRC website at 
http://www.sipo.gov.cn/sipo2008/ghfzs/zltj/ gnwszzlsqzknb/2009/201001/t20100122_488402.html. 
Retrieved August 14, 2010.

The Rise of International Coinvention    139
inventor is residing in the United States at the time of application. The same 
is true of US patents granted to Japanese inventors, where over 90 percent 
of such patents are generated by exclusively Japanese inventor teams.6 How-
ever, this is not true of US patents being generated in India and China. A 
large and growing fraction of patents with Indian or Chinese inventors result 
from something we call international coinvention—teams of researchers 
based in different countries combining their skills and knowledge to generate 
patented inventions.7 In addition, a growing fraction of the patents produced 
by purely Indian or Chinese inventor teams is created under the sponsor-
ship of MNCs. In fact, as illustrated in figure 5.1 and figure 5.2, patents 
resulting from international coinvention and MNC sponsorship account 
6. Danguy (2012) provides a purely descriptive overview of the frequency of international 
coinvention in an expansive sample of USPTO and EPO patents, and finds it to be relatively rare.
7. To the best of our knowledge, the first use of the term international coinvention was in 
Branstetter et al. (2008).
Fig. 5.1 The rise of coinvented and MNC- sponsored USPTO patents in India

140    Lee Branstetter, Guangwei Li, and Francisco Veloso
for the majority of new US patents granted to Indian or Chinese inventors 
in recent years.8
India and China’s patent increases also differ quite substantially from 
the innovation explosions in Taiwan and South Korea that preceded them. 
A breakdown of US patent grants to  Taiwan- based inventors and South 
Korea–based inventors is provided in figure 5.3. As can be seen, starting in the 
late 1980s and proceeding through the 1990s, both Taiwan and South Korea 
underwent a sharp transition from being almost pure imitators to being 
increasingly aggressive innovators. The speed of this transition is reminiscent 
of India and China’s more recent invention surges, but the composition of 
inventor teams is not. The Taiwanese and South Korean patent explosions 
were generated almost entirely by purely indigenous teams of inventors. The 
important role of foreign firms in India and China’s invention explosions 
may help explain why they are occurring at an even earlier stage of economic 
development than did the invention surges in South Korea and Taiwan.
8. This finding was first documented in Branstetter et al. (2008).
Fig. 5.2 The rise of coinvented and MNC- sponsored USPTO patents in China

The Rise of International Coinvention    141
Patents granted by the Indian and Chinese national patent offices also 
bear witness to the importance of foreign firms. In China, foreigners account 
for more than 50 percent of the total number of invention patents granted 
by the SIPO over the 1990–2008 period. In 2009, the number of domestic 
invention patents slightly exceeded foreign invention patents, yet foreign 
invention patents still had a share of 49 percent.9 In India, the Office of the 
Controller General of Patents, Designs & Trade Marks (CGPDTM) granted 
between 59–84 percent of patents to foreign applicants during the period 
from 2000–2001 to 2010–2011.10
In the same way that USPTO patent data help trace the explosive growth 
of innovative activity in India and China, they also help put their current 
levels into perspective. In figure 5.4, we look at patents granted to inventors 
based in eight different countries from 1996 to 2010, and it is clear that, in 
spite of the fact that China’s inventive output as measured by US patents 
places it head and shoulders above India and other so- called BRIC (Brazil, 
Russia, India, and China) economies of Russia and Brazil, China’s genera-
tion of patents still lags far behind that of the leading advanced industrial 
economies, and even behind that of newly industrializing economies such 
as Taiwan and South Korea. Despite being among a population less than 
9. Source: The State Intellectual Property Office of PRC website at http://www.sipo.gov 
.cn/sipo2008/ghfzs/zltj/ gnwszzlsqzknb/2009/201001/t20100122_488402.html. Retrieved on Au- 
gust 14, 2010.
10. Source: CGPDTM annual report 2010–11 at http://ipindia.gov.in/main_text1.htm. 
Retrieved on November 19, 2012. The authors made the calculation. 
Fig. 5.3 Patterns of USPTO patenting from South Korea and Taiwan

142    Lee Branstetter, Guangwei Li, and Francisco Veloso
one- tenth that of China, or about one- tenth of India, Japanese inventors 
received thirteen times as many US patent grants as those based in China 
in 2010. Taiwan’s national population is lower than that of the municipal-
ity of Chongqing in the Chinese interior, yet Taiwanese inventors received 
nearly three times as many patents as mainland Chinese inventors in 2010. 
India and China’s explosive growth in US patents has come from a very low 
base, and these two countries have a long way to go before they can claim to 
be a vital part of the global innovation system. However, if China’s current 
international patenting growth rates persist, it will start to rival the patent 
output of Taiwan and South Korea within a few years. It will clearly take 
longer for India to reach Taiwan’s and South Korea’s current levels.
By either assuming or predicting that innovation occurs exclusively in 
“the north,” the product life cycle theory (Vernon 1966) and its current 
variants (Krugman 1979; Grossman and Helpman 1990, 1991) rules out 
the possibility of innovation in “the south.” This reflects the situation at the 
time when these theories were established. Research and development in 
developing countries at the time was sporadic, usually incremental in nature, 
and lacked real technological breakthroughs.
However, this stylized pattern has begun to change since the mid- 1990s. 
First, multinationals are doing an increasing amount of R&D in emerg-
ing economies, notably in India, China, and the leading nations in Eastern 
Europe (Zhao 2006; Branstetter et al. 2008; Branstetter and Foley 2010). 
This shift has occurred against a backdrop of rising globalization of R&D, 
more generally. Between 1999 and 2009, the R&D expenditure of all foreign 
Fig. 5.4 India- and China- based USPTO patenting in comparative perspective

The Rise of International Coinvention    143
affiliates of US firms almost doubled (Barefoot and Mataloni 2011). In 
China, these expenditures more than doubled just between 2004 and 2010, 
and in India they grew by a factor of ten over the same period.11 Second, the 
nature of multinational R&D in emerging economies has changed from a 
pure adaptation of existing technologies to include some cutting edge R&D 
on par with that undertaken in developed economies (UNCTAD 2005).
Some work has been done to address these changes. Grossman and Rossi- 
Hansberg (2008) provide a theoretical model of offshoring that includes 
 skill- intensive tasks. Puga and Trefler (2010) investigated innovation in 
emerging markets in a theoretical context in which it was treated as mostly 
incremental. Zhao (2006) suggested that by using closely knit internal tech-
nological structures as an alternative mechanism to protect their intellectual 
property in countries with weak IP legal environments, MNCs are increas-
ingly conducting R&D in countries with less developed intellectual property 
rights systems, such as India and China. However, systematic study on this 
topic is still insufficient.
The MNCs’ leveraging of their innovation competencies across borders 
per se is not a new phenomenon (Cantwell 1995; Kogut and Zander 1993), 
but using coinvention as a vehicle to create novel innovations in emerging 
economies is. The clear importance of international coinvention in the data 
on US patents granted to Indian and Chinese inventors may suggest some-
thing extremely interesting: the possibility that the R&D process itself can 
now be sliced into multiple stages, and countries may participate in different 
stages according to their competitive advantages. This phenomenon is often 
referred to as “vertical specialization” or “vertical disintegration” in the 
trade literature (Krugman, Cooper, and Srinivasan 1995; Hummels, Ishiii, 
and Yi 2001; Yi 2003).
If India and China’s emergence in the global innovation system follows this 
economic canon, coinvention created in India and China is likely to be char-
acterized by a division of labor in the research process. As such, Indian and 
Chinese researchers may undertake more repetitive, codified, and relatively 
routine research tasks while researchers in advanced countries may provide 
more sophisticated, creative, and high- level intellectual input. Combining the 
two, MNCs can produce more (and more impactful) innovative output with 
a given amount of R&D expenditure (Romer 1990). As a consequence, an 
increase in R&D activity induced in China and India through this process 
might not be a direct substitute for the  higher- level R&D inputs from the 
Western advanced countries, but rather a strong complement to it. However, 
this notion of complementarity could fade over time. Local Indian and Chi-
nese inventors who initially collaborated with Western inventors through coin-
vention partnerships could acquire and accumulate high- level skills through 
this collaboration, and then engage in high- level, original inventive activity 
11. See Yorgason (2007) and Barefoot (2012).

144    Lee Branstetter, Guangwei Li, and Francisco Veloso
without the need for input from Western inventors. In this case, coinvention 
could, over time, lead to greater direct substitution between Western and local 
invention. But, it is also possible that after acquiring and accumulating high- 
level skills, these local Indian and Chinese inventors would continue to col-
laborate with Western inventors (Kogut and Zander 1992; Weitzman 1998; 
Singh 2008). We will return to this issue in the latter part of this chapter.
5.3 Data Sources and Trends
Our analysis in this chapter will focus primarily on US patent grants as 
an indicator of inventive output. This is principally because prior research 
has established that the real economic value of most patents is extremely 
small (Jaffe and Trajtenberg 2002), but the more valuable patents tend to be 
patented not just in the home country but in other major markets as well. 
Because India and China are developing countries with  still- developing pat-
ent systems, a patent grant in India or China is less likely to represent an 
important advance over the global state of the art. However, the USPTO 
will apply the same standards to patent applications originating in India or 
China that it applies to patent applications originating in California. These 
US patent grants are far more likely to be reflective of economically valuable 
new- to- the- world inventions than is an “invention” for which we find Indian 
or Chinese patent grants but no US patent grants. Furthermore, significant 
changes in the domestic patent systems in India and China make Indian and 
Chinese patent data inconsistent over time.
Our data come from several sources. The first is the selected bibliographic 
information from the US Patents DVD (2009 December) released by the 
USPTO, which contains bibliographic information for all granted patents 
from 1969 to 2009.12 The second is the Disambiguation and Co- Authorship 
Networks of the US Patent Inventor Database (Lai et al. 2011), which contains 
bibliographic information for granted patents and citations data for patents 
granted during the period of 1975–2010.13 The third is the COMETS database 
1.0 (Zucker and Darby 2011), which we used to verify and supplement citation 
data from the Disambiguation and Co- Authorship Networks of the US Pat-
ent Inventor Database. The fourth is the USPTO Patent Full- Text and Image 
Database (online), as well as the Patent Assignment Database (online), which 
we used to identify and verify some important information in our data set. 
12. The information from this data source has been included in the Disambiguation and Co- 
Authorship Networks of the US Patent Inventor Database (Lai et al. 2011). However, when we 
began work on this research project, the Disambiguation and Co- Authorship Networks of the 
US Patent Inventor Database had not come out.
13. In earlier versions of this paper, the citation data were extracted from the NBER Pat-
ent Data Project (PDP) citation file (1976–2006) downloaded from Professor Bronwyn Hall’s 
website and the Patent Grant Bibliographic Data/XML Version 4.2 ICE (Text Only) 2007, 2008, 
and 2009, downloaded from the USPTO website. These have been included in the Disambigu-
ation and Co- Authorship Networks of the US Patent Inventor Database.

The Rise of International Coinvention    145
We dropped withdrawn patents from our data sets, updated patent classes to 
current classifications as of the end of 2010, and standardized the assignee 
codes and names according to the USPTO’s assignee harmonization system.14
By combining the first three data sets, we identified and characterized 
3,983,050 utility patents granted from 1975 to 2010. We then used these 
patents to track citation relationships and counted the number of citations 
received (or “forward citations”) for each patent.
For the purposes of our research, we separated Hong Kong and Taiwan 
from mainland China.15 A total of 12,419 patents are identified as those 
with at least one inventor residing in China at the time of invention during 
the period 1981–2010.16 A total of 7,754 patents are identified as those with 
at least one inventor residing in India at the time of invention during the 
period 1975–2010.17
The USPTO has classified all patents into the seven types of assignees:
1. Unassigned
2. Assigned to US nongovernment organizations
3. Assigned to non- US nongovernment organizations
4. Assigned to US individuals
5. Assigned to non- US individuals
6. Assigned to the US federal government
7. Assigned to non- US governments
However, we want to distinguish patents granted to a firm entity from those 
granted to a nonfirm entity. To do so, we manually screened all first assignees’ 
information listed on patents, including original type code, name, address, 
and so forth, and consulted Dun & Bradstreet’s Million Dollar Database, 
14. See USPTO, http://www.uspto.gov/patents/process/search/withdrawn.jsp (retrieved Janu-
ary 24, 2012). According to a Cassis2 DVD- ROM, Patents Class: Current Classifications of 
US Patents Issued 1790 to Present (2010 December). In earlier versions of this chapter, the 
harmonized assignee codes were extracted from the selected bibliographic information from US 
Patents DVD (2009 December). We combined them with assignee codes for patents granted in 
2010 according to the files downloaded from the USPTO website. http://www.uspto.gov/web/
offices/ac/ido/oeip/taf/data/misc/ data_cd.doc/assignee_harmonization/. Retrieved July 13, 2012.
15. One issue arises for the years after 1997, when the United Kingdom returned sovereignty 
over Hong Kong to China. Some inventors residing in Hong Kong continued to list Hong Kong 
as their inventor country, while others began to list China as their inventor country. (Note: 
politically, Hong Kong has never been a country, but USPTO designates a separate country 
code to it for classification purposes.) Before and after 1997, we identify Hong Kong addresses 
and consider them to be geographically distinct from mainland China. Similar mistakes can 
be found when a Taiwanese inventor listed Republic of China, the official name of Taiwan, as 
her home country. A small number of Taiwanese patents have been mistakenly classified with 
an inventor country code of “CN” (which stands for China) instead of “TW” (which stands for 
Taiwan) by the USPTO. We corrected these mistakes by looking up an inventor’s full address. 
16. The first China- based patent was granted to Dynapol, a chemical company in 1981. The 
patent counts are based on grant years.
17. Similar to what happened to the China- based data, in a few cases, Indonesia and the state 
of Indiana were mistakenly assigned with an inventor country code of “IN” (which stands for 
India). We corrected all of these mistakes.

146    Lee Branstetter, Guangwei Li, and Francisco Veloso
LexisNexis Corporate Affiliations, Hoover’s Online, and assignees’ websites 
to assign the proper assignee types for all China- and India- related assignees. 
After this procedure, we find that 78 percent of all 12,419 US utility patents 
granted to Chinese inventors were assigned to a firm entity, 12 percent to an 
individual or identified as unassigned, 9 percent to universities and research 
institutes, and 1 percent to other entities such as governments, hospitals, and 
so forth. For India- based patents, 74 percent of total 7,754 US utility pat-
ents were assigned to a firm entity, 5 percent to an individual or identified as 
unassigned, 20 percent to universities and research institutes, and 2 percent 
to other entities. It can be concluded that firms are the main contributors of 
the recent increase of US patents in India and China.
Who owns these patents? For India, US MNCs own the majority of India- 
based US patents. Of all 5,716 India- based patents assigned to a firm entity, 
70 percent are assigned to US MNCs, 18 percent are assigned to Indian indige-
nous firms, 3 percent are assigned to Germany, and 3 percent are assigned to 
France and Italy. These patents are owned by a single firm, STMicroelectronics 
Pvt. Ltd., the Indian subsidiary of  French- Italian multinational electronics and 
semiconductor manufacturer STMicroelectronics. The remaining 5 percent is 
distributed among all other countries. For China, at the assignee nationality 
level, Taiwanese and US MNCs own the majority of Chinese patents, even more 
than Chinese indigenous enterprises. Of all 9,744 China- based patents assigned 
to a firm entity, 35 percent are assigned to Taiwanese MNCs or their Chinese 
subsidiaries, 29 percent are assigned to US MNCs, and 23 percent are assigned 
to Chinese indigenous firms. Other important nations and areas include Hong 
Kong, Germany, and Japan, which account for 3 percent, 2 percent, and 2 per-
cent, respectively. The remainder as a whole accounts for 6 percent.
At the firm level, table 5.1 lists the top ten firm assignees of India- generated 
US patents. Among them, eight are US MNCs and one is a  French- Italian 
Table 5.1 
Top ten firm assignees of India- based USPTO patents
Rank 
Assignee name
 
Nationality
 
Number
 
Share 
(%)
1
General Electric Company
United States
464
8.12
2
IBM
United States
450
7.87
3
Texas Instruments, Inc.
United States
418
7.31
4
Cisco Technology, Inc.
United States
162
2.83
5
Intel Corporation
United States
151
2.64
6
STMicroelectronics Pvt. Ltd.a
France & Italy
151
2.64
7
Honeywell International, Inc.
United States
126
2.20
8
Symantec Operating Corporation
United States
116
2.03
9
Ranbaxy Laboratories, Limited
India
102
1.78
10
 
Microsoft Corporation
 
United States  
96
 
1.68
a STMicroelectronics Pvt. Ltd. is the Indian subsidiary of STMicroelectronics, a  French- Italian 
multinational electronics and semiconductor manufacturer.

The Rise of International Coinvention    147
MNC. The only Indian indigenous firm in the list is Ranbaxy, one of the 
world’s top generic pharmaceutical companies. Table 5.2 lists the top ten 
firm assignees of China- generated US patents. Among them, Hon Hai, a 
Taiwanese manufacturing firm, also known by its English name Foxconn, 
leads the list. As the largest manufacturer of electronics and computer com-
ponents worldwide, Hon Hai conducts intensive R&D in China and has 
2,958 US utility patents, or 30 percent of total China- based, firm- owned 
US patents. Microsoft, with 765 patents, or 8 percent, is a distant second. 
The third is Huawei, an indigenous Chinese firm that has quickly become 
one of the leading networking and telecommunication equipment suppliers 
in the world.
To measure what kinds of invention have been done in India and China, 
we aggregate all China- and India- based US patents that are owned by a firm 
entity into the widely used technology categories created by Hall, Jaffe, and 
Trajtenberg (2001). We will refer to their taxonomy as the HJT categories. 
The results presented in figure 5.5 show that, with regard to India- based 
patents, computers and communications is the leading field. India has been 
well- known for its software industry, so one question worth asking is: To 
what extent have software patents contributed to India’s US patent surge? 
Among all India- based US patent grants before 2007, about 10 percent are 
software patents. A large proportion of China- based patents taken out in 
the United States are in two HJT categories: computers and communica-
tions and electrical and electronic. During the same period, the share of 
China- based software patents is about 5 percent. It can also be seen in figure 
5.5 that coinvention plays an important role across all categories in both 
countries.
By extracting the geographic information on inventors included in pat-
ent documents, we found that among the 20,088 inventor addresses that 
indicate the inventor was living in India, 20,045 addresses can be associated 
with a particular state in India. Karnataka, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, 
Uttar Pradesh, and Delhi are the top five states/territories that host most 
Indian inventors. Together, they account for 76 percent of the frequency 
distribution of India inventor addresses. These areas are also where tech-
nology business incubators (TBIs), science and technology entrepreneurs 
parks (STEPs), software technology parks of India (STPIs), and universi-
ties and research institutions tend to concentrate (Sharma, Nookala, and 
Sharma 2012).
We found 27,238 inventor addresses indicating that the inventor was 
located in China. Of these addresses, 27,177 were sufficiently complete that 
we could associate the address with a particular Chinese province. We find 
that Chinese inventors are highly clustered in three areas: Beijing Munici-
pality, Guangdong province, and the greater Shanghai regional economy, 
comprised of Shanghai and the bordering provinces of Jiangsu and Zhe-
jiang. Those areas account for 86 percent of the frequency distribution of 

Table 5.2 
Top ten firm assignees of China- based USPTO patents
Rank 
Assignee name
 
Nationality
 
Number
 
Share 
(%)
1
Hon Hai Precision Ind. Co., Ltd.a
Taiwan
2,958
30.36
2
Microsoft Corporation
United States
765
7.85
3
Huawei Technologies Co., Ltd.
China
430
4.41
4
Intel Corporation
United States
197
2.02
5
Inventec Corporationb
Taiwan
177
1.82
6
China Petrochemical Corporation (Sinopec)c
China
173
1.78
7
Semiconductor Manufacturing International (Shanghai) Corporation
China
139
1.43
8
IBM
United States
129
1.32
9
Sae Magnetics (H. K.), Ltd.d
Hong Kong/Japan
128
1.31
10
 
Metrologic Instruments, Inc.
 
United States
 
92
 
0.94
a Figure here represents the sum of patents taken out under Hon Hai (Foxconn) and its China- based subsidiaries.
b Figure here represents the sum of patents taken out under Inventec Corporation, Inventec Appliance and Inventec Electronics (Nanjing) Co.
c The original data set confused China Petrochemical Corporation (Sinopec), a Chinese company, with China Petrochemical Development Corporation 
(CPDC), a Taiwanese company. The figure presented here is after correction.
d Sae Magnetics (H. K.), Ltd. is a wholly owned subsidiary of TDK, a Japanese multinational electronics manufacturer. However, Sae Magnetics (H. K.), 
Ltd. itself has manufacturing branches in mainland China. For our research purpose, we will treat it as a Hong Kong firm in our analysis.

The Rise of International Coinvention    149
Chinese inventor addresses. These areas are not only the most developed 
areas in China, but also the places where most multinational R&D centers 
are located.18
All of the above features are based on the analysis of US patent data, 
which have limitations as indicators of invention in India and China. The 
most obvious one is that US patent data may exaggerate the roles of US 
MNCs, since companies usually patent more in their home market than 
somewhere else. Moreover, although the United States is the largest national 
economy in the world and grants a large number of patents, patents granted 
by its patent office may still not be able to capture the whole picture of the 
rise of innovation in India and China. For these reasons, we have also ana-
lyzed European Patent Office (EPO) patent data as a robustness check. The 
major patterns revealed by US patent data also hold using EPO data, includ-
ing the importance of coinvention and MNC sponsorship, technological 
concentration in information technology (IT)- related fields, and geographic 
18. As of the end of 2009, 465 multinational R&D centers were established as independent 
legal entities with approval of the Ministry of Commerce of the People’s Republic of China. 
These centers are mainly concentrated in Shanghai, Beijing, Guangdong, Jiangsu, and Zhejiang. 
Source: People’s Daily online, http://english.peopledaily.com.cn/90001/90778/90861/6921243 
.html. Retrieved August 17, 2010.
Fig. 5.5 Firm- owned China- and India- based USPTO patents across HJT 
technology categories

150    Lee Branstetter, Guangwei Li, and Francisco Veloso
clustering of Indian and Chinese inventors. It is worth pointing out that even 
EPO data indicate that US MNCs play a more important role than Euro-
pean MNCs in India- based patenting. This probably reflects the fact that 
US MNCs are following more aggressive strategies of conducting R&D in 
India than are MNCs from other places. Figures and tables presenting the 
results using the EPO patent data are available upon request.
Before moving on to the next section, we need to answer another impor-
tant question: To what extent can we base our inference about innovation 
in India and China on the relatively small number of US patents, especially 
when there is a tidal wave of patents being issued in China itself (Hu and 
Jefferson 2009)? The numbers of Chinese domestic patents granted by Chi-
na’s State Intellectual Property Office (SIPO) in the most recent years are 
mind- boggling. In 2011 alone, the SIPO issued nearly one million patents 
of various kinds. The majority of these grants go to indigenous/domestic 
applicants. Is our focus on the international patents of Chinese inventors 
generating a distorted picture of the true innovation going on inside China? 
To answer this question, we have carefully examined Chinese invention pat-
ents, using SIPO microdata on Chinese grants over the 1985–2012 period.
The first thing we want to point out is that the overwhelming majority of 
SIPO grants are actually utility models or design patents. These are not true 
patents, in the usual Western sense of the word. Neither requires a substan-
tive examination or a significant technical advance over the existing state 
of the art. When we focus on China’s so- called invention patents, which do 
require a substantive examination and, in principle, an advance over the 
existing technical state of the art, we see significantly smaller numbers and 
significantly less growth. With this more restrictive definition, the total grant 
number drops by about 80 percent in recent years.
Second, as of the end of 2012, about half of SIPO invention patents are 
granted to foreign applicants, and among these  foreign- owned invention 
patents, 90 percent of them possess a foreign priority claim. That means 
more than 40 percent of Chinese invention patents are inventions initially 
created abroad and then patented in China. Even this may understate the 
role of foreign inventors. Patents granted to MNC Chinese subsidiaries and 
joint ventures in China are classified as domestic grants by the SIPO. How-
ever, many of these patents are generated using intellectual inputs from out-
side China, including resources and capabilities located in the multination-
als’ R&D centers far beyond China’s borders. These considerations further 
limit the degree to which China’s impressive headline patent numbers can 
be taken as evidence of globally significant innovative activity.
Third, we find that domestic applicants allow their patents to expire ear-
lier than foreign applicants by failing to pay maintenance fees over the full 
legal life of the patent. This result is consistent with Huang (2012), who 
found similar results for invention patents initially applied for during the 
1987–1989 period. This suggests that there is a quality difference between 

The Rise of International Coinvention    151
Chinese patents granted to foreign inventors and Chinese patents granted 
to domestic inventors.
These concerns are strongly reinforced by the extremely low propensity for 
Chinese inventors, in the aggregate, to apply for and receive patent protec-
tion for their Chinese inventions in patent jurisdictions outside China. For 
decades, researchers seeking to quantify innovation have used the fraction 
of domestic patents for which foreign patent protection is sought, and the 
number of foreign jurisdictions in which patent protection for a given inven-
tion is sought, as indicators of patent quality. Even in advanced countries 
with mature patent systems, the need to file patent applications quickly in 
order to avoid being foreclosed by rival innovators means that firms often 
begin the patent application process, at least at home, at a very early stage 
in the R&D process, before even the inventors themselves have a clear sense 
of the ultimate economic value of the patent. Under international patenting 
rules, firms have up to a year after the domestic filing during which they can 
start the process of seeking patent protection in foreign jurisdictions, with 
the “priority date” established by their home patent application filing date. 
We generally observe that firms are more selective in their foreign patent-
ing, applying for the patent protection in major markets outside the home 
country only when the invention appears sufficiently important to merit the 
additional time and expense of multiple foreign patent filings.
In the context of these considerations, it is interesting to observe that 
the top 100 US patent applicants seek to protect nearly 30 percent of their 
domestic patents in at least one major foreign market, such as Japan or 
the EPO. In striking contrast, we find that the top 100 Chinese domestic 
applicants seek patent protection for less than 6 percent of their inventions 
in the United States, only 4 percent in Europe, and only 1 percent in Japan. 
If we look at the number of domestic patent grants for which Chinese firms 
pursue the patent application process all the way to the successful receipt of 
a foreign patent grant, the numbers are vanishingly small. So far, fewer than 
3 percent of Chinese invention patents have been successfully patented in any 
major market outside China, and fewer than 1 percent have been patented 
in two or more major markets. Even after decades of rapid growth, China 
is still a significantly smaller economy than the United States or Western 
Europe. If Chinese inventors possess new- to- the- world technology, it would 
seem to be well worth their while to take out patents in these markets that 
are still larger, in aggregate terms, than China itself. The fact that Chinese 
inventors forego the opportunity to do so for the overwhelming majority of 
their domestic patents appears to represent a striking vote of no confidence 
in the quality of their inventions.
A more detailed discussion of the SIPO data and the unique features of 
the Chinese domestic patent system is beyond the scope of this chapter, but a 
number of recent studies call into question the degree to which China’s flood 
of domestic patents really indicates a substantial degree of indigenous inno-

152    Lee Branstetter, Guangwei Li, and Francisco Veloso
vation.19 We note here two recent studies of special interest. Lei, Sun, and 
Wright (2012) note widespread government subsidies for domestic patenting 
in China, but show that an increase in these subsidies appears to increase the 
number of patents but not the quantity of innovation. Eberhardt, Helmers, 
and Yu (2011) study domestic and foreign patenting by Chinese firms, and 
conclude that the only Chinese firms engaging in real innovation are those 
also taking out significant numbers of patents outside China.
5.4 Empirical Model and Results
5.4.1 Hypotheses
In section 5.2, we argued that the R&D process itself can be sliced into 
multiple stages, and countries participate in different stages according to 
their comparative advantage (Krugman, Cooper, Srinivasan 1995; Hum-
mels, Ishii, and Yi 2001; Yi 2003). Previous research found that invention 
being generated in developing countries is incremental in nature (Zhao 2006; 
Puga and Trefler 2010). These findings suggest that Indian and Chinese 
researchers under the sponsorship of MNCs are likely to undertake low- 
end tasks, while Western researchers undertake high- end tasks. As such, 
we might expect that a comparison between Indian or Chinese invention 
with and without Western intellectual input would suggest that patents with 
Western intellectual input are of substantially higher quality than those 
without. The same considerations might suggest that even within the same 
MNC, patents with Indian or Chinese input might be of lower quality than 
the patent output of all- Western inventor teams. Interviews with India- 
based R&D personnel and managers suggest that R&D in India largely 
follows this pattern.
We will seek to validate that perception by measuring the relative quality 
of India- based USPTO patents in multiple ways. First, we will compare 
coinvention generated in India with patents created by purely domestic 
researcher teams, and compare inventions created by MNCs with those 
generated by indigenous enterprises. The traditional theory of vertical spe-
cialization would suggest our first hypothesis.
Hypothesis 1 (H1). Coinvention and MNC sponsorship are associated 
with relatively higher patent quality.
We then compare the quality of the patents MNC generated in India 
(both coinvention and purely domestic patents) with the patents the same 
MNCs produced in their home countries (with all inventors residing in the 
19. Hu and Jefferson (2009), who undertook an early quantitative study of the impressive 
increase in China’s domestic patenting, suggested that it was primarily driven by an increase in 
the propensity to patent rather than an increase in real innovative effort.

The Rise of International Coinvention    153
MNC’s home country). A view based on traditional theory would suggest 
our second hypothesis.
Hypothesis 2 (H2). Patents produced by MNCs in India are of lower 
quality than those produced by the same MNCs in their home countries, and 
even coinvented patents generated in emerging economies are of marginally 
lower quality.
Besides overall comparisons, we also want to assess the dynamics of 
patent quality across different patent categories. Conversations with mul-
tinational R&D managers suggest that it takes time for talented research-
ers in emerging economies to become “mature.” This implies our next 
hypothesis.
Hypothesis 3 (H3). The quality gap between patents (including coinven-
tion) produced by MNCs in India and patents produced by the same MNCs 
in their home countries declines as MNCs gain more experience doing R&D 
in India.
We have pointed out the possibility that international coinvention could 
accelerate the advancement of indigenous innovative capability. After a 
period of time working under the tutelage of multinationals, talented Indian 
engineers could put their skills and experience to work for indigenous firms 
that increasingly compete directly with the MNCs. It will therefore be impor-
tant to see if the measured gaps in patent quality between indigenous firms 
and multinationals are closing over time.
At this stage, however, it is difficult to capture such a dynamic process. 
There is no clear turning point in our data set at which we could usefully 
divide the data into an “early period” with limited  catch- up and a later 
period with more complete convergence of innovative capacity. This stems in 
part from the fact that some multinationals entered the Indian market early 
and began building strong R&D operations ten or more years ago, whereas 
other multinationals have only begun to establish their research capacity 
much more recently. It may be that early entrants have not only incubated 
a strong team of local engineers within their labs, but also seeded a number 
of local spin- off entrants with seasoned R&D personnel. But the innovative 
performance of these veterans of MNC R&D activity is diluted by an inflow 
of newly graduated and relatively inexperienced local Indian researchers. 
Thus, the ideal way to measure convergence would be to compare MNC- 
employed engineers and engineers employed in indigenous firms who are at 
the same stage in their inventive careers. This requires the tracking of indi-
vidual inventors over time. This will be the focus of future research, but we 
will not attempt such a fine- grained comparison in this chapter. Instead, we 
will arbitrarily divide the data into three periods to see if there is evidence of 
a declining gap in relative invention quality between indigenous enterprises 
and MNCs over time. This leads us to our last hypothesis.

154    Lee Branstetter, Guangwei Li, and Francisco Veloso
Hypothesis 4 (H4). The gap in patent quality between indigenous enter-
prises and MNCs is declining over time.
Throughout this section of the chapter, our focus will be on MNC R&D 
in India. In ongoing research, however, we are conducting a similar empirical 
investigation of MNC R&D in China, and, in the sections below, we will 
offer a qualitative comparison of our results for India with those we obtain 
when running similar regressions on a Chinese data set.
5.4.2 Empirical Model
As already noted, we regard patent citations as an indicator of patent 
quality. Patent citations serve an important legal function because they 
delimit the scope of the property rights awarded by the patent. Thus, if pat-
ent B cites patent A, it implies that patent A represents a piece of previously 
existing knowledge upon which patent B builds, and over which B cannot 
have a claim (Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg 2001). Alcácer and Gittelman 
(2006) showed that patent citations are an imperfect measure of knowledge 
spillovers between inventors because examiners add a significant fraction 
of the citations after the initial patent application. It is obviously problem-
atic to consider these  examiner- added citations as reflecting the sources of 
inspiration of the inventor herself. However, we use citations as an indicator 
of patent quality rather than a measurement of knowledge spillover. Prior 
literature has shown that total citations received are highly correlated with 
the underlying quality of the invention (Trajtenberg 1990; Jaffe, Trajtenberg, 
and Fogarty 2000; Harhoff et al. 1999; Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg 2005). 
More valuable invention is more frequently cited by subsequently granted 
patents. Thus citations received can be used to proxy for the quality of each 
patent.
Two issues arise when using patent citations as a measure of patent qual-
ity: truncation due to time and difference due to technological fields. Prior 
research has demonstrated that it takes time for patent citations to occur 
(Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg 2001). The number of citations made to a pat-
ent granted just one year ago may be only a small fraction of citations that 
will occur over the following fifteen years. It is easy to see that patents of 
different vintages are subject to different degrees of “citation truncation” 
(Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg 2001) as one cannot simply tell that a patent 
from 2005 with  twenty- five citations is better or worse than a 2008 patent 
with only ten citations. Similarly, one cannot tell that an electronic device 
patent granted in 2000 with  twenty- five citations is better or worse than a 
pesticide patent granted in the same year with only five citations. To address 
the issue of truncation, we will control for patent grant years and use count 
models with “exposure” (Cameron and Trivedi 1998) in all regressions. To 
address the issue of technological difference, we control for major techno-
logical fields in our empirical analysis.

The Rise of International Coinvention    155
Our basic model regresses the citations a patent has received on a number 
of control variables. These variables include a dummy variable indicating 
whether or not it was a product of international coinvention, a dummy vari-
able indicating whether or not it was produced under multinational sponsor-
ship, and so forth. A significantly positive coefficient on a control variable 
of interest indicates a higher number of citations received and suggests a 
higher quality of the patent.
We apply the Poisson  quasi- maximum likelihood (PQML) estimation to our 
regressions for two reasons. First, patent citations are integer counts and have 
a minimum value of zero. Second, our data are overdispersed and the PQML 
estimator is consistent under the weaker assumption of the correct conditional 
mean specification and no restriction on the conditional variance (Wooldridge 
1999, 2002; Cameron and Trivedi 2005; Gourieroux, Monfort, and Trognon 
1984; Hall, Griliches, and Hausman 1986). While a negative binomial (NB) 
mode can also deal with the “overdispersion” issue, it assumes that the con-
ditional variance has a gamma distribution. The  trade- off between the NB 
model and the PQML model is obvious: if the gamma assumption about the 
conditional variance is correct, then the NB estimator will be more efficient, 
but if the gamma assumption does not hold, then the NB estimator will be 
biased. Overall, the PQML model is more likely to result in lower significance 
levels than the NB model. Thus, we tend to regard the PQML model as pref-
erable. However, we also run regressions using the NB model as a robustness 
check. The NB estimation results are qualitatively consistent with the PQML 
results presented in this chapter and are available upon request. The PQML 
estimators can be obtained by estimating an unconditional Poisson model 
with robust standard errors (Wooldridge 1999; Cameron and Trivedi 2005).
Our dependent variable Y is the number of citations a patent has received, 
a quantity also referred to in the literature as the count of “forward cita-
tions.” We count the cumulative number of citations a patent has received 
as of the end of 2010, when our current citation data set ends. We drop the 
patents granted in 2010 in order to get at least one year of citation counts 
for the patents used in regression analysis.
We exclude self- citations in the citation counts. We do this because we 
are concerned that an inventor working in the Indian R&D subsidiaries of 
a multinational might have a higher propensity to cite her own or her col-
leagues’ patents than an inventor working in the MNC’s home country or 
somewhere else. This problem is exacerbated by the very rapid growth of 
India- based US patents in recent years. In addition, Zhao (2006) has sug-
gested that patents created in a developing country and resulting from mul-
tinational sponsorship are subject to more self- citations than those created 
in advanced countries due to MNCs’ internal IP protection arrangements. 
Based on these considerations, we regard the number of citations a patent 
receives, excluding self- citations, as a better indicator of the “true” quality 
than those including self- citations.

156    Lee Branstetter, Guangwei Li, and Francisco Veloso
5.4.3 Cross- Firm,  Within- Country Comparisons
To test H1, we run regressions on our India- based patent sample, includ-
ing all USPTO patents that are granted to Indian inventors by the end of 
2009 and assigned to a firm entity. Our regressions take the following form:
(1)
 
E(Ci) = PatAgei ⋅exp(0 + 1Coinvi
+ 2MNCi + 3PatStock f
+ 4TeamSizei + 5Gdelayi + Hi + Ti).
 
where C is the total number of non- self- citations an  Indian- based patent i 
receives by the end of 2010. The key coefficients of interest are those on Coinv 
and MNC, which are dummy variables indicating whether or not a patent is 
coinvented and whether or not it is assigned to a multinational assignee. The 
key task here is to compare coinvented and MNC- owned patents generated 
in India with patents generated by Indian indigenous firms. In addition, we 
also control for other factors that may influence citations. PatStock denotes 
the assignee f’s  three- year patent stock (three- year cumulative sum of US pat-
ents) before the date of application. We used PatStock as a proxy for a com-
pany’s inventive productivity at the time of patent creation. TeamSize is the 
total number of inventors on the patent. If larger teams are required for more 
“fundamental” (and potentially more valuable) inventions (Jones 2009), and 
larger teams are more likely to be international teams, then this could intro-
duce a mechanical positive association between coinvention and quality—the 
TeamSize variable helps us control for this. Gdelay is the year delay between 
the patent’s application date and grant date. As mentioned earlier, forward 
citations are truncated in a sense that recently granted patents have less time to 
garner citations than earlier ones. To correct this, we estimate the PQML mode 
with “exposure” (Cameron and Trivedi 1998). PatAge is the age of the patent, 
which serves as the exposure variable and is calculated as the days between the 
application date and the end of 2010. Thus the natural log of PatAge enters as 
an offset in the conditional mean. Inclusion of the “exposure” variable controls 
for the effect of the passage of time on the likelihood of citation if that effect 
is constant over time. However, this may not be true, so we also include grant 
year fixed effects T and HJT subcategory fixed effects.
Table 5.3 shows the results. Column (1) includes a coinvention dummy, 
column (2) includes a MNC assignee dummy, and column (3) includes both 
dummies. Across all three specifications, the coefficients on the coinvention 
dummy are positive and significant. The coefficient of 0.239 in column (1) 
can be interpreted as suggesting that coinvented patents receive 27 percent 
(exp(0.239)–1) more non- self- forward citations than purely  Indian- generated 
patents. Similarly, column (2) suggests that MNC- sponsored patents—with 
a multinational assignee—receive 45 percent more citations than ones under 
the sponsorship of Indian indigenous enterprises, whether they are coin-

The Rise of International Coinvention    157
vented or not. It turns out that almost all coinvention in India is found in 
MNC- sponsored patents, so we cannot estimate much of a separate coef-
ficient for the MNC assignee dummy when we also control for a coinvention 
dummy in column (3). The two dummies are highly collinear. It is also notable 
that team size has a positive and significant effect on patent quality.
We acknowledge that the biases and issues that beset patent citation data 
may especially complicate quality comparisons between indigenous patent-
ing and MNC patenting, so we want to proceed with caution. But the data 
suggest that coinvented and MNC- sponsored patents are more technologi-
cally sophisticated and valuable than indigenous patents, as well as more 
numerous. Running similar regressions on a parallel China- based patent 
data set yields similar results. With China- based patent data, it is possible 
to separately estimate multinational sponsorship and international coinven-
tion effects. Both are positive, statistically significant, and collectively point 
to a multinational patent premium that is roughly the same magnitude as 
that observed in India.
Table 5.3 
Cross- firm comparison within India (1979–2009)
DV: no. of non- self- citations 
received as of the end of 2010  
Control for 
coinvention 
(1)
 
Control for  
assignee type 
(2)
 
Control for  
both 
(3)
Indian coinvention
0.239**
0.171*
(0.0851)
(0.0806)
Multinational assignee
0.375**
0.264
(0.144)
(0.138)
Three- year patent stock  
prior to application date (in 
thousands)
0.00760
–0.000294
0.00358
(0.0119)
(0.0121)
(0.0122)
Grant delay in years
0.123***
0.132***
0.127***
(0.0282)
(0.0285)
(0.0281)
Team size
0.0465***
0.0526***
0.0479***
(0.00615)
(0.00566)
(0.00603)
Constant
–8.643***
–8.817***
–8.793***
(0.586)
(0.578)
(0.577)
Grant year dummy 
Yes
Yes
Yes
HJT subcat. dummy 
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
4,280
4,280
4,280
Offset
ln(pat_age)
ln(pat_age)
ln(pat_age)
Log pseudolikelihood
–13,541.4
–13,545.0
–13,512.2
Chi- square
2,037.3
2,087.0
2,051.7
Pro > chi- square
 
0
 
0
 
0
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses.
***Significant at the 1/10 of 1 percent level.
**Significant at the 1 percent level.
*Significant at the 5 percent level.

158    Lee Branstetter, Guangwei Li, and Francisco Veloso
5.4.4 Cross- Border Comparisons within MNCs
Next, we want to know whether patents produced by MNCs in India are of 
lower quality than those produced by the same MNCs in their home countries 
(H2). To do so, we keep only those India- based US patents that are assigned 
to (owned by) MNCs from 1996 to 2009. We then match them to the patents 
that are created by inventors in the MNCs’ home countries, with the same 
firm assignee code,  three- digit technological class, and grant year. Patents 
without a match are dropped. We drop patents granted in years before 1996 
to ensure that we have a reasonable number of Indian domestic patents for 
comparison. Undertaking the same matching procedure as described above, 
we construct a second sample that only includes MNCs with more than thirty 
India- based patents by the end of 2010. Our specification is as follows:
(2)
 
E(Ci) = PatAgei ⋅exp(0 + 1Coinvi
+ 2Domestici + 3PatStock f + 4TeamSizei
+ 5Gdelayi + Fi + Hi + Ti)
, 
where Coinv is a dummy variable indicating whether or not an MNC- 
sponsored patent is coinvented. Domestic is a dummy variable indicating 
whether or not an MNC- sponsored patent is generated exclusively by domes-
tic inventor teams in India. Since we compare patents within the boundaries 
of the MNC, we also include Fi, which denotes assignee (firm) fixed effects. 
All other variables are defined as in specification (1).
We also want to investigate the dynamics of the quality difference between 
patents produced by MNCs in India and those produced by the same MNCs in 
their home countries over time (H3). Using the basic specification as in equation 
(2), we interact Coinv and Domestic dummies with period dummies that are 
based on the length of a firm’s experience generating USPTO patents through 
the work of India- based inventors when the patent application was filed. We 
divide our data into three periods: one to five years of India experience, six to 
ten years of India experience, and more than ten years of India experience.
Results are presented in tables 5.4 and 5.5. Table 5.4 shows that patents 
generated by MNCs in India appear to get systematically fewer non- self- 
citations than those generated at home. In most cases, the differences are 
statistically significant at the standard levels. With regard to the dynamics 
of the quality difference, the point estimates for interaction terms in table 
5.5 are all negative. Statistically significant negative quality differences fade 
for both coinvented patents and those with purely Indian inventor teams. 
Depending on how one looks at it, one can see limited evidence of a relative 
quality improvement over time for coinventions in India, but the results are 
still quite weak. These results are consistent with a division of labor between 
Indian R&D personnel and Western R&D personnel within the boundaries 
of the MNC in which much of the more fundamental, more frequently cited 
work is disproportionately likely to be conducted on the Western side.

The Rise of International Coinvention    159
Interestingly, similar regression analyses on Chinese data reveal a different 
pattern. There is no statistically significant difference in quality between China- 
generated multinational invention and invention generated in the multination-
al’s home country. Efforts to track the evolution of quality differences over 
time, as in table 5.5, suggest that, in the case of China, there has been rapid rela-
tive improvement in the measured quality of the MNC invention conducted in 
China. Understanding the differences in the Indian results reported here and 
the results obtained from our Chinese data is the focus of ongoing research.
5.4.5 The Dynamics of the Quality Gap  
between MNCs and Indigenous Firms
Is the quality difference between MNCs and indigenous firms narrow-
ing over time? (See H4.) We can examine this by dividing the patents used 
for specification (1) into time periods according to their grant year and 
interacting our Coinv and MNC dummies with these period dummies. We 
arbitrarily divide our data into three periods: grant years before 2000, grant 
years from 2000 to 2004, and grant years from 2005 to 2009.
We specify the regressions as follows:
Table 5.4 
Cross- border comparisons within MNCs (India, 1996–2009)
DV: no. of non- self- citations 
received as of the end of 2010
 
Full sample 
(1)
 
Firms with >30 IN 
patents 
(2)
Indian coinvention
–0.212***
–0.182*
(0.0613)
(0.0895)
Purely Indian invention
–0.229*
–0.189
(0.109)
(0.113)
Three- year patent stock prior to 
application date (in thousands)
–0.00344
0.00461
(0.0180)
(0.0232)
Grant delay in years
0.101***
0.115***
(0.0130)
(0.0138)
Team size
0.0626***
0.0638***
(0.00490)
(0.00556)
Firm fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Grant year dummy
Yes
Yes
HJT subcat. dummy 
Yes
Yes
Observations
40,324
32,633
Offset
ln(pat_age)
ln(pat_age)
Number of firms
234
21
Log pseudolikelihood
–14,2502.3
–116,929.6
Chi- square
8.45260e+11
5.53888e+10
Pro > chi- square
 
0
 
0
Note: Robust standard errors clustered by the MNC in parentheses.
***Significant at the 1/10 of 1 percent level.
**Significant at the 1 percent level.
*Significant at the 5 percent level.

160    Lee Branstetter, Guangwei Li, and Francisco Veloso
(3)
 
E(Ci) = PatAgei ⋅exp(0 + 1Coinvi * Gyear<2000
+ 2Coinvi * Gyear2000−2004 + 3Coinvi * Gyear2005−2009
+ 4MNCi * Gyear<2000 + 5MNCi * Gyear2000−2004
+ 6MNCi * Gyear2005−2009 + 7PatStock f + 8TeamSizei
+ 9Gdelayi + Hi + Ti.
 
Results from this regression specification are given in table 5.6. These 
results suggest that the quality premia associated with coinvention and with 
MNC sponsorship do not appear to be fading over time in India. Instead, 
both remain economically and statistically significant. When we run a paral-
Table 5.5 
Cross- border comparisons within MNCs over time (India, 1996–2009)
DV: no. of non- self- citations 
received as of the end of 2010
 
Full sample 
(1)
 
Firms with >30 IN 
patents 
(2)
Coinvention*1–5 years of India 
experience
–0.251***
(0.0638)
–0.195*
(0.0987)
Coinvention*6–10 years of India 
experience
–0.348***
(0.0710)
–0.389***
(0.116)
Coinvention*more than 10 years of 
India experience
–0.0986
(0.118)
–0.114
(0.127)
Purely Indian invention*1–5 years of 
India experience
–0.295*
(0.125)
–0.278
(0.146)
Purely Indian invention*6–10 years 
of India experience
–0.436***
(0.0631)
–0.383***
(0.0520)
Purely Indian invention*more than 
10 years of India experience
–0.133
(0.139)
–0.0995
(0.136)
Three- year patent stock prior to 
application date (in thousands)
–0.00302
(0.0180)
0.00535
(0.0231)
Grant delay in years
0.102***
(0.0130)
0.116***
(0.0136)
Team size
0.0616***
(0.00502)
0.0631***
(0.00559)
Firm fixed effects
Yes
Yes
Grant year dummy
Yes
Yes
HJT subcat. dummy 
Yes
Yes
Observations
40,324
32,633
Offset
ln(pat_age)
ln(pat_age)
Number of firms
234
21
Log pseudolikelihood
–142,469.6
–116,903.5
Chi- square
9.45986e+11
4.33773e+10
Pro > chi- square
 
0
 
0
Note: Robust standard errors clustered by the MNC in parentheses.
***Significant at the 1/10 of 1 percent level.
**Significant at the 1 percent level.
*Significant at the 5 percent level.

The Rise of International Coinvention    161
lel regression on our Chinese data set, we find evidence suggesting that the 
quality premium associated with international coinvention appears to fade 
over time, but the quality premium associated with multinational sponsor-
ship remains strong, both in magnitude and in statistical significance.
5.5 Peering inside Coinvention: Lessons from  
Interviews of Multinational R&D Personnel
To obtain insights into the mechanisms behind the multinational R&D 
phenomenon in emerging economies, we took a research trip to China in 
December 2009 to conduct face- to- face interviews with inventors from 
Table 5.6 
Cross- firm comparison within India over time (1979–2009)
DV: no. of non- self- citations 
received as of the end of 2010  
Control for 
coinvention 
(1)
 
Control for 
assignee type 
(2)
 
Control for both 
(3)
Coinvention*grant year  
< 2000
0.327
0.277
(0.206)
(0.212)
Coinvention*grant year  
2000–2004
0.109
0.0476
(0.106)
(0.118)
Coinvention*grant year  
2005–2009
0.332***
0.252**
(0.0918)
(0.0939)
Multinational assignee*grant 
year < 2000
0.351
0.163
(0.250)
(0.247)
Multinational assignee*grant 
year 2000–2004
0.265
0.233
(0.136)
(0.154)
Multinational assignee*grant 
year 2005–2009
0.743***
0.614***
(0.151)
(0.155)
Three- year patent stock  
prior to application date  
(in thousands)
0.00766
–0.000550
0.00283
(0.0119)
(0.0121)
(0.0123)
Grant delay in years
0.124***
0.134***
0.129***
(0.0287)
(0.0288)
(0.0287)
Team size
0.0463***
0.0523***
0.0475***
(0.00605)
(0.00564)
(0.00598)
Constant
–8.672***
–8.802***
–8.773***
(0.588)
(0.598)
(0.595)
Grant year dummy 
Yes
Yes
Yes
HJT subcat. dummy 
Yes
Yes
Yes
Observations
4,280
4,280
4,280
Offset
ln(pat_age)
ln(pat_age)
ln(pat_age)
Log pseudolikelihood
–13,523.2
–13,529.2
–13,480.0
Chi- square
1,973.3
2,319.3
2,209.9
Pro > chi- square
 
0
 
0
 
0
Note: Robust standard errors in parentheses.
***Significant at the 1/10 of 1 percent level.
**Significant at the 1 percent level.
*Significant at the 5 percent level.

162    Lee Branstetter, Guangwei Li, and Francisco Veloso
multinational R&D centers there. We supplemented these interviews with 
 telephone- based interviews of multinational R&D managers in India, and 
one member of the research team also participated in on- site interviews 
in Delhi, Mumbai, Hyderabad, and Bangalore. Our interviews focused on 
several aspects of multinational R&D activity: How are the international 
research teams formed? What do the backgrounds of Indian or Chinese 
participants look like? Where do the main ideas in collaborative work come 
from? How do team members communicate? Does a division of labor exist 
within international research teams, and if so, to what extent?
We received strong confirmation from all sources that there is an emerg-
ing international division of R&D labor within multinational firms, and 
that a significant fraction of their India- based and China- based research 
manpower is being used to contribute to global research projects whose 
ultimate application will be in global markets, not just the local market. 
Most interviewees emphasized their commitment to a long- run research 
presence that could engage the large and growing endowment of engineer-
ing human resources in the local labor market in the service of their firm’s 
global R&D agenda.
Second, we also received confirmation of the view that while the endow-
ment of raw talent in China and India is immense and impressive, these tal-
ent pools still contain relatively few individuals who have become capable of 
directing a  world- class R&D effort in key areas of technology without many 
years of exposure to multinational best practice.20 That being said, talented 
local engineers can and do become “mature” and effective collaborators in 
international R&D projects, even taking on leading roles, after a few years of 
intense experience within a multinational R&D lab. In some organizations, 
it was explicitly acknowledged that the fundamental intellectual insights 
and the structuring of the research agenda still came from the foreign side. 
In other organizations, there was much more local autonomy in terms of 
setting the research agenda. But even in these cases, expatriate R&D man-
agers and/or local staff with extensive educational and work experience in 
the United States often maintained a key role in directing the R&D activities 
of younger staff whose education and experience had been obtained entirely 
in the local market.
Nevertheless, a simple story of collaboration in which US- based engineers 
come up with the ideas and give the orders and local engineers carry them 
out was clearly far too simple to reflect the much more complex patterns of 
20. We are drawing a sharp distinction here between “indigenous” local personnel who are 
educated in India or China and spend their entire professional lives there, and “multinational” 
personnel with Western educations and long- term work experience in the West, who may 
nevertheless have an Indian or Chinese ethnic background. The statement about managerial 
capability applies to the former, most definitely not to the latter. Interestingly, these judgments 
were often rendered by multinational managers who had the same ethnic background as their 
“local” employees.

The Rise of International Coinvention    163
interaction we heard described in our interviews. There were certainly cases 
in which important ideas came in the first instance from the local side, as well 
as cases in which the projects were conceived, developed, and implemented 
entirely by the local side, with very little Western input.
Many interviewees placed far more stress on the importance of “(re)engi-
neering products for the local market” as a source of coinvention than we 
initially expected. In many markets for industrial intermediate goods—and 
even in some markets for consumer goods—the Chinese market is now sub-
stantially larger than the US market or even the European market. India 
now has more cellular phone subscribers than the United States has citi-
zens. However, India and China are still both poor, developing countries, 
and the  trade- off between cost and functionality is quite different for a local 
customer—even a local corporate customer—than it is for a Western cus-
tomer. Therefore, a significant fraction of local engineering personnel were 
employed in the ongoing process of reengineering Western products for the 
local market—in ways that were both subtle and profound. This activity was 
taking place in both China and India, but the tone of the interviews sug-
gested a significantly greater intensity of this effort in China. In the context 
of this reengineering work, it is not surprising that local engineers often take 
a leading role. However, the division between “reengineering for the local 
market” and “contributing to the global R&D agenda” was a fuzzy one and, 
over time, the same local engineer might be involved in both kinds of under-
takings. In fact, interviewees noted that some cost- reducing innovations 
are often applied to products in other developing markets around the world 
and sometimes to even Western products and processes. For these reasons, 
reengineering projects could generate coinvented US patents.
Finally, our interviewees generally confirmed both the communications 
challenges posed by intercontinental research collaboration and the role of 
modern telecommunications technologies in meeting these challenges. Vid-
eoconferencing and software design tools that allowed a globally distributed 
team to work with the same virtual prototypes were important mechanisms 
facilitating research collaboration. The R&D engineers noted that videocon-
ferences with collaborators around the world were now a routine practice in 
most projects. It was also seen as important for the firms to ensure a steady 
flow of personnel between the various global R&D centers. Face- to- face 
communications helped provide a foundation of basic understanding and 
trust that later  Internet- mediated interaction could build on. Most inter-
viewers agreed that, without modern communications tools, this kind of 
globally distributed R&D effort would be impossible.
5.6 Conclusions and Implications
In this chapter, we have analyzed the patterns found in India- and China- 
based US patents. In doing so, we found that a majority of India’s US 

164    Lee Branstetter, Guangwei Li, and Francisco Veloso
patents are owned by foreign MNCs, with US firms playing an especially 
important role. Similarly, a majority of China’s US patents are owned by 
non- Chinese MNCs, with Taiwanese and US firms playing a significant 
role. We have shown that China- and India- based US patents are techno-
logically concentrated in IT- related fields. We suspect that the prevalence 
of  software- based design and engineering tools in these domains might 
have facilitated coinvention and long distance R&D efforts. We explored the 
geographic distribution of Indian and Chinese inventors and found that the 
majority of Indian and Chinese inventors are clustered in the most economi-
cally advanced regions in both countries, where foreign direct investment 
(FDI) is also concentrated.
We complemented statistical analyses of the patent data with in- person 
interviews with researchers in multinational R&D subsidiaries. These inter-
views confirmed that Indian and Chinese R&D personnel are increasingly 
seen as an integral part of MNCs’ global R&D operations, and they are 
increasingly contributing to innovations whose ultimate market targets are 
outside of China and India. However, the patterns of international collabo-
ration within MNCs are more complex than those that arise directly out of 
traditional views of comparative advantage. Our interviews supported the 
view that modern advances in telecommunications technologies have been 
instrumental in facilitating international R&D collaborations.
We have used forward citations from patent documents to compare the 
quality of India- based patents in multiple ways. Our results support our 
R&D vertical disintegration argument. Our study suggests that the increase 
in US patents in India and China are to a great extent driven by MNCs 
from advanced economies and are highly dependent on collaborations with 
inventors in those advanced economies. As such, India and China’s striking 
rise in innovation may represent less of a challenge to conventional views of 
development economics. The view that the rise of innovation in India and 
China is undermining the traditional position of technological leadership 
enjoyed by the United States and other advanced industrial economies has 
been exaggerated.
Nevertheless, the world of R&D is indeed undergoing a major change. 
The increase in R&D activity in emerging economies such as India and 
China represents a growing international division of R&D labor. By under-
taking R&D in emerging economies, MNCs can now provide innovative 
technologies to global markets at a lower cost and introduce products more 
suitable for emerging markets.
All of this leads us to the possibility of a “win- win” outcome for a more 
integrated global innovation system that can benefit both emerging and 
advanced economies. By participating in MNCs’ R&D networks, emerging 
economies not only bring in more investment and create more employment, 
they can also participate in the generation of new technology at an earlier 
stage in the economic development process, even before they have inter-

The Rise of International Coinvention    165
nally developed all of the necessary categories of capabilities required for 
the complete R&D process. Their participation can also shift the direction 
of global R&D in a way that creates more goods and services suited to the 
income levels and conditions of emerging markets. Jones (2009) suggests 
diminishing productivity in R&D investment in the traditional innovation 
centers of the West as the burden of knowledge rises, but this can be off-
set by adding enough new scientists into a globalized innovation process, 
generating gains at the global level. By letting their companies do R&D 
in countries like India and China, advanced economies will also benefit 
from a faster pace of innovation and a more rapidly expanding stock of 
knowledge.
References
Alcácer, J., and Michelle Gittelman. 2006. “Patent Citations as a Measure of Knowl-
edge Flows: The Influence of Examiner Citations.” Review of Economics and Sta-
tistics 88 (4): 774–79.
Barefoot, Kevin. 2012. “US Multinational Companies: Operations of US Parents 
and their Foreign Affiliates in 2010.” Survey of Current Business November:51–74.
Barefoot, Kevin, and Raymond Mataloni. 2011. “Operations of US Multinational 
Companies in the United States and Abroad.” Survey of Current Business Novem-
ber:29–48.
Basant, Rakesh, and Sunil Mani. 2012. “Foreign R&D Centres in India: An Analysis 
of Their Size, Structure, and Implications.” IIM Working Paper no. 2012- 01- 06, 
Indian Institute of Management.
Branstetter, Lee, and C. Fritz Foley. 2010. “Facts and Fallacies about US FDI in 
China.” In China’s Growing Role in World Trade, edited by Robert C. Feenstra and 
Shang- Jin Wei, 513–39. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Branstetter, Lee, Itzhak Goldberg, John Gabriel Goddard, and Smita Kuriakose. 
2008. Globalization and Technology Absorption in Europe and Central Asia. Wash-
ington, DC: World Bank Publications. doi:10.1596/978–0–8213–7583–9.
Branstetter, Lee, and Mariko Sakakibara. 2002. “When Do Research Consortia 
Work Well and Why? Evidence from Japanese Panel Data.” American Economic 
Review 92 (1): 143–59.
Cameron, Adrian Colin, and Pravin K. Trivedi. 1998. Regression Analysis of Count 
Data. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
———. 2005. Microeconometrics: Methods and Application. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Cantwell, John. 1995. “The Globalisation of Technology: What Remains of the 
Product Cycle Model?” Cambridge Journal of Economics 19 (1): 155–174.
Chen, Jennifer, Show- Ling Jang, and Chiao- Hui Chang. 2013. “The Patterns and 
Propensity for International Co- Invention: The Case of China.” Scientometrics 
94:481–95.
Danguy, Jerome. 2012. “Globalization of Innovation Production: A  Patent- Based 
Industry Analysis.” iCite Working Paper no. 2014- 009, International Centre for Inno-
vation, Technology, and Education Studies, Solvay Brussels School of Economics 
and Management. http://www.solvay.edu/sites/upload/files/WP009- 2014.pdf.

166    Lee Branstetter, Guangwei Li, and Francisco Veloso
Eberhardt, Markus, Christian Helmers, and Zhihong Yu. 2011. “Is the Dragon 
Learning to Fly? An Analysis of the Chinese Patent Explosion.” CSAE Working 
Paper no. 2011- 15, Centre for the Studies of African Economies.
Freeman, Richard B. 2006. “Does Globalization of the Scientific/Engineering Work-
force Threaten US Economic Leadership?” In Innovation Policy and the Economy, 
vol. 6, edited by Adam Jaffe, Josh Lerner, and Scott Stern, 123–58. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Gourieroux, C., A. Monfort, and A. Trognon. 1984. “Pseudo Maximum Likelihood 
Methods: Applications to Poisson Models.” Econometrica 52 (3) : 701–20. doi: 
10.2307/1913472.
Griffith, Rachel, Rupert Harrison, and John Van Reenen. 2006. “How Special is the 
Special Relationship? Using the Impact of US R&D Spillovers on UK Firms as 
a Test of Technology Sourcing.” American Economic Review 96 (5): 1859–75. 
doi:10.2307/30035000.
Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman. 1990. “Comparative Advantage and 
Long- Run Growth.” American Economic Review 80 (4): 796–815. doi:10.2307/ 
2006708.
———. 1991. “Quality Ladders in the Theory of Growth.” Review of Economic 
Studies 5(1): 43–61. doi:10.2307/2298044.
Grossman, Gene M., and Esteban Rossi- Hansberg. 2008. “Trading Tasks: A Simple 
Theory of Offshoring.” American Economic Review 98 (5): 1978–97. doi:10.2307/ 
29730159.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Zvi Griliches, and Jerry A. Hausman. 1986. “Patents and R and D: 
Is There a Lag?” International Economic Review 27 (2): 265–83. doi:10.2307/2526504.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg. 2001. “The NBER Pat-
ent Citation Data File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools.” NBER 
Working Paper no. 8498, Cambridge, MA.
———. 2005. “Market Value and Patent Citations.” RAND Journal of Economics 
36 (1): 16–38. doi:10.2307/1593752.
Harhoff, Dietmar, Francis Narin, F. M. Scherer, and Katrin Vopel. 1999. “Citation 
Frequency and the Value of Patented Inventions.” Review of Economics and Sta-
tistics 81 (3): 511–15.
Hu, Albert Guangzhou, and Gary H. Jefferson. 2009. “A Great Wall of Patents: 
What Is Behind China’s Recent Patent Explosion?” Journal of Development Eco-
nomics 90 (1): 57–68.
Huang, Can. 2012. “Estimates of the Value of Patent Rights in China.” UNU- 
MERIT Working Paper no. 004, Maastricht Economic and Social Research Insti-
tute on Innovation and Technology.
Hummels, David, Jun Ishii, and Kei- Mu Yi. 2001. “The Nature and Growth of 
Vertical Specialization in World Trade.” Journal of International Economics 54 (1): 
75–96. doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0022–1996(00)00093–3.
Jaffe, Adam B., and Manuel Trajtenberg. 2002. Patents, Citations and Innovations: 
A Window on the Knowledge Economy. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Jaffe, Adam B., Manuel Trajtenberg, and Michael S. Fogarty. 2000. “Knowledge 
Spillovers and Patent Citations: Evidence from a Survey of Inventors.” American 
Economic Review 90 (2): 215–18. doi:10.2307/117223.
Jang, Show- Ling, Tzu- Ya Wang, and Jennifer Chen. 2012. “Cross- Border Patenting 
in Emerging Countries—The Cases of China and India.” National Taiwan Uni-
versity Working Paper.
Jones, Benjamin F. 2009. “The Burden of Knowledge and the ‘Death of the Renais-
sance Man’: Is Innovation Getting Harder?” Review of Economic Studies 76 (1): 
283–317. doi:10.1111/j.1467–937X.2008.00531.x.

The Rise of International Coinvention    167
Kogut, Bruce, and Udo Zander. 1992. “Knowledge of the Firm, Combinative Capa-
bilities, and the Replication of Technology.” Organization Science 3 (3): 383–97.
———. 1993. “Knowledge of the Firm and the Evolutionary Theory of the Multi-
national Corporation.” Journal of International Business Studies 24 (4): 625–45.
Krugman, Paul. 1979. “A Model of Innovation, Technology Transfer, and the World 
Distribution of Income.” Journal of Political Economy 87 (2): 253–66. doi: 
10.2307/1832086.
Krugman, Paul, Richard N. Cooper, and T. N. Srinivasan. 1995. “Growing World 
Trade: Causes and Consequences.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1995 
(1): 327–77. doi:10.2307/2534577.
Lai, Ronald, Alexander D’Amour, Amy Yu, Ye Sun, Vetle Torvik, and Lee Fleming. 
2011. “Disambiguation and Co- Authorship Networks of the US Patent Inventor 
Database.” Harvard Institute for Quantitative Social Science. https://thedata 
.harvard.edu/dvn/dv/patent/faces/study/StudyPage.xhtml?studyId=70546&version 
Number=5.
Lei, Zhen, Zhen Sun, and Brian Wright. 2012. “Patent Subsidy and Patent Filing in 
China.” Working Paper, Penn State University and University of California, Berkeley.
National Research Council. 2007. “Rising above the Gathering Storm: Energizing 
and Employing America for a Brighter Economic Future.” Academy of Science, 
National Academy Of. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press.
———. 2012. “OECD Science, Technology and Industry Outlook 2012.” OECD 
Publishing.
Puga, Diego, and Daniel Trefler. 2010. “Wake Up and Smell the Ginseng: Interna-
tional Trade and the Rise of Incremental Innovation in Low- Wage Countries.” 
Journal of Development Economics 91 (1): 64–76. doi:10.1016/j.jdeveco.2009.01.011.
Romer, Paul M. 1990. “Endogenous Technological Change.” Journal of Political 
Economy 98 (5): S71–S102. doi:10.2307/2937632.
Sharma, P., S. B. S. Nookala, and Anubhav Sharma. 2012. “India’s National and 
Regional Innovation Systems: Challenges, Opportunities and Recommendations 
for Policy Makers, Industry and Innovation.” Industry and Innovation 19 (6): 
517–37.
Singh, Jasjit. 2008. “Distributed R&D, Cross- Regional Knowledge Integration and 
Quality of Innovative Output.” Research Policy 37 (1): 77–96. doi:10.1016/j.respol 
.2007.09.004.
The Royal Society. 2010. “The Scientific Century: Securing Our Future Prosperity.” 
London: The Royal Society.
Trajtenberg, Manuel. 1990. “A Penny for Your Quotes: Patent Citations and the 
Value of Innovations.” RAND Journal of Economics 21 (1): 172–87. doi:10.2307/ 
2555502.
———. 2001. “Innovation in Israel 1968–1997: A Comparative Analysis Using Pat-
ent Data.” Research Policy 30 (3): 363–89. doi:10.1016/S0048–7333(00)00089–5.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). 2005. World 
Investment Report 2005: Transnational Corporations and the Internationalization 
of R&D. New York: United Nations. 
Vernon, Raymond. 1966. “International Investment and International Trade in the 
Product Cycle.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 80 (2): 190–207. doi:10.2307/ 
1880689.
Weitzman, Martin L. 1998. “Recombinant Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Econom-
ics 113 (2): 331–60. doi:10.2307/2586906.
Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 1999. “Distribution- Free Estimation of Some Nonlinear 
Panel Data Models.” Journal of Econometrics 90 (1): 77–97. doi:10.1016/S0304 
–4076(98)00033–5.

168    Lee Branstetter, Guangwei Li, and Francisco Veloso
———. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press.
Yi, Kei- Mu. 2003. “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?” 
Journal of Political Economy 111 (1): 52–102. doi:10.1086/344805.
Yorgason, Daniel. 2007. “Research and Development Activities of US Multinational 
Corporations: Preliminary Results from the 2004 Benchmark Survey.” Survey of 
Current Business March:22–39.
Zhao, Minyuan. 2006. “Conducting R&D in Countries with Weak Intellectual Prop-
erty Rights Protection.” Management Science 52 (8): 1185–99. doi:10.1287/mnsc 
.1060.0516.
Zucker, Lynne G., and Michael R. Darby. 2011. “COMETS Data Description, 
Release 1.0.” Los Angeles, CA: UCLA Center for International Science, Tech-
nology, and Cultural Policy.