GRIFFITH JOURNAL 
 OF LAW & HUMAN DIGNITY 
 
 
Editor-in-Chief 
Danielle Warren 
 
Executive Editors 
Michelle Gunawan 
Molly Jackson 
Felicia Lal 
Eleesa Panton 
 
IT Administrator & Executive Editor 
Neerav Gorasia 
 
Editors 
Renee Curtis 
Alex Neumann 
Isabelle Quinn 
Lana Ristic 
Ashlee Robin 
Ada Sculthorp 
Alexander Vanenn 
Josephine Vernon 
Genevieve White 
 
Consulting & Executive Editor 
Dr Allan Ardill 
 
 
Volume 3(1) 2015 
Published in May 2014, Gold Coast, Australia by the Griffith Journal of Law & Human Dignity 
ISSN: 2203-3114 
 
 

CONTENTS 
 
KEIRAN HARDY 
NATIONAL SECURITY REFORMS AND FREEDOM OF THE PRESS 
1 
EDWIN BIKUNDO 
THE PRESIDENT’S TWO BODIES: UHURU KENYATTA AT THE 
INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURT 
30 
MICHELLE MALONEY 
FINALLY BEING HEARD: THE GREAT BARRIER REEF AND THE 
INTERNATIONAL RIGHTS OF NATURE TRIBUNAL 
40 
STEVEN FREELAND 
JUDICIAL DECISION-MAKING IN INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL 
COURTS: “EFFECTIVE” JUSTICE? 
59 
ADELE ANTHONY 
THE LAW AND BOXING: A PARADOX 
86 
NIKOLAS FEITH TAN 
PRABOWO AND THE SHORTCOMINGS OF INTERNATIONAL 
JUSTICE 
103 
FELICITY GERRY QC 
LET’S TALK ABOUT SLAVES … HUMAN TRAFFICKING: 
EXPOSING HIDDEN VICTIMS AND CRIMINAL PROFIT AND HOW 
LAWYERS CAN HELP END A GLOBAL EPIDEMIC 
118 
GEMIMA HARVEY 
THE PRICE OF PROTEST IN WEST PAPUA 
170 
 
 

59 
 
JUDICIAL DECISION-MAKING IN INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURTS:  
“EFFECTIVE” JUSTICE?1 
STEVEN FREELAND* 
The past two decades have witnessed the re-emergence of a system of 
international justice mechanisms, and the “institutionalisation” and 
“judicialisation” of international criminal justice, principally through the 
operation of formalised international and hybrid courts and tribunals. This 
followed a long period of impunity, during which there was virtually no 
legal accountability for the commission of atrocities and international 
crimes. After a slow beginning, several of these mechanisms then became 
active in the implementation of criminal justice against those accused of the 
most egregious crimes. All of a sudden, judges were required to adjudicate 
on complex and emotional factual and legal issues, largely without the 
benefit of significant practical experience. Over time, and particularly more 
recently, questions have been publically raised — even by judges themselves 
— as to the validity of several significant decisions. Highly visible 
controversies have emerged that have highlighted the difficulties in the 
judicial 
decision-making 
processes 
within 
these 
mechanisms 
of 
international justice. These challenge perceptions as to the “efficiency” of 
the justice being handed down. This article will discuss the applicable law 
used to determine and interpret legal rules in the international criminal 
arena, and then explore how these are increasingly challenged by both 
internal and external factors associated with the overarching context of the 
specific conflicts, and their political and social consequences. 
 
 
                                                             
1 This article, completed in June 2014, is based upon a presentation by the author at the University of 
Antwerp, Belgium in May 2014. The author, at the time a ‘Marie Curie’ Fellow, acknowledges the generous 
financial assistance provided by the European Commission. 
* Professor of International Law, University of Western Sydney, Australia; Permanent Visiting Professor, 
iCourts Centre of Excellence for International Courts, Denmark; Visiting Professor, University of Vienna, 
Austria. 

VOL 3(1) 2015  
         GRIFFITH JOURNAL OF LAW & HUMAN DIGNITY                    
 
60 
 
CONTENTS 
I 
IS SOMETHING “ROTTEN” WITH THE CURRENT STATE OF INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL 
JUSTICE?…............................................................................................................. 
 
60 
II 
THE IMPERATIVE TO DEVELOP (QUICKLY) A “PRACTICE” OF INTERNATIONAL 
CRIMINAL JUSTICE.................................................................................................. 
 
63 
III 
“CONSTRUCTIONIST” DECISION-MAKING TO CREATE “NEW” MODES OF CRIMINAL 
LIABILITY?............................................................................................................. 
 
68 
IV 
JUDICIAL INDEPENDENCE AND IMPARTIALITY............................................................ 
71 
V 
CONCLUDING REMARKS: “EFFECTIVE” JUSTICE?......................................................... 79 
I IS SOMETHING “ROTTEN” WITH THE CURRENT STATE OF INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL JUSTICE? 
In June 2013, the then-judge of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former 
Yugoslavia (‘ICTY’), Frederik Harhoff of Denmark, wrote a confidential letter to 56 of his 
friends in which he suggested that the jurisprudence of that tribunal had recently 
deviated from ‘more or less set practice’,2 with the effect that it had become significantly 
more difficult to convict senior military commanders for crimes committed by their 
subordinates. This followed the decision of the ICTY Appeals Chamber in the case of 
Perišić in February 2013,3 in which a former (Serbian) Chief of the General Staff of the 
Yugoslav army, having been convicted by the Trial Chamber of war crimes and crimes 
against humanity and sentenced to 27 years imprisonment, was acquitted of all charges 
on appeal, a decision described by one news agency as ‘a rare victory for Serbs’.4 
Judge Harhoff found himself in a ‘deep professional and moral dilemma’ and alleged that 
this ‘back-tracking’ in the application of the law relating to aiding and abetting was, in 
part, due to ‘tenacious pressure’ on other judges by the President of the ICTY, American 
Theodor Meron — who presided in the Perišić Appeals Chamber decision — in response 
to pressure supposedly imposed by various (named) countries.5 Three months prior to 
                                                             
2 An English version of this letter can be found at; Email from Judge Frederik Harhoff to 56 Contacts, 6 
June 2013, <http://www.bt.dk/sites/default/files-dk/node-files/511/6/6511917-letter-english.pdf>. 
3 Prosecutor v Perišić (Judgement) (International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Appeals 
Chamber, Case No IT-04-81-A, 28 February 2013) (‘Perišić’). 
4 See Guy De Launey, ‘Momcilo Perisic Hague acquittal leaves little sense of justice’, BBC News (online), 28 
February 2013 <http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-21621695>. 
5 Harhoff, above n 2.  

                             JUDICIAL DECISION-MAKING IN THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURTS                 VOL 3(1) 2015 
 
61 
 
the acquittal of Momčilo Perišić, the Appeals Chamber (again presided by Judge Meron), 
in a decision that caused outrage in Serbia, had acquitted two Croat Generals, Ante 
Gotovina and Mladen Markač, who had been convicted and sentenced to 24 years and 18 
years respectively by the Trial Chamber.6 Both of these Appeals Chamber Judgements 
were notable for strident dissenting opinions on the question of acquittal and the 
application of relevant legal principles. 
Following the subsequent publication of his letter, Judge Harhoff was himself found not 
to be impartial by a majority of a panel of other ICTY judges. He was held to have 
‘demonstrated a bias in favour of conviction such that a reasonable observer properly 
informed would reasonably apprehend bias’.7 He was therefore removed from the Šešelj 
case, in which the accused had already spent over 11 years in detention without a final 
verdict.8 Judge Harhoff was replaced in that case by Judge Mandiaye Niang on 31 
October 2013 and then effectively forced to leave the ICTY. He has returned to the 
University of Southern Denmark as a Professor of Law. 
A subsequent ICTY Appeals Chamber Judgement in early 2014 — in which Judge Meron 
was not a member of the bench — disagreed with the Perišić reasoning in unusually 
strong language. In Šainović,9 the majority ‘unequivocally reject[ed] the approach 
adopted in [Perišić] as it is in direct and material conflict with the prevailing 
jurisprudence … and with customary international law’.10 Perišić was also rejected by 
the Appeals Chamber of the Special Court for Sierra Leone (‘SCSL’) in its decision in 
Taylor in September 2013.11 In light of the Šainović Appeals Chamber decision, the ICTY 
Prosecutor, in what he admitted would be an ‘extraordinary measure’ — as well as being 
legally and procedurally unsupportable — filed a motion requesting that the ICTY 
                                                             
6 Prosecutor v Gotovina (Judgement) (International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Appeals 
Chamber, Case No IT-06-90-A, 16 November 2012). 
7 Harhoff Disqualification Decision (International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Chamber 
Convened by Order of the Vice-President, Case No IT-03-67-T, 28 August 2013). 
8 The judgement in the Šešelj case had been scheduled for 30 October 2013; however, the departure of 
Judge Harhoff and the necessity for the replacement judge to familiarise himself with the voluminous brief 
so that he could actively participate in the deliberations for, and drafting of, the final decision have meant 
that the judgement has been indefinitely postponed.  
9 Prosecutor v Šainović (Judgement) (International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Appeals 
Chamber, Case No IT-05-87-A, 23 January 2014) (‘Šainović’). 
10 Ibid [1650]. 
11 Prosecutor v Taylor (Judgement) (Special Court for Sierra Leone, Appeals Chamber, Case No SCSL-03-01-
A, 26 September 2013)[471–486] (‘Taylor Appeals Chamber Judgement’). 

VOL 3(1) 2015  
         GRIFFITH JOURNAL OF LAW & HUMAN DIGNITY                    
 
62 
 
reconsider the Appeals Chamber acquittal in Perišić. This motion has since been rejected 
by an Appeals Chamber bench (presided by Judge Meron), which held that: 
… the Appeals Chamber has underscored the importance of “certainty 
and finality of legal judgements” for both victims and individuals who 
have been convicted or acquitted by the Tribunal … [and that] victims’ 
interest in the success of the Motion does not constitute a legal basis 
which would justify granting the Motion.12 
Whilst this sequence of events is unusual for its public nature, it is not an isolated 
incident in terms of the important questions that it highlights. These relate particularly 
to the impartiality and independence of judges in the international criminal arena, the 
effects of external pressures (or perceptions thereof) on their judicial decision-making, 
and the overall role of judges in speaking out in instances where they perceive that the 
judicial decision-making process has been compromised. Thus, in another extraordinary 
statement by an international criminal judge in April 2012, the Senegalese jurist El Hadji 
Malik Sow — who was the alternate (reserve) judge in the SCSL Trial Chamber hearing 
the Taylor case — made the following claims in the court room after the guilty verdict 
had been pronounced, the microphones switched off, and the three other Trial Chamber 
Judges had left the room: 
… there were no deliberations … and I disagree with the findings and 
conclusions of the other Judges, standard of proof the guilt of the accused 
from the evidence provided in this trial is not proved beyond reasonable 
doubt by the prosecution. And my only worry is that the whole system is 
not consistent with all the principles we know and love, and the system is 
not consistent with the values of international criminal justice, and I’m 
afraid the whole system is under grave danger of just losing all credibility, 
and I’m afraid this whole thing is heading for failure.13 
                                                             
12 Prosecutor v Perišić (Decision on Motion for Reconsideration) (International Criminal Tribunal for the 
Former Yugoslavia, Appeals Chamber, Case No IT-04-81-A, 20 March 2014) 2–3. 
13 These comments by Judge Sow were transcribed by a court stenographer at the time, but were 
subsequently expunged from the official court records. However, they were widely circulated on the 
internet. See, eg, Charles Jalloh, ‘The Verdict in the Charles Taylor Case and the Alternate Judge’s 
“Dissenting Opinion”’ on Blog of the European Journal of International Law (11 May 2012)  
<http://www.ejiltalk.org/the-verdict-in-the-charles-taylor-case-and-the-alternate-judges-dissenting-
opinion/>.  

                             JUDICIAL DECISION-MAKING IN THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURTS                 VOL 3(1) 2015 
 
63 
 
Judge Sow was shortly thereafter dismissed as a judge of the SCSL for misconduct.14 
Irrespective of the accuracy of each of the claims made by Judges Harhoff and Sow, they 
indicate that disagreements among judges sometimes occur in the decision-making 
processes in the international criminal courts and tribunals, which have led these judges 
to, in effect, become “whistle-blowers”. This does not necessarily seem coincidental, 
given that there are many complex external factors at play for each of these mechanisms 
of criminal justice. This article briefly reflects on a number of those factors that 
characterise judicial decision-making in the area of international criminal justice, and 
their possible impact on the “effectiveness” of these courts and tribunals. 
II THE IMPERATIVE TO DEVELOP (QUICKLY) A “PRACTICE” OF INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL JUSTICE 
Much has been written about the proliferation of international (and hybrid 
“internationalised”) criminal tribunals and courts over the past two decades. At the end 
of the Second World War, the Nuremberg Military Tribunal in particular had made 
generally positive steps regarding the formulation of principles of international criminal 
law and the development of an international-level process of judicial accountability. 
However, there then followed a long period of impunity, particularly due to factors of an 
international and national political nature. It has been estimated that as many as 170 
million people were killed during the period 1945 to 1990, with little accountability 
before national or international courts.15 It was not until the shackles of the Cold War 
were loosened in the early 1990s, and the United Nations Security Council was then able 
to play a more active role in addressing international crimes, albeit after the fact, that 
the world finally saw a renewed and much more concerted effort to create a system of 
international criminal justice.  
                                                             
14 See Hirondelle News Agency, ‘SCSL/Taylor’s defence wants to call dissenting Judge to the stand’, 
Hirondelle News Agency (online), 22 August 2012 <http://www.hirondellenews.com/other-courts/325-
scsl/33630-082212-scsltaylors-defence-wants-to-call-dissenting-judge-to-the-stand>. See also the 
Concurring Opinion on Aiding and Abetting Liability in Taylor at [717] of Justice Shireen Avis Fisher, who 
‘absolutely repudiated’ any suggestion of political influence on the decisions of international criminal 
judges stating that ‘to suggest otherwise wrongfully casts a cloud on the integrity of judges in 
international criminal courts generally and the rule of law which we are sworn to uphold, and encourages 
unfounded speculation and loss of confidence in the decision-making process as well as in the decisions 
themselves’. 
15 M Cherif Bassiouni, ‘Introduction to the Symposium: The Normative Framework of International 
Humanitarian Law: Overlaps, Gaps and Ambiguities’ (1998) 8(1) Transnational Law and Contemporary 
Problems 199, 203. 

VOL 3(1) 2015  
         GRIFFITH JOURNAL OF LAW & HUMAN DIGNITY                    
 
64 
 
Faced with genocides in both Rwanda and in the former Yugoslavia, the United Nations 
Security Council eventually agreed to establish two ad hoc tribunals to prosecute the 
perpetrators of serious crimes committed during those conflicts. These institutions have 
been followed by a series of other sui generis courts and tribunals dealing with specific 
conflicts and situations in various places including Sierra Leone, East Timor, Cambodia, 
and Lebanon. More significantly, in 1998, a treaty to establish a permanent International 
Criminal Court (‘ICC’) was agreed, and that court began its operations in 2002.  
Thus, over a short time frame, it became necessary to shift from a 45-year-period in which 
there was no “practice” of international criminal law, to a vibrant era of significant 
jurisprudential evolution. This called for the development and elaboration of even the 
most basic notions of what constitutes an international crime, and how international 
criminal accountability should operate to counter such acts. What had largely been 
considered merely interesting and somewhat academic questions (albeit important) 
became “real” — they were being raised and challenged in a formalised and highly visible 
international legal process. This required adjudication by competent judges.  
For example, although the definition of genocide, the so-called “crime of crimes”, was 
concluded in 1948, it was not until 1998 (50 years later) that judges were first required 
to interpret and apply the core elements of the crime. Even what had been assumed to 
be a fundamental and perhaps obvious issue — the characterisation of the relevant 
groups within the crime of genocide — gave rise to difficulties and controversy in this 
initial period of (renewed) international criminal justice.16 
The judges in the embryonic stages of this new era of international criminal justice 
evidently had no “hard” practical experience in this field. Yet, the rapid evolution of this 
“internationalisation” of criminal justice called for the appointment of a significant 
number of judges over a relatively short space of time. They were thrust into a position 
where many interested parties, as well as the relevant stakeholders, were watching 
them adjudicate a series of high-profile trials with inflated expectations that the 
                                                             
16 See Prosecutor v Akayesu (Judgement) (International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, Trial Chamber, Case 
No ICTR-96-4-T, 2 September 1998) [511] (‘Akayesu’), where the Trial Chamber extended the scope of 
genocide beyond the four specified groups to apply to any ‘stable and permanent’ group. This was 
subsequently rejected in a series of later decisions at the ICTR. 

                             JUDICIAL DECISION-MAKING IN THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURTS                 VOL 3(1) 2015 
 
65 
 
establishment of these various mechanisms would ultimately deal effectively with the 
complex issues that they would inevitably raise. 
Not surprisingly, despite the fact that the first of these tribunals to be established in this 
new era of accountability, the ICTY, was to ‘apply rules of international humanitarian 
law which are beyond any doubt part of customary law’,17 the initial phases of judicial 
decision-making were characterised by what could be termed “law-creation on the run”. 
This involved a departure from well-established principles of national criminal law, due 
to the unique aspects of this (re)new(ed) area of international legal practice. This is, in 
part, a reflection of the fact that this regulatory regime for international crimes was 
initially developed in reaction to, rather than in anticipation of, horrendous events, 
including those that could not have possibly been foreseen.  
As a practical matter, the generally reactive nature of this system will sometimes 
necessitate the “adaptation” of existing and well-established principles to meet 
particular situations. Judge Cassese has suggested that international criminal courts can 
still work within the legal principle of nullum crimen sine lege (“no crime without law”), 
a fundamental human rights principle that underpins the operation of criminal law in 
many national legal systems, whilst, at the same time, refining and elaborating upon ‘by 
way of legal construction, existing rules’.18 Other commentators have, however, taken a 
different view and have not been as generous in their assessment of the international 
judicial processes. Schabas has argued that international criminal judges at the ICTY 
have adopted a ‘relaxed attitude’ to the nullum crimen principle from quite early on in 
their decision-making activities,19 while Bassiouni and Manikas have suggested that, in 
the context of international criminal law, the principle itself should be moulded to 
instead become nullum crimen sine iure (”no crime without some law”).20 
While this may be a necessary modus operandi of the judicial mechanisms of 
international criminal justice, particularly given the very complex and unique factual 
                                                             
17 See Report of the Secretary-General Pursuant to Paragraph 2 of Security Council Resolution 808, UN Doc 
S/25704 (3 May 1993) [34] <http://www.un.org/ga/search/view_doc.asp?symbol=S/25704>.  
18 Antonio Cassese, International Criminal Law (Oxford University Press, 3rd ed, 2003) 149. 
19 William Schabas, ‘Commentary on Judgement, Prosecutor v Furundžija’, in André Klip and GöranSluiter 
(eds), Annotated Leading Cases of International Criminal Tribunals, Volume III, The International Criminal 
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, 1997–1999 (Intersentia, 2001) 753, 757. 
20 M Cherif Bassiouni and Peter Manikas, The Law of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former 
Yugoslavia (Transnational Publishers, 1996) 290. 

VOL 3(1) 2015  
         GRIFFITH JOURNAL OF LAW & HUMAN DIGNITY                    
 
66 
 
situations with which they often deal, it does have its risks, particularly where judges 
may perceive there to exist an underpinning “pressure to convict”. This has presented 
not inconsiderable challenges for judges seeking to demonstrate unconditional 
objectivity and to present considered deductive reasoning in their judgments. Despite 
the increasing body of jurisprudence, international criminal law still remains a 
developing field, and there may be no “precedent” to rely upon in particular 
circumstances. As such, a judge may be forced into a position where he/she must 
elaborate on the boundaries (or, seen from another perspective, the “potential”) of a 
codified crime, often with the result that the crime is interpreted to encompass 
situations to the maximum extent possible — and thus cover the specific factual 
matrix before the court. This, however, also brings with it the attendant concerns that 
the application of the nullum crimen principle may invariably be compromised. 
One example may be illustrative in this regard. In Furundzija,21 a Trial Chamber of the 
ICTY, having concluded that there existed no definition of “rape” in international law, 
formulated its own definition, after a consideration of various national laws. This was 
necessary because an element of the relevant crime with which the accused was charged 
was the commission of an act of rape (rather than any other form of sexual assault). The 
definition that the Trial Chamber arrived at made reference to body parts and included 
forced oral penetration, which encompassed the acts of the accused, and he was thus 
ultimately found guilty of the crime. In 2001, another ICTY Trial Chamber,22 while 
accepting that the Furundzija definitional elements, if proved, constituted the actus reus 
of rape, proceeded to expand the scope of the crime even further by not limiting it to 
situations of “coercion”, as had been stipulated in Furundzija. Once again, this led to the 
conviction of the accused in that case. 
At the International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda (‘ICTR’), only three months before the 
Furundzija decision, a Trial Chamber, having been required also to define rape (once 
again, it constituted an element of one of the crimes with which the accused was charged), 
came up with a completely different definition, not based on reference to body parts, but 
                                                             
21 Prosecutor v Furundzjia (Judgement) (International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Trial Chamber, 
Case No IT-95-17/1, 10 December 1998) [174–185]. 
22 Prosecutor v Kunarac (Judgement) (International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Trial 
Chamber, Case No IT-96-23-T, 22 February 2001) [453–460]. 

                             JUDICIAL DECISION-MAKING IN THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURTS                 VOL 3(1) 2015 
 
67 
 
rather emphasising ‘physical invasion’.23 This, therefore, covered violent acts perpetrated 
with foreign implements and/or sticks. This was typically a feature of the horrors in 
Rwanda. Once again, the accused was ultimately found guilty of the relevant crime.  
As such, the question arises as to whether, in their judicial decision-making, the judges 
strayed beyond what was legally defensible into a realm of “doing what it takes” to 
convict? This divergence of opinion as to the nature of the act of rape — an essential 
element of a crime that must be proven by the Prosecution beyond a reasonable doubt 
— gives rise to more than concerns about the “fragmentation” of international law. 
These examples leave a distinct impression that definitions were formulated by the 
respective Chambers to fit the circumstances before them in each case. Indeed, and 
bearing in mind the then current state of national law in the relevant regions, there are 
strong arguments to suggest that the accused could not have been in a position to know 
that such acts constituted rape, as opposed to sexual assault.24 
Arguably, the reasoning of these judges was seemingly driven by the intended result 
such that the “ends justified the means” of judicial decision-making. This may be both 
morally acceptable and defensible. Perhaps this even contributes towards the 
attainment of some of the “macro” goals of international criminal justice in 
circumstances including deterrence, closure, reconciliation, and the provision of a voice 
for victims. However, one must always keep in mind that the practical consequence of a 
conviction in an international criminal trial is, at its “micro” level, the deprivation of an 
accused person’s liberty, sometimes for a significant period of time.  
As such, it is an essential element of the trial process that even those accused of 
grave crimes must be accorded their full rights. Indeed, one of the primary 
justifications of the system of internationalised criminal justice is that it ensures a 
fair trial for all accused. The credibility of the process itself should reinforce the 
importance of the decision of the relevant court or tribunal, as well as the historical 
record that arises from the evidence presented. Obviously, these are principles that 
should not be discarded. Prosecutorial burdens of proof and certainty, and legality 
protections for an accused, exist for important reasons. 
                                                             
23 Prosecutor v Akayesu (International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, Trial Chamber, Case No ICTR-96-
40T, 2 September 1998) [598]. 
24 Mia Swart, Judges and Lawmaking at the International Criminal Tribunals for the former Yugoslavia and 
Rwanda (PhD Thesis, University of Leiden, 2006) <https://openaccess.leidenuniv.nl/handle/1887/5434>. 

VOL 3(1) 2015  
         GRIFFITH JOURNAL OF LAW & HUMAN DIGNITY                    
 
68 
 
In this regard, it is perhaps interesting to note that the nullum crimen sine lege principle, 
which was not expressly mentioned in the ICTY or ICTR Statutes, has been specifically 
included in the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court.25 
III “CONSTRUCTIONIST” DECISION-MAKING TO CREATE “NEW” MODES OF CRIMINAL LIABILITY? 
The significance of judge-made law within the modern regime of international criminal 
justice goes further than isolated cases such as those referred to above. Although there 
is no formalised system of precedent throughout the system, it is clear that several of 
the early decisions have since established or confirmed important benchmarks and 
legal tools. Those decisions, delivered in the context of developing the practice of 
international criminal law, have particularly shaped subsequent jurisprudence, even to 
the present time. 
The overall jurisprudential methodology adopted in particular by the ICTY and ICTR has 
undoubtedly broadened the possibilities that senior leaders may be implicated in the 
perpetration of crimes, even where they are located at all relevant times at a 
(geographical) distance from the actual acts committed. This approach, almost by 
definition, brings with it elements of subjectivity and policy as to how far one extends the 
linkages that would result in the individual criminal responsibility of, for example, senior 
military personnel. Recall the words of Judge Harhoff: this is ‘more or less set practice’.26  
These considerations are particularly heightened in the context of an international 
criminal trial, where the complexities associated with the trial of those “most 
responsible” for the commission of international crimes — typically senior military or 
political leaders who themselves are not involved in “pulling the trigger” — have 
widespread implications for the future of judicial decision-making, including at the ICC, 
as well as the aforementioned “macro” goals of international criminal justice. 
A striking example of this, and one that has had profound implications for subsequent 
judicial decision-making in this area, is the 1999 ICTY Appeals Chamber decision in 
                                                             
25 Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, opened for signature 17 July 1998, 2187 UNTS 90, art 
22 (entered into force 1 July 2002) (‘Rome Statute’). 
26 Harhoff, above n 2. 

                             JUDICIAL DECISION-MAKING IN THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURTS                 VOL 3(1) 2015 
 
69 
 
Tadić.27 One of the members of this bench was the first President of the ICTY, the highly 
esteemed legal jurist-cum-international criminal judge, Antonio Cassese, who is 
remembered by many ‘for having taken international criminal law out of the classroom 
and into the courtroom’.28 In its decision, the Chamber, in what was in certain respects a 
judge-made construct, concluded that, in its opinion, there existed under customary 
international law a mode of liability stemming from the notion of ‘common criminal 
purpose’, comprising three categories of cases giving rise to collective criminality.29 
Ultimately, this construct came to be formally referred to as a Joint Criminal Enterprise 
(‘JCE’), the effect of which is to connect those in some way involved in the commission of 
an international crime through a common plan or design. This is despite the fact that 
they may not have been active in all aspects, or even necessarily aware, of the 
commission of the crime to every degree.  
Many subsequent decisions, particularly at the ICTY, have centred on the application of 
this legal tool of accountability, although it has also given rise to considerable confusion 
and controversy.30 Indeed, the interpretation of dicta of the Tadić Appeals Chamber, 
particularly where it compared the elements of the common criminal purpose with the 
actus reus of aiding and abetting liability, lie at the heart of the legal controversies that 
surround the Perišić decision referred to earlier.31 
Equally striking, in Stakić, a decision rendered some several years after the concept had 
first been introduced into the jurisprudence of the ICTY, a Trial Chamber rejected the 
application of the JCE as a mode of liability, even though it had been specifically pleaded 
by the Prosecution in that case, on the grounds that its application could ‘constitute a 
new crime not foreseen under the [ICTY] Statute and therefore amount to a flagrant 
infringement of the principle nullum crimen sine lege.’32 Instead, the Trial Chamber itself 
                                                             
27 Prosecutor v Tadić (Judgement) (International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Appeals 
Chamber, Cases No IT-94-1, 15 July 1999) (‘Tadić’). 
28 Antonio Cassese (28 October 2014) Antonio Cassese Initiative for Justice, Peace and Humanity 
<http://www.cassese-initiative.org/antonio-cassese.html>. 
29 Tadić (ICTY, Appeals Chamber, Case No IT-94-1, 15 July 1999) [195]. 
30 Some sceptics have rather cynically suggested that the JCE acronym in reality stands for “Just Convict 
Everyone”. 
31 See Tadić (ICTY, Appeals Chamber, Case No IT-94-1, 15 July 1999) [229]. 
32 Prosecutor v Stakić (Judgement) (International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Trial 
Chamber, Case No IT-97-24-T, 31 July 2003) [433] (‘Stakić’) (emphasis added). 

VOL 3(1) 2015  
         GRIFFITH JOURNAL OF LAW & HUMAN DIGNITY                    
 
70 
 
applied a new mode of liability, which it labelled as ‘co-perpetration’,33 or as the Appeals 
Chamber referred to it, ‘co-perpetratorship’.34 
The case went to appeal and, in its judgement, the Appeals Chamber considered this 
question proprio motu (“on its own impulse”) given its general importance. In the end, 
the Appeals Chamber rejected the new mode of liability suggested by the Trial Chamber, 
stating pointedly that it ‘does not have support in customary international law or in the 
settled jurisprudence of this Tribunal, which is binding on the Trial Chambers’.35 The 
Appeals Chamber concluded that, in fact, the Trial Chamber’s findings did support the 
conclusion that the accused in that case had participated in a JCE. 
Even today, the JCE construct, although now undoubtedly regarded by the ICTY as a 
form of commission under customary international law, still gives rise to confusion and 
unnecessary judicial complexity. This was evident in the January 2014 Appeals Chamber 
decision in Dordević, where the Chamber, having found that the Trial Chamber had 
convicted the accused on the basis of two modes of liability — JCE and aiding and 
abetting — found that this represented an error of law, as the Trial Chamber had failed 
to articulate why both modes were necessary to reflect the ‘totality of Mr Dordević’s 
criminal conduct’.36 The Appeals Chamber then, without any detailed explanation, stated 
that such conduct was ‘fully reflected in a conviction based solely on his participation in 
the JCE’.37 The Chamber, by so holding, was able to avoid further discussion of the 
elements of aiding and abetting, which also lies at the core of the Perišić controversy. 
As such, the extent to which confusion, not to mention lack of consistency and certainty 
in relation to the JCE concept, continues within the ICTY, serves to indicate that judicial 
creativity may not necessarily be appropriate in all circumstances. This is particularly 
given the importance attached to the use of “collective” modes of liability in the overall 
judicial decision-making of the ICTY and ICTR. It is perhaps not surprising that the 
                                                             
33 Ibid [440–41]. 
34 Both terms were referred to by the Appeals Chamber in Tadić (ICTY, Appeals Chamber, Case No IT-94-1, 
15 July 1999) [198], [201], [220]. 
35 Prosecutor v Milomir (Judgement) (International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Appeals Chamber, 
Case No IT-97-24-A, 22 March 2006) [62]. 
36 Prosecutor v Dordević (Judgement) (International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Appeals 
Chamber, Case No IT-05-87/1-A, 27 January 2014) [832]. 
37 Ibid [833]. 

                             JUDICIAL DECISION-MAKING IN THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURTS                 VOL 3(1) 2015 
 
71 
 
drafters of the Rome Statute chose not to incorporate all aspects of the JCE into the ICC’s 
judicial framework.38 
IV JUDICIAL INDEPENDENCE AND IMPARTIALITY 
Another relevant consideration in relation to judicial decision-making within the context 
of international criminal justice relates to the general requirement that a judge act with 
unfettered independence and complete impartiality. It is a fundamental precept of 
international human rights law that an accused person is entitled to a hearing before an 
independent and impartial court.39 Independence and impartiality are two different 
concepts but are linked — it would be difficult, for example, to envisage a situation 
where a judge is not free from political or other interference but at the same time would 
still be able to operate completely impartially. Whilst these are fundamental 
requirements for any judge, either in a national or international legal regime, there are 
some factors inherent in the operation of the mechanisms of international criminal 
justice that add to their complexity. 
Dealing first with the issue of independence, it is generally considered that 
independent judges are more likely to act in accordance with existing law and thus 
deliver decisions that ‘have a certain predictability’, which itself contributes to ‘the 
political stability and economic prosperity of a society’.40 The scholarship tends to 
differentiate between two forms of judicial independence: i) internal independence, 
which relates to a judge’s activities within the Court environment vis-à-vis actors 
present in that same system such as other judges, the Registrar, Prosecutor, or 
Defence; and ii) external independence, which reflects the degree to which a judge is 
independent of and free from any political interference by any government, 
intergovernmental organisation, or other external stakeholder.  
Whilst there is an implicit assumption that the “professional” judges hearing 
international criminal cases will automatically display the appropriate level of 
independence, the issue is never quite so straightforward. Given that international 
                                                             
38 See Kai Ambos, ‘Joint Criminal Enterprise and Command Responsibility’ [2007] Journal of International 
Criminal Justice 159, 172–4. 
39 See Universal Declaration of Human Rights, GA Res 217A (III), UN GAOR, 3rd sess, 183rd plen mtg, UN Doc 
A/810, art 10 (10 December 1948). 
40 Theodor Meron, ‘Judicial Independence and Impartiality in International Criminal Tribunals’ (2005) 
99(2) The American Journal of International Law 359, 359. 

VOL 3(1) 2015  
         GRIFFITH JOURNAL OF LAW & HUMAN DIGNITY                    
 
72 
 
criminal justice has become a significant growth industry over the past two decades, 
more and more judges have been engaged to deal with the increasing workload 
generated by the proliferation of courts and tribunals. Some of these judges, even today, 
are relatively inexperienced and not necessarily adequately equipped to deal with the 
myriad of issues involved. A number of those thrust into this role will never even have 
acted as judges previously — diplomats, academics, legal advisers yes, but not judges. 
This continues to be the case.41 As Judge Meron has himself noted: 
... for an international judge to conduct himself in an impartial and 
independent way may require adaptation and discipline. The synergy 
between the personal perception and the court’s culture of judicial 
independence is critical in helping the newcomer adapt to a whole new 
universe of judicial thinking and action.42 
Moreover, it has been generally observed that the process of nominating and appointing 
judges to these international criminal tribunals is very much a politicised process, 
raising suggestions of “horse trading” among States eligible to vote in these elections. 
One study of the nomination and election of judges to the ICC and International Court of 
Justice (ICJ), has concluded that: 
[E]vidence of politicisation is apparent at both the nomination and 
election stages. For both courts, nomination practices are fragmented, 
lacking in transparency, and highly varied. At one end of the spectrum, a 
few candidates emerge following a transparent and formal consultative 
process that focuses on merit; at the other end, it is not unusual for 
individuals to be selected as a result of overtly political considerations 
or even nepotism. Whatever form of nomination process is adopted, all 
nominated candidates must work their way through a highly politicised 
election process.43 
Whilst it is impossible to be too specific on this point, what becomes apparent is that it is 
certainly not the case that the best candidate is always nominated by their government, 
                                                             
41 Note, for example, the different types of competencies specified for judges of the ICC in the Rome 
Statute, art 36(3)(b). 
42 Meron, above n 40, 360. 
43 Ruth Mackenzie et al, Selecting International Judges: Principle, Process, and Politics (Oxford University 
Press, 2010) 173. 

                             JUDICIAL DECISION-MAKING IN THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURTS                 VOL 3(1) 2015 
 
73 
 
or indeed is elected to take up an appointment at the relevant court. Of course, it is a 
truism that ‘[c]ourts are only as good as the people sitting on the bench’.44 The 
incorporation of extraneous factors into the nomination or election process 
compromises the scope for true judicial independence, as well as the legitimacy and 
effectiveness of these mechanisms.45 
As to internal independence, this may in fact represent an unattainable “holy grail”, at 
least for many of the less experienced judges. The possibility that they might be in a 
position to actively influence a decision, and the application of the relevant legal 
principles, is at times limited, particularly given that many judgments are drafted by in-
house legal officers, who may take instructions from the registry of a particular court, or 
be overseen only by a small number of senior judges. This threat to judicial 
independence is quite insidious and hidden, perhaps only rising to the surface on those 
rare occasions when a “whistle-blower” judge decides to make such allegations public. 
Naturally, it is always open to a judge to register a dissenting or separate opinion on a 
particular issue and, as noted above, this is sometimes the case. However, to do so is not 
necessarily an easy undertaking for a new judge, particularly when finding his or her 
way in the particular Court. It may also be made even more difficult where there is some 
implicit or express pressure being brought to bear for unanimity by the other members 
of the relevant chamber. 
With respect to external independence, the subject matter of, and overall political 
environment within which international mechanisms of criminal justice operate, give 
rise to added pressure, even perhaps greater than other international judicial bodies. 
International criminal judges, whilst exercising a judicial function, deal with issues that 
are highly sensitive from a social, political, and historical perspective.46 
                                                             
44 Kai Ambos, Book Review of Ruth Mackenzie et al, Selecting International Judges: Principle, Process, and 
Politics (2012) 23 Criminal Law Forum 223, 223. 
45 Ibid 228. 
46 Consider, for example, that international criminal proceedings are often held within the context of an 
ongoing conflict situation (ICC — Democratic Republic of the Congo, Central African Republic), or with the 
active “encouragement” of the United Nations Security Council (ICC — Sudan, Libya), or coincidentally 
with peace negotiations (ICC — Uganda) or attempts at reconciliation (ICTR), or may involve former or 
incumbent Heads of State (ICC — Bashir, SCSL — Taylor, ICTY — Milosevic), or deal with issues that are of 
extreme sensitivity to the then current Government (Extraordinary Chambers in the Courts of Cambodia 
(‘ECCC’) — prosecution of former Khmer Rouge officials). 

VOL 3(1) 2015  
         GRIFFITH JOURNAL OF LAW & HUMAN DIGNITY                    
 
74 
 
In such circumstances, one would imagine there to be an extraordinarily high degree of 
public scrutiny of the relevant judges. It would also be naïve to consider that these 
issues are not within the consciousness of the judges themselves, or even that there have 
been no external attempts made (whether or not successful) to influence the judicial 
decision-making process in some way. The risks are magnified when members of the 
judiciary in a mechanism of international criminal justice are also nationals of the 
country within which the alleged crimes were perpetrated — “local” judges (for 
example, ECCC).  
There have, for example, been public statements by the Governments of Rwanda and 
Cambodia directly critical of various aspects of the proceedings at the ICTR and ECCC 
respectively. Extremely serious allegations have been made as to the integrity and 
independence of some judges and judicial officials at those institutions. The SCSL, the 
first international(ised) criminal tribunal to be financed entirely from voluntary 
contributions by states, operates under a Management Committee comprised of 
representatives of donor states, which is responsible for the payment of the judges’ 
salaries. One accused, Sam Hinga Norman, unsuccessfully challenged the independence 
of the judges trying his case for this very reason.47 
The ICC faces a seemingly endless barrage of criticism from, for example, the African 
Union, governments, and commentators, for being too slow, too costly, too selective, too 
politicised, too removed from the actual victims of atrocities, and even racist.48 In 2009, 
the Assembly of the African Union decided that AU member states should not cooperate 
with respect to certain aspects of ‘the arrest and prosecution of President Omar El 
Bashir of The Sudan’, as the UN Security Council had failed to act upon previous 
                                                             
47 See Prosecutor v Norman (Decision on Preliminary Motion based on Lack of Jurisdiction (Judicial 
Independence)) (Special Court for Sierra Leone, Appeals Chamber, Case No SCSL-2004-13-AR72(E), 13 
March 2004). 
48 See, eg, Mark Kersten, ‘Is the ICC Racist?’, Justice in Conflict (22 February 2012) 
<http://justiceinconflict.org/2012/02/22/is-the-icc-racist/>. 

                             JUDICIAL DECISION-MAKING IN THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURTS                 VOL 3(1) 2015 
 
75 
 
requests.49 Furthermore, ample legal scholarship raises criticisms towards the ICC from 
multiple perspectives,50 and in the public media domain.51 
In such circumstances, the question arises as to whether international criminal judges 
should be held to the same standard of external independence as national judges or, 
instead, the unique factors encompassed by an international criminal trial necessitate 
that a ‘different (lesser) standard’ should be applicable.52 
Turning now to the question of impartiality, it is of course vital that a judge exercise his 
or her judicial decision-making duties without bias or the appearance of bias. The 
overarching principle that ‘[j]ustice must not only be done, but should manifestly and 
undoubtedly be seen to be done’ should also be rigorously applied at the international 
level.53 This is perhaps even more necessary in (international) criminal proceedings, 
where the liberty of the accused is at stake. The situation is, however, complicated in the 
international field by the ‘relatively small world of international law’,54 and the even 
smaller subset of international criminal law. There is simply not the luxury of an 
overwhelming number of potential international criminal law judges available (although 
this is changing); thus the possibility of disqualification should be managed sensibly. 
Indeed, there is a strong presumption of impartiality that attaches to a judge at the 
international criminal courts, and this has long been borne out in the jurisprudence.55 
                                                             
49 Decision of the Assembly of the African Union (AU Assembly), ‘Decision on the Meeting of African States 
Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC)’, Assembly/AU/Dec.245(XIII) Rev.1, 3 
July 2009 [10]. 
50 See Sarah M H Nouwen and Wouter G Werner, ‘Doing Justice to the Political: The International Criminal 
Court in Uganda and Sudan’ (2010) 21(4) European Journal of International Law 941; Mirjan R Damaska, 
‘What is the Point of International Criminal Justice’ (2008) 83 Chicago-Kent Law Review 329; James 
Meernik, ‘Victor’s Justice or the Law? Judging and Punishing at the International Criminal Tribunal for the 
Former Yugoslavia’ (2003) 47(2) Journal of Conflict Resolution 140. 
51 See Tony Cadman, ‘The International Criminal Court’s many flaws can’t simply be glossed over’, The 
Guardian (online), 28 June 2012 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/jun/28/international-criminal-courts-flaws-
overlooked>; Ian Paisley, ‘Peace Must Not be the Victim of International Justice’, The International Herald 
Tribune (online), 16 March 2012 <http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/17/opinion/peace-must-not-be-
the-victim-of-international-justice.html?_r=1>. 
52 Ruth Mackenzie and Philippe Sands, ‘International Courts and Tribunals and the Independence of the 
International Judge’ (2003) 44(1) Harvard International Law Journal 271, 275–6. The authors were 
referring to international judges in general, but it is submitted that this question is particularly pertinent 
with respect to the international criminal law judge.  
53 R v Sussex Justices, ex parte McCarthy [1923] 1 KB 256, 259 (Lord Hewart CJ). 
54 Ibid 280. 
55 See the footnoted references in Prosecutor v Karadžić (Decision on Motion to Disqualify Judge Picard and 
Report to the Vice-President Pursuant to Rule 15(B)(ii)) (International Criminal Tribunal for the Former 

VOL 3(1) 2015  
         GRIFFITH JOURNAL OF LAW & HUMAN DIGNITY                    
 
76 
 
However, given the diverse background of the international criminal law judge, it is quite 
possible that, prior to having been appointed to the relevant court or tribunal, they will 
have had (as counsel, advisor, or diplomat) some connection with, or (as an academic) 
made comments relating to, a party to proceedings over which they are now required to 
adjudicate. Difficult issues arise as to whether, and in what circumstances, judges should 
recuse themselves from such proceedings. In the international criminal law arena, there 
have been a number of challenges to the impartiality of a judge, and anecdotal evidence 
suggests a general reluctance of judges to voluntarily recuse themselves, thus requiring a 
judicial hearing by that judge’s peers to determine the issue.  
The ICTY Appeals Chamber has set out general principles that assist in determining the 
impartiality requirement at that tribunal. They establish a framework within which a 
judge should be able to decide whether to recuse him/herself from specific proceedings; 
although in practice, it has typically been left to that judge’s colleagues to make that 
determination. In Furundžija, the Appeals Chamber rejected the accused’s allegation of 
bias on the part of Judge Mumba based on her previous involvement with the United 
Nations Commission on the Status of Women, which had dealt with issues of mass and 
systematic rape in the former Yugoslavia. The principles enunciated in that decision 
were as follows: 
A. A judge is not impartial if it is shown that actual bias exists. 
B. There is an unacceptable appearance of bias if: 
i) a judge is a party to the case, or has a financial or proprietary interest in the 
outcome of a case, or if the judge’s decision will lead to the promotion of a cause 
in which he or she is involved, together with one of the parties. Under these 
circumstances, a judge’s disqualification from the case is automatic; or 
ii) the circumstances would lead a reasonable observer, properly informed, to 
reasonably apprehend bias.56 
One well-known instance of disqualification occurred at the SCSL. Prior to having been 
appointed to the Court (where he acted as its President at the time of the decision) the 
highly regarded scholar and legal counsel, Geoffrey Robertson QC, had discussed the 
                                                                                                                                                                                              
Yugoslavia, Chamber Convened by Order of the Vice-President, Case No IT-95-05/18-PT, 22 July 2009) 
[17]. 
56 Prosecutor v Furundzjia (Judgement) (International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, 
Appeals Chamber, Case No IT-95-17/1-A, 21 July 2000) [189]. 

                             JUDICIAL DECISION-MAKING IN THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURTS                 VOL 3(1) 2015 
 
77 
 
events in Sierra Leone, and come to various conclusions about the warring groups and 
some of the defendants. In his book Crimes Against Humanity: the Struggle for Global 
Justice published in 2002,57 he characterised the acts of several of the accused as 
international crimes, and labelled one particular accused, Foday Sankoh, as the ‘nation’s 
butcher’.58 The defence, supported on this issue by the prosecution, sought the judge’s 
immediate withdrawal from the case on the grounds of bias.  
Judge Robertson declined to voluntarily withdraw, arguing that: 
… [t]o permit such a challenge would be contrary to the principle of 
judicial independence, under which a judge must be secure in the office 
itself, notwithstanding the right of parties to seek his removal from the 
bench in a particular case, a judge would most sensibly resign his office, 
but that decision must, if judicial independence is to be maintained, be 
his decision alone.59 
Ultimately, applying the Furundžija test, the SCSL Appeals Chamber concluded that 
Judge Robertson should be disqualified from any case relating to the Revolutionary 
United Front (‘RUF’), of which the particular accused had been members.60 The 
decision of the Appeals Chamber was important in terms of maintaining the integrity 
of the SCSL and its activities; the decision by Judge Robertson not to voluntarily 
withdraw from the case was perhaps regrettable.  
More recently, as noted above, Judge Harhoff was disqualified from the Šešelj case, a 
decision that he himself did not agree with. The majority of a special Chamber 
established to consider this issue (and the motion of an accused) concluded that: 
… in the Letter Judge Harhoff has demonstrated a bias in favour of 
conviction such that a reasonable observer properly informed would 
reasonably apprehend bias. As such an unacceptable appearance of bias 
exists. Therefore, the Majority … finds that the presumption of 
                                                             
57 Geoffrey Robertson, Crimes against Humanity: the Struggle for Global Justice (New Press, Rev ed, 2002). 
58 Prosecutor v Sesay (Decision on Defence Motion Seeking the Disqualification of Justice Robertson from the 
Appeals Chamber) (Special Court for Sierra Leone, Appeals Chamber, Case No SCSL-2004-15-AR15, 13 
March 2004) [2] (‘Robertson Disqualification Decision’). 
59 Robertson Disqualification Decision (SCSL, Appeals Chamber, Case No SCSL-2004-15-AR15, 13 March 
2004) [11]. 
60 Ibid. 

VOL 3(1) 2015  
         GRIFFITH JOURNAL OF LAW & HUMAN DIGNITY                    
 
78 
 
impartiality has been rebutted. Accordingly, the Majority finds that the 
allegation of bias against Judge Harhoff is founded.61 
The majority conclusion in the Harhoff Disqualification Decision seemingly ignored the 
views of Judge Antonetti, the presiding judge in the Šešelj case who, after having noted 
that Judge Harhoff had sworn an oath and should be ‘presumed unbiased’, argued that 
the claim against the judge should be rejected, adding that: 
… without violating the secrecy of deliberations … Judge Harhoff has 
always demonstrated the utmost professionalism and I never 
observed in him any bias for or against the accused since the 
proceedings commenced.62 
The Harhoff Disqualification Decision was marked by a dissent from Judge Liu — who 
had also dissented in Perišić and subsequently presided in the Šainović decision that so 
unequivocally rejected the Perišić interpretation of the applicable law. Judge Liu was not 
persuaded that the June 2013 letter ‘would lead a reasonable observer, properly 
informed, to reasonably apprehend bias’ on the part of Judge Harhoff.63 Yet, even so, 
Judge Liu was highly critical of Harhoff’s actions in writing the letter, stating that: 
… I consider a letter of this kind to be undoubtedly improper in various 
respects for a judge in his position. In the letter, Judge Harhoff sets forth 
an inarticulate critique of the recent jurisprudence of the tribunal based 
on unsubstantiated speculations and insinuations of improper conduct by 
other colleagues in a fashion that is unbefitting of a judge. I believe that 
Judge Harhoff should have used the proper channels available to him and 
present any criticism of the recent jurisprudence in this manner.64 
 
                                                             
61 Harhoff Disqualification Decision, (ICTY, Chamber Convened by Order of the Vice-President, Case No IT-
03-67-T, 28 August 2013) [14]. 
62 Prosecutor v Šešelj (Decision to Unseal the Report of the Presiding Judge to the President of the Tribunal or 
Alternatively the Judge Designated by Him Regarding the Motion for Disqualification of Judge Harhoff) 
(International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Chamber of the President, Case No IT-03-67-
T, 4 September 2013) annex 7.  
63 Harhoff Disqualification Decision (ICTY, Chamber Convened by Order of the Vice-President, Case No IT-
03-67-T, 28 August 2013) [5]. 
64 Ibid [2]. 

                             JUDICIAL DECISION-MAKING IN THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURTS                 VOL 3(1) 2015 
 
79 
 
Significantly, Judge Liu did not believe that what he regarded as Judge Harhoff’s ‘improper’ 
actions, ‘unsubstantiated speculations and insinuations’, and conduct ‘unbefitting of a 
judge’ were determinative in relation to the question of his impartiality.65 Clearly, and 
despite the relatively straightforward and often-quoted test set out in Furundžija, the 
assessment in practice of a judge’s impartiality in specific circumstances may give rise to 
substantial disagreement. It is therefore of crucial importance that the judges themselves 
are sensitive to public perception about the possibility of bias, although it appears that, in 
practice, this is perhaps not always the case. 
V CONCLUDING REMARKS: “EFFECTIVE” JUSTICE? 
The aim of this article is to raise a number of issues that highlight the complex matrix of 
factors that may be relevant in assessing the objectivity of the judicial decision-making 
process within the system of international criminal justice. The cases and situations 
referred to demonstrate that basic requirements for proper judicial functioning may 
potentially become “clouded” by various non-legal issues. Judges are required to 
administer justice in accordance with the prevailing law properly applied to the facts as 
proven. This may be easier said than done. 
The controversies and uncertainties explored in this article demonstrate the 
difficulties in the process of adjudicating international criminal cases. These 
international trials are very complex, very difficult, unique (in the sense that each 
one will be different), and very costly. Despite the fact that a considerable degree of 
jurisprudence has developed, coupled with the now one-generation of expertise in 
the area of international criminal law, everyone concerned is still learning as they go. 
The vast majority of current judges acting within the arena of international criminal 
law possess, of course, great expertise and extensive qualifications. However, there 
may (rightly or wrongly) be changes in legal direction along the way. 
 
Although international criminal law decisions and judgments will continue to be 
expressed in the language of legal deductive reasoning based on the interpretation of 
the relevant rules, there remains the underlying risk that these non-legal factors also 
play an increasingly significant role in the fashioning of international criminal legal 
                                                             
65 Ibid. 

VOL 3(1) 2015  
         GRIFFITH JOURNAL OF LAW & HUMAN DIGNITY                    
 
80 
 
decision-making by judges. As such, it is contended that we are just at the “end of the 
beginning” along the path in trying to work out precisely (if we ever will be able to) 
how best to progress towards more effective international criminal justice by way of 
process and law. 
 

                             JUDICIAL DECISION-MAKING IN THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURTS                 VOL 3(1) 2015 
 
81 
 
REFERENCE LIST 
A Articles/Books/Reports 
Ambos, Kai, Book Review of Ruth Mackenzie et al, Selecting International Judges: 
Principle, Process, and Politics, (2012) 23 Criminal Law Forum 223 
Ambos, Kai, ‘Joint Criminal Enterprise and Command Responsibility’ (2007) 5(1) Journal 
of International Criminal Justice 159 
Ambos, Kai, Treatise on International Criminal Law: Volume 1 (Oxford University Press, 
2013) 
Bassiouni, M Cherif, ‘Introduction to the Symposium: The Normative Framework of 
International Humanitarian Law: Overlaps, Gaps and Ambiguities’ (1998) 8(1) 
Transnational Law and Contemporary Problems 199 
Bassiouni, M Cherif and Peter Manikas, The Law of the International Criminal Tribunal 
for the Former Yugoslavia (Transnational Publishers, 1996) 
Cassese, Antonio, International Criminal Law (Oxford University Press, 3rd ed, 2003) 
Damaska, Mirjan R, ‘What is the Point of International Criminal Justice’ (2008) 83(1) 
Chicago-Kent Law Review 329 
Mackenzie, Ruth, and Philippe Sands, ‘International Courts and Tribunals and the 
Independence of the International Judge’ (2003) 44(1) Harvard International Law 
Journal 271 
Mackenzie, Ruth, et al, Selecting International Judges: Principle, Process, and Politics 
(Oxford University Press, 2010) 
Meernik, James, ‘Victor’s Justice or the Law? Judging and Punishing at the International 
Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia’ (2003) 47(2) Journal of Conflict Resolution 
140 
Meron, Theodor, ‘Judicial Independence and Impartiality in International Criminal 
Tribunals’ (2005) 99(2) The American Journal of International Law 359 

VOL 3(1) 2015  
         GRIFFITH JOURNAL OF LAW & HUMAN DIGNITY                    
 
82 
 
Nouwen, Sarah M H, and Wouter G Werner, ‘Doing Justice to the Political: The 
International Criminal Court in Uganda and Sudan’ (2010) 21(4) European Journal of 
International Law 941 
Robertson, Geoffrey, Crimes against Humanity: the Struggle for Global Justice (New Press, 
Rev ed, 2002) 
Schabas, William, ‘Commentary on Judgement, Prosecutor v Furundžija’, in André Klip 
and Göran Sluiter (eds), Annotated Leading Cases of International Criminal Tribunals 
Volume III: The International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia 1997–1999 
(Intersentia, 2001) 753 
B Cases 
Prosecutor v Gotovina and Markač (Judgement) (International Criminal Tribunal for the 
Former Yugoslavia, Appeals Chamber, Case No IT-06-90-A, 16 November 2012) 
Prosecutor v Furundzjia (Judgement) (International Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, 
Trial Chamber, Case No IT-95-17/1, 10 December 1998) 
Prosecutor v Furundzjia (Judgement) (International Criminal Tribunal for the Former 
Yugoslavia, Appeals Chamber, Case No IT-95-17/1-A, 21 July 2000) 
Prosecutor v Taylor (Judgement) (Special Court for Sierra Leone, Appeals Chamber, Case 
No SCSL-03-01-A, 26 September 2013) 
Prosecutor v Tadić (Judgement) (International Criminal Tribunal for the Former 
Yugoslavia, Appeals Chamber, Case No IT-94-1, 15 July 1999) 
Prosecutor v Sesay (Decision on Defence Motion Seeking the Disqualification of Justice 
Robertson from the Appeals Chamber) (Special Court for Sierra Leone, Appeals Chamber, 
Case No SCSL-2004-15-AR15, 13 March 2004) 
See Prosecutor v Akayesu (Judgment) (International Criminal Tribunal for Rwanda, Trial 
Chamber, Case No ICTR-96-4-T, 2 September 1998)  
Prosecutor v Karadžić (Decision on Motion to Disqualify Judge Picard and Report to the 
Vice-President Pursuant to Rule 15(B)(ii)) (International Criminal Tribunal for the 

                             JUDICIAL DECISION-MAKING IN THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURTS                 VOL 3(1) 2015 
 
83 
 
Former Yugoslavia, Chamber Convened by Order of the Vice-President, Case No IT-95-
05/18-PT, 22 July 2009) 
Prosecutor v Kunarac (Judgement) (International Criminal Tribunal for the Former 
Yugoslavia, Trial Chamber, Case No IT-96-23-T, 22 February 2001) 
Prosecutor v Stakic (Judgement) (International Criminal Tribunal for the Former 
Yugoslavia, Trial Chamber, Case No IT-97-24-T, 31 July 2003)  
Prosecutor v Milomir (Judgement) (International Criminal Tribunal for the Former 
Yugoslavia, Appeals Chamber, Case No IT-97-24-A, 22 March 2006)  
Prosecutor v Perišić (Judgement) (International Criminal Tribunal for the Former 
Yugoslavia, Appeals Chamber, Case No IT-04-81-A, 28 February 2013) 
Prosecutor v Šainović (Judgement) (International Criminal Tribunal for the Former 
Yugoslavia, Appeals Chamber, Case No IT-05-87-A, 23 January 2014)  
Prosecutor v Norman (Decision on Preliminary Motion based on Lack of Jurisdiction 
(Judicial Independence) (Special Court for Sierra Leone, Appeals Chamber, Case No SCSL-
2004-13-AR72(E), 13 March 2004) 
Prosecutor v Perišić (Decision on Motion for Reconsideration) (International Criminal 
Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia, Appeals Chamber, Case No IT-04-81-A, 20 March 
2014)  
Prosecutor v Dordević (Judgement) (International Criminal Tribunal for the Former 
Yugoslavia, Appeals Chamber, Case No IT-05-87/1-A, 27 January 2014) 
Prosecutor v Šešelj (Decision on Defence Motion for Disqualification of Judge Frederik 
Harhoff and Report to the Vice-President) (International Criminal Tribunal for the 
Former Yugoslavia, Chamber Convened by Order of the Vice-President, Case No IT-03-
67-T, 28 August 2013) 
Prosecutor v Šešelj (Decision to Unseal the Report of the Presiding Judge to the President of 
the Tribunal or Alternatively the Judge Designated by Him Regarding the Motion for 
Disqualification of Judge Harhoff) (International Criminal Tribunal for the Former 
Yugoslavia, Chamber of the President, Case NoIT-03-67-T, 4 September 2013) 

VOL 3(1) 2015  
         GRIFFITH JOURNAL OF LAW & HUMAN DIGNITY                    
 
84 
 
R v Sussex Justices, ex parte McCarthy [1923] 1 KB 256 
C Treaties 
Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court, opened for signature 17 July 1998, 
2187 UNTS 90 (entered into force 1 July 2002) 
D United Nations Documents 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights, United Nations General Assembly Resolution 
217A (III), UN Doc A/810 (10 December 1948) 
Report of the Secretary-General Pursuant to Paragraph 2 of Security Council Resolution 
808, SC Res UN Doc S/25704 (3 May 1993) 
E International Criminal Tribunals and Courts 
Report of the Advisory Committee on Nominations of Judges on the work of its third 
meeting, DocNoICC-ASP/13/22 (29 September 2014) 
Decision of the Assembly of the African Union (AU Assembly), ‘Decision on the Meeting 
of African States Parties to the Rome Statute of the International Criminal Court (ICC)’, 
Assembly/AU/Dec.245(XIII) Rev.1, 3 July 2009 
F Other 
Cadman, Tony, ‘The International Criminal Court’s many flaws can’t simply be glossed 
over’, The Guardian (online), 28 June 2012 
<http://www.guardian.co.uk/commentisfree/2012/jun/28 /international-criminal-
courts-flaws-overlooked> 
Cassese, Antonio, ‘Initiative for Justice, Peace and Humanity’ <http://www.cassese-
initiative.org/antonio-cassese.html> 
De Launey, Guy, ‘Momcilo Perisic Hague acquittal leaves little sense of justice’, BBC News 
(online), 28 February 2013 <http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-21621695> 

                             JUDICIAL DECISION-MAKING IN THE INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL COURTS                 VOL 3(1) 2015 
 
85 
 
Email from Judge Frederik Harhoff to 56 Contacts, 6 June 2013, 
<http://www.bt.dk/sites/default/files-dk/node-files/511/6/6511917-letter-
english.pdf> 
Hirondelle News Agency, ‘SCSL/Taylor’s defence wants to call dissenting Judge to the 
stand’, Hirondelle News Agency (online), 22 August 2012 
<http://www.hirondellenews.com/other-courts/325-scsl/33630-082212-scsltaylors-
defence-wants-to-call-dissenting-judge-to-the-stand> 
Jalloh, Charles, ‘The Verdict in the Charles Taylor Case and the Alternate Judge’s 
“Dissenting Opinion”’ on Blog of the European Journal of International Law (11 May 
2012) <http://www.ejiltalk.org/the-verdict-in-the-charles-taylor-case-and-the-
alternate-judges-dissenting-opinion/> 
Kersten, Mark, ‘Is the ICC Racist?’, Justice in Conflict <http://justiceinconflict. 
org/2012/02/22/is-the-icc-racist/> 
Musoni, Edwin, ‘Rwanda wants ICTR Judge Meron to Resign’, The New Times (online), 19 
June 2013 <http://allafrica.com/stories/201306200232.html> 
Paisley, Ian, ‘Peace Must Not be the Victim of International Justice’, The International 
Herald Tribune (online), 16 March 2012 
<.http://www.nytimes.com/2012/03/17/opinion/peace-must-not-be-the-victim-of-
international-justice.html?_r=1> 
Swart, Mia, Judges and Lawmaking at the International Criminal Tribunals for the former 
Yugoslavia and Rwanda, PhD Thesis, University of Leiden, 13 December 2006 
<https://openaccess.leidenuniv.nl/handle/1887/5434>