158 
 
GIFTED EDUCATION IN VARIOUS COUNTRIES OF EUROPE 
Eva Reid – Heiner Boettger 
 
DOI: 10.18355/PG.2015.4.2.158-171 
 
Abstract 
Nowadays, gifted education varies considerably from country to country. 
On one hand, there are countries with elaborated special gifted 
programmes, and on the other hand there are countries, which are not even 
recognising terms such as giftedness and gifted children. Most countries 
provide support of the gifted children with the help of various 
organizations. Apart of the system of schooling of the gifted, also 
organizations supporting the gifted children are mapped. Very often there is 
a view, even among educationalists, that gifted education is elitist and that 
gifted children would do just fine without any intervention. These are 
myths which when believed can inhibit the opportunity to maximise the 
potential of gifted children. Gifted children require special attention, 
otherwise their talents can be lost without noticing. This article is a part of 
greater holistic research on gifted education and it particularly discusses 
different ways the gifted children are educated in several countries in 
Europe. 
 
Key words 
gifted education, gifted education in Europe, talented, gifted 
 
1. Introduction 
An overview of various school systems, definitions, supporting 
organizations of gifted education in ten European countries is described in 
this article. Information on gifted education in some countries is quite 
elaborate and supported with research findings. Specifically, gifted 
education in the United Kingdom, Austria, Germany, Switzerland, Spain, 
Denmark, Finland, Czech Republic, Hungary and Slovakia is mapped. 
Information on gifted education is not always accessible about all the 
analyzed countries, neither relevant research published in the English 
language.  
 
2. United Kingdom 
History of education of the gifted in the United Kingdom dates back to 
1944, when a new School Act provided possibilities for talented children to 
study at newly created Grammar Schools. These were later viewed as elitist 
and local authorities were encouraged to close them down and replace them 
by Comprehensive schools, which were to provide equal opportunities for 
everybody. However, some Grammar Schools survived alongside a 
significant number of private fee paying schools (Casey, Koshy, 2012). 
UK’s education system today aims to provide appropriate education to all 
the children, consequently the education of the gifted should be a part of a 

 
 
Slavonic Pedagogical Studies Journal Vol. 4 Issue 2, September 2015 
159 
larger whole. The approach to gifted education in the whole of the UK is 
inclusive and holistic. There are differences within the UK though, for 
example, in England the terms “gifted” and “talented” are used and 5 to 
10% of pupils in every school in England are considered to be gifted or 
talented. In Wales the terms “more able” and “talented” are used and up to 
20% of pupils are considered to be more abled and talented. Scotland uses 
the term “able” and also covers the inclusive approach (Monks, Pfluger, 
2005). The “English model” prefers the integrated approach to gifted 
education. Gifted children should spend most of their time with the regular 
school group (especially in the age 5-11) with a small amount of cross 
school and out of school opportunities.  
Each school should recognize individual differences and should plan 
curriculum meeting the needs of individuals. This means that schools 
should plan to meet the needs of both, the gifted as well as the least able 
children. One of the ways is to divide a class to groups based on their 
abilities. With 14 – 19 years old, there is the emphasis on personal routes to 
meet personal needs. School here is to provide optimum match between 
needs and opportunities. Every teacher in this integrated education must be 
also a teacher of the gifted and also, each teacher has the power to decide 
who is gifted (Eyre, 2009).  
Knowing how difficult it is to recognize gifted children and how to nurture 
their needs, the teachers in England are given too much power and 
responsibility, which is usually provided by psychologist and teachers for 
children with special needs. Eyre (2004) believes that the educational 
process in England is not so much a question of intellect, but rather a 
question of affluence, with the most affluent receiving the best education. 
However, the Government’s agenda was to increase gifted education in all 
schools and by 2007 all schools in England were supposed to have a school 
policy and a coordinator for the gifted pupils. It was believed that, where 
schools integrated programmes for the gifted as part of their overall plan, 
general educational standards would rise.  
There were several organizations created to support the gifted in the UK. 
The National Association for Gifted Children was established in 1967 to 
support the social, emotional and learning needs of children with high 
learning potential of all ages and backgrounds (Potential Plus UK, 2014). 
National Association for Able Children in Education (NACE) was 
established in 1983 to support, guide and train teachers to attain the best 
from able learners in everyday classrooms. It also has a history of 
supporting schools overseas. In 2002 the National Academy for Gifted and 
Talented Youth (NAGTY) was established at the University of Warwick to 
help deliver the Government’s programme for gifted and talented learners, 
in particular by developing, promoting and supporting educational 
opportunities for gifted and talented children up to the age of 19 (DE, 
2009). In 2008 a government policy for supporting the gifted was issued 
under the National Programme for gifted and talented education (DCSF, 
2008). It was to encourage schools in identifying gifted and talented 
learners focusing on 11-19 years old, who are gifted and talented relative to 

 
160 
their peers in their own group and school. Schools should focus on range of 
abilities, such as talents in the arts and sports, and ability rather than 
achievement, so the underachievers are amongst those identified. This 
programme is nowhere to be found any more and I could not find if it is 
still in operation. However, despite the positive evaluation of the NAGTY 
by the Department of Education (DE, 2009), more than 200,000 children 
receiving support, thousands of teachers being trained, the NAGTY was 
closed down in 2010 (Henry, 2010; Muray, 2010). According to Potential 
Plus UK (2014), the introduction of new teaching standards in 2012 expects 
schools to identify and support gifted children. It does not specify the needs 
of the gifted, but it focuses on progression for all pupils with the aim to 
meet the National Curriculum.  
 
3. Austria 
Gifted education in Austria dates back to 1962, when gifted education was 
explicitly mentioned in educational legislation. In 1970s an opportunity to 
skip classes for gifted children was allowed. Supporting children with 
special educational needs has a long tradition and in 1990s integrated 
education was a part of Austrian compulsory education. Gifted children, 
just like the slow learners, were recognized as learners with specific needs, 
interests, abilities and modes of thinking. In 1999 an Austrian Research and 
Support Center for the Gifted and Talented (ÖZBF) was established with 
the aim to provide support system for the gifted children, their parents and 
educators. In 2006 an early entry to compulsory schooling was allowed 
(Weilguny, Resch, Samhaber, Hartel, 2013). 
With the General Decree on the Promotion of Giftedness and Talent issued 
by the Ministry for Education in 2009 (Weilguny, Resch, Samhaber, Hartel, 
2013), all Austrian schools were to develop the potentials of the gifted and 
talented children. Basic principles for the promotion of giftedness and talent 
focus on strength and interests, accepting and supporting giftedness in an 
unbiased way, integrating giftedness and talent into the overall school 
culture. Schools should identify characteristics that are relevant to 
giftedness and talent, apply specific educational measure and provide 
feedback in a way that enhances motivation.  
Austrian legislation emphasises a general idea of individualized education, 
acceleration and enrichment within regular schools as well as within 
specific schools. School legislation specifies that gifted children can skip 
classes, can be released from compulsory education, attend classes at 
universities and attend universities from the age of 15. The more common 
education of the gifted pupils is within the regular classes, where they 
receive special attention through enrichment, workshops, individual 
mentors or various programmes regarding language, maths, science, music 
or sports. However, there are some schools which prefer segregated model 
of educating the gifted children. Regional, national and international 
“Olympiads” are frequently organized at all levels. Additionally, summer 
schools for gifted children are arranged.  Identification of the gifted 
children is done by teachers and psychologists who use standardized tests 
(Oswald at al, 2005). School achievement is an indicator for high potential, 

 
 
Slavonic Pedagogical Studies Journal Vol. 4 Issue 2, September 2015 
161 
which does not give many chances to the underachievers. However, the 
identification of underachievers is a topic of concern in Austria.  
4. Germany 
In Germany, the 16 federal states are responsible for their education system. 
The gifted education is mentioned in the legislation of some states, but all 
states promote flexible school system including early enrolment at primary 
schools and class skipping. Regular practices for gifted children are early 
enrolment at primary school, acceleration, grade skipping, taking classes 
with higher grades, cooperation with universities, extra-curricular syllabus, 
competitions and summer camps (Ziegler, Stoeger,, Harder, Balestrini, 
2013). Gifted children are identified by teachers, parents or even children 
themselves. Extraordinary school achievements are the precondition in the 
selection process. Some programmes use IQ tests for identification (Fisher 
et al, 2005). Ziegler, Stoeger,, Harder and Balestrini (2013) pointed out 
findings from the longitudinal research Malburg Giftedness Project from 
2000, which indicated that only 15 % of high performers were gifted (above 
125 IQ) and that in fact 15 % of gifted students were underachievers. These 
findings question the belief that school performance goes hand in hand with 
intelligence. The issue of gifted underachievers in not found in the German 
education system. However the gifted education in Germany cannot be 
generalized, as the 16 federal states have variable systems, which should be 
inspected individually. 
The system of college-preparatory secondary education for high achieving 
children Gymnasia dates back to the 18th century. The tradition of 
Gymnasia exists to this day throughout Germany and it offers academic 
excellence. For instance, only 1% of pupils completed Gymnasium in 1900, 
by 1930 the number has risen to 3% and the number of students that 
completed Gymnasium by 2010 reached 30% (Ziegler, Stoeger,, Harder, 
Balestrini, 2013). 
Die Deutsche Gesellschaft für das hochbegabte Kind (DGhK, 2015) is a 
nation-wide non-profit organization which was established in 1978 and it 
provides help and special courses to gifted children, parents, whole 
families, educators and psychologists. The DGhK was established because 
of the experience that it cannot be taken for granted that gifted children are 
always high achievers.  Gifted children can develop problems at school and 
in social interaction, if their intellectual needs are not recognized and 
developed. Today the DGhK has 15 regional organizations and more than 
3,000 members. Hochbegabtenförderung e.V. is an organization, which was 
established in 1994 by parents of the gifted children. It operates in 25 towns 
all around Germany and it organizes weekend, afternoon, holiday courses 
for gifted children and counselling for parents and teachers (Persson, R.S, 
Joswig, H., Balogh, L, 2000). It has helped over 13 thousand children since 
1994 (Bundesgeschäftsstelle Bochum, 2015). 
 
5. Switzerland 
Educational system in Switzerland is decentralized and it is organized 
autonomously by 26 cantons. The following information concerns the 

 
162 
gifted education in the 19 German speaking cantons, which are integrated 
in a network for gifted education in Switzerland. Most of the school 
legislation of the Swiss cantons recognises gifted pupils, provides 
information about gifted education, or recognises gifted children as a part 
of a group of students with special needs. A common practice for the gifted 
is acceleration, early entrance, grade skipping and enrichment. The gifted 
are mainly organised within regular class differentiation, and in special 
cases can be released from compulsory education. Occasionally, education 
is carried out in specific segregated classes, but mostly for non-intellectual 
giftedness. Identification of the gifted is based on the teacher or self 
nomination. For skipping classes and sharing classes with higher grades, 
examination by a psychologist is necessary (Grossenbacher, 2005).  
 
Meta analysis of gifted education in German speaking countries – 
Germany, Austria and Switzerland - was carried out by Herman and Nevo 
in 2011. According to the authors, the notion of gifted education is 
relatively new in German speaking countries. A general dislike for anything 
connected with the advancement of elites is possibly connected to the 
history events during the Third Reich. There is also the assumption that 
gifted children would be sufficiently challenged in the regular education 
system. Herman and Nevo (ibid.) provided a detailed account of current 
gifted education in Germany, Austria and Switzerland. They reported that 
even though there are some differences between the three countries, the 
programmes offering education to the gifted children are very similar. All 
three countries include early enrolment at primary school, grade skipping, 
sharing classes with higher grades, early part time attendance of university, 
early exit from school to attend university, ability grouping, special schools 
for gifted children, school competitions and summer academies. Possible 
criteria for choosing gifted children to the special programmes are grades, 
school external achievement (competitions), performance tests (IQ), 
questionnaires (filled by the child, or the third party), parent checklist, 
nominations, as well as institutional criteria. Herman and Nevo (ibid.) also 
analysed the impact of various programmes on the gifted children. The 
outcomes from all types were very positive. However, all studies were 
carried out at the gymnasium level and they included only high achieving 
children, which does not always go hand in hand with ability. The top 
marks were always a condition for children to be accepted to the special 
programmes. These programmes would very unlikely suit the most 
vulnerable group of gifted children, who have asynchronous development 
and are often underachieving, or with social or behavioural problems. 
 
6. Spain 
Gifted education in Spain is explicitly mentioned in the Spanish legislation 
and gifted children are considered as students with special educational 
needs. Class sharing with higher grades, curricular adaptation and class 
skipping are possible, but rarely used in Spanish schools. There is a 
growing interest in provisions for gifted children, with curricular 
adaptations, or class skipping, but the specific school actions for the gifted 

 
 
Slavonic Pedagogical Studies Journal Vol. 4 Issue 2, September 2015 
163 
are still rare. Schools regularly organise school competitions for the gifted 
children. Despite there is a legal obligation to identify the gifted children, 
there are no criteria for the gifted, nor the procedures or test instruments to 
identify the gifted. There is also very little attention paid to the teacher 
training of the gifted children. Even though the school legislation 
recognises gifted children, their education has been generally neglected 
(Touron et al, 2005).  
 
7. Denmark 
Official programmes for gifted education does not exist in Denmark 
(Baltzer et al, 2005). The term giftedness or gifted students is not 
mentioned in the school legislation. However, the recognition of individual 
differences is the fundamental guideline in the Danish school system. 
Identification of the individual needs of each student, choosing the 
appropriate teaching materials and methods should be ensured by teachers. 
Only few schools pay special attention to the gifted, there is a Royal Ballet 
School for talented dancers, music talents are educated at the Sct Anna 
Gymnasium and a lower secondary school in Odsherred offers special 
maths classes for gifted pupils. There are no identification processes for the 
gifted children in Denmark and there is no special training for teachers of 
gifted pupils. Only the two mentioned schools for ballet and music have 
special entrance exams for admission of gifted students. Some activities in 
the area of gifted education can be seen by private initiatives, such as the 
association Gifted Children Denmark, which groups gifted children, offers 
support and organises summer camps. Many teachers are still sensitive to 
the topic of gifted education and there is a lack of political recognition and 
legislative considerations regarding gifted children. Silverman (2013) 
emphasises the need for gifted education in Denmark, as the gifted do not 
receive the needed attention and do not develop their potentials.  
 
8. Finland 
The school legislation in Finland does not mention gifted students explicitly 
or as a group of students with special educational needs. The education 
system is strongly decentralised and deregulated. At the national level only 
general guidelines are provided. The legislation acknowledges individual 
differences and allows schools to arrange teaching according to the age 
level and abilities of the students. Early entrance to primary schools, 
choosing subjects other than the ones in the national curriculum, skipping 
classes, sharing classes with higher grades, acceleration, workshops, extra-
curricular activities are possible in the Finish education system. Finland 
follows a strong direction toward individualisation. Schools have been 
encouraged to provide more individual curricula, which allow teaching to 
be more differentiated. The differentiation of education is a general policy 
and therefore the gifted pupils can benefit from this system. The un-grades 
system is very flexible and it allows pupils to accelerate depending on their 
abilities. The trend for parents is to choose a school which would suit the 
best their children’s needs. Gifted students at the secondary school level 

 
164 
join various competitions, or summer courses at universities. There are no 
official procedures or nominations for gifted children. One exception is the 
early entrance to school, where psychological and medical tests are required 
(Tirri, 2005). Even though, there is a lack of specific legislation concerning 
gifted education in Finland, the system appears to work very well (not only 
for the gifted children), as Finish students regularly finish at the top of 
international assessments, for example in PISA testing (OECD, 2014).  
 
9. Hungary 
Gifted education in Hungary has a long tradition. After the Second World 
War, nurturing the gifted has become a priority of Hungarian education. 
The Hungarian legislation recognises the gifted as pupils with special 
educational needs. Systematic development and innovation in the past 
decades have resulted in significant progress in the gifted education. 
Stockton (2009) reports, that Hungarian students have traditionally been 
very successful in international competitions and mathematics Olympiads. 
Hungarian system of specialised schools for mathematically gifted is 
believed to be original and this model was adopted by Russia and also the 
United States. Schools and teachers are responsible for identification and 
recognition of individual differences and talents of their pupils. The 
selection and identification process of the gifted children in Hungary is 
based on several criteria, such as the within school achievement, external 
achievement (competitions), teacher nomination, third party nomination 
and the psychologists’ nomination based on psychological tests.  
In Hungary, the enrichment is the preferred format for the gifted. 
Acceleration, grade skipping and sharing classes with higher grades is very 
uncommon. The gifted pupils can be offered a special curriculum, special 
classes, workshops and extra-curricular activities. There are special schools 
for the gifted in different areas of talents, from intellectual, music, arts to 
sports. The gifted education is successfully developed from the primary to 
the end of secondary education. There were 22 secondary schools in 2006 
in Hungary, which followed a five year programme for the gifted. These 
courses were frequently evaluated to ensure an optimal development of the 
gifted students. There is a long tradition of organising regional or national 
competitions for students with many types of abilities (ibid.). Government 
regulations make it compulsory to include the education for the gifted in the 
fundamental teacher training. Every student has 20 – 30 contact lessons 
during their training and the topics include identification, giftedness and 
age, giftedness and creativity, school programmes, cooperation of school 
and family, underachievement of the gifted, special role of the teachers in 
the gifted education, special fields of the gifted education, etc. Gifted 
education in Hungary has support and recognition from the state, schools 
and private initiatives on a very high level. More and more teachers take 
part in further training and the plan is to have one specialist in gifted 
education in every school, who would coordinate work with the gifted 
(Balogh et al, 2005; Gyarmathy, 2013). 
 
10. Czech Republic 

 
 
Slavonic Pedagogical Studies Journal Vol. 4 Issue 2, September 2015 
165 
Gifted education does not have a long tradition in the Czech Republic. In 
the communist regime, any form of giftedness was considered as unsuitable 
elitism. Even though in the 1960s there were found special classes 
developing certain areas (languages, maths, sports), there was nothing 
special done in the gifted education. There were many requests from 
psychologists and educators for consideration of the gifted children in 
educational process. One of the first documents mentioning the gifted 
education was the National Programme for the Development of Education 
“White book” in 2000  and it contains a passage emphasising the 
importance of education for the gifted children in the areas of intellect, art, 
sports, etc. (Simonik, 2010). Education Programme Framework for 
Elementary education from 2004 specified the role of schools in education 
of the gifted children and the School Act 561 officially recognised the 
gifted education.  
Today, gifted education is by legislation defined as education of pupils with 
special educational needs. The national curriculum sets it as a priority to 
identify and nourish the needs of gifted individuals, who would be able to 
achieve recognition in the competition with other countries. Children have 
to be identified as gifted by pegagogical-psychological advisory services. 
There are three possibilities of gifted education: integration, special classes 
and special schools for gifted children. According to Stava (2010) 
integration is the preferred model with the use of special methods, 
approaches, forms and materials, which would guarantee the development 
of 
gifted 
children. 
Individual 
learning 
programme, 
acceleration, 
enrichment, early enrolment to primary school, grade skipping are possible 
forms of gifted education.  
In 2008, the Czech School Inspection published a report showing 
insufficiencies in educating the gifted children. According to research done 
by Simonik (2010), teachers were aware of the need to support education of 
gifted children, but they claimed that they received inadequate education on 
how to work with gifted pupils. Teachers also believed that there was a 
very little chance to work systematically with gifted children in the 
environment of a standard classroom. Simonik (ibid.) claimed that gifted 
education in the Czech Republic was on a very low level, where individual 
teachers or small groups of teachers were making effort to work with gifted 
children, often improvising. Teachers do not receive appropriate training 
and there are not available appropriate materials, methodologies and 
conditions for educating the gifted children. There is not a centralised care 
and information about support provided for gifted children in the Czech 
Republic. However, there are several institutions providing care and 
support via afternoon hobby classes, courses, weekend, virtual schools and 
summer camps and competitions (e.g. olympiads in maths, foreign 
languages, history, etc.) (Kovarova, Klugova, 2009). Mensa CR (2015) has 
established many clubs around the country for the support of gifted 
children. The aim is to identify highly gifted children at an early age and 
support their development. These clubs cooperate closely with local 
authorities, primary schools and parents. They provide supporting meetings 

 
166 
at least once in two weeks, excursions, lectures and activities developing 
intellectual abilities of talented children. 
 
11. Slovakia 
History of gifted education in Slovakia goes back to the 1970s, when the 
Research Institute for Child Psychology and Patopsychology (VÚDPaP) 
started researching the issue of giftedness. They were trying to analyse 
specifics of mathematical, language, sport and artistic giftedness. Before 
the 1970s giftedness was considered as an elitist matter not acceptable in 
the communist regime. However, even at that time special schools 
developing talents existed, e.g. conservatoires, art schools, sport centres, 
etc. These schools and centres were developing only artistic or sport talents 
of children. In 1960s, as a reaction to the world trends to develop 
intellectually gifted children, special classes focusing on mathematics, 
language or sports began to be established. These classes offered more 
lessons of maths per week or early start of learning a foreign language. 
Different competitions and Olympiads from mathematics, physics, 
chemistry, geography, biology and foreign languages came to existence 
with the aim to stimulate talents of pupils (Laznibatova, 2008). In 1990s, 
after the end of the communist regime in 1990s, the real changes in gifted 
education started to happen.  
In 1991, an Association for gifted children was founded. In 1993 
Laznibatova started an experimental Project of alternative education for 
gifted children in segregated classed or schools at the primary school level. 
(Laznibatova, 1996, 2001, 2008; Dockal, 2005). After the Project of 
educating gifted children was approved by the Ministry of Education in 
May 1993 – the first experimental classroom for gifted children was opened 
in September 1993 in Bratislava. In 1998 the first school for gifted children 
was officially established in Bratislava, with Laznibatova as the director. In 
1999 was also opened a 8-year-gymnasium as a part of the School for gifted 
children in Bratislava (SpMNDaG). In 2007 the experimental verification 
of the Project, which had been carried out between September 1993 and 
June 2007, was officially evaluated. The official evaluation took place at a 
conference with the presence of representatives of the three guarantors 
(National Institute for Education, Faculty of Education at the Comenius 
University, Research Institute for Child Psychology and Pathopsychology), 
representatives of the Ministry of Education, representatives of the 
Eurocommissary for education, and also many other specialists, school 
directors, teachers, psychologists and parents. Results of experimental 
verification were evaluated as highly effective and successful. 
Based on these results, new alternative curricular documents were 
accredited in 2007 and modified in the process of curricular reform in 2009: 
a) curriculum for primary education ISCED1 for pupils with 
general intellectual giftedness (accredited by the Ministry of 
Education CD-2008-18550/39582-1:914, valid from 26th May 
2009) 
b) curriculum for lower secondary education ISCED2 for pupils 
with general intellectual giftedness (accredited by the Ministry of 

 
 
Slavonic Pedagogical Studies Journal Vol. 4 Issue 2, September 2015 
167 
Education CD-2008-18550/39582-1:914, valid from 26th May 
2009) 
c) curriculum for secondary education ISCED3 for pupils with 
general intellectual giftedness (accredited by the Ministry of 
Education CD-2008-18550/39582-1:914, valid from 26th May 
2009) (VÚDPaP, 2015).  
In the process of curricular reform in Slovakia, the School act 245/2008 § 6 
was passed, which introduced two levels of curriculum: the national 
curriculum and the school curriculum. The national curriculum serves as a 
base document for creating curricular documents for pupils with specific 
educational needs. A School act 245/2008 § 2 letter j) and q) specifies 
gifted children (pupils) as children with specific educational needs. 
Children with special educational needs have to be identified by centres of 
pedagogical-psychological advisory services. According to § 103 (1), 
special schools offer education for children with: 
a) intellectual giftedness (general and specific),  
b) artistic giftedness 
c) giftedness in sport (VUDPaP, 2015). 
The national curriculum § 103 (1) letter a) number 1 specifies the 
key stages, core subjects, expected standards of pupils’ performance for 
pupils with general intellectual giftedness. The key competences, which 
pupils have to acquire, are the same as for the regular pupils. Accordingly, 
the principles and standards are the same in the national curriculum for both, 
the regular pupils and for pupils with general intellectual giftedness. The 
reason for the same standards is for compatibility of all schools, which is 
necessary in the case when pupils change schools (ibid.).  
Another difference in the curricula for pupils with general intellectual 
giftedness is that the special educational needs of talented children have to 
be considered, and consequently, suitable approaches, methods, techniques 
and activities should be implemented. The personal, emotional and social 
peculiarities and differences in the level of development of gifted children 
needs to be recognized. Teachers should apply a highly individual approach 
to pupils and need to regard peculiarities of gifted children (sensitivity, 
communicativeness, individualism, anxiety, imagination, ambitions, 
perfectionism, hyperactivity, etc.) with the aim to develop their talents 
adequately (VUDPaP, 2015).  
There are two ways of educating gifted children in Slovakia. One form of 
educating talented children is a model of segregated education. Another 
form of educating talented children is a model of integrated education 
(Dockal, 2005; Duchovicova, Babulicova, Gunisova, 2010; Koncepcia 
rozvoja nadanych deti a mladeze, 2007). The model of segregated 
education of gifted children has several principles. Apart from the 
minimum requirements set in the national curriculum, there are certain 
modifications: small number of pupils in classes (12), accelerated teaching 
with elements of extended and profound teaching, English language, 
Informatics and an “Enrichment subject” (special subject, in which pupils 
gain skills such as learning through discovery, creative problem solving, 

 
168 
presentation of interesting topics, such as dinosaurs, the seas and oceans, 
traveling with Felix, Greek legends, etc.), elaborating projects (depending 
on the children’s interests), elaborating annual projects (which are the main 
projects of the school year), new forms of evaluation and self evaluation, 
support and stimulation of children towards the higher forms of thinking 
and creativity, specific atmosphere at lessons, empathy and tolerance being 
the main features, pedagogical and psychological factors being present at 
equal level in the process of education (Juraskova, 2006). 
Today, the Research Institute for Child Psychology and Pathopsychology 
(VUDPaP, 2015) is the only workplace in Slovakia that is focused on 
research of psychological aspects of child and youth development. The 
Institute also organizes educational courses for pedagogical staff who work 
with gifted children. 
 
Conclusion 
By researching gifted education systems in Europe, I came to conclusion 
that most gifted programmes are designed for the ambitious and high 
achieving individuals and the underachievers are left out. This view is also 
supported by Silverman (2013) who also adds that giftedness is largely 
invisible. The visibly gifted are high achievers, who represent the tip of the 
iceberg. The vast majority of the gifted are hidden from the view. 
Responsibility for identifying the gifted is put down to schools, teachers 
and parents. Teachers in general do not receive much education concerning 
the gifted children during their teacher training. Consequently they are not 
always able to recognize the giftedness in their pupils. Silverman (ibid.) 
believes that psychologists should be scouts seeking the gifted individuals 
in all groups. Professionals who specialise in the gifted can recognize the 
“gold beneath the surface” (ibid., p. 17). To conclude, I believe that gifted 
children need to be recognized. They need professionals who understand 
the issues of giftedness, their striving, their search for meaning, their desire 
for connection, and their complexity, sensitivity and intensity. Without 
deliberate search for the gifted and sensitive school programmes for all the 
gifted (including underachievers), there will not be successful and fair 
education for all gifted individuals. 
 
Bibliography 
BALOGH. L. et al. 2005. Country specific information – Hungary.  Monks, 
F.J., Pfluger, R. (ed.) Gifted Education in 21 European Countries: Inventory 
and Perspective. Radboud University Nijmengen. Available online: 
https://www.bmbf.de/pub/gifted_education_21_eu_countries.pdf. 
BALTZER, K. et al. 2005. Country specific information – Denmark.  
Monks, F.J., Pfluger, R. (ed.) Gifted Education in 21 European Countries: 
Inventory and Perspective. Radboud University Nijmengen. Available 
online www.bmbf.de/pub/gifted_education_21_eu_countries.pdf. 
BIROVA, J. 2013. About Theoretical Definitions of Pluralistic and 
Pluricultural Approaches. XLinguae, Vol. 6. N. 2. ISSN 13378384. 
BUNDESGESCHÄFTSSTELLE bochum. 2015. Hochbegabten-förderung 
e.V. Available online: www.hbf-ev.de/index.php?id=11. 

 
 
Slavonic Pedagogical Studies Journal Vol. 4 Issue 2, September 2015 
169 
CASEY, R. – KOSHY, V. 2012. Gifted and Talented Education: The 
English Policy Highway at a Crossroads? Brunel University. Available 
online: http://bura.brunel.ac.uk/bitstream/2438/8266/2/Fulltext.pdf. 
DEPARTMENT of education (DE). 2009. National Academy for Gifted 
and 
Talented 
Youth 
(NAGTY). 
Available 
online: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/national-academy-for-gifted-
and-talented-youth-evaluation. 
DEPARTMENT for children, school and families (DCSF). 2008. 
Identifying gifted and talented learners – getting started. Available online: 
http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/20130401151715/http://www.ed
ucation.gov.uk/publications/eOrderingDownload/Getting%20StartedWR.pd
f. 
DGhK. 2015. Die Deutsche Gesellschaft für das hochbegabte Kind. 
Available online:www.dghk.de/wir-ueber-uns. 
DOCKAL, V. 2005. Zamereno na talenty, aneb, Nadani ma kazdy. Prague: 
Nakladatelstvi Lidove noviny, pp. 7-13, 23-26, 91-97, 132, 179-189. ISBN 
8071068403.  
DUCHOVICOVA, J. – BABULICOVA, Z. – GUNISOVA, D. 2010. 
Tvorivost, nadanie a ich neurodidakticky rozmer. Strategicky vyznam 
inovacii 
v 
edukacnej 
teorii 
a praxi. 
Nitra: 
UKF, 
2010. 
ISBN 
9788080947743, p. 7. 
EYRE, D. 2004. Gifted Education: The English Model. Available online: 
www.potentialplusuk.org/file_upload/GT%20English%20Model-deborah-
eyre%20%282%29.pdf. 
EYRE, D. 2009. The English Model of Gifted Education. Shavinina, L. 
International Handbook on Giftedness. Springer. ISBN: 9781402061615. 
FISHER, C. et al. 2005. Country specific information – Germany. Monks, 
F.J., Pfluger, R. (ed.) Gifted Education in 21 European Countries: Inventory 
and Perspective. Radboud University Nijmengen. Available online: 
https://www.bmbf.de/pub/gifted_education_21_eu_countries.pdf. 
GROSSENBACHER, S. 2005. Country specific information – Switzerland. 
In: Monks, F.J., Pfluger, R. (ed.) Gifted Education in 21 European 
Countries: Inventory and Perspective. Radboud University Nijmengen. 
Available 
online: 
www.bmbf.de/pub/gifted_education_21_eu_ 
countries.pdf. 
GYARMATHY, E. 2013. The Gifted and Gifted Education in Hungary.  
Journal for the Education of the Gifted. Vol. 36. No. 1, pp. 19-43. ISSN 
01623532. 
HENRY, J. 2010. Ministers pull the plug on gifted and talented academy. 
The 
Telegraph.. 
Available 
online: 
www.telegraph.co.uk/ed 
ucation/educationnews/7062061/Ministers-pull-the-plug-on-gifted-and-
talented-academy.html. 
HERRMANN, A. – NEVO, B. 2011. Gifted Education in German – 
Speaking Countries. Gifted and Talented International. Vol. 26, No 1, 2, p. 
47-63. ISSN: 15332276. 
JURASKOVA, J. 2003. Zaklady pedagogiky nadanych. Pezinok: Format. 
ISBN: 808900511. 

 
170 
JURASKOVA, J. 2006. Nadanie.sk O intelektovom nadani pre kazdeho. 
Available online: www.nadanie.sk/index.php?ID=12. 
KONCEPCIA rozvoja nadanych deti a mladeze v SR. 2007. Available 
online: 
www.minedu.sk/data/USERDATA/RegionalneSkolstvo/SpVaV/ 
Materialy/Koncepcia_rozvoja_nadanych_deti.pdf .  
KOVAROVA, R. – KLUGOVA, I. 2009. Edukace nadanych deti a zaku. 
Synergie 
projekt 
c. 
CZ.1.07./2.2.00/07.0355. 
Available 
online: 
http://projekty.osu.cz/synergie/dok/opory/kovarova-edukace-nadanych-
deti-a-zaku.pdf. 
LAZNIBATOVA, J. et al. 2008. 10 rokov zalozenia skoly pre mimoriadne 
nadane deti a Gymnazium, 1.1. 1998 – 1.1.2008. Bratislava. 2008. 
LAZNIBATOVA, J. 2001. Nadane dieta: jeho vyvin, vzdelavanie 
a podporovanie. 1. vyd. Bratislava: Iris, ISBN 8088778328. 
LAZNIBATOVA, J. (ed.) 2008. Od rozvijania nadania k rozvijaniu 
osobitosti nadanych. Zbornik prac z 5. Medzinarodnej konferencie. 
Bratislava: Iris. 
LAZNIBATOVA, J. 1996. Problemy vychovy a vzdelavania nadanych deti. 
(Projekt  starostlivosti o nadane deti v podmienkach zakladnych skol).  
Pedagogicka revue. Vol. 1, No. 1-2, pp. 79-84.  
LALINSKA, M. 2012. Posudenie cudzojazycnej kompetencie ziakov na 
vystupe z 1. stupna ZS v SR. XLinguae Journal. Vol. 5. No. 4, ISSN 
13378384. 
MENSA CR. 2015. Mensa CR: Pro nadane deti. Available online: 
http://deti.mensa.cz/. 
MÖNKS, F.J. – PFLUGER, R. 2005. Gifted Education in 21 European 
Countries: Inventory and Perspective. Radboud University Nijmengen. 
Available 
online: 
www.bmbf.de/pub/gifted_education_21_eu_ 
countries.pdf. 
MURAY, J. 2010. Farewell to the gifted and talented scheme. The 
Guardian. Available online: http://www.theguardian.com/education/2010/ 
feb/02/gifted-talented-scrapped-funds-redirected. 
OECD. 
2014. 
PISA 
2012 
Results. 
Available 
online: 
http://www.oecd.org/pisa/keyfindings/pisa-2012-results.htm. 
OSWALD, F. at al. 2005. Country specific information – Austria. Monks, 
F.J., Pfluger, R. (ed.) Gifted Education in 21 European Countries: Inventory 
and Perspective. Radboud University Nijmengen. Available online: 
www.bmbf.de/pub/gifted_education_21_eu_countries.pdf. 
PERSSON, R.S. – JOSWIG, H. – BALOGH, L. 2000. Gifted Education in 
Europe: Programs, Practices and Current Research. Heller, K.A. et al.: 
International Handbook of Giftedness and Talent. Oxford: Elsevier. ISBN 
0080437966. 
POTENTIALPLUSUK. 2014. Available online: www.potentialplusuk.org/ 
general.php?webid=457#.U9YxOUAtIdU. 
SILVERMAN, L. 2013. Why Does Denmark Need Gifted Education? 
Gifted Children‘s Symposioum. Danish Associatin for Gifted Children. 
Soro, Denmark. Available online: www.giftedchildren.dk/content.php?735-
Linda-Silverman-Why-Does-Denmark-Need-Gifted-Education. 

 
 
Slavonic Pedagogical Studies Journal Vol. 4 Issue 2, September 2015 
171 
STOCKTON, J. C. 2009. Hungary and the United States: A Comparison of 
Gifted Education. Mathematics Faculty Publications. Paper 8. Available 
online: http://digitalcommons.sacredheart.edu/cgi/viewcontent.cgi?article 
=1007&context=math_fac. 
SIMONIK, O. (ed.) 2010. School and talented pupil. Vyzkumny zamer 
MSM0021622443. Brno: MU. ISBN 9788021053502. 
STAVA, J. 2010. Pristupy k nadanym zakum v soucasne skole; legislativa 
moznych pristupu skol a ucitelu k nadanym zakum. Simonik, O. (ed.) 
Vzdelavani nadanych zaku. Brno: Masarykova Univerzita. ISBN: 978-80-
210-5349-6. 
TIRRI, K. 2005. Country specific information – Finland. Monks, F.J., 
Pfluger, R. (ed.) Gifted Education in 21 European Countries: Inventory and 
Perspective. Radboud University Nijmengen.  
TOURON, J. et al. 2005. Country specific information – Spain. Monks, 
F.J., Pfluger, R. (ed.) Gifted Education in 21 European Countries: Inventory 
and Perspective. Radboud University Nijmengen. Available online: 
https://www.bmbf.de/pub/gifted_education_21_eu_countries.pdf. 
VAN TASSEL-BASKA, J. 2013. The World of Cross-Cultural Research: 
Insight for Gifted Education. In: Journal for the Education of the Gifted. 
Vol. 36. No. 1. pp. 6-18. ISSN 0162-3532. 
VUDPaP. 2015. Vyskumny ustav detskej psychologie a patopsychologie. 
Vzdelavacie programy pre ziakov so vseobecnym intelektovym nadanim. 
Available online:  www.vudpap.sk/informacie-pre-pedagogov/. 
WEILGUNY, M. W. – RESCH, C. – SAMHABER, E. – HARTEL, B. 
2013. White Paper promoting talent and excellence. Available online: 
www.oezbf.at/cms/tl_files/Publikationen/Veroeffentlichungen/weissbuch_
E_fertig_interaktiv.pdf. 
ZIEGLER, A. – STOEGER, H. – HARDER, B. – BALESTRINI, D.P. 
2013. Gifted Education in German-Speaking Europe. Journal for the 
Education of the Gifted. Vol. 36. No. 3, pp. 384. ISSN 01623532. 
 
Mgr. Eva Reid, PhD. 
Constantine the Philosopher University in Nitra 
Faculty of Education 
Department of Language Pedagogy and Intercultural Studies 
Drážovská cesta 4, 94974 Nitra 
ereid@ukf.sk 
 
prof. Heiner Boettger, PhD. 
Catholic University of Eichstaett-Ingolstadt 
Department of Linguistics and Literature 
Universitätsallee 1, 85072 Eichstätt 
heiner.boettger@ku.de