China Perspectives 
2014/3 | 2014
The Rise of Environmentalism
The Maoming Anti-PX Protest of 2014
An environmental movement in contemporary China
Kingsyhon Lee and Ming-sho Ho
Electronic version
URL: http://journals.openedition.org/chinaperspectives/6537
DOI: 10.4000/chinaperspectives.6537
ISSN: 1996-4617
Publisher
Centre d'étude français sur la Chine contemporaine
Printed version
Date of publication: 1 September 2014
Number of pages: 33-39
ISSN: 2070-3449
 
Electronic reference
Kingsyhon Lee and Ming-sho Ho, « The Maoming Anti-PX Protest of 2014 », China Perspectives
[Online], 2014/3 | 2014, Online since 01 January 2017, connection on 15 September 2020. URL : http://
journals.openedition.org/chinaperspectives/6537 
© All rights reserved

Introduction
O
n 30 March 2014, an anti-PX rally took place in Maoming (茂名),
a remote city in western Guangdong Province. Beginning in the
morning, tens of thousands of protestors gathered in front of City
Hall, their numbers reaching a peak in the evening, at which point a violent
clash occurred, lasting until the next day. Fear among the local citizens re-
sulted in a gradual decrease in the number of protestors until the city re-
gained its tranquillity on 7 April.
There has been a streak of anti-PX protests recently in China. Para-xylene
(PX), a chemical used in the manufacture of plastic bottles and polyester, is
extracted from petroleum in a process that entails environmental and
health risks. As early as May 2007, the first large-scale anti-PX protest broke
out in Xiamen, Fujian Province, where not only ordinary citizens but also
105 national committee members (including Zhao Yufen, a renowned pro-
fessor at Xiamen University) and dozens of university presidents and acad-
emicians took to the streets to voice their opposition. Although the local
government tried to censor media coverage, the event drew international
attention due to the participation of elites. (1) After half year’s mediation,
the Fujian provincial government and Xiamen municipal government finally
conceded by relocating the PX project to the Gulei Peninsula in Zhangzhou
on 16 December 2007. Since then, there has been a demonstrable effect of
the Xiamen movement with the emergence of anti-PX demonstrations in
Chengdu in 2008, Dalian in 2011, Kunming in 2013, and Maoming in 2014
(see Map 1).
While many observers have hailed the activism of the urban middle class
as the birth of China’s environmental consciousness, many have overlooked
the PX dispute in Jiujiang, Jiangxi Province. Since the Jiujiang municipal gov-
ernment was able to promote the PX project in a skilful way, large-scale so-
cial protests failed to occur. As a result, Jiujiang is regarded as a model for
implementating petrochemical projects by neutralising popular opposi-
tion. (2) In February 2014, top officials in the Maoming government went to
N o . 2 0 1 4 / 3  •  c h i n a  p e r s p e c t i v e s
33
1.
Tu Chaohua, Xiamen PX shijian shimo (The Xiamen PX incident), Beijing, Zhongguo qingnian bao
(China Youth Daily), 28 December 2007.
2.
Liu Xiaoyi, “Jiujiangshi dapo px kunju” (Jiujiang city overcame the obstacle to PX project), Beijing,
Minzhu yu fazhi shibao (Democracy and Rule of Law Times), 21 April 2014, section 11.
China perspectives
Current affairs
The Maoming Anti-PX 
Protest of 2014
An environmental movement in contemporary China
KINGSYHON LEE AND MING-SHO HO
ABSTRACT: China has witnessed several peaceful and successful anti-PX (para-xylene) protests in Xiamen, Dalian, and Ningbo in re-
cent years. However, the protest in Maoming in 2014 turned out to be a noteworthy exception. By using participant observation and in-
depth interview data, this article raises the following observations: first, in spite of official propaganda, Maoming citizens actually un-
derstand the environmental risk of PX production because of their personal experiences with existing pollution as well as from their
knowledge of the Xiamen incident. Secondly, the Maoming protest proceeded in a less organised manner, which explains its violent
tendencies. Finally, the large-scale protest was able to proceed without the support of mainstream media and the middle class due to
the use of online social media and local knowledge of the urban terrain. 
KEYWORDS: Maoming anti-PX protest, environmental movement, social media, protest mobilisation.
Map 1 – The recent anti-PX protests in China © Kingsyhon Lee

Jiujiang to gain know-how, which they nevertheless failed to replicate back
home. (3) Unlike other cities, Maoming has long hosted petrochemical facil-
ities. Known as “the oil town of the south” (nanfang youcheng 南方油城),
Maoming has since 1955 been home to a production centre of the state-
owned Sinopec Group, the capacity of which has grown to more than
20 million tons of crude oil refinement and one million tons of ethylene
production annually, making it one of the biggest taxpayers in Guangdong
Province. (4) Due to its importance in China’s petrochemical production as
well as its economic value, Maoming was upgraded to a prefecture-level
city. While other cities have risen in protest against previously unknown en-
vironmental threats, Maoming’s petrochemical production has been a fact
of life for more than half a century, thus providing a contrasting view of en-
vironmental politics in contemporary China. 
The first author of this article had the opportunity to participate in and
observe the Maoming movement due his native status. He conducted in-
depth interviews with more than 30 protestors and 20 other citizens to ob-
tain information concerning public perceptions of pollution, the information
and network of protest mobilisation, and so on. As a pioneering study, our
observation reached the following conclusions: first, Maoming citizens had
a fairly good understanding of the environmental risk of PX production be-
cause of their personal experience with existing pollution as well as their
knowledge of the Xiamen incident. Secondly, while there are nascent envi-
ronmental NGOs in China, their presence is largely limited to major met-
ropolitan areas, and mass membership remains underdeveloped. Lacking
this resource, Maoming protestors had to resort to direct action. It is ob-
served that middle-class environmental NGOs tend to adopt “moderate,
self-contained means to tackle politically safe issues,” and their campaigns
occasionally win the endorsement of environmental officials in the central
government. (5) Such is not the case for grassroots victims who suffer from
pollution and whose self-help activism is deemed subversive by officials. Fi-
nally, even without the support of mainstream media and the middle class,
large-scale protest was possible due to the skilful use of online social media
and local knowledge of the urban terrain. In conclusion, we will discuss the
broader implications for China’s environmentalism.
Promoting the PX project in Maoming
The PX project in Maoming was co-sponsored by the municipal govern-
ment and the Maoming Petrochemical Company, with a budget of 3.5 bil-
lion yuan. It was first raised in the 2011 “Twelfth Five-Year Plan for Economic
and Social Development of Maoming,” which aimed at a world-class petro-
chemical base with the capacity for 15 million tons of oil refining, one mil-
lion tons of aromatics, and 0.6 million tons of para-xylene production per
year, with completion scheduled for 2014. According to the 2010 Census,
Maoming’s registered population totalled 7.4 million, but only around
611,000 lived in the urban area. (6) Since the Maoming Petrochemical Com-
pany’s factories are located within five kilometres of the city centre, down-
town residents have suffered from toxic pollution for many years. On rainy
or windy days, Maoming citizens have always smelled odours discharged
by the refinery, with the result that many interviewees jokingly referred to
nasal inflammation as a “local special product.”
One month before the outbreak of the protest, the local government
launched a publicity campaign in which the local newspaper Maoming Daily
played an important role. As Zhou Qingshu (周清树), a journalist for Beijing
News, revealed in an interview, the Maoming government invited media
representatives to a closed-door press conference in February and told them
how to publicise this project and pre-empt the emergence of a social move-
ment. (7)Twenty press releases provided by the local Party committee prop-
aganda 
department, 
including 
“Knowledge 
about 
PX,”
(8)
“Demystifying PX,” (9) and “Is PX really harmful or not,” (10) were published
in Maoming Daily from 18 March onward. (11) Officials were eager to demon-
strate the benefits and harmlessness of PX production. The local TV station
began its propaganda offensive even earlier, in October 2013, and continued
even after the anti-PX protests began.
Learning from the example of Jiujiang, Jiangxi Province, as mentioned
above, Maoming officials adopted a pre-emptive control measure by mo-
bilising citizens to “sign an agreement” to forestall protest activities. In late
March, the Maoming Petrochemical Company and local schools circulated
a document entitled “Agreement to Support the Aromatics Project of the
Maoming Petrochemical Company and Maoming Municipal Government,”
which required signees to not only endorse the investment, but also to re-
frain from “spreading rumours.” Teachers we interviewed revealed that stu-
dents who refused to hand in the affidavit were told that they could not
graduate, and if those who signed were seen taking part in the protest, they
would be expelled from school. Under this pre-emptive measure, the ma-
jority of students and their parents ended up signing the agreement initially.
Within the petrochemical company, management carried out an education
campaign for employees who did not sign the agreement. With work sched-
ules and wages affected by demands to attend lectures on the PX project,
most employees gave in to pressure from above.
However, there was a whistle-blower who became locally famous, Liang
Zongrui (梁宗瑞), a staff member of the petrochemical company who re-
signed out of opposition to the PX plant. Liang attended many forums to
provide alternative information, and he also insisted on carrying out protests
in a peaceful manner. On 3 April 2014, the deputy secretary of the Education
Department denied that it was the government’s intention to coerce citizens
to sign the agreement, blaming it on “ill-conceived moves by some school
leaders.” As explained by an interviewed senior high school teacher, such of-
ficial rationalisation was highly suspicious; if the schools had not received
instructions from above, they would not have acted that way. In addition,
the wording of the agreements in different schools was identical, so it could
not have been purely an initiative from below. The official clarification clearly
backfired. One interviewed citizen viewed the official statement as a clumsy
cover-up, and another senior media worker considered it an incidence of
“over-hasty propaganda.” (12) Public indignation rose over the official denial,
as a result of which Maoming Health School students refused to sign the
34
c h i n a  p e r s p e c t i v e s •  N o . 2 0 1 4 / 3
3.
Zhou Qingshu, “Maoming PX shijian qian 31 tian” (31 days before Maoming PX protest), Xinjing
bao (Beijing News), 5 April 2014, section A16.
4.
www.mpcc.com.cn/2012/MMSH/Profile/Introduction.aspx (accessed on 25 May 2014).
5.
Yanfei Sun and Dingxin Zhao, “Environmental Campaigns,” in Popular Protest in China, ed. by Kevin
J. O’Brien, Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press, 2008, p. 160.
6.
“Maoming City,” Wikipedia (Chinese version), last accessed 25 May 2014.
7.
Zhou Qingshu, “Maoming PX shijian qian 31 tian” (31 days before the Maoming PX protest),
art. cit. 
8.
“PX zhishi zhi duoshao” (Knowledge about PX), Maoming ribao, 18 March 2014, section A2.
9.
Ran Yongping, “Jiekai PX de shenmi miansha” (Demystifying PX), Maoming ribao, 19 March 2014,
section A3.
10.
Shen Hui, “PX daodi youmeiyou weihai” (Is PX really harmful or not?), Maoming ribao, 20 March
2014, section A3.
11.
Tu Chaohua, “Xiamen PX shijian shimo” (The process of the Xiamen PX protest incident), Beijing,
Zhongguo qingnian bao (China Youth Daily), 28 December 2007.
12.
Zhou Qingshu, “Maoming PX shijian qian de 31 tian” (31 days before Maoming PX protest), art. cit.
Current affairs

agreement en masse, followed by other high schools. Some students wrote
profanities on the agreement to vent their anger. All of the interviewed cit-
izens uniformly criticised the high-handed actions of the officials. 
Aside from this official suppression of dissent, there were other reasons
explaining the emergence of the Maoming protest. Maoming had long been
a centre of petrochemical production, and an ethylene plant was recently
built without arousing popular opposition. However, our interview data sug-
gest three sources for the anti-PX discontent: first, the Xiamen dispute
aroused public concern over the safety of PX production; second, Maoming
officials were notorious for their corruption, which fuelled popular distrust;
finally, Maoming residents resented the chronic pollution in their city.
Practically all of the residents we interviewed knew about the successful
anti-PX protest in Xiamen through a variety of information channels, such
as social media on the Internet, personal relationships, and so on. There was
a shared understanding that the unwelcome PX plant had been chased out
of Xiamen and sent to their hometown. A sense of unjustified victimhood
as well as inspiration from the Xiamen success story lent legitimacy to local
protests. The following interview excerpt is fairly representative of the views
of Maoming residents:
I heard that they tried to build PX plants in Xiamen, Dalian, and Ningbo,
and all were stopped after public protests. The Maoming PX plant was
driven out of those places. The government intends to kill Maoming
people, as if lives in other cities are more valuable and the health of
people in Maoming has to suffer. If the PX plant is not toxic, as the
government says, it should be built someplace else. If the PX plant can
be successfully removed from Xiamen, Maoming people can do the
same. (A small businessman at the farmers’ market, 4 April 2014)
The protestors’ reasoning was simple and straightforward: Xiamen resi-
dents did not want the PX plant because it was toxic, and the more positive
things government propaganda said about PX, the more dubious it was. In
the end, there was virtually no trust in the government.
Distrust of the government was aggravated by exposure of official venality.
In 2014, the Communist Party’s Central Commission for Discipline Inspec-
tion sent more than 70 investigators to Maoming to look into allegations
of widespread graft in the city government. Two former Party secretaries of
Maoming, Zhou Zhenhong and Luo Yinguo, were sentenced to death with
a two-year reprieve for corruption. (13) Such scandals deepened the negative
impression of official irregularities as well as of a cavalier attitude toward
popular opinion. Maoming residents resented the fact that major policies
were executed without proper consultation. Even when people accepted
the view that PX in itself was not toxic, they still strongly opposed the PX
project because they felt a corrupt government simply could not guarantee
industrial safety.
Just a few days ago, the former chairman of the Political Consultative
Conference in Maoming, Feng Limei, was investigated and prosecuted.
Maoming officials are a mess and the government is simply hopeless.
PX products are not toxic, but there can be problems of leakage during
the processing stage. The entire city of Maoming will be affected if
that happens. Who ends up suffering the consequences? I don’t op-
pose PX per se, and China certainly needs PX, but I don’t believe that
a government that lacks credibility can manage PX production well.
(A petrochemical company employee, 4 April 2014)
Previously, Maoming residents might have been willing to tolerate pollu-
tion because petrochemical production provided them with a livelihood.
For more than a half century, the industry had offered job opportunities to
local people. In particular, since children were allowed to take over their
parents’ positions when they retired, many families literally lived off of the
petrochemical industry from generation to generation. However, after the
reform of state-owned enterprises in 2000, many workers were laid off,
souring the previously favourable image. Now most Maoming residents
were of the opinion that while the petrochemical company might con-
tribute to local GDP, there was not much economic benefit to local resi-
dents, who furthermore suffered from the effects of pollution.
N o . 2 0 1 4 / 3  •  c h i n a  p e r s p e c t i v e s
35
13.
Patrick Boehler, “Violence, arrests in Guangdong city of Maoming as locals rally against petro-
chemical plant,” South China Morning Post, 31 March 2014.
Kingsyhon Lee and Ming-sho Ho – The Maoming Anti-PX Protest of 2014 
Photos 1, 2, and 3 – Pro-PX agreements in the schools of Maoming.  © Kingsyhon Lee

I believe the PX project is good for the economic development of
Maoming, but will it provide employment opportunities for us? The
GDP of Maoming ranks among the top contributors to Guangdong
Province, but why is per capita income still so low? Obviously the
city is wealthy and strong, but the people are poor and weak. More-
over, there are already two time bombs, the ethylene plant and the
oil refinery, in Maoming. Can people survive if a PX plant is built this
year? An explosion occurred in the ethylene plant in 2008, and as a
result, well water in the nearby villages became black and undrink-
able. Such pollution incidents happen frequently in Maoming. Every
time it is rainy and windy, we can smell the stench of the oil refinery.
Living here is simply slow-motion suicide. The special local product
here is no longer lychees and longan fruit, but rather nasal inflam-
mation. (A retired worker, April 4 2014)
Protest and repression
On Sunday morning, 30 March 2014, people who were mostly residents
near the planned PX site began to gather on the front lawn of the Maoming
municipal government office building. It started off as a spontaneous gath-
ering without leadership and protest activity, and the police maintained
order by urging the crowd to leave and preventing people from getting close
to the government building. There was confusion among the crowd until
8:30 AM, when a young woman standing in front began shouting the slogan
“Get PX out of Maoming! Give us back a clean homeland!” The protestors
then became agitated, and some began distributing protest leaflets. (14)
When most of the people had received the leaflets, the crowd became bet-
ter organised. The leaders directed thousands of people to march along the
densely populated main thoroughfares of the city centre in order to attract
more attention. When the demonstrators attempted to return to the city
government lawn, columns of policemen stopped them. After minor scuffles,
protestors broke through the police cordon and gathered again in front of
the city government building. The morning rally had been largely peaceful,
but the government did not send a delegate to meet the crowd, which be-
came increasingly frustrated and restless.
At 3 PM, some young people began throwing eggs and bottles of urine at
policemen lined up in front of the government building. After initial restraint,
the police attempted to disperse the crowd at 4 PM, beating those who
hurled projectiles. Protestors fled to safety, and some young people with
dyed hair and fashionable clothing were savagely beaten. According to Ms.
Zhu, an eyewitness, “the situation was chaotic. Five policemen roughed up
one person until he could no longer stand. Even a girl who was taking pic-
tures was knocked unconscious.” Ms. Zhu also panicked at that point and
took shelter in a nearby high-rise to observe from a safe vantage point. She
was shocked by the police brutality. “We protested peacefully,” she argued;
“How could the police beat us up?”
By 6 PM, most of the protestors were gone and only a few people re-
mained. Two hours later, the crowd remerged just as during the daytime,
with an obvious increase in young people, who kept shouting slogans and
demanding that the mayor step down. An attempt to persuade young pro-
testors to proceed in a civilised and non-violent manner produced the op-
posite effect. Around 9 PM, an official car approached, and an angry mob
intercepted and smashed it, mistakenly identifying it as the mayor’s. (15) A
young woman mounted and stomped on the car, attracting loud cheering,
and finally the car was turned upside down. This daring act triggered a riot,
and images of the obstruction and burning of a police vehicle at 12 AM was
circulated on the Internet (see Photos 4 and 5). As the police started crack-
ing down, the crowd was driven off and rioters were arrested. A witness de-
scribed the horrible scene as a battlefield “like we saw in TV films about the
Anti-Japanese War. Many young females were crying out in fear.” 
The crowd gathered again the following day. There were efforts to per-
suade people to protest without violence. A peaceful demonstration lasted
for a whole day in front of the government office building, but ended with-
out protesters being able to see any official representative. Some local po-
licemen gently urged the demonstrators to leave, explaining their dilemma
and unwillingness to use violence against local compatriots. However, a
large number of armed policemen from subordinate cities (Gaozhou 高州,
Xinyi 信宜, and Dianbai 电白) and adjacent cities (Zhanjiang 湛江and
Yangjiang 阳江) were deployed. The out-of-town armed police began dis-
persing the crowd at 6 PM, using tear gas and specialised batons. The
demonstrators were so frightened that they immediately fled from the
lawn. “The police were so horrible that they punched people on the ground
and did not stop beating. It seemed that they were going to beat people to
36
c h i n a  p e r s p e c t i v e s •  N o . 2 0 1 4 / 3
14.
Originally, a local realty broker prepared 50 copies of leaflets to be distributed at the rally. Seeing
that they were not enough for the crowd, some people volunteered to duplicate more copies at
a nearby store. 
15.
According to the criminal police, the car belonged to the Deputy Director of the Anti-smuggling
Office, who disregarded the police suggestion to stay away from the crowd.
Current affairs
Photos 4 and 5 – Burned vehicles in Maoming, 30 March 2014. © Mr. Yang

death,” according to an interviewee. Nevertheless, protestors did not give
up; they immediately returned to the lawn during breaks in the police crack-
down. There were several rounds of crowd dispersion and re-gathering, and
the confrontation lasted until midnight. Some young rioters who were afraid
of the armed police chose to vent their anger by destroying public facilities,
billboards, and roadside rails and burning police booths.
Previous anti-PX protests in Xiamen, Ningbo, Kunming, and Dalian did not
experience police crackdowns, and officials eventually adopted a moderate
response by abandoning the PX projects. (16) Why was Maoming a conspic-
uous exception in using coercive policing? Why were protestors so angry
that destructive riots resulted?
The deployment of outside armed police provides a clue to unravelling
the puzzle. The local leadership in Maoming City did not have the authority
to mobilise them, so the directive must have come from the provincial gov-
ernment. The advanced anti-riot equipment, tear gas, batons, and pepper
water, were normally used in situations of second-degree alert. It can be
safely assumed that Maoming officials had obtained their superiors’ ap-
proval. There were direct and personal stakes involved in the PX project,
since it was a joint investment with the city government, which expected
to receive tax and profit, and according to convention, the local deputy
Party secretary served as general manager of the Maoming Petrochemical
Company. The overlap of political power and economic interest therefore
hardened official intransigence.
The Maoming protest proceeded spontaneously for the most part, with
people emerging as impromptu leaders to lead the crowd. Based on our in-
terview with the “leaders,” they did not belong to any pre-existing organi-
sation, nor was there prior planning. After their arrival at the scene, they did
not know the organisers’ identities or the schedule for protest activities.
They received the information from an anonymous Internet source and
went there out of anger or curiosity. Another event on 28 April 2014 showed
a similar lack of organisation. A group of villagers close to the PX construc-
tion site gathered around 10 AM because of a piece of Internet news. At
first, people were just standing around and talking as if watching a play. For
three hours, no leader talked to the crowd or shouted slogans. Then a group
of young villagers lined up their motorcycles to form a barricade, humiliating
the plainclothes police amid jeering and cheering from the crowd. A morn-
ing’s protest at the construction site ended in a minor brawl.
The lack of organisation deprived the protestors of meaningful engage-
ment with officials when the opportunity rose. On the third day of the
protest, officials announced their intention to meet and negotiate with
protest delegates. It was difficult, however, to decide who could represent
the crowd. When some representatives were finally chosen, they were com-
plete strangers to one another, and during the meeting with officials, they
simply voiced their personal opinions rather than conveying the collective
demands of the protestors. After the session with the officials, these repre-
sentatives went home without explaining the situation to the crowd. The
absence of leadership obviously made it impossible to win concessions from
the government. Ultimately, a disorganised crowd motivated by the highly
emotional appeal “getting PX out of Maoming” could be very disruptive and
riotous, but they had difficulty translating their discontent into concrete
demands and pressure on officials, who in turn found suppression a less
costly option than good-faith negotiation.
Without organisational leadership, protestors’ information came mostly
from anonymous Internet sources. Widespread anger brought them to the
protest scene, but since they were mutual strangers, there was low trust
among them, and suspicion of plainclothes police and agents provocateurs
was endemic. The spontaneous attempt to constrain violent behaviour was
doomed to fail because no participant had the legitimacy to represent the
protestors as a group. As a matter of fact, the riot provided the perfect ex-
cuse for the government to utilise coercive force.
While protest activities in Maoming were mainly spontaneous, unorgan-
ised, and violence-prone, a solidarity demonstration on 1 April in
Guangzhou, the capital of Guangdong Province, offered a contrasting ex-
ample. The Guangzhou rally was organised by Maoming sojourners in this
southern metropolis of more than ten million people. One man, who re-
vealed his surname as “Dai” to journalists, sent an invitation to his 2,000
friends in social media for a protest at the provincial government office.
Due to Internet censorship, only around 300 participants showed up, (17) and
their rally was peaceful. Guan Dongqin, an accountant in Guangzhou, raised
a banner stating, “For all the Maoming compatriots, freedom is everything.”
In the end, the police arrested nine persons, including Guan. (18)
The apparently spontaneous and violent nature of the Maoming protest
stood in contrast to similar cases in Xiamen, Ningbo, Kunming, and Dalian,
where middle-class members of the community made up most of the par-
ticipants and their leaders gained the opportunity to articulate their de-
mand in mainstream media. (19) In their protest against a waste incinerator,
middle-class homeowners in Guangzhou managed to stage “rational resist-
ance” with the intention of setting themselves apart from nearby villagers
who might likewise suffer from the facility. (20)We do not imply here an in-
herent tendency among lower-class members of society to resort to unruly
protest. As stressed by Frances Fox Piven and Richard A. Cloward in their
observation on American poor people’s movements, the grassroots did not
experience their grievances in the abstract, but rather in daily unpleasant
encounters with their superiors. Hence it was in the mundane milieu that
their acts of resistance first emerged, usually in the form of mass defiance
disrupting everyday routine. (21)The same observation applied to the nascent
stage of Taiwan’s environmental movement of the mid-1980s, when the
victims of industrial pollution erected barricades to bring production forcibly
to a halt. (22)
Although the scale of the Maoming protest surpassed the preceding cases,
“local elites were not involved in this dispute,” observed an interviewed real
estate agent. The interviewed witnesses concurred that the main protest
participants came from lower class backgrounds and from occupations such
as karaoke bar workers, mobile phone salespersons, barbershop workers,
small clothing store owners, rural farmers, and a significant number of un-
employed youth. Many high-school students took part in the protest on
the first day, but a subsequent demand from the city government sent them
N o . 2 0 1 4 / 3  •  c h i n a  p e r s p e c t i v e s
37
16.
Cao Kai and Zheng Caixiong, “Protests show growing concern over environment,” China Daily, 
3 April 2014.
17.
Demetri Sevastopulo, “China PX plant protests spread to provincial capital Guangzhou,” Financial
Times, 1 April 2014.
18.
Demetri Sevastopulo, “Chinese police detain Guangzhou protesters.” Financial Times, 2 April 2014.
19.
Jie Chen, “Transnational Environmental Movement: Impacts on the green civil society in China,”
Journal of Contemporary China, Vol. 19, No. 65, 2010, pp.503-523; Yanqi Tong and Shaohua Lei,
“Large-Scale Mass Incidents and Government Responses in China,” International Journal of China
Studies, Vol. 1, No. 2, 2010, pp. 487-508.
20.
Amy Zhang, “Rational Resistance: Homeowner Contention against Waste Incinerator in
Guangzhou,” China Perspectives, No. 2014/2, pp. 45-52.
21.
Frances Fox Piven and Richard A. Cloward, Poor People’s Movements: Why They Succeed, How
They Fail, New York, Vintage Books, 1978.
22.
Ming-sho Ho and Feng-san Su, “Control by Containment: The Politics of Institutionalizing Pollution
Disputes in Taiwan,” Environment and Planning A, Vol. 40, No. 10, 2008, p. 2406.
Kingsyhon Lee and Ming-sho Ho – The Maoming Anti-PX Protest of 2014 

back to school, thus effectively containing student activism. Employees of
state-owned banks and power companies were given lessons in ideological
indoctrination, and they were prohibited from joining the protest. In short,
the government was effectively able to forestall the participation of people
in its directly supervised sectors. Consequently, the anti-PX protest could
only recruit participants from the private sector, which was relatively un-
developed in Maoming and supported few independent middle class actors.
In Maoming, where the state-owned petrochemical company dominates
the city, members of the middle class usually work for the government. By
pre-emptively constraining their involvement, the government deprived the
protest movement of a valuable manpower resource. Without the leader-
ship, discursive capacity, and media connections of the middle-class, Maom-
ing protestors could only rely on mass action to put pressure on the
incumbent elites.
Social media, urban space, and protest
mobilisation
As soon as the protest came into being, Maoming citizens tried to contact
nationally renowned media such as Southern Weekend (Nanfang zhoumo
南方周末), Southern Metropolis Daily (Nanfang dushibao 南方都市报), and
Southern Daily (Nanfang ribao 南方日报). There were live call-ins to the
popular TV programs “Today’s Focus” (今日关注) and “DV Live” to publicise
the plight of Maoming. Although Guangzhou-based journalists appeared
sympathetic, their superiors did not grant permission for on-the-spot re-
porting in Maoming. Originally, after the 30 March rally, people were con-
fident that the powerful demonstration of local unity should attract broader
media attention that might force local officials to revise the PX policy, and
many people were disappointed at the neglect of the mainstream media.
After four days of sustained protest, the government announced a press
conference on 3 April 2014, which raised a ray of hope among the protes-
tors. People waited again in front of the city government offices, bringing
their videos and other visual images in hopes of being interviewed by jour-
nalists. The government changed the venue at the last minute and held the
press conference behind closed doors, although it was simultaneously
broadcast on the Internet. Only one news agency and ten newspapers were
invited, and all followed the directives of the Communist Party. Domestic
media with public credibility and the international press were not allowed
to cover the news. This was clearly a public relations tactic on the part of
officials. With long-awaited coverage in the mainstream media still unavail-
able, Maoming protesters resorted to sharing their videos and pictures
through Internet social media – the only self-help method to circumvent
official censorship.
In the recent wave of environmental movements in China, such as the
anti-incinerator protest in the Panyu district of Guangzhou and anti-PX
protests in Xiamen, traditional media played a critical role in the mobilising
process. (23) Media affect the movement by validating and enlarging the
scope of its frame. (24)Almost all movement activists desire media attention;
for them, “no news is bad news.” However, as noted above, traditional media
were absent at the Maoming protest. As an alternative, protest mobilisation
proceeded through online channels. Almost all our interviewees indicated
that throughout the protest movement their social media, such as QZone
and WeChat, were overloaded with related information. Some people de-
cided to join the rally because they felt angry after seeing pictures of police
suppression. On the second day of the riot, some bogus pictures and de-
scriptions circulated on the Internet and fuelled popular fury. One wide-
spread rumour claimed that 15 people were dead and 80 were injured. Hong
Kong media relayed this rumour without verification, and a report in Apple
Daily was massively circulated as “evidence of a Maoming massacre.”
After the riot, the authorities made “Maoming” a censored word on Weibo
(a Chinese version of Twitter), and photos of police brutality on Qzone were
deleted. As a result, WeChat became the only online channel relatively free
from official Internet surveillance. Information on WeChat was shared on
the basis of friendship, which certainly limited the scope of its circulation.
Nevertheless, this drawback was compensated by greater reliability, because
receivers tended to know senders on a personal basis. At the protest scene,
many participants were busy sending the latest news via social media, and
some pieces were later quoted by the international media or reposted in
online bulletin boards. Since there were no professional journalists on the
spot to report on the anti-PX rally, participants had to play the dual role of
protesting and news-making, as happened in the Xiamen case. (25)The only
difference was that traditional media eventually became involved following
the self-reporting by Xiamen protestors, while Maoming protestors could
only rely on social media.
Aside from the Internet, Maoming protestors used their intimate knowl-
edge of the city layout to maximise participation. Map 2 shows that the
demonstration started from the lawn of the city government building and
made a counter-clockwise circle. Protestors took the route via the city’s
traffic arteries so they could march through commercial areas, populous
residential areas, and marketplaces. Upon seeing the protest procession,
many people at roadside stores came out to express their solidarity by ap-
plauding or shouting slogans. Quite a few people joined the protest along
the route. Mr. Yang was among the frontline demonstrators raising a protest
banner. He estimated that the rally began with 1,000 to 2,000 people, but
when they finished circling the city centre and returned to the city govern-
38
c h i n a  p e r s p e c t i v e s •  N o . 2 0 1 4 / 3
23.
Yu Huang and Zeng Fanxu, “Cong yilinweihe dao zhengce changdao: Zhongguo meiti yu shehui
kangzheng de huji moshi” (From “not in my back yard” to policy advocacy: The co-empowerment
model between media and protests in China), Xinwenxue yanjiu (Mass Communication Studies),
Vol. 109, 2011, pp. 167-200.
24.
William A.Gamson and Gadi Wolfsfeld, “Movements and Media as Interacting Systems,” The An-
nals of the American Academy of Political and Social Science, Vol. 528, 1993, pp. 114-125.
25.
Hung Chinfu, “Citizen Journalism and Cyberactivism in China’s Anti-PX Plant in Xiamen, 2007-
2009,” China: An International Journal, Vol. 11, No. 1, 2013, pp. 40-54.
Current affairs
Map 2 – The route of the demonstration in Maoming 
© Kingsyhon Lee

ment, the crowd grew to roughly 7,000. Here Maoming people utilised an
analogous spatial tactic to that of the Beijing pro-democracy student ac-
tivists in 1989. As analysed by Zhao Dingxin, (26) student protestors zigzagged
through the student quarters to attract more participants before marching
through the police cordon line. Similarly, the counter-clockwise demonstra-
tion in Maoming was a mobilising strategy to make up for the deficiency in
organisational resources and middle-class leadership.
Conclusion
What happened in Maoming in spring 2014 was the first anti-PX protest
in China that generated bloody confrontation. It deviated from the scenarios
in Dalian, Xiamen, Kunming, and Chengdu, where urban development nour-
ished a broadly-based middle class more capable of publicising their envi-
ronmental grievances due to their better resource endowment. Particularly
on issues concerning homeowners’ rights, China’s major cities have wit-
nessed sustained activism among the middle class in defiance of business
and its political colluders to the point that observers saw broader political
implications. (27) By contrast, Maoming was a petrochemical town whose
economic viability depended chiefly on environmentally harmful produc-
tion. Moreover, Chinese classify their cities in terms of economic and social
development, and Maoming barely qualifies listing among the “third tier.”
As a result, disruptive protests and the subsequent repression failed to draw
media and public attention. The official decision to launch the PX project
was announced without proper consultation, as a result of which the lead-
erless and disorganised protestors could only resort to violence to express
their opposition. Their initial optimism and sense of empowerment gave
way to fear and indignation after the police suppression, and their hope was
completely dashed after the closed-door press conference. Their protest
seemed to founder in helplessness and isolation.
The government gave a vague promise in early April 2014 that the PX proj-
ect would not get started until “a consensus among citizens is reached.” At
the time of writing (June 2014), there has been no follow-up news. According
to a realty agent, local housing transactions plunged to an unprecedented
low in April but quickly rebounded in early May. Clearly the riot and suppres-
sion created a temporary panic among existing or prospective Maoming
homeowners, but many chose to forget what happened. There was also a
tacit understanding that a so-called “consensus among citizens” would
emerge sooner or later and that the PX project would ultimately proceed. 
To conclude, the Maoming lesson demonstrates the formidable difficulties
faced by China’s nascent environmental movement. Mass environmental
consciousness is visibly on the rise, and victims are willing to claim their
right to a liveable homeland through disruptive protest if necessary. How-
ever, except in some major cities, critical resources for successful environ-
mentalism, such as middle-class leadership, organisational basis, and
sympathetic media, are direly lacking. At this moment, it can be safely as-
sumed that it will take years or perhaps decades before the successful
movement in Xiamen can be replicated in a social context like Maoming’s.
In other words, it remains a long-term project for the sprouts of urban en-
vironmentalism to take root on a national basis in China.
z Kingsyhon Lee is a visiting research student at National Taiwan
University.
National Taiwan University, No. 1, Roosevelt Rd. Sec 4., Taipei City,
10617, Taiwan (l.kingsyhon@gmail.com).
z Ming-sho Ho is a professor in the Department of Sociology,
National Taiwan University. 
Department of Sociology, National Taiwan University, No. 1,
Roosevelt Rd. Sec 4., Taipei City, 10617, Taiwan
(mingshoho@gmail.com).
N o . 2 0 1 4 / 3  •  c h i n a  p e r s p e c t i v e s
39
26.
Dingxin Zhao, “Ecologies of Social Movements: Student Mobilization during the 1989 Pro-democ-
racy Movement in Beijing,” American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 103, No. 6, 1998, pp. 1493-1529.
27.
Benjamin L. Read, “Democratizing the Neighborhood? New Private Housing and Home-Owner
Self-Organization in Urban China,” China Journal, Vol. 49, 2003, pp. 31-59; Luigi Tomba, “Residential
Space and Collective Interest Formation in Beijing Housing Disputes,” China Quarterly, Vol. 184,
2005, pp. 934-951; Zhengxu Wang et al., “Leadership in China’s Urban Middle Class Protest: The
Movement to Protect Homeowners’ Right in Beijing,” China Quarterly, Vol. 214, 2013, pp. 411-
431.
Kingsyhon Lee and Ming-sho Ho – The Maoming Anti-PX Protest of 2014