Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, 
Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
Moshe Schwartz 
Specialist in Defense Acquisition 
May 23, 2014 
Congressional Research Service 
7-5700 
www.crs.gov 
R43566 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
Summary 
The Department of Defense (DOD) relies extensively on contractors to equip and support the 
U.S. military in peacetime and during military operations, obligating more than $300 billion on 
contracts in FY2013. 
Congress and the executive branch have long been frustrated with waste, mismanagement, and 
fraud in defense acquisitions and have spent significant resources attempting to reform and 
improve the process. These frustrations have led to numerous efforts to improve defense 
acquisitions. Since the end of World War II, every Administration and virtually every Secretary of 
Defense has embarked on an acquisition reform effort. Yet despite these efforts, cost overruns, 
schedule delays, and performance shortfalls in acquisition programs persist.  
A number of analysts have argued that the successive waves of acquisition reform have yielded 
only limited results due in large part to poor workforce management. Most reports have 
concluded that the key to good acquisitions is having a sufficiently sized and talented acquisition 
workforce and giving them the resources, incentives, and authority to do their job. Yet most of the 
reform efforts of the past decades have not sought to fundamentally and systematically address 
these workforce-related issues. 
Significant changes to the national security and industrial landscape in recent years, including 
consolidation of the defense industrial base and the increasing complexity of weapon systems, 
have led many analysts to call for a renewed effort to improve the acquisition process.  
Historically, eras of budgetary restraint have been associated with the pursuit and implementation 
of acquisition reform. Against the current backdrop of the Budget Control Act of 2011 and 
declines in defense spending, the stage may be set for a renewed effort to significantly improve 
defense acquisitions. Other factors contributing to a sense among analysts that the time may be 
ripe for reform include recent experiences in Iraq and Afghanistan and the increasing availability 
of data to drive decisions.  
In recent years, DOD has taken a number of steps to improve the process by which it buys goods 
and services, including  
• 
rewriting the regulatory structure that governs defense acquisitions;  
• 
launching the Better Buying Power and Better Buying Power II initiatives aimed 
at improving the productivity of the acquisition system and the industrial base; 
• 
improving the use of data to support decision making; and 
• 
establishing a team to develop a legislative proposal aimed at simplifying the 
laws and regulations governing defense acquisitions.  
Many analysts believe that what DOD can do on its own to improve acquisitions can only go so 
far—that significant, effective, and lasting acquisition reform will occur only with the active 
participation of Congress. Congress has been critical to advancing acquisition reform; such 
efforts as establishing the Federal Acquisition Regulation, creating Defense Acquisition 
University, streamlining acquisition regulations, and enacting the Goldwater-Nichols Act were the 
result of congressional action.  

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
Oversight issues for Congress include the extent to which the Weapon System Acquisition 
Reform Act of 2009 (P.L. 111-23) and the various DOD initiatives are having a positive effect on 
acquisitions, whether current reform efforts are sufficient to address concerns related to the 
acquisition workforce, and what additional steps, if any, Congress can take to further the effort to 
improve defense acquisitions. 
 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
Contents 
Introduction ...................................................................................................................................... 1 
Background ...................................................................................................................................... 1 
Prior Efforts to Improve Acquisitions ....................................................................................... 3 
Cost, Schedule, and Performance Problems Persist .................................................................. 4 
Can Acquisition Reform Succeed? ............................................................................................ 5 
The Weapon Systems Acquisition Reform Act ................................................................... 6 
Operational Contract Support .............................................................................................. 7 
The Changing Landscape of Defense Acquisitions ................................................................... 8 
Now May Be a Good Time for Acquisition Reform ............................................................... 10 
Recent DOD Efforts to Improve Acquisitions ............................................................................... 12 
Issues for Congress ........................................................................................................................ 16 
Improving the Workforce ........................................................................................................ 16 
Building a Capable, Trained, and Sufficiently Sized Workforce ....................................... 18 
Creating the Right Incentives ............................................................................................ 19 
Establishing Authority and Accountability........................................................................ 20 
Targeted Reform Efforts .......................................................................................................... 21 
Streamlining Acquisition Laws and Regulations .............................................................. 21 
Logistics and Supply Chain Management ......................................................................... 21 
 
Figures 
Figure 1. Contract Obligations, by Agency ..................................................................................... 2 
Figure 2. DOD Contract Obligations (FY2013 dollars) .................................................................. 2 
Figure 3. Percentage of Contract Obligations, by Category ............................................................ 3 
 
Appendixes 
Appendix A. Complexity of the Acquisition Process .................................................................... 23 
Appendix B. Constantly Changing Acquisition Rules ................................................................... 25 
Appendix C. Syllabus for the CRS Seminars Defense Acquisitions: What Can We Learn 
From Past Reform Efforts? ......................................................................................................... 27 
 
Contacts 
Author Contact Information........................................................................................................... 29 
 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
1 
Introduction 
The Department of Defense (DOD) relies extensively on contractors to equip and support the 
U.S. military in peacetime and during military operations. Contractors design, develop, and build 
advanced weapon and business systems, construct military bases around the world, and provide 
services such as intelligence analysis, logistics, and base support. For as long as the U.S. military 
has relied on contractors, DOD and Congress have sought to improve the cost, schedule, and 
performance of the goods and services being acquired. Pursuit of this goal has often taken the 
form of seeking to identify and implement effective reforms of the acquisition process. 
This report provides background information and identifies issues for Congress when 
contemplating acquisition reform. Related CRS products include Defense Acquisitions: What Can 
We Learn From Past Reform Efforts?, a multi-part video series that reflects on past defense 
acquisition reform efforts. See Appendix C for the syllabus accompanying the course on 
acquisition reform. To view the series, see 
• 
CRS Report WVB00020, Defense Acquisitions: What Can We Learn From Past 
Reform Efforts?, by Moshe Schwartz  
• 
CRS Report WVB00022, Defense Acquisitions: The Foundation of Modern 
Acquisition Reform (1970-1986): The Fitzhugh and Packard Reports, by Moshe 
Schwartz 
• 
CRS Report WVB00024, Defense Acquisitions: The 1990s: The Perry Report, 
Section 800 Panel, and More, by Moshe Schwartz 
Related CRS reports include CRS Report RL34026, Defense Acquisitions: How DOD Acquires 
Weapon Systems and Recent Efforts to Reform the Process, by Moshe Schwartz; CRS Report 
R41293, The Nunn-McCurdy Act: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress; and CRS 
Report R43074, Department of Defense’s Use of Contractors to Support Military Operations: 
Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress.  
Background 
In FY2013, DOD obligated $310 billion on federal contracts—more than half (51%) of total 
DOD direct obligations and more than the contract obligations of all other federal government 
agencies combined (Figure 1).1 DOD contract obligations were equivalent to approximately 9% 
of the entire U.S. budget.2 
                                                 
1 Calculations are based on total contract obligations data as recorded in the Federal Procurement Data System—Next 
Generation, February 2014. FPDS-NG does not include data from judicial branch agencies, the legislative branch, 
certain DOD components, or select executive branch agencies, such as the Central Intelligence Agency and National 
Security Agency. See also United States Department of the Treasury, “Joint Statement of Secretary Lew and OMB 
Director Burwell on Budget Results for Fiscal Year 2013 ,” press release, October 30, 2013, http://www.treasury.gov/
press-center/press-releases/Pages/jl2197.aspx.  
2 For purposes of this report, total obligations are defined as total direct obligations. Deflators for converting into 
constant dollars derived from Office of the Under Secretary of Defense (Comptroller), National Defense Budget 
Estimates for FY 3013, Department of Defense, “Department of Defense Deflators – TOA by Category ‘Total Non-
(continued...) 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
2 
Figure 1. Contract Obligations, by Agency 
FY2013 
 
Source: Federal Procurement Data System-Next Generation, February, 2014. Figure by CRS Graphics. 
Note: DOE – Department of Energy; DHHS – Department of Health and Human Services; VA – Department of 
Veterans Affairs; NASA - National Aeronautics and Space Administration. 
From FY1999 through FY2013, adjusted for inflation (FY2013 dollars), DOD contract 
obligations increased from $175 billion to $308 billion (see Figure 2). Over the first part of this 
period—FY1999 through FY2008—contract obligations increased 150%, from $175 billion to 
$435 billion. This trend reversed itself in FY2008: from FY2008 through FY2013, contract 
obligations decreased by 30%, dropping from $435 billion to $308 billion. 
Figure 2. DOD Contract Obligations (FY2013 dollars) 
FY1999-FY2013 (in billions) 
 
Source: CRS analysis of data from the Federal Procurement Data System—Next Generation, February 2014. 
                                                                 
(...continued) 
Pay,’” Table 5-5, pp. 59-60, March, 2012.  

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
3 
In FY2013, the acquisition of services represented 52% of total DOD contract obligations 
(including research and development) compared to 48% for goods (see Figure 3). Despite more 
than half of contract obligations being dedicated to the acquisition of services over the last two 
decades, past reform efforts have tended to focus on the acquisition of goods—with particular 
attention paid to weapon systems.  
Figure 3. Percentage of Contract Obligations, by Category 
FY1998-FY2013 
 
Source: CRS Analysis of data from the Federal Procurement Data System, February 2014. 
Note: R&D is broken out as a separate category to highlight the trend in R&D obligations.  
Prior Efforts to Improve Acquisitions 
Congress and the executive branch have long been frustrated with waste, mismanagement, and 
fraud in defense acquisitions and have spent significant resources seeking to reform and improve 
the process. Efforts to address wasteful spending, cost overruns, schedule slips, and performance 
shortfalls have continued unabated, with more than 150 major studies on acquisition reform since 
the end of World War II. Every Administration and virtually every Secretary of Defense has 
embarked on an acquisition reform effort.3 
In the early 1980s a number of major weapon system programs experienced dramatic cost 
overruns—overruns that increased the defense budget by billions of dollars but resulted in the 
production of the same number of, or in some cases fewer, weapons than originally planned. In 
1985, President Ronald Reagan established the President’s Blue Ribbon Commission on Defense 
Management, chaired by former Deputy Secretary of Defense David Packard, which issued a 
final report (known as the Packard Commission Report) that contained far-reaching 
recommendations “intended to assist the Executive and Legislative Branches as well as industry 
in implementing a broad range of needed reforms.” In 1994, then Secretary of Defense William 
                                                 
3 Robert F. Hale, Promoting Efficiency in the Department of Defense: Keep Trying, Be Realistic, Center for Strategic 
and Budgetary Assessments, January 2002, p. 7. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
4 
Perry released a blueprint for another round of reform efforts in the report Acquisition Reform: A 
Mandate for Change.4 
Congress has also been active in pursuing reform, legislating changes through the annual National 
Defense Authorization Acts and through stand-alone legislation, such as the Defense Acquisition 
Workforce Improvement Act of 1990,5 Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994,6 Clinger-
Cohen Act of 1996,7 and Weapon System Acquisition Reform Act of 2009.8A number of these 
efforts were aimed at implementing recommendations of the Packard and Perry reports. 
The various reform efforts have dramatically altered the process by which DOD procures goods 
and services. Major changes include 
• 
creating the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) to develop uniform 
acquisition regulations across DOD and the federal government; 
• 
establishing Defense Acquisition University to train and improve the 
performance of the acquisition workforce; 
• 
instituting a streamlined management chain (Program Manager, Program 
Executive Office, Service Acquisition Executive, Under Secretary of Defense) to 
foster accountability and authority; 
• 
implementing a milestone decision process to improve oversight; 
• 
requiring independent cost estimates to improve budget forecasting;9 
• 
establishing a joint requirements board to improve requirements development 
and eliminate duplicative programs;  
• 
moving away from the use of customized military standards and specifications to 
increased use of commercial technologies; and  
• 
using multi-year procurements (with congressional approval) to lower costs. 
Cost, Schedule, and Performance Problems Persist 
Acquisition programs initiated since the 1970s have continued to experience significant cost 
increases and other problems.10 As one RAND report stated, “despite the many acquisition 
                                                 
4 Honorable William J. Perry, Acquisition Reform: A Mandate for Change, Department of Defense, February 9, 1994. 
5 P.L. 101-510. 
6 P.L. 103-355. 
7 P.L. 104-106. 
8 P.L. 111-23. 
9 The Cost Analysis and Improvement Group was established within the Office of the Secretary of Defense in 1972 to 
develop these independent cost estimates. Today, independent cost estimates are generated by the Office of the Director 
of Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation, which supplanted the Cost Analysis and Improvement Group. 
10 See David S. Christensen, Ph.D., Capt. David A. Searle, USAF, and Dr. Caisse Vickery, “The Impact of the Packard 
Commission’s Recommendations on Reducing Cost Overruns on Defense Acquisition Contracts,” Acquisition Review 
Quarterly, Summer 1999, p. 251; Deloitte Consulting LLP, Can We Afford Our Own Future? Why A&D Programs are 
Late and Over-budget—and What Can Be Done to Fix the Problem, 2008; U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on 
Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, Subcommittee on Federal Financial Management, Government 
Information, Federal Services, and International Security, Comments of Michael J. Sullivan, Government 
(continued...) 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
5 
reforms and other DoD management initiatives over the years, the development cost growth of 
military systems has not been reduced.”11 Consider the following: 
• 
Since 1993, development contracts have experienced a median of 32% cost 
growth (not adjusted for inflation).12 
• 
Since 1997, 31% of all Major Defense Acquisition Programs (MDAP) have had 
cost growth of at least 15%.13 
• 
During the period 1990-2010, the Army terminated 22 Major Defense 
Acquisition Programs; every year between 1996 and 2010, the Army spent more 
than $1 billion on programs that were ultimately cancelled.14 
• 
Procurement costs for the aircraft carrier CVN-78 have grown more than 20% 
since the submission of the FY2008 budget, and 4% since the submission of the 
FY2013 budget, prompting the Navy to program more than $1.3 billion in 
additional procurement funding for the ship in FY2014 and FY2015.15 
Can Acquisition Reform Succeed? 
Given the results of past efforts, some analysts have argued that acquisition reform is a fruitless 
effort and that the fundamental problems with DOD acquisitions lie not in policy but in execution 
and expectations. In an article entitled Let’s Skip Acquisition Reform This Time, MIT professor 
Harvey Sapolsky wrote 
The limited number of available reforms have all been recycled. You can centralize or 
decentralize. You can create a specialist acquisition corps or you can outsource their tasks. 
You can fly before you buy or buy before you fly. Another blue-ribbon study, more 
legislation, and a new slogan will not make it happen.16 
A number of analysts have also argued that far from improving the system, many past reform 
efforts have made the process less efficient and effective.17 A recent report on Army acquisitions 
                                                                 
(...continued) 
Accountability Office, Tools to Prevent Defense Department Cost Overruns, 112th Cong., 1st sess., March 29, 2011. 
11 See Obaid Yousossi, Mark V. Arena, and Robert S. Leonard, et al., Is Weapon System Cost Growth Increasing?, 
RAND, Santa Monica, CA, 2007, p. xx. 
12 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense Acquisition, Technology and Logistics, Performance of the Defense 
Acquisition System, 2013 Annual Report, June 28, 2013, p. 28. 
13 Based on percentage of programs experiencing Nunn-McCurdy breach. Office of the Under Secretary of Defense 
Acquisition, Technology and Logistics, Performance of the Defense Acquisition System, 2013 Annual Report, June 28, 
2013, p. 20. 
14 U.S. Army, Army Strong: Equipped, Trained and Ready, Final Report of the 2010 Army Acquisition Review, 
January 11, 2011, p. ix. 
15 CRS Report RS20643, Navy Ford (CVN-78) Class Aircraft Carrier Program: Background and Issues for Congress, 
by Ronald O'Rourke, p. 9. 
16 Harvey Sapolsky, “Let’s Skip Acquisition Reform This Time,” DefenseNews, February 9, 2009, p. 29. 
17 U.S. Institute for Peace, The QDR in Perspective: Meeting America’s National Security Needs in the 21st Century, 
Final Report of the Quadrennial Defense Review Independent Panel, July 28, 2010, p. 83; Department of Defense, 
Defense Acquisition Performance Assessment Report, January 2006, p. 6; Business Executives for National Security, 
Getting to Best: Reforming the Defense Acquisition Enterprise, A Business Imperative for Change from the Task Force 
on Defense Acquisition Law and Oversight, July, 2009, p. iii. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
6 
argued “in an attempt to not repeat past failures, additional staff, processes, steps, and tasks have 
been imposed. While well intended, collectively these modifications are counterproductive.”18 
One observer noted, “If someone were asked to devise a contracting system for the federal 
government, it is inconceivable that one reasonable person or a committee of reasonable people 
could come up with our current system.”19 
Some analysts point out that some past reform efforts have had modest success, generating 
savings in certain areas and keeping pace with a changing world. For example, most analysts 
view the original consolidation of disparate acquisition rules into a single, uniform Federal 
Acquisition Regulation as an improvement to the system. More recently, Congress has embarked 
on select acquisition reform efforts through legislation that some (but not all) analysts believe 
have contributed to improving defense acquisitions, including the Weapon Systems Reform Act of 
2009 and efforts to improve operational contract support. Many of these analysts believe that 
learning from past reform efforts—understanding what worked, what did not work, and why—is 
critical to successful acquisition reform.20 
The Weapon Systems Acquisition Reform Act 
In developing the Weapon Systems Acquisition Reform Act of 2009, Congress considered reports 
by government and other analysts that focused on the early stages of weapon system 
development, prior congressional hearings and investigations, and extensive consultations with 
DOD, industry, and outside experts. The act did not seek to rectify all of the problems related to 
the acquisition process. Rather, it focused primarily on improving the early stages of weapon 
system development. Key provisions in the act included 
• 
appointment of a Director of Cost Assessment and Program Evaluation (CAPE); 
• 
appointment of a Director of Developmental Test and Evaluation; 
• 
appointment of a Director of Systems Engineering; 
• 
a requirement that the Director of Defense Research and Engineering periodically 
assess technological maturity of MDAPs and annually report finding to 
Congress; and 
• 
a requirement that combatant commanders have more influence in the 
requirements generation process. 
The full effect of the Weapon System Acquisition Reform Act may not be quantifiable until the 
next generation of weapon systems are in production. However, a number of analysts believe that 
the act is already having a positive effect.21 Senior officials within the Offices of the CAPE, 
Developmental Test and Evaluation, and Systems Engineering believe that their offices were 
                                                 
18 U.S. Army, Army Strong: Equipped, Trained and Ready, Final Report of the 2010 Army Acquisition Review, 
January 11, 2011, p. iv  
19 J. Ronald Fox, Defense Acquisition Reform 1960-2009: An Elusive Goal (Center of Military History, 2011). 
20 See Robert F. Hale, Promoting Efficiency in the Department of Defense: Keep Trying, Be Realistic, Center for 
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, January2002, p. 7.  
21 U.S. Government Accountability Office, Defense Acquisition Reform: Reform Act is Helping DOD Acquisition 
Programs Reduce Risk, but Implementation Challenges Remain, GAO-13-103, December 14, 2012. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
7 
empowered to positively impact weapon system acquisitions.22 These offices have been given 
access to senior leaders within the department, opportunities to provide input at key points in the 
acquisition system, and resources to carry out their responsibilities. For example, the CAPE has 
contributed to a better understanding of potential costs for a number of major programs, such as 
the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter program.23 The act’s focus on the early stage of the acquisition 
process and on using data to inform decisions complements and reinforces a number of the 
current internal DOD initiatives to improve acquisitions. However, some analysts have raised 
concerns that the offices created or empowered by the act are not sufficiently funded or 
manned to accomplish their mission.24 
Operational Contract Support 
In recent years, DOD has significantly improved its use of operational contract support.25 Many 
analysts and senior DOD officials have stated that without the efforts of Congress, DOD would 
not have been as successful at improving operational contract support.26 Congressional efforts 
have included establishing the Special Inspector General for Iraq Reconstruction, the Special 
Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction, and the Commission on Wartime Contracting 
in Iraq and Afghanistan. Congress has also held numerous hearings, published reports, and 
maintained focus on the issue. 
These efforts have combined to elevate within DOD the recognition of the importance of the use 
of contractors, and resulted in the development of a body of work that informed DOD and 
Congress. Other examples of congressional action cited as having contributed to improving 
operational contract support including the following: 
• 
legislation that led to establishment of the office of the Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of Defense (Program Support); 
• 
legislation establishing general/flag officer billets for acquisition; 
• 
legislation creating the Defense Acquisition Workforce Development Fund;  
• 
legislation requiring the increased integration of contractor scenarios into training 
and education; and  
• 
oversight hearings that raised awareness of contractor abuses and led to the 
creation of Task Force 2010.27 
                                                 
22 Based on meetings these senior officials had with CRS in early 2011. 
23 Based on discussions with senior officials from the Joint Staff, J-8 (Force Structure, Resources, and Assessment 
Directorate) and Joint Operations Support (Acquisition, Technology & Logistics), December 2011. 
24 U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Armed Services, Reform of the Defense Acquisition System, Written Testimony 
of Jonathan Etherton, 113th Cong., 2nd sess., April 30, 2014. 
25 Operational contract support is the term used in DOD doctrine to describe the use of contractors to support military 
operations. For a full discussion, see CRS Report R43074, Department of Defense’s Use of Contractors to Support 
Military Operations: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress, by Moshe Schwartz. 
26 Ibid. 
27 Task Force 2010 was established in 2010 to help DOD commanders and acquisition personnel better understand with 
whom they are doing business, to conduct investigations to gain visibility into the flow of money at the subcontractor 
level, and to promote best contracting practices. For a detailed discussion of reform in operational contract support, see 
CRS Report R43074, Department of Defense’s Use of Contractors to Support Military Operations: Background, 
Analysis, and Issues for Congress, by Moshe Schwartz. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
8 
The Changing Landscape of Defense Acquisitions 
Much of the organization of the defense acquisition system was developed during the early years 
of the Cold War. In recent years, the defense acquisition landscape has changed significantly, and 
a number of analysts believe that the acquisition system is not sufficiently responsive to an ever-
changing world.28 A 2009 study by the Defense Science Board argued that current DOD 
acquisition practices are inadequate in a changing industrial landscape.29 Significant changes 
shaping the acquisition environment often cited by analysts include the following: 
• 
The defense industrial base has consolidated significantly over the last 25 years. 
According to a study by the Defense Science Board, over the last 25 years, the 
number of major defense contractors decreased from 50 to 6.30 Such 
consolidation, which was partly due to the reduction in defense procurement 
following the end of the Cold War, can have benefits but can also hurt 
competition and innovation. 
• 
DOD is becoming a less influential buyer. Fewer U.S. industries are dominated 
by defense spending.31 For example, in 1965, DOD accounted for over 75% of all 
U.S. semiconductor purchases. By 1990, government-wide purchases represented 
less than 10% of the market. By 2012, government represented less than 2% of 
the semi-conductor market.32 
As DOD becomes a less important customer, an increasing number of companies 
are diversifying their revenue streams. In 2012, the top 100 defense companies 
received 28% of their revenue from defense contracts, down from 38% of 
revenue in 2007.33 Other companies are choosing not to compete for defense 
contracts because of extensive and ever-changing regulations, increased costs, 
auditing requirements, and instability of funding caused by sequestration, 
continuing resolutions, and lapses in appropriations. 
• 
Weapon and business systems are more complex and sophisticated. Some 
analysts believe that the acquisition system is not nimble enough for acquisition 
programs that rely heavily on rapidly changing technologies. These technologies 
are posing new challenges to acquisitions. For example, according to U.S. Air 
                                                 
28 Department of Defense, Defense Acquisition Performance Assessment Report, January 2006, p. 7. 
29 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, Buying Commercial: Gaining 
the Cost/Schedule Benefits for Defense Systems, Defense Science Board Task Force on Integrating Commercial 
Systems into the DOD, Effectively and Efficiently, February 2009, p. xvii. 
30 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense For Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, Creating an Effective National 
Security Industrial Base for the 21st Century: An Action Plan to Address the Coming Crisis, Defense Science Board 
Task Force on Defense Industrial Structure for Transformation, July 2008, p. 15. See also: Kenneth Flamm, “Post-Cold 
War Policy and the U.S. Defense Industrial Base,” National Academy of Engineering of the National Academies, vol. 
35, no. 1 (Spring 2005); Barry D. Watts, Sustaining the U.S. Defense Industrial base as a Strategic Asset, Center for 
Strategic and Budgetary Assessments, Backgrounder, September 2013, p. 15. 
31 Kenneth Flamm, “Post-Cold War Policy and the U.S. Defense Industrial Base,” National Academy of Engineering of 
the National Academies, vol. 35, no. 1 (Spring 2005); See Business Executives for National Security, Getting to Best: 
Reforming the Defense Acquisition Enterprise, A Business Imperative for Change from the Task Force on Defense 
Acquisition Law and Oversight, July, 2009, p. 4. 
32 Data provided to CRS by Semiconductor Industry, October, 2013.  
33 Zachary Fryer-Biggs, “Looking Beyond Defense: Firms Grow Revenue—By Diversifying,” DefenseNews, July 22, 
2013, p. 11. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
9 
Force Lt. Gen. Christopher Bogdan, the biggest risk to the F-35 program is 
software development.34 Some analysts believe that the increasing complexity of 
systems is the principal reason that aircraft development times have increased 
significantly since 1980.35 
• 
U.S. military spending is declining, squeezing acquisition accounts. Constraints 
on U.S. defense spending, combined with real growth in per-capita expenditure 
for military personnel and pay benefits, limit the funding available for 
acquisitions and bring about reductions in force structure.36 These effects also 
reduce potential economies of scale in defense production and can make it more 
difficult to pursue acquisitions associated with specialized or niche capabilities.  
• 
As U.S. military spending is declining, other countries are investing more in their 
militaries. DOD obligated more money on just contracts in FY2012 ($360 
billion) then the combined value of the five largest non-U.S. total defense 
budgets in the world ($335 billion).37 Some analysts believe that given recent 
trends, the United States may not continue to dominate defense spending as much 
as it has in recent years. These analysts point to countries such as Russia and 
China. China’s military modernization has been fueled by two decades of steadily 
increasing military spending. According to a DOD report to Congress, China’s 
officially disclosed military budget increased an average of 9.7% annually in 
inflation-adjusted terms from 2003 to 2012.38 
• 
DOD-financed research and development is playing a less important role in 
innovation and development.39 DOD is spending a decreasing share of its 
contracting dollars on R&D contracts. In FY1998, 18% of DOD contract 
obligations were dedicated to R&D contracts compared to just 10% in FY2013 
(see Figure 3). One analyst pointed out that even though the military is still an 
important funder of specific, leading-edge technologies such as supercomputers 
and microelectromechanical systems devices, “commercial demand for these 
products has far outstripped the requirements of the military.”40 At the same time, 
technologies developed for the commercial market are commonly adapted for 
military use. As one general officer stated, whereas the military used to go to 
industry and tell them to create a technology to meet a specific requirement, 
                                                 
34 Andrea Shalal-Esa, “Pentagon Sees Some Risk of Delay in F-35 Software,” NBCnews.com, April 24, 2013, at 
http://www.nbcnews.com/id/51649848/ns/technology_and_science-tech_and_gadgets/t/pentagon-sees-some-risk-delay-
f—software/#.UlWMmm3zByU. 
35 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense Acquisition, Technology and Logistics, Performance of the Defense 
Acquisition System, 2013 Annual Report, June 28, 2013, p. 57. Aircraft development times have also markedly 
increased in the commercial aerospace market. 
36 Department of Defense, Defense Budget Priorities and Choices, Fiscal Year 2014, April 2013, p. 5. 
37 The five largest 2012 defense budgets were China ($102.4B), United Kingdom ($60.8B), Russia ($59.9B), Japan 
($59.4B), and Saudi Arabia ($52.5B). Source: The International Institute for Strategic Studies, The Military Balance 
2013, the annual assessment of global military capabilities and defence economics, London, 20113, p. 41. 
38 See CRS Report R41108, U.S.-China Relations: An Overview of Policy Issues, by Susan V. Lawrence, p. 16. 
39 See Business Executives for National Security, Getting to Best: Reforming the Defense Acquisition Enterprise, A 
Business Imperative for Change from the Task Force on Defense Acquisition Law and Oversight, July 2009, p. 4. 
40 Kenneth Flamm, “Post-Cold War Policy and the U.S. Defense Industrial Base,” National Academy of Engineering of 
the National Academies, vol. 35, no. 1 (Spring 2005). 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
10 
increasingly the military is going to industry and asking them to adapt an existing 
commercial technology to military requirements.41 
Many analysts believe that the current acquisition system is not well suited to meet the challenges 
of an ever changing landscape and that fundamental reforms are necessary.42 In 2009, Norman 
Augustine (former CEO of Lockheed Martin) and former Senators Gary Hart and Warren 
Rudman wrote that the defense acquisition system operates 
too slowly and at vastly greater cost than necessary. In earlier times we could arguably afford 
such flaws in efficiency, but we can afford them no longer.... We must examine the status 
quo systemically, in all its aspects, in order to make necessary and long overdue changes. If 
we do not, we will be in an increasingly sclerotic defense acquisition process that may one 
day no longer be able to supply American war fighters with the means to assure this nation’s 
freedom and security.43 
Now May Be a Good Time for Acquisition Reform 
Historically, eras of budgetary restraint have been associated with the pursuit and implementation 
of acquisition reform. In the 1980s, the deficit targets enacted as part of the Gramm-Rudman-
Hollings Act (The Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985; P.L. 99-17) are 
seen by analysts as having contributed to development of the Packard Report and changes in 
defense acquisitions. Later, the Budget Enforcement Act of 1990 (Title X of The Omnibus Budget 
Reconciliation Act of 1990; P.L. 101-508) and related limits on defense spending are seen as 
having led to the Perry Report of 1994 and another round of far-reaching acquisition reform. 
Against the current backdrop of the Budget Control Act of 2011 (P.L. 112-25) and declines in 
defense spending, many analysts argue that the stage is set for a renewed effort to embark on a 
significant effort to improve defense acquisitions.   
A number of analysts and DOD believe that recent changes within the military make significant 
reform possible. These officials and analysts suggest that a culture shift is occurring within the 
department—a shift that reflects a better understanding of the importance of defense acquisitions, 
more attention to fiscal discipline, and a fuller commitment on the part of senior leadership, 
uniform personnel, and civilian personnel to support efforts to improve defense acquisitions. 
Changes contributing to the culture shift include the following: 
Operations in Iraq and Afghanistan have highlighted the importance of acquisitions. In the early 
years of the conflicts, contracting in Iraq and Afghanistan was done on an ad-hoc basis, without 
significant consideration of implications for foreign policy and without putting in place necessary 
                                                 
41 Based on discussion with CRS analyst, May 8, 2013. 
42 Department of Defense, Defense Acquisition Performance Assessment Report, January 2006, p. 6; Business 
Executives for National Security, A Business Imperative for Change from the Task Force on Defense Acquisition Law 
and Oversight, July, 2009, p. 4. Then Secretary of Defense William Perry used the same logic to implement acquisition 
reforms in the 1990s. He stated “Because the world in which DoD now must operate has changed beyond the limits of 
the existing acquisition system’s ability to adjust or evolve—the system must be totally re-engineered. If DoD is going 
to be capable of responding to the demands of the next decade, there must be a carefully planned, fundamental re-
engineering or re-invention of each segment of the acquisition process.” See Honorable William J. Perry, Acquisition 
Reform: A Mandate for Change, Department of Defense, February 9, 1994, p. 9; Department of Defense, Defense 
Acquisition Performance Assessment Report, January 2006, Introductory Letter by Chairman Ronald Kadish. 
43 Business Executives for National Security, A Business Imperative for Change from the Task Force on Defense 
Acquisition Law and Oversight, July, 2009, p. iii. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
11 
oversight systems. Insufficient resources were dedicated to oversight, resulting in poor 
performance, billions of dollars of waste, and failure to achieve mission goals.44 However, the 
experiences of the operational force underscored the importance of acquisitions to senior leaders 
and prompted numerous internal efforts to examine contractor support, such as the report of the 
Commission on Army Acquisition and Program Management in Expeditionary Operations 
(known as the Gansler report). 
Constrained budgets are fostering a culture of better decision making. Former Secretary of 
Defense Robert Gates stated that as a result of defense spending more than doubling between 
FY2001 and FY2010, “we’ve lost our ability to prioritize, to make hard decisions, to do tough 
analysis, to make trades.”45 As mentioned earlier, declines in defense acquisition spending since 
FY2008 have resulted in efforts to prioritize programs, reign in the ‘gold-plating’ of requirements, 
and increase the focus on costs.46  
Data is improving.47 Advances in information technology are making it possible to better track 
and analyze larger amounts of data. DOD is improving its information technology and business 
systems, and has embarked on a number of wide-ranging efforts to gather and analyze data to 
inform policy decisions, often at the behest of Congress. For example, the Weapon System 
Acquisition Reform Act of 2009 required DOD to conduct a root-cause analysis of the cost, 
schedule, and performance of Major Defense Acquisition Programs that experience cost growth 
that surpasses the thresholds set forth in the Nunn-McCurdy Act.48 Over the years, these analyses 
have provided insight into what drives cost growth. Despite the progress being made, there 
continue to be significant gaps in the data available and in the reliability of some existing data.49 
In sum, the unique combination of constrained budgets, a changing strategic and industrial 
landscape, recent experiences in Iraq and Afghanistan, and the increased availability of data have 
led many analysts and officials to conclude that this may be a unique opportunity to embark on 
another effort to improve defense acquisitions.50  
                                                 
44 CRS Report R43074, Department of Defense’s Use of Contractors to Support Military Operations: Background, 
Analysis, and Issues for Congress, by Moshe Schwartz. 
45 Department of Defense, “DOD News Briefing with Secretary Gates and Adm. Mullen from the Pentagon,” press 
release, June 6, 2011, http://www.defense.gov/transcripts/transcript.aspx?transcriptid=4747. 
46 See Yamil Berard, “Former Pentagon leader says defense cuts are necessary,” Fort Worth Star-Telegram, October 
16, 2013.; Barry D. Watts, Sustaining the U.S. Defense Industrial base as a Strategic Asset, Center for Strategic and 
Budgetary Assessments, Backgrounder, September 2013, p. 15. 
47 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense Acquisition, Technology and Logistics, Performance of the Defense 
Acquisition System, 2013 Annual Report, June 28, 2013, p. 106. 
48 P.L. 111-23, Section 103. The Nunn-McCurdy Act requires DOD to report to Congress whenever a major defense 
acquisition program experiences cost overruns that exceed certain cost thresholds. See CRS Report R41293, The Nunn-
McCurdy Act: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress, by Moshe Schwartz. 
49 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense Acquisition, Technology and Logistics, Performance of the Defense 
Acquisition System, 2013 Annual Report, June 28, 2013, p. 105; U.S. Army, Army Strong: Equipped, Trained and 
Ready, Final Report of the 2010 Army Acquisition Review, January 11, 2011, p. iv. The report found that “The Army 
lacks a sufficiently robust and trustworthy database on acquisition programs, workforce and lessons learned,” p. 42. 
50 Bill Greenwalt, “Once More Unto The Breach, This Time For Acquisition Reform,” Breaking Defense, April 23, 
2014. At http://breakingdefense.com/2014/04/once-more-unto-the-breach-this-time-for-acquisition-reform/. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
12 
Recent DOD Efforts to Improve Acquisitions 
In recent years, DOD has taken a number of steps to improve the process by which it buys goods 
and services. At a press conference in May 2009, then Secretary of Defense Robert Gates 
announced steps to rein in cost and schedule growth in weapon system acquisitions.51 He called 
for cancelling programs that significantly exceed budget, do not meet current military needs, or 
do not have sufficiently mature technology. Addressing programs with significant cost growth, he 
called for the cancellation of a number of programs, including the VH-71 presidential helicopter. 
He also called for the cancellation of programs for which a strong requirement no longer existed 
or for which needed technology had not matured—such as the ground components of the Future 
Combat System and missile defense’s Multiple Kill Vehicle (MKV). Other programs, such as the 
F-22 and Air Force Combat Search and Rescue X (CSAR-X), were also cancelled or curtailed.  
That same year, Secretary Gates also sought to improve the use of contractors during military 
operations. He acknowledged DOD’s failure to adequately prepare for the use of contractors 
when he testified that the use of contractors occurred 
without any supervision or without any coherent strategy on how we were going to do it and 
without conscious decisions about what we will allow contractors to do and what we won't 
allow contractors to do... We have not thought holistically or coherently about our use of 
contractors, particularly when it comes to combat environments or combat training.52  
Since that time, DOD has taken steps to improve how it uses contractors during operations,53 such 
as establishing a Functional Capabilities Integration Board, co-chaired by the Deputy Assistant 
Secretary of Defense for Program Support and the Joint Staff Vice Director of Logistics. This 
board is a forum for senior leaders to come together to address critical operational contract 
support issues.54 DOD has also significantly expanded regulation, policy, doctrine, and training 
related to operational contract support, including the following examples:  
• 
In 2009, DOD released a directive entitled, Orchestrating, Synchronizing, and 
Integrating Program Management of Contingency Acquisition Planning and its 
Operational Execution.55  
• 
In 2010, DOD updated its Policy and Procedures for Determining Workforce 
Mix, which addressed contractor personnel as part of the total force.56  
                                                 
51 For the full text of the press conference, see http://www.defense.gov/transcripts/transcript.aspx?transcriptid=4396. 
52 U.S. Congress, Senate Committee on Armed Services, To Receive Testimony on the Challenges Facing the 
Department of Defense, 110th Cong., 2nd sess., January 27, 2009. 
53 U.S. Government Accountability Office, Warfighter Support: DOD Needs Additional Steps to Fully Integrate 
Operational Contract Support into Contingency Planning, GAO-13-212, February 8, 2013, p. 3. 
54 The Operational Contract Support Functional Capabilities Integration Board was chartered based on the authority set 
forth in Section 854 of the John Warner National Defense Authorization Act for 2007 (P.L. 109-364). See 
http://www.acq.osd.mil/log/PS/fcib.html. 
55 DOD Directive 3020.49 Orchestrating, Synchronizing, and Integrating Program Management of Contingency 
Acquisition Planning and its Operational Execution, March 2009.  
56 DOD Instruction 1100.22, Policy and Procedures for Determining Workforce Mix, April 2010. DOD is in the 
process of updating DOD Instruction 1100.22 as well as DOD Directive 1100.4, Guidance for Manpower Management.  

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
13 
• 
In 2011, a major update to the DOD Instruction for operational contract support 
was released, which established roles and responsibilities for managing 
operational contract support.57  
• 
In 2012, DOD updated its joint planning and execution policy to include 
operational contract support in many non-logistical functional areas, such as 
intelligence, personnel, and engineering.58 
• 
In 2013, DOD developed standards for using private security contractors.59  
• 
In 2014, DOD conducted a joint exercise for operational contract support.60 
In addition to steps taken to improve discrete areas of defense acquisitions, such as weapon 
systems and contingency contracting, DOD has embarked on a comprehensive effort to improve 
the overall defense acquisition system. Many of these initiatives can be traced back to the ideas 
and recommendations of the Packard Report. The current effort generally focuses on  
• 
rewriting the rules and regulations to create a more efficient and effective 
acquisition process;  
• 
improving the culture and professionalism of the acquisition workforce; and  
• 
improving the overall performance of the acquisition system. 
On September 14, 2010, then-Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology and 
Logistics Ashton Carter issued the memorandum Better Buying Power: Guidance for Obtaining 
Greater Efficiency and Productivity in Defense Spending. The memorandum outlined 23 principal 
actions to improve efficiency, including making affordability a requirement, increasing 
competition, and decreasing the time it takes to acquire a system. In November 2012, Secretary 
Carter’s successor, Frank Kendall, launched the Better Buying Power 2.0 initiative, an update to 
the original Better Buying Power effort, aimed at “implementing practices and policies designed 
to improve the productivity of the Department of Defense and of the industrial base that provides 
the products and services” to the warfighters.61 Better Buying Power 2.0 contained 34 separate 
initiatives, including reducing the frequency of senior-level reviews and improving requirements 
and market research.62 According to officials, Better Buying Power 3.0 is in development. 
                                                 
57 DOD Instruction 3020.41, Operational Contract Support, December 2011. In 2012, this Instruction was codified in 
32 Code of Federal Regulations Part 158. 
58 Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Manual 3130.03, Adaptive Planning and Execution (APEX) Planning Formats 
and Guidance, October 2012.  
59 Private Security Contractor standards were required by Section 833 of the NDAA for FY2011. The American 
National Standards Institute validated these standards in March 2013.  
60 The exercise has been held annually for the past four years. The 2014 exercise, the first to be sponsored by the Joint 
Chiefs of Staff, was attended by some 500 individuals drawn from across military services and components.  
61 While much of the original effort remains intact, the new version does contain some changes. For example, the 
original effort called for increased use of fixed-price contracts whereas the newer version emphasizes the use of an 
appropriate contract type, depending on the circumstances. Quote taken from document provided to CRS by DOD 
entitled Better Buying Power (BBP) 2.0 Summary.  
62 The full text of the Better Buying Power 2.0 memorandum can be downloaded at http://bbp.dau.mil/doc/USD-
ATL%20Memo%2024Apr13%20-%20BBP%202.0%20Implementation%20Directive.pdf. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
14 
DOD has also undertaken a comprehensive effort to overhaul the regulatory structure that 
governs defense acquisitions.63 For example: 
• 
On January 10, 2012, DOD issued updated versions of the instructions Charter of 
the Joint Requirements Oversight Council and Joint Capabilities Integration and 
Development System. 
• 
On January 19, 2012, DOD issued an updated version of the Manual for the 
Operation of the Joint Capabilities Integration and Development System.64 
• 
On January 25, 2013, DOD issued an updated version of the directive The 
Planning, Programming, and Budgeting System (PPBS). 
• 
On November 26, 2013, DOD issued an updated “interim” instruction Operation 
of the Defense Acquisition System (5000.02). 
• 
On December 2, 2013, Secretary Kendall announced the establishment of a team 
to develop a legislative proposal that would attempt to “simplify the existing 
body of law and replace it with a more coherent and ‘user friendly’ set of 
requirements, without sacrificing the intention behind existing statutes.”65  
These updates focus on fostering a culture that provides more autonomy to the workforce and an 
emphasis on making good management decisions instead of managing by compliance or a check-
the-box mentality. For example, the new DOD Instruction 5000.02 (Operation of the Defense 
Acquisition System) emphasizes that  
the structure of a DOD acquisition program and the procedures used should be tailored as 
much as possible to the characteristics of the product being acquired, and to the totality of 
circumstances associated with the program....66  
In promoting a more tailored approach, the instruction goes on to outline four different models 
(and two additional hybrid models) for acquisitions, depending on the type of program being 
pursued. This theme of good decision-making is repeated in numerous documents, speeches, and 
policy decisions, including the following examples: 
1. In the memorandum issued to implement the Better Buying Power (BBP) 2.0 
initiative, Secretary Kendall wrote “the first responsibility of the acquisition 
workforce is to think. We need to be true professionals who apply our education, 
training, and experience through analysis and creative, informed thought to 
address our daily decisions. Our workforce should be encouraged by leaders to 
think and not to automatically default to a perceived ‘school solution’ just 
                                                 
63 See memo accompanying issuance of interim DOD Instruction 5000.02, Deputy Secretary of Defense Ashton Carter, 
Defense Acquisition, Department of Defense, November 26, 2013. 
64 The manual can be found at https://dap.dau.mil/policy/Documents/2012/
JCIDS%20Manual%2019%20Jan%202012.pdf. A four page errata sheet was issued on September 20, 2012 (see 
https://dap.dau.mil/policy/Documents/2012/JCIDS%20Manual%20Errata%20-%2020%20Sept%202012.pdf). 
65 Under Secretary of Defense Frank Kendall, The New Department of Defense Instruction 5000.02, Department of 
Defense, Memorandum for the Acquisition Workforce, December 2, 2013, p. 1. 
66 Department of Defense, Instruction 5000.02, Operation of the Defense Acquisition System, p. 3, November 25, 2013. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
15 
because it is expected to be approved more easily. BBP 2.0, like BBP 1.0, is not 
rigid dogma—it is guidance subject to professional judgment.”67 
2. A memorandum jointly issued by Under Secretaries of Defense Robert Hale 
(comptroller) and Kendall stated “the threat that funding will be taken away or 
that future budgets can be reduced unless funds are obligated on schedule is a 
strong and perverse motivator. We risk creating incentives to enter into quick but 
poor business deals or to expend funds primarily to avoid reductions in future 
budget years. We need to rethink how we approach managing mid-year and end-
of-year obligations and to change the types of behavior we reward or punish.”68 
3. There has been a significant focus on using data to drive decisions. Evidence of 
this shift includes a sign hanging by the door of Secretary Kendall’s office which 
reads “In God We Trust. All Others Must Bring Data”69 and the release of the 
first annual report Performance of the Defense Acquisitions System, which relies 
extensively on data gathered over 30 years to analyze and measure the 
effectiveness of weapon system acquisitions.70 The annual report is one of, if not 
the most, comprehensive, data-driven analyses on defense acquisitions issued by 
DOD in many years.71 
Many members of the acquisition workforce have argued that these efforts, while laudable, have 
generally not had a significant impact on defense acquisitions. These individuals point out that 
the fundamental incentives in the acquisition system remain unaltered.72 For example, they say, 
there is a culture within DOD (and other agencies) that encourages the obligation of funds before 
they expire out of fear that if money is not spent, future budgets will be cut. This belief, which 
may be reinforced by certain congressional oversight practices,73 encourages managers to 
prioritize spending based on an arbitrary calendar deadline instead of sound business decisions.74 
According to this argument, reform efforts will have only limited impact until incentives are 
changed to better align with desired outcomes. Others have argued that implementing such far-
reaching change takes years of sustained effort and that the groundwork is being set for long-term 
change that may not produce visible gains for years to come.  
                                                 
67 Under Secretary of Defense Frank Kendall, Implementation Directive for Better Buying Power 2.0 - Achieving 
Greater Efficiency and Productivity in Defense Spending, Department of Defense, April 24, 2013, p. 1. 
68 Under Secretary of Defense Robert Hale and Under Secretary of Defense Frank Kendall, Department of Defense 
Management of Unobligated Funds; Obligation Rate Tenets, Office of the Secretary of Defense, September 10, 2012, 
p. 1. 
69 Quote attributed to W. Edwards Deming. 
70 Office of the Under Secretary of Defense, Acquisition, Technology and Logistics, Performance of the Defense 
Acquisition System, 2013 Annual Report, June 28, 2013. The concluding comments of the report states “measuring the 
performance of defense acquisition provides objective, quantitative information on our current performance. The 
following insights provide some broader perspectives and considerations. These should inform and enable stable 
improvement in our overall acquisition performance.” p. 109. 
71 The report acknowledges that more work and more data analysis needs to be done; the report seeks to provide initial 
results in what is expected to be a long-range effort to use data to inform efforts to improve acquisitions. 
72 Based on dozens of CRS interviews with acquisition personnel from June 2013-May 2014.  
73 DOD briefings on acquisition programs, apparently at the request of some Congressional recipients, routinely 
conclude with slides providing data on percentages of prior-year funding obligated and expended to date. 
74 Robert F. Hale and Frank Kendall, Department of Defense Management of Unobligated Funds; Obligations Tenets, 
Office of the Secretary of Defense, Memorandum, September 10, 2012. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
16 
A number of analysts, industry officials, and DOD officials argue that constrained budgets are the 
key to fostering a culture of better decision-making. Some analysts argue that declines in defense 
acquisition spending since FY2008 have resulted in efforts to prioritize programs, rein in the 
expansion of requirements, improve efficiency, and increase the focus on costs.75  
Some analysts suggest that DOD does not have the authority or ability to substantially improve 
the acquisition process on its own and that substantial reform requires close, consistent, and long-
term collaboration between DOD, Congress, and industry. For example, a comprehensive effort to 
streamline and improve the efficiency of the acquisition regulations will in some instances require 
Congress to amend existing legislation, DOD to amend internal practices, and industry to play a 
constructive role.  
Issues for Congress 
What DOD can do on its own to improve acquisitions can only go so far—for more extensive 
reforms, DOD needs help from Congress. Such efforts as the Goldwater-Nichols Act, 
establishment of the Federal Acquisition Regulation, creation of Defense Acquisition University, 
and streamlined acquisition rules and regulations were all the result of congressional action. More 
recently, many analysts and senior DOD officials have stated that without the efforts of Congress, 
DOD would not have been as successful at improving operational contract support.76 As a 2009 
report by the Business Executives for National Security argues, Congress “sets the expectations 
and tone for the entire [defense] enterprise—and must be at the forefront of any change.”77 The 
role of Congress may be particularly important in the area of workforce and culture. As GAO 
stated as far back as 1992, “ultimately, change will occur only through the collective action of 
acquisition participants, particularly within the Department of Defense and the Congress, for it is 
their actions that dictate the incentives that drive the process.”78 
Improving the Workforce 
Despite the hundreds of recommendations to improve defense acquisitions, most reports seeking 
to address the fundamental weaknesses of the system arrive at the same conclusion: the key to 
good acquisitions is having a good workforce and giving them the resources, incentives, and 
authority to do their job.79 As David Packard wrote in a 1986 report to President Reagan, 
                                                 
75 See Yamil Berard, “Former Pentagon leader says defense cuts are necessary,” Fort Worth Star-Telegram, October 
16, 2013; Barry D. Watts, Sustaining the U.S. Defense Industrial base as a Strategic Asset, Center for Strategic and 
Budgetary Assessments, Backgrounder, September 2013, p. 15. 
76 See CRS Report R43074, Department of Defense’s Use of Contractors to Support Military Operations: Background, 
Analysis, and Issues for Congress, by Moshe Schwartz. 
77 Business Executives for National Security, Getting to Best: Reforming the Defense Acquisition Enterprise, A 
Business Imperative for Change from the Task Force on Defense Acquisition Law and Oversight, July, 2009, p. 12. 
78 U.S. General Accounting Office, Weapons Acquisition: A Rare Opportunity for Lasting Change, NSIAD 93-15, 
December 1992, p. 3. 
79 For additional discussions, see Thomas Christie, “Sound Policy, Awful Execution,” DefenseNews, December 15, 
2008, p. 53. Thomas Miller, “Rearranging Deck Chairs on the Titanic: Why Does Acquisition Reform Never Work?” 
Defense AT&L, November-December 2010, p. 27; Scott Reynolds, “Let’s Fix It: A Five-Step Plan for Improving 
Acquisitions,” Defense AT&L, November-December 2009, p. 18. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
17 
Excellence in defense management cannot be achieved by the numerous management layers, 
large staffs, and countless regulations in place today. It depends ... on reducing all of these 
by adhering closely to basic, common sense principles: giving a few capable people the 
authority and responsibility to do their job, maintaining short lines of communication, and 
holding people accountable for results.80 
A number of analysts have argued that the successive waves of acquisition reform have generally 
yielded limited results, due in large part to poor workforce management. As one recent analysis 
stated, “There is little doubt that acquisition reforms produce limited positive effects because they 
have not changed the basic incentives or pressures that drive the behavior of the participants in 
the acquisition process.”81 The workforce is not the only area that analysts believe needs to be 
improved—recommendations are aimed at budgeting, developing requirements, estimating costs, 
and other structural problems. However, without a culture that promotes good acquisition 
decisions, analysts believe that reform efforts will not achieve their fullest potential. This culture 
includes not only the acquisition workforce but also other people involved in the process, such as 
those who develop requirements and budgets. As Robert Hale wrote in 2002 
Efficiency requires change, and change is difficult to implement in any organization—public 
or private. To have any chance of success, there must be an incentive to change. Incentives 
start with the climate created by top leaders... But commitment must extend beyond the 
senior leadership to the Defense Department’s field commanders and managers. Efficiencies 
achieved at the base or installation level could add up to substantial savings, and the 
individuals running these bases will be more likely to implement changes if they have 
incentives to do so.82 
                                                 
80 A Quest for Excellence, Final Report to the President by the Blue Ribbon Commission of Defense Management, June 
30, 1986. 
81 J. Ronald Fox, Defense Acquisition Reform 1960-2009: An Elusive Goal (Center of Military History, 2011), p. 190. 
This point was reiterated in Secretary Kendall’s guidance on implementing the Better Buying Power initiatives, which 
stated “Policies and processes are of little use without acquisition professionals who are experienced, trained, and 
empowered to apply them effectively. At the end of the day, qualified people are essential to successful outcomes and 
professionalism, particularly in acquisition leaders, drives results more than any policy change.” See Frank Kendall, 
Implementation Directive for Better Buying Power 2.0 - Achieving Greater Efficiency and Productivity in Defense 
Spending, Office of the Under Secretary of Defense Acquisition, Technology and Logistics, Memorandum, April 24, 
2013. 
82 Robert F. Hale, Promoting Efficiency in the Department of Defense: Keep Trying, Be Realistic, Center for Strategic 
and Budgetary Assessments, January 2002, p. 20. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
18 
The Importance of People and Proper Incentives 
Numerous reports have highlighted the importance of people in successful acquisitions. Below are conclusions 
from some of the most influential reports on defense acquisitions from 1970 to the present. 
• 
“Regardless of how effective the overall system of Department procurement regulations may be judged to be, 
the key determinants of the ultimate effectiveness and efficiency of the Defense Procurement process are the 
procurement personnel.... The importance of this truism has not been appropriately reflected in the 
recruitment, career development, training, and management of the procurement workforce.”83 Fitzhugh Report 
(1970) 
• 
“DOD must be able to attract, retain, and motivate well qualified acquisition personnel.”84 Packard Report 
(1986) 
• 
“Making fundamental improvements in acquisitions will require attacking the cultural dimension of the 
problem. Changes of the type needed will not come easily. They must be directed at the system of 
incentives.”85 GAO (1992) 
• 
“Give line managers more authority and accountability (reward results, not just compliance with rules; focus 
on the customer).”86 Perry Report (1994) 
• 
“The department should focus on creating incentives so that commanders and managers seek efficiencies.”87 
Robert Hale (2002) 
• 
“To repeat: the emphasis must be on the individuals in line management.... the key to effective execution of 
any contract is not the quality of the contract, it is the quality of the program management responding to 
clear assignment of authority and accountability for each program.”88 QDR Independent Panel (2010) 
• 
“There is little doubt that acquisition reforms produce limited, positive effects because they have not changed 
the basic incentives or pressures that drive the behavior of the participants in the acquisition process.”89 
Defense Acquisition Reform: 1960-2009 (2011) 
Building a Capable, Trained, and Sufficiently Sized Workforce 
Analysts have concluded that insufficient resources or shortages in the number of properly 
trained, sufficiently talented acquisition personnel increase the risk of poor contract performance, 
which in turn can lead to waste, fraud, and abuse.90 In an effort to improve the size and quality of 
                                                 
83 Department of Defense, Report to the President and the Secretary of Defense on the Department of Defense by the 
Blue Ribbon Panel, July 1, 1970, p. 94. 
84 A Quest for Excellence, Final Report to the President by the Blue Ribbon Commission of Defense Management, June 
30, 1986, p. xxv. 
85 U.S. General Accounting Office, Weapons Acquisition: A Rare Opportunity for Lasting Change, NSIAD 93-15, 
December 1992, pp. 2-3. 
86 Honorable William J. Perry, Acquisition Reform: A Mandate for Change, Department of Defense, February 9, 1994, 
p. 9. 
87 Robert F. Hale, Promoting Efficiency in the Department of Defense: Keep Trying, Be Realistic, Center for Strategic 
and Budgetary Assessments, January 2002, p. iii. 
88 U.S. Institute for Peace, The QDR in Perspective: Meeting America’s National Security Needs in the 21st Century, 
Final Report of the Quadrennial Defense Review Independent Panel, July 28, 2010, p. 86. 
89 J. Ronald Fox, Defense Acquisition Reform 1960-2009: An Elusive Goal (Center of Military History, 2011), p. 190. 
90 J. Ronald Fox, Defense Acquisition Reform 1960-2009: An Elusive Goal (Center of Military History, 2011), p. 195, 
199.See also, Commission on Wartime Contracting in Iraq and Afghanistan, At What Risk? Correcting over-reliance 
on contractors in contingency operations, Second Interim Report to Congress, February 24, 2011, p. 17; United States 
Institute of Peace, The QDR in Perspective: Meeting America’s National Security Needs in the 21st Century, 2010, p. 
39; U.S. Government Accountability Office, Military Operations: High-Level DOD Action Needed to Address Long-
standing Problems with Management and Oversight of Contractors Supporting Deployed Forces, GAO-07-145, 
(continued...) 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
19 
the acquisition workforce, the FY2008 NDAA mandated the establishment of the Department of 
Defense Acquisition Workforce Fund to enable the “recruitment, training, and retention of 
acquisition personnel.”91 From FY2008 through FY2012, DOD obligated $2.3 billion through the 
fund. According to DOD, this funding was used to augment training and hire an additional 8,300 
people in contracting, cost estimating, systems engineering, auditing, and other related fields. 
However, many analysts believe that while DOD and congressional efforts are starting to have a 
positive impact on the acquisition workforce, additional support and focus is needed.92 
Creating the Right Incentives 
Many analysts argue that even with a sufficiently robust, highly trained and capable workforce, 
effective acquisition reform depends on having the right incentive structure in place. Some argue 
that practices proven effective in the private sector have not been similarly effective when applied 
to government because the same incentives that made the practice effective in industry are not 
present in government.  
Often, the incentives in the acquisition process, analysts argue, encourage people to make poor 
decisions.93 One example, discussed above, is the incentive to obligate funds before the end of the 
fiscal year. Another example of incentives driving poor acquisition decisions relates to cost 
estimating. Senior defense officials, both past and current, acknowledge that program advocates 
have strong incentives to underestimate program acquisition costs. Contractors use low cost 
estimates to win the contract; program representatives use low estimates to argue for approval of 
the system against competing systems.94 In 1981, then-Deputy Secretary of Defense Frank C. 
Carlucci testified that low cost estimates “are fueled by optimistic contractor proposals to win 
competitions and program managers who want to see their programs funded.”95 Almost 30 years 
later, then-Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics John Young 
echoed this sentiment, stating “the enterprise will often pressure acquisition teams and 
industry to provide low, optimistic estimates to help start programs.”96 
                                                                 
(...continued) 
December 18, 2006; Commission on Wartime Contracting In Iraq and Afghanistan, Transforming Wartime 
Contracting: Controlling costs, reducing risk, Final Report to Congress, August, 2011, pp. 83-84; Business Executives 
for National Security, Getting to Best: Reforming the Defense Acquisition Enterprise, A Business Imperative for 
Change from the Task Force on Defense Acquisition Law and Oversight, July, 2009, p. 3. 
91 P.L. 110-181, Section 852. 
92 Data provided by DOD. See also Department of Defense, Defense Acquisition Workforce Development Fund 
(DAWDF) FY2012 Report to Congress, Department of Defense, April 2013, p. 4. DOD has recognized the need to 
dedicate sufficient resources to develop a more professional and skilled workforce. The 2010 Quadrennial Defense 
Review states that “to operate effectively, the acquisition system must be supported by an appropriately sized cadre of 
acquisition professionals with the right skills and training to successfully perform their jobs.... We will continue to 
significantly enhance training and retention programs in order to bolster the capability and size of the acquisition 
workforce.” pp. 77-78.  
93 J. Ronald Fox, Defense Acquisition Reform 1960-2009: An Elusive Goal (Center of Military History, 2011), pp. 197-
199; Department of Defense, Defense Acquisition Performance Assessment Report, January 2006, p. 5; See Business 
Executives for National Security, Getting to Best: Reforming the Defense Acquisition Enterprise, A Business 
Imperative for Change from the Task Force on Defense Acquisition Law and Oversight, July, 2009, p. 3. 
94 House Armed Services Hearings, 97th Cong., 1st Sess., Volume 11, 1981. Op. Cit. p. 883.  
95 House Armed Services Hearings, 97th Cong., 1st Sess., Volume 11, 1981. Op. Cit. p. 1086. 
96 John J. Young, Jr., Reasons for Cost Changes for Selected Major Defense Acquisition Programs (MDAPs), 
Memorandum, January 30, 2009. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
20 
The absence of more reliable cost estimates prevents Congress from deciding on competing 
strategic and budget priorities based on realistic cost assumptions and hinders DOD from 
developing a well-conceived acquisition plan. The 2010 Quadrennial Defense Review stated, 
“our system of defining requirements and developing capability too often encourages reliance on 
overly optimistic cost estimates. In order for the Pentagon to produce weapons systems 
efficiently, it is critical to have budget stability—but it is impossible to attain such stability in 
DOD’s modernization budgets if we continue to underestimate the cost of such systems from the 
start.”97 
Establishing Authority and Accountability 
Authority and accountability are viewed as critical elements in building an effective workforce.98 
Without authority, even the most skilled and incentivized professionals cannot effectively run and 
manage a program. Yet many analysts believe that the management structure is too bureaucratic 
and that too many people can say “no” or influence a program. As one program manager recently 
quipped, the inside joke among program managers is that “We are not really sure who runs the 
program.”99 Without anyone having practical authority to manage a program, there is no one who 
can effectively be held accountable. The Quadrennial Defense Review Independent Panel 
concluded that “the fundamental reason for the continued underperformance in acquisition 
activities is fragmentation of authority and accountability for performance.”100 
Congress could consider workforce as an area ripe for acquisition reform. In considering the 
workforce, issues for Congress can include the extent to which  
• 
the rules and regulations governing workforce management (including hiring, 
firing, promotion and retention authorities) promote or inhibit DOD’s ability to 
effectively hire and retain capable people, and promote accountability; 
• 
key personnel are endowed with appropriate authority and given sufficient 
resources to most effectively manage programs;  
• 
the incentives inherent in the rules and regulations governing the acquisition 
process promote or inhibit efficient and effective acquisitions management; and 
• 
DOD has and is effectively implementing a strategic plan to build, develop, and 
manage the acquisition workforce (at the military service and OSD level). 
  
                                                 
97 Department of Defense, Quadrennial Defense Review Report, February 2010, p. 76. 
98 The Packard Report, for example, stated “We must give acquisition personnel more authority to do their jobs. If we 
make it possible for people to do the right thing the first time and allow them to use their common sense, then we 
believe that the Department can get by with far fewer people.” See p. xxiv. 
99 Based on conversations with program managers and other acquisition personnel, September 14, 2013.  
100 U.S. Institute for Peace, The QDR in Perspective: Meeting America’s National Security Needs in the 21st Century, 
Final Report of the Quadrennial Defense Review Independent Panel, July 28, 2010, p. 85. Italics as in original. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
21 
Targeted Reform Efforts 
In addition to workforce management, efforts to reform specific areas of defense acquisitions, as 
was done by the Weapon System Acquisition Reform Act of 2009 and efforts to improve 
Operational Contract Support, have the potential to generate cost savings and operational 
benefits. Examples of possible areas ripe for reform include streamlining acquisition laws and 
regulations, and focusing on contract logistics. 
Streamlining Acquisition Laws and Regulations 
In some instances, regulations aimed at improving the acquisition process or promoting public-
policy goals impose unintended cost or regulatory burdens to industry. A number of analysts have 
argued that repealing or amending regulations that no longer provide a substantial benefit could 
simplify the acquisition process, remove unnecessary regulatory burdens on industry, and entice 
more companies to compete for defense and other federal government contracts (see Appendix A 
for a more detailed discussion of the complexity of the acquisition process). Sometimes, the laws 
and regulations governing defense procurement can add to the cost of doing business, as in the 
case of certain domestic source restrictions like the Berry Amendment. Such a perspective does 
not necessarily argue for wholesale removal of regulations and oversight, but rather an approach 
of weighing the costs to industry and government against the policy and oversight benefits of 
certain regulations.101 Congress could also choose to amend statutes and regulations so as to 
alleviate regulatory or financial burdens while preserving the intent of the regulation.  
Congress has spearheaded past efforts to streamline the laws and regulations governing 
acquisitions. For example, Section 800 of the FY1991 NDAA102 required the Under Secretary of 
Defense for Acquisition to establish an advisory panel charged with reviewing the acquisition 
laws applicable to the Department of Defense.103 This effort ultimately resulted in enactment of 
the Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994,104 which was a comprehensive reform effort.  
Logistics and Supply Chain Management 
Some government officials and industry experts have identified logistics as an area where 
significant cost savings could be generated without negatively affecting operational 
                                                 
101 Honorable William J. Perry, Acquisition Reform, Department of Defense, A Mandate for Change, February 9, 1994, 
p. 8. 
102 P.L. 101-510 
103 The panel was directed to  
(1) review the acquisition laws applicable to the Department of Defense with a view toward streamlining the 
defense acquisition process; 
(2) make any recommendations for the repeal or amendment of such laws that the panel considers necessary, as a 
result of such review, to— 
(A) eliminate any such laws that are unnecessary for the establishment and administration of buyer and seller 
relationships in procurement; 
(B) ensure the continuing financial and ethical integrity of defense procurement programs; and 
(C) protect the best interests of the Department of Defense; and 
(3) prepare a proposed code of relevant acquisition laws. 
104 P.L. 103-155. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
22 
capabilities.105 Recent reports have identified instances of wasteful spending in this area. For 
example, the DOD Inspector General has developed a body of work that found the following: 
• 
Boeing charged the Army about $13 million more than fair and reasonable prices 
for 18 parts on a support contract.106 
• 
Sikorsky charged the Army approximately $12 million more than fair and 
reasonable prices for 28 parts.107  
• 
Boeing charged DLA Aviation $13.7 million more than fair and reasonable prices 
for 27 parts associated with 1,469 delivery orders.108 
In addition, the Special Inspector General for Afghan Reconstruction reported that military forces 
in Afghanistan were unable to account for about $230 million worth of spare parts and then 
ordered $138 million of additional parts without sufficient accountability.109  
Given the examples of potential savings identified to date, Congress could consider logistics and 
supply chain management as a potential area for increased congressional oversight and further 
investigation. 
                                                 
105 Based on conversations with CRS analysts, July 2013 through October 2013. 
106 Department of Defense Inspector General, “Excess Inventory and Contract Pricing Problems Jeopardize the Army 
Contract with Boeing to Support the Corpus Christi Army Depot,” Report D-2011-061, May 3, 2011. 
107 Department of Defense Inspector General, “Pricing and Escalation Issues Weaken the Effectiveness of the Army 
Contract with Sikorsky to Support the Corpus Christi Army Depot,” Report D-2011-104, September 8, 2011, 
108 Department of Defense Inspector General, “Improved Guidance Needed to Obtain Fair and Reasonable Prices for 
Sole-Source Spare Parts Procured by the Defense Logistics Agency from the Boeing Company,” Report DODIG-2013-
090, June 7, 2013, 
109 Special Inspector General for Afghanistan Reconstruction, Afghan National Army: Combined Security Transition 
Command-Afghanistan Lacks Key Information on Inventory in Stock and Requirements for Vehicle Spare Parts, 
SIGAR 14-3, October 16, 2013, p. 1. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
23 
Appendix A. Complexity of the Acquisition Process 
Until World War II, the regulations and rules governing government contracting in general, and 
defense contracting in particular, were minimal. After World War II, the growth in defense 
acquisition regulations was so rapid and uncoordinated that an Office of Federal Procurement 
Policy study from the late 1970s found that DOD had 79 different offices issuing procurement 
regulations and that these offices had developed a procurement process that consisted of some 
30,000 pages of regulations. 
Concerned that the defense acquisitions process was overly complex and unwieldy, Congress 
enacted the Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act of 1994110 to overhaul the process. Despite this 
act and other congressional and executive branch efforts, contracting with the federal government 
remains a highly regulated process governed by a myriad of statutes and regulations.111 These 
regulations govern such issues as 
• 
how DOD solicits, negotiates, and awards a contract; 
• 
what costs DOD will reimburse and how contractors account for those costs; 
• 
the information systems used by contractors; and  
• 
how contractors must comply with such rules as combatting trafficking in 
persons, maintaining a drug-free workplace, and other public policy goals.112 
Factors contributing to the increased complexity of the acquisition system include past reform 
efforts, increased complexity of technology and weapon systems, and inclusion of public policy 
goals into the acquisition process. Examples of regulations that reflect public policy goals include 
the requirement to purchase certain goods from domestic suppliers (such as the Berry 
Amendment and Buy American Act),113 preferences for buying goods and services in Afghanistan 
to support campaign objectives in theatre, requirements to take steps to combat trafficking in 
persons,114 set asides to promote small businesses and other entities perceived as disadvantaged, 
and the International Traffic in Arms Regulations. 
In some instances, conflicts arise between obtaining the best value for the government and 
promoting public policy goals. Some analysts debate the value of regulations requiring certain 
defense items to be manufactured domestically. Others argue these requirements are necessary to 
ensure domestic sources of supply during war time. Some analysts argue domestic sourcing 
regulations unnecessarily increase the cost to government, that the regulations could be 
implemented in a more cost-efficient manner, and that some items are on the list for protectionist 
reasons, not to preserve military capabilities. 
                                                 
110 P.L. 103-155. 
111 http://www.cdc.gov/od/pgo/funding/contracts/contractmain.shtm. 
112 Carl L. Vacketta, Federal Government Contract Overview, http://library.findlaw.com/1999/Jan/1/241470.html. 
113 See DFARS, Part 225.7002; FAR Part 25. See also CRS Report RL31236, The Berry Amendment: Requiring 
Defense Procurement to Come from Domestic Sources, by Valerie Bailey Grasso. 
114 FAR Subpart 22.17, Combating Trafficking in Persons. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
24 
The complexity of the regulations can make it difficult for some companies to enter the 
government contracting arena.115 Many analysts believe that the rules and regulations governing 
defense acquisitions need to be further streamlined and simplified in a manner that reduces the 
burden on private industry and controls the increase in costs while preserving sufficient oversight. 
                                                 
115 Ibid. See also Grant Thornton, 16th Annual Government Contractor Industry Survey Highlights Book, Industry 
Survey Highlights 2010, p. 7. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
25 
Appendix B. Constantly Changing Acquisition 
Rules 
Some analysts believe that the successive reform efforts have discouraged some companies from 
seeking government contracts out of concern that the rules could be changed in the middle of the 
game. Implementing successive changes to the acquisition system can also add to the cost of 
doing business with DOD and make it more difficult for DOD and Congress to determine 
whether individual changes are having a positive or negative effect on the acquisition process. 
Changes to the rules governing defense acquisitions generally are the result of legislation or 
executive branch rules and regulations. 
Legislative Changes 
In recent years, the primary mechanism by which Congress has exercised its legislative powers to 
reform defense acquisitions has been the annual National Defense Authorization Act (NDAA). 
Sections of these acts have prescribed requirements applicable to both specific acquisition 
programs and the acquisition structure overall, the latter of which has typically been addressed in 
Title VIII, which is usually called “Acquisition Policy, Acquisition Management, and Related 
Matters.” Over a recent six-year period, the Title in the NDAA dealing with acquisitions included 
more than 275 sections.116 
Other titles within the NDAA can also include legislation that affects companies seeking to 
contract with DOD.117 At times, Congress has chosen to enact legislation affecting defense 
acquisitions in a stand-alone bill. For example, in May 2009, Congress passed and the President 
signed into law the Weapon Systems Acquisition Reform Act of 2009 (S. 454/P.L. 111-23), which 
contained a number of sections that impacted defense acquisitions, ranging from issues related to 
competition to conflicts of interest. 
Regulatory Changes 
DOD procurement activities are generally governed by three sets of federal government 
regulations: 
• 
The first set of regulations, which applies to the entire federal government 
(including DOD unless stated otherwise), are found in the Federal Acquisition 
Regulation (FAR), 
• 
The second set of regulations applies only to DOD and is found in the Defense 
Federal Acquisition Regulation Supplement, and 
                                                 
116 Based on CRS review of the National Defense Authorization Acts for FY2008-2012. Not all sections in the Title 
impact private industry; rather, the volume of sections portrays the challenges in keeping abreast of legislative changes 
that could significantly impact industry. 
117 For example, the FY2010 NDAA, Title III (Operation and Maintenance) included a section effecting defense 
acquisitions. See P.L. 111-84, Sec. 325. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
26 
• 
The third set of regulations applies only to individual DOD components and is 
found in component-unique FAR Supplements.118 
Procurement actions in DOD must adhere to the various regulations, and program managers must 
take the regulations into account during the planning and execution of their programs. The rules 
and regulations governing defense acquisitions can change at a rapid pace. For example, the DOD 
Directive 5000 series was established in 1971 to regulate the acquisition of major weapon 
systems. Over the next 40 years, the process for acquiring weapon systems set forth in the 5000 
series was revised more than a dozen times—a change approximately once every three years. In 
some cases, the changes have been dramatic. The 5000 series documents have been issued and 
reissued, with different versions ranging in length from as few as 8 to as many as 840 pages. 
These regulatory changes also modified the number of milestones and other decision points 
required for approval from two, to three, to as many as seven. The documentation required for 
milestone reviews has ranged from one document in 1971 to dozens of documents in 2008.119 
                                                 
118 The Army, Air Force, Navy and Marine Corps, Defense Logistics Agency, and U.S. Special Operations Command 
each have unique supplements. 
119 Based on discussions with analysts and government officials, CRS review of regulations and documentation, and 
review of academic working papers that have not yet been published. See J. Ronald Fox, Defense Acquisition Reform: 
An Elusive Goal - 1960 to 2010, Harvard Business School, Working Paper 11-120, p. Appendix B, referenced with 
permission of the author. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
27 
Appendix C. Syllabus for the CRS Seminars Defense 
Acquisitions: What Can We Learn From Past Reform 
Efforts? 
The five-session program examines past reform attempts to identify what has been tried before, 
what has worked, what has not worked, and lessons that can be drawn from these efforts.  
Class 
Suggested Reading Prior to Class 
Overview of Defense Acquisitions: 
Overview of syllabus, defense acquisition 
history, prevalent players in the process, 
environmental effects and constraints, and 
measures of success for acquisition 
reform. 
For those new to defense acquisitions, please read Defense Acquisition Reform 1960-
2009 – An Elusive Goal, pages 1-21; 30-33 (Chapter One). 
 
 
 
The Foundation of Modern 
Acquisition Reform (1970-1986): 
Discuss findings and recommendations of 
the Fitzhugh and Packard panels; The 
Nunn-McCurdy Act. 
Report to The President and the Secretary of Defense on the Department of Defense 
(Fitzhugh Report, 1970); pages 1-12 & 17-18 (Executive Summary); pages 79-84; 
pages 93-96.  
A Quest for Excellence (Packard Report, 1986); pages xi-xiii (Forward); pages 41-71 
(Chapter Three).  
CRS Report R41293, The Nunn-McCurdy Act: Background, Analysis, and Issues for 
Congress. 
The 1990s: The Perry Report, 
Section 800 Panel, and More: Review 
the findings and recommendations from 
Secretary Perry and the GAO and 
consider how their perspectives have 
changed over time. A look at the Section 
800 panel.  
Acquisition Reform: A Mandate For Change (Perry Report, 1994) 
Weapons Acquisition: A Rare Opportunity for Lasting Change (GAO, 1992), pages 
35-68. 
The Origins and Development of the Federal Acquisition Streamlining Act (Hon. Jeff 
Bingaman, 1994).  
 The QDR In Perspective (US Institute for Peace, 2010); pages 83-93. 
 Defense Acquisition: Charting a Course for Lasting Reform (GAO, 2009).  
2000-2011: An Analysis of Key 
Reports and the Impact of War on 
Acquisition Reform: Review the 
findings and recommendations of three 
recent reports on acquisition reform; 
discuss the impact of Iraq and Afghanistan 
on defense acquisitions. 
Army Strong: Equipped, Trained and Ready (2011), pages vii-xxvi (Executive Summary). 
Defense Acquisition Performance Assessment Report (DAPA, 2006), pages vii; 1-16 
(Summary). 
Getting to Best: Reforming the Defense Acquisition Enterprise (2009); pages iii; 1-13 
(Executive Summary). 
General Allan ISAF Counter Insurgency Contracting Guidance. 
CRS Report R43074, Department of Defense’s Use of Contractors to Support Military 
Operations: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress. 
Recent Initiatives: From Better 
Buying Power to Congressional 
Action: Discuss the range of ongoing 
acquisition system initiatives and assess 
their impact and potential for long-term 
improvement. 
Better Buying Power Fact Sheet and Implementation memo. 
September 2012 DOD memo on end of year obligations. 
Performance of the Defense Acquisition System, 2013 Annual Report, pages iii-iv; 105-
112. 
Defense Acquisition Reform 1960-2009, pages 189-207 (Conclusions). 
 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
28 
 
Bibliography of Readings (in order of assignment) 
• 
J. Ronald Fox, Defense Acquisition Reform 1960-2009: An Elusive Goal (Center 
of Military History, 2011), at http://www.history.army.mil/html/books/051/51-3-
1/index.html. 
• 
Department of Defense, Report to the President and the Secretary of Defense on 
the Department of Defense by the Blue Ribbon Defense Panel, July 1, 1970, at 
http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&ved=
0CCcQFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fwww.dtic.mil%2Fcgi-
bin%2FGetTRDoc%3FAD%3DADA013261&ei=
S6sUU6fYIOni0gHG9oDYDg&usg=AFQjCNHXnfsT3jYxSK4t-
LzkD38HWtqKYQ&bvm=bv.61965928,d.dmQ. 
• 
President’s Blue Ribbon Commission on Defense Management, A Quest for 
Excellence, Final Report to the President by the President’s Blue Ribbon 
Commission on Defense Management, June 30, 1986, at http://usacac.army.mil/
cac2/CSI/docs/Gorman/06_Retired/01_Retired_1985_90/
07_86_PackardCommission_FinalReport/
01_PackardCommission_FinalReport.pdf. 
• 
CRS Report R41293, The Nunn-McCurdy Act: Background, Analysis, and Issues 
for Congress, by Moshe Schwartz. 
• 
U.S. General Accounting Office, Weapons Acquisitions: A Rare Opportunity for 
Lasting Change, GAO/NSIAD-93-15, December 1992, at http://www.gao.gov/
products/NSIAD-93-15. 
• 
Honorable Jeff Bingaman, “The Origins and Development of the Federal 
Acquisition Streamlining Act,” Military Law Review, vol. 145 (Summer 1994), 
pp. 149-170, at http://heinonline.org/HOL/Page?handle=hein.journals/milrv145&
div=7&collection=journals&set_as_cursor=3&men_tab=srchresults#155. 
• 
Honorable William J. Perry, Acquisition Reform: A Mandate for Change, 
Department of Defense, February 9, 1994, at https://dap.dau.mil/policy/
Documents/Policy/
Acquistion%20Reform%20a%20Mandate%20for%20Change.pdf. 
• 
U.S. Institute for Peace, The QDR in Perspective: Meeting America’s National 
Security Needs in the 21st Century, Final Report of the Quadrennial Defense 
Review Independent Panel, July 28, 2010, at http://www.usip.org/quadrennial-
defense-review-independent-panel-/view-the-report. 
• 
U.S. Government Accountability Office, Defense Acquisitions: Charting a 
Course for Lasting Reform, GAO-09-633T, April 30, 2009, at 
http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d09663t.pdf. 
• 
U.S. Army, Army Strong: Equipped, Trained and Ready, Final Report of the 2010 
Army Acquisition Review, January 11, 2011, at http://usarmy.vo.llnwd.net/e2/c/
downloads/213465.pdf. 

Defense Acquisition Reform: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress 
 
Congressional Research Service 
29 
• 
Department of Defense, Defense Acquisition Performance Assessment Report, 
January 2006, at http://www.defense.gov/pubs/pdfs/DAPA%2012-
22%20WEB%20Exec%20Summary.pdf. 
• 
Business Executives for National Security, Getting to Best: Reforming the 
Defense Acquisition Enterprise, A Business Imperative for Change from the Task 
Force on Defense Acquisition Law and Oversight, July, 2009, at 
http://www.bens.org/document.doc?id=12. 
• 
CRS Report R43074, Department of Defense’s Use of Contractors to Support 
Military Operations: Background, Analysis, and Issues for Congress, by Moshe 
Schwartz. 
• 
Office of the Under Secretary of Defense Acquisition, Technology and Logistics, 
Performance of the Defense Acquisition System, 2013 Annual Report, June 28, 
2013, at http://www.acq.osd.mil/docs/
Performance%20of%20the%20Def%20Acq%20System%202013%20-
%20FINAL%2028June2013.pdf. 
• 
Under Secretary of Defense Robert Hale and Under Secretary of Defense Frank 
Kendall, Department of Defense Management of Unobligated Funds; Obligation 
Rate Tenets, Office of the Secretary of Defense, September 10, 2012. 
• 
Under Secretary of Defense Frank Kendall, Implementation Directive for Better 
Buying Power 2.0 - Achieving Greater Efficiency and Productivity in Defense 
Spending, Department of Defense, April 24, 2013. 
• 
Under Secretary of Defense Frank Kendall, The New Department of Defense 
Instruction 5000.02, Department of Defense, Memorandum for the Acquisition 
Workforce, December 2, 2013. 
 
 
Author Contact Information 
 
Moshe Schwartz 
Specialist in Defense Acquisition 
mschwartz@crs.loc.gov, 7-1463