SLAVERY TODAY JOURNAL 
A Multidisciplinary Journal of Human Trafficking Solutions 
      Volume 1, Issue 1                                                                            February 2014
Unlocking the 
Science of 
Slavery 
by Kevin Bales, PhD 
Professor of Contemporary Slavery at 
the Wilberforce Institute 
for the Study of Slavery and Emancipation, 
co-founder of Free the Slaves 

Inauguration of Slavery Today: Unlocking the Science of Slavery.  Kevin Bales.
Inauguration of Slavery Today 
Unlocking the Science of Slavery 
by Kevin Bales, PhD 
 
 
 
After the Battle of Britain, in late 1942, Winston Churchill famously said, 
"Now this is not the end. It is not even the beginning of the end, but it is, perhaps, 
the end of the beginning." In the world of anti-slavery research and campaigning it 
can be argued that we are now approaching the “end of the beginning” of this the 
fourth great anti-slavery movement  in human history. From a simplistic, emotive, 
1
disparate, and disorganized minority cause, slavery is quickly becoming an issue of 
global concern, and is now generating global responses. This has occurred for a 
number of reasons: increased awareness, a recognition of the possibility of 
eradication, and a growing understanding of the economic and social cost of 
slavery are just a few of those reasons. There is history to be written of the opening 
stages of this anti-slavery movement, but as we clamber over this tipping point it is 
time to think hard about the future. 
 
It is time to consider where we are going. To understand how we as scholars 
and activists make the transition from a simplistic, emotive, disparate, and 
disorganized global anti-slavery movement, to one that is complex, logical, 
unified and organized. It is clear that achieving that change requires scholarship 
and knowledge, "joined-up thinking" as the phrase goes. This new journal in 
reporting research, and creative anti-slavery actions and policies, is part of moving 
toward not just “the end of the beginning” but ultimately the beginning of the end. 
 
There are clear gaps in both our understanding and practice as we bring the 
field of slavery studies into maturity. Not surprisingly, these gaps tend to appear in 
precisely those stages that reflect scientific processes, steps that all fields must take 
in order to achieve a foundation of conceptualization as well as application. All 
scientific disciplines, for example, operate within a conceptual paradigm that sets 
out the boundary of their field of inquiry. Rarely discussed and equally rarely 
altered, the dominant paradigm of a discipline states what is and what is not part of 
the field of study. 
 The first anti-slavery movement began in 1787 in Great Britain, it was the first human rights campaign, and 
1
originated what we now call “NGOs”. The second was the American anti-slavery movement of the first half of the 
19th century. The third was the Congo Reform Movement that began in the late 1890s and culminated with the 
annexation of the Congo Free State by Belgium in 1908. All three achieved international support and became social 
movements.
Slavery Today, Volume 1, Issue 1, February 2014 
!1

Inauguration of Slavery Today: Unlocking the Science of Slavery.  Kevin Bales.
 
So, what is the paradigm of the field of slavery studies?  On one hand this is 
2
perfectly clear – it is the relationship between two people that is marked by an 
extreme power differential, a very high likelihood of violence, and significant 
control of one person by the other, leading to a diminution in agency and freedom 
of movement, and exploitation, normally economic but often sexual as well. On the 
other hand, this relationship can be mediated by culture, gender, politics, religion, 
family ties, (and many other social filters) and through that mediation it is given 
very different sets of meanings. Consequently, agreement as to what, exactly, 
constitutes slavery is currently under debate. 
 
It is worth noting that in most scientific disciplines paradigmatic and 
operational definitions tend toward clarity and precision over time, but the reverse 
has occurred with the study of slavery. From the time of the earliest human records 
slavery has been discussed and analysed, yet the definition of slavery was very 
rarely questioned. Indeed, most works concerned with slavery, including laws and 
treaties, from the dawn of writing right up to the early 20th century, do not offer a 
definition of slavery. Slavery was simply a fact of life so pervasive, so obvious, 
and so self-explanatory, that no definition was considered necessary. Like “death” 
it needed no further definition. 
 
Today, as we reach a point in history when the eradication of slavery is 
possible, confusion has erupted as to what constitutes enslavement. On some levels 
agreement to disagree is possible, but in terms of operationally defining slavery, 
such disagreement leads to a field of study in chaos. As with all sciences, without 
an agreed definition of the object of study we are unable to achieve comparable 
findings and interpretations, doomed to forever argue the nuances of apples versus 
oranges. 
 
One of the reasons for this confusion is the fact that slavery is both a social 
activity and a relationship, and so it exists: 1) as a state of being (what it means to 
the slave to be a slave); 2) as a form of human interaction (the nature of the 
unequal and normally violent relationship between slave and slaveholder); and 3) 
as the outcome of slavery as part of society at large (through, for example, the 
economic output of slaves). Each of these dimensions provides necessary and 
essential criteria for determining whether a particular activity or relationship is, or 
is not, slavery.  
3
 
Virtually all human activity, and certainly slavery, occurs in each of these 
three dimensions. For example, there are very few things any person might do that 
 A good place to start in understanding social science paradigms is George Ritzer’s Sociology: A Multiple Paradigm 
2
Science, Allyn & Bacon, 1974.
 These categories are developed more fully in: “The Paradox of Women, Children, and Slavery” in Trafficking in 
3
Slavery’s Wake: Law and the Experience of Women and Children in Africa, Benjamin N. Lawrence and Richard L. 
Roberts (eds), Ohio University Press, 2012, pp 241-253, with Jody Sarich.
Slavery Today, Volume 1, Issue 1, February 2014 
!2

Inauguration of Slavery Today: Unlocking the Science of Slavery.  Kevin Bales.
occur in complete isolation or solitude, and yet we live within our own minds and 
are ultimately individuals and discrete organisms. One cannot understand any part 
of humanity or our history without reference to the individual. At the same time, all 
of us are also products of, and constantly involved in, interaction with others. We 
learn and are shaped by these relationships, and our lives, jobs, families, and so on, 
are the sum of these interactions with others. Furthermore, we all live within larger 
societies and currents and patterns in these societies shape us as well – gender, 
ethnicity, politics, economics, and on and on. Slavery exists at all these levels, in 
the lived experience of the slave, in the relationship of slave and slaveholder and 
the community where they live, and within the sweeping patterns of societies and 
economies. 
 
There is a great deal more that might be said about the nature of 
enslavement, but the key point in terms of bringing the study of slavery into a state 
of intellectual and scientific readiness is that a generally accepted operational 
definition of slavery must be achieved before meaningful, comparable, research 
can be accomplished. One of the barriers to achieving this is an attempt to resolve 
this lack of a common operational definition by adopting one of the many existing 
legal definitions to guide research and analysis. For the most part such an attempt 
cannot but fail. The law is a relatively closed logical system using specific 
vocabulary in order to standardize the understanding and control of actions and 
outcomes within a framework of norms, governance, and control. That vocabulary 
and system are important, but they do not necessarily reflect the complexities and 
dynamic qualities of the social reality. For that reason international conventions or 
national laws make poor operational definitions - they are simply designed to meet 
a different conceptual need. Most importantly, a field’s operational definition 
should be derived from the measurable reality of the object of study, not from the 
needs of legislators, litigators, or adjudicators (or the special interest groups that 
influence them). 
 
How then do we find the measurable reality of slavery on which to build an 
operational definition? The first step is to strip away the social, cultural, and 
ideological packaging in which the fact of slavery is often wrapped. For example, 
no matter whether it is called “sex trafficking”, forced marriage, debt bondage, or 
child soldiers, our operational definition should be able to encompass any activity 
that demonstrates the key criteria that mark slavery. This is likely to lead to debates 
based on ideological or traditional views about slavery. Some groups have invested 
heavily, for example, in the premise that organ trafficking or most forms of child 
labour are slavery. But the term “slavery” must not be a catch-all, absorbing all 
exploitative activities, it must stand as a precise set of criteria which allows 
discrimination between potential objects of study. 
 
I will not offer an operational definition here since operational definitions 
Slavery Today, Volume 1, Issue 1, February 2014 
!3

Inauguration of Slavery Today: Unlocking the Science of Slavery.  Kevin Bales.
should be constructed within the framework of specific research questions. I will, 
however, point to the Bellagio-Harvard Guidelines written by the Members of the 
Research Network on the Legal Parameters of Slavery in 2012 (a network of 20 
scholars of international law, anti-slavery leaders and leading scholars of slavery), 
which use the legal definition of slavery found at Article 1(1) of the 1926 Slavery 
Convention. The 1926 definition reads: “Slavery is the status or condition of a 
person over whom any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership are 
exercised.” This definition is reproduced in substance in Article 7(a) of the 1956 
UN Supplementary Convention on the Abolition of Slavery, the Slave Trade, and 
Institutions and Practices Similar to Slavery, as well as in the Article 7(2)(c) of the 
1998 Statute of the International Criminal Court. 
 
As legal ownership rights are no longer asserted by slaveholders, the 
Bellagio–Harvard Guidelines state that today, the exercise of “the powers attaching 
to the right of ownership” should be understood as possession: “control over a 
person by another such as a person might control a thing.” Therefore, “slavery” 
may be defined as “controlling a person in such a way as to significantly deprive 
that person of individual liberty, with the intent of exploitation through the use, 
management, purchase, sale, profit, transfer or disposal of that person.” The 
exercise of any or all of these powers attaching to the right of ownership should 
provide evidence of slavery, insofar as they demonstrate control over a person 
tantamount to possession. This definition provides the type of legal certainty that is 
fundamental to any prosecution of contemporary slavery.  
4
 
Once an agreed definition has been achieved, and accepting that it may 
evolve over time, it can be used to generate the comparable information that makes 
the next steps of scientific endeavor possible. The first of these steps is description. 
Whether the object of study is new species of insect or the complex nature of 
human relationships, basic descriptive information is needed. Slavery is slavery, 
but every manifestation of slavery differs slightly from the next. Those differences 
are crucial to understanding the processes of enslavement as well as the potential 
points and forms of intervention. Certainly, a common challenge when 
 For the full Bellagio–Harvard Guidelines, see Jean Allain (ed.), The Legal Understanding of Slavery: From the 
4
Historical to the Contemporary (Oxford University Press, 2012), 375-380, also available here: www.qub.ac.uk/
s c h o o l s / S c h o o l o f L a w / R e s e a r c h / H u m a n R i g h t s C e n t r e / R e s o u r c e s / B e l l a g i o -
HarvardGuidelinesontheLegalParametersofSlavery/. The Bellagio–Harvard Guidelines are similar to the definition 
put forward in the Joint UN Commentary on the EU Directive of 2011. Observing the 1926 definition (“the status or 
condition of a person over whom any or all of the powers attaching to the rights of ownership are exercised”) the 
UN Commentary adds: “The deﬁnition in the Slavery Convention may cause difﬁculties today, as there could be no 
rights of ownership for one person over another. In order to solve this difﬁculty, an alternative deﬁnition would be 
‘the status or condition of a person over whom control is exercised to the extent that the person is treated like 
property,’ or ‘reducing a person to a status or condition in which any or all of the powers attaching to the right of 
property are exercised.’”See Joint UN Commentary on the EU Directive – A Human Rights-Based Approach (2011), 
103. For further discussion of the definition of slavery, see most recently Jean Allain and Kevin Bales, “Slavery and 
Its Definition,” Global Dialogue 14.2 (2012): 1-15.
Slavery Today, Volume 1, Issue 1, February 2014 
!4

Inauguration of Slavery Today: Unlocking the Science of Slavery.  Kevin Bales.
communicating information about slavery to a wider audience, even information 
that has been carefully gathered following the best social scientific practices, is a 
cultural insistence that slavery takes only a single form, and anything that deviates 
from that form is debatable and dubious. In North America, the cultural “norm” for 
slavery is the antebellum African slavery of the Deep South of the United States. 
That is considered “real” slavery. Other groups have invested heavily in the 
concept of “human trafficking” and seek to make (as in the legal definition in the 
Palermo Protocol ) “slavery” a sub-set of “trafficking.” Our challenge is to provide 
5
description that is as objective as possible, reached through a common operational 
definition. Only in that way can the breadth of slavery be recognized for what it is. 
 
The field of archeology is famously divided into “splitters” and “lumpers” - 
those who interpret each new bone or pottery fragment as a new category of human 
or culture, and those who see commonality and continuity and assign new finds to 
existing categories. This is understandable when the objects under study are rare, 
are fragmentary, and are far removed in time from their original context. Those 
factors leave plenty of space for debate. Slavery, however, is far from rare, and we 
have millions of potential subjects of study. Nor are these slaves fragmentary 
records of people, they are complete human beings with the capacity to interpret 
their own lives. And they are embedded in the context of their enslavement, with 
immediate and recordable pasts. The science of slavery has no excuse to be 
‘splitting’ and ‘lumping,’ it can derive a grounded operational definition from the 
reality of slavery. And once applied, it can begin the description of the variety that 
exists within that defined group. 
 
This description might take many forms. Fundamental information such as: 
the prevalence (number enslaved) in a certain type of slavery, the nature of the 
mechanism leading to their enslavement (debt, kidnap, fraud), and the type of work 
required, all need careful compilation. Today we actually know little about our 
subject, to use a taxonomic analogy, we tend to agree that slavery falls within the 
Order of human exploitation, that there is a Family of behaviors that involve 
extreme levels of control and violence as a basis for that exploitation, that there is a 
Genus made up of categories such as “human trafficking,” debt bondage, and 
slavery, and there are a large number of specific Species of slavery that are 
expressed in ways that reflect local “ecosystems” of culture, economics, 
 "Trafficking in persons" shall mean the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by 
5
means of the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of fraud, of deception, of the abuse of 
power or of a position of vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of 
a person having control over another person, for the purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall include, at a 
minimum, the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or 
services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs. (Protocol to Prevent, Suppress 
and Punish Trafficking in Persons, especially Women and Children supplementing the UN Convention against 
Transnational Organized Crime.)
Slavery Today, Volume 1, Issue 1, February 2014 
!5

Inauguration of Slavery Today: Unlocking the Science of Slavery.  Kevin Bales.
discrimination, and so forth. What is also very clear is that we are nowhere near an 
exhaustive description of the variant Species of contemporary slavery around the 
world. 
 
Fundamental description is only a first step, necessary but not nearly as 
useful as exploring the relationships between slavery and factors that might drive, 
support, or act to extinguish it. In a context of limited resources questions of 
correlation are important. It is a commonplace that slavery is linked to poverty, 
corruption, discrimination, and conflict. The question becomes which of these 
factors is more important in supporting slavery in different situations. For example, 
the following graph  shows the correlation between slavery (the “log of prevalence 
6
measure”) and the UN Human Development Index (the HDI measures the 
availability of education, life expectancy, and standard of living) for 162 countries. 
 
As the scatterplot suggests, and the statistics confirm, there is a significant 
(.001 level) and reasonably strong (R2 = 0.55) relationship between the Human 
Development Index score and the prevalence of slavery in a country. Exploring 
 Drawn from the 2013 Global Slavery Index, Walk Free Foundation.
6
Slavery Today, Volume 1, Issue 1, February 2014 
!6

Inauguration of Slavery Today: Unlocking the Science of Slavery.  Kevin Bales.
relationships like this gives us a measured and more precise estimation of our 
“common knowledge” - that globally slavery is related to human development and 
that when education, health, and the standard of living is low, slavery is more 
prevalent. But how far does that actually take us? As we take the first steps in 
bringing precision and scientific analysis to slavery, we will pile up a large amount 
of exactly such measured relationships. They will need to be sifted and tested and 
compared. They are not the “answer”. They are the ballast that allows further 
exploration, the foundation upon which more detailed research will be constructed. 
 
That further research takes us into the third level of scientific explanation, 
beyond relationships and into causation. When we are able to measure over time, 
and to separate out the independent impact of one variable on another, we enter the 
realm of prediction. We are able to predict that changes in one measured variable 
will have a certain effect on another. When we reach that stage smarter and more 
efficient interventions against slavery become possible. At present, a lack of data 
on the extent and types of slavery makes this very difficult, but an example shows 
the way forward. The following diagram shows the independent effect of five 
variables in predicting the extent of slavery in 37 European countries. 
Slavery Today, Volume 1, Issue 1, February 2014 
!7

Inauguration of Slavery Today: Unlocking the Science of Slavery.  Kevin Bales.
 
The relationship between each of these variables and the prevalence of 
slavery in these countries is statistically significant, and the strength of that 
relationship, independent of the other variables, is measured and given in the 
standardized Beta Coefficients shown in parentheses. Clearly, the countries of the 
former Soviet Union and Soviet Block suffer from governmental instability, 
curtailments on basic human rights (like the freedom of speech), and a lack of 
credit that makes building up new enterprise very difficult, and as a result their 
citizens are more likely to take risky decisions about moving to areas of greater 
opportunity, and thus sometimes are drawn into slavery. Citizens of richer 
countries also have greater longevity, and this is reflected in the variable that 
measures the proportion of the population over aged 60. This variable reflects a 
demographic that tends to higher levels of demand for foreign workers, and 
potentially demand for enslaved workers as well.  
7
 
Again, there is a certain amount of information in this diagram that is no 
surprise, but taken together it might point to interventions that were not 
immediately envisaged. The strong and predictive relationship between access to 
financial services and slavery, for example, suggests corruption-free microcredit 
projects in Eastern Europe might help to stem the flow of trafficked people. Further 
research can go deeper, and field testing such findings can determine if the 
predicted influence can be translated into real change. 
 
There are tough questions to answer about modern slavery and real 
methodological challenges along the way. Criminals are keen to conceal their 
crimes, and those in slavery are hard to find. But find them we must, both in order 
to count and measure, since many countries are in denial about the extent of the 
problem, and to open the door to liberation and reintegration. 
 
One of the outcomes of building a social science of slavery is that greater 
specialism will occur. At present most practitioners are generalists, which is not 
unusual when only general knowledge is available. But as we move forward, as 
resources and the number of people involved in the field increase, we will have the 
opportunity to delve more deeply into the sub-sets and sub-categories of slavery. 
There is, for example, no basic work on the relationship between slavery and 
religion, or on women and slavery. The interaction between “low intensity” 
conflicts and the eruption of slavery is also relatively unexamined. This list could 
go on into specific areas such as trauma, needful curricula for public facing 
workers, computation of demand curves for different types of enslaved labor, and 
on and on. 
 See also: Monti Narayan Datta and Kevin Bales “Slavery in Europe: Part 2, Testing a Predictive Model,” Human 
7
Rights Quarterly, (May 2014).
Slavery Today, Volume 1, Issue 1, February 2014 
!8

Inauguration of Slavery Today: Unlocking the Science of Slavery.  Kevin Bales.
 
The fact that these issues are being addressed, that these questions are being 
asked, indicates progress in our understanding. For my part I am very glad to be at 
the “end of the beginning”. For too long we have been both a movement and a 
proto-science enfeebled by being simplistic, emotive, disparate, and disorganized. 
Our internal conflicts have wasted our strength, and our unsophisticated analyses 
have done little toward our true goal – the end of slavery. That has to be our 
mindset now. It is time to put aside notions that slavery is a vast, incomprehensible, 
and unstoppable crime. Now is the time to imagine and then construct the 
beginning of the end of slavery.
Slavery Today, Volume 1, Issue 1, February 2014 
!9