BOOK REVIEWS
Book Reviews • DOI: 10.2478/njmr-2014-0003 NJMR • 4(1) • 2014 • 45-51
Andersson, Mette, Jacobsen, Christine M, Rogstad, Jon & 
Vestel, Viggo (2012) Kritiske hendelser – Nye stemmer. Politisk 
engasjement og transnasjonal orientering i det nye Norge, Oslo: 
Universitetsforlaget. 271 pp.
This volume investigates the different types of political engagement 
among ethnic minority youth in contemporary Norwegian society. 
The point of departure is that critical events on both national and 
international levels have been decisive for mobilisation of political 
engagement. The authors make a connection among well-known 
international events such as the Rushdie affair, the Muhammad 
caricature drawings and the terror attacks of 22 July 2011 to 
“local” Norwegian events such as the Obiora case in 2006 and the 
Farah case in 2007, which are less known to the non-Norwegian 
international reader. The two latter cases involve the death of Eugene 
Obiora outside a social office after being apprehended by the police 
and the case of Ali Farah where an injured Farah was rejected by the 
personnel of the ambulance which had been summoned. Both cases 
were from different sides characterised as examples of prevailing but 
not recognised structural racism or structural discrimination. Common 
for both the international cases and the Norwegian ones is that the 
authors take the cases as means for mobilisation and employ them 
to ask a number of fundamental questions: How does the political 
engagement among minority youth differ from conventional political 
participation; who are the new actors/voices; what type of media is 
being used for transmitting their messages and claims-making; how 
does transnational affiliations and reflexivity influence the political 
engagement; and other questions. Seen in the perspective of existing 
literature, the questions they ask are not new, but are contextualised 
in the Norwegian case and dealt with through very rich empirical 
data. In this sense, they add positively to the literature on collective 
mobilisation.
The book contains 10 chapters which offer different empirical 
perspectives on the mobilisation of political engagement. The 
theoretical perspectives, outlined primarily in the first chapter, draw 
on literature from a broad range of research approaches, e.g. studies 
on political opportunity structures; social movement theories; and 
transnationalism. The authors – themselves social anthropologists 
and sociologists – draw especially on James C Scott’s theory on 
power and hidden and public transcripts as means for understanding 
how and why people act (in this case ethnic minority youth). The main 
point is that the awareness of having a subordinated position spurs 
reaction and potentially mobilisation. The authors coin the notion of 
alternative scripts, that is, scripts which challenge and compete with 
public scripts, to illustrate that mobilisation, political engagement 
and resistance no longer need to be hidden but are enacted in the 
public sphere as well. The authors do not restrict themselves to this 
theoretical framework however, but introduce different approaches to 
particular issues and comparable literature throughout the chapters.
The book uses the notion of “new Norway” in the title. It is 
not really clear what is new here and how it differs from what was 
before and when it began. However, the authors do write that the 
informants – and hence the ethnic minority youth – have grown up 
in Norway and reflect about their shared experiences, a growing 
consciousness of being minority in the society one grew up in and 
being allocated subordinated positions. All these reflections become 
part of the identity work of the youth and in some situations a means 
for collective mobilisation. The empirical basis of the book is close to 
50 qualitative interviews with members of both organisations as well 
as individuals. The authors describe the informants as being rappers, 
anti-racists, practicing Moslems and persons running websites and 
discussion boards for ethnic and religious minorities. The informants 
have different histories and experiences with formal and informal 
political engagement and belong to rather different spheres of society.
Focusing on several different forms of mobilisation and types of 
engagement can be seen as both a strength and weakness of the 
book. It sets the basis for a complex, detailed and interesting analysis 
as we are able to exactly get a glimpse of shared experiences and 
reasons for mobilisation and activism among the different types of 
actors. Here the different chapters each present empirical findings 
from the Norwegian context and are able to engage in discussion 
with the existing literature on similar forms of mobilisation and identity 
work in other national contexts. Generally, the authors are generous 
in their use of comparable literature and display an overview and 
knowledge of the research field as such which lends credibility to 
the analyses. On the other hand, the broad perspective makes the 
reader begin from scratch in some of the chapters, as the theoretical 
framework is supplemented with supporting theoretical perspectives 
45
Brought to you by | European University Institute
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/30/16 3:02 PM

and literature. The result is rather general introductions to the topics, 
e.g. ethnic minority, culture and hip-hop, which at least for this reader 
are all familiar. Going more in-depth with a lesser number of forms of 
mobilisation and engagement could perhaps have added even more 
perspective to the particular literature on the given type of activism 
and mobilisation. That said, the chosen form offers good introductions 
to different types of research studies, for instance, on ethnic minority 
and media and on ethnic minorities, music and aesthetics. In this 
sense, it can be very helpful for readers not engaged in these 
particular research fields.
Another small point of critique relates not as much to the broad 
perspectives but to what have been included among these. As 
mentioned, the authors provide interesting analyses and come up 
with findings which can be related to studies elsewhere but somehow 
follow the main trends in the existing research. As the authors also 
demonstrate in the literature overview, there have been several studies 
on the role of rap and hip-hop as a means and tool for resistance, 
for articulating frustrations and emancipation, and for constructing 
minority identities. The authors add to the existing research in 
their interviews with Norwegian rappers as well as provide a more 
historical overview of the acts and persons involved in the hip-hop 
scene. However, we rarely find studies encompassing other types of 
musical engagement and performances. I find that the focus on this 
particular genre has been over-prioritised due to its roots and history 
which offers obvious parallels to the adaptation of rap culture and 
embedded modes of resistance and identity outside the USA. It would 
be very interesting to include the focus on other genres as well as 
including ones located in mainstream genres. Watching for instance 
the Danish version of X Factor shows that ethnic minority youth are 
highly over-represented. We have few research studies looking at the 
impact of such figures for identity work, for empowerment, for making 
religious and ethnic minorities visible and a part of the mainstream 
media and ultimately for mobilisation. Likewise, there has been very 
little focus on authors with ethnic minority background. What role 
do these authors play for example in identity work, renegotiating 
majority–minority relations and articulating minority positions? The 
authors of this book demonstrate an impressive overview of the field, 
and it would have been interesting to enter less analysed dimensions 
and contribute to expanding our perspectives as well as empirical 
knowledge.
Lastly, I would like to address the notion of critical events. 
Again, I think the authors provide a convincing, rich and interesting 
analysis of mobilisations interpreted in relation to particular events. 
They make good use of social movement perspectives and explain 
when and why mobilisation becomes a success and when and why 
it decreases. Also here, it might be unfair to ask for something they 
chose not to work with; nevertheless, I would find it interesting to 
understand mobilisations and political engagement taking place 
isolated from such critical events. Without any doubt, critical events 
serve as triggering events as the authors demonstrate throughout 
the chapters, but people – ethnic minority youth – also engage in 
political, cultural and social types of activism without triggering 
events. Newer types of social movements (with all reservations for 
different definitions) like the Swedish Pantrarna have for instance 
mobilised actively as a response to structural social exclusion and 
marginalisation of life-conditions in segregated areas in Swedish 
suburban areas (Göteborg, Stockholm, Malmö). As the name 
suggests, it links to the American Black Panther movement of the 
1960s and in this sense establishes the historical and transnational 
links also identified by the authors of this book. Pantrarna is not 
easily explained with reference to external critical events and it is 
questionable if personal critical events can explain the collective 
organisation they express. Therefore, I will argue that when focusing 
solely on mobilisations’ surrounding events, we risk losing important 
mobilisations.
The authors have been working with the issues outlined in 
the book for years and their motivation and knowledge are clearly 
depicted in their collective work. As a scholar working with some of 
the same issues, I could wish for a comparable work on the Danish 
case. The book will be of interest to researchers working on social 
movements, ethnic relations and transnational belonging and 
formations. It is well written, offers a good overview of the existing 
literature – both Norwegian and international – and provides analyses 
of interesting empirical material.
Martin Bak Jørgensen*
PhD, Associate Professor, Centre for the Studies of Migration and Diversity, Aalborg University
Berg, Anne-Jorunn, Flemmen, Anne Britt & Gullikstad, Berit 
(eds.) (2010) Likestilte norskheter. Om kjønn og etnisitet, Oslo: 
Tapir akademiske forlag. 260 pp.
This book represents a coherent ambition to analyse discourses 
and practices concerning production of differences and sameness 
in the Norwegian welfare state in terms of intersectionality, where 
gender and ethnicity takes centre stage. Intersectionality refers to the 
intertwining of difference-producing practices which, together and/or 
apart, may produce opportunity situations that favour or disfavour 
actors (individuals and groups) in different ways. The book consists of 
an introduction by the editors and seven articles discussing different 
aspects of equality/inequality producing processes in different 
ethnographic fields. All the authors work within a common theoretical 
frame based on constructivist oriented gender research, where 
gender is seen as processes that enact gender (p. 135).The authors 
thus share a theoretical foundation where action or enactment is the 
key concept to understand human society, and where gender as 
processes plays a critical role.
In the introduction written by the editors, we are presented with 
the ambition of the book, the common theoretical framework and 
key concepts that bind the articles together to a coherent discussion 
“about the Norwegian national order and how it is constituted in our 
time”1 (p. 31). Apart from intersectionality, which is presented as a 
sensitising concept and a methodological principle, the introduction 
discusses concepts like “majorizing” (majoritetsgjørende) and 
“minorizing” (minoritetsgjørende) that point to the empirically 
grounded processes of power relations rather than on preset 
concepts like majority/minority. In the same vein, the editors discuss 
the relations between “unmarked” and “marked” individuals and 
groups in terms of “the first” and “the other”, applied in several of the 
articles as processes of “firstness” and “secondness”. The editors 
finally present four “central concepts in the present debate about our 
own society” (p. 31) – gender equality, “Norwegianness”, majority 
and minority – and claim that all articles in the book in one way or 
another deal with the constitution, maintenance and change of these 
central concepts.
Theoretical approaches to the study of difference-making 
processes are rather scarce in the field of migration studies. The 
theoretical perspectives and concepts discussed in the introduction, 
mostly developed in gender studies, run through the articles and 
bind them together, at its best in complementary ways. All articles 
contribute in different ways to the coherence of this publication by 
raising several questions about essentialist and static concepts 
* E-mail: martinjo@cgs.aau.dk 
46
Brought to you by | European University Institute
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/30/16 3:02 PM

and understandings of equality/inequality producing relations and 
processes particularly related to gender and ethnicity/“race”. At its 
best, it is also an important model for how intersectionality can be 
applied to empirical studies. The coherent theoretical approach 
does however raise some concerns. A top-down approach where 
the analytical ambition is to analyse how certain categorisations 
are applied in different contexts must necessarily rest on the idea 
that these categorisations are relevant in all contexts; more or less 
universal. Another approach would be to ask what interests are 
enacted in different contexts, how these interests are understood 
by the actors, and which categorisations and power relations are 
enacted, confirmed and changed. My critical points will, however, 
address problems inherent to the book’s actual approach. First, I 
will briefly discuss the methodological constriction of the discursive 
approach. My second comment deals with the rather restricted sense 
of intersectionality that is applied, while my third comment concerns 
the understanding and use of central concepts.
Discursive practices, as public documents or other texts available 
to the public or as conversations and interviews, are the common 
empirical grounds of almost all articles in the volume. In the first article, 
Guro Korsness Kristensen discusses public discursive perspectives 
on fertility and wage-labour as minorizing or majorizing processes 
that categorise people as more or less equal and Norwegian. By 
analyzing texts and photos from journals and scientific magazines, 
and by applying intersectionality as a perspective, the author claims 
that some men (minority) are constructed as Norwegian, thus are 
majorized by being active child-carers, while women (minority) 
are made Norwegian and thus majorized by wage-labour. Here 
discourse analysis gives interesting perspectives on the way ideas of 
“Norwegianness” or “firstness” are presented in these texts, because 
the scope of the analysis is limited and the claim of the author 
empirically based and plausible.
In her generally interesting article, Berit Gullikstad discusses the 
inequality producing processes in four public nursing homes based 
on interviews with leaders and employees. The author asks whether 
and how one can combat discrimination and establish equality 
between employees by means of a conscious recruitment strategy 
for diversity and equality. In this context, I cannot see how discourse 
analysis, based on interviews, can grasp the plurality of aspects 
that are relevant in everyday interactions. When the author claims 
that the immigrant employees in the four wards are “minorized” as 
secondary care-givers by a process of culturalisation based primarily 
on their ethnicity and expressed by their language-inefficiency, I 
wonder if the focus on gender, ethnicity and sexuality may be too 
narrow. Class, age, religious affiliation, personal comportment and 
other locally defined categorisations seem to be made invisible by 
this rather narrow focus.
This point leads me to my second comment. Instead of focusing 
on gender and ethnicity as inequality producing categories, 
intersectionality aims at analyzing how gender, ethnicity, race, 
sexuality, class, nationality and other locally relevant categorisations 
are intertwined, mutually strengthening or weakening the power 
ratios of actors. This implies that the local context “decides” which 
categories are made relevant in the situation and the power relations 
between actors. The article by Britt Kramvik and Anne Britt Flemmen 
is a good example of how an intersectional approach can shed light 
on social processes where different aspects of persons are combined 
in different ways to enact different identities and relations. Here the 
authors discuss how equality, dignity and respect are negotiated in 
transnational marriages between Saami and non-Saami, Norwegians 
and Russians in Finnmark, a northern province of Norway. Their 
argument is that a new diversity paradigm is evolving in Finnmark, 
building on localised negotiations of identities based on common 
everyday practices. This new diversity paradigm creates metaphors 
that enable bridges, not boundaries. Concepts such as “respect” and 
“dignity” contribute to an interesting and dynamic analysis where 
locally defined understanding plays centre stage.
In the last article, Anne-Jorunn Berg and Tone Gunn Kristiansen 
discuss how visible differences like gender and “race” seemingly 
are invisible in an official text about the Norwegian Introductory 
Program for refugees. In the text, the authors see visible differences 
as skin-colour and “race” lurking behind terms such as “newly 
arrived immigrants and non-Western immigrant” and stereotyped 
“minorized” women hidden in statements such as “there are fewer 
employed women than men among immigrant ….” (p. 243). But, is 
not the reader the creator or co-creator of the meaning of the text? 
When the reader (here the author) sees skin-colour behind the term 
“non-western”, is this not her creation based on her stereotypes? 
Or do the authors mean to have detected some kind of conspiracy 
where the “true truth” is hidden behind seemingly innocent concepts 
and phrases?
This brings me to my last critical comment that concerns the 
use of concepts. The authors use the term ethnicity/“race” without 
discussing what the concepts mean in different contexts. “Race” is 
in quotation marks, and a short introductory discussion explains that 
this is done to mark the authors’ ambivalence about the term, but 
they do not tell us what they want it to mean. The same goes for 
ethnicity, without quotation marks. In anthropology, ethnicity is seen 
as a processual and relational term referring to group consciousness 
and “boundary work”. In these texts, ethnicity seems to be used in an 
essentialist way, almost synonymous with nationality. And what about 
the Norwegian term “likestilling” (equality): is it self-evident and does 
it mean the same in all contexts?
My last comment also concerns the concepts of “minorizing” 
and “majorizing”/“secondness” and “firstness”. In my understanding, 
the rationale for using these concepts is to avoid the essentialist 
and static notions of majority and minority that freeze actors in 
positions irrelevant of context. The authors insist on “minorized” and 
“majorized” as positions that are locally embedded “doings” that may 
shift in different contexts. In spite of this ambition, the concepts are 
sometimes used in the same way as majority/minority to position 
groups. One example is in the interesting article by Anne-Jorunn 
Berg and Elisabet Ljunggren where they ask why entrepreneurship 
is encouraged for minorized groups (for instance p. 133, see also p. 
243), a categorisation I interpret as rather static if they are referring 
to immigrant women in general. This unproblematised use of some 
terms and jumble in the use of minorizing/majorizing, terms that I find 
quite useful, is irritating and confusing for the reader.
In spite of these comments, I enjoyed reading the book and 
recommend it to anyone interested in critical theory. In the book’s last 
article, Donna Haraway is referred to saying that one should drop 
any ambition in knowledge production about seeing or explaining the 
“whole picture”. Instead, “the eye” or “seeing” is basic to scientific 
knowledge production and different perspectives or “eyes” together 
form complex understandings of social reality (p. 255). The volume 
Likestilte norskheter contributes to this ambition.
Ada I. Engebrigtsen*
Research professor, NOVA, Norsk institutt for forskning om oppvekst, velferd og aldring 
Note
1. All English translations from this book are made by the reviewer.
* E-mail: aie@nova.no  
47
Brought to you by | European University Institute
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/30/16 3:02 PM

Brochmann, Grete & Hagelund, Anniken (eds.) Med bidrag 
fra Karin Borevi, Heidi Vad Jønsson og Klaus Petersen (2010) 
Velferdens grenser. Innvandringspolitikk og velferdsstat i 
Skandinavia 1945-2010, Oslo: Universitetsforlaget. 392 pp.
Velferdens grenser1 constitutes an extensive presentation. It 
represents predominantly comparative social history, but is 
additionally discussing issues within social policy, political science 
and sociology. The book is about the Scandinavian welfare states 
facing immigration since World War II. As more comparative research 
on Nordic societies without a doubt is needed, this book is most 
welcome as a general introduction to immigration in Scandinavian 
welfare states. The editors observe: “When the theme is social 
security and economic transfers, and the comparative frame is 
global, Denmark, Sweden and Norway end up in the same model. 
But the closer one gets to the concrete design of the model, the more 
striking become the differences”.2 The book deals with social policies 
in a situation where the systems were considered complete, but 
turned out not being complete when they faced the new challenges 
of immigration.
Velferdens grenser is mainly a descriptive book and does not 
open up theoretical definitions, discussions or debates about core 
concepts such as integration, national unity, nation-building and 
multiculturalism.3 In this case it is, however, a completely sound 
strategy as broad overviews about the topic are rare, and the nexus 
between the welfare state and immigration has recently not been 
covered by much research. The approach provides a conceptual 
definition in which what is and has become in terms of regime defines 
the concept rather than an a priori analytical departure point.
The book is divided into five parts. The first part introduces the 
theme, the following three parts present the separate Scandinavian 
national cases, and the concluding part summarises and compares 
the cases from a number of thematic perspectives. The Swedish 
case is presented by Karin Borevi, and the Danish case by Heidi Vad 
Jønsson and Klaus Pedersen. Norway is presented by the editors 
Grete Brochmann and Anniken Hagelund who have also written the 
introductory chapter and the final comparative chapter. The chapters 
have a further subdivision into decades, which summarise the main 
developments in the immigration policies of the respective countries 
and periods. The approach is consequently also process oriented, 
and describes the respective paths to what has become. The book is 
written in three different Scandinavian languages, Danish, Norwegian 
and Swedish.4
Due to its state centric, comparative approach, the underlying 
theme of the study is integration of immigrants into Scandinavian 
countries with the aid of welfare state measures, and the 
dependency of integration on the particular features and varieties 
of the welfare state. The book contains much information about 
the welfare model, socio-political arrangements and principles, 
and administrative measures. Even political constellations, within 
national parliaments, between the state and municipalities and with 
the gradual emergence of populist parties are described. Brochmann 
and Hagelund conclude that Sweden and Norway are characterised 
by consensus in immigration policy, whereas Denmark has a higher 
degree of conflict orientation within this field. Sweden is the most 
liberal case and Denmark the most restrictive (control oriented) case, 
with Norway lying somewhere in between.
The temporal presentation about established actors, such as trade 
unions and political parties, being central designers of the regime in 
the early stages is illustrative. 1970s is seen as the establishment 
of integration policies, but also as a period of emerging social 
problems. During 1980s and 1990s, the question about humanitarian 
immigration dominates, and since the millennium the entire 
immigration and integration regime is re-evaluated. The temporal 
narrative of the welfare state illustrates the way in which welcoming 
sporadic amateur measures were gradually replaced by systematic 
measures of state steering with specific requirements and increasing 
economic reasoning. This has to do partially with the transformation 
of the welfare state and the emergence of the “work line”, which 
emphasises needs and rights being dependent on inputs and duties. 
In this process, the gradual departure from civil society arrangements 
in refugee admittance towards more state and municipality controlled 
management of humanitarian immigration is the prevailing feature. 
In the partial retreat of public arrangements in the general welfare 
system and the introduction of Public Private Partnership (PPP) 
projects, it is thought-provoking that civil society has not in a higher 
degree re-entered the field of immigration administration during the 
previous 10 years. This could have been examined in the book, but 
recent pressures on the welfare system, in terms of the change of 
management regimes, are not covered except for the emergence of 
the work line in welfare policies. It is also educational to observe that 
the administration differs between the countries, where Sweden has 
its specific administration in the Immigration Board, whereas Denmark 
does not have a specific administration. Sweden has also had other 
interesting administrative measures such as the liberal principle 
of own housing (Ebo) since 1994 in order to diminish problems in 
employment, but with unintended consequences in the concentration 
of immigrants in big cities with overcrowded dwellings. Previously 
open minded Denmark is sadly characterised by an increasing 
number of humiliating administrative measures and ethno-centric 
political discourses especially since the turn of the millennium. Norway 
in its turn borrows a little from here and there, without developing a 
clear line in its integration policies, but with the general aim of nation-
building and emphasis on social citizenship.
Whether the policies are directed towards the control of flows or 
integrating newcomers is an important division. The emphasis in this 
book is on the integration, and in this the division between direct and 
indirect measures. As the Scandinavian welfare model is universalistic, 
indirect measures dominate. Identical socio-political measures cover 
both immigrants and natives, and tailored measures for immigrants 
are rare and almost exclusively restricted to refugees and asylum 
seekers. The question about universalism versus particularism in 
welfare regimes is well explained in the book. It is intriguing that the 
Danish integration allowance is a break with the universalistic system, 
as the level of the benefit is lower than the income support on the 
dole. But simultaneously the frontiers of the welfare state have not 
been very extensively described in the book, where differing rights (of 
for instance residence) would be linked to different degrees of social 
citizenship that often have temporal conditions. The question about 
language testing and testing of knowledge about the receiving society 
has been presented, but not questions for instance about temporal 
conditions for being entitled to dwelling based social security and 
the national health insurance. The book is thus rather abstract and 
general with emphasis on the welfare system, instead of describing 
conditions for welfare services and benefits. Consequently, the title 
of the book is somewhat misleading and in the original objectives for 
analysis, that is ideologies, institutional moorings of the welfare and 
integration policies and concrete welfare measures, the last is least 
covered by analysis.
The book illustrates informatively how immigration in Sweden 
and Denmark has in some periods become administratively an 
uncontrollable issue, with lots of unintended consequences due to 
48
Brought to you by | European University Institute
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/30/16 3:02 PM

big entry numbers. The development of the public administration, 
especially on the municipal level and in large cities, has not kept pace 
with the rapid increase in numbers. This has been prevalent in refugee 
admittance and in housing. In Norway and Denmark, questions 
about family reunification policies and the asylum system have been 
problematic areas. These issues have been linked to questions 
about cultural differences and gender relations, especially in relation 
to arranged marriages, but also in relation for instance to honour 
related violence. Recently, work related immigration has become the 
main area of discussion, where the attracting of immigrant workers 
has been a goal in immigration policies due to the problematic 
demographical structure of the countries and the balance of 
resources. In this case, immigration is linked to possibilities of funding 
an extensive welfare state, and immigration has become strategic in 
economic policy. The book also illustrates how immigration has been 
a more politicised area of public debate and policy in Denmark than 
in Sweden or Norway. Whether differences between countries have 
effects on the integration of newcomers is discussed only shortly, 
without any clear, empirically grounded answer.
The book has been published in English in 2012 by Palgrave 
with the title: Immigration Policy and the Scandinavian Welfare 
State 1945-2010, and thus important insights about the Nordic 
model in immigrant integration are now also accessible for the 
larger international audience. Velferdens grenser is a welcome 
contribution to the discussion both on the welfare state and on 
ethnic relations and migration. The extensive approach of the book 
facilitates highlighting here only a few of the numerous discussions 
presented by the authors. The book can thus be recommended as an 
introductory reader in social policy and courses in ethnic relations at 
the undergraduate level in Nordic countries.
Mika Helander*
Post-doctoral researcher, Turku School of Economics
Notes
1. Which  can  be  translated as the frontiers or alternatively borders 
    of welfare.
2. My translation from Norwegian.
3. Multiculturalism  is,  however,  shortly  defined  in the introductory 
    chapter (pp. 27–28).
4. An English language article that summarises the main findings was 
    published separately in this journal No# 1/2011, pp. 13–24.
Hübinette, Tobias, Hörnfeldt, Helena, Farahani, Fataneh & 
Rosales, René León (eds.) (2012) Om ras och vithet i det samtida 
Sverige, Botkyrka: Mångkulturellt centrum. 239 pp.
This anthology, Om Ras och Vithet i det Samtida Sverige, is an 
invitation and inspiration to critical discussions of race in Sweden. 
It is a textbook-orientated collection targeted towards higher-level 
students. The book makes several important contributions to Nordic 
critical race studies; first it offers a critical race perspective outside 
of the historically American perspective, acknowledged as a gap 
in the applicability of the concepts in other contexts. Second, it 
explores contemporary race and multiculturalism in Sweden from a 
range of experiences and contexts. The editors have successfully 
produced an accessible book that raises provocative questions about 
racialisation processes in Sweden and it is a well-worth reading for 
any student or researcher exploring race, ethnicity or immigration.
The anthology takes the position that race needs to be taken 
up in discussions on Swedish multiculturalism in order to challenge 
normative white culture. Additionally, it highlights that Sweden is 
multicultural as a result of its diverse population – not only from 
immigration. This separates the discussion from migration debates 
and enters into place-bound racialised power relations. In introducing 
the book, it is argued that in Sweden discussing race is taboo and 
that society and researchers alike must not shy away from discussing 
racialisation. “Colour-blind” approaches hide and mask how race is a 
central relational construct. Ignoring race denies the deeply ingrained 
connection between whiteness and Swedishness. Consequently, 
whiteness is privileged as belonging in Sweden. This entanglement 
between belonging and race, if unchallenged, will maintain and 
facilitate racialised structures in Sweden.
Beginning with the editor’s call to action, the reader is quickly 
taken into the challenges and multidimensional character of non-
white experiences in Sweden. Three chapters in particular are 
worth highlighting. Ylva Habel’s background chapter, “Movements 
and layers within critical white studies”2, introduces critical white 
studies to new readers and situates these debates within a Swedish 
context. Astutely, Habel debunks the notion of “ethnic Swedes” as 
a “colour-blind” category. The term “ethnic Swede” she highlights 
is deeply connected to whiteness, thereby connecting belonging 
with whiteness. This is a powerful statement given the political 
correctness associated with this term and, as Habel points out, even 
the Swedish Prime Minister uses this term to establish a “mainstream” 
notion of white Swedishness. The chapter “Understanding racism in 
Sweden: On ice cream ads and the battle of norms”3 by Oscar Pripp 
and Magnus Öhlander is especially poignant because a seemingly 
mundane event tests the boundaries of differing types of racism in 
practice. By studying over 180 media articles that debate the Nogger 
Black ice cream ads, which show graffiti style and asphalt graphics 
to promote the licorice flavour, the authors reveal the depth of the 
hierarchal race norm-system in Sweden and emphasise power 
struggles over who gets to define racism. Finally, Catrin Lundström 
in “Racialized Desires: The Other as exotic”4 connects white male 
desire with the racialisation of Latina women in Sweden. Lundström 
shares interviews with young women who describe how white men 
objectify them into exotic, yet safe, racialised bodies symbolic of 
global geographies. The intersections among race, gender and 
class reveal the complicated relational power processes in building 
individual subjectivities in Sweden. These chapters uncover that race 
is a key organising principle in the politics of belonging in Sweden 
and therefore worthy of exploration.
Published by the Mångkulturellt Centrum (The Multicultural 
Centre) located in Botkryka municipality, this book represents a 
strong connection between research and activism. The editors 
Tobias Hübinette, Helena Hörnfeldt, Fataneh Farahani and René 
León Rosales are all researchers who are active at the Mångkulturellt 
Centrum, Södertorn University College or Stockholm University. 
These experienced researchers in critical race studies bring together 
years of research within the Swedish context. The book consists of 
academic chapters written by a range of Swedish scholars from the 
fields of critical race and white studies, gender studies and ethnology. 
These chapters are complemented by a series of short vignettes by 
non-academic individuals from a variety of ages, backgrounds and 
experiences sharing their experience of racialisation in Sweden. 
The vignettes, from participants in the organisation Mellanförskapet 
(betweenness or in-betweenness loosely translated into English) 
described in Daphne Arbouz’s chapter, are an excellent and 
clever addition to the book, but unfortunately float ambiguously in 
* E-mail: Mika.helander@utu.fi
49
Brought to you by | European University Institute
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/30/16 3:02 PM

the text rather than being integrated within the main thrust of the 
book. Perhaps this is metaphorically intentional but it does add 
unnecessary confusion to the structure of the book and undermines 
their valuable contribution to the discussion that the book hopes to 
engage. Nevertheless, these vignettes are illuminating in bringing 
forth the individual, personal and emotional experiences of people, 
no longer abstract. The voices of Madeleine Romero, Samuel, writer 
Astrid Trotzig and journalist Patrik Lundberg among others highlight 
how deeply ingrained race and racism is in Swedish daily life and 
provide a sense of urgency to the book’s overarching arguments and 
themes.
The chapters and vignettes closely follow critical race/white 
perspectives and the theoretical challenges stem not from the 
anthology itself but from critiques of the theory in general. A drawback 
to the compilation, however, is that whiteness is taken for granted, 
and even as a homogenous universal instead of complicating 
Swedish whiteness as a multifaceted construct. Given its title, it begs 
the question: What does it mean to be white in Sweden? Why is white 
ethnicity central to Swedish discourse of identity? George Lipsitz 
(2011: 6) states that whiteness is learned, yet perceived as natural 
and, important to this text, place-bound. It is argued throughout the 
text that whiteness means privilege and power. Granted, they are 
probably correct in their assumptions, nevertheless, a critical eye 
to how this social category is continuously created and learned in 
the Swedish context would have lifted their argument into a stronger 
relational conceptualisation of race and whiteness. For example, 
a chapter on white non-Swedes’ encounters of Swedishness, or a 
discussion on the complexity of white Swedish identities, may have 
provided a platform for teasing out contextual complexities in race 
relations. Nonetheless, their argument remains poignant and this 
anthology is an important offering in literature on race in Sweden.
Natasha Webster*
PhD Candidate, Dept. of Human Geography, Stockholm University
References
Lipsitz, G 2011, How Racism Takes Place, Temple University Press, 
Philadelphia.
Notes
1. Author’s own translation. The original chapter title is: “Rörelser och 
schatteringar inom kritiska vithetsstudier”.
2. Author’s own translation. The original chapter title is: “Att uppfatta 
rasism i Sverige: Om glassreklam och normstrider”.
3. Author’s own translation. The original chapter title is: ”Rasifierat 
begär: ”De Andra” som exotiska”.
Kraler, Albert, Kofman, Eleanore, Kholi, Martin & Schmoll, 
Camille (eds.) (2011) Gender, Generations and the Family in 
International Migration, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University 
Press. 394 pp.
This volume edited by Albert Kraler, Eleanore Kofman, Martin Kholi 
and Camille Schmoll provides a rich collection of contributions on 
the multiple connections among international migration, gender and 
family relations. The book aims to move beyond what the editors 
define as the “compartmentalisation” of existing studies of the 
migrant family, and develops an inter-disciplinary dialogue by bringing 
together contributions from different disciplines, including politics, 
geography, sociology, anthropology and policy studies. Particularly 
important is the argument about the necessity to map how legal, 
political and policy “regimes” in receiving countries frame the way in 
which migrant families have been understood, represented and made 
an object of intervention. This issue has been widely overlooked in 
contemporary studies of migrant families, partly as a consequence 
of a more general and persistent disconnection between, on the one 
hand, a political- and policy-oriented approach to migration and, on 
the other, field-based socio-anthropological studies of kinship and 
family relations.
A second important aspect addressed is the disconnection 
between a stereotypical representation of the family as developed 
by media and political debates and the lived reality of migrant 
families. The editors rightly note how, in the last decades, we have 
witnessed in many European countries (and beyond) a widening 
gap between changing and diverse family life and narrower – if not 
simplistic conceptions – of the family as articulated by national and 
supranational legal and policy frameworks. In this line, as many of 
the chapters show, “the migrant family” – and the gender relations 
underpinning it – have been increasingly represented in national 
political debates in problematic terms: first, as an antinomy of the 
modernity of “national” family and gender models; second, as an 
expression of cultural backwardness; and, finally, as the site of 
generational and gender conflicts. Notable in this context is the 
political representation in many receiving countries of migrant men as 
the bearers of patriarchal and misogynist values, which is assumed to 
be the cause of domestic violence and a threat to the safety and well-
being of “national” women. In contrast, various contributors of this 
volume show how legal and policy frameworks impact on the process 
of family formation and how this frequently leads to the exacerbation 
of family conflicts. As such, inter-generational and gender violence 
should not be considered as a “timeless” and “natural” dimension 
of the migrant family, but rather as a potential result of the interplay 
among different – political, policy, economic and social – factors.
The book is organised into four sections. The first section 
investigates the family as a moral and social order to highlight how 
“what a family is” has become a site of controversy and negotiation 
among different political, institutional and informal actors. Particularly 
relevant are the studies of Sarah van Walsum and Ralph Grillo. 
The former highlights the construction of “the migrant family” in the 
Netherlands as the antithesis of modern liberalism and secularism. 
The latter shows how, in contemporary Britain, “the family” has 
become an important idiom through which cultural difference and the 
otherness of migrants and minorities are forged.
The second section takes up the relevant role of labour in shaping 
gendered relations within migrant families. The chapters engage 
with feminist studies which, since the 1990s, have put into question 
the conventional representation of migrant women as “following 
subjects”. In this line, the interesting analysis developed – among 
other chapters – by Gillian Creese, Isabel Dyck and Arlene Tiger 
McLaren demonstrates how the social capital of migrant kin women 
may lead to processes of re-skilling and labour market inclusions of 
their husbands.
The third section explores the role of marriage in transnational 
mobility while also taking into account the powerful role of the state 
in framing the definition of family values and relations. The state 
emerges in different contributions as playing an active role in the 
construction of a stereotypical definition of migrant family values and 
norms (i.e. as “backwards” and “patriarchal”). Particularly valuable 
is the study of Annett Fleischer on Cameroonian men marrying 
German women, not least because the analysis offers an insight on 
* E-mail: Natasha.webster@humangeo.su.se
50
Brought to you by | European University Institute
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/30/16 3:02 PM

the relatively under-researched topic of migrant masculinities, and on 
the role of “legal insecurity” in the framing of men’s identity.
The final section offers insight on the logic of care and 
intergenerational arrangements in transnational families and 
combines more conventional studies of unskilled migration with the 
less studied dimension of middle-class skilled migrants. The work 
of Paolo Boccagni and Ludovica Banfi on Italy compares the care 
arrangements developed among Ukrainian, Polish and Ecuadorian 
migrants and interestingly argues how the term “transnational” 
reveals to be more appropriate to understand the working of 
intergenerational relations than conjugal ones. Equally interesting is 
the analysis of Aurélie Varrel on Indian skilled migrants. By going 
beyond a methodological individualism usually adopted in the study 
of professional forms of mobility, Varrel highlights how a moral and 
emotional commitment towards family members informs kinship 
involvement of Indian migrants returning to India.
The editors identify some key reasons for the increasing 
academic interest in the migrant family, as it developed in the last 
two decades. Among the most important ones, they discuss the 
diversification of family forms and relations that result from shifting 
patterns of migration as well as from changing legal provisions. One 
may well connect the analysis developed in the book with the wider 
debate on the “new migration in Europe”. This label addresses the 
increased variety of routes, destinations and, crucially, of migrant 
profiles in contemporary flows towards mainland destinations as well 
as the unprecedented role of “the political” in shaping the social forms 
of people’s mobility. The book innovatively shows how the growing 
diversity of migrant families is shaped by (legal) selective processes 
of reunification and by a “politics of suspiciousness” as enacted by 
administrative authorities. This aspect is further analysed in relation 
to the growing European involvement in the legal definition of family 
migration policy. The latter, as many contributors show, oscillates 
between logics of inclusion and exclusion. Particularly relevant for 
the discussion of the relation among migration, legal framework and 
politics is the study of mixed and binational marriages insofar as they 
create a tension in the majority–minority relations. Marriage across 
ethnicity, race and nationality is increasingly seen with “suspicion” by 
the State as an instrumental gateway to citizenship, and is openly 
contrasted by right-wing rhetoric of national purity. Finally, the analysis 
of binational and mixed marriages leads to a discussion of a third 
relevant aspect in the contemporary phenomenology of the “migrant 
family”, that is, transnational mobility. In this respect, transnational 
marriages are one among several emerging forms of reproduction of 
family relations through international mobility, alongside much less 
researched issues of parental care and adult–children relations.
By bringing together all these issues within a single framework 
of analysis, the book gives a valuable contribution to the under-
researched relation between families, migration and contemporary 
politics/policies. As already mentioned, one of the most important and 
original features of the book relates to the adoption of what the editors 
define as “methodological pluralism” in the study of contemporary 
migrant families. Most contributions reaffirm the necessity to bring 
an ethnography of “politics” and “policies” back into the analysis of 
the migrant family, and to analyse the role of the state in framing the 
terms and conditions in which kinship comes to be understood and 
experienced.
If anything, the book might have benefited from a consideration 
of and engagement with the classical and more recent literature on 
kinship in migration. Relevant for the analysis developed in the volume 
would have been, for instance, the pioneer work of Sylvia Yanagisako 
on Japanese–American kinship, the ones of Gerd Baumann and 
Alison Shaw on South Asian families in London or the more recent 
studies of Katy Gardner on ageing and transnational care among 
Bangladeshi migrants. This would have allowed for a more nuanced 
analysis of continuities and differences in the historical and social 
changes of the family in migration, thereby avoiding what at times 
emerges as an overemphasis of the novelty of studies of the migrant 
family as developed in the last decade. Nevertheless, the book 
represents an important step forward towards the interdisciplinary 
analysis of the family in migration and offers a rich and stimulating 
scenario of different national contexts. It will certainly be of interest 
not only to scholars of sociology, anthropology, migration studies and 
policy analysis, but also to a wider set of readers working in social 
work, NGOs, voluntary sector as well as to policy makers.
Ester Gallo*
Assistant Professor in Social Anthropology, Department of Sociology, Gediz University
* E-mail: Ester.Gallo@Gediz.edu.tr
51
Brought to you by | European University Institute
Authenticated
Download Date | 11/30/16 3:02 PM