‘Contemporary liberal thought imagines war as a perpetual policing exercise, 
in which disorder is made into order. Demonstrating a command of theory few
analysts of war can muster, Holmqvist shows how liberalism supplies a set of 
metaphors – an intellectual scaffolding encompassing time, space, agency and
power – through which war becomes a management tool for the restoration
of the social contract in other peoples’ countries. While real in its effects, such 
imagination amounts to an illusory construct of war, with results for all to see 
in Iraq and Afghanistan. Surpassing earlier analyses of liberal war in depth and 
sophistication, Holmqvist is now the definitive guide.’
 — Tarak Barkawi, London School of Economics and 
Political Science, UK
‘War without antagonism is one of the great oxymorons for our time. Holmqvist
explores the sense in western military theory that war can be fought without
ultimate opposition when it is about reducing disorder and policing good gover-
nance. Those who resist this oxymoronic post-adversarial logic get branded and
punished as obstructionist criminal elements. Holmqvist stretches the concept
of contemporary war as a form of policing liberal order by tracing its roots to
pre-9/11 times and spaces and by theorising its depths today. She is a compel-
ling and important new voice on the forms, logics and implications of today’s
western ways of warring.’
— Christine Sylvester, University of Connecticut, USA
This interdisciplinary study provides an original account of the US-led wars 
in Afghanistan and Iraq to show how, why and with what consequences,
twenty-first century wars became seen as policing wars. Holmqvist starts
from the assumption that wars always reflect the societies that wage them 
and combines the analysis of Western strategic thinking with a philosophical
examination of the core ideas that structure the contemporary liberal imagina-
tion. She argues that the US-led interventions in Afghanistan and Iraq were 
characterised by a widespread understanding of war as ‘policing’ – that is, 
waged against opponents deemed ‘criminal’ rather than political, and directed 
at the creation and maintenance of a certain type of ‘order’. Holmqvist turns 
to themes of social theory and philosophy to offer new perspectives on why 
the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq were waged in the way they were, and why 
the fantasy of policing wars came to resonate so widely amongst policy  makers
and academics alike. This unique contribution to the study of war and inter-
national politics will appeal to scholars of the philosophy and sociology of 
war,military strategy and international relations.
Caroline Holmqvist is Senior Lecturer in War Studies at the Swedish National 
Defence College in Stockholm, Sweden and a Visiting Fellow at the Centre for
International Studies at the London School of Economics, UK. She has previ-
ously worked at the Stockholm Institute for International Affairs and at the
Stockholm International Peace Research Institute.

Rethinking Political Violence Series
Series editor: Roger Mac Ginty, Professor of Peace and Conflict Studies,
University of Manchester, UK
This exciting series provides a space in which to interrogate and challenge
much of the conventional wisdom on political violence. Books in the series
are at the forefront of research, pushing forward new debate in the field of 
political violence without rehashing clichés about security, violence and 
‘ terrorism’. Authors from both the critical and orthodox perspectives use the
book series to reappraise some of the fundamental questions facing societies
on how to deal with and interpret organised violence. Many of the books in
the series are comparative, draw on fieldwork, and use insights from a variety
of methodologies.
Titles include:
Stephen Gibson and Simon Mollan (editors)
REPRESENTATIONS OF PEACE AND CONFLICT
Linda A. Hall and Laura J. Shepherd (editors)
GENDER, AGENCY AND POLITICAL VIOLENCE
Caroline Holmqvist
POLICING WARS
On Military Intervention in the Twenty-First Century
Jaremey R. McMullin
EX-COMBATANTS AND THE POST-CONFLICT STATE
Challenges of Reintegration
Rethinking Political Violence series
Series Standing Order ISBN 978–0–230–24376–7
You can receive future titles in this series as they are published by placing a 
standing order. Please contact your bookseller or, in case of difficulty, write 
to us at the address below with your name and address, the title of the series 
and the ISBN quoted above.
Customer Services Department, Macmillan Distribution Ltd, Houndmills, 
Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS, England

Policing Wars
On Military Intervention in the
Twenty-First Century
Caroline Holmqvist
Swedish National Defence College, Stockholm, Sweden

© Caroline Holmqvist 2014
All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this 
 publication may be made without written permission.
No portion of this publication may be reproduced, copied or  transmitted 
save with written permission or in accordance with the provisions of the 
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, or under the terms of any licence 
permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency, 
Saffron House,  6– 10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication 
may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
The author has asserted her right to be identified as the author of this work 
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
First published 2014 by 
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN
Palgrave Macmillan in the UK is an imprint of Macmillan Publishers Limited, 
registered in England, company number 785998, of Houndmills, Basingstoke, 
Hampshire RG21 6XS.
Palgrave Macmillan in the US is a division of St Martin’s Press LLC, 
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010.
Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies 
and has companies and representatives throughout the world.
Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States, 
the United Kingdom, Europe and other countries.
This book is printed on paper suitable for recycling and made from fully 
managed and sustained forest sources. Logging, pulping and manufacturing 
processes are expected to conform to the environmental regulations of the 
country of origin.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
Typeset by MPS Limited, Chennai, India.
ISBN 978-1-349-99990-3                ISBN 978-1-137-32361-3 (eBook)
DOI 10.1057/9781137323613
Reprint of the original edition 2014
ISBN 978-1-137-32360-6

v
Preface and Acknowledgements 
vi
Introduction 
1
1 Narratives of Disorder 
17
2 Perpetual Policing Wars 
35
3 Policing the Globe 
57
4 Power in Policing Wars 
74
5 On Agency: Policing Logics and War 
‘Without Antagonism’ 
102
Conclusion 
127
Notes 
140
Index
168
Contents

vi
This is not a book about policing. Nor is it, really, a book about war.
Instead, it is an attempt to describe how a certain rationalisation 
of war – of war as policing, directed against purportedly ‘criminal’ 
forces and in the interest of upholding a particular type of ‘order’ –
came to resonate so widely in the first decade of the twenty-first
century. More than anything, it is an attempt to approach the study
of war by looking at what sustains particular ideas, rationalisations
and imaginations of war, and asking why certain ideas (about war)
catch on when they do. 
The US-led wars in Afghanistan and Iraq came to stand at the
pivot of debates about war from the time of the original invasions in 
2001 and 2003 respectively. For sure, they were a part of the ‘war on 
terror’, but they also had many other origins – and they fit in with
particular ideas about the world, politics and change. This book turns 
to themes of social theory and philosophy to offer new perspectives
on why these wars were conducted in the way they were, and why 
so many people at the time seemed to partake in the fantasy of war
as ‘policing’.
This book is originally my PhD thesis, and the greatest thanks 
I owe are to Professor Christopher Coker and Professor Mervyn 
Frost, my two supervisors. Both were extremely generous, helpful
and above all inspiring. Encouragement from my friends Dan Öberg,
Tom Lundborg, Astrid Nordin and Stefan Borg of the Stockholm
International Theory Group was important during the time I took to
rewrite the thesis into a book. 
Parts of Chapter 2 were published previously in The Character of 
War in the 21st Century, Eds Caroline Holmqvist and Christopher
Coker (London: Routledge, 2010), and parts of Chapter 3 appeared
in an article in the journal Global Crime, vol. 13 no. 4 (2012). I am 
grateful to Taylor & Francis for allowing me permission to reprint
this material.
My sincere thanks go to Roger Mac Ginty, editor of Rethinking 
Political Violence, for inviting me to contribute this book to the 
series; to Julia Willan, Eleanor Davey-Corrigan and Harriet Barker at
Preface and Acknowledgements

Preface and Acknowledgements  vii
Palgrave for their help along the way with all aspects of the project;
and to Geetha Williams for excellent project management. My friend
Jens Münch shot the cover image in Iraq in 2003; I’m very glad he 
allowed me to use it for this book. The photograph was taken on 
17 February 2003 on the northbound motorway from Kuwait City,
leading up to border with Iraq.
Finally, I’d like to thank my husband, Staffan, who has witnessed 
this project from PhD to book – via a stint in Kabul, Afghanistan in
2009 and two periods of leave from work with the arrival of our chil-
dren Clara and Sofus in 2010 and 2013. I’m grateful for a great many 
things in our life together but right now most of all for his urging me 
to ‘get the book done’.