Time, “Temporament,” and Sustainable Peace: 
The Essential Role of Time in Conflict and 
Peace
Luc Reychler
Time is the most precious resource we have. It is irreversible and nonrenewable. 
It makes the difference, more than ever, between the best and worst scenarios of 
climate change, energy competition, economic development, poverty, and security. 
Despite this, an incredible amount of time is wasted, especially the time of others 
and of nature. These latter resources are needed to prevent violence, build sustainable 
security, and ensure the well-being of all. Therefore, it is high time to radically 
change the way we deal with time and to develop a more adaptive “temporament.” 
This article defines time, surveys temporal deficiencies, and presents the parameters 
of a more responsible way of dealing with time in conflict transformation. 
Keywords  sustainable peacebuilding, temporament, time, democratic fascism,  
                        failed foreign policy
Introduction
Something is fundamentally wrong with the way we deal with conflicts. Instead of 
contributing to sustainable peacebuilding, the foreign policy of the West has led 
to more insecurity abroad and at home. This has been especially true since 9/11 
in the Middle East and North Africa. The obsession with military supremacy has 
transformed diplomacy into coercive diplomacy. Characteristic of the latter is the 
absence of proactive conflict prevention, a high level of temporal inadequacies, 
and the enormous waste of time, especially the time of others and of nature. 
Without a more adaptive “temporament” (the manner of thinking, feeling and 
behaving towards time) we will not be able to deal successfully with global 
challenges or achieve sustainable development and peace.
The first part of this article defines sustainable peace in terms of outcomes 
and necessary preconditions, given that sustainable peace is an indispensable 
precondition for the survival of humanity. The second part looks at the impact 
Asian Journal of Peacebuilding  Vol. 3  No. 1 (2015): 19-41
Research Article 
© 2015 The Institute for Peace and Unification Studies, Seoul National University
ISSN 2288-2693 Print, ISSN 2288-2707 Online

20  Luc Reychler
of Western foreign policy on the global peacebuilding process. In the Middle 
East and North Africa, especially since 9/11, the impact has been disastrous. The 
third part highlights time as an essential factor in conflict transformation and 
peacebuilding. It also offers a multidimensional definition of time and stresses the 
importance of taking a big-picture view of time. Most people focus on one or two 
facets of time but overlook others. The fourth part of the article overviews several 
types of temporal inadequacies. The prevailing temporament is clearly not fit for 
dealing with the global challenges nor for achieving sustainable development 
and peace. The last part of the article deals with how to upgrade our temporal 
behavior. It defines the parameters of a more adaptive temporament. This 
discussion of time is based on the research done for my forthcoming book, Time 
for Peace, which includes a questionnaire to assess one’s own or another actor’s 
temporament. Most of the examples relate to the Middle East and North Africa, 
and to the Gaza war, which killed some 2,100 Palestinians and 73 Israelis, and 
destroyed 17,000 buildings in the Gaza area. 
The Imperative of Sustainable Peace
In our globalized world, building sustainable peace has become imperative. If we 
do not improve the human climate or handle conflicts more constructively, we 
will not be able to deal with the interlocking global crises successfully. Sustainable 
peace is an old dream that has become an indispensable precondition for the 
survival of humanity. The opportunity costs of the unresolved violent conflicts 
and military interventions are too high. Too many opportunities to deal more 
effectively with the global crises are lost. Military interventions in the name of 
democracy, regime change, human rights, or in pursuit of Netanyahu’s “sustainable 
quiet,”1 do not further sustainable security and peace. 
Since terms like peace and sustainability have many different meanings, 
it is imperative to provide an operational definition. In this article, sustainable 
peace refers to a situation with a very low level of direct and indirect violence. It 
distinguishes itself from other types of peace by the absence not only of physical 
violence, but also of structural, psychological, cultural, environmental, and 
temporal violence. It is the most cost-effective means of violence prevention.2 
Sustainable peace requires the installation of five peacebuilding blocks plus one, 
which is called the peacebuilding pentagon (Reychler 2006). 
The first building block focuses on the establishment of an effective 
communication, consultation, and negotiation system at different levels between 
the conflicting parties or party members. In contrast to the negotiation styles 
used in most international organizations, the European Union’s negotiation style, 
for example, is predominantly integrative. Ample time and creativity is invested 
in generating mutually beneficial agreements. Without win-win agreements, the 

 Time, “Temporament,” and Sustainable Peace  21
Union could disintegrate and became a dis-union. 
The second building block consists of peacebuilding structures. In order to 
achieve a sustainable peace, (conflict) countries have to install political, economic, 
and security structures and institutions that sustain peace. The political reform 
process aims at the establishment of political structures with a high level of 
legitimacy. The legitimacy status is influenced by: (1) the effectiveness of a 
regime to deliver vital basic needs, such as security, health services, and jobs; 
and (2) the democratic nature of the decision-making process. Initially, an 
authoritarian regime with high-quality leaders and technocrats can obtain a high 
legitimacy score, but in the end, consolidated democracies are the best support 
for sustainable peacebuilding. It is crucial to note that the transition from one 
state (e.g., non-democratic structures) to another (e.g., a consolidated democratic 
environment) is not without difficulties; the devil is in the transition (Reychler 
1999). The economic reform process envisions the establishment of an economic 
environment that stimulates sustainable development, eliminates gross vertical 
and horizontal inequalities, and develops positive expectations about the future. 
The security structure safeguards and/or increases the population’s objective and 
subjective security by effectively dealing with both internal and external threats. 
This implies a cooperative security system producing a high level of human 
security, collective defense and security, and proactive conflict prevention efforts 
(Cohen and Mihalka 2001, 69). 
The third necessary building block for establishing a sustainable peace 
process is an integrative climate, which is the software of peacebuilding (Reychler 
and Langer 2003, 53-73). This peacebuilding block highlights the importance of a 
favorable social-psychological environment. Although climate is less tangible and 
observable than the other building blocks, it can be assessed by the consequences. 
The presence of an integrative or disintegrative climate can be assessed by the 
prevailing attitudes, behavior, and institutions. Characteristic of an integrative 
climate are expectations for an attractive future as a consequence of cooperation, 
the development of a “we-ness” feeling or multiple loyalties, reconciliation, trust, 
social capital, and the dismantlement of sentimental walls.
The fourth building block consists of systems supporting the development 
and installation of the other peacebuilding blocks: (1) an effective and legitimate 
legal system, (2) an empowering educational system, (3) peace media, (4) a well-
functioning health system, and (5) humanitarian aid in the immediate post-war 
phase. 
The fifth building block is a supportive regional and international environment. 
The stability of a peace process is often dependent on the behavior and interests of 
neighboring countries or regional powers. They can have a positive influence on 
the peace process by providing political legitimacy or support, by assisting with 
the demobilization and demilitarization process, or by facilitating and stimulating 
regional trade and economic integration. However, these same actors can also 

22  Luc Reychler
stifle progress towards stability, for example, by supporting certain groups 
that do not subscribe to the peace process. Likewise, the larger international 
community plays a crucial role in most post-conflict countries. The international 
community, by means of UN agencies or other international (non-) governmental 
organizations, can provide crucial resources and funding or even take direct 
responsibility for a wide variety of tasks, such as the (physical) rebuilding process, 
political transformation, humanitarian aid, and development cooperation. 
The installation of all these building blocks requires a critical mass of 
peacebuilding leadership (Reychler and Stellamans 2005) in different domains 
(politics, diplomacy, defense, economics, education, media, religion, health, 
etc.) and at different levels: the elite, mid-level, and grassroots (Lederach 1997). 
Peacebuilding leadership envisions a shared, clear, and mutually attractive peaceful 
future for all who want to cooperate; these leaders do everything to identify and 
gain a full understanding of the challenge confronting them; they frame the 
conflict in a reflexive way; their change behavior is adaptive, integrative, and 
flexible; they are well acquainted with nonviolent methods; they use a mix of 
intentional and consequential ethics and objectives; and they are courageous men 
and women with high levels of integrity (Reychler and Stellamans 2003, 1-49).
All of these peacebuilding blocks are essential and interlocking. The lagging 
of one or more can seriously impede the pace of the peacebuilding process.
Failing Foreign Policy
What is the impact of Western foreign policy on peacebuilding? Instead of finger 
pointing at the so-called “undemocratic and less civilized world,” let us look at 
the three fingers pointing back at ourselves. After 9/11 the diplomatic landscape 
changed drastically. The art of diplomacy became a different creature:  
• ‌It transformed into a type coercive diplomacy that makes use of diplomatic 
isolation, sanctions, threats, armed interventions, and psychological warfare. In the 
21st century, democratic countries are fighting most international wars in the world, 
in particular in the Middle East and North Africa. Interventions in the name of 
security, anti-terrorism, anti-weapons of mass destruction (WMD), regime change, 
human rights, and democratization have brought instability, human suffering, 
and material destruction, leaving weak and failing states. All of this could be 
judged as “failed foreign policy.” Powerful interest groups, however, consider these 
interventions successes; they prefer weak and unstable states over stable regimes that 
can resist Western interference. The prime goal of the West in the Middle East is to 
achieve absolute security by means of offensive and defensive military dominance 
and regime change. The democratic West is the best-armed group of countries in 
the world. The main difference between authoritarian and democratic regimes is 
that the former commit violence against their own citizens, whereas the latter does 

 Time, “Temporament,” and Sustainable Peace  23
so against other people.  
• ‌Domestic interference, or government-to-people diplomacy, became a major tool 
for the new diplomacy. Exemplary is the support and manipulation of “square 
democracy” in Iran, Egypt, Libya, Syria, and Ukraine. The scenarios are similar: 
Protests are staged on a square in the limelight of the international news media; the 
opposition is supported and portrayed as the voice of the people; and the regime 
currently holding office is sanctioned and spurred to step down. When the new 
regime does not meet Western expectations, it is ousted by a coup d’état, repression, 
isolation, or by a new square democracy protest. Think of the elimination of the 
elected Hamas government in Palestine and of the Morsi-led government in 
Egypt. Regarding the former, when a Palestinian unity government was created, 
Israel claimed that it would never accept a peace agreement. Hamas needed to be 
destroyed first and then elections could be held. 
• ‌Foreign policy decision making has become less democratic. Winston Churchill’s 
observation that “democracy is the worst form of government, except for all others 
that have been tried” applies to domestic politics, not foreign policy. Worrisome, 
especially in regard to the West’s foreign policy towards the Middle East and North 
Africa (MENA), is the appearance of democratic fascism. This may sound like an 
exaggeration, but when judged by the main parameters of fascism, the foreign policy 
of the West and its allies in the MENA shows signs of creeping fascism. It is chilling 
to see how the foreign policy of the West gradually changed into an Ionescan 
Rhinoceros-type of behavior (Ionesco 1960).
   ‌   First, foreign policy in the Middle East is extremely militaristic. The aim is 
military superiority at a price amounting to hundreds of thousands of casualties 
and billions of dollars. During the last Gaza war, Israel’s biggest-selling newspaper 
called for returning Gaza to the Stone Age (Regev 2014). Second, foreign policy has 
become extremely patriotic. Citizens are rallied around the flag to defeat terrorists 
and evil rogue regimes. There are first- second- and third-class victims. Enemies 
deserve becoming victims; they are collateral damage. “As Palestinian children are 
killed, that may seem like a lot to stomach, but it is no less necessary” (Jones 2014, 
18). Third, the “enemy” is dehumanized and stigmatized as cruel, evil, vicious, 
backward or a terrorist. One seems to forget that anti-terrorism and state terrorism 
cause disproportionally more violence and destruction (in some cases 10, 100 or 
1000 times more) than most terrorist acts. Fourth, this policy seeks full control of 
the region and is expansionistic. Much of the territory of Palestine since 1967 has 
become exclusive zones or colonized areas, and when the Israeli settlers left Gaza in 
2005, it was turned into a ghetto with 1,800,000 people. Fifth, propaganda and spin-
doctors define realities and responsibilities. For example, our domestic interference 
is justified; others are responsible for the rack and ruin. We are fighting in a civilized 
way whereas “they” use barbarism. Gazan people would receive telephone calls to 
inform them that their houses would be bombed five minutes later. If they did not 
leave their homes in time, the inhabitants would be considered fully responsible 
for their own deaths. ISIS fighters’ slicing of Westerners’ throats has rightly been 
depicted as full, barbaric horror. But what about the tens of thousands of innocent 
civilians, adults and children, who are pierced, torn to pieces, burned, poisoned, 
or suffocated by intelligent weapons. Part of the propaganda is the staging of 

24  Luc Reychler
scapegoats, such as Iran, Hamas or more recently President Putin. There is a 
systematic denial of the policy of domination and of the responsibility for the 
negative consequences of interventions. Dissidents are labeled unpatriotic, traitors, 
leftists, peaceniks, and are ostracized and threatened with death or job loss. 
• ‌Finally, the new diplomacy is shaped by the media revolution and by fear. There 
is not only the culture of instant news, but also the phenomenon that, except in 
extreme circumstances, it is scarier to follow an event on TV than it is actually to be 
there covering it (Brooks 2014, 13). David Axelrod points to the political and news 
media culture that has gone well beyond healthy skepticism and scrutiny. “There’s 
an impetus to create fear and then market and exploit it. And that’s true on the part 
of the media, and that’s true on the part of the politicians. ” (cited in Backer 2014, 
5). A Swedish conflict analyst, Jan Oberg, commenting on the submarine hysteria 
in the coastal waters of Sweden in October 2014, observes that during the last 20 to 
30 years the quality of media work and commentary in the fields of security, defense 
and peace has steadily declined. There is less professional knowledge, research, 
and independent analysis; there is less resistance to marketing and psychological 
operations (PSYOPS), which is done by the military to boost its legitimacy in the 
eyes of the paying public; there is much more uniformity; the disease exists of 
journalists interviewing other journalists as if they were experts; and there is a fierce 
struggle for sheer survival in the digitalized media world with fewer owners in the 
business (Oberg 2014). The escalation of fear after 9/11, and more recently due to 
the ISIS and Ebola crises, has been amplified by the feeling that boundaries have 
become more porous and that government policies are less effective in preventing 
threats and keeping problems and death at a distance. According to Higgins (2014, 
1), this hysteria and overreaction “springs from a paradox at the heart of the West.” 
The more we master the world through science, technology (and economic and 
military dominance), the more frightened we are of those things we cannot control, 
understand, and anticipate. “We live in very secure societies and like to think we 
know what will happen tomorrow. There is no place … for the unknown” (ibid., 4). 
All of this has transformed the art of diplomacy into rapid-reaction diplomacy (Seib 
2012). On the whole, the impact of foreign policy on peacebuilding in the MENA 
has been disastrous.  
The Essential Role of Time 
The Relevance of Time in Conflict and Peace 
Time is an essential factor in conflict transformation and peacebuilding. First, 
it provides a more sensitive and comprehensive measure of violence. Attention 
is given not only to fast violence (killing), but also to slow, chronic violence that 
results from structural, psychological, ecological, cultural and other means of 
violence. Analysts frequently overlook temporal violence. Second, time is an 
important aspect of the conflict environment. Think of the impact of a crisis 
environment or of historical trauma. The appetite to join or not join the Arab 
Spring revolutions was strongly influenced by memory. In Algeria, the civil 

 Time, “Temporament,” and Sustainable Peace  25
war against the Islamists in the 1990s—at the cost of 200,000 lives—inhibited 
revolutionary escapades. Third, time is an aspect of descriptive, explanatory, and 
predictive analysis. There is, for example, the sticky past, events or developments 
in the past that have an impact on today’s behavior and are difficult to erase or 
neutralize, such as demographic and ecological trends, or traumatic experiences. 
There is also the malleable past, relating to lessons learned, the manipulation of 
history, and dealing with a violent past. Fourth, time is a major component of the 
planning and implementation of peace. Decisions have to be taken with respect 
to sequencing, prioritization, entry and exit, and the nature of change. Fifth, 
time is an important aspect of evaluation. It provides criteria for distinguishing 
bad and good temporal behavior. Good temporal behavior implies a high level 
of temporal democracy and temporal empathy, deference to nature’s time, and 
adequate efforts to build sustainable peace. Finally, time is a tool of power and 
influence. 
The Dimensions of Time 
While I was writing Time for Peace, some people asked me if the book was about 
philosophy or history. I told them that it dealt with existential time. We are all 
heading to the future and to death, or the end of our time. To save our own 
lifetimes, or that of loved ones, most people would consider killing if no other 
options are seen. I also reminded them that history is very important, but it is 
only one facet of temporal reality. Time is a multi-dimensional phenomenon. 
A thorough temporal analysis investigates the big picture, the cross-impacts 
between the different dimensions, and the emotions of time. A narrow temporal 
analysis can lead to serious distortions and misunderstandings. The temporal 
dimensions are divided into five principal and four transformative dimensions. 
The principal dimensions distinguish the fundamental components of time in 
conflict and peace. The transformative dimensions draw attention to variables 
that can alter temporal perception and behavior. 
Principal Dimensions
1. Existential time is about life and death. The duration and quality of a lifetime 
can be reduced by fast (armed) violence or slow (structural) violence. People who 
Table 1. Principal and Transformative Dimensions of Time
Principal Dimensions
Transformative Dimensions
1. Existential time
2. Orientation to the past, present, and the future
3. Time modes
4. Anticipation
5. Temporal management
6. Manipulation of the perception of time 
7. Temporal equality or inequality 
8. Temporal empathy
9. Temporal efficacy

26  Luc Reychler
have been subjected to armed and long-term structural violence may decide to 
risk or even offer their lives to achieve freedom. Someone confided to me that he 
had played with the idea of considering himself dead. This made it easier to live 
and risk his life for freedom, as he was dead anyway. In the current Gaza conflict, 
the issue is not only how to bring about a cease-fire, but also a cease-occupation. 
The price of turning a blind eye to freedom aspirations is often a surprise. 
2. Orientation to the past, present, and future: After a bloody conflict, a 
peace process must deal with the past, the present, and the future. The three 
time orientations are interdependent. It is very difficult to deal with the past 
successfully when the parties involved in a conflict cannot imagine a better 
common future.
3. Time modes: This dimension relates to change, succession, continuity, 
turning points, duration, and sustainability. Each of these modes can be further 
differentiated. Change can vary in terms of its speed or pace, its momentum, 
magnitude, pattern, and visibility or invisibility. The Gaza conflict entails a 
temporal confrontation between Israelis, who prefer the status quo or slow, step-
by-step change, and Palestinians, who demand radical and immediate change, 
and an independent state here and now.
4. Anticipating or not anticipating crises and the negative impacts of 
interventions: The recent regime change in Libya is an example of tremendous 
temporal misconduct or violence. 9/11 may have been the most visible turning 
point in U.S. foreign policy, but the armed regime change in Libya altered the 
international landscape tremendously. 
5. Temporal management deals with the timing of interventions, proactive or 
reactive conflict prevention, the prioritization of efforts, sequencing, synergy, and 
coherence. Today’s diplomatic landscape is dominated by a reactive approach to 
conflicts. As long as an anti-terrorist policy does not deal with the root causes, 
it will likely remain expensive, counter-productive, and incapable of delivering 
lasting results.
Transformative Dimensions
6. Manipulation and framing of the perception of time: The Gaza war of 2014 
has been the subject of a great deal of temporal manipulation. The bombardments 
of Gaza by Israel were justified as reactions to Palestinian missiles. Crucial 
elements in the causal chain, such as the transformation of Gaza into a mega 
prison camp and the imprisonment of a great number of political leaders, are left 
out of the picture. The same is true with regard to Iranian-American relations. 
America tends to delete from the narrative: the CIA-assisted coup of an elected, 
secular government in 1953; giving the green light to Saddam Hussein’s war 
against Iran in 1980; and shooting down an Iranian civilian airliner in 1988.
7. Temporal equality and inequality: In a genuine democracy the time of each 
citizen is equally valuable. In the occupied territories, the time of the Palestinians 

 Time, “Temporament,” and Sustainable Peace  27
is controlled and wasted by checkpoints, slow and unpredictable administrative 
procedures, political imprisonment, and so forth. 
8. Temporal empathy is the capacity and will to discern how others think and feel 
about time. Each culture has its own orientation to the past, present, and future; 
a preference for sequential or synchronic organization of its activities; particular 
uses of short- or long-term time horizons; and each has a distinctive sense of 
temporal control, and of the value of human, natural, and transcendental time.
9. Temporal efficacy is the opposite of determinism, fatalism, powerlessness, 
defeatism, despair. It indicates a reasonable confidence in one’s ability to 
understand the significance of time and to deal with time in ways that further 
one’s interests.
To fully grasp conflict and peace behavior, attention should be given to the 
big picture of time. First, this implies assessing the impact and cross-impact of 
every temporal dimension. It also means paying attention to temporal emotions. 
Time is not only an abstract, conceptual experience. Emotion is central to the 
experience of time. The past can be very painful. People can become victims of 
future shock, which can lead to maladaptive behavior, such as denial, obsessive 
nostalgia for previously successful, adaptive routines, or the use of super 
simplifiers (Toffler 1970). Significant changes can trigger strong emotions, such 
as the feeling of unpredictability or surprise, anger directed against those who 
resist or push too hard, denial and disillusionment. Change can also raise high 
expectations, hope, euphoria, enthusiasm, anticipation, happiness, love, and 
fulfillment (Cloke and Goldsmith 2002). While researching temporal emotions, I 
was surprised not only by the importance, but also the great variety, of temporal 
emotions. Twenty-four could be distinguished. Each emotion has its opposite 
(hope/despair, trust/distrust, or optimism/pessimism), but also subcategories: 
smart and blind trust, generalized and particularized trust, moralistic trust, 
strategic trust, deterrence-based trust, and identification-based trust. The 
strongest feelings accompany death or closeness to death. The best and the worst 
emotions take over when wars break out, such that war itself becomes the cause of 
more war. Finally, the big picture entails paying attention to the influence of both 
secular and religious time. Despite the process of secularization, religion remains 
an important factor in human behavior. For the majority of people in the world, 
religion is a major part of private and collective identity. Religious institutions 
promote moral principles and defend their interests. They also have become part 
of the globalization process in which people compare and evaluate the limits and 
possibilities of different belief systems. This can lead to friction and conflict, but 
also to the growth of eclecticism or shared (poly-) religious truth (Galtung and 
MacQueen 2008).

28  Luc Reychler
Temporal Inadequacies 
Conflict transformation and peacebuilding efforts continue to be seriously 
hampered by multiple temporal inadequacies. In Time for Peace, twelve 
inadequacies in the ways people deal with time are distinguished. The 
inadequacies are split into four groups dealing with problems of temporal 
sensitivity, temporal praxis, temporal ethics, and temporal efficacy.
Low Temporal Sensitivity
1. Weak appreciation of the role of time in conflicts. The military intervention 
in Libya (March–October 2011) illustrates several temporal deficiencies that 
significantly raised the human and material costs. This intervention, although 
not recognized as such, has been a major turning point in international relations. 
Despite the fact that the intervention was lauded as a success and role model 
for humanitarian intervention, it can also be judged a case of temporal folly 
or temporal misconduct. Alan Kuperman (2013) calls it a negative model of 
humanitarian intervention; it suffered from serious temporal deficiencies. 
The first of these was the manipulation of the perception of the past, 
present, and future. The media diabolized Kaddafi’s violence as a lunatic 
massacre, reminded its audience of the Lockerbie bombing, warned them of a 
new Srebrenica or Rwanda, depicted the protests as nonviolent, and exaggerated 
the initial death toll by a factor of ten. In fact, large-scale violence was initiated 
Table 2. Temporal Inadequacies
Temporal Insensitivity
1. Weak appreciation of the role of time in conflict and peace processes
2. Neglect or denial of temporal violence
3. A wide gap between the value of my time and your time
4. Low level of temporal discernment and empathy
Temporal Malpractice
5. An unsatisfactory and unbalanced orientation to the past, present and the future
6. Strong propensity for reactive conflict prevention
7. Incoherent temporal management
8. Low investment in sustainable development and peace
Unethical Temporal Behavior
9. Low accountability for temporal misconduct and violence
10. Undemocratic time 
Low Temporal Efficacy and Reflexivity
11. Temporal inefficacy
12. Low reflexivity, invention and learning

 Time, “Temporament,” and Sustainable Peace  29
by one part of the protestors and the government never responded with 
indiscriminate force. Second, a strong sense of urgency and existential crisis was 
created in which no time could be wasted by delays or diplomatic niceties to 
prevent or stop a possible human disaster. Third, several opportunities for dealing 
with the conflict in more constructive and effective ways were missed. Offers by 
Venezuela, the African Union (AU) and Turkey for mediation towards a ceasefire 
were refused. The primary objective of the rebels and NATO was to overthrow 
the regime. Fourth, regime change was prioritized as the preferred outcome, even 
if this escalated and extended the civil war and thereby raised the threat to the 
Libyans (ibid., 115).
Fifth, there was a failure to anticipate and prevent negative external side 
effects or harm.3 The war spilled over into Mali and also had a negative effect on 
the non-Western part of the international community. Russia, China, and the AU 
felt betrayed by a transformation of the Responsibility to Protect (R2P) principle 
of the intervention into regime change. The most negative external impact was 
felt in Syria. The success of the rebels in Libya raised the expectations of the 
Syrian armed opposition. With external support the opposition expected a quick, 
decisive victory and so negotiations with Assad were out of the question. On the 
other side, the Syrian regime was prepared to do anything to avoid what they had 
seen in Iraq and Libya (the hanging of Hussein, the lynching of Kaddafi, and the 
degradation of the countries into broken and weak states). Major international 
players, especially Russia, China and the African Union, refused to support 
military intervention in Syria, even to protect civilians. 
2. Neglect or denial of temporal violence: Temporal violence refers to a 
quantitative and qualitative depreciation of one’s life expectancy as a consequence 
of protracted conflict, long-term sanctions, structural violence, ecological 
deterioration, or the killing and wasting of others’ time. Everybody has the 
right to be fully alive right now. Corrupt regimes and failed countries waste a 
disproportionate amount of the time of their citizens. Colonization goes hand 
in hand with considerable temporal violence. In the remaining Palestinian 
Territories (approximately 22% of the mandatory Palestine of 1947), Palestinians 
undergo long-term structural violence (also called apartheid, colonization, 
sanctions), thousands are political prisoners (Brown 1998). The timeframes of 
Gaza’s inhabitants are enclosed, their economic and educational opportunities 
curtailed, and a great deal of their precious time wasted at checkpoints and in 
the absence of corridors between isolated parts of the territory. Another example 
of temporal violence is poverty. The term “extreme poverty,” used by the rich 
and powerful, veils the impact of gross inequality and the long-term violence 
experienced by the less poor. 
3. A wide gap between the value of my time and their time: Earlier we 
distinguished first- second- and third-class victims. Second- and third-class 
victims are those on the other side. Our victims are prioritized as first-class. 

30  Luc Reychler
Threats to “us” are strategic or existential threats, which justify the disproportional 
use of firepower, torture, and rapid dominance. Innocent citizens on the other 
side are labeled collateral damage, as the regrettable outcome of “unintentional,” 
but predictable, incidents. After shooting down an Iranian airbus in 1988 (in the 
same year as the Pan Am Lockerbie bombing), the U.S. government regretted the 
loss of human lives and paid reparations, but never apologized or acknowledged 
wrongdoing. And in the climate debate, future generations have no voice. 
4. Low empathy for temporal differences: There are many temporal cultures. 
Academic disciplines conceive of time in a variety of ways. The professionals 
involved in conflict transformation and peacebuilding have different views 
about priority setting and sequencing. People think and act differently in 
peacetime than in wartime. The temporal culture of the rich and strong contrasts 
significantly with the time experienced by the poor and weak. Religious time 
differs from secular time. Despite these differences, there is a tendency to 
interpret the temporal experiences of others through one’s own familiar temporal 
lenses and/or to impose our temporal culture on others. On the whole, the will 
and ability to view and feel how the other party conceives and experiences time 
and temporal violence is low. 
Temporal Malpractice
5. An unbalanced orientation to the past, present, and future: Temporal 
orientations can be considered inadequate when the needs and challenges 
of the past, present and future are handled insufficiently and in unbalanced 
ways. For example, the past can be repressed or put between brackets in order 
to build a new future, or inadequate efforts may be made to raise hope for a 
better and common future. In many conflicts, the violent past is not dealt with 
satisfactorily. On February 27, 2012, the Spanish Supreme Court exonerated 
Judge Baltasar Garzon of abusing his authority (prevarication) in an investigation 
into disappearances during the Spanish Civil War. Previously, Garzon had 
successfully issued arrest warrants against the Chilean dictator Pinochet and the 
Argentine military command for their responsibility in genocide, torture, and 
state terrorism. The trouble came when he applied his theory that neither statutes 
of limitation or amnesty laws could preclude investigations into crimes against 
humanity in his own country. No one has ever been held accountable for crimes 
during that civil war and up to 150,000 dead remain unidentified in unmarked 
graves (Roht-Arriaza 2012). 
Several problems relate to the handling of the present. George Loewenstein 
says that the ceaseless influx of information has conditioned our decision-making 
machinery to what is latest, not what is more important or more interesting 
(the “recency” effect). “We pay a lot of attention to the most recent information, 
discounting what came earlier” (Begley 2011). Decisions are driven by what is 
urgent rather than what is important. 

 Time, “Temporament,” and Sustainable Peace  31
Finally, there are future orientations that inhibit adaptive change. Think 
of the short-term thinking of the majority of politicians or the use of worst-
case scenarios. Tony Judt (2012) criticized the state of Israel for its use of fear, 
especially “the fear that Israel could be wiped off the face of the earth,” in order 
to justify the continuation of an unavailing policy. The fear, he argued, is not a 
genuine one, but a politically calculated, rhetorical fear. Many governing elites 
are not seizing the moment to create responsible financial systems, sustainable 
economies, and a more equal world, nor for dealing with environmental 
deterioration and the shrinking access to vital human necessities, such as food 
and water (George 2010). 
6. Propensity for reactive conflict prevention: Proactive violence prevention 
is at a low point. Following 9/11, traditional diplomacy was high on force and 
low on diplomacy. The very word diplomacy became unfashionable on Capitol 
Hill and in some European capitals, such as Tony Blair’s London; the drums of 
confrontation, toughness and inflexibility prevailed (Cohen 2013). Concepts 
like preventive diplomacy and conflict prevention were removed and replaced 
by layers of economic sanctions, diplomatic pressure and isolation, military 
threats, preemptive and preventive wars. The Middle East turned into a living 
museum of defunct diplomacy. In reactive policy most if not all the attention 
went to the symptoms and not to root causes. The war on terror aimed at killing 
or incapacitating the terrorists and the organizations or networks behind them. 
Frequently negative side effects were not anticipated, were denied or considered 
necessary evils. Think of the American support of Muslim fighters in the Afghan-
Soviet war, or the emergence and growing strength of Hezbollah during the 18 
years of Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon. Measures are taken to eliminate 
risks to “our” people by the installation of stringent border controls, the building 
of protective walls, fighting from the air, launching missiles from distant bases, 
and engaging private security corporations and mercenaries. In the short term, 
reactive conflict prevention may seem successful, but in the long term it can be 
counter-productive and overly expensive.
7. Incoherent temporal management: Achieving a coherent peacebuilding 
process is difficult. Coherence depends on the confluence of decisions taken with 
respect to the six components of the peacebuilding architecture: (1) inclusion or 
exclusion of the major stakeholders; (2) definition of the end state—the peace 
they want to install and the theoretical assumptions about how to get there; (3) 
assessment of the conflict at the baseline and the peacebuilding deficiencies; (4) 
analysis of the context, including power relations, the willingness to build peace, 
and the peacebuilding resources; (5) the nature of the peacebuilding process, 
including temporal issues, like when to intervene and when to stop, priority 
setting and sequencing of operations, and the creation of synergies; and (6) 
monitoring and evaluation of the results. 
8. A shortage of investment in sustainable development and peace: Despite 

32  Luc Reychler
the fact that sustainable development and peace resonate with strongly held 
convictions about the present and the future, their realization has proven to be 
highly illusive (Adger and Jordan 2009).
Unethical Temporal Behavior 
9. Low accountability for temporal misconduct: Decision-makers and -shapers 
are accountable if they are expected to explain their decisions and believe they 
can be rewarded or punished as a result. When they are held accountable for their 
decisions, they are likely to be more careful and will be more likely to procure 
and evaluate recommendations or policies in a more holistic manner (Mintz 
and De Rouen 2011, 30-33). For Mintz and De Rouen, a holistic search means 
reviewing all the information on alternative courses of action, the dimensions 
that influence the decision, and the implications of each alternative. The level 
of unaccountability and immunity for temporal misconduct in foreign policy is 
high. Temporal misconduct can involve: the neglect of early warning signals of 
genocidal behavior or civil war, the absence of adequate preventive or damage-
limiting measures, exaggerating threats and thereby the manipulation of fear, 
negligence towards the negative impacts of economic and political interference, 
the defense of policies with inappropriate historical analogies, killing and wasting 
the other’s time, giving more time to military and coercive intervention than to 
diplomatic efforts to stop violence, and so on. 
10. The undemocratic control of time: Controlling time has always been a key to 
power. Giordano Nanni illustrated the linkage of power and time in his book, The 
Colonization of Time (2012). Nanni examines British rituals and concepts of time 
imposed on other cultures as fundamental components of colonization during 
the nineteenth century. Today, time remains an important source of political, 
economic, and military power. Jeremy Rifkin observes that some people’s time is 
more valuable or expendable than others’: millions starve while a minority lives 
in splendor. The rich and powerful tend to shape the (preferred) future world 
order (Kapur 2014). Jaron Lanier, a philosopher and computer specialist, argues 
that the corporations with the newest and fastest computers, using data gathered 
for free from the public, are able to calculate ways to avoid risk, thus making the 
society riskier for everybody else. “Instead of leaving a greater number of us in 
excellent financial health, the effect of digital technologies—and the companies 
behind them—is to concentrate wealth, and challenge [the] livelihoods of 
an ever increasing number of people” (Lanier 2013). Temporal autonomy, or 
discretionary time, which is unequally distributed, is a salient measure of freedom 
and democracy (Whillans 2011).
Low Temporal Efficacy and Reflexivity
11. Temporal inefficacy: Several developments have increased feelings of 
discomfort and temporal inefficacy in different parts of the world. There 

 Time, “Temporament,” and Sustainable Peace  33
is growing pressure to be efficient and meet the fast pace of life. There are 
complaints about the world changing at lightning speed (Benkler 2011), the 
increasing scarcity of time or “time famine,” fast information and communication 
facilities, and short response times. The world is plagued by chronic crises. More 
than a billion people must try to survive on less than $1 a day. Urban youngsters 
with poor economic prospects are impatient and slow political change has led 
to revolutionary protests in Sarajevo, Kiev, Cairo. Indicators of temporal efficacy 
are the emotions of fear in the West and humiliation in the Muslim world, as 
described by Dominique Moïsi (2009). 
12. Low on reflexivity, invention, and learning: Our brains need more space 
and time to have new strategic insights and ideas. The lack of understanding of 
rapid political changes seems to be sublimated by moralizing international affairs. 
Secular missionaries pursue national interests in the name of the responsibility 
to protect, human rights, democratization, freedom, liberalization. However, 
interpreting Lao Tzu, Ralph Alan Dale reminds us that the course of events does 
not simply follow our wishes and prayers: 
The harder we try to force events to conform to our moralization, the less likely our 
success. On the other hand, the more we yield to the rhythms of life, the greater our 
fruition. How often Lao Tzu bids us to put aside our ideological predilections so 
that we may be free to ebb and flow with the new opportunities of every pregnant 
moment. (Lao Tzu 2002, 172)
Temporal inadequacies can result from poor temporal intelligence, the 
arrogance of power and greed, pseudo democratic decision making, a low level 
of accountability for temporal misconduct and violence, the denial of temporal 
problems, the sanctioning of dissident voices, and the blaming of others for 
negative impacts. 
Although people pay ample attention to time, they tend to focus on some 
aspects, for example the past and the near future, and overlook the other aspects 
of time. Temporal inadequacies have also been attributed to stupidity. Barbara 
Tuchman calls it wooden-headedness. It consists in assessing a situation in terms 
of preconceived and fixed notions while ignoring or rejecting any contrary signs. 
She epitomizes this type of self-deception with an historian’s statement about 
Philip II of Spain: “No experience of the failure of his policy could shake his belief 
in its essential intelligence” (Tuchman 1964, 7). The pursuit of power, prestige 
and greed can intensify and prolong violence. Nixon and Kissinger’s New Year’s 
wish of 1973, to end the Vietnam War with a “peace with honor,” protracted 
the terrible war more than two years. During the eighties, America supported 
brutal pro-Western dictatorships and opposed truly popular governments and 
opposition movements in Latin America. Exclusive democracies characterized 
by segregation, apartheid and repression commit temporal violence to control 

34  Luc Reychler
second-class citizens. When elections are held in the Occupied Territories, elected 
collaboration is favored and elected resistance repressed. Liberal democracies that 
do not provide a minimum of social security can create gross inequalities and 
poverty. Another factor that enhances temporal inadequacy is the lack of political 
accountability for temporal misconduct and violence. 
Problematic also, especially in the Middle East, is the denial of double-bind 
policies by the West and Israel. Both strongly avoid recognizing and confronting 
their conflicting aims, such as pursuing military dominance and at the same time 
expecting sustainable security and peace, or Israel’s colonization of the occupied 
Palestinian territories and its expectation of “sustainable quiet.” These policies 
are confounded by inherent unresolvable dilemmas. To deal with emotionally 
distressing dilemmas, resolute efforts are made to deny responsibility, to silence 
critics, and to blame and punish others for the negative impacts. Governments 
who are not willing to confront an unresolvable dilemma will neither resolve 
it nor opt out of the situation (McNally 2012; Gisha 2009).4 The people who 
suffer most of the negative impacts of double-bind policies are those in the area 
where the interventions take place. A double bind is also present in our relation 
to nature. On the one hand, we do try to preserve the natural environment; on 
the other hand, we wish to continue economic growth although our standard 
of living disrupts nature and our relation to it (Wedge 2011). Human beings act 
in destructive ways towards other human beings and fragile ecological systems 
because we do not want to see the impact of our behavior upon others, the 
environment and, in the end, on our own lives. To overcome these policies we 
must throw light on the contradictions, place the problem in a larger temporal 
context, and protest these double-bind policies.  
Towards a More Adaptive Temporament
Temporal behavior can be upgraded by: (1) installing a more effective accounting 
or monitoring and evaluation system of temporal behavior, (2) codifying gross 
temporal misconduct and temporal violence in international criminal law (the 
responsible decision-makers and -shapers should be made accountable), (3) 
making people more conscious of the limits of the prevailing temporament, 
and (4) developing a more adaptive temporament. The prevailing temporament 
today—the manner of thinking, feeling and behaving towards time—is clearly 
not fit for dealing with the challenges of the world or achieving sustainable 
development and peace. An adaptive temporament can be defined by twelve 
parameters. 
Temporal Sensitivity
1. A high level of appreciation of time: Appreciation of time refers to the value 

 Time, “Temporament,” and Sustainable Peace  35
people attach to the role of time in the pursuit of one’s interests and needs, 
especially with respect to economic well-being and security. Time is not only 
money, but also well-being and security. People with a high appreciation tend to 
pay ample attention to the role of time and try to use time in ways that further 
their life expectancy.   
2. Discernment of temporal violence: An adaptive temporament is attentive 
to temporal violence. This involves an awareness that the quality and quantity 
of life can be reduced by both fast and slow killing, long-term poverty, wasting 
and imprisoning the time of adversaries and dissidents, unequal opportunities, 
allowing conflicts to become protracted, not allocating the necessary time and 
means for conflict prevention, denying or not anticipating negative side-effects of 
our actions, too-little-too-late responses, criminal negligence, failing to address 
root causes, and so forth. People with an adaptive temporament pay serious 
attention to the role of time in conflict analysis and conflict transformation.  
3. An inclusive approach to time: Inclusion implies that not only my/our time 
is considered and valued in decision making, but also that of other stakeholders, 
including past and future generations. Inclusion also implies recognition of the 
biological and physical clocks of nature. Religious people demand respect for 
sacred and transcendental time. Those with an exclusive time approach focus 
solely on their own lifetimes and life expectations; others’ lifetimes are secondary. 
People with an inclusive temporal approach respect the time of others and of 
nature. 
Table 3. Parameters of an Adaptive Temporament
Temporal Sensitivity
1. High awareness and appreciation of time 
2. Discernment of temporal violence
3. An inclusive approach to time
4. Recognition of, and empathy with, different temporal cultures, interests, and needs
Good Temporal Practice
5. Constructive and balanced orientation to the past, present, and future
6. Strong propensity for proactive violence prevention
7. Synergetic temporal planning and implementation
8. Enabling sustainable development and peace
Ethical Temporal Behavior
9. An ethical approach to time
10. Democratization of time
Temporal Efficacy and Reflexivity 
11. A sense of temporal efficacy
12. Reflexivity and adaptive leadership 

36  Luc Reychler
4. Recognition of, and empathy with, different temporal cultures: There are no 
universally accepted timeframes. In fact there are many temporal cultures. The 
way people deal with time is influenced by their culture, but also by the interests 
at stake, power, professional outlook, age, generation, gender, and religion. 
Temporal empathy (cognitive and emotional) refers to the will and ability to view 
and feel how the other conceives and experiences time and temporal violence. 
High temporal empathy correlates positively with a high level of understanding 
and compassion. This enables conflict transition and peacebuilding. Low 
temporal empathy leads to inconsiderate, indifferent, and often disproportional 
or vindictive temporal behavior.
Temporal Practice
5. A balanced orientation to the past, present, and future: People with an 
adaptive temporament tackle the needs of the past, present, and future in a 
sufficient and balanced way. An unbalanced approach deals with these needs 
insufficiently and in an imbalanced way. For example, the past can be repressed 
or put between brackets in order to build up something new in the present, or 
inadequate efforts can be made to raise hope for a better and common future. 
Dealing with the past without an attractive common future is a tantalizing 
experience. Bracketing the past for some time is possible, but denying or 
forgetting it can spoil the future. 
6. Propensity for proactive conflict prevention: Serious efforts are made to 
anticipate future threats and opportunities by means of scenarios and other 
forecasting methods. The analysts are acquainted with such concepts as theory-
based methods for anticipating civil wars, genocidal behavior, ripeness of conflict, 
and also with research on tipping points, black swans, decisive moments, and 
so on. Efforts are also made to anticipate the positive and negative impacts 
of interventions. They are acquainted with the newest impact assessment 
methodologies. Proactive conflict prevention is a high priority; special attention 
goes to the identification and elimination of the root causes and to the building 
of sustainable peace. When prevention fails, effective crisis management, and 
damage limitation skills and facilities are available.
7. Synergetic planning and implementation: An adaptive temporament furthers 
synergy and coherence in conflict transformation and peacebuilding. This involves 
decisions with respect to: (1) the nature of the involvement and coordination; (2) 
clarity and consensus about the end state or peace sought as well as the roadmap 
to get there; (3) conflict analysis and assessment of the peacebuilding deficiencies 
at the baseline; (4) entry and exit timing, the prioritization and sequencing of 
military, diplomatic, political, economic, educational, and other interventions; 
the pacing or the speed of external intervention; the preference for slow, gradual 
or fast and radical change (such as military shock and awe interventions, or 
Jeffrey Sachs’ economic shock therapy for Russia after the Cold War5); and the 

 Time, “Temporament,” and Sustainable Peace  37
anticipation of possible negative side effects and measures to stop or reduce such 
negative impacts.
8. Enabling sustainable development and peace: Sustainable development and 
peacebuilding are considered vital for humanity and our planet. Sustainability 
requires a lot of cooperation, or agreement to work together for mutual benefit 
(Mainelli and Harris 2011, 43), and more emphasis on social enterprise (Smith 
2012). Robert Axelrod, in The Evolution of Cooperation, writes that cooperation 
depends on “the shadow of the future,” or the expectation that interactions in the 
future might be affected by the quality of current ones (Mainelli and Harris 2011, 
43; Axelrod 2006; Benkler 2011).
Temporal Ethics
9. An ethical approach to time: Ethical time deals with the normative 
assumptions underlying temporal thinking and behavior. It judges the negative 
consequences of intervention, but also of non-intervention, of delay and criminal 
negligence, and demands more accountability for temporal misconduct and 
temporal violence. It favors and advocates sufficient investment in sustainable 
development and peacebuilding. 
10. Democratization of time: Time is dealt with as a political issue. Everybody’s 
time is considered equally valuable and no one person’s time is regarded as more 
expendable than another’s (Rifkin 1987). People cannot be disempowered by 
manipulating time, by destroying artifacts and documents from the past, or by 
controlling their future. A genuine democracy, at both national and international 
levels, respects the time of all citizens.   
Temporal efficacy and reflexivity
11. A sense of temporal efficacy: Temporal efficacy is the opposite of 
determinism, fatalism, temporal disorientation, and stress. There is a reasonable 
confidence in understanding the role of time and dealing with time in ways that 
further one’s interests and the pursuit of conflict transformation and sustainable 
peace. Temporal efficacy demands a great deal of practical experience, learning 
from history, imagining alternative futures, self-esteem, and courage. In tough 
conflicts it requires embracing death, not necessarily physical death, but death 
of the ego. When we are too invested in our egos, we cannot collaborate, change, 
adapt and mediate in peace negotiations (Warner and Schmincke 2009). 
Temporal efficacy should not be confused with temporal hubris (the feeling that 
one is the future), which leads to security and foreign policy follies.
12. Reflexivity and adaptive leadership: One of the most frequently heard 
complaints concerns the lack of time and/or too much time pressure. In essence, 
the problem is the allocation of enough time for important issues and decisions, 
and for developing good judgment and legitimate political governance at different 
systemic levels.6 An adaptive temporament frees time for: (1) broader and deeper 

38  Luc Reychler
understandings of conflict dynamics and seeing the big picture; (2) reflexive 
framing of conflicts;
7 (3) developing more accurate measures of temporal 
misconduct and their costs and benefits; (4) imaging and planning mutually 
attractive and sustainable common world futures; (5) anticipating the positive and 
negative consequences of interventions or policies; (6) resolving difficult inter-
temporal problems faced by people who are both farsighted planners and myopic 
doers by aligning incentive systems and/or imposing rules (Mainelli and Harris 
2011, 72); and (7) diplomatic work and the improvement of conflict management 
systems.
Conclusion
Reading this article has likely taken approximately 40 minutes, or 2,400 seconds, 
of your life. That time is now gone. I hope it was worth it. However, as one Sufi 
saying goes, even “when the heart weeps for what it has lost, the soul laughs 
for what it has found” (Atwater 1999). This article reminds us that in our fast-
changing globalized world, the way we deal with time will more than ever 
determine the success or failure of dealing with global crises and the building 
of sustainable peace and development. Despite the urgency of handling time 
more effectively, too much time is wasted. The prevailing way of dealing with 
conflict is glutted with temporal inadequacies. Illustrative is the foreign policy 
of the West in the Middle East and North Africa after 9/11. The impact has been 
disastrous. A thorough and comprehensive analysis and evaluation of temporal 
behavior in foreign policy is needed. This implies considering the big picture: 
the temporal dimensions and emotions, as well as both secular and religious 
time. Assessing the temporal behavior of the stakeholders in conflict and peace 
should be an essential part of monitoring and evaluation. It could also help to 
identify the temporal inadequacies more systematically and steepen the learning 
curve of peace builders. It could advance the accounting for the costs of temporal 
misconduct and the accountability of policymakers. Above all it should make 
us more aware that today’s prevailing political temporament stands in the 
way of sustainable peace and security. Thus, take the time to get to know your 
temporament and start making it more adaptive.   
Notes
This article is a long version of the keynote speech the author gave at the International 
Peace Research Association (IPRA) in Istanbul in August 2014, on the occasion of IPRA’s 
50th anniversary.

 Time, “Temporament,” and Sustainable Peace  39
1.	
A term used/coined by Israeli Prime Minister Netanyahu in an interview during the 
Gaza war of 2014. http://edition.cnn.com/2014/07/20/world/meast/mideast-crisis-blitzer-
netanyahu-interview/ (accessed February 19, 2015).
2.	
A complete cost assessment considers: humanitarian, economic, political, material, 
social, cultural, psychological, ecological, and spiritual costs (Reychler and Paffenholz 
2001, 4). 
3.	
The promise of military intervention encouraged the armed rebellion and the refusal 
to negotiate. The NATO intervention also increased the number of casualties significantly.
4.	
Also see Wikipedia, “Double bind,” http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Double_bind> 
(accessed January 5, 2015).
5. 	
Shock therapy involved a sudden privatization of Russia’s 225,000 or so state-owned 
businesses, a sudden release of price and currency controls, withdrawal of state subsidies, 
and sudden trade liberalization. See Smitha n.d., and Wikipedia, “Shock therapy,” http://
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shock_therapy_%28economics%29 (accessed February 19, 2015).
6. 	
The legitimacy of a government depends on effectiveness and democracy. Political 
legitimacy = democracy x effectiveness. 
7. 	
For Jay Rothman (1997, 33-52), this is a slowed-down and self-conscious analysis 
of the interactive nature of reactions that allows actors to be proactive agents in a conflict 
instead of reactive victims, and which furthers analytic empathy.
References
Adger, W. Neil, and Andrew Jordan, eds. 2009. Governing Sustainability. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Atwater, P.M.H. 1999. Future Memory. Charlottesville, VA: Hampton Roads Publishing 
Company.
Axelrod, Robert. 2006. The Evolution of Cooperation. New York: Basic Books.
Backer, Peter. 2014. “Confidence Ebbs as Americans See Missteps Mount.” International 
New York Times, October 23.
Begley, Sharon. 2011. “I Can’t Think.” Newsweek, March 7.
Benkler, Yochai. 2011. The Penguin and the Leviathan: The Triumph of Cooperation over 
Self-Interest. New York: Crown Business.
Brooks, David. 2014. “The Quality of Fear.” International New York Times, October 22.
Brown, Alyson. 1998. “Doing Time: The Extended Present of the Long-Term Prisoner.” 
Time & Society 7 (1): 93-103.
Cloke, Kenneth, and Joan Goldsmith. 2002. The End of Management and the Rise of 
Organizational Democracy. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Cohen, Richard, and Michael Mihalka. 2001. Cooperative Security: New Horizons for 
International Order. Garmisch-Partenkirchen: George C. Marshall European Center 
for Security Studies.
Cohen, Roger. 2013. “Diplomacy is Dead.” International Herald Tribune, January 22.
Emanuel, Gabrielle. 2013. “Time poverty.” State of Opportunity. Online magazine of 
Michigan Radio, September 3. http://stateofopportunity.michiganradio.org/post/
time-poverty (accessed February 15, 2015).  

40  Luc Reychler
Galtung, Johan and Graeme Macqueen. 2008. Globalizing God: Religion, Spirituality and 
Peace. Transcend University Press. 
George, Susan. 2010. Whose Crisis, Whose Future? Cambridge: Polity.
Gisha - Legal Center for Freedom and Movement. 2009. “Restrictions and Removal: Israel’s 
Double Bind Policy for Palestinians Holders of Gaza IDs in the West Bank. Fact 
Sheet.” (November). http://gisha.org/publication/1633 (accessed January 5, 2015).
Higgens, Andrew. 2014. “Fear Itself Rather than Risk Underlies Ebola Alarm.” International 
New York Times, October 18-19.
Ionescu, Eugen. 1960. Rhinoceros. New York: Grove Press.
Jones, Owen. 2014. “Occupying can often Corrupt an Occupier.” The Guardian Weekly, July 
25.
Judt, Tony. 2012. Thinking the Twentieth Century. London: Random House.
Kapur, Sahil. 2014. “Scholar Behind Viral ‘Oligarchy’ Study Tells You What It Means.” TPM, 
April 22. http://talkingpointsmemo.com/dc/princeton-scholar-demise-of-democracy-
america-tpm-interview (accessed January 9, 2015).
Kuperman, Alan. 2013. “A Model Humanitarian Intervention? Reassessing NATO’s Libya 
Campaign.” International Security 38 (1): 105-136.
Lanier, Jaron. 2013. Who Owns the Future? New York: Allan Lane.
Lao Tzu. 2002. Tao Te Ching: A New Translation and Commentary, Translated by Ralph 
Alan Dale. New York: Barnes & Noble Books.
Lederach, John Paul. 1997. Building Peace: Sustainable Reconciliation in Divided Societies. 
Washington, DC: United States Institute of Peace Press.
Mainelli, Michael, and Ian Harris. 2011. The Price of Fish: A New Approach to Wicked 
Economics and Better Decisions. London: Nicholas Brealy Publishers.
McNally, Kyle. 2012. “Global Security and the Intervention Double Bind.” Global Policy, 
October 23. 
Mintz, Alex, and Karl De Rouen Jr. 2011. Understanding Foreign Policy Decision-Making. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Moïsi, Dominique. 2009. De geopolitiek van emotie [The Geopolitics of Emotion]. 
Amsterdam: Nieuw Amsterdam.
Nanni, Giordano. 2012. The Colonization of Time: Ritual, Routine and Resistance in the 
British Empire. Manchester: Manchester University Press.
Oberg, Jan. 2014. “Sweden’s Submergency.” TFF Associates & Themes Blog, October 24. 
Lund, Sweden: Transnational Foundation for Peace & Future Research. http://blog.
transnational.org/2014/10/swedens-submergency/ (accessed January 5, 2015).
Regev, Amos. 2014. “Return Gaza to the Stone Age.” Israel Hayom, July 9. http://www.
israelhayom.com/site/newsletter_article.php?id=18675 (accessed March 16, 2015).
Reychler, Luc. 1999. Democratic Peace-building and Conflict Prevention: The Devil is in the 
Transition. Leuven: Leuven University Press.
Reychler, Luc. 2006. “Challenges of Peace Research.” International Journal of Peace Studies 
11 (1): 1-16. http://www.gmu.edu/programs/icar/ijps/vol11_1/11n1Reychler.pdf 
(accessed January 12, 2015).
Reychler, Luc, and Arnim Langer. 2003. “The Software of Peace Building.” Canadian 
Journal of Peace Studies 35 (2): 53-73.
Reychler, Luc, and Thania Paffenholz. 2001. Peace Building: A Field Guide. Boulder: Lynne 
Rienner.

 Time, “Temporament,” and Sustainable Peace  41
Reychler, Luc, and Anton Stellamans. 2003. “Peace Building Leaders and Spoilers.” Cahiers 
of the Centre for Peace Research and Strategic Studies 20 (1): 1-42.
Reychler, Luc, and Anton Stellamans. 2005. “Researching Peace Building Leadership.” 
Cahiers of the Center for Peace Research and Strategic Studies 20 (2): 1-73.
Rifkin, Jeremy. 1987. Time Wars: The Primary Conflict in Human History. New York: Henry 
Holt and Company. 
Roht-Arriaza, Naomi. 2012. “The Spanish Civil War, Amnesty, and the Trials of Judge 
Garzón.” Insights: American Society of Internal Law 16 (24). http://www.asil.
org/insights/volume/16/issue/24/spanish-civil-war-amnesty-and-trials-judge-
garz%C3%B3n (accessed January 9, 2015).
Rothman, Jay. 1997. Resolving Identity-based Conflict in Nations, Organizations and 
Communities. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Schmidt, Eric, and Jared Cohen. 2014. The New Digital Age: Transforming Nations, 
Businesses, and Our Lives. New York: Vintage Books.
Seib, Philip. 2012. Real-Time Diplomacy: Politics and Power in the Social Media Era. New 
York: Palgrave MacMillan.
Smith, Emmanuelle. 2012. “Won Over by Social Enterprise.” Financial Times, March 26.
Smitha, Frank E. n.d. “Transition to a Market Economy, End of the Cold War and Soviet 
Union (9 of 9).” Macro History and World Timeline. http://www.fsmitha.com/h2/
ch33-9.htm (accessed January 21, 2015).
Toffler, Alvin. 1970. Future Shock. New York: Bantam Books.
Tuchman, Barbara. 1964. The March of Folly: From Troy to Vietnam. London: Abacus-Shere 
Books.
Warner, Chris, and Dan Schmincke. 2009. High Altitude Leadership: What the World’s Most 
Forbidding Peaks Teach Us. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Wedge, Marylin. 2011. “The Double Binds of Everyday Life. Everything We Do to Grow 
Our Economy Disrupts the Environment.” Psychology Today, October 13. http://www.
psychologytoday.com/blog/suffer-the-children/201110/the-double-binds-everyday-
life (accessed January 5, 2015).
Whillans, Jennifer. 2011. “Book Review, Time Poverty: The Unequal Distribution of 
Temporal Autonomy.” Time & Society 20 (1): 137-140.
Luc Reychler (Ph.D. Harvard 1976) is now emeritus professor of international relations at KULeuven, 
Belgium. Formerly, he was director of the Center for Peace Research and Strategic Studies (CPRS), 
founder of the Field Diplomacy Initiative (FDI), Secretary General of the International Peace 
Research Association (IPRA) 2004-2008, and holder of the UNESCO chair on intellectual solidarity 
and sustainable peacebuilding. His latest book on the role of time in conflict and peacebuilding, Time 
for Peace, will be published in 2015. He promotes intellectual solidarity and speaks out on sensitive 
international issues on his blog www.diplomaticthinking.com. 
E-mail: luc.reychler@soc.kuleuven.be