Palgrave Studies in Compromise after Conﬂict
Advisory Board: John Braithwaite (Australian National University), Hastings
Donnan (Queen’s University Belfast), Brandon Hamber (University of Ulster),
Ian McAlister (Australian National University), William Mishler (University of
Arizona), Barbara Misztal (University of Leicester), Orla Muldoon (University of
Limerick), and Clifford Shearing (University of Cape Town).
Titles include:
John D. Brewer, David Mitchell, Gerard Leavey
EX-COMBATANTS, RELIGION, AND PEACE IN NORTHERN IRELAND
The Role of Religion in Transitional Justice
Palgrave Studies in Compromise after Conﬂict
Series Standing Order ISBN 978–1–1373–2320–0
Hardback 978–1–1373–2321–7 Paperback
(outside North America only)
You can receive future titles in this series as they are published by placing a
standing order. Please contact your bookseller or, in case of difﬁculty, write to
us at the address below with your name and address, the title of the series and
the ISBN quoted above.
Customer
Services
Department,
Macmillan
Distribution
Ltd,
Houndmills,
Basingstoke, Hampshire RG21 6XS, England

Also by John D. Brewer
THE PUBLIC VALUE OF THE SOCIAL SCIENCES: An Interpretative Essay
(forthcoming)
RELIGION, CIVIL SOCIETY AND PEACE IN NORTHERN IRELAND (with Gareth
Higgins and Francis Teeney)
PEACE PROCESSES: A Sociological Approach
C. WRIGHT MILLS AND THE ENDING OF VIOLENCE
ETHNOGRAPHY (Part of the ‘Understanding Social Research’ series)
ANTI-CATHOLICISM IN NORTHERN IRELAND 1600–1998: The Mote
and the Beam (with Gareth Higgins)
CRIME IN IRELAND 1945–95: Here Be Dragons (with Bill Lockhart and
Paula Rodgers)
THE POLICE, PUBLIC ORDER AND THE STATE, second edition (with Adrian
Guelke, Ian Hume, Edward Moxon-Browne and Rick Wilford)
BLACK AND BLUE: Policing in South Africa
INSIDE THE RUC: Routine Policing in a Divided Society (with Kathleen Magee)
THE ROYAL IRISH CONSTABULARY: An Oral History
THE POLICE, PUBLIC ORDER AND THE STATE (with Adrian Guelke, Ian Hume,
Edward Moxon-Browne and Rick Wilford)
AFTER SOWETO: An Unﬁnished Journey
MOSLEY’S MEN: The BUF in the West Midlands
A–Z OF RESEARCH (co-edited with Robert Miller)
RESTRUCTURING SOUTH AFRICA (ed.)
CAN SOUTH AFRICA SURVIVE? (ed.)
Also by Gerard Leavey
IDENTITY AND HEALTH (with D. Kelleher)

Ex-Combatants, Religion,
and Peace in Northern
Ireland
The Role of Religion in Transitional
Justice
John D. Brewer
Sixth-Century Professor of Sociology, University of Aberdeen, UK
David Mitchell
Research Associate, School of Communication, University of Ulster, UK
Gerard Leavey
Professor and Director of the Bamford Centre for Mental Health,
University of Ulster, UK

John D. Brewer, David Mitchell, and Gerard Leavey © 2013
All rights reserved. No reproduction, copy or transmission of this
publication may be made without written permission.
No portion of this publication may be reproduced, copied or transmitted
save with written permission or in accordance with the provisions of the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, or under the terms of any licence
permitting limited copying issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency,
Saffron House, 6–10 Kirby Street, London EC1N 8TS.
Any person who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication
may be liable to criminal prosecution and civil claims for damages.
The authors have asserted their rights to be identified as the authors of this
work in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
First published 2013 by
PALGRAVE MACMILLAN
Palgrave Macmillan in the UK is an imprint of Macmillan Publishers Limited,
registered in England, company number 785998, of Houndmills, Basingstoke,
Hampshire RG21 6XS.
Palgrave Macmillan in the US is a division of St Martin’s Press LLC,
175 Fifth Avenue, New York, NY 10010.
Palgrave Macmillan is the global academic imprint of the above companies
and has companies and representatives throughout the world.
Palgrave® and Macmillan® are registered trademarks in the United States,
the United Kingdom, Europe and other countries.
This book is printed on paper suitable for recycling and made from fully
managed and sustained forest sources. Logging, pulping and manufacturing
processes are expected to conform to the environmental regulations of the
country of origin.
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress.
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
22
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
13
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 2013 978-1-137-29935-2
ISBN 978-1-349-45270-5          ISBN 978-1-137-29936-9 (eBook)
DOI 10.1057/9781137299369

Contents
List of Figures
vi
Preface and Acknowledgements
vii
Series Editor’s Introduction
xii
Introduction
1
1
Religion and the Northern Ireland Conﬂict
8
2
The Personal Faith of Ex-Combatants
31
3
Religion and Motivations for Violence
45
4
Religion and Prison
71
5
Ex-Combatants and the Churches
91
6
Perspectives on the Past: Religion in the Personal and the
Political
118
Conclusion: Religion and Transitional Justice in Northern
Ireland
153
Notes
177
Bibliography
182
Index
189
v

Figures
1
Religion and transitional justice
159
vi

Preface and Acknowledgements
This is a book about former combatants who were involved in Northern
Ireland’s post-1968 conﬂict, known colloquially as ‘the Troubles’.
Religiously motivated violence has long interested scholars and the gen-
eral public, and there is a growing interest in the positive contributions
to peace in Northern Ireland made by ex-combatants; many former
combatants have also written autobiographies to explain their own per-
sonal journey to peacemaking. This volume is different in two respects.
It is concerned, ﬁrst, with the heady mix of armed struggle, religion,
and peace, building into the focus a consideration of the mediating role
of religion in the choice combatants made between violence and peace;
and, secondly, it develops a framework for understanding the contri-
bution of religion in transitional justice which is widely applicable to
other conﬂicts in which religion is involved. It therefore expounds a
general model for undertaking religious interventions in transitional
justice based on a detailed analysis of a case from Northern Ireland
that is interesting enough in its own right. This model will be interest-
ing to transitional justice practitioners, religious actors, and academic
researchers.
This focus is at once obvious and controversial. It is so obvious that
it is surprising it has not been done before. Northern Ireland is an
extremely religious society, and religion forms a part of political his-
tory and identity on the island of Ireland, so it would be unusual
for ex-combatants not to engage with religion. However, the human
rights tradition of transitional studies, which is the dominant paradigm
and the one which motivates previous research on Northern Ireland’s
ex-combatants, neglects religion. Religion is seen as both outside the
domain of human rights and, indeed, part of the problem that causes
human rights abuses in the ﬁrst place. We challenge this perspective by
addressing ex-combatants’ views on religion and the uses to which they
put religion both during their combatant experiences and, afterwards,
in the post-conﬂict phase.
Our focus is controversial for another reason. The work on religion in
transitional justice studies is overwhelmingly from the United States,
where it featured as part of the post-Cold War triumphalism of the
end-of-history debates, in which the United States saw itself as the
vii

viii
Preface and Acknowledgements
last superpower standing and as representing the universalisation of
democracy and political stability. Religion was made part of this tri-
umphalism and was enthusiastically endorsed for its positive role in
statecraft, diplomacy, peacebuilding, and transitional justice, amongst
other things. While this volume may appear to be within this tradition
of transitional justice studies by addressing the material and spiritual
uses to which religion was put by Northern Ireland’s ex-combatants, we
challenge the easy, almost naive, simplicity of the way religion is treated
in this US literature. We use the narratives of ex-combatants to portray
that religion plays a much more ambivalent role, and is both a facili-
tator and a constraint in transitional justice. We address most of these
concerns in the Conclusion, where we outline a conceptual framework
that we feel better captures the difﬁculties and complexities of religion
in transitional justice.
To get to that endpoint, however, we ﬁrst explore, as our primary con-
cern, the multiple uses to which religion is put by a sample of Northern
Ireland’s ex-combatants. We recognise that this is itself controversial.
That combatants had religious belief may provoke disbelief amongst our
readers. Some readers may appropriate what our respondents say in ways
that conﬁrm their every prejudice about people of the ‘other religion’,
or consider what our respondents say as incredulous for people with the
same religious convictions as themselves. We ask such readers to step
outside their prejudices and suspend their incredulity and hear what our
respondents are trying to say about the role of faith in their decisions to
take up arms and then desist.
This volume looks at ex-combatants’ engagement with both violence
and the peace process through the perspective of religion. This religious
dimension is approached in two ways – personal faith and the religious
form through which ‘the Troubles’ was experienced in Northern Ireland.
For people unfamiliar with ‘the Troubles’, the latter needs explanation.
Though the substance of conﬂict was thoroughly political, religion was
a cultural reality even for those who lacked personal faith, wrapped up
in people’s identity and sense of belonging. Religiosity describes the
practice of religion, and religion the sense of identiﬁcation and belief
that may or may not prompt practice. Religion is relevant in Northern
Ireland in this second sense even where there is no religious practice.
We place this emphasis on religion because the growing literature on ex-
combatants in Northern Ireland neglects the religious dimension. Ours
is therefore not just another book about ex-combatants which appears
now with some regularity; it is the only study so far to locate the tension
within ex-combatants between armed struggle and non-violence within

Preface and Acknowledgements
ix
a religious perspective. We see this volume as a contribution as much to
our understanding of religious peacebuilding in Northern Ireland as to
its ex-combatants.
However, this attention to ex-combatants makes this a fundamen-
tally different book from the most recent one that documents the
phenomenon of religious peacebuilding in Northern Ireland, Religion,
Civil Society and Peace in Northern Ireland (Brewer, Higgins, and Teeney,
2011). It complements it by addressing two new issues: the contribu-
tion religion played in ex-combatants’ transformation to a non-violent
strategy; and ex-combatants’ experience of the institutional churches’
religious peacebuilding. Some of the themes of the earlier book on
religious peacebuilding in Northern Ireland are taken up again here
but looked at from the perspective of ex-combatants. And we come to
the same gloomy conclusions about the contradictory role of religion
(in this case, in ex-combatants’ choice to desist from armed struggle)
and the same highly critical judgement of the failure of the institutional
churches (in this case, to assist ex-combatants in this transition). This is
no better demonstrated than by two of our respondents, one a Republi-
can ex-combatant who was told by a priest to ‘fuck off’ when he went
to confession as a result of emotional anxiety; the other a Loyalist ex-
combatant who said the mainstream Protestant ministers treated him as
scum, like something disgusting found on the rich leather sole of their
rather expensive Italian shoes. Narratives like this enrich this volume
and we have tried to allow ex-combatants to speak in their own words.
We do not wish to suggest, by this focus on ex-combatants, that
we undervalue victim issues or see victims as less important to the
consolidation of Northern Ireland’s peace process. The primary and
main author, John Brewer, is leading a ﬁve-year project on vic-
tims funded by the Leverhulme Trust (see http://www.abdn.ac.uk/
compromise-conﬂict), making the focus here on ex-combatants sym-
metrical rather than one-sided, and done in the recognition that both
constituencies, which overlap anyway, are critical if peace processes are
to succeed (in Northern Ireland or elsewhere).
The original research on which this volume is based was under-
taken on behalf of the Northern Ireland Association for Mental Health
(NIAMH), where Gerard Leavey was formerly Director of Research, and
was conducted in association with John Brewer and David Mitchell from
the University of Aberdeen. Neither body is responsible for the views of
the three authors expressed here. We thank Linda Emslie from the Uni-
versity of Aberdeen for paying attention to the ﬁnances. NIAMH saw
this research as part of their wider commitment to build a ﬂourishing

x
Preface and Acknowledgements
Northern Ireland but was also interested in exploring the mental well-
being of former prisoners and the role of religion in assisting with it.
Any consideration of the role of religion and spirituality in the lives
of former prisoners, however, is forced to ask a wider set of questions
about the contribution of religion to the conﬂict, its use as a symbolic
resource in sustaining the violence, its role as a source of motivation
as well as its function inside prison for those incarcerated. Religion is
part of their pre-combatant life, as well as their lives inside and outside
prison. The research therefore extended well beyond the narrow mental
health concerns of NIAMH.
The research was conducted between October 2010 and September
2011, just before access to former combatants in Northern Ireland dried
up in reaction to the Boston College affair in the United States, in
which interviewees in an oral history project on the Northern Irish
conﬂict conducted in the United States had their testimonies pored
over by lawyers and the Northern Irish police looking into evidence
for historical enquiries as a result of some salacious writing around
their testimonies. The effect of the Boston College affair has been
to make potential respondents clam up. We recognise how privileged
we are, therefore, to have amongst the last open testimonies from
ex-combatants for what could be a very long while.
John Brewer and Gerard Leavey were the principal investigators on the
project and David Mitchell the research fellow primarily responsible for
data collection. We are grateful to the Republican ex-prisoner organisa-
tions Tar Anall and Coiste for assistance in locating respondents willing
to be interviewed, and to John Foster for helping us make contact. The
assistance of Jim and Francis Teeney, Philip Orr, and Gary Mason in
locating other respondents was invaluable. Above all, we are very grate-
ful to all our respondents who kindly gave up time to allow us to infringe
on their privacy and to talk about deeply sensitive and emotive issues.
We are also grateful for the detailed comments of Francis Teeney on our
arguments. We absolve everyone mentioned from any responsibility for
the ﬁnal argument.
We would like to take this opportunity to explain – and justify –
our terminology. The term ‘ex-combatant’ is contested by former
combatants themselves, in part because it suggests their times of active
engagement are past, for even though they desist violence, they very
much like to think of themselves as remaining involved in their com-
munity’s broader struggle for justice. But others believe it is a victor’s
term (worse still, a favoured term of the British), used judgementally to
condemn. Some prefer the label ‘soldier’ for its obvious connotations of

Preface and Acknowledgements
xi
legitimacy and respectability. The Irish Republican tradition has always
favoured ‘volunteer’. We apologise to our respondents where our ter-
minology continues to offend but we wish to retain use of the term,
precisely to link with the transitional justice literature on post-conﬂict
societies, where the issue of the social reintegration of ex-combatants is
recognised as one of the most important concerns in consolidating the
peace and where the term is widely used in a neutral manner. We do not
use it as a judgemental label; after all, the whole tenor of the Northern
Irish peace process is that it is a negotiated settlement with no distinc-
tion between vanquished and victor. It is in this open spirit that we
carried out this research – we do not undervalue the issue of victims,
nor do we seek to privilege one constituency in the conﬂict over others.
We happen to believe, however, that the transition from a military to a
political strategy by former combatants is one of the chief achievements
in a peace process and the role of religion in this choice is worthy of
intellectual consideration. We use the term ‘ex-combatant’ as a way of
honouring our respondents’ choice towards peace.
John D. Brewer, David Mitchell, and
Gerard Leavey, Belfast

Series Editor’s Introduction
Compromise is a much used but little understood term. There is a sense
in which it describes a set of feelings (the so-called ‘spirit’ of com-
promise) that involve reciprocity, representing the agreement to make
mutual concessions toward each other from now on: no matter what we
did to each other in the past, we will act toward each other in the future
differently as set out in the agreement between us. The compromise set-
tlement can be a spit and a handshake, much beloved in folk lore, or a
legally binding statute with hundreds of clauses.
As such, it is clear that compromise enters into conﬂict transforma-
tion at two distinct phases. The ﬁrst is during the conﬂict resolution
process itself, where compromise represents a willingness among parties
to negotiate a peace agreement that represents a second-best preference
in which they give up their ﬁrst preference (victory) in order to cut a
deal. A great deal of literature has been produced in Peace Studies and
International Relations on the dynamics of the negotiation process and
the institutional and governance structures necessary to consolidate the
agreement afterwards. Just as important, however, is compromise in the
second phase, when compromise is part of post-conﬂict reconstruction
and reconciliation, in which protagonists come to learn to live together
despite their former enmity and in face of the atrocities perpetrated
during the conﬂict itself.
In the ﬁrst phase, compromise describes reciprocal agreements
between parties to the negotiations in order to make political con-
cessions sufﬁcient to end violence; in the second phase, compromise
involves victims and perpetrators developing ways of living together
in which inter-personal concessions are made as part of shared social
life. The ﬁrst is about compromises between political groups and the
state in the process of statebuilding (or re-building) after the politi-
cal upheavals of communal conﬂict; the second is about compromises
between individuals and communities in the process of social healing
after the cultural trauma provoked by the conﬂict. Reconciliation in the
second phase is as protracted and difﬁcult as in the ﬁrst, and usually
takes longer.
This book series primarily concerns itself with the second process, the
often messy and difﬁcult job of reconciliation, restoration and repair in
xii

Series Editor’s Introduction
xiii
social and cultural relations following communal conﬂict. Communal
conﬂicts and civil wars tend to suffer from the narcissism of minor dif-
ferences, to coin Freud’s phrase, leaving little to be split halfway and
compromise on, and thus are usually especially bitter. The series there-
fore addresses itself to the meaning, manufacture and management of
compromise in one of its most difﬁcult settings. The book series is cross-
national and cross-disciplinary, with attention paid to inter-personal
reconciliation at the level of everyday life, as well as culturally between
social groups, and the many sorts of institutional, inter-personal, psy-
chological, sociological, anthropological and cultural factors that assist
and inhibit societal healing in the array of post-conﬂict societies, histor-
ically and in the present. It focuses on what compromise means when
people have to come to terms with past enmity and the memories of the
conﬂict itself, and relate to former protagonists in ways that consolidate
the wider political agreement.
This sort of focus has special resonance and signiﬁcance for peace
agreements are usually very fragile. Societies emerging out of conﬂict
are subject to ongoing violence from spoiler groups who are reluctant
to give up on ﬁrst preferences, constant threats from the outbreak of
renewed violence, institutional instability, weakened economies, and a
wealth of problems around transitional justice, memory, truth recovery
and victimhood, amongst others. Not surprisingly therefore, reconcili-
ation and healing in social and cultural relations is difﬁcult to achieve,
not least because inter-personal compromise between erstwhile enemies
is difﬁcult.
Lay discourse picks up on the ambivalent nature of compromise after
conﬂict. It is talked about in common sense in one of two ways, in
which compromise is either a virtue or a vice, taking its place among
the angels or in Hades. One form of lay discourse likens concessions
to former protagonists with the idea of restoration of broken relation-
ships and societal and cultural reconciliation, in which there is a sense of
becoming (or returning) to wholeness and completeness. The other form
of lay discourse invokes ideas of appeasement, of being compromised by
the concessions, which constitute a form of surrender and reproduce
(or disguise) continued brokenness and division. People feel they con-
tinue to be beaten by the sticks which the concessions have allowed
others to keep; with restoration, however, weapons are turned truly into
ploughshares. Lay discourse suggests, therefore, that there are issues that
the Palgrave Studies in Compromise after Conﬂict series must begin to prob-
lematise, so that the process of societal healing is better understood and
can be assisted and facilitated by public policy and intervention.

xiv
Series Editor’s Introduction
In the ﬁrst book in the series, the authors focus on one of the most
well-known and studied processes of conﬂict transformation in recent
history, the ending of ‘the Troubles’ in Northern Ireland. Ex-combatants
are a key constituency in the development of compromise, for their
social reintegration is one of the major challenges facing the recon-
ciliation process in societies emerging out of conﬂict. Policies toward
re-integration, however, only serve to highlight the difﬁculties in gar-
nering societal healing, for these policies are usually controversial and
invariably provoke hostility from victims. Yet the decision among
combatants to shift from a military to a political strategy is one of
the key components of peace processes. The commitment of many
ex-combatants to the peace process in Northern Ireland has been a
recurring theme in much post-Troubles research. The focus in this book,
however, is unusual, for in a detailed and rich ethnographic study with
a cross section of Republicans and Loyalists, the authors address the use
of religion as a spiritual and material resource in the transition to peace.
They look speciﬁcally at its role in the lives of ex-combatants – their
decision to take up arms, its role as a resource in the conduct of the
military campaign, and its contribution to the decision to desist from
violence. The authors conclude by usefully suggesting ways in which
we might conceptualise the role of religion in transitional justice so that
it can be better practised in other communal conﬂicts where religion is
involved. The editor warmly welcomes this book to the Palgrave Studies
in Compromise after Conﬂict series.
John D. Brewer
Aberdeen, January 2013