 
Abstract—Innovation with the consideration of local identity 
strengthens the similarities and differences between different 
cultures, communities and individuals. The resilience within the 
system is needed. In this paper, the study of the role of design 
strategy is balancing innovation and localism when sustainable 
solutions are necessary within cultural issues. The data 
collection during the research is structured in two steps: the 
first step is to build the literature data to theoretically 
exploration between design strategy, related to new products, 
services and branding, and cultural sustainability in social 
innovation. Afterwards, I will present two typical cases which 
focus on illustrating how strategic design facilitate the process 
of coming up with sustainable solutions in the context of 
cosmopolitan localism. In these two cases, practical solutions 
driven by design are sharing reflections and experiences of 
innovatively solving certain common problems through 
balancing two aspects of cultural sustainability. Finally the 
paper exemplifies and highlights the necessary of “strategic 
design” approach, which might represent and expend the 
mindset and perspective of understanding and solving cultural 
issues from an emerging process, in contemporary society. 
 
Keywords—Design 
strategy, 
cultural 
sustainability, 
cosmopolitan localism, design-driven innovation.  
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
As the globalization and manufacture are increasingly 
affecting the world, which is becoming much “smaller” than 
before, we are encountering kind of the same crisis no matter 
where and who we are. While we are taking actions to solve 
these problems, however, sustainable solutions with 
considerations on culture and identities based on territories, 
which are more or less ignored in the past, are becoming of 
huge importance in contemporary development. There is 
ongoing debate about the need to include the cultural 
dimension as a part of sustainable development. Within the 
whole framework of the sustainable development, the role of 
cultural sustainability is still vague among quite a number of 
domains, both theoretical and practical. This is where 
different opinions and disciplines are able to find the new 
interpretation from their point of views. Of course, not all of 
them have to be developed by designers, but, for sure, many 
of them require some specific design knowledge [1]. The 
practice of design may have the ability to become a critical 
aspect of establishing a sustainable condition, considering 
other aspects: the history, history, tradition, and identity of 
culture [2]. Through this process, there might be better 
defined and visualized local identities, which are resilient and 
 
Manuscript received August 30, 2014; revised October 23, 2014. 
Xue Pei is  with the Research Related to Social Enterprise and Design 
Management in Politecnico Di Milano, Via Durando 38/A 20158, Milano, 
Italy (e-mail: xue.pei@polimi.it).  
dynamic, with global innovation impact. 
 Based on exploring the role of design strategy in fostering 
the cultural aspect of society development and transforming 
the process towards sustainability, this paper is to study the 
relationship and active effects of innovative design strategy 
on local-based cultural sustainability, a component of social 
sustainable development. By re-thinking, re-defining and 
deeply looking into theoretical and practical areas, it will be 
much clearer to explore how design is able to meet the new 
and essential needs of cultural sustainability. 
 
II. DESIGN FOR CULTURE SUSTAINABILITY 
Sustainability is known as an emerging competitive aspect 
for organizations in environmental and economic domains 
for balancing the reduction of bad impacts and improvement 
of benefits towards a promising scenario in the future. At the 
same time, the mindset of sustainability about social, even 
more specifically about the culture, is becoming attracting 
attentions from different perspectives, and moving from 
physical and tangible resources to spiritual and intangible 
experiences, including the behavior, lifestyle, relationships of 
communities and individuals. 
Cultural sustainability is a new interdisciplinary approach, 
which aims at raising the significance of culture and its 
factors in local, regional and global sustainable development. 
The need to increase understanding and methodological 
development related to social and cultural values in planning 
are explicitly emphasized in the European Landscape 
Convention [3]. As always considered that culture is an 
increasingly crucial aspect for sustainable development, as it 
represents the awareness and responsibility of people on 
identifying, maintaining, generating and applying cultural 
factors to come up with an special and unique perspective, as 
well as a kind of vision. The modern society seems to be in a 
framework 
of 
multi-local 
society, 
a 
network 
of 
interconnected communities and places, at the same time, 
open and localized [4], in which new definitions and 
interpretations of “global” and “local” are needed. These two 
aspects cannot be ignored and should always be considered at 
the same time and the same level. 
Design, as usual, is increasingly treated as an effective and 
promising approach to look and think about social issues, 
cultural issues also included. From Herbert Simon‟s 
perspective [5], “design is devising courses of action aimed at 
changing current situations into preferred ones”. And in 
recent society and context, the “preferred ones” are highly 
related to cultural sustainability. Alternatively, to arrive the 
preferred ones, there are definitely different thinking 
processes and approaches, but the common objective is for 
communication. In this sense, design is a way of life and all 
Innovation Meets Localism: An Exploratory Study on 
Design Strategy Towards Cultural Sustainability 
Xue Pei 
International Journal of Social Science and Humanity, Vol. 6, No. 3, March 2016
230
DOI: 10.7763/IJSSH.2016.V6.648

 
 
others around our lives and us, and it makes things better [6]. 
Design is mainly located in “communication”, where 
designers are dealing with not only the objects, service, 
experiences themselves, but also the all that around these 
main elements, taking actions to express or to facilitate others 
to express their attitudes, opinions and finally reach desirable 
results. Thus, designers and people with certain design 
knowledge are able to contribute the elaboration of 
innovative and better solutions and frameworks [2] to solve 
problems, or it can be said that they are more sensitive to 
detect the needs to change, and they have a better perspective 
to look into the possible trends. Finally, they are more 
capable to communicate and realize these solutions into 
reality in accordance with modern social and culture contexts, 
or even more to promote a new culture for living and acting, 
which is considered to be more sustainable. 
With the objectives and capabilities, design, especially 
strategic design, is able to take actions from two approaches 
to face and cater the cultural sustainability requires: on one 
hand, strategic design has advantages in catalyzing and 
fostering the innovative processes on cultural sustainability 
from a global perspective, which provides a shared vision 
between different regions, communities and individuals, and 
provides possibilities to communicate and exchange; design 
strategies, on the other hand, is an effective way to detect the 
related elements of local identities, afterwards to analyze, 
synthesize and make sense of them based on the perception 
and traditions of local communities and individuals, as well 
as the territory-contexts. These two aspects should be carried 
on simultaneously and concordantly, thus, this is what is 
highlighted as one characteristic of design strategy for 
promoting the ways and processes of cultural sustainability 
through a delicate and mutual restraint balance. 
 
III. NEW RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CULTURAL 
GLOBALIZATION AND LOCALIZATION 
According to the third innovative wave, which challenged 
the mainstream of globalized production and consumption 
system. Globally distributed system provides trends and 
possibilities to be open and, where design strategy can 
conduce to promote the interactions between different 
territories, open to the interaction with wider flows of people, 
who bring together with their ides, that characterize 
contemporary global society [7]. And this interactive 
scenario is always where innovation appears by learning and 
reflecting on certain problems based on open relationships. In 
this dynamic process, culture goes through one to another; 
different cultural elements are affecting and growing at the 
same time. On one hand, when dealing with similar problems, 
like food, transportation, housing, aging, through looking 
into other culture contexts and how others‟ solution for 
solving similar problems and sharing opinions among 
different cultures are always beneficial to come up with the 
best solutions, not only because we know how to get the best 
solution, but also because we obtain sufficient and different 
experiences during the process for solving these problems 
together with others. On the other hand, when facing the 
totally different problems, there are useful inspirations and 
suggestions, which worth learning, sharing and discussion, as 
well. 
Manzini states in the online platform SEP (sustainable 
everyday project) that by the expression „local‟ what is meant 
now is something very removed from what was understood in 
the past (i.e. the valley, the village, the small provincial town, 
all isolated and relatively closed within their own culture and 
economy). Compared with the “traditional” meanings of 
these two words, new situations and contexts reflect new 
relationship between the two words, meaning both antithetic 
and coherent. A distributed production and consumption 
system where the global is a “network of locals” [8], the new 
understanding 
of 
“local” 
includes 
all 
the 
specific 
characteristics of a territory and the communities and 
individuals with the new phenomena based on connected 
“global” and interconnected culture. The new form of “local” 
is not completely independent; oppositely, new interpretation 
of localization should focus on defining the combined 
network of different but related “local”s. 
The dynamic and delicate relationship between global and 
local is name by certain scholars as a kind of cosmopolitan 
localism [9], [10], being an outcome of a particular condition 
featured by the delicate balance between being locailized and 
open to innovate and connect to global flows of ideas, 
information, people, things and money [11] as well. The 
characteristics of cosmopolitan localism are seen as a 
creative balance between being rooted in a given place and 
community and being open to global flows of ideas, 
information, people, things and money [12]. Nevertheless, 
this creative balance can be promoted in some ways, and be 
destroyed as well. If the innovative process of globalization 
takes more important role, which probably leads to be totally 
open, it will result in losing the locally specific features and 
identities. Being as the same as what happens in anywhere in 
the world is not the real purpose of innovation process. On 
the other hand, if the limitation and persistence of local 
traditions are over highlighted making the innovative process 
more closed and independent will result in losing the 
innovative opportunities and disruptive possibilities in 
exploring better solutions for local development. Thus, if this 
delicate balance is well balanced, executed and achieved, it‟s 
able to create a network, within which there are no isolate 
entities but interrelated. The cosmopolitan localism 
regenerate new identity for specific places, where all the 
solutions are combing both typical local identities and shared 
vision. 
A new definition and interpretation about the relationship 
about globalization and localism from the perspective of 
cultural innovation are needed, where design knowledge and 
strategies are especially able to contribute. 
 
IV. STRATEGIC DESIGN DRIVEN COSMOPOLITAN LOCALISM  
Replying to the development of awareness and 
responsibility in better defining the concept of cosmopolitan 
localism and making it understandable in a large scale by 
more individuals, design is capable to transform it into a 
visual language for communication. Design has increasingly 
been recognized as a strategic resource (design has 
transformed from product styling to service experience and 
till the strategic consulting) for a large number of companies, 
recently, its strategic ability is increasingly considered as an 
important approach for realizing culture sustainability in 
International Journal of Social Science and Humanity, Vol. 6, No. 3, March 2016
231

 
 
social issues and impacts, being more specific in this paper, 
for cosmopolitan localism. How design is able to drive, lead 
and facilitate the process of coming up with solutions based 
on cosmopolitan localism can be synthesis with two aspects. 
In the academic theory, there are mainly three ways to 
promote the process of innovation: technology-driven, 
market-driven and design-driven. When considering the 
innovation in the cultural sustainability, focusing on the new 
trend of cosmopolitan localism, the design driven approach, 
compared with the other two, will be a better choice, because 
of its essential capability of brokering and visualizing the 
culture value deep from the contexts, local communities and 
individuals. Design-driven innovation approach expands and 
elaborates the concept of form and communication through 
the language and meaning it conveys [13]. This definition is 
able to broaden more as: design-driven approach express the 
hidden meaning reflected by culture, especially the modern 
trend-cosmopolitan localism, not only by the physical forms 
of products, but also intangible service experience, business 
model and so on and how to communicate and visualize these 
cultural reflections as well. In general, the outcome, which 
strategic design can bring, is mostly a sustainable solution 
that aims to facilitate users to achieve a result consistent with 
the criteria of culture sustainability [8]. The design driven 
approach have more advantages on synthesizing complex 
influences and communicating them by different forms. 
Alternately, different design strategies can also efficiently 
involve people into participatory design processes, during 
which designers act as an activator to facilitate the local 
communities and active citizens, who actually own and 
deeply influenced by the local culture, to do something 
innovatively from a global perspective. 
The fairly delicate balance within cosmopolitan localism 
(formed by global innovation and local reflection) needs to be 
considered paralleling about the two sides. The capability of 
strategic design in balancing the tension between exploration 
and exploitation [14] within a number of corporations is 
treated as useful approach for managing innovation process. 
Comparing the delicate relationship of global innovation and 
local reflection with that of exploration and exploitation, it‟s 
possible to strength strategic design in realizing and 
communicating the good effects and social influence of 
cosmopolitan localism, where the dynamic balance is 
essential. Thus the strategic design explores more 
possibilities to find more innovative solutions from the 
globally open and connected network, and at the same time to 
exploit the deeply local-based cultural contexts to better 
serve local communities and individuals, and further, to 
reflects to the global network as well. These are all the 
contributions design strategies are able to provide. 
 
V. RESEARCH EXAMPLES 
Strategic design, with the capability of mediating and 
balancing theories from multidiscipline, can help to generate 
solutions, which are not only innovative, but also 
reassembling all the elements into a better way with the 
consideration of global and local identities and contexts. 
There are many innovative solutions and successful cases all 
over the world. Based on the collected literature research data 
above, future analysis will move to study the specific 
examples, which are chosen for better understanding the 
capability of design strategy in contributing to cosmopolitan 
localism, the new expression of cultural sustainability. Two 
typical cases, which are closely related to offer useful 
outcomes and insights for study, were chosen in this research: 
(1) SHOKAY--- a social enterprise, focusing on providing 
high quality hand knitting products based on the yak from 
Tibet and improving local living conditions at the same time, 
as well as, including collaboration, design and research 
programs. (2) Chinese Country Fair --- local community 
supported agriculture activities, which tries to build new food 
bridges and network for local farmers and citizens based on 
the context of cities, like Beijing and Shanghai. These two 
examples are coming from different areas, and focusing on 
totally different topics: sustainable fashion social enterprise 
and local farmer market, including a huge scale of design 
domains: product design, service design, business model 
design, branding, experience design. When detected from the 
point of view of cosmopolitan localism, however, essentially, 
they have a lot in common. 
A. SHOKAY  
 
   
 
Fig. 1. Communicating SHOKAY‟s sustainable solutions, Source: 
SHOKAY homepage (2013). 
 
SHOKAY, means Yak in Tibetan, is an international 
scaled social enterprise and the first dedicated luxury yak 
brand. It aims at creating luxury fashion brand with social and 
cultural responsibilities. The concept of SHOKAY comes 
from the consideration and research of “trying to understand 
issues of poverty, and how [they] could apply sustainable 
solutions to the Chinese context” [15]. SHOKAY derives its 
origins from the mountainous Himalayan regions of western 
China, and directly gets the resource, which is of 
hand-combed by the local Yak herders, from Tibet 
communities in Qinghai province to make sure the quality. 
The outstanding points of SHOKAY [16] is to revolute and 
optimize the yak industry, they maintain the high quality of 
combing, cleaning and sorting the fiber through respecting 
the traditional and local skills of local communities (Yak 
herders), and they spread the fantastic sources and skills by 
providing high quality and well designed products and 
services to global market, in this way, the living condition of 
local communities is highly improved, compared with before, 
and 
at 
meantime, 
SHOKAY 
ensure 
the 
potential 
opportunities of cultural sustainability in Tibet in the future. 
SHOKAY‟s strategy of involving design in the whole 
industrial innovation process is typical design-driven 
approach for implementing culture sustainability in reality. In 
SHOKAY „s whole system (solution), they are firstly 
focusing on providing the yak down products, which spread 
the hidden cultural meaning and quality through designing 
the semiotic outlook. Design language is considered as the 
driven factor for presenting the meaning which, in some ways, 
is easy to be forgotten or ignored because the markets and 
International Journal of Social Science and Humanity, Vol. 6, No. 3, March 2016
232

 
 
consumers often have little knowledge, which should be and 
can be exaggerated by design and design strategies. As a 
result, while the products spreading in global market, the 
local cultural identity will be surely recognized all over the 
world, meanwhile, the global markets are also able to 
generate some feedback. In SHOKAY, they provide an open 
platform where local and traditional skills meets the 
innovative designers and strategies, where design can help 
local communities, who are the culture owners but without 
design knowledge, to tell their story and their perspective of 
what the products should be like. Besides, SHOKAY also has 
worldwide-connected 
design 
platform. 
In 
these 
multi-approaches design and strategies are properly combing 
global innovation and local knowledge through performing 
both products and services to realize cosmopolitan localism. 
Simultaneously, the balancing capability of design strategy 
is 
helping 
SHOKAY 
to 
develop 
towards 
cultural 
sustainability. The On-going training program is another 
design-driven strategy for cosmopolitan localism, which is 
promoted increasingly nowadays. For example, the collected 
innovative concepts from global cooperative programs come 
up with new needs and skills for combing yak fibers, or even 
knitting, in order to form complicated patterns and get high 
quality and unique products, which also bring back higher 
return to local communities [17]. The delicate balance 
between maintaining local traditions and innovatively 
adapting to global markets and consumers‟ needs is 
significant for SHOKAY‟s future development in the trend of 
cosmopolitan localism. The corporation‟s strategy now 
explores more possible model to operate and realize the 
original mission and objective in different and changing 
markets, societies and cultures. For example, SHOKAY is 
also play the role of providers of SHOKAY yarns for some 
companies and cooperate with them, through collaborating 
process, SHOKAY can spread its own brand identity and 
traditional and high quality of Tibet resources and skills 
(going from local to global), on the other hand, SHOKAY 
also guide the cooperators by telling the inspiration stories, 
and by combining the stories with their international 
backgrounds as the concept for designing, SHOKAY comes 
up with outstanding products, which definitely win in the 
context of cosmopolitan localism, because of the capability 
of keeping the dynamic balance. 
B. Chinese “Country” Fair 
The food security accidents are appearing on the 
newspapers almost everyday in China, where citizens are 
increasingly paying more attention, time and money on the 
food quality issue. Like some developed countries in North 
America and Europe, many active citizens and traditional 
farmers are taking actions to get contact with each other to 
form the new small scale and flexible exchange systems, 
which later becomes the country fair, or farmer market, 
farmers come to the appointed place in the urban area with 
fixed frequency (like once a week, always in the weekend), 
and this phenomena is an emerging social activities in many 
cities, especially in big cities in China, like Beijing and 
Shanghai, where citizens are much further away from the 
traditional and high quality food. In the market, good 
relationship is easy to be set up between farmer and citizens, 
which contributes to build the trust bridges during knowledge 
exchange and food purchase process, which is fairly related 
to cultural sustainability. These is one way for promoting the 
community supported agriculture, which aims at reduce the 
distance between farmers and consumers, meaning reduce the 
time, money and effort waste within the whole process and 
meanwhile take the advantages of distributed system. The 
farmers‟ market is challenging the traditional food 
distribution system from producing to consuming, forming a 
new system to be open, connected and local.  
In this new system and relationship between farmers and 
citizens, a design strategy driven approach can be useful for 
the communication about its products, services, experiences 
and brands based on the local cultural contexts. Firstly, 
designers have advantages to better understand the 
characteristics of the potential customers and are able to 
provide certain strategies to visualize the communication 
style. And since in this case, most important part of the 
outcome of the country fair service are intangible experience, 
design strategic also moving the traditional products semiotic 
language to express the meaning hidden in the process and 
touchpoints of services, like the poster, website, customer 
journeys. When are visualized, these elements are needed to 
be considered both innovatively and locally, using the 
innovative language to highlight the innovative part and trend 
influenced by the global culture and also utilizing the local 
features to attract and cater local customers. Besides, because 
the sensitive ability to catch the emerging trend in local 
contexts, they choose the most promising social media 
(Weibo) in China at that time, later, this is proven to be one of 
the best approaches to reach the right customers and the best 
platform for information communication between different 
stakeholders. Design, strategy design, in this way, 
strengthens the capability to form the new image of country 
fair towards cultural sustainability.  
Fig. 2. Farmer market in Beijing and Milan, Source: 
http://www.mercatidellaterra.it/,http://www.weibo.com/farmersmarketbj 
(2014). 
 
Comparing the Chinese farmers market with similar cases 
in the world, differences and similarities exist as a reply to the 
trend of cosmopolitan localism. As part of the global 
sustainable solutions for promoting local food production and 
consumption, Chinese country fair has the same mission and 
objective to promote the sustainable cultural and social 
behaviors no matter where this phenomena happens. On the 
other hand, there are specific differences in Chinese culture 
contexts even though it is dealing with the same problems 
form the same start point. And design strategies help to keep 
the balance between open and unique by properly connecting 
them together. In Chinese farmer market, the relationship is 
more interpersonal, most of consumers come because of the 
introduction form friends, even though they have already 
know about the fair some time ago. Strategic Designers know 
about this “special” relationship before they start to intervene. 
That‟s why they choose Weibo as the main and primary 
International Journal of Social Science and Humanity, Vol. 6, No. 3, March 2016
233

 
 
social media to communicate before every week‟s activities. 
And on Weibo, people are mostly following and followed by 
their friends, besides, people also follows some famous 
people, whose words will affect their activities as well. From 
this detailed difference, it‟s easily to see the importance to 
balance the two parts of cosmopolitan localism, which can 
lead to succeed in realizing sustainable solutions in specific 
territory 
 
VI. CONCLUSION 
The strategic nature of design can be formulate as a 
manager of dealing with multi-discipline issues, like 
branding, technology management, social innovation, as well 
as cultural sustainability. Design strategy, which has been 
considered for a long time as an efficient tool in business area, 
starts to present more impact on managing the decision 
making process as well, like what, why, how to do based on 
contemporary 
complicated 
society 
towards 
cultural 
sustainability. With the discussion and analysis deeply into 
typical cases, better illustration on the impacts of local, 
innovative, social actions driven by design strategy are 
obtained finally. The finding suggests that design strategy, 
with its inclusive capability on better understanding of 
culture, is not only a collection of tools for solving social 
problems and presenting innovative ideas, but also a better 
approach to re-thinking how to integrate and balance local 
resources and design-led innovations in order to generate 
initial solutions with consideration of local contexts, where 
people have new needs and intentions together with their 
traditional way of thinking and acting. The contributions of 
strategic design process to better achieve cultural 
sustainability are quit clear both in near future and long-term 
plans. By making the problems much easier to understand, 
explore and solve, strategic design will definitely influence 
the local-based sustainable solutions from much more ways 
and processes. The significant role of design strategy in 
forming new interpretation of cultural sustainability with 
regard to innovation and localism, and it also contributes to 
transformation and management for future related researches 
and applications.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
E. Manzini, “Small, local, open and connected, design for social 
innovation and sustainability,” The Journal of Design Strategies, vol. 4 
pp. 24-30, 2010. 
[2] 
S. Blankenship, “Outside the center: defining who we are,” Design 
Issues, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 24-31, Winter 2005. 
[3] 
Council of Europe. "European landscape convention," Report and 
Convention, Florence. 2000. 
 
 
[6] 
G. Julier, “From visual culture to design culture,” Design Issues, vol. 
22, no. 1, pp. 64-76. 2006.  
[7] 
S. Blankenship, “Outside the center: defining who we are,” Design 
Issues, vol.  21, no. 1, pp. 24-31, Winter 2005. 
[8] 
E. Manzini, “SLOC, The emerging scenario of small, local, open and 
connected,” Grow Small Think Beautiful, Floris Books: Edinburgh, 
2011. 
[9] 
E. Manzini. A Cosmopolitan Localism: Prospects for a Sustainable 
Local Development and the Possible Role of Design. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.sustainable- everyday.net.  
[10] W. Sachs, Planet Dialectics: Exploration in Environment and 
Development, New Jersey, London: Zed Books Ltd, 1999. 
[11] E. Manzini and F. Jegou, "Sustainable everyday," Scenarios of Urban 
Life, 2003. 
[12] A. Appadurai, “Disjuncture and difference in the global cultural 
economy,” Theory, Culture, Society, vol. 7, pp. 295-310, 1990. 
[13] A. Appadurai, “The globalization of archaeology and heritage: A 
discussion with arjun appadurai,” Journal of Social Archaeology, vol. 
1, no. 1, pp. 35-49, 2001. 
[14] R. Verganti, “Design as brokering of languages: Innovation strategies 
in Italian firms,” Design Management Journal (Former Series), vol. 14, 
no. 3, pp. 34-42. 2003. 
[15] E. Manzini, A Cosmopolitan Localism: Prospects for a Sustainable 
Local Development and the Possible role of Design. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.sustainable- everyday.net.  
[16] R. Martin, The Design of Business, Harvard Business Press, Boston, 
MA, 2009. 
[17] CNN Travel. Yak Farmers Providing the Latest Shanghai Fashion. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://travel.cnn.com/shanghai/shop/shanghai-yak-factor-105646 
[18] Shokay 
Homepage. 
(2013). 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.shokay.com/world/index.jsp. 
[19] C. H. Zhuang and R. Q. Li, “Exploitation and optimization of „Yak 
Culture‟ resources,” in Proc. the International Congress on Yak, 
Chengdu, Sichuan, P.R. China, 2004.  
 
 
 
Xue Pei was born in 1989 in the city of Taiyuan, 
China. She is now studying in Politecnico di Milano, 
Italy, as a PhD candidate in the Apartment of Design. 
She has gained her bachelor in product design in 2010 
in Jiangnan University in China. Afterwards, she 
continued her study in the same university in the field 
of product service system design for three years. 
During her postgraduate, she had involved in a large 
number of researches and projects related to topics 
like social innovation and design for sustainability. 
Finally in June of 2013, she got her master degree as industrial engineering 
in Jiangnan University. 
During her past experiences, Xue has been taken part in different kinds of 
workshops and conferences in her research field. She has been the assistant 
of DESIS (Design for Social Innovation and Sustainability) conferences and 
symposiums in China for building deeper understanding of existing contexts 
in China and for building a better platform to discuss and share the opinions 
of the future scenario of social innovation in China. What‟s more, Xue has 
also actively participated in many activities among DESIS network in Asia, 
like DESIS Japan. Xue have published several proceedings and journal paper 
in Chinese and English related to the technology applied design research and 
the role of designers in the future of sustainable Asia. Now she is conducting 
her PhD research in the Department of Design in Politecnico di Milano and 
she is focusing on exploring the future scenario of social enterprise from the 
perspective of design and design thinking.  
 
 
 
 
International Journal of Social Science and Humanity, Vol. 6, No. 3, March 2016
234
[4]
C. Vezzoli and E. Manzini, “Design for sustainable consumption,” 
Perspectives on Radical Changes to Sustainable Consumption and 
Production, vol. 20, p. 167, 2006.
[5]
H. A. Simon, The Sciences of the Artificial, vol. 136, MIT press, 1969.