Mathematical Literacy
Mogens Niss
Introduction
The actual design and implementation of the structure and organisation of the four
TSG sessions was carried out by Mogens Niss, with the assistance of GwiSoo Na,
Eduardo Mancera, and Michèle Artigue. Unfortunately, Eduardo Mancera was
eventually unable to attend the Congress and the TSG.
This TSG was included for the ﬁrst time in the history of the ICMEs. Hence,
there was no established ICME tradition to build on concerning this topic.
Moreover, generally speaking, the very notion of mathematical literacy is not well-
deﬁned, especially as several related concepts, such as numeracy, quantitative
literacy, mathematical proﬁciency, and mathematical competencies, are in general
use as well. Against this background it was decided to devote a fair proportion of
the session time to coming to grips with the notions of mathematical literacy and its
“relatives”.
The presentations given in the four sessions of TSG 6 were partly commissioned
papers, partly contributed ones. As is often the case with TSGs, the attendance to
this TSG was not completely stable, but varied across the four sessions, the average
attendance being about twenty participants per session.
The themes of the four sessions were chosen as a reﬂection of perceived intel-
lectual and scholarly needs, and of the papers contributed by participants. The main
theme of the opening session was the Notions and interpretations of mathematical
literacy, whilst The role and impact of mathematical literacy in national and
Organizers Co-chairs: Mogens Niss (Denmark), Hileni Magano-Kapenda (Namibia); Team
Members: Eduardo Mancera (Mexico), GwiSoo Na (Korea), Jianming Wang (China); Liaison
IPC Member: Michèle Artigue (France).
M. Niss (&)
Roskilde University, Roskilde, Denmark
© The Author(s) 2015
S.J. Cho (ed.), The Proceedings of the 12th International Congress
on Mathematical Education, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-12688-3_31
409

international studies was the main theme chosen for Session 2. Session 3 was
primarily devoted to the theme The role, use and implementation of mathematical
literacy in educational systems and institutions. The main theme of the fourth and
ﬁnal session was Mathematical Literacy and teachers. In order to ensure discussion
of the presentations, each session was concluded by questions or comments, in
Sessions 1 and 4 assisted by a round-table.
Major Points from the Four Sessions
Session 1: Tuesday, 10th July, 10:30–12:00
To set the stage for the work of TSG 6, Mogens Niss gave a 30-minute introduction
focusing on the notions of mathematical literacy and its relatives. He began by
observing that mathematics educators have always insisted that knowledge, skills
and insights pertaining to elementary mathematics go far beyond facts, rules and
procedures. This was already the case with the First International Mathematics
Study (FIMS), conducted by the IEA and published in 1967, which spoke about
ﬁve “cognitive behaviours”. Later on, organisations such as NCTM and OECD-
PISA, and several individual researchers, made an effort to identify aspects of the
“add-ons” involved, suggesting various terms for the enterprise. The term Mathe-
matical Literacy was used at least as early as in 1944, but the ﬁrst attempt at a
deﬁnition seems to have been made in the ﬁrst OECD-PISA framework in 1999,
with minor modiﬁcations in subsequent frameworks. Other related terms are
numeracy, quantitative literacy, mathematical proﬁciency, and mathematical com-
petence (competencies). Niss asked whether these terms are just different names for
the same thing, or each term stands for something independent. He concluded that
when it comes to mathematical literacy, numeracy and quantitative literacy, many
people use them interchangeably, even though it is actually possible to attach
distinct speciﬁc meanings to these terms. Given that people tend not to stick to
deﬁnitions, he proposed to use Mathematical Literacy as the overarching term for
the common underlying idea of promoting mathematical empowerment by making
mathematics functional in extra-mathematical contexts. In contrast, the terms
mathematical proﬁciency and mathematical competencies refer to a much wider
spectrum of mathematical mastery, pertaining also to intra-mathematical contexts.
Next, two 15-minute presentations on aspects of the range and scope of math-
ematical literacy were given. In the ﬁrst one, Steve Thornton (with John Hogan)
(Australia), suggested to utilise a notion of “slow mathematics”—inspired by the
notion of “slow food” in contrast to fast food—as a metaphor for quality mathe-
matics education and for mathematical literacy. Slow mathematics is meant to
capture what working mathematically is actually about, going against the “one-size-
ﬁts-all” idea typical of traditional curricula. Thornton proposed that working
mathematically should be made the curriculum, whereas content should be of
410
M. Niss

secondary importance. He illustrated his ideas by two examples, one on sums
occurring in the dice game of Yahtzee, and one on cyclones and tides. Karen
François (Belgium) (co-author not present) discussed the relationship between
mathematical literacy and statistical literacy from a theoretical perspective, based on
a literature review. François concluded that whilst there are indeed clear similarities
and links between mathematical and statistical literacy there are also signiﬁcant
differences (e.g. statistical literacy focuses on decision making under uncertainty),
as reﬂected in the sociological fact that statistical literacy and statistics education
have developed into independent notions and ﬁelds of study. In other words
statistical literacy should not simply be perceived as a special sub-ﬁeld of mathe-
matical literacy.
The session ended with a round-table in which Nitsa Movshovitz-Hadar (Israel),
the speakers and the members of the audience discussed the range and scope of the
concept of mathematical literacy. Movshovitz-Hadar made the point that mathe-
matical literacy should encompass insights into the reality of current mathematical
developments and described a project in Israel in which secondary school students
were exposed to contemporary “mathematical snapshots” once every two weeks.
Session 2: July 11th Wednesday, 10:30–12:00
The session opened by a 30-minute invited presentation by Ross Turner (Australia)
(in charge of implementing the mathematics part of the OECD-PISA study for
several cycles). After considering the genesis and meanings of the notions of
mathematical and scientiﬁc literacy, numeracy and quantitative literacy in various
reports, Turner zoomed in on the ways in which the notion of mathematical literacy
was developed in different PISA cycles, right from the beginning. The concept of
mathematical literacy in PISA has always given rise to some tension within the
group of participating countries. The key tension can be phrased as one between
seeing mathematics as a superset, having mathematical literacy is a smaller part, or
seeing mathematical literacy as the overarching domain, with mathematics as a
subset. The tension is both a conceptual one, reﬂected in the ways in which different
versions of the PISA framework draws upon mathematical competencies and
overarching content areas (“big ideas”), and a political one, reﬂected in the fear
voiced in some quarters, that PISA, by focusing on contextualised mathematics,
would not provide an adequate coverage of school mathematics curricula, as only
relatively low level mathematics seems to be needed to solve PISA problems.
Nevertheless, several PISA items could be solved by a tiny minority of students
only. Another problem is that the word “literacy” does not exist in many languages,
making translation difﬁcult. These tensions gave rise to a strong pressure on the
OECD, and then on those in charge of PISA, to change the focus of PISA 2012
towards a more traditional view of mathematics as being constituted by well-known
content areas, without directly forbidding the use of the term mathematical literacy.
Turner concluded by mentioning the promising work done by some of the PISA
Mathematical Literacy
411

mathematics experts on the impact of mathematical competencies on the intrinsic
demands of PISA items, and on these demands as predictors of observed item
difﬁculty.
In the ﬁrst of three 15-minute presentations, Jeff Evans (UK) offered a com-
parative analysis of the deﬁnition of numeracy in PIAAC (Project for International
Assessment of Adult Competencies) and the deﬁnition of mathematical literacy in
PISA, 2006. He found the PISA deﬁnition somewhat broader and more “human-
istic” than that in PIAAC. Finally, Evans pointed to the criticism, raised by some, of
the unidimensionality of the performance levels in both surveys.
Next, Kees Hoogland (The Netherlands) reported on a randomized, controlled,
comparative study of 38,000 Dutch students solving image-rich, respectively word-
based, numeracy problems. The aim of the study was to test the hypothesis that
replacing word problems with image-rich problems would have a signiﬁcant
positive effect on students’ result, and even more so with vocational students. In the
study, 24 pairs of mathematically equivalent numeracy problems were constructed
such that each pair contained a language-rich version and an image-rich version of
the “same” problem. Each student was randomly given 12 problems of each type.
The study was found to provide a fair degree of conﬁrmation of the hypothesis
stated.
The ﬁnal presentation was given by Yukihiko Namikawa (Japan), who described
a national project in Japan which ﬁrst focused on scientiﬁc literacy and then moved
on to mathematical literacy, focusing on citizenship. A key part of this project was
the publication “Mathematical Literacy for All Japanese”, containing chapters on
the nature of mathematics, on the central objects and concepts of mathematics, on
mathematical methods and mathematical competencies, on mathematical topics,
and, ﬁnally, on the relationship of mathematics with humanity and science.
Following a report published in 2008 by the Central Council for Education, a new
comprehensive, national standards curriculum emphasising mathematical literacy
for all is being phased in, challenging the education of teachers at all levels.
Session 3: Friday 13th July, 15:00–16:30
This session contained a variety of short presentations. John Hogan (with Steve
Thornton) (Australia), after having proposed to deﬁne “being mathematically
literate” as more or less the same as “being numerate”, went on to suggest that this
cannot be developed or observed in the mathematics classroom alone, it has to go
across the curriculum. To illustrate how this can be pursued, Hogan brieﬂy outlined
some settings in the arts, English, health and physical education and science,
corresponding to early, middle and later years, respectively. He ﬁnally sketched a
numeracy framework developed for diagnostic, analytic and practical purposes.
Yelena Baishanski (USA, with co-author not present) spoke about achieving
literacy through articulated reasoning in remedial mathematics courses for US
community college students (i.e. La Guardia CC, New York). The project involved
412
M. Niss

activities on simple applied arithmetico-algebraic problems, arising out of “current
compelling issues” meant to be engaging and meaningful to students, on which they
can develop and practice their own skills in reasoning and written communication
about reasoning, so as to develop conﬁdence in their own powers of deduction.
In the next presentation, Jenna Tague (USA, with co-authors not present), dealt
with two linked topics: the so-called STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics education) reform in the USA and a related development project at
Ohio State University, reconceptualising engineering courses by focusing on
mathematical literacy. More speciﬁcally, Tague proposed to devise a mathematical
literacy framework within a “STEM for engineering students” context, taking
inspiration from the Danish KOM project on mathematical competencies.
Based on the observation that many interpretations of mathematical literacy give
a crucial role to mathematical modelling, Abolfazi Reﬁepour Garabi (Iran)
presented two related empirical studies, one of Iranian mathematics textbooks and
one of teachers’ views about application and modelling problems in their
classrooms. Mathematical modelling and applications were introduced in Iranian
textbooks in 2008/2009. Comparing with Australian textbooks, the author ﬁnds that
measured by the number of real world modelling problems, these textbooks tend to
have a larger emphasis on mathematical literacy than do Iranian textbooks. Iranian
mathematics teachers experience difﬁculties in using applications and modelling
problems in their classrooms, especially because they don’t have access to adequate
sources for modelling tasks.
The ﬁnal presentation was given by Luis Rico Romero (Spain, with co-authors
not present). He presented a study in progress on Spanish in-service secondary
teachers’ assessment of mathematical competences. In the Spanish curriculum of
2006, the notion of competence, including mathematical competence, is given a key
role at all educational levels, and also in the related system of performance indi-
cators. The study focuses on teachers’ understanding of, and intended methods with
regard to, competency assessment in mathematics. The components of a workshop
on this topic for teachers were outlined.
Session 4: Saturday 14th July, 10:30–12:00
In the ﬁrst presentation, Cigdem Arslan (with Günes Yavuz), Turkey, reported on a
research study on the mathematical literacy self-efﬁcacy of prospective mathematics
teacher students (PTs) in different programmes in a Turkish university. The study
was conducted by way of a 25 item questionnaire, where each item was to be
answered in a ﬁve-point Likert scale format. The study found that PTs indicate an
above-medium level of mathematical literacy self-efﬁcacy, and that there were no
signiﬁcant differences between their mean scores with respect to their year in
university, between male and female students, or with respect to their choice of
programme.
Mathematical Literacy
413

The presentation by Lyn Webb (South Africa, with co-authors not present) was
based on the fact that mathematical literacy was introduced in South Africa as a
mathematics option for prospective teachers as an alternative to “usual” mathe-
matics. This led to the establishment of mathematical literacy programmes at some
higher education institutions. The degrees obtained are rather different from those of
traditional mathematics programmes. Two mathematics programmes are offered at
two universities in KwaZulu Natal. After comparing the programmes with respect
to their overall design, Webb concluded from the study that a balanced mix of types
of knowledge, particularly disciplinary, pedagogical, practical and situational
learning, is essential for teacher training qualiﬁcation, and that content knowledge is
not sufﬁcient.
The ﬁnal presentation was delivered jointly by Dave Tout (Australia) and Iddo
Gal (Israel). They set out by contrasting internal views of educational goals
(learning the trade of the discipline) with external views of educational outcomes
focusing on real-world functional demands (“literacies”/“competencies”). Different
surveys of students (e.g. TIMSS, PISA) and adults (e.g. ALL, PIAAC) have been
conducted to shape educational policies and to design interventions. Mathematical
literacy and numeracy are of the same nature, but mathematical literacy sits
(mainly) in student and school contexts and numeracy in adult world contexts. This
is reﬂected in PIAAC’s deﬁnition of numeracy, focusing on the mathematical
demands of a range of situations in adult life and on associated facets of numerate
behaviour. The presentation went on to highlight various results from PIAAC and
other adult numeracy surveys, and concluded by calling attention to three kinds of
challenges to mathematical literacy/numeracy: Conceptual challenges (“what is
it?”), educational challenges (“how can we develop it?”), and systemic challenges
(“where is it (to be) located?”).
This conclusion provided a handy lead-on to the ﬁnal part of the session, a
combined round-table and discussion amongst participants. Members of the round-
table, moderated by Mogens Niss, were GwiSoo Na, Yukihiko Namikawa and Ross
Turner. The round-table and the audience focused on important points for future
work on mathematical literacy, such as examining the relationship between math-
ematical literacy and mathematical knowledge and skills, and ﬁnding ways to
develop teaching and learning of mathematical literacy so as to ensure that all
students (and adults) get something out of their mathematical education of
subjective and objective value.
Open Access This chapter is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
Noncommercial License, which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
414
M. Niss