9	
Higher education revolutions
Short-­term success versus long-­term 
viability?
The preceding chapters have shown how, in a relatively short period of time, 
GCC governments were able to build a national system of public higher educa-
tion alongside a variety of private institutions that have made higher education 
more accessible to those seeking it. This accessibility has been particularly bene-
ficial to women who now can study at home compared to the past when few 
parents allowed their daughters to pursue higher education abroad. In addition, the 
children of expatriate workers, both males and females, who have grown up in 
the GCC no longer have to leave the region in order to receive a college degree.
	
In addition to accessibility, the introduction of private universities has also 
forced public universities to become more accountable and has led to reforms in 
their curricula, delivery methods, admission requirements and administration. 
The competition resulting from these changes has also introduced quality assur-
ance measures and processes throughout the educational landscape. A less 
impressive change resulting from the educational revolution has been in the area 
of research production although the recent emphasis on developing research 
centers and the establishment of think-­tanks is creating open spaces that are sup-
posed to encourage critical discussions and participation in global research 
networks.
	
At the same time, these revolutionary educational reforms are not without 
controversy. Their embrace of the new predominantly utilitarian mission of the 
university is problematic for a coherent evolution of Gulf societies based on their 
present realities and their own visions for the future. The revolutions which have 
swept the GCC higher education raise two key questions: 
1 	
Can the type of educational reforms adopted in the GCC accomplish the 
overarching goals of modernizing and joining the global world while main-
taining and preserving cultural and linguistic identities of the GCC soci-
eties?
2 	
Can changes at the level of higher education work in isolation from trans-
formative changes at other educational and socio-­political levels?
	
We have attempted to show in this book that the high expectations placed on 
education to revolutionize GCC societies are not likely to be realized, if other 

Higher education revolutions    205
policies and practices outside the higher educational system do not support the 
desired changes. While education is a major means for development, it must be 
supported by changes at other levels of social, economic, and political structures 
and processes. If it is to succeed, it must provide citizens with fair “opportunities 
for education, employment, civic participation, and social and cultural fulfill-
ment as human beings, in the context of a fair distribution of the society’s 
resources among all its citizenry” (Boulding and Parker, 2005: 179).
	
This chapter assesses the degree of alignment of educational practices at the 
level of their content, delivery and administration with GCC nations’ constitu-
tions and their declared early twenty-­first century visions. In our analysis, we 
rely on data from published official declarations and documents as well as 
mission statements, goals and curricular trends of major universities in the 
region. These sources are complemented with interviews of university execu-
tives when possible. Our analysis is based on the findings described in the 
previous chapters of this book and draws on our personal experiences as aca-
demics and administrators in UAE higher education.
National visions and the role of educational reforms
The five GCC countries (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar and the UAE) focused 
in this book, not only share a common past but they also have a common vision 
for their future. A reading of the GCC constitutions and the various visions pro-
mulgated in the last two decades shows that they share important aspirations. All 
five nations aspire to become knowledge societies, attain great economic devel-
opment and become leaders rather than followers in the globalized world. In 
their constitutions, they also affirm their belonging to the Arab nation and 
declare Arabic as their official language. The early articles of the constitutions of 
the five GCC countries all make it clear that the modern states are part of the 
Arab nation, linked to its history and cultural heritage through language and reli-
gion. This commitment to the Arab identity is also confirmed in strategic devel-
opments that are outlined in visions and goals for the next decades. For example, 
Sheikh Mohammad, the ruler of Dubai, prime minister of the UAE and one of 
the leading actors in Dubai’s fast-­paced development, stated in his book, My 
Vision: Challenges in the Race for Excellence (Al Maktoum, 2006) that in order 
for the UAE to join the developed world, it needs to acclimate itself to the rapid 
changing reality of the world, embrace change and transform its thinking from 
the past to the future to become a leading nation in the twenty-­first century. He 
also stressed that the UAE must preserve its identity as a member of the Arab 
nation1 and be guided by its core values, convictions and principles derived from 
belonging to the Arab civilization. The important role given to Arabic as the 
national language is also reaffirmed in the UAE vision for 2021 which asserts 
that “Arabic will re-­emerge as a dynamic and vibrant language, expressed every-
where in speech and writing as a living symbol of the nation’s progressive Arab-­
Islamic values” (Cabinet releases, 2010; Youssef, 2010). Projecting into 2021, 
which will mark the nation’s jubilee, the vision identifies several goals. The 

206    Higher education revolutions
­following are some of the themes relevant to this study as articulated by the 
UAE government in its vision 2021:
1.4	 Vibrant culture: The UAE’s distinct culture will remain founded on 
progressive and moderate Islamic values and endowed with a rich 
Arabic language, to proudly celebrate Emirati traditions and heritage 
while reinforcing national identity.
2.2	 We want the nation to draw strength from its traditions of openness, 
peaceful coexistence and understanding. In this way Emiratis will 
always resist the value-­flattening effects of globalisation, and will 
always be enriched rather than threatened by their nation’s openness to 
the world.
3.1	 The UAE will harness the full potential of its National human capital 
by maximising the participation of Emiratis, encouraging entrepreneur-
ship, and nurturing home-­grown public and private sector leaders while 
attracting and retaining the best talent.
(Cabinet releases, 2010)
The same aspirations and challenges are identified by all GCC countries in their 
visions. They all recognize human and social development as prerequisites for 
economic development. The Qatar National Vision (QNV2030) promulgated in 
2008, for example, states that, “Despite rapid economic and social gains, as well 
as political change, Qatar has maintained its cultural and traditional values as an 
Arab and Islamic nation that considers the family to be the main pillar of 
society.” It recognizes that one of the major challenges to achieve its long-­term 
goals is to modernize while preserving its traditions under globalization pres-
sures (Qatar National Vision, 2030). The Kuwaiti 2031 vision states as one of its 
aims: “Providing [a] climate for balanced human development, safeguarding 
social values and national identity, preserving the community’s values and its 
Arab and Islamic identity.”2 Similarly, the Bahraini vision 2030 (also decreed in 
2008) focuses on economic development, and stresses “The Kingdom of Bah-
rain’s interaction with the human civilization and its Arab belonging to satisfy 
the requirements of continuous development that conforms with the international 
standards, as stated in the Kingdom’s constitution” (Kingdom of Bahrain).3 
Oman’s 2020 vision focuses on diversification of the Omani economy which can 
be achieved by promoting: 
a Higher Education system that: a) keeps pace with developments and 
changes in today’s world; b) meets the requirements of sustainable develop-
ment in the Knowledge Era, while preserving the cultural identity of Omani 
society; and, c) contributes to the progress and development of humankind. 
(Ministry of Higher Education-­Oman)
	
To achieve these stated visions, education is expected to be both the engine of 
the desired transformations and the keeper of traditional values and Arab culture. 

Higher education revolutions    207
This has led all GCC countries to implement a series of educational reforms 
which are discussed in the next sections.
Educational reforms
Both in terms of their goals and the means used to implement them, educational 
reforms adopted throughout the GCC are strikingly similar in both their under-
lying assumptions and implementations. They share the following underlying 
assumptions: 
1 	
improving education quality can be achieved through the transplantation of 
the Western university model; 
2 	
adopting English as the medium of instruction is the most efficient shortcut; 
3 	
presuming that educational reforms do not negatively affect the Arab-­
Islamic identity of the region;
4 	
achieving economic development and nationalization of the labor force 
through education can be isolated from other important policies that govern 
employment and social practices.
	
These assumed transformative powers of education are consistent with those 
discussed in various international governmental organizations and reiterated by 
successive Arab Human Development Reports (UNDP, 2002, 2004, 2005). 
Higher education reform is envisaged to play the key role in transforming GCC 
societies both economically and socially. It is expected that tribal affiliations will 
become less important; a greater number of more empowered women will enter 
the labor market; and the countries’ reliance on professional expatriate labor will 
be reduced. It is also assumed that all these fundamental shifts in social and eco-
nomic practices will occur while preserving and strengthening Arab and Muslim 
heritage, culture and traditions and protecting the Arabic language in the face of 
English dominance.
Improving education quality by transplanting the Western university 
model
As discussed in Chapter 3, the transplantation of the Western university model is 
part of the globalization of education all over the world. This trend, which has 
been accelerated by the globalization of the economy and, more particularly, by 
the generalization of information technologies, has facilitated global intercon-
nectedness and encouraged the homogenization of higher education. Institutions 
in the periphery tend to adopt Western curricula, Western produced textbooks 
and materials, and patterns of organization and standardization (Spring, 2009). 
There is also homogeneity in the way these institutions submit themselves to 
American and British systems of accreditation agencies to improve their institu-
tions’ and programs’ rankings on the global stage. However, transplanted models 
are also affected by local forces and are born out of political decisions decreed 

208    Higher education revolutions
by local governments that impose their own specific regulations. Naturally, gov-
ernmental interventions shape the actual functioning of the imported institutions 
and as such cannot lead to mirror images of the Western institutions which they 
copy. Local influences have manifested themselves in governance issues, adjust-
ing to students’ competencies, teaching conditions and encouragement of 
research across the GCC.
	
In addition to the transplantation of the Western university structure and cur-
riculum which are widespread worldwide, Westernization in GCC higher educa-
tion has gone further by relying on Western faculty and administrators to 
implement and lead their reforms. This dependence on Westerners started with 
private universities and spread to public institutions at all levels. For example, 
most reforms of the primary and secondary educational system were developed 
and supervised by external partnerships and Western consultants. At the univer-
sity level, Arab top executives were replaced by Western administrators in many 
public universities especially in the UAE, and the reforms to revamp educational 
programs in most GCC countries were also led by Western experts and organiza-
tions (Mills, 2008a).
	
There are many assumptions that can explain governments’ decisions to rely 
on Western experts to reform education. It is believed that importing Western 
curricula is the most expedient way to respond to globalization’s fast-­paced need 
for wide-­ranging economic transformations. Policy-­makers consider that they 
are in a race against time to join the globalized world and that the fastest way to 
reach development is to import the knowledge and expertise available in the 
developed West. According to a higher education adviser in the UAE,4 given the 
priority of professional education and the constraints of time to accomplish such 
training, it is not realistic to expect university education to accomplish every-
thing in four or five years. This view was shared by other university provosts 
who stated that the main objective of university education is to provide profes-
sional training to young nationals so that they can serve their country. A former 
Zayed University provost pointed out that the university was exploring ways to 
“align and link everything ZU does with national needs,” in order to “support the 
business community and economic development of the country” (personal com-
munication, March 2009). In another interview with New York Institute of Tech-
nology (NYIT) Abu Dhabi dean, it was emphasized that the goal of NYIT is to 
provide professional education that trains students “for a clear career orienta-
tion.” The dean did concede that the issue of contextualizing the curriculum had 
to be resolved in the future. For example, courses on federal taxation required by 
NYIT in New York are irrelevant for business students in the region where there 
are no taxes. The same priorities of preparing graduates for the labor market 
were stressed in interviews in Kuwait with university administrators.
	
The second reason often cited to justify the adoption of the Western educa-
tional model in the region is linked to the serious criticisms leveled against the 
Arab educational system in the entire Arab world (Mazawi and Sultana, 2010). 
Drzeniek-­Hanouz and Yousef (2007: 8) point out that one of the reasons the 
UAE did not have a better standing among the 40 most competitive economies 

Higher education revolutions    209
in the world was due to “low rankings on indicators related to health and educa-
tion when benchmarked against the group of advanced economies.” They 
pointed out that “aside from quantitative targets, the quality of outcomes in terti-
ary schooling needs to be enhanced to reverse the low valuation of educational 
credentials by the private sector.” The World Bank report on education in the 
MENA region levels similar criticisms. Arabic education has become syn-
onymous with rote learning, outdated teaching methods and a teacher-­centered 
approach (Boyle, 2006; World Bank, 2009). Its failures are usually attributed to 
its being out of sync with the skills requirements of the modern job market 
because of a curriculum and pedagogy that do not develop the necessary skills of 
flexibility, critical thinking and analysis, and lifelong learning. Since these skills 
are considered to be the hallmark of the Western educational system and the 
reason for the advancement of Western societies, transplanting the Western/
American educational models and importing top executives to lead the reforms 
of the educational system are seen as the solution to what is ailing the Arab 
educational system and a shortcut to producing Arab graduates with the required 
qualifications to spearhead the development of their countries (Drzeniek-­Hanouz 
and Yousef, 2007; UNDP, 2003; Mazawi, 2007). It is expected that recruiting 
international consultants, mainly from the United Kingdom, the United States 
and Australia, to direct both public and private institutions will remedy Arab 
education failings and raise the quality of Arab university graduates’ modest 
output as researchers, innovators and producers of knowledge (Bollag, 2006; 
Mills, 2008a, 2008b).
	
The nature of the reforms and the short-­term failure to change labor market 
outcomes has led many academics and parents alike to question their effective-
ness. They point to the relatively high unemployment rates among national 
graduates and what they consider as young generations’ weakening ties to 
Arabic culture and Arabic proficiency. Mounting criticisms of the direction of 
earlier reforms, particularly in the UAE and Qatar where the reforms were the 
most aggressive, has resulted in the reversal of some of their components such as 
a partial return to Arabic as a medium of instruction in the humanities and social 
sciences and the nomination of national administrators to lead public and even 
some private universities. By April of 2013 sweeping changes in the administra-
tion of UAE public universities were carried out by the new minister of higher 
education. Qatar University also reversed its policy of English medium instruc-
tion by reinstating Arabic in all but hard science colleges (see Chapter 5). These 
abrupt shifts serve to highlight key problems with the reform process: the exclu-
sion and lack of participation of important national stakeholders in the planning 
stages of educational reforms opened the door to criticisms of the reforms. In 
some cases governments reacted by decreeing reversals of parts of the policies in 
unpredictable and unplanned ways, thus creating further instability in the educa-
tional system and resulting in new problems of their own.

210    Higher education revolutions
Adopting English as the medium of instruction is a 
pragmatic solution
As discussed in Chapter 8, there has been relatively little attention in official dis-
courses about the implications of a language policy that stresses the need 
for English proficiency rather than a dual language proficiency in both Arabic 
and English (Al Baik, 2008; Al Najami, 2007; Nahyan, 2009).5 The emphasis on 
English as the language of modern education reflects an acceptance of the 
developed/developing binary division of the world and stems from the belief that 
it is possible to catch up to the developed countries by using English to access 
the knowledge available in it (Tikly, 2004; Drummond, 2010; Lewis, 2010; 
Swan and Lewis, 2010). There seems to be little concern about the impact that 
using English to educate may have on the maintenance, let alone the develop-
ment, of Arabic as a language of knowledge in the future, as aspired to in the 
vision statements discussed above. The contradiction between the adoption of 
English as the language of instruction and the declared goals of developing 
Arabic to become the language of twenty-­first-century knowledge seems to be 
set aside for more pressing pragmatic considerations. Interviewed university 
executives6 concede that more attention should be given to Arabic culture and 
language in university education. However, they stressed that the priorities in 
education today are to prepare university graduates for a labor market that 
requires English. They shared the opinion that, today, there is a clear emphasis 
in the Middle East on professional education and that to prepare graduates for 
the knowledge society they need to master English, the language of science, 
research, business and technology and develop the skills required in the labor 
market. In effect, this association between English and “useful education” helps 
“standardize Western measures of skill technology, innovation and productivity 
in ways that are quickly recalibrating regional economic and political relation-
ships” (Tikly, 2004: 16). Setting the priorities from this perspective impacts not 
only the neglect of the mother tongue but it also means that students must devote 
more time to learning English and professional skills with very little space in the 
curriculum reserved for the acquisition of local knowledge to ground them in 
their culture and history.
	
The consequences of these implemented educational policies are all the more 
important given the demographic makeup of the society and family structure. The 
need to import a large labor force and a reliance on the expatriate experts to build 
infrastructure and lead economic development have seriously impacted GCC soci-
eties’ communication patterns and channels, although to varying degrees.7 The 
influx of expatriates has given rise to globalized urban centers where Western 
culture and the English language have become ubiquitous and their influence ines-
capable inside and outside the home. From a very early age, children watch Amer-
ican programs on TV and are spoken to in English by their parents or their foreign 
nannies at home. Outside the home, English functions as the lingua franca in com-
munication between expatriates from different linguistic and cultural backgrounds 
and with nationals. Western cultural messages dominate the social landscape in 

Higher education revolutions    211
shopping malls, restaurants, movie theaters and hospitals. Nationals must know 
some English to obtain even the most basic services in their own countries.8 In 
some cities such as Dubai or Doha public spaces, local culture and language have 
become confined to souks and heritage villages that have been developed to 
represent culture not only for tourists but also for young generations of nationals 
(Khalaf, 2002, 2005).
	
Although the impact of globalization is not uniform across the region and 
seems to depend on the degree of integration with the global market and depend-
ence on imported skilled manpower, the infiltration of English into life patterns 
of young generations seems to be similar across the GCC, particularly in urban 
centers. Several studies conducted among university and high school students in 
the GCC reveal that young Gulf nationals and Arabs residing in the UAE, Qatar 
and Oman feel the real impact not only in terms of their linguistic practices 
where English dominates their diverse interactions but also in their thought pat-
terns. The reliance on English for almost everything in their lives has aroused 
concerns and made university students themselves ambivalent about their mother 
tongue (Al-­Issa and Dahan, 2011). Such linguistic practices are clearly mis-
aligned with GCC vision statements emphasizing Arabic language and culture as 
an integral part of their identities.
Reforms’ impact on the construction of national identity
Mission statements of GCC public universities and the different types of private 
or branch institutions are similar in their visions and goals although they may 
highlight different aspects having to do with reducing the “flattening effect of 
globalization” on national identity. For example, the more ambitious semi-­
private universities do recognize the need to combine the global with the 
Islamic/historical/cultural/local knowledge in their educational outcomes, 
unlike branch and public universities that tend to emphasize preparing students 
for careers in a globalized world. The larger semi-­private institutions also 
acknowledge the value of a liberal arts education model which is generally one 
of the important features of the American-­style university education. However, 
the focus on professional education remains dominant in most universities in 
the region. In defense of this professional focus in higher education, one of our 
interviewees stated that “Arabs need to adapt to the global context and not 
allow [their] history to prejudice their outlook on the present environment.”9 He 
went on to explain that in order for universities to provide the desired local 
knowledge, students would have to spend more years in university study given 
their initial low competencies in English and other study skills.10 Similarly, in 
response to a question on how the university is ensuring that students receive a 
liberal arts education when the focus is on professional training, the dean of the 
school of humanities at AUK suggested that their approach is to blend acquisi-
tion of liberal arts education, local knowledge and professional training 
throughout the curriculum. She went on to explain that this blending is accomp-
lished by offering a professional education and targeting problem solving skills 

212    Higher education revolutions
to find solutions to local market problems. Such a perspective seems to suggest 
that localizing university education means focusing on professional training and 
providing the skill set in demand by the local labor market.
	
Other administrators acknowledged that there is a problem with the way uni-
versity education is presently handling its grounding in the local Arab culture 
and environment. A university provost stated:
Our students have told us they don’t know much about their own history 
and we are trying to respond to that. The question is what minimum level of 
knowledge students should have about their own country and culture 
[emphasis added] and to build that into the general education curriculum so 
that, that level of awareness is assured. Even beyond that, communicating in 
Arabic is something that even our students who have grown up here are not 
able to do effectively in some cases. Increasing the level of sophistication 
and knowledge in the use of communicating in Arabic is an important part 
of what we are trying to accomplish.
(Personal communication, March 2009)
The concerns about how university education can balance between its two goals 
of grounding itself in local culture and preparing students to participate in the 
global economy of their countries was expressed over and over again by univer-
sity professionals (faculty and administrators) interviewed in Kuwait, Qatar and 
the UAE. The pressure to graduate students who can directly enter the job 
market is too great to allow for the allocation of time to a more liberal arts cur-
riculum. This is particularly problematic given the low skill sets that entering 
students bring with them from high schools (see Chapter 5).
	
Two further elaborations are in order here. First, what exactly does one mean 
by liberal arts education and, second, what does one mean by grounding in local 
culture? In its definition of the purpose of general education offered in a liberal 
arts approach to education, the Harvard Task Force Report (Harvard University 
College of Arts and Sciences, 2007: 1) states that it should prepare citizens to 
“[E]ngage with forces of change—cultural, religious, political, demographic, 
technological, [and] planetary.” This is generally accomplished by having stu-
dents take general courses in humanities, social sciences, mathematics, composi-
tion and natural science disciplines, before moving on to specialize in their 
particular field (Latzer, 2004). However, in the GCC context, the benefits of such 
program of study are constrained by the relatively low academic English profi-
ciency of freshmen. Depending on their TOEFL scores, students may have to 
spend a year or more in pre-­college courses of instruction in order to prepare 
them for the four-­year collegiate course of study. Thus, the normal four-­year 
course of study for students in the West can often be extended to five, or even 
six, years. The result is that less time is spent on the type of courses that can 
provide students with “the tools to face [the cultural, religious, political, demo-
graphic, technological and planetary] challenges in an informed and thoughtful 
way” (Harvard Task Force, 2007: 1). As a result, general education has to devote 

Higher education revolutions    213
more time to developing linguistic proficiency in English to access professional 
level training rather than a more humanistic education.
	
UNESCO defines humanistic education as one that promotes critical thinking 
about one’s own society, culture and historical traditions to prepare citizens to 
be active defenders of human rights, equitable societies and the environment 
(Spring, 2009). Offering an education that does challenge the traditional status 
quo is understandably a sensitive route that universities must carefully negotiate, 
and doing it in Arabic might be even more difficult. But preparing graduates to 
make appropriate choices and be critically engaged in the development of their 
societies requires it. In addition, the fact that the majority of faculty are expatri-
ates, with no real job security, often makes them avoid discussing “sensitive 
issues” for fear of being negatively labeled as not respecting local cultures and 
traditions.11
	
The GCC states are relatively young nations that have witnessed phenomenal 
transformations during their short history. They are faced with a multitude of 
existential questions which have been further intensified by recent regional 
upheavals. Since the 9/11 events, the region has come under world scrutiny and 
such questions are being debated within prevalent competing paradigms ranging 
from liberal, progressive, conservative to Islamist ideologies. Dominant conser-
vative and liberal perspectives are often at odds over how to reconcile Western 
values and lifestyles brought in by globalization with an understanding of “pro-
gressive and moderate Islamic values [that are] endowed with a rich Arabic lan-
guage, to proudly celebrate . . . [national] traditions and heritage while reinforcing 
national identity” (Cabinet releases, 2010: Theme 1.4). The debates touch on 
issues relating to all aspects of social and political life ranging from environ-
mental and gender issues, morality, cultural affiliation, religious practices, 
Islamic and Western banking systems to political alignments. All of these ques-
tions are regular topics of discussions on TV programs and newspapers in the 
region (e.g., Mathew, 2008; Al Jazeera TV, 2009; Al Arabiya TV, 2009; BBC 
Arabic, 2014). While university education cannot provide a magic solution to 
these issues, it should offer students skills and knowledge to participate in this 
debate and reflect on competing discourses. The evidence from the general 
education curriculum of both private and public universities shows little evid-
ence that this discourse is taking place. A liberal arts education that makes stu-
dents acquire knowledge of their national history, cultural heritage and society 
could enable students “to think and act critically and reflectively outside the 
channels of a career or profession” (Muller, 2000: 41). So far, higher education 
reform has missed the opportunity to use general education to create a new gen-
eration of critical thinkers who can productively construct their own national 
identities and civic engagements.
Defining knowledge in the new mission of the university
In describing what they called the “Education Gospel” Grubb and Lazerson 
(2006) point to the similarities across many parts of the world, from the United 

214    Higher education revolutions
States to China, passing through Europe, sharing a common discourse about 
education. This discourse “first stresses the failures of schools and universities 
and then proceeds to reform them with more economic and utilitarian goals” 
(295). There is a widespread acceptance of this gospel by all stakeholders in the 
education process. This doctrine rests on the belief that in light of the “know-
ledge revolution” that has taken place in the last decades, work qualifications 
have also changed with the labor market demanding “higher order skills” which 
can only be obtained through higher education if individuals want to participate 
in the knowledge economy. The framing of the value of education in terms of its 
“economic production function” is widespread worldwide and is attributed to the 
corporatization of higher education (Olssen and Peters, 2005; Spring, 2009). 
Nedeva (2008: 86) observes that the “rhetoric about repositioning universities as 
global players in the ‘knowledge society’ and major contributors to ‘economic 
competitiveness’ and ‘wealth creation’ is widespread both horizontally and ver-
tically.” Horizontally, across nations, university education missions stress their 
role as knowledge producers and the same discourse is held vertically at all 
levels within each nation. IGOs such as the World Bank and the OECD and 
national governments expect HEIs to offer citizens and societies a competitive 
advantage on the global stage. These expectations have affected not only the 
type of skills being targeted but also the mission of the institution itself. The 
emphasis on efficiency, accountability and competitiveness are gradually trans-
forming university education into marketable services and subjecting it to the 
capitalist laws of the market. Such changes are leading many education research-
ers to question HEI’s new role (see, e.g., Epstein, 2008; Dale, 2008; Naidoo, 
2008; Ursin, 2008). For example, Etzkowitz (1998, cited in Nedeva, 2008: 88) 
argues that the growing commercialization of higher education is creating an 
“entrepreneurial university,” which integrates economic development into the 
university as an academic function along with teaching and research. It is this 
“capitalization of knowledge” that is at the heart of a new mission for the univer-
sity, linking universities to users of knowledge more tightly and establishing the 
university as an economic actor in its own right.
	
While criticisms of the reframing of the university’s mission to serve this 
“third mission” to respond to corporate funding demands are beginning to be 
heard in the West (Nedeva, 2008; Brown et al., 2008), the rest of the world has 
embraced the university’s new mission and its commercialization as the sacred 
gospel to be duplicated. Universities in the Arabian Gulf and elsewhere have 
approached reforming education from an either-­or perspective. The binary 
alternatives of either importing Western curricula and language to close “the 
knowledge gap separating the Arab and Islamic nations from the advancement 
of contemporary global civilization” (Abdallah S. Jum’ah, quoted in Verde, 
2010) or lagging behind is a false dilemma.
	
Developing countries’ education may be better reformed if it seriously con-
siders the concerns raised about the corporatization of universities to avoid its 
pitfalls. In addition, an educational system that worked in the West with different 
social and historical configurations may not necessarily yield the same outcomes 

Higher education revolutions    215
in a different socio-­historical context and a rapidly changing and diversified 
global landscape.
	
The fast-­paced and dynamic changes of increasingly global economic and 
social structures and knowledge capital require that higher education pay more 
attention to lifelong learning critical thinking skills. For example the World 
Bank (2003) suggests that the new type of learning should “emphasize creating, 
applying, analyzing, and synthesizing knowledge and engaging in collaborative 
learning across the lifespan” (World Bank, 2003: xvii–xviii cited in Farrell and 
Fenwick, 2007: 15). While this may be true, the debate remains about how to 
define a type of knowledge that has local relevance. According to Muller (2000), 
there are two orientations regarding the categories of knowledge. He argues 
against: 
accepted dichotomies between an education for knowledge and an education 
for skills, a curriculum of the past and one of the future, the emphasis on 
understanding or memorization because they tend to “portray the world en 
route from one to the other [and] will certainly not aid our understanding of 
what knowledge and skills our millennial citizen will find most worthwhile.” 
(Muller 2000, 54)
The problems of governance and sustainability
The need to develop a university and college system that addresses local needs 
while providing students with the technical and intellectual means to make their 
way in a rapidly globalizing economy requires us to look at the governance of 
higher education institutions. One cannot develop the humanities and social sci-
entific academic infrastructure to creatively engage students in exploring 
important social and cultural issues without creating an administrative system 
that can unleash the creative scholarly energy of the faculty.
	
As we noted in Chapter 6, many of the new private institutions that have been 
created over the past two decades suffer from what we might call a participatory 
governance deficit. In extreme cases, faculty members are employed to teach a 
large number of courses whose syllabi and methods of assessment are predeter-
mined. Sometimes, accreditation demands inadvertently exacerbate this problem 
by insisting on the quantification of educational outcomes. This leads to the 
adoption of standardized tests and limits the ability of institutions to provide 
engaging courses of study. This problem is especially severe for the small insti-
tutions that primarily provide business and information technology degrees. It is 
likely that the very competitive environment that these for-­profit institutions face 
make it much more unlikely that their owners will encourage the empowerment 
of their key workers.
	
While it is not uncommon for faculty to assist in the management of degree 
programs as well as to evaluate the educational accomplishments of their stu-
dents, it is less common for academic workers in most of the GCC institutions to 
contribute to important decisions on efforts to reform the curricula.12 More often 

216    Higher education revolutions
than not, these decisions come from above in unpredictable ways. This is par-
ticularly the case in public institutions that are run directly by ministries of 
higher education or councils under these ministries. Very few universities and 
colleges in the GCC have functioning Faculty Senates. This is partly a result of 
the hierarchical political systems of the Gulf, but it is noteworthy that the newer 
higher educational institutions often have a more disempowered expatriate 
faculty than the older public institutions.
	
The elite branch campuses face a series of different issues that call into ques-
tion their long-­term ability to integrate the study of local social issues into their 
curricula. In some cases, the campus is required to provide an identical curric-
ulum to that offered by the home campus. This can obviously limit the ability of 
the campus to creatively respond to local student needs. On the other hand, the 
prestigious nature of these institutions allow the campus administrators to limit 
teaching loads and encourage research, and some of these institutions have 
developed impressive research output in the few years of their existence.
	
The larger issue these campuses face revolves around efforts to maintain their 
legitimacy as most were created through decisions of a very small group of 
elites. On the GCC side, the ruler must commit to providing a high level of sub-
sidies even though most of the students are not national citizens. On the univer-
sity side, the university president is often responsible for the decision to create a 
branch campus even though the faculty of the home institution might be unen-
thusiastic. It is not at all difficult to imagine a change in university leadership 
leading to a reassessment of a home country’s overseas commitments. Nor is it 
hard to foresee a new ruler in a GCC country re-­evaluating the commitment of 
subsidies to an elite university that services a very small number of its own 
national citizens. The isolation of GCC citizens from the educational reform 
process is particularly noteworthy in these cases.
Can education reform alone achieve the nationalization of 
the labor market?
One of the major challenges of the GCC planning authorities has been the effort 
to encourage the nationalization of the workforce. Despite heavy investments in 
education and the various qualitative reforms we have documented, there 
remains an almost total reliance on expatriates in most private sectors of the 
economy. As we have seen, the causes of this mismatch are often blamed on the 
quality of education and the orientation of students in humanities and non-­
scientific degrees that are considered not to be aligned with the required skill sets 
and qualifications demanded by the private sector. The evidence, however, 
points to a different conclusion: in the absence of a strong coordination between 
education, labor and economic policies, this mismatch is likely to continue.
	
Most GCC nationals graduating from university seek management positions 
and are unwilling to accept positions that they do not consider prestigious due to 
real social pressure on them. Nationals are expected to be rich and owners of 
businesses rather than mid or low level employees (this is especially true for 

Higher education revolutions    217
Kuwaiti, Qatari and UAE nationals). Such attitudes perpetuate the dependence 
on expatriates to occupy these positions, particularly in the private sector. In 
fact, an important outcome of higher education reform is that it has provided 
educational opportunity for expatriate youth and promoted their employment in 
the private sector at lower wages than nationals are willing to accept. Current 
labor laws and regulations end up not encouraging nationals to join the private 
sector who prefer public sector employment because it offers higher pay scales, 
shorter working hours, longer holidays, and retirement benefits. From busi-
nesses’ perspective, there is reluctance to employ nationals because of regula-
tions making it difficult to fire them and the perceptions that nationals either lack 
the needed skills or, just as importantly, the motivation to be productive workers. 
This has often led to the employment of shadow (or phantom) workers doing the 
job of the national in sectors of the economy where the states have imposed 
hiring quotas such as banking in the UAE, Qatar or Kuwait. Hertog reports that 
these hiring quotas
have been difficult to monitor, have led to evasion and in some cases cor-
ruption between businesses and labor administrations. Various forms of 
“phantom employment” of nationals are widespread across the region, and 
quotas have probably increased the informal employment of foreigners.
(Hertog, 2014: 7)
The lesson drawn from this unsuccessful experience has been that quotas have 
failed because nationals do not have the appropriate skills to function effectively 
in a global economy or do not have incentives to do so. Quotas alone cannot 
force businesses to really use labor services of national citizens. Neither can 
expansion of higher education alone make national students seek private sector 
employment.
	
The embrace of higher education across the GCC where in some countries 
close to 90 percent of high school graduates apply for tertiary education has led 
some cynics to see in this step a strategy to delay youths from entry into the job 
market and disguise the potential high unemployment rates among the youths. In 
some cases, such as in Oman, the current labor market is unable to absorb all 
tertiary education graduates and the prediction is that a brain drain is underway 
where Omanis are looking for careers in neighboring countries. Recently, 
however, education policies are encouraging vocational training colleges and 
institutes as an alternative to university education, particularly in countries such 
as Oman and Bahrain. The indication is that government policy-­makers do want 
increasing numbers of GCC citizens to find private sector employment, but so 
far, national citizens continue to disproportionately work in the public sector for 
relatively high wages, while the private sector largely employs a disproportion-
ate number of expatriate workers at lower wages.13
	
In the richer countries (Qatar and the UAE), more than 90 percent of the 
private sector labor force is expatriate, while more than 80 percent of employed 
nationals work in the public sector. National workers in the three lower income 

218    Higher education revolutions
countries of the GCC (Saudi Arabia, Oman and Bahrain) are more likely to work 
in the private sector, but only Oman has over the past decade successfully 
reduced the relative presence of expatriates in the private sector and the relative 
number of nationals who work in the public sector (Kuwait may also be meeting 
these goals). The inability and unwillingness of nationals to enter the private 
sector has particularly affected well-­educated women who desire to work and 
less well-­educated national men. Unemployment rates for female nationals have 
climbed as larger numbers of young adult women improve their educational 
attainment. In the UAE, for example, the percentage of women in the labor force 
who cannot find work is 28 percent. In Saudi Arabia, this female unemployment 
rate is 35 percent (IMF, 2013).
	
What accounts for the seeming inability of higher educational reforms to 
transform the labor market? Part of the explanation is linked to recent and trans-
itory trends. In the wake of the recent period of high oil prices, many of the GCC 
states are implementing large physical infrastructure projects that require the 
importation of vast numbers of low-­wage workers from South Asia. More funda-
mentally, however, is the continuation of an incentive structure that favors relat-
ively low wage expatriate employment in the private sector and high wage 
employment for nationals in the public sector.
	
Given these realities, education reforms alone cannot achieve the goal of 
attracting more nationals to the productive sectors of the economy without policy 
interventions to reform the patterns of job creation in the GCC. There is a need 
for the creation of higher-­skilled mid-­level job opportunities for the thousands of 
national university, college and vocational training graduates who expect more 
attractive wages than the private sector is presently paying to expatriates. A port-
folio of coherent government interventions to address short-­term employment 
constraints could include the introduction of a tax and subsidy program that can 
induce an increase in the relative share of nationals employed in the private 
sector. Such steps must be accompanied by changes in public sector wage-­setting 
practices and private sector employment management policies so that wage dif-
ferentials between the private and public sectors decrease. These measures 
should be coupled with what is referred to as “labor market active programs” 
such as the UAE’s TANMIA.14 If these reforms are implemented, then the higher 
education reforms we have documented are much more likely to succeed in 
increasing nationals’ participation in the private sector of the economy toward 
achieving GCC nationalization goals.
Opening the doors to women: a chance for equality?
GCC governments across the region have entrusted education with social devel-
opment and the empowerment of women. But unlike the limited impact that 
education has had in the area of nationalization of the labor force discussed 
above, a major achievement of higher education in the GCC is that it has laid the 
basis for women’s emancipation. Across the GCC the percentage of women 
enrolled in HEIs is equal if not superior to men. This has been possible thanks to 

Higher education revolutions    219
the availability of HE education at home as families are much more reluctant to 
send their daughters to study abroad. Literacy rates among females above the 
age of 15 are around 84 percent, and in 2009 more than 60 percent of graduates 
in Kuwait, Qatar and the UAE were women (Al Masah Capital Limited, 2012).
	
The personal and social benefits of women’s education are undeniable. 
Worldwide research shows a clear correlation between women’s education and 
health benefits for both females and their children. Increased education of 
women leads to a decrease in child mortality and fertility rates, increase in life 
expectancy and an increase in potential income (Adely, 2009). For most coun-
tries of the GCC, the rapid increase in the number of educated women has 
resulted in gender role imbalances as the percentage of women university gradu-
ates is greater than men’s. Women’s empowerment seems at times to have out-
paced the often paternalistic traditions and expectations which still prevail in 
society (Al-­Nasr, 2011).15
	
Despite these advances, women’s educational successes have not been paral-
leled by corresponding participation in the labor market. Indeed, women’s parti-
cipation in the labor sector remains well below what one would expect. Despite 
governments’ steps to encourage women to participate in their societies’ labor 
market, out of the 10.2 million literate women above the age of 15 only 3.3 
million are recorded as employed, bringing their participation in the GCC labor 
market to 26.9 percent, compared to 84 percent for males (Al Masah Capital 
Limited, 2012). IGOs have tended to explain this mismatch by invoking the role 
of cultural values and family traditions as a major cause. The questions often 
asked are: how important are Arab cultural and family values in explaining this 
mismatch? What is the role of economy planning and labor policies in women’s 
low participation in the labor market? And, can other reforms in higher educa-
tion reverse this reality?
	
There is no agreement as to the role played by culture, family and tradition. It 
is widely presumed that women’s freedom to work outside the home is restrained 
by Arab traditional values in male-­dominated societies. These traditions are 
often reinforced by laws that severely limit women’s rights under the guise of 
religion. For example, in most Arab countries, laws still favor men over women 
in inheritance and their ability to make their own decisions relating to marriage, 
divorce and freedom of movement.
	
As restrictive as this reality is, Arab women’s legal rights have progressed in 
the last decades. Women’s equal rights to men have been formally recognized in 
most GCC constitutions such as “in Qatar, Kuwait (Kuwait Constitution Article 
29), UAE (UAE Constitution Article 25), Bahrain (Bahraini Constitution Article 
4), Oman (Oman Basic Law Article 17), [and] the Saudi Arabian Constitution 
guarantees ‘human rights in accordance with Shari’ah’ (Article 26)” (Al-­Nasr, 
2011: 44). GCC women have also gained some political rights, including voting 
and running for parliament in some countries. There are women ministers and 
municipality representatives in Kuwait and the UAE. Within higher education, 
Sheikha Moza al Misnad of Qatar, the mother of the present-­day ruler, is the 
head of the Qatar Foundation, which supervises Doha’s Education City. In 

220    Higher education revolutions
Kuwait, Sheikha Dana al Sabah is the founder and head of the Board of Trustees 
of the American University of Kuwait. In the UAE, Sheikha Fatma, the wife of 
the late UAE president Sheikh Zayed, and four women holding ministerial posts, 
are all role models that send powerful messages to GCC women and men.
	
GCC women have also made great strides in business. Like in the rest of the 
world they have become entrepreneurs, albeit at much slower rates depending on 
the specific country. Zeidan and Bahrami (2011: 102) report that “Saudi, Bahrain 
and the UAE seem to be at the forefront, while the women of Kuwait, Qatar and 
Oman have not been as active.” According to the authors, women’s participation 
in business activities still face several challenges including access to capital and 
relevant information, and cumbersome and sometimes gender-­discriminatory 
regulations, particularly in Saudi Arabia. Other barriers have to do with a lack of 
self-­confidence and, more importantly, women’s prioritization of their family 
responsibilities and desires to establish a family and work balance. It is clear that 
such factors limiting labor force participation of women are not unique to Arab 
women but can be found everywhere across cultures (Adely, 2009).
	
In an ethnographic study conducted by Adely on Jordanian women and their 
perceptions of paid work outside the home, participants articulated a wide 
variety of reasons for their participation in higher education. For some it was 
seen in economic/financial terms as opening doors for better employment oppor-
tunities, while for others, the reasons were more personal such as improving 
their prospects for a better marriage. Adely (2009) suggested that there are many 
factors that influence women’s decisions regarding education and work that go 
beyond the neo-­liberal explanations and stereotypical conceptions of “a patho-
logical” representation of the “Arab family,” “Arab culture” and “Arab men and 
women” prevalent in IGO reports such as the 2005 Arab Human Development 
Report, which tend to perpetuate such discourse on Arab women’s status. Adely 
concludes that such stereotypical representations ignore the rapid changes that 
are taking place not only at the level of the economy but also at the level of cul-
tural beliefs. She writes that:
The AHDR 2005, despite making important contributions to the conceptual-
ization of development challenges in the Arab world, fails to account for the 
range of factors that shape decisions about education, waged labor, marriage 
and family. It oversimplifies the significance of global economic and polit-
ical forces tied to contemporary development projects like formal education, 
and despite giving credence to the importance of developing human capabil-
ities to make informed choices, it continues to rely on assumptions shaped 
by economic determinants and a liberal ideal of progress about what consti-
tutes progress and quality of life. Thus the reader is unable to imagine alter-
nate outcomes or desires.
(Adely, 2009: 117)
It is clear that transformative changes taking place in Arab societies are also 
leading to changes in “Arab family” values, albeit at different rates. While some 

Higher education revolutions    221
values, such as parents’ role to decide for their children, both males and females, 
what to study, who to marry and where to work are still current practices, many 
others are in transition. Nonetheless, Arab attitudes toward the value of girls’ 
education have dramatically changed. Across the Arab world, families are 
willing to make great sacrifices to send their daughters to school and university 
when it is accessible to them and they can afford it.
	
When it comes to work, there are many other factors that affect women’s 
choices of employment. In a study of women’s perceptions of work, Khalifeh 
(2011) found that interviewed Qatari women felt that both their society and their 
government encouraged them to enter the workforce. They expressed prefer-
ences as to which sectors are better working environments for them based on 
their need to balance work and family. They consider working in the public 
sector safer even though they recognize that work in the private sector leads to 
better pay and better opportunities for career advancement. For them the priority 
is to find a job that allows them to balance between family and work responsibil-
ities, a balance that is possible in careers such as in education.
	
One of the accepted economic benefits of women’s paid employment outside 
the home, worldwide, is the liberating force of being financially independent 
which empowers them to be more assertive. In the GCC, there are possible 
explanations as to why employment may not necessarily be perceived as that 
financially liberating force. GCC women can be financially independent without 
having to work. The welfare system in the wealthy GCC states subsidizes basic 
living for all its citizens, making employment for financial needs less of a neces-
sity. It should be noted here that Islam grants wives the right to control their own 
financial resources and makes men alone responsible for household expenditures 
and family support. In addition, many national women can claim unemployment 
to receive supplementary government unemployment insurance. As a result 
many women may choose not to work if the family constraints on their freedom 
of movement are not too onerous.
	
The changes described above are not uniform throughout Arab societies or 
the GCC. It is true that there are still family/cultural constraints that do limit 
possibilities for those women who do want to work. Parents of unmarried young 
women do not favor their daughters moving away from home in search of 
employment unless they are in dire need of that extra income. In the GCC, as 
elsewhere, this constraint on women’s mobility is exacerbated by job creation 
spatial patterns. Both government and private industry employment availabilities 
tend to be concentrated in the larger cities such as Dubai, Abu Dhabi, Doha, 
Kuwait City, Manama or Muscat. Educated women living outside of these 
centers are less likely to find work (specifically in the private sector) close to 
home unless they are willing to commute. There are also still cultural restrictions 
on the type of work acceptable for women. For example, women engineers are 
unlikely to be offered or themselves seek work that requires night shifts in manu-
facturing industry, construction sites or offshore oil rigs.
	
Socially, prevailing beliefs that male and female spaces should be segregated 
in societies that are male-­dominated also limit women’s opportunities to partake 

222    Higher education revolutions
in their own development and the development of their societies. Separate educa-
tional institutions have made it possible for parents to send their daughters to 
school in an environment that otherwise would have kept them at home. At the 
same time segregated schools have perpetuated the mentality that women do not 
belong in public spaces controlled by men. In some contexts such as Saudi 
Arabia, gender segregation has also negatively affected the quality of education 
being delivered and received by women. On the job market, women are encour-
aged to work in domains where there is little interaction with males, such as 
teaching, thus limiting their opportunities for work. Social discourses about 
women’s education tie the benefits of education to their role in the private space 
of the home and family as good mothers and wives rather than direct participants 
in the economic development of their societies. It is often said that by raising 
good citizens, educated mothers are in fact participating in the evolution of their 
societies. In short, through their education women are expected to be enablers 
and supporters of men to carry out their responsibilities. We should be mindful, 
though, that constraints on women are not necessarily unique to the “Arab 
family” or the GCC societies but can be found in all cultures and civilizations.
	
Nonetheless, the impressive participation of women in universities and col-
leges throughout the GCC signals a significant shift in the social practices 
throughout the region. Arab/Islamic culture is not static or inherently hostile to 
female empowerment. Most young women and their parents are now firmly 
committed to attaining high levels of formal education. The fact that significant 
increases in education have not yet resulted in sharp rises in labor force parti-
cipation is partly due to the cultural barriers we have outlined in previous para-
graphs. But we should also give due weight to economic factors that have limited 
both the ability and desire of young women to become professional workers. The 
incentive system that channels national workers into the public sector also nega-
tively affects national women’s desire to seek work in the private sector. The 
lack of government employment opportunities combined with lower wages in 
the corporate business world and a welfare system that encourages women to 
stay within the household economy are also responsible for low female labor 
force participation. Higher education attainment is one important factor promot-
ing the increased autonomy and equality of women, but educational reforms by 
themselves cannot be expected to shift the subaltern status of GCC women.
Conclusion
There is little doubt that the road taken by educational policies in the GCC has 
revolutionized the education system in terms of its quantity and quality. There 
are however many questions about where this road is leading to. The determina-
tion of GCC leaders to transform their sheikhdoms into modern societies is 
impressive. They have bet on educational reforms to help them achieve their 
goals of becoming part of the twenty-­first-century knowledge societies but in 
following education commodification trends prevalent in contemporary Western 
higher education, they run the risk of missing their goals of becoming leaders 

Higher education revolutions    223
rather than followers. Even the embrace of a professional education to enable 
students to enter the entrepreneurial global economy seems to be questionable 
when measured by the actual participation and productivity of national graduates 
in the new knowledge economy of their respective countries. Such shortcoming 
may be the result of a turnkey approach to education that is not rooted in its local 
socio-­cultural, historical and economic context. The reforms have considered 
education as “a key site of cultural reproduction” (Phillipson, 2000: 99) where 
authentic individual development is generally secondary. In his critique of this 
perspective, Sing observes that it “is narrowly economic and instrumental and 
often means little more than short term retraining and adaptation. Most govern-
ments are concerned more with national competiveness and economic growth 
than individual development” (Sing, cited in Spring, 2009: 67). GCC educational 
reforms are inscribed in this deeply flawed instrumental view of education that 
too often associates tradition with inertia and “modernity” with progress. As 
Ramadan (2009) points out, all traditions are constructed through movement; 
and modernity is a present tradition that deals with the challenges of con-
temporary times.
	
It is the obligation of any national education policy to guarantee its citizens 
the right to their past so that students can learn to critically evaluate their her-
itage and participate in their own social evolution. Rulers expect their univer-
sities and colleges to nurture citizens’ sense of pride and appreciation of their 
cultural heritage. Their effort to construct a contemporary national identity, 
however, is frustrated by the importation of educational systems, curricula and 
academic workers. This can clearly limit the opportunities for students to study 
their own culture and society. A global university should engage students in a 
truly global culture to build a future society that starts with knowledge about its 
own traditions, social dynamics and environmental issues. This knowledge is 
just as essential and urgent as technological and scientific knowledge and can 
provide the tools necessary to “resist the flattening and homogenizing effects of 
globalization” expressed in the UAE charter. In this respect, using Arabic as one 
of the languages of instruction is essential because “when the written language 
becomes a means of representing and problematizing the issues facing the com-
munity . . . [then it serves] as a tool for linking [students’] uses of language to 
their concerns within the local community” (Holmes, 2008: 363).
	
To pose the challenge of development as either following the Western model 
or remaining underdeveloped creates a false and unproductive dilemma. The 
universities and colleges of the GCC can offer their students all that is good 
about Western education while at the same time teach them about themselves 
and their environment. Given their wealth, they can afford to do it. It is fitting to 
close this chapter and book with one of the great leaders of the GCC and the 
founder of the UAE when he stated:
I believe that he who does not know his past will not understand the present, 
nor will he be able to prepare himself for the future.
(Sheikh Zayed)16

224    Higher education revolutions
Notes
  1	 Arab nation refers to the imagined community of all Arab states forming one nation 
as Arabic has two terms for nation, one referring to the nation state, “qutr’ or “dawla,” 
and the other with a more Pan-­Arab conceptualization with religious overtones, 
“Umma.” Umma is linked to the past Arab/Islamic empires and later to attempts by 
nationalists such as Jamal Abdel Nasser of Egypt and the Baathist movements to 
unify the Arab world.
  2	 World Trade Organization (January 4, 2012). Trade Policy Review Report by the 
State of Kuwait.Wt/Tpr/G/258.
  3	 Kingdom of Bahrain, Ministry of Education website, available at: www.moe.gov.bh/
en/vision_mission.aspx#.UpxEUiLp0is.
  4	 Interview with the higher education advisor to the Ruler of Sharjah, April 10, 2008.
  5	 Fears regarding the loss of Arabic among future generations in the Arab world is a 
constant topic of debate in Arab media.
  6	 We interviewed provosts and deans from the following universities, American Uni-
versity of Kuwait, Kuwait University, Qatar University, University of Sharjah, Zayed 
University, New York Institute of Technology, Abu Dhabi. We also gathered informa-
tion from colleagues in Texas A&M Qatar, University of Bahrain, the Gulf University 
for Science and Technology, and Georgetown University Qatar.
  7	 The five countries could be placed on a continuum with the UAE being the most 
impacted and Oman the least.
  8	 See Badry (2011) for a discussion of the impact of global English and globalization 
on UAE identity.
  9	 Higher education advisor to a UAE ruler, personal communication, April 10, 2008.
10	 When students matriculate into their major after the foundation year, they generally 
have to complete around 12 credits in English composition alone, which limits the 
number of courses they are required to take in their general education component.
11	 Discussions on local politics and religion tend to be taboo subjects in class discussions.
12	 There are, however, exceptions to this observation. In some semi-­private universities 
such as AUS, faculty serve on curriculum committees to make recommendations to 
higher administration for changes or additions to their courses and programs. AUS 
also moved to develop a Faculty Senate and Faculty handbook that provides the 
faculty with many avenues for participating in the governance of the institution.
13	 The data analysis in this paragraph heavily relies on a recent report on GCC labor 
markets prepared for the Gulf Cooperation Council by the International Monetary 
Fund (IMF, 2013).
14	 TANMIA is an effort by the government of the UAE to provide job training that can 
match the needs of the labor market with the skills of potential national citizen 
workers. TANMIA is supposed to supplement and improve on the high level skills 
that national citizens should be obtaining through the higher education system. Other 
countries have similar programs, but some more heavily rely on quotas and adminis-
trative diktats.
15	 Such imbalance is sometimes blamed on higher rates of divorce as educated women 
tend to be less submissive. Education of women has also led to profound social 
changes. Young couples are less likely to live in extended family arrangements.
16 Quoted in Codrai (1990).
References
Adely, F.J. (2009). Educating women for development: The Arab Human Development 
Report 2005 and the problem with women’s choices. International Journal of Middle 
Eastern Studies, 41: 105–122.

Higher education revolutions    225
Al Arabiya TV (2009). Television broadcast in Arabic: hiwaaru al-­arab. ‘the dialogue of 
Arabs.’ March 26.
Al Baik, D. (2008). It is not acceptable to drop Arabic language from our lives. Gulf 
News, March 16. 
Al-­Issa, A. and Dahan, L. (eds.). (2011). Global English and Arabic: Issues of Language 
Culture and Identity. Oxford: Peter Lang.
Al Jazeera TV (2009). Television broadcast in Arabic: ma wara’a al khabar “Behind the 
news.” Discussion with Dr. Salem Sari and Dr. Jasem Sultan. April 18.
Al Maktoum, S.M.b.R. (2006). My Vision: Challenges in the Race for Excellence. Dubai: 
Motivate Publishing Co. (in Arabic).
Al Masah Capital Limited (2012). Women in the GCC: Challenging the status quo. 
Report 19. Available at: http://almasahcapital.com/uploads/report/pdf/report_19.pdf.
Al Najami, S. (2007). Bilingual education hangs in the balance for schools. Gulf News, 
October 18. Available at: http://gulfnews.com/news/gulf/uae/education/bilingual-­
education-hangs-­in-the-­balance-for-­schools-1.207122.
Al-­Nasr, T.J. (2011). Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) Women and Misyar marriage: 
Evolution and progress in the Arabian Gulf. Journal of International Women’s Studies, 
12(3): 43–57.
Badry, F. (2011). Appropriating English: Languages in identity construction in the UAE. 
In A. Al-­Issa and L. Dahan (eds.). Global English and Arabic: Issues of Language, 
Culture, and Identity in the Arab World. Bern: Peter Lang, 81–122.
BBC Arabic (2014). Talking points program. Guests and participants discussed the 
decline of Arabic and speculated on reasons behind the decline and possible recom-
mendations. December 18.
Bollag, B. (2006). America’s hot new export: Higher education. Chronicle of Higher 
Education, 52(24): A44. 
Boulding, E. and Parker, H. (2005). Women and development. In Snarr, Michael T. and Snarr, 
D. Neil (eds.). Introducing Global Issues, 3rd edn. Boulder: Lynne Rienner, 185–200.
Boyle, H.N. (2006). Memorization and learning in Islamic schools. Comparative Educa-
tion Review, 50(3): 478–495.
Brown, P., Lauder, H. and Ashton, D. (2008). Towards a high-­skills economy: Higher 
education and the new realities of global capitalism. In Epstein, D., Boden, R., Deem, 
R., Rizvi, F. and Wright, S. (eds.). Geographies of Knowledge, Geometries of Power: 
Framing the Future of Higher Education. New York: Routledge, 191–210.
Cabinet releases UAE Vision 2021 (2010). UAEinteract. February 7. Available at: www.
uaeinteract.com/docs/Cabinet_releases_UAE_Vision_2021_(full_text)/39555.htm.
Codrai, R. (1990). The Seven Shaikhdoms: Life in the Trucial States before the Federa-
tion of the United Arab Emirates. Singapore: Stacey International.
Dale, R. (2008). Repairing the deficits of modernity: The emergence of parallel discourses 
in higher education in Europe. In Epstein, D., Boden, R., Deem, R., Rizvi, F. and 
Wright, S. (eds.). Geographies of Knowledge, Geometries of Power: Framing the 
Future of Higher Education. New York: Routledge, 14–31. 
Drummond, J. (2010). Bilingual classes at heart of shake-­up. FT.com, June 28. Available 
at: www.ft.com/cms/s/0/c3d168da-82c8-11df-b7ad-00144feabdc0.html.
Drzeniek-­Hanouz, M. and Yousef, T.(2007). Assessing competitiveness in the Arab 
world: Strategies for sustaining the growth momentum. 2006–2007. Available at: 
www.weforum.org/pdf/Global_Competitiveness_Reports/Reports/chapters/1_1.pdf.
Epstein, D. (2008). Introduction: Geographies of knowledge, geometries of power: 
Framing the future of higher education. In Epstein, D., Boden, R., Deem, R., Rizvi, F. 

226    Higher education revolutions
and Wright, S. (eds.). Geographies of Knowledge, Geometries of Power: Framing the 
Future of Higher Education. New York: Routledge, 191–210. 
Farrell, L. and Fenwick, T. (2007). Educating a global workforce. In Farrell, L. and 
Fenwick, T. (eds.). Educating the Global Workforce: Knowledge, Knowledge Work 
and Knowledge Workers. London: Routlege, 13–26.
Grubb, N.W. and Lazerson, M. (2006). The globalization rhetoric and practice: The 
education gospel and vocationalism. In Lauder, H., Brown, P., Dillabough, J. and 
Halsey, A.H. (eds.). Education, Globalization and Social Change. Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 295–307.
Harvard University College of Arts and Sciences (2007). Report of the Task Force on 
General Education. Available at: www.sp07.umd.edu/HarvardGeneralEducationRe-
port.pdf.
Hertog, S. (2014). Arab Gulf States: An assessment of nationalization policies. Gulf 
Labor Markets and Migration (GLMM). GLMM Research paper. N.1/2014.
Holmes, J. (2008). Culture and identity in rural Africa: Representation through literacy. 
Language and Education, 22(6): 363–379.
IMF (2013). Labor market reforms to boost employment and productivity in the GCC. 
Staff Report Prepared for Annual Meeting of GCC Ministers of Finance and Central 
Bank Governors.
Khalaf, S. (2002). Globalization and heritage revival in the Gulf: An anthropological look 
at Dubai Heritage Village. Journal of Social Affairs, 19(75): 13–42.
Khalaf, S. (2005). National dress and the construction of Emirati cultural identity. The 
Journal of Human Sciences. Bahrain: University of Bahrain.
Khalifeh, F. (2011). Qatari women: Employment challenges and the new generation of 
leaders. University of Phoenix, ProQuest, UMI Dissertations Publishing, 2011. 
3535522.
Latzer, B. (2004). Common knowledge: The purpose of general education. The Chronicle 
of Higher Education, October 8. Available at: http://chronicle.com.ezproxy.aus.edu/
article/Common-­Knowledge-the-­Purpo/12903/http://chronicle.com.ezproxy.aus.edu/
article/Common-­Knowledge-the-­Purpo/12903/.
Lewis, K. (2010). Bilingual education for pupils aged 4. The National, June 21.
Mathew, F. (2008). Shoring up national identity. Gulf News, April 17.
Mazawi, A.E. (2007). “Knowledge society” or work as “spectacle”: Education for work 
and the prospects of social transformation in Arab societies. In Farrell, L. and Fenwick, 
T. (eds.). Educating the Global Workforce: Knowledge, Knowledge Work and Know-
ledge Workers. London: Routledge, 251–267.
Mazawi, A.E. and Sultana, R.G. (eds.) (2010). Education and the Arab “World”: Polit-
ical Projects, Struggles, and Geometries of Power. London: Routledge.
Mills, A. (2008a). Emirates look to the west for prestige. The Chronicle of Higher Educa-
tion, September 28. Available at: http://chronicle.com/article/Emirates-­Look-to-­the-
West-­for/8165 (accessed June 5, 2015).
Mills, A. (2008b). U.S. universities negotiate tricky terrain in the Middle East. Chronicle 
of Higher Education, 54(46): A1. 
Muller, J. (2000). Reclaiming Knowledge: Social Theory, Curriculum and Education 
Policy. Florence, KY: Routledge. 
Naidoo, R. (2008). Higher education: A powerhouse for development in a neo-­liberal 
age? In Epstein, D., Boden, R., Deem, R., Rizvi, F. and Wright, S. (eds.). Geographies 
of Knowledge, Geometries of Power: Framing the Future of Higher Education. New 
York: Routledge, 248–265.

Higher education revolutions    227
Nahyan: English to stay as medium of instruction in varsities (2009). Staff Report. Gulf 
News, November 22.
Nedeva, M. (2008). New tricks and old dogs: The “third mission” and the re-­production 
of the university. In Epstein, D., Boden, R., Deem, R., Rizvi, F. and Wright, S. (eds.). 
Geographies of Knowledge, Geometries of Power: Framing the Future of Higher 
Education. New York: Routledge, 85–103.
Olssen, M. and Peters, M.A. (2005). Neoliberalism, higher education and the knowledge 
economy: From the free market to knowledge capitalism. Journal of Education Policy, 
20(3): 313–345. 
Phillipson, R. (2000). English in the new world order: Variations on a theme of linguistic 
imperialism and “World” English. In Ricento, T. (ed.). Ideology, Politics and Lan-
guage Policies. Philadelphia: John Benjamins, 87–106.
Qatar National Vision 2030. Available at: www.gsdp.gov.qa/portal/page/portal/gsdp_en/
qatar_national_vision/qnv_2030_document/QNV2030_English_v2.pdf.
Ramadan, T. (2009). Identity, Islam and the challenges of modernity. Paper presented at 
the “Who am I? Who are You?” conference, April 20–21, in HCT Sharjah, UAE.
Spring, J. (2009). Globalization of Higher Education. London: Routledge.
Swan, M. and Lewis, K. (2010). Billions invested into university research. The National, 
June 10. Available at: www.thenational.ae/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20100610/
NATIONAL/100619985/1010.
Tikly, L. (2004). Education and the new imperialism. Comparative Education, 40(2): 
173–198. 
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) (2003). Arab Human Development 
Report: Building an Arab Knowledge Society. New York: UNDP.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) (2004). Arab Human Development 
Report 2004: Towards Freedom in the Arab World. New York: UNDP.
UNDP (United Nations Development Programme) (2005). Arab Human Development 
Report 2005: Towards the Rise of Women in the Arab World. New York: UNDP.
Ursin, J. (2008). In quality we trust? The case of quality assurance in Finnish universities. 
In Epstein, D., Boden, R., Deem, R., Rizvi, F. and Wright, S. (eds.). Geographies of 
Knowledge, Geometries of Power: Framing the Future of Higher Education. New 
York: Routledge, 128–141.
Verde, T. (2010). Houses of wisdom. Saudi Aramco publication. Available at: www.sau-
diaramcoworld.com/issue/201003/houses.of.wisdom.htm.
World Bank (2009). The World Bank annual report. Available at: http://siteresources-
worldbank.org/EXTANNREP2K8/Resources/YR00_Year_in_Review_Englishpdf.
Youssef, M. (2010). Cabinet sets nation new targets for 2021. The National, February 6. 
Available at: www.thenational.ae/apps/pbcs.dll/article?AID=/20100207/NATIONAL/7
02069832&SearchID=73393375552175.
Zeidan, S. and Bahrami, S. (2011). Women entrepreneurship in GCC: A framework to 
address challenges and promote participation in a regional context. International 
Journal of Business and Social Science, 2(14). Available at: http://ezproxy.aus.edu/
login?url=http://search.proquest.com/docview/904521781?accountid=16946.