International Journal of Scientific Engineering and Research (IJSER)
www.ijser.in
ISSN (Online): 2347-3878
Volume 2 Issue 3, March 2014
Education and Role of Media in Education System 
Preeti 
B. Ed - 2013-14, CIE, University of Delhi, Delhi, India 
Abstract: This paper is showing the relationship between the media and education. It contains the role and importance of media in 
providing education, rural education and for environmental awareness. It also talks about the use of media in classroom and in the 
teaching learning process. This paper is representing the extensive and extreme use of media in education content and its social impact 
upon society because of its inherent ability to reach large number of public.
Keywords: Education, Media, social impact, environmental awareness 
1. Introduction 
Education is the process of learning and knowing, which is 
not restricted to our school text-books. It is a holistic process 
and continues through our life. Even the regular happenings 
and events around us educate us, in one or the other way. It 
would not be an exaggeration to say that the existence of 
human beings is fruitless without education. An educated 
person has the ability to change the world, as he/she is 
brimming with confidence and assured of making the right 
moves. It Makes Better Citizens, Ensures A Productive 
Future, Opens New Vistas, Spreads Awareness, Helps In 
Decision-Making, Bolsters Confidence. 
The term media is derived from Medium, which means 
carrier or mode. Media denotes an item specifically designed 
to reach a large audience or viewers. The term was first used 
with the advent of newspapers and magazines. However, 
with the passage of time, the term broadened by the 
inventions of radio, TV, cinemas and Internet. In the world 
of today, media has become almost as necessary as food and 
clothing. It is true that media is playing an outstanding role 
in strengthening the society. Its duty is to inform, educate 
and entertain the people. It helps us to know current 
situation around the world. The media has a strong social 
and cultural impact upon society. Because of its inherent 
ability to reach large number of public, it is widely used to 
convey message to build public opinion and awareness. 
The role of media in education is evident today by the 
number of computer labs, television sets and libraries that 
have become part of curriculum in most schools today. 
Media comes in different forms and each form affects the 
way students learn and interpret information. Media has 
brought the world closer (globalization) so that now students 
from different universities in different parts of the world are 
connected through a mere internet connection. Amidst the 
information revolution mass media has become such a 
massive part of our lives. 
2. Role of Mass Media in providing Education 
Mass media :- Television programs, internet websites, 
feature-length films, newspapers, music tapes and CDs, 
magazines, billboards, radio programs: essentially, a 
tool/technology which is used by someone to transmit a 
message to a large external audience is called mass media. 
John Dewey stated that education could not be limited 
within teacher and taught without social environment. So 
mass media is one such potent force in the social 
environment of education. Through modern electronic 
techniques and technologies, mass media prove that 
education is, really comprehensive not confined within four 
walls of the classroom. 
Really, mass media are the educational medium for the mass 
and 
mass 
education. 
Irrespective 
of 
caste, 
color, 
geographical, sociological, economical diversities mass 
media prove as an important means for the education to all. 
Mankind gets a great deal of information from the 
widespread mass media i.e. newspaper, TV, radio, 
magazines, journals, films, etc. It is estimated that mass 
media may substitute the real classroom teaching in future. 
3. Functions of Mass Media 
1) Providing 
Information: 
These 
media 
help 
in 
disseminating information for the mass. People acquire 
different knowledge very quickly. 
2) Providing vocational information: Media help in 
providing vocational and professional information to a 
larger group of the community. 
3) Spreading awareness and civic responsibility: People 
can be aware of different problems of the society and 
their role in changing society through mass media. 
People know their rights and duties for the nation clearly. 
4) Educational programmes: Mass Media help in forming 
suitable habit for different programmes and they utilize 
their leisure time in a productive way. It also influences 
the behavior of the people through different programmes. 
5) Role as a non-formal agency: Now in an advanced 
society mass media are not treated as informal agencies 
of education. They are called non-formal agencies due to 
its wide coverage of educational items in a systematic 
way. It is viewed that these media can substitute the 
classroom teaching in future. 
Therefore, mass media are the main means of educating the 
society. These are the cheapest and quickest means of the 
education for the people. The impact and motivation is very 
Paper ID: J2013158
174 of 177

International Journal of Scientific Engineering and Research (IJSER)
www.ijser.in
ISSN (Online): 2347-3878
Volume 2 Issue 3, March 2014
quick through mass media. The teacher must use the 
educational media and methods effectively in the classroom. 
4. Mass media for rural education and 
environmental awareness 
Mass media and print media and its usage play a important 
role for the development of rural education. Various forms 
of mass media such as television, radio, handy video 
cameras, interactive video, computer and print media (news 
papers, magazines bulletins, leaflets) can be used for the 
development of rural education. Door darshan is telecasting 
the latest information on agricultural education and rural 
development through electronic media, covering majority of 
rural population. The findings of various studies stated that 
impact of TV was more on small farmers and illiterates. 
They watched the agricultural programmes and adopted the 
recommended practices. A majority of the farmers viewed 
TV programmes for the sake of education. 
Agriculture is the mainstay of the Indian economy and 
approximately half of the Indian population still gets their 
livelihood directly from agriculture. Most of India's poor 
live in rural areas and are engaged in agriculture. Climate 
change and food security have become burning issues in the 
world. Continued deforestation is a major challenge for 
forests and livelihood and one of the major causes of 
environmental degradation in India can be attributed to rapid 
growth of population, which is adversely affecting the 
natural resources and environment. The growing trends of 
population and consequent demand for food, energy and 
housing have considerably altered land - use practices and 
severely degraded forest area as well as environment. These 
include pressure on land and forests, loss of biodiversity, 
rising demand for energy, global warming, climate change, 
water scarcity and pollution. For agricultural development, 
knowledge and information on farm technologies, methods 
and practices need to be imparted to the farmers at the right 
time. Mass media (electronic and print media) are playing 
very important role in creating environmental awareness and 
dissemination of new agricultural technologies among the 
rural people. Different information tools like radio, 
television and news paper are spreading awareness related to 
climate change and environment protection among the rural 
people at the faster rate than personal contact. The 
production and distribution of printed materials such as 
book, magazines, newspaper and brochure may help in 
transfer of new information’s and technologies whereas 
radio and television are the important tools for dissemination 
of quick information.  
5. The Role of Social Media in Education Life 
These days we are living in the fast developing society 
which every day offers its inhabitants a great number of new 
possibilities. Predominantly, these unique opportunities 
concern the advancement of social media that have 
noticeably permeated the modern education world. In fact, it 
is not a secret that the majority of teachers and professors 
highly appreciate the power of these tools which lies in the 
ability to engage, motivate as well as to involve the students 
into deep contemplation and sensible discussion.  
In general, the term “social media” implies the number of 
activities that include socializing and networking online 
through words, pictures and videos. To some extent, it is a 
two way discussion which brings people together to discover 
and share some information, interests as well as ideas. 
Admittedly, 
social 
media 
can 
range 
from 
social 
bookmarking, where all users have a chance to share their 
online libraries of links and connect to each other’s lists 
within a definite online community, to online collaboration 
spaces.
6. Implementation 
of 
Social 
Media 
Into 
Education Life 
Nowadays, many educational establishments are beginning 
to embrace social media into their everyday life. It is a well-
known fact that Twitter and Facebook are considered to be 
the fastest ways of finding information that might be of great 
value for all students. Remarkably, these websites can be 
easily used for creating a discussion in the classroom. 
Interestingly, it is possible to create a chat room that can be 
embedded later to some blog and scheduled to open at a 
specified time. Actually, all teachers can easily pull new 
stories from any of these online sources and the students can 
put any questions in order to develop the further discussion 
of the previously downloaded article. Speaking about 
various blogs, they can be utilized to encourage creative 
writing and to enrich grammar skills. Thus, the professors 
here are welcome to suggest their requirements for writing 
projects that are to be fulfilled by the students within certain 
deadlines. On the whole, one of the biggest assets of each 
social media tool lies in bringing together the students of all 
ages to help them with all types of assignments, starting with 
the homework and finishing with different researches. It is 
worth mentioning that such phenomenon as geo-tagging has 
a great future perspective in education life, owing to the fact 
that it can be used to target and find necessary data about the 
places that are being studied. In addition, it has been 
scientifically proven that social media can assist the students 
in solving their engagement crisis. Indeed, the lack of 
engagement has become the main reason for students’ 
expulsion both from the course and college. In this case, 
social media engages them into close communication and 
collaboration with their instructors so that the studying 
process is properly maintained.  
7. The Use of Media in Teaching – Learning 
Process 
Learning is a process to acquire knowledge. It needs hard 
work and sometimes will make students frustrated and get 
bored, so that they lose their attention to a lesson. In this 
case, the use of media in teaching- learning process is 
needed to attract students’ attention and to make teaching- 
learning activities more interesting and also effective. The 
use of media in teaching- learning process is not a new 
thing. Many teachers know that media will be helpful. 
Paper ID: J2013158
175 of 177

International Journal of Scientific Engineering and Research (IJSER)
www.ijser.in
ISSN (Online): 2347-3878
Volume 2 Issue 3, March 2014
Media give students something new, but not all of teachers 
know how to implement it correctly, so sometimes media 
disturb learning process instead of helping students in 
learning process. This situation causes a problem. The use of 
media is questioning whether it really helps teaching- 
learning activities or not. Based on that assumption, the 
writer wants to find out the fact of the use of media in 
teaching- learning process, whether media can help 
teaching- learning process or not. By reading this article, 
readers will get a real experience of the use of media, which 
can help learning process. Besides, they will also know 
some obstacles that may arise from the use of media, how to 
overcome them, and detail example of how to conduct 
teaching- learning process by using media, especially globe 
and map. This article will provide an interview of a teacher’s 
experience in implementing media for teaching social 
studies. 
Usually use of media is very useful to teach social studies by 
this we can use pictures from encyclopedia or else, a globe, 
a map, and internet to teach social studies. the students had 
to find all-important information including the map, flag, 
landmark, famous buildings, mountains, traditions, etc. By 
using media in teaching, students’ improvement can be seen 
clearly.
The use of media in teaching- learning process has also 
several advantages. Media could raise the students’ interest 
of the lesson and media is important to lead students’ 
attention. Media increase students’ responsibility to control 
their own learning. In brief, we can say that the use of media 
in teaching- learning activity is good. 
8. The Importance of Media in the Classroom 
Media in the classroom engage students in learning and 
provide a richer experience. Media are useful tools for 
illustrating a lesson, allowing students to see examples of 
what they are learning. Interactive media such as Smart 
Boards allow students to move items on a screen for 
illustrative purposes. Students view media as exciting 
learning aids, making learning entertaining and less 
monotonous, according to the report "Benefits and Risks of 
Media and Technology in the Classroom "from the UCLA 
Office of Instructional Development. 
8.1 Appeal to Multiple Learning Styles 
Media appeal to visual, auditory and kinesthetic learners. 
Students can watch a movie, listen to music or interact with 
digital media on an interactive Smart Board. Effective 
teachers do not rely on teaching students in merely one style 
but use a variety of styles to reach the greatest number of 
students. Providing a rich learning experience through 
classroom media keeps students focused and engaged in 
learning.
8.2 Creates an Authentic Learning Experience
Using newspapers, brochures, job application forms and 
news broadcasts provides authentic opportunities for 
students to learn using real-world media. This method 
simulates real-life experiences in which students must read, 
evaluate and interpret information based on items that they 
need in their daily lives. When students use objects from the 
real world, they can see the connection between what they 
learn in school and how they can use the knowledge as a 
member of society. 
8.3 Strengthens Critical-Thinking Skills 
Teachers can use media to hone critical-thinking skills. 
Students can write about a song, interpret a movie or 
interpret a news broadcast. Teachers can use the media to 
ask probing questions and facilitate discussions that extend 
beyond basic comprehension questions. Teachers can also 
create projects in which students develop their own media, 
using classroom media as a model. This hands-on activity 
challenges students to formulate media, using their own 
creativity and interpretations from classroom media. 
8.4 Teaches Students to Use Media 
Using media in the classroom teaches students how to use 
and care for resources to further their education. Students 
not only learn how to use the Internet, a dictionary or a 
newspaper for information, but they also learn how to care 
for and protect the items they use, according to the Center 
for Media Literacy. Students can also learn how to 
determine the value of media and learn methods to 
contribute to society, producing their own media.
9. Conclusion
The media has the power of educating people, the good and 
the bad. Since it affect the eyes, the ears and the mind 
simultaneously nothing can overcome the influence of the 
media. The media in the advanced society should perform a 
noble mission of enlightening people and discourage 
sectarian, communal and divisive trends. 
Media integration is consistently referred to as a relatively 
new phenomenon in education. Although complete media 
integration is not yet commonplace in classrooms 
throughout the country, media’s use in the classroom, much 
like that of technology, is seemingly old hat Although 
“movie day in the classroom” has shifted from slides and 
projectors to DVDs and YouTube as a result of rapidly-
changing technologies in the 21st century, media use in the 
classroom remains prevalent none the less .Hardly a country 
in the world is spared controversy in education, but when 
one looks behind the sometimes anarchic scenes, there is a 
lot about which to be optimistic and hopeful.  
Traditionally, the mass media and education have enjoyed a 
love-hate relationship. On one hand television and 
newspapers particularly, have provided extensive and 
Paper ID: J2013158
176 of 177

International Journal of Scientific Engineering and Research (IJSER)
www.ijser.in
ISSN (Online): 2347-3878
Volume 2 Issue 3, March 2014
extremely useful education content. On the other, however, 
their newsrooms never seem to hesitate when controversy 
rears is ugly head. The power of media is so extensive and 
huge; it can be used to educate people with very little cost. 
Media today is to inform the people about the latest 
happening around them and the world. They cover all 
aspects of our interest like weather, politics, war, health, 
finance, science, fashion, music, etc. The need for more and 
more news has evolved into creation of dedicated TV & 
radio channels and magazines. People can listen, watch and 
read latest news whenever and wherever they want. 
References 
[1] Cates, W. M. (1995). The technology of educational 
restructuring: planning for change in teacher education. 
Computers in the Schools, 11(4), 1-22. 
[2] Change, J., & Moores, T., & Smith, D. K. (2005). 
Prepare your mind for learning. 
[3] Communications of the ACM, 48(9), 115-118. 
[4] Clark, R. E. (1994). Media will never influence learning. 
Educational Technology Research and Development, 
42(2), 21-29. 
[5] Clark, R. E. (1992). Media use in education. In M.C. 
Alkin (Ed.), Encyclopedia of 
[6] Educational 
Research 
(pp.805-814). 
New 
York: 
Macmillan. 
[7] Clark, R. E. (1983). Reconsidering research on learning 
with media. Review of Educational Research, 53(4), 445-
459. 
[8] Crick, R. D., & Wilson, K. (2005). Being a learner: a 
virtue for the 21st century. British Journal of Educational 
Studies, 53(3), 359-374. 
[9] Jonassen, D. H., & Carr, C., & Yueh, H. P. (1998). 
Computers as mind tools for engaging learners in critical 
thinking. Tech Trends, 43(2), 24-32. 
Author Profile
Preeti has completed her B.A from Bahadurgarh 
District of Haryana. She has done her M.A in 
Geography from Department of Geography, Delhi 
School of Economics, and University of Delhi in 
2012. Presently she is pursuing her B.Ed from 
University of Delhi. Women Issue, Conflict, Crime, Corruption, 
Politics and Development Issues are few areas of her Interest. She 
is also very active in social services mainly in child education and 
women empowerment
Paper ID: J2013158
177 of 177