ARCTOS
Acta Philologica Fennica
VOL. XLVIII
HELSINKI 2014

INDEX
11
25
57
67
93
109
137
165
185
205
211
229
261
279
295
319
Neil Adkin	
Some Recent "Improvements" to the Text of Jerome's 
Letter 52, "On Sacerdotal Lifestyle"
Neci̇p Fi̇kri̇ Ali̇can	
Rethought Forms: How Do They Work?
Luigi Arata	
Usi medici dell'Anagyris foetida nella medicina greca
Christer Bruun	
True Patriots? The Public Activities of the *Augustales 
of Roman Ostia and the summa honoraria
Giuseppe Camodeca	
Un nuovo consularis Byzacenae di tardo IV secolo e i 
Tannonii di Puteoli
Antonio Corso	
Retrieving the Style of Cephisodotus the Younger
Lee Fratantuono	
Saevit medio in certamine: Mars in the Aeneid
Seppo Heikkinen	
Copy-paste Metrics? Lupus of Ferrières on Boethius
Panu Hyppönen	
4π = 12.5? – The Problems in the Vitruvian Hodometer
Mika Kajava	
Two Greek Documents on Bronze (IG XIV 954; IG XIV 
955 = IGUR 4)
Tua Korhonen	
Some Steps Towards Plato's Ecopolitics in the Laws
Antti Lampinen	
Fragments from the 'Middle Ground' – Posidonius' 
Northern Ethnography
Jari Pakkanen	
A Reappraisal of the First Publication of Stirrup 
Jar Inscriptions from Tiryns by Johannes Sundwall: 
Photographs, Lost Sherds and the 'a-nu-to/no-di-zo 
Workshop'
Giorgos C. Paraskeviotis	
Verg. ecl. 6,13–30. Mimic Humour in Silenus' Scene
Elina Pyy	
In Search of Peer Support: Changing Perspectives on 
Sisterhood in Roman Imperial Epic
Olli Salomies	
Some Published, But Not Very Well Known Latin 
Inscriptions

Heikki Solin	
Analecta epigraphica CCXCII– CCCI
Pietro Verzina	
L'esordio ἦν ὅτε (Cypria fr. 1,1 Bernabé) e le sue 
connotazioni narrative
Ville Vuolanto 	
Children in the Roman World: Cultural and Social 
Perspectives. A Review Article
De novis libris iudicia
Index librorum in hoc volumine recensorum
Libri nobis missi
Index scriptorum
347
415
435
451
575
581
587

Arctos 48 (2014) 67–91
TRUE PATRIOTS? 
THE PUBLIC ACTIVITIES OF THE *AUGUSTALES 
OF ROMAN OSTIA AND THE SUMMA HONORARIA *
Christer Bruun
1. The *Augustales in the Roman world 
The Augustales constitute an important group in what anachronistically could be 
called the Roman "middle class".1 They had their own association in most towns 
in Roman Italy, and they frequently appear elsewhere too in the Roman West. 
The titles of the men who belonged to essentially similar local organizations vary 
somewhat, so that we find Augustales, seviri Augustales, magistri Augustales, 
quattuorviri Augustales, and still other varieties. Modern scholarship commonly 
makes use of the blanket term *Augustales as a collective denominator for these 
several categories.2 The term was coined by Robert Duthoy, who is the author of 
*  Much of my research on Ostia has been supported by a Standard Research Grant awarded by 
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRCC), and my research 
on freedmen by a SSHRCC Insight Grant, which is gratefully acknowledged. Part of this 
paper was presented at a conference at the University of Gothenburg in 2012, organized by 
the "Inscripta" network; sincere thanks are due to the organizers and the other participants. My 
work was much facilitated by a stay at the Institutum Romanum Finlandiae and by its Intendent 
Simo Örmä. I am grateful to Mika Kajava, Olli Salomies, Heikki Solin, and the referees for 
helpful comments, and to Alexander Kirby, MA, for improving my English; remaining errors 
are my own.
1  I use this term in a purely technical sense here, to denote a layer of population which in social 
status and probably often financially is situated between the leading ordo decurionum and the 
rest of the population in towns of Roman Italy. 
2  Duthoy 1978, 1265–6, 1300–1; Abramenko 1993, 11 n. 1, 87–9 for other similar organizations 
at the local level, such as the Apollinares, Martini, and Mercuriales, the social composition of 
which was similar to that of the *Augustales; cf. Mouritsen 2006, 238–40. 

Christer Bruun
68
a number of still essential studies on these groups.3 The *Augustales recruited 
the vast majority of their members from among the wealthy local freedmen in 
Roman cities and towns.4 In some places, such as Ostia, the membership of the 
*Augustales almost exclusively consisted of freed slaves, to judge from the sur­
viving evidence.5
Besides some literary references in the Cena Trimalchionis episode of 
Petronius' Satyrica, the *Augustales are known almost exclusively from epi­
graphic evidence.6 Latin inscriptions provide evidence for some two thousand 
individuals who belong in this group.7 
The position or rank of Augustalis first appears during the reign of Augus­
tus, from 12 BCE onwards when the princeps became pontifex maximus. The 
Augustales were supposed to take part in cult practices, or, to cite a recent brief 
synthesis by John Scheid, to be in charge of the local cult of the Genius Augusti, 
the Numen Augusti, and the Lares Augusti. Slightly different views of their role 
in the field of cultic activities have been expressed in recent scholarship as well,8 
3  See Duthoy 1978, with reference to earlier works by the same author; cf. note 17 below. 
Individuals using the plain title sevir belonged to a different organization and will not concern 
me here, as they are not found at Ostia. Abramenko 1993, 13–42 shows that although seviri 
and *Augustales belonged to different organizations, their social background was very similar. 
4  Magistri Augustales, Augustales, and seviri Augustales do not appear in the city of Rome; 
it is thought that in the capital, the vicomagistri or magistri vici had a corresponding function; 
thus Duthoy 1978, 1290–91. 
5  The VIvir Augustalis T. Tettius C.f. Lenus in AE 1996, 295 represents one of the few examples 
of freeborn *Augustales from Ostia; C. Calpurnius C.f. Celer in CIL XIV 4562,3 is another, as 
acknowledged by Abramenko 1993, 228, although on pp.18, 20 he seems to indicate that there 
are no ingenui among the Ostian *Augustales.
6  Petr. 30,1–2; 65,3–5; 71,12. See also the scholia cited in n. 8.
7  Numbers in Duthoy 1976 and Duthoy 1978, 1258 n. 30, who included also the plain seviri, 
who can be difficult to separate from the seviri Augustales. Abramenko 1993, 336–9 added 
some two hundred new inscriptions, and in his tables on pp. 18–9 the number of *Augustales 
is c. 1870 (the figure for Ostia is much too low, see n. 18), while the seviri number over nine 
hundred.
8  Ostrow 1990; Scheid 1997; Linderski 2007; cf. Duthoy 1978, 1259 nn. 33–4, with reference 
to Keller 1904, 158 = Ps.-Acro, ad Hor. serm. 2,3,281: iusserat enim Augustus in compitis deos 
Penates constitui, ut studiosius colerentur. Erant autem libertini sacerdotes qui Augustales 
dicebantur, and Hauthal 1866, 278 = Porphyrion, ad Hor. serm. 2,3,281: ab Augusto enim 
Lares, id est dii domestici in compitis positi sunt, et libertini sacerdotes dati, qui Augustales 
appellati sunt. 

True patriots?
69
but the precise cultic purpose and nature of the *Augustales associations is not 
central to my paper and does not require a detailed discussion here. 
An important fact is that the *Augustales were involved in many activities, 
both cultic and profane, individually or as a body. Surveying the whole range 
of these activities in a particular context constitutes the topic of this paper. This 
study is part of a larger project aiming at charting civic participation and civic 
identity in Rome's harbour town Ostia. It has been claimed that Ostia suffered 
from a deficit of public buildings, allegedly a result of the lack of interest among 
its inhabitants in the wellbeing and flourishing of their town, to which, so the ar­
gument goes, most were newcomers. The wealthier residents felt that they were 
in transition, as they either hoped to move to the nearby Urbs or possibly to return 
to their place of origin. Members of the elite, who elsewhere in the Roman world 
during the High Empire tended to shower their community with benefactions, 
at Ostia were uninterested in spending their fortunes on civic building projects, 
leading to a relative lack of urban development.9 
Against this background, the actions and behaviour of the Augustales as­
sumes a wider importance, since they constitute a significant segment of the pop­
ulation, for which, moreover, a good number of sources is available. With over 
six thousand known inscriptions, Ostia provides rich epigraphic evidence on the 
Augustales, in many regards more than is available in any other town in the Ro­
man world. This paper, therefore, aims to investigate the public actions of the 
*Augustales, their collective or individual impact on their town. 
The common view is that, except for a few early plain Augustales, start­
ing in the late first century CE all members of this group at Ostia held the title 
of sevir Augustalis.10 There is newly discovered evidence which challenges this 
neat scheme, since some plain Augustales now appear to have been active after 
the appearance of the seviri Augustales, but discussing this matter is a topic for a 
future study as it does not affect the argument below.11 
The *Augustales in the Roman world, being predominantly freedmen, suf­
fered from a serious handicap when aiming for broad social recognition and ad­
vancement. The lex Visellia of 24 CE did not allow liberti to become decuriones 
9  Heinzelmann 2002, 119–20, who detects a trend towards more investments from local 
residents possibly setting in towards the end of the second century CE.
10  See, e.g., Meiggs 1973, 217–22; Cébeillac-Gervasoni – Caldelli – Zevi 2010, 195–6.
11  In particular, the interesting new inscription in Marinucci 2007 (= AE 2009, 192) has been 
added to the previously known evidence.

Christer Bruun
70
and, hence, to have a public career in their municipality.12 Thus, from Tiberius' 
reign onwards freedmen could never aspire to become officially recognized lead­
ers of their towns and fellow citizens. Instead, it is thought — and surely rightly 
— that local associations of *Augustales came to provide a venue to engage in 
public life for these self-made men, successful and wealthy. It is of course true 
that since the Augustales appeared before the lex Visellia of 24 CE, their exist­
ence cannot be seen as a direct response to the law's exclusion of freedmen from 
positions in local government.13 Yet, the local *Augustales associations may have 
come to assume the role of safety valve, channelling the energy of upwards mov­
ing social strata of Roman society, thereby helping to keep social peace in local 
towns. As an *Augustalis, a nouveau-riche freedman could gain social prestige 
and feel satisfaction and loyalty towards the prevailing social order; any thoughts 
of invoking sudden changes would have less traction among these men who had 
already risen above most of their peers. This is the common sociological and psy­
chological explanation for the significance of the *Augustalitas, and it is quite a 
compelling one.14 
At Ostia, there is rich evidence for the *Augustales, which has never been 
properly collected or discussed in its entirety. Russell Meiggs dedicated a mere 
six pages to the *Augustales in his classic monograph on Ostia,15 while a partial 
treatment can be found in John D'Arms's monograph on commerce and social 
standing from 1981, in which he presented and discussed some of the most ex­
12  The law is documented in Codex Iustinianus IX 21; Abramenko 1993, 49. Only freeborn 
citizens could be elected to municipal magistracies according to ch. 54 of the so-called Lex 
Malacitana, which is a copy of the Flavian municipal law given to a number of towns with 
Italic rights; see González 1986, 163, 188, 215. 
13  This point is made by Abramenko 1993, 49–50. 
14  See, for instance, Ostrow 1990, 365, 375–6. However, Mouritsen 2006, 242–3 professes 
disagreement with the common explanation for the function of the *Augustalitas, although his 
own explanation for this phenomenon is not at odds with the standard view; cf. Mouritsen 2011, 
259–60. Abramenko 1993, 44–57 set out from the fact that in Northern Italy a good portion 
of ingenui are found as members of the *Augustales, at least within a century of the creation 
of these organizations (p. 18). On this basis, he refuted the theory that the *Augustalitas was 
intended to integrate liberti into the social and political structures of the Principate. The error 
here is not to realize that these local organizations could equally well integrate a surplus of 
wealthy local freeborn men who were unable to find a space in the ordo decurionum. In many 
places, the *Augustales were overwhelmingly freedmen from the inception, and in other places 
they tended to be recruited from among the liberti to an ever larger extent as the Principate 
advanced. 
15  Meiggs 1973, 217–22.

True patriots?
71
tensive inscriptions mentioning *Augustales, while giving a list of 119 members 
of the organization.16 Yet, because there are altogether over four hundred *Augus­
tales from Ostia known by name, D'Arms evidently omitted much material. Rob­
ert Duthoy collected all the evidence available in his day, but his general over­
views cannot do justice to a single town.17 Andrik Abramenko presumably had an 
up-to-date database on which he based his many perceptive and acute comments, 
but in his statistical tables he did not include all the Ostian *Augustales either (but 
only about a third of them).18 More recently, Henrik Mouritsen presented some 
controversial views on the *Augustales and their significance, but it was never his 
intention to provide a comprehensive discussion.19 On several occasions, Alfredo 
Marinucci has published inscriptions which add significantly to our knowledge of 
Ostian *Augustales,20 while the recent franco-italian epigraphic manual presents 
a brief synthesis of the *Augustales association at Ostia and reveals that further 
relevant texts await publication.21
2. Which actions of the *Augustales count as "benefactions"? The summa 
honoraria as "evergetism"
In total, some twenty-five inscriptions are known in which we find the Ostian 
*Augustales performing some public activity, either as a collective or individu­
ally. This aspect of the impact of the *Augustales at Ostia has to my knowledge 
not been investigated before.22 It will be done here with an eye to evaluating to 
16  D'Arms 1981, 128–40 discussed many aspects of the social position and professional 
activities of the Augustales at Ostia and Puteoli, without aiming for completeness, with a list 
of the Ostian ones on p. 177–9.
17  See Duthoy 1974; Duthoy 1976; Duthoy 1978. 
18  Cf. note 7 above. Abramenko 1993, 18 registered 156 *Augustales from Ostia with the 
rationale "Berücksichtigt wurden hier natürlich nur Inschriften, in denen einzelne *Augustales 
genannt werden, nicht aber solche, in denen sie kollektiv (etwa bei divisiones) auftreten"; cf. 
233. According to this definition, also the men listed in the so-called fasti et alba Augustalium 
(CIL XIV 4560–63) ought to have been considered, as indeed they were in Abramenko 1992. 
See further Abramenko 1993, 227–33 for a chapter wholly dedicated to the Ostian *Augustales.
19  Mouritsen 2006; 2011, 250–61. 
20  Marinucci 1992; Marinucci 2007.
21  Cébeillac-Gervasoni – Caldelli – Zevi 2010, 195–6; similarly Marinucci 2012, 43–4.
22  D'Arms 1981, 128–33 focused on the business connections of the known Augustales and 

Christer Bruun
72
what extent the *Augustales can be found acting as benefactors, i.e. engaging in 
"evergetism", in the Ostian community. 
Before surveying the evidence, some words need to be said about the view, 
voiced on several occasions in recent years when the topic of private benefactions 
in the municipal context is encountered, that actions which were required in order 
to achieve membership among the seviri Augustales ("die bloße Pflichtleistung", 
in Abramenko's words), expressed with the formula ob honorem and carried out 
instead of paying the summa honoraria or membership fee, should not be count­
ed as "evergetism".23 While this issue is of little importance at Ostia, since such 
expressions almost never appear in Ostian inscriptions, they occur elsewhere in 
Italy, and for comparative purposes (which will become clear below) it is impor­
tant to be clear about the nature of such actions.
The background for this view can be briefly sketched. Roman towns re­
quired of men who took on leading municipal positions to pay an entrance fee, 
a summa honoraria, for their distinction. That the town councillors, the decu­
riones, did so in most cases is generally assumed, although this issue has not 
received much attention lately.24 More attention has recently been paid to the 
summa honoraria which the annual magistrates (duoviri, aediles, quaestores) 
contributed to their town's treasury during their year in office. This sum could 
be used for the benefit of their fellow citizens, for instance, by paying for specta­
cles. A similar requirement applied to elected holders of high-ranking municipal 
priestly offices.25 As for the *Augustales, there are several indications that they 
were elected by the town council, the decuriones, and there are a few texts that 
refer to the summa honoraria which elected *Augustales needed to pay into the 
arca of the town. We hear about the system only on the occasions when either an 
*Augustalis boasted about having been relieved of this financial burden, as a sign 
on their ties to various commercial and professional organizations. Abramenko 1993, 142–6 
surveyed the evergetism, in South-Central Italy, of what he calls the "munizipale Mittelschicht", 
in which the *Augustales play the most important role, but he does not focus on Ostia, the 
discussion lacks details, and some material is omitted. 
23  Duthoy 1978, 1270 n. 112; Abramenko 1993, 142–3. The difference between "real evergetism" 
and costs connected to officeholding was more recently and forcefully stressed by Eck 1997, 
307–9, where, however, the emphasis was on the summa honoraria of municipal magistrates; 
followed by Campedelli 2014, 73–7, without distinction between actions by magistrates and 
by *Augustales.
24  Liebenam 1900, 54–5; Garnsey 1970, 311–23 with important distinctions.
25  Liebenam 1900, 54–65; Garnsey 1970, 323–5; Duncan-Jones 1982, 82–8 and 107–10 (North 
Africa), 147–55 and 215–7 (Italy); Eck 1997, 307–9.

True patriots?
73
of esteem by the decuriones, or when an *Augustalis is taking credit for some 
public work or expenditure that he carried out ob honorem Augustalitatis (some 
similar expressions also occur).26 
This situation is well known and often commented upon, but to my knowl­
edge it has not generated much discussion in the period of modern scholarship 
on the *Augustalitas initiated by Duthoy's still fundamental works. Undoubtedly 
the terms ob honorem and summa honoraria occur in some inscriptions concern­
ing *Augustales, but, as shall be argued here, the *Augustales were not in the 
same position as municipal decuriones or magistrates when they took on these 
expenses. I find it surprising that there has been little discussion about the view 
that such contributions from *Augustales should not count as benefactions or 
"evergetism".27 
First, it is to some extent an arbitrary decision not to count a summa hono­
raria which an *Augustalis used for public works (or spectacles) as an act of ev­
ergetism. Why should it not be considered as an expense that someone made vol­
untarily for the benefit of his fellow townspeople? When someone shouldered the 
responsibilities of a sevir Augustalis, this happened because of a conscious per­
sonal choice. The person knew that he was expected to contribute a certain sum 
to the community once he accepted his new rank. This was a deliberate action, 
different from other situations when someone's money entered the town's or the 
state's treasury, as, for instance, when taxes were collected, or duties on imported 
or exported goods were paid. There were laws and bylaws establishing what taxes 
and duties had to be paid, and these regulations concerned everyone who resided 
in and/or conducted business in the town; there was no place for personal choice 
here. In contrast, any person could choose whether to aim for the position of *Au­
gustalis or not, and it must remain doubtful whether any freedman's livelihood 
would have been seriously threatened had he chosen not to accept the position of 
sevir Augustalis. Thus, we are truly dealing with a matter of choice here.28  
26  For the sources, see Duthoy 1978, 1266–7; Abramenko 1993, 142–54 (including actions that 
the author disqualifies as "evergetism", as well as examples of bona fide munificence). 
27  Some vague hesitation about the views expressed in Eck 1997 can be found in Goffin 2002, 
11, 24–5; her actual study of evergetism by *Augustales (pp. 197–201) does not seem to make 
any distinction between evergetic deeds ob honorem and others; cf. n. 23.
28  To illustrate the difference between a tax or customs due and the summa honoraria which 
was expected from a leading *Augustalis: if someone wanted to avoid paying, for instance, the 
portorium tax, this could only be achieved by changing one's profession from being involved in 
import/export to something else. A wealthy freedman who declined to perform as an *Augustalis 
did not face a similarly existential threat to his livelihood. 

Christer Bruun
74
Second, a survey of the mechanism behind the system of collecting the 
summa honoraria will show that whenever this term (or a similar one) appears 
in connection with some public engagement by an *Augustalis, we must assume 
that a voluntary expenditure of private funds by the person in question had also 
taken place, in additional to the established summa honoraria. 
Current scholarship holds that the election of a new sevir Augustalis was 
supposed to lead to the influx of perhaps 2,000 sestertii as an entry fee into the 
town's coffers.29 This means that the money was then at the disposal of the mag­
istrates of the town, normally the duoviri and certain lesser magistrates, and the 
sum is considered to have been a welcome addition to the municipal funds.30 
What, then, would have lead the town council and its leaders to forego this in­
come? Where is the advantage in allowing a hopeful new *Augustalis, in a certain 
sense still an outsider,31 to either offer public spectacles in his own name or carry 
out public works on his own, which would allow him to take full credit for its 
completion through a commemorative inscription, albeit while probably adding, 
at the bottom, the standard bland formula d(ecreto) d(ecurionum) – "by decision 
of the town council"? Why would the duoviri or other local leaders not want to 
be in charge of the money and the project, so as to be able to add to their own 
prestige? 
Where is the "quid pro quo" in this kind of affair? If it was the case that in 
every town a fixed summa honoraria had to be paid for entry into the *Augustali­
tas, one must assume that there was a clear advantage for the town in allowing a 
presumptive *Augustalis to convert the fee into some activity that had a public 
impact. He must have been willing to spend more, with the knowledge that by 
being responsible for public works (or public spectacles) he would gain local 
authority and prestige – and these are precisely the same motives which drove 
regular "evergetism" in the Roman world.32  
29  Duncan-Jones 1982, 152 with several examples.
30  Liebenam 1900, 251–68 on the town council and the magistrates making the decisions; Eck 
1997, 307–9. The so-called lex Irnitana, published in 1986, increased our knowledge of the 
prerogatives of local magistrates and their interactions with the decurions, see chapters 79 and 
82–3 with González 1986, 173–4, 194–5, 225–7. 
31  Many scholars consider *Augustales to have been indelibly marked by the macula servitutis, 
a view I do not necessarily share, but in any case they were clearly not yet members of the 
officially recognized ruling elite.
32  This scenario admittedly sets out from the assumption that membership among the *Augustales 
was a desirable distinction. On the contrary, if there was no interest in the *Augustalitas 

True patriots?
75
It will not do to argue that the organization of Roman towns was often so 
rudimentary that they were at the mercy of energetic entrepreneurs, as the *Au­
gustales are supposed to have been, if they wanted a street paved or a basilica 
repaired. Even if towns had no large work force of their own to employ, any nec­
essary work contract would simply have been put out for tender, surely using the 
same procedure as an *Augustalis would do.
3. The activities of the *Augustales at Ostia 
The discussion of what constitutes municipal evergetism is important to the dis­
cussion of the Ostian evidence and the actions of *Augustales elsewhere in Italy 
which follows. At Ostia itself there are, to my knowledge, no such contentious 
cases that need to be dealt with. One instance may be represented by the follow­
ing fragmentary inscription, which leaves us completely in the dark about the 
action that may have been carried out: [------] Maxi[mus ---] / [sevir Aug.] idem 
q(uin)q(uennalis) co[---] / [---]m ob hono[rem ---] / [---] quinquenn[alitatis] / 
[------] (CIL XIV 384, now in the Vatican Museum); another similar text is also 
known.33
Excluding, for obvious reasons, simple epitaphs, the relevant inscriptions 
are the following ones: 
1. CIL XIV 8 = ILS 6154: the curator Augustalium M. Cornelius Epagathus 
in 141 CE dedicates a statuette to the genius coloniae Ostiensium and distributes 
the sum of one denarius, presumably to his fellow *Augustales who are present 
at the inauguration.34
among the well-to-do population and the town council believed that they needed to coopt new 
*Augustales, they may, to be sure, have deviced a system whereby freedmen were allowed 
to carry out various projects, the costs of which were considerably lower than the official 
summa honoraria, instead of paying the fee. Perhaps such a situation developed later in the 
third century CE, but I presume it was not the case during the High Empire, from which most 
of our documentation derives. Yet, even in this hypothetical situation, if the *Augustalitas had 
become nothing but a burden, joining the college and paying for the membership meant that the 
person who did so was willing to spend money on matters that benefited the community; this 
too is akin to evergetism.
33  Published by Laird 2000, 53, as [co]rporis[---] / C. Clodi[us ---] / sevir Au[g(ustalis) ---] / 
ob honorem qui[nquennalitatis ---] / C. Clodi M[---/---]idm[---].
34  This inscription is quoted, translated, and discussed in Bruun (2014). Abramenko 1993, 
145 assumes that the whole free male population at Ostia would have benefited, wherefore 

Christer Bruun
76
2. CIL XIV 12: the sevir Augustalis and curator (Augustalium) A. Livius 
[---] dedicates a statuette to the genius sevirum [Augustalium] Ost[iensium].
3. CIL XIV 33:35 the VIvir Augustalis and quinquennalis honoratus T. An­
nius Lucullus donates a signum Martis to the dendrophor(i) Ostiensium in 143 
CE. 
4. CIL XIV 367 = ILS 6164: the seviri Augustales decided to honour one 
of their leading members P. Horatius Chryseros with the erection of a statue, 
because he had donated 50,000 sestertii to their treasury, the interest of which 
was to be used for the benefit of the Augustales and to decorate his statue on his 
birthday. Horatius Chryseros replied by distributing a gift of money to the town's 
decuriones and to the Augustales (this is the term used) at the dedication of his 
statue in 182 CE, and by taking on the cost of erecting the statue.
5. CIL XIV 373: the ordo Augustalium honours L. Licinius L.f. Pal. 
Herodes, a meritorious eques Romanus who had held many local offices and is 
called an optimus civis, probably with a statue.
6. CIL XIV 431: a long inscription reveals that in honour of a person, 
whose name is missing, the [ordo Augustalium] passed a decree to erect a statue 
of him (huic ... [statu]am decrevit). The honorand, who very likely, as we shall 
see, was called Q. Veturius (no hypothesis concerning his cognomen is possible), 
responded by donating 50,000 sestertii to the treasury (arca) of the organization, 
with the instruction that every year on his birthday, there would be a distribution 
of money to those present from the interest generated by this sum while the statue 
would be decorated. The inscription further records that two individuals, Veturia 
Q.f. Rufina and Q. Veturius Q.f. Felix Socrates, the latter among other distinc­
tions a decurio at Ostia, shouldered the cost of erecting the statue (which makes it 
likely that their father was the honorand), while Q. Veturius Felicissimus, a freed­
man and sevir Augustalis quinquennalis and curator of that ordo (i.e., the *Au­
gustales), was in charge (curante) of a distribution of cash to the decurions and 
the Augustales on the occasion of the inauguration of the statue. The role played 
by the latter makes it very likely that it was the association of the *Augustales 
which bestowed honours on this distinguished person. 
7. CIL XIV 451 = AE 1987, 176a: the [sevir] Augustalis and q(uin)-
[q(uennalis)] A. Egrilius Faustus, together with one or two other men, honour 
the cost to the benefactor would have been considerable. In my view, it is more likely that the 
*Augustales, which still comprised several hundred members, would have been the target of 
the distribution.
35  Vermaseren 1956, 135–6 no. 285.

True patriots?
77
Marcus Aurelius while the latter was still Caesar in the reign of Antoninus Pius. 
The plaque, inscribed on both sides (for the later text, see the following entry) 
may have decorated a statue basis.
8. CIL XIV 451 = AE 1987, 176b: in a fragmentary inscription, one M. 
Au[-] Ma[-], assumed to be a [sevir Augustalis] and [q(uin)]q(uennalis), honours 
the emperor Commodus sometime during the years 180/184 by having the plaque 
mentioned in the previous entry inscribed on the other side. The plaque may have 
been attached to a statue base.
9. CIL XIV 461: on a marble base, probably for a statue, which was dedi­
cated in 239 CE, a total of seven *Augustales of various rank (one perpetuus, 
three quinquennales, and four curatores) are listed as being in charge of this 
public activity.36 
10. CIL XIV 4293: the VIvir Augustalis and [quinquennalis] Q. Varius 
Secundus honours Iuppiter Optimus Maximus, based on a dream (ex viso), with 
the gift of ten statuettes of the Lares, made of silver, on an inscribed pedestal also 
of silver. 
11. CIL XIV 4318:37 the VIvir Augustalis P. Clodius Flavius Venerandus 
erects a dedication to the Numen Caeleste inspired by a dream (somno monitus). 
12. CIL XIV 4333: in a very fragmentary inscription, likely from the later 
third century or the early fourth, it appears that a [sevir(?)] Augustali[s] is hon­
ouring an unidentified emperor.
13. CIL XIV 4341: the [seviri(?)] Augustale[s] honour the emperor Nerva 
in a partially preserved inscription of which no further content survives.38 
14. CIL XIV 4486a: this fragmentary inscription appears to record that the 
seviri Augustales honoured a pa[tronus] of theirs who was a viator tribunicius, 
i.e. an apparitor and perhaps therefore a Roman knight, and who had also re­
ceived some kind of appreciation from the emperor Trajan.
36  The text is discussed by Oliver 1958, 489–90. The inscription does not explicitly state that 
the men are *Augustales, but some of them are known from other inscriptions in this capacity, 
and, as Oliver shows, their ranks are found only among the *Augustales.
37  Vermaseren 1956, 142 no. 304. There is a great likelihood that the same man is the author of 
another dedicator, to Invictus Deus Sol Omnipotens and several other deities in a fragmentary 
inscription found near the same Mithraeum from which the previous text stems; the name of 
the dedicator appears as V[enera]ndus (CIL XIV 4309).
38  See Meiggs 1973, 219.

Christer Bruun
78
15. CIL XIV 4559: on a marble cippus (as described by the CIL editor 
Wickert; surely part of a larger ensemble), six *Augustales are listed as acting in 
concert when the monument was dedicated in 242 CE.39 
16. CIL XIV 4624a:40 the ordo Augustalium honours a performing artist, 
a p[an]tomim[us sui temporis] primus, probably with a statue; his father is also 
referred to with respect. 
17. CIL XIV 4725: in a fragmentary inscription from 83 CE a se[vi]r 
Aug(ustalis) whose name does not survive clearly performs a public action, as 
the inscription contains the typical formula dedic(ata/atum) followed by the date.
18. CIL XIV 5322:41 the viator [tribunicius] and Augustalis (C. Iulius) 
Pot[hus] Nymphodoti l(ibertus) honours Drusus Caesar, called the son of the em­
peror Tiberius, grandson of Augustus and great-grandson of Divus Iulius, pos­
sibly with a statue (posuit).
19. CIL XIV 5328: the sevir A[ugustalis] M. Mar[ius ?] honours the son of 
the emperor Pius, i.e. the future emperor Marcus Aurelius, perhaps with a statue, 
in recognition of the success of his own son M. Ma[rius M.f. Pal.] Prim[itivus], 
on whom the honos of the quinquennalitas had been bestowed.42
20. CIL XIV 5380 = AE 1987, 197: jointly with another man who precedes 
him in the inscription, the Augustalis P. Sulpicius Hera erects sua p(ecunia) an 
honourary inscription to L. Aelius Commodus (the future emperor Lucius Verus), 
the adopted son of the emperor Pius. The date appears to be c. 140 CE.43
21. AE 1946, 214: the freedman Agathangelus, a sevir Augustalis quin­
quennalis honours his most worthy (dignissimus) patronus A. Livius Chryseros, 
who also is a sevir Augustalis quinquennalis. 
39  See Oliver 1958, 90–1 for a discussion of the rank of these men, who according to Oliver's 
convincing argument must be *Augustales, although this is not explicitly stated.
40  For the most recent improved presentation of this text, see Cébeillac-Gervasoni – Caldelli 
– Zevi 2010, 292–3 no. 88a–b.
41  The text is edited, with comment, by Marinucci 1992, 172 C 20.
42  The name can be restored with the help of the dedication CIL XIV 4553, in which the son 
M. Marius Primitivus appears as decurionum decreto aedilis II sacris Volkani faciundis. Since 
he was freeborn and engaged in a municipal career, the quinquennalitas mentioned can hardly 
refer to the *Augustales organization, but was likely held in the corpus traiectus Rusticeli, with 
which he is connected in CIL XIV 4553–4 and which is also mentioned in the inscription listed 
here. See also Royden 1986, 93 no. 73, 242 (= AE 1989, 125).
43  Thus Marinucci 1992, 201–2 C 65, who also provides a new accurate reading of the text. 
Earlier, an improved reading had been presented by Royden 1986, 243 (= AE 1989, 128). The 
two men are discussed in Royden 1986, 88–9 nos. 61–2.

True patriots?
79
22. AE 1988, 213:44 the sevir Augustalis and quinquennalis M. Iulius 
Chrysophorus and his son M. Iulius Aelianus (also called Serapio) and M. Iulius 
Zosimus (probably his brother) and the latter's son M. Iulius Philippus honour 
Iuppiter Optimus Maximus Serapis and the Castores (i.e., Castor and Pollux) on 
account of a vow.
23. AE 1988, 215:45 the sevir Augustalis and quinquennalis M. Iulius 
Chrysophorus and his son M. Iulius Aelianus (also called Serapio) and M. Iulius 
Zosimus (probably his brother) and the latter's son M. Iulius Philippus honour 
Iuppiter Optimus Maximus Serapis and Hercules on account of a vow.
24. NSA 1953, 299–301 no. 67: fragments of a broken marble plaque re­
veal that two men, Nymphodotus and Pothus N[ymphodoti lib.] repaired the ma­
cellum. Scholars are in agreement that we are dealing with the same Pothus as in 
no. 18 above, where he is identified as an Augustalis, as well as with his patron, 
who it is not known to have been an Augustalis.46 
The public actions of the *Augustales and of their association, several times 
called the ordo Augustalium, broadly speaking belong to three categories, with 
a fourth category containing only one instance. There are seven dedications to 
various deities (nos. 1, 2, 3, 10, 11, 22, 23), another seven honouring the emperor 
and members of his family (nos. 7, 8, 12, 13, 18, 19, 20), and six inscriptions that 
honour individuals of varying status (nos. 4, 5, 6, 14, 16, 21). Nos. 9 and 15 most 
probably belong in one of these categories as well. Finally, while the nature of 
the action mentioned in no. 17 cannot be determined, there is also one building 
inscription (24). 
It has been suggested by Abramenko that also CIL XIV 404 provides infor­
mation about an act of munificence concerning a public building at Ostia, carried 
out by a sevir Augu[stalis] idem q(uin)q(uennalis), but the fragmentary inscrip­
tion is in reality an epitaph which records that a man, [?]lius Pri[?], has built, in 
area pura, various structures such as a portic[us] that are part of a monumental 
tomb, which he ultimately leaves to his freedmen with the typical concluding 
phrase [liber]tis lib[ertabusque] [poster]isq(ue) [eorum].47
44  See Bricault 2005, 590 no. 503/1129 for this text.
45  See Bricault 2005, 590 no. 503/1130.
46  See Bloch 1953, 299–301; Cébeillac-Gervasoni – Caldelli – Zevi 2010, 156–7, who note 
that new and as yet unpublished evidence shows that the inscription was recut in the Trajanic 
age, although the two benefactors were active in the late Augustan period.
47  Abramenko 1993, 145. There is a clear parallel to this fragmentary inscription in CIL XIV 
671, an epitaph also from Ostia, which, for instance, contains the phrase aream puram cum 

Christer Bruun
80
As for the chronological distribution, over two thirds of the inscriptions 
contain internal evidence (a consular date or the mention of an emperor) which 
allows a fairly precise dating. The material reflects the general composition of the 
Ostian epigraphic evidence quite well: two texts are Augustan (18, 24), one Fla­
vian (17), one dates to around 100 CE (13), one is Trajanic/Hadrianic (14), five 
belong in the middle of the second century (1, 3, 7, 19, 20), two date to ca. 180 
CE (4, 8), three to the second quarter of the third century (5, 9, 15), one to the late 
third (16), and one to the late third/early fourth century (12). For the other seven 
texts a closer inspection of the physical context in some cases allows a closer 
dating, as with no. 21, dated to the second century on iconographic grounds,48 
and nos. 22–23, which are dated to the late second or early third century.49 An ar­
chaeological study of the remaining four monuments might allow us to date them 
as well. The overall picture would hardly change: the inscriptions overwhelm­
ingly belong to a period from the beginning of the second century to the end of 
the Severan period.
When evaluating the activities of the *Augustales, it may also be relevant 
to study the individuals who receive honorific dedications. Emperors and mem­
bers of the imperial family obviously play by far the greatest role, and it is well 
known that they were the objects of veneration from all segments of society that 
appear in inscriptions. Among the six individuals that the *Augustales honour, in­
dividually or as a collective, there is, perhaps surprisingly, no senator. The high­
est-ranking honorand is instead an eques Romanus, encountered in the following 
inscription (CIL XIV 373 = ILS 6141):
 
L(ucio) Licinio L(uci) fil(io) Pal(atina
Herodi
equit(i) Rom(ano) decuriali
decuriae viatoriae 
equestris co(n)s(ularis) decurioni
quinquennali duumviro
sacerdoti Geni col(oniae) flam(ini)
Rom(ae) et Aug(ustorum) curat(ori) oper(um) public(orum)
triclinio and is left by the builder Oceanus in usu eiusdem Oceani et filiorum eius lib(ertis) 
libertabusq(ue) posterisq(ue) eor(um).
48  Bollmann 1998, 337, with earlier scholarship: not before Trajan, perhaps even of Antonine 
date, on account of the statue that the inscribed base supported.
49  Bricault 2005, 590.

True patriots?
81
quaestori aer(arii) aedili flam(ini)
divi Severi sodali Arulensi
praet(ori) prim(o) sac(ris) Volk(ani) faciu(ndis)
ordo Augustal(ium)
optimo civi ob merita
"To L. Licinius Herodes son of Lucius, of the Palatina voting tribe, Ro­
man knight, a decurialis (member) of the decuria of mounted attendants 
of consuls, decurio, duumvir with censorial powers, priest of the cult of 
the genius of Ostia, flamen of the cult of Roma and the Augusti, curator 
of public buildings, quaestor of the treasury, aedile, flamen of the Deified 
Severus, sodalis Arulensis (a local priesthood),50 first praetor of the cult of 
Vulcanus, the ordo of the Augustales (honoured) a foremost citizen on ac­
count of his merits." 
The inscription is interesting for what it tells us about the public career and ac­
tivities of the honorand, L. Licinius Herodes. Beginning his career as an appari­
tor, a "civil servant" in the capital, he is a good example of how such a position 
led to an entry into the equestrian order.51 The rest of Herodes' career played out 
at Ostia. Conspicuously, the inscription makes no mention of military charges 
or indeed of any imperial procuratorships. The contrast to the many honorific 
equestrian inscriptions found at Ostia is striking, which were erected for imperial 
equestrian officeholders by a variety of local organizations. The corpus mercato­
rum frumentariorum, for instance, honoured Q. Calpurnius Modestus (CIL XIV 
161 = ILS 1427; mid-second century CE), while the corpus mercatorum frumen­
tariorum adiutorum et acceptorum did the same for Q. Acilius Fuscus (CIL XIV 
154 = ILS 1431; the Severan age). The numerus caligatorum decuriarum XVI 
collegii fabrum tignuariorum Ostis likewise honoured P. Bassilius Crescens with 
a statue (CIL XIV 160 = ILS 1428; c. 220 CE).52 While one might suggest that the 
50  Meiggs 1973, 340 suggests that the priesthood of sodalis Arulensis was instituted after the 
mid-second century CE.
51  On the apparitores, Purcell 1983 is the classic work; see p. 153 for Licinius Herodes, who 
was not included in the RE or PIR2. 
52  The two first examples can conveniently be found, accompanied by commentary and dating, 
in Cébeillac-Gervasoni – Caldelli – Zevi 2010, 233–6. On Bassilius Crescens, see Fora 1996, 
33–34, who dates the inscription to 220/224 CE based on the 33rd lustrum of the fabri tignuarii 
of Ostia mentioned in the inscription.

Christer Bruun
82
Augustales were not prominent enough an organization to grant such an honour 
to an imperial procurator (though this must remain unproven), it remains a fact 
that in the case of Licinius Herodes, the person they decided to honour was some­
one who had dedicated practically his whole career to Ostian municipal affairs. 
This is an indication as good as any of the civic "patriotism" of the *Augustales 
themselves.
As seen above, the most common form of activity by the *Augustales were 
dedications to the ruler or a prince of the ruling family, and one must imagine that 
these inscriptions always accompanied the erection of a statue or at least a por­
trait bust. Although one might expect that an organization, which in its very name 
refers to Caesar Augustus and his successors, would be focused on honouring the 
ruler, it has nevertheless been claimed that such instances are rare in Italy.53 If this 
is indeed so, the Ostian pattern is markedly different.
Dedications to Roman deities almost equal the imperial ones in number. 
No clear common denominator emerges, but in some cases one can easily suggest 
a reason for why a particular deity was venerated, as in the case of two almost 
identical dedications to I. O. M. Serapis accompanied by Castor and Pollux and 
Hercules, respectively (nos. 22–23). The Dioscuri and Hercules protected seafar­
ers and the concluding phrase – voto suscepto reddiderunt ("having made a vow 
they discharged it") – makes it very likely that the four dedicators were sailors or 
traders had been away on a sea voyage and had returned to Ostia safe and sound. 
Some of the other deities were chosen for reasons unknowable to us, but it is 
interesting to observe a dedication to the Genius coloniae Ostiensium (no. 1), 
which again is evidence for a certain local "patriotism".  
4. *Augustales participating in other associations
The instances listed and discussed above do not represent every type of activity 
in which individual *Augustales engaged. Their organization had an internal life, 
as all organizations are bound to have, and a series of documents on stone have 
survived, the so-called alba of the *Augustales, which contain long lists of mem­
bers. These alba also record which members had shouldered particular duties 
within the organization, adding epithets such as quinquennalis or curator, and 
53  Mouritsen 2006, 241, listing about a dozen cases. For Ostia, the author does not cite any 
evidence but refers to an unpublished dissertation by M. Laird.

True patriots?
83
they refer to a number of decisions taken by the organization with the expression 
ex decreto ordinis Augustalium (see, for instance, CIL XIV 4561,1).54 It is also 
revealed by these alba that by the late second century CE, a number of *Augus­
tales who were given the title q(uin)q(uennalis) had contributed money, surely to 
the arca of their own organization, as shown by the abbreviation d(ono) d(ato) 
following the letters QQ.55 But this evidence for internal activity among the *Au­
gustales is less important when discussing their public commitments and impact. 
Instead, we find many individual *Augustales playing a role in other associations, 
and this must also briefly be touched upon. 
Ostia is famous for its many inscriptions illustrating the activities and mem­
bership of various professional organizations, called corpus or collegium. These 
collegia or corpora enrolled members who were engaged in professions essential 
to the functioning of Ostia-Portus as Rome's main harbour. Most of them had 
something to do with commerce, and *Augustales are frequently found in leading 
roles in these organizations.56 To restrict the survey to inscriptions found after the 
publication of the latest volume of CIL XIV, one finds *Augustales engaging in 
associations such as: 
the corpus lenunculariorum traiectus Luculli ("the association of ferrymen 
at the traiectus Luculli" (AE 1987, 196);57 
the corpus mensorum nauticorum Ostiensium ("the association of the mari­
time measurers of Ostia") (AE 1999, 410);
the corpus negotiatorum fori vinarii ("the association of merchants from 
54  See CIL XIV 4560–63, containing consular dates from 193 to 242 CE, with one very late 
fragment from 297 CE. For the date of CIL XIV 4563, which I believe is much earlier than the 
other parts of the records, see my "The Date of One Hundred *Augustales from Roman Ostia 
in CIL XIV 4563: Late First Century CE" (in preparation).
55  Abramenko 1992, developing further an hypothesis often advanced previously. The 
quinquennales d(ono) d(ato) were lower in rank then the properly elected eponymous 
quinquennales of the *Augustales. In CIL XIV 367 the sum of HS 10,000 is being paid ob 
honorem curae into the treasury of the *Augustales.
56  According to Abramenko 1993, 136, as many as 28 *Augustales at Ostia can be found 
holding positions in other organizations; this engagement is exceptional, compared to the rest 
of Italy (p. 142). 
57  The Ostian *Augustales were even more frequently engaged in a similar association, the 
corpus lenunculariorum traiectus Rusticelii. No recent finds have added to our information, 
but see CIL XIV 4553–6, 5327–8 and Meiggs 1973, 297, 325.  

Christer Bruun
84
the wine market") (AE 1974, 123a); 
the fabri navales ("the shipbuilders") (AE 1989, 124);
the navicularii maris Hadriatici ("the traders on the Adriatic sea") (AE 
1987, 191; 1988, 178); 
the navicularii lyntrarii (= lintrarii) ("boatmen"; from linter, "small boat") 
(AE 1974, 123a); 
the stuppatores ("the rope-makers") (AE 1987, 196). 
There were also more common professional organizations in which the *Augus­
tales engaged, of the kind one may encounter in any Roman town, like: 
the fabri tignuarii Ostienses, ("the Ostian builders") (AE 1988, 200), and
the nummularii ("money-changers") (AE 1974, 123a). 
It is indeed not at all uncommon to see an Ostian *Augustalis among the leaders 
of these professional associations, as these three short examples show:
T. Testio Helpidiano / seviro Aug(ustali) idem q(uin)q(uennali) / item pa­
trono et q(uin)q(uennali) / corporis treiectus (!) / marmorariorum / IIII 
Testii Helpidianus / Priscus Priscianus / et Felix fili(i) et heredes / patri 
dulcissimo. 
(CIL XIV 425 = X 542 = ILS 6170 = AE 1994, 319; an epitaph)  
A. Caedicius Successus / sevir Aug(ustalis) idem quinquenn(alis) / curator 
navicularior(um) maris Hadriat(ici) / idem quinquennalis … (AE 1987, 
191; an epitaph)
[A. Li]vius Anteros / [magiste]r quinquennal(is) colleg(i) fabr(um) / [tignu­
ari]orum Osti(en)s(ium) lustri XVII VI(vir) / [Augusta]lis corporatus inter 
/ [fabros] navales … (AE 1989, 124; an epitaph)
It was undoubtedly important for the *Augustales to be active in these profes­
sional organizations. In this environment, many business opportunities will have 
materialized, and making money was important for these men. This also means 
that as members in these professional organizations, the *Augustales may have 
taken part in various other kinds of public activities, without this being specifi­
cally documented in our sources. This should be kept in mind when evaluating

True patriots?
85
the overall impact of the members of the *Augustales in Ostian society, although 
there is no way to evaluate the significance of the activity. 
As to the question of where the primary loyalties of the Ostian *Augustales 
lay, that is, whether one of them would have considered himself primarily a se­
vir Augustalis item quinquennalis or a curator naviculariorum maris Hadriatici 
(as A. Caedicius Successus is in AE 1987, 191 cited above), this question is ir­
relevant for the present inquiry. What is at stake here is the dedication of these 
individuals to the town in which they lived and worked, and it does not matter in 
which organization or in what capacity they engaged in furthering the cause of 
Ostia and its inhabitants. What matters is the presence or absence of a "patriotic 
feeling" in this segment of society. 
Concerning the relative importance of a person's membership among the 
*Augustales, however, it may be worth offering the observation which, to my 
knowledge, has not been made before, namely that when more than one duty 
or charge is listed in an inscription, the *Augustalitas regularly comes first (AE 
1989, 124, cited above, is a rare exception; similarly CIL XIV 299, 407). It seems 
akin to what we find in senatorial cursus-inscriptions,58 when these begin by 
listing the traditional offices of republican origin, namely, the consulship, a pro­
consulship, perhaps a priestly office, before providing a chronological account of 
the person's career. This practice among the *Augustales is evident proof of the 
worth placed on their membership. 
5. What is missing from the activities of the *Augustales, and why?
As the evidence now stands, the visible public activities of the *Augustales as a 
group or as individual members of the Ostian community are almost exclusively 
restricted to the erection of public monuments, in most cases statues. It is obvi­
ously important to keep in mind that we only can use inscriptions when analyz­
ing the public activities of the *Augustales, and most of the epigraphic evidence 
that once existed is undoubtedly lost, but one can only argue from the sources we 
have. Thus one is bound to conclude that there is one activity in particular that the 
*Augustales of Ostia engage very little in: we almost completely lack proof that 
they participated in more conspicuous euergetic activities, that is, in contributing 
to the physical infrastructure of the town. 
58  For the now somewhat controversial term "cursus-inscription", see Bruun 2015, 212–3.

Christer Bruun
86
When their actions directly benefit their fellow citizens, it is most com­
monly in the form of distributions of money. Even the public banquets or feasts, 
which can be found in many towns of Roman Italy, and which *Augustales on 
several occasions sponsor elsewhere, do not occur in Ostia under patronage of 
an *Augustalis. Instead, on three occasions, in nos. 1, 4, and 6 above, there is 
mention of divisiones of cash: the curator Augustalium M. Cornelius Epagathus 
donates one denarius (four sestertii), presumably only to his fellow *Augustales 
(no. 1), while the sevir Augustalis P. Horatius Chryseros donates five denarii to 
both the decuriones and the Augustales on the occasion of the inauguration of 
his statue59 (no. 4). In the third case (no. 6), the donor Q. Veturius stipulated that 
from the interest of a large donation of 50,000 sestertii to the Augustales, on his 
birthday there will always be a distribution of cash to those among the *Augus­
tales who are present (in [c]onventu inter praesentes). In addition, the donor's 
children Veturia Q.f. Rufina and Q. Veturius Q.f. Felix Socrates shouldered the 
cost of erecting the statue, while the freedman Q. Veturius Felicissimus, sevir 
Augustalis quinquennalis and curator of the association, was in charge of a cash 
distribution (sportula) which again only benefited the decurions, who were given 
three denarii, and the Augustales (as he names them), who somewhat unusually 
received the higher sum of five denarii. 
As can be seen in Abramenko's survey of actions undertaken by *Au­
gustales in Italy, there is a greater variety of benefactions, and more examples 
thereof, elsewhere. What I have in mind is a behaviour that we find documented 
in many other Italian towns, such as at Suessa Aurunca, where C. Titius Chresi­
mus received conspicuous recognition from the ordo decurionum because he had 
sponsored spectacles for the community: pro salute et indulgentia Imp(eratoris) 
Antonini Pii Felicis Aug(usti) et ex voluntate populi munus familiae gladiatoriae 
ex pecunia sua diem privatum secundum dignitatem coloniae ediderit (CIL X 
4760 = ILS 6296). Another example of how some *Augustales provided lavishly 
for their fellow citizens comes from Abella, where N. Plaetorius Onirus is hon­
oured quod auxerit ex suo ad annonariam pecuniam HS X (10,000) n(ummum) et 
vela in theatro cum omni ornatu sumptu suo dederit (CIL X 1217)
Concerning public building, in the central Augustan regio I we find cases 
such as the following from Cales, in which an anonymous Augustalis viam ab 
angiporto aed[is] Iunonis Lucinae usque [ad] aedem Matutae et clivom ab Ianu 
59  In addition, his large gift to the association of the *Augustales was intended to generate 
funds for a distribution of money among the membership each year on his birthday. This is an 
internal event and not a public one, which here is the issue.

True patriots?
87
ad gisiarios porta[e] Stellatinae et viam patulam ad portam Laevam et ab foro ad 
portam domesticam sua pecunia stravit (CIL X 4660),60 and two identical texts 
from Cereatae Marianae (Casamari), which record how the freedman C. Livinius 
Pelasgi lib. Victor ob honorem Augustalitatis in his own and his son's name con­
tributed HS 2,000 to the repair work on a bridge which otherwise was carried out 
by decision of the town council (NSA 1921, 70).61 Also, the Augustalis C. Mina­
tius Bithus gave HS 2,000 ad stratam reficiendam (CIL X 1885),62 while three 
fragmentary inscriptions by *Augustales from Puteoli likewise testify to public 
construction works ([---]p et basilica[m ---/--- ma]rmoribu[s ---], CIL X 1838;63 
idem sua pecunia aedificavit, CIL X 1887; [c]um epistyl[is ---/---]os tector[ium 
---], CIL X 1891).
In the nearby regiones II and IV there are a number of similar cases. Near 
Compsa, the magister Augustalis N. Bovius N. et M. l. Hilarus viam stravit (CIL 
IX 1048),64 at Sipontum, the Augustalis P. Memmius P.l. Diogenes t[ribuna?]l 
et tectum s[ua] p(ecunia) f(aciendum) c(uravit) (AE 1981, 269), and at Vibinum 
(Bovino) two relatives, one of which was the Augustalis A. Allienus Primus, po­
dium s(ua) p(ecunia) f(aciendum) c(uraverunt) (AE 1969/70, 165). At Saepinum 
the Augustalis C. Coesius Tertius plateam stravit a tervio ad tervium (CIL IX 
2476),65 while his colleague M. Annius Phoebus ob honorem Aug(ustalitatis) et 
biselli(i) contributed to the macellum cum columnis (CIL IX 2475). These exam­
ples suffice to show the situation, but many more examples can be found in the 
other Italian regiones.66 All these examples of public expenditure — whether the 
inscription labels the money spent as sua pecunia or specifies that the funds were 
derived from a summa honoraria or were paid ob honorem Augustalitatis — we 
are justified in regarding as evergetism by *Augustales, as argued above in sec­
tion 2.
60  See Campedelli 2014, 121–3 nos. 11–2.
61  See Campedelli 2014, 178–9 no. 59.
62  The provenance is probably Ausculum; the inscription is also published, in an unsatisfactory 
fashion, as CIL IX 664.
63  Also cited by D'Arms 1981, 129 as example of munificence by *Augustales.
64  See Campedelli 2014, 184 no. 65.
65  See also Campedelli 2014, 212–3 no. 90.
66  This evidence, and more, can be found in Abramenko 1993, 146–54, where however all 
instances of expenses by the "munizipaler Mittelstand" is included (such as, e.g., by veterans), 
not just munificence by the *Augustales. For evergetism by *Augustales in northern Italy, see 
now Gofin 2002, 197–201, with thirty instances.

Christer Bruun
88
In contrast, in the exceptionally rich epigraphic material providing details 
about the activities of the Ostian *Augustales, all that turns up in the category of 
evergetism for the purpose of infrastructure improvement and the construction of 
buildings is the fragmentary inscription no. 24 above (p. 79). That text documents 
work on the macellum of Ostia, undoubtedly a building of significant public im­
portance, by the Augustalis Pothus N[ymphodoti lib.] and his patron Nympho­
dotus (who may not have been an Augustalis at all).67 It is noteworthy that the 
inscription belongs to a comparatively early stage in Ostia's history, before the 
construction of Claudius' harbour, and much earlier than Ostia's rapid expansion 
in the second half of the first century CE. This event belongs to a time when the 
great wave of immigration, which followed upon the construction of the Claudian 
and, later, the Trajan harbour, had not yet set in. For good reason, no suspicions 
have been voiced about any lack of civic spirit during this earlier phase of Ostia's 
history.
The matter is different when we view the Flavian era and later periods. The 
fact that at Ostia the *Augustales cannot be found involved in this kind of local 
munificence is potentially an important issue, at least for the question of "civic 
identity" at Ostia. If members of this group of well-to-do individuals, represent­
ing one important part of the local "middle class", were not using their wealth 
in a way that visibly benefited their local community from the 70s CE onwards, 
this would seem to show a remarkable detachment from the fortunes of their own 
town, including an apparent unconcern with bolstering their own social standing 
in the community. 
It is, however, surely the case that another factor comes into play here, 
namely, the close connection between Ostia and Rome and the great investments 
made by the emperor and the imperial administration in the town. There was 
simply lesser scope for local sponsorship with money and investments flowing in 
from the imperial treasury. The imperial influence in Ostia has been documented 
and stressed on many occasions.68 One effect of the imperial oversight at Ostia is 
the very late appearance of a curator rei publicae, a centrally nominated official 
with the task of assisting a Roman town in managing its finances; a necessary 
course of action as economic problems began to appear in the local context dur­
ing the second century CE. The earliest known curator r. p. is however not found 
67  The site of the macellum at Ostia, long believed to have been at the intersection of the 
Decumanus and the Via del Pomerio (Reg. IV, Is. V, 1–2), has recently been put into question, 
see Pavolini 2006, 195–6; Cébeillac-Gervasoni – Caldelli – Zevi 2010, 256–7.
68  See, in particular, Bruun 2002, with previous literature.

True patriots?
89
at Ostia before the late third century. In my view, this is a significant fact which 
may merit more attention than it normally receives.69 Therefore, the relative ab­
sence of local sponsorship of public buildings and of road works should not be 
taken as proof of a lack of "patriotism" on the part of the wealthier segment of the 
population. The presence of imperial power at Ostia and the influx of resources 
from the capital to the town made it unnecessary and impossible for the local elite 
and, as we have seen in the case of the *Augustales, for the sub-elite, to engage in 
local benefactions in the same way as they did elsewhere in Italy. 
Yet one notices, when studying the actions taken by the Ostian *Augus­
tales in public, the presence of a strong connection with Ostia and its inhabit­
ants. Sometimes it is the choice of person that they honour which is important 
(Licinius Herodes), and sometimes it is the deity they venerate (the Genius of the 
colonia). Above all, it is the abundance if statues and memorials dedicated by 
these individuals that is most striking. Although occasionally we lack informa­
tion about what the dedicated object represented, we can see, from the surviving 
inscriptions, that the *Augustales here behave precisely like their peers elsewhere 
in the Roman world. Their concern with creating local monuments that dignify 
the urban environment is a testimony to their own piety and dedication and pre­
serves the memory of their presence in the city. There is no reason to believe that 
the Ostian *Augustales harboured any less amor patriae than their colleagues 
elsewhere in Italy or around the empire.
University of Toronto
Bibliography
Abramenko, A. 1992. "Zu den Quinquennales d.d. in den fasti et alba augustalium aus Ostia", 
Habis 23: 153–58.
Abramenko, A. 1993. Die munizipale Mittelschicht im kaiserzeitlichen Italien. Zu einem neuen 
Verständnis von Sevirat und Augustalität, Frankfurt a.M.
Bloch, H. 1953. "Ostia. Iscrizioni rinvenute tra il 1930 e il 1939", NSA: 239–306.
Bollmann, B. 1998. Römische Vereinshäuser. Untersuchungen zu den scholae der römischen 
Berufs-, Kult- und Augustalen-Kollegien in Italien, Mainz. 
Bricault, L. 2005. Recueil des inscriptions concernant les cultes isiaques 2 (Mémoires de 
l'Académie des Inscriptions et des Belles-Lettres 31), Paris.
69  Bruun 2002, 189. 

Christer Bruun
90
Bruun, C. 2002. "L'amministrazione imperiale di Ostia e Portus", in: C. Bruun – A. Gallina 
Zevi (eds.), Ostia e Portus nelle loro relazioni con Roma (Acta IRF 27), Roma, 161–92.
Bruun, C. 2014. "Civic Identity in Roman Ostia: Some Evidence from Dedications (Inaugura­
tions)", in: A. Kemezis (ed.), Urban Dreams and Realities in Antiquity: Remains and 
Representations of the Ancient City, Leiden, 347–69.
Bruun, C. 2015. "The Epigraphy of the Senatorial and Equestrian Orders. Prosopography", 
in: C. Bruun – J. Edmondson (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of Roman Epigraphy, New 
York, 200–24.
Campedelli, C. 2014. L'amministrazione municipale delle strade romane in Italia (Antiquitas 
R. I,62), Bonn.
Cébeillac-Gervasoni, M. – M. L. Caldelli – F. Zevi. 2010. Epigrafia latina. Ostia: cento is­
crizioni in contesto, Roma (revised version of French original, Paris 2006).
D'Arms, J. H. 1981. Commerce and Social Standing in Ancient Rome, Cambridge (MA) – Lon­
don.
Duncan-Jones, R. P. 1982. The Economy of the Roman Empire. Quantitative Studies2, Cam­
bridge (1st ed., 1974).
Duthoy, R. 1974. "La fonction sociale de l'Augustalité", Epigraphica 36: 134–54.
Duthoy, R. 1976. "Recherches sur la ripartition geographique et chronologique des termes se­
vir Augustalis, Augustalis, et sevir dans l'Empire Romain", Epigraphische Studien 11: 
143–214. 
Duthoy, R. 1978. "Les *Augustales", ANRW II 16.2: 1254–1309.
Fora, M. 1996. Epigrafia anfiteatrale dell'Occidente Romano IV. Regio Italiae I: Latium, Roma.
Goffin, B. 2002. Euergetismus in Oberitalien, Bonn.
González, J, 1986. "The Lex Irnitana: A New Copy of the Flavian Municipal Law", JRS 76: 
147–243.
Hauthal, F. 1866. Acronis et Porphyrionis commentarii in Q. Horatium Flaccum II, Berolini.
Heinzelmann, M. 2002. "Bauboom und urbanistische Defizite – zur städtebaulichen Entwick­
lung Ostias im 2. Jh.", in: C. Bruun – A. Gallina Zevi (eds.), Ostia e Portus nelle loro 
relazioni con Roma (Acta IRF 27), Roma, 103–21.
Keller, O. 1904. Pseudacronis scholia in Horatium vetustiora II, Lipsiae (repr. Stutgardiae 
1967).
Laird, M. L. 2000. "Reconsidering the So-called "Sede degli Augustali" at Ostia", MAAR 45: 
41–84.
Liebenam, W. 1900. Städteverwaltung im römischen Kaiserreich, Leipzig (repr. Amsterdam 
1967).
Linderski, J. 2007. "Augustales and sodales Augustales", in idem, Roman Questions II (HABES 
44), Stuttgart, 179–83.

True patriots?
91
Marinucci, A. 1992. "Iscrizioni", in: P. Cicerchia – A. Marinucci, Scavi di Ostia XI. Le Terme 
del Foro o di Gavio Massimo, Roma, 163–228.
Marinucci, A. 2007. "Ara – ossuario", in: S. Pannuzi (ed.), Necropoli Ostiensi. Lo scavo ar­
cheologico per la costruzione della linea elettrica a 150 kV in cavi interrati Lido Vec­
chio – Casal Palocco, Roma, 39–40.
Marinucci, A. 2012. Disiecta membra. Iscrizioni latine da Ostia e Porto 1981–2009, Ostia.
Meiggs, R. 1973. Roman Ostia2, Oxford (1st ed. 1960).
Mouritsen, H. 2006. "Honores libertini: Augustales and seviri in Italy", in: I. Nielsen (ed.), 
Zwischen Kult und Gesellschaft: Kosmopolitische Zentren des antiken Mittelmeer­
raumes als Aktionsraum von Kultvereinen und Religionsgemeinschaften (Hephaistos 
24), Augsburg, 237–48.
Mouritsen, H. 2011. The Freedman in the Roman World, Cambridge.
Oliver, J. H. 1958. "Gerusiae and Augustales", Historia 7: 472–96.
Ostrow, S. E. 1990. "The Augustales in the Augustan Scheme", in: K. A. Raaflaub – M. Toher 
(eds.), Between Republic and Empire. Interpretations of Augustus and His Principate, 
Berkeley – Los Angeles – London, 364–79. 
Pavolini, C. 2006. Ostia. Guida archeologica Laterza2, Roma – Bari (1st ed. 1983).
Purcell, N. 1983. "The apparitores: A Study in Social Mobility", PBSR 51: 125–73.
Royden, H. L. 1986. The Magistrates of the Roman Professional Collegia in Italy from the 
First to the Third Century A.D., Pisa. 
Scheid, J. 1997. "Augustales", Der Neue Pauly 2: 291–92.
Vermaseren, M. J. 1956. Corpus Inscriptionum et Monumentorum Religionis Mithriacae I, 
Den Haag.