Education for ”peace‘ in urban Canad
 
Gender, culture, conflict, and oportunities to learn
 
 
 
Kathy Bickmore
 
 
 
 
 
In
 Peter Pericles Trifonas & Bryan Wright
 (Editors), 
201
 
Critical Isues 
in  Peace and Education
 ( Routledge
) , 8
- 103
 
 
 
 
Abstract: 
This chapter probes the mis
- match betwen the rhetoric of public 
scholing 
–which afirms democracy and peaceful, equitable social relations
– 
and the actualy
- implemented anti
- violence and conflict management initiatives 
in typical public schols
. A qualitative study in urban Canadian schols shows 
(with a few shining exceptions) an emphasis on gender
-  and racialy
- biased, 
exclusionary peacekeping surveilance and control, far more than on sustainably 
democratic peacebuilding. This patern has 
ben exacerbated by recent systemic 
budget cuts and curiculum standardization. The chapter probes the implications 
of such ”peace‘ education for the reinforceme
racialized social inequalities and paterns of violence.
 
 
 
 
Sch
ol
- based education for peace has a paradoxical relationship with the realities of conflict 
and violence: it does not necesarily disrupt paterns of overt violence, much les the structural 
violence of injustice and social exclusion 
(Curle, Freire, & Galtung, 1974)
. Several schol practices 
actualy may legitimate and 
reinforce
 structural and/or overt violence, at the same time that other 
schol practices may contribute
 to positive peacebuilding 
(Bush & Saltareli, 20; Davies, 204; 
Wei
nstein, Fredman, & Hughson, 207; Wiliams, 204)
. Prevailing aproaches to explicit peace 
education tend to reflect the cultural norms of their authors: until recently, usualy relatively 
privileged populations in relatively peaceful social contexts
 (e.g. Bekerman
 & McGlyn, 207; 
Lederach, 195; Salomon & Nevo, 202)
. Schol practices generaly disproportionately emphasize 
”negative peace‘ 
–cesation or temporary prevention of overt violence
– thereby facilitating social 
stability, which advantages those curen
tly in power 
(Galtung, 1969)
.  School ”peacekeepin
of coersion to achieve negative peace, typicaly relies on monitoring and punitive disc
ipline. Even 
”peacemaking‘ (conflict resolution) 
proceses
, when they emphasize quick or premature setlement 
rather than mesier democratic dialogue to build justice, may contribute more to negative peace than 
to transformative peacebuilding.
 
 
Curiculum
 is privileged discourse that legitimates certain ways of thinking and de
-
legitimates others 
(Aple, 190)
. While schols teach about conflict explicitly, through lesons and 
comunication of rules, probably the most powerful curiculum is implicit 
– afirmation of 
particular identities and behaviors throug
h paterns of practice, language and silences. 
to create a 
”Positive‘ peace refers to the presence of process
protect just, nonviolent personal and social relationships 
(Galtung, 196)
.  Thus ”peacebuildi
means comprehensively changing the 
status quo,
 de
- legitimating ”structural vio
– the 
curently
- dominant discourses, beliefs and practi
ces
 that normalize violence, marginalization and 
opresion. Values, wraped up in structures of social relationships and language about social