Chapter 6
European Cities in Search of Knowledge
for Their Integration Policies
Rinus Penninx
6.1
Introduction
In the study of integration policies, the national level of individual countries has
been the dominant unit of analysis. In such studies, integration policies towards
newcomers are studied under the assumption that such a national frame sets
conditions for processes of integration everywhere in the country and at all levels.
There is an abundance of such national studies, often funded by policy agencies.
There is also an established tradition of comparative studies of countries and their
integration models,1 including a critical stream of studies on such ‘national models’
(see also Chap. 4).2
Studies of integration processes and policies at the lower levels of cities and
municipalities are more recent than national ones. A quick inventory of the
international literature reveals that such studies appeared already well before the
turn of the century. Early studies focused predominantly on the political dimension
of integration and policies related to civic and political participation, as in the case
of Patrick Ireland’s study of four cities in France and Switzerland (Ireland 1994);
Rex and Samad (1996) on Birmingham and Bradford; Blommaert and Martiniello
(1996) on Antwerp and Liège; Garbaye (2000) on Birmingham and Lille; Bousetta
1For an overview of European studies, see Penninx et al. 2006. For a recent overview of
policymaking (in ten European countries) see Zincone et al. 2011.
2See for example Favell 1998; Bommes and Morawska 2005; Thränhardt and Bommes 2010;
Entzinger and Scholten 2014.
R. Penninx ()
Institute for Migration and Ethnic Studies, University of Amsterdam, Nieuwe Achtergracht 166,
1018 WV Amsterdam, Netherlands
e-mail: m.j.a.penninx@uva.nl
© The Author(s) 2015
P. Scholten et al. (eds.), Integrating Immigrants in Europe,
IMISCOE Research Series, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-16256-0_6
99

100
R. Penninx
(2001) on Antwerp, Liège, Lille and Utrecht and Fennema and Tillie (2004) on
Amsterdam, Liège and Zürich. Other studies focused on speciﬁc aspects of local
policies such as housing and segregation patterns in nine cities (Musterd et al.
1998), policing in Paris, Marseille and Lyon as compared to New York and Chicago
(Body-Gendrot 2000), local policies relating to Islam and Muslim institutions in
European cities (Rath et al. 2001; Maussen 2009) or the management of diversity
in the implementation of local policies in Manchester and Marseille (Moore 2001,
2004). More recently we also saw examples of attempts to compare the making of
local integration policies (Caponio and Borkert 2010; Gesemann and Roth 2009).
An early large-scale comparative analysis of integration policies at the local level
of cities has been done in the MPMC-project (Multicultural Policies and Modes
of Citizenship in European Cities). The MPMC-project ran from 1996 till 2004.
It focused in its empirical research particularly on the political participation of
immigrants, but that speciﬁc focus was framed in a more general comparison of
cities, their immigrants and local governmental policies. Systematic descriptions
were made of 16 major European cities and Tel Aviv.3 In two book publications
(Rogers and Tillie 2001; Penninx et al. 2004) general comparisons of policies and
cities were supplemented by in-depth comparisons on selected topics. Alexander
(2004) used this material not only to construct a ﬁrst typology of local policies, but
also to devise a new in-depth comparison of policies in Amsterdam, Paris, Rome
and Tel Aviv (Alexander 2003, 2007).
There is thus an increasing scientiﬁc literature on local integration policies, but
does this literature inform us about the existence of research-policy structures and
dialogues at the local level? Are local policymakers searching for knowledge and/or
are researchers providing knowledge relevant for policies? The literature mentioned
above is not commissioned and funded by cities or local policymakers, so not part of
a research-policy dialogue. But there is also a less well known (and difﬁcult to ﬁnd)
subset of local research on migrant policies. It is this local policy-research nexus
that I would like to explore in this contribution.
In the exploration below, I will try to systematise evidence from personal
observations as a researcher and policymaker in the Netherlands,4 from research
institutes within the IMISCOE-consortium, from my participation as a researcher
in research projects on local integration policies, such as the MPMC-project and
the CLIP-project (Cities for Local Integration: see below), and from advising cities
on their policies. In the course of this exploration, I will make some observations
3The city templates are available on the UNESCO website: www.unesco.org/most
4The author worked in Dutch ministries responsible for (stimulating local) integration policies from
1978 till 1988. He was director of the Institute for Migration and Ethnic Studies at the University
of Amsterdam from 1992 to 2006. He was co-chair of the International Metropolis-project from
1999 till 2009. He was coordinator of IMISCOE – a European network of research institutes in the
ﬁeld of migration and integration – from its inception in 2004 until 2014. In all these capacities
he has been involved in policy-research dialogues, including those at the local level in Dutch cities
(Amsterdam and Haarlem) and through the CLIP-project in Copenhagen (Denmark) and Turku
(Finland). See: Penninx 1988, 2005a, b, 2009; Penninx et al. 2004; Wolff et al. 1999.

6
European Cities in Search of Knowledge for Their Integration Policies
101
on how cities deﬁne their needs and possibilities to acquire knowledge that they
perceive as relevant. The special position of local authorities in the multi-level
governance of migration and integration (i.e. their relations with national and
European Union policies) receives special attention, since this inﬂuences their
possibilities to collect certain knowledge. I will also outline a number of initiatives
led by cities for horizontal exchange of relevant knowledge on good or best practices
that have sprung up during the last decade. Finally, I will make some tentative
concluding remarks on the policy-research-nexus on the local level.
6.2
Dutch Cities in the Quest to Acquire Knowledge About
Migrant Integration
In 1986, the Advisory Committee Research on Minorities in the Netherlands
(ACOM) published a ‘Review of Municipal Minorities Research’: a survey of some
100 research projects initiated by 54 municipalities in the Netherlands, not including
the four major cities Amsterdam, Rotterdam, The Hague and Utrecht (Uniken Ven-
ema 1986). More than 80 % of these municipalities had been engaged in research or
were doing so at that time. The four largest cities had built up signiﬁcant research
programmes by then (Uniken Venema 1986: i). The report notes that the decisions
to have research done were mostly taken by either researchers or policymakers
working for the city who wanted policy-relevant data or information. The research
was often implemented by municipal research or statistical departments. Most of it
was small in scale.
The signiﬁcant engagement of Dutch cities and municipalities in research and
data collection about migrants in their cities should be understood against the
background of a new national policy: the national government had decided in 1980
to have an Ethnic Minorities Policy for the integration of immigrant groups in the
Netherlands (Ministerie van Binnenlandse Zaken 1980). One of the starting points
of that new policy was that cities and local authorities should develop an active local
integration policy for immigrants and minorities. To stimulate local authorities to do
so a special temporary regulation was made to ﬁnance extra costs for setting up local
policies (the ‘Extra Bestuurskosten Regeling’), starting in 1980. One of these extra
costs mentioned explicitly was research for policy. Local authorities thus received
funding from the national government that they could use to have research done.
Obviously this funding facility was readily used. This was conﬁrmed in an analysis
of research projects on minorities in the Netherlands in the period 1981–1985: the
percentage of research projects ﬁnanced by cities/municipalities had increased from
6 % in 1981 to 25 % in 1984 (Penninx 1988: 13).
Admittedly, such a stimulating environment for research initiatives at the local
level was exceptional in Europe in the 1980s: the Netherlands was one of the few
countries that developed a national integration policy quite early (i.e. before the
turn of the century). The other country that had an integration policy (still earlier,

102
R. Penninx
since 1975) was Sweden.5 Probably there was also an early local Policy-Research
Nexus in Sweden, although one of the few reviews of policy-research connections
in Sweden that covers the period between 1965 and 1984 (Hammar 2004) does not
mention cities as initiators or users of research. For the later period, after 1984,
there is more evidence that Swedish cities – particularly Stockholm, Göteborg and
Malmö6 – have initiated and co-ﬁnanced research from universities in their cities
on a signiﬁcant scale and developed contacts with the universities in their cities on
issues of local integration policies.
What function did research on the local level in the Netherlands have for
policymakers and what function did that research have in the policy cycle? In
view of the speciﬁc context, local research projects in the Netherlands were not
initiated as tools for recognition and problem deﬁnition in the ﬁrst phase of such a
cycle. Instead, recognition and problem deﬁnition were attributable to the (national)
context and policy. Local research projects had much more of a function for the
second phase – that of supporting the concrete instrumentation of policies. Such
research was supposed to answer questions about what issues policymakers should
prioritise and what instruments could be used. Later, when local policy was in
place, the attention shifted to the third phase of the cycle: evaluation. Monitoring
outcomes of policy and evaluation of policies became central issues in research. As
to monitoring, cities chose predominantly two forms: the ﬁrst were self-evaluative
monitoring systems to be ﬁlled in by practitioners themselves. (Sometimes such
systems were designed with external help from researchers.) The second is that
the statistical services of the city were asked to produce data regularly and in a
systematic way.
Cities, particularly larger cities that built up a longstanding tradition of integra-
tion policies such as Amsterdam and Rotterdam in the Netherlands, did commission
part of their research to external researchers: to universities but also to commercial
research institutes. In the case of Amsterdam, for example, the Institute for Migra-
tion and Ethnic Studies (IMES) at the University of Amsterdam was commissioned
regularly since its inception in 1992 by the city to do evaluation studies, often
on a speciﬁc part of their policies or a speciﬁc strategy. IMES evaluated e.g. the
speciﬁc strategy of one of the districts of Amsterdam to engage organisations
of immigrants in policymaking and implementation in the district (Wolff et al.
1999), and more recently did a study about radicalisation of Muslims in Amsterdam
(Slootman and Tillie 2006). In Rotterdam, the Citizenship, Migration and the City
(CIMIC) programme of the Faculty of Social Sciences has more recently developed
5One could argue that also the UK had early integration policies since the mid-1960s, but these
policies focused primarily on ‘race relations’ and did not go under the label of ‘integration’.
6The city of Malmö is closely connected to the emergence of the MIM-department (Malmö
Institute for Studies of Migration, Diversity and Welfare) at Malmö University. The city has
ﬁnanced among other things the Guest Professorship in International Migration and Ethnic
Relations in Memory of Willy Brandt since 1998.

6
European Cities in Search of Knowledge for Their Integration Policies
103
regular contacts between the Erasmus University and the city, which includes
commissioning research by the city of Rotterdam.7
In the fourth phase of the policy cycle, local politicians and policymakers also
regularly felt the need to reformulate policies. That need could be based primarily
on monitoring and evaluation, but was often also inspired primarily by a need for
a political redeﬁnition of the ﬁeld. Researchers were often asked to participate
in commissions to advise politicians and policymakers on this. For example, I
participated in an expert commission (Commissie van Deskundigen 1998) that
advised the city of Amsterdam on the revision of their minorities policy in 1998.
As regards the question of how cities use knowledge, and what kind of
knowledge, the material suggests that they use research and knowledge primarily
for the instrumentation of their policies. In the course of time cities have formulated
their speciﬁc needs more and more in terms of ‘exchange of policy practice’, often
called good or best practices. Initiatives for such international exchange and learning
between cities had already started in the Netherlands by the 1990s. For example, in
1998 the city of Amsterdam and its local district mayors invited policymakers and
practitioners from Antwerp, Berlin, Birmingham, Brussels, Copenhagen, Frankfurt
am Main, Liège, London, Manchester, Madrid, Milan, Rotterdam, Stockholm,
Utrecht and Vienna for the Ethnic Minorities and Local Government Conference
(Bestuurlijk Overleg Stadsdelen 1998). The conference itself also illustrates a form
of research-policy dialogue on the local level: the city organisers hired researchers to
prepare the conference and several of the invited cities brought their own scientiﬁc
advisors to the conference (Amsterdam, Liège, London, Manchester, Rotterdam and
Stockholm).
The city of Amsterdam conference in 1998 was not exceptional in the Nether-
lands: the city of Haarlem, for example, organised a conference in 2004 with its twin
cities Osnabrück (Germany) and Angers (France) comparing the integration policies
of the three cities. A comparative report was commissioned from the Institute for
Migration and Ethnic Studies of the University of Amsterdam (Penninx 2005b).
When doing the comparative study, it turned out that the city of Osnabrück had
commissioned studies from the Institute for Migration and Intercultural Studies
(IMIS) at the University of Osnabrück in 1998 and 2000 (by Michael Bommes and
others) to revise its policies.8
7The city’s interest in research is also expressed in the fact that the city co-ﬁnanced in the past a
special chair on Islam and recently supported the transition of the coordination of IMISCOE to the
Erasmus University of Rotterdam.
8The ﬁrst 1998 report led to new integration policies in the city of Osnabrück in 1999, very much
inspired by Dutch local integration policies. In a second report of 2000, IMIS reported on the
feasibility of concrete policies in ﬁve areas.

104
R. Penninx
6.3
European Cities and Their National Connections
Local integration policies have always been in the shadow of national integration
policies or in the shadow of the absence of the latter, ﬁrst of all because immigration
policies (decisions about who is allowed to enter and stay) are made at the national
level. If immigration policy is followed by a national integration policy, as happened
in an early phase in Sweden (since 1975) and the Netherlands (since 1980), then
local integration policies are stimulated and facilitated by such national policies.
That is why Dutch and Swedish cities do have a longer history of local integration
policies than other European cities. By implication, they also have developed forms
of local research-policy dialogues, as described above for Dutch cities.
But immigration in Europe in the second half of the twentieth century was not
necessarily followed by integration policy at the national level: most West European
countries experienced signiﬁcant immigration but did not enact national integration
policies until the turn of the century. Nevertheless, immigrants did settle in cities
and municipalities and some of these cities (but by no means all!) did develop
integration policies, also in the absence of national policies. Quite a few of the cities
that Amsterdam had invited to its conference in 1998 (the ones not coming from the
Netherlands, Sweden and the UK) were cities that had pioneered local integration
policies without the support of their national authorities.
Similarly, cooperation between universities and cities on research and integration
policies, such as we mentioned for the Dutch case, was not exceptional in the late
1990s in Europe. When I was preparing the IMISCOE Network of Excellence in
2003, most of the 19 research institutes that were part of the IMISCOE-project in the
beginning had undertaken a signiﬁcant number of research projects commissioned
by cities and local authorities. This was clearly the case for IMES (University
of Amsterdam), CEDEM (University of Liège, Belgium), CEIFO (University of
Stockholm, Sweden), COMPAS (University of Oxford, United Kingdom), efms
(University of Bamberg, Germany), IMIS (University of Osnabrück, Germany), the
Austrian Academy of Sciences (in Vienna, Austria) and FIERI (in Torino, Italy).9
Swiss cities are interesting cases to illustrate how cities have developed local
integration policies in a national context with a long history of temporary employ-
ment of foreign workers in which the concept of integration was non-existent
(D’Amato and Gerber 2005; Wicker 2003). In the second half of the 1990s,
anthropologists (ethnologists) at universities in the cities of Zurich, Bern and Basel
conducted research on the integration of immigrants and – in collaboration with
city authorities – developed so called ‘Integrationsleitbilder’ (integration policy
frames: Begert 2005; Kessler 2005; Tremp 2005). Contrary to what I described for
cities in the Netherlands, this input of researchers did function as the ﬁrst phase
of a policy cycle, that of recognition and problem deﬁnition. At the same time
9It is not accidental that ﬁve of these institutes formed the consortium that would provide CLIP-
cities with the case-study research and the comparative reports of their policies between 2006 and
2012.

6
European Cities in Search of Knowledge for Their Integration Policies
105
the cities cooperated – amongst other things by organising a joint conference in
which these Leitbilder were presented and discussed – in presenting their initiatives
to national authorities, suggesting that the national government should have an
integration policy and should support cities in their integration policies. However
this latter initiative was not successful: it took several more years before the concept
of integration was introduced at the national level in Switzerland.
Whatever the history of local integration policies, a common characteristic during
the last decade seems to be that tensions between cities and national governments
on a number of issues developed or increased (see e.g. Scholten 2013 for the Dutch
case). Such tensions may relate to different views on how to implement (restrictive)
immigration policies: how to handle irregular migrants in practice, particularly
the ones that cannot be returned to their country of origin? How to implement
restrictions on access to facilities and services in the domains of employment,
housing, education and health in order to combat illegal residence?10 Disagreement
between national and local authorities may also relate to the new reception policies,
the civic integration courses, the increased cultural requirements for continued
residence and for naturalisation: where national policies may be quite ideological
on such matters, local policy practitioners tend to look more for feasible practical
solutions that are acceptable in immigrant communities. Tensions also arise when
the ﬁnancing of integration facilities is at stake, particularly when national policies
prescribe new action, but do not deliver the ﬁnancial and other resources needed to
implement it.
Such tensions make it clear that the interests at stake in integration policies
and their implementation may differ substantially, or be perceived as different, at
the local and national level. At the city level, the confrontation with the day-to-
day consequences of immigration is far more direct, and especially immigrants
more immediately feel the implications of policies. European cities are increasingly
aware that they need long-term, consistent integration policies in order to preserve
their viability as communities and their liveability for all residents. During the last
decade, cities have increasingly turned to new partners outside the national arena in
their search for knowledge and resources for their policies, as we shall see below.
6.4
EU Integration Policy and Horizontal Cooperation
Between Cities
Recently European cities have developed signiﬁcant new relations outside their
national context, particularly in the form of networks of cities that exchange
knowledge and practical experiences in local integration policies. Although such
initiatives primarily aim at cross-national horizontal forms of cooperation between
10The Linkage Law in the Netherlands, for example, obliges all public service providers to check
for legal residence of clients. Illegal clients should not be served.

106
R. Penninx
cities, all of these networks have strong connections with and support from the
European Commission. New coalitions have emerged in the multi-level governance
of migration and integration in Europe.
This new constellation goes back the Amsterdam Treaty of 1997 and the Tampere
Summit of ministers responsible for migration and integration policies in 1999.
These had stipulated that asylum and migration should become a common EU
policy domain, that existing migration policies and practices should be harmonised,
and that third-country nationals who are long-term residents should be granted
rights that approximate those of EU-citizens as closely as possible (which was the
interpretation of the integration concept at that time).
In the ﬁrst period of the Tampere Programme (1999–2004), EU policymaking
concentrated strongly on the harmonisation of migration and asylum policies;
integration was nearly absent (Van Selm and Tsolakis 2004). In fact, until 2003 EU
policies started from the implicit assumption that if the legal position of immigrants
was made as equal as possible to national citizens (as the Tampere programme
stipulated), and if adequate instruments were put in place to combat discrimination,
then integration processes could be left to societal forces. Thus, legal integration of
TCNs was to be ensured by means of the directives on family reuniﬁcation and free
movement after 5 years on the one hand, and by anti-discrimination directives on
the other.
It was only in 2003 that the European Commission came up with a more
comprehensive view on integration policies in its Communication on Immigration,
Integration and Employment.11 This Communication deﬁned integration as ‘a
two-way process based on reciprocity of rights and obligations of Third-Country
Nationals and host societies that foresee the immigrant’s full participation’ (Euro-
pean Commission 2003). This holistic policy approach targets all dimensions of
integration (economic, social and political rights, cultural and religious diversity,
citizenship and participation). In November 2004, the Council of Ministers respon-
sible for integration agreed on the Common Basic Principles (CBP) for integration
as a ﬁrst step towards a common framework for a European approach to immigrant
integration.12
In contrast to EU migration policies, which are governed by communitarian
principles (ﬁrst pillar), EU integration policymaking is on an intergovernmental
basis (third pillar). This means that policies have to be decided through consensus
of member states and there is no binding legislation and directives. This has two
effects on the making of policies. On the one hand, national governments do protect
their sovereign right to decide in many domains that are important in the broad
11EC COM (2003) 336 ﬁnal.
12This shift to a very broad conception of integration, however, did not go together with a
broadening of the target group: integration policies are supposed to be for Third-Country Nationals
only. Immigrants who are citizens from EU member states are supposed to be integrated by
deﬁnition. The latter assumption has been criticised recently by local authorities in regions that
received many new immigrants from accession states after the enlargements of 2004 and 2007
(Collett 2013).

6
European Cities in Search of Knowledge for Their Integration Policies
107
concept of integration, like social security, education, housing and health. In this
sense, EU integration policies are clearly ‘soft’ policies and limited to what national
governments allow them to be. On the other hand, through intergovernmental
policymaking national governments may also try to transpose their national policies
to the EU-level. Since 2004 some West European countries, for example, have
increasingly ‘uploaded’13 their cultural integration requirements for new Third-
country immigrants to EU-integration policies. What had started in the Netherlands
as voluntary toolkit programmes for early reception at the local level in the 1990s
became mandatory national civic integration courses in the 2000s, and these gained
currency in other EU member states after 2004, including testing and sanctions.
Although this speciﬁc mechanism of policymaking and implementation is
‘soft’ – the method is called the ‘open method of coordination’ – the European
Commission has managed to get agreement on some inﬂuential practical tools for
concrete action. From 2004 to 2006 the INTI- programme (Integration of Third-
Country Nationals) ﬁnanced action and research, followed by two more substantial
funds running from 2007 to 2013: ﬁrstly the European Integration Fund (EIF), and
secondly the European Refugee Fund (ERF), designed especially to compensate
states for their efforts regarding the reception and integration of refugees. For the
European Commission as a policymaker, these funds are important, since they create
direct relations between the EU and local and regional authorities (and their policies)
on the one hand, and non-governmental civil society partners at all levels on the
other.
It is against this new constellation of the multi-level governance of integration
that a new coalition between the European Commission and new networks of
European cities came into existence shortly after 2004. That new constellation is
also the reason why most of the network initiatives of cities for integration policies –
though not all of them14 – are networks of European cities exclusively. I will
describe the four most important networks (and the involvement of research in these
initiatives) below.
The ﬁrst is the CLIP-Network (Cities for Local Integration Policies15), estab-
lished as a European Network of cities in 2006 by the Congress of Local and
Regional Authorities of the Council of Europe, the City of Stuttgart and Euro-
found.16 It comprises some 30 European cities. The basic idea of the CLIP-project
13Hannelore Goeman uses this term in her analysis of the constitution of integration policies at the
EU level: Goeman 2012. See also Guild et al. 2009.
14The Cities of Migration project (http://citiesofmigration.ca) is an initiative taken by the Canadian
Maytree Foundation. It is a project rather than a network. Cities of Migration does not have
members. Cities are invited to (mostly virtually) share their experiences and learn from each other.
The Cities of Migration project’s main instrument is its website. The Cities of Migration project is
now supported by a dozen private foundations from Europe, North America and elsewhere.
15http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/areas/populationandsociety/clip.htm
16The European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions (Eurofound)
is a tripartite European Union Agency, whose role is to provide knowledge in the area of social and
work-related policies.

108
R. Penninx
is to learn by exchanging knowledge and experience between cities. This is
done in a systematic process involving research institutes that collect material
on integration policies in the participating cities. Five research institutes of the
IMISCOE Network of Excellence17 have been engaged to do case studies in each
of the cities and to compare these cases. The project is organised as a suite of
consecutive modules in which speciﬁc aspects of local integration policy are studied
empirically and compared systematically. The ﬁrst module was on housing for
immigrants (Bosswick et al. 2007), the second on diversity policies in employment
and service provision (Spencer 2008), the third on inter-group relations (Lüken-
Klassen and Heckmann 2010), and the fourth on immigrant entrepreneurship (Rath
et al. 2011). Each module generated some 25–30 case studies, one comparative
synthesis report18 and speciﬁc policy briefs. Each module was followed by a
conference in which the results were discussed among the cities involved and with
a wider interested audience. CLIP was funded from 2006 to 2012 by the European
Foundation. The CLIP materials focus strongly on policy practices in particular sub-
domains of integration policies, enabling analysis of the complete chain from policy
formulation to implementation and results, showing the often strong dependence of
such policies on the functioning of general institutions at the local and national
levels. It also gives important insights into the administrative and bureaucratic
mechanisms involved in policymaking and implementation.
The second network is Integrating Cities,19 a project (also since 2006) carried
out by Eurocities, a large network of some 140 major European cities. Integrating
Cities can be seen as a policy dialogue between Eurocities and the European
Commission. The most important platform for dialogue between cities and the Euro-
pean Commission are the Integrating Cities Conferences (2008–2013 in Rotterdam,
Milano, Berlin, London, Amsterdam and Tampere). The network has developed the
Eurocities Charter on Integrating Cities as a programme for city governance.
In terms of searching for relevant knowledge, Eurocities has implemented a
number of EU-funded projects on local integration as well as initiatives from
the Eurocities’ Working Group on Migration and Integration. The oldest of these
projects was the INTI-Cities project that ran for 18 months during 2007–2009. The
project was about ‘Benchmarking Integration Governance in European Cities’: peer
reviews were used to assess integration policies in European cities. By measuring
policies against a benchmark of high standards, it aimed at delivering expert-
17The ﬁve institutes involved in CLIP are the European Forum for Migration Studies (EFMS) at the
University of Bamberg, the Centre on Migration Policy and Society (COMPAS) at the University
of Oxford, the Institute for Migration and Ethnic Studies (IMES) of the University of Amsterdam,
the Austrian Academy of Sciences and the Centre for Ethnic and Migration Studies (CEDEM) of
the University of Liège.
18These case studies are available in the e-library of the European Urban Knowledge Network
(EUKN: www.eukn.org) and on the website of the European Foundation (www.eurofound.europa.
eu). The comparative synthesis reports are published by the Council of Europe and at www.
eurofound.europa.eu
19www.integratingcities.eu/

6
European Cities in Search of Knowledge for Their Integration Policies
109
validated, comparative knowledge on local practices in twelve cities from nine EU
member states. Four dimensions of integration policy were assessed:
1. General governance arrangements in the ﬁeld of migrant integration;
2. Policies in support of individual migrant empowerment;
3. Structures and effectiveness in administrative cooperation;
4. Policies creating and supporting partnerships with civil society and migrant
associations.
The ﬁnal report (Niessen and Kirchberger 2009) summarises benchmarks and
recommendations.
The INTI-project was followed by the DIVE-project that had a different and
narrower focus on the promotion of diversity and equality in local policies,
examining how cities and municipalities can effectively implement diversity policies
in management and employment policies led by principles of equality. The project
was co-ﬁnanced by the European Integration Fund. The project resorted again to the
methodology of benchmarking and peer reviewing:
1. A set of four benchmarks with regard to the four key responsibilities of
cities in promoting mutual accommodation were designed: municipalities as
policymakers, employers, service providers and buyers of goods and services;
2. Empirical research was carried out on local integration policies through peer-
reviews in four major European cities (Berlin, Rome, Amsterdam and Leeds),
involving senior city ofﬁcials with relevant responsibilities;
3. The benchmark report that resulted from this exercise was shared with actors
across Europe. It nurtured the Integrating Cities conferences of Berlin 2009
and London 2010 and contributed to the Cities’ charter on the role of local
government in the integration of migrants.20
The results of the project were published in the report ‘Cities Accommodating
Diversity’ (Moloney and Kirchberger 2010).
The MIXITIES-project (Making integration work in Europe’s cities 2010–2012)
built on the work developed by the INTI- and DIVE-projects. It aimed to develop
peer reviews, structured exchange workshops, and toolkits to support cities in
delivering the commitments of the Charter. The project focused on three key areas,
namely anti-discrimination policy, diversity competences in public services and
introductory courses for newcomers. Peer reviews were held on each of these themes
respectively in the cities of Gent, Barcelona and Stockholm in 2011. The project’s
ﬁndings and recommendations were presented at the Integrating Cities conference
held in Amsterdam in March 2012.
20The Integrating Cities Charter, launched in 2010, commits signatories to fully acknowledge the
presence of migrants in their roles as policymakers, service providers, employers and buyers of
goods and services. By September 2013, 30 European cities have signed the charter, which is
complemented by a process of monitoring and peer learning.

110
R. Penninx
The third network is Intercultural Cities,21 a joint action of the Council of Europe
and the European Commission started in 2008. It emerged from the White Paper on
Intercultural Dialogue that the Council of Europe had submitted for the European
Year of Intercultural Dialogue in that same year. The concept of the Intercultural
City was developed earlier by the British think-tank Comedia. In 2004, Comedia
conducted a 2 year research programme in the UK, United States, Australia,
New Zealand and Norway entitled ‘The Intercultural City: Making the Most of
Diversity’. It looked at cultural diversity as a source of innovation, creativity and
entrepreneurship and how increased intercultural dialogue, exchange and activity
can be the catalyst for such a process (Wood 2009).
The Intercultural Cities strategy is a management strategy that publicly advo-
cates respect for diversity and a pluralistic city identity. The Intercultural Cities
Programme was developed and ﬁrst applied in eleven European pilot cities and has
evolved since then. The Programme develops tools such as the Intercultural Cities
Index for cities to evaluate and develop their policies. It organises international
conferences for cities to exchange experience.
The fourth network is a more speciﬁc horizontal cooperation initiative, the
European Coalition of Cities Against Racism (ECCAR22) established in 2004 upon
the initiative of UNESCO. The aim of this coalition of cities is to share experiences
in order to improve policies to ﬁght racism, discrimination and xenophobia. Since
2008, its annual general conference is the main tool for exchange between cities.
In the meantime, 104 municipalities from 22 European countries have joined the
network and adopted the ‘Ten-Point-Plan of Action’.
These four European networks described above are all networks that have built
up some form of organisation and continuity of cooperation. But apart from these,
there have been numerous forms of cooperation of cities that have existed only
during the period that they have been funded (mostly by EU-funds). Examples
are ELCI – European Local Cooperation for Integration (2010)23 – an 18-month
project funded by the European Integration Fund that aims to promote knowledge
and understanding of the valuable role that migrant organisations could play in
integration process. Another example is DELI – Diversity in the Economy and
Local Integration – ﬁnanced by the Council of Europe and the EIF. It focuses
on migrant-owned small and medium size enterprises in the local economy. If we
were to scrutinise the long list of projects funded by the ERF, the EIF and also the
ESF (European Social Fund) for material relating to local integration of migrants,
we would certainly ﬁnd many more. The ESF in particular has funded a number
of projects on local labour market integration and on entrepreneurship in which
(im-)migrants have a signiﬁcant place.
21http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/cultureheritage/culture/Cities/
22http://www.citiesagainstracism.org/ICCAR.6.0.html
23http://menedek.hu/

6
European Cities in Search of Knowledge for Their Integration Policies
111
6.5
Conclusions
This brief exploration of local research-policy dialogues in European cities and
municipalities leads me to the following conclusions and hypotheses for further,
more systematic research. The ﬁrst is that – at ﬁrst sight – local research-policy
dialogues as such are nearly invisible in the international literature, but their
existence turns out to be much older and more concrete if we turn to the local and
national grey literature and to sources close to the partners involved: i.e. cities and
their policymakers (and policy documents) on the one hand, and researchers and
their institutes on the other. Obviously, much of what is produced in the context of
local research-policy dialogues has to be made with more modest means than what is
ﬁnanced at the national level; it is also published in less well-known outlets, mostly
in the local language. As a consequence, it does not reach a wider (international)
audience.
Secondly, the above exploration suggests that – at least historically – cities and
municipalities are more likely to start integration policies and use research (or any
other form of systematic knowledge) to underpin their local policies when they
are stimulated and supported to do so by higher level governance. The relatively
strong and early development of local research-policy-relations in the Netherlands
is clearly related to active national integration policies since the beginning of the
1980s. A comparably favourable situation may also have stimulated cities in Sweden
in the 1980s and 1990s to develop local policy-research-dialogues. In terms of the
functions of research, the data on Dutch cities suggests that – given the national
framing of policies – cities used research primarily for instrumentation of policies
in the beginning and monitoring and evaluation thereafter.
While an active integration policy at the national level might thus increase
the probability of a local research-policy nexus emerging, the absence of such a
national policy does not prevent cities from developing local integration policies.
A signiﬁcant number of European cities did so, often using research and initiating
research-policy dialogues. Contrary to Dutch and Swedish cities in the 1980s and
1990s, the case of Swiss cities in the late 1990s suggests that, particularly in the
beginning, such (externally commissioned) research did fulﬁl the function that
research normally has in the ﬁrst phase of a policy cycle, namely in recognising
and deﬁning problems and setting the frame for local policies.
The above exploration has thus established the existence of local research-policy
dialogues in European cities on a larger scale than was known before and in diverse
regions of Europe. The material, however, is still too scant to make substantial
statements neither on the frequency of such local dialogues, nor on their continuity
over time. As to the latter, I would venture the hypothesis that more continuous
forms of local dialogues have developed in those cities in which the interest in
integration policies developed simultaneously both in local universities or research
institutes and among local politicians and civil servants. Those cities seem, however,
to be exceptional. Most local research-policy-dialogues, one may hypothesise, are
incidental and short term.

112
R. Penninx
The relevance of what happens at the other levels of the increasingly multi-
level governance of integration in Europe becomes clear after the European Union
initiated its own integration policy in 2003. Although the European Commission
has a very speciﬁc deﬁnition of integration and of target groups (which is certainly
not always shared by cities), increasingly direct policy cooperation has come into
existence between the European Commission and local authorities, bypassing the
national governance level. In that new constellation of multi-level governance,
an interesting form of research-policy dialogues has mushroomed: networks of
European cities that evaluate and share their own practical knowledge, assisted
in that process by researchers, and ﬁnanced by the European Commission. A
systematic study of what has been produced in three of these networks, Cities for
Local Integration Policies, Integrating Cities and Intercultural Cities, would teach us
a lot about local policy-research relations as these have evolved in the last decade,
both in terms of the individual cities involved and in terms of their cross-national
cooperation.
Open Access This chapter is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
Noncommercial License, which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
References
Alexander, M. (2003). Host-stranger relations in Rome, Tel Aviv, Paris and Amsterdam: A
comparison of local policies toward migrants. PhD thesis, Universiteit van Amsterdam,
Amsterdam.
Alexander, M. (2004). Comparing local policies towards migrants: An analytical framework, a
typology and preliminary survey results. In R. Penninx, K. Kraal, M. Martiniello, & S. Vertovec
(Eds.), Citizenship in European cities. Immigrants, local politics and integration policies (pp.
57–84). Aldershot: Ashgate.
Alexander, M. (2007). Cities and labour immigration. Comparing policy responses in Amsterdam,
Paris, Rome and Tel Aviv. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Begert, U. (2005). Städteleitbild und migrationspolitische Erfahrungen der stadt Bern. In G.
D’Amato & B. Gerber (Eds.), Herausforderung Integration. Städtische Migrationspolitik in
der Schweiz und in Europa (pp. 93–99). Zürich: Seismo Verlag.
Bestuurlijk Overleg Stadsdelen Amsterdam. (1998). Ethnic minorities and local government.
Report of the conference’. 22 and 23 January 1998, Bestuurlijk Overleg Stadsdelen, Amster-
dam.
Blommaert, J., & Martiniello, M. (1996). Ethnic mobilisation, multiculturalism and the political
process in two Belgian cities: Antwerp and Liège. Innovation, 9(1), 51–73.
Body-Gendrot, S. (2000). The social control of cities? Oxford: Blackwell.
Bommes, M., & Morawska, E. (2005). International migration research. Constructions, omissions
and the promises of interdisciplinarity. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Bosswick, W., Lüken-Klaßen, D., & Heckmann, F. (2007). Housing and integration of migrants in
Europe. Strasbourg: Council of Europe.
Bousetta, H. (2001). Immigration, post-immigration policies and the political mobilisation of
ethnic minorities: A comparative case study of Moroccans in four European cities. PhD
dissertation, KUB, Brussels.

6
European Cities in Search of Knowledge for Their Integration Policies
113
Caponio, T., & Borkert, M. (2010). The local dimension of migration policymaking. Amsterdam:
Amsterdam University Press.
Collett, E. (2013). The integration needs of mobile EU citizens: Impediments and opportunities.
Brussels: Migration Policy Institute Europe.
Commissie van Deskundigen. (1998). Amsterdam heeft de wereld in huis. Advies van de commissie
van deskundigen Herziening Minderhedenbeleid van de gemeente Amsterdam. Amsterdam:
Gemeente Amsterdam.
D’Amato, G., & Gerber, B. (Eds.). (2005). Herausforderung Integration. Städtische Migra-
tionspolitik in der Schweiz und in Europa. Zürich: Seismo Verlag.
Entzinger, H., & Scholten, P. (2014). The interplay of knowledge production and policymaking: A
comparative analysis of research and policymaking on migrant integration in Germany and the
Netherlands. Journal of Comparative Policy Analysis, 18, 1–15.
European Commission. (2003). Communication on immigration, integration and employment, 3
June. EC COM (2003) 336 ﬁnal.
Favell, A. (1998). Philosophies of integration. Immigration and the idea of citizenship in France
and Britain. London: Macmillan.
Fennema, M., & Tillie, J. (2004). Do immigrant policies matter? Ethnic civic communities and
immigrant policies in Amsterdam, Liège and Zurich. In R. Penninx, K. Kraal, M. Martiniello,
& S. Vertovec (Eds.), Citizenship in European cities. Immigrants, local politics and integration
policies (pp. 85–106). Aldershot: Ashgate.
Garbaye, R. (2000). Ethnic minorities, cities and institutions: A comparison of the modes of
management of ethnic diversity of a French and a British city. In R. Koopmans & P.
Statham (Eds.), Challenging immigration and ethnic relations politics: Comparative European
perspectives (pp. 283–311). Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gesemann, F., & Roth, R. (Eds.). (2009). Lokale Integrationspolitik in der Einwanderungsge-
sellschaft – Migration und Integration als Herausforderung von Kommunen. Wiesbaden: VS
Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.
Goeman, H. (2012). Integrating integration. The constitution of a EU policy domain on migrant
integration. PhD thesis, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussel.
Guild, E., Groenendijk, K., & Carrera, S. (Eds.). (2009). Illiberal liberal states: Immigration,
citizenship and integration in the EU. Farnham: Ashgate.
Hammar, T. (2004). Research and politics in Swedish immigration management 1965–1984. In M.
Jandl & I. Stacher (Eds.), Towards a multilateral migration regime. Special anniversary edition
dedicated to Jonas Widgren (pp. 11–34). Vienna: ICMPD.
Ireland, P. (1994). The policy challenge of diversity: Immigrant politics in France and Switzerland.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Kessler, T. (2005). Das Integrationsleitbild des Kantons Basel-Stadt. In G. D’Amato & B.
Gerber (Eds.), Herausforderung Integration. Städtische Migrationspolitik in der Schweiz und
in Europa (pp. 104–111). Zürich: Seismo Verlag.
Lüken-Klassen, D., & Heckmann, F. (2010). Intercultural policies in European cities. Strasbourg:
Council of Europe.
Maussen, M. (2009). Constructing mosques. The governance of Islam in France and the Nether-
lands. PhD thesis, University of Amsterdam, AISSR.
Ministerie van Binnenlandse Zaken. (1980). Regeringsreactie op het rapport “Etnische minderhe-
den” van de Wetenschappelijke Raad voor het Regeringsbeleid. Den Haag: Min. van BiZa.
Moloney, Th., & Kirchberger, A. (2010). Cities accommodating diversity: Findings and recom-
mendations from the peer review project “Diversity and Equality in European Cities”. At http://
www.migpolgroup.com/public/docs/171.CitiesAccommodatingDiversity_DIVE_22.02.10.pdf
Moore, D. (2001). Ethnicité et Politique de la Ville en France et en Grande-Bretagne. Paris:
L’Harmattan.
Moore, D. (2004). In R. Penninx, K. Kraal, M. Martiniello, & S. Vertovec (Eds.), Citizenship in
European cities. Immigrants, local politics and integration policies (pp. 127–138). Aldershot:
Ashgate.

114
R. Penninx
Musterd, S., Ostendorf, W., & Breebaart, M. (1998). Multi-ethnic metropolis: Patterns and
policies. Amsterdam: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Niessen, J., & Kirchberger, A. (2009). Strategic thinking on equality and mobility. INTI-cities:
Key ﬁndings and recommendations for European-level policy makers. At: http://www.archive.
migpolgroup.com/public/docs/150.INTI-Cities_MPG_Presentation_BenchmarkingReport_28.
01.09.pdf
Penninx, R. (1988). Wie betaalt, bepaalt? De ontwikkeling en programmering van onderzoek naar
migranten, etnische minderheden en woonwagenbewoners 1955–1985. Amsterdam: SGI-reeks.
Penninx, R. (2005a). Integration of migrants: Economic, social, cultural and political dimensions.
In M. Macura, A. L. MacDonald, & W. Haug (Eds.), The new demographic regime: Population
challenges and policy responses (pp. 137–152). New York/Geneva: United Nations.
Penninx, R. (2005b). ‘Integratiebeleid in Angers, Haarlem en Osnabrück: visies, strategieën en
de praktijk’ (pp. 9–16), ‘Integrationspolitik in Angers, Haarlem en Osnabrück: Ansichten,
Strategien und Praxis’ (pp. 43–52), ‘Politique d’integration à Angers, Haarlem en Osnabrück:
points de vue, stratégies et pratique’ (pp. 77–86). In Multiculturalité et Integration à Angers,
Haarlem et Osnabrück, Multiculturaliteit en Integratie in Angers, Haarlem et Osnabrück,
Multiculturalität und Integration in Angers, Haarlem et Osnabrück, Haarlem: Gemeente
Haarlem. Also published on: http://www.eukn.org/netherlands/themes/Urban_Policy/Social_
inclusion_and_integration/Integration_of_social_groups/multiculturality-in-angers-haarlem-
and-osnabruck_1024.html
Penninx, R. (2009). Vergleichende Studien zu Integrationspolitiken europäischer Städte. In F.
Gesemann & R. Roth (Eds.), Lokale Integrationspolitik in der Einwanderungsgesellschaft –
Migration und Integration als Herausforderung von Kommunen (pp. 611–634). Wiesbaden:
VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften.
Penninx, R., Kraal, K., Martiniello, M., & Vertovec, S. (Eds.). (2004). Citizenship in European
cities. Immigrants, local politics and integration policies. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Penninx, R., Berger, M., & Kraal, K. (Eds.). (2006). The dynamics of international migration and
settlement in Europe. A state of the art. Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press.
Rath, J., Penninx, R., Groenendijk, K., & Meyer, A. (2001). Western Europe and its Islam.
Leiden/Boston/Cologne: Brill.
Rath, J., Swagerman, A., Krieger, H., Ludwinek, A., & Pickering, L. (2011). Promoting eth-
nic entrepreneurship in European cities. At: http://www.eurofound.europa.eu/publications/
htmlﬁles/ef1138.htm
Rex, J., & Samad, Y. (1996). Multiculturalism and political integration in Birmingham and
Bradford. Innovation, 9(1), 11–31.
Rogers, A., & Tillie, J. (Eds.). (2001). Multicultural policies and modes of citizenship in European
cities. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Scholten, P. (2013). Agenda dynamics and the multi-level governance of migrant integration: The
case of Dutch migrant integration policies. Policy Sciences, 46, 217–236.
Slootman, M., & Tillie, J. (2006). Processes of radicalisation – Why some Amsterdam Muslims
become radicals. Amsterdam: Institute for Migration and Ethnic Studies.
Spencer, S. (2008). Equality and diversity in jobs and services: City policies for migrants in
Europe. Strasbourg: Council of Europe.
Thränhardt, D., & Bommes, M. (Eds.). (2010). National paradigms of migration research.
Göttingen: V&R Unipress.
Tremp, J. (2005). Vom Integrationsleitbild zur Integrationspolitik der stadt Zürich. In G. D’Amato
& B. Gerber (Eds.), Herausforderung Integration. Städtische Migrationspolitik in der Schweiz
und in Europa (pp. 87–92). Zürich: Seismo Verlag.
Uniken Venema, P. (1986). Overzicht gemeentelijk minderhedenonderzoek. Leiden: ACOM.
Van Selm, J., & Tsolakis, E. (2004). The enlargement of an ‘area of freedom, security and
justice’: Managing migration in a European Union of 25 members. Policy Brief, May 2004.
Washington: Migration Policy Institute.
Wicker, H.-R. (2003). Einleitung: Migration, Migrationspolitik und Migrationsforschung. In H.-R.
Wicker, W. Haug, & R. Fibbi (Eds.), Migration und die Schweiz (pp. 12–62). Zürich: Seismo.

6
European Cities in Search of Knowledge for Their Integration Policies
115
Wolff, R., Van Heelsum, A., & Penninx, R. (1999). Erkend, aangesproken, aanspreekbaar?
Evaluatie van het migrantenbeleid van voormalig stadsdeel Oost en de participatie van
organisaties van migranten, 1996–1998. Amsterdam: Stadsdeel Oost/Watergraafsmeer.
Wood, P. (Ed.). (2009). Intercultural cities: Towards a model for intercultural integra-
tion. Strasbourg: Council of Europe Publishing. Also available at http://www.coe.int/t/dg4/
cultureheritage/culture/cities/ICCModelPubl_en.pdf
Zincone, G., Borkert, M., & Penninx, R. (Eds.). (2011). Migration policymaking in Europe: The
dynamics of actors and contexts in past and present (IMISCOE Research series). Amsterdam:
Amsterdam University Press.