I N HIS BOOK Banques et banquiers dans les cites grecques (Leiden 1968), R. Bogaert made valuable observations concerning the interpreta-tion of the intractable document OGIS 484, directing his attention in the main towards its financial aspects (pp.231-34). The contribution offered here in the form of translation and commentary incorpo-rates Bogaert&amp;apos;s work and has two principal ends: to explain the financial. commercial and juridical features of the text and to emend misinterpretations which have gained currency over the years largely by default. The inscription, fragmentary at its beginning and end, preserves an imperial epistula, \\vhich addresses itself to problems of currency exchange experiened in the Pergamene market and to matters of legal procedure having to do with default, distraint and trial. Written in response to a petition made to the Roman emperor about various abuses perpetrated by money changers, it upholds the institution of an exchange monopoly locally at Pergamum and at the same time establishes corrective measures on the basis of what purports to be a thorough examination of the complaints. Though its tenor is pre-dictably paternalistic, nonetheless it was framed with an eye towards consumer welfare and with the clear intent of eliminating duress. In fine, it provides an intriguing insight into entrepreneurial pressures and schemes in the marketplace. Nowhere in the surviving portion of the document do those at the centre of the controversy, those who stand accused of illegal-or, at the very least, arbitrary-conduct, receive a name. Their prime activ-ity is described as money-changing, but they were also involved in lending. It will do no harm to refer to them as &amp;apos;bankers &amp;apos; and their business concretely as &amp;lt;the bank&amp;apos;, so long as it is remembered that the raison d &amp;apos; etre of this bank was to produce revenue for the city of Pergamum from currency exchange. Any other facilities it (may ha ve) offered were subsidiary. The document itself is cast in the form of an