submissions each year. The meeting covers a wide breadth of Earth and space sciences such as atmospheric sciences, volca- nology, and space physics. The AGU Fall Meeting provides a high-powered test for equality in the allocation of speaking opportunities to men and women across a broad range of physical sciences. Since 2013, AGU, an international scientiﬁc association with 60,000 members from 137 countries, has asked its members to self-report gender (female, male, prefer not to answer), highest degree obtained, including year, and other demographic data. For the AGU Fall Meeting 2014 to 2016 abstract database (here after referred to as the abstract database), 98% (n = 65,247) of abstract authors self-identify as male or female, of which >98% provided career information (n = 64,209). Note that although authors self- identify their gender, our binary analysis (female/women/male/ men) does not capture the spectrum of gender identity. Career stage is self-identiﬁed as student or retired, or calculated based on number of years since highest degree obtained: early career (0–10 years), mid-career (10–20 years), experienced (>20 years). AGU deﬁnes these career stages for award eligibility. AGU is organized into Sections (e.g., atmospheric sciences, seismology, etc). For the AGU Fall Meeting, topical sessions within a section are proposed by a self-organized group of up to four members, led by a primary convener. Traditionally, there are two types of sessions: oral and poster. The primary convener and the co-convener(s) can also invite a limited number of authors. During abstract submission, authors opt to be assigned an oral or poster presentation by the conveners or may opt for a poster only presentation. The primary convener and co-convener(s) then assign abstract submissions as either oral or poster pre- sentation. When an author opts for a poster only abstract sub- mission, it typically remains a poster presentation (99%). The abstract ﬁrst author and primary convener