10 Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated tremendous capabilities in solving com- 11 plex tasks, from quantitative reasoning to understanding natural language. However, LLMs 12 sometimes suffer from confabulations (or hallucinations) which can result in them making plau- 13 sible but incorrect statements (Bang et al., 2023; Borji, 2023). This hinders the use of current 14 large models in scientific discovery. Here we introduce FunSearch (short for searching in the 15 function space), an evolutionary procedure based on pairing a pre-trained LLM with a system- 16 atic evaluator. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach to surpass the best known re- 17 sults in important problems, pushing the boundary of existing LLM-based approaches (Lehman 18 et al., 2022). Applying FunSearch to a central problem in extremal combinatorics — the cap 19 set problem — we discover new constructions of large cap sets going beyond the best known 20 ones, both in finite dimensional and asymptotic cases. This represents the first discoveries made 21 for established open problems using LLMs. We showcase the generality of FunSearch by apply- 22 ing it to an algorithmic problem, online bin packing, finding new heuristics that improve upon 23 widely used baselines. In contrast to most computer search approaches, FunSearch searches for 24 programs that describe how to solve a problem, rather than what the solution is. Beyond being 25 an effective and scalable strategy, discovered programs tend to be more interpretable than raw 26 solutions, enabling feedback loops between domain experts and FunSearch, and the deployment 27 of such programs in real-world applications. 28 Many problems in mathematical sciences are “easy to evaluate,” despite being typically “hard to 29 solve.” For example, in computer science, NP-complete optimization problems admit a polynomial- 30 time evaluation procedure (measuring the quality of the solution), despite the widespread belief that 31 no polynomia