In this globalization era, there have been drastic changes taking place all over the world. These tremendous vicissitudes occur when people have a strong desire to achieve something. People’s desires are fulfilled when they clearly express their ideas and opinions with others. Thus, they need to learn communication skills in order to fulfill their ambitions, desires, and goals. In this modern world, communication skills play a vital role and one must have mastery over these skills to get success in their respective fields. So, speaking is the most important skill among all the four language skills in order to communicate well in this global world. As English is widely used all over the world, there is a need for learners to acquire the communication skills of it to get success in their respective fields. Thus, the classroom is the ideal platform to acquire good communication skills, especially, speaking skills. The teachers have to understand the problems of the ELLs (English language learners) and try to implement various teaching strategies in their classrooms in order to develop their learners’ speaking skills in English classrooms. This is possible for the teachers when they change their methods and materials and by using the latest techniques of teaching speaking skills. Therefore, the teachers should introduce some group and pair activities in their regular English classrooms that the ELLs can develop their speaking skills enormously.This paper sheds light on the importance of speaking skills in English classrooms. First of all, this paper discloses the significance of the basic language skills of English. Later, this paper also explains the importance of speaking skills in English classrooms in a comprehensive way. It also explains the need to teach speaking skills. Then the kinds of speaking situations and the main advantages of speaking skills are explained elaborately. Furthermore, this paper also supplies several techniques to develop speaking skills among the EFL/ESL learners in the English classrooms. Finally, this paper suggests some useful tips for the teachers to introduce various activities that involve the ELLs more on practicing their speaking skills in English classrooms. Moreover, it also suggests the ELLs improve their speaking skills as these are very useful for them to build their future career in a perfect way.