University of Groningen
The mechanism of the modified Ullmann reaction
Sperotto, Elena; Klink, Gerard P.M. van; Koten, Gerard van; Vries, Johannes G. de
Published in:
Dalton Transactions
DOI:
10.1039/c0dt00674b
IMPORTANT NOTE: You are advised to consult the publisher's version (publisher's PDF) if you wish to cite from
it. Please check the document version below.
Document Version
Publisher's PDF, also known as Version of record
Publication date:
2010
Link to publication in University of Groningen/UMCG research database
Citation for published version (APA):
Sperotto, E., Klink, G. P. M. V., Koten, G. V., & Vries, J. G. D. (2010). The mechanism of the modified
Ullmann reaction. Dalton Transactions, 39(43), 10338-10351. https://doi.org/10.1039/c0dt00674b
Copyright
Other than for strictly personal use, it is not permitted to download or to forward/distribute the text or part of it without the consent of the
author(s) and/or copyright holder(s), unless the work is under an open content license (like Creative Commons).
The publication may also be distributed here under the terms of Article 25fa of the Dutch Copyright Act, indicated by the “Taverne” license.
More information can be found on the University of Groningen website: https://www.rug.nl/library/open-access/self-archiving-pure/taverne-
amendment.
Take-down policy
If you believe that this document breaches copyright please contact us providing details, and we will remove access to the work immediately
and investigate your claim.
Downloaded from the University of Groningen/UMCG research database (Pure): http://www.rug.nl/research/portal. For technical reasons the
number of authors shown on this cover page is limited to 10 maximum.
Download date: 05-01-2026

PERSPECTIVE
www.rsc.org/dalton | Dalton Transactions
The mechanism of the modiﬁed Ullmann reaction†
Elena Sperotto,a Gerard P. M. van Klink,a Gerard van Koten*a and Johannes G. de Vries*b
Received 17th June 2010, Accepted 18th August 2010
DOI: 10.1039/c0dt00674b
The copper-mediated aromatic nucleophilic substitution reactions developed by Fritz Ullmann
and Irma Goldberg required stoichiometric amounts of copper and very high reaction temperatures.
Recently, it was found that addition of relatively cheap ligands (diamines, aminoalcohols, diketones,
diols) made these reactions truly catalytic, with catalyst amounts as low as 1 mol% or even lower.
Since these catalysts are homogeneous, it has opened up the possibility to investigate the mechanism
of these modiﬁed Ullmann reactions. Most authors agree that Cu(I) is the true catalyst even though
Cu(0) and Cu(II) catalysts have also shown to be active. It should be noted however that Cu(I) is capable
of reversible disproportionation into Cu(0) and Cu(II). In the ﬁrst step, the nucleophile displaces the
halide in the LnCu(I)X complex forming LnCu(I)ZR (Z = O, NR¢, S). Quite a number of mechanisms
have been proposed for the actual reaction of this complex with the aryl halide: 1. Oxidative addition
of ArX forming a Cu(III) intermediate followed by reductive elimination; 2. Sigma bond metathesis; in
this mechanism copper remains in the Cu(II) oxidation state; 3. Single electron transfer (SET) in which
a radical anion of the aryl halide is formed (Cu(I)/Cu(II)); 4. Iodine atom transfer (IAT) to give the aryl
radical (Cu(I)/Cu(II)); 5. p-complexation of the aryl halide with the Cu(I) complex, which is thought
to enable the nucleophilic substitution reaction. Initially, the radical type mechanisms 3 and 4 where
discounted based on the fact that radical clock-type experiments with ortho-allyl aryl halides failed to
give the cyclised products. However, a recent DFT study by Houk, Buchwald and co-workers shows that
the modiﬁed Ullmann reaction between aryl iodide and amines or primary alcohols proceeds either via
an SET or an IAT mechanism. Van Koten has shown that stalled aminations can be rejuvenated by the
addition of Cu(0), which serves to reduce the formed Cu(II) to Cu(I); this also corroborates a Cu(I)/Cu(II)
mechanism. Thus the use of radical clock type experiments in these metal catalysed reactions
is not reliable. DFT calculations from Hartwig seem to conﬁrm a Cu(I)/Cu(III) type mechanism
for the amidation (Goldberg) reaction, although not all possible mechanisms were calculated.
aOrganic Chemistry & Catalysis, Utrecht University, Padualaan 8, 3584,
CH, Utrecht, NL. E-mail: g.vankoten@uu.nl; Fax: +31 30 252 3615
bDSM Innovative Synthesis BV, A unit of DSM Pharma Chemicals, P.O. Box
18, 6160, MD, Geleen, NL. E-mail: Hans-JG.Vries-de@dsm.com; Fax: +31
46 4767604
† Based on the presentation given at Dalton Discussion No. 12, 13–15th
September 2010, Durham University, UK.
Elena Sperotto
Elena Sperotto was born in San-
drigo, Italy, and studied chemistry
at the University of Padova where
she received her Masters degree
in 2003. Afterwards, she spent
one year at DSM Research in
Geleen, The Netherlands, for a
post-graduate research project on
enzymatic resolution of amino
acids. She then worked on her
PhD thesis at Utrecht University,
The Netherlands, under the su-
pervision of Prof. G. van Koten,
where she investigated copper-
catalyzed carbon-heteroatom coupling reactions, until receiving her
doctorate in September 2009.
Gerard van Koten
Gerard van Koten is a Distin-
guished University Professor of
Utrecht University. From 2005
to 2007 he was Dean of the
Faculty of Science at Utrecht
University. In 2007 he became
Distinguished Research Profes-
sor (part-time) at Cardiff Uni-
versity (UK). His research com-
prises the study of fundamen-
tal processes in organometallic
chemistry and the application of
organometallic complexes as ho-
mogeneous catalysts. Recent in-
terests are the immobilization of catalysts on dendrimers and on
inorganic supports as well as the use of these materials for tandem
catalysis. This also includes the development of novel enzyme–
organometallic hybrid catalytic materials.
1.
Introduction
1.1
The Ullmann reaction
In the early 1900’s, Fritz Ullmann and Irma Goldberg reported
their pioneering work on copper-mediated aromatic nucleophilic
substitution reactions.1–3 The original protocol for the coupling
10338 | Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 10338–10351
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Downloaded by University of Groningen on 13 January 2011
Published on 27 October 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C0DT00674B

reaction required the use of stoichiometric amounts of copper salts
together with high reaction temperatures (≥200 ◦C) and long reac-
tion times. In spite of this, numerous industrial applications, such
as synthesis of intermediates in pharmaceutical, agrochemical, ﬁne
and polymer chemistry were found over the years.4–7 According to
commonly accepted nomenclature, the term ‘Ullmann conden-
sation reaction’ refers to a copper-mediated (stoichiometric or
catalytic) reaction between an aryl halide and an amine, phenol or
thiophenol to synthesize the corresponding aryl -amine, -ether or
-thioether compounds, respectively. With the ‘Ullmann reaction’,
though, the copper-mediated synthesis of biaryls from aryl halides
is described (Scheme 1).8–11
Scheme 1
Schematic representation of the Ullmann reaction and the
Ullmann condensation.
Two related reaction types exist known as the Goldberg and
Hurtley reactions. The Goldberg condensation reaction involves
the copper-mediated reaction between an aryl halide and an amide,
to form a new C(aryl)–N bond,12 whilst the copper-catalyzed
condensation of 2-halobenzoic acids with various b-dicarbonyls
(1,3 diketones) is called the Hurtley reaction.13
The recent interest in Ullmann chemistry has been spurred
by the tremendous success of the palladium catalysed cross
coupling reactions between haloarenes and nucleophiles, such as
the Hartwig–Buchwald amination reaction, that were developed
Hans de Vries
Hans de Vries received a PhD
in Organic Chemistry from the
University
of
Groningen
with
R. M. Kellogg. After a postdoc
at Brandeis University in the US
with Jim Hendrickson his ﬁrst
job was as a medicinal chemist
with Sandoz in Vienna and Lon-
don. Since 1988 he works for
DSM in Geleen, The Netherlands
where he is a Principal Scien-
tist in Homogeneous Catalysis.
In 1999 he was appointed part-
time professor at the University of
Groningen. He is also a visiting industrial professor at the University
of Bristol. His research interests are homogeneous catalysis and
catalysis for renewables.
during the past 20 years.14–18 An obvious concern for large scale
applications of this type of chemistry is the cost of the metal and
the ligands as well as the need for fully removing the metal from
the product solution. The recent quest for cheap and sustainable
reactions made many researchers turn their attention again to the
copper-mediated cross-coupling reactions. The successful deve-
lopment of improved catalytic versions of this grand old chemistry
has caused a veritable ‘renaissance’ of what is now known as the
‘modiﬁed Ullmann reaction’. Many drawbacks of the classical
reaction (e.g. the high reaction temperatures, long reaction times,
high metal loadings, and narrow scope) have been overcome and
a wide range of new procedures became available for applications
in many areas.19–26 The key of the ‘modiﬁed Ullmann’ procedure
lies in the addition of ligands to the copper catalyst in order to
improve the solubility of the copper precursors, leading to the use
of milder reaction conditions, i.e. lower reaction temperature and
time, lower catalyst loadings, and a widened scope of reactivity.
In general the copper (pre-)catalyst is prepared by the in situ
mixing of a copper salt and a suitable, often bidentate, chelator19–26
such as diamines,27–29 amino acids,25,30,31 1,10-phenantrolines,32–37
diols38–40 and other nitrogen- and oxygen-containing ligands.41–44
These developments have been so successful that the modiﬁed
Ullmann reaction has already found its way into large-scale
production.45 It is clear that this technology is much cheaper
than the highly successful palladium-catalyzed variants. There is
one major difference, however; whereas the palladium-catalysed
Hartwig–Buchwald arylation is mechanistically well-understood
there appears to be no consensus yet on the mechanism of the
modiﬁed Ullmann reaction.
1.2
General aspects of copper chemistry
As a late transition element, copper occurs in a range of oxidation
states (Cu(0), Cu(I), Cu(II), Cu(III) and Cu(IV)), and the ions read-
ily form complexes yielding a variety of coordination compounds.
Oxidation states I and II are known for many compounds and
are the most common, while compounds with copper in oxidation
state III are fewer in number.46–48 Compounds containing Cu(0)
species have been observed under particular conditions49 and
oxidation state IV exists only in a speciﬁc environment, in ﬂuorides
and oxides.50,51
Copper(I) is unstable in aqueous solution, according to the
reported oxidation potentials (Cu+ + e- →Cu E0 = 0.52 V;
Cu2+ + e- →Cu+ E = 0.162 V),52 leading to a disproportionation
equilibrium: 2Cu(I) ⇆Cu(0) + Cu(II). However, the relative
stabilities of Cu(I) and Cu(II) in solution strongly depend on the
nature of their anions and ligands and may vary considerably with
solvents.
These considerations have a bearing on the difﬁculty of
pinpointing an individual oxidation state involved in a speciﬁc
reaction, since copper is likely to be present at more than one
oxidation level, proportions of which may alter during the reaction
as a result of redox processes. Moreover, many solvents and
ligands show an outstanding coordinating effect with regard to
copper, and thus they can inﬂuence the equilibria involved in
solution. Copper ions not only undergo complex formation with
molecules/anions present in the reaction system, but they often
associate to form higher aggregated species.54 In addition, both
heterolytic and homolytic mechanisms have been suggested for
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 10338–10351 | 10339
Downloaded by University of Groningen on 13 January 2011
Published on 27 October 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C0DT00674B

reactions involving copper species, but telling between the two
is complicated by the possible copper mediated electron transfer
between organic intermediates of ionic and radical type (i.e. R
∑+
Cu2+ →R+ + Cu+).55 Therefore, the elucidation of the reaction
mechanism for copper-mediated processes often appeared to be
cumbersome and has led to conﬂicting mechanistic proposals,
sometimes even for the same reaction.
In this perspective, we review the mechanistic studies reported
for the Ullmann condensation reaction since its discovery and
we present an overview of the possible and proposed mechanistic
pathways for copper-catalyzed aromatic nucleophilic substitution
reactions in homogeneous systems. Understanding the mechanism
of this reaction could lead to important advances in this ﬁeld
and will probably allow further progress in the application of the
modiﬁed Ullmann reactions.
2.
Mechanistic investigations on the Ullmann
condensation
Since the original work of Ullmann and Goldberg, it has been
known that various copper sources are effective in the C–C and
C–X coupling reactions, ranging from Cu(I) to Cu(II) salts, and
even including metallic copper.1–3 Comparisons among the various
systems studied, mainly for C–N and C–O bond formations, led
authors to conclude ‘that almost any copper or copper compound
may be used as a source of catalyst’56 with similar behaviour, even
though the use of Cu(I) salts appeared to lead to higher reactivities.
The conclusion was that probably a single catalytically active
species emanated from all these precursors. Therefore, the question
of which oxidation state of copper is present in the active catalyst
was the ﬁrst to catch the interest of the scientiﬁc community.
Studies on the formation of diphenyl ether from bromobenzene
and potassium phenoxide using electron paramagnetic resonance
(EPR) spectroscopy led to the hypothesis that the cuprous salt
(Cu+) was the true catalytic species and that the cupric salt (Cu2+)
was reduced to Cu+ by the phenoxide ions.57 In 1987, Paine pub-
lished a more systematic investigation on the catalytic species in
the Ullmann synthesis of triarylamines.58 In his work, he reported
the results of experiments using homogeneous and heterogeneous
catalysts having three different oxidation states of copper. When
Cu(II) precursors were used, the catalytic activity was attributed
to Cu(I) species, derived from the reduction of the cupric ions
present, similarly to Weingarten’s proposal.57 The evidence for
this hypothesis was the observed oxidation of the nucleophile
diphenyl amine to tetraphenylhydrazine. Another example of
ligand/nucleophile oxidation was reported by Aalten et al. as part
of their investigation on the synthesis of anisole derivatives from
the chloroarene using sodium methoxide.59 Examining Cu(0) as
precursor, Paine found, via scanning electron microscopy (SEM),
that the surface of metallic copper is covered by a thin layer of
Cu2O. Upon coordination of the amine, which is not only the
substrate but also a ligand, Cu2O can leach into the solution and
be active as Cu(I) precursor. More recently, Jutand and co-workers
showed that 2 eq. of Cu(0)/1,10-phenanthroline can react with aryl
halides to form Cu(I)phenanthroline and the aryl anion which is
protonated to the arene.60 These results and other considerations
from Paine¢s work supported the role of Cu(I) in the Ullmann-type
reaction, and at present Cu(I) ions are generally accepted as the
primary catalytic species.60
The other steps in the catalytic cycle have generated more
controversy. Since its discovery, the major debate involved with
the Ullmann reaction always focused on the mechanism of the
aryl halide activation step.19–26,60–62 None of the reported proposals
received a universal consensus from the scientiﬁc community, but
only numerous and long standing questions. As will be seen in the
next sections, diverse mechanistic suggestions have been reported
and supported by experimental investigations, but evidence against
each of them has also been described.
2.1
Proposed mechanistic pathways: historical overview
On the basis of a historical overview of the literature,63 one can
recognize four different classes of mechanisms proposed for the
Ullmann condensation reaction. They will be discussed in the next
sections. The different proposals can be classiﬁed into two main
categories: those in which the oxidation state of copper changes
throughout the mechanistic cycle and those in which the oxidation
state remains constant. The four different alternatives involve:64
(1) Oxidative addition of ArX on copper(I) resulting in an
intermediate Cu(III) species.
(2) Aryl radical intermediates, either via single electron transfer
(SET) or via halide atom transfer (AT).
(3) s-bond metathesis through a four-centre intermediate.
(4) p-complexation of copper(I) on ArX.
Clearly, alternatives (1) and (2) belong to the ﬁrst category in
which the copper species changes its oxidation state during the
catalytic cycle, whereas (3) and (4) belong to the second category
in which the copper species maintains the same oxidation state
through the whole cycle.
2.1.1.
Mechanistic pathways involving oxidative addition/
reductive elimination.
Several literature reports evoke the in-
volvement of copper(III) intermediates in the Ullmann reaction
mechanism. Although the existence of copper(III) complexes has
been questioned for a long time, nowadays multiple examples are
known.48,51,65,66 The ﬁrst to propose this type of organocopper(III)
intermediates was Cohen, supported by previous studies per-
formed on organocuprates.67–69 In his ﬁrst report,70 he investigated
the reaction of o-iodo-N,N-dimethylbenzamide with CuCl in
DMF. Upon addition of benzoic acid, the reaction products
found were N,N-dimethylbenzamide and the substituted product
o-chloro-N,N-dimethylbenzamide. He observed that with an in-
crease of benzoic acid concentration, formation of N,N-dimethyl-
benzamide increased, while the Cl-substituted product decreased.
Similarly, after addition of CuCl2, he noticed an increase of
o-chloro-N,N-dimethylbenzamide production and a decrease of
N,N-dimethylbenzamide. To explain the observed behaviour of
the reaction, he proposed a pathway via the oxidative addition
of the carbon-halogen bond to the cuprous chloride, leading to
copper(III) organometallic intermediates (see Scheme 2).
With this proposal, he ruled out the possibility of a four-
centred intermediate (aryl-halide-nucleophile–Cu) as this mech-
anism would not account for the observed reactivities. Moreover,
radical intermediates were also excluded, because of the absence
of N-methylbenzamide, which should have derived from the ortho-
aryl radical via rapid hydrogen abstraction from the methyl group.
Van Koten et al. reasoned against Cohen’s conclusions, because
‘this mechanism did not take into account the known chemistry of
arylcopper(I) compounds’.6,71,72 In particular, the absence of ArH
10340 | Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 10338–10351
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Downloaded by University of Groningen on 13 January 2011
Published on 27 October 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C0DT00674B

Scheme 2
Cohen’s mechanistic proposal involving organocopper(III) intermediates.
Scheme 3
Bethell’s proposal for the Cu(III)-intermediate in the reaction of halogenoanthraquinone with primary amines.
and coupled products Ar–Ar, expected to be formed during the
reaction especially under the particular conditions used, seemed
to make a mechanism invoking the formation of organocopper
intermediates less likely. Instead he proposed these reactions to
take place at the “surface” of mixed valence copper halide species.
Following Cohen’s work,73,74 other authors invoked the presence
of arylcopper(III) intermediates in their proposed pathways.75–77,61
In particular, Bethell investigated the reaction of some primary
amines (RNH2) with 1-halogenoanthraquinones (AQX) promoted
by copper salts in acetonitrile, and he detected two different
products, the aminated anthraquinone (AQNHR) and the dehalo-
genated one (AQH).75 He then observed some particular features:
(i) the reaction rate was dependent on the nature of the leaving
halogen X (I > Br > Cl), but it didn¢t affect the product ratio
(AQNHR:AQH); (ii) N-deuteration of the amine gave a small
kinetic isotopic effect and did not affect the product ratio, whereas
deuteration on the a-carbon of the amine led to the observation
of an isotope effect and a large increase in the formation of the
aminated product (AQNHR). He explained these observations by
the intermediacy of an arylcopper(III) complex bearing one or
more amine ligands and one amide ligand (Scheme 3).
Bethell also noticed that the ratio of aminated to dehalogenated
products was directly proportional to the concentration of the
free amine present in the reaction. He then interpreted these
results considering that the partitioning of products derived
from the competition between an intermolecular amination and
intramolecular hydrogen transfer from the C–H bonds of the
amide ligand, which would account for the formation of AQH.
To summarize the various reports which invoked the same
mechanism, a current representation for two potential oxidative
addition/reductive elimination mechanistic pathways can be de-
picted as shown in Fig. 1.
In one proposal for this catalytic cycle, the ﬁrst step is an
oxidative addition of the aryl halide to copper, to form a copper(III)
intermediate. Subsequently, the halide on copper is exchanged for
the nucleophile and the obtained intermediate, via a reductive
Fig. 1
Two possible pathways for the relative order of the oxidative
addition and the transmetallation steps in the Cu(I)/Cu(III) mechanism.
elimination step, releases the coupling product and the active
Cu(I) catalyst is regenerated. Unlike palladium(0) catalyzed cross-
couplings, in which the oxidative addition step is considered to
precede the transmetallation,15 in the copper-cycle the relative
order of these two steps is uncertain, thus either of the two routes
of Fig. 2 can take place. Most recent reports favour the mechanism
in which the nucleophile reacts with the copper(I) halide catalyst
before the oxidative addition.
2.1.2.
Mechanistic pathways involving single electron transfer
(SET).
In 1937, Waters was probably one of the ﬁrst to propose
that free-radicals could be involved in the Ullmann reaction,
but at that time this was just speculation.78–80 In the 60’s, an
electron transfer radical mechanism for aliphatic nucleophilic
substitution was proposed by two authors, Kornblum81 and
Russell,82 who independently were working on chain reactions via
radical anion intermediates. Bunnett extensively studied radical
nucleophilic substitution reactions and expanded these studies
to aromatic systems.83–90 In his ﬁrst report,83 he investigated the
reactivity of various 5- and 6-halopseudocumenes with KNH2
in liquid ammonia, expecting the reaction to proceed via an
aryne intermediate and through a rearranging substitution mech-
anism. Instead, based on the product ratio, he concluded that a
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 10338–10351 | 10341
Downloaded by University of Groningen on 13 January 2011
Published on 27 October 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C0DT00674B

Fig. 2
Proposed catalytic cycle involving an intermediate via s-bond
metathesis.
non-rearranging substitution mechanism was clearly in competi-
tion with the aryne mechanism. After performing some tests in
the presence of a radical scavenger (tetraphenylhydrazine) he was
ﬁnally convinced of the formation of aryl halide radical anions in
the mechanistic cycle. He then proposed the designation ‘SRN1¢ for
this type of mechanism, which stands for unimolecular radical-
nucleophilic substitution; this notation is still in use. In general
terms, the SRN1 mechanism is a chain reaction mechanism, and as
such comprises of initiation, propagation and termination steps
(Scheme 4).
Scheme 4
General scheme for the SRN1 mechanism.
In the initiation step, an electron is added to a suitable
substrate by one of several procedures, such as photochemically,
electrochemically, by redox agents, by added solvated electrons, or
thermally.91 The radical anion then undergoes fragmentation into
an aryl radical and the anion of the leaving group.92 Subsequently,
the aryl radical couples with the nucleophile, forming a new radical
anion, which eventually transfers its electron to the substrate.
Summation of these three steps provides the overall equation:
ArX + Nu- →ArNu + X-, which accounts for an aromatic
nucleophilic substitution that involves radical and radical anion
intermediates and an electron transfer step.
Since it was already known that metals and organometallic
compounds that are capable of electron transfer71,93–95 also catalyze
aromatic nucleophilic substitution,96 the step to connect the
copper-catalyzed Ullmann reaction to the SRN1 mechanism was
a plausible one.
An important study was reported in 1978 by Arai et al. on the
reaction of 1-bromoanthraquinone (AQBr) with 2-aminoethanol
(AE), catalyzed by CuBr in a mixture of 1,2-dimethoxyethane
and methyl cellosolve as solvent.96–98 Using EPR experiments
they could demonstrate the formation of an organic paramag-
netic species, identiﬁed as 1-bromoanthraquinone radical anion
(AQBr
∑-) derived by an electron transfer from the Cu(I) species
to 1-bromoanthraquinone (AQBr + Cu(I) →AQBr
∑- + Cu(II)).
In the reaction system, anthraquinone (AQH) was also produced,
and its formation was explained again via the formation of the
AQBr
∑- radical anion, by its dehalogenation process (AQBr
∑- →
AQ
∑→AQH). This was the ﬁrst time the formation of an organic
radical was observed as a result of the oxidation of Cu(I) to Cu(II).
This and other reports99,100 supported the proposal that the copper-
catalyzed aromatic nucleophilic substitution could follow a SRN1
pathway.
Different proposals appeared in the literature, mainly thanks to
major contributions of Kochi to the ﬁeld.100,101 Since he showed
that a free radical reacts rapidly with a Cu(II) species via atom
transfer (Scheme 6, eqn (2–3)) another pathway could be possible,
depicted as follows (Scheme 5):
Scheme 5
General scheme for copper-catalyzed SRN1-type mechanism for
the Ullmann coupling.
Scheme 6
Halogen atom transfer SRN1-type mechanism.
Despite the several investigations which supported an aryl
halide activation via the Cu(I)/Cu(II) redox couple (SET), other
authors reported evidence against such a radical mechanism.57,73,74
In particular, Bowman performed two diagnostic tests to disprove
the involvement of SRN1-type mechanism for a C–S coupling,
comparing the results obtained for this reaction, when it was either
initiated by photostimulation or catalyzed by copper iodide.76 In
the ﬁrst test, he used 1-chloro-4-iodobenzene, which was reacted
with phenylthiolate. Under SRN1 conditions (photostimulated), the
only product was the disubstituted product. When the reaction
was repeated in the presence of catalytic CuI, exclusively mono-
substituted product was obtained. The results clearly indicated a
difference in operating mechanism for the two reactions. However,
our view is that whereas the use of ultraviolet light can overcome
the high energy barrier, necessary for the breakage of a C–Cl
bond, this energy barrier may simply be too high for the copper
catalyzed reaction. The second test was based on the potential
intramolecular ring closure between an oleﬁn and an aryl radical
to prove the presence of aryl radical intermediates (Scheme 7). The
copper-catalyzed reaction yielded solely the coupled product and
no cyclisation product was observed, whereas the reaction under
SRN1 conditions gave the cyclisation product.
Scheme 7
Radical clock test for the presence of aryl radicals.
Therefore, the absence of ring closure in the copper-catalyzed
reaction provided evidence against aryl radicals as intermediates.
10342 | Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 10338–10351
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Downloaded by University of Groningen on 13 January 2011
Published on 27 October 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C0DT00674B

Here it should be noted that the validity of using this radical-clock
type experiment in the presence of transition metal catalysts has
not been proven.102 Whereas in the light-stimulated experiment the
competition is between ring-closure and reaction with the thiolate
anion, in the copper-catalyzed reaction the competition is between
ring-closure and reaction with the copper thiolate complex, which
is still in very close proximity to the aryl radical. Hence, this latter
reaction may be much faster than ring-closure.
2.1.3
Mechanistic pathways involving r-bond metathesis.
In
this reaction type, the copper catalyst is assumed not to change
its oxidation state during the cycle, remaining in its +1 state.
One of the proposals involves the activation of the aryl halide
via a four-centred intermediate between the aryl halide and the
copper catalyst. The metal catalyst is proposed to form a s-
complex with the lone electron pair of the halogen atom, thus
inducing polarisation of the carbon-halogen bond that facilitates
the subsequent attack by the nucleophile. In the course of their
studies on substitution reactions between aryl halides and cuprous
salts, Bacon and Hill used this mechanism to explain their results
(Scheme 8, eqn (1)).103–105
Scheme 8
Bacon’s proposals for reaction intermediates.
However, multi-centre processes are not easy to differentiate
from those involving an ionic intermediate (Scheme 8, eqn (2)),
and thus such a mechanism is hard to ascertain. Litvak and
Shein investigated the mechanism of the copper catalysed reaction
of aryl bromides with sodium methoxide and they proposed a
mechanism in which they combined a radical process with a four-
centre intermediate (Scheme 9).106 A few years later though, van
Koten and co-workers systematically studied the copper-catalyzed
reaction of sodium methoxide with aryl halides,59 and reported an
alternative mechanism for the same reaction, via intimate-electron
transfer, through the Cu(I)–Cu(II) redox couple.
Scheme 9
Litvak and Shein’s proposal for the copper-catalyzed etheriﬁ-
cation reaction.
In a general overview of these proposals, a potential scheme for
the mechanistic pathway via s-bond metathesis can be depicted as
in Fig. 2.
The ﬁrst step in this cycle is the displacement of the halide by
the nucleophile, to form a Cu–Nu species which acts as the catalyst
for the coupling reaction. Subsequently, the copper catalyst
coordinates to the aryl halide via a four-centred intermediate, in
which the coordination is orientated by the partial charges on
Cu+ and on the electronegative halide, respectively. Therefore, the
polarisation of the C–X bond creates a partial positive charge on
the ipso-carbon and assists the substitution by the nucleophile, to
give the coupling product and the free Cu(I) species.
2.1.4
Mechanistic pathways involving p-complexation.
In
1964 Weingarten not only reported evidence for the catalytic
activity of a copper(I) species, but he also proposed a new
mechanism for the aryl halide activation step.57 The reaction that
was investigated by a kinetic study, concerned the formation of
phenyl ether from bromobenzene and potassium phenoxide. In
this Ullmann coupling, the typical reactivity pattern of aryl halides
for the nucleophilic aromatic substitutions was observed and in
particular it was found that the relative reactivities of different
aryl halides (ArI > ArBr > ArI) parallels the one observed for
reactions known to involve a C–X (X = halogen) bond cleavage
step.107 Thus, it was proposed that the catalyst activated the aryl
halide through the interaction of the copper(I) species with the
p-electrons of the aromatic system. The intermediate that was
proposed to be part of the catalytic reaction looked as depicted
in Scheme 10, in which the metal functions as an electron sink
and assists the replacement of the halogen by the nucleophile. In
addition, the copper complexation leads to stabilization of the
Wheland complex.
Scheme 10
Weingarten’s proposal for the intermediate via p-complexa-
tion in the reaction of bromobenzene and potassium phenoxide.
This proposal was supported to some extent by the known
structures of Cu(I)-benzene complexes,108,52 although these tend
to be h2-complexes, and by the similarities seen with the already
studied chlorobenzene-chromium tricarbonyl complexes, found
to be reactive in nucleophilic aromatic substitution.109 This
mechanistic pathway has been proposed several times but attracted
neither large support nor disagreement.61 Calculations have shown
that h-6 coordination is preferred over h-2 or h-1 coordination in
complexes between copper(I) and benzene.110 However, in practice
h-6 complexes are rare.111
We can summarize this proposal by the catalytic cycle in ﬁg. 3.
In this mechanism, in which the copper species maintains its +1
oxidation state, there is prior coordination of the copper catalyst to
the aromatic ring. The aryl halide then undergoes a polarization
which facilitates the substitution of the halide on the ring and
brings about the formation of a copper-product complex. Release
of the coupling product restores the copper(I) catalyst.
3.
Recent mechanistic investigations on the modiﬁed
Ullmann reaction
As discussed in the introduction, the Ullmann condensation has
been much improved through the addition of ligands, which
enabled faster reactions and allowed milder conditions. This
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 10338–10351 | 10343
Downloaded by University of Groningen on 13 January 2011
Published on 27 October 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C0DT00674B

Fig.
3
Proposed
catalytic
cycle
involving
an
intermediate
via
p-complexation.
effect has initially been explained through improved solubility
and stability of the active copper species.112 The development
of these new catalytic protocols and the screening of various
ligands/additives have already been the subject of many excellent
reviews.19–26 Relatively few studies were dedicated to mechanistic
investigations on the actual role of the ligand and/or on a possible
catalytic cycle.
In an early publication on the synthesis of diaryl ethers for
example, Buchwald found that stoichiometric quantities of car-
boxylic acids promoted the coupling of less reactive phenols with
aryl bromides and iodides.113 Together with the caesium carbonate
used as a base, the additives appeared to increase the solubility
of the intermediates, allowing to perform the reaction also with
less soluble phenols and phenols containing electron-withdrawing
groups (Scheme 11). Liebeskind and co-workers introduced the
use of Cu(I) 2-thiophenecarboxylate (CuTC) as soluble and highly
active catalyst for the reductive Ullmann coupling.114
More recently, Taillefer, Jutand and co-workers conducted a
structure/activity relationship study on the diaryl ether formation
catalyzed by CuI with N,N-chelating ligands.115 They found that
the best performing ligands contain an imine- and a pyridine-
binding site and she investigated the inﬂuence of the electron
density of the binding sites on the reactivity of the catalyst in
the arylation of 3,5-dimethylphenol with iodobenzene. The results
obtained were then explained by the authors using a cycle via an
oxidative addition/reductive elimination mechanism (Scheme 12).
In another recent report, Taillefer investigated the role of a
tetradentate N-ligand used for the C–O coupling and pointed out
its inﬂuence on the solubility and the electronic properties of the
copper centre.44 In addition, he rationalized the role of the solvent
acetonitrile in the early stages of the reaction, and concluded that
acetonitrile coordination facilitates ligand exchange at the copper
centre.
New publications have also appeared on the thiol arylation
reaction.19–26,116 Most authors propose an oxidative addition mech-
anism, mainly to account for the relative reactivities of electron-
rich and electron-poor aryl halides (Scheme 13).117,118
Most mechanistic research, however, has been focused on the
C–N coupling reaction. Ma was the ﬁrst to show that a-amino
acids, acting as N,O-bidentate ligands for the metal can be
arylated very fast at mild reaction temperatures.25,119 He explained
this accelerating effect by a mechanistic proposal which involves
chelation of the amino acid to the copper ion, p-complexation
of the copper to the aryl ring, and an intramolecular nucleophilic
substitution step to form the coupling product ArNu (Scheme 14).
This mechanistic scheme was used to account for the substituent
effects of aryl halides but did not fully explain the reactivity order
Scheme 11
Buchwald’s mechanistic proposal for the effect of carboxylates in the synthesis of diaryl ethers.
Scheme 12
Jutand¢s mechanistic proposal for the synthesis of diaryl ethers.
10344 | Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 10338–10351
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Downloaded by University of Groningen on 13 January 2011
Published on 27 October 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C0DT00674B

Scheme 13
Mechanistic proposal for the synthesis of aryl thioethers.
Scheme 14
Ma’s mechanistic proposal for the coupling of aryl halides
with a-amino acids.
found, i.e. ArI > ArBr > ArCl. No evidence was given for the
p-complexation step.
Afterwards, Ma demonstrated that amino acids are suitable
ligands for a variety of Ullmann type reactions, such as the cou-
pling of aryl halides with primary amines, secondary cyclic amines
and N-containing heterocycles.25,120 Besides the previous proposal
(Scheme 14), he suggested another catalytic cycle (Scheme 15), in
which the chelation of Cu(I) with an a-amino acid makes the Cu(I)
species more reactive toward an oxidative addition step and/or
stabilizes the following intermediates, facilitating the coupling
reaction.
This mechanism was used to explain the observed order I > Br >
Cl for the ease of halogen displacement from the aromatic ring
and the better reactivity shown by electron-deﬁcient aryl halides.
Fu and co-workers referred to the same mechanistic proposal
for their catalytic protocol, which involved pipecolinic acid as
ligand which could act as the a-amino acids in Ma’s system.121
Other reports using similar catalytic protocols with N,O- or O,O-
Scheme 15
Mechanistic proposal for the coupling reaction with amino
acids as ligands.
bidentate ligands evoked the same mechanistic interpretation via
oxidative addition/reductive elimination process.122–124
In 2004, Taillefer125,126 reported a catalytic protocol for N- and
C-arylations with aryl bromides and iodides. A range of chelating
N,N- and N,O-ligands were screened in the arylation reactions
with azoles, amides and malonic acid derivatives. Moreover,
some mechanistic considerations for the N-arylation reaction
were reported, starting by considering two possible mechanisms,
involving radical intermediates or oxidative addition/reductive
elimination steps. The presence of any kind of radicals was
excluded on the basis of a number of experiments. First, inhi-
bition of the coupling reaction upon use of radical scavengers
or electron acceptors did not occur. Secondly, the test which
was developed earlier by Bowman76,83,86,88 was performed, using
1,4-diiodobenzene and pyrazole as substrates, and since only
mono-substituted product was obtained, the hypothesis of the
intermediacy of an aryl radical was rejected (vide supra). Thus,
an oxidative addition/reductive elimination catalytic cycle was
proposed, which could account for the experimental observations
such as: (i) the reactivity order (ArI > ArBr ≫ArCl) parallels
the leaving group ability of halides; (ii) couplings are slightly
favoured with electron-withdrawing groups on the aryl halide and
disfavoured with electron-donating groups; (iii) steric hindrance
on the substrates decreases the reaction rate. However, the authors
underlined that uncertainty still remains on the relative order of
the two steps, nucleophilic substitution and oxidative addition.127
In other literature reports the same mechanistic proposal through
a Cu(I)/Cu(III) cycle was suggested,128–131 based mainly on simi-
larities with previous reported reactions but without providing
mechanistic evidence.
Stahl reacted an isolated Cu(III) macrocyclic pincer complex
with acidic nitrogen compounds such as imides and was able to iso-
late the macrocyclic imide and a copper(I) complex (Scheme 16).65
The reaction proceeds fairly rapidly without the addition of a
base, testifying to the high reactivity of the Cu(III) complex. This
Scheme 16
Stahl’s reaction of nitrogen nucleophiles on a Cu(III) macrocyclic pincer complex.65
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 10338–10351 | 10345
Downloaded by University of Groningen on 13 January 2011
Published on 27 October 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C0DT00674B

result strongly suggests that the mechanism proceeds via reductive
elimination of an aryl copper imidate complex. However, based
on the available information a direct attack on the ipso carbon by
the nucleophile could not be excluded.
Buchwald reported an interesting study on the N- and O-
arylation of amino alcohols. He investigated the orthogonal
selectivity that results by switching between to different ligands: a
b-diketone or tetramethylphenanthroline, an N–N type ligand.132
The mechanistic hypothesis was based on the two initial steps,
which are considered responsible for the observed selectivities
(Scheme 17).
Scheme 17
Buchwald’s mechanistic hypothesis for the arylation of amino
alcohols.
With this mechanistic scheme he could explain his observations,
related to the electrophilicity of the ligated Cu-centre, i.e. the
Cu(I)-diketone complex has a lower electrophilicity than the Cu(I)-
tetramethylphenanthroline complex. Thus, in case of coordination
with a diketone-ligand, this lower electrophilicity of the copper-
centre would disfavour the binding of the alcohol and favour
the amine to bind to Cu(I). In the case of the complexation of
copper with the tetramethyl-phenanthroline ligand though, the
coordination to the metal centre would lead to a more Lewis
acidic copper species and would facilitate the formation of the
copper-alcohol bond. Thus, in this mechanistic cycle there is a
plausible explanation for why the coordination of the nucleophile
should precede the transmetallation step, but the mode of aryl
halide activation was not discussed. However, for a more detailed
discussion of this phenomenon based on DFT calculations, see
below.
Not only the copper-catalyzed N-arylation of amines was
the subject of recent mechanistic study, but also the amidation
reaction, the so-called Goldberg reaction, raised considerable
interest.133,134 In particular, Buchwald reported a kinetic study
performed on the reaction between 3,5-dimethyliodobenzene and
2-pyrrolidinone, catalyzed by CuI in the presence of a chelating
1,2-diamine as ligand.135,136 Through this study he identiﬁed the
role of the diamine ligand in preventing multiple ligation of the
amide. Indeed, at high concentration of the ligand the activation
of the aryl halide becomes the rate-limiting step while, at low
concentration of the diamine ligand, multiple ligation of the amide
on copper occurs (Scheme 18). Thus, the dissociation of an amide
and coordination of a diamine are required to generate the active
copper species. Moreover, it was demonstrated that the copper(I)-
amidate complex is an intermediate in the N-arylation process.
Three different mechanisms were considered for the reaction
with the aryl halide: Cu(I)/Cu(III), SET and IAT. However, his
data did not allow any choice between the three.
Buchwald’s reports were among the ones that inspired a
theoretical study on the copper-catalyzed Goldberg reaction. Guo
and co-workers explored the reaction between phenyl bromide and
acetamide via the density functional theory (DFT) method.137 All
the results were in good agreement with Buchwald¢s experimental
observations and conﬁrmed that the diamine-ligated copper(I)
amidate is the most reactive intermediate in the reaction mixture,
when compared to other possible copper(I) intermediate (i.e.
cationic diamine-ligated Cu(I) or multiple amide-ligated Cu(I)
complexes). In addition, the DFT calculations pointed to the
oxidative addition of ArX on L2Cu(I)-amidate as the rate-limiting
step, to generate a L2Cu(III)-(Ar)(X)(amidate) pentacoordinated
species. However, this computational study considered only a
mechanism based on oxidative addition/reductive elimination
steps and neglected to evaluate the pathways for a possible
electron-transfer mechanism.127
Hartwig and co-workers recently reported a detailed investi-
gation about the possible reaction steps in the stoichiometric
Goldberg reaction of haloarenes with N,N- or P,P-ligated copper
complexes containing anionic nitrogen ligands.138 In this work,
they described the synthesis and characterisation of the copper
Scheme 18
Buchwald’s proposed mechanism for the Goldberg reaction using a Cu(I)-catalyst with diamine ligands.
10346 | Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 10338–10351
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Downloaded by University of Groningen on 13 January 2011
Published on 27 October 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C0DT00674B

Scheme 19
Reactions with isolated copper complexes studied by Hartwig.138
amidate and imidate complexes (Scheme 19), and they obtained
kinetic data on the reactions of these species with haloarenes. In
particular, the rates of the reactions with p-cyano-chlorobenzene
and 1-bromonaphthalene were compared. These compounds have
similar reduction potentials and similar rates of halide dissociation
from the radical anions. Thus if the reactions proceed by a
radical mechanism the rates with these two substrates should be
similar. In practice the chloro-compound did not react but rather
decomposed, whereas the bromo-naphthalene was converted in
high yield. This argues against a radical mechanism. The kinetic
data were supported with DFT calculations. The authors provided
rate and mechanistic data about the possible individual steps of
the C–N coupling process. The neutral ligated copper imidate and
amidate complexes are subject to a disproportionation equilibrium
in which two eq. of the neutral complex form one equiv. of
[L2Cu]+[Cu(amidate)2]-. It is less likely that this anionic form is
responsible for the amidation reaction as they were able to show
that R4N+CuI(phthalimidate)2
- was not capable of reaction with
an aryl bromide or iodide.
The intermediacy of free aryl radicals during the reaction could
be excluded, based on a number of observations. First of all,
he did not observe signiﬁcant quantities of biaryl or arene-H
products from the reactions of copper amidate/imidate complexes
in solvents that can act as H-atom donors. Furthermore, studies
on the effect of the electronic properties of the haloarene, in
particular the lack of reaction of electron-poor chloroarenes
and the high-yield reactions of more electron-rich bromoarenes,
argued against pathways involving outer-sphere electron transfer
to form haloarene radical anions. In addition, reactions of aryl
iodides containing a radical clock ruled out the generation of
free aryl radicals. On the other hand, arylcopper(III) intermediates
containing dative nitrogen ligands were calculated to be kinetically
accessible under mild conditions, and such species could be
formed by a concerted oxidative addition or by an internal
electron transfer and formation of an arylcopper species within
the coordination sphere of the metal. Thus, Hartwig concluded
that the Cu(I)/Cu(III) mechanism was the most likely one.
Similar research was performed by Hartwig on the phenol
arylation reaction using pre-formed copper phenoxide complexes.
Here also the same disproportionation occurs as in the case of
the amidate and imidate complexes. Conductivity measurements
showed that in solution, the complexes are predominantly present
as L2Cu+Cu(OPh)2
-. In this case R4N+Cu-(OPh)2 did react slowly
with iodobenzene to give a meagre 10% yield of PhOPh whereas
use of L2Cu+Cu(OPh)2
- led to clean and high yielding reactions.
This again seems to prove the idea that it is the neutral LCu(OPh)
that is the reactive catalyst. Radical clock experiments tested
negative for radicals.139
Van Koten and co-workers reported the catalytic activity of an
aminoarenethiolato-copper(I) complex, CuSAr, in the reaction of
benzylamine with bromobenzene.140 CuSAr is acting as a pre-
catalyst and is converted in the initial stages of the reaction
into CuBr/PhSAr which presumably is the actual active catalytic
system (Scheme 20).
The catalyst was capable of catalysing the arylation of amines.
Kinetics showed that the reaction is ﬁrst order in catalyst, aryl
halide and amine. Surprisingly, in these reactions aryl bromides
reacted much faster than the iodides. The authors showed that the
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 10338–10351 | 10347
Downloaded by University of Groningen on 13 January 2011
Published on 27 October 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C0DT00674B

Scheme 20
Active catalyst in van Koten’s amination.
use of radical traps slowed down or stopped the C–N coupling
reaction. These and other observations on the reactivity of the
system employed, like the activating effect of the addition of
metallic copper to the reaction mixture and the observation of
a parallel oxidation process for the benzylamine used, led the
authors to propose a mechanism for this reaction (Scheme 21),
which involves a single-electron transfer (SET) from the Cu(I)
centre to the aryl bromide to form an aryl radical (kinetically
protected by the back reaction with Cu(II)) and a Cu(II) species,
subsequent reaction with the amine partner and a second SET to
regenerate the Cu(I) species.
Scheme 21
Mechanistic proposal for aminoarenethiolato-copper(I) cat-
alyzed amination of bromobenzene.
In this type of reaction a build-up of Cu(II) can occur either
as a result of scavenging of the aryl radical, or due to the
disproportionation mechanism. This results in a slower reaction
rate as a result of the lack of Cu(I). Indeed, experimentally
these reactions were found to slow down considerably over time.
Addition of copper powder restored the Cu(I) levels as a result
of the comproportionation reaction between Cu(0) and Cu(II)
and was found to improve the rate of the reaction leading to
full conversions. Although this mechanistic proposal is based on
the study of one single model reaction, it is a clear example of the
involvement of a radical pathway.
A recent comprehensive study from Houk, Buchwald and co-
workers used DFT calculations to discriminate between four
different mechanisms (Scheme 22).141
They studied the reactions between iodobenzene and both
methanol and methylamine as a previous study (vide supra)
had shown that the O- vs. N-selectivity of the arylation of
aminoethanols depended upon the nature of the ligand, which was
either of the diketone type or a phenanthroline. The outcome of the
DFT calculations showed that formation of the Cu(I) methoxide
complex is easier than formation of the amide complex. However,
the rate determining step is the reaction with the aryl iodide.
This step was calculated for both ligand types and nucleophiles
for all four mechanisms (Table 1). From the results it is clear
that when phenanthroline is used as a ligand the IAT and SET
mechanisms have similar barriers and either may occur depending
on the nucleophile. The copper catalysed O-arylation reaction
proceeds via IAT, whilst the N-arylation proceeds via SET. In the
arylations with the diketone ligand, both reactions favour the SET
mechanism. Signiﬁcantly, the oxidative addition could be excluded
based on the unfavourable TS.
Scheme 22
Four mechanisms explored using DFT calculations.
10348 | Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 10338–10351
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Downloaded by University of Groningen on 13 January 2011
Published on 27 October 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C0DT00674B

Table 1
Free energies (kcal mol-1) for TS and other key stationary points in ligand promoted O- and N-arylation reactions
Nucleophile
Ligand
CuZMe formation
TS OA
TS Sig
TS IAT
TS SET
Product formation
MeO
Diketone
2.9
64.6
57.1
32.9
27.2
-41.3
MeNH
Diketone
14.8
55.0
65.6
41.1
26.2
-48.0
MeO
Phenanthroline
7.2
43.2
43.4
34.0
43.6
-47.1
MeNH
Phenanthroline
17.0
53.7
50.9
39.6
35.1
-52.6
Summary and outlook
The question remains if there really is a single mechanism for
all copper catalysed N-and O-arylations. Nevertheless, major
progress has been made in unravelling the mechanism of the
modiﬁed Ullmann reaction, particularly in the last few years.
By now, most authors agree that reaction between the copper
precursor complex and the nucleophile precedes the activation of
the aryl halide. Indeed, the electron-rich copper alkoxide or amide
complex is much more reactive than the copper halide, regardless
of what the second step of the mechanism is.
Thus far it would seem that the mechanism of the aryl halide
activation may differ depending on the halide, the ligand and
the nucleophile. Involvement of radical intermediates, although
proposed by many authors, was initially discounted based on
competition experiments and radical clock experiments. However,
the validity of both types of experiments in this context is
at least open to questioning. The radical clock test is based
on the occurrence of very rapid follow-on reactions of the
formed aryl radical, such as ring-opening or closing, a valid
type of proof in organic chemistry, where most reaction rates
have been charted out much earlier. Here we are dealing with
organometallic reactions for which little is known on the rate
of the individual steps, in particular of the radical type. Recent
work from van Koten and co-workers and Buchwald and Houk
and co-workers provide compelling evidence for a radical type
mechanism in the reaction between the copper-nucleophile com-
plex and the aryl halide. Nevertheless, research by Buchwald,
Hartwig, Stahl and others on the Goldberg reaction and on
the phenol arylation seem to provide strong evidence against a
radical mechanism and here the Cu(I)/Cu(III) mechanism may be
operative.
Increasingly, DFT calculations are used to distinguish between
pathways. However, it should be stressed that the value of this
method lies in its ability to compare different mechanisms. Thus,
all possible mechanisms should be calculated in order to make
a meaningful comparison. The Buchwald–Houk study described
above is a very good example and more studies are expected in the
future.
The question remains if the mechanisms described in this paper
are the ﬁnal word. In this respect, the recent ﬁndings of both
Bolm and Buchwald142 as well as Norrby and Bolm and co-
workers143 on the use of “homeopathic doses” of copper oxide
(both Cu2O as well as CuO were used) in the copper catalysed
arylation of a range of nitrogen nucleophiles still evokes a number
of questions. In these reactions a very large excess of ligand
still needs to be used. The suggestion is that in reactions with
larger amounts of copper the majority of copper is not involved
in the catalytic cycle but parked in some form of resting state.
A possible explanation could be that the copper is present in
the form of nanoparticles. It is by now well accepted that high
temperature Heck–Mizoroki reactions proceed via the formation
of palladium nanoparticles.144–146 Use of high substrate catalyst
ratios leads to the formation of very small nanoparticles as the
reaction with the aryl halide solubilises the palladium in the
form of monomeric anionic complexes. This “eating away” at
the rim of the nanoparticles counters the natural tendency of the
nanoparticles to increase in size, the so-called Oswald ripening. If
the substrate/catalyst ratio is too low, the Ostwald ripening wins,
the nanoparticles become too big, most of the palladium atoms are
inside the nanoparticles and hence inactive and ﬁnally palladium
will precipitate as palladium black. Thus, the higher the S C-1 ratio
the higher the turnover frequency will be.147 Both Cu(0) as well as
Cu(I) and Cu(II) oxide can form nanoparticles. Moreover, as in
most reactions halide anions, either from the substrate or from the
used copper salt precursor, are abundant, even under apparently
homogeneous reaction conditions, the presence of nano-particles
of copper halide salts (copper in various oxidation states with
bridging halides, cf. ref. 68) could be anticipated. The tendency of
many (mixed valence) copper salt complexes to exist at least in the
solid state as sometimes highly aggregated species (as determined
by X-ray structure determination techniques) has been extensively
documented. An EXAFS and/or TEM study could reveal the
presence of such nanoparticles.
Thus, in conclusion, although much progress has been made
in unravelling the mechanism of the modiﬁed Ullmann reaction,
much remains to be uncovered.
Finally, looking into the future one may wonder if the mecha-
nisms of the recently discovered copper-catalysed C–H activation
reactions shows any similarity with those discussed here.148–150 In
this respect, the work of Ribas, Stahl and co-workers is highly
intriguing.151 They studied in detail the formation of a cationic
[ArCu(III)Br]+Br- complex in which the ArH is part of a triaza
macrocycle via reaction between ArH and Cu(II)Br2 (See also
Scheme 16). In the ﬁrst step of their proposed mechanism a
coordination complex is formed between the macrocycle and
CuBr2. In the next step a disproportionative cupration of ArH
happens in which simultaneously the ArCu(III) complex is formed
and a second molecule of Cu(II)Br2 is reduced to Cu(I)Br. This
cupration was made part of a catalytic cycle by the addition of a
nucleophile and oxygen as oxidant. Thus ArOMe was formed
in the presence of MeOH and O2. The reaction with MeOH
is proposed to lead to the [ArCu(III)OMe]+Br- complex, which
has also been proposed as intermediate in the modiﬁed Ullmann
couplings discussed above.
Gaunt recently showed that treatment of anilides with catalytic
Cu(OTf)2 and Ph2IOTf resulted in meta-arylation of acetanilide.152
They propose a mechanism via dearomatising cupration, involving
a Cu(III) species (Scheme 23).
Many new developments can be expected in this area.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 10338–10351 | 10349
Downloaded by University of Groningen on 13 January 2011
Published on 27 October 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C0DT00674B

Scheme 23
Gaunt’s proposed mechanism for the copper-catalyzed ortho-arylation.
Acknowledgements
We thank the Dutch Ministry of Economic Affairs, NWO/CW,
DSM, Organon N.V. and Solvay Pharmaceuticals for ﬁnancial
support administered through the CW/CombiChem programme.
We are grateful to Dr B. de Lange (DSM, The Netherlands) and
to Prof. H. J. Heeres (University of Groningen, The Netherlands)
for their help and the useful discussions.
References
1 F. Ullmann, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1903, 36, 2382.
2 F. Ullmann, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1904, 37, 853.
3 I. Goldberg, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1906, 39, 1691.
4 P. N. Craig, in Comprehensive Medicinal Chemistry, C. J. Drayton,
Ed., Pergamon Press: New York, 1991, Vol. 8.
5 Comprehensive Heterocyclic Chemistry II, A. R. Katritzky, C. W. Rees,
ed., Elsevier, Oxford, 1996.
6 J. B. Buckingham, Dictionary of Natural Products, CRC Press, 1994,
Vol. 1.
7 G. D¢Aprano, M. Leclerc, G. Zotti and G. Schiavon, Chem. Mater.,
1995, 7, 33.
8 J. Hassan, M. S´evignon, C. Gozzi, E. Schulz and M. Lemaire, Chem.
Rev., 2002, 102, 1359.
9 P. E. Fanta, Chem. Rev., 1946, 38, 139.
10 P. E. Fanta, Chem. Rev., 1964, 64, 613.
11 P. E. Fanta, Synthesis, 1974, 9.
12 A. A. Goldberg, J. Chem. Soc., 1952, 4368.
13 W. R. H. Hurtley, J. Chem. Soc., 1929, 1870.
14 J. F. Hartwig, Modern Amination MethodsA. Ricci, Ed.; Wiley- VCH:
Weinheim, Germany, 2000.
15 L. Jiang, S. L. Buchwald, in Metal-Catalyzed Cross-Coupling Reac-
tionsA. De Meijere, F. Diederich Eds,.; Wiley-VCH: Weinheim, 2004;
Vol. 2, p 699.
16 A. F. Littke and G. C. Fu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 4176.
17 D. S. Surry and S. L. Buchwald, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47,
6338.
18 E. M. Beccalli, G. Broggini, M. Martinelli and S. Sottocornola, Chem.
Rev., 2007, 107, 5318.
19 I. P. Beletskaya and A. V. Cheprakov, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248,
2337.
20 S. V. Ley and A. W. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 5400.
21 K. Kunz, U. Scholz and D. Ganzer, Synlett, 2003, 2428.
22 J.-P. Finet, A. Y. Fedorov, S. Combes and G. Boyer, Curr. Org. Chem.,
2002, 6, 597.
23 F. Monnier and M. Taillefer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3096.
24 G. Evano, N. Blanchard and M. Toumi, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 3054.
25 D. Ma and Q. Cai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1450.
26 F. Monnier and M. Taillefer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6954.
27 A. Klapars, X. Huang and S. L. Buchwald, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002,
124, 7421.
28 J. C. Antilla, A. Klapars and S. L. Buchwald, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002,
124, 11684.
29 F. Y. Kwong and S. L. Buchwald, Org. Lett., 2003, 5, 793.
30 D. Ma, Q. Cai and H. Zhang, Org. Lett., 2003, 5, 2453.
31 W. Deng, Y. F. Wang, Y. Zou, L. Liu and Q. X. Guo, Tetrahedron
Lett., 2004, 45, 2311.
32 H. B. Goodbrand and N.-X. Hu, J. Org. Chem., 1999, 64, 670.
33 R. Gujadhur, D. Venkataraman and J. T. Kintigh, Tetrahedron Lett.,
2001, 42, 4791.
34 R. K. Gujadhur, C. G. Bates and D. Venkataraman, Org. Lett., 2001,
3, 4315.
35 M. Wolter, A. Klapars and S. L. Buchwald, Org. Lett., 2001, 3, 3803.
36 C. Han, R. Shen, S. Su and J. A. Porco, Org. Lett., 2004, 6, 27.
37 G. Evindar and R. A. Batey, Org. Lett., 2003, 5, 133.
38 F. Lang, D. Zewge, I. N. Houpis and R. P. Volante, Tetrahedron Lett.,
2001, 42, 3251.
39 C. Enguehard, H. Allouchi, A. Gueifﬁer and S. L. Buchwald, J. Org.
Chem., 2003, 68, 4367.
40 F. Y. Kwong, A. Klapars and S. L. Buchwald, Org. Lett., 2002, 4, 581.
41 P. J. Fagan, E. Hauptman, R. Shapiro and A. Casalnuovo, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 5043.
42 B. de Lange, M. H. Lambers-Verstappen, L. Schmieder-van, de
Vondervoort, N. Sereinig, R. de Rijk, A. H. M. de Vries and J. G.
de Vries, Synlett, 2006, 3105.
43 A. Shaﬁr and S. L. Buchwald, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 8742.
44 A. Ouali, J-F. Spindler, A. Jutand and M. Taillefer, Organometallics,
2007, 26, 65.
45 A. H. M. de Vries, J. G. de Vries, F. B. J. van Assema, B. de Lange, D.
Mink, D. J. Hyett, P. J. D. Maas WO 2006/069799, to DSM IP Assets
BV, 2006.
46 B. J. Hataway, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1981, 35, 211.
47 B. J. Hataway and D. E. Billing, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1970, 5, 143.
48 N. Krause, Modern Organocopper Chemistry, John Wiley&Sons, 2002,
Chap. 1.
49 D. McIntosh and G. A. Ozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1976, 98, 3167.
50 W. Levason and D. Spicer, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1987, 76, 45.
51 T. V. Popova and N. V. Aksenova, Russ. J. Coord. Chem., 2003, 29,
743.
52 F. A. Cotton, G. Wilkinson, C. A. Murillo, M. Bochmann, in Advanced
Inorganic Chemistry, John Wiley&Sons, 1999, pp 854–876.
53 Organometallic Compounds of Nickel, Palladium, Platinum, Copper,
Silver and Gold, R. J. Cross, D. M. P. Mingos, ed., Chapman and Hall,
London, 1985.
54 P. J. P´erez, M. M. D´ıaz-Requejo, in Comprehensive Orgamometallic
Chemistry III, R. Crabtree, M. Mingos, ed., Elsevier Science, 2006,
Vol 2, K. Meyer, Volume ed. p153.
55 R. G. R. Bacon and H. A. O. Hill, Q. Rev. Chem. Soc., 1965, 19, 95.
56 P. E. Weston and H. Adkins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1928, 50, 859.
57 H. Weingarten, J. Org. Chem., 1964, 29, 3624.
58 A. J. Paine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 1496.
59 H. L. Aalten, G. van Koten, D. M. Grove, T. Kuilman, O. G. Piekstra,
L. A. Hulsof and R. A. Sheldon, Tetrahedron, 1989, 45, 5565.
60 M. Mansour, R. Giacovazzi, A. Ouali, M. Taillefer and A. Jutand,
Chem. Commun., 2008, 6051.
61 J. Lindley, Tetrahedron, 1984, 40, 1433.
62 C. Couture and A. J. Paine, Can. J. Chem., 1985, 63, 111.
63 Note: with ‘historical overview’ we consider years between 1900¢s and
1980¢s.
64 Derek van Allen, PhD Thesis, 2004, University of Massachusetts
Amherst.
65 L. M. Huffman and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9196.
66 R. Xifra, X. Ribas, A. Llobet, A. Poater, M. Duran, M. Sol`a, T. D. P.
Stack, J. Benet-Buchholz, B. Donnadieu, J. Mah´ıa and T. Parella,
Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 5146.
67 G. M. Whitesides, W. F. Fisher, J. San Filippo, R. W. Bashe and H. O.
House, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1969, 91, 4871.
68 G. M. Whitesides and P. E. Kendall, J. Org. Chem., 1972, 37, 3718.
69 C. R. Johnson and G. A. Dutra, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1973, 95, 7783.
70 T. Cohen, J. Wood and A. G. Dietz, Tetrahedron Lett., 1974, 15,
3555.
71 G. van Koten, J. T. B. H. Jastrzebski and J. G. Nolte, Tetrahedron
Lett., 1976, 17, 223.
10350 | Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 10338–10351
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Downloaded by University of Groningen on 13 January 2011
Published on 27 October 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C0DT00674B

72 G. van Koten, R. W. M. ten Hoedt and J. G. Noltes, J. Org. Chem.,
1977, 42, 2705.
73 T. Cohen and I. Cristea, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1976, 98, 748.
74 T. Cohen and I. Cristea, J. Org. Chem., 1975, 40, 3649.
75 D. Bethell and I. L. Jenkins, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 1985, 1789.
76 W. R. Bowman, H. Heaney and P. H. G. Smith, Tetrahedron Lett.,
1984, 25, 5821.
77 T. P. Lockhart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 1940.
78 D. H. Hey and W. A. Waters, Chem. Rev., 1937, 21, 169.
79 W. A. Waters, The Chemistry of Free Radicals, 2nd edition, Oxford
University Press, Oxford and London, 1948, p. 171.
80 J. F. Bunnett and R. E. Zahler, Chem. Rev., 1951, 49, 273.
81 N. Kornblum, R. E. Michel and R. C. Kerber, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
1966, 88, 5662.
82 G. A. Russell and W. C. Danen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1966, 88, 5663.
83 J. Kook Kim and J. F. Bunnett, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1970, 92, 7463.
84 J. Kook Kim and J. F. Bunnett, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1970, 92, 7464.
85 J. F. Bunnett and X. Creary, J. Org. Chem., 1974, 39, 3173.
86 J. F. Bunnett and X. Creary, J. Org. Chem., 1974, 39, 3611.
87 J. F. Bunnett, R. G Scamehorn and R. P. Traber, J. Org. Chem., 1976,
41, 3677.
88 J. F. Bunnett and R. P. Traber, J. Org. Chem., 1978, 43, 1867.
89 J. F. Bunnett and S. J. Shafer, J. Org. Chem., 1978, 43, 1877.
90 C. Galli and J. F. Bunnett, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 7140.
91 J. M. Saveant, Acc. Chem. Res., 1980, 13, 323.
92 R. A. Rossi, Acc. Chem. Res., 1982, 15, 164.
93 K. A. Bilevitch, N. N. Pubnov and O. Yu. Okhlobystin, Tetrahedron
Lett., 1968, 9, 3465.
94 T. D. Tuong and M. Hida, Chem. Lett., 1973, 363.
95 R. G. R. Bacon and A. Karim, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 1973,
272.
96 S. Arai, M. Hida and T. Yamagishi, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1978, 51,
277.
97 S. Arai, M. Hida, T. Yamagishi and S. Ototake, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn.,
1977, 50, 2982.
98 S. Arai, T. Yamagishi, S. Ototake and M. Hida, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn.,
1977, 50, 547.
99 W. R. Bowman, H. Heaney and P. H. G. Smith, Tetrahedron Lett.,
1982, 23, 5093.
100 C. L. Jenkins and J. K. Kochi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1972, 94, 856.
101 J. K. Kochi, Organometallic Mechanisms and Catalysis, Academic
Press, New York, 1978.
102 In this type of experiment, the radical that is formed as intermediate
rearranges further in a unimolecular reaction that is known to be
very fast, faster than any known bimolecular reaction. Thus, not
ﬁnding the rearrangement product is seen as strong evidence against
the intermediacy of the radical. The hidden assumption is that
the bimolecular reaction is always slower than the intramolecular
rearrangement reaction.
103 R. G. R. Bacon and H. A. O. Hill, J. Chem. Soc., 1964, 1097.
104 R. G. R. Bacon and H. A. O. Hill, J. Chem. Soc., 1964, 1108.
105 R. G. R. Bacon and H. A. O. Hill, J. Chem. Soc., 1964, 1112.
106 V. V. Litvak and U. S. M. Shein, Z. Org. Khim., 1974, 10, 2360.
107 H. Weingarten, J. Org. Chem., 1964, 29, 977.
108 R. W. Turner and E. L. Amma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1963, 85, 4046.
109 B. Nichols and M. C. Whiting, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1959, 551.
110 T. K. Dargel, R. H. Hertwig and W. Koch, Mol. Phys., 1999, 96, 583.
111 R. T. Stibrany, C. M. Zhang, T. J. Emge, H. J. Schugar, J. A. Potenza
and S. Knapp, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 9713.
112 P. Capdevielle and M. Maumy, Tetrahedron Lett., 1993, 34, 1007.
113 J.-F. Marcoux, S. Doye and S. L. Buchwald, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997,
119, 10539.
114 S. Zhang, D. Zhang and L. S. Liebeskind, J. Org. Chem., 1997, 62,
2312.
115 A. Ouali, J.-F. Spindler, A. Jutand and M. Taillefer, Adv. Synth. Catal.,
2007, 349, 1906.
116 E. Sperotto, G. P. M. van Klink, J. G. de Vries and G. van Koten,
J. Org. Chem., 2008, 73, 5625.
117 L. Rout, P. Saha, S. Jammi and T. Puniyamurthy, Eur. J. Org. Chem.,
2008, 640.
118 C. Savarin, J. Srogl and L. S. Liebeskind, Org. Lett., 2002, 4,
4309.
119 D. Ma, Y. Zhang, J. Yao, S. Wu and F. Tao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998,
120, 12459.
120 H. Zhang, Q. Cai and D. Ma, J. Org. Chem., 2005, 70, 5164.
121 X. Guo, H. Rao, H. Fu, Y. Jiang and Y. Zhao, Adv. Synth. Catal.,
2006, 348, 2197.
122 H.-C. Ma and X.-Z. Jiang, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 8943.
123 Z. Lu and R. J. Twieg, Tetrahedron Lett., 2005, 46, 2997.
124 Y.-X. Xie, S.-F. Pi, J. Wang, D.-L. Yin and J.-H. Li, J. Org. Chem.,
2006, 71, 8324.
125 H.-J. Cristau, P. P. Cellier, J.-F. Spindler and M. Taillefer, Chem.–
Eur. J., 2004, 10, 5607.
126 H.-J. Cristau, P. P. Cellier, J.-F. Spindler and M. Taillefer, Eur. J. Org.
Chem., 2004, 695.
127 R. A. Altman, A. M. Hyde, X. Huang and S. L. Buchwald, J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9613.
128 M. Periasamy, P. Vairaprakash and M. Dalai, Organometallics, 2008,
27, 1963.
129 H. Huang, X. Yan, W. Zhu, H. Liu, H. Jiang and K. Chen, J. Comb.
Chem., 2008, 10, 617.
130 K. Verma, J. Singh and R. Chaudhary, Tetrahedron Lett., 2007, 48,
7199.
131 J. P. Collman, M. Zhong, C. Zhang and S. Costanzo, J. Org. Chem.,
2001, 66, 7892.
132 A. Shaﬁr, P. A. Lichtor and S. L. Buchwald, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007,
129, 3490.
133 G. Evindar and R. A. Batey, J. Org. Chem., 2006, 71, 1802.
134 G. Feng, J. Wu and W.-M. Dai, Tetrahedron Lett., 2007, 48, 401.
135 E. R. Strieter, D. G. Blackmond and S. L. Buchwald, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2005, 127, 4120.
136 E. R. Strieter, B. Bhayana and S. L. Buchwald, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2009, 131, 78.
137 S.-L. Zhang, L. Liu, Y. Fu and Q.-X. Guo, Organometallics, 2007, 26,
4546.
138 J. W. Tye, Z. Weng, A. M. Johns, C. D. Incarvito and J. F. Hartwig,
J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9971.
139 J. W. Tye, Z. Weng, R. Giri and J. F. Hartwig, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2010, 49, 2185.
140 E. Sperotto, G. P. M. van Klink, J. G. de Vries, G. van Koten,
submitted.
141 G. O. Jones, P. Liu, K. N. Houk and S. L. Buchwald, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2010, 132, 6205.
142 S. L. Buchwald and C. Bolm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48,
5586.
143 P.-F. Larsson, A. Correa, M. Carril, P.-O. Norrby and C. Bolm, Angew.
Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 5691.
144 J. G. de Vries, Dalton Trans., 2006, 421.
145 N. T. S. Phan, M. Van, Der Sluys and C. W. Jones, Adv. Synth. Catal.,
2006, 348, 609.
146 L. Djakovitch, K. K¨ohler and J. G. de Vries, In Nanoparticles and
Catalysis, D. Astruc, ed., Wiley-VCH, 2008, p303.
147 A. H. M. de Vries, J. M. C. A. Mulders, J. H. M. Mommers, H. J. W.
Henderickx and J. G. de Vries, Org. Lett., 2003, 5, 3285.
148 X. Chen, X.-S. Hao, C. E. Goodhue and J.-Q. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc.,
2006, 128, 6790.
149 O. Daugulis, H.-Q. Do and D. Shabashov, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42,
1074.
150 F. Besseli`evre and S. Piguel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9553.
151 A. E. King, L. M. Huffman, A. Casitas, M. Costas, X. Ribas and S. S.
Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12068.
152 R. J. Phipps and M. J. Gaunt, Science, 2009, 323, 1593.
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 10338–10351 | 10351
Downloaded by University of Groningen on 13 January 2011
Published on 27 October 2010 on http://pubs.rsc.org | doi:10.1039/C0DT00674B
