Pure &Appl. Chem., Vol. 66, No. 5, pp. 1077-1184,1994. 
Printed in Great Britain. 
0 
1994 IUPAC 
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF PURE 
AND APPLIED CHEMISTRY 
ORGANIC CHEMISTRY DIVISION 
COMMISSION ON PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY* 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN 
PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
(IUPAC Recommendations 1994) 
Prepared for publication by 
P. MULLER 
DCpartement de Chimie Organique, UniversitC de Genbve, CH-1211 Genbve 4, Suisse 
*Membership of the Commission during the period (1987-93) the report was drafted was as follows: 
Chairman: 1987-93 P. Muller (Switzerland); Secretary: 1987-91 M. P. Doyle (USA); 1991-93 
W. Drenth (Netherlands). Titular Members: P. N. I. Ahlberg (Sweden, 1987-91); E. A. Halevi (Israel, 
1987-89); J. M. McBride (USA, 1987-93); V. Minkin (USSR, 1991-93); 0. M. Nefedov (USSR, 
1987-91); M. Oki (Japan, 1987-91); J. Shorter (UK, 1989-93); Y. Takeuchi (Japan, 1991-93); Z. 
Rappoport (Israel, 1991-93); Associate Members: P. N. I. Ahlberg (Sweden, 1991-93); T. A. Albright 
(USA, 1987-91); W. Drenth (Netherlands, 1987-91); E. A. Halevi (Israel, 1989-93); R. A. Y. Jones 
(UK, 1987-89); V. I. Minkin (USSR, 1987-91); 0. M. Nefedov (USSR, 1991-93); C. Pemn (USA, 
1991-93); D. Raber (USA, 1991-93); K. Schwetlick (GDR, 1987-89); Y. Takeuchi (Japan, 1987-91); 
P. Van Brandt (Belgium, 1987-93); J. R. Zdysiewicz (Australia, 1989-93); National Representatives: 
J.-L. Abboud Mas (Spain, 1991-93); E. Baciocchi (Italy, 1989-93); M. V. Bhatt (India, 1989-91); 
X. Jiang (China, 1987-93); J. J. E. Humeres Allende (Brazil, 1991-93); P. Laszlo (Belgium, 
1987-91); D. J. McLennan (New Zealand, 1987-91); Z. Rappoport (Israel, 1987-91); R. Sabbah 
(France, 1989-93); B. E. Smart (USA, 1987-91); J. A. Silva Cavaleiro (Portugal, 1991-93); J. Suh 
(Republic of Korea, 1989-93); 0. Tarhan (Turkey, 1989-93); T. T. Tidwell (Canada, 1991-93); 
M. Tisler (Yugoslavia, 1987-93); J. Zavada (Czechslovakia, 1987-89); J. Zdysiewicz (Australia, 
Membership of the Working Party 1987-93: 
Chairman: P. Muller (Switzerland); Members: P. N. I. Ahlberg (USA), M. P. Doyle (USA), W. Drenth 
(Netherlands), E. A. Halevi (Israel), R. A. Y. Jones (UK), J. M. McBride (USA), V. Minkin (USSR), 
M. Oki (Japan), Y. Takeuchi (Japan), J. R. Zdysiewicz (Australia). 
Republication of this report is permitted without the need for formal IUPAC permission on condition that an 
acknowledgement, with full reference together with IUPAC copyright symbol (0 1994 IUPAC), is printed. 
Publication of a translation into another language is subject to the additional condition of prior approval from the 
relevant IUPAC National Adhering Organization. 
1987-89). 

1078 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
A 
a 
P 
CP 
e 
Ea 
G 
H 
h 
K 
KD 
k 
kB 
lg 
In 
h 
V 
0 
List of General Symbols 
pre-exponential factor in Arrhenius equation [see energy of actiuation). 
order of reaction with respect to reactant A, or Bronsted coemcient (see order of reaction 
Br0nsted relation) . 
order of reaction with respect to reactant B or Bronsted coefficient (see order of reaction 
Brramted relation). 
heat capacity [at constant pressure). 
base of natural logarithms (e = 2.718). 
energy of activation (see energy of actiuation). 
Gibbs energy. 
enthalpy . 
Planck constant. 
Kelvin (unit of thermodynamic temperature). 
equilibrium constant. 
rate constant (see order of reaction). 
Boltzmann constant. 
natural logarithm. 
decadic logarithm. 
wavelength. 
frequency. 
(superscript) relating to thermodynamic standard state. 
pressure. 
gas constant. 
entropy. 
second (unit of time). 
summation. 
thermodynamic temperature. 
time. 
rate of reaction (see rate of reaction). 
(superscript) relating to transition state. 
See &localization. 
amount concentration of X. 
See also IUPAC QUANTITIES (1988). 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1079 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
2nd Edition, 1994 
Synopsis. This glossary contains definitions and explanatory notes for terms 
used in the context of research and publications in physical organic chemistry. Its 
aim is to provide guidance on physical organic chemical terminology with a view to 
achieve a far-reaching consensus on the definitions of useful terms and on the 
abandonment of unsatisfactory ones. As a consequence of the development of 
physical organic chemistry, and of the increasing use of physical organic 
terminology in other fields of chemistry, the 1994 revision of the Glossary is much 
expanded in comparison to the previous edition, and it also includes terms from 
cognate fields. A few definitions have been refined, some others totally revised in the 
light of comments received from the scientific community. 
INTRODUCTION TO THE 1994 REVISION 
General Remarks 
The "Glossary of Terms Used In Physical Organic Chemistry" was published in provisional 
form in 1979 (IUPAC PHYSICAL. ORGANIC GLOSSARY (1979)) and in revised form in 1983. A 
historical account of procedure and progress up to that stage was outlined in the provisional 
publication. The 1983 revision incorporated modifications agreed by the IUPAC Commission 
111.2 (Physical Organic Chemistry), partly in response to comments received since the 
provisional publication. The terms defined in the 1983 Glossary are incorporated in the IUPAC 
"COMPENDIUM OF CHEMICAL TERMINOLOGY (1987) (Victor Gold Book). 
The present revision was undertaken with the long-term objective of compiling a com- 
pendium of organic chemical terminology. For this reason the criteria for inclusion of terms 
were much expanded'. The criteria for the 1983 edition were that the meaning of a term was 
either not given in non-scientific dictionaries or standard textbooks or differed significantly 
from the deflnition in such reference works, or that the term was associated with some ambi- 
guity or uncertainty with respect to its meaning. The present compendium tries to be com- 
prehensive, but without including trivial terms and without redefining IUPAC approved terms. 
In particular, terms from cognate fields which are used by physical organic chemists, are 
included. The terminology for the various spectroscopic methods of interest to organic chemists 
is not treated in the present document, except for some terms from NMR spectroscopy, but may 
be the subject of a separate study. As a matter of policy, named reactions (such as Diels-Alder) 
and symbolic representation of reaction mechanisms (SN1. etc.) have been excluded with a few 
exceptions. These topics have been treated in separate reports of this Commission (IUPAC 
REACTION MECHANISMS (1989), IUPAC TERMINOLOGY FOR TRANSFORMATIONS (1989)). 
The work has been coordinated with that of other Commissions within the Division of Or- 
ganic Chemistry, which deal with terminology, (e.g., IUPAC PHOTOCHEMICAL GLOSSARY 
(1988), and 
its 
revision 
(1992), Commission 
111.3; 
IUPAC 
TERMINOLOGY 
OF 
STEREOCHEMISI'RY (1993), joint project of Commissions 111.1 and 111.2, and IUPAC CLASS 
NAMES (1993). joint project of Commissions 111.1 and 111.2), and with that of Commission 1.5. 
Discrepancies in the views between the Commissions have been eliminated. Whenever there 
was overlap or disagreement between the 1983 glossary and one of the more recent ones, the 
best available definitions were incorporated in the present text with a reference to their origin. 
Otherwise this glossary was not expanded into areas where other Commissions or working 
parties are already active. It is hoped that a merged compendium will be published after 
approval of the various glossaries. 
The aim of the Glossary is to provide guidance on physical-organic chemical terminology 
with a view to achieving a far-reaching consensus on the definitions of useful terms and the 
abandonment of unsatisfactory ones. The Commission is anxious to emphasize that it cannot 
(and would not wish to) impose rules or restrictions which might hinder rather than help the 
precise formulation of new ideas. 
Generally speaking, operational definitions were preferred to definitions couched in terms 
of theoretical models. We have tried to avoid taking sides on issues of scientific, as distinct from 
semantic, disagreement. 
The Commission is pleased to acknowledge the generous contributions of many scientists 
who helped by proposing or defining new terms, or by criticizing existing ones. The following 
have contributed to this revision: 

1080 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
I.P. Beletskaya 
N.J. Leonard 
T.W. Bentley 
R.M. Magid 
C.F. Bernasconi 
P.C. Maria 
E. Buncel 
RT. Myers 
C. Eabom 
C. Reichardt 
J.F. Gal 
J.D. Roberts 
S. Hoz 
M.F. Ruasse 
W.P. Jencks 
H. Zollinger 
N. W a y  
The Commission thanks Mrs. M. Wyss and Dr. S. Motallebi for their help in the 
preparation of the manuscript of this Glossary. 
Arrangement, Abbreviations and Symbols 
The arrangement is simply alphabetical, terms beginning with Greek letters following 
those beginning with Latin ones. Italicized words in the body of a definition, as well as those 
cited at the end, point to relevant cross-references. No distinction is made between singular and 
plural in cross-referencing. Literature references should direct the reader either to the original 
literature where the term was originally defined, or to pertinent references where it is used. 
Underlining of words means that the words should be emphasized in the particular context of 
the entry. The appearance of a term in quotation marks in the body of a definition indicates 
that no further information will be found under that heading. Capitalized names indicate 
references. 
A cross (+) against the title of an entry implies that the Commission recommends dis- 
continuation of the term. 
In accordance with general practice KekulC structures are normally used in this Glossary 
to represent the formulae of aromatic compounds. A single hexagon with a full circle inside is 
used in cases where delocalization is qphasized. A full circle is also used in the case of 
monocyclic aromatic ions, but fused aromatics are represented by KekulC structures, because 
in this case each circle would imply the presence of 6 x electrons in each hexagon. Thus 
naphthalene with two circles would appear to have 12 x electrons, while it has only 10 in re- 
ality. Dashed lines indicate delocalization of positive or negative charge or of the spin of an 
unpaired electron. Curved singly headed arrows represent formal movement of electron pairs, 
while doubly headed arrows between formulae symbolize resonance. 
In accordance with previous IUPAC recommendations (IUPAC QUANTITIES (1988)) the 
symbol * to indicate transition states ("double dagger") is used as a prefix to the appropriate 
quantities, e.g. ASG rather than the more often used A&. 
Relative positions are indicated by post-slashed Arabic numerals. For example, 
1/4/dibromo-additlon may refer to addition at positions 9 and 10 of anthracene, or at positions 
2 and 5 of hexa-2,4-diene (IUPAC TERMINOLOGY FOR TRANSFORMATIONS (1989)). 
Alphabetical Entries 
abstraction 
moval of an atom (neutral or charged) from a molecular entity. For example: 
A chemical reaction or transformation, the main feature of which is the bimolecular re- 
CH3COCH3 + (i-C3H7)2N- - 
(CH&OCH;?>- + (i-C3H7)2NH 
(proton abstraction from acetone) 
CH4 + C1' - 
H3C' + HCl 
(hydrogen abstraction from methane) 
acceptor number (AN) 
acid 
mica or capable of forming a covalent bond with an electron pair (see Lewis acid. 
See detachment. 
A quantitative measure, devised by GUTMA" (1976). of Lewis acidity. 
A molecular entity or chemical species capable of donating a hydron (proton) (see Br0nsted 
See also hard mid. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1081 
acidity 
(1) Of a compound: 
For Bronsted acids it means the tendency of a compound to act as a hydron donor. It can 
be quantitatively expressed by the acid dissociation constant of the compound in water or some 
other specified medium. For Lewis acids it relates to the association constants of Lewis adducts 
and IC adducts. 
(2) Of a medium: 
The use of the term is mainly restricted to a medium containing Br0nsted acids. where it 
means the tendency of the medium to hydronate a specific reference base. It is quantitatively 
expressed by the appropriate aciditymtion 
acidity function 
Any function that measures the thermodynamic hydron-donating or -accepting ability of a 
solvent system, or a closely related thermodynamic property, such as the tendency of the bate 
ion of the solvent system to form Lewis adducts. (The term "basicity function" is not in common 
use in connection with basic solutions.) Acidity functions are not unique properties of the 
solvent system alone, but depend on the solute (or family of closely related solutes) with respect 
to which the thermodynamic tendency is measured. 
Commonly used acidity functions refer to concentrated acidic or basic solutions. Acidity 
functions are usually established over a range of composition of such a system by W/VIS 
spectrophotometric or NMR measurements of the degree of hydronation (protonation or Lewis 
adduct formation) for the members of a series of structurally similar indicator bases (or acids) 
of merent strength: the best known of these functions is the Hammett acidity function & (for 
uncharged indicator bases that are primary aromatic amines). For detailed information on 
other acidity functions, on the evaluation of acidity functions, and on the limitations of the con- 
cept, see ROCHESTER (1970), COX and YATES (1983). 
HAMMETT (1940, 1970). 
activated complex 
An activated complex, often characterized by the superscript 4, is defined as that assembly 
of atoms which corresponds to an arbitrary infinitesimally small region at or near the col 
(saddle point) of a potential energy surface. 
See also transition state. 
activation energy 
See energy of activation 
addend 
See addition reaction. 
(1) Refers to addition reaction or addition transformation 
(2) Loosely, the formation of an adduct. (For an example, see Lewis acid.) 
(3) Loosely. any association or attachment 
addition reaction 
A chemical reaction of two or more reacting molecular entities, resulting in a single reaction 
product containing all atoms of all components, with formation of two chemical bonds and a 
net reduction in bond multiplicity in at least one of the reactants. The reverse process is called 
an elimination reaction. The addition may occur at only one site (a-addition l/l/addition), at 
two adjacent sites (1/2/addition) or at two non-adjacent sites (1/3/- or 1/4/addition, etc.). For 
example 
addition 
(a) Ht + Br- + (CH3),C=CH2 - 
(CH3),CBr-CH3 
(lR/addition) 
(b) Br2 + CH2=CH-CH=CH2 
.-+ 
BrCH2-CH=CH-CH2Br (1/4/addition) 
and BrCH2-CH(Br)-CH=CH2 (lD/addition) 
If the reagent or the source of the addends of an addition are not specified, then it is called 
an addition tmnsformation 
See also addition a-addition cheletropic reaction eyeloaddition 
additivity principle 
The hypothesis that each of several structural features of a molecular entity makes a sepa- 
rate and additive contribution to a property of the substance concerned. More specifically, it is 
the hypothesis that each of the several substituent groups in a parent molecule makes a sepa- 
rate and additive contribution to the standard Gibbs energy change (or Gibbs energy ofactiua- 

1082 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
tion) corresponding to a particular equilibrium (or rate of reaction). For further information and 
examples see BENSON (1976). 
See also transferability. 
adduct 
A new chemical species AB, each molecular entity of which is formed by direct combination 
of two separate molecular entities A and B in such a way that there is change in connectivity, 
but no loss, of atoms within the moieties A and B. Stoichiometries other than 1: 1 are also pos- 
sible, e.g. a bis-adduct (2:l). 
An "intramolecular adduct" can be formed when A and B are 
groups contained within the same molecular entity. 
TNs is a general term which, whenever appropriate, should be used in preference to the 
less explicit term complex. It is also used specifically for products of an addition reaction For 
examples see Lewis adduct, Meisenheimer adduct n-adduct. 
A-factor 
See energy of activation. 
The term designates structures in which a hydrogen atom is bonded to both a carbon 
atom and a metal atom. The term is also used to characterize the interaction between a CH 
bond and an unsaturated metal centre, and to describe similar bonding of a transition metal 
with Si-H compounds. The expression "p-hydrido-bridged" is also used to describe the bridging 
hydrogen. 
BROOKHART and GREEN (1983); 
LUO and CRABTREE (1989). 
alcoholysis 
See soluolysis. 
allylic substitution reaction 
A substitution reaction occurring at position 1/ of an allylic system, the double bond being 
between positions 2/ and 3/. The incoming group may be attached to the same atom 1/ as the 
leaving group, or the incoming group becomes attached at the relative position 3/, with 
movement of the double bond from 2/3 to 1/2. For example: 
agostic 
(written as a transformafton). 
alternant 
sets so that no atom of one set is directly linked to any other atom of the same set. 
Example of non-alternant x system: 
A conjugated system of sc-electrons is termed alternant if its atoms can be divided into two 
Example of alternant x system: 
f / *  
*' 4 
* 
* 
(two atoms of unstarred set 
are directly linked) 
ambident 
A description applied to a chemical species whose molecular entities each possess two 
alternative and strongly interacting distinguishable reactive centres, to either of which a bond 
may be made in a reaction: the centres must be connected in such a way that reaction at either 
site stops or greatly retards subsequent attack at the second site. The term is most commonly 
applied to conjugated wleophiles, for example the enolate ion 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1083 
(which may react with electrophiles either at the P-carbon atom or at oxygen) or y-pyridones, 
and also to the vicinally ambident cyanide ion, cyanate ion, thiocyanate ion, sulflnate ion, 
nitrite ion, and unsymmetrical hydrazines. Ambident electrophiles are exemplified by carboxylic 
esters RC(0)OCR3 which react with nucleophiles either at the carbonyl carbon or the alkoxy 
carbon. 
Molecular entities, such as dianions of dicarboxylic acids, containing two non-interacting 
(or feebly interacting) reactive centres, are not generally considered to be ambident and are 
better described as "bifunctional". 
The Latin root of the word implies &Q reactive centres, but the term has in the past also 
incorrectly been applied to chemical species with more than two reactive centres. For such 
species the existing term "polydent" (or, better, "multident") is more appropriate. 
GOMPPER (1964); SMITH and DeWALL (1977). 
See also chelation 
A compound containing a large organic cation or anion which possesses a long 
amphiphilic 
unbranched hydrocarbon chain, e.g. 
H3C(CH2),C02-M+ H3C(CH2),S03-M+ H3C(CH2),N(CH3)3+X- 
(n > 7). 
The existence of distinct polar (hydrophilic) and non polar (hydrophobic) regions in the 
molecule promotes the formation of micelles in dilute aqueous solution. 
amphiprotic (solvent) 
example H20 and CH,OH, in contrast to aprotic soluent. 
amphoteric 
A chemical species that behaves both as an acid and as a base is called amphoteric. This 
property depends upon the medium in which the species is investigated: H2S04 is an acid 
when studied in water, but becomes amphoteric in superacids. 
anchimeric assistance 
See neighbouring group participation 
anionotropic rearrangement (or anionotropy) 
A rearrangement in which the migrating group moves with its electron pair from one atom 
to another. 
anion radical 
annelation 
French language. 
annulation 
Self-ionizing solvent possessing both characteristics of Br0nsted acids and bases, for 
See radical ion 
Alternative, but less desirable term for annulatto 
* n The term is widely used in German and 
A transformation involving fusion of a new ring to a molecule via two new bonds. 
Some authors use the term "annelation" for the fusion of an additional ring to an already 
existing one, and "annulation" for the formation of a ring from one or several acyclic precursors, 
but this distinction is not made generally. 
DANHEISER, GERE and SARD (1982), JUNG (1976). 
See also cyclization 
annulene 
Mancude (i.e. having formally the maximum number of noncumulative double bonds) 
monocydic hydrocarbon without side chains of the general formula C,H, 
(n is an even number) 
or C,H,l 
(n is an odd number). Note that in systematic nomenclature an annulene with seven 
or more carbon atoms may be named [nlannulene, where n is the number of carbon atoms, e.g. 
[Slannulene for cyclonona- 1,3,5,7-tet.raene. 
IUPAC CLASS NAMES (1993). 
See aromatic, HiickeZ(4n + 2) rule. 

1084 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
antarafacial, suprafacial 
When a part of a molecule ("molecular fragment") undergoes two changes in bonding 
(bond-making or bond-breaking), either to a common centre or to two related centres, external 
to itself, these bonding changes may be related in one of two spatially different ways. These are 
designated as "antarafacial" if opposite faces of the molecular fragment are involved, and 
"suprafacial" if both changes occur at the same face. The concept of "face" is clear from the 
diagrams in the cases of planar (or approximately planar) frameworks with isolated or 
interacting p-orbitals (Figs. a and b below). 
The terms antarafacial and suprafacial are, however, also employed in cases in which the 
essential part of the molecular fragment undergoing changes in bonding comprises two atoms 
linked only by a o-bond. In these cases it is customary to refer to the phases of the local a- 
bonding orbital: occurrence of the two bonding changes at sites of like orbital phase is regarded 
as suprafacial, whereas that at two sites of opposite phase is antarafacial. The possibilities are 
shown for C-C and C-H o-bonds in Figs. c and d. There may be two distinct and alternative 
stereochemical outcomes of a suprafacial process involving a o-bond between saturated carbon 
atoms, i.e. either retention or inversion at both centres. The antarafacial process results in 
inversion at one centre and retention at the second. 
For examples of the use of these terms see cycloaddition, sigmatropic rearrangement. 
See also anti, sigma, pi 
p-orbital 
-. 
\ 
antarafacial 
I 
suprafacial 
-. 
0 -  
\ 
T 
A 
\ .- 
c -  
-. 
\ 
i 
c-c 
&
o
c
o
 
a-bond 
(b) 
-. c -  
: i  
o
c
o
c
o
 
or 
-. * -  
-. .- 
; i  
C-H 
o
c
a
 
o-bond 
(4 
anti 
In the representation of stereochemical relationships "anti" means "on opposite sides" of a 
reference plane, in contrast to "syn" which means "on the same side", as in the following ex- 
amples. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1085 
W TWO 
substituents attached to atoms joined by a single bond are anti if the torsion angle 
(dihedral angle) between the bonds to the substituents is greater than 900, or syn if it is less 
than 900. [A further distinction is made between antiperiplanar, synperiplanar, anticlinal and 
IUPAC ORGANIC RULES (1979); IUPAC STEREOCHEMICAL TERMINOLOGY (1993); 
KLYNE and PRELOG (1 960). 
03) In the older literature the terms anti and syn were used to designate stereoisomers of 
oximes and related compounds. That usage was superseded by the terms "trans" and "cis" or E 
and 2, respectively. 
(C) When the terms are used in the context of chemical reactions or transformations. they 
designate the relative orientation of substituents in the substrate or product: 
(1) Addition to a carbon-carbon double bond: 
synclinal.) 
Me 
Br 
H HH 
Me 
H 
Br 
+ Br2 - 
Me*+- 
)<Me p 
anti : 
+ R2BD - 
Me 
D 
(2) Alkene-fonning elimination: 
bSO2Ph 
+ PBr
f-BuONa+l NaNH2 
syn : 
F 
IUPAC ORGANIC RULES (1979). 
In the examples described under (1) and (2) anti processes are always antarc@xid, and 
syn processes are suprafacial. See also IUPAC STEREOCHEMICAL TERMINOLOGY (1993) for 
further meaning of the term. 
antiaromatic 
See aromatic. 
anti-Hammond effect 
anti-Markownikoff addition 
See More OFerrall-Jencks diagram 
See Markownikoff rule. 
aprotic (solvent) 
Non-protogenic (in a given situation). (With extremely strong Br0nsted acids or bases, 
solvents that are normally aprotic may accept or lose a proton. For example, acetonitrile is in 
most instances an aprotic solvent, but it is protophilic in the presence of concentrated sulfuric 
acid and protogenic in the presence of potassium tert-butoxide. Similar considerations apply to 
benzene, trichloromethane, etc.) 
See also dipolar aprotic solvent 

1086 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
aquation 
The incorporation of one or more integral molecules of water into another species with or 
without displacement of one or more other atoms or groups. For example the incorporation of 
water into the inner @and sphere of an inorganic complex is an aquation reaction. 
See also hydration 
aromatic, aromaticity 
(1) In the traditional sense, "having a chemistry typified by benzene". 
(2) A cyclically cor@gated molecular entity with a stability (due to &localization) signifl- 
cantly greater than that of a hypothetical localized structure (e.g. Kekdt? structure) is said to 
possess aromatic character. If the structure is of higher energy (less stable) than such a hy- 
pothetical classical structure, the molecular entity is "antiaromatic". 
The most widely used method for determining aromaticity is the observation of diatropicity 
in the 1H NMR spectrum. 
A W N S  (1974); GARFKIT (1986). 
See also Hiickel(4n + 2) rule, M6bius aromaticity. 
(3) The terms aromatic and antiaromatic have been extended to describe the stabilization 
or destabilization of transition states of pericyclic reactions. The hypothetical reference structure 
is here less clearly defined. and use of the term is based on application of the HiickeZ(4n + 2) 
rule and on consideration of the topology of orbital overlap in the transition state. Reactions of 
molecules in the ground state involving antiaromatic transition states proceed, if at all, much 
less easily than those involving aromatic transition states. 
Arrhenius equation 
DEWAR (1971); ZIMMERMA" (1971). 
See energy of activation 
w
e
 
A hydrocarbon derived from an arene by abstraction of two hydrogen atoms from adjacent 
carbon atoms: thus 1,2-didehydroarene. Arynes are commonly represented with a formal triple 
bond. The analogous heterocyclic compounds are called heteroarynes or hetarynes. 
E.g., benzyne 
Arynes are usually transient species. 
IUPAC CLASS NAMES (1993). 
association 
The assembling of separate molecular entities into any aggregate, especially of oppositely 
charged free ions into ion pairs or larger and not necessarily well-defined clusters of ions held 
together by electrostatic attraction. The term signifies the reverse of dissociation but is not 
commonly used for the formation of definite nrlrlrlnts by colligation or coordination 
asymmetric induction 
The traditional term describing the preferential formation in a chemical reaction of one 
enantiomer or diastereoisomer over the other as a result of the influence of a chiral feature in 
the substrate, reagent, catalyst or environment. The term also refers to the formation of a new 
chiral feature preferentially in one conturation under such influence. 
atomic orbital 
nucleus and the other electrons present. 
attachment 
A transformation by which one molecular entity (the substrate) is converted into another by 
the formation of one (and only one) two-centre bond between the substrate and another 
molecular entity and which involves no other changes in connectivity in the substrate. For ex- 
ample, the formation of an acyl cation by attachment of carbon monoxide to a carbenium ion 
(R+): 
IUPAC STEREOCHEMICAL TERMINOLOGY (1993). 
A one-electron wavefunction describing an electron in the effective field provided by a 
See also molecular orbital. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1087 
R++CO - 
(RCO)+ 
The product of an attachment may also be the adduct of the two reactants, but not all 
adducts can be represented as the products of an attachment. (For example, the Diels-Alder 
cycloaddition 
results in an adduct of buta-1,3-diene and ethene, but the reaction cannot be described as an 
attachment since bonds are formed between more than two centres.) 
See also colligation electron attachment 
autocatalytic reaction 
A chemical reaction in which a product (or a reaction intermediate) also functions as cuta- 
&jst. In such a reaction the observed rate of reaction is often found to increase with time from 
its initial value. 
See order of reaction. 
automerization 
Synonymous with degenerate rearrangement 
A proton (hydron) t r m j e r  reaction between two identical molecules (usually a solvent), 
autoprotolysis 
one acting as a Bronsted acid and the other as a Bronsted base. For example: 
2H20 - 
H30++OH 
autoprotolysis constant 
The product of the activities (or, more approximately, concentrations) of the species pro- 
duced as the result of autoprotolysis. For solvents in which no other ionization processes are 
significant the term is synonymous with "ionic product". The autoprotolysis constant for water, 
&, is equal to the product of activities 
a(H30+)a(OH-) = 1.0 x 10-14 at 25OC. 
- 
"A" value 
The conformational preference of an equatorial compared to an axial substituent in a 
monosubstituted cyclohexane. This steric substituent parameter equals A,@ in kcal/mol for 
the equatorial to axial equilibration on cyclohexane. The values are also known as 'Winstein- 
Holness" A values. 
+ azacarbene 
HIRSCH (1967); CAREY and SUNDBERG (1990). 
See nitrene. 
+ azene 
+ azylene 
See nitrene. 
a-addition (alpha-addition) 
A chemical reaction resulting in a single reaction product from two or three reacting chem- 
ical species, with formation of two new chemical bonds to the same atom in one of the reactant 
molecular entities. The synonymous term 1 / 1 /addition is also used. For example: 
See nitrene. 

1088 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
(This particular example can also be viewed as an insertion reaction) In inorganic chemistry 
such a-addition reactions, generally to a metallic central atom, are known as "oxidative ad- 
ditions". 
a-Addition is the reverse of a-elimination or 1/ l/elimination. 
See also addiflon, eliminatlo n 
a-effect 
A positive deviation of an a-nucleophile (a nucleophile bearing an unshared pair of 
electrons on an atom adjacent to the nucleophilic site) from a Bronsted-type plot of log hUc 
us. 
pK, constructed for a series of related normal nucleophiles. More generally, it is the influence of 
the atom bearing a lone pair of electrons on the reactivity at the adjacent site. 
HOZ and BUNCEL (1985). 
See also Bronsted relation 
The use of the term has been extended to include the effect of any substituent on an 
adjacent reactive centre, for example in the case of the "a-silicon effect". 
a-elimination 
A tranqfoonnation of the general type 
where the central atom 2 is commonly carbon. The reverse reaction is called a-addition 
Baldwin's rules 
A set of empirical rules for certain formations of 3- to 7-membered rings. The predicted 
pathways are those in which the length and nature of the linking chain enables the terminal 
atoms to achieve the proper geometries for reaction. The disfavoured cases are subject to severe 
distortions of bond angles and bond distances. 
base 
A chemical species or molecular entity having an available pair of electrons capable of 
forming a covalent bond with a hydron (proton) (see Brransted base) or with the vacant orbital of 
some other species (see Lewis base). 
See also hard base, superbase. 
basicity 
For Brmsted bases it means the tendency of a compound to act as hydron (proton) 
acceptor. The basicity of a chemical species is normally expressed by the acidity of the 
conjugate acid (see conjugate mid-base pair). For Lewis bases it relates to the association 
constants of Lewis adducts and IC-addwts. 
basicity function 
See acidityfunction 
bathochromic shift (effect) 
Shift of a spectral band to lower frequencies (longer wavelengths) owing to the influence of 
substitution or a change in environment. It is informally referred to as a red shift and is 
opposite to hypsochromic ship (blue shift). 
IUPAC PHOTOCHEMICAL GLOSSARY (1 992). 
Bell-Evans-Polanyi principle 
sometimes observed within a series of closely related reactions. 
BALDWIN (1976). 
The linear relation between energy of actSafion (E,) and enthalpy of reaction (AH,.) 
E, = A + BAHr 
DEWAR (1969), JENCKS (1985). 
benzgne 
1.2-Didehydrobenzene (the aryne derived from benzene) and its derivatives formed by 
substitution. The terms rn- and pbenzyne are occasionally used for 1,3- and 1,4- 
didehydrobenzene, respectively. 
IUPAC CLASS NAMES (1993). 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1089 
bifunctional catalysis 
Catalysis (usually for hydron transfer) by a bifunctional chemical species involving a 
mechanism in which both functional groups are implicated in the ratecontrolling step. so that 
the corresponding catalytic coefficient is larger than that expected for catalysis by chemical 
species containing only one of these functional groups. 
The term should not be used to describe the concerted action of two different catalysts 
("concerted catalysis"). 
bimolecular 
See molecularity. 
binding site 
A specific region (or atom) in a molecular entity that is capable of entering into a stabilizing 
interaction with another molecular entity. An example of such an interaction is that of an active 
site in an enzyme with its substrate. 'Qpical forms of interaction are by hydrcrgen bondlng, 
coordination and ion pair formation. 
Two binding sites in different molecular entities are said to be complementary if their in- 
teraction is stabilizing. 
biradical 
nearly independently of each other, e.g. 
An even-electron molecular entity with two (possibly delocalized) radical centres which act 
Species in which the two radical centres interact significantly are often referred to as 
"biradicaloids". If the two radical centres are located on the same atom, the species are more 
properly referred to by their generic names: carbenes, nitrenes, etc. 
The lowest-energy triplet state of a biradical lies below or at most only a little above its 
lowest singlet state (usually judged relative to kT., the ptoduct of the Boltzmann constant k~ 
and the absolute temperature 3. The states of those biradicals whose radical centres interact 
particularly weakly are most easily understood in terms of a pair of local doublets. 
Theoretical descriptions of low-energy states of biradicals display the presence of two 
unsaturated valences (biradicals contain one fewer bond than permitted by the rules of 
valence): the dominant valence bond structures have two dots, the low energy molecular orbital 
con&urations have only two electrons in two approximately nonbonding molecular orbitals, two 
of the natural orbitals have occupancies close to one, etc. 
The term is synonymous with "diradical". 
IUPAC PHOTOCHEMICAL GLOSSARY (1993). 
See also carbene, nitrene. 
Bodenstein approximation 
See steady state. 
bond 
There is a chemical bond between two atoms or groups of atoms in case that the forces 
acting between them are such as to lead to the formation of an aggregate with sufficient 
stability to make it convenient for the chemist to consider it as an independent "molecular 
species". In the context of this Glossary, the term refers usually to the covalent bond 
PAULING ( 1967). 
See also agostic, coordination. hydrogen bond, multi-centre bond 
See heterolysis, homolysis. 
(In ordinary usage the term refers to homolysis only.) 
bond-dissociation energy, D (SI unit: kJ mol-1, or J (per molecule)) 
The enthalpy (per mole) required to break a given bond of some specific molecular entity by 
homolysis, e.g. for CH, + H3C* + H ,  symbolized as D(CH3-H) (cf. heterolytic bond dissociation 
See also bond energy. 
bond dissociation 
energy). 

1090 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
bond energy (mean bond energy) 
The average value of the gas-phase bond dissociation energies (usually at a temperature of 
298 K) for all bonds of the same type within the same chemical species. The mean bond energy 
for methane, for example, is one-fourth the enthalpy of reaction for 
CH4(g) - 
+4H(g) 
selected typical chemical species containing that type of bond. 
bond migration 
See migration 
bond number 
The number of electron-pair bonds between two nuclei in any given Lewkformula. For 
example in ethene the bond number between the carbon atoms is two, and between the carbon 
and hydrogen atoms is one. 
bond order 
A theoretical index of the degree of bonding between two atoms relative to that of a normal 
single bond, i.e. the bond provided by one localized electron pair. In the valence-bond theory it 
is a weighted average of the bond numbers between the respective atoms in the contributing 
structures. In molecular-orbital theory it is calculated from the weights of the atomic orbitals in 
each of the occupied molecular orbitals. For example, in valence-bond theory (neglecting other 
than Kekult structures) the bond order between adjacent carbon atoms in benzene is 1.5: in 
Hackel molecular orbital theory it is 1.67. Other variants of molecular orbital theory provide 
other values for bond orders. 
borderline mechanism 
intermediate between SN1 and %2, or intermediate between electron transfer and %2. 
Bredt's rule 
A double bond cannot be placed with one terminus at the bridgehead of a bridged ring 
system unless the rings are large enough to accommodate the double bond without excessive 
sirah For example, while bicyclo[2.2.llhept-l-ene is only capable of existence as a transient 
its higher homologues having a double bond at the bridgehead position have been isolated: e.g. 
Tabulated bond energies are generally values of bond energies averaged over a number of 
A mechanism intermediate between two extremes, for example a nucleophilic substitution 
Bicyclo[3.3.l]non-l-ene 
Bicyclo[4.2. llnon- 1 (8)-ene 
BREDT (1924); see also FAWCE'IT (1950): WISEMAN (1967); KEESE (1972). 
For an alternative formulation see WISEMAN and CHONG (1969). 
bridged carbocation 
A carbocation (real or hypothetical) in which there are two (or more) carbon atoms that 
could in alternative Lewisfonrutlae be designated as carbenium centres but which is instead 
represented by a structure in which a group (a hydrogen atom or a hydrocarbon residue, pos- 
sibly with substituents in non-involved positions) bridges these potential carbenium centres. 
One may distinguish "electron-sumcient bridged carbocations" and "electron-deficient bridged 
carbocations". Examples of the former are phenyl-bridged ions (for which the trivial name 
"phenonium ion" has been used), such as (A). These ions are straightforwardly classified as 
carbeniLun ions. The latter type of ion necessarily involves three-centre bonding. Structures (C) 
and (D) contain five-coordinate carbon atoms. The "hydrogen-bridged carbocation" (B) contains 
a two-co-ordinate hydrogen atom. Hypercoordination, which includes two-coordination for 
hydrogen and five- but also higher coordination for carbon is generally observed in bridged 
carbocations. 
O W ,  
SURYA PRAKASH. WILLIAMSON, FIELD, and WADE (1987). 
See also carbonium ion multi-cenb-e bond neighbouring group participation 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1091 
(A) 
bridging ligand 
A ligand attached to two or more, usually metallic, central atoms. 
IUPAC INORWIC NOMENCLATURE (1990). 
Bmnsted acid (Bronsted acid) 
A molecular entlty capable of donating a hydron (proton) to a base, (i.e. a "ydron donor") 
or the corresponding chemical species. For example: H20, H30+, CH3C02H. H2S04. HS04-, 
See also conjugate acid- base pair. 
Bmnsted base (Bronsted base) 
A molecular entity capable of accepting a hydron (proton) from an acid (i.e. a "hydron 
acce tor") or the corresponding chemical species. For example: OH-, HzO, CH3C02-, HS04-, 
See also conjugate acid- base pair. 
Brgnsted relation (Bransted relation) 
The term applies to either of the equations 
HC1. CH30H, NH3. 
so4&. c1-. 
km/P = G(kq/P)" 
kA/q = Gl&q/P)-' 
(or their logarithmic forms) where a, p and G are constants for a given reaction series (a and p 
are called "Brensted exponents"), 
and kA are catalytic coe$kients (or rate coefficients) of 
reactions whose rates depend on the concentrations of HA and/or of A-. & is the acid 
dissociation constant of the acid HA, p is the number of equivalent acidic protons in the acid 
HA, and q is the number of equivalent basic sites in its conjugate base A-. The chosen values of 
p and q should always be specified. (The charge designations of HA and A- are only illustrative.) 
The Brensted relation is often termed the "Brensted catalysis law" (or the "Catalysis Law"). 
Although justiflable on historical grounds, this name is not recommended, since Brensted 
relations are known to apply to many uncatalysed and pseudo-catalysed reactions (such as 
simple proton (hydron) transfer reactions). The term "pseudo-Bransted relation" is sometimes 
used for reactions which involve nucleophilic catalysis instead of acid-base catalysis. Various 
types of Brensted parameters have been proposed such as Pig, Pnuc, Pes for leaving group, 
nucleophile and equilibrium constants, respectively. 
See also linear free-energ y relation 
Bunnett-Olsen equations 
The equations for the relation between lg([SH+I/[Sl) + Ho and Ho + lg [H+] for base S in 
aqueous mineral acid solution, where Ho is Hammett's acidity function and H, + lgiH+l 
represents the activity function lg(yS%+)/ysH+ for the nitroaniline reference bases to build kk,. 
Ig([SH+I/[SI) - IgIH+l = (0 
- 1)(Ho + 1g[H+I1 + PKsHt 
lg([SH+l/[SI) + Ho = @(Ho + lg[H+]) + PKsH+ 
BUNNE?T and OLSEN (1966); HAMMEXT (1970). 
See also Cox-Yates equation 
cage 
An aggregate of molecules, generally in the condensed phase, that surrounds the fi-ag- 
ments formed, for example, by thermal or photochemical dissociation. Because the cage 
hinders the separation of the fragments by diffusion, they may preferentially react with one 
another (''cage effect") but not necessarily to re-form the precursor species. For example, 

1092 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
A 
R-N=N-R - 
[R+N=N+Rl,,,, - 
R-R+N* 
See also geminate recombination. 
A polycyclic compound having the shape of a cage (see O W ,  
1990). The term is also used 
cage compound 
for inclusion compounds. 
canonical form 
See contributing sbucture. 
captodative effect 
Effect on the stability of a carbon centred radical determined by the combined action of a 
captor (electron withdrawing and a dative (electron releasing substituent, both attached to the 
radical centre. The term is also used for certain unsaturated compounds. 
BORDWELL and LYNCH (1989); 
SUSTMA" and KOFtTH (1990); VIEHE, JANOUSEK, 
MERENY, and STELLA (1985). 
carbanion 
Generic name for anions containing an even number of electrons and having an unshared 
pair of electrons on a tervalent carbon atom (e.g. C13C- or HC=C-) or - if the ion is mesomeric 
(see mesomerism) - having at least one significant contributing sfructure with an unshared pair 
of electrons on a tervalent carbon atom, for example. 
0 -  
0 
I 
II 
0
0
 
II - 
II 
CH3C=CH-CCH3 
c------) CH3C-CH-CCH3 
See also radical ion 
carbene 
Generic name for the species H2C: and substitution derivatives thereof, containing an 
electrically neutral bivalent carbon atom with two nonbonding electrons. The nonbonding elec- 
trons may have antiparallel spins (singlet state) or parallel spins (triplet state). Use of the 
alternative name "methylene" as' a generic term is not recommended. 
carbenium centre 
The three-coordinate carbon atom in a carbenhrrt ion to which the excess positive charge 
of the ion (other than that located on heteroatoms) may be formally considered to be largely 
attributed, i.e., which has one vacant p-orbital. (N.B. It is not always possible to uniquely 
identify such an atom.) This formal attribution of charge often does not express the real charge 
distribution. 
carbenium ion 
A generic name for carbocafions. real or hypothetical, that have at least one important con- 
tributing sbuclure containing a tervalent carbon atom with a vacant p-orbital. ("he name 
implies a protonated carbene or a substitution derivative thereof.) 
The term was proposed (and rejected) as a replacement for the traditional usage of the 
name carbonium ion 
To avoid ambiguity, the name should not be used as the root for the systematic nomencla- 
ture of carbocations. The corresponding difficulty confused carbonium ion nomenclature for 
many years. For example, the term "ethylcarbonium ion" has at times been used to refer either 
to CH3CH2+ (ethyl cation) or (correctly) to CH3CH2CH2+ (propyl cation). 
For the nomenclature of carbenium ions see IUPAC NOMENCLATURE GUIDE (1993). 
carbenoid 
A carbene like chemical species but with properties and reactiuity differing from the free 
carbene itself. e.g. 
See also biradical. 
R*R*C 
\ M  
M = metal 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1093 
carbocation 
A cation containing an even number of electrons with a significant portion of the excess 
positive charge located on one or more carbon atoms. This is a general term embracing 
carbenium ions, all types of carbonium ions, vinyl cations, etc. Carbocations may be named by 
adding the word "cation" to the name of the corresponding radical [IUPAC ORGANIC RULES 
(19791, IUPAC NOMENCLATURE GUIDE (19931.1 Such names do not imply structure (e.g. 
whether three-coordinated or five-coordinated carbon atoms are present). 
O
M
 
and SCHLEYER (1972). 
See also bridged carbocation. radical ion. 
carbonium ion 
The term should be used with great care since several incompatible meanings are 
currently in use. It is not acceptable as the root for systematic nomenclature for carbocations. 
(1) In most of the existing literature the term is used in its traditional sense for what is 
here defined as carbenim ion 
(2) A carbocation, real or hypothetical, that contains at least one five-coordinate carbon 
atom. 
(3) A carbocation, real or hypothetical, whose structure cannot adequately be described by 
two-electron two-centre bonds only. (The structure may involve carbon atoms with a 
coordination number greater than five.) 
OLAH and SCHLEYER (1972). 
carbyne 
Generic name for the species 
HC: 
and substitution derivatives thereof, such as 
Et O p C ' :  
containing an electrically neutral univalent carbon atom with three non-bonding electrons.' Use 
of the alternative name "methylidyne" as a generic term is not recommended. 
catalysis 
The action of a catalyst. 
catalysis law 
See Brprnsted relation 
catalyst 
A substance that participates in a particular chemical reaction and thereby increases its 
rate but without a net change in the amount of that substance in the system. At the molecular 
level, the catalyst is used and regenerated during each set of microscopic chemical events lead- 
ing from a molecular entity of reactant to a molecular entity of product. 
See also autocatalytic reaction, bifunctional catalysis, catalytic coefficient, electron-trmfer 
catalysis, general acid catalysis, general base catalysis, intramolecular catalysis, micellar 
catalysis, Michaelis-Menten kinetics, phase-trmfer catalysis. pseudo-catalysis, rate of reaction, 
catalytic coemcient 
spmi catalysis. 
If the rate of reaction (u) is expressible in the form 
where A, B. ... are reactants and C, represents one of a set of catalysts, then the proportionality 
factor & is the catalytic coemcient of the particular catalyst C, Normally the partial order of 
reaction (4 with respect to a catalyst will be unity, so that k, is an (a+p+ ...+ 1)th order rate 
coemcient. The proportionality factor kj, is the (a+P+ ... )th order rate coeMcient of the 
uncatalysed component of the total reaction. 
cation radical 
See radical ion 
cationotropic rearrangement (cationotropy) 
See tautomerism 

1094 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
chain reaction 
A reaction in which one or more reactive reaction fntemdiates (frequently radicals) are 
continuously regenerated, usually through a repetitive cycle of elementary steps (the 
"propagation step"). For example, in the chlorination of methane by a radical mechanism C1. is 
continuously regenerated in the chain propagation steps: 
C1' + CH, - 
HCl + H3C' 
Propagation steps 
H3C' + C1, - 
CH,Cl+ C1' 
In chain polymerization reactions, reactive intermediates of the same types, generated in 
successive steps or cycles of steps, differ in relative molecular mass, as in 
RCHZCHPh + H,C=CHPh 
-b 
RCH,CHPhCH,CHPh 
See also chain transfer, initiation termination 
chain transfer 
The abstraction, by the radical end of a growing chain-polymer. of an atom from another 
molecule. The growth of the polymer chain is thereby terminated but a new radical, capable of 
chain propagation and polymerization, is simultaneously created. For the example of alkene 
polymerization cited for a chain reaction, the reaction 
RCH2CHPh + CCl, 
____) RCH?CHClPh + Cl$' 
represents a chain transfer, the radical C13C* inducing further polymerization: 
CH,=CHPh + Cl3C ' .-+ 
C13CCH2CHPh 
Cl,CCH,&HPh + CH,=CHPh - 
Cl3CCH,CHPhCH,CHPh 
etc. 
The phenomenon occurs also in other chain reactions such as cationic polymerization. 
See also telomerization 
charge density 
charge population 
prescribed definition. e.g. that of MULLIKEN (1955). 
charge-transfer complex 
See electron density. 
The net electric charge on a specified atom in a molecular entity, as determined by some 
See also electron density. 
A ground state adduct which exhibits an observable charge transfer absorption band. 
IUPAC PHOTOCHEMICAL GLOSSARY (1 992). 
chelation 
The formation or presence of bonds (or other attractive interactions) between two or more 
separate binding sites within the same ligand and a single central atom. A molecular entity in 
which there is chelation (and the corresponding chemical species) is called a "chelate". The 
terms bidentate (or didentate), tridentate, tetradentate ... multidentate are used to indicate the 
number of potential binding sites of the ligand, at least two of which must be used by the 
ligand in forming a "chelate". For example, the bidentate ethylenediamine forms a chelate with 
CuI in which both nitrogen atoms of ethylenediamine are bonded to copper. Vhe use of the 
term is often restricted to metallic central atoms.) 
The phrase "separate binding sites" is intended to exclude cases such as 
[PtCl3(CH2=CH2)I-, ferrocene, and (benzene)tricarbonylchromium in which ethene, the cy- 
clopentadienyl group, and benzene, respectively, are considered to present single binding sites 
to the respective metal atom, and which are not normally thought of as chelates (see hapto). 
See also cryptand. 
cheletropic reaction 
A form of cycbaddition across the terminal atoms of a fully conjugated system with for- 
mation of two new o-bonds to a single atom of the ("monocentric") reagent. There is formal loss 
of one x-bond in the substrate and an increase in coordination number of the relevant atom of 
the reagent. An example is the addition of sulfur dioxide to butadiene: 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1095 
The reverse of this type of reaction is designated "cheletropic elimination". 
WOODWARD and HOFFMA" (1969). 
Alternative (and etymologically more correct) name for cheletropic reaction 
DEWAR (1971). 
chemical flux 
A concept related to rate of reaction, particularly applicable to the progress in one di- 
rection only of component reaction steps in a complex system or to the progress in one di- 
rection of reactions in a system at dynamic equilibrium (in which there are no observable 
concentration changes with time). Chemical flux (Q) is a derivative with respect to time, and has 
the dimensions of amount of substance per unit volume transformed per unit time. 
The sum of all the chemical fluxes leading to destruction of B is designated the "total 
chemical flux out of B" (symbol ZQ.~); the corresponding formation of B by concurrent ele- 
mentary reactions is the "total chemical flux into B or A" (symbol ZQJ& 
For the mechanism 
chelotropic reaction 
1 
-1 
A + B  
c 
C + D  
2
,
 E 
the total chemical flux into C is caused by the single reaction (1): 
wc = 91 
whereas the chemical flux out of C is a sum over all reactions that remove C: 
c9-c = 9-1 + Q2 
where 'pml is the "chemical flux out of C into B (and/or A)" and (pz is the "chemical flux out of C 
into E .  The rate of appearance of C is then given by 
In this system cpl (or XqA) can be regarded as the hypothetical rate of decrease in the con- 
centration of A due to the single (unidirectional) reaction (1) proceeding in the assumed absence 
of all other reactions. 
For a non-reversible reaction 
1 
A - P  
-d[Al/df= QI 
If two substances A and P are in chemical equilibrium 
A 
-P 
then 
and 
-d[A]/dt = d[P]/dt = 0 
GOLD (1979). 
See also order of reaction, rate-limiting step, steady state. 

1096 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
chemical reaction 
A process that results in the interconversion of chemical species. Chemical reactions may 
be elementary reactions or stepwise reactions. (It should be noted that this definition includes 
experimentally observable interconversions of conformers.) 
Detectable chemical reactions normally involve 
of molecular entities, as indicated by 
this definition, but it is often conceptually convenient to use the term also for changes involving 
single molecular entities (i.e. "microscopic chemical events"). 
See also identity reaction 
chemical relaxation 
If the equilibrium mixture of a chemical reaction is disturbed by a sudden change, es- 
pecially of some external parameter (such as temperature, pressure, or electrical field strength), 
the system will readjust itself to a new position of the chemical equilibrium or return to the 
original position, if the perturbation is temporary. The readjustment is known as chemical 
relaxation. 
In many cases, and in particular when the displacement from equilibrium is slight, the 
progress of the system towards equilibrium can be expressed as a first-order law 
where (G 
l1 and (cqI2 are the equilibrium concentrations of one of the chemical species in- 
volved i n b e  reaction before and after the change in the external parameter, and c, is its con- 
centration at time t The time parameter 7. named relaxation time, is related to the rate con- 
stants of the chemical reaction involved. 
Measurements of the relaxation times by relaxation methods [involving a temperature 
jump @-jump), pressure jump, electric field jump or a periodic disturbance of an external 
parameter, as in ultrasonic techniques] are commonly used to follow the kinetics of very fast 
reactions. 
See BERNASCONI (1976); LEFFLER and GRUNWALD (1963); see also relavafion 
chemical shift (NMR), 
6 (SI unit: 1) 
m e  variation of the resonance frequency of a nucleus in nuclear magnetic resonance 
(NMR) spectroscopy in consequence of its magnetic environment. The chemical shift of a 
nucleus, 6. is expressed in ppm by its frequency, v c ~ .  
relative to a standard, vref, and defined 
as 
VO 
where vo is the operating frequency of the spectrometer. For IH and 1% NMR the reference 
signal is usually that of tetramethylsilane (SiMe,). Other references are used in the older 
literature and in other solvents, such as D20. 
If a resonance signal occurs at lower frequency or higher applied field than an arbitrarily 
selected reference signal, it is said to be upfield, and if resonance occurs at higher frequency or 
lower applied field. the signal is downfield. Resonance lines upfield from SiMe4 have positive, 
and resonance lines downfield from SiMe4 have negative &values. 
chemical species 
An ensemble of chemically identical molecular entities that can explore the same set of 
molecular energy levels on the time scale of the experiment. The term is applied equally to a set 
of chemically identical atomic or molecular structural units in a solid array. 
For example, two conformational isomers may be interconverted sumciently slowly to be 
detectable by separate NMR spectra and hence to be considered to be separate chemical species 
on a time scale governed by the radiofrequency of the spectrometer used. On the other hand, in 
a slow chemical reaction the same mixture of conformers may behave as a single chemical 
species, i.e. there is virtually complete equilibrium population of the total set of molecular 
energy levels belonging to the two conformers. 
Except where the context requires otherwise, the term is taken to refer to a set of 
molecular entities containing isotopes in their natural abundance. 
The wording of the definition given in the first paragraph is intended to embrace both 
cases such as graphite, sodium chloride, or a surface oxide, where the basic structural units 
may not be capable of isolated existence. as well as those cases where they are. 
In common chemical usage, and in this Glossary, generic and specific chemical names 
(such as radical or hydroxide ion) or chemical formulae refer either to a chemical species or to a 
molecular entity. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1097 
chemically induced dynamic nuclear polarization (CIDNP) 
See CIDNP. 
chemoselective, chemoselectivity 
Chemoselectivity is the preferential reaction of a chemical reagent with one of two or more 
different functional groups. A reagent has a high chemoselectivity if reaction occurs with only a 
limited number of different functional groups. For example, sodium tetrahydroborate is a more 
chemoselective reducing agent than is lithium tetrahydroaluminate. The concept has not been 
defined in more quantitative terms. The term is also applied to reacting molecules or 
intermediates which &bit 
selectivity towards chemically different reagents. 
Some authors use the term chemospecificity for 100 % chemoselectivity. However, this 
usage is discouraged. 
See TROST (1980). 
See also regioselectivity, stereoselectivtty. stereospea@city. 
+ chemospecificity 
See chemoselectiuify. 
chromophore 
The part (atom or group of atoms) of a molecular entity in which the electronic transition 
responsible for a given spectral band is approximately localized. The term arose in the dyestuff 
industry, referring originally to the groupings in the molecule that are responsible for the dye's 
colour. 
wI?T (1876). 
CIDNP (Chemically Induced Dynamic Nuclear Polarization) 
Non-Boltzmann nuclear spin state distribution produced in thermal or photochemical 
reactions, usually from colligation and diffusion, or disproportionation of radical pairs, and 
detected by NMR spectroscopy by enhanced absorption or emission signals. 
cine-substitution 
adjacent to that occupied by the leauing group. For example, 
A substitution reaction (generally aromatiCj in which the entering group takes up a positiajn 
OCH, 
I 
ocH3 
I 
See also tele-substitution 
class (a) metal ion 
the lightest of their Periodic Group. 
class (b) metal ion 
the lightest of their Periodic Group. 
clathrate 
collig at ion 
reverse of unimolecular homolysis). For example: 
A metal ion that combines preferentially with Zigands containing ligating atoms that are 
See also class (bl metal ion, hard acid 
A metal ion that combines preferentially with bands containing ligating atoms other than 
See also class (d metal ion, hard acid. 
See host, inclusion compound. 
The formation of a covalent bond by the combination or recombination of two radfculs (the 
'OH + .H3C* - 
CH,OH 

1098 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
common-ion effect (on rates) 
A reduction in the rate of certain reactions of a substrate RX in solution [by a path that in- 
volves a pre-equilibrium with formation of R+ (or R-) ions as reaction intermediates] caused by 
the addition to the reaction mixture of an electrolyte solute containing the "common ion" X- (or 
X+). 
For example, the rate of solvolysis of diphenylmethyl chloride in acetone-water is reduced 
by the addition of salts of the common ion C1- which causes a decrease in the quasi-equilibrium 
concentration of the diphenylmethyl cation in the scheme: 
1 
-1 
Ph2CHC1 
-
,
 
Ph?CH+ + C1- 
Ph,CH+ + OH2 
2
,
 
PhzCHOH + H+ 
(free ions, not ion pairs) 
- 
(solvated) 
This phenomenon is a direct consequence of the mass-law eflect on ionization equilibria in 
electrolytic solution. 
More generally, the common-ion effect is the influence of the "common ion" on the re- 
activity due to the shift of the dissociation equilibrium. It may also lead to an enhancement of 
the rate of reaction 
compensation effect 
In a considerable number of cases plots of TAtS us. AtH, for a series of reactions, e.g. for a 
reaction in a range of different solvents, are straight lines of approximately unit slope. 
Therefore, the terms A*H and TASS in the expression partially compensate, and AtG = AtH - 
TAtS often is a much simpler function of solvent (or other) variation than AtH or TAtS 
separately. 
CONNOR (1991). 
See also isokinefic relationship. 
complementary binding sites 
See binding site. 
complex 
A molecular entity formed by loose association involving two or more component molecular 
entities (ionic or uncharged), or the corresponding chemical specks. The bonding between the 
components is normally weaker than in a covalent bond. 
The term has 'also been used with a variety of shades of meaning in different contexts: it is 
therefore best avoided when a more explicit alternative is applicable. In inorganic chemistry the 
term "coordination entity" is recommended instead of "complex" (IUPAC INORGANIC 
NOMENCLATURE (1990)). For the different usage of "complex" in inorganic chemistry, see 
IUPAC INORGANIC RULES (1970); Rule 2.24. 
See also activated complex adduct, charge transfer cornpa electron-donor-acceptor 
complex encounter complex, inclusion complex 0-adduct, sc-adduct, transifion state. 
composite reaction 
A chemical reaction for which the expression for the rate of disappearance of a reactant (or 
rate of appearance of a product) involves rate constants of more than a single elementary 
reaction Examples are "opposing reactions" (where rate constants of two opposed chemical 
reactions are involved), "parallel reactions" (for which the rate of disappearance of any reactant 
is governed by the rate constants relating to several simultaneous reactions to form different 
respective products from a single set of reactants), and stepwise reactions. 
comproportionation 
The reverse of disproportionation The term "symproportionation" is also used. 
HARTMANNS, KLENKE, and METZGER (1986). 
concerted process 
Tho or more primitive changes are said to be concerted (or to constitute a concerted pro- 
cess) if they occur within the same elementary reaction. Such changes will normally (though 
perhaps not inevitably) be "energetically coupled". (In the present context the term 
"energetically coupled" means that the simultaneous progress of the primitive changes involves 
a transition state of lower energy than that for their successive occurrence.) In a concerted 
process the primitive changes may be synchronous or asynchronous. 
See also bi@nctional catalysis, potential energy (reaction) surface. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1099 
condensation reaction 
A (usually stepwise) reaction in which two or more reactants (or remote reactive sites 
within the same molecular entity) yield a single main product with accompanying formation of 
water or of some other small molecule, e.g. ammonia, ethanol, acetic acid, hydrogen sulfide. 
The rnech.an&sm of many condensation reactions has been shown to comprise consecutive 
addition and eliminam 
* n reactions, as in the base-catalysed formation of (a-but-2-enal 
(crotonaldehyde) from acetaldehyde, via 3-hydroxybutanal (aldol). The overall reaction in this 
example is known as the aldol condensation. 
The term is sometimes also applied to cases where the formation of water or another 
simple molecule does not occur, as in ''benzoin condensation". 
configuration (electronic) 
A distribution of the electrons of an atom or a molecular entity over a set of one-electron 
wavefunctions called orbitals, according to the Pauli principle. From one configuration several 
states with different multiplicities may result. For example, the ground electronic configuration 
of the oxygen molecule (02) 
is 
2
2
2
2
4
2
2
 
log. lo,, 2ag, 2% lx,, 3og, lxg 
resulting in the 
3Cg, IAg, and 
multiplets . 
IUPAC PHOTOCHEMICAL GLOSSARY (1992). 
configuration (molecular) 
In the context of stereochemisby, the term is restricted to the arrangements of atoms of a 
molecular entity in space that distinguishes stereoisomers, the isomerism of which is not due to 
conformational differences. 
IUPAC STEREOCHEMICAL TERMINOLOGY (1993). 
conformation 
The spatial arrangements of atoms affording distinction between stereoisomers which can 
be interconverted by rotation about formally single bonds. Some authorities extend the term to 
include inversion at trigonal bipyramidal centres and other "polytopal rearrangements". 
IUPAC STEREOCHEMICAL TERMINOLOGY (1993). 
conjugate acid-base pair 
The Brransted acid BH+ formed on protonation of a base B is called the conjugate acid of B, 
and B is the conjugate base of BH+. (The conjugate acid always carries one unit of positive 
charge more than the base, but the absolute charges of the species are immaterial to the den- 
nition.) For example: the Brcansted acid HC1 and its conjugate base C1- constitute a conjugate 
acid-base pair. 
conjugated system, conjugation 
represented as a system of alternating single and multiple bonds: e.g. 
In the original meaning a conjugated system is a molecular entity whose structure may be 
CHz=CH-CH=CH, 
CH2=CH-CrN 
In such systems, conjugation is the interaction of one p-orbital with another across an 
intervening o-bond in such structures. (In appropriate molecular entlties d-orbitals may be 
involved.) The term is also extended to the analogous interaction involving a p-orbital 
containing an unshared electron pair, e.g. 
: Cl-CH=CH, 
See also delocalization, homn~'ugation, resonance. 
conjugative mechanism 
See electronic efect. 
connectivity 
In a chemical context, the information content of a linefomrula, but omitting any in- 
dication of bond multiplicity. 

1100 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
constitution 
the atoms in a molecular entity (omitting any distinction from their spatial arrangement). 
conrotatory 
See electrocyclic reaction. 
contact ion pair 
See ionpair. 
contributing structure 
The definition is based on the valence-bond formulation of the quantum mechanical idea 
of the wavefunction of a molecule as composed of a linear combination of wavefunctions, each 
representative of a formula containing bonds that are only single, double or triple with a 
particular pairing of electron spins. Each such formula represents a contributing structure, 
also called "resonance structure" to the total wavefunction. and the degree to which each 
contributes is indicated by the square of its coefficient in the linear combination. The 
contributing structures, also called "canonical forms", themselves thus have a purely formal 
significance: they are the components from which wavefunctions can be built. Structures may 
be covalent (or non-polar) or ionic (or polar). The representation is frequently kept qualitative so 
that we speak of important or major contributing structures and minor contributing structures. 
For example, two major non-equivalent contributing structures for the conjugate base of 
acetone are 
The description of the identity and connectivity (and corresponding bond multiplicities) of 
H2*'- 
t-----) 
H 2 6 T 0  
CH3 
CH3 
See also delocalization, Kekulk structure, resonance. 
coordinate covalence (coordinate link) 
See coordination 
coordination 
The formation of a covalent bond the two shared electrons of which have come from only 
one of the two parts of the molecular entity linked by it, as in the reaction of a Lewis acid and a 
Lewis base to form a Lewis adduct; alternatively, the bonding formed in this way. In the former 
sense, it is the reverse of unimoleculur heterolysis. "Coordinate covalence" and "coordinate link" 
are synonymous (obsolescent) terms. The synonym "dative bond" is obsolete. 
(The origin of the bonding electrons has by itself no bearing on the character of the bond 
formed. Thus, the formation of methyl chloride from a methyl cation and a chloride ion involves 
coordination: the resultant bond obviously differs in no way from the C-C1 bond in methyl 
chloride formed by any olher path, e.g. by colligation of a methyl radical and a chlorine atom.) 
The term is also used to describe the number of ligands around a central atom without 
necessarily implying two-electron bonds. 
See also dipolar bond sc-adduct. 
coordination number 
The coordination number of a specified atom in a chemical species is the number of other 
atoms directly linked to that specified atom [cf. IUPAC INORGANIC NOMENCLATURE (1990); 
Rule 1-10.2.51. For example, the coordination number of carbon in methane is four, and it is 
five in protonated methane, CH,+. (The term is used in a different sense in the crystallographic 
description of ionic crystals.) 
coordinatively saturated 
atom. 
coordinatively unsaturated 
A transition metal complex that possesses fewer ligands than exist in the coordinatively 
saturated complex. These complexes usually have fewer than 18 outer shell electrons at the 
central metal atom. 
coronate 
A transition metal complex that has formally 18 outer shell electrons at the central metal 
See crown. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1101 
correlation analysis 
The use of empirical correlations relating one body of experimental data to another, with 
the objective of finding quantitative estimates of the factors underlying the phenomena in- 
volved. Correlation analysis in organic chemistry often uses linearfree-energy relations for rates 
or equilibria of reactions, but the term also embraces similar analysis of physical (most 
commonly spectroscopic) properties and of biological activity. 
CHAPMAN and SHORTER (1972. 1978). 
See also Quantitative Sbucture-Actiuitg Relationships [ Q W .  
cosphere 
See cybotactic region. 
coupling constant (spin-spin coupling constant), J (SI unit: Hz (NMR)) 
A quantitative measure for nuclear spin-spin, nuclear-electron (hyperfine couplingl and 
electron-electron (fine coupling in EPR) coupling in magnetic resonance spectroscopy. The 
"indirect" or scalar NMR coupling constants are in a first approximation independent of the 
external magnetic field and are expressed in Hz. 
covalent bond 
A region of relatively high electron density between nuclei which arises at least partly from 
sharing of electrons and gives rise to an attractive force and characteristic internuclear 
distance. 
See also agostic, coordination, hydrogen bond. multi-centre bond. 
Cox-Yates equation 
A modification of the Bunnett-Olsen equation of the form 
lg ([SH+ll/[Sll - lg[H+l = m*X+ P%H+ 
where Xis the activity function Ig(Ys%+)/YSH+) for an arbitrary reference base. The function Xis 
called the excess acidity because it gives a measure of the difference between the acidity of a 
solution and that of an ideal solution of the same concentration. In practice X = - (H, + lgIH+I) 
a n d m * = l - Q .  
COX and YATES (1978, 1981): LUCCHINI, MODENA, SCORRANO, COX and YATES 
(1982). 
See also Bunnett-Olsen equations. 
critical micelle concentration (cmc) 
There is a relatively small range of concentrations separating the limit below which 
virtually no micelles are detected and the limit above which virtually all additional surfactant 
molecules form micelles. Many properties of surfactant solutions, if plotted against the con- 
centration, appear to change at a different rate above and below this range. By extrapolating 
the loci of such a property above and below this range until they intersect, a value may be 
obtained known as the critical micellization concentration (critical micelle concentration), 
symbol Q, abbreviation cmc (or c.m.c.). As values obtained using different properties are not 
quite identical, the method by which the cmc is determined should be clearly stated. 
See IUPAC MANUAL APPENDIX I1 (1972). 
See also inverted micelle. 
cross-conjugation 
In a system XCGH,GY this is conjugation involving the substituent X, the benzene ring, 
and the side-chain connective-plus-reaction site GY. i.e. either X is a +R group and GY is a -R 
group, or X is a -R group and GY is a +R group. In Hammett correlations this situation can lead 
to the need to apply exalted substituent constants o+ or 0-, respectively, as in electrophilic or 
nucleophilic aromatic substitution, respectively. The term "through resonance" is synonymous. 
Cross conjugation has also been used to describe the interactions occurring in 2-phenylallyl 
and and similar systems (DEWAR (1969)). 
A molecular entity comprising a monocyclic ligand assembly that contains three or more 
binding sites held together by covalent bonds and capable of binding a guest in a central (or 
nearly central) position. The adducts formed are sometimes known as "coronates". The best 
known members of this group are macrocyclic polyethers, such as "18-crown-6". containing 
several repeating units -CQ-CQO- 
(where R is most commonly H), and known as crown 
ethers. 

1102 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
PEDERSEN (1967): CRAM et al. (1986). 
See also host. 
"18-crown-6'' 
cryptand 
A molecular entity comprising a cyclic or polycyclic assembly of binding sites that contains 
three or more binding sites held together by coualent bonds, and which deflnes a molecular 
cavity in such a way as to bind (and thus "hide" in the cavity) another molecular entity, the 
guest (a cation, an anion or a neutral species), more strongly than do the separate parts of the 
assembly (at the same total concentration of binding sites). The adduct thus formed is called a 
"cryptate". The term is usually restricted to bicyclic or oligocyclic molecular entities. 
Example 
Corresponding monocyclic ligand assemblies (crowns) are sometimes included in this 
group, if they can. be considered to define a cavity in which a guest can hide. The terms 
"podand" and "spherand" are used for certain speciflc ligand assemblies. Coplanar cyclic 
polydentate ligands, such as porphyrins, are not normally regarded as cryptands. 
DIETRICH, LEHN and SAUVAGE (1969). 
See also host. 
For a contribution to the evolving terminology, see also VdGTLE (1980). 
Curtin-Hammett principle 
In a chemical reaction that yields one product (3 
from one conformational isomer (A') and 
a different product M from another conformational isomer (A") (and provided these two isomers 
are rapidly interconvertible relative to the rate of product formation, whereas the products do 
not undergo interconversion) the product composition is not in direct proportion to the relative 
concentrations of the conformational isomers in the substrute; it is controlled only by the dif- 
ference in standard free energies (6A%l of the respective transition states. 
It is also true that the product composition is formally related to the relative concen- 
trations of the conformational isomers A' and A" (i.e. the conformational equilibrium constant) 
and the respective rate constants of their reactions; these parameters are generally - though 
not invariably - unknown. 
The diagram below represents the energetic situation for transformation of interconverting 
isomers A and A' into products X and Y. 
k~ >> kx 
k-1 >> k y  
ELIEL (1962); see also SEEMAN et al. (1980), SEEMAN (1983). 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1103 
G t  
L 
I 
A$Gi 
A*G; 
I 
A' 
Figure. Curtin-Hammett principle. Transformation of interconverting isomers A' and A" 
into products X and Y. 
cybotactic region 
That part of a solution in the vicinity of a solute molecule in which the ordering of the sol- 
vent molecules is modified by the presence of the solute molecule. The term solvent "cosphere" 
of the solute has also been used. 
KOSOWER (19681; STEWART and MORROW (19271. 
See also soluation 
cyclization 
Formation of a ring compound from a chain by formation of a new bond. 
See also annulation 
cycloaddition 
A reaction in which two or more unsaturated molecules (or parts of the same molecule] 
combine with the formation of a cyclic adduct in which there is a net reduction of the bond 
mu1 tiplicity. 
The following two systems of notations have been used for the more detailed specification 
of cycloadditions, of which the second, more recent system (described under (2)) is preferred: 
(11 A (l+j+ 
...) cycloaddition is a reaction in which two or more molecules (or parts of the 
same molecule), respectively, provide units of i j, ... linearly connected atoms: these units 
become joined at their respective termini by new o-bonds so as to form a cycle containing 
(i+j+ ...I atoms. In this notation, (a) a Diels-Alder reaction is a (4+21 cycloaddition, (b) the initial 
reaction of ozone with an alkene is a (3+2) cycloaddition, and (c) the reaction shown below is a 
(2+2+2) cycloaddition. (N.B.: parentheses (...I are used in the description based on numbers of 
atoms. I 
H,COOC 
COOCH3 
(2) The symbolism [i+j+..,] 
for a cycloaddition identifies the numbers i j, ... of electrons in 
the interacting units that participate in the transformation of reactants to products. In this 
notation the reaction (a] and (b) of the preceding paragraph would both be described as [2+4] 
cycloadditions, and (cl as a [2+2+21 cycloaddition. The symbol a or s (a = antarafacial s = 
suprafacial] is often added ,(usually as a subscript after the number to designate the stere- 
ochemistry of addition to each fragment. A subscript specifymg the orbitals, viz., o, x (sigma, pi] 
with their usual significance] or n (for an orbital associated with a single atom only], may be 

1104 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
added as a subscript before the number. Thus the normal Diels-Alder reaction is a [4,+2,] or 
[K4s + ,2,1 cycloaddition, whilst the reaction 
+ 
COOEt 
CN 
would be a [14,+2$ or [K14a + K2s] cycloaddition. (N.B. Sauare brackets [...I are used in the 
descriptions based on numbers of electrons.) 
Cycloadditions may be pericyclic reactions or (non-concerted) stepwise reactions. The term 
"dipolar cycloaddition" is used for cycloadditions of 1,3-dipolar compounds. 
HUISGEN (1968); HUISGEN, GRASHEY and SAUER (1964); WOODWARD and 
HOFFMA" (1969). 
See also cheletTopic reactions. 
cycloelimination 
The reverse of cycloaddition The term is preferred to the synonyms "cycloreversion", 
"retro-addition", and "retrocycloaddition". 
+ cycloreversion 
See cycloelimination 
+ dative bond 
See coordination 
decomposition, chemical 
The breakdown of a single entity (normal molecule, reaction intermew, etc.) into two or 
more fragments. 
+ de-electronation 
See oxidafion ( 11. 
degenerate chemical reaction 
See identity reaction 
degenerate rearrangement 
A molecular rearrangement in which the principal product is indistinguishable (in the 
absence of isotopic labellingl from the principal reactant. The term includes both "degenerate 
intramolecular rearrangements" and reactions that involve intermolecular transfer of atoms or 
groups ("degenerate intermolecular rearrangements"): both are degenerate isomerlzations. The 
occurrence of degenerate rearrangements may be detectable by isotopic labelling or by dynamic 
NMR techniques. For example: the [3,3lsigmatropic rearrangement of hexa-1.5-diene (Cope 
rearrangement], 
Synonymous but less preferable terms are "automerization", "permutational isomerism", 
BINSCH, ELIEL, and KESSLER (1971). 
See also fluxion4 molecular rearrangement, valence isomer. 
delocalization 
A quantum mechanical concept most usually applied in organic chemistry to describe the 
rc-bonding in a conjugated system This bonding is not localized between two atoms: instead, 
each link has a "fractional double bond character" or bond order. There is a corresponding 
"delocalization energy", identifiable with the stabilization of the system compared with a 
"isodynamic transformation", "topomerization". 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1105 
hypothetical alternative in which formal (localized) single and double bonds are present. Some 
degree of delocalization is always present and can be estimated by quantum mechanical 
calculations. The effects are particularly evident in aromatic systems and in symmetrical 
molecular entities in which a lone pair of electrons or a vacant p-orbital is conjugated with a 
double bond (e.g. carboxylate ions, nitro compounds, enamines. the ally1 cation). Delocalization 
in such species may be represented by partial bonds or as resonme (here symbolized by a 
two-headed arrow) between contributing structures. 
L 
I 
H 
+ 
+ 
c 
C /""' 
L 
I 
I 
- 
H 
H 
These examples also illustrate the concomitant delocalization of charge in ionic conjugated 
systems. Analogously, delocalization of the spin of an unpaired electron occurs in conjugated 
radicals. 
See also mesomerism 
deshielding 
See shielding. 
detachment 
The reverse of an attachment. 
See also electron attachment 
detailed balancing, principle of 
When equilibrium is reached in a reaction system (containing an arbitrary number of 
components and reaction paths), as many atoms, in their respective molecular entities, will pass 
forward. as well as backwards, along each individual path in a given finite time interval. 
Accordingly, the reaction path in the reverse direction must in every detail be the reverse of the 
reaction path in the forward direction (provided always that the system is at equilibrium). 
The principle of detailed balancing is a consequence for macroscopic systems of the 
principle of microscopic reversibility. 
diamagnetic 
Substances having a negative magnetic susceptibility are diamagnetic. They are repelled 
out of a magnetic field. 
See also paramagnetic. 
diastereoisomerism 
Stereoisomerism other than enantiomerisrn Diastereoisomers (or diastereomers) are 
stereoisomers not related as mirror images. Diastereoisomers are characterized by differences 
in physical properties, and by some differences in chemical behaviour toward achiral as well as 
chiral reagents. 
dielectric constant 
A measure for the effect of a medium on the potential energy of interaction between two 
charges. It is measured by comparing the capacity of a capacitor with and without the sample 
present. 
dienophile 
IUPAC STEREOCHEMICAL TERMINOLOGY (1993). 
The olefin component of a Diels-Alder reaction. 
See cycloaddition 

1106 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
diffusion-controlled rate 
dimerization 
See encounter-controlled rate, microscopic d w i o n  control See also mixing control 
The transformation of a molecular entity A to give a molecular entity 4. For example: 
H3C' + %H3 
CH3CH3 
2 CH3COCH3 
-b 
(CH,),C(OH)CH,COCH3 
2 RCOOH 
(RCOOH), 
See also association 
A measure of the ionizing power (loosely po2arity) of a solvent. based on the maximum 
Dimroth-Reichardt % parameter 
wavenumber of the longest wavelength electronic absorption band of 
lPh 
Ph 
I 
'Ph 
'Ph 
in a given solvent. q, 
called q(30) by its originators, is given by 
6 = 2.859 x lo-% 
= 2.859 x 10%-1 
where q 
is in kcal/mol, v is in cm-1 and h is in nm. 
The so-called normalized 
scale is deflned as 
= [Edsolvent) - 30.71 / 32.4 
N Wsolvent) - EdSiMe,) 
Edwater) - E?(SiMe4) 
ET = 
DIMROTH, REICHARDT, SIEPMA" and BOHLMANN (1963); REICHAFDT (1988). 
See also Grunwald-Winstein equation 2-value. 
dipolar aprotic solvent 
A solvent with a comparatively high relative permittivity (or dielectric constant), greater 
than ca. 15, and a sizable permanent dipole moment, that cannot donate suitably labile 
hydrogen atoms to form strong hydrogen bonds, e.g. dimethyl sulfoxide. The term (and its 
alternative "polar aprotic solvent") is a misnomer and is therefore discouraged. Such solvents 
are usually not aprotic, but protophilic (and at most weakly protogenic). In describing a solvent it 
is better to be explicit about its essential properties, e.g. dipolar and non-protogenic. 
dipolar bond 
combination of which results in charge-separated structures, e.g., 
A bond formed (actually or conceptually) by coordination of two neutral moieties, the 
R3N: + 0: - 
R 3 N L 0 -  
The term is preferred to the obsolescent synonyms "coordinate link", "co-ordinate co- 
valence", "dative bond", "semipolar bond. 
dipolar cycloaddition 
See cycloadciition. 
dipole-dipole interaction 
Intermolecular or intramolecular interaction between molecules or groups having a 
permanent electric dipole moment. The strength of the interaction depends on the distance and 
relative orientation of the dipoles. The term applies also to intramolecular interactions between 
bonds having permanent dipole moments. 
See also v a n  der Waals forces. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1107 
dipole-induced dipole forces 
See van der Waals forces. 
diradical 
See biradicd 
direct effect 
Seefield effect 
dismutation 
See disproporCionafion 
dispersion forces 
See London forces. 
disproportionation 
Any chemical reaction of the type A + A + A' + A" where A, A' and A" are different 
chemical species. For example: 
2 ArH+ 
-b 
ArH + ArH'+ 
The reverse of disproportionation is called comproporfionafion 
A special case of disproportionation (or "dismutation") is "radical disproportionation", 
exemplified by 
'CHZCH, + 'CH2CH3 - 
CH2=CH2 + CH3CH3 
Reactions of the more general type 
RkHCH3 + R'kHCH3 
RCH=CH, + RCH,CH, 
are also loosely described as radical disproportionations. 
(A somewhat more restricted usage of the term prevails in inorganic chemistry.) 
disrotatory 
See electrocyclic reaction 
dissociation 
(1) The separation of a molecular entity into two or more molecular entities (or any similar 
separation within a polyatomic molecular entity). Examples include mimolecular heterolysis 
and homlysis, and the separation of the constituents of an ion pair into free ions. 
(2) 
The separation of the constituents of any aggregate of molecular entities. 
In both senses dissociation is the reverse of association 
A radical cation in which charge and radical sites are separated. 
YATES, B O W  and RADOM (1986). 
donor number (DN) 
A quantitative measure of Lewis basicity devised by GUTMA" (1976). 
driving force (also called the afihity) of a reaction, A (SI unit: kJ mol-'I 
The decrease in Gibbs energy on going from the reactants to the products of a chemicd 
reaction (-AG). 
downfield 
distonic radical cation 
See chemical shfi. 
dual substituent-parameter equation 
In a general sense, this is any equation which expresses substituent effects in terms of 
two parameters. However, in practice the term is used more specifically for an equation for 
summarizing the effects of meta- or para-substituents (i = rn or p) X on chemical reactivity, 
spectroscopic properties, etc. of a probe site Y in benzene or other aromatic system. 

1108 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
P i =  P b r  + P R ~ R  
P is the magnitude of the property Y for substituent X, expressed relative to the property 
for X=H; 0 1  and oR are inductive or polar and resonance substituent constants. respectively, 
there being various scales for oR: 
PI and pR are the corresponding regression coefficients. 
EHRENSON, BROWNLEE, and TAFT (1973); TAFT and TOPSOM (1987). 
See also extended H m t t  equation 
An uncatalyzed process in which two o-bonds simultaneously migrate intramolecularly, 
dyotropic rearrangement 
e.g. 
REETZ (1972). 
+value 
See Dimroth-Reichardt 4 parameter, Z-value. 
+ educt 
Term used mainly in the German literature for starting material (reactant). It should be 
avoided in English, because there it means "something that comes out" and not "something 
that goes in". The german use of the term is in fact also incorrect. 
effective charge 
Change in effective charge is a quahtity obtained by comparison of the polar efiect of 
substituents on the free energies of rate or equilibrium processes with that on a standard 
ionization equilibrium. Rovided the effective charge on the states in the standard equilibrium 
are defined, then it is possible to measure effective charges for states in the reactio? or 
equilibrium under consideration. 
effective molarity (or effective concentration) 
The ratio of the first-order rate constant of an intramolecular reaction involving two 
functional groups within the same molecular entity to the second-order rate constant of an 
analogous intemlecular elementary reaction This ratio has the dimension of concentration. 
The term can also apply to an equilibrium constant. 
See also intramolecular catalysis. 
eighteen-electron rule 
An electron-counting rule to which an overwhelming majority of stable diamagnetic 
transition metal complexes adhere. The number of nonbonded electrons at the metal plus the 
number of electrons in the metal-ligand bonds should be 18. The 18 electron rule in transition 
metal chemistry is a full analogue of the "Lewis octet rule". 
WILLLAMS (1984. 1992). 
' 
electrocyclic reaction 
A molecular rearrangement that involves the formation of a o-bond between the termini of 
a fully conjugated linear x-electron system (or a linear fragment of a x-electron system) and a 
decrease by one in the number of x-bonds, or the reverse of that process. For example: 
The stereochemistry of such a process is termed "conrotatory" or antarafaclal if the 
substituents at the interacting termini of the conjugated system both rotate in the same sense, 
e.g. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1109 
Si"' 
q
3
 
..-. 
t 
CH3 
CH3 
or "disrotatoxy" (or suprafacial) if one terminus rotates in a clockwise and the other in a 
counter-clockwise sense, e.g. 
See also pericyclic reaction 
electrofuge 
A leaving group that does not cany away the bonding electron pair. For example, in the 
nitration of benzene by NO2+, H+ is the electrofuge. The adjective of electrofuge is electrofugal. 
See also electrophile, nucleofwe. 
electromeric effect 
A molecular polarizability effect occurring by an intrcunolecular electron displacement 
(sometimes called the "conjugative mechanism" and, previously, the "tautomeric mechanism") 
characterized by the substitution of one electron pair for another within the same atomic octet 
of electrons. It can be indicated by curved arrows symbolizing the displacement of electron 
pairs, as in 
which represents the hwothetical electron SM 
R,N-C=C-C=O 
- - - - - - - - - - 
R,N+=C-C=C-O* 
I I I  
I I  I 
INGOLD (1953). 
The term has been deemed obsolescent or even obsolete (see rnesornerlc effect, resonance 
effect). It has long been custom to use phrases such as "enhanced substituent resonance effect" 
which imply the operation of the electromeric effect, without using the term, and various 
modern theoretical treatments parametrize the response of substituents to "electrontc demand", 
which amounts to considering the electromeric effect together with the indwtorneric eflect 
EHRENSON, BROWNLEE and TAFT (1973); TAlT and TOPSOM (1987); CHARTON (1987). 
electron acceptor 
(1) A substance to which an electron may be transferred: for example 1,4-dinitrobenzene 
or the dication 111'-dimethyl-4,4'-bipyridyldiium 
. 
+ (2) A Lewis acid. This usage is discouraged. 
electron affinity 
The energy released when an additional electron (without excess energy) attaches itself to 
a molecular entity (usually an electrically neutral molecular entity). (The direct measurement of 
this quantity involves molecular entities in the gas phase.) 
electron attachment 
(algebraically) increased negative charge. (It is not an attachment, as defined in this Glossary.) 
The transfer of an electron to a molecular entity, resulting in a molecular entity of 
See also oxidation (1). reduction 

1110 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
electron configuration 
electron-deficient bond 
See conhuration (electronic). 
A single bond between adjacent atoms that is formed by less than two electrons. as in 
B2HC: 
The B-H-B bonds are called a "two-electron three-centre bonds". 
electron density 
If P(xy,z) dx dy dz is the probability of finding an electron in the volume element dx dy dz 
at the point of a molecular entity with coordinates xy,z, then P(xy,z) is the electron density at 
this point. For many purposes (e.g., X-ray scattering, forces on atoms) the system behaves 
exactly as if the electrons were spread out into a continuously distributed charge. The term has 
frequently been wrongly applied to negative charge population 
electron detachment 
See also charge density. 
The reverse of an electron attachment. 
(1) A molecular entity that can transfer an electron to another molecular entity, or to the 
+ (2) A Lewis base. This use is discouraged. 
A term sometimes employed instead of charge-transfer complex or Lewis adduct. 
See also adduct, coordination 
A synonym for Lewis acid 
A synonym for Lewis base. 
The transfer of an electron from one molecular entity to another, or between two localized 
See also inner sphere (electron transfer), outer sphere (electron transfer), Marcus equation 
The term indicates a sequence of reactions such as shown in equations (1)-(3), 
leading 
electron donor 
corresponding chemical species. 
+ electron-donor-acceptor complex 
electron-pair acceptor 
electron-pair donor 
electron transfer 
sites in the same molecular entity. 
electron-transfer catalysis 
from A to B: 
(1) 
A*- .
-
b
 
B.- 
(2) 
B.-+ A 
.-+ 
B + A * -  
(3) 
A + e- - 
A * -  
An analogous sequence involving radical cations (&+, B*+) 
is also observed. 
The most notable example of electron-transfer catalysis is the h l  
(or T+%+h) reaction 
of aromatic halides. 
The term has its origin in a suggested analogy to acid-base catalysis, with the electron 
instead of the proton. However, there is a difference between the two catalytic mechanisms, 
since the electron is not a true catalyst, but rather behaves as the initiator of a chain reaction 
"Electron-transfer induced chain reaction" is a more appropriate term for the situation de- 
scribed by equations (1)-(3). 
EBERSON (1987). 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1111 
electronation 
See electron attachment. reduction 
electronegativity 
A measure of the power of an atom or a group of atoms to attract electrons from other 
parts of the same molecular entity. The concept has been quantified by a number of authors, 
including especially Pauling and Mulliken. 
See ATKINS (1 974). 
electroneutrality principle 
The principle expresses the fact that all pure substances cany a net charge of zero. 
electronic effect of substituents: symbols and signs 
The inductive effect has universally been represented by the symbol I. This is now com- 
monly taken to include both through-bonds and through-space transmission, but I is also used 
specifically for through-bonds transmission: through-space transmission is then symbolized as 
F (for f i l d  eflect). The symbols for the influence of substituents exerted through electron 
delocalization have variously been M (mesomeric), E (electromeric), T (tautomeric), C 
(conjugative), K (konjugativ), and R (resonance). Since the present fashion is to use the term 
resonance effect, R is the most commonly used symbol, although M is still seen quite often. 
Both the possible sign conventions are in use. The Ingold sign convention associates 
ekctronegativity (relative to hydrogen atom) with a negative sign, electropositivity with a positive 
sign. Thus the nitro group is described as electron-withdrawing by virtue of its -I and -M 
effects: chloro is described as a -I, +M substituent, etc. For correlation analysis and linearfree- 
energy relationships this convention has been found inconvenient, for it is in contradiction to 
the sign convention for polar substituent constants (a-constants). Authors concerned with these 
fields often avoid this contradiction by adopting the opposite sign convention originally 
associated with Robinson, for electronic effects. This practice is almost always associated with 
the use of R for the electron delocalization effect: thus the nitro group is a +I, +R substituent; 
chloro a +I, -R substituent, etc. 
electrophile, electrophilic 
partner (the mcleophile) by accepting both bonding electrons from that reaction partner. 
plying the entering group acts as an electrophile. For example 
An electrophile (or electrophilic reagent) is a reagent that forms a bond to its reaction 
An "electrophilic substitution reaction" is a heterolyfic reaction in which the reagent sup- 
C6H6 + NO*+ 
.-w 
C,H.jNO, + H+ 
electrophile 
electrofuge 
Electrophilic reagents are Lewis acids. "Electrophilic catalysis" is catalysis by Lewis acids. 
The term "electrophilic" is also used to designate the apparent polar character of certain 
radicals, as inferred from their higher relative reactivities with reaction sites of higher electron 
density. 
See also electrophilicity. 
electrophilicity 
(1) The property of being electrophilic (see electrophile). 
(2) The relative reactivity of an electrophilic reagent. (It is also sometimes referred to as 
"electrophilic power".) Qualitatively, the concept is related to Lewis acidity. However, whereas 
Lewis acidity is measured by relative equilibrium constants, electrophilicity is measured by 
relative rate constants for reactions of different electrophilic reagents towards a common 
substrate (usually involving attack at a carbon atom). 
See also nucleophilicity. 
element effect 
The ratio of the rate constants of two reactions that differ only in the identity of the el- 
ement of the atom in the leaving group, e.g., k&kpl. 
As for isotope effects, a ratio of unity is 
regarded as a "null effect". 
elementary reaction 
A reaction for which no reaction intermediates have been detected or need to be postulated 
in order to describe the chemical reaction on a molecular scale. An elementary reaction is 
assumed to occur in a single step and to pass through a single transition state. 
IUPAC CHEMICAL KINETICS (1 98 1). 
See also stepwise reaction. 

1112 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
elimination 
The reverse of an addition reaction or trmfonnation 
In a n  elimination two groups (called eliminands) are lost most often from two different 
centres (1/2/elimination or 1/3/elimination, etc.) with concomitant formation of an un- 
saturation in the molecule (double bond, triple bond) or formation of a new ring. 
If the groups are lost from a single centre (a-elimination, l/l/eZiminatio n) the resulting 
product is a carbene or a "carbene analogue". 
See also a-elimination 
enantiomer 
One of a pair of molecular entities which are mirror images of each other and non-su- 
perimposable. 
enantioselectivity 
See stereoselectiuity. 
encounter complex 
A complev of molecular entities produced at an encounter-controlled rate, and which occurs 
as an intermediate in a reaction mechanism. When the complex is formed from two molecular 
entities it is called an "encounter palr". A distinction between encounter pairs and (larger) 
encounter complexes may be relevant in some cases, e.g. for mechanisms involving preasso- 
ciation 
encounter-controlled rate 
A rate of reaction corresponding to the rate of encounter of the reacting moleadar entities. 
This is also known as "diffusion-controlled rate" since rates of encounter are themselves con- 
trolled by diffusion rates (which in turn depend on the viscosity of the medium and the di- 
mensions of the reactant molecular entities). 
For a bImolecular reaction between solutes in water at 25 OC an encounter-controlled rate 
is calculated to have a second-order rate constant of about 1010 dm3 mol-1 s-1. 
See also microscopic d i m i o n  control. 
ene reaction 
The addition of a compound with a double bond having an allylic hydrogen (the "ene") to a 
compound with a multiple bond (the "enophile") with transfer of the allylic hydrogen and a 
concomitant reorganization of the bonding, as illustrated below for propene (the "ene") and 
ethene (the "enophile"). The reverse is a "retro-ene" reaction. 
enerp of activation (Arrhenius energy of activation; activation energy), Ea (SI unit: kJ 
mol- ) 
temperature according to 
An operationally defined quantity expressing the dependence of a rate constant on 
Ea = f l ( 3  In k / al), 
as derived from the "Arrhenius equation", k = A exp(-Ea/Rl). where A (SI unit: as for the 
corresponding rate constant) is termed the "pre-exponential factor". 
See also enthcdpy of activation 
energy profile 
See Gibbs energy diagram potential-energy proJle. 
enforced concerted mechanism 
Variation of reaction parameters in a series of reactions proceeding in non-concerted steps 
may lead to a situation, where the putative intermediate will possess a lifetime shorter than a 
bond vibration, so that the steps become concerted. The transition state structure will lie on the 
coordinate of the More OFerrall-Jencks diagram leading to that of the putative intermediate. 

Cornmission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1113 
enophile 
See ene reaction. 
entering group 
An atom or group that forms a bond to what is considered to be the main part of the sub- 
strate during a reaction. For example: the attacking nucleophile in a bimolecular nudeophilic 
substitution reaction 
enthalpy of activation (standard entalpy of activation), ASH0 (SI unit: kJ mol-'1 
The standard enthalpy difference between the transition state and the ground state of the 
reactants at the same temperature and pressure. It is related to the temperature coefllcient of 
the rate constant according to the equation: 
ASH = @(a In k/a21p - RT= E, - RT 
= -R@ln(k/21/W/21)p 
where E, is the energy of activation, providing that the rate constants for reactions other than 
first-order reactions are expressed in temperature-independent concentration units (e.g., mol 
dm-3, measured at a fured temperature and pressure). If Ink is expressed as 
Ink=(a/'l)+b+clnT+dT, 
ASH = -& + (C - i)m+ m. 
then 
If enthalpy of activation and entropy of activation are assumed to be temperature 
independent, then 
A+H =-& 
If the concentration units are mol dm-3, the true and apparent enthalpies of activation 
See also entropy of activation, Gibbs energy of actwation 
The standard entropy difference between the transition state and the ground state of the 
It is related to the Gibbs energy of activation and enthdpy of activation by the equations 
differ by (n - l)/(ctRfl), where n is the order of reaction and a the thermal expansivity. 
entropy of activation, (standard entropy of activation), A S P  (SI unit: J mol-l K-l) 
reactants, at the same temperature and pressure. 
ASS = (ASH -ASG)/T 
= ASH/T- Rln (kB/h) + R h  [k/q 
or,iflnkisexpressedaslnk= a/T+ b + c l n T + d T ,  
ASS= R [b - ln [kB/h) + (c- 1)(1 + In 'I) + 2 d'17 
provided that rate constants for reactions other than first-order reactions are expressed in 
temperature-independent concentration units (e.g., mol dm-3, measured at a k e d  temperature 
and pressure). The numerical value of ASS depends on the standard state (and therefore on the 
concentration units selected). If entropy of activation and enthalpy of activation are assumed to 
be temperature-independent, 
ASS = R[b - h [ k ~ / h ) ]  
Strictly speaking, the quantity defined is the entropy of activation at constant pressure 
The information represented by the entropy of activation may alternatively be conveyed by 
from which the entropy of activation at constant volume can be deduced. 
the pre-exponential factor A [see energy of activation). 
epimer 
tetrahedral "stereogenic" centres present in the respective molecular entity. 
A diastereoisomer that has the opposite con&uratwn at only one of two or more 
IUPAC STEREOCHEMICAL GLOSSARY (1993). 

1114 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
epimerization 
centres. 
equilibrium, chemical 
Reversible processes (processes which may be made to proceed in the forward or reverse 
direction by the (infinitesimal) change of one variable, ultimately reach a point where the rates 
in both directions are identical, so that the system gives the appearance of having a static 
composition at which the Gibbs energy, G, is a minimum. At equilibrium the sum of the 
chemical potentials of the reactants equals that of the products, so that 
Interconversion of epimers by reversal of the conflguration at one of the "stereogenic" 
AGr=AGrO+RTlnK=O 
AGr0 = -RTln K 
The equilibrium constant, K, is given by the mass-law effect. 
equilibrium control 
See thermodynamic control 
equilibrium isotope effect 
See isotope effect. 
excess acidity 
See Bunnett-Olsen equations, Cox-Yates equation 
excimer 
An excited dimer, "non-bonding" in the ground state. For example;. a complex formed by 
the interaction of an excited molecular entity with a ground state counterpart of this entity. 
IUPAC PHOTOCHEMICAL GLOSSARY (1 992). 
See also exciplex. 
exciplex 
An electronically excited complex of definite stoichiometry, "non-bonding" in the ground 
state. For example, a complex formed by the interaction of an excited molecular entity with a 
ground state counterpart of a different structure. 
IUPAC PHOTOCHEMICAL GLOSSARY (1992). 
See also excimer. 
excited state 
State of a system with energy higher than that of the ground state. This term is most 
commonly used to characterize a molecule in one of its electronically excited states, but can 
also refer to vibrational and/or rotational excitation in the electronic ground state. 
IUPAC ANALYTICAL CHEMISTRY (1982). 
extended Hammett equation 
This term applies in a general way to any multiparametric extension of the Hammett 
equation It is sometimes used specifically for a form of dual substituent-parameter equation in 
which the actual value of the correlated property P under the influence of the substituent X is 
used, rather than the value relative to that for X = H. An intercept term h corresponding to the 
value of P for X = H is introduced, e.g. 
P=ao,+ PoR+ h 
The equation may be applied to systems for which the inclusion of further terms to 
CHAPMAN and SHORTER (1972, 1978); CHARTON (1987). 
See ion-pair return 
A transformation in which an atom or group Y connected to two other atoms or groups X 
represent other effects, e.g. steric. is appropriate 
external return 
extrusion transformation 
and 2 is lost from a molecule, leading to a product in which X is bonded to 2, e.g.. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
x-Y-z ___) x-2 + Y 
or 
1115 
C 
hu 
N 
N - 
II 
The reverse of an extrusion is called insertion 
See cheletropic reaction 
qaymbol (“eta”) 
See hapto. 
fast-atom bombardment (FAB) mass spectroscopy 
A method in which ions are produced in a mass spectrometer from nonvolatile or 
thermally fragile organic molecules by bombarding the compound in the condensed phase with 
energy-rich neutral particles. 
IUPAC MASS SPECTROSCOPY (1991). 
field effect 
An experimentally observable effect symbolized by F (on reaction rates, etc.) of 
intramolecular coulombic interaction between the centre of interest and a remote unipole or 
dipole, by direct action through space rather than through bonds. The magnitude of the fleld 
effect (or “direct effect”) depends on the unipolar charge/dipole moment, orientation of dipole, 
shortest distance between the centre of interest and the remote unipole or dipole, and on the 
effective dielectric constant. An approach to its calculation was described by KIRKWOOD and 
WESTHEIMER (1938) and has been elaborated in more recent years. 
flash vacuum pyrolysis (FVP) 
perature, usually in the gas phase. 
fluxional 
A chemical species is said to be fluxional if it undergoes rapid degenerate rearrangements 
(generally detectable by methods which allow the observation of the behaviour of individual 
nuclei in a rearranged chemical species, e.g. NMR, X-ray]. 
Example: Bullvalene (1 209 600 interconvertible arrangements of the ten CH groups). 
See also electronic effect. inductiue effect, polar effect. 
Thermal reaction of a molecule by exposing it to a short thermal shock at high tem- 
The term is also used to designate positional change among ligands of complex com- 
See also valence taufomerization. 
pounds and organometallics. In these cases, the change is not necessarily degenerate. 
force-field calculations 
See molecular mechanics calculation. 
fractionation factor, isotopic 
The ratio ( x ~ / % ) ~ / ( x ~ / % ) ~ ,  
where x is the abundance, expressed as the atom fraction of 
the isotope distinguished by the subscript numeral, when the two isotopes are equilibrated 
between two different chemical species A and B (or between specific sites A and B in the same 
or different chemical species). The term is most commonly met in connection with deuterium 
solvent isotope effects, when the fractionation factor 
expresses the ratio 

1116 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
for the exchangeable hydrogen atoms in the chemical species (or sites) concerned. The concept 
is also applicable to transition states. 
fragmentation 
GOLD (1969). 
(1) The heterolyfic cleavage of a molecule according to the general reaction 
a- b-c-d-X 
-b 
(a-b)+ + c=d + X- 
where a-b is an electrome and X is a nucleome (which may emerge from the reaction in 
combined form), and the middle group affords the unsaturated fragment c=d. For example, 
Ph3C-CO2H + H+ 
-b 
Ph,C+ + C=O + H20 
GROB (1969). 
(2) The breakdown of a radical into a diamagnetic molecule or ion and a smaller radical, 
e.g., 
(CH,),C-O. - 
(CH3)2C=O + H3C 
[ArBr].- - 
Ar. + Br- 
(solution) 
(3) The breakdown of a radical ion in a mass spectrometer or in solution, forming an ion of 
lower molar mass and a radical, e.g., 
[(CH,),C-OH] 
* +  
-b 
(CH3),C=OtH + H,C* 
(mass spectrometer) 
free radical 
See radical. 
frontier orbitals 
The Highest-energy Occupied Molecular Orbital (HOMO) (filled or partly filled) and Jhwest- 
energy Unoccupied Molecular Orbital (LUMO) (completely or partly vacant) of a molecular entity. 
Examination of the mixing of frontier molecular orbitals of reacting molecular entities affords 
an approach to the interpretation of reaction behaviour: this constitutes a simplified 
perturbation molecular orbital theory of chemical behaviour. 
FUKUI, YONEZAWA, and SHINGU (1952): FLEMING (1976). 
See also SOMO, subjacent orbital. 
functional group 
Organic compounds are thought of as consisting of a relatively unreactive backbone, for 
example a chain of sp3 hybridized carbon atoms, and one or several functional groups. The 
functional group is an atom, or a group of atoms that has similar chemical properties whenever 
it occurs in different compounds. It defines the characteristic physical and chemical properties 
of families of organic compounds. 
gas-phase acidity 
The negative of the Gibbs energy (AGro) change for the reaction 
A-H 
-b 
A - +  H t  
in the gas phase. 
gas-phase basicity 
BAWTMESS and MC lVER (1979). 
The negative of the Gibbs energy (AGro) change associated with the reaction 
B + H +  A BHt 
in the gas phase. Also called absolute or intrinsic basicity. 
See also proton affinity. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1117 
geminate pair 
Pair of molecular entities in close proximity in solution within a solvent cage and resulting 
from reaction (e.g. bond scission, electron transfer, group transfer) of a precursor that 
constitutes a single kinetic entity. 
See also ion pair, radical pair. 
geminate recombination 
The reaction with each other of two trunsient molecular emies produced from a common 
precursor in solution. If reaction occurs before any separation by diffusion has occurred, this is 
termed "primary geminate recombination". If the mutually reactive entities have been 
separated, and come together by diffusion, this is termed "secondary geminate recombination". 
"primary" 
diffusion J 
\minate recombination 
secondary 
geminate 
other products - 
N2 + 2R. 
R - R + N *  
recombination 
general acid catalysis 
The catalysis of a chemical reaction by a series of Br0nsted acids (which may include the 
solvated hydrogen ion) so that the rate of the catalysed part of the reaction is given by Xk~&-lAl 
multiplied by some function of substrate concentrations. (The acids HA are unchanged by the 
overall reaction.) General catalysis by acids can be experimentally distinguished from spec@ 
catalysis by hydrogen cations (hydrons) by observation of the rate of reaction as a function of 
buffer concentration. 
See also catalysis, catalytic coeffkient, intramolecular catalysis, pseudecatalysis, sp&& 
catalysis. 
general base catalysis 
The catalysis of a chemical reaction by a series of Br0nsted bases (which may include the 
bate ion) so that the rate of the catalysed part of the reaction is given by Ck+JBl multiplied by 
some function of substrate concentration. 
See also general acid catalysis. 
Gibbs energy diagram 
A diagram showing the relative standard Gibbs energies of reactants, transition states, 
reaction intermediates, and products, in the same sequence as they occur in a chemical reac- 
tion. These points are often connected by a smooth curve (a "Gibbs energy profile", commonly 
still referred to as a "free energy profile") but experimental observation can provide information 
on relative standard Gibbs energies only at the maxima and minima and not at the 
configurations between them. The abscissa expresses the sequence of reactants, products, 
reaction intermediates and transition states and is usually undefined or only vaguely defined 
by the reaction coordinate (extent of bond breaking or bond making). In some adaptations the 
abscissas are however explicitly defined as bond orders, Bransted exponents, etc. 
Contrary to statements in many text books, the highest point on a Gibbs energy diagram 
does not necessarily correspond to the transition state of the rate-limiting step. For example, in 
a stepwise reaction consisting of two reaction steps 
(1) 
A + B  1 
C 
(2) 
C + D  - 
E 
one of the transition states of the two reaction steps must (in general) have a higher standard 
Gibbs energy than the other, whatever the concentration of D in the system. However, the value 
of that concentration will determine which of the reaction steps is rate-limiting. If the particular 
concentrations of interest, which may vary, are chosen as the standard state, then the rate- 
limiting step is the one of highest Gibbs energy. 

1118 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
GoA + G; + G; 
See also potential energy profile, potential energy (reaction) surface, reaction coordinate. 
Gibbs energy of activation (standard free energy of activation), ASG (SI unit: kJ mol-1) 
The standard Gibbs energy difference between the transition state of a reaction (either an 
elementary reaction or a stepwise reaction) and the ground state of the reactants. It is calcu- 
lated from the experimental rate constant k via the conventional form of the absolute rate 
equation: 
AtG = RT [ln(kB/h) - ln(k/7ll 
where 
is the Boltzmann constant and h the Planck constant ( b / h  = 2.08358 x 1Olo K-l s-l). 
The values of the rate constants, and hence Gibbs energies of activation, depend upon the 
choice of concentration units (or of the thermodynamic standard state). 
ground state 
See also enthalpy of activation entropy of activation. 
The state of lowest Gibbs energy of a system. 
IUPAC ANALYTICAL CHEMISTRY (1982). 
See also excited state. 
group 
A defined linked collection of atoms or a single atom within a molecular ennty. This use of 
the term in physical organic and general chemistry is less restrictive than the definition 
adopted for the purpose of nomenclature of organic compounds. [See IUPAC ORGANIC RULES 
(1979), Section Cl 
See also substituent. 
Gnmwald-Winstein equation 
The linearfree energy relation 
expressing the dependence of the rate of solvolysis of a substrate on ionizing power of the 
solvent. The rate constant 
applies to the reference solvent (ethanol-water, 80:20, v/v) and & 
to the solvent s, both at 25 OC. The parameter rn is characteristic of the substrate and is as- 
signed the value unity for tert-butyl chloride. The value Y is intended to be a quantitative 
measure of the ionizing power of the solvent s. The equation was later extended by WINSTEIN, 
GRUNWALD and JONES (1 95 1) to the form 
log(kJh) = rnY + UV 
where N is the nucleophilicity of the solvent and 1 its susceptibility parameter. The equation has 
also been applied to reactions other than solvolysis. [For the definition of other Yscales, see 
BENTLEY and SCHLEYER (19771, BENTLEY and LLEWELLYN (1990).1 
GRUNWALD and WINSTEIN (1948); FAINBERG and WINSTEIN (1956). 
See also Dimroth-Reichardt E, parameter, polarity, Zvalue. 
guest 
An organic or inorganic ion or molecule that occupies a cavity, cleft or pocket within the 
molecular structure of a host molecular entity and forms a complex with it or that is trapped in 
a cavity within the crystal structure of a host. 
See also crown cyptand, inclusion compound 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1119 
half-life, tlI2 (SI unit: s) 
In a kinetic experiment, the time required for the concentration of a particular reacting 
species to fall to one-half of its initial value. (Its dependence on initial concentration depends 
upon the order of reaction It is independent of initial concentration only for a first-order pro- 
cess.) 
See also lgetime. 
halochromism 
Halochromism means the colour change which occurs on addition of acid (or base, or a 
salt) to a solution of a compound. A chemical reaction (e.g. ion formation) transforms a 
colourless compound into a coloured one. 
FALBE and REGITZ (1990); REICHARDT, ASHARIN-FORD, and SCHAEFER. (1993). 
Hammett acidity function 
See acidityfunction 
Hammett equation (or Hammett relation) 
The equation in the form 
or 
applied to the influence of meta- or para-substituents X on the reactivity of the functional 
group Y in the benzene derivative rn- or p-XC6H4Y. k or K is the rate or equilibrium constant, 
respectively, for the given reaction of rn- or p-XC6H4Y k, or K, refers to the reaction of C6H~Y, 
i.e. X = H; IS is the substituent constant characteristic of rn- or p X ;  p is the reaction constant 
characteristic of the given reaction of Y. The equation is often encountered in a form with lg k, 
or lg K, written as a separate term on the right hand side, e.g. 
lg k =  po + lg k, 
or 
lg K =  po + lg K, 
It then signifles the intercept corresponding to X = H in a regression of lg k or lg K on Q. 
HAMMETT (1940, 1970). 
See also p-value, o-constant, Taft equation Yukawa-Tsuno equation 
Hammond principle (or Hammond postulate) 
The hypothesis that, when a transition state leading to an unstable reaction intermediate 
(or product) has nearly the same energy as that intermediate, the two are interconverted with 
only a small reorganization of molecular structure. Essentially the same idea is sometimes re- 
ferred to as "Leffler's assumption", namely, that the transition state bears the greater resem- 
blance to the less stable species (reactant or reaction intermediate/product). Many text books 
and physical organic chemists, however, express the idea in Leffler's form, but attribute it to 
Hammond. 
As a corollary, it follows that a factor stabilising a reaction intermediate will also stabilize 
the transition state leading to that intermediate. 
The acronym "Bemahapothle" [Bell, Marcus, Hammond, mlanyi, mornton, killer) is 
sometimes used in recognition of the principal contributors towards expansion of the original 
idea of the Hammond postulate. 
HAMMOND (1955); LEFFLER (1953); WILLIAMS (1984). See also FARCASIU (1975). 
See also More O'FerraZl-Jencks diagram 
Hansch constant 
A measure of the capability of a solute for hydrophobic (lipophilic) interaction based on the 
partition coefficient P for distribution of the solute between octan-1-01 and water. The most 
general way of applying P in correlation analysis, QSAR, etc. is as log P, but the behaviour of 
substituted benzene derivatives may be quantified by a substituent constant scale, R, which is 
defined in a way analogous to the Hammett o scale. There are various R scales, depending on 
the substrate series used as reference. 
HANSCH and LEO (1979). 

1120 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
hapto 
The hapto symbol, q with numerical superscript, provides a topological description for the 
bonding of hydrocarbons and other x-electron systems to metals, by indicating the connectivity 
between the ligand and the central atom. For example, 173 indicates that three atoms of the 
ligand are bonded to the central atom. 
IUPAC INORGANIC NOMENCLATURE (1990). 
hard acid 
A Lewis acid with an acceptor centre of low polarizability. Other things being 
approximately equal, complexes of hard acids and bases or soft acids and bases have an added 
stabilization (sometimes called "HSAB" rule). For example the hard 0- (or N-) bases are 
preferred to their S- (or P-1 analogues by hard acids. Conversely a "soft acid" possesses an 
acceptor centre of high polarizability and exhibits the reverse preference for coordination of a 
soft base. These preferences are not defined in a quantitative sense. 
See PEARSON (1963, 1973); HO (1977). 
See also class (4) metal ion. hard base. 
A Lewis base with a donor centre (e.g. an oxygen atom) of low polarizability; the converse 
See also hard acid. 
A quantity related to the temperature coemcient of ASH (enthalpy of activa.tton) and A& 
hard base 
applies to "soft bases". 
heat capacity of activation, A*CpO (SI unit: J mol-1 K-1) 
(entropy of activation) according to the equations: 
ASCp = (JASH/J7)p = T (JA*S/J7), 
If the rate constant is expressible in the form In k = a/T + b + c In T + dT, 
then 
A*Cp = (C - 1) R + 2dRT 
See KOHNSTAM (1967). 
+ hemileptic 
See homoleptic. 
Henderson-Hasselbach equation 
An equation of the form 
pH = PK, - lg([HAI/IA-I) 
for the calculation of the pH of solutions where the ratio [HAMA-] is known. 
heterobimetallic complex 
A metal complex having two different metal atoms. 
heteroconjugation 
+(1) Association between a base and the conjugate acid of a different base through a hg- 
drogen bond (B'-HB+ or AH --A-). The term has its origin in the conjugate acid-base pair and 
is in no way related to conjugation of orbitals. Heteroassociation is a more appropriate term. 
+(2) Some authors refer to conjugated systems containing a heteroatom, e.g. pyridine, as 
"heteroconjugated systems". This usage is discouraged since it inappropriately suggests an 
analogy to homoconjugation (21, and conflicts with the currently accepted definition of that 
term. 
heteroleptic 
Transition metal od Main Group compounds having more than one type of ligand 
See also homoleptic. 
heterolysis, heterolytic 
The cleavage of a covalent bond so that both bonding electrons remain with one of the two 
fragments between which the bond is broken, e.g. 
P 
A-B 
A + + B -  

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1121 
Heterolytic bond fission is a feature of many bimolecular reactions in solution (e.g., elec- 
trophilic substitution, nucleophilic subs ti tu tion). 
See also homolysis, heterolytic bond-dissociation energy. 
heterolytic bond-dissociation energy 
The energy required to break a given bond of some specific compound by heterolysis. For 
the dissociation of a neutral molecule AB in the gas phase into A+ and B- the heterolytic bond- 
dissociation energy O(A+B-) is the sum of the bond dissociation energy, LYA-B), and the 
adiabatic ionization energy of the radical A minus the electron amnity of the radical Be. 
heterovalent hyperconjugation 
See hyperconjugation 
hidden return 
See ion-pair return. 
Hildebrand parameter 
A parameter measuring the cohesion of a solvent (energy required to create a cavity in the 
'solvent). 
CHASTRE?TE, RAJZMA", CHANON, and PURCELL (1985). 
Hofmann rule 
'The principal alkene formed in the decomposition of quaternary ammonium hydroxides 
that contain different primary alkyl groups is always ethylene, if an ethyl group is present." 
Originally given in this limited form by A.W. Hofmann, the rule has since been extended and 
modifled as follows: 'When two or more alkenes can be produced in a p-eumination reaction, the 
alkene having the smallest number of alkyl groups attached to the double bond carbon atoms 
will be the predominant product." This orientation described by the Hofmann rule is observed 
in elimination reactions of quaternary ammonium salts and tertiary sulfonium salts, and in 
certain other cases. 
HOFMA" ( 185 1). 
See also Zaitsev rule. 
(1) An acronym for Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital. Seefrontier orbitals. 
(2) A p r e k  (consisting of lower case letters, homo.) used to indicate a higher homologue of 
homo 
a compound. 
homoaromatic 
Whereas in an aromatic molecule there is continuous overlap of p-orbitals over a cyclic 
array of atoms, in a homoaromatic molecule there is a formal discontinuity in this overlap re- 
sulting from the presence of a single sp3 hybridized atom at one or several positions within the 
ring: p-orbital overlap apparently bridges these sp3 centres, and features associated with 
aromaticity are manifest in the properties of the compound. Pronounced homoaromaticity is 
not normally associated with neutral molecules, but mainly with species bearing an electrical 
charge, e.g., the "homotropylium" cation, C8H9+, 
c." 
'- 
*' 
In bis, tris, (etc.) homoaromatic species, two, three, (etc.) single sp3 centres separately 
interrupt the Ir-electron system. 
See also homoconjugation (2). 
homoconjugation 
+ (1) Association between a base and its conjugate acid through a hydrogen bond (B.-HB+ 
or AH.-A-). Homoassociation is a more appropriate term for this phenomenon. 
(2) The orbital overlap of two Ir-systems separated by a non-conjugating group, such as 
See also conjugate acid-base pair, cory'ugated system homoaromatic. 
Transition metal or Main Group compounds having only one type of l i g d  are said to be 
See also heteroleptic. 
CH,. 
homoleptic 
homoleptic, e.g. TaMe5. 

1122 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
homolysis, homolytic 
The cleavage of a bond ("homolytic cleavage" or "homolytic fission") so that each of the 
molecular fragments between which the bond is broken retains one of the bonding electrons. A 
unimolecular reaction involving homolysis of a bond (not forming part of a cyclic structure) in a 
molecular entity containing an even number of (paired) electrons results in the formation of two 
radicals: 
It is the reverse of colligation Homolysis is also commonly a feature of bimolecular sub- 
stitution reactions (and of other reactions) involving radicals and molecules. 
See also bond dissociation energy, heterolysis. 
host 
A molecular entity that forms complexes with organic or inorganic guests, or a chemical 
species that can accommodate guests within cavities of its crystal structure. Examples include 
cryptands and crowns (where there are ion-dipole attractions between heteroatoms and positive 
ions), hydrogen-bonded molecules that form "clathrates" (e.g. hydroquinone and water), and 
host molecules of inclusion compounds (e.g. urea or thiourea). van der Waals forces and 
hydrophobic interactions bind the guest to the host molecule in clathrates and inclusion 
compounds. 
Huckel(4n + 2) rule 
Monocyclic planar (or almost planar) systems of trigonally (or sometimes digonally) 
hybridized atoms that contain (4n + 2) x-electrons (where n is a non-negative integer) will 
exhibit aromatic character. The rule is generally limited to n = 0-5. 
This rule is derived from the Huckel MO calculation on planar monocyclic conjugated 
hydrocarbons (CHI, where rn is an integer equal to or greater than 3 according to which (4n + 
2) n-electrons are contained in a closed-shell system. Examples of systems that obey the Hackel 
rule include: 
A 
0 
Cyclopropenyl cation 
Cyclopentadienyl anion 
Benzene 
(m = 5, n = 1) 
(m = 6, n = 1) 
(m = 3, n = 0) 
Systems containing 4n x-electrons (such as cyclobutadiene and the cyclopentadienyl 
cation) are "antiaromatic". 
See also conjugation M6bius aromaticity. 
hybridization 
Linear combination of atomic orbitals on an atom. Hybrid orbitals are often used in or- 
ganic chemistry to describe the bonding molecules containing tetrahedral (sps), trigonal (~$1, 
and digonal (sp) atoms. 
hydration 
example, hydration of ethene: 
Addition of water or of the elements of water (i.e. H and OH) to a molecular entity. For 
H,C=CH, + H2O - 
CH3CH2OH 
The term is also used in a more restricted sense for the process: 
A(gas) 
___) 
A (aqueous soh) 
cf. the use of the term in inorganic/physical chemistry to describe the state of the ions of an 
electrolyte in aqueous solution. 
AHRLAND (1979). 
See also aquation, solvation 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1123 
hydrogen bond 
The hydrogen bond is a form of association between an electronegative atom and a hy- 
drogen atom attached to a second, relatively electronegative atom. It is best considered as an 
electrostatic interaction, heightened by the small size of hydrogen, which permits proximity of 
the interacting dipoles or charges. Both electronegative atoms are usually (but not necessarily] 
from the first row of the Periodic Table, i.e., N, 0, or F. Hydrogen bonds may be intermolecular 
or intramolecular. With a few exceptions, usually involving fluorine, the associated energies are 
less than 20-25 kJ mol-1 (5-6 kcal mol-11. 
hydrolysis 
Soluolysis by water. 
hydron 
General name for the ion H+ either in natural abundance, or where it is not desired to 
distinguish between the isotopes, as opposed to proton for 1H+, 
deuteron for 2H+ and triton for 
3H+. 
hydrophilic 
solvents, in particular with water, or with other polar groups. 
hydrophobic interaction 
The tendency of hydrocarbons (or of lipophilic hydrocarbon-like groups in solutes) to form 
intermolecular aggregates in an aqueous medium and analogous intramolecular interactions. 
The name arises from the attribution of the phenomenon to the apparent repulsion between 
water and hydrocarbons. However, the phenomenon ought to be attributed to the effect of the 
hydrocarbon-like groups on the water-water interaction. The misleading alternative term 
"hydrophobic bond' is discouraged. 
hyperconjugation 
In the formalism that separates bonds into o and x types, hyperconjugation is the in- 
teraction of o-bonds (e.g. C-H, C-C, etc.) with a x network. This interaction is customarily 
illustrated by contributing structures, e.g. for toluene (below), sometimes said to be an example 
of "heterovalent" or "sacrificial hyperconjugation", so named because the contributing structure 
contains one two-electron bond less than the normal Lewisfomda for toluene 
IUPAC NAMES FOR HYDROGEN ATOMS (1988). 
'Water loving". The capacity of a molecular entity or of a substituenf to interact with polar 
At present, there is no evidence for sacriffcial hyperconjugation in neutral hydrocarbons. 
The concept of hyperconjugation is also applied to carbenium ions and radicals, where the 
interaction is now between o-bonds and an unfilled or partially filled 5c- or p-orbital. A 
contributing structure illustrating this for the tert-butyl cation is: 
3.%,. 
4. 
/H 
CH 
This latter example is sometimes called an example of "isovalent hyperconjugation" (the 
contributing structure containing the same number of two-electron bonds as the normal Lewis 
formula). 
Both structures shown on the right hand side are also examples of "double bond- no-bond 
resonance". 
The interaction between filled x 
or p orbitals and adjacent antibonding o* orbitals is 
referred to as "negative hyperconjugation", as for example in the fluoroethyl anion: 

1124 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
H /- 
\H 
,..,....... 
H /- \ "  
H 
RADOM (1982). 
See also sigma, p i  n-cs* delocalization 
hypsochromic shift 
Shift of a spectral band to higher frequency or shorter wavelength upon substitution or 
change in medium. It is informally referred to as blue shift. 
IUPAC PHOTOCHEMICAL GLOSSARY (1 988). 
See also bathochromic sh@. 
identity reaction 
A chemical reaction whose products are chemically identical with the reactants, for ex- 
ample the bimolecular self exchange reaction of CH31 with I-. 
See also degenerate rearrangement. 
imbalance 
The situation in which reaction parameters that characterize different bond forming or 
bond breaking processes in the same reaction have developed to different extents as the b-an- 
sition state is approached along some arbitrarily defined reaction coordinate. For example, in 
the nitroalkane anomaly, the Bransted p exponent for proton removal is smaller than the 
Bransted a for the nitroalkane, because of imbalance between the amount of bond breaking 
and resonance delocalizatibn in the transition state. Imbalance is common in reactions such as 
elimination, addition and other complex reactions that involve proton (hydron) transfer. 
BERNASCON1 (1 992). 
See also synchronous, synchronization [pnhciple of imperfect synchronization). 
See nitrene. 
+ imene 
+ imidogen 
+ imidonium ion 
See nitrene. 
See nib-enium ion. 
+ imin 
See nitrene. 
+ imine radical 
See nitrene. 
inclusion compound (or inclusion complex) 
A complex in which one component (the host) forms 
cavity or, in the case of a crystal, a 
crystal lattice containing spaces in the shape of long tunnels or channels in which molecular 
entities of a second chemical species (the guest) are located. There is no covalent bonding be- 
tween guest and host, the attraction being generally due to v a n  der Waals forces. If the spaces 
in the host lattice are enclosed on all sides so that the guest species is "trapped" as in a cage, 
such compounds are known as "clathrates" or "cage" compounds". 
induction period 
The initial slow phase of a chemical reaction which later accelerates. Induction periods are 
often observed with radical reactions, but they may also occur in other systems (for example 
before steady-state concentration of the reactants is reached). 
inductive effect 
In strict definition, an experimentally observable effect (on rates of reaction, etc.) of the 
transmission of charge through a chain of atoms by electrostatic induction. A theoretical dis- 
tinction may be made between the f ~ l d  efect, and the inductive effect as models for the 
Coulomb interaction between a given site within a molecular entity and a remote unipole or 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1125 
dipole within the same entity. The experimental distinction between the two effects has proved 
difficult, except for molecules of peculiar geometry, which may exhibit "reversed field effects". 
Ordinarily the inductive effect and the field effect are influenced in the same direction by 
structural changes in the molecule and the distinction between them is not clear. This situation 
has led many authors to include the field effect in the term "inductive effect". Thus the 
separation of ts values into inductive and resonance components does not imply the exclusive 
operation of a through-bonds route for the transmission of the non-conjugative part of the 
substituent effect. To indicate the all-inclusive use of the term inductive, the phrase "so-called 
inductive effect" is sometimes used. Certain modem theoretical approaches suggest that the 
"so-called inductive effect" reflects a field effect rather than through-bonds transmission. 
EHRENSON, BROWNLEE and TAFT (1973): TAFT and TOPSOM (1987). 
See also fEld effect, mesomeric effect, polar effect. 
inductomeric effect 
A molecular polarizability effect occurring by the inductive mechanism of electron dis- 
placement. The consideration of such an effect and the descriptive term have been regarded as 
obsolescent or even obsolete, but in recent years theoretical approaches have reintroduced 
substituent polarizability as a factor governing reactivity, etc. and its parametrization has been 
proposed. 
inert 
See TAFT and TOPSOM (1987); INGOLD (1953). 
Stable and unreactiue under specified conditions. 
inhibition 
The decrease in rate of reaction brought about by the addition of a substance (inhibitor), 
by virtue of its effect on the concentration of a reactant, catalyst or reaction intermediate. For 
example, molecular oxygen and pbenzoquinone can react as "inhibitors" in many reactions 
involving radicals as intermediates by virtue of their ability to act as scavengers toward these 
radicals. 
If the rate of a reaction in the absence of inhibitor is u, and that in the presence of a 
certain m o u n t  of inhibitor is u, the degree of inhibition (Q is given by 
i =  (u, - U ) / U ,  
See also mechanism based inhibition 
initiation 
A reaction or process generating free radicals (or some other reactiue reaction intermedi- 
ates) which then induce a chain reaction For example, in the chlorination of alkanes by a radi- 
cal mechanism the initiation step is the dissociation of molecular chlorine. 
inner-sphere (electron transfer) 
Historically an electron transfer between two metal centres sharing a ligand or atom in 
their respective coordination shells. The definition has more recently been extended to any 
situation in which the interaction between the donor and acceptor centres in the transition 
state is significant (>20 
kJ mol-1). 
IUPAC PHOTOCHEMICAL GLOSSARY (1992). 
See also outer-sphere electron transfer. 
A chemical reaction or iransfonnation of the general type 
insertion 
x-2 + Y - 
x-Y-z 
in which the connecting atom or group Y replaces the bond joining the parts X and 2 of the 
reactant XZ. An example is the carbene insertion reaction 
R3C-H + H2C: 
___) R3C-CH3 
The reverse of an insertion is called an exmLsion 
See also a-addition 

1126 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
intermediate 
A molecular entity with a lfefetime appreciably longer than a molecular vibration 
[corresponding to a local potential energy minimum of depth greater than RZI that is formed 
(directly or indirectly) from the reactants and reacts further to give (either directly or indirectly) 
the products of a chemical reaction; also the corresponding chemical species. 
intermolecular 
interactions between two or more molecular entities. 
See reaction step, elementary reaction, stepwise reaction 
(1) Descriptive of any process that involves a transfer (of atoms, groups, electrons, etc.) or 
(2) Relating to a comparison between different molecular entities. 
See also intramolecular. 
internal return 
See ion-pair return. 
intimate ion pair 
See ionpair. 
intramolecular 
(1) Descriptive of any process that involves a transfer (of atoms, groups, electrons, etc.) or 
interactions between different parts of the same molecular entity. 
(2) Relating to a comparison between atoms or groups within the same molecular entity. 
See also intermoledar. 
intramolecular catalysis 
The acceleration of a chemical transformation at one site of a molecular entVy through the 
involvement of another functional ("catalytic") group in the same molecular entity, without that 
group appearing to have undergone change in the reaction product. The use of the term should 
be restricted to cases for which analogous intermolecular catalysis by chemical species bearing 
that catalytic group is observable. Intramolecular catalysis can be detected and expressed in 
quantitative form by a comparison of the reaction rate with that of a comparable model 
compound in which the catalytic group is absent, or by measurement of the eflectiue molarity of 
the catalytic group. 
See also effctiue molarity, neighbouring group participation. 
intrinsic barrier 
The Gibbs energy of activation (AtGI in the limiting case where AGO = 0.i.e. when the effect 
of thermodynamic driving force is eliminated. According to the Marcus equation the intrinsic 
barrier is related to the reorganization energy, h, of the reaction by the equation 
ASG = h / 4  
CANNON (1980); SCHLESENER, AMATORE and KOCHI (1986). 
inverse kinetic isotope effect 
See isotope eflect. 
inverted micelle 
The reversible formation of association colloids from surfactants in non-polar solvents 
leads to aggregates termed inverted (or inverse, reverse or reversed) rnicelles. Such association 
is often of the type 
Monomer L 
7 
Dimer L 
1 
Trimer L 
1 
...... n-mer 
and the phenomenon of critical rnicelle concentration (or an analogous effect) is consequently 
not observed. 
In an inverted micelle the polar groups of the surfactants are concentrated in the interior 
and the lipophilic groups extend towards and into the non-polar solvent. 
ion pair 
A pair of oppositely charged ions held together by Coulomb attraction without formation of 
a coualent bond. Experimentally, an ion pair behaves as one unit in determining conductivity, 
kinetic behaviour, osmotic properties, etc. 
Following Bjerrum, oppositely charged ions with their centres closer together than a 
distance 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1127 
q = 8.36 x lo6 z+z/(~,'ll 
pm 
are considered to constitute an ion pair ("Bjerrum ion pair"). [zf and z are the charge numbers 
of the ions, and E, is the relative permittivity (or dielectric constant) of the medium.] 
An ion pair, the constituent ions of which are in direct contact (and not separated by an 
intervening solvent or other neutral molecule) is designated as a "tight ion pair" (or "intimate" or 
"contact ion pair"). A tight ion pair of X+ and Y- is symbolically represented as X+Y-. 
By contrast, an ion pair whose constituent ions are separated by one or several solvent or 
other neutral molecules is described as a "loose ion pair", symbolically represented as X+ I IY-. 
The members of a loose ion pair can readily interchange with other free or loosely paired ions in 
the solution. This interchange may be detectable (e.g., by isotopic labelling) and thus afford an 
experimental distinction between tight and loose ion pairs. 
A further conceptual distinction has sometimes been made between two types of loose ion 
pairs. In "solvent-shared ion pairs" the ionic constituents of the pair are separated by only a 
single solvent molecule, whereas in "solvent-separated ion pairs" more than one solvent 
molecule intervenes. However, the term "solvent-separated ion pair" must be used and in- 
terpreted with care since it has also widely been used as a less specific term for "loose" ion pair. 
ion pair return 
See also common-ion effect, dissociation, ion-pair return. special salt effect. 
The recombination of a pair of ions R+ and 2- formed from ionization of Rz. 
If the ions are paired as a tight ion pair and recombine without prior separation into a 
loose ion pair this is called "internal ion-pair return": 
R+Z- 
RZ 
tight ion pair 
covalent molecule 
It is a special case of "primary geminate recombination". 
If the ions are paired as a loose ion pair and form the covalent chemical species via a tight 
ion pair, this is called "external ion-pair return": 
L 
1 
RZ 
R'IIZ 
R+Z 
loose ion pair 
tight ion pair 
covalent molecule 
It is a special case of "secondary geminate recombinatiori". 
When the covalent molecule RZ is reformed without direct evidence of prior partial 
racemization or without other direct evidence of prior formation of a tight ion pair, (e.g., without 
partial racemization if the group R is suitably chiral) the internal ion-pair return is sometimes 
called a "hidden return". 
External (unimolecular) ion-pair return is to be distinguished from "external (bimolecular) 
ion return", the (reversible) process whereby dissociated ions are converted into loose ion pairs: 
R+ + Z- 
R'IIZ 
ionic strength, I (SI unit: mol dm-3) 
In a solution of fully dissociated electrolytes the ionic strength is defined as I = 0.5Ziqqi, 
in which C~ is the concentration and z, the charge number of ionic species i p is also defined as 
Im = 0.5Cimiq2, where m, is the molality. 
ionization 
The generation of one or more ions. It may occur, e.g. by loss of an electron from a neutral 
molecular entity, by the unimolecular heterolysis of such an entity into two or more ions, or by a 
heterolytic substitution reaction involving neutral molecules, such as 
CH3COZH + HZO - 
H30f + CH,CO,- 
(electrophile assisted) 
Ph3CC1 
-W 
Ph3CfC1- 
(ion pair, in benzene) 
The loss of an electron from a singly, doubly, etc. charged cation is called second, third, 
etc. ionization. This terminology is used especially in mass spectroscopy. 
See also dissociation, ionization energy. 

1128 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
ionization energy, Ei (SI unit kJ mol-1 or J per molecule) 
The minimum energy required to remove an electron from an isolated molecular entity (in 
its vibrational ground state) in the gaseous phase. If the resulting molecular entity is con- 
sidered to be in its vibrational ground state, one refers to the energy as the "adiabatic ionization 
energy". If the molecular entity produced possesses the vibrational energy determined by the 
Franck-Condon principle (according to which the electron ejection takes place without an 
accompanying change in molecular geometry), the energy is called the "vertical ionization 
energy". The name ionization energy is preferred to the somewhat misleading earlier name 
"ionization potential". 
See also ionization 
ionizing power 
A term to denote the tendency of a particular solvent to promote ionization of an un- 
charged or, less often, charged solute. The term has been used both in a kinetic and in a 
thermodynamic context. 
See also Dimroth-Reichardt 4 parameter, Grunwald-Winstein equation, 2-value. 
ipso-attack 
The attachment of an entering group to a position in an aromatic compound already 
carrying a substituent group (other than hydrogen]. The entering group may displace that sub- 
stituent group but may also itself be expelled or migrate to a different position in a subsequent 
step. The term "ipso-substitution" is not used, since it is synonymous with substitution. 
For example: 
where E+ is an electrophile and 2 is a substituent (other than hydrogen). 
See also cine-substitution tele-substitution. 
isodesmic reaction 
the products are the same as those which are broken in the reactants, e.g. 
A reaction (actual or hypothetical) in which the types of bonds that are made in forming 
(a) PhCOOH + ~-c~c,jH~coo- - 
PhCOO- + p-C1C&COOH 
(b) CICH=CH2 + CICHZCHZCI .-+ 
CH,=CH, + CI,CHCH$l 
Such processes have advantages for theoretical treatment. The H m t t  equation as ap- 
plied to equilibria (cf. (a)) essentially deals with isodesmic processes. 
For the use of isodesmic processes in quantum chemistry, see HEHRE et al. (1970). 
isoelectronic 
Two or more molecular entities are described as isoelectronic if they have the same 
number of valence electrons and the same structure, i.e. number and comctivify of atoms, but 
differ in some of the elements involved. thus 
CO, N2 and NO+ are isoelectronic 
CH2=C=0 and CH2=N=N are isoelectronic 
CH3COCH3 and CH3N=NCH3 have the same number of electrons, but have different 
structures, hence they are not described as isoelectronic. 
isoentropic 
same standard entropy of activation 
isoequilibrium relationship 
equation defining the isoequilibrium temperature p is 
A reaction series is said to be isoentropic if the individual reactions of the series have the 
A relationship analogous to the isokinetic relationship but applied to equilibrium data. The 
A$ - PA$ = constant 
where AH and AS are enthalpy and entropy of reaction, respectively. 
See also isokinetic relationship. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1129 
isokinetic relationship 
When a series of structurally related substrates undergo the same general reaction or 
when the reaction conditions for a single substrate are changed in a systematic way, the en- 
thalpies and entropies of activation sometimes satisfy the relation 
ASH - PASS = constant 
where the parameter p is independent of temperature. This equation (or some equivalent form] 
is said to represent an "isokinetic relationship". The temperature T = p (at which all members of 
a series obeying the isokinetic relationship react at the same rate] is termed the "isokinetic 
temperature". 
Supposed isokinetic relationships as established by direct correlation of ASH with AtS are 
often spurious and the calculated value of p is meaningless, because errors in ASH lead to 
compensating errors in ASS. Satisfactory methods of establishing such relationships have been 
devised. 
EXNER (19731; LEFFLER (1955). 
See also compensation effect, isoequilibrium relationship, isoselective relationship. 
isolobal 
The term is used to compare molecular fragments with each other and with familiar 
species from organic chemistry. Two fragments are isolobal if the number, symmetry properties, 
approximate energy, and shape of the frontier orbitals and the number of electrons in them are 
similar. 
See isoelectronic. 
isomer 
One of several species (or molecular entities] that have the same atomic composition 
(molecular formula) but different line formulae or different stereochemical formulae and hence 
different physical and/or chemical properties. 
isomerization 
A chemical reaction, the principal product of which is isomeric with the principal reactant. 
An intrmkcular isomerization that involves the breaking or making of bonds is a special case 
of a molecular rearrangement. 
Isomerization does not necessarily imply molecular rearrangement (e.g. in the case of the 
interconversion of conformational isomers). 
isosbestic point 
This term is usually employed with reference to a set of absorption spectra, plotted on the 
same chart for a set of solutions in which the sum of the concentrations of two principal 
absorbing components, A and B, is constant. The curves of absorbance against wavelength (or 
frequency] for such a set of mixtures often all intersect at one or more points, called isosbestic 
points. 
Isosbestic points are commonly met when electronic spectra are taken (a] on a solution in 
which a chemical reaction is in progress (in which case the two absorbing components con- 
cerned are a reactant and a product, A + B), or (b] on a solution in which the two absorbing 
components are in equilibrium and their relative proportions are controlled by the concen- 
tration of some other component, typically the concentration of hydrogen ions, e.g., an acid- 
base indicator equilibrium. 
A
-
 - 
B + Htaq 
The effect may also appear (cl in the spectra of a set of solutions of two unrelated non- 
interacting components having the same total concentration. In all these examples, A (and/or 
Bl may be either a single chemical species or a mixture of chemical species present in invariant 
proportion. 
If A and B are single chemical species, isosbestic points will appear at all wavelengths at 
which their molar absorption coefficients (formerly called extinction coeficients) are the same. 
(A more involved identity applies when A and B are mixtures of constant proportion.] 
If absorption spectra of the types considered above intersect not at one or more isosbestic 
points but over progressively changing wavelength, this is prima facie evidence in case (a) for 
the formation of a reaction intermediate in substantial concentration (A + C + B], in case (b] for 
the involvement of a third absorbing species in the equilibrium, e.g. 
A 
B + Htaq 
C + 2Htaq, 

1130 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
or in case (c) for some interaction of A and B, e.g., 
A + B  F
-
 
c 
isoselective relationship 
A relationship analogous to the isokinetic relationship, but applied to selectivity data of 
reactions. At the isoselective temperature, the selectivities of the series of reactions following 
the relationship are identical. 
GIESE (1984). 
See also isoequilibrium relationship, isokinetic relationship. 
isotope effect 
The effect on the rate or equilibrium constant of two reactions that differ only in the 
isotopic composition of one or more of their otherwise chemically identical components is 
referred to as a kinetic isotope effect (see isotope eflect, kinetic) or a thermodynamic (or 
equilibrium) isotope effect (see isotope effect, thermodynamic), respectively. 
.isotope effect, equilibrium 
see isotope effect, thermodynamic. 
isotope effect, heavy atom 
An isotope effect due to isotopes other than those of hydrogen. 
isotope effect, intramolecular 
A kinetic isotope effect observed when a single substrate, in which the isotopic atoms 
occupy equivalent reactive positions, reacts to produce a non-statistical distribution of 
isofopomric products. In such a case the isotope effect will favor the pathway with lower force 
constants for displacement of the isotopic nuclei in the transition state. 
isotope effect, inverse 
A kinetic isotope eflect which kl/@ c 1, ie. the heavier substrate reacts more ra idly than 
isotope effect will normally be "normal" when the frequency differences between the isotopic 
transition states are smaller than in the reactants. Conversely, in inverse isotope effect can be 
taken as evidence for an increase in the corresponding force constants on passing from the 
reactant to the transition state. 
isotope effect, kinetic 
effect. 
the lighter one, as opposed to the more usual "normal" isotope effect, in which d/ rp > 1. The 
The effect of isotopic substitution on a rate constant is referred to as a kinetic isotope 
For example in the reaction 
A + B  + C 
the effect of isotopic substitution in reactant A is expressed as the ratio of rate constants kl/kh, 
where the superscripts 1 and h represent reactions in which the molecules A contain the light 
and heavy isotopes, respectively. 
Within the framework of transition state theory in which the reaction is rewritten as 
and with neglect of isotopic mass on tunnelling and the transmission coeflicient, kl/@ can be 
regarded as if it were the equilibrium constant for an isotope exchange reaction between the 
transition state [TSS] and the isotopically substituted reactant A, and calculated from their 
vibrational frequencies as in the case of a thermodynamic isotope effect (see isotope eJect, 
themdynamic). 
Isotope effects like the above, involving a direct or indirect comparison of the rates of 
reaction of isotopologues, are called "intermolecular". in contrast to intramolecular isotope 
effects (see isotope effect, intramolecula?, in which a single substrate reacts to produce a non- 
statistical distribution of isotopomeric product molecules. 
See WOLFSBERG (1972). 
isotope effect, primary 
A kinetic isotope effect attributable to isotopic substitution of an atom to which a bond is 
made or broken in the rate-controlling step or in a pre-equilibrium step of a specified reaction is 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1131 
termed a primary isotope effect. The corresponding isotope effect on the equilibrium constant of 
a reaction in which one or more bonds to isotopic atoms are broken, is called a "primary 
equilibrium isotope effect". 
See also isotope effect, secondary. 
isotope effect, secondary 
A kinetic isotope effect that is attributable to isotopic substitution of an atom to which 
bonds are neither made nor broken in the rate-controlling step or in a pre-equilibrium step of a 
specified reaction, and is therefore not a primary isotope effect, is termed a secondary isotope 
effect. One speaks of a, p (etc.) secondary isotope effects, where a, p (etc.) denote the position of 
isotopic substitution relative to the reaction centre. The corresponding isotope effect on the 
equilibrium constant of such a reaction is called a "Secondary equilibrium isotope effect". 
Secondary isotope effects have been discussed in terms of the conventional electronic 
effects of physical organic chemistry, e.g. induction, hyperconjugation, hybridization, etc., since 
these properties are determined by the electron distribution, that depends on vibrationally 
averaged bond lengths and angles which vary slightly with isotopic substitution. While this 
usage is legitimate, the term "electronic isotope effect'' should be avoided, because of the 
misleading implication that such an effect is electronic rather than vibrational in origin. 
isotope effect, solvent 
the solvent. 
isotope effect, steric 
A secondary isotope effect attributed to the different vibrational amplitudes of 
isotopologues. For example, both the mean and mean-square amplitudes of vibrations 
associated with C-H bonds are greater than those of C-D bonds. The greater effective bulk of 
molecules containing the former may be manifested by a steric effect on a rate or equilibrium 
constant. 
isotope effect, thermodynamic 
thermodynamic (or equilibrium) isotope effect. 
equilibrium: 
See also isotope effect, steric. 
A kinetic or equilibrium isotope effect resulting from change in the isotopic composition of 
The effect of isotopic substitution on an equilibrium constant is referred to as a 
For example, the effect of isotopic substitution in reactant A that participates in the 
is the ratio fi/@ 
of the equilibrium constant for the reaction in which A contains the light 
isotope to that in which it contains the heavy isotope. The ratio can be expressed as the 
equilibrium constant for the isotopic exchange reaction: 
A1 + Ch F. 
Ah + C1 
in which reactants such as B that are not isotopically substituted do not appear. 
The potential energy surfaces of isotopic molecules are identical to a high degree of 
approximation, so thermodynamic isotope effects can only arise from the effect of isotopic mass 
on the nuclear motions of the reactants and products, and can be expressed quantitatively in 
terms of partition function ratios for nuclear motion: 
Although the nuclear partition function is a product of the translational, rotational and 
vibrational partition functions, the isotope effect is determined almost entirely by the last 
named, specifically by vibrational modes involving motion of isotopically different atoms. In the 
case of light atoms (i.e. protium us. deuterium or tritium) at moderate temperatures, the 
isotope effect is dominated by zero-point energy differences. 
WOLFSBERG (1 972). 
See also fractionation factor. 

1132 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
isotope exchange 
A chemical reaction in which the reactant and product chemical species are chemically 
identical but have different isotopic composition. In such a reaction the isotope distribution 
tends towards equilibrium (as expressed by fractionation factors) as a result of transfers of 
isotopically different atoms or groups. For example, 
H 
D 
DC1 
+ *: 
\ 
R 
- r$R 
\
R
 + 
HCI 
R 
R 
isotopic perturbation, method of 
NMR shift difference measurement of the isotope effect on a fast (degenerate) equilibrium 
between two species which are equivalent except for isotopic substitution. This can be used to 
distinguish a rapidly equilibrating mixture with time-averaged symmetry from a single 
structure with higher symmetry. 
isotopic scrambling 
within a specified set of atoms in a chemical species or group of chemical species. For example. 
SIEHL (1987). 
The achievement, or the process of achieving, an equilibrium distribution of isotopes 
(* denotes position of an isotopically different atom.) 
See also fractionation factor. 
A mkcuZar entity that differs only in isotopic composition (number of isotopic sub- 
isotopologue 
stitutions), e.g. CH,, CH3D, CH2D ,... . 
isotopomer 
The term is a contraction of "isotopic isomer". 
isotopic stereoisomers (e.g. (R)- 
and (S)-CH,CHDOH or (a- and (a-CH3CH=CHD). 
isovalent hyperconjugation 
' 
See hyperconjugation. 
Kamlet-Taft solvent parameters 
Parameters of the Kamlet-Taft solvatochromic relationship which measure separately the 
hydrogen bond donor (a), 
hydrogen bond acceptor $3). 
and dipolarity/poZurizabiZity (x*) 
properties of solvents as contributing to overall solvent polarity. 
KAMLET, ABBOUD and TAFT (1981). 
Kekulk structure (for aromatic compounds) 
A representation of an aromatic molecular entity (such as benzene), with fixed alternating 
single and double bonds, in which interactions between multiple bonds are assumed to be 
absent. 
Isomers having the same number of each isotopic atom but differing in their positions. 
Isotopomers can be either constitutional isomers (e.g. CH2DCH=0 and CH3CD=O) or 
IUPAC STEREOCHEMICAL TERMINOLOGY (1993). 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
For benzene, 
1133 
are the Kekuli: structures. 
kinetic control (of product composition) 
The term characterizes conditions (including reaction times) that lead to reaction products 
in a proportion governed by the relative rates of the parallel (forward) reactions in which the 
products are formed, rather than by the respective overall equilibrium constants. 
See also thermodynamic control. 
kinetic electrolyte effect (kinetic ionic-strength effect) 
The general effect of an added electrolyte (i.e. an effect other than, or in addition to, that 
due to its possible involvement as a reactant or catalyst) on the observed rate constant of a 
reaction in solution. At low concentrations (when only long-range coulombic forces need to be 
considered) the effect on a given reaction is determined only by the ionic strength of the solution 
and not by the chemical identity of the ions. For practical purposes, this concentration range is 
roughly the same as the region of validity of the Debye-Huckel limiting law for activity 
coefficients. At higher concentrations, the effect of an added electrolyte depends also on the 
chemical identity of the ions. Such specific action can usually be interpreted as the incursion of 
a reaction path involving an ion of the electrolyte as reactant or catalyst, in which case the 
action is not properly to be regarded just as a kinetic electrolyte effect. 
Kinetic electrolyte effects are usually (too restrictively and therefore incorrectly) referred to 
as "kinetic salt effects". 
A kinetic electrolyte effect ascribable solely to the influence of the ionic strength on activity 
coefficients of ionic reactants and transition states is called a "primary kinetic electrolyte 
effect". 
A kinetic electrolyte effect arising from the influence of the ionic strength of the solution 
upon the pre-equilibrium concentration of an ionic species that is involved in a subsequent rate- 
limiting step of a reaction is called a "secondary kinetic electrolyte effect". A common case 
encountered in practice is the effect on the concentration of hydrogen ion (acting as catalyst) 
produced from the ionization of a weak acid in a buffer solution. 
kinetic ambiguity 
kinetic equivalence 
See also common-ion effect, order of reaction. 
Synonymous with kinetic equivalence. 
Two reaction schemes are kinetically equivalent if they imply the same rate law. 
For example, consider the two schemes (i) and (ii) for the formation of C from A 
kl , OH- 
k2 
(i> 
A # B B C  
k-1 I OH- 
Providing that B does not accumulate as a reaction intermediate. 
Providing that B does not accumulate as a reaction intermediate 
klk2 [A1 [OH-] 
dt 
k-I + k2 [OH-] 
(2) 
d[Cl - 
- -  

1134 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
Both equations for d[C]/dt are of the form 
where r and s are constants (sometimes called "coefficients in the rate equation"). The equa- 
tions are identical in their dependence on concentrations and do not distinguish whether OH- 
catalyses the formation of B, and necessarily also its reversion to A, or is involved in its further 
transformation to C. The two schemes are therefore kinetically equivalent under conditions to 
which the stated provisos apply. 
kinetic isotope effect 
See isotope effect. 
Koppel-Palm solvent parameters 
Parameters to measure separately the ability of a solvent to enter into non-specific sol- 
vent-solute interactions (permittivity E and refractive index 4) and specific solvent-solute 
interaction (solvent basicity or nucleophilicity B and solvent acidity or electrophilicity E) as 
contributing to overall solvent polarity. 
KOPPEL and PALM (1972). 
Kosower Zvalue 
See 2-value. 
labile 
The term has loosely been used to describe a relatively unstable and transient chemical 
species or (less commonly) a relatively stable but reactive species. It must therefore not be used 
without explanation of the intended meaning. 
See also inert persistent, reactive, unreactiue. 
least nuclear motion, principle of 
The hypothesis that, for given reactants, the reactions involving the smallest change in 
nuclear positions will have the lowest energy of activation. (It is also often simply referred to as 
principle of least motion.) 
HINE (1977). 
leaving group 
An atom or group (charged or uncharged) that becomes detached from an atom in what is 
considered to be the residual or main part of the substrate in a specifled reaction. 
For example, in the heterolytic solvolysis of benzyl bromide in acetic acid 
PhCH2Br + AcOH 
PhCH2OAc + HBr 
the leaving group is B r  : in the reaction 
MeS- + PhCHzN+Me3 
MeSCH2Ph + NMe3 
the leaving group is NMe3; in the electrophilic nitration of benzene, it is H+. The term has 
meaning only in relation to a specified reaction. The leaving group is not, in general, the same 
as the substituent group present in the substrate (e.g. bromo and trimethylammonio in the 
substrates of the flrst two examples above.) 
A slightly different usage of the term prevails in the (non-mechanistic) naming of trans- 
formations, where the actual substituent group present in the substrate (and also in the 
product) is referred to as the leaving group. 
See also electrojige, entering group, nucleoMe. 
Leffler's assumption 
See H m n d  principle. 
left-to-right convention 
Arrangement of the structural formulae of the reactants so that the bonds to be made or 
broken form a linear array in which the electrons move from left to right. 
IUPAC REACTION MECHANISMS (1989). 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1135 
levelling effect 
The tendency of a solvent to make all Brransted acids whose acidity exceeds a certain value 
appear equally acidic. It is due to the complete transfer to a protophilic solvent of a hydron from 
a dissolved acid stronger than the conjugate acid of the solvent. The only acid present to any 
significant extent in all such solutions is the lyonium ion. For example, the solvent water has a 
levelling effect on the acidities of HClO,, HC1, and HI: aqueous solutions of these acids at the 
same (moderately low) concentrations have the same acidities. A corresponding levelling effect 
applies to strong bases in protogenic solvents. 
Lewis acid 
A molecular entity (and the corresponding chemical species) that is an electron-pair ac- 
ceptor and therefore able to react with a Lewis base to form a Lewis adduct, by sharing the 
electron pair furnished by the Lewis base. For example: 
- +  
Me3B 
+ 
:NH3 - 
Me3B-NH3 
Lewis acid 
Lewis base 
Lewis adduct 
See also coordination, dipolar bond 
Lewis acidity 
The thermodynamic tendency of a substrate to act as a Lewis acid. Comparative measures 
of this property are provided by the equilibrium constants for Lewis adduct formation of a 
series of Lewis acids with a common reference Lewis base. 
See also acceptor number [AN, 
electrophilicity. 
Lewis adduct 
The adduct formed between a Lewis acid and a Lewis base. 
Lewis base 
A molecular entity (and the corresponding chemical species) able to provide a pair of 
electrons and thus capable of coordination to a Lewis acid, thereby producing a Lewis adduct 
Lewis basicity 
The thermodynamic tendency of a substance to act as a Lewis base. Comparative mea- 
sures of this property are provided by the equilibrium constants for Lewis addut formation for 
a series of Lewis bases with a common reference Lewis acid. 
See also donor number [DN), 
nucleophilicity. 
Lewis formula (electron dot or Lewis structure) 
Molecular structure in which the valency electrons are shown as dots so placed between 
the bonded atoms that one pair of dots represents two electrons or one covalent (single) bond, 
e.g. 
.. 
H : C l :  
.. 
A double bond is represented by two pairs of dots, etc. Dots representing non-bonded outer- 
shell electrons are placed adjacent to the atoms with which they are associated, but not be- 
tween the atoms. Formal charges (e.g. +, -, 2+, etc.) are attached to atoms to indicate the dif- 
ference between the positive nuclear charge (atomic number) and the total number of electrons 
(including those in the inner shells), on the formal basis that bonding electrons are shared 
equally between atoms they join. (Bonding pairs of electrons are usually denoted by lines, 
representing covalent bonds, as in line formulae.) 
lifetime (mean lifetime), T 
The lifetime of a chemical species which decays in a first-order process is the time needed 
for a concentration of this species to decrease to l/e of its original value. Statistically, it 
represents the mean life expectancy of an excited species. In a reacting system in which the 
decrease in concentration of a particular chemical species is governed by a first-order rate law, 
it is equal to the reciprocal of the sum of the (pseudo)unimolecular rate constants of all 
processes which cause the decay. When the term is used for processes which are not first 
order, the lifetime depends on the initial concentration of the species, or of a quencher, and 
should be called apparent lifetime instead. 
See also chemical relaxation, half-l$e, rate of reaction. 

1136 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
ligand 
If it is possible to indicate a "central atom" in a polyatomic molecular entity, the atoms or 
groups bound to that atom are called ligands. (Cf. IUPAC INORGANIC NOMENCLATURE (1990): 
Rule 1-10.2.3.) The term is generally used in connection with metallic "central atoms". 
In biochemistry a part of a polyatomic molecular entity may be considered central, and 
atoms, groups or molecules bound to that part are considered ligands (Cf. BIOCHEMICAL 
NOMENCLATURE (1 992)). 
line formula 
A two-dimensional representation of molecular entities in which atoms are shown joined 
by lines representing single or multiple bonds, without any indication or implication concerning 
the spatial direction of bonds. For example, methanol is represented as 
H 
I 
I 
H - 
c- 
0-H 
H 
(The term should not be confused with the representation of chemical formulae by the 
'Wiswesser line notation", a method of string notation. Formulae in this notation are also 
known as 'Wiswesser line formulae".) 
linear free-energy relation 
A linear correlation between the logarithm of a rate constant or equilibrium constant for 
one series of reactions and the logarithm of the rate constant or equilibrium constant for a 
related series of reactions. Typical examples of such relations. (also known as linear Gibbs en- 
ergy relations) are the Bransted relation, and the Huinmett equation (see also o-value). 
The name arises because the logarithm of an equilibrium constant (at constant tem- 
perature and pressure) is proportional to a standard free energy (Gibbs energy) change, and the 
logarithm of a rate constant is a linear function of the free energy (Gibbs energy) of activation. 
It has been suggested (IUPAC PHYSICAL ORGANIC GLOSSARY (1983)) that this name 
should be replaced by Linear Gibbs Energy Relation, but at present there is little sign of 
acceptance of this change. 
The area of physical organic chemistry which deals with such relations is commonly re- 
ferred to as "Linear Free-Energy Relationships". 
linear Gibbs energy relation 
See linear free-energy relation. 
linear solvation energy relationships 
Equations involving the application of solvent parameters in linear or multiple (linear) 
regression expressing the solvent effect on the rate or equilibrium constant of a reaction. 
See Dimroth-Reichardt 
parameter, Kamlet-Tuft solvent parameter, Koppel-Palm solvent 
parameter, 2-value. 
line-shape analysis 
Determination of rate constants for a chemical exchange from the shapes of spectroscopic 
lines of dynamic processes. The method is most often used in nuclear magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy. 
Lineweaver-Burk plot 
lipophilic 
tendency to dissolve in fat-like (e.g. hydrocarbon) solvents. 
London forces 
also components of the forces between polar molecules. Also called "dispersion forces". 
See Michael&-Menten kinetics. 
Literally "fat-loving". Applied to molecular entities (or parts of molecular entities) having a 
See also hydrophilic, hydrophobic interaction 
Attractive forces between apolar molecules, due to their mutual polarizability. They are 
See also van der Waals forces. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1137 
lone (electron) pair 
designated with two dots. 
text books. 
loose ion pair 
TWO paired electrons localized in the valence shell on a single atom. Lone pairs should be 
The term "nonbonding electron pair" is more appropriate, and is found in many modem 
See ionpair. 
See frontier orbitals. 
The anion produced by hydron removal from a solvent molecule. For example, the hy- 
LUMO 
lyate ion 
droxide ion is the lyate ion of water. 
lyonium ion 
The cation produced by hydronation of a solvent molecule. For example, CH30H2+ is the 
lyonium ion of methanol. 
See also onium ion. 
macroscopic diffusion control 
See mixing controL 
magic acid 
See superacid. 
magnetic equivalence 
Nuclei having the same resonance frequency in nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy 
and also identical spin-spin interactions with the nuclei of a neighbouring group are 
magnetically equivalent. The spin-spin interaction between magnetically equivalent nuclei does 
not appear, and thus has no effect on the multiplicity of the respective NMR signals. 
Magnetically equivalent nuclei are necessarily also chemically equivalent, but the reverse is not 
necessarily true. 
magnetization transfer 
NMR method for determining kinetics of chemical exchange by perturbing the 
magnetization of nuclei in a particular site or sites and following the rate at which magnetic 
equilibrium is restored. The most common perturbations are saturation and inversion, and the 
corresponding techniques are often called "saturation transfer" and "selective inversion- 
recovev" . 
Marcus equation 
force (Arc"' ) of the reaction: 
See also saturation tTansfer. 
A general expression which correlates the Gibbs energy of activation (A*G) with the driving 
ASG = (X/4)( 1 + ArG'"/X)2 
where h is the reorganization energy and Arc"' is the standard free energy of the reaction cor- 
rected for the electrostatic work required to bring the reactants together. h/4 is the intrinsic 
barrier of the reaction Originally developed for outer-sphere electron transfer reactions, the 
Marcus equation has later been applied also to atom and group transfer reactions. 
MARCUS (1964); ALBERY (1980). 
Markownikoff rule 
"In the addition of hydrogen halides to unsymmetrically constituted [unsaturated] hy- 
drocarbons, the halogen atom becomes attached to the carbon bearing the lesser number of 
hydrogen atoms." Originally formulated by Markownikoff (Markovnikov) to generalize the 
orientation in additions of hydrogen halides to simple alkenes, this rule has been extended to 
polar addition reactions as follows. " In the heterolytic addition of a polar molecule to an alkene 
or alkyne, the more electronegative (nucleophilic) atom (or part) of the polar molecule becomes 
attached to the carbon atom bearing the smaller number of hydrogen atoms." 
This is an indirect statement of the common mechanistic observation, that the more elec- 
tropositive (electrophilic) atom (or part) of the polar molecule becomes attached to the end cf 
the multiple bond that would result in the more stable carbenium ion (whether or not a carbe- 

1138 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
nium ion is actually formed as a reaction intermediate in the addition reaction). Addition in the 
opposite sense is commonly called "anti-Markovnikov addition". 
mass-law effect 
constant. Thus for the equilibrium 
MARKOWNIKOFF (1870). 
At equilibrium, the product of the activities (or concentratipp) of the reacting species is 
aA + PB 
yC + 6D 
K = [C]y [DI6 / [AIa [B]P 
GULDBERG and WAAGE (1879). 
See also common-ion effect, equilibrium 
matrix isolation 
A term which refers to the isolation of a reactive or unstable species by dilution in an inert 
matrix (argon, nitrogen, etc.), usually condensed on a window or in an optical cell at low 
temperature, to preserve its structure for identification by spectroscopic or other means. 
IUPAC ATMOSPHERIC GLOSSARY (1990). 
mean lifetime 
See lifetime. 
mechanism 
A detailed description of the process leading from the reactants to the products of a 
reaction, including a characterization as complete as possible of the composition, structure, 
energy and other properties of reaction intermediates. products, and transition states. An 
acceptable mechanism of a specified reaction (and there may be a number of such alternative 
mechanisms not excluded by the evidence) must be consistent with the reaction stoichiometry, 
the rate law, and with all other available experimental data, such as the stereochemical course 
of the reaction. Inferences concerning the electronic motions which dynamically interconvert 
successive species along the reaction path (as represented by curved arrows, for example) are 
often included in the description of a mechanism. 
It should be noted that for many reactions all this information is not available and the 
suggested mechanism is based on incomplete experimental data. It is not appropriate to use 
the term mechanism to describe a statement of the probable sequence in a set of stepwise 
reactions. That should be referred to as a reaction sequence, and not a mechanism. 
mechanism-based inhibition 
substrate. Also called "suicide inhibition". 
medium 
are studied in a particular investigation. 
Meisenheimer adduct 
A cyclohexadienyl derivative formed as Lewis adduct from a nucleophile (Lewis base) and 
an aromatic or heteroaromatic compound, also called Jackson-Meisenheimer adduct. In earlier 
usage the term "Meisenheimer complex" was restricted to the typical Meisenheimer alkoxide 
adducts of nitro-substituted aromatic ethers, e.g., 
See also Gibbs energy dihgrarn 
Irreversible inhibition of an enzyme due to its catalysis of the reaction of an artificial 
The phase (and composition of the phase) in which chemical species and their reactions 
NO2 
[ 02N
EtO 
OEt 
+ 
K+OEt- - 
- 
K+ 
.
.
 
. .  
NO2 
NO2 
Analogous cationic adducts, such as 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1139 
considered to be reaction intermediates in electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions. are called 
"Wheland intermediates", and sometimes, inappropriately, o-complexes. 
JACKSON and GAZZOLO (1900); BUNCEL, CRAMFTON, STRAUSS and TERRIER (1984). 
See also o-adduct. 
melting point (corrected/uncorrected) 
The term originally signified that a correction was made (not made) for the emergent stem 
of the thermometer. In current usage it often means that the accuracy of the thermometer was 
(was not) verified. This current usage is inappropriate and should be abandoned. 
mesolytic cleavage 
Cleavage of a bond in a radical ion whereby a radical and an ion are formed. The term 
reflects the mechanistic duality of the process, which can be viewed as homolytic or heterolytic 
depending on how the electrons are attributed to the fragments. 
See MASLAK and NARVAEZ (1990). 
mesomeric effect 
The effect (on reaction rates, ionization equilibria, etc.) attributed to a substituent due to 
overlap of its p- or x-orbitals with the p- or x-orbitals of the rest of the'molecular entity., De- 
localization is thereby introduced or extended, and electronic charge may flow to or from the 
substituent. The effect is symbolized by M. 
Strictly understood, the mesomeric effect operates in the ground electronic state of the 
molecule. When the molecule undergoes electronic excitation or its energy is increased on the 
way to the transition state of a chemical reaction, the mesomeric effect may be enhaneed by the 
ekcb-omeric effect. but this term is not much used, and the mesomeric and electromeric effects 
tend to be subsumed in the term resonance effect of a substituent 
mesomerism 
picture of x-electrons as less localized in an actual molecule than in a Lewisfomla. 
between two or more Lewis formulae. 
mesophase 
phase. 
metastable (chemical species) 
See transient [chemical species). 
met at hesis 
A bimolecular process formally involving the exchange of a bond (or bonds) between 
similar interacting chemical species so that the bonding affiliations in the products are identical 
(or closely similar) to those in the reactants. For example: 
See also electronic effect, field effect inductive effect. 
Essentially synonymous with resonance. The term is particularly associated with the 
The term is intended to imply that the correct representation of a structure is intermediate 
See also aromatic (2), 
delocalizafion 
The phase of a liquid crystalline compound between the crystalline and the isotropic liquid 
RCH 
CHR 
RCHXHR' 
RCH 
CHR' 
RCH=CHR - 
II 
+ 
11 
+ 
("he term has its origin in inorganic chemistry with a different meaning, but this older 
usage is not applicable in physical organic chemistry.) 
+ methylene 
See carbene. 

1140 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
+ methylidyne 
See carbyne. 
micellar catalysis 
The acceleration of a chemical reaction in solution by the addition of a surfactant at a 
concentration higher than its critical micelle Concentration so that the reaction can proceed in 
the environment of surfactant aggregates (miceks). (Rate enhancements may be due, for 
example, to higher concentration of the reactants in that environment, more favourable 
orientation and solvation of the species, or enhanced rate constants in the micellar 
pseudophase of the surfactant aggregate.) Micelle formation can also lead to a decreased 
reaction rate. 
See also cataZyst. 
micelle 
Surfactants in solution are often association colloids, that is, they tend to form aggregates 
of colloidal dimensions, which exist in equilibrium with the molecules or ions from which they 
are formed. Such aggregates are termed micelles. 
See also inverted micelle. 
IUPAC MANUAL APPENDIX I1 (1972). 
Michaelis-Menten kinetics 
The dependence of an initial rate of reaction upon the concentration of a substrat2 S that 
is present in large excess over the concentration of an enzyme or other catalyst (or reagent) E 
with the appearance of saturation behaviour following the Michaelis-Menten equation, 
u = VISl/(K, + [SI), 
where u Is the observed initial rate, V is its limiting value at substrate saturation (i.e., [S] 
>> 
I&,), and K, the substrate concentration when u = V/2. The definition is experimental, i.e., it 
applies to any reaction that follows an equation of this general form. The symbols V, 
or urnax 
are sometimes used for V. 
The parameters V and K, (the "Michaelis constant") of the equation can be evaluated from 
the slope and intercept of a linear plot of u1 against [Sl-l (a "Lineweaver-Burk plot") or from 
slope and intercept of a linear plot of u against u/[Sl ("Eadie-Hofstee plot"). 
A Michaelis-Menten equation is also applicable to the condition where E is present in large 
excess, in which case the concentration [El appears in the equation instead of [Sl. 
The term has sometimes been used to describe reactions that proceed according to the 
scheme 
kcat 
ES - 
Products 
kl . 
E + S  
k-l 
in which case K, = (k-l + k&/kl 
(Briggs-Haldane conditions). It has more usually been ap- 
plied only to the special case in which k.l >> kt and I&, 
= k-l/kl = 4: in this case I& 
is a 
true dissociation constant (Michaelis-Menten conditions). 
See also rate-determining step. 
microscopic chemical event 
See chemical reaction, molecularity. 
microscopic diffusion control (encounter control) 
The observable consequence of the limitation that the rate of a bimolecular chemical re- 
action in a homogeneous medium cannot exceed the rate of encounter of the reacting molecular 
entities. 
If (hypothetically) a bimokcdar reaction in a homogeneous medium occurred instan- 
taneously when two reactant molecular entities made an encounter, the rate of reaction would 
be an encounter-controlled rate, determined solely by rates of diffusion of reactants. Such a 
hypothetical "fully diffusion controlled rate" is also said to correspond to "total microscopic 
diffusion control", and represents the asymptotic limit of the rate of reaction as the rate con- 
stant for the chemical conversion of the encounter pair into product (or products) becomes 
large relative to the rate constant for separation (or dissociation) of the encounter pair. 
"Partial microscopic diffusion control" is said to operate in a homogeneous reaction when 
the rates of chemical conversion and of separation are comparable. (The degree of microscopic 
diffusion control cannot usually be determined with any precision.) 
See also mixing control. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1141 
microscopic reversibility, principle of 
In a reversible reaction, the mechanism in one direction is exactly the reverse of the 
mechanism in the other direction. This does not apply to reactions that begin with a 
photochemical excitation. 
See also chemical reaction, detailed balancing. 
migration 
(1) The (usually intramolecular) transfer of an atom or group during the course of a 
molecular rearrangement. 
(2) The movement of a bond to a new position, within the same molecular entity, is known 
as "bond migration". 
Allylic rearrangements, e.g.. 
RCH=CHCH2X - 
RCHCH=CH2 
I 
X 
exemplify both types of migration. 
migratory aptitude 
The term is applied to characterize the relative tendency of a group to participate in a 
rearrangement. In nucleophilic rearrangements (migration to an electron-deficient centre), the 
migratory aptitude of a group is loosely related to its capacity to stabilize a partial positive 
charge, but exceptions are known, and the position of hydrogen in the series is often 
unpredictable. 
migratory insertion 
chemistry. 
A combination of migration and insertion. The term is mainly used in organometallic 
d 
M-CO-R 
M- 
R 
co 
M = metal 
I 
minimum structural change, principle of 
See molecular rearrangement. 
mixing control 
The experimental limitation of the rate of reaction in solution by the rate of mixing of 
solutions of the two reactants. It can occur even when the reaction rate constant is several 
powers of 10 less than that for an encounter-controlled rate. Analogous (and even more 
important) effects of the limitation of reaction rates by the speed of mixing are encountered in 
heterogeneous (solid/liquid, solid/gas, liquid/gasl systems. 
See also microscopic diffusion control, stoppedjlow. 
Mobius aromaticity 
A monocyclic array of orbitals in which there is a single out-of-phase overlap (or, more 
generally, an odd number of out-of-phase overlaps) reveals the opposite pattern of aromatic 
character to Huckel systems: with 4n electrons it is stabilized (aromatic), whereas with 4n + 2 it 
is destabilized (antiaromatic]. In the excited state 4n + 2 MBbius n-electron systems are sta- 
bilized, and 4n systems are destabilized. No examples of ground-state Mobius x-systems are 
known, but the concept has been applied to transition states of pericyclic reactions [see aromatic 
(311. 
The name is derived from the topological analogy of such an arrangement of orbitals to a 
Mabius strip. 
HEILBRONNER (1964); ZIMMERMAN (1971). 
See also Hiickel(4n + 2) rule. 
In ph sical organic chemistry moiety is generally used to signify part of a molecule, e.g. in 
moiety 
an ester R Y COOR2 the alcohol moiety is R20. The term should not be used for a small fragment 
of a molecule. 

1142 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
molecular entity 
Any constitutionally or isotopically distinct atom, rrwlecule. ion, ion pair, radical, radical 
ion complex, conformer etc., identifiable as a separately distinguishable entity. 
Molecular entity is used in this glossary as a general term for singular entities, 
irrespective of their nature, while chemical species stands for sets or ensembles of molecular 
entities. Note that the name of a compound may refer to the respective molecular entity or to 
the chemical species, e.g. methane, may mean a single molecule of CH, (molecular entity) or a 
molar amount, specified or not (chemical species), participating in a reaction. 
The degree of precision necessary to describe a molecular entity depends on the context. 
For example "hydrogen molecule" is an adequate definition of a certain molecular entity for 
some purposes, whereas for others it is necessary to distinguish the electronic state and/or 
vibrational state and/or nuclear spin, etc. of the hydrogen molecule. 
molecular mechanics calculation 
An empirical calculational method intended to give estimates of structures and energies 
for conformations of molecules. The method is based on the assumption of "natural" bond 
lengths and angles, deviation from which leads to strain, and the existence of torsional 
interactions and attractive and/or repulsive v a n  der Waals and dipolar forces between non- 
bonded atoms. The method is also called "(empirical) force-field calculations". 
molecular metal 
oxidative doping: e.g. polyacetylene following oxidative doping with iodine. 
molecular orbital 
A one-electron wavefunction describing an electron moving in the effective field provided 
by the nuclei and all other electrons of a molecular entity of more than one atom. Such 
molecular orbitals can be transformed in prescribed ways into component functions to give 
"localized molecular orbitals". Molecular orbitals can also be described, in terms of the number 
of nuclei (or "centres") encompassed, as two-centre, multi-centre, etc. molecular orbitals, and 
are often expressed as a linear combination of atomic orbitals. 
A n  orbital is usually depicted by sketching contours on which the wavefunction has a 
constant value (contour map) or by indicating schematically the envelope of the region of space 
in which there is an arbitrarily k e d  high (say 96%) probability of finding the electron 
occupying the orbital, giving also the algebraic sign (+ or -) of the wavefunction in each part of 
that region. 
molecular rearrangement 
The term is traditionally applied to any reaction that involves a change of connectivity 
(sometimes including hydrogen), and violates the so-called "principle of minimum structural 
change". According to this oversimplified principle, chemical species do not isomerize in the 
course of a transformation, e.g. substitution, or the change of a functional group of a chemical 
species into a different functional group is not expected to involve the making or breaking of 
more than the minimum number of bonds required to effect that transformation. For example, 
any new substituents are expected to enter the precise positions previously occupied by 
displaced groups. 
The simplest type of rearrangement is an intramolecular reaction in which the product is 
isomeric with the reactant (one type of "intramolecular isomerization"). An example is the first 
step of the Claisen rearrangement: 
BURKERT and ALLINGER (1982). 
A non-metallic material whose properties resemble those of metals, usually following 
The definition of molecular rearrangement includes changes in which there is a migration 
of an atom or bond (unexpected on the basis of the principle of minimum structural change), as 
in the reaction 
CH3CH2CH,Br + AgOAc - 
(CH3)2CHOAc + AgBr 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1143 
where the rearrangement stage can formally be represented as the "1.2-shift" of hydride be- 
tween adjacent carbon atoms in the carbocation 
CH3CH,CH2+ - 
CH,CH+CH, 
Such migrations occur also in radicals, e.g.: 
CH3 
The definition also includes reactions in which an entering group takes up a different 
position from the leaving group, with accompanying bond migration. An example of the latter 
type is the "allylic rearrangement": 
(CH3)2C=CHCH2Br + OH- - 
(CH3)2C(OH)CH=CH2 + Br- 
A distinction is made between "intramolecular rearrangements" (or "true molecular re- 
arrangements") and "intermolecular rearrangements" (or "apparent rearrangements"). In the 
former case the atoms and groups that are common to a reactant and a product never separate 
into independent fragments during the rearrangement stage (i.e. the change is intramolecular), 
whereas in an "intermolecular rearrangement" a migrating group is completely free from the 
parent molecule and is re-attached to a different position in a subsequent step, as in the Orton 
reaction: 
MAY0 (1980). 
molecularity 
The number of reactant molecular entities that are involved in the "microscopic chemical 
event" constituting an elementary reaction. (For reactions in solution this number is always 
taken to exclude molecular entities that form part of the medium and which are involved solely 
by virtue of their solvation of solutes.) A reaction with a molecularity of one is called 
"unimolecular", one with a molecularity of &Q "bimolecular" and of 
See also chemical reaction, order of reaction. 
molecule 
An electrically neutral entity consisting of more than one atom (n > 1). Rigorously, a 
molecule, in which n > 1 must correspond to a depression on the potential energy surface that 
is deep enough to confine at least one vibrational state. 
See also molecular entity. 
More O'FerrallJencks diagram 
Visualization of the potential energy surfaces for a reacting system, as a function of two 
chosen coordinates. It is particularly useful to discuss structural effects on the tTansition state 
geometry for processes occurring either by stepwise or concerted routes. The use of such 
diagrams, first suggested for elimination reactions (MORE O'FERRALL (1970)), was later 
extended to acid-base catalysis and to certain other reactions (JENCKS (1972, 1980)). 
"termolecular". 

1144 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
El I 
f
+
 
c-c 
/ 
\ 
=C 
:: 
D 
W - 
.- 
2 
c!l 
/ 
-C 
\N" 
b 
\
&
 
4C-C 
IN" 
Figure. More O'Ferrall-Jencks diagrams of energy contours for p-elimination reactions as a 
function of lengths of the two bonds broken. Reaction coordinates follow the dotted 
lines. a: & mechanism with "central" character, simultaneous fission of C,-Nu and Cb- 
H bonds. b: The result of stabilization of the carbanion. Nu-C-C-; a continuation of this 
trend would result in a switch to the El,b mechanism (Reproduced from N. S. ISAACS, 
"Physical Organic Chemistry", Longman Scientific. Essex, UK, (19871, with permission 
of Longman Scientific). 
Structural changes influencing vibrational modes of the transition states cause changes in 
transition state geometry. Changes in the direction of the reaction coordinate (reactant or 
product stabilizing- or destabilizing factors) cause changes according to the H m n d  principk. 
Structural changes perpendicular to the reaction coordinate (anti-Hammond effects, 
perpendicular effects) cause changes opposite to the Hammond behaviour, i.e., the easier the 
process related to the structural change, the more advanced it will be at the transition state. 
See WINEY and THORNTON (1975). 
multi-centre bond 
Representation of some molecular entities solely by localized two-electron two-centre bonds 
appears to be unsatisfactory. Instead, multi-centre bonds have to be considered in which 
electron pairs occupy orbitals encompassing three or more atomic centres, Examples include 
the three-centre bonds in diborane, the delocalized z-bonding of benzene, and bridged 
carbccations. 
+ multi-centre reaction 
A synonym for pericyclic reaction The number of "centres" is the number of atoms not 
bonded initially, between which single bonds are breaking or new bonds are formed in the 
transition state. This number does not necessarily correspond to the ring size of the transition 
state for the pericyclic reaction. Thus, a Diels-Alder reaction is a "four-centre reaction". This 
terminology has largely been superseded by the more detailed one developed for the various 
pericyclic reactions. 
multident 
See cycloaddition, sigmatropic rearrangement. 
See ambident. 
CL (mu) and E 
Notation for a ligand (prefur) that bridges two or more metal centres. The symbol g is used 
for dipole moments. 
+ narcissistic reaction 
A chemical reaction that can be described as the conversion of a reactant into its mirror 
image, without rotation or translation of the product, so that the product enantiomer actually 
coincides with the mirror image of the reactant molecule. Examples of such reactions are cited 
under the entries jlflwcional and degenerate rearrangement. 
SALEM (1971). 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1145 
neighbouring group participation 
The direct interaction of the reaction centre (usually, but not necessarily, an incipient 
carbenium centre) with a lone pair of electrons of an atom or with the electrons of a 0- or x- 
bond contained within the parent molecule but not conjugated with the reaction centre. A 
distinction is sometimes made between n-, 0- and x-participation. 
A rate increase due to neighbouring group participation is known as "anchimeric assis- 
tance". "Synartetic acceleration" is the special case of anchimeric assistance ascribed to par- 
ticipation by electrons binding a substituent to a carbon atom in a P-position relative to the 
leaving group attached to the a-carbon atom. According to the underlying model, these 
electrons then provide a three-centre bond (or "bridge") "fastening together" (as the word 
"synartetic" is intended to suggest) the a- and P-carbon atoms between which the charge is 
divided in the intermediate bridged ion formed (and in the transition state preceding its for- 
mation). The term synartetic acceleration is not widely used. 
See also intramolecular catalysis, multi-centre bond 
NHOMO 
See subacLJacent orbitaL 
The intramolecular hydrogen migration which can be observed in enzymatic and chemical 
NIH shift 
hydroxylations of aromatic rings. It is evidenced by appropriate deuterium labelling, i.e. 
In enzymatic reactions the NIH shift is generally thought to derive from the rearrangement 
(NIH stands for National Institutes of Health where the shift was discovered.) 
HANZLIK, HOGBERG and JUDSON (1984). 
nit r e n e 
Generic name for HN: and substitution derivatives thereof, containing an electrically 
neutral univalent nitrogen atom with four non-bonding electrons. Two of these are paired; the 
other two may have parallel spins (triplet state) or antiparallel spins (singlet state). The name is 
the strict analogue of carbene and, as a generic name, it is preferred to a number of alternatives 
proposed ("imene", "imine radical", "azene". "azylene", "azacarbene", "imin", "imidogen"). 
nitrenium ion 
positive charge, and two unshared electrons. A synonymous term is aminylium ion. 
no-bond resonance 
of arene oxide intermediates, but other pathways have been suggested. 
See LWOWSKI (1970). 
The cation H,N+ and its N-hydrocarbyl derivatives %N+, in which the nitrogen has a 
IUPAC CLASS NAMES (1993). 
See hyperconjugation. 
nonclassical carbocation 
A carbocation the ground state of which has delocalized (bridged) bonding x- or (3- 
electrons. (N.B.: Allylic and benzylic carbocations are not considered nonclassical.) 
BARTLETT (1965). 
normal kinetic isotope effect 
See isotope efect. 
nucleofuge 
A leaving group that carries away the bonding electron pair. For example, in the hy- 
drolysis of an ale1 chloride, C1- is the nucleofuge. The tendency of atoms or groups to depart 
with the bonding electron pair is called nucleofugality. 
The adjective is nucleofugal. 
See also electrofuge, nucleophile. 

1146 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
nucleophile, nucleophilic 
partner (the electrophik) by donating both bonding electrons. 
supplying the entering group acts as a nucleophile. For example 
A nucleophile (or nucleophilic reagent) is a reagent that forms a bond to its reaction 
A "nucleophilic substitution reaction" is a heterolytic reaction in which the reagent 
MeO- + Et-C1 
___) MeO-Et + C1' 
nucleophile 
nucleofuge 
The term "nucleophilic" is also used to designate the apparent polar character of certain 
radicals, as inferred from their higher relative reactivity with reaction sites of lower electron 
density. 
Nucleophilic reagents are Lewis bases. 
nucleophilic catalysis 
Catalysis by a Lewis base, involving formation of a Lewis adduct as a reaction intermedi- 
ate. For example, the hydrolysis of acetic anhydride in aqueous solution catalysed by py-ridine: 
CSHSN + (CH,CO),O 
___) [CSHSNCOCH~]+ + CH3C02- 
[CSHSNCOCH~]+ 
+ H2O - 
CjHSN + CH3COzH + H+, 
See also electrophilic, nucleophilicity. 
(1) The property of being nucleophilic. 
(2) The relative reactivity of a nucleophilic reagent. (It is also sometimes referred to as 
"nucleophilic power".) Qualitatively, the concept is related to Lewis basicity. However, whereas 
Lewis basicity is measured by relative equilibrium constants, 
nucleophilicity 
K 
B: + A 
B+-A- 
nucleophilicity of a Lewis base is measured by relative rate constants of different nucleophilic 
reagents towards a common substrate, most commonly involving formation of a bond to carbon, 
B: + A-Z - 
B+-A- + Z:- 
See also electrophilicity, Ritchie equation Swain-Scott equation 
Debcalization of a free electron pair (n) into an antibonding 0-orbital (o*). 
See hyperconjugation, resonance. 
onium ion 
(1) A cation (with its counterion) derived by addition of a hydron to a mononuclear parent 
hydride of the nitrogen, chalcogen and halogen family, e.g. H4N+ ammonium ion. 
(2) Derivatives formed by substitution of the above parent ions by univalent groups, e.g. 
(CH,),S+H dimethylsulfonium, (CH,CH,),N+ tetraethylammonium. 
(3) Derivatives formed by substitution of the above parent ions by groups having two or 
three free valencies on the same atom. Such derivatives are, whenever possible, designated by a 
specific class name. E.g. %C=NH,+ iminium ion. 
IUPAC CLASS NAMES (1993). 
See also carbenium ion, carbonium ion 
na* delocalization (or n-0* no bond resonance) 
opposing reactions 
See composite reactions. 
optical yield 
In a chemical reaction involving chiral reactants and products, the ratio of the optical 
purity of the product to that of the precursor, reactant or catalyst. This should not be confused 
with "enantiomeric excess". The optical yield is in no way related to the chemical yield of the 
reaction. 
IUPAC STEREOCHEMICAL TERMINOLOGY (1993). 
See stereoselectiuity. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1147 
orbital 
See atomic orbital, molecular orbital, 
orbital steering 
governed by the most favourable overlap of their appropriate orbitals. 
orbital symmetry 
The behaviour of an atomic or localized mkculcu orbital under molecular symmetry 
operations characterizes its orbital symmetry. For example, under a reflection in an appropriate 
symmetry plane, the phase of the orbital may be unchanged (symmetric), or it may change sign 
(antisymmetric), i.e. the positive and negative lobes are interchanged. 
A principal context for the use of orbital symmetry is the discussion of chemical changes 
that involve "conservation of orbital symmetry". If a certain symmetry element (e.g. the 
reflection plane) is retained along a reaction pathway, that pathway is "allowed" by orbital 
symmetry conservation if each of the occupied orbitals of the reactant(s) is of the same 
symmetry type as a similarly (e.g. singly or doubly) occupied orbital of the product(s). This 
principle permits the qualitative construction of correlation diagrams to show how molecular 
orbitals transform (and how their energies change) during idealized chemical changes (e.g. 
An idealized single bond is a o-bond, i.e., it has cylindrical symmetry, whereas a p-orbital 
or n-bond orbital has rc-symmetry, i.e. it is antisymmetric with respect to reflection in a plane 
passing through the atomic centres with which it is associated. In ethene, the x-bonding orbital 
is symmetric with respect to reflection in a plane perpendicular to and bisecting the C-C bond, 
whereas the rc*-antibonding orbital is antisymmetric with respect to this operation. 
Considerations of orbital symmetry are frequently grossly simplified in that, for example, 
the p-orbitals of a carbonyl group would be treated as having the same symmetry as those of 
ethene, and the fact that the carbonyl group in, for example, camphor, unlike that in 
formaldehyde, has no mirror planes would be ignored. These simplified considerations nev- 
ertheless afford the basis of one approach to the understanding of the rules which indicate 
whether pericyclic reactions are likely to occur under thermal or photochemical conditions. 
A concept expressing that the stereochemistry of approach of two reacting species is 
cycloadditions) . 
WOODWARD and HOFFMA" (1969); HALEVI (1992). 
See also sigma, pi. 
order of reaction, n (SI unit: 1) 
If the macroscopic (observed. empirical or phenomenological) rate of reaction (u) for any 
reaction can be expressed by an empirical differential rate equation (or rate law) which contains 
a factor of the form k [Ala[Blp ... (expressing in full the dependence of the rate of reaction on the 
concentrations [A], [Bl ...I where a, p are constant exponents (independent of concentration and 
time) and k is independent of [A] and [BI etc. (rate constant, rate coefficient), then the reaction 
is said to be of order a with respect to A, of order p with respect to B, ..., and of (total or overall) 
order n = a+p+ .... The exponents a, p,... can be positive or negative integral or rational 
nonintegral numbers. They are the reaction orders with respect to A, B, ... and are sometimes 
called "partial orders of reaction". Orders of reaction deduced from the dependence of initial 
rates of reaction on concentration are called "orders of reaction with respect to concentration": 
orders of reaction deduced from the dependence of the rate of reaction on time of reaction are 
called "orders of reaction with respect to time". 
The concept of order of reaction is also applicable to chemical rate processes occurring in 
systems for which concentration changes (and hence the rate of reaction) are not themselves 
measurable, provided it is possible to measure a chemicalflwc For example, if there is a 
dynamic equilibrium according to the equation 
and if a chemical flux is experimentally found, (e.g. by NMR line shape analysis) to be related to 
concentrations by the equation 
then the corresponding reaction is of order a with respect to A... and of total (or overall) order n 
(= a +h +... ). 
The proportionality factor k above is called the (nth order) "rate coefficient". 
Rate coefficients referring to (or believed to refer to) elementary reactions are called "rate 
constants" or, more appropriately "microscopic" (hypothetical, mechanistic) rate constants. 

1148 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
The (overall) order of a reaction cannot be deduced from measurements of a "rate of 
appearance" or "rate of disappearance" at a single value of the concentration of a species whose 
concentration is constant (or effectively constant) during the course of the reaction. If the 
overall rate of reaction is, for example, given by 
u = k[A]a[B]P 
but [Bl stays constant, then the order of the reaction (with respect to time), as observed from 
the concentration change of A with time, will be a. and the rate of disappearance of A can be 
expressed in the form 
The proportionality factor &bs deduced from such an experiment is called the "observed 
rate coefficient" and it is related to the (a + p)th order rate coefficient k by the equation 
For the common case when a = 1, &bs is often referred to as a "pseudo-first order rate 
coefficient" ($1. 
For a simple (elementary) reactions a partial order of reaction is the same as the stoi- 
chiometric number of the reactant concerned and must therefore be a positive integer (see rafe 
ofreaction). The overall order is then the same as the molecdarity. For stepwise reactions there 
is no general connection between stoichiometric numbers and partial orders. Such reactions 
may have more complex rate laws, so that an amarent order of reaction may vary with the 
concentrations of the chemical species involved and with the progress of the reaction: in such 
cases it is not useful to speak of orders of reaction, although apparent orders of reaction may 
be deducible from initial rates. 
In a stepwise reaction, orders of reaction may in principle always be assigned to the ele- 
mentary steps. 
See also kinetic equivalence. 
outer-sphere (electron transfer) 
An outer-sphere electron transfer is a reaction in which the electron transfer takes place 
with no or very weak (4 -16 kJ mol-1) electronic interaction between the reactants in the tran- 
sition state. If instead the donor and the acceptor exhibit a strong electronic coupling, the re- 
action is described as inner-sphere electron transfer. The two terms derive from studies con- 
cerning metal complexes and it has been suggested that for organic reactions the term 
"nonbonded' and 'bonded" electron transfer should be used. 
See also inner-sphere electron transfer. 
EBERSON (1987); LI?TLER (1970). 
oxidation 
(1) The complete, net removal of one or more electrons from a molecdar entity (also called 
"de-electronation") . 
(2) an increase in the oxidation number of any atom within any substrate (see 
HENDRICKSON, CRAM and HAMMOND (1970)). 
(3) Gain of oxygen and/or loss of hydrogen of a n  organic substrate. 
All oxidations meet criteria (1) and (2), 
and many meet criterion (3), but this is not always 
easy to demonstrate. 
Alternatively, an oxidation can be described as a transformation of an organic substrate 
that can be rationally dissected into steps or primitive changes. The latter consist in removal of 
one or several electrons from the substrate followed or preceded by gain or loss of water and/or 
hydrons or hydroxide ions, or by nucleophilic substitution by water or its reverse and/or by an 
intramolecular molecular rearrangement. 
This formal definition allows the original idea of oxidation (combination with oxygen), 
together with its extension to removal of hydrogen, as well as processes closely akin to this type 
of transformation (and generally regarded in current usage of the term in organic chemistry to 
be oxidations and to be effected by "oxidizing agents") to be descriptively related to definition 
(1). For example the oxidation of methane to chloromethane may be considered as follows: 
reversal of hydrolysis 
CH, - 2e- - H+ + OH- = CH30H 
b CH3C1 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1149 
oxidation number 
(1990). Rules 1-5.5.2 and 1-10.2.7. 
oxidative addition 
overall two-electron loss on one metal or a one-electron loss on each of two metals, i.e., 
L,M~ + xy - 
L,,M"+~(x) (Y), or 
2 L,M~ + xy - 
L , M ~ + ~  
(x) + L , M ~ + ~  
gr) 
See IUPAC INORGANIC RULES (1970), Rule 0.1; IUPAC INORGANIC NOMENCLATURE 
See also oxidation. 
The insertion of a metal of a metal complex into a covalent bond involving formally an 
In free-radical chemistry, the term is used to indicate a free radical addition to a carbon- 
carbon double bond, under oxidative conditions. For example: 
RH + Mn+X 
___) 
R* + HX + M("-') 
oxidative coupling 
transition metal compound and involving dioxygen as the oxidant: e.g., 
The coupling of two molecular entities through an oxidative process, usually catalysed by a 
catalyst 
2CO + 2MeOH + 1/20, - 
MeOOCCOOMe + H,O 
parallel reaction 
See composite reaction. 
paramagnetic 
Substances having a magnetic susceptibility greater than 0 are paramagnetic. They are 
drawn into a magnetic field. 
See also diamagnetic. 
partial rate factor 
The rate of substitution at one specific site in an aromatic compound relative to the rate of 
substitution at one position in benzene. For example, the partial rate factor fpz for para- 
substitution in a monosubstituted benzene C6H5Z is related to the rate constants k(C6H5Z) and 
k(C6Hd for the total reaction be. at all positions) of C,H5Z and benzene, respectively, and % 
para (the percentage para-substitution in the total product formed from C6H5Z) by the relation 
WC6HsZ) 
% para 
&Z = 
k(C6H6) 
100 
Similarly for meta-substitution: 

1150 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
(The symbols p?, mi! 
are also in use.) The term applies equally to the @SO position, and it 
can be extended to other substituted substrates undergoing parallel reactions at different sites 
with the same reagent according to the same rate law. 
INGOLD (1953); 
STOCK and BROWN (1963). 
See also selectivity. 
pericyclic reaction 
A chemical reaction in which concerted reorganization of bonding takes place throughout a 
cyclic array of continuously bonded atoms. It may be viewed as a reaction proceeding through a 
fully conjugated cyclic transition state. The number of atoms in the cyclic array is usually six, 
but other numbers are also possible. The term embraces a variety of processes, including 
cycloadditions, cheletropic reactions, electrocyclic reactions and sigmah-opic remaqements, etc. 
(provided they are concerted). 
periselectivity 
[4+61 cycbaddition of cyclopentadiene to tropone. 
perpendicular effect 
See More O'Ferrall-Jencks diagram 
persistent 
The term persistent is used to characterize radicals which have lifetimes of several min- 
utes or greater in dilute solution in inert solvents. Persistence is a kinetic or reactivity property. 
In contrast, radical stability, which is a thermodynamic property, is expressed in terms of the 
C-H bond strength of the appropriate hydrocarbon. The lifetime of a radical is profoundly 
influenced by steric shielding of the radical centre by bulky substituents. 
See also multi-centre reaction. 
The differentiation between two symmetry-allowed processes, for example the [2+41 us. 
GRILLER and INGOLD (1976). 
See also transient. 
A plot of observed rate coefficient, or more usually its decadic logarithm, against pH of 
pH-rat e profile 
solution, other variables being kept constant. 
phase-transfer catalysis 
The phenomenon of rate enhancement of a reaction between chemical species located in 
different phases (immiscible liquids or solid and liquid) by addition of a small quantity of an 
agent (called the "phase-transfer cataIyst') that extracts one of the reactants, most commonly 
an anion, across the interface into the other phase so that reaction can proceed. These cata- 
lysts are salts of "onium ions" (e.g. tetraalkylammonium salts) or agents that complex inorganic 
cations (e.g. crown ethers). The catalyst cation is not consumed in the reaction although an 
anion exchange does occur. 
phenonium ion 
photolysis 
of light, or a photochemical process in which such cleavage is an essential part. For example: 
See bridged carbocation. 
The cleavage of one or more covalent bonds in a molecular entity resulting from absorption 
c12 
___) 2Cl' 
The term is used incorrectly to describe irradiation of a sample, although in the 
IUPAC PHOTOCHEMICAL GLOSSARY (1 992). 
combination flash photolysis this usage is accepted. 
+ polar aprotic solvent 
See dipolar aprofic. 
polar effect 
For a reactant molecule RY, the polar effect of the group R comprises all the processes 
whereby a substituent may modify the electrostatic forces operating at the reaction centre Y, 
relative to the standard ROY. These forces may be governed by charge separations arising from 
differences in the elecb-onegatiuity of atoms (leading to the presence of dipoles), the presence of 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1151 
unipoles, or eleclron delocalization It is synonymous with electronic effect or "electrical effect" 
of a substituent as distinguished from other substituent effects, e.g. steric effects. 
Sometimes, however, the term "polar effect" is taken to refer to the influence, other than 
steric, that non-conjugated substituents exert on reaction rates, i.e. effects connected with 
electron delocalization between a substituent and the molecular framework to which it is 
attached are excluded. Polar effect is then not synonymous with electronic effect 
polar solvent 
polarity 
See alsofild effect, inductive effect mesomeric effect. 
See polarity. 
When applied to solvents, this rather ill-defined term covers their overall solvation 
capability (solvation power) for solutes (i.e. in chemical equilibria: reactants and products: in 
reaction rates: reactants and activated complex; in light absorptions: ions or molecules in the 
ground and excited state), which in turn depends on the action of all possible, nonspecific and 
specific, intermolecular interactions between solute ions or molecules and solvent molecules, 
excluding such interactions leading to definite chemical alterations of the ions or molecules of 
'the solute, Occasionally, the term solvent polarity is restricted to nonspecific solute/solvent 
interactions only (i.e. to van der Waals forces). 
See also Dimroth-Reichardt ,?+ parameter, Grunwald-Winstein equation, ionizing power, 
Kamlet-Taft solvent parameters, van der Waals forces, 2-value. 
REICHARDT (1 965, 1988). 
polarizability 
The ease of distortion of the electron cloud of a moZecuZar entity by an electric field (such 
as that due to the proximity of a charged reagent). It is experimentally measured as the ratio of 
induced dipole moment (kLind) to the field E which induces it: 
= k&ld/E 
The units of a are C2 m2 V-1. In ordinary usage the term refers to the "mean polarizability", i.e., 
the average over three rectilinear axes of the molecule. Polarizabilities in different directions 
(e.g. along the bond in C12, called "longitudinal polarizability". and in the direction 
perpendicular to the bond, called "transverse polarizability") can be distinguished, at least in 
principle. Polarizability along the bond joining a substituent to the rest of the molecule is seen 
in certain modern theoretical approaches as a factor influencing chemical reactivity, etc., and 
parametrization thereof has been proposed. 
See INGOLD (1953); TAFT and TOPSOM (1987). 
polydent 
See ambident. 
potential-energy profile 
A curve describing the variation of the potential energy of the system of atoms that make 
up the reactants and products of a reaction as a function of one geometric coordinate, and 
corresponding to the "energetically easiest passage" from reactants to products (i.e. along the 
line produced by joining the paths of steepest descent from the transition state to the reactants 
and to the products). For an elementary reaction the relevant geometric coordinate is the 
reaction coordinate; for a stepwise reaction it is the succession of reaction coordinates for the 
successive individual reaction steps. (The reaction coordinate is sometimes approximated by a 
quasi-chemical index of reaction progress, such as "degree of atom transfer" or bond order of 
some specified bond.) 
See also potential-energy (reaction) surface, Gibbs energy diagram 
potential-energy (reaction) surface 
A geometric hypersurface on which the potential energy of a set of reactants is plotted as a 
function of the coordinates representing the molecular geometries of the system. 
For simple systems two such coordinates (characterizing two variables that change during 
the progress from reactants to products) can be selected, and the potential energy plotted as a 
contour map. 
For simple elementary reactions, e.g. A-B + C + A + B-C, the surface can show the po- 
tential energy for all values of the A, B, C geometry, providing that the ABC angle is fixed. 
For more complicated reactions a different choice of two coordinates is sometimes pre- 
ferred, e.g. the bond orders of two different bonds. Such a diagram is often arranged so that re- 
actants are located at the bottom left corner and products at the top right. If the trace of the 

1152 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
representative point characterizing the route from reactants to products follows two adjacent 
edges of the diagram, the changes represented by the two coordinates take place in distinct 
succession: if the trace leaves the edges and crosses the interior of the diagram, the two 
changes are concerted. In many qualitative applications it is convenient (although not strictly 
equivalent) for the third coordinate to represent the standard Gibbs energy rather than po- 
tential energy. 
Using bond orders is, however, an oversimplification, since these are not well-defined, 
even for the transition state. (Some reservations concerning the diagrammatic use of Gibbs 
energies are noted under Gibbs energy diagram1 
The energetically easiest route from reactants to products on the potential-energy contour 
map defines the potential-energy projle. 
ALBERY (19671; MORE O'FERRALL (19701; JENCKS (1972, 19851. 
See also reaction coordinate. 
pre-association 
A step on the reaction path of some stepwise reactions in which the molecular entity C is 
already present in an encounter pair or encounter complex with A during the formation of B 
from A, e.g. 
rapid 
Pre - association 
A + C 1. 
(A --C) 
* B  
encounter 
complex 
In this mechanism the chemical species C 
but does not necessarily assist the 
Re-association is important when B is too short-lived to permit B and C to come together 
See also microscopic d u i i o n  control, spectator mechunism 
formation of B from A. which may itself be a bimolecular reaction with some other reagent. 
by diffusion. 
precursor complex 
pre-equilibrium (or prior equilibrium) 
ample 
See encounter complex. 
A rapidly reversible step preceding 
I 
rate - limiting 
cten 
the rate-limiting step in a stepwise reaction. For 
\ +/ 
pre - equilibrium 
w 
Ho- + /C=N 
'H 
I-- 
/ 
* HO-C-N 
I 
'H 
See also kinetic equivalence. 
pre-exponential factor 
ex- 
See energy of activation, entropy of activation 
See kinetic electrolyte efect. 
See isotope efect. 
primary kinetic electrolyte effect 
primary kinetic isotope effect 
primitive change 
One of the conceptually simpler molecular changes into which an elementary reaction can 
be notionally dissected. Such changes include bond rupture, bond formation, internal rotation, 
change of bond length or bond angle, bond migration redistribution of charge, etc. 
The concept of primitive changes is helpful in the detailed verbal description of elementary 
reactions, but a primitive change does not represent a process that is bv itself necessarily ob- 
servable as a component of an elementary reaction. 
IUPAC REACTION MECHANISMS (1989). 
prior equilibrium 
See pre-equilibrium 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1153 
product-determining step 
The step of a stepwise reaction, in which the product distribution is determined. The 
product-determining step may be identical to, or occur later than, the rate-controlling step on 
the reaction coordinate. 
product development control 
The term is used for reactions under kinetic control where the selectivity parallels the rel- 
ative (thermodynamic) stabilities of the products. Product development control is usually as- 
sociated with a transition state occurring late on the reaction coordinate. 
See also steric-approach control, thermodynamic control. 
promotion 
See pseudo-catalysis. 
propagation 
See chain reaction. 
protic 
See protogenic. 
protogenic (solvent) 
Capable of acting as a proton (hydron) donor strongly or weakly acidic (as a Brransted 
acid). The term is preferred to the synonym "protic" or the more ambiguous expression "acidic" 
by itself. Also called HBD (hydrogen bond donor] solvent. 
See protophilic solvent. 
+ protolysis 
This term has been used synonymously with proton (hydronl-transfer reaction. Because of 
its misleading similarity to hydrolysis, photolysis, etc., its use is discouraged. 
See also autoprotolysis. 
proton affinity 
The negative of the enthalpy change in the gas phase reaction (real or hypothetical) 
between a proton (more appropriately hydro4 and the chemical species concerned, usually an 
electrically neutral species to give the corylgate acid of that species. Proton amnity is often, but 
unofficially, abbreviated as PA. 
LIAS, LIEBMAN, and LEVIN (1984). 
See also gas phase basicity. 
proton transfer reaction 
A chemical reaction, the main feature of which is the intermolecular or intramolecular 
transfer of a proton (hydron) from one binding site to another. For example, 
0 
O+H 
- 
II 
II 
CH3C02H + CH3CCH3 - 
CH3CO2- + CH3CCH3 
In the detailed description of proton transfer reactions, especially of rapid proton transfers 
between electronegative atoms, it should always be specified whether the term is used to refer 
to the overall process (including the more-or-less encounter-controlled formation of a hydrogen 
bonded complex and the separation of the products: see microscopic d@sion 
controq or just to 
the proton transfer event (including solvent rearrangement] by itself. 
See also autoprotolysis, tautornerism 
protophilic (solvent) 
Capable of acting as proton acceptor, strongly or weakly basic (as a Brmsted base). Also 
called HBA (hydrogen bond acceptor) solvent. 
See also protogenic solvent. 
prototropic rearrangement (or prototropy) 
See tautomerism 
pseudo-cat alysis 
If an acid or base is present in nearly constant concentration throughout a reaction in 
solution (owing to buffering or the use of a large excess], it may be found to increase the rate of 

1154 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
that reaction and also to be consumed during the process. The acid or base is then not a 
catalyst and the phenomenon cannot be called catalysis according to the well-established 
meaning of these terms in chemical kinetics, although the mechanism of such a process is often 
intimately related to that of a catalysed reaction. It is recommended that the term pseudo- 
catalysis be used in these and analogous cases [not necessarily involving acids or bases). For 
example, if a Bronsted acid accelerates the hydrolysis of an ester to a carboxylic acid and an 
alcohol, this is properly called acid catalysis, whereas the acceleration, by the same acid, of 
hydrolysis of an amide should be described as pseudo-catalysis by the acid: the "acid pseudo- 
catalyst" is consumed during the reaction through formation of an ammonium ion. The terms 
"general acid pseudo-catalysis" and "general base pseudo-catalysis'' may be used as the 
analogues of general acid catalysis and general base catalysis. 
The term "base-promoted", "base-accelerated, or "base-induced" is sometimes used for 
reactions that are pseudo-catalysed by bases, However, the term "promotion" also has a 
different meaning in other chemical contexts. 
pseudo-first order rate coefficient 
See order of reaction 
+ pseudomolecular rearrangement 
The use of this awkwardly 
"intermolecular rearrangement". 
See molecular rearrangement. 
pseudopericyclic 
formed term is discouraged. It is synonymous with 
A concerted transformation is pseudopericyclic if the primary changes in bonding occur 
within a cyclic array of atoms at one [or more) of which nonbonding and bonding atomic or- 
bitals interchange roles. 
A formal example is the enol + enol prototropy of pentane-2,4-dione (acetylacetone). 
Because the a- and o-atomic orbitals that interchange roles are arthogonal, such a 
reaction d o e  not proceed through a fully co$ugated transition state and is thus not a pericyclic 
reaction and therefore not governed by the rules that express orbital symmetry restrictions 
applicable to pericyclic reactions. 
+ pseudo-unimolecular 
meaningless. 
pyrolysis 
ROSS, SEIDERS and LEMAL (1976). 
A term sometimes used as synonymous with pseudo-first order, but is inherently 
See moleculwity, order of reaction 
TY-temIysis, usually associated with exposure to a high temperature. 
See alsoJash vacuum pyrolysis. 
An adduct formed by electron-pair donation from a x-orbital into a o-orbital, or from a o- 
x-adduct (pi-adduct) 
orbital into a x-orbital, or from a x-orbital into a x-orbital. For example: 
Such an adduct has commonly been known as a "a-complex", but. as the bonding is not 
necessarily weak, it is better to avoid the term complex in accordance with the recommen- 
dations in this Glossary. 
See also coordination. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1155 
sc-bond (pi bond) 
+ a-complex 
a-electron acceptor, x-electron donor group 
See sigma, pi. 
See n-adduct. 
A substituent capable of a +R (e.g. NOz) or -R (e.g. OCH,) effect, respectively. 
See electronic effect, polar effect, o-constant. 
a-orbital 
See sigma, pi. 
quantitative structure-activity relationships (QSAR) 
The building of structure-biological activity models by using regression analysis with 
physicochemical constants, indicator variables or theoretical calculations. The term has been 
extended by some authors to include chemical reactivity, i.e. activity is regarded as 
qnonyn-ious with reactivity. This extension is, however, discouraged. 
See CHARTON (1 989). 
See also correlation analysis. 
The number of defined events which occur per photon absorbed by the system. The 
quantum yield 
integral quantum yield is 
$ =  
number of events 
.. number of photons absorbed 
For a photochemical reaction, 
moles of reactant consumed or product formed 
moles of photons absorbed 
$ =  
The differential quantum yield is 
dEx1 I dt 
n 
$ =  
where d[x]/dt is the rate of change of the amount of (substance) concentration of a measurable 
quantity, and n the amount of photons (mol or its equivalent einsteins) absorbed per unit time. 
can be used for photophysical processes or photochemical reactions. 
IUPAC PHOTOCHEMICAL GLOSSARY (1992). 
radical (or free radical) 
A molecular entity such as CH,, *SnH3, C1. possessing an unpaired electron. (In these 
formulae the dot, symbolizing the unpaired electron, should be placed so as to indicate the 
atom of highest spin density, if this is possible.) Paramagnetic metal ions are not normally 
regarded as radicals. However, in the "isolobal analogy" (see HOFFMA" (198211, the similarity 
between certain paramagnetic metal ions and radicals becomes apparent. 
At least in the context of physical organic chemistry, it seems desirable to cease using the 
adjective "free" in the general name of this type of chemical species and molecular entity, so that 
the term "free radical" may in future be restricted to those radicals which do not form parts of 
radical pairs. 
Depending upon the core atom that possesses the unpaired electron, the radicals can be 
described as carbon-, oxygen-, nitrogen-, metal-centred radicals. If the unpaired electron 
occupies an orbital having considerable s or more or less pure p character, the respective 
radicals are termed o- or sc-radicals. 
In the past, the term "radical" was used to designate a substituent group bound to a 
mlecular entity, as opposed to "free radical", which nowadays is simply called radical. The 
bound entities may be called groups or substituents, but should no longer be called radicals. 
IUPAC NOMENCLATURE GUIDE (1993). 
See also biradical. 
See radical ion. 
radical anion 

1156 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
radical centre(s) 
The atom (or group of atoms) in a polyatomic radical on which an unpaired electron is 
largely localized. Attachment of a monovalent atom to a radical centre gives a molecule for 
which it is possible to write a Lewis formula in which the normal stable valencies are assigned 
to all atoms. 
radical combination 
See colligation 
radical ion 
A radical that carries an electric charge. A positively charged radical is called a "radical 
cation" (e.g., the benzene radical cation C6H6.'); a negatively charged radical is called a "radical 
anion" (e.g., the benzene radical anion C6H6.- or the benzophenone radical anion PhC-O.-). 
Commonly, but not necessarily, the odd electron and the charge are associated with the same 
atom. 
Unless the positions of unpaired spin and charge can be associated with specific atoms, 
superscript dot and charge designations should be placed in the order .+ or .- suggested by the 
name "radical ion", (e.g C3H6.+). 
Note: In the previous edition of the Glossary, it was recommended to place the charge 
designation directly above the centrally placed dot. However, this format is now discouraged 
because of the difficulty of extending it to ions bearing more than one charge, and/or more 
than one unpaired electron. 
In mass spectroscopic usage the symbol for the charge precedes the dot representing the 
unpaired electron. 
IUPAC MASS SPECTROMETRY (1991). 
radical pair (or geminate pair) 
The term is used to identify two radicals in close proximity in solution, within a solvent 
cage. They may be formed simultaneously by some unimolecular process, e.g., peroxide 
decomposition, or they may have come together by diffusion. While the radicals are together, 
correlation of the unpaired electron spins of the two species cannot be ignored: this correlation 
is responsible for the CIDNP phenomenon. 
See also geminate recombination 
radiolysis 
The cleavage of one or several bonds resulting from exposure to high-energy radiation. The 
term is also often used loosely to specify the method of irradiation ("pulse radiolysis") used in 
any radiochemical reaction, not necessarily one involving bond cleavage. 
rate coefficient 
See order of reaction, kinetic equivalence. 
rate-controlling step 
A rate-controlling (rate-determining or rate-limiting) step in a reaction occurring by a 
composite reaction sequence is an elementary reaction the rate constant for which exerts a 
strong effect - stronger than that of any other rate constant - on the overall rate. It is 
recommended that the expressions rate-controlling, rate-determining and rate-hitiq be 
regarded as synonymous, but some special meanings sometimes given to the last two 
expressions are considered under a separate heading. 
A rate-controlling step can be formally defined on the basis of a control function (or 
control factor) CF, identified for an elementary reaction having a rate constant ki by 
CF = (alnu/alnki) 5. kj 
where u is the overall rate of reaction. In performing the partial differentiation all equilibrium 
constants K, and all rate constants except ki are held constant. The elementary reaction having 
the largest control factor exerts the strongest influence on the rate v, and a step having a CF 
much larger than any other step may be said to be rate-controlling. 
A rate-controlling step defined in the way recommended here has the advantage that it is 
directly related to the interpretation of kinetic isotope e8ect.s. 
IUPAC CHEMICAL KINETICS (1 99 1) 
As formulated this implies that all rate constants are of the same dimensionality. Consider 
however the reaction of A and B to give an intermediate C, which then reacts further with D to 
give products: 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1157 
kl 
k-1 
k2 
A + B  t 
C 
(1) 
C + D .-+ 
Products 
(2) 
Assuming that C reaches a steady state, then the observed rate is given by 
kIk2 [A1 [BI [Dl 
k-1 + k2 [DI 
v =  
Considering h [D ] a pseudo-first order rate constant, then k$D] >> k-l, and the observed 
Step (1) is said to be the rate-controlling step. 
If b[D] cc k-l, then the observed rate 
rate v = kl[AIIBl and k&s = kl 
[A1 [BI [Dl 
klk2 
k- 1 
v = -  
= Kk2 [A1 [BI [Dl 
where K is the equilibrium constant for the pre-equilibrium (1) and is equal to kl/kml, and k&s 
Step (2) is said to be the rate-controlling step. 
See also Gibbs energy diagram, microscopic dimion control, mixing control, rate- 
= &. 
determining step, rate-limiting step. 
rate constant, k (SI unit: s-l (dm3 mol-l)n-l) 
See order of reaction, 
rate-determining step, rate-limiting step 
These terms are best regarded as synonymous with rate-controlling step. However, other 
meanings that have been given to them should be mentioned, as it is necessary to be aware of 
them in order to avoid confusion: 
Sometimes the term rate-determining is used as a special case of rate-controlling, being 
assigned only to an initial slow step which is followed by rapid steps. Such a step imposes an 
upper limit on the rate, and has also been called rate-limiting. 
In view of the considerable danger of confusion when special meanings are applied to rate- 
determining and rate-limiting, it is recommended that they be regarded as synonymous, with 
the meaning explained under the entry rate-controlling step. See Michael&-Menten kinetics. 
IUPAC CHEMICAL KINETICS (1991). 
rate law (or empirical differential rate equation) 
An expression for the rate of reaction of a particular reaction in terms of concentrations of 
chemical species and constant parameters (normally rate coefficients and partial orders of reac- 
tion) only. For examples of rate laws see equations (1) to (3) under kinetic equivalence, and (1) 
under steady state. 
rate of appearance 
rate of reaction 
See rate of reaction, 
For the general chemical reaction 
aA + bB + pP + qQ ... 
occurring under constant-volume conditions, without an appreciable build-up of reaction in- 
termediates, the rate of reaction v is defined as 
I J = - - -  
d[A] = - 
d[B1 = + 1 d[PI 
= + 1 d[QI 
a 
dr 
b 
dt 
P 
dt 
4 
dt 
where symbols placed inside square brackets denote amount (or amount of substance) 
concentrations (conventionally expressed in units of mol dm-3). The symbols R and r are also 
commonly used in place of u. It is recommended that the unit of time should always be the 
second. 

1158 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
In such a case the rate of reaction differs from the rate of increase of concentration of a 
product P by a constant factor (the reciprocal of its coemcient in the stoichiometric equation, p) 
and from the rate of decrease of concentration of the reactant A by l/a. [It should be noted that 
all coemcients in the stoichiometric equation are positive: those for products (p. q...] will 
therefore differ in sign from the stoichiometric numbers defined in IUPAC MANUAL (19791.1 
The quantity 
defined by the equation 
1 
- 
1 h P  - 
1 &Q 
S = - '  
= - - - - - + - - - + - -  
a d t  
b 
dt 
P 
dt 
4 d t  
(where nA designates the amount of substance A, conventionally expressed in units of mole) 
may be called the "rate of conversion" and is appropriate when the use of concentrations is 
inconvenient, e.g. under conditions of varying volume. In a system of constant volume, the rate 
of reaction is equal to the rate of conversion per unit volume throughout the reaction. 
For a stepwise reaction this definition of "rate of reaction" (and "extent of reaction", 6) will 
apply only if there is no accumulation of intermediate or formation of side products. It is 
therefore recommended that the term "rate of reaction" be used only in cases where it is ex- 
perimentally established that these conditions apply. More generally, it is recommended that, 
instead, the terms "rate of disappearance" or "rate of consumption" ofA 0.e. -d[Al/dt, the rate of 
decrease of concentration of A) or "rate of appearance" of P (i.e. d[Pl/dt, the rate of increase of 
concentration of product P) be used, depending on the concentration change of the particular 
chemical species that is actually observed. In some cases reference to the chemical j7.u~ 
observed may be more appropriate. 
The symbol u (without lettered subscript) should be used only for rate of reaction; u with a 
lettered subscript (e.g. uA) refers to a rate of appearance or rate of disappearance (e.g. of the 
chemical species A). 
N.B. This definition is consistent with CODATA (1974) recommendations and with IUPAC 
MANUAL APPENDIX V (1981), but differs from the unconventional terminology in the earlier 
IUPAC MANUAL (1979). 
See also chemical relaxation, lifetime. order of reaction. 
reacting bond rules 
(1) For an internal motion of a molecular entity corresponding to progress over a transition 
state (energy maximum), any change that makes the motion more dimcult will lead to a new 
molecular geometry at the energy maximum, in which the motion has proceeded further. 
Changes that make the motion less difficult will have the opposite effect. (This rule corresponds 
to the Hammond principle. 
(2) For an internal motion of a molecular entity that corresponds to a vibration, any 
change that tends to modify the equilibrium point of the vibration in a particular direction will 
actually shift the equilibrium in that direction. 
(3) Effects on reacting bonds (bonds made or broken in the reaction) are the most 
significant. The bonds nearest the site of structural change are those most strongly affected. 
THORNTON (1967). 
See also More O'Ferrall-Jencks diagram. 
See chemical reaction. 
reaction 
reaction coordinate 
A geometric parameter that changes during the conversion of one (or more) reactant 
molecular entities into one (or more) product molecular entities and whose value can be taken 
for a measure of the progress of an elementary reaction (for example, a bond length or bond an- 
gle or a combination of bond lengths and/or bond angles: it is sometimes approximated by a 
non-geometric parameter, such as the bond order of some specified bond). 
In the formalism of "transition-state theory", the reaction coordinate is that coordinate in a 
set of curvilinear coordinates obtained from the conventional ones for the reactants which, for 
each reaction step, leads smoothly from the configuration of the reactants through that of the 
transition state to the configuration of the products. The reaction coordinate is typically chosen 
to follow the path along the gradient (path of shallowest ascent/deepest descent) of potential 
energy from reactants to products. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1159 
The term has also been used interchangeably with the term transition coordinate, applica- 
ble to the coordinate in the immediate vicinity of the potential energy maximum. Being more 
specific, the name transition coordinate is to be preferred in that context. 
MARCUS (1 966). 
See also potential-energy profi, potential-energy reaction surface. 
reaction mechanism 
See mechanism 
(1) A synonym for mechanism 
(2) 
A trajectory on the potential-energy swface. 
(3) A sequence of synthetic steps. 
A set of one or more (possibly experimentally inseparable) reaction steps leading to and/or 
reaction path 
reaction stage 
from a detectable or presumed reaction intermediate. 
,reaction step 
An elementary reaction constituting one of the stages of a stepwise reaction in which a re- 
action intermediate (or. for the first step, the reactants) is converted into the next reaction in- 
termediate (or, for the last step, the products) in the sequence of intermediates between re- 
actants and products. 
See also rate-limiting step, reaction stage. 
reactive, reactivity 
As applied to a chemical species, the term expresses a kinetic property. A species is said to 
be more reactive or to have a higher reactivity in some given context than some other (reference) 
species if it has a larger rate constant for a specified elementary reaction The term has.meaning 
only by reference to some explicitly stated or implicitly assumed set of conditions. It is not to be 
used for reactions or reaction patterns of compounds in general. 
The term is also more loosely used as a phenomenological description not restricted to ele- 
mentary reactions. When applied in this sense the property under consideration may reflect not 
only rate, but also equilibrium, constants. 
See also stable. weactive, unstable. 
reactivity index 
Any numerical index derived from quantum mechanical model calculations that permits 
the prediction of relative reactivities of different molecular sites. Many indices are in use, based 
on a variety of theories and relating to various types of reaction. The more successful 
applications have been to the substitution reactions of cory'ugated systems where relative 
reactivities are determined largely by changes of rc-electron energy. 
reactivity-selectivity principle (RSP) 
This idea may be expressed loosely as: the more reactive a reagent is, the less selective it 
is. 
Consider two substrates S1 and S2 under oing the same type of reaction with two 
reagents R1 and R2, S2 being more reactive than &, and R2 more reactive than R1 in the given 
type of reaction. The relative reactivities (in log units, see selectivity) for the four possible re- 
actions may notionally be represented as follows: 
l o g k  T 
(iii) 
S1 + R 2  
S2 + R1 
S1 + R1 

1160 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
With the ositions of (Sl + Rl), (S2 + Rl), and (S1 + R2) fixed, there are three types of 
In position fi) the selectivity of R2 for the two substrates, measured by a is the same as the 
selectivity of R1 for the two substrates, also a 
In position (ii) the selectivity of R2 for the two substrates, measured by b, is less than the 
selectivity of R1 for the two substrates, i.e. b c a It is this situation which is in accord with the 
RSP. 
In position (iii) the selectivity of R2 for the two substrates, measured by c, is greater than 
the selectivity of R1 for the two substrates, i.e. c > a. This situation may be described as anti- 
RSP. 
There are many examples in which the RSP is followed, but there are also many examples 
corresponding to situations (i) and (iii). The RSP is in accord with intuitive feeling and certainly 
holds in the limiting case when reactivity is controlled by diffusion. However, the validity of the 
RSP is a matter of great controversy "...and diverse opinions have been expressed, from 
declaring the reactivity-selectivity principle as a universal law up to 'virtually useless in practice 
as a general rule'." [EXNER (198811. 
ARGILE, CAREY, FUKATA, HARCOURT, MORE O'FERRALAND MURPHY (1985); BUNCEL 
,and WILSON (1987); JOHNSON (1975); STOCK and BROWN (1963). 
rearrangement 
See degenerate rearrangement, molecular rearrangement, sigmatropic rearrangement 
rearrangement stage 
The elementary reaction or reaction stage (of a molecular rearrangement) in which there is 
both making and breaking of bonds between atoms common to a reactant and a reaction 
product or a reaction intermediate. If the rearrangement stage consists of a single elementary 
reaction, this is a "rearrangement step". 
reduction 
The complete transfer of one or more electrons to a molecular entity (also called 
"electronation"), and, more generally, the reverse of the processes described under oxidation (21, 
(3). 
reductive elimination 
positions for (S B + R2): 
The reverse of oxidatiue addition 
regioselectivity, regioselective 
A regioselective reaction is one in which one direction of bond making or breaking occurs 
preferentially over all other possible directions. Reactions are termed completely (100 %) 
regioselective if the discrimination is complete, or partially (x %), if the product of reaction at 
one site predominates over the product of reaction at other sites. The discrimination may also 
semi-quantitatively be referred to as high or low regioselectivity. 
(Originally the term was restricted to addition reactions of unsymmetrical reagents to 
unsymmetrical alkenes.) 
In the past, the term "regiospecificity" was proposed for 100 % regioselectivity. This 
terminology is not recommended owing to inconsistency with the terms stereoselecfiuity and 
stereospecijkity . 
See ADAMS (1992); HASSNER (1968). 
See also chemselectiuity. 
Passage of an excited or otherwise perturbed system towards or into thermal equilibrium 
IUPAC PHOTOCHEMICAL GLOSSARY (1 988). 
See also chemical relaxation. 
relaxation 
with its environment. 
reorganization energy 
In a one-electron transfer reaction 
A + D 
A*- + D.+ 
the reorganization energy X is the energy required for all structural adjustments (in the reac- 
tants and in the surrounding solvent molecules) which are needed in order that A and D as- 
sume the configuration required for the transfer of the electron. 
See inhinsic banier, Marcus equation. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1161 
resonance 
In the context of chemistry, the term refers to the representation of the electronic 
structure of a molecular entity in terms of contributing structures. Resonance among con- 
tributing structures means that the wavefunction is represented by "mixing' the wavefunctions 
of the contributing structures. The concept is the basis of the quantum mechanical valence 
bond methods. The resulting stabilization is linked to the quantum mechanical concept of 
"resonance energy". The term resonance is also used to refer to the delocalization phenomenon 
itself. 
See ATKINS (1974). 
See also mesomerism 
resonance effect 
This is the term most commonly used to describe the influence (on reactivity, spectra, etc.) 
of a substituent through electron delocalization into or from the substituent. The use of the 
term obviates the need to attempt to distinguish between the operation of the mesomeric eflect 
and the electTomeric efect. 
(An alternative term with essentially the same meaning is 
"conjugative effect". At one time "tautomeric effect" was also used, but was abandoned because 
-tautomerisrn implies reorganization of the atomic nuclei.) The effect is symbolized by R. 
resonance energy 
The difference in potential energy between the actual molecular entity and the conb-ibuting 
structure of lowest potential energy. The resonance energy cannot be measured, but only 
estimated, since contributing structures are not observable molecular entities. 
See resonance. 
+ retroaddition 
See cycloelimination 
See cycloelimination 
See ene reaction. 
+ retrocycloaddition 
retro-ene reaction 
reverse micelle (or reversed micelle) 
Rftchie equation 
See inverted rnicelle. 
The linearfree energy relation 
logh=log ko + N+ 
applied to the reactions between nucleophiles and certain large and relatively stable organic 
cations, e.g. arenediazonium, triarylmethyl, and aryltropylium cations in various solvents. 
is 
the rate constant for reaction of a given cation with a given nucleophilic system (i.e. given 
nucleophile in a given solvent). 
is the rate constant for the same cation with water in water, 
and N+ is a parameter which is characteristic of the nucleophilic system and independent of the 
cation. A surprising feature of the equation is the absence of a coefficient of N+, characteristic of 
the substrate (cf. the s in the Swain-Scoff equation), even though values of N+ vary over 13 log 
units. The equation thus involves a gigantic breakdown of the reactivity-selectivity principle. The 
equation has been extended both in form and in range of application. 
RITCHIE (1972, 1978, 1986). 
See also CHAPMAN and SHOWER (1978). 
p-value (rho-value) 
A measure of the susceptibility to the influence of substituent groups on the rate constant 
or equilibrium constant of a particular organic reaction involving a family of related substrates. 
Deflned by Hammett for the effect of ring substituents in meta- and para-positions of aromatic 
side-chain reactions by the empirical "po-equation" of the general form 
in which ox is a constant characteristic of the substituent X and of its position in the reactant 
molecule. 
More generally (and not only for aromatic series), p-values (modifled with appropriate 
subscripts and superscripts) are used to designate the susceptibility of reaction series for 

1162 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
families of various organic compounds to any substituent effects, as given by the modified set of 
o-constants in an empirical po-correlation. 
Reactions with a positive p-value are accelerated [or the equilibrium constants of analo- 
gous equilibria are increased) by substituents with positive o-constants. Since the sign of o was 
defined so that substituents with a positive o increase the acidity of benzoic acid, such 
substituents are generally described as attracting electrons away from the aromatic ring. It 
follows that reactions with a positive p-value are considered to involve a transition state (or 
reaction product) so that the difference in energy between this state and the reactants is 
decreased by a reduction in electron density at the reactive site of the substrate. 
pa-equation (rho-sigma equation) 
See also H m t t  equation, 0-constant, Taft equation. 
See H m t t  equation, p-value, o-constant, Taft equation 
sacrificial hyperconjugation 
+ salt effect 
See hyperconjugation. 
See kinetic electrolyte effect. 
saturation transfer 
A term used in nuclear magnetic resonance. When a nucleus is strongly irradiated, its 
spin population may partly be transferred to another nucleus by an exchange process. 
See magnetization lransfer. 
Saytzeff rule 
Dehydrohalogenation of secondary- and tertiary--1 
halides proceeds by the preferential 
removal of the P-hydrogen from the carbon that has the smallest number of hydrog as. 
Originally formulated by A. Saytzeff (Zaitsev) to generalize the orientation in P-ehination re- 
actions of alkyl halides, this rule has been extended and modified, as follows: When two or more 
olefins can be produced in an elimination reaction, the thermodynamically most stable alkene 
will predominate. Exceptions to the Saytzeff rule are exemplified by the Hofmann rule. 
SAYTZEFF (1 875). 
See also Markownikoff rule. 
A substance that reacts with (or otherwise removes) a trace component (as in the scav- 
IUPAC COMPENDIUM (1987). 
See also inhibition. 
scavenger 
enging of trace metal ions) or traps a reactive reaction intermediate. 
scrambling 
See isotopic scrambling. 
secondary kinetic electrolyte effect 
See kinetic electrolyte effect. 
secondary kinetic isotope effect 
See isotope effect. 
selectivity 
The discrimination shown by a reagent in competitive attack on two or more substrates or 
on two or more positions in the same substrate. It is quantitatively expressed by ratios of rate 
constants of the competing reactions, or by the decadic logarithms of such ratios. 
See also isoselective relationship, partial rate factor, regioselectivity, selectivity factor, 
s tereoselectivity . 
selectivity factor 
A quantitative representation of selectivity in aromatic substitution reactions (usually elec- 
trophilic, for monosubstituted benzene derivatives). If the partial rate factor, J expresses the 
reactivity of a specified position in the aromatic compound PhX relative to that of a single 
position in benzene, then the selectivity factor Sf (expressing discrimination between p and rn- 
positions in PhXl is defined as 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1163 
SJ = log VpX/fmX1. 
STOCK and BROWN (1963). 
shielding 
In the context of NMR spectroscopy shielding is the effect of t.e electron shells of the 
observed and the neighbouring nuclei on the external magnetic field. The external field induces 
circulations in the electron cloud. The resulting magnetic moment is oriented in the opposite 
direction to the external field, so that the local field at the central nucleus is weakened, 
although it may be strengthened at other nuclei (deshielding). 
The phenomenon is the origin of the structural dependence of the resonance frequencies 
of the nuclei. 
See also chemical shij?. 
sigma, pi (o, 
XI 
The terms are symmetry designations, n molecular orbitals being antisymmetric with 
respect to a defining plane containing at least one atom (e.g. the molecular plane of ethene), 
,and o molecular orbitals symmetric with respect to the same plane. In practice the terms are 
used both in this rigorous sense (for orbitals encompassing the entire molecule] and also for lo- 
calized two-centre orbitals or bonds, and it is necessary to make a clear distinction between the 
two usages. 
In the case of two-centre bonds, a n-bond has a nodal plane that includes the internuclear 
bond axis, whereas a a-bond has no such nodal plane. (A &bond in organometallic or inorganic 
molecular species has two nodes.) Radicals are classified by analogy into o- and x-radicals. 
Such two-centre orbitals may take part in molecular orbitals of 6- or n-symmetry. For 
example, the methyl group in propene contains three C-H bonds, each of which is of local o- 
symmetry (i.e. without a nodal plane including the internuclear axis], but these three "o-bonds" 
can in turn be combined to form a set of group orbitals one of which has nqmmetry with 
respect to the principal molecular plane and can accordingly interact with the two-centre 
orbital of a-symmetry (n-bond) of the double-bonded carbon atoms, to form a molecular orbital 
of n-symmetry. 
Such an interaction between the CH, group and the double bond is an example of what is 
called hgpercory'ugation This cannot rigorously be described as "o-n conjugation" since o and n 
here refer to different defining planes, and interaction between orbitals of different symmetries 
(with respect to the same defining plane) is forbidden. 
See also JORGENSEN and SALEM (19731. 
sigmatropic rearrangement 
A m k c d a r  rearrangement that involves both the creation of a new o-bond between atoms 
previously not directly linked and the breaking of an existing o-bond. There is normally a 
concurrent relocation of x-bonds in the molecule concerned, but the total number of n- and o- 
bonds does not change. The term was originally restricted to intramolecular pericyclic reactions, 
and many authors use it with this connotation. It is, however, also applied in a more general, 
purely structural, sense. 
If such reactions are intramolecular, their tTansition state may be visualized as an associ- 
ation of two fragments connected at their termini by two partial o-bonds, one being broken and 
the other being formed as, for example, the two ally1 fragments in (a']. Considering only atoms 
within the (real or hypothetical) cyclic array undergoing reorganization, if the numbers of these 
in the two fragments are designated i and j, then the rearrangement is said to be a sigmatropic 
change of order [ij] (conventionally [il I bl). Thus the rearrangement (a] is of order [3,3], whilst 
reaction (b) is a [1,5lsigmatropic shift of hydrogen. (N.B.: By convention sauare brackets [...I 
here refer to numbers of atoms, in contrast with current usage in the context of cycloaddition.] 

1164 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
The descriptors a and s (antarafacial and suprafacia0 may also be annexed to the num- 
bers i andj: (b) is then described as a [ls.5s] sigmatropic rearrangement, since it is suprafacial 
with respect both to the hydrogen atom and to the pentadienyl system: 
@j2 
___) 
<
-
'
H
 
CH2 
The prefur "homo" (meaning one extra atom, interrupting conjugation - 
cf. 
"homoaromaticity") has frequently been applied to sigmatropic rearrangements, but is mis- 
leading. 
See also cycloaddition tautomerisrn 
silylene 
(1) Generic name for H2Si: and substitution derivatives thereof, containing an electrically 
neutral bivalent silicon atom with two non-bonding electrons. (The definition is analogous to 
that given for carbene.) 
(2) The silanediyl group (H2Si), analogous to the methylene group (H2C). 
single-electron transfer mechanism (SET) 
A reaction mechanism characterized by the transfer of a single electron between the 
species occurring on the reaction coordinate of one of the elementary steps. 
single-step reaction 
Slater-type orbital 
scaling the nuclear charge for each orbital. 
soft acid 
See hard acid. 
soft base 
See hard base. 
solvation 
Any stabilizing interaction of a solute (or solute moiety) and the solvent or a similar inter- 
action of solvent with groups of an insoluble material (i.e., the ionic groups of a n  ion-exchange 
resin). Such interactions generally involve electrostatic forces and van der Wmls forces, as well 
as chemically more specific effects such as hydrogen bond formation. 
solvatochromic relationship 
A reaction that proceeds through a single transition state. 
An approximate atomic orbital that attempts to allow for electron-electron repulsion by 
See also cybotactic region 
A linearfree-energy relationship based on solvatochromism 
See also Kmkt-Tuft solvent parameters. 
solvatochromism 
The (pronounced) change in position and sometimes intensity of an electronic absorption 
or emission band, accompanying a change in the polarity of the medium. Negative (positive] 
solvatochromism corresponds to a hypsochromic (bathochromic) shift with increasing solvent 
polarity. 
BUNCEL and RAJAGOPAL (1990); REICHARDT (1988). 
See also Dimroth-Reichardt E, parameter, Zvalue. 
solvent isotope effect 
See isotope efect. 
solvent parameter 
Quantitative measures of the capability of solvents for interaction with solutes. Such 
parameters have been 'based on numerous different physico-chemical quantities, e.g. rate 
constants, solvatochromic shifts in ultraviolet/visible spectra, solvent-induced shifts in infrared 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1165 
frequencies, etc. Some solvent parameters are purely empirical in nature, i.e. they are based 
directly on some experimental measurement. It may be possible to interpret such a parameter 
as measuring some particular aspect of solvent-solute interaction or it may be regarded simply 
as a measure of solvent polarity. Other solvent parameters are based on analysing experimental 
results. Such a parameter is considered to quantify some particular aspect of solvent capability 
for interaction with solutes. 
See REICHARDT (1965). 
See also Dimroth-Reichardt .!+ parameter, Grunwald-Winstein equation, K d t - T u f t  
solvent parameters, Koppel-Palm solvent parameters, solvophobicity parameter, .%value. 
solvent polarity 
See polarity. 
solvent-separated ion pair 
See ionpair 
Generally, reaction with a solvent, or with a lyonim ion or lyate ion, involving the rupture 
'of one or more bonds in the reacting solute. More specifically the term is used for s u b s f f ~ n  
elimination and fragmentation reactions in which a solvent species is the nucleophile 
("dcoholysis" if the solvent is an alcohol, etc.). 
solvophobicity parameter 
solvolysis 
A solvent parameter defined by 
Sp = 1 - M/M(hexadecane) 
derived from the Gibbs energy of transfer (At@) of a series of solutes from water to numerous 
aqueous-organic mixtures and to pure solvents: 
AtGO(to solvent) = MRT + D 
where RT is a solute parameter, and M and D characterize the solvent. The Mvalues are used to 
define a solvent solvophobic effect so that Sp values are scaled from unity (water) to zero 
(hexadecane) . 
SOMO 
ABRAHAM, GRELLIER, and MCGILL (1988). 
A Singly Occupied Molecular Orbital (such as the half-filled HOMO of a radical). 
See also frontier orbitals. 
Irradiation with (often u1tra)sound waves, e.g. to increase the rate of a reaction or to 
sonication 
prepare vesicles in mixtures of surfactants and water. 
special salt effect 
reactions, upon addition of some non-common ion salts, especially LiC104. 
species 
See chemical species. 
speciflc catalysis 
The acceleration of a reaction by a unique catalyst, rather than by a family of related sub- 
stances. The term is most commonly used in connection with specific hydrogen-ion or hy- 
droxide-ion (lyonium ion or lyate iod catalysis. 
See also general acid catalysis, general base catalysis, pseudo-catalysis. 
spectator mechanism 
A pre-association mechanism in which one of the molecular entities, C, is already present 
in an encounter pair with A during formation of B from A, but does not assist the formation of 
B, e.g. 
The initial steep rate increase observed in the kinetic electrolyte efect on certain solvolysis 
Pre association 
rapid 
A + C 
(A .*--C) 
,-+ 
(B -:---*C) 
b Product 
encounter 
encounter 
complex 
complex 

1166 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
The formation of B from A may itself be a bimolecular reaction with some other reagent. 
Since C does not assist the formation of A, it is described as being present as a spectator, and 
hence such a mechanism is sometimes referred to as a spectator mechanism. 
See also microscopic d m i o n  control. 
spin adduct 
See spin trapping. 
spin counting 
See spin trapping. 
spin density 
The unpaired electron density at a position of interest, usually at carbon, in a radicaf It is 
often measured experimentally by electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR, ESR (electron spin 
resonance)) spectroscopy through hyperhe coupling constants of the atom or an attached 
hydrogen. 
.spin label 
A stable paramagnetic group (typically a nitryl radical) that is attached to a part of a 
molecular entity whose microscopic environment is of interest and may be revealed by the 
electron spin resonance (ESR) spectrum of the spin label. 
When a simple paramagnetic molecular entity is used in this way without covalent attach- 
ment to the molecular entity of interest it is frequently referred to as a "spin probe". 
spin trapping 
In certain reactions in solution a transient radical will interact with a diamagnetic reagent 
to form a more persistent radical. The product radical accumulates to a concentration where 
'detection and, frequently, identification are possible by EPR/ESR spectroscopy. The key re- 
action is usually one of attachment; the diamagnetic reagent is said to be a "spin trap", and the 
persistent product radical is then the "spin adduct'. The procedure is referred to as spin trap- 
ping, and is used for monitoring reactions involving the intermediacy of reactive radicals at 
concentrations too low for direct observation. m i c a 1  spin traps are C-nitroso compounds and 
nitrones, to which reactive radicals will rapidly add to form nitryl radicals. A quantitative 
development, in which essentially all reactive radicals generated in a particular system are 
intercepted, has been referred to as "spin counting". Spin trapping has also been adapted to the 
interception of radicals generated in both gaseous and solid phases. In these cases the spin 
adduct is in practice transferred to a liquid solution for observation in order to facilitate 
interpretation of the EPR/ESR spectra of the radicals obtained. 
stable 
As applied to chemical species, the term expresses a thermodynamic property, which is 
quantitatively measured by relative molar standard Gibbs energies. A chemical species A is 
more stable than its isomer B if A,@ 
> 0 for the (real or hypothetical) reaction A 
B, under 
standard conditions. If for the two reactions 
See also radical centre. 
P + X + Y  
(Arclo) 
Q + X + Z  
(4- 
Gzo) 
ArGI0 > ArG20, P is more stable relative to the product Y than is Q relative to 2. Both in quali- 
tative and quantitative usage the term stable is therefore always used in reference to some 
explicitly stated or implicitly assumed standard. 
The term should not be used as a synonym for unreactive or "less reactive" since this 
confuses thermodynamics and kinetics. A relatively more stable chemical species may be more 
reactive than some reference species towards a given reaction partner. 
See also inert, unstable. 
stationary state 
(11 In quantum mechanics: A state that does not evolve with time. 
(2) In kinetics: See steady state. 
steady state (or stationary state) 
(1) In a kinetic analysis of a complex reaction involving unstable intermediates in low 
concentration, the rate af change of each such intermediate is set equal to zero, so that the rate 
equation can be expressed as a function of the concentrations of chemical species present in 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1167 
macroscopic amounts. For example, assume that X is an unstable intermediate in the reaction 
sequence: 
kl 
k-1 
A
t
X
 
Conservation of mass requires that: 
[A1 + [XI + [Dl = [A10 
which, since [Alo is constant, implies: 
- d[a/dt = d[A]/dt + d[D]/dt. 
Since [XI is negligibly small, the rate of formation of D is essentially equal to the rate of dis- 
appearance of A, and the rate of change of [XI can be set equal to zero. Applying the steady 
state approximation (d[X]/dt = 0) allows the elimination of [XI from the kinetic equations, 
whereupon the rate of reaction is expressed: 
Note: The steady-state approximation does not imply that [XI is even approximately 
constant, only that its absolute rate of change is very much smaller than that of [A] and [Dl. 
Since according to the reaction scheme d[D]/dt = h[XI[Cl, the assumption that [XI is constant 
would lead, for the case in which C is in large excess, to the absurd conclusion that formation 
of the product D will continue at a constant rate even after the reactant A has been consumed. 
(2) In a stirred flow reactor a steady state implies a regime so that all concentrations are 
independent of time. 
stepwise reaction 
A chemical reaction with at least one reaction intermediate and involving at least two con- 
secutive elementary reactions. 
See also composite reaction. 
stereoelectronic 
Pertaining to the dependence of the properties (especially the energy) of a molecular entity 
in a particular electronic state (or of a transition state) on relative nuclear geometry. The 
electronic ground state is usually considered, but the term can apply to excited states as well. 
Stereoelectronic effects are ascribed to the different alignment of electronic orbitals in different 
arrangements of nuclear geometry. 
stereoelectronic control 
Control of the nature of the products of a chemical reaction (or of its rate) by stereoelec- 
tronic factors. The term is usually applied in the framework of an orbital approximation. The 
variations of molecular orbital energies with relative nuclear geometry (along a reaction 
coordinate) are then seen as consequences of variations in basis-orbital overlaps. 
stereoselectivity, stereoselective 
Stereosdectivity is the preferential formation in a chemical reaction OA m e  stereoisomer 
over another. When the stereoisomers are enantiomers, the phenomenon is called 
enantioselectivity and is quantitatively expressed by the enantiomer excess: when they are 
diastereoisomers, it is called diastereoselectivity and is quantitatively expressed by the 
diastereomer excess. Reactions are termed (1 00%) stereoselective if the discrimination is 
complete or partially (,$!) 
stereoselective if one product predominates. The discrimination may 
also be referred to semiquantitatively as high or low stereoselectivity. 
ELIEL (1962); IUPAC STEREOCHEMICAL TERMINOLOGY (1993). 
stereospecificity, stereospecific 
(1) A reaction is termed stereospecific if starting materials differing only in their 
con&uration are converted into stereoisomeric products. According to this definition, a 
stereospeciflc process is necessarily stereoselective but not all stereoselective processes are 
stereospeciflc. Stereospeciflcity may be total (100%) or partial. The term is also applied to 

1168 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
situations where reaction can be performed with only one stereoisomer. For example the 
exclusive formation of trans- 1,2-dibromocyclohexane upon bromination of cyclohexene is a 
stereospecific process, although the analogous reaction with (E)-cyclohexene has not been 
performed. 
(2) The term has also been applied to describe a reaction of very high stereoselectivity, but 
this usage is unnecessary and is discouraged. 
ELIEL (1 962). 
[For the use of the term "stereospecific polymerization" see IUPAC POLYMERS (198111 
steric-approach control 
Control of stereoselectiuity of a reaction by steric hindrance towards attack of the reagent, 
which is directed to the less hindered face of the molecule. Partial bond making is strong 
enough at the transition state for steric control to take place. This suggests that the transition 
state should not be close to products. 
See also product development control. 
steric effect 
The effect on a chemical or physical property (structure, rate or equilibrium constant) 
upon introduction of substituents having different steric requirements. The steric effect in a 
reaction is ascribed to the difference in steric energy between, on the one hand, reactants and, 
on the other hand, a transition state, (or products). A steric effect on a rate process may result 
in a rate increase ("steric acceleration") or a decrease ("steric retardation"). (The adjective 
"steric" is not to be confused with stereochemical.) 
Steric effects arise from contributions ascribed to strain as the sum of (1) non-bonded 
repulsions, (2) bond angle strain, and (3) bond stretches or compressions. 
For the purpose of correlation analysis or linearfree-energy relations various scales of 
steric parameters have been proposed, notably A values, Taft's E, and Charton's u scales. 
In a reactant molecule RY and an appropriate reference molecule ROY, the "primary steric 
effect" of R is the direct'result of differences in compressions which occur because R differs 
from RO in the vicinity of the reaction centre Y. A "secondary steric effect" involves the 
differenti a1 moderation of electron delocalization by non-bonded compressions. 
Some authors make a distinction between "steric" effects attributed to van der Wads 
repulsions alone, and "strain" effects, attributed to deviations of bond angles from "ideal" 
values. 
CHARTON (1987). 
See Tuft equation, van der Waals forces. 
See isotope effect, steric. 
The original term for a steric efect arising from crowding of substituents. 
stoichiometric number 
See rate of reaction. 
stopped flow 
A technique for following the kinetics of reactions in solution (usually in the millisecond 
time range) in which two reactant solutions are rapidly mixed by being forced through a mixing 
chamber. The flow of the mixed solution along a uniform tube is then suddenly arrested. At a 
fvred position along the tube the solution is monitored (as a function of time following the 
stoppage of the flow) by some method with a rapid response (e.g. photometry). 
See mixing control 
strain 
Strain is present in a mkcular entity or transition structure if the energy is enhanced be- 
cause of unfavourable bond lengths, bond angles, or dihedral angles ("torsional strain") relative 
to a standard. 
It is quantitatively defined as the standard enthalpy of a structure relative to a strainless 
structure (real or hypothetical) made up from the same atoms with the same types of bonding. 
(The enthalpy of formation of cyclopropane is 53.6 kJ mol-1, whereas the enthalpy of formation 
based on three "normal" methylene groups, from acyclic models, is -62 kJ mol-1. On this basis 
cyclopropane is destabilized by ca. 115 kJ mol-1 of strain energy.) 
steric isotope effect 
steric hindrance 
See molecdar mechanics calculation. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1169 
subjacent orbital 
The Next-to-Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital ("NHOMO, 
also called "HOMO-") and the 
Second Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital (SLUMO). Subjacent orbitals are sometimes found 
to play an important role in the interpretation of molecular interactions according to thefrontier 
orbital approach. 
substituent electronegativity 
See electronegativity. 
substituent 
An atom or group of bonded atoms that can be considered to have replaced a hydrogen 
atom (or two hydrogen atoms in the special case of bivalent groups) in a parent molecular entity 
(real or hypothetical). 
substitution reaction 
placed by another atom or group. For example, 
BERSON (1972). 
A reaction, elementary or stepwise, in which one atom or group in a molecular entity is re- 
CH$l 
+ OH- ___) CH30H + C1- 
substrate 
A chemical species. the reaction of which with some other chemical reagent is under ob- 
servation (e.g., a compound that is transformed under the influence of a catalyst). The term 
should be used with care. Either the context or a specific statement should always make it 
clear which chemical species in a reaction is regarded as the substrate. 
See also dm.reformation 
successor complex 
The radical ion pair which forms by the transfer of an electron from the donor D to the 
acceptor A after these species have diffused together to form the precursor or encounter 
A + D - 
(A D) - 
(A: Dt) 
complex 
suicide inhibition 
See mechanism-based inhibition. 
superacid 
A medium having a high acidity, generally greater than that of 100 wt.-% sulfuric acid. 
The common superacids are made by dissolving a powerful Lewis acid (e.g. SbF,) in a suitable 
Bronsted acid, such as HF or HS03F. (An equimolar mixture of HS03F and SbF5 is known by 
the trade name "magic acid".) 
In a biochemical context "superacid catalysis" is sometimes used to denote catalysis by 
metal ions analogous to catalysis by hydrogen ions. 
By analogy, a compound having a very high basicity, such as lithium diisopropylamide, is 
called a "superbase". 
GILLESPIE (1968): OLAH (1985): OLAH and OLAH (1970). 
superbase 
See superacid. 
suprafacial 
See antarafacial. 
supramolecule 
A system of two or more molecular entities held together and organized by means of 
intermolecular (noncovalent) binding interactions. 
LEHN (1993). 
Swain-Scott equation 
The linearfree-energy relation of the form 
lg(k/h) = sn 

1170 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
applied to the variation of reactivity of a given electrophilic substrate towards a series of nu- 
cleophilic reagents. n is characteristic of the reagent (i.e. a measure of its nucleophilicity) and s 
is characteristic of the substrate (i.e. a measure of its sensitivity to the nucleophilicity of the 
rqagent). A scale of n values is based on the rate coefficients k for the reaction of methyl bro- 
mide with nucleophiles in water at 25 'C, s being defined as 1.00 for these reactions and n 
being defined as 0.00 for the hydrolysis of methyl bromide. (Other scales have been devised.) 
Swain-Lupton equation 
A dual parameter approach to the correlation analysis of substituent effects, which 
involves a field constant (9) and a resonance constant (a). 
The original treatment was modified 
later. 
SWAIN and LUFTON (1968); SWAIN, UNGER ROSENQUIST and SWAIN (1983). 
"he procedure has been considerably applied, but also much criticized (see REYNOLDS 
and TOPSOM (1984); HOEFNAGEL, OSTERBEEK and WEPSTER (1984); CHAliTON (1984); 
SWAIN (1984); HANSCH, LEO, and TAlT (1991). 
symbiosis 
The term was originally applied to describe the maximum flocking of either hard or soft 
Zigands in the same complexes. For hydrocarbon molecules, symbiosis implies that those 
containing a maximum number of C-H bonds (e.g. CH,) or C-C bonds (e.g. Me4C) are the most 
stable. 
HO (1977). 
symproportionation 
SWAIN and SCOTT (1953). 
Synonymous with cornproportionation 
See anti. 
S y n  
synartetic acceleration 
See neighbowing group participation. 
synchronization (principle of nonperfect synchronization) 
This principle applies to reactions in which there is a lack of synchronization between 
bond formation or bond rupture and other primitive changes that affect the stability of products 
and reactants, such as resonance, solvation electrostatic, hydrogen bonding and polarizability 
effects, The principle states that a product-stabilizing factor whose development lags behind 
bond changes at the transition state, or a reactant-stabilizing factor whose loss is ahead of bond 
changes at the transition state, increases the intrinsic barrier and decreases the "intrinsic rate 
constant" of a reaction. For a product-stabilizing factor whose development is ahead of bond 
changes, or reactant factors whose loss lags behind bond changes, the opposite relations hold. 
The reverse effects are observable for factors that destabilize a reactant or product. 
BERNASCONI (1 992). 
See also imbalance. synchronous. 
synchronous 
A concerted process in which the primitive changes concerned (generally bond rupture and 
bond formation) have progressed to the same extent at the transition state is said to be 
synchronous. The term figuratively implies a more or less synchronized progress of the 
changes. However, the progress of the bonding change (or other primitive change) has not been 
defined quantitatively in terms of a single parameter applicable to different bonds or different 
bonding changes. The concept is therefore in general only qualitatively descriptive and does not 
admit an exact definition except in the case of concerted processes involving changes in two 
identical bonds. 
See also i m b a b e .  
a-adduct (sigma adduct) 
The product formed by the attachment of an electrophilic or nucleophilic entering group or 
of a radical to a ring carbon of an aromatic species so that a new o-bond is formed and the 
original conjugation is disrupted. (This has generally been called a "o-complex", but adduct is 
more appropriate than complex according to the definitions given.) The term may also be used 
for analogous adducts to unsaturated (and conjugated) systems in general. 
See also Meisenheimer adduct. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1171 
o-bond (sigma bond) 
See sigma, pi. 
o-constant (sigma constant) 
Specifically the substituent constant for E t a -  and for para-substituents in benzene 
derivatives as defined by Hammett on the basis of the ionization constant of a substituted 
benzoic acid in water at 25OC, i.e. log(&/&O), where & is the ionization constant of a m- or p 
substituted benzoic acid and &O 
that of benzoic acid itself. 
The term is also used as a collective description for related electronic substituent con- 
stants based on other standard reaction series, of which, &, a- and 00 are typical: also con- 
stants which represent dissected electronic effects such as oI and oR. For this purpose it might 
be better always to spell out the term in full, i.e. as "Hammett sigma constant", and restrict a- 
constants to the scale of substituent constants which is based on benzoic acid. 
A large positive o-value implies high electron-withdrawing power by inductive and/or 
resonance effect, relative to H; a large negative o-value implies high electron-releasing power 
relative to H. 
CHAPMAN and SHORTER (1972, 1978); JOHNSON (1973); 
SHORTER (1973). 
See also Hammett equation p-value, TaJ equation 
a-orbital (sigma orbital) 
See sigma, pi. 
See chemical relaxation 
T-j-P 
Taft equation 
Various equations are associated .with R.W. Taft,, but the term is most often used to 
designate the family of equations that emerged from Taft's analysis of the Oeactivities of 
aliphatic esters, and which involved the polar substituent constant o* and the steric sub- 
stituent constant E, 
log k = log k, + p'o* + 6Es 
or the one-parameter forms applicable when the role of either the polar term or the steric term 
may be neglected. Nowadays o' is usually replaced by the related constant a,. 
TAFT (1952, 
1953). 
See also Hammett equation, p-value, o-constant. 
See electromeric effect. 
Isomerism of the general form 
+ tautomeric effect 
tautomerism 
G-X-Y=Z 
1
-
2
 
X=Y-Z-G 
where the isomers (called tautomers) are readily interconvertible; the atoms connecting the 
groups X,Y,Z are typically any of C, H, 0, or S, and G is a group which becomes an elecbofuge 
or nucleofuge during isomerization. The commonest case, when the electrofuge is H+, is also 
known as "prototropy". 
Examples, written so as to illustrate the general pattern given above, include: 
Keto-enol tautomerism, such as 
CH, COzEt 
I
1
 
CH, CO,Et 
I
I
 
H-O-C=C 
c--- 
____) 
0 x C - c - H  
I 
H 
I H 
enol 
keto 
(G = H, X = 0, Y = CCH,, Z = CHC02Et) 

1172 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
N 
I 
I 
(G = H, X = CHAr, Y = N, Z = CHAr') 
The grouping Y may itself be a three-atom (or five-atom) chain extending the conjugation, 
asin 
(G = H, X = 0, Y =C-CH=CH, Z = N) 
The double bond between Y and 2 may be replaced by a ring, when the phenomenon is 
called ring-chain tautomerism, as in 
CO2H 
C02H 
0-H 
I 
___) 
o=c 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
II 
- 
0 
H-0-C 
(CH3)2CCH(CH3)C 
(CH&lCCH(CH3)C 
0 
II 
0 
C02H 
0 )  
I 
(CH3)2CCH(CH3)C 
II 
I 
I 
(G = H, X = 0, (Y = Z) = -C 
0 
INGOLD (1953). 
See also ambident, sigmatropic reanzmgement, tautomerization, valence tautomerizafion 
The isomerization by which tautomers are interconverted. It is a heterolytic molecular re- 
See tautomerism 
A substitution reaction in which the entering group takes up a position more than one atom 
tautomerization 
arrangement and is frequently very rapid. 
tele-substitution 
away from the atom to which the leaving group was attached. 
Br 
See also cine-substitution. 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1173 
telomerization 
The formation of an addition oligomer, having uniform end groups X...X', by a chain re- 
actionin which a chain transfer limits the length of the polymer ("telomer") produced. An ex- 
ample is the polymerization of styrene in bromotrichloromethane solution (X = CC13, X" = Br), 
where C13C- radicals are formed in the initiation step to produce C13C[CH2CHPhlnBr, with n 
greater than 1 and often less than ca. 10: 
chain 
propagation 
1 
I 
termination 
active, thus ending the chain. 
tetrahedral intermediate 
A reaction intermediate in which the bond arrangement around an initially double-bonded 
carbon atom (typically a carbonyl carbon atom) has been transformed from trigonal to tetra- 
hedral. For example, aldol in the condensation reaction of acetaldehyde (but most tetrahedral 
intermediates have a more fleeting existence). 
thermodynamic control (of product composition) 
The term characterizes conditions that lead to reaction products in a proportion governed 
by the equilibrium constant for their interconversion and/or for the interconversion of reaction 
intermediates formed in or after the rate-limiting step. (Some workers prefer to describe this 
phenomenon as "equilibrium control".) 
See also kinetic contro L 
thermolysis 
The uncatalysed cleavage of one or more covalent bonds resulting from exposure of a 
compound to a raised temperature, or a process in which such cleavage is an essential part. 
See also pyrolysis. 
tight-ion pair 
See ionpair. 
torquoselectivity 
The term refers to the preference for "inward" or "outward" rotation of substituents in 
conrotatory or disrotatory electrocyclic ring opening reactions. 
JEFFORD, BERNARDINELLI, WANG, SPELLMEYER, BUDA, and HOUK (1992). 
transferability 
Transferability assumes invariance of properties, associated conceptually with an atom or 
a fragment present in a variety of molecules. The property, such as electronegativity, 
nucleophilicity, NMR chemical shijt, etc. is held as retaining a similar value in all these 
occurrences. 
transformation 
The conversion of a substrate into a particular product, irrespective of reagents or mecha- 
nisms involved. For example, the transformation of aniline (C6H5NH2) into N-phenylacetamide 
(C6H5NHCOCH3) may be effected by use of acetyl chloride or acetic anhydride or ketene. A 
transformation is distinct from a reaction, the full description of which would state or imply all 
the reactants and all the products. 
For nomenclature of 
transformations see IUPAC TERMINOLOGY FOR TRANS- 
FORMATIONS ( 1989). 
The steps in a chain reaction in which reactive intermediates are destroyed or rendered in- 

1174 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
transient (chemical) species 
Relating to a short-lived reaction intermediate. It can be defined only in relation to a time 
scale fixed by the experimental conditions and the limitations of the technique employed in the 
detection of the intermediate. The term is a relative one. 
Transient species are sometimes also said to be "metastable". However, this latter term 
should be avoided, because it relates a thermodynamic term to a kinetic property, although 
most transients are also thermodynamically unstable with respect to reactants and products. 
See also persistent. 
transition coordinate 
The reaction coordinate at the transition state corresponding to a vibration with an imagi- 
nary frequency. Motion along it in the two opposite senses leads towards the reactants or 
towards the products. 
See also reaction coordinate, transition state. 
transition state 
In theories describing elementary reactions it is usually assumed that there is a transition 
state of more positive molar Gibbs energy between the reactants and the products through 
which an assembly of atoms (initially composing the molecular entities of the reactants) must 
pass on going from reactants to products in either direction. In the formalism of "transition 
state theory" the transition state of an elementary reaction is that set of states (each charac- 
terized by its own geometry and energy) which an assembly of atoms, when randomly placed 
there, would have an equal probability of forming the reactants or of forming the products of 
that elementary reaction. The transition state is characterized by one and only one imaginary 
frequency, The assembly of atoms at the transition state has been called an activated complex. 
(It is not a complex according to the definition in this Glossary.) 
It may be noted that the calculations of reaction rates by the transition state method and 
based on calculated potential-energy surfaces refer to the potential energy maximum at the 
saddle point, as this is the only point for which the requisite separability of transition state 
coordinates may be assumed. The ratio of the number of assemblies of atoms that pass 
through to the products to the number of those that reach the saddle point from the reactants 
can be less than unity, and this fraction is the "transmission coefficient" K. (There are also re- 
actions, such as the gas-phase colligation of simple radicals, that do not require "activation" 
and which therefore do not involve a transition state.) 
See also Gibbs energy of activation, H m n d  principle, potential energy profile, transition 
structure. 
transition state analogue 
reaction. 
transition structure 
harmonic force constant matrix. 
transmission coefflcient 
A substrate designed to mimic the properties or the geometry of the transition state of 
A saddle point on a potential-energy surface. It has one negative force constant in the 
See also activated complex, transition state. 
See transition state. 
transport control 
See microscopic dfluion control 
trapping 
The interception of a reactive molecule or reaction intermediate so that it is removed from 
the system or converted into a more stable form for study or identification. 
See also scavenger. 
tunnelling 
The process by which a particle or a set of particles crosses a barrier on its potential 
energy surface without having the energy required to surmount this barrier. Since the rate of 
tunnelling decreases with increasing reduced mass, it is significant in the context of isotope 
effects of hydrogen isotopes. 
umpolung 
Any process by which the normal alternating donor and acceptor reactivity pattern of a 
chain, which is due to the presence of 0 or N heteroatoms, is interchanged. Reactivity 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1175 
umpolung is most often achieved by temporary exchange of heteroatoms (N, 0) by others, such 
as P, S, and Se. 
The original meaning of the term has been extended to the reversal of any commonly 
accepted reactivity pattern. For example, reaction of R-C=CX (X = halide) as a synthon for “R- 
C=C+ (i.e. electrophilic acetylene) is an umpolung of the normal more common acetylide. R-CS- 
(i.e. nucleophilic) reactivity. 
SEEBACH (1979). 
unimolecular 
See molecularity. 
unreactive 
Failing to react with a specified chemical species under specified conditions. The term 
should not be used in place of stable, since a relatively more stable species may nevertheless be 
more reactive than some reference species towards a given reaction partner. 
unstable 
The opposite of stable, i.e. the chemical species concerned has a higher molar Gibbs 
energy than some assumed standard. The term should not be used in place of reactiue or 
transient, although more reactive or transient species are frequently also more unstable. 
(Very unstable chemical species tend to undergo exothermic mimolecular decompositions. 
Variations in the structure of the related chemical species of this kind generally affect the 
energy of the transition states for these decompositions less than they affect the stability of the 
decomposing chemical species. Low stability may therefore parallel a relatively high rate of 
unimolecular decomposition.) 
upfield 
See chemical shif. 
valence 
The maximum number of univalent atoms (originally hydrogen or chlorine atoms) that 
may combine with an atom of the element under consideration, or with a fragment, or for which 
an atom of this element can be substituted. 
valence isomer 
A constitutional isomer interrelated with another by pericyclic reactions. For example, 
Dewar benzene, prismane and benzvalene are valence isomers of benzene. 
See tautomerism 
valence tautomerization 
The term describes simple reversible and generally rapid isomerizations or degenerate re- 
arrangements involving the formation and rupture of single and/or double bonds, without 
migration of atoms or groups; e.g. 
TISLER (1973) 
See also jlwcional, tautomerism 
van der Waals forces 
The attractive or repulsive forces between molecular entities (or between groups within the 
same molecular entity) other than those due to bond formation or to the electrostatic inter- 
action of ions or of ionic groups with one another or with neutral molecules. The term includes: 
dipole-dipole, dipole-induced dipole and London (instantaneous induced dipole-induced dipole) 
forces. 
The term is sometimes used loosely for the totality of nonspecific attractive or repulsive 
intermolecular forces. 
volume of activation, A$V 
used for reactions in solution), defined by the equation 
A quantity derived from the pressure dependence of the rate constant of a reaction (mainly 
A$V = -RT(aln k/JplT 

1176 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
providing that the rate constants of all reactions (except first-order reactions) are expressed in 
pressure-independent concentration units, such as mol dm-3 at a fixed temperature and 
pressure. 
The volume of activation is interpreted, according to transition state theory as the differ- 
ence between the partial molar volumes of the transition state (*V) and the sums of the partial 
volumes of the reactants at the same temperature and pressure, i.e., 
A*V = SV - E(rVR) 
where T is the order in the reactant R and VR its partial molar volume. 
Wheland intermediate 
See Meisenheimer adduct, o-adduct. 
Woodward-Hoffmann rules 
YUde 
rectly attached to the central atom of an "onium" ion e.g. 
See orbital symmeby. 
A chemical species produced (actually or notationally) by loss of a hydron from an atom di- 
Ph3PLCHRR - 
( Ph3P+C-RR c--) phJP=CRR) 
ylide 
Yukawa-Tsuno equation 
resonance effects on the reactivity of E t a -  and para-substituted benzene derivatives, e.g. 
A multiparameter extension of the H m t t  equation to quantify the role of enhanced 
lg k = lg 
+ pIo + r (o+ - 011 
The parameter r gives the enhanced resonance effect on the scale (o+-o), 
or (c-o), 
See also p-value, o-constant. 
See WKAWA and TSUNO (1959); SHORTER (1973). 
Z-value 
An index of the ionizing power of a solvent based on the frequency of the longest wave- 
length electronic absorption maximum of 1 -ethyl-4-methoxycarbonylpyridinium 
iodide in the 
solvent. The Z-value is defined by 
z = 2.859 x 104/h 
where 2 is in kcal mol-1 and h is in nm. 
respectively. 
KOSOWER (1 958). 
See also Dimroth-Reichardt 4 
parameter, Grunwald-Winstein equation 
Zaitsev rule 
See Saytzeff rule. 
zwitterionic compound 
A neutral compound having electrical charges of opposite sign, delocalized or not on 
adjacent or nonadjacent atoms. Zwitterionic compounds have no uncharged canonical 
representations. Sometimes referred to as inner salts, ampholytes, dipolar ions (a misnomer). 
For example: H,N+CH,C(=O)O-, glycine. 
See also ylide. 
Zucker-Hammett hypothesis 
This hypothesis states that, if in an acid catalyzed reaction, lg kl (fist-order rate constant 
of the reaction) is linear in H, (Hammett acidityfunction), water is not involved in the transition 
state of the rate-controlling step. However, if log kl is linear in log[H+], then water is involved. 
This has been shown to be incorrect by Hammett himself (see HAMME?T (1970)). 
LONG and PAUL (1957). 

Commission on Ph ysical Organic Chemistry 
1177 
References 
(Reports and Rules drafted by other IUPAC Commissions are indicated by an asterisk.) 
ABRAHAM, M. H., GRELLIER. P. L.. and MCGILL. R. A. (19881, J. C h e m  Soc. Perkin Trans 11, 
ADAMS, D. L. (1992). J. Chern Educ., 69, 451. regioselectiuity 
AHRJAND, S. (19791. Pure Appl. C h e m ,  51,2019. hydration 
kBERY, W. J. (1967). Bog. ReactionKinetics. 4, 353. potentialenergy [reaction) SWface 
ALBERY, W. J. (1980), A
w
 
Rev. Phys. Chern, 31,227. Marcus equation 
ARGILE, A, CAREY, A. R. E., FUKATA, G., HARCOURT, M., MORE O'FERRALL, R. A, and 
ATKINS, P. W. (1974), "Quanta: a Handbook of Concepts", Clarendon Press, Oxford. aromatic; 
BALDWIN, J. E. (1976), J. C h e m  Soc. C h e m  C o r n ,  734. Baldwin's rules 
BARTLE'IT, P. D. (ed.) (1965), "Nonclassical Ions", Benjamin, New York. nonclassical 
BAIITMESS. J. R., and MC IVER, R. T. (1979), "Gas-Phase Ion Chemistry", Vol. 2, (BOWERS, 
BENSON, S. W. (1976), 'Thermochemical Kinetics", Second Edition, Wiley-Interscience, New 
BENTLEY, T. W., and LLEWELLYN, G. (19901, Progr. Phys. Org. .Chem, 17, 121. Gmwald- 
BENTLEY, T. W.. and SCHLEYER, P. v. R. (1977), Adv. Phys. Org. Chem, 14, 1. Gmwald- 
BEFWASCONI, C. F. (19761, "Relaxation Kinetics". Academic Press, New York. chemical 
339. solvophobicity parameter 
MURPHY, M. G. (1985). Zsr. J. C h e m ,  26.303. reactivity-selectiuity principle 
electronegatiuity; resonance 
carbocation 
M.-T., ed.), Academic Press, New York, Chap. 11. gas phase acidity 
York. additivity principle 
Winstein equation 
Winstein equation 
relavation 
BEFWASCONI, C. F. (19921, Adv. Phys. Org. C h e m ,  27, 119. imbalance; synchronization 
BERSON. J. A. (1972). Acc. C h e m  Res., 5, 406. subjacent orbital 
BINSCH. G., ELIEL, E. L., and KESSLER, H. (1971), Angew. C h e m  Int. Ed. WL, 
10, 570. 
degenerate rearrangement 
BIOCHEMICAL NOMENCLATURE (1992). JCBN/NC-IUBMB Newsletter, in "Biochemical 
Nomenclature and Related Documents", 2nd edn., Portland Press, London, 335. @and 
BORDWELL, F. G., and LYNCH. T.-Y. (1989), J. Am C h e m  Soc., 1 1  1, 7558. captodative effect 
BREDT, J. (1924), JustusLiebigsAm Chern, 437, 1. Bredt's nrle 
BROOKHART, M., and GREEN, M. L. H. (19831, J. Organornet. C h e m ,  250, 395. agostic 
BUNCEL, E., CRAMPTON, M. R.. STRAUSS, M. J., and TERRIER, F. (19841, "Electron Deficient 
Aromatic- and Heteroaromatic- Base Interactions. The Chemistry of Anionic Sigma 
Complexes". Elsevier, Amsterdam. Meisenheinter udduct 
BUNCEL, E., and WAGOPAL, S. (1990), Acc. C h e m  Res., 23, 226. soluatochromism 
BUNCEL, E., and WILSON, H. (1987), J. C h e m  Educ., 64, 475. remtiuity-selectiuity principle 
BUNNE'IT, J. F., and OLSEN, F. P. (1966), C a n  J. C h e m  44, 1899, 1917. Bunnett-Oken 
equation 

1178 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
BURKERT, U., and ALLINGER, N. L. (1982), "Molecular Mechanics", ACS Monograph 177, 
CANNON, R. D. (19801, "Electron Transfer Reactions", Buttenvorths. London. intrinsic barrier 
CAREY, F. A, and SUNDBERG, R. J. (1990), "Advanced Organic Chemistry, Part A", Plenum, 
CHAPMAN, N. B., and SHORTER. J. (eds.) (1972), "Advances in Linear Free Energy 
American Chemical Society, Washington, D.C. molecular mechanics calculations 
New York, p. 133-138. A-value 
Relationships", Plenum, New York. correlation analysis; extended H m t t  equation; 0- 
constant 
CHAPMAN, N. B., and SHORTER, J. (eds.) (1978). "Correlationhalysis in Chemistry: Recent 
Advances", Plenum, New York. extended Hammett equation; Ritchie equation; 0-constant 
CHARTON, M. (1984), J. Org. Chem, 49, 1997. Swain-Lupton equation 
CHARTON, M. (19871, Progr. Phys. Org. Chem, 16.287. electromeric effect; extended Hammett 
CHARTON, M. (19891, 'The Chemistry of Double-Bonded Functional Groups". (PATAI, S., ed.), 
CHASTRE?TE, M., RAJZMANN, M., CHANON, M., and PURCELL, K. (19851, J. Am Chem Soc., 
CODATA (1974), CodataBulletin No. 13, Dec. 1974, p. 4. rate ofreaction 
CONNOR, K. A. (1991). "Chemical Kinetics", VCH, New York, p. 368. compensation effect 
COX, R. A, and YATES, K. (19781, J. Am Chem Soc., 100, 3861. Cox-Yates equation 
COX, R. A., and YATES, K. (1981). Can. J. Chem, 59, 2116. Cox-Yates equation 
COX, R. A, and YATES, K. (19831, Can. J. Chem, 61,2245. acidity function 
CRAM, D. J., HO, S. O., KNOBLER, C. B., MAVERICK, E., and TRUEBLOOD, K. N. (1986), J. 
DANHEISER, R. L., GERE, S. K., and SARD, H. (1982), J. Am Chem Soc., 204, 7670. annulation 
DEWAR, M. J. S. (1969), 'The Molecular Orbital Theory for Organic Chemistry", McGraw-Hill, 
DEWAR, M. J. S. (19711, Angew. Chem Znt Ed EngL, 10, 761. aromalic, chebtropic reaction 
DIETRICH, B., LEHN, J.-M., and SAUVAGE, S. P. (19691, TetrahedronLett., 2889. cryptand 
DIMROTH, K., REICHARDT, C., SIEPMANN, T., and BOHLMA", F. (1963), Justus Liebigs Ann. 
EBERSON, L. (1987), "Electron Transfer Reactions in Organic Chemistry", Springer, Berlin. 
EHRENSON. S., BROWNLEE, R. T. C., and TAFT, R. W. (1973), Progr. Phys. Org. Chem, 10, 1. 
ELIEL, E. L. (19621, "Stereochemistry sf Carbon Compounds", McGraw Hill, New York. Curtin- 
EXNER, 0. (1973), Progr. Phys. Org. Chern, 10, 41 1. isokinetic relationship 
EXNER. 0. (19881, "Correlation Analysis of Chemical Data", Plenum, New York, SNTL, Prague. 
equation' steric effect 
Wiley, Chichester, Chap. 5. quantitative structure-activity realtionships [QSARI 
107, 1. Hildebrand parameter 
Am Chem Soc., 108, 2989. crown 
New York. Bell-Evans-Polanyi principle 
Chem.. 661, 1. Dimroth-Reichardt &-parameter 
electron transfer catalysis; outer sphere [electron transfer) 
dual substituent parameter equation' electromeric efect; inductive esect 
H m t t  principle; stereoselectwe; stereospecific 
reactivity-selectivity principle 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1179 
FAINBERG A. H., and WINSTEIN, S. (19561, J. A m  Chem Soc., 78, 2770. Grunwald-Winstein 
FALBE, J., REGITZ, M. (eds) (1990), RiSmpp Chemie W o n ,  9th edition, Vol. 3. Thieme, 
FARCASIU, D. (19751, J. Chem Educ., 52, 76. H m n d p r i n c i p l e  
FAWCETT, F. S. (1950), Chem Rev., 47, 219. Bredt's rule 
FLEMING, I. (1976), "Frontier Orbitals and Organic Chemical Reactions". Wiley, New York. 
FUKUI. K.. YONEZAWA, T., and SHINGU, H. (1952), J. Chem Phys., 20, 722. frontier orbital 
GARRA?T. P. J. (1986), "Aromaticity", Wiley, New York. aromatic 
GIESE, B. (1984), Acc. Chem Res. 17, 438. isoselective relationship 
GILLESPIE, P. J. (1968), Acc. Chem Res., 1, 202. superacid 
GOLD, V. (1969), Adv. Phys. Org. Chem, 7, 259. fractionation factor, isotopic 
GOLD, V. (1979), NouveauJ Chim, 3, 69. chemicalflux 
GOMPPER, R. (1964), Angew. Chem Int Ed EngL, 3, 560. ambident 
GRILLER. D., and INGOLD, K. U. (1976), Acc. Chem Res., 9, 13 persistent 
GROB, C. A. (1969). Angew. Chem Int Ed -1, 
8, 535. fragmentation 
GRUNWALD, E., and WINSTEIN, S. (1948), J. Am Chem Soc., 70,846. Grunwald-Winstein 
GULDBERG, C. M., and WAAGE, P. (1879), J. pr&. 
Chem, 19, 69. mass-law effect 
GUTMA", V. (1976). Coord. Chem Rev., 18, 225. acceptor number [AN; 
donor number (DN 
HALEVI, E. A. (1992), "Orbital Symmetry and Reaction Mechanisms. The Ocams View", 
HAMMETT, L. P. (1940, 1970). "Physical Organic Chemistry", 1st and 2nd editions, McGraw 
equation 
Stuttgart. halochromism 
frontier orbital 
equation 
Springer. Berlin. orbital symmetry 
Hill, New York. acidity function; Bunnett-Olsen equation; Hammett equation; Zucker-Hammeif 
hypothesis 
HAMMOND, G. S. (1955). J. A m  Chem Soc., 77,334. Hammondprinciple 
HANSCH, C., and LEO, A. J. (19791, "Substituent Constants for Correlationhalysis in 
HANSCH, C., LEO, A. J., andTAFT, R. W. (1991), Chem Rev., 91, 165. Swain-Luptonequalion 
HANZLIK, R. P., HOGBERG, K., and JUDSON, C. M. (19841, Biochemistry, 23, 3048. NIH-sht3 
HAFCMANNS, J.. KLENKE, K., and METZGER, J. 0. (19861, Chem Ber., 119, 488. 
HASSNER, A. (1968). J. Org. Chem, 33, 2684. regioselectiuity 
HEHRE, W. J., DITCHFIELD, W. J.. RADOM. L., and POPLE, J. A. (1970). J. A m  Chem Soc., 
HEILBRONNER, E. (19641, Teb-ahedronktt., 1923. M6bius aromaticity 
HENDRICKSON, J. B., CRAM, D. J., and HAMMOND, G. S. (19701, "Organic Chemistry", 3rd 
Chemistry and Biology", Wiley, New York. Hansch constant 
cornproportionation 
92, 4796. isodesmic reaction 
edition, McGraw Hill, New York. Chapter 18. oxidation 

1180 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
HINE, J. (19771, Adu. Phys. Org. Chem, 15, 1. least nuclear motion, principle of 
HIRSCH, J. A. (1967). Top. in Stereochem, 1, 199. A-value 
HO, T.-L. (1977), "Hard and Soft Acids and Bases Principle in Organic Chemistry", Academic 
HOEFNAGEL, A. J.. OOSTERBEEK, W., and WEPSTER, B. M. (19841, 49, 1993. Swain-Lupton 
HOFFMANN, R. (1982). Argew. Chem Int. Ed. EqL, 21.711. radical 
HOFMA", A. W. (185 l), Justus Liebigs Ann Chem, 78,253; 79, 1 1. Hofmcv7n rule 
HOZ, S. and BUNCEL, E. (19851, Isr. J. Chern, 26, 313. a-effect 
HUISGEN, R (19681, Angew. Chem Int Ed. B g L ,  7, 321. cycloaddition 
HUISGEN. R, GRASHEY, R., and SAUER, J. (1964), 'The Chemistry of Alkenes", (PATAI. S., 
INGOLD, C. K. (1953). "Structure and Mechanism in Organic Chemistry". Cornell University 
Press, New York. hard acid, symbiosis 
equation 
ed.), Wiley Interscience, London, p. 739. cycloaddition 
Press, New York. elecb-omeric effect; inductomeric effect; partial rate factor; polarizability; 
tautomerisrn 
ISAACS, N. S. (19871, "Physical Organic Chemistry", Longman, Essex. Curtin-hamnett principle 
'IUPAC ANALYTICAL CHEMISTRY (1982). IUPAC: Analytical Chemistry Division, Pure AppL 
'IUPAC ATMOSPHERIC GLOSSARY (1990). IUPAC: Applied Chemistry Division: Commission on 
Chem, 54, 1533. excited state; ground state 
Atmospheric Chemistry. Glossary on Atmospheric Chemistry Terms. h v e  Appl Chem, 62, 
2167. mab-ix isolation 
Chemical Kinetics. Pure Appl Chem, 
53,764. 
Chemical Kinetics. A Glossary of Terms Used in Chemical Kinetics Including Reaction 
Dynamics. Fifth Draft, provisional. elementary reaction 
'IUPAC CLASS NAMES (1993). IUPAC: Organic Chemistry Division. Glossary of Class Names of 
Organic Compounds and Reactive Intermediates Based on Structure. IDCNS and public 
review. annulene; aryne; benzyne; nibenium ion; onium ion 
'IUPAC COMPENDIUM (1987). IUPAC: Compendium of Chemical Terminology, (GOLD, V., 
LOENING, K. L., MCNAUGHT, A. D., and SEHMI, P., eds.), Blackwell, Oxford. scavenger 
'IUPAC INORGANIC NOMENCLATURE (1 990). IUPAC: Nomenclature of Inorganic Chemistry, 
Recommendations 1990, (LEIGH, G. J., ed.). Blackwell, Oxford. complex; coordination 
number; hapto; oxidation; oxidation number 
'IUPAC INORGANIC RULES (1 970). IUPAC: Nomenclature of Inorganic Chemistry. Definitive 
Rules 1970: Buttenvorths, London. complex oxidation; oxidation number 
'IUPAC MANUAL (1979). IUPAC: Manual of symbols and terminology for physico-chemical 
quantities and units, Pure AppL Chem. 51, 1. Gibbs energy; ligand. rate ofreaction 
'IUPAC MANUAL APPENDIX I1 (1972). IUPAC: Manual of symbols and terminology for physico- 
chemical quantities and units. Appendix 11. Pure Appl Chern, 31,577. critical micelle 
concentration; micelle 
'IUPAC MANUAL APPENDIX V (1981). IUPAC: Sub-committee on Chemical Kinetics. Manual of 
symbols and terminology for physico-chemical quantities and units. Appendix V. 
Symbolism and terminology in chemical kinetics. Pure Appl Chem, 53, 733. rate ofreaction 
'IUPAC CHEMICAL KINETICS (1981). IUPAC: Physical Chemistry Division: Commission on 
'IUPAC CHEMICAL KINETICS (1991). IUPAC: Physical Chemistry Division: Commission on 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1181 
'IUPAC MASS SPECTROSCOPY (1991). IUPAC: Physical Chemistry Division: Commission on 
Molecular Structure and Spectroscopy: Subcommittee on Mass Spectroscopy. Pure AppL 
Chem, 63, 1541. fast-atom bombardment [FAB) mass spectroscopy 
Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry. Names for Hydrogen Atoms, Ions, and Groups, 
and for Reactions Involving Them. Pure AppL Chem, 60, 11 15. hydron 
Organic Nomenclature. Guide to IUPAC Nomenclature of Organic Compounds, Blackwell, 
Oxford, 1993. carbocation; carbonium ion; radical 
'IUPAC ORGANIC RULES (1 979). IUPAC: Nomenclature of organic chemistry: definitive rules, 
1979. Sections A, B, C, D, E, F, and H. Pergamon Press, Oxford. anti 
'IUPAC PHOTOCHEMICAL GLOSSARY (1 988). IUPAC: Organic Chemistry Division: Commission 
on Photochemistry. Glossary of Terms Used in Photochemistry. Pure AppL Chern, 60, 1055. 
'*IUPAC PHOTOCHEMICAL GLOSSARY (1992). IUPAC: Organic Chemistry Division: Commission 
on Photochemistry. Glossary of Terms Used in Photochemistry. Draft 1, provisional. 
biradicac bathochromic shi& charge transfer complex; con_figuration [electronic); excimer; 
exciplex: hypsochromic sh$C inner sphere [electron trmfer; quantum yielck relaxation 
Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry. Glossary of Terms Used in Physical Organic 
Chemistry. Provisional. PureAppL Chem, 51. 1725. 
Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry. Glossary of Terms Used in Physical Organic 
Chemistry. PureAppL Chem, 55, 1281. linearfree-energy relation 
Stereochemical definitions and notations relating to polymers. Pure AppL Chem, 53, 733. 
s tereospeci$ci ty 
Physicochemical Symbols, Terminology and Units."Quantities, Units and Symbols in 
Physical Chemistry", MILLS, I. CVITAS, T., HOMA", K., KALLAY, N., and KUCHITSU, K, 
eds.). Blackwell, Oxford. 
IUPAC REACTION MECHANISMS (1989). IUPAC: Organic Chemistry Division: Commission on 
Physical Organic Chemistry. System for Symbolic Representation of Reaction Mechanisms. 
Pure AppL Chem, 61, 23. left-to-righ convention; primitive charge 
'IUPAC STEREOCHEMICAL TERMINOLOGY (1 993). IUPAC: Organic Chemistry Division: Basic 
Terminology of Stereochemistry. IDCNS and public review. anti; asymmetric induction' 
configuration' conformation; dimstereoisomerism epimer; isotopomer, optical yield; 
stereoselectivity 
Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry. Terminology for Organic Chemical 
Transformations. Pure AppL Chem, 61, 725. transformation 
IUPAC NAMES FOR HYDROGEN ATOMS (1988). IUPAC: Organic Chemistry Division: 
'IUPAC NOMENCLATURE GUIDE (1993). IUPAC: Organic Chemistry Division: Commission on 
' 
IUPAC PHYSICAL ORGANIC GLOSSARY (1979). IUPAC: Organic Chemistry Division: 
IUPAC PHYSICAL ORGANIC GLOSSARY (1983). IUPAC: Organic Chemistry Division: 
'IUPAC POLYMERS (198 1). IUPAC: Commission on Macromolecular Nomenclature. 
'IUPAC QUANTITIES (1988). IUPAC: Physical Chemistry Division: Commission on 
IUPAC TERMINOLOGY FOR TRANSFORMATIONS (1989). IUPAC: Organic Chemistry Division: 
JACKSON, C. J., GAZZOLO. F. H. (19001, J. A m  ChemSoc., 23, 376. Meisenheimer adduct 
JEFFORD, C. W., BERNARDINELLI, G., WANG, Y., SPELLMEYER, D. C.. BUDA, A., and HOUK, 
JENCKS, W. P. (1972), Chem Rev., 72, 705. More OFerral-Jencks diagram potential energy 
JENCKS, W. P. (19801, Acc. Chem Res. 13, 161. More O'Ferral-Jencks diagram 
JENCKS. W. P. (1985), Chem Rev., 85, 51 1. Bell-Evans-Polayiprinciple; 
potential energy 
K. N. (19921, J. A m  Chem Soc., 114;1157. torquoselectivity 
[reaction) surface 
(reaction) surface 

1182 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
JOHNSON, C. D. (1973), 
'The Hammett Equation", Cambridge University Press. o-constant 
JOHNSON, C. D. (1975). 
Chem Rev., 75. 755. reactiuity-selectivity principle 
JORGENSEN, W. L.. and SALEM, L. (1973), 
"The Organic Chemist's Book of Orbitals". 
JUNG, M.E. (19761, 
Tetrahedron, 32, 3. annulation 
KAMLET, M. J.. ABBOUD, J. L. M., andTAFT, R. W. (19811, 
Progr. Phys. Org. Chem, 13, 485. 
KEESE, R. (1972), 
Angew. Chem Int Ed EngL, 11, 518. Bredts rule 
K I W O O D ,  J. G., and WESTHEIMER, F. H. (19381, 
J. Chem Phys., 6, 506, 513.f~ld effect 
KLYNE, W., and PRELOG, V. (1960), 
Experientia, 16.521. anti 
KOHNSTAM, G. (1967). 
Adv. Phys. Org. Chem. 5. 121. heat capacity of activation 
KOPPEL, I. A, and PALM, V. A. (1972), 
"Advances in Linear Free Energy Relationships". 
Academic Press, New York. sigma, pi 
Kamlet-Ta$ solvent parameters 
(CHAPMAN, N. B., and SHORTER, J., eds), Plenum Press, New York, Chap. 5. Koppel-Palm 
solvent parameters 
KOSOWER, E. M. (1958), 
J. A m  Chem Soc., 80, 3253. Z-ualw 
KOSOWER, E. M. (1968), 
"An Introduction to Physical Organic Chemistry". Wiley, New York. 
LEHN, J.-M. (1993), 
Science, 260, 1762. supramolecule 
LEFFLER, J. E. (1953), 
Science, 11 7,340. H m n d  principle 
LEFFLER, J. E. (1955), 
J. Org. Chem, 
20, 1202. isokinetic realtionship 
LEFFLER, J .  E., and GRUNWALD, E. (1963). 
"Rates and Equilibria of Organic Reactions", 
LIAS, S. G., LIEBMAN, R. P., and LEVIN, R. P. (19841, 
J. Phys. Chem Ref: Data, 13, 695. proton 
LITTLER, J. S. (1970), 
"Essays on Free-Radical Chemistry". Special Publication No. 24, p. 383. 
LONG, F. A., and PAUL, M. A. (1957), Chem Rev. 57, 935. Zucker-Hammeff hypothesis 
LUCCHINI, V., MODENA, G., SCORRANO, G., COX, R. A., and YATES, K. (1982). 
J. A m  Chem 
LUO, X.-L., and CRABTREE, R. H. (1989), 
J. A m  Chem Soc., 111, 2527. agostic 
LWOWSKI, W. 
(1970), 
"Nitrenes", Interscience, New York. nitrene 
MARCUS, R. A. (1964). 
Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem, 15, 155. Marcus equation 
MARCUS, R. A. (1966), 
J. Chem Phys., 45, 4493, 4500. reaction coordinate 
MARKOWNIKOFF, W. (1870). 
Justus LiebigsAnn. Chem, 153,256. 
Markownikoffrule 
MASLAK, P., and NARVAEZ, J. N. (1990), 
Angew. Chem Int. E d  EngL, 29, 283. mesolytic 
MAYO, P. DE (1980), 
"Rearrangements in Ground and Excited States", Vols. 1-111, Academic 
cybotactic region 
Wiley, New York, pp. 77-86. chemical relamtiow H m n d  principle 
ctt%mf 
Chemical Society, London. outer sphere (electron transfer) 
Soc. 104, 1958. Cox-Yates equation 
cleavage 
Press, New York. molecular rearrangement 

Commission on Physical Organic Chemistry 
1183 
MORE O'FERRALL, R. A. (1970). J. Chem SOC. (B), 
274. More OFerrall-Jencks diagram, potential 
MULLIKEN. R. S. (1955), J. Chem Phys., 23, 1833, 1841,2338, 2348. charge population 
OLAH, G. A. (1985), "Superacids". Wiley, New York. superacid 
OLAH, G. A. (ed.) (1990), "Cage Hydrocarbons". Wiley, New York. cage compound 
OLAH, G. A, and OLAH, J. A. (1970), "Carbonium Ions" Vol. 11, (OLAH, G. A,, and SCHLEYER 
OLAH. G. A., and SCHLEYER, P. v. R. (1972), "Carbonium Ions", Vols I-V, Wiley, New York. 
energy (reaction) surface 
P. v. R., eds.), Wiley, NewYork, p. 715. superacid 
carbocation' carbonium ion 
OLAH, G. A., SURYA PRAKASH, G. K.. WILLIAMS, R. E., FIELD, L. D., and WADE, K. (19871, 
PAULING. L. (1967), 'The Chemical Bond", Cornell University Press, Ithaca, New York. bond 
PEARSON. R. G. (19631, J. A m  Chem Soc., 85, 3533. hard acid 
PEARSON, R. G. (1973), "Introduction to Hard and Soft Acids and Bases". Dowden, 
PEDERSEN, C. J. (19671, J. A m  Chem SOC., 89, 7017. crown 
RADOM, L. (1982), Prcgr. Theor. Org. Chem, 3, 1. hypercory'ugation 
REM'Z, M. (1972). Angew. Chem Int. E d  EngL, 1 1 ,  129, 130. dyotropic rearrangement 
REICHARDT, C. (19651, Angew. Chem Ink E d  ErgL, 4, 29. solventparameter 
REICHARDT, C. (1988), "Solvents and Solvent Effects in Organic Chemistry" 2nd ed., VCH 
"Hypervalent Chemistry". Wiley, New York. bridged carbocation 
Hutchinson, Ross, Stroudsburg. hard acid 
Verlagsgesellschaft, Weinheim, Chap. 7. Dimroth-Reichardt 
parameter; soluatochrornism polarity 
halochromisrn 
parameter; polarity; solvent 
REICHARDT, C., ASHARIN-FORD, S., and SCHAEFER, G. (1993), C h e m  Ber., 126, lr3. 
REYNOLDS, W. F., and TOPSOM, R. D. (1984), J. Org. Chem, 49, 1989. Swain-Lupton equation 
RITCHIE, C. D. (1972), Acc. Chem Res., 5, 348. Ritchie equation 
RITCHIE. C. D. (1978), Pure Appl Chem, 50, 1281. Ritchie equation 
RITCHIE, C. D. (19861, Can. J. Chem, 
64. 2239. Ritchieequalion 
ROCHESTER, C. H. (1970), "Acidity Functions", Academic Press, New York. acidityfunction 
ROSS, J. A., SEIDERS, R. P., and LEMAL, D. M. (1976), I. Am. Chem. SOC., 98, 4325. 
SALEM, L. (1971), Acc. Chem Res., 4, 322. narcissistic reaction 
SAYTZEFF, A. (1875), Justus Liebigs Am?. Chem, 179, 296. Saytzeff rule 
SCHLESENER, C. J., AMATORE, C., and KOCHI, J. K. (1986), J. Phys. Chem, 90, 3747. 
SEEBACH, D. (1979), Angew. Chem Int. Ed. EngL, 18, 239. umpolung 
SEEMAN. J. I. (1983), C h e m  Rev., 83, 73. Curtin-Hammettprinciple 
SEEMAN, J. I., SECOR, H. V., HARTUNG, H., and GALZEFWNO, R. (1980), J. A m  Chem Soc., 
pseudopericyclic 
intrinsic barrier 
102, 774 1. Curtin-Hammett principle 

1184 
GLOSSARY OF TERMS USED IN PHYSICAL ORGANIC CHEMISTRY 
SHORTER, J. (1973). 
"Correlation Analysis in Organic Chemistry: An Introduction to Linear 
SIEHL, H. U. (1987), 
Adv. Phys. Org. Chem, 23, 63. isotopic perturbation, method of 
SMITH, P. A. S., and DeWALL, G. L. (1977), 
J. Am Chem Soc., 99, 5751. ambident 
S T E W m ,  G. W., and MORROW, R. M. (1927). 
Proc Natl Acad. Sci USA, 13,222. cycbotactic 
STOCK, L. M., and BROWN, H. C. (1963). 
Adv. Phys. Org. Chem, 1, 35. partial rate factor; 
SUSTMA". R., and KORTH, H. G. (1990). 
Adv. Phys. Org. Chem, 26. 131. captodative effect 
SWAIN, C. G. (1984). 
J. Org. Chem, 49, 2005. Swain-Lupton equation 
SWAIN. C. G., and LUPTON, E. C. (1968), 
J. A m  Chem Soc., 90, 4328. Swain-Lupton equation 
SWAIN, C. G., and SCOT", C. B. (1953), 
J. A m  Chem Soc., 75, 141. Swain-Scott equation 
SWAIN, C. G., UNGER, S. H.. ROSENQUIST, N. R., and SWAIN, M. S. (1983), 
J. A m  Chem Soc., 
TAFT. R W., Jr. (1952, 1953). J. A m  Chem Soc.. 74,3120; 
75,4231. Tuft equation 
TAFT, R. W., Jr., and TOPSOM. R. D. (1987), 
Progr. Phys. Org. Chem, 16, 1. dual substituent 
THORNTON, E. R., (1967), 
J. A m  Chem Soc., 89, 2915. reacting bond ruks 
TISLER, M. (1973), 
Synthesis. 123. valence tautomerisrn 
TROST, B. M. (1980). 
Acc. Chem Res., 13, 385. chemoselective, chemoselectivity 
VIEHE, H. G., JANOUSEK, Z., MERENY, R., and STELLA, L. (1985), 
Acc. Chem Res., 18, 148. 
VOGTLE, F. (1980), 
Inorg. Chim Acta, 45, L65. cryptand 
WILLIAMS, A. (1984), 
Acc. Chem Res., 17, 425. effective charge; Hammondprinciple 
WILLIAMS, A. (1992), 
Adv. Phys. Org. Chem. 27. 1. effective charge 
WINEY, D. A., and THORNTON, E. R. (1975), 
J. A m  Chem Soc., 97, 3102. More OFerralZJencks 
WINSTEIN, S., GRUNWALD, E., and JONES, H. W. (1951), 
J. A m  Chem Soc., 73, 2700. 
WISEMAN, J. R. (1967), 
J. Am Chem Soc., 89, 5966. BredCs rule 
WISEMAN, J. R., and CHONG, J. A. (19691, 
J. Org. Chem. 31, 7775. Bredt's rule 
WIT", 0. M. (1876). 
Ber. Deut Chem Ges., 9, 522. chromophore 
WOODWARD, R. B., and HOFFMA", R. (1969). 
Angew. Chem Znt. Ed EngL, 8, 781. cheletropic 
WOLFSBERG, M. (1972), 
Acc. Chem Res., 5,225. 
isotope effect, kinetic and thermodynamic 
YATES, B. F., BOUMA, W. J., and FUDOM. L. (1986). 
Tetrahedron, 42, 6225. distonic radical 
YUKAWA. Y., and TSUNO, Y. (1959), 
Bull Chem Soc Jpn, 32, 971. Yukawa-Tsuno equation 
ZIMMERMAN, H. E. (1971), 
Acc Chem Res., 4, 272. aromatic; M6bius aromaticity 
Free Energy Relationships". Oxford University Press. o-coutmt, Yukawa-Tsuno equation 
region 
reactivity-selectiviiy principle; selectivity factor 
105, 492. Swain-Lupton equation 
parameter equation. electromeric effect; inductive effect; inductomeric effect; polarizability 
cap todative effect 
@ram 
Gmwald-Winstein equation 
reaction' cycloaddition' orbital symmetry 
cation 
