Introduction
Oxidation of low-density lipoproteins (LDL) plays an
important role in atherogenesis. Oxidized LDL (OxLDL)
(and certain chemically modified LDL) have the ability to
bind to scavenger receptors, which can lead to unregulat-
ed accumulation of cholesterol in macrophages and for-
mation of foam cells. Consequently, it has been proposed
that OxLDL is one of the physiological ligands for the
scavenger receptors. Numerous studies have supplied evi-
dence that OxLDL is present in vivo. For example, OxLDL
can be extracted from atherosclerotic lesions (1–3), epi-
topes of OxLDL can be demonstrated immunohisto-
chemically in atherosclerotic lesions in humans and ani-
mal models (1, 4–8), autoantibodies reactive with OxLDL
are present in plasma and lesions of humans and animals
(1, 8–10), and small amounts of minimally oxidized LDL
can be demonstrated in plasma (10–14).
Although OxLDL causes lipid deposition in
macrophages, it may also have other characteristics that
affect atherogenesis. For example, OxLDL is chemotac-
tic for monocytes (15) and for T cells (16), and cytotoxic
for cultured endothelial cells (17). Also, studies have
shown that minimally oxidized LDL (mm-LDL) stimu-
lates the release of macrophage colony–stimulating fac-
tor (M-CSF) (18) and monocyte chemoattractant pro-
tein-1 (MCP-1) (19) from endothelial cells, which
recruits monocytes into the arterial wall and facilitates
their differentiation into tissue macrophages.
Although many of the proatherogenic properties of
OxLDL are known, little is known of the structures in
OxLDL that cause these effects. LDL oxidation is a very
complex process and much heterogeneity is generated dur-
ing this process. During oxidation both the protein and the
lipid moieties of LDL particles can be modified. A major
The Journal of Clinical Investigation
|
January 1999
|
Volume 103
|
Number 1
117
Monoclonal autoantibodies specific for oxidized
phospholipids or oxidized phospholipid–protein 
adducts inhibit macrophage uptake of oxidized 
low-density lipoproteins
Sohvi Hörkkö,1 David A. Bird,1 Elizabeth Miller,1 Hiroyuki Itabe,2 Norbert Leitinger,3
Ganesamoorthy Subbanagounder,3 Judith A. Berliner,3 Peter Friedman,4
Edward A. Dennis,4 Linda K. Curtiss,5 Wulf Palinski,1 and Joseph L. Witztum1
1Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0682, USA
2Department of Microbiology and Molecular Pathology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Teikyo University, 
1091-1 Sagamiko, Kanagawa 199-0195, Japan 
3Department of Medicine, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California, 90024-1732, USA 
4Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0682, USA
5Departments of Immunology and Vascular Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, California 92037, USA
Address correspondence to: Joseph L. Witztum, or Sohvi Hörkkö, Department of Medicine, University of California,
San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California 92093-0682, USA. Phone: (619) 534-4347; Fax: (619) 534-2005;
E-mail: jwitztum@ucsd.edu; shorkko@ucsd.edu
Received for publication July 9, 1998, and accepted in revised form November 19, 1998.
We recently cloned monoclonal IgM autoantibodies which bind to epitopes of oxidized low-density
lipoprotein (OxLDL) from apoE-deficient mice (EO– autoantibodies). We now demonstrate that those EO–
autoantibodies that were originally selected for binding to copper-oxidized low-density lipoproteins
(CuOx-LDL), also bound both to the oxidized protein and to the oxidized lipid moieties of CuOx-LDL.
The same EO– autoantibodies showed specific binding to products of oxidized 1-palmi--
toyl-2-arachidonoyl-phosphatidylcholine (OxPAPC) and to the specific oxidized phospholipid, 1-palmi-
toyl-2-(5-oxovaleroyl)-phosphatidyl-choline (POVPC), whereas oxidation of fatty acids (linoleic or arachi-
donic acid) or cholesteryl esters (cholesteryl-oleate or cholesteryl-linoleate) did not yield any binding activ-
ity. Those EO– autoantibodies that bound to oxidized phospholipids (e.g., EO6) inhibited the binding and
degradation of CuOx-LDL by mouse peritoneal macrophages up to 91%, whereas other IgM EO– autoan-
tibodies, selected for binding to malondialdehyde (MDA)-LDL, had no influence on binding of either
CuOx-LDL or MDA-LDL by macrophages. F(ab′)2 fragments of EO6 were equally effective as the intact
EO6 in preventing the binding of CuOx-LDL by macrophages. The molar ratios of IgM to LDL needed to
maximally inhibit the binding varied from ∼8 to 25 with different CuOx-LDL preparations. Finally, a
POVPC–bovine serum albumin (BSA) adduct also inhibited CuOx-LDL uptake by macrophages. These
data suggest that oxidized phospholipid epitopes, present either as lipids or as lipid-protein adducts, rep-
resent one class of ligands involved in the recognition of OxLDL by macrophages, and that apoE-deficient
mice have IgM autoantibodies that can bind to these neoepitopes and inhibit OxLDL uptake.
J. Clin. Invest. 103:117–128 (1999).

process is the peroxidation of the polyunsaturated fatty
acids (PUFA) present in phospholipids and cholesteryl
esters. A variety of highly reactive breakdown products are
generated as a result, such as malondialdehyde (MDA) or
4-hydroxynonenal (4-HNE) (20). In turn, these aldehydes
can form Schiff-base adducts with lysine residues of the
intimately associated apoprotein of LDL, apoB. Aldehyde
groups on the modified fatty acid fragments, still attached
to the phospholipid backbone, could also form such
adducts, leading to modified lipid–protein adducts or
lipid–lipid adducts (Fig. 1, and in ref. 21). In addition, dur-
ing LDL oxidation apoB breaks down as a result of direct
oxidative attack, to yield a mixture of fragments of differ-
ent sizes (from 14 to over 550 kDa) (22). Thus, as a result
of oxidation, literally hundreds of different structures are
generated that could be immunogenic. We have termed
such epitopes “oxidation-specific epitopes” (1, 23).
Previously, Parthasarthy et al. (24) demonstrated that the
delipidated protein moiety of OxLDL could bind to
macrophage scavenger receptors and inhibit the binding
of intact OxLDL. Recently, Terpstra et al. (25) used com-
petition studies to demonstrate that microemulsions
made from lipids extracted from OxLDL could also inhib-
it the uptake and degradation of intact OxLDL. The pur-
pose of the present study was to characterize some of the
ligands on OxLDL that are responsible for the uptake of
OxLDL by macrophage scavenger receptors. We used pre-
viously generated natural monoclonal autoantibodies to
epitopes of oxidized lipoproteins cloned from apoE-defi-
cient mice (10) and a monoclonal antibody (MAB) gener-
ated using human atheromatous plaque as immunogen
(26). We provide evidence that specific oxidized phospho-
lipids in OxLDL, present as lipids or as lipid–protein
adducts, could be ligands for macrophage recognition.
Methods
Materials. L-α1-palmitoyl-2-arachidonoyl-sn-glycero-3-phospho-
choline (PAPC) was obtained from Avanti Polar Lipids (Alabaster,
Alabama, USA). 1-palmitoyl-2-(5-oxovaleroyl)-sn-glycero-3-phos-
phocholine (POVPC) was synthesized by H. Itabe (Teikyo Uni-
versity) as described (27) and by the laboratory of J.A. Berliner
(University of California, Los Angeles) (28). Alkaline phos-
phatase–labeled goat anti–mouse IgM (and anti-IgG) were from
Sigma Chemical Co. (St. Louis, Missouri, USA), and LumiPhos
530 was from Lumigen Inc. (Southfield, Michigan, USA).
Monoclonal antibodies. “Natural” MABs directed against oxida-
tion-specific epitopes of OxLDL were cloned from hybridomas
generated from apoE-deficient mice that had not been immunized
exogenously, as described in detail previously (10). B lymphocytes
from the spleens of two apoE-deficient mice were fused with a
myeloma cell line. Hybridoma supernatants were screened for
binding to OxLDL or to models of OxLDL epitopes: MDA-LDL
and a mixture of 4- and 16-h copper-oxidized LDL (CuOx-LDL).
Selected hybridomas were cloned by limiting dilution, and cells
were injected intraperitoneally into Pristane (Aldrich Chemical
Co., Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA) primed BALB/C mice to pro-
duce ascites fluid. After cloning, all 13 MABs, termed EO– autoan-
tibodies, were isotyped as IgM and characterized as described (10).
All the EO antibodies used in these experiments were purified
from ascites by fast protein liquid chromatography (FPLC) as
described previously (10). In addition, we used an IgG1a MAB
termed MDA2 (23), which is specific for MDA-lysine epitopes, and
murine MAB MB47, which is specific for LDL apoB (29). The
MAB DLH3 was generated by Itabe and colleagues by immuniz-
ing mice with homogenates of human atheromatous plaque (26).
DLH3 is an IgM MAB selected for its ability to bind to CuOx-LDL.
Chemiluminescent immunoassay for antibody binding. Antigens in
PBS (containing 0.27 mM EDTA) were plated into 96-well,
white, round-bottomed High Binding Microfluor microtitra-
tion plates (Dynex Technologies, Chantilly, Virginia, USA)
overnight at 4°C. The wells were washed four times with PBS
and blocked with PBS containing 1% BSA (BSA-PBS) for 30 min.
Antibodies were diluted with BSA-PBS and incubated for 1 h at
room temperature. The amount of primary antibody bound was
measured with alkaline phosphatase–labeled goat anti–mouse
IgM (or anti-IgG) (Sigma Chemical Co.) (in a TBS buffer con-
taining 150 mM NaCl, 50 mM Tris base, 0.27 mM EDTA, and
1% BSA) using chemiluminescent technique (21, 30).
Competition immunoassays were performed by incubating 25
µl of increasing concentrations of competitors with 25 µl of
MAB (10 µg/ml) at room temperature in antigen-coated wells
for 1 h. After four washes with PBS, the amount of antibody
bound was measured with alkaline phosphatase–labeled goat
anti–mouse IgM.
Preparation of copper-oxidized LDL and MDA-LDL. Copper oxi-
dation and MDA modification of LDL were carried out as
118
The Journal of Clinical Investigation
|
January 1999
|
Volume 103
|
Number 1
Figure 1
(a) Immunoassay showing binding of natural mono-
clonal autoantibodies from apoE-deficient mice
(EO1–EO17), a murine MAB from mice immunized with
homogenates of human atheromatous plaque (DLH3)
and MDA2 (a murine MAB to MDA-lysine), to BSA,
native LDL, LDL oxidized with copper for 16 h (CuOx-
LDL), and MDA-modified LDL (MDA-LDL). The antigens
were plated at 10 µg/ml overnight (4°C), and the puri-
fied antibodies were incubated with antigen at 10 µg/ml
for 1 h (room temperature). The amount of anti-
body bound was then measured with alkaline phos-
phatase–labeled goat anti–mouse IgM (or anti-IgG for
MDA2) antibody using chemiluminescent technique.
Each bar is the mean of triplicate determinations. (b)
Competition immunoassay showing binding of a fixed
and limiting dilution of biotinylated EO6 MAB to immo-
bilized CuOx-LDL in the presence of increasing amounts
of nonimmune mouse IgM, EO6, and MAB DLH3. LDL,
low-density lipoproteins; MAB, monoclonal antibody;
MDA, malondialdehyde; RLU, relative light units.

described in detail previously (23).
LDL lipid extraction and microemulsion preparation. LDL lipids
and protein were separated with chloroform/methanol extrac-
tion as described in detail previously (25). Then, 2 ml of
methanol and 2 ml of chloroform were added to 1–2 mg of LDL
protein in 1.8 ml PBS containing 0.01 M HCl. After vortexing,
the mixture was centrifuged at 1,800 g for 10 min, and the chlo-
roform phase was removed and dried under N2. PBS was added
to the dried lipids, vortexed until the lipids were in suspension,
and then extruded 8–10 times through 0.1 µm polycarbonate
membranes under N2 flow. For flow cytometry experiments, the
lipid microemulsions were labeled by adding 3,3′-dihexadecy-
loxacarbocyanine (DiO) (Molecular Probes Inc., Eugene, Ore-
gon, USA) to the lipid extracts at a weight ratio of 1%.
The chloroform/methanol- extracted CuOx-LDL protein
was washed two times with ice-cold H2O, once with ice-cold
acetone, and then once with ice-cold H2O; it was then solubi-
lized with octylglucoside (30 times the protein mass) as
described previously (24). Octylglucoside was removed by
extensive dialysis against PBS.
Preparation of oxidized PAPC. One to two milligrams of PAPC
was dried on the surface of a 50-ml glass tube and exposed to air
for 16–24 h. The oxidized PAPC (OxPAPC) was then solubilized
in ethanol, and the fatty acids were analyzed in a Varian gas chro-
matograph (Varian, Walnut Creek, California, USA)  equipped
with a column of 10% Silar 5CP on 100/120 Gas Chrom QII (All-
tech Associates Inc., Deerfield, Illinois, USA) as described (31).
Preparation of POVPC-modified BSA. POVPC (final 2 mM) was
dried onto a glass tube and incubated with 1 mg/ml of BSA at
37°C for 4 h. Then, 10 mM of NaCNBH3 was added and the mix-
ture was further incubated overnight at 37°C. After incubation
the unbound POVPC was removed by extensive dialysis with PBS.
Antibody absorption experiments. Increasing concentrations of
native PAPC, OxPAPC, or microemulsions made from lipids
extracted from native LDL or CuOx-LDL were incubated with 1.0
ml of MABs (10 µg/ml) in PBS for 1 h. The immunocomplexes
were pelleted by spinning at 13,000 g (native PAPC and OxPAPC)
or 100,000 g (microemulsions), and the supernatants were tested
for remaining binding activity in the solid phase immunoassay.
Macrophage binding and degradation assays. Mouse peritoneal
macrophages were elicited by intraperitoneal injection of 2 ml
thioglycollate medium (Difco Laboratories, Detroit, Michigan,
USA) three days before harvesting the cells. The macrophages
were plated in 24-well clustered dishes at a density of 106
cells/well in 0.5 ml of Roswell Park Memorial Institute medium
(RPMI)-1640 containing 5% FCS. Nonadherent cells were
removed after 3 h and the medium replaced for an overnight
incubation. The degradation or binding of 125I-CuOx-LDL or
125I-MDA-LDL by cells was determined using methods described
by Goldstein et al. (32). For degradation, the indicated concen-
tration of 125I-CuOx-LDL or 125I-MDA-LDL in serum-free media
was added to each well in the absence or presence of competitors
for 5 h at 37°C. The amount of lipoprotein degraded was deter-
mined as the amount of 125I-labeled TCA–soluble (noniodide)
material present in the medium. Cells were washed with PBS, sol-
ubilized in 0.2 M NaOH, and aliquots were removed for count-
ing as well as for protein determination by the method of Lowry
et al,(33). To determine binding of 125I-CuOx-LDL or 125I-MDA-
LDL, cells were preincubated at 4°C for 30 min in serum-free
medium. Cells were kept on ice during the entire binding assay.
After 3 h, cells were washed with ice-cold 1% BSA-PBS followed
by three washes with PBS alone and finally solubilized in 0.2 M
NaOH. Aliquots were removed for counting and protein deter-
mination. In some experiments cell association was determined
at 37°C as described previously (32). In 4°C binding or 37°C cell-
association and degradation assays, the amount of lipoprotein
bound or degraded per milligram of cell protein was calculated,
and the results were expressed as the percentage of control in the
absence of any competitor.
Flow cytometry analysis. Resident peritoneal macrophages were
isolated from female Swiss-Webster mice by peritoneal lavage
with PBS. The cells were plated in a 12-well dish at a density of
1.3 × 106 cells/well in DMEM containing 10% FCS. After 3 h,
the cells were washed and fresh medium was added. The fol-
lowing day, the cells were incubated with DiO-labeled
microemulsions (see above) for 2 h at 4°C, washed, scraped
The Journal of Clinical Investigation
|
January 1999
|
Volume 103
|
Number 1
119
Figure 2
Immunoassay showing binding of MABs EO3, EO6, EO7, EO14, and MDA2 to the protein moiety (upper row) or to the lipid moiety (lower row) of
native LDL (squares), LDL oxidized with copper for 4 h (circles), and LDL oxidized with copper for 18 h (triangles). Protein and lipid moieties of native
and OxLDL preparations were separated with chloroform/methanol extraction, and the extracted lipids were made into microemulsions by extru-
sion. Then, 10 µg/ml of the MABs was incubated with antigens, and the amount of antibody bound was measured with alkaline phosphatase–labeled
goat anti–mouse IgM (or IgG) secondary antibody. Each point is the mean of triplicate determinations.

from the wells, and then resuspended in PBS containing 0.1%
BSA and 0.01% NaN3. Mean fluorescence intensity was meas-
ured by flow cytometry (Becton- Dickinson Immunocytometry
Systems, San Jose, California, USA)
Preparation of F(ab′)2 fragments. To prepare F(ab′)2 fragments,
the IgM was dialyzed overnight at 4°C against 100 mM sodium
acetate, 150 mM NaCl, and 0.05% sodium azide, pH 4.5 (diges-
tion buffer). A column containing 2 ml immobilized pepsin
(Pierce Chemical Co., Rockford, Illinois, USA) was equilibrated
with digestion buffer. The IgM was applied to the column and
incubated at 37°C for 1.5 h. The fractionated IgM was eluted
with 2 ml of digestion buffer, and the F(ab′)2 was subsequently
successively separated with spin concentrators with molecular
weight cutoffs of 300,000 and 30,000 (MSI, Westboro, Massa-
chusetts, USA). The final preparation was dialyzed extensively
against PBS, pH 7.4. SDS-PAGE and silver staining of the
digested IgM demonstrated a major band at ∼150 kDa, corre-
sponding to the appropriate F(ab′)2 fragments. There was also
a small band of ∼90 kDa, presumably corresponding to more
extensively digested fragments.
Western blot. CuOx-LDL and native -LDL were electrophoresed
on SDS 4%–12% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gels using Novex
precast gels and Xcell II Mini-Cell apparatus (Novex, San Diego,
California, USA). Fresh β-mercaptoethanol (2.5% final concen-
tration) was used to reduce the samples. Proteins were electro-
transferred to nitrocellulose membranes, and transfer was con-
firmed with 0.1% Ponceau S solution (Sigma Chemical Co.)
staining of the membrane. Membranes were blocked with Super
Block (Pierce Chemical Co.) for 45 min and washed with TBS
(0.05% Tween-20). Primary antibodies (EO6 and biotinylated
MB47) were diluted in 3% BSA-TBS (0.01% Tween-20) and incu-
bated for 1 h at room temperature, and the membranes were
washed five to seven times. The bound antibodies were detected
with alkaline phosphatase–labeled goat anti–mouse IgM anti-
bodies (EO6) or alkaline phosphatase–labeled avidin (biotiny-
lated MB47) (Pierce Chemical Co.). Alkaline phosphatase was
visualized with Alkaline Phosphatase Conjugate Substrate Kit
(Bio-Rad Laboratories Inc., Hercules, California, USA)
Results
Antibody binding to OxLDL. We have shown previously that
a panel of natural monoclonal autoantibodies cloned
from apoE-deficient mice (EO– autoantibodies) recog-
nizes model epitopes of OxLDL (10). Figure 1a shows the
binding of selected EO– autoantibodies to CuOx-LDL
and MDA-LDL. In general, antibodies initially selected
for predominant recognition of CuOx-LDL (EO1 to
EO7) had stronger binding to CuOx-LDL than to MDA-
LDL, and antibodies selected for recognition of MDA-
LDL (EO11 to EO17) bound better to MDA-LDL (Fig.
1a). EO13 showed some degree of binding to both CuOx-
LDL and MDA-LDL. The specificity of MDA2, a mouse
IgG MAB made against MDA-LDL (23), is shown for
comparison (Fig. 1a). MDA2 frequently shows little bind-
ing to intact CuOx-LDL, but as noted below, binds well
to the delipidated apoprotein of CuOx-LDL.
MAB DLH3, generated by immunizing mice with
homogenates of human atheromatous plaque (26), was
shown previously to bind to foam cells in atherosclerot-
ic lesions and to CuOx-LDL (26, 27). Because the bind-
ing properties of DLH3 in our assays were so similar to
the binding properties of EO6, we tested the ability of
DLH3 to compete with biotinylated EO6 for binding to
CuOx-LDL. Fig. 1b demonstrates that DLH3 competed
for >90% of the EO6 binding to CuOx-LDL, suggesting
that these two monoclonal antibodies are directed
against a closely related or identical epitope.
Antibody binding to the protein or lipid moiety of OxLDL.
During the oxidation of LDL a large number of reactive
lipid peroxidation products are generated, which can
modify the apoprotein as well as the lipids in LDL. To
investigate whether the epitopes for the EO– autoanti-
120
The Journal of Clinical Investigation
|
January 1999
|
Volume 103
|
Number 1
Figure 3
Western blot analysis of lipid and protein moieties of CuOx-LDL and
native LDL using MABs EO6 and MB47 (anti-apoB antibody) after SDS-
PAGE under reducing conditions. (a) Standards. (b) EO6 binding to lipids
from CuOx-LDL. (c) EO6 binding to delipidated protein from CuOx-LDL.
(d) EO6 binding to lipids from native -LDL. (e) EO6 binding to delipidat-
ed protein from native LDL. (f) Standards. (g) MB47 binding to lipids from
native LDL. (h) MB47 binding to delipidated protein from native LDL. (i)
MB47 binding to lipids from CuOx-LDL. (j) MB47 binding to delipidated
protein from CuOx-LDL.
Figure 4
(a) Immunoassay showing binding of EO– autoantibodies and DLH3 to
unoxidized PAPC liposomes, OxPAPC liposomes, or POVPC. The lipo-
somes were plated at 10 µg/ml overnight (4°C), and POVPC (10 µg/ml)
was plated onto the microtiter wells by evaporation with air for 15 min
just before use. Antibodies (10 µg/ml) were then incubated with antigens
for 1 h (room temperature). The amount of antibody bound was meas-
ured with alkaline phosphatase–labeled goat anti–mouse IgM antibody
using chemiluminescent technique. (b) Binding of EO6 to increasing con-
centrations of PAPC, CuOx-LDL, or POVPC-BSA. Each point is the mean
of triplicate determinations. OxPAPC, oxidized PAPC; PAPC, unoxidized
L-α1-palmitoyl-2-arachidonoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine; POVPC, 1-
palmitoyl-2-(5-oxovaleroyl)-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine.

bodies are in the protein or in the lipid moiety of 
OxLDL, we separated the lipids and protein with chloro-
form/methanol extraction. The lipids extracted from the
CuOx-LDL were reconstituted into microemulsions by
extrusion through a polycarbonate filter (see Methods).
Figure 2 demonstrates the binding of selected EO–
autoantibodies to the immobilized delipidated protein
moiety (upper row) or the immobilized lipid moiety (lower
row) of CuOx-LDL. All the autoantibodies that specifi-
cally bound to the intact CuOx-LDL (EO3, EO6, and
EO7; Fig. 1) also bound both to the protein and to the
lipid portion of CuOx-LDL. More binding was observed
to the protein and lipid moieties of LDL oxidized with
copper for 18 hours than to that oxidized for only four
hours. No binding was observed to the protein or lipids
extracted from native-LDL. EO14, which was selected for
binding to MDA-LDL, did not bind to either lipid or pro-
tein fractions. The monoclonal IgG antibody to MDA-
lysine (MDA2) showed binding only to the CuOx-LDL
protein portion. While these experiments are representa-
tive, there was variation in binding to different OxLDL
preparations, presumably reflecting different degrees of
modification of these preparations.
In other experiments, we also demonstrated that the
EO– autoantibodies bound to the lipids extracted from
CuOx-LDL (but not from native LDL) even when the
extracted lipids were solubilized in ethanol and directly
coated onto microtiter wells (data not shown). This sug-
gests that the MABs recognize the epitopes in the lipid
moiety of CuOx-LDL whether the extracted lipids are in
a more organized form (microemulsions) or in an unor-
ganized form (just as plated lipids on microtiter wells).
The amount of protein contamination in the lipid
microemulsions prepared from CuOx-LDL was estimat-
ed by acid hydrolysis followed by quantitative amino acid
analysis using ion-exchange chromatography (25). For
every 1 mg of OxLDL protein extracted, ∼13 µg of amino
acids was measured in the lipid fraction (25). Thus, even
at the maximum amount of lipid added to the microtiter
well, there would be ∼26 ng of protein added, of which
<10% binds; therefore, there would be 2.6 ng protein
bound to the lipid-coated well. Also, Western blots of the
lipid fractions showed no staining with antibody MB47
(Fig. 3, lanes g and i), which binds with high affinity to
apoB (29) as well as to oxidized apoB fragments (23).
Antibody binding to OxLDL on a Western blot analysis. The
data above demonstrate binding of the EO– autoanti-
bodies to the protein moiety of CuOx-LDL. To further
test if the epitopes for the MABs were lipids covalently
bound to the protein moiety of CuOx-LDL, we ran a
sodium dodecyl sulfate–polyacrylamide gel elec-
trophoresis (SDS-PAGE) of CuOx-LDL and native LDL
under reducing conditions. The gel was electrotrans-
ferred to nitrocellulose and the binding of EO6 MAB
was detected. Figure 3 shows that EO6 bound exten-
The Journal of Clinical Investigation
|
January 1999
|
Volume 103
|
Number 1
121
Figure 5
(a) Competition immunoassay showing binding of a limiting and con-
stant amount of EO6 to CuOx-LDL in the presence of increasing amounts
of native LDL, CuOx-LDL, PAPC liposomes, and OxPAPC liposomes.
Control incubations with EO6 without competitors were performed
under identical conditions and the results are expressed as percentage of
control. (b) Competition immunoassay showing binding of a fixed and
limiting amount of EO6 to POVPC in the presence of increasing amounts
of BSA, CuOx-LDL, MDA-LDL, and native unoxidized PAPC liposomes.
Control incubations with EO6 without competitors were performed
under identical conditions, and the results are expressed as percentage
of control. Each point is the mean of triplicate determinations.
Figure 6
(a) Absorption experiment with microemulsions made from lipids extract-
ed from native LDL and LDL oxidized with copper for 4 h or 18 h (CuOx-
LDL). In this experiment, EO7 and EO11 MABs (10 µg/ml; total of 1.0
ml) were incubated for 1 h with increasing concentrations of lipid
microemulsions in TBS buffer in the absence of any protein. After incu-
bation the microemulsions were pelleted by ultracentrifugation, and the
supernatants were tested for antibody binding to CuOx-LDL (EO7) or
MDA-LDL (EO11) in a solid phase immunoassay. Control incubations
with MABs without any lipid microemulsions were performed under iden-
tical conditions (including ultracentrifugation), and the results are
expressed as percentage of control. (b) Absorption experiment with PAPC
and OxPAPC. In this experiment, EO6 and EO14 MABs (10 µg/ml; total
of 1.0 ml) were incubated for 1 h with increasing concentrations of PAPC
and OxPAPC in PBS in the absence of any protein. After incubation, the
immunocomplexes were pelleted with centrifugation, and the super-
natants were tested for antibody binding to CuOx-LDL (EO6) or MDA-
LDL (EO14) in a solid-phase immunoassay. Control incubations with
MABs without any phospholipid were performed under identical condi-
tions (including ultracentrifugation); the results are expressed as per-
centage of control. Each point is the mean of triplicate determinations.

sively to the protein moiety of CuOx-LDL apoB (lane c).
This binding was noted from apparently intact or even
aggregated apoB to fragments as small as 40 kDa (lane
c). No EO6 binding was detected to the protein moiety
of native LDL (Fig. 3, lane e), to the lipids extracted from
CuOx-LDL and handled in an identical manner (lane b),
or to the lipids extracted from native LDL (lane d). MAB
MB47, which binds to apoB, showed binding to the pro-
tein moiety of both the native LDL (Fig. 3, lane h), and
CuOx-LDL (lane j). Note that the native apoB in Fig. 3,
lane h had been delipidated before the SDS-PAGE and
showed fragmentation. This is in contrast to a single
band noted at ∼550 kDa when intact LDL was subject-
ed to SDS-PAGE. Despite this fragmentation, the native
LDL did not bind EO6 (Fig. 3, lane e). MB47 did not
bind to the lipids extracted from native LDL (Fig. 3, lane
g) or CuOx-LDL (lane i). Small bands seen in Fig. 3,
lanes g and i, at 70 kDa were shown in another blot to be
due to binding of alkaline phosphatase–labeled avidin
alone (data not shown).
Antibody binding to oxidized phospholipids. The initial site of
oxidation of LDL (at least when mediated by copper in
vitro) occurs in the PUFA of phospholipids on the surface
of LDL (31). The main PUFA in LDL are linoleic (18:2) and
arachidonic acid (20:4), the former being predominantly
(65%) bound in the cholesteryl esters, and the latter most-
ly (68%) bound to the phospholipids (34). When linoleic
acid, arachidonic acid, cholesteryl oleate, or cholesteryl
linoleate were oxidized by exposure to air for 24 hours,
they did not yield any EO– autoantibody binding activity
(data not shown). To investigate if the epitopes for the EO–
autoantibodies are generated when phospholipids under-
go oxidation, we oxidized synthetic PAPC by drying it on
the surface of a glass tube and exposing it to air for 16–24
h, and then we tested the binding of the MABs to lipo-
somes made from the native and oxidized PAPC (OxPA-
PC). Fig. 4a shows that all the EO– autoantibodies origi-
nally selected for binding to CuOx-LDL (EO3, EO4, EO6,
EO7), as well as antibody DLH3, bound to OxPAPC lipo-
somes, but not to unoxidized PAPC liposomes. EO11,
EO13, and EO14 that had originally been selected for
binding to MDA-LDL showed almost no binding to
OxPAPC or PAPC liposomes (Fig. 4a).
When PAPC is oxidized, a wide variety of oxidation
products can be detected by mass spectrometry (28).
Some of these compounds, such as POVPC and 1-palmi-
toyl-2-glutaroyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine, are pres-
ent in minimally modified LDL and have been 
shown to be biologically active, e.g., by inducing mono-
cyte–endothelial interactions (28). We tested the binding
of the MABs to synthetic POVPC (27, 28). MABs EO1,
EO3, EO4, EO6, and EO7 which bound to CuOx-LDL
(Fig.1) and OxPAPC (Fig. 4a), that also bound to POVPC
(Fig 4a), whereas the MABs that bound to MDA-LDL
(EO11, EO14, and EO17) did not. Monoclonal antibody
122
The Journal of Clinical Investigation
|
January 1999
|
Volume 103
|
Number 1
Figure 7
(a) Binding of 2 µg (4 µg/ml) of 125I-CuOx-LDL to elicit-
ed mouse peritoneal macrophages at 4°C in the pres-
ence of 50 µg (100 µg/ml) of unlabeled LDL, CuOx-
LDL, MDA-LDL, acetylated LDL (Ac-LDL), natural
mouse monoclonal IgM autoantibodies (EO1–EO17),
and murine IgG MAB MDA2 as competitors. (b) Bind-
ing of 2 µg (4 µg/ml) of 125I-CuOx-LDL to elicited
mouse peritoneal macrophages (in another experiment)
in the presence of 50 µg (100 µg/ml) of unlabeled
CuOx-LDL and mouse MABs DLH3, EO6, and EO7. In
both experiments (a and b), the data are expressed as
the percentage of 125I-CuOx-LDL bound in the absence
of competitors (a: 1.3 µg/mg cell protein; b: 0.5 µg/mg
cell protein). Each bar is the mean of triplicate determi-
nations.
Figure 8
Degradation of 2 µg (4 µg/ml) of 125I-CuOx-LDL by elicited mouse peri-
toneal macrophages in the presence of increasing concentrations of EO–
autoantibodies (EO3, EO4, EO6, and EO11) at 37°C. Asterisk indicates
that the degradation assay with EO6 was carried out in a separate exper-
iment. The data are expressed as the percentage of 125I-CuOx-LDL
degraded in the absence of competitors (2.2 µg/mg cell protein; *0.9
µg/mg cell protein). Addition of a 50-fold excess of unlabeled CuOx-LDL
inhibited the degradation of 125I-CuOx-LDL to 4% of control. Each point
is the mean of triplicate determinations.

DLH3 also bound to POVPC, as reported previously (27).
The specificity of the EO– autoantibodies EO1–EO7 for
an aldehyde in the sn2 position of the phospholipid was
demonstrated by showing that the 5-carbon carboxylic
analogue of POVPC (1-palmitoyl-2-glutaroyl-sn-glycero-
3-phosphocholine) did not react with any of these anti-
bodies (data not shown). To determine if the EO–
autoantibodies would recognize degradation products
that are generated from the oxidized fatty acids (without
the phospholipid backbone), we used pure valeralde-
hyde, valeric acid, 5-amino valeric acid, amyl amine, and
pentanol as plated antigens. None of the EO– autoanti-
bodies showed any binding activity against these com-
pounds (data not shown).
The above data suggest that an oxidized phospholipid
with an aldehyde in the sn2 position is required for anti-
body recognition of the isolated lipid. Because the EO–
autoantibodies also recognized the modified protein of
OxLDL (Figs. 2 and 3), we prepared reduced Schiff-base
adducts of POVPC with bovine serum albumin (BSA).
As shown in Fig. 4b, EO6 clearly binds to such covalent
adducts. Although it is not clear how EO6 reacts with
both the phospholipid containing free aldehyde and the
lipid–protein adduct, we speculate that the free alde-
hyde, which would be more polar, can interact via
hydrogen bonding with the PC-headgroup to generate
a structure immunologically similar to that occuring
with Schiff-base formation.
Competition immunoassays were then performed to
demonstrate the presence of OxPAPC and POVPC epi-
topes on CuOx-LDL. Fig. 5a shows that the binding of
EO6 to CuOx-LDL was totally competed by OxPAPC
liposomes, as well as by intact CuOx-LDL, whereas unox-
idized PAPC liposomes or native LDL showed no compe-
tition for binding. Fig. 5b shows that the binding of EO6
to POVPC was almost completely competed by CuOx-
LDL, but not by MDA-LDL, BSA, or unoxidized PAPC
liposomes. These data strongly suggest that POVPC or
POVPC-apoB adducts are present on CuOx-LDL.
Antibody binding to the lipid moiety of OxLDL in the absence
of protein. The reactive aldehydes generated from the
breakdown products of lipid peroxidation during LDL
oxidation could react with lysine (or histidine) residues
of any closely associated protein. Thus, in theory, any pro-
tein present in the microtiter wells could react with the
oxidative breakdown products of the phospholipids (and
other lipids) and form lipid–protein adducts. This could
even happen with the BSA used for blocking the nonspe-
cific binding sites in the microtiter wells. To investigate
the binding of the EO– autoantibodies to the lipid
microemulsions in the absence of any added protein
(except the antibodies themselves), we incubated the lipid
microemulsions with the antibodies in a fluid phase
assay in TBS buffer for one hour to allow binding and
then spun down the microemulsions in an ultracen-
trifuge (100,000 g). The supernatants containing
unbound antibodies were then tested for binding to
CuOx-LDL (EO7) or MDA-LDL (EO11) in the solid
phase chemiluminescent immunoassay. Figure 6a shows
that MAB EO7 was absorbed by lipid microemulsions
prepared from CuOx-LDL oxidized for 4 or 18 hours in
the absence of any other protein, whereas it was not
absorbed by lipid microemulsions prepared from native
LDL. Control antibody EO11 was not absorbed by the
lipid microemulsions prepared from 18-hour CuOx-LDL.
To determine whether EO6 binds to OxPAPC in the
absence of any protein (except EO6 itself), we incubated
OxPAPC (or PAPC) and EO6 in phosphate-buffered saline
for one hour, spun down the immunocomplexes, and test-
ed the supernatant for remaining binding activity in a
The Journal of Clinical Investigation
|
January 1999
|
Volume 103
|
Number 1
123
Figure 9
(a and b) Immunoassay showing binding of EO3, EO6, and F(ab′)2 fragments of EO3 and EO6 to CuOx-LDL. Increasing concentrations of antibodies
or F(ab′)2 were incubated in CuOx-LDL–coated wells for 1 h at room temperature, and the amount of antibody bound was measured with alkaline
phosphatase–labeled goat anti–mouse IgM antibody using chemiluminescent technique. (c) Binding of 2 µg (4 µg/ml) of 125I-CuOx-LDL to elicited
mouse peritoneal macrophages in the presence or absence of 10 and 20 µg of unlabeled LDL, CuOx-LDL, monoclonal autoantibodies EO3 and EO6,
and F(ab′)2 fragments of EO3 and EO6 as competitors. The data are expressed as the percentage of 125I-CuOx-LDL bound in the absence of com-
petitors (0.6 µg/mg cell protein). Each value is the mean of triplicate determinations.

chemiluminescent immunoassay. Fig. 6b shows that EO6
was absorbed completely by OxPAPC, but not by native
PAPC, in the complete absence of protein in the incuba-
tion medium. Control absorptions with MAB EO14,
which does not bind to OxPAPC (Fig. 4a), demonstrated
that neither PAPC nor OxPAPC inhibited the binding of
EO14 to MDA-LDL (ruling out nonspecific interactions
of these lipids on antibody function). These data suggest
that the epitopes for MABs EO1–EO7 are generated when
intact phospholipids containing PUFAs undergo oxida-
tion and that the antibodies do not require a protein back-
bone (such as apoB) for the epitope recognition.
Stoichiometry of EO6 binding to CuOx-LDL. The binding
affinity for EO6 binding to CuOx-LDL was estimated by
incubating increasing concentrations of 125I-CuOx-LDL
(0–20 µg/ml) in wells were coated with EO6. After a four-
hour incubation at room temperature, the unbound 125I-
CuOx-LDL was washed off and the wells counted for
radioactivity. The calculated dissociation constant (Kd)
values for EO6 binding to 125I-CuOx-LDL (1/2Bmax) were
2.9 × 10–8 M and 4.1 × 10–8 M in two separate experi-
ments with different OxLDL preparations. To determine
the number of binding sites per OxLDL particle, a dif-
ferent fluid phase assay was used in which increasing
amounts of unlabeled EO6 were added to a fixed
amount of 125I-CuOx-LDL (100 ng/well). These mixtures
were incubated in EO6-coated microtiter wells overnight
at 4°C and the amount of 125I-CuOx-LDL bound to EO6
was measured. In these experiments, there were two dif-
ferent kinds of binding sites: one similar to those
obtained in experiments above (4.7 × 10–8 M) and anoth-
er with even higher affinity (7.9 × 10–11 M). There were
approximately five high-affinity sites on one CuOx-LDL
particle. The curve for the low-affinity binding was quite
shallow and yielded estimates between 223 and 310
binding sites per CuOx-LDL particle (data not shown).
The effect of MABs on the binding of OxLDL to macrophages.
To investigate if the oxidized phospholipid epitopes rec-
ognized by the MABs would also be involved in the
recognition of OxLDL by macrophage scavenger recep-
tors, 
we 
incubated 
mouse 
elicited 
peritoneal
macrophages with 2 µg of 125I-CuOx-LDL in the pres-
ence of 50 µg of unlabeled EO– autoantibodies as com-
petitors (at 4°C). These amounts yield molar ratios of
IgM to apoB (as a marker of LDL particles) of ∼15:1. As
shown in Fig. 7a, all the EO– autoantibodies that bound
to CuOx-LDL, OxPAPC, and POVPC (EO1, EO3, EO4,
EO6, and EO7) also inhibited 60%–80% of the binding of
125I-CuOx-LDL to macrophages. MABs binding pre-
dominantly to MDA-LDL (EO11, EO14, EO17, and
MDA2) did not influence the binding (Fig. 7a). Antibody
EO13, which bound to CuOx-LDL and MDA-LDL, but
bound very poorly to oxidized phospholipids, did not
inhibit the binding. In another experiment (Fig. 7b), EO6
and EO7 inhibited the binding of 125I-CuOx-LDL to
macrophages to an even greater extent (86% and 91%,
respectively), and the MAB DLH3 also showed signifi-
cant inhibition of binding (80%).
We also tested the ability of the MABs to inhibit the bind-
ing of 125I-MDA-LDL to macrophages (data not shown).
None of the antioxidized phospholipid autoantibodies
(EO1, EO3, EO4, EO6, and EO7) inhibited binding, and
surprisingly, none of the anti–MDA-LDL autoantibodies
inhibited the binding either (EO11, EO13, EO14, and
EO17) (data not shown), even though we had earlier shown
that these latter antibodies bind strongly to MDA-LDL (Fig.
1). These data demonstrate again that the antibodies were
not inhibiting the binding of OxLDL nonspecifically.
The effect of MABs on the degradation of OxLDL by
macrophages. Each of the EO– autoantibodies that bound
to oxidized phospholipids (e.g., EO3, EO4, and EO6),
also inhibited degradation of 
125I-CuOx-LDL by
macrophages in a dose-dependent fashion, whereas
EO11 showed no effect (Fig. 8). The inhibition reached
saturation at a molar ratio of 10 added IgM molecules to
one apoB molecule in this experiment. In other experi-
ments, with different CuOx-LDL preparations, the
molar ratios needed to maximally inhibit the binding
and degradation of 125I-CuOx-LDL by macrophages var-
ied from ∼8 to 25 IgM molecules to one apoB molecule.
This variation is most likely caused by differences in the
OxLDL preparations; i.e., some preparations may be
more heavily oxidized than others and thus may express
different numbers of epitopes.
The effect of F(ab′)2 fragments of the MABs on the binding of
OxLDL to macrophages. The molecular weight of IgM is
∼900 kDa. To reduce the possibility that the EO– autoan-
tibody IgM molecules could be masking the epitopes rec-
ognized by scavenger receptors on macrophages simply
by nonspecific steric hindrance, we prepared F(ab′)2 frag-
124
The Journal of Clinical Investigation
|
January 1999
|
Volume 103
|
Number 1
Figure 10
Binding of DiO-labeled CuOx-LDL lipid microemulsions to mouse peri-
toneal macrophages in the presence of unlabeled EO6, EO11, or control
mouse IgM as competitors. DiO-labeled CuOx-OxLDL lipid microemul-
sions were incubated with resident mouse peritoneal macrophages in the
presence of MABs EO6, EO11, or control mouse IgM for 2 h at 4°C. The
cells were washed and the mean fluorescence intensity was measured
using flow cytometry (20,000 events). The data are expressed as the per-
centage of DiO-labeled CuOx-OxLDL microemulsions bound to the
macrophages in the absence of competitors. Each bar is a single meas-
urement. The figure shows two separate experiments with different CuOx-
OxLDL lipid microemulsions.

ments of EO3 and EO6 antibodies. When binding to
CuOx-LDL was tested in an immunoassay, the EO6
F(ab′)2 fragments bound as well as the intact EO6 IgM
molecules, whereas the EO3 F(ab′)2 fragments lost most
of their binding activity (Fig. 9, a and b). Accordingly, the
EO6 F(ab′)2 fragments inhibited the 125I-CuOx-LDL bind-
ing to macrophages to the same extent as the intact EO6
IgM molecules, whereas the EO3 F(ab′)2 fragments did
not inhibit the binding (Fig. 9c).
The effect of MABs on the binding of microemulsions made
from OxLDL lipid to macrophages. The data above suggest
that the EO– autoantibodies can inhibit uptake of
OxLDL by murine macrophages, and that they bind to
both the isolated lipid and protein moieties of CuOx-
LDL. To investigate if the EO– autoantibodies could
inhibit macrophage recognition of the isolated lipid
moiety of OxLDL, we incubated resident mouse peri-
toneal macrophages with DiO-labeled lipid microemul-
sions in the presence of 100 or 200 µg of unlabeled EO–
autoantibodies as competitors (4°C) and measured the
binding with flow cytometry. Figure 10 demonstrates
that EO6 substantially inhibited the binding of two sep-
arate preparations of lipid microemulsions prepared
from OxLDL. In contrast, EO11 (which binds predomi-
nantly to MDA-LDL) and control mouse IgM showed no
effect on the binding (Fig. 10). DiO-labeled microemul-
sions of native LDL showed no binding to resident
macrophages (data not shown).
POVPC-modified BSA inhibits the degradation of OxLDL by
macrophages. To further test the hypothesis that POVPC
was a ligand on OxLDL that mediated macrophage
recognition, we tested the ability of POVPC- modified
albumin to inhibit the uptake of 125I-CuOxLDL.
POVPC-BSA was readily recognized by EO6 (Fig. 4b). As
shown in Fig. 11, whereas native BSA had no impact,
both unlabeled OxLDL and POVPC-BSA inhibited
uptake and degradation >80%.
Discussion
In this paper we demonstrate that several monoclonal
autoantibodies cloned from apoE-deficient mice bind to
oxidized phospholipid epitopes and to both the oxidized
lipid moiety and the oxidized protein moiety of OxLDL.
These same antibodies block the binding, uptake, 
and degradation of OxLDL and OxLDL lipids by
macrophages. Furthermore, an adduct of POVPC with
BSA also blocks the uptake of OxLDL. These data sug-
gest that oxidized phospholipids represent one class of
ligands on OxLDL that mediates its binding and uptake
by macrophage scavenger receptors.
In earlier studies, we demonstrated that apoE-defi-
cient mice, which have extensive hypercholesterolemia
and associated atherosclerosis, have exceedingly high
autoantibody titers to various epitopes of OxLDL (8).
These very high titers allowed us to clone a series of
monoclonal autoantibodies to OxLDL using the
spleens of two apoE-deficient mice that had not been
exogenously immunized (10). In our initial screening
strategy (10), we used several model epitopes of OxLDL
(and other proteins, such as HDL, BSA, and polylysine)
and demonstrated that most of these EO– autoanti-
bodies were binding to epitopes of adducts of oxidized
lipid and protein. The results shown in this report
demonstrate that not only do some of the EO– autoan-
tibodies bind to neoepitopes formed by covalent adduct
formation between oxidized lipids and apoB, as demon-
strated by immunoassays of delipidated apoB and
Western blot analysis, but they also bind to the protein-
free lipid moiety of OxLDL. Although a very small
amount of protein was detected in lipids extracted from
the OxLDL (∼1.3% of the initial protein content was
carried over to the lipid fraction; ref. 25), our demon-
stration that oxidation of synthetic PAPC also gave rise
to the epitopes strongly suggests that some of the anti-
bodies can recognize oxidized phospholipids in OxLDL
both as isolated lipid and as oxidized lipid adducts
covalently attached to apoB. Furthermore, we show that
the monoclonals that inhibited macrophage binding
specifically bound to POVPC, an oxidized phospholipid
present in OxPAPC and mm-LDL (28). Figures 5 and 6
clearly demonstrate that epitopes found in oxidized
PAPC and POVPC are present on OxLDL. Furthermore,
EO6 recognizes POVPC present as isolated lipid (Fig. 4),
or as an adduct with BSA (Fig. 4b). The fact that oxida-
tion of fatty acids (linoleic acid and arachidonic acid),
or cholesteryl esters (cholesteryl-oleate and cholesteryl-
linoleate), or various analogues of oxovaleraldehyde,
did not yield any binding activity, further suggests that
the “intact” oxidized phospholipid is important for
antibody binding, and by inference, ligand formation.
The actual spatial presentation of the oxidized phos-
pholipids, however, seems less clear for the antibody
binding activity because the MABs bound to the epi-
topes when the oxidized lipids were plated in organic
solvent, or when present as microemulsions or when
present as lipid–protein adducts in denatured form on
gels in the Western blot analysis.
The Journal of Clinical Investigation
|
January 1999
|
Volume 103
|
Number 1
125
Figure 11
Cell association (37°C) and degradation of 2 µg of 125I-CuOx-LDL by
mouse peritoneal macrophages in presence of 50 µg of BSA, unlabeled
CuOx-LDL, or POVPC–BSA adduct. The data are expressed as the per-
centage of 125I-CuOx-LDL associated with cells or degraded in the
absence of competitors (0.95 and 0.32 µg/mg cell protein, respectively).
Each bar is the mean of duplicate determinations.

These data strongly support the hypothesis that oxi-
dized phospholipid epitopes, such as POVPC, are one class
of ligands on OxLDL for macrophage scavenger receptor
recognition. Although we cannot absolutely exclude the
possibility that the EO– autoantibodies and DLH3 inhib-
ited OxLDL binding to macrophages by binding to oxi-
dized phospholipids on the surface of OxLDL and there-
by masking other nearby epitopes, several lines of evidence
argue against this possibility. First, F(ab′)2 fragments of
EO6, which were one-sixth the size, were equally effective
as intact EO6. Second, EO13, which bound to CuOx-LDL
and MDA-LDL, but not to oxidized phospholipids, failed
to inhibit binding and degradation of OxLDL. Third, the
EO– autoantibodies to MDA-LDL, including EO13, did
not inhibit the binding of MDA-LDL to macrophages.
This strongly suggests that the inhibition of the antioxi-
dized phospholipid antibodies was not due to steric hin-
drance. Indeed, the effects of the blocking IgMs were
restricted to those antibodies that bound to oxidized
phospholipid such as POVPC. Nonspecific effects were
further excluded by the demonstration that IgMs that did
not bind to OxLDL did not inhibit binding to the
macrophages. We have not yet fully elucidated all of the
potentially modified phospholipid epitopes that may be
structurally and immunologically similar to POVPC, that
may also act as epitopes for the antibodies and as ligands.
In preliminary experiments, EO6 also recognizes 1-palmi-
toyl-2-(9-oxononanoyl)-phosphocholine (PONPC), the
nine-carbon aldehyde analogue of POVPC, either as free
lipid or when covalently attached to BSA (data not
shown). In a similar manner, Itabe et al. (27) reported that
DLH3 also recognizes PONPC, as well as an adduct of
PONPC, with a COOH-terminal peptide of peroxisomal
membrane protein . Thus, there may be a number of ana-
logues of oxidized phospholipids that are ligands for
OxLDL recognition. Finally, the direct demonstration
that a POVPC–BSA adduct directly inhibited the binding
and degradation of OxLDL strongly supports the role of
POVPC as an important ligand.
As pointed out earlier, OxLDL is a very complex struc-
ture, and it is likely that there are multiple ligands
responsible for macrophage recognition, just as there
appear to be several different macrophage receptors for
OxLDL. Because a variety of modifications of lysine
residues of LDL, such as acetylation, maleylation, or
modification with MDA or 4-HNE all lead to enhanced
macrophage uptake, it was generally assumed that pro-
tein modifications alone were responsible for
macrophage uptake. Indeed, Parthasarathy et al. (24)
delipidated OxLDL and resolubilized the oxidized
apoprotein in octylglucoside. They showed that the pro-
tein moiety of OxLDL was taken up and degraded by
macrophages at almost the same high rate as intact
OxLDL and that this uptake was competed by intact
OxLDL. They concluded that during oxidative modifica-
tion new epitopes are generated on the apoprotein that
are responsible for the recognition by scavenger receptors
(24). Steinbrecher and colleagues (35) initially demon-
strated that oxidation of LDL resulted in modification of
lysine residues. Subsequently, they demonstrated that
LDL (and other proteins) modified with oxidation prod-
ucts generated from arachidonic acid by thermal autoxi-
dation also had enhanced degradation by macrophages,
which could be blocked by MABs specific for adducts of
oxidation products with lysine (36). This also suggested
that derivatization of lysine residues with specific lipid
peroxidation products is necessary and sufficient for
binding of proteins to the scavenger receptors. However,
another study by Hoppe et al. (37) showed that LDL mod-
ified by selected lysine group–specific chemical reagents
expected to occur in LDL oxidation as a result of lysine
derivatization by lipid peroxidation products (such as
oxononanal, hexanedione, and trimethylpyrylium) had
an enhanced uptake and degradation by macrophages.
The possibility that the oxidized lipid moiety of
OxLDL could also serve as ligand for macrophages had
not been considered in the studies described above.
However, a very recent study by Terpstra et al. (25) used
competition studies to demonstrate that the binding
and uptake of intact 125I-OxLDL could be strongly
inhibited by microemulsions made either from lipids
extracted from OxLDL or by OxPAPC, implying that the
lipid moiety of OxLDL may play an important role in
macrophage recognition. In the present paper, for the
first time, we use carefully characterized MABs, as well
as their F(ab′)2 fragments, to define epitopes on OxLDL
responsible for binding to macrophages. Remarkably, all
of the EO– autoantibodies that blocked macrophage
uptake of OxLDL also bound to both the lipid and pro-
tein moiety of OxLDL. This suggests that either oxidized
phospholipids or lipid–protein adducts, or, both could
serve as ligands for macrophage recognition. The wide-
spread generation of such epitopes over both the lipid
and protein surface of OxLDL could explain why
OxLDL is so avidly bound by macrophages and why the
EO– autoantibodies are so effective in blocking this
binding. Indeed, as shown in Fig. 10, the antibodies
block binding of lipid microemulsions prepared from
OxLDL. Further studies are under way to determine the
ability of the antibodies to block the uptake of either the
lipid or the isolated protein of OxLDL by macrophages
and to delineate which of the known OxLDL receptors
are responsible for recognition of this class of ligands.
Considering the complexity of the ligands on OxLDL
and the different OxLDL receptors, the degree to which
the EO– autoantibodies to oxidized phospholipids
inhibited OxLDL uptake is surprising. Although these
may be important, or even dominant ligands, it also
must be considered that there may be hot spots on
OxLDL (e.g., where polyunsaturated fatty acids occur)
such that clustering of ligands for the various OxLDL
receptors occurs. Thus, blocking one legitimate ligand
may block other equally competent ligands as well.
We and others demonstrated previously that autoan-
tibodies to OxLDL occur in plasma and atherosclerotic
lesions of humans and animal models. The present stud-
ies are also important because for the first time, they
characterize some of the actual epitopes to which many
of the autoantibodies to OxLDL bind. In fact, it is of con-
siderable interest that most of the autoantibodies that
we cloned from apoE-deficient mice on the basis of their
ability to bind to OxLDL bind to oxidized phospho-
lipids. Both the EO– autoantibodies and DLH3 have
been shown to immunostain atherosclerotic lesions and
126
The Journal of Clinical Investigation
|
January 1999
|
Volume 103
|
Number 1

both recognize epitopes on circulating LDL (10–12, 26).
Antibody DLH3 was generated by immunizing mice
with human atheromatous material. It is remarkable
that DLH3 and EO6 bind to a very closely related epi-
tope (Fig. 1b). Indeed, they both bind to POVPC and
PONPC. These data together with the recent observa-
tions of Watson et al. (28) demonstrate that oxidized
phospholipids are prominent components of OxLDL
and of atherosclerotic lesions, and in particular are
strong immunogens. As we reported recently (21), many
of the so-called antiphospholipid antibodies found in
humans are directed against oxidized phospholipids or
oxidized phospholipid–protein adducts (30). We suggest
that oxidized phospholipids, present in OxLDL or as
components of atherosclerotic lesions, as well as those
present on other oxidatively damaged structures, such as
cellular membranes, may all give rise to common epi-
topes and common autoantibodies.
These findings also indicate that oxidized phospho-
lipid epitopes are involved in the recognition of OxLDL
by macrophages, and that apoE-deficient mice have
endogenously generated IgM autoantibodies that can
bind to these epitopes and inhibit OxLDL uptake. It is
unknown at present whether such antibodies have any
biological significance. However, it is known that
immunization of hypercholesterolemic rabbits and
mice with OxLDL leads to an amelioration of the pro-
gression of atherosclerosis (38–42). An interesting ques-
tion is whether the type of autoantibodies described in
this paper could play a role in this protective effect? We
have reported previously that IgM antibodies to oxida-
tion-specific epitopes are present in human subjects (10,
43). Because the epitopes of the EO– autoantibodies are
present in human atherosclerotic lesions and on human
circulating LDL (10), it can be speculated that similar
autoantibodies are likely to be present in humans as
well. Further studies will be needed to determine the rel-
evance of such immunological responses to oxidized
phospholipid neoepitopes.
Acknowledgments
The authors thank Daniel Steinberg for his continued advice
and support, as well as Valeska Terpstra and Kristin Gillotte for
helpful discussions and insights. These studies were supported
by National Institutes of Health grants HL56989 (La Jolla Spe-
cialized Center of Research), HL57505 (to J.L. Witztum), and
HL30568 (to J.A. Berliner), and by a Postdoctoral Research Fel-
lowship of the American Heart Association, California Affiliate
(to S. Hörkkö).
1. Palinski, W., et al. 1989. Low density lipoprotein undergoes oxidative
modification in vivo. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 86:1372–1376.
2. Ylä-Herttuala, S., et al. 1989. Evidence for the presence of oxidatively
modified low density lipoprotein in atherosclerotic lesions of rabbit and
man. J. Clin. Invest. 84:1086–1095.
3. Ylä-Herttuala, S., Palinski, W., Rosenfeld, M.E., Steinberg, D., and Witz-
tum, J.L. 1990. Lipoproteins in normal and atherosclerotic aorta. Eur.
Heart J. 11(Suppl. E):88–99.
4. Haberland, M.E., Fong, D., and Cheng, L. 1988. Malondialdehyde-altered
protein occurs in atheroma of Watanabe heritable hyperlipidemic rab-
bits. Science. 241:215–218.
5. Boyd, H.C., Gown, A.M., Wolfbauer, G., and Chait, A. 1989. Direct evi-
dence for a protein recognized by a monoclonal antibody against oxida-
tively modified LDL in atherosclerotic lesions from a Watanabe herita-
ble hyperlipidemia rabbit. Am. J. Pathol. 135:815–825.
6. Rosenfeld, M.E., Palinski, W., Ylä-Herttuala, S., Butler, S., and Witztum,
J.L. 1990. Distribution of oxidation specific lipid-protein adducts and
apolipoprotein B in atherosclerotic lesions of varying severity from
WHHL rabbits. Arteriosclerosis. 10:336–349.
7. Hammer, A., et al. 1995. Generation, characterization, and histochemi-
cal application of monoclonal antibodies selectively recognizing oxida-
tively modified apoB-containing serum lipoproteins. Arterioscler. Thromb.
Vasc. Biol. 15:704–713.
8. Palinski, W., et al. 1994. Apoprotein E-deficient mice are a model of
lipoprotein oxidation in atherogenesis: demonstration of oxidation-spe-
cific epitopes in lesions and high titers of autoantibodies to malondi-
aldehyde-lysine in serum. Arterioscler. Thromb. 14:605–615.
9. Palinski, W., Tangirala, R.K., Miller, E., Young, S.G., and Witztum, J.L.
1995. Increased autoantibody titers against epitopes of oxidized low den-
sity lipoprotein in LDL receptor-deficient mice with increased athero-
sclerosis. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 15:1569–1576.
10. Palinski, W., et al. 1996. Cloning of monoclonal autoantibodies to epi-
topes of oxidized lipoproteins from apo E-deficient mice. Demonstra-
tion of epitopes of oxidized LDL in human plasma. J. Clin. Invest.
98:800–814.
11. Itabe, H., et al. 1996. Sensitive detection of oxidatively modified low den-
sity lipoprotein using a monoclonal antibody. J. Lipid Res. 37:45–53.
12. Tamai, O., et al. 1997. Single LDL apheresis improves endothelium-
dependent vasodilatation in hypercholesterolemic humans. Circulation.
95:76–82.
13. Holvoet, P., Theilmeier, G., Shivalkar, B., Flameng, W., and Collen, D.
1998. LDL hypercholesterolemia is associated with accumulation of oxi-
dized LDL, atherosclerotic plaque growth, and compensatory vessel
enlargement in coronary arteries of miniature pigs. Arterioscler. Thromb.
Vasc. Biol. 18:415–422.
14. Sevanian, A., et al. 1997. LDL– is a lipid hydroperoxide-enriched circu-
lating lipoprotein. J. Lipid. Res. 38:419–428.
15. Quinn, M.T., Parthasarathy, S., Fong, L.G., and Steinberg, D. 1987.
Oxidatively modified low density lipoproteins: a potential role in recruit-
ment and retention of monocyte/macrophages during atherogenesis.
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 84:2995–2998.
16. McMurray, H.F., Parthasarathy, S., and Steinberg, D. 1993. Oxidatively
modified low density lipoprotein is a chemoattractant for human T lym-
phocytes. J. Clin. Invest. 92:1004–1008.
17. Hessler, J.R., Morel, D.W., Lewis, L.J., and Chisolm, G.M. 1983. Lipoprotein
oxidation and lipoprotein-induced cytotoxicity. Arteriosclerosis. 3:215–222.
18. Rajavashisth, T.B., et al. 1990. Induction of endothelial cell expression of
granulocyte and macrophage colony-stimulating factors by modified
low-density lipoproteins. Nature. 344:254–257.
19. Cushing, S.D., et al. 1990. Minimally modified low density lipoprotein
induces monocyte chemotactic protein 1 in human endothelial cells and
smooth muscle cells. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 87:5134–5138.
20. Esterbauer, H., Gebicki, J., Puhl, H., and Jürgens, G. 1992. The role of
lipid peroxidation and antioxidants in oxidative modification of LDL.
Free Radical Biol. Med. 13:341–390.
21. Hörkkö, S., et al. 1996. Antiphospholipid antibodies are directed against
epitopes of oxidized phospholipids: recognition of cardiolipin by mon-
oclonal antibodies to epitopes of oxidized low-density lipoprotein. J. Clin.
Invest. 98:815–825.
22. Fong, L.G., Parthasarathy, S., Witztum, J.L., and Steinberg, D. 1987.
Nonenzymatic oxidative cleavage of peptide bonds in apoprotein B-100.
J. Lipid Res. 28:1466–1477.
23. Palinski, W., et al. 1990. Antisera and monoclonal antibodies specific for
epitopes generated during oxidative modification of low density lipopro-
tein. Arteriosclerosis. 10:325–335.
24. Parthasarathy, S., Fong, L.G., Otero, D., and Steinberg, D. 1987. Recog-
nition of solubilized apoproteins from delipidated, oxidized low densi-
ty lipoprotein (LDL) by the acetyl-LDL receptor. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA.
84:537–540.
25. Terpstra, V., Bird, D., and Steinberg, D. 1998. Evidence that the lipid
moiety of oxidized low density lipoprotein plays a role in its interaction
with macrophage receptors. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 95:1806–1811.
26. Itabe, H., et al. 1994. A monoclonal antibody against oxidized lipopro-
tein recognizes foam cells in atherosclerotic lesions. J. Biol. Chem.
269:15274–15279.
27. Itabe, H., et al. 1996. Oxidized phosphatidylcholines that modify pro-
teins. Analysis by monoclonal antibody against oxidized low density
lipoprotein. J. Biol. Chem. 271:33208–33217.
28. Watson, A.D., et al. 1997. Structural identification by mass spectrometry
of oxidized phospholipids in minimally oxidized low density lipoprotein
that induce monocyte/endothelial interactions and evidence for their
presence in vivo. J. Biol. Chem. 272:13597–13607.
29. Young, S.G., Witztum, J.L., Casal, D.C., Curtiss, L.K., and Bernstein, S.
1986. Conservation of the low density lipoprotein receptor-binding
domain of apoprotein B. Demonstration by a new monoclonal antibody,
MB47. Arteriosclerosis. 6:178–188.
30. Hörkkö, S., Miller, E., Branch, D.W., Palinski, W., and Witztum, J.L. 1997.
The epitopes for some antiphospholipid antibodies are adducts of oxi-
dized phospholipid and beta-2 glycoprotein 1 (and other proteins). Proc.
Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 94:10356–10361.
The Journal of Clinical Investigation
|
January 1999
|
Volume 103
|
Number 1
127

31. Reaven, P., et al. 1993. Effects of oleate-rich and linoleate-rich diets on
the susceptibility of low density lipopotein to oxidative modification in
mildly hypercholesterolemic subjects. J. Clin. Invest. 91:668–676.
32. Goldstein, J.L., Basu, S.K., and Brown, M.S. 1983. Receptor-mediated
endocytosis of low-density lipoprotein in cultured cells. Methods Enzy-
mol. 98:241–260.
33. Lowry, O.H., Rosebrough, N.J., Farr, A.L., and Randall, R.J. 1951. Protein
measurement with the Folin phenol reagent. J. Biol. Chem. 193:265–275.
34. Esterbauer, H., Dieber-Rotheneder, M., Waeg, G., Striegl, G., and Jurgens,
G. 1990. Biochemical, structural, and functional properties of oxidized
low-density lipoprotein. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 3:77–92.
35. Steinbrecher, U.P., Witztum, J.L., Parthasarathy, S., and Steinberg, D.
1987. Decrease in reactive amino groups during oxidation or endothe-
lial cell modification of LDL. Correlation with changes in receptor-medi-
ated catabolism. Arteriosclerosis. 7:135–143.
36. Zhang, H., Yang, Y., and Steinbrecher, U.P. 1993. Structural requirements
for the binding of modified proteins to the scavenger receptor of
macrophages. J. Biol. Chem. 268:5535–5542.
37. Hoppe, G., O’Neil, J., Sayre, L.M., and Hoff, H.F. 1997. Non-conventional
modification of low density lipoproteins: chemical models for mar-
cophage recognition of oxidized LDL. Biochim. Biophys. Acta. 1362:103–108.
38. Palinski, W., Miller, E., and Witztum, L.J. 1995. Immunization of LDL
receptor-deficient rabbits with homologous malondialdehyde-modified
LDL reduces atherogenesis. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA. 92:821–825.
39. Nilsson, J., et al. 1997. Immunization with homologous oxidized low
density lipoprotein reduces neointimal formation after balloon injury
in hypercholesterolemic rabbits. J. Am. Coll. Cardiol. 30:1886–1891.
40. Ameli, S., et al. 1996. Effect of immunization with homologous LDL and
oxidized LDL on early atherosclerosis in hypercholesterolemic rabbits.
Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. 16:1074–1079.
41. George, J., et al. 1998. Hyperimmunization of apo-E-deficient mice with
homologous malondialdehyde low-density lipoprotein suppresses early
atherogenesis. Atherosclerosis. 138:147–152.
42. Freigang, S., Hörkkö, S., Miller, E., Witztum, J.L., and Palinski, W. 1998.
Immunization of LDL receptor-deficient mice with homologous mal-
ondialdehyde-modified and native LDL reduces progression of athero-
sclerosis by mechanisms other than the induction of high titers of anti-
bodies to oxidative neoepitopes. Arterioscler. Thromb. Vasc. Biol. In press. 
43. Salonen, J.T., et al. 1992. Autoantibody against oxidised LDL and pro-
gression of carotid atherosclerosis. Lancet. 339:883–887.
128
The Journal of Clinical Investigation
|
January 1999
|
Volume 103
|
Number 1
